B6233A E910_8 R207512 99866557 118833
THE Arraignment and Condemnation OF Cap. Bridges Bushell; DECLARING The Occasion and Manner how A SOLDIER Was by him slain, about Nine years since; For which he was never questioned Till Midsummer last, 1656. At which time he was apprehended, and upon Examina∣tion committed to the White Lion Prison in Southwark. And at the Lent-Assizes there, Anno 1657. Received the Sentence of Death; which was accordingly Executed. Left behinde him in Writing, to the End it might be Printed and Published, LONDON: Printed for Marmaduke Boat. 1657.
I Bridges Bushell Captain, desire that these Lines may be Published in Print, for the Satisfaction of some Friends. The which Lines are to declare the occasion and manner how a Soldier was by me slain about Nine years since; As also to manifest, That although I have been at my home at Darkin, in the County of Surrey, several times since the Fact (so called) was done; yet I was never questioned for it until Midsummer last past. Anno Dom. 1656. I being then a Soldier in Collonel Ingoldsbies Regiment, in Captain Fox his Company; where by means of Information given unto Ensign Frances, Ensign to Captain Fox aforesaid, I was apprehended, and after Examination committed to the White Lyon Prison in Southwark, and at the Lent As∣sizes, 1657. I was araigned and condemned to dye. ABout Nine years since, or more; it was at that time when the late Earl of Holland raised a party for th late King of England, in the County of Surrey, I being then a Soldier for that party, and the Head-quarters being then at Rygate, in the County aforesaid. And upon the day that our party was to march from Rygate to Darkin, a Neighboring Town; I staying behind at Rygate, there came a Soldier of the Parliaments party, which was a Trooper, into the said
Town, whose Pistols were taken away, but not by me, though I owned that Act; whereupon the Trooper vio∣lently assaulted me with his Sword drawn; and I in my own defence, answered him as a Publick Enemy (as he was) and shot him: For the which I was never question∣ed, until the time abovesaid; although I was several times at my abovesaid home since the death of the said Soldier, as is well known; yet notwithstanding, when I was brought to my Tryal, at the time and place before mentioned, the chief Evidence that was there and then given in against me, was by one that was but Ten years old when the above said Trooper was slain: The Jury then brought in their Verdict that I was guilty of Man∣slaughter, who afterwards altered their Judgments, and brought me in guilty of wilful Murther; and thereupon I received the Sentence of Death. Be pleased to [observe that the abovesaid Evidence was in opposition to truth; for the said witness swore, That I had never been at home at my own house at Darkin since the Trooper was slain, though it be known that for five years together, I came several times, and stayed with my Family so long as my then present Im∣ployments would admit of, I being then a Soldier in the service of the Commonwealth of England, and was up∣on many Dsigns; as at the taking of the Islands of Silly and Jersey, and was likewise at the two last En∣gagements at Sea against the Hollanders, being Cor∣poral at that time of the Culpepper, under the command of Capt. Cheney. In all which services, it is well known I behaved my self faithfully and valiantly. And now briefly, I shall recite the Injuries that I have suffered, which will be, I believe, by some la∣mented.
First, I look upon the Evidence as inconsiderable, in respect of his Nonage. Secondly, In respect of his Oath, which was in con∣tradiction to the Testimony of more then Forty persons of credit. Thirdly, I judge it could not be proved wilful Murther, in respect that the man slain, was to me a stran∣ger; so that there could be no former grudge: And also as I before said, he was a professed Enemy. Much more I could say, as in reference to the un∣kindness of my nearest relations; But not willing to cast an odium upon them. I shall be sparing in publishing their want of Love and Duty: Yet I must speak truth, both Wife and Children neglected me in my greatest misery; so that I may say of them, Miserable comforters were they all; yet God was pleased to raise me a Friend, when all my Relations left me: For in my Imprison∣ment, a poor Widow (whose Husband was my dear Friend; yet I had not beheld her face in four years, before she came and administred unto me) supplyed my wants with what she got by her Labor. So that my maintenance may probably prove her ruine, if not pre∣vented by some of my Friends; who I hope (though I cannot promise) may requite her; however, I hope the Lord will requite her. And least any should think it were for any sinister end, that she should thus contribute to my extream ne∣cessities, know, It was for no other cause, but that I and her Husband was familiar Friends; onely her com∣passionate Soul sympathising with me in my indigent and deplorable estate; which was certainly by an extra∣ordinary providence. For the which, I desire to ascribe gory to God.
Again, for the Publick Satisfaction of all, as refer∣ing to the Fact, both in the Manner and Matter of it, as is above declared, I dye Innocently in respect of the National Law: And because the manner of my death is a shameful death, I desire all, that they would not in the lest attribute it to the dishonor of the Family, from whence I descended. And now all you that shall peruse these Lines, be∣ing the Language of a dying man, take notice that I freely forgive all such that are concerned in my death, whether ignorantly, wilfully, or negligently; and my Prayers are, That the Almighty would not so lay it to their charge, as may redound to their Ruines. And now be pleased to suffer a few words of advice, Labor to be circumspect in your Pilgrimage here, and beware of the deceiving vanities of this World; trust not in the promises of great ones, nor put not thy trust in Princes, whose breath is in their Nostrils. Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end, but ponder the paths of thy Feet, and let all thy ways be established; neither insult over others in their ruines. And let him that thinketh he stands, take heed lest he fall; nor boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know∣est not what a day may bring forth.
Ʋpon Captain Bushell. I Cannot I adorn thy Herse With any high Heroick Verse, Nor blaze thy name beyond desert; Truth bids me tell but what thou wert. Thy name and place, where known, was good, And that thou sprang'st from Gentile blood, Pitty it was so hard a Fate, Should lend thy life no longer date. BEreft of life, and by so hard a Fate, Revive his memory, and him antidate. Imbalm his Name, with odors sweet, though hence Death snatch'd him; and if by his offence The Law he hath incur'd, and merited his Death, Envy be silent, let not infectious breath Send scandals forth 'gainst him, because he dy'd By th'hand of Justice; Oh let none deride; Vertue and Ingenuity, most sure I am, Shall not insult, nor glory in his shame. How can the best of men, blest Ends premise? Even when there's nothing certain but uncertainties. Let none then post, but by his end take heed, Lest whilst you think you stand, you fall indeed.
Ʋpon the Widows Charity. MUch hath been wrote and said in Ancient Days, Of Womens commendation; would I could praise This poor, yet much deserving one, whose worth is such, As is the purest Gold, so prov'd by touch. No counterfeit she is, in Stamp nor Oar; She prov'd what she appear'd, none ere could more. Therefore her actions speaks her, better then my Quill Can blaze to th' World, yet I'll commend her still; And what in power is wanting, I desire, But 'cause I cannot, I will still Admire. FINIS.
