C7066 E1065_12 99869460 169269
A DECLARATION OF His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR AND THE PARLIAMENT, For a Day of Publique Thanksgiving On Friday the Twentieth of February, 1656. blazon of the Commonwealth Monday, the 2d of February, 1656. ORdered by the Parliament, That the Declaration for a Day of Thanks∣giving on the Twentieth of February instant, be forthwith Printed and Published, and that the same be sent to the Sheriffs of the respective Counties and Shires, who are required to take care that the same be deli∣vered to the Ministers of the respective Parishes and Congregations. Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament. London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the Lord Protector, 1656.
A Declaration of His Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament, for a Day of Publique Thanksgiving on Friday the Twentieth of Fe∣bruary, 1656. THe good People of this Com∣monwealth after a long and sharp Contention, with the greatest of Hazards and Diffi∣culties, for the preservation of their Native Rights, being at length, by the Goodness and Power of God, restored to the blessings of Peace and Freedom, and their Enemies given into their power, Did nevertheless by all tenderness and milde proceedings, endeavor the regaining of their Countreymen, and not their destruction: Yet such was the rancor of many of them, that they ceased not to design and labor to raise new Troubles amongst us, and open fresh veins of English blood; for which end, they lately were in actual Arms in several places, endeavoring again to kindle the flames of Civil Dissension in these Nations, had not the same by the good Hand of the Lord been quenched and prevented. Besides these, have risen up a sort of dis∣contented Spirits, called Levellers, plotting to disturb Our Peace, divide Our Strength, and to bring new Miseries upon Vs; but by the same good Hand of Providence, these were likewise seasonably discovered, and at that time suppressed. The latest of these wicked Practices, was chiefly by some of that Party, together with the former Adversary; and these have so far degenerated, as to associate themselves with
the inveterate Enemies of the English Nati∣on and Protestant Religion, those of Spain; and for malice and hire, to submit themselves to be executioners of their barbarous De∣signs, and against their Native Countrey; and finding themselves disabled to prosecute the same by open Violence, and well knowing that in all precedent Passages and Deliver∣ances from the beginning of our Troubles to this present, it pleased God to make use of, and to own the Lord Protector, as a most Eminent and Principal Instrument, and the Leader of his People: These Conspirators fell to that which is detested even by the People who know not God, yet after the practice of our Foreign Enemy (whereof our publique Ministers imployed in Foreign parts have had sad ex∣perience) they fell to secret and unworthy Plots against the life of the Lord Protector, to commit base and horrid Murther upon His person, bloodily and inhumanely to Assasinate Him, whom they durst not by open Force attempt. The particulars whereof in the ensuing Narrative appear, by Examination upon Oath, and Confession of some of the parties themselves who were engaged in this Design of Blood and Confusion. THat about four Moneths since one Miles Sunder∣comb acquainted John Cecill, that there was a De∣sign in hand among some very considerable persons, for killing the Lord Protector, perswading him to engage therein; and that it would be a very acceptable Service to take off the Protector, whereby things would come to Confusion, and the People rise.
That there was no attempting him in the Field, nor any other way, but by falling upon his person at an advantage, and that money should be provided. Upon these and such like discourses, Cecill engaged to joyn in this work (viz.) to attempt and kill the Lord Protector. First they provided good horses, and agreed to at∣tempt him as he went upon the Road, and the intenti∣on was to make a Party of Horse, of about forty to have assaulted him, but that proving a difficult business to get so many men together, it was resolved to be done by a lesser party, and these two agreed to take the first opportunity to Assacinate the Protector when he went abroad, and one Toop of the life-Guard, whom Sunder∣comb had engaged to serve them in this attempt, was to give them notice when the Protector went abroad; and Sundercomb and Cecill were upon the Road five or six times, on purpose to have made this attempt, and had notice of the Protectors going abroad by Toop, but had no opportunity to effect the design. That Sundercomb went once into Hide Park with in∣tention to have attempted the Protector there, having a Sword and Pistol to that purpose, being confident that if he could have come neer him, he could have done it and escaped. That this way proving not effectuall, they took a house at Hammer-smith, where there is a garden-wall, and upon the wall a Banquetting-house which is upon the street, out of which the intention was to shoot as he came by, with Guns made on purpose for that business, which should carry twelve or more Bullets at a time. That at the same time they had a design to fire White∣hall, and a fire-work was prepared for that purpose, and made up in a hand basket with two matches hang∣ing out of each side. That Sundercomb and Toop viewed several places
where they might put the fire-work, and Toop under∣took to place it. That they & Cecill on Thursday the 8. of January instant, between five and six of the clock in the Evening, came to the Chappel at White-hall, and brought thither and placed their fire-work with the matches lighted, that they conceived it would have fired between twelve and one of the clock at night. That one Boyes (a principal actor in these designes) did assure them, that when the Protector was dispatch∣ed, Forces were to come from Flanders, in ships to be hired with the King of Spaines money. That a Port Town was to be seized upon, where Forces were to be landed, and that a very great sum of money would be given for such a place. That their design is going on for taking away the life of the Protector, and that there are thirty or forty men engaged therein. That there was a design to take away the Pro∣tectors life the first day of the Parliament, the inten∣tion being to shoot the Protector as he went by in his Coach, but there being no possible way of escaping, they were discouraged from that enterprise. Then they hired a house neer the Abby in Westminster, thinking to shoot him as he went from the Sermon to the Parliament, but they not having time to make con∣veniencies, and finding so many people standing on both sides the way before the Protector came by, and as he passed, they durst not do any thing for fear of being dis∣covered before they shot. That Sundercombs discourse was such, that another of his companions believed that he was hired, and set on work by the King of Spain. That he assured him that within half a year, he him∣self should be a Colonel of Horse, and that the other should have a Troop of Horse and fifteen hundred
pounds in money, when the Protector should be killed; and said, that it was better that Charles Stuart should raign here then the Protector. That there were five of them besides Toop who knew of this design and were ingaged to effect it. This Bloody and barbarous design thus carried on, though by so few persons, yet it pleased the just God (who detesteth wickedness) so to work upon the heart of one of that small number, that he voluntarily came and discovered it to his Highness. Thus did they imagin a Mischievous device, which (through the goodness of God) they were not able to perform; but the Lord hath brought their Counsel to nought, and made their Devices of none effect. It is God who delivered us, and doth deli∣ver, and in whom we trust, that he will yet de∣liver us. For this eminent Mercy and great delive∣rance which the Lord hath wrought for our Chief Magistrate, and for all the good People of this Commonwealth; whose peace and com∣forts were designed to be taken away with the life of the Protector, and thereby new Cala∣mities, Blood and Confusion upon all the Inhabitants of the three Nations. For this and many other Mercies, His High∣ness the Lord Protector, and this present Par∣liament, hold themselves obliged, with all hum∣ble and thankfull acknowledgement, to praise his Name, who is the Author of all our Mer∣cies; And for this purpose have thought fit, and do hereby appoint, That Fridaythe Twen∣tieth day of February One thousand six hun∣dred fifty six, shall be set apart for a day
of Publique thanksgiving to the Lord, in all the three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland; And do hereby incite and encourage all persons, who are sensible of the Mercy of God to them, to come together in their several Congregati∣ons for the performance of this Duty, to praise the Lord for his goodness, humbly to intreat the continuance of his loving kindness to us, (though we have departed from him) that our God may be exalted in his own strength; and that Peace and Righteousness may flou∣rish in these Nations. And all persons whatsoever, are hereby Re∣quired and Enjoyned to abstain from bodily la∣bour, and from the ordinary workes of their calling upon that day, under the penalties which by Law are to be inflicted for such offen∣ces. And that all Ministers in their respective Congregations, be Required to publish this Declaration and Narrative on the Lords day, next before the said day of Publique Thanks∣giving: And that they be Exhorted on all oc∣casions in their prayers in the Publique Con∣gregation, to pray for the Lord Protector and all that are in Authority in this Common∣wealth. Henry Scobell Clerk of the Council.
