d1996ba 99897297 137026
The Lady Eleanor Douglas, Dowger, Her Iubiles Plea or Appeal, Ao &c. EVen she a Prisoner so many years that hath been for the Kingdom of Heaven; shews this Prisoner called to the Bar, Sir John Stowel Knight, He the Herald ap∣pointed for displaying her Title, as in this Looking-glass presented or appears; in the VVest Parts one of no mean Quality or Means: Four and twenty Knights since the Con∣quest, he the last of them: His Mo∣ther the onely Daughter in being of that Queen, bears that Virgin Name, Eliz. The said Prisoner aged November last, Fifty years; moreover well known, whose Grandfather Sir John Stowel, un∣happily that had his hands in blood, &c. Had two wives living at once,
begetting no Common Suits at Law, between the Divorced's Su∣ing for Dower after his Decease, and others of the Name to carry the Inheritance, &c. Thus paraliz'd here with the Stuarts Line, the late Charls aged Novembr. 48. Anno redempti, 1648. He since the Conquest the four and twentieth Crowned of these VVe∣stern Isles, whose father (that made it death in like case) King Ja: had himself his Leah and Rachel also, two VVives, lived with both; the first, she Daughter of one Sir Peter Yong: His Son Charls about a Moneth yonger then Sir Archibald Douglas deceased, &c. to one of his own name, who marryed her as K. Ja: ever disclaiming that of Stuart, &c. alway Stiling the said Sir Peter
his Father with due reverence every way; whose eldest Son the Dean of Winchester, K. James his Executor made, &c. about a month before his death, appointing out of his Reve∣nues about 10000 per annum for the said Sir A: Douglas; with no plea∣sing Aspect by the Buckinghams look'd upon. And how it hath succeeded, wit∣ness such slips what root have ta∣ken: His eldest Son Henry at full age cut off: His eldest Daughter a Fugitive: Her eldest drowned, &c. as better for him too, then his person prostituted so to the Iron rods lash: That token bequeath'd his Son a Milstone in the place, e∣ven he and his extirpated, with Wil∣liam Conquerer, Bastard as began, concluded with Charls, &c. By
whose unseasonable Elevated thoughts, others bidden be wise: The Germain Empires Ebb, for his forewarning who had, and super∣fluous many words. Lastly, But put it their proper Case; likewise in those Courts of theirs, whether re∣quire not of Tenants, an Oath of Fealty, without questioning Pos∣sessions, Title of those owners (as whereunto referred) suffices point of Law; so for deciding other-like doubts: Bars striving with that of Iustice, one or the other, the Sword with two Edges. December, &c. FINIS.
