d651 e425_14 99864033 116252
A DECLARATION OF THE Commanders and other Officers OF Colonell HUMFREY'S Regiment, IN Vindication of Themselves from these Aspertions and Scandals cast upon them, OF Plotting and Fomenting Discontents, and obstructing the Disbanding of Supernumeraries. Imprimatur. Gil. Mabbot. LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton at the sign of the three Daggers neare the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet-Street, 1648.
A DECLARATION Of the Commanders and other Of∣ficers of Colonell HUMFREY'S Re∣giment, in Vindication of themselves from these aspertions and Scandals cast upon them, Of plotting and fomenting discontents, and obstructing the Disbanding of Supernumeraries. ACcused Innocencie may crave so much liberty as to speak for it selfe, and we hope a just Vindication of our late pro∣ceedings is both convenient and necessary. Were not our Enemies pow∣erfull, and the accusations guided over with
pretended truth, wee had not appeared in publique; but things falling out as they doe in the fomicture of time, our expecta∣tions being raised for a better construction of our actions our silence had been our sins, and wee justly culpable of so grosse a neglect. We therefore in behalfe of our selves and Regiment declare as followeth. I. Whereas wee understand that divers sug∣gestions of an high nature to the Honoura∣ble Committee of Lords and Commons at Darby-House have been transmitred against us, and from them to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of obstructing the businesse of disbanding, as if wee had plotted a com∣bination to the fomenting an ill spirit a∣mongst our Souldiers. Wee in the sincerity of our hearts affirme to the World our ready submission to the Authority of Parliament, and Commands of his Excellency. Wee were not so unwise, having by the blessing of God so many yeares with all humble sub∣jection
owned the Commands of the State, now at one Exit to staine the honour of that faithfulnesse with a non-obedience. II. Although wee heare of a discontented party, men who love to fish in troubled wa∣ters, yet as formerly they dissented from the Army and us in our concurrance with it, so none can remonstrate our dislike of their proceedings, though neighbouring to us, and that wee are so farre from entertaining their designe, which if it had been mentio∣ned to us, they should have had nothing but discovery and opposition from us, and this our last Summers actions sufficiently taught them as the Parliaments Call gave both edge and action to our swords, so we shall willingly sheathe them at their com∣mand, notwithstanding any invitation to the contrary. III. That although some dissatisfaction hath
met us in the way of disbanding (fire being struck supposing us a tynder, thereby to re∣duce us to ashes) yet the Eagle stoopes not to Flies, and such rebbes shall not turne us out of the way of our obedience, by which we shall serve the publique, which is our maine end, and frustrate some ends of our contriving Enemies, though it may be ad∣vantagious to them in their private Inte∣rests. IV. Wee are in a ready way of disdanding, our Accounts are stating, Orders have been and shall be observed to the very last, and we hope 'twill not bee long ere the worke be finished, Peace being brought home up∣on the wings of Victory, and 'tis one com∣fort to have a share in that Peace, in the ob∣taining of which God hath been pleased to make use of our bloud and labour. If ever the Clowds gather again, and that spirit be∣gins to worke which we have now laid, or a∣ny other in opposition of the Parliaments Authority, and his Excellencies Commands,
though disbanded, yet upon a call from the Parliament we shall willingly engage again, being very ambitious of the houour to bee stiled the Faithfull Servants of our English Parliament. Ianuary 30. 1647. Colonell Iohn Humfery. Liev. Col. Iohn Blackmore. Major VVilliam Piggit. Captaines VVilliam Browne. Anth. Gardner. Ionathan Humfrey. Edward Tyson. Anth. Basket. Tho. Prichet. VVilliam Iones. FINIS.
