e1000 e1074_2 99897122 170842
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ACT For Appointing COMMISSIONERS For Bringing in the Arrears of the Revenue due to the Commonwealth. 30 May 1659 WHereas the Receipts arising by the Customs, Excise, Prize Goods and otherwise, have been kept on foot, raised and managed by divers Orders and Powers exercised since the twentieth day of April, which was in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and three, when this Parliament was interrupted, and divers great sums of Money arising as aforesaid, are in
arrear and due from particular persons to the Commonwealth, which in case they should be Remitted, or not Levied, will not onely occasion greater Burdens upon the People, but be a grievance to those who have already made pay∣ment; for the avoiding whereof, Be it Enacted and Declared by this present Parliament and the Authority thereof, That all and every sum and sums of Money, which are already grown due and in arrear from any person or persons whatsoever, and which shall grow due, before the first day of October, one thousand six hundred fifty and nine, for Custom and Subsidies, Ex∣cise, New Impost, or Farms of them, or any of them. Prize Goods or otherwise, be Collected, Levied, Recovered, and paid in such maner and form, as by the said Orders and Powers is di∣rected, to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been directed to be continued, raised and managed by Authority of this present Parlia∣ment. And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That Luke Robinson Esquire, Adam Bayns Esq Doctor William Parker, Mr. John Jackson, and Col. William White, or any three or more of them, be, and they are hereby Authorised, Impowred, and required to put in execution, or cause to be put in execution by such person and persons as they shall think fit, All and every the said Orders and Powers, aswel for Sequestration as otherwise, for the speedy and effectual collecting, recovering, and bring∣ing in the said Monies so in Arrear, and which shall accrue and grow payable as aforesaid, and to re-enter upon all such Farms of Customs and Excise, as are or shall become forfeit to the Commonwealth for non-payment of Rent or
otherwise, and to pursue such further directions concerning the Premises, as they shall from time to time receive from the Parliament, or the Committee for Inspection of the Trea∣suries. And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer for Excise in Broadstreet, do pay unto the persons above named, or such others as they or any three or more of them shall imploy in and about the Premises, such sum and sums of Money, for incident and necessary Charges and Dis∣bursments, as the said Committee for Inspe∣ction of the Treasuries, by Warrant under their hands shall appoint. And it is lastly Enacted and Declared, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the twenty fifth day of March, one thousand six hun∣dred and sixty, and no longer. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forth∣with Printed and Published. Passed the 26th of May 1659. THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament. London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.
