e1046 e1065_24 99869661 169281
AN ACT FOR Limiting and Setling THE PRICES FOR WINES. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th Day of September, Anno Domini 1656. seal or coat of arms of the Commonwealth LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.
AN ACT FOR Limiting and Setling THE PRICES FOR WINES. BE it Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parliament, and by the Autho∣rity of the same, That for one Year; to be accounted from the Fifteenth Day of August, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, no Canary Wines, Muscadells, or Alligants, or other Spanish Wines, shall be sold by Retail, at any Rate, Proportion, or Price, exceeding Eighteen pence the Quart. And that no Gascoigne or other French Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by Re∣tail, at any Rate, Proportion, or Price, exceed∣ing Seven pence the Quart. And that no Rhenish Wines whatsoever shall be sold by Re∣tail, at any Rate, Proportion, or Price, exceed∣ing Twelve pence the Quart. And according to these Rates, Proportions, and Prices, for
greater or lesser quantities, by Retail, all and every the aforesaid Wines shall and may be sold, and at no other Rate, Proportion, or Price exceeding the same respectively, upon pain and penalty that every person within Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, who shall utter or sell any of the said Wines by Retail; that is to say, by the Pint, Quart, Pottle, or Gallon, or by any other greater or lesser Retail-Measure, at any Rate, Proportion, or Price, exceeding the Rates, Proportions and Prices hereby re∣spectively limited and appointed, do and shall for every such Pint, Quart, Pottle, Gallon, or other greater or lesser Retail-Measure so sold, forfeit the sum of five pounds; all which afore∣mentioned Forfeitures shall and may be reco∣vered by Original Writ of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information; in which Suit or Suits no Wager of Law shall be admitted, nor any Pro∣tection or Essoin allowed. The one third part of all such Forfeitures shall be to the use of His Highness the Lord Protector, and his Sucees∣sours, and the other two third parts to the use of such person and persons as shall sue and pro∣secute for the same. London, Printed by Henry Hills and Iohn Field, Printers to His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, 1657.
