E1113 E1065_28 99859547 169284
AN ACT FOR THE IMPROVEMENT Of the Revenue of the Customs and Excize. WHereas by the Humble Petition and Advice of the Parliament, it is thought fit and Declared, That the constant yearly Reve∣nue of Thirteen hundred thou∣sand pounds, shall be raised and setled for the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, and for De∣fraying the Charges of the Government; And
whereas it will be necessary that the Profits of the Excize and Customs, and other the Publique Revenue, be by all good ways and means Improved to the best Advantage of the Commonwealth, and as much as may be, reduced to a Certainty, to the end the said Yearly Revenue of Thirteen hundred thou∣sand pounds may be answered & raised with∣out a Land-Tax, according to the Humble Pe∣tition and Advice, without weakning the Se∣curities wherewith the same are already char∣ged; Be it therefore Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parlia∣ment, and by Authority thereof, That the Lord Whitlock, Col. Sydenham, Col. Philip Jones, the Lord Commissioner Fyennes, the Lord Commissioner Lisle, Mr. Secretary Thurloe, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir William Ro∣berts, Mr. Drake, Mr. Godfrey, Col. John Clerk, Mr. Bond, Capt. Stone, Sir Christopher Pack, Al∣derman Foot, Mr. Lloyd, the Lord Chief Iu∣stice Glyn, Sir Charls Wolseley, Sir John Trevor, Mr. Upton, the Lord Broghil, Gen. Disbrow, Major General Goff, M. Bodwrda, Mr. Thomas Smith, Col. Twisleton, Mr. Rushworth, Mr. Downing, Sir John Barkstead, Col. John Jones, Major Beak, Capt. Blackwel, Mr. Highland, Col. Mildmay, Col. Matthews, Major General Hains, Major General Kelsey, and Mr. Maidston, or any seven of them shall be, and hereby are Authorised and Impowered to be a Commit∣tee of Parliament, to Treat, Contract and Conclude with any person or persons for the Farming all or any part of the Duties of Cu∣stoms and Subsidy of Tonnage and Poun∣dage, and of Excise and New Impost, and all
or any part of the Duties mentioned in two several Acts made this present Parliament, the one Entituled, An Act for Continuing and Establishing the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage; And for reviving an Act for the better Packing of Butter, and for Redress of Abuses therein; The other Entituled, An Additional Act for the better Improve∣ment and Advancing the Receipts of the Excize and New Impost, and all or any part of the Duties mentioned in any other Act or Ordinance touching the said Customs and Excize, which by vertue of the aforementioned Acts are Re∣vived, Continued, Confirmed or put in force; And what Contract, Bargain or Agreement, Contracts, Bargains, or Agreements, shall be made by the said Committee, or any seven of them, with any person or persons for or touching the premises, or any part of them; which Contract, Bargain or Agreement, Contracts, Bargains or Agreements being assented unto by His Highness, with the Ad∣vice of His Council, and Ratified and Confir∣med by any Grant or Grants under the Great Seal of England, shall be, and hereby is and are declared to be and continue Good and Valid to all intents and purposes; and all and every person or persons that shall be a Farmer or Contractor, Farmers or Contractors in pur∣suance of this Act, shall be saved and kept harmless by Authority of Parliament. Provided always, That the premises nor any part of them, be farmed for any Term ex∣ceeding Seven years: And the said Commit∣tee are hereby required to give an Accompt of their Proceedings hereupon to the Parlia∣ment at their next Sitting.
Provided always, That no person appoint∣ed by this Act to be of the Committee of Par∣liament as aforesaid, shall directly or indirect∣ly be a Farmer, or Partner in the farming of any part of the Custom or Excise aforesaid. Provided always, and it is hereby Enact∣ed, That no person or persons whatsoever, that shall farm the Customs or Excize, or any part of them, or shall be Commissioner or Commissioners of them or either of them, shall during the time of such Farm or Com∣mission, trade in any the Commodities which may fall under the said Farm, or within the Compass of such Commission. LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.
