E2547 E475_21 99864799 117031
THE DEBATES OF THE House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, touch∣ing His Majesties Concessions and Answers upon the TREATY. With their VOTES concerning their In∣structions given to Col. Hamond Governour of the Isle of Wight, for security of his Majesties PERSON: As also A LETTER of the Commons to the Lord General Fairfax, acquainting him with the contradiction of his Orders to Col Ewers, to their Instructions and Resolutions. Together with His Majesties last SPEECH to the Lords-Commissioners at their departure from the Isle of Wight. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed for R. Smithurst. 1648.
THE VOTES OF THE House of Commons assembled at Westminster, concerning their late Instru∣ctions given to Col. HAMMOND Governour of the Isle of VVIGHT. THis day the House of Commons received a Letter from Colonell Hammond, Governor of the Isle of Wight, brought by Major Cromwell, and one enclosed from the Gene∣rall, requiring him to attend his Excellency at the Head-quarters; And that Colonell Ewer was appointed to take the command of His Majesty there. The Commons had debate hereupon, and
Voted that Colonell Hammond should be  stay in the Isle of Wight, and attend his Chrge there till further Order: And that his Excellency should be acquain∣ted with this Vote. They likewise Voted to send a Letter to the Lord Admirall, to require him to send some Ships for security of the Isle of Wight, with Orders that they obey the Commands of Colonell Ham∣mond. A Messenger came last night to Windsor from the Isle of Wight, who brought word that Colonell Ewer had the custody of his Majesty, and that Col. Hammond was on his way to Windsor. A Letter this day came from Colonell Hammond from Farnham Castle, with a Co∣pie of the Orders from the Generall Coun∣cell of the Army; and their Letter to Col. Ewers and others, for securing His Majesties person in the Isle of Wight. Ordered, That a Letter should be forth∣with sent to his Excellency, to acquaint him that these Orders and Instructions from him to Colonell Ewers, for securing
His Majesties person in the Isle of Wight, are contrary to their Resolutions and In∣structions given to Colonell Hammond, and that it is the pleasure of the House, That his Excellency recall the said Orders, and that Colonell Hammond be set at liberty to attend his Charge in the Isle of Wight. A Letter from his Excellency, was re∣ported from the Committee of the Army, wherein his Excellency takes notice, that they intend not to furnish him with any Moneys for contingencies, which of neces∣sity must be had for pay of Messengers, and other daily incident Charges to the Army, and therefore his Excellency must be forc'd thereby to receive moneys for this purpose out of the Collectors and Receivers hands, where he can find, if speedy course be not taken to supply him. The House Ordered hereupon, That it should be referred to the Committee of the Army to take such course as they shall think fit, for pay of the Arreas o the Army.
Major Cromwell returned this day with Letters further from Colonell Hammond, acquainting the House of his being come to Windsor, and there detained, and so can∣not act as to the Order of Parliament: That Colonell Ewers hath the command of His Majesty in the Isle of Wight. The Houses had a Conference hereupon, the Lords pres∣sing the business to be taken into speedy consideration. The House this day heard the Report of the Commissioners from the Isle of Wight, of His Majesties severall Conces∣sions, as you have had them formerly in Order, which was read twice over, and the greatest part of the day spent in debate thereof. A bout two of the Clock in the afternoon they came to the question, whether they should now debate, whether His Majesties Answers and Concessions reported by them are satisfactory, or unsatisfactory, and it was resolved in the Negative, That they would not then debate it further, or the
question be put, but that the debate thereof should be resumed to morrow morning at nine of the Clock Mr. Speaker according to the Order of the House, gave the Lord Wenman, Mr. Hollis, and Mr. Pierepoint, three of the Commissioners, who came last from the Treaty, thanks for their great pains and care in managing of the Treaty. This day the House resumed the debate, according to Order, of the Kings Conces∣sions and Answers upon the Treaty; the debate was very high, and took up the whole day, yet they came to no conclusion, or any Vote passed, but put off the further debate untill Munday morning.
His Majesties last Speech to the Lords-Com∣missioners at their departure from the Isle of Wight. MY LORDS, You are come to take your leave of me, and I beleeve we shall scarce ever see each other again: but Gods will be done; I thank God, I have made my peace with him, and shall without fear, undergo what he shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me. My Lords, you cannot but know, that in my fall and ruine you see your own, and that also neer to you; I pray God send you better friends then I have found. I am fully informed of the whole carriage of the Plot against Me and Mine; and nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the miseries that hang over my three Kingdoms, drawn upon them by those who (upon pretences of good) violently pursue their own Interests and ends. These words his Majesty delivered with much alacrity and cheerfulness, with a serene Countenance, and a carriage free from all disturbance. Thus he parted with the Lords, leaving many tender Impressions (if not in them) in the standers by. FINIS.
