E3022 E1019_1 99867208 119510
ENGLANDS REDEMPTION: OR, A Path Way TO PEACE: Plainly Demonstrating, That we shall never have any setled State, UNTIL CHARLES II. (Whose Right it is) enjoy the Crown. Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. Lament. 5.8. Servants have ruled over us, and there is none that doth deliver us out of their hands. March .26. LONDON: Printed for Charles King. 1660.
ENGLANDS REDEMPTION OR, PATH-WAY TO PEACE. AS a distracted Ship (whose Pilot the raging violence of a tempestuous storm, hath cast down headlong from the Stern) stag∣gereth to and fro amongst the unquiet Waves of the rough Ocean; someimes clashing against the proud surly Rocks, and some∣times reeling up and down the smoother waters; now threatning present shipwrack and destruction, by and by promising a seeming safety, and secure arrival, yet never setled fast, nor absolutely tending to the quiet and desired Haven: So the vexed Government of frantick England, ever since the furious madness of a few turbulent Spirits beheaded our King and King∣dom, threw down Charles the Martyr (our onely law∣ful Governor) from the Stern of Government, and
took it into their unskilful and unlawful hands, it hath been tossed up and down, sometimes falling amongst the lawless Souldiers, as a Lamb among Wolves, or as a Glass upon Stones) yet in all our Revolutions, (although many gaps have been laid open) the Go∣vernment hath not steered its course directly to Charls the second, its onely right and quiet Haven. O therefore let our diracted England be a Warn∣ing-Piece to all Nations, that they never attempt to try and judge their King, for what cause soever; and let all Traytors and Tyrants in the world learn by the example of our English Rebels, that their prosperity and dominion (though it seemeth never so perpetual) is but momentany, and as the wnd which no man seeth; for who so much applauded and look'd upon, as the Long Parliament, when they first took upon them to correct and question the King? and who now so ridiculous and scorned? They were then ad∣mired by the people as the Patrons, Vindicators, Re∣deemers, and Keepers of their Liberty: Nay, I may most truly say, that the people did Worship and Adore them, more than they did God▪ But now they aae be∣come a by-word, the scorn and derision both of men, women and children▪ and hooted at by every one, as the greatest and most shameful laughing-stock in the world. O abominable! that Englishmen should degene∣rate into such impudence: for this is the truth of their Case; Might they but still have the Kings and Bi∣shops Lands, which they have gotten by their horri∣ble Treason and Rebellions, and be sure to live secure from the punishment which the Law of the Land
would inflict upon them, they would easily confess, (if the Devil have not made them Contradictors of all manner of truth) That Monarchy is the best of all Governments, especially for the English Nation, where (as one may say) it grew by Nature, until these Destroyers of the Laws of God, Nature, and the Realm, rooted it up, and endevoured to plant their fancied Commonwealth in its room, which will grow there, when Plums grow in the Sky, or when Rocks grow in the Air, not before; as you may see by the small Root it hath taken, ever since the Reigne of Charles the Martyr: Reade his incomparable hea∣venly Book, which will make thee weep for our loss, but rejoyce and admire at his piety. As for our rising Sun, Charles the second, though hitherto obscured by the foggy Mists of Treason and Rebellion in his own Kingdoms, yet do the rayes of his Sacred Majesty shine throughout the world be∣side, and his Renown ecchoeth in every part of the Earth, to the admiration of Foraign Kingdoms, and to the envy and hatred of the Rebels in his own: yet cannot their malice but marvel at the Vertues and Pa∣tience of their King, whom they so much wrong; and it grieves them to see that Royall Progeny (whose ruine they so greedily hunt after) flourish with such glorious splendor amongst the Kings and Princes of the Earth, growing in favour wit God and man, whilst they (odious to all but themselves) by their Tyranny and Rebellion, incur the displeasre both of Heaven and Earth, and become a ridiculous Rump, the ob∣ject of the Sorn and Derision both of old and yong, rich and poor: And had not these infatuated Rebels
brazen faces to deny what their own Consciences telleth them is true, they would presently Declare, That the onely way to settle our Distractions, and re∣store our Nation to its pristine Happiness and Glory, were to call in the Kng, and re-establish him in his own, which they unjustly pocket from him: for so long as there is one of the Race of the Stuarts (which God long preserve) and any Foraign King or people remain alive, we must never look for peace or plenty, but (as publick Thieves) always live in a posture of War, and ever expect Foraign Nations to come in, and swallow us up, who account it (as indeed it is) the greatest piece of Justice under the Sun, to re∣venge (with our Bloods, and utter Destruction) the bloody Murther of Charles the first, and the unna∣tural Banishment of Charles the second, our onely lawful Soveraign. Therefore let the cries of the People come unto thee, O God; and restore our gracious King Charles the second to his Hereditary Crown, whose Youth thou hast seasoned with the Afflictions of King Da∣vid; and clouded the Morning of his and our hap∣pinesse, with the Misery of an unchristian Exile, which hath made him the fitter for his Throne, and thy Mercy. Restore our Ancient Liturgy, and our Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal, to their undoubted rights and Priviledges in Parliament: Restore the Commons to their right Wits, and learn them to know, That the Head is above the Feet: So that our King one∣ly, with the Assent of the Lods and Commons, may make, and give us Laws, as it was in the beginning:
Until which time I will put down my Sails, and keep close under the Haven, being sure to have nothing else but Tempests and Storms, and no clear setled Weather, until then, either in Church or Common∣wealth: Let our Republicans boast of their Free-State, or of what else they please; for a bone out of joynt, will never be setled right, but in its proper place. On the late Miraculous Revolutions in England. I. THree Kingdoms, like one Ship, a long time lay Black Tempest-proof, upon a troubled Sea, Bandy'd from Wave to Wave, from Rock to Sand, A prey to Pirats from a Foraign Land. II. Expos'd to all the Injuries of Fate, All the reproaches of a Bedlam State: The brave Sails torn, the Main-Mast cut in sunder; Destruction from above, and ruine under. III. Once the base rout of Sailors try'd to steer The giddy vessel: but thence could appear Nothing but mad Confusion: Then came one, He sate at Helm, and his Dominion
IV. Frighted the blust'ring Billows for a while, And made their Fury counterfeit a Smile. Then for a time, the Bottom seem'd to play Ith'wonted Channel, and the beaten way: V. Yet floated still. The Rabble snatch'd again Its Management: but all (alas) in vain; No Anchor fixt, no wished Shore appears, No Haven after these distracted years. VI. But when the Lawful Pilot shall direct Ovr wav'ring course (and heav'n shall him protect) The Storms shall laugh, the Winds rejoyce thereat, And then our Ark shall finde an Arrarat. FINIS.
