F397 E1017_10 99866978 119268
A Phanatick PLAY. THE FIRST PART, As it was presented before and by the Lord Fleetwood, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Sir Henry Vane, the Lord Lambert, and others, last Night, WITH Master Jester and Master Pudding. This is the First Edition. The Knave the chiefest Card hath won the day, Had not the KING come in whilst they did Play. London Printed in the Year, 166.
A Phanatique PLAY. Enter a Jester, and with him a Jack-Pudding. Jester. GOod Morrow Mr. Pudding, how is it now? Pudding. Never more at hearts ease in all my life. Jest. What news at Westminster to day? Pud Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, fa, la, la, ha, ha, fa, la. Jest. Tell me Mr. Puding what you laugh at that I may laugh with you and be merry. Pud. I am going to see a Play, a new Play af∣ter the old fashion, that makes me so merry. Jest. But prethee tell me who plays the devils part. Pud. In good truth Sir Arthur Hasilrigg. Jest. He's full of compunction is he not? Pud. He hates Charles Stuart inveterately, be∣cause he has gained a vast estate of his lands into his hands, and holds it for his own. Enter Lambert, Hasilrigg and Vane. Jester. What! my Lord Lambert, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Sir Henry Vane, well met all three of you, whither are all of you bound you go so fast, & want your horses? what all alike, all alike!
Lambert. I am bound for the West, to visit Sir George Booth, and I hope he will make me wel∣come; for I hear his Lands are restored again, which by my unjustness was sequestred. Pud. The Divel he wil; he cannot chuse but make you welcome, with a Fox to you. Hasl. Sir, I am going to Portsmouth, for I hope they will entertaine me with all respect. Jest. Thou lookest so like the Divel that they will raise the Bulwarks of the great guns against your highness. Vane. I am bound to my country house for my healths sake, thank the Rump. Pud. I'le turn Doctor, and give you a Scotch pil; fear you not an Apothecary, for I was Moun∣tebanck to Nol with the great Nose; my Pils wrought so effectually that they brought him to rest. Jest. Puddings pils will make you shit out your disease as freely as you was shit out of the Rump, your self, and ease your discontents. Pud. May it please your honours to play one game at Honours, & I'le furnish you with Cards? Jest. What will you play for John Lambert. Lamb. An English Crown if you please. Pud. Are you all agreed or not? All answers, We are all agreed. Jest. I'le deal, Lambert do you shuffle, and Pud∣ding shal cut and we'l play the knaves to the pur∣pose, to make you all merry. Hasl. I like not his cheating play, he Jugles, I'le play no longer, I'le play no longer, by my Bi∣shoprick
of Durham, he's a false player. Vane I'le shuffle the Cards my selfe. Lam. Vane, you play Legerdemain under-hand, see how he culs out the Knaves, to put them into his own hands, and cheat us all, but we want a fourth man to make up the set. Pud. I'le play if you please. Lamb. Not with us, we'l have no fools. Pud. If you had cast all the knaves then. Fleetwood. I'le make a fourth man. Are you all greed? yes, yes. Lamb. You shall be my partner then. Fleet. With all my heart, I will, I will. Jest. Shuffle Gaffer General Fleetwood. Hasl. Vane, I see, must of necessity be with me, Gaffer Fleetwood, you are a cunning Gamster, and the cheatingest player in this Nation, play fair or I will kick you out of the Company. Jest. Hark, hark, a noise, a noise! Pud. What ist, what ist, hey, hey, hey, Jest. The North wind, it blows strong. Flhet. Lambert shut you the dore, keepe out the wind, rise and begone, I'le keepe your stake, and my own I'le warrant you. Pud. Gaffer Fleetwood, thats fowl play, to send Lambert to shut the door whilst you run away with all the money. Fleet. Hold thy tongue, there's half a piece for thee; if any enquire for me, tell them I am gone to the Committee of Safety. Pud. Lambert is come again, call them away, to come and play out their game, I say.
Jest. Come all away, come all away, sit down. Hasl. Deal Fleetwood, deal Fleetwood, why are you so slow to deal to others, and so quick to deal to your self, we all weight upon you? Lamb. I am sure he sent me to shut the door, and carried away my money instead of his own. Jest. Sirs you doe not make use of your time, know not you that the Drums will beat buy and buy, are you mad, make use of time, whilst time is to be had. Pud. Play quick, silently, and now play round. Fleet. Who dealt, who dealt this round? Lamb. My Lord General Fleetwood. Jest. If he be all wood, sound or rotten t'wil burn. Pud. Can you tell whether here or in Hell? Jest. He'l have all the whole pack except four. Hasl. What four I wish for no more— Jest. What the Divel ale you Hasilrig, blow in my blowing box, and I will shew you how to Conjure, command what you please in your thoughts, it shall be performed by your blast, blow strong sweet or sower. Hasl. I have blown such a blast; my mind, &c. Pud. By all the vertue in my conjuring books, The City Gates are all blown off the hooks. Jest. Your Honours fury to this cities known, What would you doe if that it were your own? Hasl. The Golden Chains should quickly flye, My self would Raign without tranquility. Pud. My mind unto remembrance calls one thing That all this time you plaid without a King.
Jest. Through up your cards, your game is not worth a pin. Pud. Then for a fool I will come in. Jest. Sir Arther many maimed Souldiers wait for you. Arthur, Let them wait and be hanged. Pud. Speak to them your self, youl please them. Hasl. Who desires to speak with Arthur Haslrig? Souldiers. Your honours Souldiers for their Pen∣tion, we are all in are are fifteen Months. Hasl. You are no Souldiers, but a pack of rogues. Soul. It becomes not your honour to call all Souldiers Rogues. Jest. The Gods confound your honour. Pud. Sir William Waller will tell you that you rid the field of your person at the Vize, or run away, that's plain. Jest. Play your game or give over. Pud. Sir Arthur play Durham Bishoprick, the old quit rents or yearly revenues, was one thou∣sand six hundred twenty one pounds eighteen shillings and three pence, whereof the Bishop paid to the King, one hundred sixty two pounds, two shillings six pence and odd, beside Mr. Colingwoods lands, and several Parks and other Lands, which for the company sake I forbear to name. Jest: Play round a Crown a head boys. Pud. What never a King here to be found? Hasl. I fear he'l be at my hand too soon. Fleet. Where's the King, in your hand? Hasl. Upon my life I'le keep him out, he shall be a King and no King at all, by my consent.
Enter a King, a General, a Jester, and a Pudding. Jest. Suppose they have but Fleetwood, Lambert, Haslrig and Vane into a bag, the first that comes forth, will be a—what you please. Pud. Come see quickly a fine sight: Jest. Gaffer King, Gaffer King, hear, here they have put Lambert and Haslrig into a great Bird-Cage; did you ever see the like to this that they have now done? Pud. They look like two night birds, and sing most melodiously, shitten sweetly, the one sings on this wise in the Cage: I do desire Portsmouth, once more to see. The other answered. I would I was at Durham now with thee. Jest. Lambert What have you now in your hat? Lamb. My head yet, so long as I can keep it. Pud. My Lord, be well advised er'e you parr with it. Lamb. So I will I'le warrant thee Pudding. They all sing together. Now let us all together rant and sing, Though here be all the knaves, we want the King Here may we be and the Countrey not offend, Waiting dayly, expecting of our end. FINIS.
