F947 E1602_1 99867821 170144
FINETTI PHILOXENIS: SOM CHOICE OBSERVATIONS OF Sr. JOHN FINETT KNIGHT, And Master of the CEREMONIES to the two last KINGS, Touching the Reception, and Precedence, the Treatment and Audience, the Puntillios and Con∣tests of Forren AMBASSADORS IN ENGLAND. Legati ligant Mundum. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. Twyford and G. Bedell, and are to be Sold at their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, and the Middle Temple Gate, 1656.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE PHILIP, Lord Vicount Lisle, &c. MY LORD, I Know well (for I know it by Experience) that your Lordship hath been trained up from a Youth in matters of Embas∣syes, and Legantine Affaires,
as wel when you attended my Lord your Father to Den∣mark, and other States of Germany, as many yeares after in the French Court: Therefore the Dedicatory addresse of this new Peece, will not be adjudged incon∣gruous by any discerning Reader, but very pertinent, considering the quality of the subject, which treats of trans∣actions of that nature, being the Manuall observations of that knowing Knight, and well accomplish'd Courtier, Sir John Finett, vvho officiated so ma∣ny yeares in Affaires of that
kind; Therefore this Peece goes indented vvith many signall Passages of the Recep∣tion, and Treatments, of the Conduct & Audiences, the Pre∣tences, and Precedencies, vvith divers Contests, and Puntili∣oes of State between forren Ambassadors. Among other parts of In∣dustry vvhich vvere knovvn to be in that Worthy Knight, one vvas, to couch in vvri∣ting, and keep an exact Di∣ary of vvhat things had pas∣sed in his Province as Ma∣ster of the Ceremonies, accord∣ing
to the laudable Custome of the Italians, and trans∣mitted by them to the high and low Dutch Ministers of State, vvith others. Moreover, these Obser∣vations go interwoven vvith divers Historicall Passages, and those most faithfully re∣lated, there being nothing taken here upon trust, but all upon his own knovvledge, being stil upon the place him∣self, and an Actor in every thing, as appeared by the Manuscript he left: And thus much, out of the conver∣sation
I had often vvith him, I vvas desired to tell the World. Lastly, Besides the Mo∣tives before mentioned, there vvent another Inducement to this Election, vvhich vvas the high respects, and Honour I professe your Lordship, having discove∣red in you a true Sidneyan Soule, vvhich by a pecu∣liar Noble Genius, is ob∣served to be extraordinari∣ly inclin'd to the Theory, and Speculative part of Vertue, as vvell as to the
Practicall; In vvhich opini∣on I rest, My most Honoured Lord, Your very humble, and ever ready Servant, JAMES HOWELL. Holborn this 20. of April, 1656.
THE Chief Heads and Substance of the ensuing DISCOURSE. 1. THe Arch-Dukes Ambassa∣dor discontented, and the Kings Apologie for his satisfaction. 2. The Braveries used at the Lady Elizabeths Wedding. 3. Passages of Ambassadors about invitations to the Earl of Somersets Marriage. 4. A clash betwixt the Savoy, and Florence Ambassadors for precedence: 5. Differences at a Mask betwixt the Spa∣nish Ambassadors and the States. 6. The Spanish Ambassador excepting a∣gainst the States for sitting with him in the Kings presence.
7. The Spanish Ambassador refusing to be at a Mask. 8. The Venetian Ambassador discontented about his Present. 9. Foure Ambassadors at a Readers Feast. 10. Ambassadors invited to hunt with the King. 11. Ambassadors invited to the Princes Creation. 12. The rich present of Furres sent by the Emperour of Russia to the King. 13. A clash betwixt the Spanish and French Ambassadors. 14. Touching Sir Henry Manwayring 15. Exceptions taken by the French 16. The sitting of Ambassadors at a Mask with the King reform'd. 17. Differences betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors reconcil'd. 18. Of the flaunting Embassie of Monsieur Cadenet 19. Exceptions about placing. 20. Six in joynt Ambassie at once from the States. 21. The Russian Ambassadors puntillio for precedence. 22. A great Embassie from the Emperour. 23. Questions betwixt the Imperiall and Ve∣netian
Ambassadors, concerning Titles and Visits, the like with the French 24. The young Landgrave of Hessens enter∣tainment. 25. The States Ambassadors distasts: 26. The Duke of Soubizes Negotiation. 27. Exceptions taken by the Venetian Am∣bassadors. 28. Exceptions of the States Ambassadors. 29. The Prince his return from Spain 30. The French Ambassador gets ground of the Spanish 31. Difference betwixt the Spanish Ambas∣sadors. 32. Reasons for the Master of the Ceremonies to sit in the same Coach with the Ambassa∣dors. 33. A clash betwixt the French and Spa∣nish Ambassador. 34. Sir Robert Sherley Ambassador from Persia 35. Ambassadors extraordinary from France to treat of a Marriage. 36. Death of King James, and Solemnities of his Funerall. 37. Complaint of the Venetian Ambassa∣dor. 38. Reason of the Venetian Ambassador for
Parity with Crownd heads. 39. The King and Queens first interview at Dover 40. The Marquesse of Blamvillés contestati∣ons for formalities, and his Lodging and Dyet at Court. 41. His reason for not assisting at the Coro∣nation. 42. The great clash betwixt the Persian Am∣bassador, and Sir Robert Sherley 43. The French cashier'd from Court. 44. Difference betwixt the Master of the Ce∣remonies and Jewell house, who is to carry Presents to Ambassadors. 45. Bethlem Gabors Ambassadors. 46. The Reformation of Ambassadors sitting in publick, and eating with the King. 47. The Danish Ambassadors complaint. 48. The Mantovan Ambassadors Expostu∣lations. 49. A new Declaration touching the Treat∣ment of Ambassadors, and the value of their Presents abated. 50. The Expostulations of the Duke of Sa∣voyes Ambassador. 51. Questions and Puntillioes betwixt Re∣gall and Ducall Ambassadors. 52. The Lord Majors refusing to give place to
the King of Denmarks Ambassador. 53. A clash betwixt the Ambassador of Sa∣voy, and the Duke of Buckingham, be∣cause he gave Sanctuary to my Lady Pur∣beck 54. The States Ambassadors exceptions and complaints how satisfied. 55. The notable Plot, the Spanish Ambas∣sadors had traced to destroy the Duke of Buckingham With divers other Signall Passages of State, and matters of remark, wherewith the Discourse is in∣terwoven. In page 250. for and machinations, read a ma∣chination; with other small mistakes which the judicious Reader will not stumble at.
Sir JOHN FINETS OBSERVATIONS Touching Forren Ambas∣sadors, &c. THE Count Palatine of the Rhone, coming to marry the Lady Elizabeth, landed at Graves end on Friday night the sixteenth of October, and had his first welcom brought him thither from the King by the Lord Haye, with the attendance of Sir Lewes Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies, and his second on Sunday fol∣lowing by the Duke of Lenox, attended by many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, the Kings Servants: As he passed before the Tower in his Majesties Barges,
the discharge of the great Ordnance there served for a warning to the Earles of Shrewsbury, Sussex, Southamp∣ton, and other Lords, to waite on the Duke of Yorke to the Staires of White-Hall for his reception at his landing there, and to conduct him to the presence of the King, Queene, Prince, and Princesse, in the Banqueting House; where having made an humble re∣verence to his Majesty, and passed his first Comple∣ment, he addressed himselfe to the Queene, kissed her hand, saluted the Prince, and turning to the Princesse (who was observed till then not to cast the least looke towards him) he stooped to touch the lowest part of her Garment, when with her hand staying his, he re∣ceived a kisse from her Highnesse, and soon after they all retyred to the privy Lodgings. The next day he spent in visiting the King, Queene Prince, and Duke of Yorke, and twice the Princesse, once in the afternoone (at her owne Lodging) in State, and once after Supper with lesse ceremony. His Traine consisted of a number, not so great as Gallant, most of them being much better fashioned, and better cloathed, then Germany usually sends them forth. There were of them eight Counts (besides Count Henry of Nassaw) about six and thirty Gentle∣men, and of the rest about an hundred and fifty. The place appointed for his most usuall abode was Essex House, neer Temple Barr, but he had other Lodg∣ings assigned him for his owne Person (as he should have occasion to use them for his owne private retraite) at White Hall with the King, and with the Prince  Saint Jameses. The thirteenth of February following I was sent by the Lord Chamberlaine (Earle of Suffolke) from his Majesty to the Arch-Dukes Ambassador, Monsiuer de Boiscot, with this formall invitation to the Marriage of the Princesse. That his Majesty (who desireth to perform all things with conveniency) having invited the French Ambas∣sador, and the Venetian, to assist at the first dayes so∣lemnity, requested him to honour the second, or third
dayes, either Dinner or Supper, or both, with his pre∣sence. After some time of pause, his first question was, (with a troubled countenance) whether the Spanish Ambassador were invited? I answered (answerable to my Instructions in case of such demand) that hee was sick, and could not be there; he was yesterday (quoth he) so well, as that the offer might have very well been made him, and perhaps accepted. To this I replyed, That his Majestie having obser∣ved that the French and Venetian Ambassadors hold∣ing between them one course of correspondence, and the Spanish and Arch-Dukes another, their Invita∣tions had been usually joynt. This he denyed, (saying) The French had been fun dry times invited to Masques, &c. and not the Ve∣netian, the Venetian and not the French, the Spa∣niard the like; but He, the Arch-Dukes Ambassador never: That for his owne particular person (as hee was Boiscot) he should think himselfe honoured to be called by his Majesty upon any termes, were it to serve up a Dish to the Princesses Table; but, as he was the Representant of so great a Prince, as the Arch-Dukes (one who would never allow (he sayd) so much as a question or thought of Competition betweene him, a Monarchall Soveraigne, and a meane Republique, go∣verned by a sort of Burghers, who had but an handfull of Territory in comparison of his Master; and (as would be averred, he sayd, by ancient proofes, had ever yeilded precedence to the Arch-Dukes Predecessors, when they were but Dukes of Burgundie) hee could not be present at that Solemnity. That further, hee knew not wherein he had deserved so ill of his Majesty, as not to have received from him any countenance or favour in all the time of his residing here, and the Ve∣netian (as he himselfe had bragged) many; that for these, and the like considerations, he would never be received to a second place, or day, after one that should have the first bestowed on him so unworthily. In conclusion he desired, That though this was, and
should be his peremptory answer, I would from him re∣quest the Lord Chamberlaine, that that might be al∣lowed him for consideration; and that the next morn∣ing he would by his owne Servant send his more di∣rect resolution, which he accordingly did in writing (seene to few more then to his Majesty and the Lord Chamberlaine) to the former purpose, thus, That he had ever yet had the honour to have been invited by his Majesty; that the Invitation hee now had, was in a second place to one who was farr from all colour of reason to precede him; that his Majesty had herein expressed his affection; that he was sorry he could not be there, &c. This written signification (redemanded and taken back after it was read by his Servant) having beene made the Saturday; the Sundayes and Mundayes fea∣sting jollity and gallantry stilld all further noyse of it, till on Tuesday I was commanded to carry him a written Declaration in French, as followeth. SA Majesté 's estant apperceūe que l'Am∣bassadeur des serenissimes Archiducs á pris ombrage de ce qu'il n'auoit esté conuié auz solem∣nitez de Madame Fille vnique de sa Majestè, et du tres illustre Prince l'Electeur Palatin au Dimenche jour de noces, l'ayant este l'Ambas∣sadeur de la serenissime Republique de Venice conuié pour ce jour lá, á trouué bon que le dit sieur Ambassadeur, et les Princes auxquels il sert entendissent, qu'en cela sa Majesté n'a voulu rien faire qui fist preiudice aux pretensions de l'un ou de l'autre de leur Princes ou Estats comm' en toutes procedures depuis son aduenement a ceste couronne il'à decliné se porter Juge de leur com∣petition en cest' endroit, ains de laisser un chacun entier en ce que luy appartient traictant tous en
general comme ses Amis; Or quant an fait pre∣sent touchant l'Ambassadeur de Venise sa Ma∣jesté fait scauoir an dit Ambassadeur des Archi∣ducs qu'ayant le dit Ambassadeur de Venise qua∣torze où quinze jours auant le iour des Noces fait entendre a sa Majesté qu'il auoit ordre de par la dicte Republique de congratuler aux dictes No∣ces qu' il desiroit faire cest' office le jour mesme d'icelles, & d'autant que pour donner meilleure grace, et manifestation plus ouuerte que porte la dicte, Republique a sa Majesté, on luy auoit ordonné frayspour la pompe, et liuréesases gens aux despens publics (honneur que sa Majesté n'anoit receu de nul autre Prince, et qui est bien extra∣ordinarie, et plus de constume entre les Princes) sa Majesté auoit toute raison de rendre a la dicte Republique la pareille de l'honneur qui par de∣monstration si signalée elle luy fairoit: Ajouste aussy ne que s'j trouuant l'Ambassadeur d'Espag∣ne en estat de l'assister le dit premier iour, et estant incertain a sa Majesté s' il ne s' y pouuoit trouuer quelque autre iour des solemnitez, sa Majesté trouuiot bon selon sa coustume de ioindre le dit Ambassadeur de Venise a celuy du Roy tres-Chre∣stien qui auoit esté conuié pour le mesme jour selon la fason que sa Majesté á tousjours tenue d'accouplir les Ambassadeurs de France & de Venise en toutes telles ocasions comm' aussy celuy d'Espagne, et des Archiducs; Et quant a ce qu' on pretend qu' ayant esté conuié le dit Am∣bassadeur des Archiducs le Mardy Gras jour dernier des magnificences, on pourroit faire con∣struction
qu' on faisoit quelque trait d'honneur a la Republique de Venise par dessus les Archi∣ducs; Sa Majesté dit qu' ayant este tousjours tres-curieux d'esquiuer toutes sortes d'offences a ses Amis en Subject de ceste condition, le dit sieur Ambassadeur, s' il luy plait d'y bien pen∣ser, trouuerá que le fait de sa Majesté en cecy ne porte point de preiudice a sa Majesté, Car∣estant la solemnité du Mariage un Acte conti∣nué, combien qu' executè en plusieurs iours, il ne contient ny prius ny posterius en soy, ains se doit entendre que tous les iours ont pareille dignité; voire, si l'on y vouloit argumenter, il se pour∣roit soustenir que le dernier jour seroit a prendre pour le plus gran iour comm'il s' ontend en plus∣iours autres cas, et nommement aux festes de Noel, que le Jour des Roys qui est le dernier se prend pour le plus gran jour, et en plusjours places en la solemnite du Caresme prenant le Merdy Gras se prend aussy pour le plus grand; Mesme au fait present le Ballet de la cour com∣posé de Conseillers et des plus Grands de la No∣blesse tant seigneurs que Dames auoit este assigne au Mardy comm' au plus gran jour de la Feste; Mais pour ne se trouuer d'accord la Noblesse de Colleges de Droict du jour enfuynant le dimenche, on á este contraint d'ordonner celuy de la Cour au dit jour antrement se deuoit faire le Mardy cousm' an plus gran jour. Mais sa Majesté qui ne se porte pour Juge des differences qni naissent entre les Princes, ne dit cecy pour rien resoudre de part eu d'autre, Mais seulement pour mon∣strer
les raisons qu' elle á eu de son coste au quel elle pense n' auoir foit tort a personne. HIs Majesty perceiving that the Ambassador of the most serene Arch-Duke hath taken some excep∣tions, that he was not invited to the solemnities of Madam, his Majesties sole Daughter, and of the most Illustrious Prince the Elector Palatine on Sunday the day of the Nuptialls, whereas the Ambassador of the most serene Republicke of Venice was invited thereunto that day; he hath thought good that the said Lord Ambas∣sador, and the Princes whom he serves should under∣stand, that his Majesty never intended to do any thing in prejudice to the pretences of either Prince or State in all procedures since his accesse to this Crown; but alwayes declind to comport himselfe as judge of their competitions in this case, leaving them both entire in what appertaines to them, and treating them in a free generall way as his freinds. Now, touching the present businesse reflecting upon the Ambassador of Venice, his Majesty lets the said Ambassador of the Arch-Dukes to understand, that the said Ambassador of Venice, having fourteen or fifteen dayes before the Wedding day in∣formed his Majesty that he had order from the Repub∣licke to congratulate the said Nuptialls, he desired that he might perform the said office the very day of the solemnity, and that he might do it with a better grace, as also for a more open manifestation of the hon∣our which the said Republicke doth beare unto his Ma∣jesty, he was appointed Extraordinary allowance for the pomp, and to put his men in liveryes accordingly upon the publicke charge (an honour which his Majesty had not received of any Prince, it being Extraordinary, and not usuall among Princes) Therefore his Majesty had all reason to correspond with the said Republicke in like civilities for so signall demonstrations of respect: Add hereunto, that the Spanish Ambassador not finding himselfe in case to assist, and be present the first day of the Nuptialls, and his Majesty being incertain whether
he would be at any other day of the Solemnities, his Majesty according to former custome commanded that the said Ambassador of Venice should be joynd with him of his most Christian Majestyes, who had been in∣vited for the same day, according to the course that was allwayes observed, to couple upon such solenmities the Ambassadors of France and Venice, as also those of Spaine and the Arch-Dukes. And whereas it is preten∣ded that whereas the Ambassador of the said Arch-Dukes being invited upon Shrove-Tuesday, the last day of the solemnity, one might inferr that a greater shew of honour was made thereby to the Republicke then to the Arch-Dukes, his Majesty sayeth, that he having allwayes been most curious to avoid all sorts of offences among his friendes in matters of this kind, the said Ambassador, if he please to consider of it well, will find that this doth not carry with it any prejudice at all to his Master; in regard that the solemnity of the mari∣age being but one continued Act though performd divers daies, admitted neither prius nor posterius in it selfe, but it is to be understood that each day had the like dignity; Nay, if one would Argumentize there∣upon, it might be alledged that the last day should be taken for the greatest day, as it is underslood in many other Coses, and particularly upon the Festivalls of Christmas wherein the Twelfe day or the Festivall of the three Kings which is the last is taken for the greatest day; And in many places Tueseday is taken for the chiefest day of Shrove-tide; wherefore the Mask at Court compos'd of Noble men and Ladies was assign'd for that day as being the greatest of the Festi∣valls; but his Majesty, who doth not undertake to be Iudge of differences arising in this nature twixt the Ministers of Princes, doth not speake this as to deter∣mine any thing on either side, but onely to shew the reasons which he hath on his behalfe in this particular, wherein he thinks not to have done any body wrong. This being read by the Ambassador I demanded his answer, which he said he could little inlarge beyond
the former; And then telling him, I was by command to returne the paper (suiteable to his owne, and his Servants proceeding with his Majesty, when he last sent his mind in writing) he affirmed peremptorily that he neither asked, nor had any paper back againe: And in this regard he must be pardoned, if he returned no an∣swere, since (quoth he) if I had received a message by word, I had answered by word, If by writeing by write∣ing, But taking this message for neither, I may, I sup∣pose, be silent. Wherewith when I had acquainted the Lord Chamberlaine, his Lordship was semewhat moved (as for his owne personall interest, and taking Sir William Button, (my Collegue assistant of the Ceremo∣nies) to witnesse what he had said, and done, his Lord∣ship willed me to returne, and affirme to him the con∣trary with confidence; But halfe the wordes which I had to say to this purpose when I came to him, were scarce uttered when he confessed the Action, yet not without blaming his Servants mistaking, and forget∣fullnesse to deliver back to him the paper. At this time the French, and Venetian Ambassadors invited to the Marriage, were not free from Puntillios. That made an offer to precede the Prince. This stood up∣on it, that they were not to sit at the Table without Chaires (though the Prince The King not present) had but a stoole (the Count Palatine, and the Princess, onely for the honour of the day, having Chayres) and insisting upon a formality that the Carver was not to stand above him, but neither of these prevailed in their reasonlesse pretences; Neither was the Wife of the French Am∣bassador cleere of these disputes, for when I had usher∣ed her up amcungst the Countesses, and left her there to the raniging of the Lord Chamberlaine, he ordered shee should be placed at the Table next beneath the Countesses, and above the Baronesses; But the Vis∣countesse of Effingham standing to her womans right, and possest allready of her proper place (as she called it) would not moove lower, so held the hand of the Ambassatrice, till after dinner the Ambassador her hus∣band informed of the difference, and opposition, tooke
it for an indignity, and calling for his Wives Coach, that by her departure it might be seen he was sensible, she was by others perswasions stayed, and was at sup∣per placed beneath the Countesse of Killdare, and above the Viscountesse of Haddington, who made no scruple of it, the Lady of Effingham in the interim forbearing (with rather too much then too little Stommach) both her supper and the Company. The Ambassador of the united Provinces (Sir Noel Caron) kept himselfe all this while quiet without quest∣ion of Prius or Posterius, or thrusting for publique Note, being a continually entertained guest during the solemnitie of the Marriage; the carriage whereof on the day of it was this. Between the howers of eleaven and twelve after that the Bride, and Bride-groom had (in manner of a procession) passed along through the first Court at White-hall, on a raised Terras conspicu∣ous to all, the first entered the Chappell was the Prince Palatine, attended by the Batchellrie of the Nobilitie, and after him the Princess apparrelled in white, her haire layed out at length in Curls, over-spreading her shoulders, and Crowned with a Coronet of rich pearles and Diamonds, followed by a dozen of choice Virgins, Bcauties all cloathed in white; (who with her Highnesse ascended by six or seaven stepps an eelevated place purposely framed in the midst of the Chappell) shee was encountered thereon by the Prince Palatine (who ascended by the other end.) After these came up the King, Queene, and Prince seating themselves, the King on the one side (next whom at his right hand stood the Earle of Arundell, carrying the sword, and next him the Prince. On the side opposite sate the Queen, next her the Princesse, then the Lady Baro∣nesse Harington her late Governesse, and last of that com∣pany Count Henry of Nassaw (on the Kings side, standing) that place being voyded of all others. The Sermon began preached by the Deane of the Chappell, Bishop of London, Doctor King, and this ended, the formall wordes of the Marriage (with all Ceremonies in use) were read by the Arch-Bishop of Canterburie,
and in place where it was requisite, repeated by the Prince Palatine in English. In conclusion, a joy pro∣nounced by the King, and Queen, and seconded with congratulation of the Lords there present, which Crowned with draughts of Ippocras out of a great gol∣den Bowle, as an health to the prosperitie of the Mar∣riage (beg an by the Prince Palatine, and answered by the Princess) After which were served up by six, or sea∣ven Barons so many Bowles filled with wafers) so much of that worke was consummate; the Bravery, and riches of that day was incomparable, Gold and Sil∣ver laid upon Lordes, Ladies, and Gentlewomens backs was the poorest burthen. Pearles, and coastly Embroy∣deries being the commonest weare. The Kings, Queenes, and Princes Iewells onely were valued that day by his Majesty himselfe (upon occasion of discourse happening to the purpose of the Braverie then appearing) at nine Hundred Thousand poundes sterling. The next two dayes came behind in time (not in cost) to the former, and an open Court was for that time kept with intertaining Tables, and free admit∣tance to them of all worthy commers, English or stran∣gers. The one and twentieth of February following, there was a great supper prepared by the King (but at the cost of certain Lords, who lost it for their ill running at the Ring against his Majesty and his party) in a large roome built of purpose for the time over the North-Ter∣ras next the first Court of White-Hall. The King and Prince onely were seated at a crosse Table placed at the end of the Roome next the Banqueting House. The Prince Palatine, the Lords, Ladies, and the Gen∣tlemen of the Inns of Court (that had been at the Marriage Maskers or Assistants to the Maske (whereof there were of both about forty) sate at another Table placed longwayes the Chamber.
Passages at the Marriage of the Earle of Summerset. 1613.THe three and twentieth of December 1613 I was sent to the Ambassador of Venice, Seig. Fos∣carini. (Sir William But∣ton, having been sent at the same time, and on the same Errant to the Ambassador of France) with this formall Message; Mons. de Buisseaux. that according to his Majesties most Royall disposition, and desire to give all due content to Mi∣nisters of Forrain Princes whereof he himselfe (the Am∣bassador) had the yeare before received a particular Testimony, having been then invited togeather with the French Ambassador to the Marriage of the Princess Palatine) I was now sent to signifie his Majesties plea∣sure to this purpose. That his Majesty was perswaded, and with all desirous, that his Excellencie would not passe any Mis-construction upon his proceeding, if the Spanish Ambassador newly come into this Kingdome, and who had not yet been present here at any enter∣tainments of Court) were togeather with the Arch-Dukes Ambassador invited to the Marriage of the Earle of Summerset, Don diego Sarmiento de Acun∣na. and not he (the Ambassador of Venice) that if he would be pleased to honour with his presence the Maske of Gentlemen of the Inns of Court to be performed on Twelfe night (a time amongst us of the solemnest observance) he should be most wellcome to it, and in the meane time I was further to let him know, that there was an intention he should be invited to the Marriage of the Lady Jane Dromond (first Lady of the Queenes Bedd-Chamber) at Candlemas. To this, his Answere was a question, whether the King in∣tended the Solemnitie towards for publicke, or for private? This I answered I had no Commission to re∣solve as from the mouth of his Majesty, and must there∣fore answere him with silence; But if he asked my
opinion as his friend, and Servant, I held it for pri∣vate and in no sort publique, since I took it to be an honour his Majesty was pleased to cast upon one of his most favoured Servants to have the Marriage Solemni∣zed in his owne House, and to invite to it whom he should think fit at his Princely pleasure. This answer seemed to give him such satisfaction, as (he said), he was of the same opinion, and added, that since his Majesty had vouchsafed the last yeare to do him the honour and right to preferr him before another (unjustly preten∣ding) in his invitation to so publique a solemnity, as was the Marriage of his onely daughter, he should bemost in∣civill now to except against his pleasure in matter of so private a condition; but ought rather to returne him (as he now did) most humble thankes for the most gra∣tious regard he discovered to have of him, and so conse∣quently of the State whereof he was a Representant. The next Morning I was sent to the French Ambas∣sadors, who (though he might seeme the day before to hold one way with the Venetian, and had correspon∣ded with him to that purpose, (whether another and he did s'entre entendre, becomes me no more to judge, then to declare) appeared now to have taken another way by himselfe, and I delivered to him a formall invita∣tion of the Marriage, which (having first asked me whether the Spanish Ambassador were yet invited, and I answered I thought no) he humbly beseecht his Ma∣jesty to pardon him, if he excused his appearance at the Marriage, in regard that that night (he said) he had the desluxion of a Rhume into his Teeth and a fit of a Ague whereof he doubted the returne. I was scarcely back at Court with his answere, when I was told that a Gentleman from the Venetian Ambassador had been to seeke me there, and at my house, where at the last having found me, he said that his Lord desired me that if ever I would do him favour, I would take the paines to come to him presently; I winding the cause to be some new buz gotten into his Braine from some Intelligence he had had from the French of that Mornings proceeding, excused my so present repaire
with the necessity of my Commanded immediate At∣tendance on my Lord Chamberlaine, which I did to gaine both time, and further Instructions from his Lordship, wherewith so soone, as I was sufficiently arm∣ed, I went to the Venetian, and in presence of his Secre∣tary, Muscorus, (whom he desired might be admitted to our Conference) he intreated me to repeate the wordes of my Invitation, and those of his answer, which I yeelded to (after some discovery of my insatisfaction to be so punctually pressed, as if he had meant to trip me) and in conclusion had his approbation, that all so farr was both in mannage and report without Exception; but that which now (he added) troubled him, and made him so to trouble me, was a later procedure of his Ma∣jesty who (as if the State he represented had either in affection, or demonstration of forwardnes to do the King Service, been inferiour to any) had that Morning vouchsafed the French Ambassador and not him a So∣lemne Invitation. To this (after I had according to my Instructions (in case I should incounter such formality) brought him to confesse, that the French Ambassador had indeed given him that intelligence) I replyed, that to be plain with him, I had no sooner received the message of his desire to speake with me, but conceiving it was to the purpose that I now found, I did repaire to my Lord Chamberlaine with my opinion, and for his Lordships further direction, which I said, was this. That if the Ambassador of Venice should except against any favour shewed the French beyond him, I should let him know, it was not that his Majesty intended a difference in distribution of honour for their more and lesse Cere∣moniall Invitation; but that if amidst the confusion usually happening at such Solemnities, there were any omission, he desired it might be interpreted as chance∣able, and not of designe, which the better to expresse I came (I tould him) even then from my Lord Cham∣berlaine, and so from his Majesty with the same order to him, as I had done to the French, to invite him. When not yet satisfied with an errand so ingrosse, he desired
me to deliver particularly, and in the same wordes the Invitation I had carryed to the French Ambassador, which when I had punctually performed, he returned this finall answer. That since I was there present a witnesse of his Realitie, he would not, as the French Ambassador had done, excuse his absence with his sick∣nesse, but was desirous his Majesty might know (after his humblest and Thankfullest acknowledgment for his favour in his Invitation) that he took the publick hon∣our he had received the last yeare for so substantiall a Testimony of his royall mind towards him (as in these private Solemnities for him to except against inviting this person or that, whom he saw his Majesty was in∣clyned to make his guests at the Feast, without over∣thronging it with the presence of others) was to pre∣sume to take from him that liberty and pleasure, which (he (the Ambassador) would strive, and had ever stri∣ved to observe with his best diligence, and obedience. With this answer I was parting, when he suddenly stayed me with the reading of another scruple (& hinc illae lachrimae) and asked me whether the Arch-Dukes Ambassador were also invited, whereof, when I had said (to keepe my selfe clear from Categoricall assevera∣tions) when I knew not fully the King my Masters plea∣sure) that I could not directly resolve him, he would needs perswade me that I diffembled, and that no doubt, whatsoever I should say, I had in charge to performe that service of Invitation, first to him, and after in my returne to Court to the other; a perswasion, which as soone as I found it aimed at (what he was most jealous of) pre∣cedencie, I did not gainesay it, 1 Seig. Ga∣veleone. holding it ill man∣ners to marr a beliefe of an Ambassadors making. The same day I was also with the Agents of Savoy and of Florence and having invited them to supper and to the Maske after it. The Florence said,2 Ant. Li. that howsoever there passed a freindly Correspondence between him and the other, and that their discretions might be like enough to keep them from incounters; he must yet pro∣test, and stand for the maintainance of his Masters right of precedence, whensoever he should meet any that
would oppose or question it? To this I replyed, that howsoever his Majesty took no such notice of any that resided here as Agents (and not Ambassadors) for their Masters as that to invite, or not to invite them was es∣fentiall; yet my Lord Chamberlaine having told me, there was a Table to be both served, and sit at in State, was all on the Queenes side, as on the Kings, and that if the A∣gents would come to either of them, the first come might make his firstchoyce, there was no doubt, but his Lordships provident care for their placeing at the Maske would keepe them out of distance, and danger of dispute for precedence. So they both came, but the Savoyard get∣ting the start, and siding allwayes close to the Spanish Ambassador was both at the supper and Maske the more conspicuous, while the other kept himselfe retyred as Sconosiuto. The Spanish Ambassador, the Arch-Dukes, and both their Ladies were on New-yeares day following invited to the sight of a Tilting, the King and Queene there present, where I by Command attended them. The first of February 1613. Mons de uisscaux. The Lord Viscount Lysle, Lord Chamberlaine to the Queen, sent me to invite (in his Majesties name) the French Ambassador to the Mar∣riage of the Lady Jane Dromond to be Solemnized the next day at Somerset House. He accepted the Invita∣tation with humble thankes as an especiall favour (he said) done to him by his Majesty, but desired (if his de∣sire might be presented to her Majesty as that she might not interpret it for a singularity in him, or a dis∣obedience to her pleasure, which rather then to incurr he would (he said) lay aside all other respects, and sub∣mit his reason to her will) that he might be excused his comming to Dinner, and be present onely at Supper, and at the entertainment after it. When I had (as far as good manners would allow me) provoked him to the reason of his request, (that I might at least glance at it in returning his answer to the Lord Chamberlaine, to procure it the better passage) he would have made it appeare, that a part of his reason was that his Lent was already entered, and that to be at two meales of flesh
togeather would be too great a sin; but when I had re∣moved that Objection, with assuring him that at our great Feasts, Fish was an especiall provision, he came neerer, telling me plainly, (but as to his Freind, (he said) Sub Sigillo confessionis, who hee knew would carry it no further (that since the Spanish Ambassador had had the precedence of him in his invitation to the marriage of the Earle of Somerset, he would not wrong the Master he represented to march in the second place, as it would be taken, if he should come to Dinner, (though ma∣ny dayes had passed since the other) and that the Queen, and not the King gave this entertainment; but if he might be spared (he sayd) from the Brides Din∣ner, at the like whereof, the other (the Spanish Am∣bassador) might be though to have done well to have spared his presence, in regard neither the King nor Queene were there in person, (a point, that men (he said) of his representative quality were especially to re∣gard in all such publique solemnities) he could not, nor would refuse the honour of being there at Supper when both King and Queen would be (as he heard) present, yet he concluded, (that riterateing his request, that I would not communicate the formality of these reasons) rather then he would in the least point distast her Majesty, he would (post-posing all other considerations) be there both Dinner and Supper. With this signification I re∣turned to the Lord Lysle (Lord Chamberlaine to the Queene) who communicated it to the Earle of Wor∣cester Master of her Majesties Horse, He presen∣ted me at my parting with a gold Chayne worth 10 l. that he might convey it to her Majesty as he should go with her in a Coach from White-Hall to Somerset House. It hung yet in intention when the Ambassadors Secretary came to me from his Lord with a further exception, that how∣soever the Queene were pleased, that he should be pre∣sent both Dinner and Supper, he would be bold to prefer this condition to her allowance, that he might not sit upon a Stoole but in a Chaire in the same man∣ner as the Bride should be seated. I answered, I thought that would be a matter of no great difficulty. But how (quoth I) if the Prince be there, and have
but a Stoole to sit on: If my Lord Ambassador were sure of that (replyed the Secretary) I presume he would make no further question, but in all beare his Highnesse Company. To be resolved of this, I went at his request to my Lord Lysle, my Lord Worcester, and my Lord Carew Vice-Chamberlaine, whom I found all∣together, and having assurance from them of the Prince his presence with the Bride at Dinner, and re∣questing their Lordships (as the Secretary desired me) that they would not trouble the Queene any further concerning the Ambassador till the Secretary had been with him, and returned with his finall Satisfaction, he repaired that Evening to my Lord Lysle, and propound∣ing the same demand of a Chayre, as he had done to me in the Afternoone; it was resolved he should have one with the Prince, and so ended that difference. The next day he came, and the Bride (seated at the Tables end, which was placed crosse at the upper end of the Hall) had the Prince at her left hand, as the better place neerest the Wall, (his Highnesse sitting with his right hand uppermost) on her right the Am∣bassadors both in Chayres, and opposite to him, beneath the Prince in a little distance, sate on a stoole a Duke of Saxonie, here at that time to visite his Majesty. The Arch-Dukes Ambassador received from me an Invitation the same day that I delivered one to ano∣ther, and accepted it, though he were then (in earnest) sick in his Bed of a cold he had taken) both for Din∣ner and Supper without Scruple or question (I will not say, without intention not to be at either) but his cold increasing that night with a Loosenesse, he wrote to me to come to him (as I did) the next Morning, and there desired his absence might be excused to her Ma∣jesty. His Lady came notwithstanding in the After∣noone (as did also the French Ambassadors with her Husband in the Morning) and had both of them their places at the Table next beneath the Countesses. Seig. Gabellion, the Duke of Savoys Agent was also invited, and had his place appointed him at Dinner next be∣neath the Duke of Lenox, Too high. and at Supper (both which
might seem to have fallne out chanceably) next above the Lord Knowles, beneath the Earles, and above the Barons. The Ambassador of France sate that night at the end of the Table at the right hand of his Majesty, with a distance between them of some halfe a dozen persons, the Queene sate next the King on his left hand, and neer her the Prince. It may appeare, that the scope and end of this question mooveing from the French Am∣bassador was, that by some addition of honour, he might get the start he seemed to have lost of preceed∣ing the Spaniard, and which himselfe bragged he had now recovered (and was indeed judged so to have done by the three Lords mentioned) when dineing with the Bride, he had the honour of the Princesse Company, and Supping, of both their Majesties, neither of these having fallne to the Spanish Ambassador at the Mar∣riage of the Earle of Sommerset, The 5. of January 1614. The Earl of Sommerset (then Lord Chamberlain) notwithstanding he understood how the yeare before the Spanish and Arch-Dukes Ambas∣sadors had been invited to the Marriage of him the Earle of Sommerset, and not the French nor the Vene∣tian (for the reasons elsewhere appeareing) gave me directions to invite the Spanish and the Venetian (not usually coupled (ut supra) to a Maske of Gentlemen set forth at the charge of his Majesty, and to come at an houre, about six in the Evening to a Supper that should be prepared for them in the Councel Chamber. They both (with one question of what Ambassadors would be there, and my assurance, that I understood of none besides themselves (as indeed then I did not) accepted the Invitation, and came the next day at the time ap∣pointed.) A little before Supper, the Spanish Ambassador taking me aside, desired me to deale freely with him, & to tel him whether Sir Noell Caron, the States Ambas∣sador were invited, and if invited, what place was in∣tended him, whether in publique neere his Majesty, or in private in some Corner of the Roome? I answered that I knew then (and not before) that he was invited, and would be there; But in which of those conditions,
publique or private, I could not resolve him. Hereup∣on, he requested me immediately to go to my Lord Chamberlain for clearing of this doubt, wherewith ac∣quainting his Lordship, and he his Majesty, I returned with this assurance. That Sir Noell Caron was invited, and should be placed within the Barres neare the King, as Ambassadors used to be. To this he made his replye, desiring me to convey it to the Lord Chamberlaine, that if Sir Noell Caron should be togeather with him at Sup∣per or in any other place, then in the Kings presence, he would use him with all the respects of civility, but in so honourable a place as that, where the sacred persons of the King, Queene and Prince were to be present, he should never with patience see the Representant of his Masters Vassalls and Rebells (so he called them) hold an equall ranck with him. That it was directly against his Instructions to concurr with him in any publique Act, as an Ambassador, and that therefore it would be better for him (as he intended with the favour of his Majesty) to retire himselfe betimes without noise, then to be forced (as he must) to discharge his duty by pub∣lique exception, and protestation against the presence of him (Sir Noell Caron) to the disturbance of so royall an Assembly, and whereupon I told him (as from my Lord Chamberlain) that his Lordship was informed his predecessor Don Alonso de Velasco had stood upon no such Puntillio when Sir Noell Caron had at another time been invited, as now, and sate as it was now determi∣ned he should; he said, he was most assured there ne∣ver had been such a concurrence, so as returning from him with this answer, I fortuned to deliver it in the hearing of my Lord Treasurer, and received from his Lordship an assurance that upon his knowledge, and in his sight, his predecessor Don Alonso de Velasco had indu∣red without any exception the placing of the States Ambassador at the left hand of the King, while he (Don Alonso) sate on the right. But this neither would sa∣tisfie him, nor hold him from affirming that (not to contradict (he said) my Lord Treasurer, who yet might forget, or mistake in some circumstances) he would
ingage his head to be cut off, if there ever had been any such placing, which being againe reported by me to my Lords Chamberlain and Treasurer, they both went to the King, and debating the businesse with his Ma∣jesty, first in presence of sundry of the Bedd-Chamber, and after more in private with halfe a dozen of other Lords, my Lord Treasurer, my Lord Chamberlain, my Lord of Worcester (and I to attend them) were sent to him into the Councell Chamber, and there (intreat∣ing first the Venetian Ambassador to pardon them, if they did awhile leave him alone) taking onely the Ambassadors Interpreter, and my selfe with them into a little Roome there by, my Lord Treasurer delivered the Kings mind to this purpose. That his Majesty having invited him to the Maske, with a mind to give him all content, was sorry that this question should grow to disturbe it. That his Majesty went upon grounds of former presidents of the like concurrence in the time of the Ambassadors predecessors, and that the had for witnesses of it (besides his owne memorie) the Queene, the Prince, and sundry of the Lords, who affirmed they had seene it. That his Majesty having heretofore intertained Sir Noell Caron in that manner, and now invited him as an Ambassador, he left it to his consideration what injury he should do to abate of his accustomed respects towards him. That whereas the Ambassador affirmed, it was formally his Instructi∣ons not to concurr with him in any publique Act, his Majesty wondred that his predecessor should not have the like Instructions, or having had such, should for∣get, or neglect to stand upon it, that if he had any such, his Majesty requested him, that (reserving other mat∣ter, which he in no sort desired that he should com∣municate, besides that purpose) he might have a sght of it for his fuller satisfaction. To this the Ambassa∣dor replyed (with many acknowledgments of the ho∣nour his Majesty had done him &c.) That first, the witnesses his Majesty had produced were so substantiall, as should he with his owne eyes have seene the contra∣ry, he should not have trusted them in opposition of
their Testimony; That if it should be known to the King his Master that Don Alonso had committed such errour, it would be enough to make him loose his head. That it was true, that in his generall instructions re∣ceived from the hand of the King his Master, it was not intended, but that upon his Arrivall in England finding in what condition of respect Sir Noell Caron was held here, he wrote particularly to the King for his pleasure about his manner of carriage towards Sir Noell Caron, in case he should be put to it upon any incounter of Negotiation, or otherwise, whereunto he had received by letter from his Majesty his will, intimating, That in concurrence of ordinary civill respects, he should use him with courtesy; but in no case admit concurrence with him in or to any publique Act, and that his Majesty should be an eye witnesse of the letter at his pleasure. The Venetian (who remaind in the meane time in the Councell Chamber) having been by the Spanish Am∣bassador before the Lords entrance, made acquainted with the difference like to grow, had affirmed to him, That he could himselfe remember, that when Don Alonso was invited (as he was now) by his Majesty, he and Sir Noell Caron were seated in a compartment, or place a∣part, and that Don Alonso did except against Carons sit∣ting in the same place neare his Majesty; he affirmed also, That howsoever it might now passe between the Spanish Ambassador and the States, he himselfe would not permit that he should sit (allato, his own word) in even ranck with him; but all the Allegations of the Venetian were held to proceed rather from a spirit of disturbance (forward, as his naturally was, to make ill businesse) then that what he said was simply truth. In fine, the Lords returning with this Declaration of the Ambassadors to his Majesty, came back soone after with his definite pleasure thus. That since he could not accord this difference, which troubled him much for the respects he bare to the Spanish Ambassador, he had willed them to signifie to him, that he might take what course should best please him; And that if he would not stay the Maske, he would take order, that
the States Ambassador should likewise depart, to avoyd all further question, about either of their pretences. Af∣ter this the Ambassador himselfe, and the Lords fell to termes of reconciling (if it could be possible) the dif∣ference, the Lords offering, that the Spanish Ambassa∣dor should sit on the right hand of the King, and at the Spaniards right hand, the Venetian, and that at the left hand next the Queene and Prince should sit the States Ambassador, this he harkened (not yeelded) to, but with such limitations, as were not fit for Sir Noell Caron to admit of, as that he should either sit a degree or step lower (which the place would not afford) or with some distance behind the Queene, and that he should not enter with the King, but some quarter of an houre after, and the like, but the conclusion was (nothing being agreed on) that they would informe the King of his resolution of departure, and so left him: yet immediately after they returned the third time, and (after some reasons to no prevaileing purpose) I told him againe, that the King desired to see the next day his instructions, and so had sent him the good night. The Lords being departed, I stayed behind (as was his Majesties pleasure, and charge given me) to tell him from his Majesty for conclusion thus much. That he had not been driven to this streight without his owne fault, because if he had made question in season, and acquainted the King with the limitation of his instructions in that point, there might have been another course had for prevention: whereto he replyed, that he had found his Majesty in all so gracious, as he could not but with all most humble thankfulness ac∣knowledge it, and that it might be held indeed a fault in him, that he had not before hand declared himselfe to that purpose, but no man could foresee all things. So (haveing merrily requested the Lords before, that since his Servants were not Ambassadors, and would not strive for places, they might be allowed roome to see the Maske) he with one Gentleman, his Secretary, and a footeman (I attending him to his Coach) departed. The King the next day at his dinner discoursing to
this purpose, brought forth amongst other Arguments this one against the Spanish Ambassador, that the Ex∣ception, or protestation he had made, could not be any way made good by him, the King of Spaines Agent, in regard the Vassallage which the King his Master pre∣tended of the States, was not properly his, but should belong (if to any) to the Arch-Dukes, to whom he had made a cession of those Provinces, and had likewise (he said) but a poore title to them, having at the time of the Treaty of Truce between them, agreed to treate with them, as with a free State, and given them since in severall letters the title and stile they pretend to (and which all other Princes and States (he said) give them) of Les Estats confederez de provinces vnies. This dispute, and difference occurred in the time that the Truce between the King of Spaine, the Arch-Duke and the States yet lasted. The Venetian Ambassador as soone as the Spanish was departed, was conducted by me into the second Roome from the privie Gallerie, and there attending till his Majesty and the Qucene came, went along with them, and was seated on the left hand of the King, beneath the Queene, and the Prince on the right. At the same time the Agent of Flo∣rence (to whom was sent by the Lord Chamberlaine to invite him, Il. Gaval∣lo Francis co Guaro∣lesi. no other then an ordinary Messenger of the Chamber, as to a Minister inferiour to an Ambassador) supped also in the Councell Chamber, and followed the King to the Maske with the Venetian, but having been ordained his seate in one of the Galleries, he in∣treated me to moove the Lord Chamberlaine, that (as he understood the great Duke his Masters Agent, and the Duke of Savoyes had been) he might be placed among the Lords, Earle of Suffolke. which was assented to, and he was pla∣ced (by the Lord Chamberlaine, and the Lord Treasurer there present) beneath the lowest Baron the Lord Mordant, and above Sir Thomas Howard second Son to the Lord Treasurer. 26 of Oct. 1614. An Ambassador from the Emperor of Russia landing at Tower wharfe, was there received by the Lord Dan∣vers, I and other Gentlemen, his Majesties Servants, at∣tending
his Lordship thither. The five and twentieth of Aprill following, he have∣ing been invited to dine with his Majesty at White-Hall, was seated on his left hand towards the Corner of the Table, and a Secretary that came in Commission with him at the Tables end. He had two of his own Servants attending at his Elbow, but with little Ser∣vice (the Kings Servants supplying) and his other fol∣lowers bestowed elswhere in the Court apart. It was first ordered that the Prince should have dined there also, seated at the Kings right hand towards the other end of the Table; but this considered to be somewhat short, the dishes many, and doubted besides whether the Ambassador would have accepted of the place at his Majesties left hand, if the Prince should have had the right, his Highnesse dined not with his Majesty. 1615 On St. Georges day, the King of Spaines Ambassador discovered to the Master of the Ceremonies (Sir Lewes Lewkner) a desire he had to see the order of that Feast of the Garter, wherewith the King made acquainted, Don Diego Sarmiento. his Majesty returned him an assurance of wellcome. He was placed for sight of the procession as it should passe by, upon the Terras in the window there, about the middle of the Brick-wall that divides the first Court, and the Cloyster Court, and thence had his prospect upon his Majesty and the Knights in their passage, who being returned to the Chappell, he repaired thither through the Guard Chamber, and had his place for sight of divine Service and Offering, in the Kings Closet. After retyring to the Councell Chamber, he had his dinner provided at his Majesties charge in the Lord Chamberlaines Lodgings therby, and conducted thence in the time of his Majesties dinner to the Ban∣quetting House, he stood at his right hand, inter∣taining discourse with him all the later part of his Majesties dinner. About the beginning of July arrived at London a Young Nobleman of Poland, Son to the great Zomoiski the famous Chancellour of that Kingdome, he deman∣ded accesse to his Majesty by a Germane (one Ryder)
that then lived in England, who speaking in hearing of Sir William Button Assistant of the Ceremonies, (as if the Master of the Ceremonies had been in great fault to have neglected to presse his desire of presenting his Service to the King) was reprooved by Sir William But∣ton for so rashly condemning the Master of the Ceremo∣nies (then imployd into Kent to meete, and receive the new come French Ordinary Ambassador) asking him if Zomoiski were a Prince Soveraigne or an extraordina∣ny Ambassador, that he should challenge that respect of a King, not to be seene at the pleasure, and time of every stranger. But this difference quietted with the forward Germanes strikeing saile, he had an Audience appointed and given him two dayes after in the Kings withdrawing Chamber. The second or third day following the same Zmoiski sent to the Master of the Ceremonies (to let him know of an invitation he had received from the King by a letter written to him in his Majesties name from Mr. John Murray of the Bedd-Chamber, to hunt with his Majesty at Theobalds) and asked (by his Messenger) the Master of the Ceremonies opinion and Counsell touching his intention to be present at Court the next Sunday (as his letter intimated) at the Audience for that day assigned of the new French Ambassador, and touching his man∣ner of carriage at it. Answer was returned him by Sir Lewes Lewkner, that he would not take upon him to re∣solve, or advise a man of his quality, especially having himselfe received no direction from the Lord Cham∣berlain to the purpose of his Invitation; so left him doubtfull, but not enough to hinder his repaire (not∣withstanding) to Court on Sunday after dinner, though too late to come to the Ambassadors Audi∣ence. Who that day the second of July had it at Theobalds, setcht in the Morning from his House at Charter-House by the Lord Walden appointed with Sir Lewes Lewkner, Mons. de Mareth. my selfe, and halfe a score Gentlemen to ac∣company him thither, whither he had for his transport one of the Kings Coaches, and three others at the
charge of his Majesty, besides two or three of his owne providing. Arriving at one of the clock, he was brought to rest himselfe in the Councell Chamber, and at two was called thence by the Master of the Ceremo∣nies and conducted by the Lord Walden to his Audi∣ence in the Presence Chamber, where the King standing under the State, the Ambassador marcht towards him, his owne followers first, next the Kings Servants that had accompained him from London, next before him Sir Lewes Lewkner, and at his side the Lord Walden. The Ambassador observing as little respect at his approaches as had been till then seene, after some few wordes of Complement, he presented his Letters, which while his Majesty read, he in all that time nor before did so much as cast his eye towards the Prince there present, till Sir Lewes Lewkner rounding my Lord Walden in the eare, his Lordship stept to him with an admoniti∣on for his addresse to the Prince, which the Ambassa∣dor tooke. But whether this admonition were well given, or well taken, or had been better deferred till the King had read his Letters (or best of all perhaps in∣timated immediately after he had performd his respects to the King) it may be a Quere. His Majesty invited him once to cover at first, but the Ambassador excusing, the King put on, and the other still stood bare headed, till the King having read the Letter, his Majesty put off againe, and falling to a discourse with him of some length, he never after covered till he was out of the Chamber. He returned to London with Sir Lewes Lewkner, and his followers attendance onely, my Lord Walden leaving him at the Court gate, and remain∣ing that night (not perhaps without a Solecisme in Ceremonie) at Theobalds. A day or two before his Audience, a question fell out between Mr. Secretary Winwood, and the Master of the Ceremonies, whether the French Ambassador mentioned were, or ought to be invited to dine at Court, (the Court being so far out of London) the day of his first Audience. Sir Lewes Lewkner said, he
knew of no such order; why then (quoth the Secreta∣rie) who should know it? but his Majesty (he added) is ill served, and ill instructed, and those things now a dayes which should be done, are not, and those not done which should be. The other replyed, he was none of his Majesties Tutors, and for himselfe, he was to receive his directions from the Lord Chamberlaine, and without them not to undertake any thing in his Office; but to answer (he said) more directly, he knew not wherein he had done amisse; yes, when (said Mr. Secretary) this French Ambassadors Ordina∣ry was met by you in Kent, when he should not, and should have had a dinner provided for him in Court the day of his first Audience, An errour of the Se∣cretary. which was neglected. Sir Lewes produced his owne experience against both his assertions, affirming he had met such and such Am∣bassadors on the way at some Towne between London and Dover, and extraordinaries at their first landing, and that Ambassadors Ordinary had many times to his knowledge had no dinner given them by the King at their first Audience. November the first. Seignior Barbarigo (who about a moneth be∣fore came to reside here Ambassador in place of Seignior Foscarini departed (his Majesty being at that time absent at Royston) was conducted from Charter-house to White-Hall by the Lord Haye for his first Audience, attended by many Gentlemen of his Majesties privy Chamber in two of the Kings Coaches, and seaven or eight of the Lords, besides five or six others hyred by himselfe. Being come to White-Hall, he had his conduction (together with his Predecessor) through the first Court up the great Staires by the Guard Chamber into the Councell Chamber, where my Lord Haye remaining with him (while the Master of the Ceremonies went to give an account that he was come) he was after brought to his Majesty in the Presence, no other Lord receiving him at the Presence doore, the Earle of Somerset (Lord Chamberlaine) be∣ing then in Prison. His Predecessor preceding, and first speaking, he delivered his Letters, and a breife
speech with a voice audible over all the Roome. Whence reconducted by the same Lord, and the Gen∣tlemen mentioned, to his house, they there found (be∣yond expectation) a long Table ready covered, and many white wax Lights, not yet (it not being foure of the Clock) lighted. When my Lord Haye, offering to parte but invited to stay at Supper (though unseason∣ably perhaps at so short a warning for a person of his quality) after some importunity of the Ambassador) yeelded (but with excuse (to indeare it might seeme) his invitation over suddaine, and familiar) that he must first returne to White-Hall to waite on his Ma∣jesty, promising to returne speedily (as he did) with such Gentlemen of his Company, as would accompany him. The supper was sumptuous, excellently ordered, and of five severall Services. The guests at it were thus ranged. At the Tables end, my Lord Haye alone; at his right hand, the old Ambassador, and beneath him the new; at his left hand Sir Henry Wotton then nominated Ambassador for Venice, and beneath him, Sir Henry Rich, the rest in their places. Within few weekes after the Ambassador Foscarini departed, who after at Venice, (being a man free, & full of fancy, of a stirring Spirit and undertaking) was ac∣cused to the State (of holding intelligence with the Spaniard) by three or foure conspiring Villaines, for what ends, either of malice to him, or advantage to themselves I know not, and condemned, and strangled in Prison; but not long after being found guiltless by his Accusers Confession, his Body was disinterred, buryed with Solemnity, and his Family (that after the course of that severe State suffered) were restored to their suspended charges in that Republique. The fifth of November (the day of the Powder Treason) his Majesty had invited the Arch-Dukes Ambassador Monsieur de Eoiscot to dine with him. He was conducted into the privy Gallerie Cham∣bers somewhat before dinner, and thence to the Kings presence. His Majesty dined in the privy Chamber, where as soon as he was set, the Ambassador having
washed apart, sate down also at the Boards end at the left hand of the King, & rising at the end of dinner, an instant before his Majesty, he followed him back into the privy Lodgings. His Secretary, and other Servants (two onely left to attend him at the Table) had at the same time ten or twelve dishes of meate served them in the Chappell Chamber on the Kings side. He de∣manded after dinner Audience of the Prince, but whe∣ther his Highnesse had such businesse with the Queen his Mother, as his excuse carryed, or that he thought the demand of the Ambassadors Audience unseason∣able, and too familiar with so short a warning, he had it not till the next day, when he came purposely for it at the houre of his Assignation. The Venetian Ambassador Foscarini being (after some five or six yeares time of his residence) to returne for Venice, a day or two before he had desired for his departure his Majesties present of Plate being brought to his House, he addressed himselfe to Sir Dudley Carle∣ton (then newly returned from his Ordinary Ambas∣sage at Venice) with a complaint, that whereas his Se∣cretary Muscorus (with whom he had had a long, and harsh difference) had been presented at his departure above halfe a yeare before with a chayne of Gold of an 100 l. value (being (he said) more by 40 l. then any of this place had before received) he (an Ambassa∣dor) that had resided here the time of a double Ambas∣sage was unproportionably rewarded, adding, That if he knew how to carry it without discovery, he would at his owne charge make up the ordinary value, the pre∣sent (as he affirmed) consisting of not above 600. ounces of gilt plate. To cleere the mistaking deceit, or intention of this proceeding. I went for better satis∣faction of the Ambassador and of Sir Dudly Carleton (who thought himselfe in regard of his late imploy∣ment bound to stir in it) to Mr. Seymer, one of the Officers of the Jewell House under Sir Henry Carewe Mr. of it, and was assured by him, that it was of the Kings own ordinance, and regulating; if the value of the Present prooved lesse then accustomed, his Majesty haveing
(he said) been informed, that his liberality towards Ambassadors in the Presents bestowed on them at their parting, exceeded that of other Princes to his Ambas∣sadors, so as he was resolved upon a defalcation. And whereas the French and Spanish Ordinaries were wont to have bestowed on them each 4000. ounces of gilt Plate, his Majesty had begun with the French Ambassa∣dor Monsieur de Buisseaux, and had sent him but two thousand ounces, the like course (he said) he held not long after with Monsieur de Boiscot, Ambassador for the Arch-Duke, whose predecessors having before had six∣teen hundred ounces, he was assigned, and received but eight hundred. So answerably, the Venetian Ambas∣sadors having usually received at their departures two thousand ounces, this had ordered him (after the pro∣portion of the other) but a thousand ounces; and for so much the said Officer affirmed, he would justify the weight of his Present, which might in reason have kept him from murmur, in regard he was by that proportion honoured with the gift of 200. ounces more then was the Arch-Dukes Ambassador, who had stood with him in competition for precedence. The King being desirous, that the French, Venetian, and Savoyard Ambassadors should all be invited to a Maske at Court prepared for New-years night, an ex∣ception comming from the French, was a cause of defer∣ring their invitation till Twelfe night, when the Maske was to be re-acted. This French Ambassador having demanded Audience by the mediation of the Lord Haye, and not obtained it as he affected (haveing not taken the due course of accesse by the Chamberlain (the Earle of Pembrooke) or being perhaps forgotten) was offended that the Spanish Ambassador (who had demanded one before the Kings remoove to Royston, but was referred to his conveniency at his returne thence) should have (as he had) an Audience before him. With this consideration, and not without his Majesties sence of such formality, he was not invited till for the Twelfe night, when he with the other two men∣tioned were received at eight of the Clock, the houre
assigned (no Supper being prepared for them, as at other times to avoid the trouble incident) and were conducted to the privy Gallery by the Lord Chamber∣laine, and the Lord Danvers appointed (an honour more then had been formerly done to Ambassadors Ordinary) to accompany them, the Master of the Ce∣remonies being also present. They were all there placed at the Maske on the Kings right hand (not right out, but Byas forward) first and next to the King the French, next him the Vene∣tain, and next him the Savoyard. At his Majesties left hand sate the Queene, and next her the Prince. The Maske being ended, they followed his Majesty to a Banquet in the Presence, and returned by the way they entered: the followers of the French were placed in a seate reserved for them above over the Kings right hand; the others in one on the left. The Span∣ish Ambassadors Son, Seig. Van Mall, and the Agent of the Arch-Duke (who invited himselfe) were bestowed on the forme where the Lords sit, next beneath the Barons, English, Scotish. and Irish as the Sonns of the Ambassador of Venice, and of Savoy had been placed the Maske night before, but were this night placed with their Country∣men in the Gallery mentioned. At a reading in the Middle-Temple, held by Mr. Martin, were invited to Dinner, the former three Am∣bassadors, Sir. Noell aron. and the States Ambassador also. At the Tables end sate the Reader, on his left hand on the Bench next the wall sate the French Ambassador, be∣neath him on that side the Savoyard, then the Earle of Worcester &c. On the Readers right hand on a forme sate first the Venetian, beneath him the States Am∣bassador, next him the Lord Lysle &c. It was observable that at this time the States Ambassador (as appeares) made no scruple of quitting the Precedence to that of the Duke of Savoye, which they have fince questioned, and still stand upon. The Ambassador of Savoy comming to the King at New Market, Note, not the Kings. March the second, was by me fetcht and conducted (in the Lord Chamberlaines Coach with
foure Horses) in company of the Lord Worceston (Sir James Spence, and Sir William Austroder) from his Lodg∣ing two miles out of Towne there to the Presence Chamber, where he attended till the Lord Chamber∣lain comming forth of the Kings withdrawing Cham∣ber brought him to his Audience there. This done, the Ambassador requested me to moove the Prince for the honour to kisse his hand. But it was objected, that the demand should have been more seasonably made, before the very instant of pretending to it. Whereto the Ambassador replyed, that he had no spare time for it between that of his Arrivall at Court and his im∣mediate repaire to his Majesty, which excuse admitted, he was immediately introduced to his Highnesse in his owne Lodgings. March the sixteenth, I brought the States Ambas∣sador to an Audience at Theobalds, after he had attend∣ed a while at the Lord Fentons Lodgings and was cal∣led up to his Majesty in the privy Gallery. A Messenger from Russia came to his Audience at White-Hall the three and twentieth of March, who not being qualified with the title of Ambassador, I onely (with no Lord to receive him) met him at the Court gate, and brought him to the Councell Cham∣ber; he was after an houre and an halfes attendance there, sent for by one of my Lord Chamberlains Gen∣tlemen, received in the stone Table Chamber by that Lord, and in the next admitted to the Presence of his Majesty. The foure and twentieth of March (being the Kings day of comming to the rowne of England, and that yeare Sunday) a tilting then prepared for, was put off till the day following. That evening a question fal∣ling between his Majesty and some Lords, whether some, all, or no Ambassadors were to be invited? The Lord hamberlain askt me, if I knew whether ever the Spanish Ambassador (Sarmiento) had been invited to that solemnity? I said, he had, and upon search of my notes found that at the Earle of Somersets Mar∣riage, he, the Arch-Dukes Ambassador, and both their
Ladies had been present at a tilting. This President brought, over-ruld his Majesty (who seemed inclined otherwise) to invite the French, Venetian and Savoyard (never before at any tilting) and now not willingly called to this, because of the troubles that those pub∣lique Ministers usually brought by their Puntillios at such incounters. Sir Lewes Lewkner was sent the evening before to the French, and the Venetian, and I to that of Savoy. The next day at two of the Clock he received the two first, and I the latter at the stayre foote of the Tilt-yard Gallery, and conducted them to the Chamber next that of ordinary Audiences, where they all attending till his Majesty and the Queen pas∣sed that way, they were taken along with them to the tilting. They were seated thus, the French on the left hand of the King with his back to the side of the Bal∣conie window, and somewhat sidelong from the Queen, that being held the best place after the Princes place on the Kings right hand, beneath whom sate the Vene∣tian, both their backs to the Balcony, and the Savo∣yard on the other side beneath the French Ambas∣sador. St. Georges Feast being come, the French Ambassador (without notice given to him, or from him of his com∣ming to Court for sight of the solemnity) was present onely with Sir George eere a Gentleman usher of the privie Chamber, in the Closet of the Chappell for sight of the Procession, both without Sir Lewes Lewkners, or my attendance, as his prepaire to Court, was without our knowledge. About the middle of the Kings dinner, Mr. Secretary Winwood meeting me, wisht me to ac∣company him where he was all alone in the Closet, and to bring him to see the King and the Knights at dinner. This I performed, and conducted him to the Banquet∣ing House, where placing himselfe at the left hand of his Majesty dining, he entertained discourse with him about an houre, and after (upon my intimation of the fitnesse of it) he descended to the side Table, and salu∣ted the Prince, and Knights of the order passing along before them, and thence returning by the privy Gal∣leries,
took Coach in the Parke to go to his Lodg∣ings. His omission of not making knowne to the King, or his Lord Chamberlain (as other Ambassadors had been accustomed) his desire to see the Feast, might have brought him to some inconvenience, worse then loosing his dinner (which the Spanish Ambassador had the year before) as this might also have had at the Lord Cham∣berlains Table. June 21. The King invited by the Earle of Exeter to hunt and dine at Wimbleton (as was also the French Ambassador) killed a brace of Staggs before he came to the house. There I demanded when it would be his Majesties pleasure to give accesse to the Ambassador whom he had not yet seen there? It was assigned him for after dinner. The Ambassador dined with the Lords and Ladies at a Table placed in the midst of a faire Roome, he seated in a Chaire at the upper end, at his right hand the Earle of Arundell, the Earle of Mountgomery, the Lady Elizabeth Hatton, the Lady Resse &c. At his left, the Lady of Exeter, the Lady Ann. Tuffton, the Marquesse de l'Isle, Unckle to the Duke of Retz (new∣ly come into England, and to that Feast in company of the French Ambassador) the Lord Haye, Then en∣tered into favour. Sir George Villars and others. After dinner the Ambassador going to see the house, he attended in the Gallery the Kings coming, and had there an houres entertainment of discourse with his Majesty. The Spanish Ambassador being invited to hunt with his Majesty in Theobalds Parke, went thither early, Don Diego Sarmiento. and after hunting, dined with his Majesty in the Privy Chamber. The King seated (as alwaies) in the midst of the Table, the Ambassador on his lest hand at the end, his Son Don Antonio, his Gentlemen and Servants had their dinner provided them in the Councell Cham∣ber, where Sir Patrick Murray, my selfe, and some other of the Kings Servants kept them company. Don Antonio fitting on a stoole at the end of the Table, gave subject of exception to one of the Kings Gentlemen ushers, as being, he said, irregular, and unusuall, that place being
ever wont to be reserved empty for State, but this as a superstition of a Gentleman ushers was neglected. After his Majesties dinner, the Ambassador (introduced by the Vice Chamberlain to the Presence of his Majesty in the Privy Gallery) had there his Audience, Sir John Digby. and as he was parting, the Lord Lysle Ghamberlain to the Queen asked me, and I the Ambassador, whether he had any intention to visite her Majesty? he answered, he thought it ill manners, and a kind of disrespect at so short a warning to venture the trouble of her Ma∣jesty. November the first Towards the time of Solemnity of Prince Charles his Creation for Prince of Wales, the King advised with some of his Lords which of the Ambassadors, French or Spanish, were first to be invited to it. The Spaniard had by a private and silent way offered him∣selfe to an Invitation. The French had been earnest∣ly pressed for by some Lords his favourous neere about the King. And had he but two dayes before (when he had an Audience of his Majesty) made offer of his presence at the Feast, his Majesty had perhaps been put to some plunge how to have excused it. But on Sunday night (the Eve of the Feast) a resolution to invite neither was taken, and I sent to the Spanish Ambassador with this Message, that his Majesty thankt him much for the offer he had made to honour the Prince his Creation with his presence, that some of his Majesties Servants neere him had earnestly solicited him to invite the French Ambassador, but his desire having been (as it should be ever) to give content to all Ministers of Forren Princes, he hoped and requested that he would not take it in ill part, if he should not be at all invited (no more then the French Ambassa∣dor should be) to that Solemnity, assuring him that to the next (whensoever) he should be invited before any. The Ambassador returned him for answer, that he most humbly kissed his Majesties hands, and desired, he would in all proceed with him as with an English man, and his Servant, that whensoever it should be his plea∣sure to do him the honour to invite him, it should be
his happinesse, and an especiall contentment to him. So againe, when his Majesty should think fit he should be absent, it should content him also, as being his Ma∣jesties pleasure to have it so. At my parting he was earnest to know whether there were not the like mes∣sage, and excuse sent to the French Ambassador, where∣of (though had it been so, it had been neither reason nor duty for me to discover) when I assured him there was none, he expressed much the greater Satisfact∣ion. About this time Cavalvere Guaratesi Agent here for the Duke of Florence, being assigned an Audience of his Majesty, was by mistake brought in (by whom I know not) by the way of the Parke, and privy Gallerie, and had a fire made him in the Chamber of the Am∣bassadors Ordinary Audience; Sir Lewes Lewkner at the same time told me of him, and wisht me to go to re∣ceive him; but neither was that Service to be performed by me to the Person of an Agent (and therefore by me declined) neither was any Agent to be admitted to that place by that way, but by the way of the privy Chamber. November the first 1617. The Ordinary Ambassador of Venice Seignior  Barbarigo dying here, Seignior  Contareni came hither Extraordinary, and was brought to his first Au∣dience at White-Hall by the Lord Clifford (accompani∣ed with halfe a score Gentlemen his Majesties Ser∣vants) in his Majesties Coch and three of the Lords Coaches. His house was at the Hospitall, where he had (attending our coming) the French Ambassaors Coach, the Masters of the Ceremonies who had dined with him, and five or six of the Ambassadors owne, and others providing. After his rest in the Councell Chamber, he was conducted to his Majesties Presence in the Presence Chamber, and there after a breife speech, Nota. and delivery of his letters of credence which (before he had made an end of speaking he took not from the Secretary, who held them in his hand) he returned to his home in company of the Persons mentioned.
An Ambassador (with his assistant Commissioner Chan∣cellour of Museovey) sent from that Emperour to his Majesty was (the fifth of November 1617.) received at Tower Wharfe by the Lord Compton, having been first met at Gravesend by Sir Richard Smith and others, sent in name of the City, and brought up in their Barges. The Kings Coach, and five or six others tooke them in at Tower Wharfe, but with such disorder of Gentle∣men come from Court (more then were appointed) that too soone pressed into them, as without my care, and boldnes to displace, some must of the better sort of Musfes have walked on foote to their Lodgings. They were wellcomd at their Landing with a volley of great Ordinance from the Tower, and shippes, and were incountered on Tower Hill by the Aldermen of the City in their Scarlet Gownes, and other Citizens in their Velvet Coates, and Chaines of Gold, all on Horse-back, and thence conducted to their House in Bishopsgate-street, where they were Lodged and defrayed at the charge of the Muscovey Company. On Saturday the eight of November, the Lord Chamberlain let me know his Majesties pleasure for my repaire to the French Ambassador with an assigna∣tion for his demanded Audience the next day at one of the Clock, and with an excuse of unfitnesse of the houre, in regard the King intended to depart that day betimes to Theobalds. He came according to appointment, and being introduced to his Majesties Presence, I (with de∣mand of Pardon) left him; and taking with me the Kings Coach (which together with the Lord Cham∣berlains attended that Service at the Court gate) went (without any Lord, or other to accompany me) to Bishopsgate-Street to setch thence the Muscovit Am∣bassadors to their Audience. All their Servants of less esteem marched all the way on foot before him (the rest in Coaches provided by the Merchants) each of those on foot carrying be∣fore them with ostentation to open view some parcell of the various Present sent to his Majestie from the Em∣perour.
This consisted of Sable Furres, black Foxes, Ermynes, Hawkes, with their Hoods and Mantles (covering their backs and wings) all enbroydered with Gold and Pearle; two lining Sables, a Persian dagger, and knife set with Stones, and Pearles, two rich Cloath of Gold Persian Horse-clothes, a Persian kettle Drum to lure Hawkes with &c. Besides many other Sables, and black Fox furres sent the King from three of the princi∣pall Nobles of the Emperors Court, and besides some presented to his Majesty from the Ambassadors and the Chancellour. The Queene and Prince had likewise their severall presents of furrs from all these mentioned alltogether esteemed worth—4000 l. sterling. The Ambassadors were received at the Court gate by the Lord Shandoys, and on the top of the staire (at the enterie to the Guard Chamber) by the Earle of Shrews∣bury, and by these conducted along the Terras immedi∣atly (the King allready expecting them with some im∣patience) into the Banquetting House. There at the doore they were met by the Lord Chamberlaine, and being entred the Roome, the exceeding press of the people so hindred their profound Superstitious reve∣rences, As stooping and knock∣ing their for cheads against the ground. or rather Adorations (intended to have been thrice) but by that hindrance only once, and that close before his Majestie performed by them) as it turn∣ed much to their discountenance, and discontent. Those that carried the Present (about fifty) were (after the Ambassador had finished his Speech, and Interpre∣tation made of it) commanded to pass along on the left hand, and in sight of his Majestie by one and one in the Privie Gallery, where his Majesty might at leasure in his return take better view of what the press before had hindred. The Lord Chamberlain recon∣ducted the Ambassadors (after their dismission) to the door of the Banquetting House, the other Lords to the Stations of the first Reception, and I only to their Lodging. The fourteenth of December, I was sent by the Lord Viscount sle (Lord Chamberlain to the Queen) to conduct the Wife of the French Ambassador to the pre∣sence
of her Majesty at Denmarke House, where at the Gate I received her, and brought her to a Chamber for her repose, at the right hand of the first Court; thither (after a small time of stay) repaired for her entertain∣ment, and to accompany her to her Majestie) the Lady Blanch Arundell, Mistress Barbara Sydney, Mistress Southwell of the Queens privy Chamber, and Mistress Gargrave, one of her Majesties maides of Honour; not long after a Gent. Usher, bringing word that the Queen was come forth into the Privy Chamber; she passed with this Company (her Servants going before her) towards her Majestie, and was met at the Presence Chamber door by the Lord Chamberlain, and received by her Majestie (without a kiss from her, though by some ex∣pected.) This done, she returned reconducted by the Lord Chamberlain to the Gaurd Chamber by the men∣tioned Ladyes to the entrance of the Portico of the first Court, and by my self to her Coach. The 17. of December (by Order of the Lord Chamber∣lain to the Queen) I and two of her Majesties Gentle∣men with her Majesties Coach, and another attended Sir Thomas Summerset, Son to the Earl of Worcester, for the Conduct of the Venetian Ambassador to his first Au∣dience of her Majestie: we found him ready at his House at the Spittle with two Choaches of his own, and some Gent. Strangers to accompany him thence. Bringing him first to the Councell Chamber at Denmarke House, he was introduced by the Lord Chamberlain to the Queen into the Privie Chamber, and after delivery of his Letters, and some few words of complement, he returned home with the company mentioned. Sir Thomas Somerset would have taken leave of him so soone as he entred the fore-Court of his House, but I telling him it was the Custome, and would be expected that he should leave him in his Chambers, he would not be perswaded to pass further then he had, which the Ambassador resenting, went sodainely from him, with∣out so much as offering to accompany him back to∣wards his Coach, and not without shewing a counte∣nance of infatisfaction.
The 28. of November, Sir Thomas Spence Lord of Wormstone, who had been a Generall in the Wars of the King of Sweden, let me know that an Ambassador ex∣traordinary from that King was arrived at Gravesend, and there attended Order for his proceeding. My Lord Chamberlaine was not then in Town, and because I was tender in taking any course without his Lordships di∣rections, and that also I knew not whether the Master of the Ceremonies, then also out of Town, might have already received Order for that Service; I wrote to him a Letter, signifying my knowledge of that imploy∣ment toward, for which, if he had already Order, I might be discharged. He wrote answer, that he knew it two dayes before, and would himself the next day go about it, and so did, fetching him from Gravesend to his abiding in the Crouchet Fryers. The fourth of December, Master Secretary Lake sent for me, and shewed me a Letter he had then received from the Earl of Buckingham, (then with the King at Newmarket) signifying in Answer of, and by him from my Lord Chamberlaine, That whereas the Ambassador of the King of Sweden, was desirous of an Audience there, the King was pleased he should have it, but not to be defraied (as that which had never yet been done to any of that Kings Ambassadors, neither would he bring up any such Custome) but that for Coaches and other things usuall, his Majesties pleasure was that Or∣der should be taken to furnish him. Upon sight of this Letter, I desired Sir Thomas Lake to send to the Master of the Ceremonies, but he was out of Town, as was also the lord Chamberlaine, whom when he returned I ac∣quainted with the business. At the first he was of Opi∣nion, that the Ambassador himself must pay for the hire of his Coaches, but I intimating, that it was his first Au∣dience he was to go to, at which usually his Majesty sent his own Coach for service of Ambassadors, he assented that he should have Coaches at the Kings charge, but not that he should have carriages, so for his Baggages also demanded, as being an allowance without presi∣dent, yet this also at the last (besides the hire of two
horses) was yeelded to, and we setting forth from London the eight of December, came the first night to Puckerage, whence I wrote by a Servant, sent before with the Am∣bassadors Cookes to the Earle of Buckingham, to signifie our approach, and that if his Majesties pleasure were to do the Ambassador any further honour by incounter of some Noble Person on the way, his Lordship might have time to take, and give directions for it. But his Majesty and my Lord being (when my letters came) allready horsed to ride on hunting, all rested without further order till the evening that we arrived at our Lodging, whence I went immediately to my Lord of Buckingham (my Lord Chamberlain being then at Lon∣don) with the accoumpt of our comming, and to solicite the Ambassadors Audience, but this being referred for resolution to the next morning, I acquainted Mr. Se∣cretary Lake, and the Lord Fenton with the Ambassa∣dors desire of dispatch, and at eleaven of the Clock before noone obtained the Kings pleasure for accesse at two After noone, when the Lord Clifford with halfe a dozen Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, his Majesties Coach, and the Bishop of Winchesters went to receive him at his Lodging, and with the Ambassadors follow∣ers in other foure Coaches that brought us from Lon∣don, brought him to Court. He was conducted (without stay any where) to the Presence Chamber, where his Majesty was already come forth to receive him. Having delivered his letters of credence, he made an Oration (to the purpose of the Kings Princely Office of media∣tion for Peace between the King of Denmark, and Sweden) of almost an houre long. Which finished, and breifely answered by his Majesty in the same Lan∣guage, the Ambassador turned to the Prince, and be∣ginning to him another formall speech, the King left him, so did the Ambassadors (after a while) the Prince, and returned to his Lodgings. This was on Thursday; The Saturday following about ten of the clock at night, came to my Lodging one of the Pages of the Bedd-Chamber to tell me from his Majesty, that his pleasure was I should invite the
Ambassador to dine with him the next day; which I performed in the morning, and had his Majesties Coach (no more) attending at the Court gate, about Noone when the King having ordered, that a Noble man should fetch him from his Lodging, it was held by others needlesse, and except at his first Audience (now past) and at his last, I onely might serve the turne for his conduction, which was allowed of, and I with Sir James Spence onely, brought him through the Presence into the withdrawing Chamber, where the King within a while entering, he took him with him to dinner in the Presence Chamber. About the midst of the Table (as accustomed) sate the King; at his left hand the Prince, and at the Tables end beneath, the Ambassador) who had for his Carver none but the Princes, and for his cup one of his own Gentlemen. Before dinner a quest∣ion grew (which was diversly argued according to opini∣ons) whether the Prince were to fit covered at dinner or no in Presence of his Father, seeing the Ambassador, as a Kings representant, was not to sit uncovered? Some affirmed, they had seene the Prince sit bare headed, when an Ambassador had his hat on: others otherwise. But the King cleared all, when after I had given him an hint of the question, and that himselfe had sate a while uncovered, he put on, and willed the like to be done by the Prince, and the Ambassador. The Ambas∣sadors Gentlemen had no Table appointed for them (by the Kings expresse order) because (he said) the young Prince of Anhaults Gentlemen (who had been with him the weeke before) had none, though the reason might not seem to serve for one as for the other (the different qualities of their Masters considered) but were sent two, or three of the cheife of them to the Table of the Groome of the Stoole, the Lord Fenton, the rest dined after with the Princes Waiters. When dinner was done, the King retyred himselfe, and left the Am∣bassadors there in the withdrawing Chamber to at∣tend there his returne, which was an houre after, and then holding with him a private conference, his Ser∣vants were after admitted into the roome, with whom I
entring, his Majesty drew out my Sword and knighted with it the Ambassador. From thence the Ambassador went (by assignation from the Prince, who would save him (he said) his offered paines of going to his Inn and returning) streight to his Highnesse Lodgings, and after a short Audience, tooke his leave. His Ma∣jesty by the mediation of Sir James Spence, was pleased (besides giving him a Patent for confirmation of his Knight-hood) to add a marke of honour to his Coate of Armes. The next day we left New-Market, dined at Cam∣bridge, saw the best Colledges there, lay the first night at Newport neare Audley end (which rare Building of the Earle of Suffolks the Ambassador also saw) lodgd the next night at Waltham, and after ten dayes absence were againe at London. There after the Ambassador had rested a day or two, he demanded Audience of the Queene, but her Majesty refused to give it without other reason or excuse, then that the King his Master had not written to her, and why should she then (she said) see his Servant. Towards the day of his parting (the King being then returned to London) and he having already taken leave of his Majesty at New-Market, it was held by some of the Lords, that his Majesty neede send him no present, his businesse (they said) little concerning us here, and his Master a re∣mote Prince of little, or of no necessary correspondence with us. Besides, he was sent hither with that Kings interest onely, as with a demand of aid against the King of Poland, and to solicite his Majesties mediation for freindship between him, and the King of Denmarke, and sinally to thank his Majesty for the good, and be∣neficiall Office he had done the King, and State of Swethland in composing by his Ambassador the bloody differences between them, and the Russians, with other the like reasons too frugally (perhaps) alleadged for sparing of a Present. But I intimating to my Lord Chamberlain, that seeing he had not been here defray∣ed by his Maesty further then by his Coaches, and Carriages, had been otherwise well looked on, and
graced by his Majesty had fairely carried the businesse he came for, of expressing of thankefullnesse, and was the first Ambassador that ever came from that King since his coming to the Crown of Swethen. His Lord∣ship moved his Majesty in it, and so prevailed, as that he sent him by me a Diamond Ring, and his picture inclosed in it worth about—2000 l. sent to him (I said) when I presented it, as a private Toaken without publique Ceremonie to be worne by him, not for the value, but for the senders memory. A day or two after he departed without any attendance or convoy of Barges or Coaches to Gravesend, and there tooke Shi∣ping. I moved my Lord Chamberlain for the Ambas∣sadors use of the Kings Barge to Gravesend, but his Lordship answered me, he knew of no such custome, and could therefore give no such directions. But his Lordship was herein mistaken, both for the extent of his owne power, and the Ambassadors right, the cust∣ome having ever been for the Lord Chamberlain to command, and for Ambassadors (especially extraordi∣naries) to use his Majesties Barges to, and from Graves∣end, as at their coming, so at their parting. January 5 1617. My Lord Chamberlain acquainting me with the pleasure of his Maesty for an Invitation (already in charge to Sir Thomas Smith cheife of the Muscovey company) to be delivered to the Ambassador and Com∣missioner of that Emperour for their dining the next day with his Maesty, his Lordship added, that he had given order to the Jewell house for a faire guilt cup to be provided, which when his Maesty had drunke in to the Ambassador, it was upon his pledge (after the custome of that Country) to be left to him as a present of the Kings favour; whereupon I was bold to demand of his Lordship, how he thought it would be apprehended, if the Chancellor his Collegue should not receive the like honour? this moved his Lordship to send to the Merchants for their opinion, which brought forth a resolutton, that the honour which one had, the other would (no question) expect,
and that threfore both must be alike proceeded with. So the next day I was sent to them with the Kings Coach and the Marquesse of Buckinghams with the company of foure or five of the Kings Servants (an honour more then usuall at such invitations) but the Merchants had made it their request, and it was not stood on for satisfaction of that particular Ambassador (whose Nation stands so much on Ceremony) with order to me to bring them to the Court gate by eleaven of the Clock, and this without stay through the Guard Chamber, and Presence to the privy Chamber, where his Majesty would be seated under the State, ready to receive them. And that after their Complement should be passed, thence I was to conduct them along the privy Gallery to the Councell Chamber for their conference with the Lords about their Negotiation (while the King should be at Chappell) and after to conduct them along the Terras, and by the way they had before passed to the privy Chamber to dinner. But all this designed course, was inverted by his Ma∣jesties impatience to stay so long for them, when, by reason I had relyed on my Lord Marquesse of Bucking∣hams assurance over night, that he would give order (as Master of the Horse) for the Kings coach to be ready the next day at the appointed houre, and his Lordship had forgotten it) we could not come to Court (being so retarded) till after eleaven; so as the King being already gone to Chappell, I received a direction dif∣ferent from the former, and discending from the Coaches at the Court gate, then happened another in∣congruity; the Lord de la ware appointed to receive them there, did not appeare at his time, so as the Am∣bassadors (Puntillios in their reception) made a stand under the Court gate, but at last (against their Cere∣monious stomacks) went on as far as the midst of that first Court, where they were met by the said Lord, and after on the top of the Stone stayres by Richard Earle of Dorset, which two Lords conducted them over the Terras into the Councell Chamber, kept them compa∣ny with almost an hours patience, till his Majesties
return from Chappell, they were at last brought through the Stone-Table Chamber, where the Lord Chamber∣laine met them, to the privy Gallery, where (about the midst of it) stood the King and received them, and was thence followed by them into the Privie Chamber, where the two Ambassadors seared at the Tables end of his Majesties left hand, they had their Health drunk to them by his Majestie after their Country manner, and the two Cups they drunk in, presented to them; After this followed, their Emperors Health drunk to them by his Majestie Their servants (about fifty of them) had a Dinner provided in the Guard Chamber, where the Guard that waited on them failed not of their accustomed care (by soone shifting away their Dishes) to keep them from surfeiting. The Ambassadors after Dinner were recon∣ducted by the two Lords mentioned, to their severall Stations, and by me and some of the Kings Servants to their Lodgings. Their failing at the time of their as∣signation (as before) was a cause, that the conference they should then have had with the Councell, was de∣ferred till the day following at nine of the Clock, which should have been otherwise either immediatly before Dinner, or in the afternoon, if they had not alleadged for excuse, that it was the Custome of their Country, that whensoever an Ambassador was to have an Audi∣ence of the Prince his Councell, they were to see the Prince his Eyes first, but in regard that their feasting with the King (where they said) they hoped his Maje∣stie would allow them the liberty to take their Drink, (which they must forbear if business were immediatly to follow) they desired they might not have their Audience till the next morning, and then see his Ma∣jesties Eyes before they should see his Councellors. This request (though unusuall) thought reasonable and granted. I about nine in the morning fetcht them from their home, where the Chancellor took ex∣ceptions that he had never a Gentleman sent to sit within his Coach, which was the Lord Chamberlaines (sent ordinarily then with the Kings) as I did with his
fellow Commissioner. And bringing them by direction through the Park, and the Tylt-yard Gallery to the Ordinary Chamber of attendance for Audiences, the King saw them only in the next Roome save one to the Privie Gallerie, and there with three words and their low reverences left them to the Councell. Eight of which having gone before into the Councell Chamber, and comming back to meet and receive them in the Stone-Table Chamber, they were by them in∣troduced (the Ambassador preceding) their Business heard, they dispatcht, brought back by the Councell to the Chamber where the King had seen them, and they (as they desired) his Majesties Eyes, and there left to my reconduction (which they had) to their Lodgings. A Mask prepared for Twelftyde (wherein the Prince was to be a principall Actor) and that his first Exercise in that kinde) was a subject for the King to in∣vite to it the Spanish Ambassador, and to observe the promise his Majestiy had made him the yeare before to that purpose, the rather because a Marriage between the Prince and the Infanta was then in Treaty. The French Ambassador in the mean time being left with litle or no regard of satisfaction given, or sought to be given him, either by private excuse, or otherwise. At which neglect (as he understood it) he took such shadow and offence, as repairing to Court, and deman∣ding (as unseasonably perhaps as impatiently) Access to his Majesty, was entertained by one or two Lords of the Bed-Chamber (whom he that instant in∣countered) with as satisfactory reasons as they could frame for diversion, but with little effect, though Sir Thomas Edmons (Comptroller of his Majesties House, who had been in France Ambassador) were (together with the Master of the Ceremonies, sent to him imme∣diatly after to the same purpose of modification; so as standing first upon his Masters right of Priority before any other Kings (particularly before that of Spaine) and affirming that he could prove by many Presidents
of our own, that if the Spanish Ambassador were ever heretofore present at any such entertainment, or Solem∣nity at Court, it was by the French Ambassadors per∣mission, when either he would not be there, or that he was sent to by his Majesty with intreaty to excuse his absence; He at last threatned to make protestation a∣gainst the wrong done his Master in his Ambassadors person. But this threatning little it seems regarded by his Majestie (who was resolved vpon his course for en∣tertainment of the Spanish) was a cause of the French Ambassadors sending his Secretary Post into France with the Account of the Kings and his own proceeding, and of the Letters that came shortly after with his Re∣vocation (before his three years Residence (wanting but a quarter) were expired; for which demanding an Audience the 16 of March, and having it granted (or the next day he after two hours attendance, had it of his Majesty in the Privie Gallery, and within few dayes after departed the Kingdome. The ill understanding be∣tween his Majestie and this Ambassador was an occasion that Master Secretary Lake sent for me, and acquainted me with the trouble his Majestie had put himself to, to make apparent the little reason the French Ambassador had to except so against his proceeding, which to justi∣fie, his pleasure was (he said) that Sir Lewes Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies, and Sir William Button, and I, Assistants should search our Notes, and presidents to the purpose of the Question. Whereabout I presently imployed my self, and sent my Collection (answerable to the time of my Service, and of my experience) to Sir Thomas Lake then with the King at Newmarket, but all to little purpose for his Majesties satisfaction beyond that he was resolved on for the Spanish Ambassador. In March, 1617. The Earle of Montgomery Gen∣tleman of his Majesties Bedchamber, was pleased to intreat my Service and company with him to the Ve∣netian Ambassador Seig. Contereni, his Lordship being sent to him from the King with a Message in the be∣halfe of Captaine Manwaring, which I delivered by
interpretation from his Lordships mouth to this purpose. His Majesty understanding what present use the State of Venice had of men for their Service, and desi∣rous to shew his affection towards them, in giving them his leave to raise certain companies here for their War, had taken further notice, that since they were to have Land-men to be commanded by Sir Henry Peyton, and Ships from hence for their Convoy to Venice; he thought fit to Recommend for command, and conduct of those Ships, Captain Manwaring, a Gentleman that he had made speciall choice of, and held most fit for that Imployment; and though the Ambassadormight have heard, perhaps, that heretofore the said Captain Man∣waring had followed the not approved course of a Pirate, it was in his unsettled yeares, and more despe∣rate fortune, but that now his Majesty knew him to be so reclaimed, as if he should himselfe have present use of such a Commander, he would imploy him as soon as any other of his Subjects, and would take it for an Ar∣gument of that Common Weales respects to him, if they would upon his recommendation entertain him. For doing which, they should find him more forward here∣after to further, and assist them in any the like occasion, when he should see that at his request they had made use of so fit a Subject for their Service. To this the Ambassador made answer, that the Re∣publique was much obliged to his Majesty for his so gra∣cious notice, and furtherance of their Assignes, and in particular for recommending one to their Service, whom he himselfe, and the World knew to be so wor∣thy, and whom he had already recommended to that State for imployment, but had as yet received no an∣swer, which dayly expecting, he must beg pardon if he did yet attend it without giving his resolution. My Lord replyed, that the King had been informd, that the Ambassador had full Commission, and power to imploy whom he should be pleased, and that with that liberty he might (he thought) admit of the Captaine. The Ambassador disclaimed, that he had any such liberty, and said, that on the contrary he had order from the
State to send the Ships away without any other Com∣mander then such as were to go along with them to go∣verne them, in regard they had a Commission with them not to offend or assaile any they should incounter at Sea, but if they should be assayled, then to defend themselves as they might with the power that was to go along with them. In conclusion, his Lordship fell to demand (that since Captain Manwaring could not have the com∣mand that his Majesty thought to prefer him to) whe∣ther the Ambassador would not let him assure the King (as from the Ambassador himselfe) and in name of the Republique, that if there should be hereafter any other imployment, suiting with the condition of Captain Manwaring, that he should have the offer of it before any man? the Ambassador assured his Lordship he might rest upon that, both for the respect, that the Re∣publique (he knew) carryed to his Majesties Recom∣mendation, and for the merit also of the Gentleman then Recommended, whom he had already (as he had said) by his Letters presented to the State for his va∣lour, and forwardnesse to do them service. The Russian Ambassador having received an Assig∣nation the two and twentieth of March, for the next dayes repaire to an Audience of the Councell; a request was made by some of the Muscovy Merchants (as such that well understood their Puntillious humoursthat way) that the Ambassadors might have (pretending it to be the custome of their Countrey, and an honour due to their Emperour) a sight of his Majesty before their conference with his Councell; which yeelded to, I had order to fetch them with one of the Kings Coaches, and the Lord Chamberlains (which was for their more ho∣nour every Audience sent to them in Company of the Kings under title of his Majesties Coach) taking with me one Gentleman of his Majesties Servants to accom∣pany me, for avoidance of the like exceptions as had been formerly taken by the Chancellour. I brought them to the Court at two of the clock, and discended at the great gate there, before I entered, I desired them
(as I had in charge) not to take it in ill part, if they found there never a Noble man to receive them, since it was (I said) a Ceremony not performed towards an Ambassador of any Prince whatsoever, except onely at his first, and last Audience. This could not hold them from murmuring, and ex∣pressing with discontented Countenances their ill Sa∣tisfactions; yet onward they went following my guid∣ance (as my Lord Chamberlain had given me directi∣ons) up the Stone Steps, through the Guard Chamber and Presence to the privy Chamber, where after some little time of stay (neere the State, but not sitting, nor having any Stooles for it offered them) the Lord Chamberlain came forth and brought them into the privy Gallery, where the King seated about a third part distant from the doore there, towards the Councell Chamber with his chaire back to the wall on the left hand, his Majesty rose up to them; at which they made their profound reverences, repeated in breife the sub∣stance of their errand, had a gracious answer, and were dismissed to rest themselves in the Stone-Table Cham∣ber, till the Councell should be assembled for them, who in a short time after passing by them, and onely saluting them, one of the Clerkes of the Councell cal∣led to me to bring them in, when comming forwards they made a suddaine stand, because they saw none of the Lords to returne forth to me and introduce them, till at length that respect also was by three or foure of the principall Lords given them, and they being en∣tred the Chamber, and seated in two chayres placed at the upper end of the Table, propounded, and dispatcht so much of their businesse as the ripenesse of it would give leave, and departed by the way of the Audience Chamber through the Privy Garden, and the Cloyster or Stone Walke there to their Coach, and were thence by me and the other Gentleman conducted to their Lodging. The next day being the foure and twentieth of March, and the day of his Majesties comming to the Crowne, I was sent (with a Gentleman to accompany
and two Coaches as before) to the same Ambassadors to conduct them to a Tylting (whither the Merchants had made way for an Invitation) by the way of the Park, to the end of the Tylt-yard Gallery next it, where in the first Window next that entrance were placed for them two Stooles, and a Carpet to leane on, the Travers drawn between them and the King, whom after the Tylting they were admitted to see and salute; their Fol∣lowers of all conditions (excepting their Interpreter for their use) were bestowed on a Scaffold ordained only for them next the entrance into the Tylt-yard on the Kings left hand, where three or four of the better sort of them had a leaning Carpet laid before them, and Seats to sit on, the rest had a Seate or two, and so took as they could their best commodities. At the time of these Ambassadors Iast appearance in the Councell Chamber, they had an assignation to be there againe the Wednesday sollowing, but other business then inter∣taining the Lords beyond expectation, it was deferred for a sevennight longer, when I fetcht, and brought them (attended as before) through the Park and Galle∣ries to the Chamber next that of ordinary Audiences, where they had not, nor affected a sight of his Majesty before their Audience of the Councell (as they had done before.) Thence I go to acquaint the Lords of their being present there, and retuning with Answer of their Lordships readiness to receive them; They would not be perswaded to move thence till some of the Lords should (as at other times) come forth to en∣troduce them which at last they did, and brought them (giving them the hand of entrance into the Councell Chamber) whence (after they had obtained a promise of a faire end to their Negotiation,) the Lords reaccompanied them to the Chamber whete they first received them, and there left them to my con∣duction. The French Ambassadot Monsieur de Mareth (having been detained here by the indisposition of his wife, or rather for fome other cause tending to his more faire loose at his departing three weeks after he had taken
leave of his Majesty) demanded, and had another Audi∣ence, whereof he had a quick dispatch, with no ill countenance from his Majestie, or shew of insatisfa∣ction from himself. The Russian Ambassadors having received Letters from their Emperor hasting their return, demanded Au∣dience of his Majestie, and had it the 13. of Aprill, at∣tended to it by me (as before:) They expected, and desired at the same time (as at other) when it was always refused or excused) to have a Nobleman to receive them at their comming to Court; but it was be∣fore hand incharged to me to put them from that hope, in regard no other Princes Ambassadorswhatsoever were allowed that honour at private Audiences, but only at the first, and last publike, and sometimes when they were invited to dine with his Majesty as they were. The 24. of April following, when they should have received an Assignation for their last Audience, and fiuall dismission, but the Signification of it having been incharged to no one particular of the Merchants, nor (as it out to have been) to the Master, or Assistant of the Ceremonies, it was forgotten or neglected till the very morning of the day assigned for it, whereof (when I, and one Gentleman with me, with only two Coaches, as formerly, came to fetch them)they com∣plained, as of a disrespect, being their last Audience, yet they set forth at halfe an hour past two, that they might be at the Court by three, their hour appointed precisely, and by me observed as punctually, that nei∣ther they might stay (against which they ever murmu∣red) for the King, nor the King (which had been most unfit) for them. At the Court Gate they were received by the Lord Gerrard, in the middle of the Court by the Lord Crumwell (an honour done them more, then (for ought I ever heard) to any other Ambassador, and yeilded to upon their own and the Merchants importu∣nity) and on the top of the Stone-Stairs by the Earle of Ormond, who with the two other Lords conducting them through the Guard-Chamber (a different way from what had been before Ordered for their passage
over the Terras to the Banqueting House, but suddenly changed, with regard to the then appearance of Courti∣ers, which in that larger Roome would have lessened the Majesty of that presence.) They were received at the Presence Chamber door by the Lord Chamberlain, and brought by him to his Majesty there standing un∣der the State, who when he had received their thanks, and was passing to his last Complement of farewell, they fell earnestly to press his Majesty that his Ambas∣sador (then nominate for Muscovy) might be sent along in company with them, and with the money granted to be lent them (which was an hundred thousand Marks.) But the King excusing both, saying, he was not yet fully resolved upon the choise of the person, for that charge, who must have time (he said) to put himself to equipage. To this answer, they objected their Commission and In∣struction, which they affirmed to have from their Empe∣ror to this purpose; That in case they should obtaine the sending back with them of an Ambassador, they should not come away without him; so as in conclusion, the King upon their much, and even unmannerly importu∣nity, denied them not that request also, whereof they knew so well how to serve themselves; as going thence immediatly to the Councell, (demanding permission for it but at that very instant) they would not let go the hold they had gotten of the Kings assent, till they were dismissed with the like from their Lordships, of sending the Ambassador in their company, though this could not succeed without great charge and trouble to the Merchants in so long a stay, as must be necessary for the preparatives of the (till then but privately nominated) Ambassador Sir Dudley Diggs: This concluded, they left the Lords, were reconducted by the three Lords before mentioned to the place of their first reception, and by me to their lodging. When the next moneth began, his Majesties trouble, the Lords, and the Merchants ended with the dispatch, and departure of these two Ceremonious Ambassadors, who (content neither with the Kings present then sent them, and by me delivered, having been provided at
the Merchants charg (though presented in his Majesties name, and worth above six hundred pounds between them) nor with the Merchants worth well neere as much) murmured that they could have with them but a third part of 100000 Markes yeelded to be lent their Emperour, and for which notwithstanding they knew not how to give one Marks worth of sufficient Security, &c. They went within few dayes after (accompanied with Sir Dudley Digs his Majesties Ambassador to the Emperour of Russia) downe to Gravesend, and thence North-ward in such Ships as the Merchants of the Mus∣covy company had provided for their returne, and for the continuance of the re-established Traffick of those parts. In September 1618. The Lords of the Councell had committed to a Justice of Peace his House (in nature of close Prisoner) one Monsieur de la Chenay (a French Gentleman, late one of the followers of Monsieur de Mareth, and now a domestique of Monsieur de Clere left Agent here after the departure of the Ambassador) for having confessed upon examination before the Lords, that he had an hand (by the said Agents imployment) in an escape that Sir Walter Rawleigh would have made into France for some disservice to his Majesty. The Agent being hereupon sent for, and appearing before the Lords assembled in the Councell Chamber, refused to answer unto Interrogations till he should be proceed∣ed with (as others) qualified as he was) had been, al∣leadging further, that Mr. Bercher (at the same time Agent for his Majesty in France) had at an Audience before the Councell of State there pretended, and clai∣med a right and honour done to his Representative quality. viz. Not to propound his businesse, till they the Lords Councellours should stand up as he did, and be uncovered as he was in that place Ambassador (he said) being allowed to sit and be covered, as they the Councellors also were at the time of their Audiences. This le Clere affirmed had been yeelded to by the King his Masters Councellors, and that he had reason to challeng the like from their Lordships. The Lords Answer was that severall Countries
had severall formes, and that the manner of proceeding in France, was no rule for ours in England, where cust∣ome had made it otherwise. But this answer would not serve to draw any from le Clere for satisfaction of their demands, till at length the Lords (neither to yeeld to him, nor to force his resolution) thought good to retyre themselves, and him with them into another Chamber, and there, as by way of private discourse (where the place being no Councell Chamber, no odds of obser∣vance were given, or taken) they examined him upon his followers la Chenays confessions and actions; he twice with great oathes denied all knowledge of them, till at length la Chenay (brought further to confront him) ac∣knowledging and confessing, (as he had done to the Lords before) the truth of his imployment for Sir Walter Rawleighs escape) le Clere could no further out∣face it, but with shame confessed it. Whereof as soon as his Majesty was informed, he was in his Majesties name commanded by the Lords to surcease from all further negotiation or exercise of his charge, and not to come in presence of his Majesty till a messenger sent instantly post to France should returne with signification of that Kings pleasure for the avowing, or dissavowing of his Ministers actions. About a moneth after a letter came in answer with particular charge (as the Agent pretend∣ed) that he was to deliver it himselfe to the Kings own hand. To which purpose, posting to Royston (where his Majesty then was) and making offer himselfe to present his Letter, he could not be admitted, but be∣ing referred for delivery of it, to one of the Lords that then attended his Majesty, he refused it and said, he would personally (as he had command) or not at all performe that Service. So as returning to London, and thence in few dayes to France with the same Letters undelivered, and the account of his proceeding, the Revocation of his Majesties Agent followed &c. A Chiaus, or messenger from Turkey, being arrived at Gravesend, was received there October the thirteenth, by the Lord Rich, accompanied with his Brother Sir Henry Rich, the Master of the Ceremonies, my selfe, and
halfe a score other Gentlemen, that Lord entertained noblie at his owne charge all the company, went the next morning from his owne Inn to the Chiauses, and thence conducting him to the Kings Barge, and two others (come down for his Service) and Landing him at Tower Wharfe, we there entred the Lords Coach, and other of his friends, and of the City (the Kings Coach not then serving) and brought him to his Lodg∣ing defrayed (as was also his diet, during his stay here) by the Turkey Merchants. He had within few dayes after his publique Audience of his Majesty in the Ban∣quetting House, purposely hung for him with rich hang∣ings, where his Majesty touched one of his followers, said to be his Son, for cure of the Kings Evill, useing at it the accustomed Ceremony of Signing the place infected with the crosse, but no prayers before or after. An Ambassador from Venice, Seignior  Donati being come to reside here in place of Seignior  Conta∣reni (recalled by the Republique) was brought to his first Audience the first of November by the Lord Clifford the Master of the Ceremonies, seven or eight other no∣minated Gentlemen, and my selfe as voluntary, the Kings Coach, the Lord Marquesse of Buckinghams, and three other serving, he was taken into them at the house of his predecessor mentioned, and their places taken up by themselves in the Coach (both on one side, the Ancienter having the right hand next the Horses) and the other side left to the Lord Clifford, and the Master of the Ceremonies. There came with us fifteen or sixteen Coaches to the Court. The Ambassadors gui∣ded over the Terras to the Councell Chamber, and af∣ter halfe an hours repose there, back to the Guard Chamber, were at the Presence doore received, and introduced by the Lord Chamberlain for their Audi∣ence, &c. This Ambassador Donati was not long after revoked by his Prince for misdemeanors in his charge whilst he was Ambassador in Savoy, and Seignior Geroni∣me Landi sent to reside here in his stead. A Maske of certain Lords and others, being prepared
for Twelfe night, and to be represented in the Hall at White-Hall (the Banquetting House having been burnt a little before) gave occasion to his Majesty (who had been often troubled with the Puntillious dif∣ferences of Ambassadors about invitations, preceden∣cies, and the like) to take advantage of this more quiet time then accustomed, while no French nor Spanish Ministers were here, and to begin a new course (at least pretended, if not intended) no more to ad∣mit of Ambassadors to sit with his Majesty under the State; and to this purpose gave order for a Box, or seate to be made apart (with Stooles, Cushions, and leaning Carpets to be bestowed in it) on his Majesties right, but somewhat obliquely forward, and therein were placed (without exceptions from any of them) the new come Venetian Ambassador Donati, and foure Commmissioners sent hither from the States of the united Provinces. The Prince Palatines Ambassador (the Baron of Donowe, at that time likewise imployed hither) was seated as a domestique (but not without consideration of avoyding question) uppermost above all the Lords on the fourme usually placed for them. 1619 The Count de Tillieurs sent to reside here Ambassador Ordinary from the French King in succession of Mon∣sieur de Maretz (though after almost an yeare, and an halfes intermission of that charge) came towards his first Audience of his Majesty then at Windsor, the fifteenth of September, and was met at Staines by the Earle of Kelley Groome of the Stoole to his Majesty, sent thither to receive, and conduct him (the Lord North having been the Evening before appointed by the Lord Chamberlain for that service, but counter∣manded the next morning upon maturer consideration of the fitnesse to send to meete him a person of a more eminent place, and title, then a Baron) with the Lord Kelley went in his Majesties Coach my selfe, and five Gentlemen of the privy Chamber; he had Audience given him in the Presence or privy Chamber (one there serving both turnes) where having in a gracefull fashi∣on
made his approach with three reverences, and pas∣sed a breife Complement, called to his Secretary for his Letters of credence, and presented them. Which whilst the King was reading, he turned towards the Prince (then present) and passed with him a short Complement, which some judicious standers by cen∣sured for unseasonable, having not yet finished the pur∣pose he had in hand with the King, affirming his car∣riage had been better onely to have bowed to the Prince after he had presented his first respects to his Majesty and not to have spoaken to the Prince till he had fully ended what he had to say to the King. After his Majesty had invited him to cover, he obeyed, but uncovered immediatly holding his hat all the time after (except one little instant) in his hand, that night he returned to Staines with the Lord Kellies conduct, who went immediately back to Windsor, and the Am∣bassador the next morning to London. The day of the French Ambassadors Audience at Windsor, came thither one of the young Dukes of Halstein, cozen Germane to the deceased Queen Ann, who sending for me to his Lodging, desired my assist∣ance for his private accesse to the King. (He having been here at another time before with his Majesty) and that he might have the honour to hunt with him the next morning without further noise or trouble of Cere∣mony. For this I repaired to the Lord Chamberlain, and craving his advice and directions, had for answer that in regard the Duke came privatly, and desired but a private accesse, he wished me to addresse my selfe to one of the Gentlemen of the Bedd-Chamber, and par∣ticularly to the Marquesse of Buckingham, that the King might be acquainted with his desires. So speak∣ing that night late both with his Lordship, and his Ma∣jesty, I had for answer, that the next morning at seven of the Clock, his Majesty would be glad of his sight, and of his Company in hunting. At the houre assigned, he and I with him entring the Kings withdrawing Roome, while his Majesty was booting himselfe, he there received his wellcome, and
waiting on his Majesty to his Coach, he was admitted to sit by him. After taking Horse with his Majesty in the Parke, he road, and I with him the death of a leash of Bucks, returning after in Coach with his Majesty to Windsore, he went the next day to London. A sea∣vennight after his Excellency had my company to his Majesty at Wansted, and that night back to Lon∣don. The Count Guido, Son to the Marquesse de Villa, or as some others stilled him de Sillana (who had been here Extraordinary about six yeares before) was sent hi∣ther Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy to condole the death of Queen Ann, dead halfe a yeare before, when our Blacks had been already laid by, by which those that he, and his followers wore, were made the more unsuitable. He had his Audience in the Presence at White-Hall (More solito) brought to it by the Earle. And the Sunday following was accompanied to his second and last Audience, and to dine with his Majesty at Theobalds. He sate with the King in the privy Chamber there at the lower end of the Table, the Or∣dinary Ambassador Gabellione sitting at the side opposite to the King neere the end. About the midst of dinner his Majesty dranke the Dukes health bare headed, and standing till they both had pledged it. After this the Count Guido dranke the Kings health to his Collegue (having first demanded leave for it of his Majesty.) Three or four men of Tille, as Count Tispoti, and  (which to do him honour had accompanied him hither) dined in the Councell Chamber accompanied by the Duke of Lenox, the Earle of Leicester, Sir Tho∣mas Edmonds Treasurer of his Majesties Household, and other Gentlemen The Baron of Denow eimployed to his Majestie from the Prince Palatine, soone after the Crown and title of King of Bohemia was conferred on him by the Election of those States, had had after his Arrivall here two or three private Audiences without publique notice or stile of King given him by his Majesty. He was after∣wards
appointed to follow the King to Newmarket, whither he came the 27. of January, with no other company or attendance but Master Williams (Agent here for the affaires of that King, or rather for the Queen, our Kings only Sister, and his own few followers. (Sir Lewes then remaining at London, and expecting the Arrivall of a Spanish Ambassador Don Diego Sar∣miento, new made Conde de Gondemar) some occasions at the same time having drawn me to Newmarket) I received there the Lord Chamberlaines Command to do the Ambassador the service of my place; so I waited on him to his first Audience there the thirtieth of Ja∣nuary, when my Lord Marquess of Buckingham, the Earl of Montgomery, the Lords Viscounts of Purbeck and Doncaster, the Lord Gray, and divers others of his Majesties better sort of Servants, did him the honour on foot to come to his Inn, (his Majesties Coach walk∣ing by) & accompany him thence on foot to the Court, where his Majestie receiving him in the withdrawing Chamber, rook him instantly with him into his Inner Lodgings, whence (after an hour, and an halfes confe∣rence) he was reconducted by all the Lords mentioned on foot as before to his Lodging. From that time he had his accesses to Court, and to his Majesties Presence as a Domestique without Ceremony, and this by the Kings own Signification of his Pleasure to me to that purpose. From Newmerket he went along with his Majesty to Royston, Theobalds, London, and with my continuall Attendance. Towards the end of February Monfieur Reuinch Hau∣son, Ambassador from the Princes of the Union of Ger∣many, came to the King at Theobalds, conducted thi∣ther by Sir Lewes Lewkner only at his own particular request (for avoidance of noyse, and perhaps of note of his small Traine) he was introduced to his Audi∣ence by a private way over the Leads into the Prevy Gallery, where the King with two or three of his Coun∣cell (and exclusion of others) gave him Audience. The 21. of March I had Command with his
Majesties Coach to conduct him from his Longing in the Strand to White Hall, by the way of the Park and Galleries to the Ordinary Chamber of Ambassadors At∣tendance, and thence after some two hours presence of stay there, to the presence of his Majesty in the private Gallery. The Conde de Gondemar sent Extraordinary Ambassa∣sador from the King of Spaine, arriving at Dover a∣bout the beginning of March, was met there with Coaches by the Masters of the Ceremonies, at Graves∣end by the Earle of Dorset, and by him, with many of the Kings Servants, and near thirty Coaches brought from his Landing out of the Kings Barge &c. at Tower Wharfe to the Bishop of Elyes House in Holborne, taken up for him (with an Example not unmurmur∣ed at.) The 12. of March, He had his first publique Audience, conducted to it by the Earle of Arrundell at White Hall, where, after some small time of repose in the Councell Chamber, passing over the then ruinous wood∣den Terras, at the instant that he was entring the first great doore next that of the Guard Chamber, the weight of the over thronging multitude next about him, pressing downe part of the Plancks and Joyces under him, that it suddainly fell, and with all the Earle of Arrundell, the Lord Gray, and others, with great danger, and some hurt (particularly to one youth, who under the ruins had his arme and shoulder broken) the Am∣bassador having received but halfe a fall of the nether parts of his Body onely, his Servants next him staying and holding him by the upper, as he was at the instant of entring under the doore. The danger, and feare of it past, he was received at the Presence doore by the Lord Chamberlain, and brought to the Presence of his Majesty without discomposition of countenance or otherwise for his fall, rather merrily excusing it, as an effect of his hast and longing to see his Majesty. The Kings day (March the foure and twentieth) returning towards the Solemnity usuall at it of running
at the Tylt &c. his Majesty was pleased to send an Invi∣tation to the Spanish Ambassador extraordinary Count of Gondemar, and also to the French Ambassador Ordi∣nary the Count de lleurs to be there; and because of their accustomed difference about precedence, there was care had as much as might be, to please them both to to their satisfactions, especially his Majesty being re∣solved (for his reasons before alleadged of the trouble they brought with them in that point) to admit neither of them to sit under the Seate next him. Hereupon it was concluded on his Majesties part (and the places offered to both their considerations) that they should be both seated in severall places on his right hand thus. The French Ambassador in the first Window of the Duke of Lenox his Lodging over the great Gate next without the Tilt-yard East-ward, and the Spanish in a standing dressed up of purpose over the Porters Lodge within the Tilt-yard, Upon view both in equall distance from his Majesty. The Spaniard professed to be pleased with his allotment, but the French not so, alleadging (though he had at the first seemed content with the distribution) that the Spaniards assigned place was in publique, and in the Kinge eye, his not, but in a pri∣vate corner out of the view of the King, and almost of the people, though in scituation higher then the other, and in the same body of the Kings House; but that which he most urged, and stood upon was, that suppose there should be in their rancking there no difference, and that they should be both placed, and entertained on equall termes, yet even that was a Subject for a maine exception in regard that the French King his Master would not (he said) treate with the Spaniard as questioning onely parity, nec vult Gaesarve priorem Pompeius∣ve parem. but as making no question of his right of Priority, which he would challenge, and take as his due wheresoever. Besides (he said) because the Spaniard might seeme to haue the better place, as being most in the Kings and peoples sight, and that place allotted him more re∣tyred, and out of view, though within the Body of the Kings own House, he desired that (if the place were so
equall, as some Spanishly inclined pretended) he might have the first choyce, and it should content him. In fine being left herein unsatisfied, he absolutely refused to come at all, or to send his Lady, though her place were already assigned her in a Compartment provided, and kept for her neere his Majesty within the Gallery, so as in conclusion, the Spaniard remained Master of the Field, where no Enemy appeared, taking his place ap∣pointed over the Porters Lodge as mentioned. In the meane time other Questions grew between other Ambassadors then also invited; as between the King of Bohemias Ambassador, the Ambassador of Venice Signior Landi, the Duke of Savoys Ambassador Seignior Gabellione, and the States Ambassador Sir Noell Caron, they all invited, made promise to be there, and to content themselves with the places appointed them at the lower end of the Tilt-yard in the House of the Lady Walsingham; but the Venetian understanding the day before that the King of Bohemias Ambassador was to accompany the Ambassador of the Princes of the Union in his way homewards as far as Gravesend, and supposing he could not possible returne in time to be present at the Titling, he sent Sir Lewes Lewkner to my Lord Chamberlain to intimate; Crowned Heads or Kings Am∣bassadors. That whereas the Ambassador of Venice had been ever accustomed to be treated al pare with the Ambassadors of Teste Coronate, if he should be placed apart with onely the Duke of Savoys and States Ambassadors at one end of the Tilt∣yard, and the Spanish Ambassador alone at the other, Axiome. it would be a diminution of his quality (the first place of an inferiour degree, being ever held (he said) worse then the last of a Superiour) and that rancking being not regall (which was that he pretended) but ducall, as he must esteem it, if he might not have the King of Bohemias Ambassador for companion. Upon this formality of the Venetian, the Master of the Ceremo∣nies repairing to the Bohemian Ambassador, and recei∣ving his assurance with promise, that he would returne in time from Gravesend, and be there in person, the Venetian and Savoyard Gabellione concluded likewise
with promise to each other to be there, and with them the States Ambassador; but this last the Evening before obtruded a new exception, and sent word to my Lord Chamberlain, that he had an express command from his Masters the States (which it seemes he had not so well thought of or had forgotten till then) not to quit the Precedence to any but to Kings Ambassadors and to the Venetians, so as if the Sovoy Ambassador should be there, he must be absent, and so he was; but on the day of Tilting, the Ambassador of Bohemia, and the Venetian both appearing, the Savoyard came not, though he had that very morning by his promise as∣sured his Presence together with the other two. Wher∣upon the Venetian having already taken his place at the lower end of the Tilt-yard (as had also the Bohe∣mian) grew to be much unsatisfied and suspicious, This tak∣ing the hand of the Venetian who gave it him without question. that the Savoyard might have cuningly insinuated himselfe into some place neerer the King, either with the French Ambassador (who perhaps (he said) might repent himselfe of the refusall he had made, and accept of the place first appointed, or with the Spanish) though that, (in regard of their then not best Correspondence) were much unlikely. In either of which Cases, the Ambas∣sador of Savoy should, to his scorne, get the Precedence, being so scated with the preceding Ambassadors, against which (if it were so) he must (he said) protest by his immediate departure, but the Savoyard (as I have said) not coming, nor intending it, (as after appeared) laid the fault of his default upon an instant opportunity (even then (he said) offered to him by the French Am∣bassador) of writing by an express of his that day to be dispatched, though the true cause of his absence were imagined to be, that he was not yet resolved (as having no order for it) to quit the Precedence to the Bohemian as to a Kings Ambassador, in regard as he was Ambas∣sador to the Prince Palatine he had disputed it; so as he drove forth the day in feare and doubt, till I that night resolved him (as I promised him I would) by a Letter from my Lord Chamberlains direction, that he had that day received no wrong at all by any cuning
or indirect carriage of the Savoy Ambassador for any advantage taken by his placing. The Axiome before delivered by the Venetian Am∣bassador (that the first place of an inferiour degree, Nota. is worse then the last of a superiour) was judged upon discourse I had with some of understanding in those Affaires) to be of valew in a distinct Company, but might be otherwise in a Joynt Assembly; as at the conclusion of the Peace at Vervins, where the French and Spanish meeting, and contending for precedence, viz. who should sit at the right hand of the Popes Legat, an Expedient was found of sending into France for the Popes Nuntio residing there, who scated at the right hand of the said Legat (the Legat himselfe sitting at the Tables end) the French Ambassador being of∣fered the choyce of the next place, he took that at the Legats left hand, leaving the second at the right hand to the Spanish, who taking it, perswaded himselfe to have the better of it; sed de hoc quaere. December 1620. The French King comming so neer England as Cal∣lays, and being newly returned thence towards Paris, sent hither for his Ambassador Extraordinary the Mar∣quess de Cadenet one of the Mareschalls of France, and brother to that Kings Favorite, the Duke de Luines. He with an Attendance of between fifty and sixty persons of title and mark, and of above three hundred others, had passed the seas to Dover, before any order for his Extraordinary reception was fully resolved on at London, so as the Master of the Ceremonies being sent thither scarcely in time to receive him; he passed his time there four or five dayes for the better ordering of his occasions. After passing on towards London, the Earle of Arrundell, accompanied with the Lord of Hunsdon, and divers Gentlemen of his Majesties Privy Chamber in about twenty Barges went from London the 28. of December, and that night visited him in his Majesties name at his Lodging in Gravesend, where the Ambassador not meeting his Lordship till he came to the Staire Head of his Chamber door, and at his parting, accompanning him no further (no more then
did the ordinary Ambassador the Count de Tillieurs who had been frownd upon by the Marquess for not meeting him sooner then at Gravesend. The Earle of Arrundell was much displeased with it, as with a neg∣lect of his quality; so as the next day (in some part to right himself) he desired the Master of the Ceremonies to go to the Ambassador, and tell him, that in regard his Trayne was great, and his Lodging little, he would not be troublesome to him there, but would meet him in the Street, and thence accompanie him to his im∣barking; So he did, and on the way incountered ano∣ther cause of exception, in that the Ordinary Ambas∣sador did not so much as offer him the hand (my Lord pretending a kind of right to it, The most of Opinions are, That the Am∣bassador Ordinary should have of the place he took. at the least to have it offered him in the presence of the Extraordinary, but of this Quaere.) Arriveing at Denmark House (ordained for the Ambassadors Aboade) the Earle landing with him at the Garden Staires, and accompanying him not further then to the foot of the first Staire ascending to the Privy Lodgings, took his leave, and (saying, there were Gentlemen there that should shew him his Lodging) left him. This bred much discourse, and was (with the other reserved proceeding of both the Ambassadors at Gravesend) soone conveied to the knowledge of his Majesty who (sensible more of the cause given by the Ambassadors then of the measure re∣turned by the Earle of Arrundell) stormed much at it, till (Sir Thomas Edmonds Comptrouller of the Kings House, being sent the same night from his Majestie with some formalization to that purpose) The Ambas∣sador was said the next day to have made his excuse to my Lord of Arrundell, that his indisposition in his Journey, and at the time when he came to receive him, was a cause that he met him no sooner, nor accompanied him no further; whereupon the difference was for that time accommodated. After one dayes rest, the King sent to the Ambassador for conduction to his already assigned Audience; the Lord Marquess of Buckingham, accompanied with the Earls of Dorset and Warwick, four or five Barons, and about twenty Gentlemen in the Kings, and sixty other Coaches (so many appointed,
but the number was soone increased to above one hun∣dred) he passed with his Traine from Denmarke House to Westminster, the King there meeting him by Barge from White-Hall, and staying his Entrance in the higher House of Parliament, where he gave him (and with him the Ordinary Ambassador) a gracious Audi∣ence. Besides the higher House of Parliament, the Court of Requests, and the Painted Chamber (the way of his passage) were all adorned with rich hangings of Tapistry. At the end of his Audience, intimating to the King, that the haste of his return would make him bold to press his Majesty for another speedy Access: His Majesty told him, he should (if he pleased) have it that Evening, which was performed after his returne to his Lodging by a private repaire to Court in Barge, accompanied only with my Lord of Buckingham, when he had the Kings Eare two hours together. On Wednesday following being the third of January he was invited to dine with the King at Westminster, where his Majestie comming thither by water stayed for him (with much impatience) Et pur cause) above an hour, the Antipaste having been already set upon the Table. Being at last come and entring (with all his company) the higher House of Parliament (wherein they dined) they so filled the Roome, disorderly stuffed before with an unruly intruding multitude, as no Offi∣cer was able freely to dischage his Service till the King sat down to meate, the Extraordinary at a convenient distance on his left hand, and the Ordinary at the Tables end (the Prince not there.) The French Noble∣men of the best quality, were conducted by the Duke of Lenox, and the rest by my self to the Court of Re∣quests, where the greater number of them taking their places promiscuously at the Table, and the Duke lea∣ving them (perhaps somewhat abruptly) before he had seen five or six of the principall, set down at the upper end. These begun whisperingly to murmure amongst themselves, as those that might seeme neglected to be left so alone without some persons of like quality to accompany them, and to invite them to their sitting;
which I perceiving, began to perswade them to what they came for, and had prevailed with the Marquess de Money, and one or two more of them, till my Lord Chancellor (Bacon) the Lord Treasurer (Montague) and the Lord Privy Seale (Earle of Worcester) entring the Roome, and passing by them to sit downe (as they did) altogether at the right hand of the Table, without gi∣ving other countenance of respect, then putting off their Hats, or once inviting the French to sit down with them, they took their Cloaks, and with shews of much discontent, departed the Roome to their Coa∣ches; whether I and two other Scottish Gentlemen fol∣lowed them fast with our best perswasions for returne, but not able to prevaile, we left them. Halfe an hour after I went, (as I had Order) upon an invitation I had delivered the day before to the Ordinary French Ambassadors House, for his Lady to come that After∣noone to a Dancing appointed at White-Hall; but she in her womans haste to be at those Sports being gone thither before I came, I there found all the Gentlemen mentioned sitting at Dinner, To whom I saying merrily, that I was sorry they should eate two Dinners in one day (one of their excuses having been, that they had dined already) and neither of them in the Kings House, one of them replied, That respecting (as they ought) the honour of the King their Master, and their own quality) they would make me their Judge, whether when they were left alone by the Duke of Lenox without any person of sort to accompany them at their sitting down to meate: and that three Messieurs de robe longue (as they with a French scorne, termed the three great Officers mentioned who had their Gowns on) came, and sate themselves down at the upper end of the Table without scarce so much as saluting them) they had not reason to leave (as they did) the Company. To which I briefly Answered, I was no Judge, nor Hom∣me de robe longue, neither were those they termed so, of inferiour rank to the greatest Lords of this Kingdome, so leaving them, and going down the Staires, I there met the two Marquesses of Buckingham and Hamilton,
coming to the purpose that I did, to conduct the Lady Ambassadrice, and Madam elle de St. Luc her Neece to the Ball, when giving these two Lords a touch of what had passed (least the French might think perhaps they came purposely to them to excuse their Trayctment which had been too great an honour for them) they passed with them some few Complements, and letting fall a word or two to the former purpose, the Lords (and I with them) returned to Court, and finding the Ambassadrice, and her Neece in my Lord of Bucking∣hams Lodging, I waited on them there, and to the Ball, where the Countess of Buckinghams Mother pla∣cing her next beneath her Daughter the Marquess, Note this manner of placing the Ambassa∣drice and the Excep∣tions ta∣ken. and above her selfe, there grew a new quarrell of Exceptions from the other Countesses (particularly from the Coun∣tess of Dorset) that she was set above them. The two Ambassadors entring with the King, the Extraordinary sate down at his left hand, and next him there, the Or∣dinary, at his Majesties right hand sate the Prince. The day of the Kings Feast, the Count d'Alle Son to the Duke d'Angontesme, and the Count de Rochford Son to the Duke de Monbason, and two or three others absented themselves, because they might not be ad∣mitted to sit at the Kings owne Table, as they affirmed the Count d'Allies Father, the Count d'Auvergne, d'Angontesme had done (they said) at Queen Elizabeths, when the Marshall de Biron was here in England. The next day our English Cavalliers, and the French ran at the King, whereas the Prince wonne the Prize. On Twelfeday following, the Ambassador and his cheife followers were brought to Court by the Earle of Warwick to be present at a Maske; he seated as be∣fore with the King, the better sort of the other on a fourme behind the Lords (the Lord Treasurer onely and the Marquesse of Hamilton sitting at the upper end of it) and all the rest in a Box, and in the best places of the Scaffolds on the right hand of his Majesty. No other Ambassadors were at that time present or in∣vited.
The Munday after the Viscount of Doncaster invited the Ambassador and all his company (men of note) to a Supper prepared and set forth with that State and cost as hath been seldome seene.) To it were also invited (for honour to the Feast, and Company) the King, the Prince, and most of the great Lords and Ladies in Towne. The Ambassador himselfe went by Coach from Denmark House to Essex House (where the Sup∣per was) the rest by water in Barges. At Supper, the King seated at a Table placed crosse the Roome and raised two steps above the Floore, had at his right hand (with a convenient distance) the Prince, at his left hand the Ambassador Extraordinary, and at the Tables end below the Ordinary. At the upper end of another Table (reaching from one end of the roome to the other) sate on the right hand side the Lady Marquess of Buckingham, beneath her a French Nobleman, and beneath him the French Ambassadors Lady; the rest sate a Lord, and a Lady as they held out. On the other side sate uppermost the Countesse of Warwick, then a French Lord, next the Lady of Don∣caster; so as the Countesse of Dorset, thought the Ancienter Countesse (whether by choyce, because she would not sit immediatly beneath the Ambassadrice, or by chance I know not) sate beneath two or three Ladies that she in right of ranck should have preceded. After Supper, they had the entertainment of a Maske presented by nine young Gentlemen, whereof the Lord Montjoy, and a Son of the Lord Hollis were two &c. The Ambassador having remained here about fifteen dayes, took leave of his Majesty at White-Hall, and was presented with a Chayn of Diamonds (being an old Jewell of the Crowne) of 300 l. valew, which (because it was not Plate) (the King and Councell having upon the sight of so much equivalent to that sum judged it not fit to deprive the Kingdome of it) was not brought to the Ambassador by the Master of the Jewell House Sir Henry Mildmay, but by the Mast∣er of the Ceremonies. The Ambassador having been defrayed for his Dyet,
Lodging and Coaches at the rate (as was said) of 200 l. per diem, went to Gravesend the  of January: himselfe and some few by Land, the rest by water, at∣tended thence by Sir Lewes Lewkner onely to his im∣barquing at Dover. When it was thought, that the Spanish Ambassador would have held it an indignity, and wrong to his Master, to be present at a Maske seen before by a French Ambassador (as the last, and the same Maske had been by the Mareshall de Cadenet at Twelftide) he appeared at it on Shrove-Sunday seated at the left hand of his Ma∣jesty under the State) different from what had been for∣merly resolved on, that no Ambassador in regard of their troublesome Puntillious) should any more sit so with his Majesty) and had his family placed over a Box at the Kings right hand, in which were placed the Spanish Ambassadors two Sons together with the Arch-Dutchess Agent. In January Arrived at Gravesend six Commissioners from the States of the United Provinces, viz. Messieurs de Senthusen, Carmelin, Soneh, Bruyning, Schot, and de Vervow, and the Secretary of their Commission, Cap∣tain Huggins: they were Lodged in Lumbarstreet, and had their first Audience in the Privy Galleries at White-Hall, As being but Depu∣ties which had been enough for Ambassa∣dors. fetcht to it by the Lord Clifford and divers Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in above twenty Coaches. Parted from his Majesty, they went with the same attendance to the Prince at St. Jameses, where before their entrance to his Presence, they were too late a ware of a Solecisme they had committed in ha∣ving delivered the Princess Letters to the King, as they had done the Kings Letters (yet remaining in their hands) to the Prince, had they not suddainly cast an eye upon them, for which they had no evasion, but to make (by the Master of the Ceremonies mouth) an ex∣cuse of then Secretaries mistaking (in the obscure light) one Letter for another. For Shrove-Tuesday following I carried them from the King an Invitation to a Maske of the Gentlemen of
the Middle-Temple to be represented in the Hall of the Court, whether I was appointed to conduct them in one of the Kings Coaches, with order to be in the new Councell Chamber (on the deceased Queens side, which had been her Privy Chamber) at seaven of the Clock without preparation (other then of Bread and Wine for Collation) I bestowed their followers on a Scaffold on the Kings right hand, and in a Box under (purposely reserved from them) themselves together with Sir Noell Caron the Ambassador. The Maske en∣ded I brought them (by direction) to the King, whom they had not yet at that time seen) whence following his Majesty (without his notice yet taken of them) till they came to the Guard Chamber, he there saluted them, and had their attendance to the Banquet there, and after in the Privy Gallery, gave them all the good night. The twentieth of January, I had the Command of the Lord Chamberlain to introduce the six mentioned Commissioners to an Audience of the Councell, and bring them for their repose to the old Councell Cham∣ber, where they attended the Lords leasure then much busied about the Exceptions taken by some Lords, and other of our Nobility against the Creation, and prece∣dence given to certain Scotish and Irish Viscounts be∣fore English Barons &c. The fift of March I received a Command and directions from the Lord Chamberlain (the Master of the Ceremonies being then sick) to go to Dover, and receive there at his Landing an Ambassador Extraordi∣nary from Poland, his name and Title Osalinskie Count Palatine of Sindomerskie. Hereupon order was gi∣ven for my receipt of 50 l. imprest out of the Exchequer which (in regard of the pressing hast pretended of the Service, that would not admit the leasure of procuring a Privy Seale for it) was by vertue of a Warrant from the Lord Treasurer Mountague, and the Controwler of the Exchequer Sir Fulke Grevell (Lord Brooke) paid to me the next morning (but in the mean time the Master
of the Ceremonies (having been first sent to by my Lord Chamberlain to speake with him, and excusing his coming by his sicknesse, supposing his imployment should have been no other, then to attend the Span∣ish Ambassador (at that time assigned an Audience) was upon better notice, and consideration of the businesses with the likelyhood of the benefit to accrew from it, resolved to discharge it himselfe, and to that purpose went to my Lord Chamberlain about it. But I already imbarked in it, and repairing to my Lord, so maintained mine interest of Primer Seazine, as his Lordship needed not perswasion to permit me to pre∣ceede, as I did the next Morning with one of his Ma∣jesties Coaches, and three other hired by me to be de∣frayed by his Majesty. The eighteenth of March I came to Dover, whence Capt. Buck (an old Capt. a Scotish man that came in my Company from London, and in the Ambassadors out of Poland) went according to the Am∣bassadors Assignation to meet him at Callayes; but the Ambassadors Journey retarded by the illness of the weather, and wayes between Amsterdam, and Ant∣werp, and at Brussels, (where he stayed also ten dayes) was a cause of the Captains fruitless stay at Callayes and of mine also, and the Coaches at Dover cleaven dayes; at the end whereof, a Post sent from the Post-Master at Gravesend, brought me word at Mid-night how the Ambassador was Landed there from Flushing. These newes carried me instantly post thither, and brought me in seaven hours to his sight and reception there from his Majesty before his rising. Towards the E∣vening Sir Lewes Lewkner sent by the King and the Lord Chamberlain (as supposing I could not obtaine time e∣nough to the knowledge of his Landing) came thither in Company of Sir Robert Steward, and divers other Gen∣tlemen) to wellcome him from his Majesty. The next Morning the Kings, and three other Barges being sent down for his Transport to London, we all went thither ranged by Sir Lewes Lewkner (for avoydance of con∣fusion at our imbarking) the Ambassador and his cozen with eight Knights, and two Gentlemen in the Kings
Barge; his chiefe Gentlemen, and Pages in the Lord Chamberlaines, and in the two other the rest. He was received at Tower-Wharrfe by the Earle of Warwick accompanied with the Lord Cromwell, and sundry of his Majesties Servants. And in the Kings, and seven or eight Coaches, was conducted to his Lodging in Crutchet Fryers, ordained for him, and de∣frayed (as was also his diet) at a certaine rate agreed upon per diem without attendance of any of the Kings Servants. His landing at Gravesend, and his so speedy repaire to London, was a cause that the Lord mentio∣ned met him no sooner. The next day (being Sunday, and his Majesty desirous for three or four dayes to leave the Town) his Publike Audience was assigned, and gi∣ven him at White-Hall (with the Conduct of the Earle of Essex, and the like number of Gentlemen and Coa∣ches as before) where in the Presence there he present∣ed Letters with a long Elegant Oration in Latine to his Majesty. The Tuesday following he was accompanied to his Audience of the Prince at Saint Jameses by the Lord Danvers, the Master of the Ceremonies, and my selfe with other Gentlemen. The 24. of March (the day of the Kings comming to the Crowne) having been invi∣ted to a Tylting of the Prince and other Knights) he was fetcht thither in the Kings Coach by Sir Lewes Lewkner; but before he came, the French, Venetian, and Savoy Ambassadors were seated in their and his appointed stand, hung and covered with Tapistrie over the Gate or Porters Lodge entring into the Tiltyard, on the right hand of his Majestie. These three other I was sent for to conduct from where they all dined together at the French Ambassadors, Sir Edward Sackvill having been appointed to conduct the Venetian, but he was parted from home before Sir Edward came thither. The French Ambassador at his entrance into the Stand, casting his Eyes about him, and asking which was the better place, that on the right hand as of Custome, or the other on the left as of Respect, and nearest to the King? The Venetian Ambassador (for∣wardest
with his Answer) said, where ever the French Kings Ambassador sits, there will be the best place. To which the French Ambassador making no reply, This may resolve which is the upper end of a Table in the midst of a roome when the best man sits at the end of it, though the placing of the Chim∣ney may perhaps, and doth sometimes, (as here in England) alter it. but sitting down uppermost on the left hand from the Kings right, the other two sate by him in their Order, till the Polonian comming they made him roome to take (as he did) the second place. The Tylting ended (and not be∣fore) they had all of them a Salutation given them by the King from the place where he sate, so parted without further Ceremony, then with my recommen∣dation. The six Commissioners of the States, and the Am∣bassador Ordinary, Sir Noell Caron (with the Secretary of their Commission) were conducted by Sir Edward Cceill to the Chamber next the Gate, at the lower end of the Tyltyard, and there with his company saw the Tylting. These Commissioners, about the beginning of Aprill demanded a finall Audience, and dispatch from his Majesty, and had for Answer, that the Sunday following his Majesty was pleased they should dine with him, and then take their leaves; but soone after a disinvitation was brought by the Lord Kelley with this excuse. That his Majesty having since received the news of the King of Spaines death, and intending that day (as the most fit) to assume his habite of mourning, supposing that this and Feasting would not accord, so if they would be pleased to stay their Journey till the time of mourning should be expired, which would be at Saint Georges Day about a fortnight after, they should have a day assigned them for the honour of eating with his Majesty. In the mean time their demanded Audience should be given them on Sunday in the afternoon, which accepted of, and the other excused with the reason of their pressing haste to be at home, they came then to Court in his Majesties Coach (perhaps too high for their qualification of Deputies, as by the place of their last Audience they might seeme to be taken for no more) introduced by the Earle of Kelley to his Majesties presence in the Chamber of private Au∣diences, there took their leaves, and received all sixe of
them the Order of Knight-hood. Upon which grew a question from some of the Kings Servants interessed concerning payment of their fees (accounting from each of them to receive forty foure pound sixteen shil∣lings) these being demanded by one Mr. Agher their Collectour and at the first not refused by them to be paid, the next day when they came to take their leaves of the Lord Chamberlain, a doubt being made of the duenesse of their payment, in regard they were pub∣lique Ministers, and a resolution asked of his Lordship, he absolutely affirmed to their Secretary there present that it was unfit they should pay any Fees, and that if they were againe demanded, they should use his name for their discharge of payment; yet (notwithstanding this Signification from his Lordship) the Collector ceased not to solicite in the name of the Gentlemen Ushers and others, protesting against the Lord Cham∣berlains power to give away or withhold their rights, till finally at their departure (April 14.) they left be∣hind them this Order (upon the importunity of the Collector, and my interposition) that if his Majesty should be pleased himselfe to say to the Lord Chamber∣lain, or to the Officer that challenged the Fees, that they should not be paid, they had no reason to loose the honour of his Majesties free favour; but if otherwise his Majesty should say they ought to be paid, that the Ambassador Ordinary Sir Noell Caron should ingage himselfe, (as he did to me the same day by his promise) for their payment. I understood after from my Lord Chamberlain, that his Majesty signified his pleasure to him, From that time to the yeare 1635 none such have paid. that those Fees should not be paid, as being not properly to be exacted from Ministers of Forren Princes or such as should have any Ordinary relation to them. The Commissioners went hence the four∣teenth of Aprill to their Shipping at Gravesend in one of his Majesties Barges, and were followed the next day in an other by the Baron of Donow Ambassador for the King of Bohemia, he also having about the same time had his dismission, and that day mine and some other Gentlemens company to their imbarking before Til∣bury.
The States Commissioners were presented (as I was informed) with 3000 ounces of gilt Plate equally divi∣ded amongst them, and their Secretary Constantine Hug∣gins with a Chayne of Gold 45 l. valew. The King of Bohemias Ambassador had assigned him for his pre∣sent 1160 ounces of guilt Plate, but this being not then presented (but with assurance to be sent after him) he two or three years after returned hither to re∣cover it, and did, (but not  to the value of it) in ready money: he presented me with a Chayne of 30 l. value. On S. Georges day, Note (if it should please him) because Ambassa∣dors are not to be in vited but to let the King know their desires to see that Feast. the Polonian Ambassador having before received an Invitation to see (if it should please him) the Solemnity of that Feast, was brought to White-Hall by Sir Lewes Lewkner (the Lord Gray ha∣ving been appointed to accompany him, but arriving too late after his departure from his Lodging) though indeed the sending of a Lord at that time was Super∣errogatory (and not usuall) he rested himselfe in the old Councell Chamber till the Procession, when (pla∣ced in a stand purposely erected for him, and his fol∣fowers next the doore at the head of the Stone Stayres) he saw the King and Knights pass by, and after that the Ceremony in the Chappell from the Kings Closet) there; that finished, he and the Arch-Dukes Agent Van Mab (all day accompaning him) were treated by the King in the Councell Chamber with the attendance of his Majesties Servants (on whom he bestowed by advice of Van Mab about ten pounds in Hungarian Duckets) and about the midst of his Majesties Dinner, went to see, and saluted the King Prince and Knights as they sate at Table, and after retyring for a while in the Councell Chamber, he departed. On Sunday the fifteenth of July this Ambassador (together with another of the House of Medici) ar∣rived here a little before from the Duke of Florence) were invited to dine with the King, and there to take their leaves. A day or two before, the Lord North had order from the Lord Chamberlain to accompany the Florentine, while it was questioned, what Person (of
somewhat a preceding quality) should accompany the Polonian; But most of the great Lords then absent from Towne, and both the Kings best Coaches so im∣ployed, as they could not be spared severally to carry them, there came a Countermand the Evening before for the Company of any Lord, so as Sir Lewes Lewkner (inone of his Majesties Coaches) only attended them; they came towards noon to Theobalds, were recived at their descent from their Coaches by the Earle of Au∣begney, and conducted to the Gouncell Chamber, neere which each of them had a Chamber appointed for their retraite: they were after the Sermon brought to the King in the Privy Chambers, and out of them fol∣lowing him to the Presence Chamber, they there di∣ned; the Polonian at the lower side of the Table on the Kings left hand, and the Florentine at the end of it. A Count Palatine, Cosin to the Polonian, and three or four Knights of Malta, and of Saint Stephen (of the Florentines Traine) dined in the Councell Chamber. At the end of the Table sate the Count Palatine in a Chaire, and for company the Lord Clifford (on his right hand) the three Knights on the left side, and beneath them the rest of the Florentines company; on the other side sate the Polonians Gentlemen &c. the inferior sort sate not at all there, but had the remaines after at the same Table. Dinner done, the Ambassadors after their retreat to their Chambers had their several Audiences. The Polonian first in the Gallery, who was after con∣ducted to the Prince by his Highness Gentleman Usher. And after him the Florentine in the same place, and order. The Polonian Ambassador not long after departed, having obtained of his Majesty (by the cun∣ning assistance of the Count de Gondemar, the loane (I may say) the gift (as never to be restored) of ten thou∣sand pound sterling. The 23. of December three Commissioners, Ambassa∣dors from the States, being assigned their first publique Audience, were conducted to it in the Kings Coach, and four or five others by the Lord Clifford from their
Lodging in Bread-streete, their names were d'Arsen, Lord of Somersdyks, Bass & Stavenets; they were received at the Gaurd-Chamber door by the Earle of Warwick, as Captaine of the Guard in his Brothers absence, and after their Audience of the King in the Presence Cham∣ber, had one of the Prince in his Lodgings. Twelftide appearing, and a Maske being to be pre∣sented by the Prince and other Lords and Gentlemen, my Lord Chamberlaine gave me in charge to repaire to the Venetian Ambassador, Seigniour Girolenio Landi with this message as from himself (with request of his Secrecy) That whereas he had told him two or three dayes before that no Ambassador should be invited to the Maske (as the King had signified to him his inten∣tion) he perceived that the Spanish Ambassador (the Count of Gondemar) had under-hand pressed his Ma∣jesty to be invited, so as not to appear to have doubled with him in what he had told him, he bade me let his Excellency know, that if he would for forme sake be in∣vited and frame some excuse for his not comming, he would himselfe (as from his Majesty) send him an invi∣tation. But if he would be really invited and come, his request should be, that he would make his way to it by the Marquis of Buckingham. When I had delivered this message to the Ambassador in hearing of his Se∣cretary (whom he called in) he made answer, That for excuse of his not comming (though for forme invited) he would never give that advantage to the Spanish Ambassador to say of him, that one day he would be well, and annother ill for his satisfaction (as he knew some had been) as if he stood in awe of him; and for the other point of making his way by the Marquis of Buckingham, he would never do it, since he had al∣wayes (he said) made his access to his Majesties Pre∣sence by the right door of the Lord Chamberlain, and would now enter by no other. But since he saw (he said) what this tenderness meant, he desired me to intreat his Lordship in his name, that he would be pleased to go directly to his Majesty, and by way of remembrance (no otherwise)
put him in mind from him, That the last year the French Ambassador Extraordinary Monsieur de Cadenet, and the Ordinary Monsieur de Tilliers were invited to the Prince his Maske at Christmas, and the Spanish Ambassador to the same Maske repeated at Shrove∣tide, to which he could and might justly have taken Exceptions, that he was both times omitted, but that the King of Bohemiaes Ambassador, being not then (no more then he) invited, he was content to suffer with him; but that now (though he might in reason expect, that he should be (as in his turne) invited a∣lone, he would not be so punctuall, but would referre all to his Majesties pleasure, yet if any other Ambassador should be invited he would expect the like honour, as a respect due to the Prince and State he represented, who in all publicke places had, and were to have entertaintment al par delle teste Cornate equall with Crowned Kings. And as for the Spanish Ambas∣sador (he said) his presence at the Maske should notbe an Exclusion to him) with whom though he had no correspondency of business nor visits, he had yet of Sa∣lutation and civill respects, which had many times in incounters in the Streets, passed between them, and might and should pass on his part at the Mask, if he should there meete him: This message returned by me to the Lord Chamberlaine, and seconded at the same time by the Ambassadors Secretary, and my Lord con∣veying it to the King, his Majesty was pleased that he should be (as he was the next day) invited, and was at the Maske entertained with the like respect as was the Spanish Ambassador. The States Ambassadors were not at the same time invited with respect to the incompatibility between them and the Spanish, and the Russian then here might with as little reason ex∣pect it, in regard he had questioned precedence of all o∣ther Kings Ministers. The French Ambassador had an Invitation pro forma tantum, with a civill request of his next comming to avoid question, which it seemes, he tooke not with discontent, because his Wife and Neece were there present invited.
In March 16. Sir William Russell a cheife Merchant of the Muscovy company, made request in his own name and of the rest of that Society, that I would sometimes repaire to the Russian Ambassador (a gallant Gentle∣man of the Emperours Alliance, and a great Comman∣der in his Wars by name Thomas Simonwitz) with a visit, and Complement in his Majesties name. I told him the Master of the Ceremonies was already imploy∣ed for his attendance, and that with the knowledge, and order of the Lord Chamberlain, or of the Lords of the Privy Councell, and I should wrong him, and my selfe to undertake it. This made him (with other of those Merchants) to intimate as much to the Councell (in the Lord Chamberlains absence.) So I was by their Lordships appointed to attend that business, and had notice given me to that purpose both by Sir William Russell, and Mr. Secretary Calvert, to whom objecting the Exceptions that might be justly taken by Sir Lewes Lewkner, if he were not made acquainted with the im∣ployment cast on me by the Lords in a Service wherein he was already entred, I had for my further Satis∣faction a messenger sent to Sir Lewes by Mr. Secretary, who returned with an uncertain answer, no other, then that he would himselfe come, and speak with Mr. Secre∣tary about it, but coming not in five or six dayes after, and Sir William Russell, and the other Merchants con∣tinuing to solicit my repaire to the Ambassador, he went himselfe to Sir Lewes, and brought me his assurance of satisfaction, with acknowledgement of my civill procce∣ding, and with profession of his willingnes, that I should enter upon the imployment, which I did the next day. Going to the Ambassadors Lodging in St. Thomas Apost∣les, and signifying (as I had instruction from Mr. Secre∣tary) that the King had sent me to him &c. He pro∣fessed to be specially contented, and pleased, that whereas he had hitherto (he said) had no other but Sir William Russell a Merchant, and no Souldier, nor Cour∣tier to be his Prestau as he termed him) signifying the like Officer, as the Master of the Ceremonies) he should be henceforth honoured by the visits of a Cavalier;
and a Courtier attending his Majesty, with whom he might, and would be more free in communicating what∣soever should concern the Service of his great Lord, and Master the Emperour. The Eve of the Kings day (March the foure and twentieth) I was sent to him for my Lord Chamberlain as from the King, whose name (though his Majesty had nothing of the knowledge nor trouble of it, I alwayes used in all or most of my messages, and addresses to him, to let him understand that the next day I was to at∣tend him to the sight of the Prince at his Tilting (with the Service of his Majesties coach, and such others as should be needfull for his followers; (which coaches were to be provided at the Merchants charge, though with use of the Kings name) but before he accepted of the In∣vitation (onely acknowledging the honour of it) he by way of caution, demanded if I knew what place he should have, and how entertained, in regard (he said) that if his Majesty should not receive him as an Am∣bassador preceding both the French and Spanish, he would rather keep himselfe absent, then disturbe the Solenmity by protesting and standing (as he must) for his Masters right. I assured him the care for preven∣tion of that quarrell was already taken by his Majesty, and so it was indeed. For whereas the French and Ve∣netian Ambassadors were also invited, the Spaniard the like, (but he had excused his absence with his re∣trait to Highgate to take the fresh aire, and merrily saying when he was invited, that he had rather keep away, then be present at those Excercises of danger to the Prince his person, till he should be Father of two or three Children by the King his Masters Daughter.) those Ambassadors were appointed their places with∣out in the Tilt-yard in a Scaffold, or standing erected of purpose, and hung with Tapistry on the right hand of the King neere the Gate, but the Muscovite had his ordained in the same Gallery with his Majesty (but on his left hand, and with a Traverse drawn between them) till that after the Tilting, he was onely to see the Kings face, and so depart; all which he interpre∣ted
to be the greater honour, the other Ambassadors letting it pass in the meane time without Exceptions, as regarding his remote correspondence, and holding themselves not prejudiced by his so placing. The French and Venetians followers were ordained their stands under the Gallery Windowes at the right hand of the King; the Muscovits at the entring of the Tilt∣yard on that side, and the States at the neather end. All those Stands (as before at other times) having been taken up by the Master of the Ceremonies, or the Assist∣ants order to be defrayed by his Majesty. The States three Ambassadors Commissioners were ordained their places at the lower end of the Tilt-yard, as the yeare before, and this without any of their Exceptions taken at it. But the Venetian Ambassador somewhat punctu∣all (in remembrance of his last years Treatment) and now expecting the like respects to be given him, as he understood were to be given to the French Ambassador (for Sir Lewes Lewkner, being appointed to conduct him, my selfe the Muscovits, and Sir Robert Anstroder the States Ambassador) he was (as it seemes he under∣stood it) not thought on to that purpose, so as sending to me about it, and I acquainting my Lord Chamber∣lain with his formality, his Lordship entreated (by me) Sir Edward Sackvill the Earle of Dorsets Brother) to accompany him, which he being the next day ready to have performed, the Solemnity was (in regard of the Kings indisposition, and the fowleness of the weather) deferred till the Saturday following, and then the like upon the like occasion till after Easter, and so longer, till at length it was not at all performed. The third of Aprill I had Order from my Lord Cham∣berlain, that (the Master of the Ceremonies being im∣ployed to Dover with the Kings Coach and fourteen other at his Majesties charge to bring up the Emperours Ambassador Suartzenberg, and that the said Ambassa∣dor was in the interim landed at Gravesend) I should take one of his Majesties Barges, and hasten thither to receive him, and excuse that crosse incounter, let∣ting him know that the Marquesse of Hamilton was to
come downe to receive him that Evening. With which order I tooke Barge when the Tide was far spent, rowed downe till we met a flowing water, and a strong con∣trary wind at Woollwich, so was forced to Land there and (finding no Horses) to go on foot five miles to Dar∣ford) where taking Post to Gravesend, I found there Sir Lewes Lewkner returned from Canterbury, and de∣livered my message from his Majesty to the Ambassa∣dor. That Evening my Lord Marquesse Hamilton (ac∣companied with the Lord Wentworth, Lord Bruse; and about twenty Gentlemen) came to his Lodging, and was met by him in the Entry, almost at the street doore of the Inn, conducted by him to his Chamber (the Am∣bassador after some little refusall preceding though in his own House) and after brought back by them to the Street doore. The next Morning my Lord Marquesse againe repaired to him (with the Company of the Lord Viscount Doncaster) then on his way Ambassador Extraordinary for France) and a while after the Ambas∣sador repayed their visits at the Marquesse Inn, when the Tide serving, we all came to London in ten Barges. The Ambassador, the Marquesse, the two English Lords, three Dutch Lords, and the Master of the Ceremonies in the first Barge. Two Dutch Barons, my selfe, and foure or five English in the second, and the rest in the rest, as they incountred. Landing at Denmarke-House Garden-staires, the Marquesse accompanied him to his Chamber there, and was by the Ambassador re-accom∣panied to his Coach. The Sunday following (Aprill seaven) the same Lord Marquesse accompanied with the Earle of Mont∣gomery) the Lords Candish, This not usuall for one person twice to conduct one and the same Ambassa∣dor. Bruse, two other Lords and about twenty Gentlemen listed with divers Vo∣luntaries (in neere forty Coaches, besides other hyred at the Kings charge to attend dayly) fetcht him from Denmarke-House to his Audience in the Higher House of Parliament, where he made his Oration in high Dutch, interpreted by Sir Robert Anstroder (to whom it had been the day before imparted in writing) he was conducted by the Marquesse, and the rest to the Prince
at St. Jameses (with whom he passed his Complement in Italian) whereto the Prince called me for interpreter, and thence returned with the same attendance to his Lodging at Denmarke-House. Having remained here about six dayes (defrayed by his Majesty, and attended by his Officers, and Servants) the Venetian Ambassador Landi came to my House, and acquainted me with some distasts he had to this pur∣pose. That the first day, and almost houre of the Em∣perors Ambassadors comming to Denmark-House, he had sent his Secretary to visit him, and to congratu∣late his Arrivall, who giving him the Title of Excellen∣za, he had not corresponded, but returned him (the Ambassador) that of Signioria Illustrissima, wherefore his request to me was, that I would in some man∣ner let him know by way of discourse (as if I had in∣countred him somewhere by chance) that I had asked him, whether he had yet made his visit to the Emperours Ambassador, and that he had answered me, he forbeare yet to visit him in regard, that whereas the Republique had ever been accustomed to be treated al par delle Teste Coronate, the Stile of Excellenza had not been gi∣ven him, but that of Signioria Illustrissima, which for his Princes respect, he must not let pass without tendring il pare, the like of whatsoever title should be given him. That (unlesse it were of late the Kings of Spaines Am∣bassador) all Ambassadors residing here had given him. l'Excellenza; but that the Emperours Ambassador had not onely not given him his due in Title, but in per∣sonall honour also, having not rendred him the visit of his Secretary by one of his Servants. The substance of these Doleances, I the next day imparted to the Empe∣rors Ambassador, and received for Answer, that he would never treate del pare with him (there being so great a difference between the Emperours his Masters quality, and that of the Republick of Venice) that the King of Spaines Minister would (he knew) stand upon the same termes of difference. That if any other Kings Minister (for I had told him the French Kings speak∣ing Italian, gave him alwayes Excellenza) should do
otherwise, that should be no rule for him to be gover∣ned by. That the Venetian Ambassadors Secretary had but once at the first given him Excellenza, and had for the rest made use of the third Person (ella &c.) That at his parting, it was true, that he (the Empe∣rors Ambassador) had given him but Signuria Illustris∣sima, but that if the Venetian Ambassador should style him so he would returne him onely Signuria, to express the difference that ought to be put between their two tepresentative conditions. That if he had not repayed the vifit (sent by the Venetians Secretary) by one of his Servants, it was because that Secretary had said to him, that his Lord would Quanto prima, visite him, which if he had done (as he had promised) he would af∣ter have first visited him by his Servant, and then by himself. This was the substance, and even the parti∣culars of his Answer, which when I had returned to the Venetian, he only said, If hereafter he aske you any thing concerning my Reply, let him know (I pray) up∣on those terms, I will never visite him &c. The Am∣bassador of Venice then told me, that such another Puntillio had passed between this same Ambassador and the French Kings, who having given him the first Welcome by his Secretary, even at his landing at So∣merset-House, and the third day after personally visi∣ted him, he (the French) expected a returne of both (es∣pecially of the later) to him before to any other Am∣bassador, but that he (the Emperors) breaking the Law of Visites (ever to be returned as they are made in time, person, and order) had visited the Spanish before him. In which regard, when the Emperors Ambassador had sent to know, if his leasure were that he might visite him that afternoon? He returned a plain answer by the same Messenger, That the weather had been long foule, and he meant to make use of that faire day to take the fresh Aire abroad, which was light sufficient for the others understanding, to let him see the French was sensible of what had been done, and would not receive a visite after the Spanish Ambassadors having given the first cause (he said) to be first served in returne of that
complement. But some were of Opinion, that the French Ambassador had been too quick, and too plain in his proceeding, considering that the Emperors Ambassador both affirmed that the Spanish had first vifited him per∣sonally (wheras the French had by an hasty anticipation only performed it by his Servent) and that at another time, the same French Ambassador had passed over a subject for the like punctuality without any scruple or question, as when the Bohemian Ambassador was here, and had first visited the Spanish, he was for all that visited by him the French. Tthat by the stile held in the Emperors Court, the precedence is given to the Spanish, and that he was therefore bound to observe it here; yet notwithstanding all this, the French upon a second offter of visite from the Emperors Ambassador excused his being at home, so as there passed no com∣plement of visite at all between them. In the mean time the Venetian Ambassador after I had returned as from my self) the Emperors Ambassador his answer (ut supra) wrote to me an ofter to come to my House (which preventing by going to his) told me he had re∣ceived a returne of his visite sent by his Servant by a Servant of the others, who at the first entrance of his Message (giving his own Master the title of Excellenza, and him the Venetian of Signioria Illustrif∣sima,) said his Excellency hoped to see him before his departure; which words (though of a double sence of seeing him at his own House, or at the others) taken as a courtesie, he desired me to let him know (as I did) that he had spared to make Reply to his courtesie by his own (the Venetians Servant) because the Title likely to be used by the Emperors Ambassador, and justly to be returned, (considering the Republicks paritie with Crownd Heads) by the same Servant might perhaps breed further distaste; but that I that was neutrall and uninterested might let him know (as he desired me I would) without danger of offence, or ingagement by application of Title, that he was most sorry any such difference should hinder the Visite, and acknowledge∣ment of respects, which he and his Republique owed
the Emperor, and his Ministers, but that if any mean: could be found to carry things with indifferencie, that he would most readily imbrace it. That at the first, if he had not expressed himself by those different Titles given by his Secretary, he had himselfe personally visi∣ted him, and without further condition, put himself up∣on his wisdome. That regarding the duty he owed the State he represented, he would not leave his first hold; and finally for his own particular, he was his most hum∣ble servant &c. To this the Emperors Ambassador re∣turned, that he was sorry (the difference stood so stifely upon between them) should keep him from the acquain∣tance of a person, of whom he had received so worthy respects; that he could not alter what he had once with good reason resolved, never to treate del pare with the Venetian Minister. That what he stood upon, or had done, proceeded not (he protested) from any Ca∣priccio of his own, or command of his Master, but meerly (as he knew of his own experience) according to the Stile, and manner held between the Emperors, and all Venetian Ambassadors ab antiquo, so desired pardon for his freedome, presented his love and ser∣vice &c. The last Complement being returned to the Venetian Ambassador, the business ended without interview or further question, or difference between them. The 11. of April this Ambassador had his second private Audience (fetcht from Denmark-House by wa∣ter, by the service of six or seven Barges) by the Earle of Aubigney, and other Lords and Gentlemen, landing at the Privy Staires at White-Hall, and passing through the Sheild Gallery, and the late Queens Lodgings in∣to the Kings Privy Gallery, and his withdrawing roome there, where the King held discourse with him an hour together Remotis arbitris; a day or two after he ran at Tylt in the Prince his company with the Lord Montjoy. The Sunday following (April 14.) he was publickly feasted in the Upper House of Parliament, seated on his Majesties left hand, at the distance of about three persons between, and of one beneath. His Barons and
principall Gentlemen were placed at a Table set cross at the upper end of the Court of Requests, accompani∣ed at dinner by the Lord Treasurer, the President of the Councell, and the Earle of Rutland, who had been that day his conductour from Denmarke House by water. After dinner (as before) he was brought to his Chamber of repose, and some halfe an houre after fetch∣ed thence by the same Lord (his conductour) to take leave of his Majesty in the Roome where he had dined, and thence went to St. Jameses to take leave also of the Princes Highness. On Wednesday the sevententh of Aprill, and the eleaventh day of his stay here (having been all that time defrayed) he deparred hence with all his followers in six of the Kings Barges to Gravesend, where he was to imbarke in two Ships of the Merchants (appointed by the King, but paid by himselfe) for Dunkirk. At his parting, he left his Majesties Officers and Servants little fatisfied with the gratuities, being but small Bracelet Chaines to the valew of scarse eight or 10 l. a peece. To the Master of the Ceremonies (bringing him the Pre∣sent from his Majesty) which was his Picture set in Gold richly inchaced with Diamonds, and hung at a Chaine of Diamonds, Rubies, and Pearles, valewed at 1600 l.) he gave a small Jewell, worth little above eight pound, and for all his Travell and attendance a Bason, and Ewer not of 30 l. valew. To the Guard then waiting being twenty foure he gave— 40 l. and to the Clerck of the Check, a Bracelet of Gold of about nine pounds valew. To me (who expected nothing, having had no command to attend him) he gave a small Chaine of Excellent Workmanship (as a remem∣berance (he said) not a reward) worth ten pound be∣sides the rare fashion of it. To the Porters—five pound, to two of the Kings Coachmen dayly attending him—tend pound, to the hired Coachmen—five pound, he took away (without leave, or demand of him) the Bishop of Spalato, a fault in him, and an in∣dignity offered his Majesty (considering what noble
Treatment (he the Ambassador) had received here, and the unworthy carriage of that double Apostate Pre∣late toward this State, and Religion. His Secretary had from the King a present equalling in valew almost all those he bestowed upon his Ma∣jesties Servants, being worth above an hundred pounds. A second Son of the Lands-grave of Hess, by name Phillip  sent hither on a Negotiation from his Father, was to have an Audience of his Majesty on Easter day Aprill the one and twentieth, and though he were not a qualified Ambassador, yet regarding his con∣dition I had order to receive him at the Court Gate, so conducted him thence to the Privy Chamber, whence he was (after about an hours stay) called for, received at the doore of the Privy Gallery by the Lord Chamber∣lain, and had there his Audience, the Prince being present, but unsaluted by him (as he had been by me upon demand of his manner of carriage to that purpose directed) till he had made an end of speaking to his Majesty, and presented in writing the summ of his Ne∣gotiation; parting thence, he requested me to make Tryall, whether the Prince would be pleased that Even∣ing to give him Audience at his own Court (in regard he held it a Solecisme in good manners to be present at the Tilting (appointed for the next day, and that sight much affected by him) before he had kissed the hands of his Highnesse. His Highnesse returned answer, that he thankt him for his respects, but having some businesse with the King that Evening, and the next day being assigned for the Tilting, a day or two after might serve for that Complement of visit, which he in the meane time ac∣cepted as performed. The day following, he attended the Kings coming forth into the Gallery to waite on his Majestie to the Tilting, and there to and at his Elbow. But the Am∣bassadors (in vertue of their former Invitations) ha∣ving already taken up their stands, and prepared their Expectations, the Kings indisposition, and the continu∣ing
Tempestuous Weather, were causes, that all was re∣mitted till the Sunday following, when it was yet the third time deferred till the eighteenth of May follow∣ing, and then upon the indisposition also as before for altogether discharged. The three and twentieth of Aprill he had his Audi∣ence of the Prince at St. Jameses in the Privy Cham∣ber there, and was received by me at the great Gate, observing there the same stile as when he had access to his Majesty. The nine and twentieth of Aprill the Russian Am∣bassador having not stirred from his home all the Win∣ter, and being desirous to take the fresh Aire, was by me accompanied to Theobalds, attended by as many of his followers, as filled foure coaches and that night returned. The next day he went with the same Traine and my conduct to the Artillery Garden to see that com∣pany trained, but their houre not serving till towards the Evening, he went in the interim to the Tower, where at foure severall Store-Houses of Armes, and at the Ward∣roabe, the Merchants Servant that waited on him as his Steward gave to cach but—two shillings six pence, and to the Warders at the Gate (comprehending with these two of them that every where there attended him) ten shillings, so poorely acknowledging was he for himselfe, or the Merchants for him. Don Carlos de Coloma Arrived here for Ordinary Am∣bassor from the King of Spaine in the beginning of May 1622 and foure or five dayes after had his first Audi∣ence at White-Hall with the conduct to it (from his House in Holborne the Bishop of Eleys, and possessed be∣fore by his Predecessor) of the Marquesse Hamilton, the Lords, Wentworth and Bruse, and about seaventeen or eighteen Knights, and Gentlemen, (so many having been listed, when eight or ten would have sufficed for the service, in regard of the incumbrance so often grow∣ing from their numbers intruding to places in Coaches, with the extrusion of strangers) The Coaches sent for
him were in all nineteen or twenty, the greater part with foure Horses. His Majesty received him in the Presence after he had been guided thither (together with the Conde of Gondemar) by an unusuall passage through the great Hall, and by the Chappell up to the Councell Cham∣ber (in Queen Anns time, the Presence) there to rest him, the former Councell Chamber being converted to a Lodging for the Duke of Lenox, and the Banquet∣ting House prepared for a Maske towards. Three or foure dayes after the Conde de Gondemar tooke his leave of the King at Greenwich, and with an Extraordinary honour, dined that day privately with his Majesty. On Fryday May the fifth, the Ambassador of Russia received from me an Invitation to dine with the King on Sunday following, which (though with some scruple at first to do so before he had received answer of his business propounded to the Councell) he yet thankful∣ly accepted, and (having appointed him, and hired by the Merchants six Coaches (whereof one, as I had or∣dained) with foure Horses) I brought him by halfe an houre after eleaven in the Kings coach, accompanied with Sir Francis Kinnerston, and Sir Edward Peyto, chosen by myselfe (as I had order, and liberty given me.) At the Court Gate he was received by my Lord Wentworth, at the upper end of the Hall (his passage or∣dered (as before to the Spanish Ambassador) by the Earle of March; after about a quarter of an hours rest in the Councell Chamber, he was conducted by the Lord mentioned through the late Queens Lodgings to the Kings privy Gallery (his followers returning from the doore thereof to the Guard Chamber, where they were to dine) and there met by his Majesty, the Ambas∣sador following him to the Privy Chamber, where after his Majesty had washed (and that the Ambassador had been wished to the like by the two Gentlemen men∣tioned, who held the Bason, and Towell, as the Gen∣tleman Usher had appointed) but in his Countrey civi∣lity
of respects to the Kings Presence had refused it) he was called to sit downe at the lower end of the Table, and was presented before he did eate by his Majesty with a Roll of Manchet, and salt in a salt-seller) (the Custome of his Countrey challenging the presentation of them as an expression of his welcome; without the observation of which Ceremony, I was bold merrily to tell his Majesty, that it was then in his power to starve the Ambassador, who must not cate till it were perfor∣med. Towards the middle of Dinner his Majesty stood up, and bareheaded drank to him the Health of his Em∣peror (till which Invitation of the King he was also by the Custome of his Countrey not to drink:) soon after to the Health of the Patriarch of his Country, who had sent the King a rare Cup for a Present; and lastly, to the Ambassador himself in a guilded covered Bowle of about twenty pound value, which Bowl after the Pledge, was to be his own, having been provided at the charge of his Majesty, though with the Merchants ready mo∣ney, and by a Warrant from my Lord Chamberlaine re∣inburst to them, (his Lordship having first made a que∣stion, whether the King or they were to provide it) by the Master of the Jewel-House. The Ambassadors Followers were intertained at Din∣ner in the Guard-Chamber, where at the upper end of the Table sate his Nephew, a person of greatest respect about him, and of each hand of him, and next to him sate Sir Francis Kynnerston, and Sir Edward Peyto to accompany him; beneath whom was a distance left for one mans seate, to make a difference between that Nephew, his company, and the rest of the Ambassadors Followers, who might, nor did not presume once to touch any Dish, that he had tasted of. Dinner ended, the Ambassador followed his Majesty into the Privy Gallery (his Followers going the other way) and there taking leave returned by the way, and with the con∣duction mentioned. The night following was represented a Maske, Acted the Christmas before by the Prince &c. At which were present (seated with his Majesty) the Spanish Ambas∣sadors
Don Carlos de Coloma, and the Count de Gonde∣mar, though this had taken his leave three or four dayes before, his Son and other their Followers of qua∣lity had their feates neere the King in a Scaffold on his right hand; the rest of them were bestowed together with the States, and other strangers promiscuously on a Scaffold behind the King, over the entrance there on the left hand of his Majesty. The young Landsgrave of Hess was brought in by me the back way through the Garden, and supping with the Duke of Lenox (as did also the Baron of Paperhezin remaining here after the departure of the Emperours Ambassador) was seated amongst the great Ladies. The French Ambassador Monsieur de Tillier recei∣ving a kind of Invitation, by way of offer, to be present at this Maske, returned answer, that he most humbly kissed his Majesties handes for the honour intended him; but his stomach would not (he said) agree with cold meat, and desired therefore his absence might be par∣doned, here by pointing at the Invitation and presence of the Spanish Ambassador in the first place at the same Maske the Christmas before now repeated. May the two and twentieth was the day assigned for Sr. Georges Solemnity, deferred till then. The day be∣fore my Lord Chamberlain sent me to Sir Noell Caron to let him know (and the rest of the States Commissio∣ners Mess. d'Arsen, Bass, and Stavenets) that his Majesty would be pleased with their Presence at the provision and solemne service of that day, and that to that purpose, they should have their standings for sight of the first in a long window on the left hand, almost over the Gate, and of the latter in the Chappell Closet on the Queens side, (the Spanish Ambassador Don Car∣los de Coloma being to possess that of the Kings side) I delivered this Message (by incounter) to them all foure, being then at the house of Sir Noell Caron neere Lam∣beth, which they thankfully accepted, onely Monsieur Stavenets asked whether there would be as much respect in the entertainment for the generall given to them,
as to the other Ambassador? I answered, I nothing doubted it; but as soon as I was returned to render an account of my service to my Lord Chamberlain, I found I had been up and downe sought for to be stayed my Journey (but too late) for when I came to his Lord∣ship, he told me, if I had invited those Ambassadors to stand in the Closet of the Queens side, I had ex∣ceeded my Commission, because the Spanish Ambas∣sador (he said) would never indure them so neere him, where there was but a thin Wainscot Board between them, and a Window to be opened at either of their pleasures, which might be an occasion of scandall; and distemper. I answered, I had done no otherwise, then I had directions) which his Lordship in part denied, and I was not so unmannerly as to contest against.) But at last I received a new command to repaire to them with this message, That there had been a misunderstanding, and that the place in the Chappell for the regard men∣tioned of the Spaniards neerenesse to them was impro∣per; But if it would please them to be at the proces∣sion in the morning in their appointed stands, and in the Evening at the divine Service and Solemnity there; which would be all one with that of the Forenoon, they should be wellcome. This unpleasing message deli∣vered, I received for answer from the mouth of Mon∣sieur d'Arsennes. That as often as it would please his Majesty to honour them with Invitations to any of his entertainments, they should esteem it for an especiall favour, and gladly accept it; so againe, since it now seemed, that their presence (though they had been once invited) might give distast either to his Majesty or to any other, (meaning the Spanish Ambassa∣dor.) whom he should be pleased more espe∣cially to favour) they would in that also submit them∣selues to his pleasure, and would be willingly absent; but as for being present at either the procession; or the Service in the Afternoone, they desired (since they must not be at that in the Forenoone) that they might be excused if they came not all, the rather, because they were invited to the Earle of Exeters at Wimbleton, and if they should stay the procession, they doubted
they should come thither (unmannerly) too late to Dinner, and returne to Court not soone enough to Evening Solemnity. With this message, I returned to my Lord Chamberlain, and so had the next day the free use of their places at the Procession, and of the Closet at the Service for the young Landsgrave, and his followers, whom I conducted in the Dinner time to the Banquetting House, where the Prince supplying his Fathers place (his Majesty being then indisposed) the Landsgrave stood at his Highnesse left hand (as the Spanish Ambassador did on his right) most part of the Dinner time. The Ambassador of Russia, being upon his departure, I carried to him—fifty pound from the Merchants of the Muscovy company (but as sent to him from the Lords of the Councell) so as the Company had directed me) with this formall message) That whereas (different from some Ambassadors imployed from his Emperour) he had desired money, and nor provisions to be laid in in specie for his feeding at Sea, that sum of fifty pound, was sent him according to President, but exceeding in proportion; because, whereas other Ambassadors (whereof one had thirty five men his followers, and the other fourscore) had not had above forty pounds worth of Victualls for their whole Journey, the summ now sent him was—fifty pound, but he seeming much un∣satisfied with so small proportion, and saying that Sir John Merrick Ambassador to his Emperour had had above—two hundrd pound given him for the like, made shew to refuse it, whereupon I left him, when sending his Interpreter after me downe the Stayres (not as I thought, to receive the money) but desiring me to keep it, or leave it with the Steward of the house, I refuse it, and saying, that this was a matter of conse∣quence (inferring that either the Lords of the Coun∣cell (in whose name I was to present the money) did not (in my Lord Ambassadors opinion) understand what they had to do, or that the Ambassador did do more then he ought, to the dishonour of the King my
Master) I would have returned up to him to have taken the refusall (as I said to the Interpreter it became me) from the his Ambassadors own mouth; but on the stairs I met one of his servants, that brought order from his Master, that he should (as he did) receive it. The first of June following I repaired to him with a summons from my Lord Chamberlaine to take his leave the next day at Greenwich (whether we went by land in four Coaches, besides the Kings for himself, his Ne∣phew, my self, and his two Interpreters) and descending at the Garden gate, he was (at the entrance of the o∣pen Roome at the foot of the back Privy Staires) re∣ceived by my Lord Wentworth, and by him conducted up to the Roome at the end of the Kings Privy Gallery, and there took leave, reconducted by the same Lord to his Station, where meeting by chance with my Lord Cavendish, and upon my motion saluted by him, I made use of that civility so farre as to tell the Ambassador, that that Lord being at the foot of the Staires, when he went up, and his Interpreters gone up before, he could not acquaint him with the cause of his incounter there, which was (I said) by command of his Majesty. This officious lye I made, least the Ambassador might have expected and found himself disappointed of a second Nobleman, (of precedent ranke to my Lord Went∣worth) to receive him according to the former Style of reception of those Russians first and last Audience, and as I had the day before written to my Lord Cham∣laine, that it had been, and would be required; but his Lordship mistaking, it being only an honour (he thought) proper for his dining with the King, and for his first Audience, and no other, it had been (without this devise, omitted, but this made use of, it was by him very thankfully accepted. Two or three dayes after he was feasted at his own House (as he himself, though another place were offe∣red, desired) by the Merchants of the Muscovy Compa∣ny whereof Alderman Freeman was Governor) with whom, with the rest, and best of that Company, dined my selfe, and two or three other Gentlemen, that I
was intreated to bring with me. Dinner being ended, and the Table uncovered; the Health to his Emperor was begun, and pledged round, then our Kings, the Em∣perors Father (the Patriark) then the Princes, his own and others Ʋsque ad ebrietatem; after all, the Compa∣ny by their servants brought in their Present to himself, viz. a gilded red Bowle, a peece of fine skarlet wrapt in Taffaty to make him a Gowne, and three other peeces of fine cloath of different colours. This delive∣red, there came in other Presents, a gilded Bowle, and a peece of fine cloath to his Nephew, and to each of the Interpreters, and a peece of cloath for his Porcest; after those to each of his servants a pecce of cloth; so all more merrily then soberly parted. Three or four dayes after the Merchants requested me to deliver him his Present of Plate in the Kings and Princes names (though provided at their charge.) I re∣ceived it at Alderman Freemans House neer the Ex∣change, being gilt Bowles of severall sizes (only one Bason and Ewer parcell gilt;) and for distinction of the Kings Present from the Princes, by my advice, they tied a peece of red silke Ribbin to every parcell of that, and a peece of white to this: the number of his Majesties peeces, being fifteene, and of the Princes eight. With these bestowed in two Hampers carried by two Porters I went (that they might not be suspected, if met by a∣ny of his Followers, to come from elsewhere then the Court, and from the King) first down to Queen Hithe, and the up to the Ambassadors at Saint Thomas A∣postles. Brought to his House, I caused my man (after I had finished my feighned complement in name of Majesty, and of his Highness) to range the Plate orderly, each portion by it self on a Table; that done, the Ambassa∣dor with a formall Oration of thanks, took one of the Kings Bowles, and one of the Princes, and drank their Healths in each, inviting me the next day to Dinner, that he migh (he said) express his thankfulnese (which suddenly at that instant he could not) for all my pains. The Present he made me the next day, and which after Dinner, was solemly brought into the Roome by sixe
severall men, and carried before them, consisted of two paire of rich Sables, a lining for a Gowne of Sables Bel∣lies, a lining for a Iub of white and yellow Fox Bellies, a Cup of silver gilded, worth five or six pound, and a Turkey Bow, and two Arrowes, worth altogether about thirty pounds. The Duke de Soubise refuged hether from France up∣on miscarriage of some undertakings of his there, 30 l. And Mer∣chant. 50 l. had an Audience of the King at Greenwich (June the fif∣teenth) and the next day, one of the Prince, given him by his Highnesse in the upper Garden Walkes, where he entertained him in discourse above an houre, with much respects from his Highnesse, to whom he was at his Christning in Scotland a God-Father. A day or two after, the Russian Ambassador had re∣ceived his Present, he sent to me one of his Interpre∣ters with the request that I would let the Lords know how the fifty pound sent him for his Provisions by Sea, was all laid out, and that I would intreat their Lordships in his behalfe for some addition. Further, that whereas in Lent he had forborne to take the first fasting week his Allowance of fish, that he might (as he had formerly (he said) requested) have an allow∣ance in money (equivalent) for it. Also, that their Lordships would be pleased before his departure to or∣der some course about a woman that had deceaved him (upon account of worke done for him) of—18 l. To these requests the Merchants (to whom I repaired for satisfaction, the businesse being unfit for the Lords notice) intreated me to returne these answers in the name of the Lords (as I did.) That his Lordship (the Ambassador) might (if he had pleased) have received his provisions in specie (as his Predecessors had done) at other times, which would have taken away all Subject of further question, but since he would have money, and himselfe therewith provide Victualls, they had sent him—50 l. which for the proportion of his revenew, exceeded all former Presidents. That they could not
exceed that summ, if they would prevent future in∣conveniences from such Presidents; but for his want of a weekes allowance, their Lordships had appointed the Merchants to let him have— 10 l. more; and for the Woman that had deceaved him, he must be righted by the Ordinary course of Law, which if he would leave behind him a Letter of Attorney to prose∣cute in his absence, they would give it their counte∣nance, and order for the just dispatch of it. These an∣swers returned (as if I had received them from the Lords) he made little reply to, not without shews of insatisfaction, onely the money which I delivered to his Interpreter, he not unwillingly accepted. In the interim of carrying the Present to this Ambas∣sador and his demands mentioned, Seignior Valeresso, Ambassador Ordinary from Venice in place of Seignior Landi arrived at London, fetcht from Gravesend by the Master of the Ceremonies on Fryday the seaventeenth of June, and on Munday following had his first Audi∣ence at Greenwich, conducted to it by Land by the Lord Cavendish, Son to the Earle of Devonshire, with the Lord Bruse, and others in twenty five Coaches, at∣tending his Majesty, he rested himselfe in the Coun∣cell Chamber, and there entring the Presence, was at the doore receiued by the Lord Chamberlain, there presented by his Predecessor Seignior Landi, he spake breifely, and departed. Having visited his Predecessor the Saturday before, and after at the same time himselfe (something unsea∣sonably perhaps before he had had his Audience) Seignior Landi seemed to complaine (as of a neglect cast upon his Successor) that he had not yet received a wellcome from his Majesty by some person of Title, as had been (he said) the Custome of proceeding towards all his Predecessours. Wherewith I acquainted my Lord Chamberlain, brought for an answer from his Lord∣ship, that he understood not but that the Complement of wellcoming Ambassadors from the King upon their Arrivall, had been-onely used at such times as their
Audience was excused for having been deferred for rea∣son of some instant pressing affaires of his Majesty, but that for this time, the interim would be so small be∣tween his Arrivall, and his Audience, as that the visit would hardly be given, or at the least would be ex∣cusable, if omitted; which answer passed for currant both with him, and the other, as he professed to me when I first visited him after his Audience, onely he desired that my Lord Chamberlain would but intimate his reason to him personally when he would next see him, that he might receive the more honour from his own Testimony, as he did after to his satisfaction. His Predecessour next day after his Audience, took leave of his Majesty, accompanied to it at Greenwich by the Lord North, And also the girdle and hang er. when he received the honour of Knighthood from his Majesty and had the day after (according to Custome) the Sword wherewith he was Knighted sent to him from his Majesty, and two or three dayes after an addition to his Armes, in memory of his imployment hither. June the thirteenth, the Russian Ambassador being upon his departure (after I had the day before assured my Lord Chamberlain (whereof he doubted) that Am∣bassadors from those parts had usually at their parting (as at their first Arrivall) some person of Title to ac∣company them to their imbarking, I went in my Lord Chamberlains name (as for his Majesties Service) to the Lord Stanhop, who accepted of it, we went together the next day in the Kings Coach to the Ambassadors House, and thence with five other to the Tower Wharffe, where his Lordship leaving the Ambassador. This entred the Kings Barge (his followers in an other,) and with the Company of Sir John Merrick, Alderman Hammersley, and other Merchants, we came to Graves∣end, Lodged at the Christopher, were there Feasted that night by the Muscovy Company, and the next morning making use of the Kings Barge to carry us to their Ships riding foure miles off at Tilbery, he there im∣barkt, and we returned that night to London.
The 24. of June, The Venetian Ambassador Ordina∣ry, Seignieur Girolomo Lando parted from London with∣out the Master of the Ceremonies attendance to Graves∣end (his Company spared them as not of use, or Cu∣stome for an Ordinary at departure) neither had he the Kings Barge appointed for his Transport; whereat the chiefe Barge-Master Warner (respecting his Interest) murmured, as at a course unusuall, and with wrong to the Ambassadors quality. But herein he was mistaken, the use being (as hath bin said) otherwise. The Thursday before his parting, on the Monday, when it was not known but that he would be gone the Saturday, he had received not one word to the purpose of his Present, when it should be brought him: In∣so much as glancing (in discourse with me) at the affront (as he called it) like to be put upon him in his particular, but in the generall upon his Republick, Meaning Sir Lewes Lewkener who could never re∣lish that States Mi∣nisters, as Troppo steretti di∣mano. (not unlike to proceed (he said) from some ill affected to it) I wrote to my Lord Chamberlaine about it, and his Lordship with some passion recommending the consideration of it to the Lord Treasurer, Order was given, and the business effected after the proportion (as my Lord Chamberlaine told me) of 1200. ounces of gilt plate, being two hun∣dred more then were given his Predecessor Forscareni) as with more respect to his better merit, and to his nobler fashion of carriage here towards persons of all conditions, beyond any or most of his Predecessors. After the young Prince (Landsgrave of Hessen) had made about three moueths stay in England (in which time he made a posting Journey to see Scotland) he went in Coach with my company to Windsor, there to take leave of his Majesty the sixth of July, but could not have his Audience (being remitted with reason of his Majesties then pressing affaires) till Tuesday, when after the Sermon (whereat he was present) entring with my conduction by the door of the Terras Staires into the Presence, I received command to bring him through the Princes Lodgings into a Back-withdrawing Roome there behinde the Kings Privy Lodgings, whence the
King comming to him, he with his two Assistants (Councellors to his Father) Master Klingelbuck, and Ma∣ster Zoble, had his Audience, and Farewell of the King, and of the Prince also in the same place. Thence he returned to London, and the sixth of July imbarqued for Gravesend, whether I accompanied him, though without Order, or without use of the Kings Barge, or other respect of Extraordinary Honour by Present, or the like, only I moving the Lord Admirall (the Mar∣quis of Buckingham) for a Ship of his Majesty to trans∣port him (in regard of some hazard to his person not unlikely to come from the Dunkerkers, if they should light on him at Sea, he being then in the States pay Commander of a Company) he had assigned him a Les∣ser of two Ships, then riding in the Downes, 24 pouud. which by directions of Sir William Saint Johns Vice-Admirall, was to take him in at Dover. A Mask to be presented by the Prince, the Marquis of Buckingham, and other Gentlemen on Twelfnight, 1622. was for that day, and a second remitted till Sun∣day the ninth of January, principally with regard to his Majestes indisposition, but as some thought, not without expectation that the States Ambassadors would first be gone, to avoide the distaste that might be taken from their not Invitation, whereto it seemed his Majesty (for some Spanish respect as was thought) had no great affection. But they staying, (their business with the Merchants, about composing the East-Indian differences being not yet concluded) divers underhand passages, and discourses for and against the sight of the Maske, were carried to and fro as much as might be to content them, and not displease others. For first, they had an offer made them to have a Boxe appointed them apart and by themselves only, which they absolutely refused, Ambassadors Ordinarie before having had (said they) the honour to sit with his Majesty in the same place to∣gether with the French, and other Kings Ambassadors (as also with the Spanish, till that Question fell be∣tween him and Sir Noell Caron) but the inten∣tion
in truth was, that they should not then be invited (at least to be ranked in publick, as they pretended it to be their due al par delle Teste Coronate) and reasons were framed to keep them off from discontent, as well as from their apparence there, but they might seem not of the Substantiallest. As first, that the States having given their assistance to the Rochellers against the French King, the presence of their Ministers would be distastfull, and in a manner incompatible codem loco, tempore & honore with that Kings Ambassadors, but this proved not exclusion, the French intended to make no such, having (as he said to me) no order for it, neither had the pretended distasts for the States former assist∣ance yet passed (he said) so far, as to publick notice, and exception from the King his Master. Another ex∣clusion was obtruded upon their pretence of Precedence to the Duke of Savoys Ambassador, but no such Ambas∣sador being now in England, there wanted ground for that exclusion also. Arsennes Stavencts and Basse. The last was against their number, that they could not all there be conveniently seated together with his Majesty, with the other Ambassadors invited; but this Bar they removed by their answer, that if they might have the honour of an Invitation, there should be but one of them present to receive it, esteeming that a sufficient honour to the rest absent. In a word, when neither these reasons, nor others would serve to still their Exceptions against their not being invited, they were referred to adventure of content, or not content, and so were not at all invited, Onely a dozen of their followers had places assigned them over the Lord Chamberlains Box at the entrance into the Banquetting House from the Princes Galleries. Mon∣sieur de' Arsennes Son, and their Secretary Sr. Constan∣tine Huggins, were placed on the fourme beneath the Lords. The French Ambassador that night, and the Venetian supped with the Duke of Lenox, and entered the Roome with the King, both seated there on his left hand; the French even with him, and the Venetian somewhat more forward.
The Negotiation of the States Ambassadors with our East-Indian Merchants, being brought (in appear∣ance) to a finall conclusion, the Master of the Cere∣monies onely (without any Titular Person) was sent for them with the Kings Coach (January the one and twentieth) to take their leaves of his Majesty, but a new difference in the interim occuring, they were sent to at two of the Clock (the instant of their setting forth, and were stayed their Journey; which appointed for the Fryday following, they had againe the Kings Coach (with the Master of the Ceremonies, and one other) sent for them, and entring White-Hall by the Parke, and Tiltyatd Gallery, they attended his Majesties time (he being then ill at ease) in the Chamber of Ordina∣ry Audience next that of the Stone Table, whereinto (after an houre) they were called by Mr. Secretary Conway, and being there (with the Commissioners for that businesse) upon point of signing their generall agreement) a new question arose from the Merchants with exception against the validity of their caution, which lasting til late at night (Mr. Secretary in the mean time passing often between them, and the King) they had a dismission for the next dayes Audience of his Majesty, to which the Earle of Warwick had appoint∣ment to conduct them (his Lordship having said in the hearing of some of the Lords, who after told it to the Lord Chamberlain) that it was fit some person of ho∣nourable Title (not Sir Lewes Lewkner onely) should be sent to their Lodgings to accompany them to Court at their last Audience, (which my Lord Chamberlain excusing, as forgotten by him, having not been put in mind of it (he said) by Sir Lewes) it was against the next day provided for, when the Earle of Warwick ac∣cordingly (attended with two or three other Noblemen and divers Gentlemen of the Kings Servants, in eight or nine Coaches besides the kings) brought them to Court, where passing through the Guard Chamber, and Pre∣sence into the Councell Chamber on the late Queens side, they there rested, till the Lords Commissioners for their businesse came to them, and after an hours ex∣pence
in discourse about some remaining rubs, It was finally agreed on, and the Lord together with the Am∣bassador having signed to the accord, their Lordships leaving them, repaired to the King, and after them fol∣lowed the Ambassadors through the late Queens Lodg∣ings into the Privy Gallery, where entring the Kings withdrawing Chamber, they there took their leaves (the three Ambassadors with Sir Noell Caron first, and after the other inferiour Commissioners (strangers) for that business.) Monsieur Stavenets was there Knighted, and two other having been knighted before, viz. Mon∣sieur de Arsennes, by the King of France, and Monsieur Basse by the King of Sweden. The next day being to take leaue of the Prince, they had sent for their conduct Sir Robert Car, Gentleman of his Highnesse Bed-Chamber, with the Kings, and Prin∣ce's Coaches, entring by the Privy Garden Gate at White-Hall, and thence (by the further end of the long Stone Gallery) into the Prince his Lodgings, where in his Chamber of presence he gave them their Audience and farewell, thence they went to visite, and take leave of the Marquess of Buckingham, and so home. The first of February, after they had spent here the full time of fourteen moneths in Negotiating, and had had of the King, and Councell above sixty Audiences, they went in Coaches of their own (without the Kings) to Tower Wharffe, and there imbarked in hyred and borrowed Barges to their Ships which laid not far off, and were purposely sent to transport them. This de∣fault of the Kings Coach and Barge at their parting (ever woont at that time to serve Ambassadors) pro∣ceeded from the Master of the Ceremonies, who should have been my Lord Chamberlains Remembrancer) for I acquainted his Lordship after with the omission, and I had for answer, that he knew not of the certaine time of their departure, which the Master of the Cere∣monies might, and ought to have observed, if he had not learned overmuch to some others particular satisfact∣ion, The Span∣ish Ambas∣sador. or been over partiall &c. At ten in the morning
when they were all ready to depart, the Present from his Majesty was not come, which (for that slackness) they were upon point of leaving behind them, but the Master of the Jewel-House, Sir Henry Mildmay, even then in tempore, arriving, and personally presenting it (as he said his Majesty had particularly cōmanded him (though that might seem to have been said, ad captandum) they received for each of the three Commissionershares five hundred ounces of faire gilt plate, and to their Secreta∣ry Sir Constantine Huggins a Chaine of Gold of a hun∣dred markes (more by twenty pound then he had the other time of his being here) bestowed on him, which my Lord Chamberlaine told me he himselfe had cau∣sed to be so increased, done as a Cast (he said) of his Office to a person worth. They gave at the instant of their parting no gratuities to any (that I could heare of) excepting to the Master of the Jewell-House) who discovered no great satisfaction in matter or manner to that purpose) only they had set down in a lyst the names of such as they intended should be gratified af∣ter their departure (as they signified to Sir Lewes Lewkener, and to my selfe, who three dayes after re∣ceived from the hand of Sir Noell Carone, (comming personally (in all their names to my House) a purse and in it fifty peeces. 50. pound. Monsieur de Boiscot Ambassador Extraordinary from the Arch-Duke, Arriving at London, Who had been here before Or∣dinary Am∣bassador. An. 1612. while the King was at Theobalds in his way to New-Market, and set∣ting forth from London, (in Company of the Spanish Ambassador, Don Carlos de Coloma to come for their Audience of his Majesty) On Sunday the 23 of February, lay at Ware the first night, the next at Royston, the third at Cambridge, where in Trinity Colledge, the Masters Lodgings were taken up for them, and the Kings Officers of his House ap∣pointed to serve them being defrayed there, and all the way out, and home by his Majestie, but not before nor after in London. The Wednesday following they were fetcht (by the Lord Walden, with three or four
Gentlemen, the Kings servants in the Kings Coach, and others appointed for their Journey) to New-Market, where streight entering the Court for their repose in the Princes Lodgings, (his Highness being then gone for Spaine) they were introduced by the Earle of Arrundel, meeting them at the Presence, then to the Privy-Cham∣ber door, through it, and the withdrawing Chamber, into the Kings Bed-chamber (where all other, but the Agent of the Archdutches Monsieur Van Mall, who at∣tended him there) were excluded; they had an hours Audience of his Majesty, and returned that night to Cambridge. The next day passing their time in sight of severall Colledges, and of the Schooles, (where at a Congregation purposely called) they were admitted Masters of Arts, and heard after that a disputation in Phylosophy) they the next morning parted thence to Audely-end and entertained there that night by the Lord Walden in absence of his Father the Earle of Suf∣folk) they the next day came to London. 1623 In May. I received his Majesties command to at∣tend the Earle of Rutland (appointed Admirall Gene∣rall of the Fleete sent for Spaine to transport the Prince and the Infanta to England) with order, and Instruct∣ions, that as soone as his Lordship should be come to Saint Andera (our Port assigned) I should carry to the Prince (wheresoever he should then be abiding in Spaine) the news of the Ships Arrivall for his, and the Infantas Service. Sir Thomas Somerset Son to the Earle of Worcester, had obtained the like imployment from his Majesty after I had received mine, which I stirring in, as being a derogation from my Service, his Majesty was pleased to resolve it with this signification, That he had sent Sir Thomas Somerset, as a Person of more eminent quality for the more honour of the im∣ployment, and me as his Ordinary Servant, and Offi∣cer of the Ceremonies for my more neere, and usefull attendance on it. Imbarqued, and my Cabine markt for me in the Admirall of the Fleet (the Prince Royall) I kept on the same course with the Generall from the
Downes to Portshmouth, to Waymouth, to Plimmouth, and thence to Spaine with the slow motion, that the winds lent us in above three moneths time from our first falling to the Downes, till upon the eleaventh of September we entred the Port of Saint Andera in Bis∣cay (where meeting an assurance, that the Prince was already come within a day or two's Journey of that Port (with intention to imbarke himselfe, and compa∣ny (being till then out of hope of our Ships so opportune an Arrivall) in the two Ships of Sir Francis Stewart, and Captaine Love, that had lyen there (for his High∣nesse Service long before our coming) though there were some discourse about the fitnesse or not of Sir Tho∣mas Somersets, and my going to meete the Prince, be∣fore we should heare he were come into the Town of Saint Anderas, my reasons (and resolution with them) for discharge of the Service which we were sent for, viz. to carry the news (as soon (as we should come to Spaine) of the Fleets readiness there) prevailed, and he and I rowed immediatly to shoare, whence ryding that night over the mountaines in most darke, and Tempestuous weather, we met his Highnesse about six leagues up within Land early the next morning, when (besides the Joy his Highnesse received at our incoun∣ter, and the Fleets Arrivall (a news that he said made him looke upon me, when I told it, as on one, that had the face of an Angell) the Duke of Buckingham, when I after met him, and told him the like, to express his content, kissed me, and drawing from his finger a Dia∣mond of above an hundred pounds valew) gave it me for a present. As soon as his Highnesse was come to Saint Andera, he committed to my charge and atten∣dance an Ambassador Extraordinary Don Dicgo Hurtado de Mendoza, and honourable Person of that House (one that I had known, and received honours from in Spaine nine yeares before, when I was sent thither with a pre∣sent from his Majesty) and was now sent by that King to waite on the Prince to England, and to bring back an account of his sase Arrivall there. He was quarter∣ed, and I with him, in Sir Francis Stewarts Ship (the
Saint George) out of which I accompanied him one day in the Port of Saint Andera, and another at Sea, to his Audiences of the Prince aboard his Ship, and a third time in the Castle of the Isle of Silley, wherein the Windes in our returne had forced us. The third day of the Prince his stay for wind at Saint Anderas (in which Town his Lodging was prepared (though he lay every night on Shipboard) upon an occasion offered of a storme that took him the first Evening, when ha∣ving been aboard (and the Spanish Lords also that had accompanied him from Court) he intended to returne on shoare in a Barge, but was with hazard of drowning to himselfe, and all with him driven to lye for that night in one of the other Ships, which they happily re∣covered) he made a Dinner for the Grands, and the rest of quality in the great Cabbyne of the Ship called the Prince, where at his own Table, placed cross at one end of the roome sate himself, the Spanish Ambassador men∣tioned, our Kings Ambassadors Sir Walter Ashton) the Cardinal de Capata, and the Conde de Gondemar. all the other Tituladoes, and persons of quality, being placed at another Table set long wayes; no man but I, Sir William Crosts, one of his Highness Gentlemen, and such as must necessarily attend the service being allowed Entrance. The wind comming faire of Oct. His Highness parted from Saint Andrews, and the fifth of October (ha∣ving in the mean time touched at Silley, and passed some foule weather) he came before Portsmouth, where he, and the Duke of Buckingham immediatly landed. The Ambassador Mendoza held it his duty immediatly to follow them, so went on shoare, (and I with him, though somewhat over-late) that he might there perso∣nally congratulate his Highness safe Arrivall, when his Highness in his haste to Court, rode out at one gate before we could land and enter the other. There lodging the Ambassador by the Mayors Billetting, we passed three nights before we could be provided, (in that troublesome time of so many mens landing) with Coaches, Carts, and Horses for his proceeding to London. To which purpose sending a Warrant, (which
I had before proviseonally gotten at Sea with the Duke of Buckinghams hand to it) to Sir Daniell Norton a Justice of Peace in Hampshire, he sent in three Carts, whereof we imployed but two, and sufficient number of Sadle Horses, and his own Coach, and four Horses, with which, and with the Prince his (left purposely by his Highnesse for that Service) we set forward to Lon∣don the eighteenth of October, went that night to Pe∣tersfield twelve miles, and the next day to Gilfford, twenty miles, where the Ambassador being met, halfe a mile from the Towne by one of the Viscountess of An∣nundales Gentlemen (her Lord waiting then on the King in his place of Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber) with an Invitation to Lodge at her House, it was ac∣cepted. The Master of the Ceremonies with three or foure Gentlemen came that night to us, having brought with them three or foure hyred Coaches, and one with six mules sent the Ambassador Extraordinary, by the Marquess de la Inojosa, who sometime before arri∣ved in England. The next day the Marquess mentioned, and the other Ambassador Extraordinary Don Carlos de Coloma met us (Answerable to an assignation given by Sir Lewes Lewkner) about foure miles from London, with halfe a dosen more coaches. Then the Ambassadors quitting their own Coach, and entring the Princes, were all arrived in the Evening at Excester House, their appointed Lodging, where Lodged also with them Don Hurtado de Mendoza out of his own, and the other Ambassadors election, after offer had been made him, both for his Lodging, and defraying at his Majesties charge (but was excused by the Marquess de la Inojosa with saying he should be his guest while he remained in England) so much I signified the next Morning to Don Diego from my Lord Chamberlain, with intimation further, that if he found himselfe not Lodged, or treated to his mind, he should have other provisions elsewhere, adding that his Majesty (and particularly the Prince) had given my Lord Chamberlain an especiall charge to do him honour in all things, and to procure him his full Satis∣faction.
To this offer he replyed with many thanks, but with refusall, saying, the Marquess was his kinsman and with him he would quarter, and defray himselfe (the furniture and Hangings of his Chamber supplyed him from the King, being (he said) an honour suffici∣ent for him.) There he remained, and at three dayes end I was sent to him from my Lord Chamberlain to know his desire for his Audience, and to let him know withall, that if he had aessicted a speedy dispatch, his Lordship would write to the King for it, that going from London the Wednesday, and coming that day or the next to Royston, he might the next day after have his Audience, the King having dessigned his remove from thence on Saturday to Fincham-brook, a place that afforded no commodity for his reception; or other∣wise, if he were not prest by his Affaires, he might be pleased to respite his Journey to the King, till his Ma∣jesty should returne to Theobalds, where he would not be till a Fortnight after. This latter offer he made choyce of, as of the most proper allowance of time to provide himselfe of Liveries &c. for his followers, of which he came unprovided. In the meane (within foure or five dayes of his Arri∣vall at London) his Lordship willed me to know of him if he would be pleased to receive visit from him, and other Noblemen that owed, and would discharge their respects; which offer he thankfully accepted of, and re∣ceived on the next day from his Lordship and the Earle of Arrundell coming to him both together. The thirteenth of October, the Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma set forth towards Royston to con∣gratulate the Prince his returne not yet seen by them, his Highnesse remaining yet with the King, but being on their way as far as Buntingford, they there met a message from Mr. Secretary Conway in name of his Ma∣jesty, either that they should be pleased to come pre∣sently to his Majesties Presence (and from that to the Princes) and returne that night to Buntingford (Roy∣ston being a place, the messenger said (as he was wil∣led) of ill reception) or to stay at Buntingford that
night, and have their Audience the next day, and so returne. This choice seemed somewhat round, and of hard di∣gestion to the Marquesse, and passed not without Ex∣ception comparatively against the much different Treatment of the French Ambassador the weeke before, who had (he said) both supped and Lodged in Court at Royston (though this his Treatment was suddain, as was his coming thither by Post, with onely two Gentle∣men congratulate the Prince at his Arrivall) who prevended by the same Ambassadors Servant with a con∣gratulation at his Landing at Durham House Stayres in name of his Master, and having assured him he should be the first Ambassador he would give access to) his Highnesse was immediately after sent to from the Span∣ish Ambassador to the same congratulating purpose, The wind comming now about for France. but he refused his demanded Audience with excuse of his hast of repaire to the King his Father. In conclusion the Marquess went to Royston, and had so good respects (out wardly at least) from his Majesty and the Prince, as he (in countenance) made shew of good satisfaction but &c. About a week after Don Hurtado de Mendoza his Arrivall, I dined with the Venetian Ambassador Seig. Valeresso, he upon notice taken of my former acquain∣tance with the other, desired me to let him know (after he had first told me how he had sent a Gentle∣man to the Marquess de la Inojsa with a congratula∣tory visit, and that for the title given the Marquess of Excellenza, he had returned his thanks in the third Person onely) that he was his humble Servant, and de∣sired to perform personally all due Complements, but that he had found a doore shut, which hindred him of Enterance, so hoped he would pardon him, and to that purpose. To this, I brought him answer from the Mar∣quess, that he had heard of his worth, desired his ac∣quaintarve, and good Correspondence, and was sorrey that any thing should hinder it; but if it should please him to honour him with a viset; he could not exceed
the Title, which other Ministers of the King his Master had used; and so left it to his consideration, whether he would, or not visit him. To a Serjeants Feast at the Middle-Temple, the French Ambassador had been invited in the first place, and after the Spanish, which known to this, and in∣terpreted in the sence it ought, he excused his Presence with some businesse, that he doubted might at that time be brought him from his Majesty. The French Ambassador came, and with him the Venetian, and the States Ambassador, who disappointed of the company they were promised (of the Master of the Ceremonies) I met them there, and after dinner brought them to their Coaches. The Marquess de la Inojosa (who came hither Ex∣traordinary Ambassador long before Don Diego Mendo∣za) doubting that this would challenge precedence as being the last, and freshest person of imployment from the King his Master (according to the received rule of Ambassadors come the last and of March first) wrought by all the cuning meanes he could to lessen his esteem, as by entertaining him (under pretence of his Allye, being of his family, and name) into the same House with him, abating thereby the splendour he should have received, if Lodged elsewhere, and at the Kings charge (as it had been offered) and by styling him in his Letters sent to him on his way from Portsmouth thus, a Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Ambassador Ex∣traordinary de sa Majestate circa la persona del Principe. Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Ambassador Extraor∣dinary of his Majesty about the person of the Prince. All this would not keep Don Hurtado from his pretence (which to some appeared to be cleared by his sitting, as he did always, at the head of the Table in the Marquises House) which yet to others seemed but to make him a guest, and that place therefore in that right nly given him) nor from professing (as I heard him often) that it was his right to preceed, and would do so wheresoever
he should meet him abroad and in publick, not respect∣ing the reasons alleadged for the Marquis that he was Consejero de Estado, Vizroy of Navarr, and had the Marriage Negotiation &c. Don Diego de Mexia, Governor of the Castle of Ant∣werpe, Generall of the Ordnance to the Archdutchess, and her Ambassador Extraordinary to his Majesty arri∣ved here Novemb. 5. followed by many brave Gentle∣men Tituladoes and Souldiers, he was received at Gravesend by the Lord of Bellfast, late Lord Deputy of Ireland, and by him conducted to his Lodging (the same with the three Spanish Extraordinaries) whether he came on foote after his landing at the Savoy, whilst the Kings and Noblemens Coaches sent from Court to receive him at Denmarke-House, had a Countermand to take him in at the Tower, but the Tyde falling faire (otherwise then was supposed) to give him safe passage under the Bridge, they missed him, and returned as is mentioned. Don Hurtado de Mendosa, after a moneths stay for his Audience, during the Kings absence from London, received a Message from my Lord Chamberlaine by Sir Lewes Lewkner, and by me, That since he had had so long a patience in attendance of his Audience here at London, his Majesty would not adde further trouble to it, but come himselfe hither to give it him. So the 13. of November, the King being come to Town the day before, the Earle of Rutland (who had in his Fleet brought him out of Spaine) was made choice of for his conduction to Court. The Lord attending at Bedford-House where he Lodged (the repaire thither of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber listed for the Service) a Messen∣ger from his Lordship brought them word to White∣Hall, as they stood expecting his comming thither, that there were three Coaches attending them at the Court-Gate to carry them to the Earl of Rutlands House. This Message so much displeased them (it being in
their Opinion, an irregular course for them to go to his House, when the Custome (said they) had ever been for the Lords, wheresoever sent, to take them along with him to White-Hall) as some of them refused to go at all, others went thither in those sent Coaches, and at∣tended his Lordship with the Lord Windsor, the Lord Scroope, and Sir Thomas Somerset to the Ambassadors at Exeter House, followed by twenty Coaches, and thence to White-Hall. With the Ambassador (to present him to his Majesty) came the first sent Ambassador Extra∣ordinary Don Carlos, the other (the Marquiss de lainojo∣sa, excusing that part more due and fit, as was judged for his discharge) with regard to the Question of Pre∣cedence mentioned. After his Audience of the King, the Lord Viscount of Andever being there ready to conduct him to the Prince, brought him by the way of the Stone Gallery to his Highness Quarter, where after a gratious reception in his Presence Chamber, the Ambassador re∣turned as before accompanied to his Lodging. The Earle of Kelley, well attended with many Gen∣tlemen and Coaches went from White-Hall (the 15. of November) to fetch the Archdutchess Ambassador from Excester-House, supplied there with hired Coaches, so many as made the whole number of them at the least fifty. After his rest a while in the Councell Chamber (disposing the Lackeyes, and inferiour sort of Follow∣ers to come behinde) that their Masters might have the easier and fairer access to his Majesty) whereof the Spanish Ambassadors Gentlemen, for want of that Or∣der failed the day before) he had Audience of his Ma∣jesty, and thence wnet streight to one assigned him of the Prince; he was accompanied to these Audiences by the Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma in the same Coach, neither of these two questioning Pre∣cedence (as the Marquess had done of Mendosa) who told me the Evening after, that, that question was re∣solved by Letters, which he had that very day received from the King his Master to his advantage, which was ended, but feighned as appeared soone after. For Sun∣day
the 16. of November Don Hurtado de Mendoza (haste∣ning his dispatch) had assigned, and given him his se∣cond, and last Audience, which my Lord Chamberlaine the day before told me was to be given him in his Majestes withdrawing Chamber by the way of the Park and Privy Gallery, as private, whereupon I was bold to put his Lordship in mind, that that be∣ing the last sight he was then like to have of his Ma∣jesty, it would be expected, that according to Custome he should have some Nobleman sent to conduct him, which his Lordship apprehending as fit; My Lord of Kneighton, Captaine of the Guard was appointed for it, and with a President Extraordinary and irregular, but for his respect to the Ambassador, whom it seemed, he desired particularly to honour, or for the more resplen∣dent attendance of his own person, as Captaine of that Band, he brought along with him (ranckt all the way through the Strand in head of the Coaches) the Com∣pany of the Kings Guard, to the number of sixty, which in my hearing the Ambassadors Followers did interpret as an honour done their Master, never done before to any other; and when to undeceive them, (I said) the Guard marched in that manner for attendance of their Captaine; They replyed, their honour was the greater to have such a Lord for company, that had at∣tending him such followers, so apt are strangers to make use of all to their own advantage. This Ambas∣sador having finished his Audience of the King (which lasted at the least an hour) as he told me himselfe) pas∣sed between them from first to last in Latine (a Lan∣guage that he was farre more bold then perfect in) he regarding neither Grammer nor congruity) he took leave also in the same place of the Prince his Highness. The Captaine of the Guard, and his brother the Lord Montjoy not leaving him, till they brought him with the same Attendance to the Dining Roome of his lodging. Here I think good to insert for suture occasions, and use to the Master of the Ceremonies, that Sir Lewes Lewkner reported to me, that when he came from Do∣ver in conduct of the Archdutches Ambassador Don
Diego de Mexia, Mr. Van Mall Agent here for her High∣nesse, perswaded him to take his place in one of the hired Coaches with some of the Ambassadors Gentle∣men, and with it to leade the way, leaving the Am∣bassador to come in the Kings Coach in Company of such persons of Court Eminency, as himselfe should be pleased to make choyce of, which (though Sir Lewes and he stumbled at) he at last allowed of; but being come to London, he let Van Mall know, it had been ever the manner (and with good reason) that the Mast∣er of the Ceremonies imployed from the King for the Ambassadors honour, and to receive him at the Sea side, or elsewhere in his way to Court, was to have place with him in his Coach, unlesse perhaps some Noble person were withall imployed in that Service; which assertion confirmed by him with divers Persidents and Reasons (the Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma, acknowledging that they had both severally received him into their Coaches at their first Arrivall into this Kingdome) the Arch-Dukes, and Van Mall with acknowledgment of their Errour, allowed it for requisite. One Reason given then for the fitness of the Master of the Ceremonies sitting in Coach with Ambas∣sadors on the way, was that his Presence so at hand was most usefull, and necessary for avoydance of dist∣urbing incounters from passengers or otherwise in the way; another, that it was fit, the Ambassador should have the Master of the Ceremonies alwayes neere him for discourse, and satisfaction upon Questions concer∣ning the Countrey &c. And lastly, for the honour of the Master, that sends such a one to do honour by his conduct to the Person of the Ambassador. Preparetion being made November the eighteenth for a great Feast by the Duke of Buckingham to enter∣tain principally Don Diego de Mendoza, and with him Don Diego de Mexia the Arch-Dukes Ambassador and his followers of quality. The Marquess de la Inojosa (it was intended) should have been at it as was Don Carlos de Coloma, but for the difference mentioned of Precedence between him
and the other Extraordinary; but the day before, the Duke sending to him Sir George Goring with a message that he was sorry to understand he would be absent from the entertainment he intended, because of some inconveniences &c. The Marquess returned answer, that he knew of no such inconveniences, but that if it had, or should please the Duke to invite him, he would come to his Feast &c. In sequell hereof the next day at Evening (some∣what before the invited Ambassadors should set forth, and were attending the person that should come to conduct them; the Duke sent a Gentleman of his Chamber (Mr. Endimion Porter) which a Regalo of three large Flaskets full of Provision of the choisest of three Courses of Cates intended for the Feast; One full of cold meates for the Antepasto; another with fat fowle, (raw, and ready for spit) of all sorts; and a third of the best, and rarest sweet-meates, all presen∣ted with this message, that the Duke kissed his hands, and would have held it an honour, and an happinesse to have had his Company, but since he would not have it, he desired him to tast of what he had provided for him, at that at the tasting of it at his Supper, he would be pleased to drink the health of the King of England, as he would at the same drink the health of the King of Spaine. The Marquess immediate answer to this message, was no more but this. For the happinesse my Lord Duke sayes, he should have had in my Company, he might have had it, if it would have pleased him to command it. After retur∣ning thanks for his Present, and saying, it was easie to conceive what the Feast would be, when a tast of it was so rare, and plentifull; he gave the bringer fifty Crownes, bad the Company good night, and went to Supper privately in his Chamber. Soone after the Earle of Northampton being sent for conductor to the invited Ambassadors. These, after their reception at Yorke House (the Dukes) they were there thus placed at the Table. On the left hand of his Majesty (who was there as
a guest inviting himselfe) sate with a convenient dist∣ance Don Diego de Mendoza, at the Tables end below Don Carlos de Coloma, and the Arch-Dukes Ambassador; at the other end of the Table on the right hand of the King, sate the Prince. At a long Table (not halfe filled with guests) placed long wayes the Roome) sate the Tituladoes, and Cavaliers, that came with Don Diego de Mexia, the other Don Diego Mendoza, having with him no followers of quality worthy of that place, and Com∣pany; and none of the Marquesses de inojosa then ap∣pearing with regard to their Cheefes absence. After Supper there was a Maske with a faire appearance of Ladie at it, and after the Maske, a most sumptuous Banquet. The one and twentieth of November Don Diego Hur∣tado de Mendoza, set forth for his departure with my attendance towards Dover, and being by me provided (at the Kings charge) with foure Coaches besides the Kings coach with foure Horses, and a day or two be∣fore his goods being sent thither in the weekly retur∣ning Waggon, at the rate of five shillings six pence per cent. all the way by land at the Kings charge. We laid the first night at Rochester, the next at Can∣terbury, and came the next day to Dover, where the wind standing contrary, after he, and one Don Pedro de Aldeberandino, Nephew to Pope Clement the eight (glad to take the advantage of the Kings Ship for pas∣sage) had in a small Boat set forth the Haven, and were forced back againe (as the Kings Ship at the same time was) into the Downes, we went in the Kings coach to Deale, where expecting the wind two or three dayes with the patience of an hungry entertainment from a close handed Ambassador (as his present to me at his parting from Dover (being but an old guilt Livery Pot, that had lost his fellow, and was not worth above twelve pounds, accompanied with two paire of Spanish Gloves to make it almost thirteen, made good to my shame, and his) he at length imbarked for his Transport under the conduct of Sir Richard Ringley Admirall of the nar
row Seas in the Ship called Happy Entrance, and was there left by me, but not so soon by the crosse windes, which held him in the Downes almost a seavennight before they would blow him over. He was scarse abroad when Letters overtook him (sent from Spaine in the Marquess de Inojosa Pack) with sharpe reproofes for his resumption to contest a∣bout Precedence with the said Marquess (who (it seem∣ed, after the style of Spaine (different from ours, that gives the last Extraordinary the first place) was to have it for the respect of his being Gouncellour of State, Vizroy of Navar, and formerly Governour of Milan, which Letters not onely revoked the Commission he had from the King of Spaine to the Arch-Dutches, and the King of France (as he should return that way home) but commanded also his retrait immediately upon his Arrivall in Spaine, to his own House (with a kind of Confinement) till he should know the King his Masters further pleasure. The Arch-Dutchess Ambassador Don Diego de Mexia parted from London about a week after, and having pressed hard for liberty to be transported to the Port he came from of Mardick neere Dunkerk, could not obtaine it (for satisfaction it might seeme to the Hollanders, offended, and taking Exceptions at the manner, and place of his first passage with his Majesties Convoy from that Towne, pretended to be then by them (at Sea beleaguered) so as he was forced to imbark at Do∣ver for his Transport to Callaies in the Kings Ship commanded by Sir Richard Bingley. A Maske being prepared by the Prince (with the Duke of Buckingham, and others &c.) for Twelfnight a message was sent from his Majesty to the French Am∣bassador (by whom carried I could not learne) to this purpose. That whereas there was a Maske towards, and that his Majesty was desirous that the Marquess de la Inojosa, who had not seene any in this Kingdome, should be at it, he intended to visit him also (the
French Ambassador, and in the first place, but would take it, as a respect to his satisfaction, if (to avoid the incounter, and question about their Precedence) he might before hand know, that he would be absent, framing some such excuse, as he should think fittest. To this the Ambassador returning at that instant no satis∣fieing answer, he soone after intreated the Earle of March to present one from him to his Majesty in these words. That about two yeares since upon the like oc∣casion, he had received the like message, but knowing how strongly his Majesty stood then affected to the Al∣lience with Spaine, he would give him no distast, but with excuse of his indisposition kept himselfe absent, that if he should now againe do the like, he should in the sight of the world put a scorne upon himselfe, and do an unanswerable wrong to the King his Master, be∣tween whom, and the King of Spaine his Majesty knew (if he would be pleased to declare his knowledge) that there was no question to be made of the right of Prece∣dence; that in this regard, he humbly beseecht his Majesty to proceed plainely, and fairely without useing any more colourable, or alternative Invitations (as he had done,) which might imply a Parity, in no sort to be yeelded to by the King his Master, in whom was the ab∣solute right of Priority. That if his Majesty intended to invite him, he hoped he would intend also to enter∣tain him with fitting respects, for come he would, if he should be invited, and if he should not, and the other should, he would protest against it, and immediatly re∣turne home to the King his Master with the account of his Treatment. That further his Majesty would be pleased to consider, that whereas he was at that instant sending a Person of quality to the King his Master, he might with reason expect, that whatsoever want, or omission he (the French Ambassador) should meet with here, it would be returned in France in the same mea∣sure. This message (the substance whereof he repeated to me two or three dayes after) was brought little soon∣er to the King, then it was made known to the Marquess de la Inojosa, who instantly sent for the Master of the
Ceremonies, and in a storming manner gave him a message (repeating it twice or thrice) to be delivered to his Majesty by him in this sence; that he knew what respect had been formerly given the King of Spaines (his Masters Ministers) especially those that had been here Extraordinary, and what alternative course of invitati∣on had been used with them, and the French; that he looked for no less honour to be done to him then to his Predecessors, and that since it was both his right and his turne to be now invited, he would expect it, beseeching his Majesty not underhand to invite the French Ambassadors (as he knew (he said) he was in∣tended) but to invite him directly, and openly first, and only, that so if (he Inojoso) must be made a Subject for gazers abroad, it might be to some purpose, and that he might have a just, and an apparent cause to write to his Master of the wrong done him here in his Minister, with other words in an high Spanish Stile to that purpose, which when the Master of the Ceremonies had twice or thrice requested him to temper, to take time to think better of them, and to communicate his intended message with his Collegue (Don Carlos) he only yeelded to satisfie him in this last of communicating his inten∣tion (as he did that night with that much more tempe∣rate and considerate Gentleman) from whom wresting (as Don Carlos himself after acknowledged) a con∣sent for the carriage of that message to the King by Sir Lowes Lewkner, the Maske was thereupon re∣spited &c. The nineteenth of January, having received directi∣ons from my Lord Chamberlaine to repaire to New∣market for attendence of Sir Robert Sherrley (arrived Ambassador from the King of Persia) to his Audience, which by his Majesties appointment he was to have there with the advantage and commodity of his neere aboad at Saxham, (his first rest after his Landing and long Travells, and whence his sister the Lady Crosts sent to me to London, to prepare his access to his Ma∣jesty) As soone as he was come to Court I sent my man
to him with norice of my comming thither to serve him, and having received answer of his desire to be dis∣patcht for his speedy return, I acquainted both the Duke of Buckingham, and Master Secretary Conway with the cause of my comming, and the address I had from my Lord Chamberlaine to him too for my further Govern∣ment: so the 27. of January I was sent to Saxham with the Kings Coach only, and five Gentlemen, the Kings Servants; and parting thence the next morning early (in obedience of a Command sent Post to me thither from my Lord Duke after midnight, That the King ha∣ving assigned the Audience for the afternoone, would have me bring the Ambassador by ten in the forenoon) we came with three Coaches, besides the Kings to Court, where conducting him immediatly up to the Princes Privy Chamber (which in absence of his High∣ness was purposely hung for honour to the Ambassador) he was fetcht thence by the Earle of Anglesey through the Privy Chamber, and the Withdrawing-Chamber; (where the Duke met him) into the Kings Bedcham∣ber; There having made his two first respects of Ap∣proach with his Turbant on, (his whole habite being Persian) at the third, he took it off, and laid it at the Kings feete, and made his Speech of Entrance kneeling, till the King willing him to arise and cover, he did, and presenting his Letters of Credence (written in the Persian Language, and un-understood for want of an Interpreter no where then to be found in England:) After this, having gratious words, and countenances from his Majesty, he returned accompanied as he came to the Prince his Lodgings, where Master Secretary Conway repairing to him, intertained him an hour with discourse concerning the Propositions of his Negotiati∣ation, (which he had a little before delivered to him, and the Duke in Writing, and so returned to Sax∣ham. Immediatly upon this Ambassadors Arrivall at Court, I acquainted the Duke with his intention to lay his Turbant at the Kings feet (though (he said) he had kept it alwayes on in the Presence of the Emperour and
the King of Spaine) and thereby made way for his Ma∣jesties Allowance of his covering, which was otherwise doubted would not have been permitted in regard of his naturall Subjection (though in his former imployment into England (when he wore his owne Countrey Ha∣bite) he had been (after some question about it) allow∣ed to cover in the Kings Presence. From the same King. The 12. of February he came to London with my attendance in company of his Sister Crofts, and others, met between Tottenham, and Newington with six Coaches, whereof one with foure Horses, and hired by me at the Kings charge by my Lord Chamberlains per∣mission for that day onely, his Lordship saying, he had yet no order for it from his Majesty. The 14. of February having received an assignation for his Audience of the Prince at Saint Jameses, (his Highnes Coach, and two Horses being commanded to be ready there at twelve of the clock) I found there the Earle of Arund. (Son to the Lord Marquess Ham∣ilton, and Gentleman of the Prince his Bed-Chamber) with six or seaven more of his Highness Servants, that had received Order for his conduction to his presence. We went thence to the Ambassadors Lodgings in Fleet-street, and there meeting the Lord North, and some Gentlemen of his Kindred, we brought him to the Prince his Presence Chamber at Saint Jameses, where his Hignesse standing ready to receive him, the Ambassa∣dor entered, performing all his reverences with his Turbant on, bowing himselfe low at his second reve∣rence, and touching the ground with his right hand and then his head, when come neere the Prince (who stood uncovered) he fell on his knee, but instantly rai∣sed by his Highnesse, he fell to the Complementall part, and from that to the earnest of his errand, which offered to the Prince's consideration in writing, he re∣tyred as he entered, and returned to his home with the conduction mentioned. The five and twentieth of February Mr. Secretary Conway wrote me a Letter to come to speake with me
for the Kings Service, which obeyed, he told me the Duke of Buckingham, and he had received notice of two Ambassadors landed at Gravesend from the States of the United Provinces, This was when Sir Lewes Lewkner was had in Jealousie for his af∣fection to the Spanish Ambassa∣dors, and that they had made choyce of me to be sent thither to receive them. I told him (after humble thanks for the honour my Lord Duke and his Honour intended me in that imploy∣ment) that I must in the duty of my place receive my charges from the Lord Chamberlain, and that I thought the Master of the Ceremonies had, or would have the discharge of that Service committed to him. He replied he thought he would rather attend the Spanish Ambassadors then the Dutch; and for my Lord Cham∣berlaine, (he said) he had sought him for that pur∣pose, but not finding him, he desired me to acquaint him with the Dukes, and his choyce of me, which when I accordingly imparted to his Lordship, he told me that Sir Lewes had been with him that afternoon, and re∣ceived his Directions to go presantly to Gravesend with the Kings Barge to bring them to London. The next morning my Lord Wentworth sent me word; that he was made choice of to receive them at their landing at the Tower, and desired my company, with other Gentlemens thither; whence he conducted them (being two Joynt Commissioners Monsieur d'Arsennes that had been here not long before, and Monsieur Ja∣achimi one of the States Generall of Zealand) with the attendance of half a score Coaches, half a dozen of the Kings Servants, and as many Commanders of the Low Countries (whereof Generall Veere was one) to their Lodging in Lumberstreet. The Sunday following (29. of February) the Lord Cavendish had order to bring them to their Audience of his Majesty, with him went the Lord de la Ware, and other Gentlemen, whereof my self one (though Sir Lewes had charge of the Service) being come to the Ambassadors Lodging, we found so many Coaches sent, and brought thither to do them service and honour, as our whole number (all with four horses) was thirty. Having rested themselves a while in the Councell-Chamber, they were introduced to the
Kings Presence in his withdrawing Chamber (by the back way, that leads from the Councell Chamber to the Privie Galleries) and not in the Presence Chamber the ordinary place of Audience for Ambassadors Extraordi∣nary (quod nota.) The next day having received an Assignation for an Audience of the Prince, and the Lord Compton, (son to the Earle of Northampton) being appointed to conduct him to it at Saint Jameses; I went thither about one of the clock, with intention only to be present at it; when hearing that Sir Lewes Lewkner was not likely to be there for his service, I (upon request of the Lord Carew (Chamberlaine to his Highness) attended it, accompa∣nying the Lord Compton (who had with him two of the Princes Coaches beyond Custome) and two of the Lords, and on the way in Cheapside meeting them (the Ambassadors not expecting (as they said) a person of honour should be sent for them) they there shifted Coaches, came to Saint Jameses, and with their Coa∣ches entered the first Court; (this also beyond Custome) only once excepted at an Audience of the Marquess de la Inojosa) and had their Audience &c. The 23. of March I was sent to them, to assigne them an Audience of his Majesty, the next day at two in the afternoone; but the King the night following taking little rest (by reason of a defluction in his foote) I was againe sent to them with Excuse, and request from the King to spare their paines till the daye after between three or four. When entering by the Parke, I condu∣cted them to the Ordinary Chamber of Attendance for Audiences, and there let them know (as I had directi∣ons) that in regard his Majestie was not yet free from his paines, and was then falne to sleep, they would be pleased to go, and rest themselves a while at Master Se∣cratarie Conwayes Chamber as a place more commodi∣ous wherein to pass the uncertain time of his Majesties sleep, and that at his waking the Duke would come and fetch them to his Majesty. But his Grace being then with the Prince in Exercise at Saint Jameses; three hours almost past before his returne to White-Hall,
where at length comming to them, he brought them to the King by the back Stayers into his Bed∣chamber, whence (without entring into Treaty of busi∣nesse, the houre so late, being unfit for it) they had a quick dispatch and departed. The nine and twentieth of March, the two Spanish Ambassadors (Inojosa, and Coloma) were assigned an Audience for two of the clock, and the States at foure; when to prevent their incounters, the Spanish were in∣troduced by Sir Lewes Lewkaer through the Parke, and Privy Galleries to the King in his Withdrawing Cham∣ber, where they had a lowd, and long expostulating Audience) and I in the meane time (as I had direct∣ions) received the other Ambassadors of the States at the Court gate, and conducting them to the Councell Chamber on the late Queens side, they were (immedi∣atly upon the Spanish departure) called to the Kings Presence in the same place, and making their Entry by the other end of the Privy Galleries, they had a faire Audience, returning (as the other did) by the way of their enterance. 1624 June the fourteenth having understood, that the States Ambassadors were to take their leaves of his Ma∣jesty at Theobalds, and that Sir Lewes Lewkner had neither received order, nor intended to conduct them to it, I galloped thither, and found them dining with Mr. Secretary Conway. After dinner I went to the Kings back Lodgings, and finding there the Prince, presumed to beseech his Highness to be pleased to move his Majesty for their admittance to his Presence, where∣upon receiving a command to bring them into the Pri∣vy Gallery (over the Leaden Terras there) they had a long, and a favourable Audience, and also the like of the Prince in his Quarter. The 19. they parted thence by Land (towards Mar∣gate for their imbarking there, without provision of Coach or Barge, or care taken for either by Sir Lewes Lewkner.) The little paines which I took in their Ser∣vice
was (beyond my expectation) acknowledged by them with the gratuity of a peece of Plate worth— 30 l. The 21. of June, the Marquess de la Inojosa (after he had much imbroiled his Masters, and our Kings Affaires in the Treaty of Marrriage then on foot between the Prince, and the Infanta, and had forged (as was said) certaine reports of the Duke of Buckinghams (and some other Lords of Parliament) secret Combynation to his Majesties prejudice, and to the raysing Apprehensions in him (if he would have cherrished them) against the Prince his Son) was upon his departure hence; when demanding Accesse to take his finall leave of his Ma∣jesty he was refused it; and without any present sent him, or Allowance of one of the Kings Ships to convoy him, or of other Coaches or carriages on the way (other then of his own hiring) went (together with Don Carlos de Coloma his Colleague in Office, not in disposition) to imbarke at Dover in a Merchants Ship attended thither by Sir Lewes Lewkner (not as Master of the Ceremonies, and the Kings Officer) but as a private Gentleman accompanying, and assisting him of courte∣sie for prevention of Inconveniences, and Affronts (not unlikely in their passage to be offered that Nation by some of the inferiour sort of ours, especially parting (as they did) in termes of disgrace, and disagreement from his Majesty. The French Ambassador Ordinary (Count de Tilliers) after almost five yeares residence here received from the King his Master an unexpected short warning for the quitting of his charge, and for his speedy returne home; which remove (the World said) was of designe carried in such hast, that the Count de Tilliers might not make means for his longer stay here, while he was known to be no freind to the Match, then in proposition between our King, and the French Kings second Sister: his de∣parture was about the end of June, when an Extraordi∣nary (the Marquesse de Fiat) came hither, who had been formerly here in company of the Mareshall de Ca∣denet;
and at his Arrivall now at Gravesend, was met by the Earle of Warwick, and by me conducted to Suf∣folke House (with no great number or lustre of follow∣ers) to be there Lodged (as well as defrayed) not with∣out murmur of the Earle of Suffolke, forced to a corner of his own House, which he could not wholly leave by reason of his lingering sicknesse then upon him. Instant∣ly upon his coming thither, he sent to demand Audi∣ence of his Majesty (en courser as he termed it) who was then at Windsore, and had it given him the very day of his comming thither, being Sunday the fourth of July, after he had been domestiquely entertained at Dinner by the Marquess Hamilton (then Lord Stew∣ard of the Kings House-hold) having been brought from London to Court by the Lord of Kensington, with the company (in the same coach) of the Master of the Ceremonies, and two or three other Gentlemen: he was at the great Chamber doore received by the Lord Chamberlain, and in the Presence or Privy Chamber (both being come there) had his Audience with much grace, and countenances of Familiarity from his Majest∣ie. The Prince at his enterance stood by (as a Behol∣der) and after salutations given and returned the King inviting the Ambassador to cover, he excused it, as long as the Prince should stand (as in his Fathers Presence) uncovered, till at last for these respects his Highnesse retyring, he put on, presented his Letters, and after a good time of entertainment in severall discourses, he retyred to his Lodging in the Deans House till Wednes∣day following, and then returned to London. This House (though within the Castle) could not be pro∣perly said to be of the Kings, See after when Monfier de Chasteau∣neuf was here for the Peaces Ratifica∣tion. because the Deans, though some French for their glory would have had it otherwise held. The rest of that Sommer, he almost continually attended his Majesty in the Progresse, all∣wayes lodged and defrayed. Towards the end of Novem∣br (upon order from my Lord Chamberlain for recep∣tion of another Extraordinary from France Monsieur d Villiaueler Secretary of State there, and hither sent about the same businesse of Marriage with Pr. Maria
Henrietto) Sir Lewes Lewkner went to Dover with the Kings coach, and fourteen other hired, but much sooner then he needed for the Kings profit (though not allto∣gether by the fault of his forwardnesse) but of Letters to that purpose from Mr. Secretary Conway, for when he was come thither, no news certain could assure him of the Ambassadors yet arrivall at Callayes. In the meane time, the other Ambassador allready here (hastning likewise his incounter more then he needed) pressed my Lord Chamberlain for two more to other two atten∣ding (hired) Coaches, which he had already to meet him (as he intended) at Rochester, when my Lord im∣posing on me late at night the Service of procuring them, I with much a doe got them ready by eight the next Morning, which done repairing to my Lord with the account of the Ambassadors Accommodation and readinesse to depart, Letters came from Sir Lewes of the others not yet Landing, or so much as knowledge of his approach; this known to the Marquesse de Fyat, could not stay, or turne his resolution of going that night to Rochester, whither (he said) he must go or fast, having sent his cook and provisions before him, so as parting the three and twentieth of November, he had too much (and perhaps to little reason, both for respect of the Kings charge, and of President, as one Ex∣traordinary to meete another so far off with no more difference of quality between them) he went as far as Dover, whether no sooner then six dayes after came the other from his place of Landing (the Downes) for∣ced thither by the windes, and the next day after to Canterbury, the next to Sittingborne, the next to Ro∣chester, and the day after to Gravesend, where he was that day received by the Earle of Dorset (Edward) ac∣companied with five and twenty Gentlemen the Kings Servants, and others come downe thither with two and twenty Barges. These (with regard of the Tides un∣fitnesse) were commanded to attend at Tower Wharfe about Noone, and his Lordship hastning thither by Land in Coach, we rowed two hours against the Tide, and comming to our Inn in the Evening, waited on his
Lordship to the Ambassadors Lodging, where in the midst of the entery towards the Staire foore, my Lord was met by the Marquess de Rothelin, brother in Law to Monsieur de Valliauiler, and Monsieur de Massy his o∣ther brother in Law, and received by him and his Collegue on the top of the Staires (no sooner.) Thence after a long contention, the Earle of Dorset entred first the Chamher, after him Monsieur de Villeaviler. next him (with the like strife) Sir Edward Harbert (not long before Ambassador Ordinary in France) and then Mon∣sieur de Fiat. At his Lordships returne, the Ambassa∣dors (enforcing likewise upon him the Precedence) brought him to the Street door. In the time of my Lords Supper, the Ambassador sent a Gentleman, to know of him his commodity of imbarquing the next morning, and had the like complement, returned from my Lord by a Gentleman, with the good night, and the liberty of his time to imbarque (howsoever the Tyde would invite him to be ready against a eleaven of the clock the next day) and after some question from his Lordship, whether he were againe to repaire to the Ambassadors, if he did not personally returne his Visite the next morning, and a resolution hereupon from the Master of the Ceremonies, Sir Edward Harbert (that had been an Ambassador) my self and ethers there that though they should faile of their Complement, he must not of his to fetch them from their Inn to their imbar∣quing) he performed it, and with the two Ambassadors, the Marquess de Rothelin, Sir Edward Harbert, Monsieur de Massey and the Master of the Ceremonies in the first Barge, some other principall persons and my selfe in the second, we came to our landing at Suffolk-House, ascended with my Lord of Dorset (alwayes fored to the Precedence) to the newest Ambassadors Lodging, but (after much contenrion) could not keep off the Ambas∣sadors company, till taking leave, and Coacht at the street Gate, his Lordship and the rest departed. In the time of this Monsieur de Villiavilers stay here (which was about a moneth) the King then at New∣market) his Majesty invited him to his Audience to be
given him at Cambridge, where received, and defrayed all the way out, and home, and presented from his Ma∣jesty with a Diamond Ring; of 4000 l. valew (so the Ambassador himself that pretended much knowledge in Jewels esteemed it) and with one from the Prince of a∣bove a thousand pound valew, he there took his leave, but had after at Theobalds, and London severall Audi∣ences, and on Newyears-Eve departed towards Do∣ver, the other Ambassador accompanying him to Roche∣ster, with an intention to have gone with him as farte as Dover, but that Sir Lewes Lewkner with regard to the irregularity of his Journey, further (then had been formerly by president from other Ambassadors Col∣legues undertaken, and with respect of his Majesties charge for two, more then for one) he diverted it with intimation (silently given the King) of Monsieur de Fiats changeable intention, and signification thereup∣on from his Majesty to the Ambassador, that he must speedily speak with him, which brought him back from Rochester to his home at Suffokle-House the day fol∣lowing. Both these Ambassadors were defrayed to Ro∣chester, but no further. The fourth of January I received Order for the in∣vitation of the French Ambassador (the Marquess de Fiat) the Venetian Seignior Pesaro (not long before ar∣rived here in place of Seignior Valeresso) and two A∣gents Monsieur Brumeau for the King of Spaine, and Monsieur Van Mal for the Archdutches) to a Maske of the Prince, with certaine Lords and Gentlemen on Twelfnight. I propounded, and obtained of the Vene∣tian that he would (Sir Lewes Lewkner being then ab∣sent) call in his way to Court, and accompany thither the French Ambassadors, that I might with one labour attend them both, and introduce them (as I had directi∣ons) by the Parke through the Galleries at eight of the clock at night (the place, and hour assigned also the Agents) but being the next morning, assured by the Prince himself, that the Maske was to be put off till Sunday the ninth of January, I was upon his Highness intimation sent to disinvite them all which I performed
with the French personally, and with the rest by Let∣ter. But on Saturday reinvited them for the next day, when about four of the clock, the Marquess Hamilton, (Lord Steward of his Majesties Household) then sup∣plying the place of the Lord Chamberlaine indisposed) gave me in charge to repaire to the Ambassadors, and to let them know, that in regard of the inconveniency that would grow from the intrusion of multitudes of people by the way of the Galleries (if they were left o∣pen) he desired they would enter the Court by the great Gate, and thence pass for their repose to the Marques∣ses Lodgings, till the King should come by, and take them along with him. This intimation was given also to the two Agents, who had the same Order for their Entrance as the former, but were likewise diverted, and conducted to a Roome apart in my Lord Stewards Lod∣gins, which was so ordered of design to avoid their, and the French Ambassadors incounter, not with apprehen∣tion of strife for place, their difference of qualities of Agents and Ambassadors clearing all such question, but of distast perhaps to either from their incompatibility; a regard taken also in placing their Followers in severall Scaffolds to avoid differences and wranglings that might occurre even amongst those of inferior condition, if feated promiscuously together in a Scaffold; a provi∣sionable care that the King himself had, and expressed it that day at his Dinner. The Ambassadors were seated with the King (as accustomed) and the Agents bestowed amongst the Lords, beneath Earles, and above Ba∣rons. Here end the Services of my Place of As∣sistant Master of the Ceremones under King James, who died the 27. of March follow∣ing.
SERVICES PERFORMED by Me as Assistant Master of the CEREMONIES, The first yeare of King Charles. From the beginning of the Raigne of King CHARLES. THE thirteenth of Aprill I conducted the Per∣sian Ambassador (Sir Robert Sherly) from his Lodging at Tower-Hill to an Audience of his Majesty at White-Hall. Descending at the great Gate of the Court, I brought him, William Earle of Pembrick. (as I had my directions from the Lord Chamberlain) through the darke passage from the Sermon Court to the Councell Chamber on the late Queens side, whence going to the Kings Privy Chamber, I there gave notice of the Ambassadors ar∣rivall to a Gentleman Usher of that Chamber (all fur∣ther passage being begun then to be debarred to all, but Privy Councellours, and Bed-chamber men) who conveying my intimation to my Lord Chamberlain in the Privy Galleries, I had a charge returned, that conducting him by the way of the late Queens Lodging to his Majesty in his Withdrawing Chamber, no other but my selfe should go along with him, this obeyed, he passed with his Majesty some few words of condoling complement, and returned by the way he entered. The next day I conducted to an Audience (for the same pur∣pose, and by the same way) Monsieur de Bruneau, Se∣cretary Resident (as he stiled himselfe) for the King of Spaine) with whom entered onely into the Privy Gallery one Cosmo, sometimes Servant and Secretary to the Conde de Gondemar, but I had instantly charge from my Lord Chamberlain upon his sight of him to tell him, he must avoid that Roome (as he did upon my admonition.)
Three dayes after I performed the like Service (and with the like directions and Service) for conducting of Monsieur Van Mall, Agent for the Arch-Dutches. The third of May I introduced the Venetian Ambas∣sador Seignior Pesaro to the like Audience, his Secre∣tary (notwithstanding my admonition) following us in∣to the Privy Gallery, and by his example the other followers) when hearing me say to the Ambassador that he might be pleased to leave behind him la sua gente, the Secretary answered Si si bisoina Leseine la gente, as reckoning himselfe being Secretary not de la gente, leaving them, behind and entering with the Ambassa∣dor not onely into the Gallery, but into the Presence of his Majesty, though not approaching neerer, then halfe the way within the Chamber. The French Ambas∣sador performing his complement of condoling, with conduction of the Master of the Ceremonies. Another Extraordinary Ambassador from France, The Count de Tremes. sent to condole the death of King James, arrived at Dover, in the beginning of May, and was received there by the Master of the Ceremonies, with the Service of twenty Coaches hired at the Kings charge for his Transport to Gravesend, and thence of an answerable number of Barges to Suffolk-House his appointed Lodg∣ing, together with the other Ambassador Monsieur de Fyat Resident Extraordinary. The day after his arri∣vall, he was brought to his publick Audience in the Presence Chamber by the Earle of Montgomery, served by five coaches of the Lords (besides that of the Kings) all covered with black cloath for mourning; his pas∣sage was through the Hall to the Councell Chamber, and after his rest there, to the Kings Presence where, (in company of his collegue) presenting foure Letters to his Majesty, one after the other. The last of which ap∣peared by the Kings cheerfull countenance at the re∣ceipt of it, to come from his then affianced Mist∣resse. On Saturday the seaventh of May, the Funerall of
King James was to be Solemnized, and his Body to be attended to Westminster Church by his Son King Charles and by all the other Lords, Officers, and Ser∣vants in their proper rancks (as they had (by their se∣verall places, and charges) relation to that last duty. For this purpose, the generall Rendez-Vous or assembly being to be made at Denmarke-House about nine in the morning, and the King himselfe repairing thither between twelve and one, many disputes grew between particulers for their pretended rights of Precedence; about which, while they were in question, and I attending the Heraulds call to my place of march (either as assist∣ant Master of the Ceremonies together with Sir Lewes Lewkner, to precede the Gentlemen of the Privy Cham∣ber (as the Heraulds told me we were ranckt by the Earle Mareshall) or promiscously to go amongst them as sworn Servants of that number) I had command from his Majesty to repaire to the two French Ambassa∣dors (where they were at that time reposing themselves in a Chamber apart) and to waite on them all the way to Westminster Church in ranck next after the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, as in the cheife, and highest place that could be assigned them; about which, That is, (as by o∣der of pro∣cession be∣fore. after some questions propounded by them for their better satifactions, they were desirous to see the Heraulds Book, where their places were ordered, which shewed by Sir John Burrowes (Norrey King of Armes) they took Ex∣ceptions at their rancking, (though it were next the Standard, and neerest the Body of all other, except the Heraulds, Trumpetours and other Officers of necessary Assistance) because the King himselfe (they said) went behind the Body alone (with whom (as Representants of their Master) they pretended an equall ranck, and March one on his right hand, and another on his left. But this not allowed them (as being against our recei∣ved Custome, and they having denied it the day be∣fore) they at length seemed to rest satisfied, so set forth at the time (having first presented themselves with their respects to his Majesty) and took, and kept both, one even course of Parity, and the latter came marching
all the way on the right hand of the other, though next the kennell (as they sometimes crossing the street in∣countered) followed by no other of their Servants, then such as (to the number of seven or eight) did set hand to their Traines, marching all the way bare-headed, onely the Count de Tremes had walking, and talking along with him (but somewhat sidewayes before him) his Secretary also bare-headed. Immediately before them went none but my selfe covered, and before me the Mareshall of the Ceremonies, my under Officer un∣covered; and so jealous were they of the least shad∣dow of any mans incroaching upon their rights, as they would not suffer any other to be neere the Bishop of Canterbury either behind, or on either side of him, then his Page that carried his Traine, and one that walkt at his left hand now and then to ease, and support him being aged and infirme. When in this manner we were come to Westminster Church, and had entered the Quire, the Ambassadors at the upper end of it upon the enterance towards the Herse made a stand till (the King come thither, and withdrawing himselfe towards the right hand to give way for the placing of the Body, that he might after seate himselfe in his chaire during the Sermon) they passed a short complement with his Majesty, and from him went round about the Herse to the North doore neere it, and then passing without side of the Quire, they issued out of the East doore of the Church to take Barge at the Parliament Stayres, and thence to their home. At this time the Venetian Ambassador (who having had his Blacks sent him from the King in the same full proportion for quality and goodnes of cloath as were sent to the two French Ambassadors) should have been an as∣sistant at the solemnity, was absent upon this occasion. Howsoever the Blacks that had been sent him in due time before, might seem to serve for an Invitation (as Sir Lewes Lewkner pleaded after in defence of the ac∣cusation brought against him by the said Ambassador.) He made complaint that the Lord Chamberlain having given directions to the Master of the Ceremonies to in∣vite
all the Ambassadors, the two French Ambassadors, had been formally and personally invited by him, and not he the Venetian, except (he said) in transitu, as he once met him upon the Staires in the French Ambassa∣dors House, where he Sir Lewes having said something tending to the purpose of his Invitation, he was answer∣ed by the Ambassador, faro quel che mi dira, intimating (as the Ambassador said after) that he expecting a for∣mall Invitation (with some instructions how to behave himselfe in the solemnity) should have been presented him in his owne House, and not so slightly a one in an others, but Sir Lewes not comming thither to him at all, and both the French Ambassadors visiting him, and propounding to him (as to one interessed in their cause) their difficulties, and the exceptions they had made to the place, and manner of their March (affir∣ming that upon the termes offered them they would not assist at the Funerall) was a cause that he neither made his preparations for the time, nor inquired further after it, especially when on the day of the Solemnity, he re∣ceived towards Noone, a message from the Mr. by the Mareshall of the Ceremonies (which was one of his maine formalities, and challenges against the Master, that he discharged not that Office in his own Person) that the two Ambassadors had now fully considered of all, and were absolutly resolved not to assist at the Fu∣nerall. This was the Tenour of the message, as Sir Lewes Lewkner affirmed he sent it, and as the messen∣ger swore he delivered it; but the Ambassador affirmed, it was delivered to him thus, viz. That the King and Councell were now resolved, that no Ambassador should Assist at the Solemnity, whereupon, he having been be∣fore invited to dine with the Dutches of Richmond, there to be Spectatour onely of the Solemnity passing by, went thither as giving over all thought of being an Actor in it, affirming that the wrong he had received, proceeded chiefly from the Master of the Ceremonies (notwith∣standing that when he sent the message he sent word with all that he was gone home sick) who should have punctually (he said both before, and at the instant
of the French Ambassadors change of resolution) given him notice of it (he the Master of the Ceremonies, and not they) being oblig'd (he said) by Office to those respects. For this his particular sufferance, and wrong done him in these neglects and omissions (which he preten∣ded highly to concerne, not onely his own Person in point of honour, but his Republick also in reason of State (since it challenged all Rights and Honours equal with Crowned Heads) he first formalized himselfe a∣gainst the two Ambassadors (but with little remedie, other then with their excuse of suddaine change of mind, and with affirmation, that they had acquainted the Master of the Ceremonies with it, who they thought would not have failed to let him know of it) and the next day demanded, and had Audience of his Majesty (to which I introduced him) for complaint against Sir Lewes Lewkner; who excusing himselfe with sicknesse &c. the Marshall of the Ceremonies bore for that present all the punishment, and was for some daies laid up in the Marshalseys for mistaking (as was laid to his charge) his message. This brought forth Sir Lewes Lewkners restraint a while af∣ter. But the Venetian Ambassador not so satisfied, sent an express to Venice with the account of all the proceedings. Many were of opinion (and the Venetian Ambassador said as much to me) that the French Ambassadors so suddaine change of mind, or at least their semblence of it, proceeded cheifly from the Marquess de Fyat, of purpose to exclude the Venetian, that he might not by his Presence be a dis-lustre to him in his march, while the last come Extraordinary taking his place in the midst (as was his right) with his badge, and Ensigne of Order, one would be more conspicuous, and he the less, when a third Person (the Venetian) should be added to their number, and march (as he would) in even ranck with them. Others affirmed, that it proceeded from the stomach of Monsieur de Tremes, who would not brooke, (and so some said he profest) that a Minister of a Republick should in so publick a Solemnity, march in the same ranck with the Minister of so great a Monarch, as the most Christian King his Master.
This Ambassador of Venice (upon occasion of dis∣course I had with him three or foure dayes after con∣cerning his Princes pretence to all Rights, and Marks of honour given to Kings) affirmed that their Ambassa∣dors having had allwayes their seats in Capella given them at Rome, and their Audiences Nella sala Regale there (and not Nella sala Ducale) al per delle teste Coro∣nate, and the like honour done them in the Court of France by making for them a full Guard in Armes, when they came to their first Audiences, which was made to none, but to Emperours and Kings Ambassadors. Also that the same quantity of Wine (viz. so many Tonns) was allowed them here in England free of Impost, as was allowed to Kings Ambassadors, with a difference of a less quantity to those of inferiour Princes. And that he had at the Fune∣rall sent to him from his Majesty the like quantity of Blacks as was sent to the French Ambassa∣dor. All which, and more were Arguments (he said) of their unquestioned Parity with Crownd Heads. He told me further, that in Spaine not long before, the Emperours Ambassador endeavoring the abatement of the respects given them there, made a request to the King, that he would alter the Pragmatick of giving the Title, of Il∣lustrissimo to the Venetian; which the Venetian Ambas∣sador having notice of, made it known to the French Ambassador there Resident, and intreated him to ac∣quaint therewith the King his Master, which he did, and had answer returned from the King, that if the Title of Illustrissimo given the Emperours and his Ambas∣sadors were to be changed for that of Excellentissimo, he should in his name demand, that the like alteration might be made for the Venetian; otherwise that the already received, and used Title of Illustrissimo, should be continued, answerable to the present Pragmatick, as it hath been ever since without change given in Spaine to the Ambassadors of the State of Venice, as to all other Kings Ambassadors without differ∣ence. The 31. of May, 1625. Madam Maria Henrietta, se∣cond Daughter to Henry the Fourth King of France, and the then affianced Wife of King Charles being upon her
Journey for England; his Majesty prepared for her in∣counter and Reception, went by water to Gravesend, thence by Post and Coach to Canterbury. A day or two before the Master of the Ceremonies had order for the Provision, and sending down of thirty two Coaches to serve her Majestie, and the Duke de Chevereuxe im∣ployed then Ambassador Extraordinary from that King for his Presence at the Solemziation, and finall ratifica∣tion or consummation of the Marriage. The Coaches mentioned to be taken up for the Service were defray∣ed by the King, but Carts and Post-Horses (brought in by Warrant sent abroad to the Countrey) were to be immediatly paid for at prizes usuall by such as should have use of them. The confusion was extraordinary (for want of orderly directions) in almost all things, but es∣pecially in the distrbiution of Coaches, Carts and Hor∣ses, he that first laid hand on them, possessing them, though unworthy, when others of far better qualitie, and more modest, were not at all, or ill accommo∣dated. His Majesty entering Canterbury was received by the Mayor (who had borrowed the Recorder (Master Henry Finches mouth for a wellcomming Speech delivered with much Elegancy) was lodg'd at the Lord Wootons House, parcell of the demolisht Abby of Saint Augustine; The great Lords, and their Ladies that attended him from London (which were Arrundell, Excester, Devon∣shire, Saint Johns, Andever, Dacre, de la Ware, Mor∣dant, Wentworth, Harvey, and others) were quartered severally in the City, and had their Randezvous for Diet (of his Majesties providing) at the Bishops Pal∣lace. The third day following his Majesty leaving the married Lords and Ladies at Canterbury, went to Dover for view, and directions of what was fitting for the Queens accommodation; about which, and in ex∣pectation of the newes of her approach, he there spent the time from Thursday to Tuesday, when Master Ro∣bert Tyrrwhit, servant to his Majesty, returned from France (whether he had been purposely sent) with the newes of her departure from Amiens, and her intention
to be on Wednesday at Bolloigne, which made the King (upon assurance that the Queen Mother (indisposed in her health) would not come thither with her daughter) alter the resolution he had of passing the Seas, and the next day returned to Canterbury with the reason of gi∣ving to the Queen some time of refreshing after her Sea-distempers before he would see her. But on Thursday, the Kings Fleet not able (for the winds opposition) to recover Bulloigne, and left for the same cause on Fryday, and two dayes after, on Munday the 12. of May about nine of the clock, the reports of Canons from the French coast, and the wind then come faire, made us presume of her Majesty, then shipping, as it did after assure us of her landing at seven in the Eve∣ning, passing out of her Boat on shore by an artificiall moveable Bridge framed for that use only. The newes of her arriveall was by Master Tirwhit within half an hour and six minuits carried to the King at Canterbury, Her Majesty rather ill at ease, then sick after her Sea motions, was carried from the shore to the Town in a Litter, there received Wellcome, and presented by the the Mayor, she went in Coach up to the Castle, and had there the next day her best and happiest Reception from the King, come that morning from Canterbury. May 13. Their Majesties dining that day together; the King after dinner gave Audience to the Duke de Chevereux, the Duke of Buckingham with my Service introducing him to the Presence Chamber of the Queen, whence the King honourd him (after his Audience) with his com∣pany to his Majesties own Presence Chamber for a sight, and wellcome of the faire Dutches de Chevercux. After this their Majesties set forth for Canterbury, and within two or three miles of it on Barrham Down were attended (for their meeting, and reception) by the Lords and Ladies mentioned, these latter present∣ing themselves from a fitting distance (where the Queen stood) to her Majesty, each in their ranke, with three low reverences kissing her hand, and her Majesty them for their greater honour. That night their Majesties supt, and slept together. Sic consummatū est. The next day they
removed to Cobham neer Rochester, and from thence and Gravesend they came with the lowd wellcome of great Ordinance from the Ships on the Thames, and from the Tower to London, May 16. Their landing was at the Privy Staires of Whitehall; where in the Sheild Gallery stood on each side ranged those Ladies of quali∣ty and beauty, that had not yet seen the Queen, and there they had from her particular respects of satisfacti∣on. The Duke de Chevereux, and his Lady were lodged at Somerset House, and had the next day a Visit sent them from his Majesty by the Earle of Arrundell with two or three Lords, with divers Gentlemen attending, who after conducted him to his publick Audience of his Majesty in the Presence Chamber. Thence he was upon passage to the Queene for the like, but word being brought that she was not well at ease, he was remitted to another time, and returned to his Lodging with the company of the Count de Tremes, and the Marquess de Fiat (with him joynt Commissioners.) The next day (being that of the Overture of Parlia∣ment) his Majesty (to avoid the danger of the Plague (then growing strong by the concourse of people) went to it privately by water, and after him the French Am∣bassador, for a sight of the manner of his Majesty, and the Lords first entrance to that great Work. The Am∣bassadors were placed, as in private, behinde a Traverse on the Kings right hand, which when the King began his Speech was drawn open. The Venetian (not to loose any of those Rights he was so jealous of (and with rea∣son upon so fresh a hazard as he had run) sent to me be∣fore hand for knowledge of the course designed for the Ambassadors repaire, and requested he might be ad∣mitted to the sight of it (as they should be) publick or private. Hereat my Lord Chamberlaine made at the first some difficulty, as not of Custome (he said) though once allowed to his Predecessor Landi, adding that the French would be there as attendant Domestiques of the Queen (that she had been there, as was intended, but was hindred by her indisposition,) and that no sit place could be found where he might see unseen; but at last
the Earle of Arundell acquainting the King with his designes, I had directions to bring him by a private back way to the enterance neere the King on his left hand, where in the throng he stood concealed. The ninteenth of June, An Am∣bassador from the States. This was too high and irre∣gular. an Extraordinary Ambassage from the States brought Monsieur de Arsennes, Monsieur de Joachimi (both formerly here) and Monsieur Burma∣nia from Gravesend with Sir Lewes Lewkners conduction to Tower Wharffe, where received by the Earle of Lin∣colne, they passed on with his Lordship to their Lodg∣ing at Generall Cecils House in the Strand: their im∣ployment was chiesly to congratulate the Kings mar∣riage. The 21. of June, Ratifica∣tion of the Kings marriage. the three French Ambassadors were by the Duke of Buckingham (with attendance suiting such a Conductour) fetcht from Somerset-House, and brought to White-Hall, by the way of the Guard Chamber, Presence and Privy Chamber to the Kings Withdrawing Chamber, whence (with both their Ma∣jesties) they entered the Banquetting House. Thore their Majesties seated in their chaires of State, the Queen on the right of the King, the Duke de Cheuere∣ux (seated somewhat more forward) on the left, together with the other two French Ambassadors, behind whome stood the Lord Keeper, the Earles of Carliel and Hol∣land (both there imployd in France for conclusion of that matrimoniall businesse) with other great Lords, and next besides, and behind the Queen, the great Ladies, and French Lords. There was solemnly and distinctly read the Ratification &c. After which the King joyning hands with the Queen and kissing her, they all with-drew, while the Room might be prepared for the Kings dinner, the Queen retyring her selfe to her Quarter dined there in her own Presence Chamber, the great Ladies by themselves in the Guard Chamber, soone after the King with his Ambassadors came to din∣ner in the Banquetting House; where on his left hand (with the usuall distance) sate the Duke, and at the
Boards end the two other Ambassadors. A Question in the interim growing between the Officers, whether the place opposite to the Duke, were not the most proper for them, which the Master of the Ceremonies affirmed had been the custome of one instant Treatment of three Commissioners, but his assertion was not followed for the betterr convenience of the said Officers carving and sewering; after Dinner, the Roome cleered, and cleansed, their Majesties with the Ambassadors, the Lords, and Ladies returned, and spent the rest of that Afternoon in revelling &c. The Ambassador of Venice, who had forborne to re∣quest or make so much as an offer to be present in pub∣lick or private of the solemne ratification of the mar∣riage (where he thought not fit perhaps to bring to question the intent of his pretended Rights of Parity con le teste Coronate) was the next day introduced to an Audience of the Queen demanded by her Majesties Lord Chamberlain (the Count de Tillieurs) late here Ambassador Ordinary with the King, and now retur∣ned a follower of the Queen) After notice given me of this assigned Audience, I received the Ambassador at the Court Gate, conducted him through the Preaching Court along the long darke winding Entrey, up to the Queenes Guard Chamber, and into the Chappell Chamber next it, whence (after notice given by me to her Majesties Lord Chamberlain of his Presence there) he passed on, was received there at the Presence Cham∣ber doore by the Lord Chamberlain, and by him brought to the Queen in her Privy Chamber, and thence after his congratulation returned to his Lodg∣ing without my attendance. The three and twentieth of June, the three Com∣missioners from the States had publick Audience of his Majesty, conducted to it by the Earle of Warwick, they passed the old Ordinary way up the great stone Staires over the Wooden Terras to the old Councell Chamber (then restored to the Ancient use upon the Queens use of the other for her Presence Chamber) and were called thence by the Master of the Ceremonies to proceed
through the Guard Chamber (where the Earle of Hol∣land Captaine of the Guard, stood ready in the midst of the Chamber (his company ranged on each side of it) to receive them) and the Lord Chamberlain then absent) to introduce them to his Majesties Presence in the Presence Chamber. Whence after dismission they turned by the way to the Chappell Chamber into the Queens Guard, and Presence Chamber, received there by her Majesties Lord Chamberlain, and by him brought to their Audience into her Privy Chamber. This their Access to the Queen was demanded some∣what late that day, but referred therefore to the time of her own pleasure, onely intimating that the King had granted them that day an Audience, and requesting my Lord Chamberlain to let her Majesty know so much and with all their most humble desires of the like ho∣nour from her Majesty, but with their due respects of her own best conveniency that day, or another at her pleasure. Soone after these Audiences, Monsieur de Ar∣sennes, and Monsieur Burmania taking their leave re∣turned home, Monsieur Joachim remaining here with the charge of Ambassador Extraordinary. They were at that time presented each of them with a 1000. ounces of gilt Plate. The Venetian Ambassador having taken shadow at the carriage or mis-carriage of his service done at King James his Funerall, was tender, and jealous of every oc∣casion that might touch his State in interest of honour, for which regard, having received advice from his Prince, that an Ambassage Extraordinary was resolved on to be sent from Venice, for condolement, and con∣gratulation in August or September following, he was cu∣rious to know by my inquirie from my Lord Chamber∣lain, what would be the manner, and extent of their re∣ception? About which imploying my selfe, I could get no more from his Lordship, then that they should be sure of it to the full of former Presidents, which he could not learne (he said) had been ever further off, then at Gravesend, whether a Master of the Ceremonies should be sent with the Kings Barge to meet them, and
a Nobleman of fitting quality to Tower Wharffe to re∣ceive them at their Landing there. The eight and twentieth of June a Turkish Chiaus or messenger (who came hither about the time of King James his Death) having demanded Access to the Queen for congratulation, and being allowed it, I was the same day sent to for that Service by Monsieur de Tilliers, and in absence of Sir Lewes Lewkner (who came notwitstanding at the instant of the Audience) introduced him to her Majesty in her Privy Chamber, where she received him with the interpretation of Sir Lewes Lewkner in French, another in English to the Queen of what another said to him in English from the Chiaus his mouth in Turkish. About that time, the Duke de Cheuereux (with his Lady the Dutches) tooke leave of their Majesties, so did Monsieur de Tremes, and the Marquess de Fyas soone after. The Duke presented me by his Steward with a chaine of—30 l. valew, which was assured me to have been ordained double to that) but I had to doe with the unjust Steward.) The other Ambassadors acknowledg∣ed my paines with thanks, et nihil ultra. These gone, the Plague increasing, the Court remo∣ving to Salisbury, and I with my family retiring (from the danger of infection in London) to the Countrey, I rested all the rest of that Summer unimployed. In the meane time a Splendid Ambassador N. Oxensterne (arrived at Southampton from the King of Sweden) was received and conducted by Sir Andrew Kith to the Presence of his Majesty at Salisbury, Sir Lewes Lewkner being then under restraint for his carriage towards the Venetian Ambassador, and I absent &c. for the reasons mentioned. Having in October understood of the Treatment of the Ambassador of Sweden at Salisbury, and how ne∣cessary my Service was, and would be at Court during the absence, and restraint of the Master of the Cere∣monies for the cause before specified, I repaired thither making the best way I could through the danger of the
sickness, then dispersed almost every where over the Countrey, and being arrived there found Sir Lewes Lewkner commanded from his attendance on the Mar∣quess de Bleinvill (newly come over Ambassador from the French King) to his House at Acton neere London, upon complaint of the Venetian Ambassador for his pretended interest and partiall carriage towards the said Ambassador, at the Funerall of the late King, (as is be∣fore delivered) whereupon I received the Lord Cham∣berlains commands (upon his Majesties pleasure signifi∣ed to that purpose) to attend that Service entered on by another (one of the Heraulds) but quitted upon the charge given me to discharge it, so repaired to the Am∣bassador with the signification of the proper duty of my place, and of the command I had from his Majesty to performe it at all his occasions, whereof one fell out two or three dayes after, when going to see that antiquity at Stonenge, I accompanied him. The next day going with him to render his visits to the Earle Marshall, and Lord Chamberlain, I had order opportunely to tast his disposition for his remove, the King being assigned his to Windsore, and Hampton Court, when I finding his ambition to Lodge in the Kings own House there, ac∣quainted my Lord Chamberlain with it (who had alrea∣dy given order for his Lodging at Kingston) and recei∣ved from his Lordship answer, That his Majesty would never allow any Ambassador to be Lodged so neere him; whereupon letting the Ambassador know (as dexterously as I could) what order had been already taken for his residence at Kingston; His answer at first was, that what was his Majesties pleasure should be his obedience, but proceeding, he asked, the Plague having been (as I am told) so much, and so lately in that Towne) may I not be Lodged within the Kings House at Hampton I replyed, it had not been the Custome for Ambassadors to be so Lodged; yet (said he) the Duke de Cheuereux had his Lodging in the House at Richmond, and so had the Marquesse de Fyat. To this I spared then to reply, as by way of contestation, but conveying his answer to my Lord Chamberlain, and he
it to the King: His Majesty commanded me to carry to the Ambassador this small resolution. That the Queen having been desirous for the long acquaintance sake that had passed between her, and the Dutches de Cheve∣reux, to have her neer her, at the time of her (the Dutchesses) Delivery, and lying in (then towards) would have her lodg'd in the Kings House at Richmond, and that she having her lodging there, it was fit that the Duke her Husband should have his there also. And as for Monsieur de Fiat, it concerned both his Ma∣jesties profit and his ease to bring him together with the other Ambassador to one House, when a second kept for them at London, at the Kings charg (as was the Dukes at Richmond) would be both dangerous in regard of the Sickness, troublesome to the Kings Officers by their serving in of provisions for Diet, at two severall places, and of great expence. Besides, it was intended, that if those Ambassadors should have come to lye at Hampton Court from Richmont, the King would have instant∣ly removed to Windsor, or to some other of his Houses. To this the Ambassador Bleinville answered, he knew not that, but this he knew (he said) that Lodgings were marked for the other within Hampton Court, and to be made use of there at their pleasure, adding that the Earles of Carliel and Holland (late Ambassadors to the King his Master) when they were with his Majesty at Saint Cermans, were quartered neere the Kings House, yet would not rest contented with their Lodging, till they had gotten within his Majesties own House two or three roomes furnished for their retraite, and to lodge in at their pleasure, though indeed they spared to make such use of them. In conclusion, I said, that neither his Majevty, nor the King his Father had ever lodged any Ambas∣sador in their Houses, while they themselves lodged in them, and that his Majesty now would be loth to make a President, that would hereafter beget him so great a trouble, as this was like to be, and that therefore his Majesty hoped, that the Ambassador would not take it in ill part (if desirous to give him satisfaction, and to
treate him in all, as the Representant of the King his Master) he did in this not correspond with his desires &c. Having said thus much to him as from the King, he (not without some countenance of insatisfaction, and with intimation, that he had but propounded it only, and would leave it to the Kings consideration, and pleasure,) there was for that time no further question made of it. To dayes after desiring me to procure him an Audi∣ence, I intended the King for it at his return from Hun∣ting, and though it were late, I was sent to him with his Majesties pleasure for his immediate access (with∣out further Ceremony) his Majesty being to returne the next day early to Hunting, so the Ambassador re∣pairing to Court at six in the Evening, (with reception of the President of the Houshold at the foot of the staires, and of the Chamberlain at the top) he was in∣troduced to his Majestie in his withdrawing Chamber, all his Followers remaining in the Presence. The King (upon assurance of the Plagues beginning to lessen at London, and in other places neer about) re∣moved to Windsor, and Hampton-Court, and leaving the Queen some few dayes at Salisbury, the Ambassa∣dor being upon his departure to follow his Majesty, I let him understand, that according to our Custome, he was not to have his Post-horses defrayed (though all the rest had been so hitherto) when (almost at the instant I re∣ceived a Letter from the Earle of Carliel (to whom in absence of my Lord Chamberlaine I had written for a formall resolution to that purpose) signifying his Majesties pleasure, that he should be defrayed for his Post-horses also, (as he had been for his Coaches and Carriages) but with a protestation, injoyned to be made by me as from his Majesty to the Ambassador (as it for∣mallv was, when I delivered my message) that he should be the last, who should receive that Treatment, and that he should have also his lodging provided in Court at Hampton, which favour of his Majesty he (at least in appearance) accepted of most thankfully. This Letter mentioned was written to me from the Earle of Carlile
which siginification of his Majesties pleasure appearing in it for discharge of the Ambassadors Post-horses) upon an account I had given that Lord (at the instant of his departure with the King) what words of resentment had falne from the Ambassador, after I had told him of our Custome here, as before in these formall termes and with passion answerable. He had well observed (he said) how he had been in∣treated here since his comming in a different manner from other of his Nation and quality; that Monsieur de Fiat, and Monsieur de Villiaviller were not persons to stand with him in comparison, otherwise then as they were his Masters Ambassadors, yet had they received better respects then he. That the world knew well e∣nough what his condition and person was neer the per∣son of his Master, Monsieur le prmier. being the first Gentleman of his Chamber and lodged alwayes (for divers years) next him in Court, though he were now denied lodging in the Court of England (where others had been allowed it) especially in a time that the contagion of the Plague might be a motive to lodge him rather there, then else∣where with danger to his person, whereas others (as the Duke of de Chevereux) though being a Prince he named him not as an equall instance) and besides him Monsieur Villiaviller, and Monsieur de Fiat had had their lodgings markt for them at Hampton Court. That the Earle of Carliel though he had lodgings ordained for him at Saint Germaines in the Chancellors House, the best of the Town, and neer the Court) would not be contented, till he had his lodging Chamber, and Anti-chamber in the Kings own House, and had been treated for some eighteen moneths in manner as the world knew, yet that he an Ambassador (who for ought he knew was not to stay two moneths here) was refused respects and treatment answerable in many things. That he saw well enough what had been put upon him from time to time, whereof, but for doing so ill an Of∣fice, as to raise difference or debate between the two Kingdomes (which would be an ill Servants and Sub∣jects part, especially in times of our Warrs with Spain)
he would have shewed himself sensible, He was after reu∣ted the maine bou∣tefou of our Warre with France. and would have returned the provision of diet that the King gave him, which he thankt God he had meanes of his own (be∣sides that he had from the King his Master) to allow himself in a plentifull measure, and that what regard, and treatment he had here, he knew how (and was in place about his Master able) at one time or other to repay. That further, for that one particular of Post-Horses, one or 200. crowns, more or less, was a poore thing in his consideration, which to be defrayed, or not defrayed, was nothing to him in his own person, but as he represented the person of the King his Master, he was bound to take and give notice of it. These, and o∣ther the like Stommachous Speeches he let fall in my hearing, which reported by me to my Lord of Carliel, and by him to the King, brought forth the Letter, and with it the allowance specified. The day before his de∣parture, when I presumed that his Majesties Officers had or would defray the Lodgings taken up, and made use of for his Followers, I found the Harbengers all de∣parted, and no Order left for their discharge. In which regard for the Kings honour and avoidance of clamour from so many poor men, as had furnished them with Beds and Chambers; I sent for all their names, caused them to come before the Green Cloth, and there promi∣sed them my best endeavous with my Lord Chamber∣laine, and after procured of his Lordship a Warrant for twenty two pound to be paid them out of the Treasury of the Chamber for their respective satisfaction, but when to be paid, viderit tempus. Saturday the 28. of October, after Dinner, when (all being ready we all supposed the Ambassador would instantly depart) he called me into his Chamber and imparted to me (with request of my Secresie) his designe to stay behind (pour se purger (as he profest) to purge himselfe (but whether of the humours of the Marquess de Bleinvill, or of Monsieur l'Ambassadure taking the opportunity of the Queens stay behind the King, for his more freedom of access to her Majesty I know not) there he stayed, (intreating me to proceed
with the grosse of his Traine, retaining with him two or three Gentlemen, and the Kings coach, and assuring me he would follow on Monday. Not to contradict him in his course designed, I without reply or excuse, parted that day with his Steward, and followers in five coaches (followed by seaven carts for his Baggage,) and forty foure sadle Horses, and comming that night to Andever; we had word brought us thither, that the carriage with his Plate was not that day come forth of Salisbury, a knavish carter when he see us all parted, taking advantage, and stealing away with his carriage before it came to loading, so as leaving the Marshall of the Ceremonies behind to attend that charge, we went on that night to Hart-ford Bridge, then resting all Sunday (more for the Frenches Satisfaction in at∣tendance of their Lords Plate, not yet come, then for the duty they would have paid the day by rest, though they had their Mass in the Inn, but first with request of myapprobation for the fitness or unfitness of it, in regard of scandall) we were the next day at Kingston, where at the furthest end of the Towne East-ward, the Ambassa∣dors House was appointed, but not yet (by default of some of the Kings Officers) Lodgable; so as returning into the Town, we Lodged in Inns, and elsewhere, as we could on such a suddaine be provided, and not with∣out French murmurs, till they were the third night after better bestowed in the quarter ordained from them. This Ambassador being not yet come from Salis∣bury, the Gentleman of his Horses, and of chiefe man∣nage in his Affaires (in observation of his Lords desire, and the Kings pleasure, signified to him by the Earle of Carliel, that the Ambassador should have a Chamber in Court (not (as was mis-understood to lye in it, but onely for his retrait, as is before mentioned) intreated the Earle of Carliel to move the King for his favour to that purpose, when I had already for prevention possest his Majesty and my Lord Chamberlain, that the Am∣bassadors intention of demand of a Lodging in Court, was with the like limitation, as the Earles of Carliel and Holland had had theirs in the Court of France, viz. onely at time to retyre to.
In conclusion it was the pleasure of his Majesty (and for such made known by my Lord of Carliel) that ex∣pecting no cloath of State, The yeo∣men hang∣ers had onely be∣gan to set one up in his Cham∣ber at Court, but I instantly hindred it as not fit∣ting, wher∣of I gave account to the Lord Chamber∣lain, and was ap∣plauded for it. which from first to last of his stay there was not allowed him in Court, (though he had one (as all Kings Extraordinary Ambassadors have) in his private House at Kingston) and having in his Chamher the allowance onely of a Gentleman, and two Groomes to lye by him in Pallet, he should be Lodged in Court as a particular or private Person, and not otherwise, for avoidance of future trouble to the King by President. This obtained, I sought to prevent another incon∣veniency, by acquainting my Lord Chamberlain and Carliel with the Expectation I saw towards of having his Dyet provided in Court, which would have made that publick, which was intended private. To prevent this, I had order to fall (as I did) in dis∣course with the Gentleman of his Horses, and to con∣vey the Kings mind to him (as I understood it.) I said from report, and collection) that it was intended he should have no other Dyet, then what he had at King∣ston by provision there from the Kings Officers, and that if he would eate at Court at any time, it might be at the Table of the Queens Lord Chamberlain, or else∣where there) as a private Person, sending thither, Monsieur de Tilli∣ers. when he would from Kingston part of his provision to have it drest in Court for increase of his Dyet at the Table of her Majesties Lord Chamberlain; but this was but discourse, and to little purpose, while the Ambassador himselfe remained yet with the Queen at Salisbury. The stay of his there longer, then he at the first in∣tended (or at the least in shew pretended) gave me the liberty to sisit my home (then at Brocket Hall) for re∣trait from the sicknesse) till a messenger bringing me the news that the Ambassador was come to Hampton Court, I the next morning returned thither, and that Afternoone accompanied him with two coaches each with foure Horses (appointed for his continuall Ser∣vice) to the sight of Nonesuch. These two coaches I increased to three with two Horses to each as more
usefull then one, and capable of his followers for their dayly passage to and from Court to Kingston. The fourteenth of November, that he might take possession of the honour allowed him by his Majesty to be Lodged in Court, he commaded some of his stuffe of more ne∣cessary Service to be transported thither, he himselfe that Evening following it, and was there Lodged in the Garden Lodgings, where had been sometime quartered the Lady Elizabeth before her marriage, but presuming to have his Kichin allowed him there also (ut supra) he was refused it) for having by his Servant formerly de∣manded it by my Lord Chamberlain (as hath been touched) his Lordship now sent for me, and gave me in charge this to say to him. That he beseecht him to be∣leive, his Majesty did, and would give him all the re∣spects due to his quality and person, and that for his owne particular, he had faithfully endeavoured to do him his best Service for his Accommodation in Court according to his own desires; but he found his Majesty absolutly resolved not to give way to what he requested concerning the having of a kitchin, and some other Lodgings for some of his Gentlemen for conveniency sake. This message delivered by me, he asked me, how the King would have him live in Court without eating? I answered, It was never intended (for ought I knew) that he should have further then his first demand, which was a Lodging or two for his repose sometime, or at the most to lye in, with a Pallet or two, and one Gentleman for his attendance, as had been intimated to his Esquire before, and that for his Dyet, he might be pleased to take it, (and augment it as he should think fit with some of his own dishes brought thither from Kingston) at the Table of the Queens Lord Chamberlain (ut Supra) To this he gave this peremptory reply; Howsoever his Esquire had let him know, that he must be there in his Lodgings with limitation as a private person, he was never of the mind to assent to that distinction so much against the King his Masters honour, to be Lodged (as the King of Frances Ambassador at Kingston, and as the
Marquesse de Bleinvill in the Kings House) but that both the Earle of Carliel had told him it was not intended, Because at Kingston he had a State set up and his Table kept. but that he should be treated in his Lodging in every thing as became an Ambassador, and he himselfe also did now protest for it, that he would not be, and re∣maine there, but absolutly under that title, and would insist upon his Accommodation in all things there, as an Ambassador from so great a King, as the King his Master. Which resolution of his I having made known to my Lord Chamberlain, his Lordship acquainted the King with it, and presently called me to the Presence of his Majesty in his Withdrawing Chamber, where after I had repeated the Ambassadors answer, his Ma∣jesty commanded me to returne to him with his plea∣sure thus plainly and particularly exprest. That the Ambassador might remember, that having requested earnestly the favour to have a Lodging in his Court to retyre to onely, he would not at first assent to it, till up∣on his Wives earnest intreaty (he being loth to deny her the first request she had made to him) was content to yeeld to it, but that he never intended (no more then he (the Ambassador himselfe had demanded) that he should have his Kitchin there, or any other Lodging for any of his followers; except for some such as were of necessary Service about his Person. That Carliel and Holland being in France had never any such fa∣vour done them there, and that he would have Mon∣sieur de Bleinvill know, he valewed their condition not lesse then his, rather more, regarding the businesse they then treated on (being of an higher quality then that he now had in mannage) that notwithstanding all this, he intended no such distinction of Lodging him there as a private Person, with wrong to his publick quality, that he would in all respects treat him so, (the free use of his House reserved) and that he hoped he would not press him further to what was against his likeing, and which he intended not to grant him, so desired him to rest satisfied. Having carried this his Majesties pleasure to the Am∣bassador, he made no further answer then this. That he
saw his Majesty had bestowed a favour on him, which he meant he should not make use of, in giving him a lodging to lye in, and no Kitching, to dress his meate in, and without eating he could not live. That he would onely take himselfe to my Lord of Carlile for justifica∣tion of what he had told him of his Majesties intenti∣on, that he should be lodgd in Court, not (as was told him by his Esquire) as a private Person, but as an Am∣bassador, and so might expect all Termes answerable, that in the stile of an Ambassador he expected, and had order from the King his Master to expect, and stand up∣on his Treatment in all things as his Minister; and that if he failed of this, he would demand of his Ma∣jesty a particular Audience for his satisfaction to that purpose. When I had conveyed all this to the Kings know∣ledge by my Lord Chamberlain, and that the Ambassa∣dor had personally conferred about it with his Lordship, and with my Lord of Carliel also, I knew not how it come about by those Lords satisfaction (when perhaps they saw no other remedy) or rather by the Queens once more mediation with the King in the Ambassadors behalfe, he had at length all he craved both for his Kitchin in Court (part of his Dyet being deducted out of that allowed him at Kingston) and for inlargment of his Lodgings, having all those assigned him next the River in the Garden, where sometimes Lodged the La∣dy Elizabeth, but he could not obtaine allowance for any of his Gentlemen to be Lodged there, except onely such Servants as were of immediat Attendance. The next day he had an Audience (but for other businesse this being cleered) and the two and twenti∣eth of November following, another. By this time Sir Lewes Lewkner Master of the Cere∣monies had by his freinds in Court so sollicited his re∣turne to the Service of his charge, as the Venetian Am∣bassador (satisfied with a kind of acknowledgement from him) was no hindrance to his re-attendance upon this, and other Ambassadors as there was occasion.
The Coronation being ordained for the second of February, two dayes before it my Lord Chamberlain sent Sir Lewes Lewkner to this Ambassador for know∣ledge of his finall resolution (having made some questi∣on of it) whether or no he would be present at the So∣lemnity, when I meeting Sir Lewes neere the Ambas∣sadors House, we went both together to him, and after some small time of conference between them two part (I called too by the Ambassador) we both received from him this answer, That he would not be present at the Coronation for two or three regards; the one was, that his religion tied him not to assist at our prayers, and Church Ceremonies, but herein (he said) he was not so scrupulous as that he would not be content, pour le respect du Roy de la grand Britaine de vouloir faire quel∣que petite bresche a sa conscience. But that which most prevailed with him for his absence was (he said) that he had not been proceeded with in his Invitation, as be∣came the Person, and quality of the King of France's Ambassador, and (as he understood) the King of Spains Ambassador had heretofore been in a larger, and more noble measure. That he was not before hand called (as the other had been (at other Solemnities towards) to confer, and to be made acquainted with the style, and condition of his Treatment, and placing at the solem∣nity, whereof he had received hitherto no other notice or allowance, then what was given, and to be given to the Venetian and States Ambassadors. That further for him to be a Spectator where the Queen, his Masters Sister, excused her presence, and her participation of the Solemnity of Crowning, would be an incongruity, with other the like exceptions to this purpose, amongst which one was (which (he said) he had reason to take) against his Treatment here, as not agreeable to his quality. Whereat I interposed this question, whether, his com∣plaint in that regard extended to that particular of his Invitation, or to his Treatment in generall? he re∣plyed, it extended onely to that of his Invitation, and that for the rest of his Treatment, he had received such respects, and usage from his Majesty, as he could not
except against it. Parting with this answer, we incoun∣tered the Venetian Ambassador where he then was, at the Lodging of Mr. Rossorfe the King of Bohemias Agent, and could not in a long time drive him from the suspition of the Ambassadors earnest, that all this was to deceive, and amaze him, that he might not come to the Coronation, but by his absence run the hazard of the like affront, as was put upon him at King James his Funerall, till resolved in the Evening, he made that ap∣peare, which he had before intimated at his House, that he durst not be present at the Coronation, if the French Ambassador were not, not (he said) for scruple of conscience (as the French pretended) since he pro∣fessed to understand it as an Act of State, and not of Religion) but for the scandalls sake, which might grow, with censure to him for assisting in one of our Churches at our Churches Ceremonies, in company of the States Ambassador (reckoned an Heretique) during a Solem∣nity, whereat the French Ambassador (a Catholick) had refused his Presence. So as neither of both the Ambassadors came, (though the Venetian by question examined all wayes possible how he might have a sight of it without notice of any man) in some corner, but none found allowable, and I excusing my attendance on him, as being a publick Officer, that should thereby discover him for a publick Minister, if I should be seen neere and serving him.) There was onely present the States Ambassador, whom Sir Lewes Lewkner fetching from his House in the morning, while I accompanied his Wife, and Daughters by water from the Savoy Staires, we were all let in at a little posterne door on the South side of King Henry the sevenths Chappell upon a Scaffold there, and there beheld the whole Solemnity. The French Ambassador had his stand (as he said he would) at the House of Sir Abraham Williams neere the Gate-House of the Pallace-yard in company of the Queen (as Bleinvill) which was his owne distinction) and not as Ambassador) where (with her Majesty) he had a view of the King in his passage from Westmin∣ster Hall, to the Church, and back againe.
The Queens Reason (as it was voyced) for not being Crowned together with the King, was because she could not (they said) by her Religion be present at our Church Ceremonies, where she must have had divine Service celebrated by our Bishops, and not by those of her own Religion (as was demanded) for her Crown∣ing. The ninth of February following, the King was to ride to Parliament, and though the Venetian Ambassador had assurance from me, that the French was to have no other stand appointed him for view of that Solemnity, then the company of the Queen as a private Person, and not as an Ambassador, yet his jealosie of loosing the pre∣tended right of his Re-publick in Parity with Crowned-heads, made him apprehend the allowance of an House taken up for him in King-street (about the midst of it, where also was assigned one for the States Ambassador at the charge of his Majesty) to be an Abatement of his respects, which he affirmed was, that he was to stand in the same House and place with the French Am∣bassador, but in the end pacified, he accepted of it; In the meane time a difference that fell out about the place for the Queen (she affected to stand in the Ban∣quetting House, or in the Privy-gallery (when the King had given reasons for her better fight in the house of the Countess, Mother to the Duke of Buckingham, next the Gate in Kings-street) was a Subject for some discontent &c. so far as the Ambassador Bleinvill, seem∣ing to his Majesty to have been the causer of it, had the next day a message brought him by the Lord Conway, that it was his Majesties pleasure that he should for∣beare further accesse to the Kings or Queens Presence; which he storming at, and excepting against as an in∣dignity offered to his Representative quality, demanded by two or three severall messengers, Audience of his Majesty, for knowledge of the Reasons of his restraint, but was refused it with this limiting distinction. If he demanded Audience for any particular business concern∣ing the King his Master, he should readily have it, but
if for himselfe to expostulate his own grievances, the King did absolutly let him know, that if he came to him, he would not see him, so as the Ambassador replying; that he was here for the King his Master, and not for him∣self, and that the refusall of his Audience touched the person he represented, and not his own. He the next day refused the Kings diet, and betook him to his own, lea∣ving the Lodging taken for him at Durham-House, and removing with the chiefe of his Traine to Greenwich, whence two days after returning to London, he with the Kings permission had a sight of the Queen, and the next day went againe to Greenwich. He had in the in∣terim dispatched two or three Couriers, one following another with an account of all; but at Dover (the Ports being by Order shut before hand) none of them could be allowed passage till after fourteen or fifteen days (when Master Walter Mountacue had been purposely sent from the King) they were opened, and the Ambassador had his liberty of sending his messenger. About a moneth or six weekes after, this Malantenda, this Ambassador, receiving Order from the King his Master for composing of his affaires, and differences here, and for applying of himselfe to his Majesties plea∣sure, he had an Audience or two, and peecing up mat∣ters, took his leave at a solemne Audience at White-Hall Presence, conducted to it by the Earle of Holland, the Kings Guard attending their Captain through the streets, but what congruity (as was done before) quere. and two or three dayes after departed; first, for a night or two to his private Lodging at Greenwich, and thence to Dover, accompanied by Sir Lewes Lewkner, but un∣defrayed on the way, leaving the Kings Officers and Servants (my selfe in particular, after my so long, and painfull attendance) ill satisfied with his none at all, or most unworthy acknowledgements. About the middle of February, The Merchants of the East Indian Company (having signified to his Majesty, That a Ship (long held for lost, and then arrived at Portsmouth) had brought in her an Ambassador from
the King of Persia) obtaind his Majesties Coach (with the Earle of Warwick, the Master of the Ceremonies, and other Gentlemen the Kings Servants in it) for his Reception at Kingston, and transport to London. These Merchants (with an affected honour, beyond that done to the other Persian Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley) had procured the Kings Coach to be drawn with eight Horses (as with the more grace to the latter to disgrace the former.) He came to London the 19. of February, and was lodgd (the Merchants defraying him) in the House of Alderman Holliday then deceased. There resting himselfe two dayes, his Audience was sol∣licited, and assigned for Shrovetuesday following, which suspected by Sir Robert Sherley and his friends to be a plot of the Merchants by so hastning an Audience to pre∣vent his repair to Court, and to prepossess the King with the new Ambassadors Reports) he intreated the Earle of Cleaveland (Husband to his Neece) to accompany him at a Visite he would bestow on the said Amdassa∣dor for his Wellcome, and for the declaring of his own quality of Ambassador from the same King, from whom he had so long negotiated here under that Title. To this purpose the Earle of Cleaveland addressing himself to the Lord Chamberlaine for his favour in procuring from the Lord Conway, Principall Secretary, the Letters of Credence brought to King James by Sir Robert Sher∣ley. The Lord Chamberlaine excepting his medling in it, as being (he said) no duty of his place. From him the Earle of Cleaveland, went to the Duke of Bucking∣ham, and by his meanes obtaind allowance from his Majestie for the Lord Conway to impart them for so much use and sight as might serve the Ambassador Sherleys turne for the others satisfaction; so as my Lord Cleaveland having gotten them into his hands, he the morning that the new come Ambassador, was in the afternoone to have Audience departed with the Kings Coach, and seven other (eight or nine Gentlemen and my self accompanying him) to Sir Roberts Sherleys Lodg∣ing on Tower Hill; whence being ready to set forth towards the other Ambassadors; I propounded the fit∣ness
of sending to him before (to avoid the incivility as it might be interpreted of a surprise) with signification of our instant coming to him to Visite him. To this his Answer met us on the way without other comple∣ment, then that we might come. Entring the Hall, (where he then was sitting in a chair on his legs double under him, after the Persian Posture) and affording no motion of respect to any of us, Sir Robert Sherley gave him a salutation, and sate downe on a stoole neer him, while my Lord of Cleaveland by an Interpreter signified, in three words, the cause of the Ambassador Sherleys and his and our comming to him, but with little re∣turne of regard from him, till I informing the Interpre∣ter (of the new Ambassador) what my Lords quality was, he let fall his Trust-up-leggs from his chaire, and made a kinde of respect to his Lordship. This done, Sir Robert Sherley, unfoulding his Letters, and (as the Persian use is in reverence to their King) first touch∣ing his eyes with them, next holding them over his head, and after kissing them, he presented them to the Ambassador, that he receiving them, might performe the like observance, when he suddenly rising out of his chaire, stept to Sir Robert Sherley, snarcht his Letters from him, toare them, and gave him a blow on the face with his Fist, and while my Lord of Cleaveland step∣ping between kept off the offer of a further violence; the Persians Son next at hand flew upon Sir Robert Sher∣ley, and with two or three blows more, overthrew him, when Master Maxwell of the Bedchamber, and my Lord of Cleaveland nearest to him, pulling him back (while we of the company laid hands on our Swords (but not drawing them, because not any one Sword or Dagger was drawn by the Persians) my Lord of Cleaveland re∣monstrated to the Ambassador the danger, and insolen∣cie of the Fact, saying, that if he, and the Gentlemen there with him had not borne more respect to that King whom he represented then (he the Ambassador) had done to the Letters shewed him for justification of the others quality, neither he, nor those about him, that had committed that insolency should have gone alive out of
that place. After these words, he made some shew of ac∣knowledgment, and said, he was sorrey he had offended his Lordship, and us by his Act which he had performed (transported with extreame rage against a Person that had dared to counterfeit the King his Masters hand (which was alwayes (he said) set on the top of his Let∣ters) when these Letters he had shewed had it on the back-side) and to heare (as he had done) that so meane a fellow, and an Imposter, should presume to say, he had married the King his Masters Neece. To this Sir Robert Sherley (who was in the meane time retyred behind the company, amazed and confounded with his blow and Treatment) stept in and answered. That he never said he had married the Kings Neece, but the Queens kinswoman; and that for the manner alleadged of signing his Letters, it was true, that the King of Persia, in all imployments of his own Subjects to Forren Princes, or in writing to them, used to signe above in the front of his Letters, but that when he im∣ployed a stranger to any Forren Prince, his signature was usually affixed on the back side of his Letters, that before their opening, they might shew who sent them. To this the Ambassador replyed with scornfull looks onely, we all with little or no respects to him departed, and conducting Sir Robert Sherley to his Lodging, ac∣companied the Earle of Cleaveland instantly to Court, where finding the Duke of Buckingham in the Pre∣sence-chamber (the King being even then come forth to Dinner) his Lordship acquainted his Majesty with our adventure, and I received present order to let Sir Lewes Lewkner know that he should instantly repaire to the new come Persian Ambassador, and tell him that his Audience for that afternoone was thought fit to be snspended, and remitted to another day, that his Ma∣jesty might be particularly informed of the causes of the disagreement, and disorder happened. The great∣est blot, and fault of this adoe, was cast upon Sir Robert Sherley for his default in his resolution, not to returne with blows (or words at least) the affront done him; which had he done, would have confirmed the truth
of his representative quality, and not given subject (from such weaknesse, and want of Spirit discovered by him) to the Merchants to dispute (as they confidently did,) and to his own freinds to defend  the soundness of his commission; yet at length he writ∣ing to his Majesty, and beseeching him to send him in∣to Persia with his two Letters tyed about his neck for tryall whether they were true or false, the world began to have a conceit of his unjust sufferance, and the King to charge it home to the Merchants, with his command, and especiall pleasure signified to them, that he should be senr a long in their Fleet (then ready to part for the East Indies) and be by them Landed in Persia, there to make his Purgation, which they (though unwilling∣ly) assented to, and pressing for the other Ambassadors Audience, he had it (after eight or ten dayes delay) assigned and given him, the sixth of March, fetcht to it by the Earle of Warwick &c. Entering the Banquet∣ting House, (where his Majesty stood under the State to receive him, (without one looke or gesture of respect, till coming close to the Kings person, he clapt his Let∣ters to his cyes (one after the other) kissed them, and presented them to the hand of his Majesty, but not so much as bowing his Body at their delivery, onely ha∣ving finished his little Ceremony, he in his retrait (after some twenty paces made with his back to the King) turned about and waving his hand on each side imperiously (as commanding a prospect) hindred by the multitude that pressed in between his sight, and the Kings) he made a kind of a stoopping reverence, so a second, and a third, and departed. When understan∣ding that the Queen was gone abroad (whom he meant to visite) he imployed the time a while in a walke with all his coaches about Saint Jameses Parke, and retur∣ning, saw her Majesty. The next day I brought the other Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley to a private Audience of his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber. After many Contestations between the Merchants and the Ambassador Sherley (whether he were to be defrayed by them, as the King
required, or by the King, since his Majesty had intima∣ted his resolution that he should be transported to Persia in the Fleet that was to pass for the East Indies at the beginning of May, and in them also the other Ambas∣sador, that time being come of their departure, they both arrived too late at the place of their imbarking (the Downs) for performance of that voyage in that season, the Fleet, that could no longer stay for them, being already gone (though Sir Robert Sherley had got∣ten the start of the other and imbarked in a Pinnace of the Fleet, together with Sir Dormer Cotton imployed by his Majesty at the same time Ambassador to the King of Persia, both for truth, whether Sherley were, or not an Imposter, and also to fix a Trade there (which the other Ambassador came to Negotiate) so as they were all forced to returne to London, and there attend the opportunity of departure in March ten moneths after, when begining their voyage (the two differing Ambassadors in severall Ships) they all three dyed on the way, and with them the quarrell and inquirie after it. The Venetian Ambassador Seignior Pesaro (called home somewhat sooner then other Ambassadors of that States formerly had been) parted hence to Gravesend without other attendance, then those of his Family, ha∣ving sent me (after I had taken my last leave of him) a Gold Chaine of five ounces weight, and the like of little more valew to the Master of the Ceremonies. He had no sooner passed the Seas, but here arrived by the way of the low Countryes two Gentlement sent Extraordinary Ambassadors from Venice, the one Seignior Coraro, who had resided here Ordinary about fourteen yeares before, and Seignior Contareni, they Landed at Gravesend (sea∣sonably for observation of the new order resolved on by his Majesty, that no Ambassador should be met, and re∣ceived further off then there) and were thence conduct∣ed by Sir Lewes Lewkner &c. to their Landing at Tower-wharffe, where they were welcom'd by the Earle of Dorset, accompaned by the Lord Herbert
(Castle Island) and other Gentlemen (my selfe one, not as an Officer, or listed for it, but Voluntary) with the Kings Coach and seventeen other (not one of them taken up at the Kings charge (as had been accustomed) but borrowed of Noblemen (to avoid the charge of the Master of the Ceremonies, professed to the Lord Cham∣berlain he would not undergo, without assurance of bet∣ter re-imboursment of his money, then he had met with) and were brought to their Lodgings in Aldersgate-street at the Lord Peters House, defrayed there by the King with all their attendance (of allmost an hundred Persons) their Diet compounded for by Philipp Verzel∣lini, an Italian, (who had lived long in England) at 40 l. per diem, not comprehending the charge of the Houses Furniture (being all the Kings) and waited on by his Majestyes Officers and Servants, (whereof twelve of the Guard gave their dayly attendance.) The five and twentieth of June (Sunday) they were fetched to their publick Audience at Greenwich by the Earle of Carliel from their House in the Kings Coach, and other to Tower Wharffe, and thence by Barges, introduced by the way of the great Gate, Hall, and Guard-chamber to the Presence, where his Majesty standing under the State to receive them, Seignior Carara spake first breifly, deli∣vering their credence, when the other setling himselfe, as to begin a more formall set speech, his Majesty look∣ing about for one to interpret (the Master of the Cere∣monies being retyred out of sight, not over forward to do Offices of his Office to that State) I being called to by the Lord Chamberlain, made a repetition of the cheife heads, and some of the Ambassadors long Ora∣tion to the King, and after of his Majesties breife re∣plye, which done, they returned (accompanied as be∣fore) to London. The Sunday following, they had a second Audience in private by the way of the Patke through the Privy-galleries to the Withdrawing-cham∣ber there, fetcht to it from their home by the Earle of Holland, an honour not formerly afforded any Am∣bassador to have an Earles conduct from their House to a private Audience, to which customarily none was to
bring them from home, but the Master of the Ceremo∣nies, though their Ambassage were Extraordinary, and if ordinary, he to have received them no further off then at their descent from their Coach at the Court Gate, or foot of the Stayres next the Parke. But this honour was done them by the Kings especiall pleasure, and command (as I was told) it might or may be here∣after of trouble by the consequence, when other over∣punctuall Ministers of that State, may perhaps challenge the like from president. The second of July, the Lord Conway, Secretary of State sent word to my Lord Chamberlain (then some∣what indisposed) of the arrivall of two Commissioners from Hamborough, who were styled by their followers (whom they sent before with their Letters of credence) Lords Ambassadors. Their Letters being opened in the Lord Chamberlains sight, Mr. Secretaries, and mine, the Commissioners were therein thus named, Spectabilem & Doctissimum virum Dominum Luntzman Syndicum &c. & Spectabilem virum Dominum Brand & Senatorem &c. Ablegavimus, which words made me question the right and reception they seemed to pretend to of Ambassa∣dors, so far, as communicating my reasons with my Lord Chamberlain, and receiving his opinion that Ablega∣vimus was no more, then we have deputed as our Min∣isters, I was sent back to my Lord Conway, and by him (when also ill at ease) with their concurring opinions to the King, who approving them, left me to follow my Lord Chamberlains directions, according to which I that night wellcomed them at their Lodgings at Crouchet Fryars in name of his Majesty, and let them know his pleasure for their Audience the next day at one of the clock, to which I fetched them in the Lord Chamberlains coach onely, least the use of the Kings might have seemed to raise their respects to the title they seemed to affect (but upon better advise refused) of Ambassadors, they were received of his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber, where one of them having made a formall harange, containing (besides comple∣ment
of condoleing and congratulating) a complaint against his Majesties Ships lying at the mouth of the Ebb, and hindering their free Traffique, and an humble request of his leave to transport through his Seas with∣out molestation, Corne, Powder, Copper, and Cordage to France, and Italy, their Merchants entering caution to their Senat, that they should not transport any to Spaine (then our Enemy) his Majesty entered, answer∣ed them by my interpretation, that he would gladly continue with them the friendly correspondence held by his deceased, Father, and did not, nor would interrupt them, either at the mouth of their River, or else-where at Sea for any quarrell he had to them, or any way to hinder their Traffique, but only keep them from Tra∣ding with the King of Spaine, his Enemy, which by Law of Nations, and in justice he might, and would do. To which purpose they should further repaire to his Councell, to whom he would give Order for their ac∣cess to Negotiate; so dismissed, they returned, and I with them to their Lodgings. The sixth of July, an Ambassador Extraordinary, Paul Rozenerantz, sent from the King of Denmark, arriveing at Gravesend, Then but a Baron and no Privy Councellor. was there received by Sir Lewes Lewkner two dayes after at Tower-wharffe by the Lord Willough∣by, Lord High Chamberlaine of England, and by him brought to his Lodging in Lumbard-Street, where he had his Diet defrayed by his Majesty at eighteen pound per diem. His attendance of the Kings Servants con∣sisted only of a Gentleman Usher daily Waiter, a Sewer, and two others, without any of the Guard daily to at∣tent him. His own Trayne passed not in all a do∣zen persons. The day after his Arriveall, he sent to know his Majesties pleasure for his Audience, which the King desired speedily to give him, because of his inten∣ded remove the week following to Wansteed. This had been assigned for Sunday the ninth of July, had not the Master of the Ceremonies intimated that it would prove improper (in regard, that the two Venerian Ex∣traordinaries were that day to have their parting Au∣dience at two of the clock (and to alter their houre by
anticipation, or this to come after them, might beget distaste) his Majesty would have appointed the next day, being Saturday, but that being judged too precipe∣tate, so to surprize an Ambassador before he could re∣collect himself so soone after his Arriveall, and he also apprehending it in that sence; it was by me made known to him, that he should have his Audience the Tuesday following (July 11. at Wansted.) In the meane time I received Order from my Lord Chamberlaine to hire two Coaches (of the Kings providing) besides his Ma∣jesties own Coach for his and his Followers daily use. The 16. of July I was to waite on him to his Audience assigned at Wansted with the conduct of the Earle of Northampton, but his Majesty altering the hour of two after to ten before Dinner, I was put to it at nine of the clock the night before to command an Assembly for the altered houre, so brought him at his due houre to his Audience. The 9. of July, the two Extraordinary Venetian Am∣bassadors took leave of his Majesty in the Banquetting House (purposely prepared for it, and hung with the rich Hangings) introduced by the Earle of Mongomery; their repose having been first in the Councel Chamber, whether they came by the way of the Park, a suddaine extream shower, having made the ordinary way through the Sermon-Court impossible. Then after took leave of the Queen also. July the 17. They parted to Gravesend in Barges of the Kings providing, and so farre the Ma∣ster of the Ceremonies attended them; but leaving them there (as at the limits of all Ambassadors con∣duct, or reception in observation of the new Order resolved on (as before) they were served only by Walter Brisco Marshall of the Ceremonies for the readier hire of their Carriages at their own charges, as was also all their Coaches (the Kings for their personall use excep∣ted) to their lodging the next day at Sittingborne, to their Dinner the day following at Canterbury, and to their imbarquing at Dover in two Ships of his Majesties for their landing at Callis. Though I had done little or no Service, they sent me a Chaine of twenty two
pound valew, having towards the rest of the Kings Servants carryed themselves as Italian Lesnianti without superfluity, but not without the others mur∣murs. The day that the Denmark Ambassador had his pub∣lick audience of the King at Wansted (he having exprest to me his desire for the conveniency of admitting, and returning visit of particulars, before he had seen the Queen with an over-nice curiosity, having allready seen the King) I wrot to Sir Morris Dromond, a Gen∣tleman Usher of her Majesties Privy-chamber, that he would help me to the knowledge of her Majesties plea∣sure for his Audience, which he did by Letter (upon communication both with her Majesty and her Lord Chamberlain Monsieur de Tilliers) with signification that I should bring him the next day between one and two in the Afternoon; so as late that night I wrote to my Lord Chamberlain (for better assurance from Er∣rour) what order I had received from Sir Maurice Dro∣mond, and touched upon the course usuall of fetching the Ambassador at his first publick Audience,) from his home by a Person of Title, but that the shortnesse of the time, and the two Courts divisions hindring this, I thought (I said) it would be sufficient, if the Count de Cipierre Master of the Horses to her Majesty should re∣ceive him at his Landing at Greenwich, so that morning I conducted him in the Kings coach and two other hy∣red to his imbarking at Tower Wharffe; thence to the incounter at Greenwich Bridge of the Count mention∣ed to his repose in the Councell-chamber, and after to the Queen in her Privy-chamber, the Ambassador speaking to her French, having (upon my advise) chang∣ed his first purpose of speaking to her in Latine &c. The next day (hastning his private Audience of his Majesty) he sent the King his Masters Agent, Master Below to Wansted, and obtained it for the day follow∣ing (July the fourteenth) introduced by a private stayre to a Chamber, where he might attend the Kings time of admittance, which instantly succeeding, his Majesty in the Gallery there (no Privy Councellours or other
neere) gave him his eare for above halfe an houre, and dismist him for his returne to London. The two Commissioners from Hambrough, They had brought no Letters to her Ma∣jesty, yet demanded and had Audience contrary to that when the Ambas∣sador of Sweden demanded, and was refused of Queen Ann be∣cause he had brought her no Letters. being de∣sirous to kiss the Queens hand (as an honour (they said) which other imployd from their State before them had received of the Queen deceased) they requested me to make their way, which I did, repairing for it to her Majesties Lord Chamberlain, but he then instantly gone for France, I addrest my selfe to the Bishop of Mando, and between him and Madam de Saint George (Groome of the Stoole to her Majesty) got their Audi∣ence to be assigned for the next day, (the thirtyeth of July) between foure and five after Vespers. But about two that Afternoon, I was told by Sir William Gordon Gentleman Usher to the Queen, that the King would speak with me presently about a businesse of impor∣tance, when repairing to his Majesty in his Privy-Gal∣lery, he commanded me that I should without any noise, or notice to any, go instantly to the deputies of Hambrough, and let them know, that whereas they were assigned their Audience of the Queen that day, her Majesty being ill at ease could not give it them till the next. I perceiving this alteration to be without her Majesties knowledge, and for some particular cause best known to the King, went without further question about the Service, but first told Sir William Gordon, that it might happen (as I guessed by some directions doubt∣ingly given me by the King) that he would alter his mind, and that the Audience should proceed at the houre first appointed for it, upon which consideration I would go (I said) to the Commissioners (where they then Lodged at the Still-yard, and discharge them of their expectation, but not so fully, as that I would not leave them in some opinion, that the Queen might per∣haps so recover of her indisposition, as to send to them to come to her that day: this I performed, and entertain∣ing them in doubt, whether they should go or not, ha∣ving perswaded them to dismisse their allready prepared coaches, and if they should be sent for to make their passage by water. I (after an hours expence of time
with them) had a messenger sent to me from the King, that I should come presently along with the Hambourgh Commissioners to the Queen (as I had been first ap∣pointed.) In obedience whereof I presently taking Boat with them, and landing at the Common-Court Staires, we were there met by two of her Majesties Gentlemen-Ushers of her Presence Chamber, and by them told that we should not repaire to any place of repose (which I had assigned in the Chappell Closet on the Queens side) because her Majesty was already staying for them in her Privy Galleries, whether going by the passage of the Privy Staires, they there had their access, the Queen standing at one side of the Gallery amonst the Ladies. This succeeded the Eve of the day, (July 31.) that the French were removed from about the person of her Ma∣jesty, the Kings Order to me (ut supra) relating to that important business. The 13. of August, The Ambassador of Denmark went in the Kings Coach (his two Coaches defrayed by his Majestie attending) to an Audience at None∣such, in the Privy Chamber, there (all but the Lords of the Privy Councell excluded) he was fetcht to it from his Chamber of Repose (such being the Kings pleasure, though more then usuall at a private Audience) by the Earle of Dorset. The 23. of August, An Ambassador Ordinary from Venice, by name Alanso Coutarim, (having resided with the States of the United Provinces) arrived at Graves∣end, where he was received by the Master of the Cere∣monies, was welcomed from the King at his Landing at Tower-Wharffe by the Lord Willoughby, Then but a Baron. Lord High Chamberlaine of England, and by him conducted to his House at Charter-House, where intreated to stay Sup∣per (an invitation which upon so short warning savoured more of good Fellowship then Courtship) his Lord∣ship and those with him had an Royall intertainment. The 13. of September, The King having received at Theobalds the unhappy news of an Overthrow given the King of Denmark, by the Count of Tilly Generall for the Emperor, came to London, and that morning sent
for the Ambassador of Denmark to come to him after Dinner, and received him at Denmark-House (the Queen then there) in the Privy Chamber, introduced by Sir George Goring Vice-Chamberlaine to her Maje∣stie, and fetcht from the Lord Carews Lodging by the Queens Gentleman-Usher. The 21. of September, A Messenger formerly sent by the same Ambassador to the King his Master, being re∣turned, he demanded and had an Audience of his Ma∣jesty in the Presence at Hampton Court, without re∣posing any where, though the Chappell had been as∣signed for it. That night he returned to London, he was pleased to excuse my attendance further then to my House in his way at Twittenham, where he had taken me up to his Coach in his passage to his Audience of his Majesty. He had demanded this access to his Majesty two or three dayes before by the King his Masters A∣gent, Ma. Belaw; but whether it had not been more properly carried to have gone immediatly to Court, and there in person to have by the Lord Chamberlaine demanded an immediate Audience (considering the neer relation between his Master and the King, and the consequence of the newes then brought him of his Masters defeate) was by some, and may be with reason made a Quere. The 22. of September, as I was at Supper with the Ambassador of Denmarke, one came to me with this message, That Monsieur Quadt an Honourable Gentle∣man sent Ambassador from the Prince of Transilvania, (Bethlem Gabor) being that day arrived here, had ad∣dress by Letters, both from the Prince his Master, and from the King of Bohemia to Monsieur Rosberf resi∣ding here for the affaires of that King, but understan∣ding that Monsieur Rosberf was out of Town, and my selfe (one of the Kings Masters of Seremonies) to be there, he desired my advise, and furtherance for his pro∣ceeding; I answered the Messenger, that my way must be by the Lord Chamberlaine, for his to his Majesty, and that to that purpose I would repaire presently to his
Lordships approbation of my Opinion, that Monsieur Rosdrose returne (to whom the Ambassador had such a particular address) it was unfit, and needless to give no∣tice of him to his Majesty. I went to him (though with∣out Commission) and complied with him the next morning, where receiving his allowance (with thanks) for my course taken, and advise to stay the returning of Rosdrofe; I wrote to this Gentleman how I had procec∣ded, and sent my Letter by his Servant. In the meane time his Majesty having notice of the Ambassadors ar∣riveall, signified his pleasure by my Lord Chamberlaine to Master Rosdrose then returned, and to me, that the correspondence between the Ambassador and themselves considered, and answerable to the proposition made by us two, Two Am∣bassadors Arriving at different times, lod∣ged and defrayed in one House, and at one Ta∣ble. from themselves the Prince of Transilvanians Ambassador and the King of Denmarks should be lodg'd together in the same house, and dieted at the same Table with addition of ten pound per diem, to the others eighteen pound. The traine of the latet consisting but of four persons, and that he should be admitted to his An∣dience the Tuesday following, which was performed ac∣cordingly. I accompanying to Hampton Court with the service of only two hired Coaches each with four horses. He had allowed him by the Lord Chamberlaine one Coach with four horses daily to attend his service; but for his Majesties profit, and with the Ambassadors like∣ing, I brought it to an attendance at such times only as he should be pleased the Evening before to com∣mand it. In the mean time I doubting, that some of those re∣spects ordinarily given to Ambassadors at their first Au∣diences might be omitted, whereof (but that he him∣felfe professed to affect privacie) it was one, not to have a Titular person appointed to accompany him thence to the Court; I sent a Groome of the Chamber early that morning to order what my Lord Chamber∣laine had left unordered, and to have some Nobleman to meete and receive him there at his descent out of his Coach. This being incharged to the Lord Compton, he received no sooner then at the second Gate, and there
turning up the great staires through the great Hall, and Guard-chamber, the King was already under the State in the Privy-chamber expecting him, which by sud∣dainnesse of his approach so danted him, as, though he passed through well with his Latine Oration, he forgot to present his Letters of Credence, and was forced after his parting from his Majesty to send them back to him with excuse of his Servants absence, whom he feyned to have had them about him, when he being so sud∣dainly (without stay any where) introduced, and his Secretary left in the Press behind him, could not come at them opportunely to deliver them. All the time of his Audience he never covered, being not invited to it by his Majesty, who likewise stood all that time un∣covered. After he had finished his Oration, and that his Ma∣jesty by me had given him a breife, but a gracious an∣swer, I acquainted his Majesty with his instant desire, that it might stand with his Majesties pleasure to have his publick Audience made private, by commanding an avoidance of the pressing company, or by his Ma∣jesties retrait to his more private Lodgings, where the Ambassador might have an immediate access to him for communication of some particulars of his Negotia∣tion, which required speed in dispatch. His Majesty was gratiously pleased to allow of the former, and com∣manding all to stand back but the Ambassador, they spake together a good time out of the hearing of any. After taking his leave to returne to London, and in∣countring on the way the Duke of Buckingham, he caused his coach to turne back after him, but in vaine, the Duke taking another way, but overtaking the Am∣bassador that night in his more speedie returne, he there in the way received his Letters, his complement and his request of a speedy dispatch in his businesse. The fifth of October, he had his Audience of the Queen assigned, and given him at Hampton Court without any Person of Title to receive him at the Gate, with excuse (from the Gentleman Usher upon my re∣monstrance) of their absence for Service of her Majesty
the next day in her remove. The Queen received him in her Privy-chamber, where he (after an Invitation or two of her Majesty) covered, for which he went not away uncensured of the observing Ladies, and Lords there present. His Majesty having received an account from France of the cold reception, and entertainment given his Am∣bassador (Sir Dudley Carleton) Lord of Imber-court, im∣ployd thither Extraordinary for prevention, and ac∣commodation of whatsoever differences that might grow from the late remove of the French from about the Person of the Queen; news came soone after to Court of the arrivall at Dover (September the foure and twentieth) of Monsieur de Bassampierre sent Ambas∣sador from that King about the same businesse, whom to entertain answerable to the stile, and Treatment of our Kings Ambassadors there, it was consulted of and resolved; that neither the Master of the Ceremonies, nor other Officers of his Majesty should be sent to receive, & serve him further off, then at Gravesend, & a Nobleman no neerer then Greenwich for his conduction thence by water to Tower Wharffe; and to his house hired, and furnished by himselfe in Leaden-hall-street, for which latter complement was chosen the Earle of Dorset. On his way towards his House, the Master of the Ceremo∣nies letting fall some words concerning the provision of Diet made for him by his Majesties Order; he would by no meanes accept of it, answering, that if the King would have been pleased to have assigned him a House, he would have received also the favour of his Diet, but to eate at an other mans charge in his own House, (as he would be bold to call that hired for him by his his Officers) he desired pardon, if he refused it; so were the Kings provisions that had been allready served in, turned back againe. For Sunday following (September the thirtieth) he had his audience assigned him at Hampton Court, and came thither in the Kings coach (followed by divers Noblemens) with the conduct of the Earle of Carliel (though some were of opinion, that
the Earle of Dorset should have been properly his con∣ductour, as had been one, and the same Person at the reception, and first audience of the Lord of Imber-court in France) he was brought after his repose in the Coun∣cell-chamber, where a Dinner had been prepared for him, but he came to late (purposely it was thought) to eate it, and a collation set ready on the Table at his comming, but remained untasted of by him, or any of his followers) through the great Hall to the Presence∣chamber, where both the King, and Queen stood under the State to receive him, the Lords, and Gentlemen ranged on the Kings right hand, the Ladies with the Dutches of Fremoville on the left. And having presen∣ted his Letters to the King, and passed other respects with his Majesty, he performed the like with the Queen, after which parting towards his coach, accompanied by the Lord mentioned, and others, he was in the outward Court told that the Duke of Buckingham was comming after him, whereat making a stand till the Duke came, they two privatly and apart from the rest, discoursed halfe an houre together before they parted, the Am∣bassador dismissing the Kings Coach, returned in his owne to London. The twentieth of October, a Signification from the Lords of the Councell came to the Ambassadors of Denmarke, and of Betblem Gabor (as also to Monsieur Benica, Agent sent hither from the Marquess of Baden) that if they would be pleased to come to Monsieur Ros∣dorss, resident here for the King of Bohemia) at his Lodging neere White-Hall (which they could not but think (as they did) a bold Invitation for persons of their quality) they should have word sent them thither of the time of the Lords readinesse to receive, and heare them; but when they were all there at the houre assigned, one of the Clerks of the Councell brought word, that Bethlem Gabors Ambassador and the Envoy from the Marquess of Baden, were to have present ac∣cess, but that for the Ambassador of Denmark, their Lordships desired his patience till some other time,
which he (not without shew of resentment for such an Exclusion) saying, the other two were by me introdu∣ced (first the Minister of Bethlem Gabor, and immedi∣atly after his dispatch, the other.) The two and twentieth of October, the Ambassador of Denmark had access to the King in his Withdraw∣ing-chamber with my conduct, and upon his dispatch, I demanded pardon if I gave him not my attendance home, because of a charge I had (I said) instantly tofetch the two Commissioners of Hambrough to their parting Audience: so repaired to them, where (as I had already ordered it) they stayed my comming at my House (ha∣ving before sent them to their Lodgings a Noblemans coach for their transport thither) I brought them by the way of the Parke, and Privy Galleries (answerable to the stile of their first introduction in quality of depu∣ties, not Ambassadors) into the Withdrawing-chamber, there thanking his Majesty for his favours, and desiring some small addition, and cleering to and of their River of Elb, blocked up by his Majesties Ships (their other demand of transport of Corne, Copper, and am∣munition of War (ut supra) being with reason denied them) they took their leave, and two dayes after had their presents of two Gold Chaines (each of the valew of 210 l. brought them by two of the under Officers of the Jewell-house) who had for their gratuity given them by the hand of one of the Commissioners ten peeces, and to their Servants twenty shillings. Two dayes after inviting me to dine with them, they before Din∣ner presented me with a purse, and fifty peeces. Soone after taking their Journey to Dover (without my con∣duction, or expectation of it) they there imbarqued for France to returne by Paris, Bruxells, the Hague, and Hambourgh. The Ambassador of Denmark had the fifth of Novem∣ber a private Audience of his Majesty in the Withdraw∣ing-chamber, and was after it by me conducted over the Terras crosse the lower end of the Guard-chamber to the Queens Closet in her Privy-chamber for the like Audience of her Majesty to signifie the King his Masters
pleasure of imploying him on a posting Journey into France, with intention and command of his speedy re∣turne hither. But foure or five dayes after, as he was upon the instant of his departure, Letters came from his King, which for a while retarded him till others comming; he the sixteenth of November wrote to me to procure him another Audience of his Majesty (with all possible speed, (allwayes (regarding (he said) his Ma∣jesties convenience.) This in absence of my Lord Chamberlain I moved for, and obtained within two hours after, he comming to Court by water, the Kings Coachman being not to be found for his so immediate Service. The eighteenth of November (after he had the day before prepared for his silent departure) he in the morning early went in a Barge (of his own hiring) to Gravesend, and by coach also (at his own cost) to Do∣ver, leaving behind him some murmurs of the Kings Servants, that having done him the Service of their places, expected their satisfaction, and would not be∣leive, but that they should be deceived of it, he par∣ting so suddainly without notice given, or leave taking (except some few dayes before of the King, Queen, and certaine Lords) though his intention of his speedy re∣turne were not undiscovered to some besides my selfe, whom he trusted with it.) The day of his departure Monsieur Bonika (sent from the Marquesse of Baden about important businesse) having taken leave, and received for his present a Chaine of Gold of 150 l. valew, posted after for his company, and safer passage to Paris. On Sunday the fifteenth of November, the Duke of Buckingham having prepared a sumptuous entertain∣ment of a Supper and a Maske at York-house for the French Ambassador Monsieur Bassampierre, had his Feast honored with the Presence of both their Majesties, the King sitting towards the end of the Table with the Queen at his right hand, the Ambassador was (as soone as they were set) invited by his Majesty to sit downe at the end of the Table on that hand which might seeme to be the upper end, but was held the lower,
because next the doore, and furthest from the fire he had a wet Towell to wash, which given him by the Duke, who stood by to serve him all the time of the Supper, and would not be put from him, nothwithstan∣ding the Ambassadors many excusing refusall of such service &c. the Ladies, and strangers invited had a plen∣tifull supper in the great Hall of the House, while the King, and Queen were retyred during some preparations for the Maske in that Roome, where their Majesties were Feasted, who that night lodged at Somerset-House, and had the next day a continuance of their, and the Ambassadors entertainment of Feasting, Dancing, &c. The sixteenth of November, the Queen prepared for him a Maske, represented by the Duke of Bucking∣ham, the Earle of Holland, Sir George Goring (her Viz-Chamberlain) and other her Majesties Servants, at Somerset-house, whereto he came from White-Hall in company of their Majesties by water, and had made for him after the Maske, a most sumptuous Banquet. He should have had (by assignation) his publick parting Audience, but the King (with an intreating complement of letting him know, and leaving it to his consideration how seriously the Queen was at that time applying her self to her Masking businesse) drew him to have it de∣ferred till the Sunday following, when towards foure of the clock, the Earle of Carliel (with the Kings best coach and another of his Majesties) fourteen of the Lords Coaches following (six or seaven of the Kings Servants onely in them to leave the more place for strangers) brought him for his repose to the Councell∣chamber (where Wine, Bread, Beere &c. usually served in by the Guard, was for that time spared, as a custome of improper use towards the French) and from thence over the Terras to the Banquetting-house, where both their Majesties standing ready to receive him, and the Ladies ranged in order of their qualities on the left hand of the King all along the Roome, and the Lords and Gentlemen on the right (The French that marched before the Ambassador being made to stay, and be placed
on that side for the fairer passage, and prospect to their Majesties) he there took publick leave of them both, but after followed them along the Privy-galleries as far as to the Withdrawing-Roome, and was thence conducted by the Earle of Carliel to his Lodgings to Supper, in company of divers great Lords, and Ladies, with whom after Supper returning to the King, and Queen, he was present with them at a Play in the great Hall, which ended, and their Majesties waited on by him to the Kings Withdrawing-chamber, he there took a second leave, and returned late to his Lodg∣ings. Two dayes before his departure, it being talked of in Court, that the Master of the Jewell-House, Sir Henry Mildmay had made his meanes to the Duke of Buck∣ingham, and other neere about the Kings person for carriage, and delivery of the Present designed to the Ambassador (which was a rich Jewell of foure great Diamonds, with a great Pearle pendant at it, alltoge∣ther esteemed by Jewellers (at a Merchants rate) to be worth seaven thousand pounds) the Master of the Ce∣remonies, understanding of these endeavours to the others profit, and his disadvantage both present, and future from president, came to my house (as to one whom it highly concerned) he said) in my right of re∣version after his death, or in case of his sicknesse, or ab∣sence, when I was to carry the like Presents to those Ambassadors that I had attended, or done Service, to whom they should be formerly presented) with Jewels from his Majesty) and intreated me to go with him to the Lord Chamberlain (the Earle of Montgomery.) To whom when we came, his Lordship upon the first over∣ture of the difference resolved it to be an undue claime of the Master of the Jewell-house, and professed he would to his power oppose him. From his Lordship, we went both together to the Earle of Pembrok (then Lord Steward of his Majesties House-hold, and but a small time before Lord Chamberlain) and he (with expression even of passion) condemned the pretence of the Master of the Jewell-House, saying, no man
could better speake to that question, then he could, who had been present when it was moved before the Lords of the Councell, and King James himselfe for their decision, By Sir Henry Ca∣rew and Sir Lewes Lewkner. which had most right to the carriage of Presents, the Master of the Ceremonies, or the Master of the Jewell-house? this latter pretended indeed (he said) to their carriage, when they consisted of Plate or chaines of gold, and were issued out of the Office; but he had heard (he said) the Master of the Jewell-house (Carew) nobly of himselfe disclaim all pretence of right to carry them, when they consisted of Jewels, as Rings, Chaines of Diamonds, Hatbands, or the like, and that to this he could, and would say more of his mind, and knowledge, if he should be called to it by his Majesty. This question thus far cleered, Sir Henry Mild∣may neverthelesse desisted not to make freinds under∣hand for maintainance of his Claime, till the day, and almost houre that the Jewell was to be presented, when the Duke of Buckingham (that had seemed before to favour him) came about for the Master of the Ceremo∣nies, and declared his opinion for him, so as the Earle of Carliel (who had in the interim the Jewell commit∣ted by the King to his custody) after he had also de∣clared his sentence the same way) delivered it to the hands of the Master of the Ceremonies, by whom it was that Evening presented to the Ambassador, and who the nex day received in gratuity for it, and for his atten∣dance, and paines taken in this Ambassadors service, three hundred peeces; immediatly after he had presen∣ted it, he entering the Kings Withdrawing-chamber to give account to his Majesty how thankfully it was ac∣cepted, I then standing at the door, heard his Majesty say (when Sir Lewes thankt him for his most gracious favor in committing it to his carriage) that it was the Master of the Ceremonies right, and none other to carry, and present Jewels to Ambassadors. The day of the Ambas∣sadors departure (November the fifteenth) when he was resolved already, and the Kings Barge with two other appointed for his transport to Gravesend (the Tide fal∣ling late, and the wind proving high, and contrary, he
had Coaches hired for him (at his own charge) and with them and his own coaches went thither by Land, the Master of the Ceremonies accompanying him so far but no further, answerable to the new Order for conduct of Ambassadors. The Marshall of the Ceremonies (Walter Brisco) only appointed for his service on the way for∣ward, as there might be necessary use of it, till he should be imbarqued at Dover &c. The Ambassador of Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Tran∣silvania, having received a full satisfaction of his busi∣ness, as the condition of our affaires would permit, and his Present of a thousand ounces of guilt Plate brought him by the Master of the Jewell House, and two of his Officers with him, rewarding these, he reserved the gratuitie that might be expected from him by the other to time and consideration. In the meane time I having been sought to by a Gentleman, (the Ambassadors only follower qualified as fit to sit with him at the Table) to procure him also a Present as to the Ambassadors Secre∣tary; I told him I doubted of good success in that suite, in regard not only of the present necessitous condition of the time, but also because he had not at any time ap∣peared in the Negotiation between his Master, and the Lords, which having kept him from notice of his merit, would prove, I thought, a reason for his exclusion, as indeed it did, when acquainting my Lord Chamber∣laine with his ayme, his Lordship gave him a negative Answer to that purpose, wherewith I quieted him. The day after the Ambassador had received his Pre∣sent, recommending the demand of his parting Audi∣ence (not yet formally given him; to the Vicechamber∣laine (the Lord Carleton) (in absence of the Lord Chamberlaine, then ill at ease) and his Lordship de∣manding it in my hearing, I propounded the fitness of his having it given in the Presence Chamber (as being his last Audience) therefore requisite to be in publique, as the first Audience had been at Hampton Court; but was answered by the King, that he took him to be no man that would stand upon point of Ceremony, so would have it (he said) in his Withdrawing-Chamber,
and me to introduce him by the way of the Parke, which obeying, I brought him after Dinner with the Service of two hired coaches (the Kings beings excused by him, when I offered it, because he had not had it (he said) at his first Audience) he was received by no other No∣bleman then the Lord Vice-chamberlaine at the en∣trance of the Privy Gallery, and by him brought to the King in his Withdrawing-Chamber, whence I after conducted him to the Queen for the like Audience of her Majestie; but receiving notice, that she was even then gone to Somerset-House to her vespers, and would returne for that Ambassadors occasion, he likewise went to his Lodging, and stayed there, till the Queen repassing before his door, he followed her to White-Hall, and had in her Majesties Privy Chamber Audience, and dismission. This passed, I accompanied him to the Duke of Buckingham for his farewell, but the Duke be∣ing then absent, and I going in his Search to the Privy Galleries, found there his Majestie sitting all alone, when (after demand of pardon for my entrance so at un∣awares to his Presence) I made use of the opportunity to tell his Majesty what had not an hour before passed between me, and the Ambassador upon a question mo∣ved by Sir Maurice Dromond Gentleman-Usher to the Queen immediatly before his Audience; which questi∣on (he said) had been then in his hearing moved by the Queene to the King, viz. Whether the Ambassador would or not cover in her Presence, and that the King was of opinion he would not cover; I answered the Gentleman that I would not resolve him for the future, but that for the time passed, I knew (I said) he had co∣vered at his first Audience after the Queen had once or twice invited him to it. But for better resolution of this doubt (I further told his Majestie with this oppor∣tunity) I had a little before his said Audience asked the Ambassador (as with the pretence of my own satis∣faction, who had not (I said to him) sufficiently obser∣ved him in that point) whether he had at his fist Au∣dience covered, or whether he would now at his leave-taking cover in Presence of her Majesty? His Answer
was, No, I will not now cover, though I did at first, be∣cause (said he) I shall now appeare before her Majesty as comming of my own Errand, only to take my leave, having no particular Order for it from the Prince my Master; but when I came first to her Majesties presence, I speak to her my Masters words, by my Masters com∣mand, and so thought fit upon her Majesties Invitation to cover, which now I will not do, though I should be invited to it, as having nothing to say to her from any but my self, and this only tending to the leave I am to take of her Majesty. Having reported this unto the King, and finding him to approve of the Ambassadors reasons, as civill; I pro∣ceeded further to intimate to his Majesty, That I had observed both at this Ambassadors first and last Audi∣ence, that his Majesty was pleased to stand bare-headed all that time, as if he would not have him to cover in his Presence, either from his Example or Invitation; the King answered, that I had well observed, and under∣stood it, and that he had purposely kept off his own hat, least the other might have put on his, which for some considerations he was not yet satisfied to be convenient &c. During the time of this Ambassadors stay here, there passed no visite, or other correspondence between him and the Venetian, both of them pretending to pre∣cedence, and not appearing upon the title to be mutual∣ly given of Excellenza, or because the latter stood upon it, that he was not visite first, though the other came last, being a Representant of a State that pretended to a parity with crowned Heads. The fourth of December, he took Barge at the Savoy Staires without any conduct (though offered) perhaps irregularly being no Kings Ambassador) and went that night to Gravesend for his further Journey. The night before his departure, (af∣ter many complementall Excuses of the length of his Journey, and shortness of his provisions for it) he presen∣ted me with a Purse, and in it thirty peeces. He gave to the master of the Jewell-House two dayes before a chain of fifteene pound value, which was received but coldly, as a gratuity beneath expectation, and not pro∣portioned to his quality.
There being a Maske in practice of the Queen in person, with other great Ladies for the end of Christ∣mas, I three or foure dayes before Twelftide, asked my Lord Chamberlain what course would be taken with the Ambassadors here resident, Contareni for Venice, and Joachimi for the States? he answered, that the King had already signified his pleasure, that if they would come, they should be wellcome, and have places apart provided for them, but that his Majesty was re∣solved never more to admit any Ambassadors resident to sit next his person under the State, no more then to eate with him in publick; I replyed, that I thought this change in his Majesty from his Fathers manner; would draw some Puntillious exception, or Cavill from the Venetian, unlesse it were seasonably and heedfully car∣ried, which to prevent, it would not be (I thought) amiss for his Lordship to send to the Master of the Ceremonies for use of his experience, which referred to me, I wrote to him about it, that morning he came to Court, and thence after conference with my Lord went to both those Ambassadors, the Venetian, and the States. This made no question of his comming nor pla∣cing, other then as the King should command (onely (he said) that if the Venetian should refuse to come, he should perhaps doubt, whether it would be fit for him to be there alone, as (out of a kind of Singularity) con∣demning the others absence by his Presence. The Venetian desired time for consideration, and re∣solution, it being a Novelty, and a lessening to him (he said) of the honour affoarded to his predecessour; but in the meane time he prevayled so by his reasons (how heavily it might follow him in the Judgement, and cen∣sure of his Republick, when he should be the first of his Predecessours that ever suffered by such an exclusion, and had as yet since his imployent here never received pub∣lick honour from his Majesty &c.) as that the King was pleased to let him know by my Lord Chamberlain (per∣sonally repairing to him under pretence of returning his visit) that he should for this once have the respects of being seated next his Majesty in manner as his Prede∣cessours
had been before him, and with him the States Ambassador, whom also my Lord Chamberlain had then visited with the same signification, but that neither he, nor any other Ambassador were ever to expect the like hereafter, and that to confirm, and intimate the Kings resolution in this point, he (as also the other) should do well to give account of it to his State (least other of their Ministers might hereafter pretend, or think to obtain the like honour with importunity) and further to take notice, that if the King should make another Maske at Candlemas, he must be content with a place to be assigned him apart (and not next the chair of State) if he would be present at it) with which plaine intima∣tion he seemed to hold himselfe satisfied, and the Mone∣day seaven night after following after Twelfday, he and the States Ambassador were assigned their Rendez-vous at the great Gate of the Court at six in the Evening, and with them the States Ambassadors Wife, and Daughters with limitation of as few followers as might be, and those of the better sort. The place for their repose was the Councell-chamber, whence they were conduct∣ed (first the Ladies to a Box reserved for them at the upper end of the Banquetting-house on the Kings right hand) and next their followers to a Scaffold over, and behind his Majesty, then the Ambassadors themselves to the Presence of the King in the Privy-Galleries, and after with his Majesty to the Maske; the Venetian was seated on the right hand, the States Ambassador on the left of his Majesty. I understood after that the States Ambassadors Lady, and her Daughters took exceptions against their being thrust up in a corner without re∣spects. To which I answered, that I had brought the Ambassatrice a liberty of election from my Lord Cham∣berlain whether she would be pleased to sit amongst the great Ladies or apart, and she had chosen to sit a∣part with her own company, because (she said) she wan∣ted Language, so the fault was hers, not mine, if she were unsatisfied. Monsieur Rosdorfe, after he had resided here foure
yeares for the King of Bohemia, being called home, was to receive his present, which was endeavoured by his freinds, that it should have equalled (if not that Ambassador Baron Donnows of 400 l. in Plate) at least that of Monsieur Paule (that had been here in the same condition as Rosdorfe without Title of Ambassador, and receiving at his parting a Chaine of 300 l. and 50 l besides as an ayudu de costa) But Rosdorfe having not been well relished by some, particularly by the Duke of Buckingham for his harsh plainnesse, had given to him a Chaine worth onely 220 l. as of equall valew (upon comparison and instance made) with that of the resi∣dent of the King of Spaine Monsieur Bruneau, and of Monsieur Van Mall Agent of the Arch-dukes. While I was at Canterbury for some domestique oc∣casions of my own, Her Catz. I received a Letter the eighth of March signifying the arrivall of a deputy from the States, and of the dangerous sicknesse of Sir Lewes Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies, of whose Office I was the Reversioner. These two accounts, and their con∣sequence brought me the next day to London. Two dayes after I received from my Lord Chamberlain this direction, that I should intimate to the States Ambas∣sador and to the deputy newly arrived, that whereas they had desired an accesse to the Duke of Buckingham, for an enterance to their businesse in hand, and that my Lord Duke judged it not so proper to give them one, be∣fore their Audience of his Majesty, they should be plea∣sed to thinke, and resolve of a time for the Latter, which if they would demand for that day, or the next, he doubted not, but they should have it, the rather be∣cause his Majesty was to returne (from whence he came but the day before) to Theobalds, and would not be a∣gaine at London till Thursday following. That in the meane time their first Audience being past, they might Negotiate with the Commissioners appointed for the further prosecution of their businesse. This message re∣ceived, I interposed what I thought might be expected by them, or be thought fit for the stile of their reception
viz. whether to be brought to the Kings Presence by a Nobleman, and to have the use of his Majesties coach &c. as had been allowed to other of their Country qua∣lified Ambassador. To this it was answered by my Lord Carelton (Vice-chamberlain) that he then knew the Minister new come to be qualified no otherwise then for a deputy, though a joynct Commissioner with the other, and that he could not, nor (he thought) would expect other Treatment then under that Title; with this intimation I repaired to them, and after delivery of my message (with a touch to he last purpose) I had for answer their desire of an Audience the next day, which they had of his Majesty in the great Gallery of Somerset House the twelth of March by ten in the morning (the Queen being then in her House retyred, or not yet risen.) After Dinner my Lord Duke came to their House (the Lord wimbletons) to visit them, while I that day dined with them, I had the newes brought me of the Death of Sir Lewes Lewk∣ner, by which in right of his Majesties grant of Rever∣sion by his Letters Patents, I became sole Master of the Ceremonies. The thirteenth of March; the Ambassador of the States had (without his Associate the Deputy) a pri∣vate Audience of his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber) whether I conducted him by the way of the Parke,, and the Privy-Galleries, this being the first time of the States resident Ambassadours accesse to his Ma∣jestie by that way, they having been allwayes till then accustomed to have their Audiences, and accesses given them by the back-stayres without introduction or at∣tendance of the Master or assistant Master of the Cere∣monies, which was at that time altered with the Kings better service, and more convenience for avoydance of Surprises, and also to that Ambassadors great ho∣nour (not unaffected by him in that particular) when his silent, and private accesses given him before by the back-stayres, and other obscurer passages might (and did seeme to some) an undervaluing of his publique
quality, and in this, of the State he represented (though others would have had it understood for a particular re∣spect of his Majesty given to him as a Domestique, which yet while his Audiences were never granted, nor accesse given him, but when at his request it was mo∣ved for by a Groome of the Bedd-chamber, or by one of the two principall Secretaries, it would hardly be so in∣terpreted, and so he himselfe expressed to me to con∣ceive of it, when upon my introducing him by that new way of the Privy Gallery, he fell to discourse with me about it. 1627. The Ambassador of Denmark, Paule Rosenkrantz ha∣ving negotiated with the King of France by the space of five Moneths or more, returned for England and Landed at Dover in a Holland man of War, when he had alrea∣dy written, and obtained a grant of for one of the Kings Ships to transport him (March the nine and twenti∣eth 1627) the next day he came to London, before his Lodging was fitted, or order given for it. To which pur∣pose for excuse, I compleyed with him from the Lord Chamberlain, that he would be pleased to have pati∣ence for his ill accommodation, till the Officers of the Ward-robe might set up his Bedd, and directions be gi∣ven for his Service and attendance as before; this per∣formed, the next day he began again upon the Kings diet and charge, having of his Train by list two and twenty persons. Sunday, the first of Aprill, he had Audience assigned him both from the King, and Queen. To the first I conducted him (without company of a Lord, or other then his own followers) this being not publick (though the first Audience after his return) from the Court gate by the Staire that ascends to the Sone-table chamber (the way accustomed through the Park and Tiltyard Gallery being restrained by the King, pleasure for his more privacy there) and reposing himselfe in the next Roome to that Chamber, was called forth to his Ma∣jesty in his Withdrawing-chamber, and had there his Audience. After passing through the Councell-chamber over the Terras by the lower end of the Guard-chamber
to the Chappell Closet on the Kings side, he was met at the Presence doore by Sir George Goring (the Queens Vice-chamberlain) and brought to her Presence in her Privy-chamber. He was censured of too much forward∣nesse (instantly after he had performed his respects) to cover, which though he might pretend to have done in right of the King his Master, as his representant, yet to∣wards a Lady and a Queen to have forborne, till he had been by her twice, or thrice invited to it (or rather, not to have covered at all since he would forfeit no place nor pretention by it) had been no derogation. Before he came to the Presence of the King, I asked him if he desired his Gentlemen should kiss his Majest∣ies hands? he answered, in no sort, because (quoth he) I would not have notice taken of my new train, as if I were a new come Ambassadour; and for their kis∣sing of the Kings hand, they may do it at my departure. This passed for a reason against the honour they might have had (but was not moved for) of kissing the hand of the King, remitting it to some other opportunity, which was offered the Sunday following (Aprill the eighth) when the Ambassador having a day before (upon signi∣fication of his Masters pleasure for his returne) deman∣ded Audience for his leave taking of both their Majest∣ies, he was fetched from his Lodging in Lumbard-street by the Earle of Barkshire (in correspondence of the Earle of Northampton, that had accompanied him to his first Audience at Wansted) with the company of halfe a dozen Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber &c. The Sunday seavennight after this his last Audience, my Lord Chamberlain, having delivered to my hands a Jewell (being a Picture case set with faire Diamonds and the Kings Picture in it) to about 800 l. valew (but to the Kings cost of 1200 l. it being sould to his Majesty for this use at that rate) which his Lordship told me be∣fore he had destined to my carriage in observation of the course before established, concerning the right pre∣tended to by the Master of the Ceremonies for carri∣age of Jewells, as the Master of the Jewell house doth of Plate to be bestowed on Ambassadors. I carried it, and presented it with this complement.
MOnsieur, j'ay l'honneur que par ma main le Roy vous fait present de son purtrait, le quel il vous prie poster pur amour de luy en test∣moignagede bons & agreables services, & devoirs que vous luy auez rendus pour le Roy vostre Maistre durant vostre Ambassade icy en Angle∣terre. My LORD, I have the honour that the King by my hand doth present you with his purtrait, which he prayes you to we are for his Love, in Testimony of the good and ac∣ceptable services, and duties which you have rendred him in behalfe of the King your Master during your Em∣bassie here in England. Three or foure dayes after he had taken leave, he in∣treated my opinion and Assistance for punishment of one Phillip Weisman a Germane, whose cheife Trade of life, having been to undertake the conduct and defray∣ing of Gentlemen of his Country at a price agreed on in their Travailing to, and in this, and other Kingdomes (as he had formerly done of Phillip the yong Landsgrave of Hesse, and a Duke of Holstein here) he made offer of of his service, and was entertained for the defraying of this Ambassador while he remained at Paris (after the time of that Kings defraying him till his first Audi∣ence was past) at the rate of five hundred and fifty Crownes a Moneth for Dyet, and Lodging of twelve Masters, and twelve Servants. This Bargaine made (but as the fellow pretended much to his losse in regard of the dayly increaseing number of guests at the Am∣bassadors Table) he a while held himselfe silent both at the Ambassadors departure from Paris, and on the way, (where he undertook the whole companies defraying at twenty five Crownes a man till they should come to London) but within two dayes after their arrivall here, he began to make his demands in so unreasonable
a measure, and with such touch to his honour, as he made complaint of him by me to my Lord Chamber∣lain, who acquainting the King with it, his Maiesty was pleased, that the Lord President of the Councell, the Lord Chamberlain, and Vice-chamberlain should heare, and determine the businesse. Whereupon the said Philip appearing before them (together with two or three Gentlemen of the Ambassadors and my selfe) the Lords passed on him their sentence, which (accord∣ing to the Ambassadors request sent by me to the Lords, and as it was the next day repeated by the Lord Presi∣dent, and referred to the Ambassadors owne penning in French) was as followeth. MOunsieur Henry Comte de Manchester, President de Conseil prive du Roy de la Grand Brittaigne, Phillipe Comte, de Montgo∣mery Grand Chamberlan Conscillers du Conseil prive, & d'estat de la dicte Majeste (Commis & Depute par sa dicte Majeste pour entendre la potestation que Sieur Rosenkrantz Ambassador extraordinaire pour la Majeste dt Densmark au∣roit fait a l'encontre de Phillippe Weysman pour quelques injures, & mesdisances que qu' il auro∣it proferree, & escrites contre sa personne au pre∣judice, de reputation du Roy son Maistre, & de sa bonne renomme 'e, en particulier) ayants par commandement expres de sa Maieste adiourne & examinè le dit Phillippe Wiseman nsemble entenduenmesme temps par confrontation quelques uns des domestiques du dit sieur Ambassadour & aultres ensemblé lu & examiné sa lettre and dit sieur Ambassadour. Avons trouvé que le dit Phillippe sans raison, & hors de propos (apres avoir receu beaucoup plus d'argent qu' on ne luy
autoii accordé selon sa propre confession) auroit malicieusement & effrontement mis en avant tel∣les paroles & eserits sans avoir esgard a la digni∣té de la parsonne que le dit Ambassador represente ny a sa qualitè particuliere & avons ordonne qu'il soit mis en sure garde jusques a ce qu'il don∣nera satisfaction, au dit Ambassador si ce n'est qu'il troue bon de le fayre mener, au Roy son Maistre pour l'estre chastié selon qu'il a merité. En foy de quoy nous signons la presente le 14. of April 1627. Manchester. Montgomery. Carleton. My LORD, HEnry Earle of Manchester, President of the privy Councell of his Majesty of Great Britain, Philip Earle of Mongomery, great Chamberlaine, and of the Councell of State to his said Majesty, being Commis∣sioners and Deputies for his said Majesty to heare the Protestation which the Lord Rosenbranck Ambassa∣dor Extraordinary to his Majesty of Denmarke shall make against Phillip Wiseman for certaine injuries and calumnies, which he should speak and write against his person, in prejudice of the honour of the King his Ma∣ster, and of his own particular reputation, having by express commandment from his Majestie adjour∣ned, and examined the foresaid Philip Wiseman, and understood the same time by confrontation of some of the Domestiques of the said Lord Ambassador and o∣thers, as also examined his Letter to the said Lord Am∣bassador:
We finde that the said Philip without any reason or cause, having received more monies then were agreed upon according to his own confession, hath maliciously, and impudently blazed abroad such words and writings without having regard to the honour of the person whom he presents, or to his own particular qua∣lity: therefore we have inordered that he be put in safe Custody untill he give satisfaction to the foresaid Am∣bassador, if he thinks it not fit to bring him before the King his Master, to be punished according to his deme∣rit. In faith whereof we signe this present Instrument this 14. of Aprill. 1627. Manchester. Montgomery. Carleton. The fellow persisting stubborne and most averse from submission, was (after four or five dayes restraint in the house of a Messenger) delivered by Warrant of the Lord President of the Councell, and the Lord Chamberlaine from the Messengers hands, to the Am∣bassadors, who causing him to be imprisoned in the Counter by vertue of the said Warrant, which gave him power to dispose of him, he was upon the point of being sent for Hambourgh; but his stomach lessening, and his submission made with acknowledgement of his fault, both by word and writing, he was at last set at liberty. Five or sixe dayes before Saint Georges Feast was to be kept at White-Hall, the Ordinary Ambassador of Ve∣nice Contareni desired my Confetence (intimated by his Secretary sent to me) to the purpose of his best course for his sight of that Solemnity. I hereupon repairing to him, told him; That the manner had ever been (except in one or two Exceptions, when the King was pleased to
send his Invitation) for Ambassadors to convey to his Majesties knowledge by the Lord Chamberlaine their desires to have the honour of his right, and the solemni∣tie that day; whereupon he desired me to performe that part from him, which I did, had his Majesties al∣lowance to it, and let the Ambassador know as much, who expecting (answerable to my promise, That I should a day or two before the Feast, assigne him the time and way of his comming to Court) I in the interim by my Officer sounded the disposition of the States Am∣bassador and Deputy for their sight of it also (which I did the more covertly, because the Venetian seemed to affect his being alone at the Feast, and that the other (unless they should of themselves request it) might be absent (for what cause I could not conceive, unless for his own more conspicuous note) when finding them also desirous to see the solemnity, I rendred the account hereof to his Majesty, and after to the Venetian, that he might not be ignorant of his company, which he readi∣ly allowed of; but when my Officer had cast out a word (as I had given him in charge tentandi gratia upon some doubt I had of a Puntillio) that the Denmarke Ambassador (finding the windes blow so stiffely against his departure) would be there also, he started at it, and whereas before he had given his full resolution, that he would not faile to be at the Court gate about nine of the clock before noone (as I had assigned him) he ad∣ded, that he could not tell in what disposition of health he might be that day, so if he came not at the houre appointed, I should no longer expect him. From this change of his resolution to an uncertainty, I pre∣sumed he would faile, and so found it, when on the day, and somewhat before the houre he sent his Secretary to me with a Complement to be delivered by my Lord Chamberlaine to his Majesty, that the night before ha∣ving had a Fit of an Ague, and doubting the effect of the cold Aire so soon upon it, he should not dare to venture so soone abroad to have the honour of his Majesties sight at that great Feast, but he hoped, that the next year he should have that happiness &c.
From what reason this Puntillio grew was unknown, I was told after by one of the Venetians Followers, That he was absent a affe∣cting Pre∣cedence of the King of Den∣marks. In Ambassador regard this gives it to the Ambas∣sador of the Ele∣ctors, and the Ʋene∣tian doth not. but guessed at to be a pretence of precedence, that the State of Venice might perhaps have as Kings of Cypres and Candy (though by the Turks dispossessed of the for∣mer) and under that title, to pretend precedence of the King of Denmarke as an Elective King, wheeas they held themselves Kings of Cypress by inheritance; hut what reason the Ambassador of Venice, (Landi) had at the Prince his first exercise of his Armes at Tylt (Anno 1619.) to yeeld the hand to the King of Bohe∣mias Ambassador, the Baron of Donnow. The Venetian Ambassador was of opinion (when I I first discoursed with him about the accustomed manner of the Ambassadors seeing the Feast, and presenting themselves to the King at his Dinner) that he was to performe it alone without company of the States Am∣bassadors, and of the same mind was the Ambassador of Denmarke for himselfe, and this course approved of by my Lord Chamberlaine; but when during the Kings Dinner they attended the instant for discharge of that Complement in the Conncell Chamber, and that the States Ambassador Joachimi had described them the manner of his march, together with the French Ambas∣sador at a Feast two or three years before, when he was imployed a Commissioner hither: The Ambassador of Denmarke refused not to assist, and make one worke of it, which they did, viz. The Ambassador of Denmarke, Joachimi, and Mousieur Cattz, with my conduct in the time of second course (as the King himselfe had ordered it upon my Proposition,) first the first, and next the o∣ther two complying in their order at the Kings left hand, as they altogether entred that way, and at that side of the Table, and after passing down along before the Knights of the Order (with their respects bestowed personally on each Knight, as they deemed fitting) and by the way they entred, returning. I had received them at their repaire to Court one after the other (as I had first designed with the Venetian Ambassador) at the Court gate, whether also (and no further) I went to re∣ceive him of Donmarke, because he came upon his own
invitation, and not the Kings, and had intended not to come, had not the cross windes taken away his liberty of departure. From the Gate I brought them to the Kings Chappell for sight of the Ceremony there, having also appointed the Queens Closet in the Chappell for the States Ambassador, in case the Venetian had come; but in his absence I made use of it for the others fol∣lowers. Thence at the beginning of the Provision, I conducted them cross the lower end of the Guard Chamber to the Terras) where in the first corner next the door on the right hand, I had caused a Scaffold to be raised, and carpet to be spred on the wall before, and on the rayles behinde them) where they might have sight of his Majesty, and the Knights in their procession. That finished, we returned to the Chappell, and the Service ended, I bestowed them for their repose in the Councell Chamber, till the time should serve for the sight of his Majestie at the Feast (ut supra.) The Ambassador of Denmarke preparing dayly for his departure, retarded onely by the want of 10000 l. sterling to be paid him for his Master (to whom his Ma∣jesty was debter of a far greater somm) some about him toucht upon the custome here of the Kings presenting his Secretary with a Chaine of Gold, which though I pretended, and alleadged (from example, and for rea∣sons brought against the Transilvanian Ambassador) might be denyed him, I made way for it notwithstand∣ing by my Lord Chamberlains favour, (which after his Lordships question whether I could produce a president for it, and my answer, that if there were none, it would not be amiss (I said in my opinion) that one might be dispenced with for a Secretary of a Representant of a King so neere in blood to his Majesty, and to whom he stood so much ingaged for supplies of money &c.) it was assented to, and a chaine of an 100. markes valew pre∣sented to one Mr Calendrine a Gentleman that having followed, and served him all the time of his abode here, and now at his return in place of his Secretary (then absent) was thought by the Ambassador fittest of any about him to be under that Title so rewarded.
All occasion of longer stay being removed, and the time of the Ambassadors departure being designed (as by his letter he let me know) for the third of May; I warned the Kings coach to be ready to carry him to Tower-wharffe and his Majesties Barge with two other (for his baggage and Servants) to Gravesend, so that day I accompanied him thither, took leave there of him and the next day returned to London. Towards the time of his departure he shewed himselfe carefull in ac∣knowledging the paines taken by the Kings Servants & others for his service and having by his own servants inquiry learned of me how other Ambassadors imployed hither had inlarged, or streightned themselves to that purpose, he thus proportioned his gratuities, viz. To my selfe he sent by one of his Gentlemen in a Purse 80 l. sterling; to the Marshall of the Ceremonies, Walter Brisco 10 l. To the Gentleman Usher, that all the time of his stay here gave his attendance, he gave 20 l. To the two Quarter waiters each of them 12 l. To the two Groomes of the Chamber, each 7 l. To the Yeoman Usher, Yeoman hanger, Yeoman of the Ward-robes Servants, and the Groome Porters Servants, amongst them 14 l. To the Kings Coachman that attended him all the time of his first being here 6 l. To two of the Kings Coachmen that attended him after his returne between them 6 l. To the Master of the Kings Barge 2 l. To the eight Rowers of that Barge amongst them 1 l. 4 s. To other two Masters of two hired Barges 11 s. To six men of both those Barges 1 l. 4 s. To the Por∣ters of the Court Gate 3 l. To the two Keepers of the Privy Lodgings 1 l. To two Porters of Saint James Parke 1 l. To six Coachmen of six Coaches hyred at the Kings charge 3 l. To my footman 1 l, To the Ser∣vants of the House where he was Lodged, and fed at the Kings charge amongst them 10 l. To my Lord Trea∣surers Secretary who had hastned his dispatch of 10000 l. of money paid and due, (besides a far great∣er somm) a pair of silver pots which cost 21 l. 6 s. To the Master of the House where he had Lodged, a Ba∣son and Ewer, that cost 18 l. Besides other gifts, a∣mounting in the Totall to 260 l. Sterling.
On Whitson Tuesday, Beare-baiting being appoin∣ted for the Kings pastime at White-Hall, I the day be∣fore gave notice of it to the Venetian Ambassador (A∣lonso Contareni) Resident, and the next morning had his Servant sent to me to signifie his desire to be present at it; this imparted to my Lord Chamberlain, and by him to his Majesty he was ordained his standing in the Per∣gola of the Banquetting House on the left hand of that appointed for his Majesty and the Queen with Carpets to leane, and tread on, and a stoole (no chaire) to fit on. The sport ended, the Ambassador that had entered be∣fore the King, and remained there after him, was onely saluted by their Majesties in their passage without fur∣ther complement at entering and parting. Two dayes before the Departure of the Duke of Sou∣bize (with my Lord of Buckingham towards Portsmouth for the expedition then in hand to Retz) I was com∣manded to accompany him thither to the seventh of June in company of Monsieur Blancan a brave valiant Gentleman, He was re∣fuged hi∣ther from France. and other his followers, (himselfe riding in Coach with his Majesty) and had his Lodgings taken up by Sir John Jepson, and the Majors authority (by the former in Houses of Garrison Souldiers, by the latter in those of the Townes-men) Two nights after his rest there a gang of druncken Marriners fell fowle in the streets with some of the meaner sort of French, but after some two or three heads broaken, and a sleight wound or two given, all was pacified. After which for (prevention of further mischeif) complaint was made by one to the Earle of Denbeigh then aboard as Rere-Admirall, the Duke (the Admirall) and the Earle of Lindsey Vice-Admirall, being then absent) who sending to all the Fleets for restraint of their Marriners being on shoare at undue hours, we heard no more of their insolency, especially when within foure dayes after the Dukes re∣turning from London, a Guard of a dozen Souldiers of the Garrison were commanded to give their dayly at∣tendance before the Duke of Soubizes Lodging. The thirteenth of June going with him to his Majesty at
Southwile (where the Court then lay foure or five miles from Portsmouth) and asking the Lord Stewards (Earle of Pembroks) opinion, in absence of the Lord Chamber∣lain his Brother) what course was to be taken for satis∣faction of the Duke de Soubize his host, and other of the Town for his followers Lodgings, his Lordship gave me for answer, that in regard his Lodgings had been defrayed by the King at London, it was fit the like should be observed till his departure, and that I should make a bill of my disbursements for them, leaving his Dyet, wood, and coale, and table linnen to his own provision, and discharge as they had been at Lon∣don. The fourteenth of June I had word of two Commi∣ssioners (styled by them who brought newes of them Ambassadors) arrived in the road of the Cowes from Saly in Barbary, for my better information whereof I went the day following to Court, and had order for my repaire to them, but not as with an honour to them of being sent for their reception before or at their landing, but to discover what I could of the scope of their Nego∣tiation, and to let them know his Majesty had taken no∣tice of their arrivall, and proceeding to London, they should there at his returne, have a fitting time appoin∣ted for their Audience; but when I came to the Cowes they were parted thence to Southampton, whether fol∣lowing them, I there performed my charge (finding the substance of their Negotiation to be a suit for his Ma∣jesties protection and confederation with them against the Spaniard, who had expelled them Spaine) and the next day returned to Portsmouth. About ten dayes before the King went to Portsmouth, there came to London from France a Count of Emden (second Brother to the cheife of that title, and Family) after whom his Majesty commanding my inquiry, whe∣ther he were of the Imperiall party, I found him not such, and to be come hither onely for sight of England, and of his Majesty, pretending (as I was told) that he
desired to live here unnoted till he might receive his Horses and Apparrel left in France for his better splen∣dor at Court; but the King going his journey before those came, he (while I was at Portsmouth) came thither, and not addressing himselfe to me for his Introduction to the King, took an uncertain way by another Gentle∣man, who leaving him alone (when he came to Court walking in a place unbesitting for him) I offered him my service, gave his Majesty notice of him, and had or∣der for his accesse. After which he immediatly with∣out further Ceremony took his leave, and dining at the Lord Stewards, and Lord Chamberlains Table (joyned) in company of the Duke, and Monsieur de Soubize, he after returned to Portsmouth with a Warrant that I at his request obtained for him of the Duke, for transport of six Geldings, and two stone Horses, for which Warrant he supposing (because I in absence of the Dukes Secretary drew it) that it had been a part of my Office, in which (till then) I had not served him) presented me by one of his Gentlemen with five peeces, which I excusing to receive, my Servant after accepted of as for his own, and to that end in termes of such expression given him. An houre before his imbarking, his Steward presen∣ted me from him (as too small an acknowledgment (he said) for my great paines) with twenty peeces. I gave the host of his House for his own Bed, and Cham∣ber (as paid) by the King (for which and for the rest I was after to pass my account) twenty shillings and for foure or five Beds more in his House, the like, not hin∣dering by this the gratification whatsoever that Mon∣sieur de Soubize should think fit to bestow on him. The proportion I held of payment for Beds for his followers Billetted in the Towne, was after two shillings the week a standing Bed, and fifteen pence a Trundle-bed increasing this somm to some, as their good, and kind treatment of strangers deserved it. The seven and twentieth of June, the two Commi∣ssioners from Saley had their first Audience of his Ma∣jesty
at White-hall upon a removing day, which served me for excuse of the small appearance then at Court, and of their not seeing the King under the State in the Presence-chamber at their first access, though being but Representants of a newly formed Republick, and no Christians, they had no more reason to expect, then to have that honour to be done them. I conducted them from their Lodging in Fleet-street to the Common Stayres at White-Hall in one of the Kings Barges, and thence to their Audience in the Privy Gallery, whence his Majesty for further knowledge, and debatement of their businesse, remitted them to his Councell. July the eigh, The Ambassador Resident for the States of the United Provinces, and their Deputies for the East-Indian busnesse, and for accommodation of dif∣ferences grown lately at Sea, parting from London to Lodge at Colebrook, were early at Windsore, dined with my Lord Conway principall Secretary, had their Audience in the Afternoon in the Withdrawing-cham∣ber, went that night to Kingston, and the next day to London. The tenth of July the Deputy being upon his depar∣ture, I inquired of the Ambassador what might be the disposition of the said Deputy touching his Present from his Majestie, whether to receive it in Plate, or in a gold chaine, and found him indifferent, yet intimating with∣all, that if his Majestie would be pleased to Knight him, it would make the Present (whatsoever) more accepta∣ble. This made knowne by me to my Lord Chamber∣laine, and by his Lordship to the King, he was that af∣ternoon dignified. Sir Jame Catz, and (after he and seven or eigh more attended the dispatch of some re∣maining part of his businesse) he departed for Graves∣end, and thence for Holland July the twentieth having the day before presented me with five and twenty pee∣ces, but leaving the present ordained him for his Ma∣jesty of 500. Ounces of gilt plate (allready prepared but reserved in the Goldsmiths hand, & pour cause) to be sent after him, as it was (being cousened for him by
the under Officers of the Jewell House to Monsieur Joachimi) two months after, the Bringer receiving from him the gratuity of six peeces. The Duke of Buckingham, being ready for his Ex∣pedition to Retz, and sollicited by his Servant Master Fotherley for his Signature to the Warrants, (annually bestowed on Ordinary Ambassadors and Agents) for Venison, his Majesty appointed the Earle of Dorset for Justice in Eyre during the Dukes absence, so the War∣rants being by him assigned, and I sending for them to Master Fotherley, received from him (not a refusall) a question, Whether it were not a part of his charge, and a due for him to deliver them to the Ambassadors; But this question soon resolved (from presidents of Sir Lewes Lewkner) I had them and delivered them, viz. To the Ambassador of Venice three (whereof one he bestowed on me, as a right (he said) of my charge,) to the Am∣bassador of the States three, (whereof one was returned to me; to the King of Denmarks Agent two, whereof one came to me, and to the King of Bohemias Agent two. The sixth of August, while I was retyred to my Coun∣try home at Twittenham, I had notice given me, that the Marquesse Pompeio Strozzi, Ambassador Extraordi∣nary from the Duke of Mantova, was arrived at London with ten of his company, whereof the Count di son Pau∣lo Nicolo Delfino a Gentleman of Venice, and Bartholo∣meo Amaltheo his Steward, were received as men of quality. This Ambassador having in his way negotiated with the French King, came hither for condolement of the Duke his Master (who dyed above five moneths before) and for congratulation of the other Duke (his Brothers succession to that Dukedome.) After I had (of my selfe with respect to his quality visited him) and drawn from him by discourse something of his ends &c. I re∣paired to my Lord Chamberlaine, then at his House at Endfield) and from him (as I had directions) to his Ma∣jestie then at Winsore, having before dispatched this my Officer with Letters to my Lord Chamberlaine.
But these comming in his Lordships absence, were ope∣ned, and presented by his Secretary to the Earle of Holland, and by him to the King, who in answer of their contents passed his resolution to be signified by me to my Lord Chamberlaine, That the Ambassador should have his publique Audience at Winsore on Sunday fol∣lowing, but not to have his Diet defrayed (no more then any other Ambassador should from thence for∣wards) nor have any coaches provided for them at his Majesties charge, Except at times of publique Audi∣ences. I, after this speaking with his Majestie (for my bet∣ter warrant concerning this new Order, had a confir∣mation of his pleasure to that purpose, and propounding only how fit, and acceptable it might be for the said Ambassador if (in correspondence of the treatment, which I understood he had received in France) he might have a dinner provided for him in Court the day of his first Audience) it was assented to, and his Maje∣sties pleasure for it, intimated by me to the Lord Steward of the Houshold (the Earle of Pembroke.) Af∣ter returning to London, I let this Ambassador know his Majesties resolution taken for no more defraying of Ambassadors either diet or coaches; whereat he taking no exceptions, provided himselfe of two Coaches with six Horses each, with which and with the Kings (sent thither from Windsore for carriage of his own person) he went the eleaventh of August to Bed to Staines, and receiving there the next morning his Majesties well∣come by the Earle of Cleaveland, was by his Lordship (with the attendance of foure or five Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber in the Kings, and the Lord Conways coach) conducted to Windsore, and found there prepa∣red, and fairly hanged three Lodgings of the Earle of Worcesters, and a Table ready covered for his dinner (answerable to what I had propounded to his Majesty and the Lord Steward for avoidance of a greater charge from continuall defraying) and for the Ambassadors more easie digestion of the new order, established to that frugall purpose. He had at Dinner the Service of
the Kings Officers, and Guard, and the company (be∣sides of the Earle of Cleaveland) of the Lord de la Ware and of seaven or eight Gentlemen, the Kings Ser∣vants. I immediatly after dinner repairing to the King for knowledge of his pleasure for the instant of his Audi∣ence, was by his Majesty called apart, and asked whe∣ther he must not invite him to cover? (I excusing my my definite resolution) answered that I had by discourse already drawn from him, that at his Audience of the French King (then sick in Bed) he had been called by him to his Bed-side, and made to sit downe, and cover. But (replyed the King) I know that the King of Spain doth not allow the Duke of Mantova's Ambassador to be covered in his presence. Sir, quoth I, That may be an effect of the supercilious and affected greatnesse of that King beyond others, in conformity whereof I am told by this Ambassador, that while he was at Paris, neither of the two Spanish Ministers (Ordinary nor Extraordinary) vouchsafed him a visite, and that he in returne thereof, never looked after them. Well, re∣plyed his Majesty, then I know what to doe, bring him to me; with that his Majesty entring the Presence Chamber, stayed there under the State the Ambassa∣dors comming, and the discharge of his complement, which was briefe, onely expressing the respects of his Master in the account he had command to give his Ma∣jesty of his Assumption to his Principality by the death of his Brother: How much the Duke his Master ho∣nored the King, what honour he himselfe had by that imployment &c. The King before he spake, having made him an invitation (which he took) to cover. This fin∣ished, he returned to his Chamber, the Earle of Cleave∣land reconducting him thither, but refusing to pass fur∣ther with him in the Kings coach on any part of the way, he was to goe, as not suiting (his Lordship said) with his quality, of which opinion was my Lord Cham∣berlain producing for example Monsieur de Bassampierre who had the use (he said) of the Kings coach to his first Audience from London to Hampton Court, but that
dismissed there, he returned in his own coach to Lon∣don, and had not the Earles company back that brought him thither. The like both for Lord, and coach was here observed, and the Ambassador left to proceed on his way (with his own coaches and company) towards the Queen then remaining at Wellingbourn to drink those waters. We went that night to Ammersham, there in conference, I acquainted him with something touching the Kings question to me of his covering, which question (he said) he hoped his Majesty did not move as making doubt of his Masters right in those points of respect, but to see how I could resolve him, because (said he) it is well known to all, that he goeth not lesse in respects given him by all Kings, and Princes, then the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy, whose Ambassadors cover (and so doth (said he) the Duke his Masters Ambassadors) in Presence of the Pope, the Emperour, and the King of France, of all whose Ministers when they are imployed to him, he taketh the hand in his own House, and elsewhere, he onely giving them visits at their Lodgings, sed in hoc Quaere. From Ammersham, we went through Alesbury to Stony-Stratford, to dinner, and to Bed to Northamp∣ton. Thence I instantly dispatcht my Officer with Let∣ters to the Queens Vice-Chamberlain Sir Geoge Goring and to the Earle of Carliel to procure an Audience the next day. To which the Earle returned answer by Let∣ter (the Vice-Chamberlain being absent) and assured me of the Queens especiall content for the Ambassadors arrivall there, and that she would give him an Audience and a dinner the next day at Wellingbourn seven miles from Northampton, from which he was fetched by the Lord Percy, and foure of her Majesties Gentlemen of the best quality in two of her Coaches and one Lords, was entertained at dinner by the Earle of Carliel in his Lodgings (but at the Queens charge) without the ac∣customed Court confusion (unavoidable where the Kings Servants, especially those of the Guard give their at∣tendance) and waited on onely by the Kings Servants, and accompanied by the Countesse of Oxford, and three
of the Queenes Maides of honour. After dinner he was conducted by the Lord Percy (in other two of the Queens Coaches for the more honour by that Variety) to the place, where her Majesties Tent was planted neere the Wells, and was there at the Tent doore met, and introduced by the Earle of Carliel to her Majestyes Presence (her musickke with voices disposed in an inner Roome of intent of entertaining him at his enterance) had there a most gratious Audience, delivered his Let∣ters, and complement in words little different from those he had used to the King; and (having taken his leave, but after making a short returne with excuse of his desire to hear the Musick) which he did for almost halfe an hours space in company of her Majesty (both of them all the while standing) he with exceeding sa∣tisfaction for so much honour received, returned (re∣conducted by the Lord Percy in the same coaches) to Northampton. The next day, we went to Dinner to Stony Stratford, to Bed to Dunstable, and the sixteenth of August to London, where at the instant of our Arri∣vall we were told of two Ambassadors Commissioners come from the King of Denmarke to his Majesty. This made the Ambassador (answerable to some discourse passed between him and me to that purpose) fall to question me in what manner I thought should be their Treatment, whether with or without defraying? to which I returning no direct answer (as holding it unfit for me definitly to resolve what would be his Majesties pleasure) he put me in mind of what I had told him to that purpose at his first comming, viz. That the King would no more defray Ambassadors Dyet, Lodging or coaches (having begun already with Monsieur de Bas∣sampierre. Now (added he) if the Ambassadors of Den∣marke, or the Duke of Savoys (voiced to be on the way comming hither (to whom (he said) he held himselfe being the Duke of Mantovan's Representant, equall in all conditions) should receive those respects beyond him, he could not but in his Masters behalfe resent it, who (not to reckon it (he said) as a merit, and to challenge from thence the Kings better respects) had sent to his
Majesty a person (himself) of as eminent quality (he might, he said, boldly without arrogancy say it) as any of his Court) to give his Majesty an account of the late Dukes death, and of the Assumption of this now li∣ving to his Principality (without regard what the Spa∣niard thought, or would think, or do against it) before he had ever heard, or looked to hear from England, for complement of condoling, or congratulating: Wheras the Emperor, the king of France, and the Arch-Dut∣ches had already by way of prevention sent to his Master persons of eminent condition, to condole and congratu∣late, who had been lodged in his Masters Court, Viz. After that of Monsieur de Bas∣sampierre. and de∣frayed (as he was most assured) that any Ambassador should be whom the king of England should please to send (in return of his imployment) to the Duke his Master, howsoever it had been his fortune to be made a second President for that course of not defraying, new∣ly taken in this Court, and to be observed hereafter (answerable to the intimation he had received by my mouth from his Majesty: Which (as it was, he said, a liberty that such great kings might take in their de∣grees of Eminency above other inferiour Princes (as the king of France had likewise already began and continu∣ed) yet for his Majesty to establish an Order, and after to break it (especially while he himself should be here a Witness, and a Sufferer in it) could not but be to him of so hard digestion, as that though he did but now dis∣course of it with me in private (hoping and beleiving that no such measure should be offered to him) yet he must (if offered) for the Duke his Masters honour, formalize himself against it, and give account of it. With these words and reasons I acquainted his Maje∣sty at Aldershot, and brought him such satisfaction with them, as having regard to the Ambassadors content, and to the consequence of his own Order (established for no more defraying) His Majesty gave me in charge (with the best dexterity that I could apply) to let the Ambas∣sador understand his resolution taken to that pur∣pose. In obedience hereof, I, the twentieth of August, re∣turning
to London; conferred first with one Mr. Wollsin his Majesties sworn Servant (Though imployd here in some businesses for the King of Denmark) let him know his Majesties resolution; no more to defray Ambassa∣dors, and intreated him to go before to Gravesend, for the more civill conveyance of the Kings pleasure to that purpose, least, if I should directly and in plain termes acquit my self of my charge imposed, it might have had the rellish of an Exclusion, or Exception of their persons from Honours formerly received by other Ambassadors. That night taking a barge for my passage, I went to them to Gravesend, Their names were Tom∣son and Brah. and only letting them know I had been at Court with the account of their Arrivall, and for know∣ledge of his Majesties pleasure about their Reception, (not so much as touching the point of their not being defrayed for the reason mentioned.) I concluded that I was there by the King my Masters command to receive, and obey theirs, for assistance of any of their followers, that they should be pleased to imploy to take up their Lodgings, and to perform other Services for their Ac∣commodation. So without other answer, question, or exception from them that might bewray distast from such Innovation, I took leave and returned to London, where Mr. Wollfin, I, and a Servant of the Ambassadors conferring with one Paul Foure (an entertainer of stran∣gers, and dwelling in Lumhard Street) at what rate he would provide them their Dyet, and Lodging, he (with a Mechanick consideration of the plunge they were like to be put to (being disappointed of their first expecta∣tion to be defrayed) made unreasonable demands, as of twelve pounds for eight Masters, and six Servants per diem, till sending to Gravesend to the Ambassadors for their resolution, they agreed for —six pounds per diem. So after the preparation of the Kings and two other Bar∣ges (leaving a Light-horsman to be taken up for their Baggage at Gravesend) and of the Kings Coach with the Venetians, the States Ambassadors, and three Lords Coaches to attend their landing at Tower wharfe, I travelled a whole day up and down in London and West∣minster to finde a Lord fitting for their conduct from
Gravesend: But the Service refused, or exculed by all for want of Authority from the Lord Chamberlain then with the King in Progress; I at last prevailed with the Lord Ershin, Son to the Earl of Marre, to undertake it, and fetch them thence (with the attendance of half a score Gentlemen, the Kings Servants to their landing and lodging, ut supra. In observation of the new Order established (That no Ambassador should be met further off then Graves∣end, and there but by the Master of the Ceremonies on∣ly for their first welcome.) They should not have had a Noble man to meet them neerer then Geenwich, or till their landing at Tower wharff: But the intimation made against their being defrayed, as before, being new and harsh, this course was thought fit as for that time to be taken, somewhat to sweeten the other. The twenty fourth of August, these Ambassadors much pressing their Audience of his Majesty, I sent my Osh∣cer about it to the Court then at Aldershot, and had for answer, That wheras the Ambassador of the Duke of Mantova desired to have his parting Audience, as soon as might be (though it were, he said, in answer of the Kings objection, of the unfitness of the place he then was in) under a Tree, which should be to him, he said; a Palace, and he esteemed himself as a Prince by such a favour) His Majesty resolved, they should have their Audiences both in one day the Tuesday following as Oatelands, where there should be a Dinner provided for them, and two Noblemen (with two of the Kings Coaches) for their severall conditions. To this purpose I having a Blanck Letter sent me from my Lord Chamberlain to superscribe and present whatsoever Noble-man I should think fitting for the company of the Ambassadors of Denmark, and being left to my adventure, without a Letter for the choice of ano∣ther to accompany the Montavan, I subscribed my blanck Letter to the Earle of Murray of Scotland, ob∣tained his assent, and prevailed so by intreaty with the Lord Morley, as our Journey was appointed for the day, when two daies before came to me a Letter from my
Lord Chamberlain, intimating, That wheras the Queen was to come to Oatlands at the time assigned for the Ambassadors Audience there, and that therefore the king would not alter his determined remove from Alder∣shot to Oaking; That if the Ambassadors (particularly those of Denmark) should persist in their desire of a spee∣dy Audience (otherwise then the king wisht they should) who would willingly have remitted them till Sunday following, for their more solemn Reception at London) They must not expect an entertainment with a Dinner in a place, where nothing good was to be had, &c. But should have (all of them together) their Audiences at Oaking on Tuesday. In observation of which direction I repaired to them, salved up all as dexterously as I could, and having the kings coach, with the Earl of Murreys (and for his com∣panion the Earle of Galloway) for attendance of those of Denmark; And my Lord Morly with a coach of the Queens (in place of the Kings) to conduct him of Mantova, we altogther (having besides the service of three hired coaches for the first, and two for the latter, all at their own charge) parted from London on Tues∣day morning, and were by two after Dinner at Oaking, where after a brief Complement passed between the Ambassadors, that had not till then seen one anothers (The Mantovan having alwaies kept behind, to let it be seen he was of another company, and imployment) and bringing them for their rest to two severall cham∣bers; I first introduced those of Denmark, whose com∣plement dispatched, Letters delivered, and themselves reconducted to their chamber, I after brougth in the Mantovan for his farewell. This passed, and he returned to the place of his re∣pose, I again conducted the other two to a private Au∣dience after their publick, and leaving them with his Majesty accompanied the Mantovan to his coach, and returned to the other, whose private Audience finished, we went that night to Winsore, the next morning to Hampton court, and were that evening (as the Ambas∣sador of Montava likewise was by another way) at Lon∣don,
whether both this and the other were accompani∣ed by the Lords their conductors to their severall lod∣gings, with a course and trouble to me beyond exam∣ple, of bringing two Ambassadors at once in one day to their Audiences, so far from the ordinary standing court of his Majesty. The next day, August the twentyninth, when the Ambassador of Mantova, had before hand (immediatly upon his return) sollicited, and obtained Assignation for a parting Audience of the Queen (then come to So∣merset house) at two of the clock after noon, and that I had received the desires of the Ambassadors of Denmark to have likewise their Audience of her Majesty with her first conveniency: I received from the Earl of Carliel her Majesties pleasure, That at the same hour those of Denmark should be admitted, and the Mantovan an hour after, and that to this purpose, I should repair to the Earl of Dorset for his company with the former, and to the Lord Morley for the latter: But this Lord being indisposed, I was driven to my former shift of procuring a Nobleman for the Service. The Earl of Dorset under∣took, and discharged his part, fetching the two Danes from their lodgings to Somerset house, there entring the court with the Queens coach (their other coaches stay∣ing in the street) and accompanying them in the Councel chamber, till their time of admission to the Queen, and dismission back, whither his Lordship went with them to their lodging. In the mean time only at∣tending them to the Gate of the court, was arrested there by the necessity of my service, for the introduction of the Mantovan, who for want of a Nobleman to ac∣company him, was fetch from thence by Sir Robert Ay∣ton, Secretary to the Queen, and in one of her Majesties coaches brought to court, where after a publick Audi∣ence given him in her privy chamber, she gave him a more private one in her withdrawing chamber; and at his leave taking presented him with a Diamond Ring from her own finger of four hundred pounds value; which giving him exceeding satisfaction, was an occasion ta∣ken by me for preparation of his better acceptance of the
Kings Present to come of a thousand Ounces of gilt Plate (as if both their Majesties had understood one a∣nother in the consent of so presenting him, that the pub∣lick and ordinary rates present might pass with the bet∣ter acceptation, & more out of danger to become a Pre∣fident for the Kings greater charge hereafter. But while I was thus provident for my Masters honour and profit, a Message was brought me from my Lord Chamberlain then at Court, intimating, that wheras his Majesty was pleased (by likelyhood from the Queens perswasion to correspond with her in the quality of their gifts) That this Ambassadors present should have consisted of Plate) He was now resolved to convert it to a Jewell, and to add to the value proportioned, as above: And that to this purpose I should respite the presenting of the other, till I should understand further from his Majesty. This I did accordingly, and the day after the Kings arrivall at London, I received from the hand of the Earl of Holland (the Lord Chamberlain being then going out of Town) and leaving with me such order) a Jewel being a Picture-case, set with four Diamonds of about five hundred pounds value, but no Picture in it, for which his Majesties complement was for my delivery; That his Picture wanting there (because one could not be so suddainly provided and fitted to it) it might be supplyed with that which the Ambassadors would, he said, preserve of him in his memory. About the same time one of his Gentlemen (whom he had made now and then use of for his Pen, and had withall carried the Title, and sometime executed the Office of Steward) having heard of our custome here∣tofore, to present Ambassadors Secretaries with Chains at their parting, expected the like, and made one Sir Francis Biondi his means to me by his Letter to that pur∣pose, whom I answered by Letter with reasons as before; when Bethleem Gabors Secretary petended to the like favour from his Majesty, but was refused it, and so was this (I having first acquainted the Ambassador himself with his pretence, and with our course of limitation here for presenting Secretaries onely when they were as the
Venetians Secretaries, of the Embassage, or had been for some especiall affaires imployed, and noted for Assiduall Negotiators. The fifth of September, this Ambassador parting hence in the Kings Barge with no more Barges or Boates (that one being capable of his Traine) I accompanied him to Gravesend, where presenting me with sixty double Pist∣oles, I left him in his way to Dover for his imbarking &c. He was not visited during the time of his stay here by the Venetian Ambassador, no more then this by him. The two Moores Commissioners from Saly (having long attended the Kings returne to London, and found little fruit of their Negotiation with the Lords) deman∣ded, and had at last an Audience of his Majesty in the Privy-gallery, comming to Court from their Lodging at Sir Abraham Williams in Westminster in a coach of their own hyring without my conduction, onely I re∣ceived them at the Court Gates, brought them to the Councell-chamber, thence to their Audience, back to their coach, and there left them. The ninth of December, the Ambassadors of Denmark went to an Audience of his Majesty at Havering with the Kings coach, and two others hyred by themselves (onely my selfe, and no Nobleman accompanying them (their Audience being to be private.) Arriving there to∣wards Noone, we found a Table covered for their din∣ner at the Kings charge, whereto they sate down, im∣mediatly after the King was set to his, and were served by the Guard, for whom at their parting they gave to the hand of a Gentleman Usher Quarter-waiter, 10 pee∣ces. After dinner they had their Audience in the Privy∣chamber, and that night returned to London. They were at their Dinner accompanied by the Earle of Hol∣land, Sir John North and others; the upper end of the Table being found too narrow for both their seats, they sate in chaires at the two sides, opposite one to the other, the preceding Ambassador taking his place with the end
of the Table on his left hand, as the first place in his o∣pinion. These two Ambassadors (having another pri∣vate Audience assigned them at Hampton Court) were pleased upon my request to them by Letter to pardon my repaire to their Lodging in London, thence to ac∣company them (as I ought to have done) in the Kings coach, and take me in their way at my House in Twit∣tenham, where (returning) they left me, after I had entertained them with a collation &c. to their satis∣faction. Two dayes after, they sent my Officer for demand of an Audience to take their leaves, which they had gran∣ted them for Sunday following, and were brought to it from London by the Earle of Cleaveland and foure or five Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber, (having provided for them a dinner at the Kings charge (this being their last Audience) as they should have had at the first (an∣swerable to the stile then observed) but omitted towards them, as also to the Mantovan Ambassador for the in∣terruption mentioned before. This course of their entertainment at a Dinner, I propounded to his Majesty in time of his Supper, two nights before by direction from my Lord Chamberlaine, intimating the fitnesse of it (they having the like at Havering in stead of that they should have had at their first publick Audience, but was excused for the reasons as before) and had from the King this formall answer O yes, yes, let them by any meanes have a Dinner. At the same time also I propounded (with agreement of the Master of the Jewell-House standing by, and by di∣rection from the Lord Chamberlain) the consideration of having their Presents assigned beyond the proportion of their Predecessours which had been 1500. ounces of gilt Plate, and no more, making our reason the regard of their not having been defrayed, as those other had been &c. which his Majesty approving commanded the num∣ber of 2000. ounces to be made ready for each of them, being soone after brought them by the Master of the Jewell-house himselfe, who had from them the gratuity
of  and his two Officers between them twelve peeces. Their Secretary having not appeared in any businesse, had no present. After Dinner (at which their conductour the Earle of Cleaveland, and the Lord Gordon, and others, were guests with them) I introdu∣ced them to their Audience (by the proper way being publick) through the Great Hall, and Guard-chamber to the presence, thence to the Queene in her Privy∣chamber, whither my Lord of Cleaveland made at the first some scruple to accompany them, till my Lord Chamberlain had resolved him of the fitnesse, and cust∣ome of it, but would by no mens returne with them (as both he (by custome) and the Gentlemen with him should have done) to London whither I onely served them with my Attendance, the rest taking their leaves at the Ambassadors taking coach. The eleventh of October, (while neither their Letters nor present, nor 1000 l. which they were to receive by way of defalcation (from the great debt due to the King their Master from ours) were ready for them) they re∣quested me to procure them a private Audience (if this might not (they said) appear a Solccisme after they had had a publick one for their leave taking) which I did, bringing them to it by the way of the Titlt-yard, and Privy-Galleries to his Majesties Withdrawing-cham∣ber &c. Neere the time of these Ambassadors departure, Animo re∣vertendi. my Lord Chamberlain let me know, that having received news of the comming of the Abbot de la Seaglia (Am∣bassador from the Duke of Savoy) he had written a Let∣ter (but not yet sent it) to my Lord Major for provision of a House for him in the Citty, to be paid for by the Ambassador, but, after I had intimated to his Lordship that the course had been to receive a signification first from the Ambassador himselfe of his Arrivall, and of the number of his traine, and accordingly to provide for him; that if his House should be taken up before such signification were given, and that he should not come
in a moneth or more after, the charge of it for that time must (in reason) rest upon his Majesty, the House being not taken by his own order, and he being to de∣fray himselfe for all (as was intended) the letter was stayed, and the provision of the House for that time re∣spited. After it was assured by some passengers in the same Ship with this Ambassador that he was landed, and come onward his way as far as Rochester, I repaired to my Lord Chamberlain for order of his reception how, and where &c. went with his Lordship to the King about it, and received from his Majesty this formall signification, that answerable to the order esta∣blished, and already practised towards the King of Frances Ambassador (Monsieur de Bassampierre) the the Duke of Mantovas, and the King of Denmarks, and particularly towards the last, his Unckles) he would not defray him, nor any other, except at conclusion of Peace Marriages, Baptismes of his Children, and such like Extraordinary occasions. Upon further discourse that then passed, where, and how he should be received, it was concluded by his Majesty not onely for the present but for the future, that neither he, nor any other Am∣bassador under a Kings, should be met, or received fur∣ther off, then at Tower-Wharffe in the Kings coach, af∣ter he had been brought thither from Gravesend by the Master of the Ceremonies, and that if he were a Kings Ambassador (the Master of the Ceremonies meeting him no further off, then at Gravesend (unlesse his com∣ming for the before excepted purposes might by order carry him further) he should be received no neerer Lon∣don, then at Greenwich by a Nobleman out of the Barge that brought him from Gravesend into the Kings Barge, and thence by him accompanied to his landing at Tow∣er-wharffe, and thence in the Kings coach to his Lodg∣ing. The day after that this Order was established (or rather revived) no certaine notice being yet given, or taken concerning the Savoy Ambassador for preparation of his House, because no follower of his was come im∣mediatly
about it) Mr. Gerbiere (a Gentleman serving the Duke of Buckingham) who had passed the Seas in his company, and had received some particular directi∣on to that purpose) went with me to my Lord Cham∣berlain, and acquainted him with the Ambassadors in∣tentions and desires (as of one that agreed not well, he said, with Journies by water, and had brought with him a Coach and Horses of his own) to come by land: But this desire and design of his was soon diverted by his Lordship, after he had pointed at the incommodity of a Noblemans meeting him with the Kings Coach, at the end of Southwark (where was no house nor place proper for his, and his companies stay, til the instant of the Ambassadors coming thither) and what he should want in that part of honour of having sent to him from the King to Gravesend, the Master of the Ceremonies (with his Majesties Barge for his transport) who if he should come by land, could not with that provision (and must not with Coaches, because of their late restraint of imployment for service of Ambassadors at the Kings charge) attend him. It was further intimated, that if he should not think fit to make contiunall use of the Italian Jeronimo's house for his lodging (which he had already hired) he should have another hired for him for his better accommoda∣tion, at a rate reasonabe (to be paid by himself.) These Allegations and Reasons taken notice of by Mr. Gerbiere, were conveyed to the knowledge of the Ambassador at Gravesend, and his approbation being returned, the next day I went early with the Kings Barge, and ano∣ther to bring him to Tower-wharff, where by the Lord North with half a dozen Gentlemen, the Kings Coach, and seven other attending him, he was conducted to h is lodging, October 19. At my first access to him at Graves∣end, that I might (besides the complement of his Wel∣come) intimate to him his Majesties pleasure and course held and to be held for the Traytment of Ambassadors answerable to the new Pragmatick) I spake to him in French thus
MOnsigneur, sa Majesté m'a enuoye icy aure l'honnour de ses Commandements pour vous receuoir, & vous dire de sa part que non seulement pour l'estime qu'ells fait de la personne que vous representez, mais aussy de vostre propre personne vous estes tres-bien venu en, son Roy∣aume; Et si vous trouuez que le traitement que vous receurez ne responen tout a vos merites, vous l'attribuerez, sil vous plait, non pas a manque∣ment de respect de le part de sa Majesté, mais au rei glement, & procedure qu'il luy á convenu tenir d'oresen auant envers tous les Ambassadeurs & Ministres des autres Roys & Princes comme entre autres sa Majesté á recentement practiqué enuers les Ambassadeurs de son Oncle propre; pour mon purticulier Je suis joy pour &c. MY Lord, his Majesty hath sent me hither with the honour of his Commandments to receive you, and tell you in his behalf, that nor only for the esteem he makes of the person which you represent, but also for your own particular, you are most welcome into his Kingdome: And in case you find that the Treatment which you shall receive doth not correspond in all things with your merit, you shall impute it, if you please, not to any want of respect on his Majesties part, but to the re∣gulation and procedure, which it hath behovd him for the future to observe towards the Ambassadors and Ministers of other Kings and Princes, as his Majesty hath lately practicd towards the Ambassadors of his Uncle, and for my particular I am here, &c. Friday Octob. 19. The night of his Arrivall at London, he demanded Audience of the King with his first conveniency, which referred to his pleasure (if he should think Sonday
following too soon for it) he accepted the liberty as a favour, so far as for that day it was appointed, and an Invitation delivered with all by me (as I had order) for his dining in Court, whereto he was voluntarily fetched by the Earle of Carliel (a Supererogatory cour∣tesy of his Lordship, and an irregularity of all president (when a Baron, Of no good example for Minist∣ers inferi∣our to Kigns, who might ex∣pect the like. not an Earle should have discharged that part for a Dukes Ambassador) and with the atten∣dance of five or six Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber in five coaches (besides the Kings) came to Court, dined in the Councel-chamber with the Earle, and Gentlemen mentioned, and five of his owne company. And about foure of the clock (attending so long the Queens re∣turne from Vespers, of whom (having been formerly known to her) he had a sight and Bay-samaine in tran∣situ, as she went to her coach through the Privy-Gallery) had his Audience in the Presence, returned to the Coun∣cel-chamber til the Queen and her Ladies were in readi∣nesse to receive him, and having had a gracious Audi∣ence of her Majesty, with the same company and at∣tendance that he came, returned to his Lodging. The Tuesday following, though he had let fall (of purpose it seemed for his after freedome, some speeches tending to the liberty which his Majesty (he said) to me) had given him once for all to have accesse to his Presence without Ceremony) my Lord of Carliel tel∣ling me (and desiring me to let him know) his Majest∣ies Pleasure to give him a private Audience that After∣noon, I intreated his Lordship as far forth as he could, he would direct that domestique privacy, as diminish∣ing from the respects due to his Majesty, and the right of my charge in the duty of my attendances for those Services. Which his Lordship rightly understanding, tooke on him to regulate by remonstrating to the Am∣bassador (as he did) how much he should derogate from the regard proper to his own quality (besides what might be challenged due to mine) by the worlds taking notice, and the discourses of the causes why I did not attend him at his Audiences) and by perswading him, that howsoever he might have his private accesses at his
owne times to the Kings Presence, yet that he would not (upon account to be made of the businesses of State or of particular charges received by Packet from his Master) present there commendation without my intro∣duction. So that day to begin his course, I accompanied him to his Audience (which he would otherwise have sought and had alone) by the staier leading from the Garden to the first Chamber of the Privy-lodgings, thence bring∣ing of him to the King in his Withdrawing-chamber, and a sevennight after did againe the like. In the meane time having not in five or six dayes after his publick Audience, received any visit from the Ambassadors then here residing, A mazime amongst Ambassa∣dors. the custome amongst them carrying it, that the first come, is first to visit the last come; I cast out a question, whether the Ambassa∣dour of the King of Denmarke had yet visited him? he answered no; and that he was willing to interpret the sicknesse of one of them (Monsieur Brahe) to be a cause that the other forboare that complement; be∣cause (said he) being joynct, they may perhaps think a joynct visite requisite, and so one stay for the other till both be in good disposition. In the meane time though he would (he said) make no scruple to visite the sick Ambassador (who was unable to visite him) yet that he could not conveniently do it to the one without the hazard of the worlds opinion that he did it to both, which would be (he said) a Solecisme in point of visits not approveable amongst Ambassadors, especially while one of them was in health, and might therefore visit him without the others company. This may appea e to be an ac∣knowledg∣ment of precedence from the Venetian which seemed questioned. For mine own betterin∣struction to the purpose of this Puntillio, I went instant∣ly first to the Venetian Ambassador, and found him to have forborne that complement, expecting the first discharge of it to come from the Danish, and that as they should lead, he would follow. From him I went to the other of Denmark, and found him that was in health, not excuseing the forbearance of his visits by his Collegues sicknesse, but plainly affirming the obser∣vation of it to be improper, as from the King of Den∣markes
Ambassador to a Duke of Savoys. Besides that he could plead (he said) that he and his Collegue having taken their publick leaves of the King, their visits of an Ambassador later come, were not to be expected. To this I replyed with a President I had learned from the relation of an experienced. Statesman, Her. Joa∣chimi Am∣bassad or for the States. how the King of Frances Ambassador (at the time that the States of the united Provinces were first acknowledged free, and Soveraigne) being at Disseldrop (and come thither be∣fore the States Commissioners Arrivall) about a Treaty, expected to receive from thm the first visiit, as from Representants of an inferiour condition; but they stan∣ding upon their pretended rights of Ambassadors (last come to be first to be visited) refused to visit first, till at last the French Kings Ambassador (the businesse he had in mannage necessitating him to it) gave the first visit; but this was no prevailing allegation for the Ambassa∣dor of Denmark. From them I went to the Ambassa∣dor of the States, and found him not expecting to have those of Denmark for his leaders, but onely hindred by a Catharre, which past (he said) he meant to visite the Savoyard, and so he did the next day. At that time when I (purposely) cast out some words tending to the question of precedence between the States, and the Duke of Savoyes Ambassador, the States said, he won∣dered that any man would make that question, when it had been adjudged the due of his State by the King of France in particular &c. The next day, being that of the Lord Majors Annuall Feast, and the Ambassador of Savoy desirous to see his Lordship passe through Cheapside (he having received no Invitation to the Feast with other Ambassadors per∣haps because of his so fresh Arrivall, or else to avoid the inconveniency of question likely to grow from prece∣dence between him, and the States Ambassador, and the Ambassadors of Denmark not looking after it with consideration of their leave already taken of his Majest∣ie) I was requested by the said Savoy Ambassador to in∣quire somewhat further of the Ambassadors, of Den∣marks reasons, and resolution for not visiting him which
I did immediately repairing to him, Monsteur Tompson. where he had taken his stand in Cheapeside for sight of the shew (Sconoscia∣to) and plainly received it for his resolution, that nei∣ther he, nor his Collegue had any intention to visit him first, as having no example of the like done at any time by either the King their Masters Ambassadors or by any other Kings to the Ambassador of the Duke of Savoy, and when I after met the Venetian at the Feast (wher∣to he and the States Ambassador were invited) I under∣stood the like of his mind, and expectation for example to be given him by the Ambassador of Denmark (as pre∣tending) to doe nothing (he said) but should be al par delle teste Coronate, with which insatisfaction I returned to him of Savoy, who could not make good his pretence by any President, or example, but rather he had one a∣gainst himselfe (which the Venetian Ambassador was said to have suggested to the Ambassador of Denmarke for his forbearance) of the French Ambassador (the Marquesse de Bleinville) who would not give the first vi∣sit to the Savoyard when they were both here together in England, the Ambassador of France standing upon it, that in regard of the honour of so neere allyance, as the Duke of Savoy had with so great a King as his Master, he ought to give him the first respect, as being most due to him. But this reason the Ambassador of Savoy retor∣red to his owne purpose, as that therefore the French Kings Ambassador ought first to visit him for the more honour to the King his Masters Sister, and with no dis∣paragement to himselfe in regard of the not question∣able difference of their rancks. But in the end, all, or the cheife blame of the Savoy Ambassadors want of visit lighted on the Venetian (so that of Savoy charged him) as on him, that having committed a former er∣rour (he said) not to have visited the Duke of Manto∣vas Ambassador while he was here (from the same rea∣son of difference stood upon by him of Denmark) cared not to commit another, and a greater errour, though he and all the Ministers of that Republick that should ne∣gotiate with his Master might be sure by way of retri∣bution (as he threatned) to suffer for it.
The consideration of inconveniences which might in likelyhood accrue to the common cause from such ill correspondence amongst Ambassadors our freinds, made me the next day after the Lord Mayors Feast to ad∣dresse my selfe to the Earle of Carliel (as to a person of the most experience in Ambassages for his judgement in these differences) this was, that the Ambassadors of Denmark, and that of Venice, were in the wrong, and that for Presidents, if they stood upon them, he him∣selfe would furnish them with one of his owne, having himselfe (as he affirmed) when he was Ambassador Ex∣traordinary in France) given the first visit to the selfe same Ambassador of Savoy, Arriving there after him, and had observed that the Popes Nuntio, and all other Ambassadors then there had done the like, yet that for the better information of his owne judgement, he would (he said) instantly goe, (and so did) to the King for his, who together with the Lord Steward, Earle of Pembrok, the Lord Chamberlain, and other Lords there present in his Majesties Withdrawing-chamber, were all of opinion that the Ambassadors of Denmark were over punctuall, and (as the King himselfe said) so much too blame for standing upon such nice points, in a time that required rather care, and study to get freinds then for lack of per∣forming complements, hazard the losse of any, as were they his Ambassadours, and should doe so, he would chide them well for it. The substance hereof I convey∣ed to the Ambassadors understanding, but it would not move them. While these Puntillio's were in agitation, a Play on all Saints day (being appointed at Court to begin Christmas with) I was told the day before by the Vene∣rian (when he visited me at my House) that he was in∣vited to the sight of it, and to a Supper by the Countess of Denbigh as was the Savoy Ambassador at the same time by the Earle of Carliel, understanding thus much, I did (to prevent all inconveniences that might happen by any suddain incounter) let fall a word or two in hearing of the Savoy Ambassador for his knowledge of it;
who answerably took his course in such sort, as that af∣ter the Venetian was (before the Kings comming into the Hall) entered there, leading the Countesse of Den∣bigh, and seating himselfe uppermost at the end of the Lords seat towards the Kings right hand, next above the Lady mentioned) the Ambassador of Savoy entered with the King passing promiscously amongst the Lords, and (as I had before prepared the Dutches of Bucking∣ham, were seated next above her, the other great Ladies) the Lord of Carliel sitting next above the Ambassador, but sidewayes upon another seate) on the Kings left hand, neit er of these Ambassadors so much as looking one towards another, much lesse saluting, either enter∣ing, or parting, that of Savoy going our, as he entered after the King, leaving the Dutches, and the other of Venice after those were gone following with the Coun∣tesse. Whiles one of the Ambassadours of Denmarke (Mon∣sieur Tompson) attended the recovery of the others sick∣nesse (Monsieur Brabe) and both of them the payment of a thousand pounds promised them by way of defalca∣tion, but after intimated to them by me (from the King) to be intended as a guift to them in lieu of their not having been defrayed) he sent my Lord Major word (Sir Hugh Hammersley) that he would dine with him, and bring with him three or foure of his Gentlemen his Lordship returned an acceptation both by the Am∣bassadors messenger, and by a Servant of his own; but when (I hearing of it) had let him know by Master Wol∣fin (his Masters Agent) that if he were not informed already touching the manner of his personall Treatment for the place, he should do well to inquire, whether the Lord Major would give him precedence (which he had never yet given to any person of whatsoever quality un∣der the King) the Ambassador changed his mind, made his excuses of an unexpected businesse, and onely sent his Gentlemen with whom I sending my Officer to ac∣company them, and to sound what he could of my Lord Majors disposition for the place, in case the Ambassador
himself had come to him) he made a plain profession, (which I also after received from himselfe) That he meant to maintain the Lord Majors Right and ancient Custome of preceding all men, within the City, but the King himself. So as (without this prevention of mine) there might have followed, perhaps, some scandall, or difference to the insatisfaction of the Ambassador, and the trouble of the Lord Major, not without subject of discourse for other Ambassadors, &c. These 2 Ambassadors being at length possessed of their long unpaid thousand pounds, which should have been presented them (as had been intimated in lieu of their not having been defrayded, and not by way of defalca∣tion, as they demanded it, and it was carried) They prepared for their departure, and the day before sent their Secretary to the Ambassador of Savoy, with a com∣plement of their offer of service, &c. which he the next day returning by one of his Gentlemen, it was all the correspondence, which during their abode here had pas∣sed between them. The two and twentieth of December, having the ser∣uice of the Kings Coach, and two other hired by them∣selves to their imbarquing at Tower-wharff, they went thence in the Kings Barge, with one more (I accompany∣ing them) to Gravesend, where they presenred me with a Purse, and fifty peeces, and were there left by me to the guidance of my Officer Walter Briscoe, to their shipping at Dover. On the way to Gravesend, I fell in discourse (pur∣posely) with Monsieur Tompson, concerning their not visiting the Duke of Savoys Ambassador, and found by his Ejaculations, that they repented them of their pun∣tillioes, professing to me; That if they had at first un∣derstood that the King (and since the Duke, who had made a visit to them five or six daies before their depar∣ture, on no other errand then touching that visit) would have taken such notice of it, they would have dispensed with their own reasons for want of examples, and have made a visit to him; but as that now (so were their
departure) would have been unseasonable, so they had left it to the hazard of whatsoever inconvenience might follow. I replyed, they might have discovered by my diligent endeavours, the affection of his Majesty to have had that Complement performed, as requisite for entertainment of the correspondence between their King and that Prince, and others, in times that needed it, but that having no formall command from his Ma∣jesty to meddle in it, I had reason to be so reserved as I had been. At last, I pressed him to acquaint me with the truth of what was held, I said, at Court, that the Venetian had been the first moving cause of their not discharging that visit with the reasons mentioned be∣fore. But Monsieur Tompson protested to me, that he was charged wrongfully, having been rather, he said, a per∣swader of them by Sir Francis Biondi (sent to them by the Venetian to that purpose, with assurance that they beginning the Complement, he would not fail to second them) then that he had ever used one word to dis∣swade them. With this acknowledgment I after acquainted the Savoy Ambassador, and had for answer; That it was now too late for them to amend the faults they had made, he having (he said) given account of their pro∣ceedings to the Duke his Master, and was for himself, he said, resolved, that if they should make a return, as they intended, to England, he would never, he said, re∣ceive any visit from them, though they should (with acknowledgment of their error) make offer of it. The two Commissioners from Saley in Barbary, Mehemets, Bensayd, Hamet, Naxuaez. having obtained Letters from the King to their State (with grant, and for setling of a correspondence between us and them) and to Sydi-Hamet-Laynshi, a Saint, as they termed him, much reverenced amongst them for his holiness, and descent from a Race of qualified Saints, and of great power for force of Horse to be le∣vied at his pleasure. They went hence the twelfth of November to Dover, there to embarque in a Ship fraugh∣ted
for Barbary, and to be conveyed till within a daies fail of their Port, by the Fleet for Turkie then bound thither. His Majesty having defrayed them for the time of their abode here at forty shillings per diem, Dyet and Lodging, presented each of them after they had taken their leaves in the privie Gallery, with a Gold Chain of a hundred pounds value, they presented me at their parting with thirty peeces. In time of Christmas, the Viscountess of Purbeck, ha∣ving for execution of a sentence pronounced against her in the high Commission Court, her house beset by a Ser∣jeant at Armes, with other Officers of Justice; a Gen∣tleman came in the morning from the Countess of Buckingham to the Ambassador of Savoy, demanding leave of him for the said Officers to pass through his house into his Garden (joyned to the Ladies) for her more easie apprehension, and arrest by that way, which though at first he somewhat stuck at (as wronging and lesning (he thought) the respect of his quality, to leave his house free of entrance to such persons, especially for the surprize and arrest of a fair Lady his Neighbour) he at last, notwithstanding suffered the Constable to en∣ter it, and with convenience to remain in it and in the Garden, watching his opportunity till dinner-time, when some of the Gentlemen attendants on him, con∣triving a way to be rid of that incumbrance, dressed the Ambassadors Page (a handsome fair Boy) in womans apparrell, thrust him suddenly into the Lords Coach, (as if it had been the Lady making her escape) and drove fast with him down the Strand, followed by a multitude of people, and those Officers (not without danger to the Coach-man, from their violence) but with ease to the Ambassador, that had his house by this device cleared of the Constable, but himself after char∣ged by the Duke, That all this was done of designe for the Ladies escape (which in that Hubbub she made) to his no small prejudice, and scorn in a business that so neerly, he said, concerned him (she being Wife to his
Brother, and bringing him Children of anothers beget∣ting, yet such as by the Law (because begotten and born while her Husband was in the Land) must be of his Fathering. The Ambassador for his Purgation from this charge, went immediatly to the Duke at Whitehall, but was de∣nied accesse: Wherupon repairing to my Lord Chamber∣lain for his mediation, I was sent to him by his Lordship to let him know more particularly the Dukes displea∣sure, and back by the Ambassador to the Duke with his humble request but of one quarter of an hours audi∣ence for his disblaming; But the Duke returning an∣swer, That having alwaies held him so much his friend, and given him so many faire proofs of his respects, he took his proceeding so unkindly as he was resolved not to speak with him: I reported this to the Ambassador, and had for his only answer, What Reason cannot do, Time will. Yet after this, the Earles of Carliel and Holland interposing, the Ambassador (hungry after his Peace, from a person of such power and regarding his Masters service, and the publick affaires) he a sevennight after obtained of the Duke an interview in Whitehall Garden, and after an hours parley, a reconciliation. About the same time, the Ambassador of Venice, Con∣tareni, having sent an Express to Dover with a Packet, came the Councels Warrant for passage of it, to the Den∣mark Ambassadors, attending there their passage, for conveyance of it by them to the Venetian Ambassador in France: Sir John Hippesley (Lievtenant of the Ca∣stle under the Duke of Buckingham, understanding of it (and withall the mind of his Lord and Master men∣tioned) sent to them for a sight of the Packet only, as a duty, he said, of his charge, which with some questi∣on, Quere Whether this were not Pas de Clere in their myste∣ry. the Ambassadors yeilding to, and sending it to him by their Secretary, he refused to return it, saying, he would have care for the conveyance of it; But sent it immediatly to Court to those hands that opened it, and taking out (as the Ambassador made complaint, some particular Letters, sent the rest to him, whereat he for∣malizing himself (as he did also for another Packer,
the Duplicate of this sent after it) by his Secretary at Dover, which delivered to the hand of a Marriner then upon passage, was likewise intercepted.) He demanded Audience of his Majesty, made protestation and offer to retire himself to Greenwich, till the State he represen∣ted, should upon the Account of his and their wrong signifie the sense of it, and pleasure for his further pro∣ceeding. But maturer consideration (all his Letters being returned, and his Majesty having professed to him his high displeasure for such proceeding) made him alter his course, and digest the pretended injury so far, as only to give account of it to his State, from whom he not long after received their pleasure, that he should spare his access both to King and Councel, till he should formally receive some publick satisfaction. The usuall course was and is yet, for Ambas∣sadors to send to the Master of the Cere∣monies a significati∣on of their arrivall: And after the said Master to let them know the time when be would repair to them to welcome them and conduct them to London. After a long expectation of two Ambassadors Commis∣sioners to come from the States, Viz. Monsieur Rand∣wick, and Monsieur Pawe, they arrived at Gravesend the seventh of February, and were there met by Her. Joachimi the Resident here. Amongst other discourses they had with him (as I was informed, being then ab∣sent) concerning the Treatment they might expect from his Majesty. A Question was moved whether the Ma∣ster of the Ceremonies were not to receive them there with the Kings welcome, and to know their dispositions for the time of their coming to London, before he should come to fetch them thence with the Kings Barge, which it was affirmed, Sir Lewes Lewknor had at other times done to some of their Ministers. This scruple intimated to me (at a time when I could discharge neither of those services) my Wife being then dangerously sick of the small Pox, and in that respect not stirring out of doors) I wrot to the Resident Ambas∣sador to this purpose: That howsoever some, perhaps, extraordinary occasion might have begotten at some time such a redoubled course of observance (the like whereof had not come under my experience) it was no rule, & that if I my self had (as I remembred I had once the Summer before) made a first and second Journey
to Gravesend, to the Ambassadors of Denmark, it was in the way of good manners to comply with them, at a time of the Kings remote absence from London, his Majesty being then in progress, while in the interim I attended answer to my Letters for direction about the manner of their Treatment upon the Reformation then newly established for the defraying of Ambassadors, which I hoped should serve them for a consideration to keep them from drawing into consequence that, or any other former reception, different from the Ordinary, especially at a time, that his Majesty endeavoured more then ever to reduce our formes of Treating Ambassadors to the stile of those practised by other Princes. How these reasons prevailed I know not; sure I am they had not any man sent to them in my place, till the fourth day of their stay at Gravesend (when Master Beaulieu (Secretary to his Majesty for the French tongue) intreated to that Service by me, and allowed of upon my recommendation by my Lord Chamberlain) brought them in the Kings Barge the twelfth of February to Tower-wharffe, where received by the Viscount of Wim∣bleton (accompanied with halfe a score Gentlemen in five Noblemens coaches with the Venetian and Savoy Ambassador (but without the Kings) they were brought to their lodgingat the Italian Ordinary, there to reside till at more leasure they might find better accommoda∣tion (without touch at any hand to the purpose of the Kings not defraying them.) The fayling of the Kings coach proceeded from the forgetfulnesse of my Lord Chamberlains Gentleman of his Horses, and became a Subject of no small distast, and complaint formerly made by the Resident Ambassador to his Lordship in name of the rest, as of a lessening in the respects usually afforded to all other publick Ministers of Princes, which to reconcile, a meane was thus found. It was agreed that the Ambassadors should (the third day after) re∣turne in their owne coaches by a private way about by London walls to the Tower, and after a sight of that place to be fetched thence by the same Lord Viscount of Wimbleton with as many coaches as before attending
the Kings coach (and the Queens also sent along with it) this accordingly performed, and they so accompanied through London to their Lodging, all was composed to their satisfaction. The next Puntillio obtruded was, whether at the day of their Audience, they should dine in Court as some other Ambassadors (particularly the Savoyard) had done lately before. To remove this rub I wrote to my Lord Chamberlains Secretary a Letter for his Lord∣ships sight, and consideration, imparting that the Sum∣mer before in the progress time, the Mantovan and the two Danish Ambassadors had dined in Court (the first at his first Audience at Windsor, Whereof see the reason as also why the Mantovan dined not in Court at his first Audience. the latter at Havering at their second private Audience) and that since that the King comming to White-Hall, though the Treat∣ment of dineing in Court were not perhaps necessary, nor fit to be made to any Ambassador (as out of an esta∣blished course) at or in the Kings standing House) it having been made elsewhere with regard of inconve∣niency, or want of place fitting with their owne provi∣sion to give themselves a dinner at or neere the Court in time of progress) his Majesty was yet pleased to comply with them in that point, but not to serve for an example to others. But now there must a step be made backward to the yeare 1624. at which time there happend a noble tra∣verse reflecting on the two Spanish Ambassadors viz. the Marquesse de Inojosa, and Don Carles Columa then Resident here, the last of a good disposition, the other sower and harsh, so that they were compard to oil and vinegar; the businesse was thus; the Prince of Wales being back from Madrid, matters began to gather ill blood twixt England and Spain; for the Treaty both of the match and Palatinate were dissolved by Act of Parliament, and the Duke of Buckingham made use of Parliament, and Puritan (who swayed then most in the Houses) to compasse this worke. The Spanish Ambassa∣dors understanding that the rupture of the matrimoni∣all treaty proceeded from the Practices of Buckingham, they devised a way how to supplant, and ruine him;
they fell into consideration that King James was grown old, wherefore the least thing might raise umbrages of distrust and feare in him, therefore by a notable way of plotting, they informed him at a private Audience that there was a dangerous designe against his Royall Au∣thority traced by the Duke of Buckingham and his confederats, the manner of which conspiracy will ap∣pear in this following Memoriall or Remonstrance of Sir Walter Ashton left still Ambassador leger in the Court of Spaine, which he presented there to the King him∣selfe, which was thus. To the King. Sir SIr Walter Ashton Ambassador to the King of great Britain, saith, that the King his Ma∣ster hath commanded him to represent unto your Majesty the reasons why he could receive no sa∣tisfaction by your Majesties answer of the fifth of January, and that therby by the unanimous con∣sent of his Parliament, he came to dissolve the Treaties of Match, and Palatinat. He received another answer from your Maje∣sty, wherin he found lesse grounds to work upon, and having understood that neither by the Padre Marsto, or your Majesties Ambassadors who have assisted, these daies passed in his Court there was something to be further propounded and decla∣red touching the businesse of the Palatinat, wherby he might receive contentment: The said Ambas∣sadors to this day have not said any thing at all to any purpose, which being compared with other circumstances of their ill carriage, he gathers and doubts that according to their ill affections and de∣praved
intentions wherwith they have proceeded in all things, but specially in one particular, they have laboured to hinder the good correspondence with the so necessary and desired intelligence which should be conserv'd with your Majesty. Moreover he saith, the King his Master hath commanded him to give an account to your Maje∣sty, that in an Audience which he gave to the Marquesse of Inojosa, and to Don Carlos Colo∣ma, they under the cloak and pretext of zeal, and particular care of his Majesties person, preten∣ded to discover unto him a very great Conjuration both against his Royall Dignity and person. Which was, that at the beginning of this Parliament the Duke of Buckingham had consulted with certain Lords and others of the Arguments and means which were to be taken for the breaking and dis∣solving of the Treaties both of Match and Pala∣tinat, and their Consultations passed so far, that if his Majesty would not conform himself to their Councels, they would give him a house of plea∣sure, whither he might retire himself to his sport, in regard that the Prince had now years sufficient and parts answerable for the Government of the Kingdome: The Information was of that quality, that it was sufficient to make impressions in him of an everlasting jealousie, in regard that through the sides of Buckingham they wounded the Prince his Son with the Nobility, it being not probable that they could effect such a design without depar∣ting totally from that Obligation of faith and loy∣alty which they owed to his person and Crown, be∣cause the interessed Lords made themselves culpa∣ble
as Concealors: Nor is it likely the Duke would hurt himself upon such an enterprize, with∣out communicating it first to the Prince, and knowledge of his pleasure. But because the Information might be made more cleer, his Majesty did make many instan∣ces to the said Ambassadors, that they would give the Authors of the said Conspiracy, this be∣ing the sole means wherby their own honour might be preserved, and wherby the great care and zeal they pretended to have of his person might appear: But the said Ambassadors instead of confirming the great zeal they made profession to bear him, all the answer they gave consisted of Arguments a∣gainst the discovery of the Conspirators, so that for confirmation of the said Report, there remain'd no other means then the examination of some of his Councell of State, and principall Subjects, which was put in execution accordingly, causing them to be put to their Oathes in his own presence, and commanding that such Interrogations and questi∣ons should be propounded unto them that were most pertinent to the accusation, so that not the least part, particle, or circumstance remain'd which was not exactly examined, and canvas'd: And he found in the Duke and the rest who were exami∣ned, a most clear and sincere innocency touching the impeachments and imputations wherewith your Majesties Ambassadors had charged them. This being done, he returned to make new in∣stances unto the said Ambassadors, that they would not prefer the discovery of the names of the Con∣spirators,
to the security of his Royall person, to the truth and honour of themselves, and to the hazzard of an opinion to be held the Authors and betrayers of a plot of so much malice, sedi∣tion, and danger; but the sayd Ambassadors continued still in a knotty kind of obstinacy re∣solving to conceale the names of the Conspira∣tors, notwithstanding that he gave them Au∣dience afterwards, wherein the Marquis of Ino∣josa took his leave. But a few dayes after, they desired new Au∣dience, pretending they had something to say that concerned the publick good, and conduced to the entire restitution of the Palatinate, and thereby to the conservation and confirmation of the friend∣ship with your Majesty: But having suspended some few dayes to give them Audience, thinking that being thereby better advised, they would think on better courses, and discover the Authors of so pernicious a Plot, and having since made many instances to that effect, and attended the successe of so long patience, he sent his Secretary Sir Edward Conway, and Sir Francis Coting∣ton Secretary to the Prince, commanding them that they should signifie unto the sayd Ambassa∣dors, that he desired nothing more then a conti∣nuance of the freindship betwixt the two Crowns, therefore if they had any thing to say, they should communicate it unto the sayd Secretaries, as per∣sons of great trust, which he imployed therefore expresly to that end, and if they made any diffi∣culty of this also, then they might choose amongst his Councill of State those whom they liked best,
and he would command that they should presently repaire unto them; and if this also should seeme inconvenient, they might send him what they had to say in a Letter by whom they thought fittest, and he would receive it with his own hands. But the Ambassadors misbehaving themselves, and not conforming to any thing that was thus propounded, the sayd Secretaries, according to the instructions which they had received, told them that they being the Authors of an Informa∣tion so dangerous and seditious, had made them∣selves incapable to treat further with the King their Master, and were it not for the respect he bore to the Catholick King, his dear and beloved Brother, their Master, and that they were in quality of Ambassadors to such a Majesty, he would and could by the Law of Nations, and the right of his owne Royall Justice, proceed against them with such severity as their offence deserved, but for the reasons aforesayd, he would leave the reparation to the Justice of their owne King, of whom he would demand and require it. In conformity to what hath been sayd, the sayd Ambassador of the King of Great Brittaine saith, That the King his Master hath comman∣ded him to demand refaction and satisfaction of your Majesty against the sayd Marquis de Ino∣josa, and Don Carlos Coloma, making your Majesty the Judge of the great scandall, and enor∣mous offence which they have committed against him, and against publick right, expecting ju∣stice from your Majesty in the demonstrations, and chastisement that your Majesty shall inflict
upon them; which, in regard of the manner of proceeding with your Majesty, and out of your Majesties owne integrity and goodnesse ought to be expected. Furthermore, the sayd Ambassador saith That the King his Master hath commanded him to as∣sure your Majesty, that hitherto he hath not in∣termingled the correspondence and friendship hee holds with your Majesty, with the faults and of∣fences of your Ministers, but leaves them and re∣straines them to their owne persons, and that he still perseveres with your Majesty in the true and ancient freindship and brotherhood, as for∣merly, to which purpose hee is ready to give a hearing to any thing that shall be reasonable, and give answer thereunto, therefore when it shall please your Majesty to imploy any Ambassador thither, he will afford them all good entertain∣ment, and receive them with that love which is fitting. For conclusion the sayd Ambassador humbly beseecheth your Majesty that you would be pleas∣ed to observe and weigh well the care and tender∣nesse wherewith the King his Master hath pro∣ceeded towards your Majesties Ambassadors, not obliging them to any precipitate resolutions, but allowing them time enough to prove, and give light of that which they had spoken: And besides by opening them many wayes besides, whereby they might have complyed with their Orders, if they had any such, which course if they had taken, they might well have given satisfaction to the King his Master, and moderated the so grounded opi∣nion
of their ill proceedings against the Peace, to∣gether with the good intelligence and correspon∣dence 'twixt the two Crownes. Such was the complaint, or charge rather which was exhibited by our Ambassador in Spain, against Inojosa and Coloma (for their misdemeanours in England) which fill'd that Court full of dark whispers for the present, and the World expected that the said Ambassadors should receive some punishment, or at least some mark of disgrace at their return; but matters growing daily worse and worse betwixt the two Crownes, they were rather rewarded then reprehended, Inojosa being promo∣ted to be Governour of Milan, and Coloma received ad∣ditions of employment and honours in Flanders. But the Civilities of England at that time towards the said Ambassadors was much cryed up abroad, that not∣withstanding so pernicious and machinations to dis∣compose the whole English Court, and demolish Buck∣ingham, yet were they permitted to depart peaceably, and though they had no Kings Ship to transport, them, yet Sir Lewis Leukner was sent to conduct them to the Sea side, for prevention of any affront, or outrage that might have been offered them.
AN ABSTRACT Of the Signallst Passages that go to the Composure of this DISCOURSE. A Pernicious plot of the Spanish Am∣bassadors, to destroy the Duke of Buckingham, fol. 243 The arrivall of the Palsgrave in England, with the particular of his Train 1 The Ambassadors of France and Venice stand up∣on their Puntilioes 9 The arrivall of a Russian Ambassador, &c. 24 An Ambassador with the Chancellor of Musco∣vy sent to England 38 An Ambassador extraordinary from Sweden ar∣rives 41 An affront offered the Swedish Ambassador 42
Another affront offerred the Swedish Ambassa∣dor 45 An Ambassador come from Turkie 57 The Ambassador of Venice ranked alwayes among Crowned heads 65 The Ambassador of France denies to be at the Coronation, for two reasons 169 An Axiome of State, That tis more honour to be last of a Superiour Order, then first of an Inferiour 63 Agents from Barbary arrive in England 213 No Ambassador to have his charges defrayed ex∣cept at conclusion of Peace, Marriages, or Bap∣tismes 228 An Ambassador of a King to be brought in by an Earle at least ib. An Ambassador of a Duke to be brought in by a Baron ib. No Ambassador except a Kings to be met in the Kings Coach further off then Tower Wharfe ib. Abbot de la Seaglia Ambassador from Savoy 227 B. BOiscot the Arch-Dukes Ambassador discon∣tented 3 Barbarigo the Venetian Ambassador dyes in Eng∣land 37 Baron Donaw sent Ambassador from the Pals∣grave 61
Ballompierre arrives in England, refuseth the Kings dyet 188 Benica Agent for the Marquis of Baden 189 The businesse 'twixt the States and our East In∣dia Merchants concluded 117 Barham Downe the Rendezvous of the English Ladies to welcome the Queen 153 C. NIne Counts attended the Palsgrave to Eng∣land 2 A clash 'twixt the Savoy Ambassador and him of Florence 15 A clash 'twixt Gondamar and the States Ambas∣sador 22 The Complaint of the Venetian Ambassador about his Present 39 A clash 'twixt England and France about le Clere 57 Cadenet the French Favorits Brother sent Am∣bassador Extraordinary into England 67 A Caprichio of some French Lords 70 Cadenet the French Ambassador allowed two hun∣dred pound per diem for his dyet 73 D. THe Duke of Lenox appointed to attend the Palsgrave 1 The Duke of York meets the Palsgrave 2 Donati the Venetian Ambassador recalled for mis∣demeanour 58
Sir Dudley Carltons cold reception in France 188 A difference 'twixt the Master of the Ceremo∣nies and him of the Jewell-house, about the de∣livery of Presents 194 The difference decided 195 Sir Dormer Cotton sent Ambassador to Persia 177 E. THe Earl of Somersets Marriage, &c. 12 Exception taken by the French Ambassador 28 Exceptions taken another time 64 The Earl of Arundels revenge of the French Am∣bassador 68 An Error in the Danish Ambassador 185 The Earl of Rutland sent to transport the Prince from Spain, &c. 129 The Earl of Dorset Justice in Eyre in the Dukes absence 214 F. THe first Complement 'twixt the Lady Eliza∣beth and the Palsgrave 2 The French Ambassador stands upon some punti∣lioes. 12 The Florentine Ambassador plac'd beneath the lowest English Baron at Court 24 Foscarini tragically and wrongfully put to death 29 The first rise of the Duke of Buckingham 35
The French Ambassador much discontented 49 The French Lords discontented because they sate not at the Kings Table 71 Fifty pounds sent the Muscovian Ambassador by the Lords of the Councell to pay for his Sea pro∣vision 108 G. GOndamars first arrivall in England 12 Gavelone Agent for the Duke of Savoy 15 Gondamar precedes the French Ambassador at the Earl of Somersets Wedding 17 Gondamar casts an aspersion upon the Hollands Ambassador 20 A great clash 'twixt divers Ambassadors 66 The great clash 'twixt the Persian Ambassador, and Sir Robert Shirley 174 F. CO: Henry of Nassaw accompanies the Pals∣grave to England 2 Sir Henry Manwaring recommended to the State of Venice by the King 50 Hamburgh Commissioners deemed to have Audi∣dience of the Queen. 183 I. INojosa the Spanish Ambassador clasheth with Don Diego Hurtado an Ambassador also extraordinary from Spain 126 Joachim made Ambassador leger from the States 160
K. KIng James his Apologie to the Arch-Dukes Ambassador. 4 The King Knights six Holland Ambassadors at once, without paying any sees 78 Kings James his Funerall 174 L. THe Lords make a Supper for the Lady Eli∣zabeth 11 The Landgrave of Hessen comes to England 114 Sir Lewis Lewkner suspected to be of the Spanish faction 38 The Lord Mayor of London to give place to no other but the King 237 M. THe manner of the Marriage of the Lady E∣lizabeth 10 Mareth the French Ambassador 53 Monsieur de la Chenay committed prisoner about Sir Walter Rawley 56 Monsieur de Tilliers the French Ambassador hath lodgings at Court but no dyet 165 Tilliers much discontented, and his high language 163 The Marquis Pompeo Strozzi Ambassador from the Duke of Mantova 214
A maxime among Ambassadors 232 Meanes found to content the Dutch Ambassador 242 N. A Notable clash 'twixt the Persian Ambas∣sador, and Sir Robert Sherley, the cir∣cumstances thereof 174 A notable high Memoriall the English Ambassa∣dor gave the King of Spaine 245 News brought in halfe an hour from Dover to Canterbury of the Queens arrivall 153 O. OSalinskie Ambassador Extraordinary from Poland 74 New Orders at Court touching the treatment of Forren Ambassadors 228 The new Orders practised first upon Ballompierre the French Ambassador 228 P. PResents to Ambassadors lessened 31 A rich Present sent by the Muscovit to the King 39 The Polish Ambassador receives 10000 l. of the King by way of loane 90 The Prince like to be drowned in Spaine 221 A Picture case delivered the Mantoüan Am∣bassador from the King, without his Picture,
for a Present worth 500 l. 222 The Prince taxed by the Spanish Ambassadors 245 Q. QUadt an honourable person by the Prince of Transilvania 185 She excuseth her presence at the Coronation 169 The Queens arrivall in England, and newes brought in half an hour from Dover to Canter∣bury by Mr. Terhit 153 R. AReformation of Presents given Ambassa∣dors 31 Aremarkable passage, for precedence hapned at Vervins 'twixt the French and Spanish Am∣bassadors 67 Rosdorf Ambassador for the King of Bohemia 197 Rosencrants the Danish Ambassador 180 Sir Robert Shirley laies his Turban at the Kings feet 137 Mr. Robert Tirhit rides in half an houre from Dover to Canterbury S. THe States Ambassador gives place to him of Savoy 32 The Spanish Ambassador countenanced more then the French 48
Six Commissioners in joynt Embassy from Holland Soubizes arrivall in England, being Godfather to the last King in Scotland 111 T THe Turks Ambassadors Son touch'd by the King 58 The title of King denied by King James to the Palsgrave 62 The Tarrace at Whitehall falls under Gonda∣mar when he had his first Audience for a match in Spain 63 Two Ambassadors of divers Princes lodged in one house 186 The Co. of Tremes sent to condole King Jame's death 146 U. THe Vicountesse of Effingham clasheth with the French Ambassadors Wife 9 The Venetian Ambassador gives place to the Bo∣hemian 66 The Venetian Ambassador Knighted and the Sword given him 113 The Venetian Ambassador questions the giving of precedence to him of Denmark 207 W. Away found to please the Ambassador of Spain and France 36
A way found out another time to please them 64 A witty answer of the Transilvanian Ambassa∣dor 195 Sir Walter Ashtons complaint in the Court of Spaine against the Marquis of Inojosa and Don Carlos Coloma 244 Z. ZAmoiski Son to the Chancellor of Polands arrivall 25 FINIS.
