H3582 e65_27 R1999 99860799 112924
The Humble PETITION OF THE Well-affected Commons of England: PRESENTED To the two Honourable Houses of PARLIAMENT, for a speedy Reforma∣tion, (which hath been long expected) both in CHURCH and STATE. Submissively Supplicating That Grand ASSEMBLY; That they would be pleased to Propound to, and Ad∣vice with the Grave and Reverend SYNOD Concerning the Premisses. Printed in the Yeer. 1643.
The humble Petition of the well-affected Commons, &c. Humbly Sheweth, BEfore we presume to relate our great Greivances, our grievous Perplexities, our present Sorrowes, and personall Sufferings; Give us leave (we humbly beseech you) o commemorate to the world your grand cares for the publick good, your unwearied labours, your incessant paynes, your indefatigable industry, your late-sittings, and early risings, your unanimous consent, and determinate Resolution, not to desert the Cause, which you are resolved to maintaine with your Lives and Fortunes. And though these your valiant Deter∣minations have animated the blood-thirsty Papists to combine and confederate themselves in a hostile man∣ner, with a powerfull Army now in the very bowells of the Nation; yet neverthelesse, such is your undaun∣ted Prowis, that ye have already prepared, and raised an Army of Horse and Foot to meet and oppose them in the open Field. The Romanists have been a long time Arch enemies to our Kingdome, and our Religion; from time to time they have beene the onely Incenda∣ries and Contrivers of the miseries and distractions of this Land. They have recrwted their Forces by the as∣sistance
of Forraign Nations, some of the Rebels late∣ly in Ireland are joyned unto them, they have now m∣ny strings to the bow of their expectation in the Nor∣thern parts, and have strongly fortified their party by the ayd and concurrence of the friends of Anti Christ, or (at least) of those who are friend of his friends and Ad∣herents. Their only end and ayme is to introduce the Species and Forme of Popery into this Land; and their Superlative Designe is to abollish, and quite extirpate, (if it were possible) our true Protestant Religion. To what a height of Insolence are they now arived at? Certainly that saying of the Lyrick Poet may be truely verified of them; One word in the Verse onely inverted; —Audax omnia Perpeti; Gens Romana ruit pervetitum Nefas. Against these your Arch-enemies who are insatiate after our blood, and implacable in their rage and ma∣lce against us, you have forthwith Imprest men for Service, and raise this City and Kingdom, as one man, to subdue and subjugate them, who would Tyrannize, and make Slaves of us. Eo Pede, quo caepisti pergas, As you have bravely begun, so (In Gods Name) go on: Go on and Prosper; The Lord of Hoasts, and God of Battailes go along with your Army, Teach their hands to Warre, and their fingers to Fight; And for your selves (Ye Worthies of this our Israel) the more zelous you are now for God, the more gracious will he be still to you; As you maintaine his Cause, so will he maintain you in his Cause, In the prosecution whereof, an eter∣nity of Fame doth attend you here on earth, an Im∣mortality of Glory shall Crowne you hereafter in Heaven. As we have thus in unfayned and hearty thankfull∣nesse
made a Reall and true Confession of this great Councells valour and integrity, (you being the Ag∣gregate ody of the whole Kingdome in which re∣spect it is impossible, that such a grave Senate, the great Councell of the King and Kingdome should erre, or do any injury, Vel ex odio, Vel ex Livore;) So in the next place; We the humble and poore Commons of distressed, and almost destroyed England, do as in a Map present unto you our manifold Miseries which we have a long time sustained, and sad Calamities, which for these many yeers we have groaned under, and are now grown such an intollerable, and unsupportable weight and burthen, that we are no longer able to undergoe them. The distempers and distractions of this our lan∣guishing Kingdom are various, and indeed innumera∣ble; yet neverthelesse, (for brevity sake) we will re∣duce them to three heds: Matter of Religion. Justice. And the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject. How this Land hath lamentably suffered of late yeers in all these, the woefull History of these times doth sufficiently testifie. To these three (with the leave and favour of this Honourable Court) we may allude the approved Opinion of learned Physitians; who hold that in the Body naturall there are three main principles, Namely; Cor, Caput, & Jecur; the Heart, the Head, and the Liver; Now if any these be infected, or any wayes distemper'd, the whole body suffers: And as it is in the Body naturall, so it is in the Body politicke. The truth is, that the Heart, Head, and Liver of this Common∣wealth hath been dangerously sicke; so perilously sick, that had it not beene for the sage advice, and mature Councell of this renowned Assembly (the great Phy∣sitian, the Parliament) the body Politick of this State
had long ere this been brought to an utter dissolution. The diseases of the State grow on, more and more, like a violent Torrent, they are likely to overwhelme the whole Kingdom, what with Innovasions in point of Religion, corrupting in matters of Justice, and violati∣on of the Subjects Liberty, and Propriety in his estate, this whole land strangly suffers, his Majesty of latter times hath been miserably misled and mis-informed by his Councellors in matters of State-policy; by his Clergy, in matter of Conscience; and by his Judges, in matters of Justice: And therefore that the Grandia Regni, the great affaires of the Kingdom have so unfor∣tunately been miscarried, the fault is not in him, but in them. The KING of himself is like the Sunne in the Firma∣ment, which shines gloriously of it self, but when it is obnubilated, it is in regard of the interposition of some clouds about it: In like manner there is a Malignant Party, which stands between the Prince and his Peo∣ple; This is not one of the least greivances which we undergoe, and for the timely redresse thereof, that say∣ing of Solomon (of mortall men, of immortall memory) is worthy to be imbraced, Take away the wicked from before the KING, that his Throne may be established in Righteousnesse. The two supporters of the KINGS Thron, are Mercy, and Justice; Unlesse Delinquents and Malignants be removed from his Majesties pre∣sence, his Thron will hardly be settled and established in Righteousnesse. That the administration of Justice hath been per∣verted it is too evident, for a long time the Lawes have layne still, and not been put in execution: We all know, that the world cannot afford, nor the wit of man
connot invent better Lawes then this Kingdome now enjoyes; All the defect is, only want of execution: And that the Subject hath been opprest of late dayes, we the poor Commons of England are to too sensible, we have been depriv'd of our Liberties, by the impri∣sonment of our bodies, and detain'd of our Property by the pillaging of our goods; all which we know is contrary to the Liberty of the Subject, and quite oppo∣site to the known and Fundamentall Lawes of this Land. But our greatest Greivance which goes neerest to our hearts, is the violating of our Religion, our Re∣ligion, which is dearer then our Lives, Liberties and Fortunes: How is the face of it besmeared? how is the purity of it defiled. These premisses considered in the aforesaid greivan∣ces related, our submissive Supplication unto this Ho∣nourable Assembly is, that you would be pleased (for under God is lyes in your power) to take these into your grave and juditious consideration, and forthwith to redresse, and to administer timely remedies to these emergent maladies both in Church and Common∣wealth: You have been long, and now are upon the happy worke of Reformation. Reformation is that which you endeavour for, and we all pray for; we doubt not but that God in his good time will grant it, and make you the happy instruments in the accomplish∣ment thereof. And because the maine matter in the Reformation of this Land consists in the abolishing of Popery, the extirpating of Arminianisme, and purging of our Church from those errors & Innovations, with which of latter times she hath been defiled, Therefore our humble suite unto this renowned Senate is, that you
would be pleased in the first place in your consultati∣ons, to enter upon the Reformatton of Religion, that it may be settled and established in this Kingdome in the Primitive Purity thereof, that so the wholsome and Soul-saving Doctrins and tenets of our Mother the Church of England may be truely taught and preached, and the two Sacraments (as they ought to be) rightly administred. To the end, our last Supplication (which is not the least) is, that you would be pleased, to give Order to the Reverend SYNOD of Devines now as∣sembled, (as we know your vigilancy and endeavour in this kind is not wanting) that they have a speciall care in this particular, and not be tardy in the perform∣ance, but with all possible expedition to hasten so good and pious a worke: The glory whereof will be Gods, the Honour yours, the benefit and happinesse the whole Kingdomes. And We your daily Orrators shall (as We are perpetually obliged) pray, &c. FJNJS.
