h3533 99896252 153992
The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the City of London, in Common Councell Assembled. With an humble Representation of the pressing Grievances and important Desires of the well-affected Freemen, and Covenant∣engaged Citizens of the City of London, to the Lords and Commons assembled in high Court of PARLIAMENT. Together with the severall Answers of both Houses of Parliament to the said Petitions and Representation. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Ho∣nourable City of London. 1646.
Die Sabbathi 19. Decemb. 1646. IT is Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the City Printer shall print and publish the two Petitions pre∣sented to this House this day; the one en∣tituled, The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Councell As∣sembled: and the other entituled, An humble Representation of the pressing grievances, and important desires of the well-affected Freemen, and Covenant-en∣gaged Citizens of the City of London, and the Answer of the Lords in Parliament made this day unto them both. Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
Die Sabbathi 19. Decemb. 1646. THe Lords are so fully satisfied with the constant and reall expressions of the fidelity and good affections of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Councell, and Citizens of the City of London, as they have commanded me to give hearty thanks upon the whole matter of the Petitions presented by you from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Councell, and Citi∣zens of the City of London, and to let you know that they will take the particulars of your Petitions into their speedy conside∣ration. Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum. Die Sabbathi 19. Decemb. 1646. THe House being informed, That divers Alder∣men and Citizens of the City of London were at
the Doore, they were called in, and Master Alderman Bunce presented to the House a Petition, entituled, The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Com∣mons of the City of London, in Common-Councell Assembled, Together with an humble Representation of the pressing grie∣vances, and important desires of the well-affected Free-men, and Covenant-engaged Citizens of the City of London, thereunto annexed: The which (the Citizens being withdrawne) were both of them read: And it is Resolved upon the Question, by the Commons As∣sembled in Parliament, That this Petition, and the Representation annexed, be taken into consideration on Tuesday morning next, notwithstanding any for∣mer Order. Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, That Master Speaker do give the Petitioners thanks for their constant good affections. The Petitioners were againe called in, and Master Speaker accordingly, by Command and Order of the House did give them thanks for their constant good affections, and did further acquaint them, That they had read their Petition, and the Representation annexed, and that they have appointed a very short day to take them into consideration. H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
