N473 E154_42 99860259 112376
THE ANSWER AND RESOLVTION Of the States of HOLLAND, concerning the Queenes Majesties Desire to the States. Delivered to Her Maiesty July the 6. by the Duke of Luneburg. ALSO A true Relation of two Ships which came from Holland, laden with Ammuniti∣on, and great store of Moneyes, and many Commanders, who are now with His Maiestie at Yorke, which landed at Holdernesse, the 4 of Iu∣ly, 1642. Ordered to be Printed and Published. Jo. Browne, Cler. Parl. Iuly, 12. LONDON, Printed for J H. and T. Ryder, 1642
The Answer and Resolution of the States in Holland. THe Queens Majesty since her departure from the English Court and her arrivall in Hol∣land, being moved with the consideration of the manifold dangers which trouble this Kingeome, and which without speedy prevention must of ne∣cessity produce greater and more full of danger; we being moved with these and the like considerations, being grieved at the difference between the King and his Parliament, did most seriously, as one most tender of this Kingdome, did ex∣presse her selfe unto the States of Holland, and seriously entreated from them their assistance in the Reconciliation of the King and Parliament, and withall desi∣ring
them that they would undertake to compose, and settle the difference which did so much distract this King∣dome, and for which she her selfe, as a maine sharer in these troubles, would acknowledge the benefit received, and accept as done unto her owne person. This Message or Desire was willingly received by the States, and at a pub∣lique Assembly at the Hague was open∣ly read, but for the present they retur∣ned for answer to her Majesty, that her Desires were of so great weight and con∣sequence, that they must assume some time for Answer, and that for the pre∣sent they could not returne any thing to her Majesty in satisfaction to her de∣sires, but their promise of their services, which should suddainly waite upon her with their Resolution to those her Desires. Vpon the 2. of July there was another meeting assembled, and in the Audience of those that were present, the sense of
Majesties Desires was reiterated, and af∣ter publication & a long debate thereof among the States, they did intimate their mind and chose ths Duke of Luneburg to present their Answer and Resolution to her Majesty, who with all convenien∣cy and speed that might be, provided himselfe to visit and deliver the minds of the States unto her Highnesse. The summe whereof he delivered unto every particular of her Desires. To the first De∣sire, That it was a most unpleasing Office and that it did not become any Kingdome to inter∣pose or meddle with the affayres that con∣cerne another Nation, or to screw or search in∣to the secrets and private occurrences that doe belong unto another State. yet they did heartily desire a Composure of all differen∣tes to the Honour of God, the content of his Majesty, and the prosperity of the King∣dome of England. For that they beside the Relation which they were lately happy in by the Conjunction of their Nation,
with ours of England, occasioned by the most happy and most auspicious Marriage of the Prince of Orange his sonne to the most hopefull Lady MARY Eldest Daughter to the King of England, they had many other obligations and in∣ducement to desire and by all meanes further as much as in them lyes the U∣nion and blessed estate of His Majesties Kingdomes. And with all promised their assi∣stance, so farre as might stand with their Honour to use all possible meanes of reconcilement between His Majesty and His Parliament. And also informed the Queens Majesty that they vvould dispatch a suddaine Ambassage to the King and Parliament, by which Letters they would move both King and Parliament to a reconcilement, and intimate unto them the danger of Civill difference betweene the King and Subject, not doubting but they should obtaine so much respect from both, as
not to deny their desires, which were onely grounded upon their faithfull de∣sires of peace, and their true intentions to serve His Majesty and Parliament. To her Majesties second Desire, to furnish His Majesty with strength against the opposition of these present times. His reply in the name of all the States was, That what power or forces soever they were masters of, they would wish no better imployd then to serve the King of England, and to assist him against the violence and invasion of any forraigne enemy. But for any forces against His owne Subjects, they must desire more deliberation. For they did so much ten∣der His Majesties Honour and advance∣ment, and the prosperity of His King∣domes, that they shall not dare to doe any thing which may by any meanes tend to the dishonour of the King, or the disquiet of His Subjects, or King∣dome, And that they did fore-see that if those distracted proceedings of this
Kingdome were not in time prohibited and that ruine and destruction would be the consequence and effect of private dissentions. This was the answer deli∣vered by the Duke of Luneburg to her Majesty concerning her Desires for the present, but since that time it is gene∣rally reported that two ships very well laden with all Warlike provision were sent over from the States with two hundred thousand pound to His Maje∣sty in money, in which ships were also almost two hundred Ancient Comman∣ders, which for this many yeares had served under the States of Holland, all which both ships, moneyes, ammuniti∣on, and Commanders were landed at Holdernesse the 4. of July and are now with His Majesty at Yorke. FINIS.
