N959 E129_27 R16791 99860093 156288
NEWS FROM GERMANIE. Wherein is also related, how the Em∣perours Brother Arch-Duke Leopold-William Hath proceeded according to Mar∣tiall Law against those Regiments that ran away in the late Battell fought betwixt him and the Swedish Generall Torstensohn, Near Leipzigk the 23. of October last, 1642. December the 10th. Printed in the year, 1642.
Ersurd the 13.23. of November, 1642. WE can heare no certain news how it stands with the Citie of Leipzigk; only this we understand, That the Besieged are now very quiet, and shoot but little out of the Town, they expected the Duke of Saxonies resolution; Meane while, the Swedish Generall Torstensohn hath removed his head-quarter from Steteritz in∣to the Suburbs before St. Peters Gate, and first of all, shot with his Canons such breaches through the great steeple in the Castle, and spoiled the same so much, that the besieged can make no more use of it: afterwards, over against the two wa∣ter-works, he caused a very deep ditch to be dig∣ged against the great outworke neer the Castle, and some demy-Canons to be planted very deep into the earth levell to the ground of the Castle Moat; if he brings it to passe, then the chiefest place of the Citie is lost, there are likewise three Mines more made ready, insomuch that the said Citie is in great danger. The Swedish Cavallery lyes enquartered all along in the way towards Bohemia; Assoon as Leipzigk is surrendred, it is thought they will march that way. The Wey∣marish Army is arrived about Halberstat, to expell
out of the sayd Citie and Bishoprick the new le∣vyed Imperiall Troops, and then to joyn with the Swedish Generall Major Coningsmarck: The new levyed Imperiall Troops under Colonell Pentzen, and Colonell Bothen, which were rou∣ted lately by the Swedes in Luneburgland, having recollected themselves again, had order to march towards Magdeburg, but not far by the custome Sconce there, they were surprized again by a Swedish party, and totally ruinated. From the Swedish Camp before Leipzigk the 16.26. of November. THe Siege before the Citie and Castle of Le∣ipzigk is yet seriously continued, the 7.17. and the 8.18. of this instant, Generall Torsten∣sohn made above 500. Canon-shots against the great steeple in the Castle, so that the besieged made but a volly shot out of the Steeple, and af∣terwards let down their Canons from the same, the 9.19. and 10.20. of this instant; they played again fiercely with their Canons against the Ca∣stle, and into the Citie, and battered down the stairs in the Castle steeple, they flang also divers divers Granadoes into it; especially one great one, which fell into the Storehouse neare the Castle hard by Peters steeple, which took such ef∣fect, that the whole roofe of the house was taken off by it; Mean while the Swedes continued in approaching towards the Citie, and came to the very Moats of the same: Whereupon, the 11.12. of this instant, a new Battery was raised, Can∣nons
planted upon it, and the Walls battered, whereby a great part of the Wall fell into the Moatt, and fill'd up a great part of it, the 12.22. dito, he besieged viewed the breach in the Wall, and about 10. of the clock at Noon, sallied out unawares with a reasonable strength, surprized and slew two Captains, and two Lievtenants together with some few common souldiers, nailed six Pee∣ces of Ordnance standing upon the sayd Battery, fired the Gunpowder and Watch-houses, chased the Gunners from the Battery, and afterwards retired into the Citie again, the seventh Peece of ordnance that stood on the same battery, they took not so much time to nayl it, out of the two Pee∣ces the nayls were presently taken again, out of which the Swedes played into the Citiy, out of the other four Peeces the nayls were likewise ta∣ken again, and the same likewise used again a∣gainst the Citie; the same day about four of the clock in the Evening, the besieged ventured a∣gain, sallied out again through the same Breach where the wall was battered down, fired the shel∣ters and Cannon baskets near the battery, and the powder upon it, but they were beaten back again with the losse of many men, that were both slain and taken prisoners, and the same day the besie∣ged undertook to shoot with Muskets and double Muskets out of the breach of the Castle steeple, but they were presently hindered in their designe by the Swedish Cannons. The 13.23. dito the Swedes begun to shoot a breach not far from the Castle, hard by the Water-worke, and continued
the shooting all the next day long, and spared no labour with approaching, undermining and bat∣tering, and cut off all the Mills from the besieg∣ed, and the River of Pleisse flowing heretofore thorow the city, they led another way; and being the Swedes understood by the prisoners, That a∣bout 1200 Imperiall souldiers fled in the last Bat∣tell into the city, and that they have armed all young Trades-men; and being the Swedes per∣ceive also, That the besieged intend to defend themselves to the last man, and to expect the ex∣tremities, wherefore the Swedes make all manner of preparations for a generall assault, which the besieged are every day to expect: the Swedes have planted yet 12 Cannons close to the wall, to force thereby the yeelding of the city; horses and cat∣tell are sold very cheap in the Swedish Camp; all the country thereabouts is wholly ruinated; the Weymarish Army is arrived within two hours going from the Swedish Camp; assoon as they are arrived in the Camp, a generall Assault shall be given, if Leipzigk doth not come to an Agree∣ment. Prague the 19.29 of Nov. From Rockezan the 16.26 of this instant we are certified, That Arch-Duke Leopold William hath summoned to appear before him there the Picco∣lominish, Pompeijch, Bucheimish, and Maudlo∣ish Regiments: Assoon as they were come into the Town, he caused the Gates to be guarded with a 1000 Muskettiers; and 3 other Regi∣ments arrested the 4 Lievtenant-colonells, and
signified unto them their faults: Unto the Ser∣jeant-Majors, Captains of Horse, and all other Officers, he read likewise their sentence, and thereupon caused them to be beheaded; but the Corporalls, and other Officers, together with the tenth man of the ordinary horse-men, to be hanged, the rest he declared for Rebells, made them a free Price, caused the Generall Provost to tear off their Colours from the Standards before their eyes, and to break the Standards in pieces. From Alsatia, the 18.28 of Nov. Generall Major Erluch, Governour of Bryssack, hath fetched from Hohenwiel, 2 Demi-cannons, and 4 Quarter-cannons, wherewith he intends to march towards Zell or Villingen: some write, That Lievtenant-colonell Rosa, with the Avant∣guard, hath begird already Dudlingen, wherein lie 100 Imperiall Horse, and 50 Muskettiers: At Stutgurt and Eslingen, fell the 15.25 of this in∣stant, betwixt twelve and one of the clock at Noon, an unusuall rain; the water that was taken up in Vessels, was like unto the colour of flesh, notwithstanding any linnen cloth being put into the same, it did not colour it in the least way; and in the morning, strange sights of fire appeared in the Ayr: Generall Major Erlach intends to put the whole country of Wirtenberg under contribution, like as he hath done unto the Marquisate of Baden. An extract of a Letter from Franckford, the 21 of Nov. the 1 Dec. The Arch-Duke Leopold William is at Pilsen, appointing Quarters for his Horse-men; and being
at Rockezan in Behomia, caused one of those Regi∣ments that they say did run away in the last Bat∣tell, to be put in order upon the Market-place of the Town, and so environed them all about with other Horse-men and Muskettiers, then caused their Cornets to be taken from them, and all the Officers light from their horses, and committed them as prisoners to the Generall Provost; after this, caused likewise all the ordinary Horse-men likewise to alight from off their horses, and lay down their Arms; all which together with their horses, he hath given to other Regiments, and pronounced sentence, That all the Officers should be hanged, and the ordinary Horse-men shall cast Dice, and the tenth man shall likewise be hanged, and the rest he declared Knaves and Rogues, and that they shall be sent as slaves, perpetually to work in the Fortifications of Hungaria; all which hath been done the next day, 14 Officers hanged, and two shot to death, which is a great example to all souldiers; the Lievtenant-colonell, and Ma∣jor of the Regiment, have been sent for Prague, where their Colonell is, whose name is Maudlo, in prison, where they will likewise be punished, and many others of the other 3 Regiments, but I believe not so severely as this Regiment, for the like hath not been done these many yeers. At this instant we understand of the Agent of the Bishop of Wurtsburg, That the city of Leipzigk hath a∣greed with the Swedes, to give 200000 Rixdal∣lers for the plundering, and take in one Regiment for Garrison: The truth we shall know this after∣noon by the Letters. FINIS.
