o458 e545_12 99863155 115339
THE Marquesse of Ormonds PROCLAMATION Concerning the Peace concluded with the Irish Rebells, By the KINGS Command, At the Generall Assembly at KILKENNEY; WITH A Speech delivered by Sir Richard Blake, Speaker of the Assembly at Kilkenney. Also a Speech by the Marquesse of Ormond in answer to the same. Together with a perfect List of their severall Numbers of Horse and Foot by them raised, amounting to 20000. Foot, and 3500. Horse. Imprimatur. Gilbert Mabbott. LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and John Playford. Febr. 27. 1649.
Carolus Rex. By the Lord Lievtenant Generall, and Generall Governour of Ireland. Ormond. WHereas Articles of Peace are made, concluded, accorded and agreed up∣on by and between Us JAMES Lord
Marquesse of Ormond, Lord Lievtenant-Gene∣rall, and Generall Governor of his Majesties Kingdom of Ireland, by vertue of the authority wherwith We are intrusted, for, and in the behalf of his most excellent Majesty of the one part, and the generall Assembly of the Roman Catho∣likes of the said Kingdome, for and on the be∣half of his Majesties Roman Catholike Subjects of the same on the other part, a true copie of which Articles of Peace is hereunto annexed. We the Lord Lievtenant; doe by this Procla∣mation in his Majesties Name publish the same, and do in his Maiesties Name strictly charge and command all his Maiesties Subiects, and all o∣ther inhabiting or residing within his Maiesties said Kingdom of Ireland to take notice thereof, and to render due obedience to the same in all parts thereof. And as his Maiesty hath been induced to this peace out of a deep sense of the miseries and cala∣mities brought upon this his Kingdom and peo∣ple, and out of a hope conceived by his Maiesty, hat it may prevent the further effusion of his ubiects blood, redeem them out of all the mi∣series
and calamities under which they now suffer, and restore them to all quiet∣nesse and happinesse under his Maiesties most gracious government, deliver the Kingdome in generall from those slaugh∣ters, depredations, rapines and spoiles which alwaies accompany a war, incou∣rage the Subiects and others with com∣fort to betake themselves to trade, traf∣fique, commerce, manufacture, and all o∣ther things; which uninterrupted, may in∣crease the wealth and strength of the Kingdome, beget in all his Maiesties Sub∣iects of this Kingdome a perfect unity a∣mongst themselves, after the too long con∣tinued division amongst them; so his Ma∣iesty assures himselfe that all his Subiects of this his Kingdome (duly considering the great and inestimable benefits which they may finde in this peace) will with all duty render due obedience thereunto. And wee in his Maiesties Name do hereby de∣clare, that all persons rendring due obedi∣ence to the said peace, shall bee pro∣tected,
cherished, countenanced and sup∣ported by his Maiesty and his royall Au∣thority, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Articles of Peace. Given at our Castle of Kilkenny the 17. of January 1648. God save the King.
The Speech of Sir Richard Blake, Speaker of the Assembly at Kilkenny, TO THE Marquesse of ORMOND. May it please your Excellency, I Am commanded by the Prelacy, Nobi∣lity, and Gentry, of the Roman Catho∣likes of Ireland, now assembled in the City of Kilkenny to represent unto your Excellency their ardent zeale naturally in∣grafted in their hearts to their sacred Sove∣raigne King CHARLS his service, unto whom they ever have been, and will be most faithfull and loyall Subjects; and in the next place their great affection to your Excellency, and the never dying memory
they entertaine, and will retaine of your most noble and successefull indeavours in the ioynting and setting together of the much disordered frame of this King∣dome. Former Cessations, accommodations, and capitulations did but skin over the deep and wide wounds that were and are in the body of it; they received no life or perfection, they abortively perished in the Embrion, and vanished into the aire, but the peace that by the great mercy of God, by the influences of his Maiesties graces, and by the ministery and co-operation of your Excellency is now to be established, will prove (as with ioy and confidence we expect) a firm, stable, and lasting peace, a peace that wil cure these bleeding wounds, search to the very core, and pluck out all the splinters that remaine of them; a peace that will (as we hope, and is the height of our desires, as it shall be of our indeavors) reinvest his sacred Maiesty in his most due and royall Rights and Prerogatives, and will restore this Nation in its former lustre
and plenty and tranquility, such a Peace as already ends all our doubts, fears and jealousies, in a mutual confidence, and rejoycing, and will make all the Mem∣bers of this general Assembly, an Assembly unto which the present and future ages will justly give the glorious name of the peace-making Assembly after their many distractions and long continued suffer∣ings to return to their several respective Countries & dwellings, with olive branches, the Emblems of Peace in their hands, and the Word in their mouths, that were said of our Saviour, when upon the entrance in∣to the City of Nani, he meets with a Funeral of a dead young man, the only son of his following weep∣ing mother, whom graciously compassionating her tears, he restored from death ro life, the words were, and not unaptly to be applyed to our present condi-Ecce propheta magnus surrexit in nobis & quiea deus reci∣tavit plebem suam, Most excellent Lord, whom God Almighty hath preserved, and led, as it were, by the hand through a sea of troubles and dangers, to be the happy and essential instrument to mediate, actuate and consumate this great work, and to make Ireland like the heavenly Jerusalem to be a City of Unity within it self. I cannot sufficiently express the sence and joyous exultancy of these most venerable Prelates, most ho∣norable Lords, most judicious and gallant Gentry, the Representative body of the Roman Catholiques of this Kingdom, nor with what fervor and ardor they expect to reap the blessed fruits, which they have so long sighed for, and did sow in their blood and tears of this Peace, and of your Excellencies Government
of this Kingdom, unto which being derived from his Majesty, who is the Spring from which these graces flow upon them. They will humbly pay all due obedience to your Ex∣cellencies fast and tried fidelity to his Majesty, your own great interest in the Kingdom, and the many great parts and talents that God and Nature hath en∣dowed you with, giving them assurance that your go∣vernment will produce effects suitable to their expect∣ations, that will answer their designe: it much tran∣scends my weak abilities-to represent them, their af∣fections, apprehensions and hopes, in their right and lively colours: And therefore I humbly beg, that your Excellency will vouchsafe to give as benign and fa∣vorable interpretations of what by their command I have endeavored humbly to offer to your grave Judg¦ment and Consideration; and that your Excellency will be pleased to signe this instrument the everlast∣ing Record and Monument of this blessed Peace, as by their commands, it having been solemnly and uni∣mously by so valued; I have the honor (a greater ho∣nor then my low and humble thoughts ever aspired to) in their Chair to signe this counterpart, and in all their names most humbly to present it unto your Ex∣cellency.
The L. Marquis of Ormonds Speech in Answer to the Speech of Sir Rich∣ard Blake at the Assembly in Kil∣kenney. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Shall not speak to those Epressions of du∣ty and loyalty, so eloquently digested in∣to a discourse by the Gentleman appoin∣ted by you to deliver your Sence: you will have in your hands presently greater and more solid Arguments of his Majesties gracious ac∣ceptance, then I can enumerate, or then per∣haps you your selves discern: for besides the provision made against the remotest fears of the severity of certain Laws, and besides ma∣ny other Freedoms and bounties conveyed to you and your posterity by these Articles, there is a doore, and that a large one, not left, but expresly set open, to give you entrance by your future merits to whatsoever of honor, or other advantages you can reasonably wish; so that you have in present fruition what may abundantly satisfie, and yet there are no bounds set to your hopes, but you are rathr
invited, or according to the new phrase, but to an old and better purpose; you seem to have a Call from heaven to excercise your Arms, and your utmost in the noblest and justest Cause the world hath known; for let all the circumstances, incident to a great and good cause of War, be examined, and they will be found in that which you are now warrantably called to defend. Religion, not in that narrow circumscribed definition of it, by this or that late found out names, but chri∣stian Religion is our Quarrel, which certainly is more fatally struck at by the blasphemous license of this age, then ever it was by the rudest incursions of the most barbarous and avow'd Enemies to Christianity. The vener∣able Laws and Fundamental Constitutions of our Ancestors are troden under impious and (for the most part) mechanick feet. The sacred person of our King, the life of those Laws and head of those Constitutions, is under an ignominious imprisonment, and his life threatened to be taken away by the sacrilegi∣ous hands of the basest of the people that owe hsm obedience, and to endear the Quarrel to
you, the fountain of all the benefits you have but now acknowledged, and of what you may further hope for by this Peace, and your own merits, is in danger to be obstructed by the execrable murther of the worthiest Prince that ever ruled these Islands. In short, Hell can add nothing to that desperate mischief, now openly projected. And now judg if a greater, a more glorious field, was ever set o∣pen to action, and then prepare your selves to enter into it, and receive these few advices from one throughly embarqued with you in the adventure. First, Let me recommend unto you, that to this, as to all other holy actions, you would prepare your selves with perfect charity, a cha∣rity that may obliterate whatever of rancor a long continued civil War may have contract∣ed in you, against any that shal now co-ope∣rate with you to so blessed a work, and let his engagements with you in this, whosoever he be, be as it ought to be, a bond of unity, of concord, of love, stronger then the neerest ties of nature. In the next place, mark and beware of those
that shall go about to renew or create jealou∣sies in you, vnder what petence soever, and ac∣count such as infernal Ministers, imployed to promote the black design on foot, to subvert Monarchy, and to make us all slaves to those that are so to their own avaratious lusts. A∣way as soon, and as much as possible may be, with those distinctions of Nations, and of parties, which are the fields wherein the seeds of those rank weeds are sown by the great enemies of our Peace. In the last place let us all divest our selves of that preposterous, that ridiculous ambiti∣on, and self-interest, which rather leads to our threatned ruine, then to the enjoyment of advantages unseasonably desired: And if at any time you shall think your selves pincht too neer the bone, by those Taxes and Levies that may be imposed for your de∣fence; consider then how vain, how foolish a thing it will be, to starve a righteous Cause for want of necessary support, to preserve your selves fat, and guilded sacrifices to the rapine of a merciless enemy: And if we come thus prepared to a contention so just
on our part, God will bless our endeavours with success and victory, or will crown our sufferings with honor and patience; for what honor will it not be (if God have so determined of us) to perish with a long glo∣rious Monarchy? Or who can want pati∣ence to suffer with an opprest Prince? But as our endeavors, so let our prayers be vigor∣ous, that they may be delivered from a more unnatural rebellion then is mentioned by any story, now raised to the highest pitch of success against them. I should say something to you for my self, in retribution to the advantageous men∣tion made of me, and my endeavors to bring this Settlement to pass, but I confess my thoughts were wholy taken up with these much greater concernments; let it suffice, that as I wish to be continued in your good esteem and affection, so I shall freely adven∣ture upon any hazard, and esteem no trouble or difficulty too great to encounter, if I may manifest my zeal to this cause, and discharge some part of the obligations that are upon me to serve this Kingdom.
The Engagement of the several Parties in Ireland included in the late Peace made betwixt the Marquess of Or∣mond and the Rebels.  . Foot. Horse. ORmond, Taffe, and that party engaged to raise for Munster 4000. 800 The Supream Councel, and Preston, for Lemster 4000. 800 Inchequeen 3000. 600 The Lord Clanrickard for Connaght hath engaged not to be behind with the best of them, at least 4000. 800   15000. 3000 Owen Roe is certainly upon a design of conjunction with them, the Marquesse of Antrim being (about the 17 of this instant) up on his journey to Kilkenny to work a Reconciliation betwixt the Kil∣kenney party, and the said Owen Roes party, whose number by generall computation cannot be lesse then, 5000. Foot, and 500. Horse. 5000. 500 In all 20000. 2500 FINIS.
