T2481 E173_15 99860254 112371
A TRVE AND FVLL RELATION of the horrible and hellish Plot of the Iesuites Popish Priests and other Papists in Ireland, for the Massacring of the two chiefe Justices, and all the Privie Coun∣cell and Protestants in that Kingdome. As it was related by my Lord Keeper in the house of Commons November the first. 1641. London, Printed for Thomas Bankes, and are to be sold at his shop on Bridewell stayers in Black-Fryers. 1641.
A True and full Relation of the horrible and hellish plot of the Iesuits Popish Priests and other Papists in Ireland, for the Massacring of the two cheife Iu∣stices, and all the Privie Councell and Protestants in that Kingdome. THe Lord Keepr declared unto the House of Commons, that the Lord Deputy of Ireland had received a Letter from the two Lord Cheife Iustices and Privie Counsell in Ireland, of the discovery of an Horible Plot by the Iesuites, Popish Prsts and other Papist in the Kingdome of Irland, for the murthering of the two Cheife Iustices and all the Prive Counsl and Protetants o reand, as also to sez on all the Kigs irs, Cstles and Mgen whatseer an
moreover, that they would murther all persons that should oppose them in any of their inten∣tions and desires, which were these. 1. First, to have their Crowne not to bee dependant upon England, nor to be a conque∣red Nation. 2. Secondly, to have their Irish Lawes esta∣blished, and such as should bee made hereaf∣ter. 3. Thirdly, to have free liberty of the exer∣cise of their Relegion. The Earle of Leicester declared the same al∣so, adding that hee had the originall of a Pro∣clamation which was made there, and had cau∣sed the same to bee coppied out. The Letter beares date the twenty third of October, 1641. declaring that Hugh Ocorett went to Dublin un∣to the lodging of Hugh Maymubawne his very good friend, and he and his friend going to the lodging of the Lord Marques, understood great store of Noble men and strangers had beene there, but they were all gone abroad, and they could not finde them; wherefore they re∣turned backe againe to his friends lodging, where his friend revealed unto him the whole Plot; but swore unto him he should not stirre till it was put into execution, and therefore his friend commanded his servants to looke nar∣rowly to him: but after a while he fained some excuse of necessity for his going downe, which
his friend gave way too, but sent his servants with him: when he was come downe, the ser∣vants not being so carefull to watch him as they might have beene, he leaped over a wall in the yard, and made an escape, and went to Sir Iohn Burlacy, and discovered to him the whole Plot, which was this. That at nine of the Clocke the next mor∣ning, the Irish Rebels (amongst whom the Lord Marques was on of the chiefest) intended at one hower and moment of time, to massacre and murder all the English and Protestants in the Kingdome of Ireland, likewise to murder the two Lord chiefe Iustices, and all the privy coun∣cell at Dublin, and at the same time, to seaze up∣on all the Kings Castles, Forts, and Magazens throughout the whole Kingdome of Ireland, as also the Castle of Dublin, and that if they should finde any of the Citie that would not submit to them, then they would shoote downe from the Castle, the tops of the Chimnys to affright them, and if that did not prevaile, they would then batter downe their houses about their cares. Hereupon the Lord chiefe Iustice and the rest of the privy Councell of Ireland, sat all night in consultation, and tooke the best course they could immagine of for the safeguard & se∣curity of themselves; together with the Castle and City of Dublin. The next morning they ap∣prehended
great store of these Trators and Rebells, together with the Lord Marquise, who was gone from his lodging before day and hid in a Cockloft, and at his lodging they found great store of Chaines, Hammers, and Hutchets without halves. The same day they had notice of severall places and Forts seased upon in Conno and Monno and other places, together with severall Villages plundered by the Rebells; but they wrote word that they did not beleeve that distemper was so generall as was reported to be, and then they made no que∣stion but they should with care and paines bring all to a good issue; to that end they had sent for five hundred of the Horse to come and guard them at Dublin, and had likewise raise five hundred English for the sucuring of themselves and the City, and that out of those five hun∣dred they had chosen an hundred to be put into the Castle under the command of Sir Francis Welloughby, who they hoped would give a good accompt to his Majesty of the place fees two Monthes: And in the meane time for feare least there should be some further and worser plots then they knew of, they did desire that the Parliament in England would send them downe their Lord Lieftenant with mn, money and Amunition. They further gave
us to understand, that they had taken order for their Army of old Souldiers, to bee in a readines and to mare in oppositi∣on to any of the Rebels that should draw to a head. FINIS.
