t2690 e132_28* 99871332 157287
THE TRVE Effigies of our most Illustrious Soveraigne LORD, KING CHARLES QVEENE MARY, With the rest of the Royall Progenie. Also a Compendium or Abstract of their most famous Geneologies and Pedegrees, Expressed in Prose and Verse. With the Times and Places, of their Births. Printed at London for John Sweeting, at the signe of the Angell in Popes-Head Alley. 1641.
Carolus Rex. THis shaddow is the briefe Epitomie Of Ancient, Royall, true borne Majestie, Our Noble Charles, his Geneologie brings From Portugales, Castiles, and Navarrs Kings, Spaine, Arragon, France, Bohem, Lombardie, Granado, Denmarke, Norway, Tuscanie, Stout Sweathland, Poland, and Hungaria Brave Austria, Naples and Sicillia, Gallicia, Wales, Brittaine, Vallentia; Faire England, Scotland, Ireland, Belgia, From Germanes Empire (West) & th' Empire East, From seaventy Caesars he derives (at least His Royall pedigree, and from their stemms Hee's sprung (the glory of their Diadems.) Eight hundred Kings, and Emperours (and more) Of all those Kingdomes that are nam'd before, From all their Royall bloods, that wore those Crownes, And sway'd those Scepters, (to their high Renownes) King Charles is sprung, (by lineall true descent) Their off-springs grace, their vertues ornament.) Nine Kings of France, of Charles his name there were, And each of them did severall Titles beare, As Charles the 1 Great, The 2 Greatest, The 3 Belov'd, The 4 Learn'd, The 5 Wise, The 6 Valiant (well approv'd) The 7 Noble, The 8 Victorious, and the 9 Good. By these distinctions it is understood, How these brave Princes, all were quallified, And in Fames Booke Enrol'd, and dignified. But our King Charles hath all these in his brest, He's Great, Learn'd, Wise, Belov'd, Good, and BEST. King Charles his pedigree is derived from 20 Kings of Castile, 30 K. of Leon. 18 K. of Portugale, 20 K of Aragon, 6 K. of Spaine, 42 K. of France 70 Emperors, 25 K. of Nables, 21 K of Bohemia, 40 Kings of Denmarke 25 K. of Norway, 12 K. of Lombrdie, 37 K. of Hungaria 38 K. of Sweaden, 31 K. of Poland. 34 K. of Navarre, besides from the Kings of Sicillia, Gallacia, Vallencia, with the Principa∣litie and Dukedomes of Avstria, Savoy, Wales, Brittaine, the 7 Electors of Ger∣many, with many Lords of Belgia, (or the Neatherlands,) and lastly from 50 K. of England, and 108 K. of Scotland King Charles doth derive his Royall Pede∣gree. Besides innumerable Families of Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles, who have ineall relation of Consanguinity with his Royall person in the most parts of the dominions and Kingdoms of Christendome. He was borne at Dum∣filing in Scotland, 19 of Novem. 1600. whose prosperous Raigne, God long continue amongst us.
portrait of Charles I Charles by the grace of God Kinge of England Scotland France and Ireland defendor of the faith etc.
Maria Regina. WIthin the substance of this figure here The Graces and the Vertue do shine cleare: The Godesses, the Muses, all agree That in her brest their Residence must be, From Juna, her Majestique Mind she gain'd, From Citherea, Beauty she attain'd: Minerva (Pallas) hath inspir'd her Heart With Courage, in Regarding Armes and Art. Appollo, with his radient Rayes Divine Incli'nd hir favour to the Sisters Nine; And for a Blessing to this Happy Land Shee's largely Graced, by th'Almighties Hand To be a fruitfull Vine, whose Branches may Spread Gloriously, as farre as Phaebus Rale. In Goodnesse, Greatnesse, and in true content May She, and They be Supereminent.
portrait of Henrietta Maria, Queen of Charles I Henrietta Maria by the Grace of God Queene of England Scotland France and Ireland etc.
Carolus Princeps. FElix is Happy, and on Felix day This Prince was born the twenty ninth of May 1630. A Hopefull Branch of Happinesse to Come To us, and all disjoynted Christendome; Whose fruitfull Boughes, may flourish and Extend To shelter Justice, and true Faith defend. So Wise, Grave, Aged, he in Youth appeares, As if his Age had twice out stript his Yeares: The Abstract of Admired Majesty, Rich Cabbinet of Royall modesty Possessing. It is blest Parents formes and faces, Heire to their Crownes, their vertues and their Graces. The valliant Black-Prince, that brave man of men, Made France shake, and surviv'd years five times ten And may our High-borne Charles, as long remaine Great Brittaines Honour, and beloved Raigne. This Noble and hopefull Prince was borne on the 29 day of May, 1630. betweene the howres of 10 and 11, it being Saturday And in the Almanack it is called Faelix His birth was at S. James House neare Cha∣ring Crosse. His Godfathers were Lewis the 13 the French King (now Raigning) and the other was the Prince Pallatine. The Godmother was the Queene mother of France: their Deputies there was, James Duke of Lenox (for the French King.) And James Marquest of Hamilton (for the Palsgrave) And for the Queene mother (the Durches of Richmond and Lenox was Deputie
portrait of Prince Charles (the future Charles II) Charles by the grace of God Prince of Wales Duke of Corn well York and Albany borne May 29 1630
Maria Princesse. FOr outward Beauty, and for Grace within This Princesse is the Admired Magazin. And though her Greatnesse, is from High borne blood, Pure vertue, is her best and greatest good; Milde, Modest, Assable, Belov'd, and Loving, Discreete, and Debonaire, Attractive, moving True Honour, Dutie, Service and Respect From goodmen, who true goodnesse do Affect. (Above the spanne of nine yeares Pilgrimage) Shee is a patterne for her Sex and Age: The Modell, Medull, perfect forme and name Of Her Grand-mother, (that most Princely Dame.) And as shee growes in yeares, Hir vertues store Like unexhausted Treasure, still growes more. And could my Humble Muse speake halfe her praise, My Verse would thousand yeares out live my dayes.
portrait of Princess Mary of Orange (daughter of Charles I) THE TRVE PORTRAICTVRE OF THE HIGH-BORNE Princesse▪ Mary Princesse of Orange  maried at White-Hall London 23 May 1641 borne ye 4 Nou31
Jacobus Dux Eboracensus THis Prince (much like another Sun) darts forth Most gracious beames to's Dukedom & the North: And makes us see with eyes of Expectation Hee'le be a mighty Pillar to this Nation. A stay of State, the weake supporting Proppe, Whose fame will scale the height of Honours Toppe. He hates dull idlenesse, and loves to bee In Action, such as fits his High degree: He will be stirring in such Exercise As well becomes his yeares, and qualities. Surely, th'Eternall Eye of Providence Doth watch, direct, and guard this Hopefull Prince For some designes as may be for Heaven's Glory, And fill the Earth with James his Noble Story. This all true Brittaines, do expect in Love, In hope our wishes are confirm'd ABOVE. The Duke dome of Yorke was but an Earledome in the raigne of K. Henry the second, whose daughter Mauld was mother to Otho the fourth Emperour of Germany, to which Otho, K. Richard the first was Unckle, and he gave to the said Emperour (his Kinsman) the Earledome of Yorke, Anno 1189. Edmund of Langley was fifth Son to K. Edward the third, and first Duke of Yorke, 1351. Edmund Plantagenet, was after his father Ed∣munds decease the second Duke of Yorke, he was flaine at the Barraile of Agincourt, 25 Octob 1414. Rich. Plantagenet 3 Duke of Yorke, slaine at the Battaile of Wakefield, 1460. Richard of Shrewsbury, second Son to K. Edward the 4, was the fourth Duke of Yorke, and murthered by command of his cruell Unckle K. Ric. the thrird. Henry second Son to K. Henry the seventh, was created the fifth Duke of Yorke, he was afterwards K. Henry the 8. Charles second Son to K. James, was (by his father) created the 6 Duke of Yorke, on Twelf day, 1604. he was after Prince of Wales, 3 Novemb. 1616. He is now our graci∣ous King, and long may he continue so in all prosperity. James now ∣ving, the third sonne of K. Charles, being 7 yeares of age, is the seave Duke of Yorke this yeare 1641,
portrait of Prince James, Duke of York (the future James II) THE HIGH BORNE PRINCE IAMES DVKE OF YORKE. borne October — the 13. 1633. Sould by Tho: Ienner af the South Entry of the Exchange.
Elizabeth Princesse. HEre is the Grace of Natures Workemanship Wherein her selfe, her selfe she did out-strip: And were the Muses all in one combin'd They could not Blazon her Heroicke minde Perfections Master-peece, Arts wonderment Heavens Darling, and great Brittaines Ornament Elizabeth the Faire, the Rare, the Great In Birth and Blood, and vertues full repleate, An high priz'd Jewell, an unvallued Jem (Of more worth than a Kingly Diadem) If Heaven be pleas'd such blessings to bestow That grace may grow as she in yeares doe grow, Her name and fame may curbe the power of Rome And freely spread Gods word through Christendome. Meanetime let's rest in hope, through Heavens High hand, This Princesse shall adde Blessings to this Land.
portrait of Lady Anna (infant daughter of Charles I) Ladey Anna Died the 8th of December-1640 The Purtrature of the high borne Princes the Lady Anna. borne in the mounth of March 17 in the yeare of oure Lord 1636 sold by Tho: Jenner at the Royall Exchange. 1640.
Henry Duke of Glocester. borne, Iuly. 8. 1640. KIng Charles (by Proclamation) did command A Fast t'avert Gods judgements from this Land His zealous Royall selfe did lead the way, In true Humility to Fast and Pray: And presently Gods gracious Excellence Vouchsaf'd to give us loving Audience; For note th'acceptance Deign'd from Heaven above (Whom King and People did in Prayers move) That such a Blessing did from thence returne, That presently this sweete young Prince was borne, Upon that Fasting day, HE was our Feast Of Hopefull joy, a good presage of Rest, Our Fast and Prayers (though weake, yet up they went) And God was pleas'd, and this blest Token sent, Long may HE live, (directed by Gods grace) Joy to HIS Parents and their numerous Race. Henry of Oatelands (the place of his birth) Duke of Glocester, 4. Son to K. Charles, was borne on the day of the Generall Fast, Wednesday, 8. July, 1640. In the raigne of K. Henry the first, Glocester was an Earle∣dome, and the first Earle was Robert surnamed the Consull of Glocester. He was halfe brother to Maud the Empresse, and Son to Henry the 1. The se∣cond Earle of Glocester was William, son to the foresaid Earle Robert, this William was also Earle of Glamorgan; The third Earle was John, 4. Son of K. Henry the 2. who after was K. John. Almericke Mountford was 4. Earle of Glocester. Geffrey de Mandevile was 5. Earle. Gilbert de Clare, 6. Earle of Glocester & Hertford, Richard de Clare 7. Earle. Gilbert de Clare (se∣cond of that name) was 8. Earle of Glocester. Ralph de Mount hermer, 9. Earle, Gilbert de Clare (third of that name) and 10. Earle of Glocester. Hugh Audley 11 Earle. Thom. of Woodstocke 6. Son of K. Edward 3. was the first Duke of Glocester, created in the 9 yeare of K. Richard 3. After that Tho. Lord Spencer was the 12 Earle, beheaded at Bristoll in th Richard 2. Anno 1400. Humphrey 4. Son of K. Henry 4, was second Duke of Glocester, he was called the good Duke Humphrey, he was murthered a Bury Alby, and buryed (not in St. Pauls as is fabled, but) at St. Albones. Ri¦chard 3 Duke of Glocester, was brother to King Edward the fourth.
portrait of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester (son of Charles I) Charles Prince of Great Britaine, borne, baptiz'd, and Buried. May 13, 1629 IN HONOR CARO: PRINC: MAG BRIFRA: ET HIBERN NULLI HAC TENUS ANGLORUM What doth Kingdomes happifie, But a bles't Posteritie? THIS, this Realme, Earths Goshen faire Europes Garden, makes most rare Whose most royall Princely Stemme (To adorne theire Diadem,) Two sweet May-Flowers did produce Sprung from Rose & Flower-de-Luce The most hopefull and high borne Prince, Henry Duke of Glocester who was borne at Otlandes the eight of July. Anno. 1640. Sould by Tho: Tenner at the South entry of the Exchange.
Vpon the Life, Death, and Buriall of Prince Charles, the first borne Sonne of our most gratious King and Queene, who was borne on the 13 of May, 1629. and dyed the same day: Buried at Westminster. SWeete Royall Budde that had no time to bloome, Snatcht (in one day) from's cradle, to his tombe, He (on this mortall Stage) scarce saw the light Before Death laid his Corps in endlesse night. His meanest part of Earth, the earth containes, His blessed Spirit in lasting Glory raignes. God was most gratious to this hopefull Prince, Before he knew this world, to take him hence: He, to a transitory Crowne was Heire, Hath got a Crowne immortall for his share. For earths vaine hope, He reall heav'n possest, And freed from worldly Crosses, ever Blest. FINIS.
