T2793 R226307 99899758 136173
A True NARRATIVE OF THE Great Solemnity OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF MUSTAPHA Prince of Turkie, Eldest Son of SULTAN MAHOMET Present EMPEROUR of the Turks. Together with an Account of the Marriage of his Daughter to his great Favourite MUSSAIP AT Adrianople, As it was sent in a Letter to Person of Honour By Mr. Coke Secretary of the Turkie Company; Being in Company with his Excellency the Lord Embassador Sir JOHN FINCH. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple-bar. 1676.
Licensed, January 10. 1675/6. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
A True NARRATIVE OF THE Great Solemnity OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF MUSTAPHA Prince of Turkie, Eldest Son of SULTAN MAHOMET Present EMPEROUR of the Turks. SIR, THese last five months I have spent in Adria∣nople: it's pleasantly scituated on the rising and top of an easie Hill, which to the South and West gives the prospect of a large Plain, where the eye is not lost, but bounded with the Mountains of Haemus; on the North and East are small Hills. It's watered with three Rivers (the chiefest He∣brus) which often uniting and separating their streams,
make many Islands, capable of what the most refined Luxury could plant or build; but Spring-Gardens and Walks, adorn'd with Ladies and Gallants, are things un∣known to us Barbarians. I have now told you all that's good: For this airy pleasure of the eye is lost in so many solid inconvenien∣cies, that I never yet was in any City more uneasie, nay more insuportable: the Buildings (except a Mosque or two) so mean and contemptible, that they would dis∣grace a poor Village; the Water bad, Wine worse, the Streets and all Avenues to the City so crouded with Carts, Dunghills, and Carrion, that nothing can be more troublesome or offensive to the sight and scent. In a word, what the Riches and Invention of Mankinde did contri∣bute to make Rome delightful and glorious, the stupidity and fordidness of these people have outvied in the reverse, making this place the Metropolis of filth and inconveni∣ence. Our arrival here was the 10 of May; the 15th began the Festivals for the Circumcision of the young Prince. In a large Piazza, or rather Field before the Seraglio, were pitch'd the Tents of the Grand Signior, Visier, and other great men; which made a side and half of the Square: Another side and half was taken up with Lamps hung upon Ropes, and fastened to Poles, disposed into several figures of Ships, Buildings, and Woods, &c. which were changed every night; others as they use in Egypt at their rejoycing when they cut the Nile. The fourth side was the Seraglio, where the women had the convenience of seeing through Lettices. The Show begun in the afternoon (the morning being spent in Entertainments.) The Grand Signior sitting in an elevated place by his Tent, much like a Summer-house in our Gardens, which over looked all, received the Pre∣sents brought him by the Basha's, and all the Officers of the Empire, and all the Arts of Constantinople. These
were not left to the liberty and generosity of the Pre∣senter, but they were taxt what they should give, and an Officer appointed to survey the quality of them; which if not approved, was returned, and perhaps augmented: for in this Country it's no ill manners to look a gift-Horse in the Mouth. The Mechanicks and some of the Souldiery were e∣very day entertain'd in a great Tent with a Turkish Feast; after were antick Dances in several Habits, Singing and Dancing with most obscene Gesticulations, Jack-pudding, and Punchinello's representations, Wrestling, Rope-dan∣cing, fears of Activity and Strength; all these promiscu∣ously in the Area of the Square. Had there been but a Noise, Rabble, and abominable Pigs head, nothing could have been an exacter Scene of Bartholomew-fair. At night a row of Poles, about a mans height, were stuck in the ground; on the top were Hoops of Iron, in which burnt Pine-wood with a brisk and lively flame, which with the Lamps, gave a delightful and magnificent prospect. About an hour in the night began the Fire-works, which were plentiful, and not amiss; though I think those I have seen at Rome surpass them: one sort indeed I never saw, which was a great Bason like a Mortar-piece fixt into the Ground and filled with Wild-fire, which sent out a violent stream of fire, with a hideous noise, a great height. It was an Object equally terrible and delightful. These were the constant Divertisements all the time of the So∣lemnity. The 25th, the Mufty, Visier, and all the Basha's and great Officers, with the Janizaries walking before, and the Chiaux a horse-back attended the Prince, who was so adorned or over-laden with Jewels, both himself and his Horse, that one might say, he carri'd the Value of an Empire about him.
The 27th, which was Mahomet's Birth day, he accom∣pani'd his Father to the Moschea: here was no solemn Cavalcade, onely the Grand Signior's own Retinue; and though it was less in number far than the Cavalcade, yet adjusted neater and Court-like; the Grand Signior's Footmen and Pages being very rich in Clothes and Jew∣els. This evening the Prince was Circumcis'd in the arms of his Father; he is about eleven years old, of a good Aspect, his name Mustapha. About two thousand o∣thers were cut at this Solemnity, who had Money and a Quilt from the Grand Signior. It was done publickly in the Tents, and any one Turk or Christian admitted to see them. June the 5th this Solemnity was concluded with Horse-races. After ten days repose, began the Feasts for the Marriage of the Grand Signior's Daughter, of about se∣ven years old, unto the Mussaip or Favourite, who by the Tefterdar, or Lord Treasurer (who was the Compare) in a solemn show sent his Presents to her, thirty Mules laden with Sugar-plums and Sweet-meats, figures of seve∣ral sorts of Birds and Beasts of Sugar, so ill-favouredly represented, that they could not be said to break the Law against making Images, though the Solemnity of the time had not dispenced with it. Fifty six men, each with five more Vests of Cloth of Gold, Satten, &c. then her Jewels, several Suits very rich; five led Horses with rich Furni∣ture of Pearls and precious Stone, and at last Coaches with Slaves. On the 19th of June was the Visier, &c. in a solemn Calvalcade to accompany the Presents the Grand Signior gave her: Eighty six Mules laden with rich Houshold-stuff, very rich Habits for her, and Jewels of all sorts, twelve Coaches with Slaves, and six and thirty black Eu∣nuchs.
And the 23 was the last Cavalcade of all the great men to attend her from the Seraglio to her Husbands house: They were in a close Coach plated with Silver, attended with five and twenty others. At last came the Hassaki, or Queen-regents Coach, attended with ten more; to e∣very one of these Coaches were two black Eunuchs. In a great Court-yard of the Mussaip's Palace were repeated all the Sports and Fire-works that were before, at which the Grand Signior was a constant Spectator. Besides, there was a Rope fastned to a high Steeple, whence several men came flying down: one having a Boy tied to his back with a Drum, the Rope broke; but being neer the ground, and falling on another man, they had none of them any con∣siderable hurt. The most remarkable, was a man that walked up a Rope fastned to the same Steeple, forward and backward; and another man that upon a high loose Rope hanging by his hand, his body extended, swung himself over twelve times, without stop, or touching any thing. But too much of these trifles, though the Grand Sig∣niour was much delighted with them, and made them be continued many more days than were intended. He took that fancy to a Gypsie-boy that swang and danced, as he hath him in the degree of a Favourite, being taken into the Seraglio, and presented by the Great Basha's. The Mussaip that hath married the Grand Segnior's Daughter, is a man meddles in no business, nor is thought to be much capable of it; for being Chimacham in the Visiers absence, he shewed no great abilities. The Grand Signior takes him for a constant Companion in all his Divertisements, and hath a strong affection to him; which time does not impair, but rather augment; he being a Prince most constant where he fixes. You would think this Marriage would make him happy, but it's quite con∣trary; for it not onely cuts him off in his pleasures to which he is indulgent, he being forced to discharge all his women, even his own Sisters; but it ruines his fortune,
both by the expence in maintaining her while she lives, and should she die, he must refund to the Treasury all he hath had with her, besides four millions (according to common report) of Dollars, which is her Dote; which he is so far from an ability of, that he cannot pay his present Debts. She hath good proofs of his abilities another way, he having, it's said, two and thirty Children. To our own private Affairs, his Excellency my Lord Ambassador Sir John Finch had all satisfaction, and hath obtained very advantageous additions to our Capitulati∣ons: but they being things Mercantile, and though not beyond, yet beneath your knowledge, I shall not particu∣larize. We had a very hot Plague: My Lord Ambassador re∣tired to a Village, but it soon arrived there; so he lived in his Tents till the Sickness got among the Servants, of whom five died: then he returned to the Village; Mr. North and I stuck to the City, where, though in our street onely two houses were free, besides our own, and the two adjoyning had five sick on the one, and two on the other side; yet God be praised we and our Servants pas∣sed well along the Road: and here it's not much less. Sir Thomas Baines my Lord Ambassador's Companion that attended him in his Chamber, three days after our ar∣rival, was taken, and in three more died; he is the onely English man hath been visited. His Excellency hath re∣tired upon this, a little way out of Town, for some time. Dated from Pera, the 9th of October 1675. FINIS.
