T2982 E71_5 99873356 155452
A TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE FIGHT Betweene the RIGHT HONOVRABLE THE Earle of Manchesters Forces, and the Marquesse of Newcastles Forces, on Wednesday the 11. day of this instant October, 1643. The Battaile being neere Horne Castle in LINCOLNESHIRE. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1643.
A TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE FIGHT. MY Lord of Manchester had notice when he was at Lynne, of a great force of horse and Dragooners, come into Lincolne∣shire, under the command of Generall Henderson, That upon the retreate of Sir Thomas Fairefax and Colonell Gromwell, from a∣bout Lowth, they were much heightned with confi∣dence of their successe, when ever they could draw out Forces here to an ingagement. The want of Foote and Dragooners, made Sir Thomas Fairefax, and Colonell Cromwell very un∣willing
to fight with them, untill they had acquain∣ted my Lord, and tryed what supplies he could af∣ford them, and withall his Lordship was assured, if he could draw any Forces towards Bolenbrook Castle, the enemy was so confident of his strength, that he would bring downe all his force to fight with him. Upon these grounds my Lord drew all his force both of Horse and Foote from Lynne the last weeke, excepting one Troope of Horse, and sixe Compa∣nies of Foote, which he left for the guard of that Towne with Colonell Walton, whom he made Lieu∣tenant Governour. Upon Monday my Lord drew out all his Foote out of Boston, tenne Companies he laid in Bolenbrooke Towne, under the command of Major Knight, Ser∣geant Major, to Sir Miles Hobart; Colonell Russels Regiment was quartered at Stickford, within a mile of them, and my Lords owne (being but three) companies (the rest being sent to Hull, and left at Lynne) at Stickney, and the Horse were all quartered in the Townes round about, at eight and ten miles distance. Upon Monday night Major Knight summoned the Castle in my Lord of Manchesters name, but was answered, that his bugge-beare wrds could not make them quit the place that night, our men tooke in a little house, on the right hand betweene the Ca∣stle and the Church, and resolved the next night to indeavour to breake open the Church doores, and there to mount a Morterpiece, and thence fire the Castle.
The enemy had notice upon Friday that my Lord was comming, or come into these parts, and there∣upon drew out all their Horse and Dragoones from their severall Garrisons, at Lincolne, Newarke and Gainesbury, with a resolution to find him out and fight with him. Upon Tuesday those of the Castle killed one or two of our men, and as Major Knight and Quartermaster Generall Vermeyden were view∣ing of it, made some shot at them, one of them hit the Quartermaster Generall a little below the An∣ckle, but did not pierce the skinne, onely bruised his legge. That afternoone my Lord of Manchester came himselfe to Kirkeby, which is within a mile of Bo∣lenbrooke with Colonell Cromwell, my Lord Willough∣by met him there, and Sir Thomas Farefax was then at Horne Castle about five miles off; one of his Regiaments having the watch at Edlington about three miles further, nearer the enemy. My Lord had not beene long there before he received a letter from Sir Thomas Farefax, that an Allarome was gi∣ven to some of our Quarters, and that himself had sent out some Horse to discover what it might bee, and would immediately give him a further account, which he did by another letter about an houre after; the party being returned and could get no infor∣mation of any enemy neare, but conceived it to bee a mistake. Sir Thomas Farefax resolved however to stay there untill the evening, and then come to Kirkeby to my Lord. My Lord conceived it fit, and so did all
those that were with him, to give the Allarome to all his Quarters, and to appoint Hornecastle to bee the Allarome place, and to goe himselfe immedi∣ately thither to Sir Thomas Farefax; and when all their men were thus drawne together, to take fur∣ther resolutions. And immediately with my Lord Willoughby and some Officers with him tooke horse for Hornecastle. Sir Thomas Fairefax in the meane time getting no intelligence of the enemies ap∣proach came away towards Kirkeby to my Lord. Before my Lord reached Hornecastle, the Alla∣rome came to him in good earnest, that the enemy was fallen into our quarters, and was marching to∣wards Hornecastle. Comming nearer the Towne he could heare great shouting and noyse, which hee conceived to be the enemies triumph, having beaten our men out of the towne, but it proved otherwise; for some of our men falling upon the enemies For∣lorne-Hopes, though (but part of two Troopes) seeing themselves desperately engaged, resolved to put the best face on it; and fel upon them with crying and shouting, which did exceedingly amaze the enemy, and gave our men the easier passage through the middest of them. My Lord finding the enemy come into his quar∣ters before he could have any certaine information where he was; and the Allarome place possessed, appointed Kirkeby and Bullenbrooke hill, for all his men to repaire unto, and accordingly sent word to all the quarters whither all our men came that night except three Troopes that were directed to Stickney,
and three or foure Troopes that went by the way of Tattershall, and came not in untill next morning. Many of our Troopes came to Hornecastle accor∣ding to the first orders, but finding the enemy there came away without any losse at all or very little. The enemy had fallen into our quarters at Thimbleby and some townes thereabout, where foure or five of our Troopes were in a manner surprized; but finding themselves ingaged, gave so good proofe of their courage that the enemy will hardly bragge of that nights worke. The Troopes that were enga∣ged were Captaine Johnsons, Captaine Players and Captaine Samuel Moodies, they did all of them come off very well, with little losse (except Captaine Moodie his colours) and brought halfe a dozen pri∣soners with them. I do beleeve upon good grounds that the enemy lost some Officers both of Horse and Dragooners that night, but truely we lost not one. The enemies Word was Cavendish and ours Reli∣gion. All that night we were drawing our Horse to the appointed Randezvous. The next morning being Wednesday my Lord gave order that the whole force both Horse and Foote should be drawen up to Bolenbrooke hill, where he would expect the enemy, being the only conve∣nient ground to fight with him. Colonell Cromwell was no way satisfied that we should fight, our Horse being extreame wearied with hard duty two or three dayes together. The enemie drew that morning their whole body of horse and Dragooneers into the field, being 74.
Colours of horse, and 21. Colours of Dragooneers, in all 95. Colours. We had not many more then halfe so many Colours of horse & Dragooneers, but I beleeve we had as many men, besides our foot, which indeed could not be drawne up untill it was very late. I beleeve that as we had no notice of the enemies comming towards us, so they had as little of our preparation to fight with them. It was about twelve a clocke, ere our horse and Dragooneers were drawne up, after that we marched about a mile nea∣rer the enemy, and then we began to descry him by little and little comming towards us; untill this time we did not know we should fight, but so soone as our men had knowledge of the enemies comming they were very full of joy and resolution, thinking it a great mercy that they should fight with him. Our men went on in several bodies singing Psalmes, Quartermaster Generall Vermayden with five troopes had the forlorne hope, and Collonell Cromwell the Vanne, assisted with other of my Lords troopes, and seconded by Sir Thomas Fairefax; both armies met about Ixby (if I mistake not the Townes name) both they and we had drawne up our Dragooneers, who gave the first charge, and then the horse fell in. Collonell Cromwell fell with resolution upon the enemy, immediately after their Dragooneers had given him the first volley, yet they were so nimble, as within halfe Pistoll shot they gave him another; his horse was killed under him at the first charge, and fell downe upon him, as he rose he was knock'd downe againe by the Gentleman that charged him,
who we conceive was Sir Ingram Hopton; but after∣ward he recovered a poore horse in a Souldiers hand and mounted himselfe againe. Truly this charge was so home given that the enemy stood not another, but were driven backe upon their owne body that was to second them, and put them into disorder, our men charged all in with him, and then they ranne for it, leaving all their Dragooneers which were now on foot behinde them. Our men pursued them, and did execution on them about five miles, all the way being strewed with broken armes, dead men and horses. We know not yet what persons of note were killed among them, some faire and white ksins I saw among the dead bodies both upon the place where the fight was, and in the high-way much far∣ther off. Sir Ingram Hopton is certainly slaine, and they say Sir Charles, or Sir George Bolles: we have many prisoners, some of note, Lieutenant Collonel Aires being one. What Colours are taken I cannot certainely say, but I saw many in severall hands we doe not agree upon the number of the slaine, I guesse them under one thousand; the fight continued not above a quarter of an houre, but the execution untill almost night: our word was Peace and Truth, the enemies, Newcastle. We lost very few, none of note, I know but of one Officer hurt, and that is Collonel Cromwels Captaine Lieutenant. The foote were not drawne up to the place where the fight was, untill after the fight and chase was over. Horse and foote though very weary marched on towards Horne Ca∣stle, where my Lord lay this night with all the foot,
his horse being sent to their old quarters in the townes adjoyning. Both Officer and Souldier did their duty very well and bravely, my Lord tooke wonderfull paines in bringing it to this passe, and drawing up all the foote to have relieved the horse, in case they had needed it. But God did all, taking away the enemies hearts, and giving resolution to our men, to God onely be the glory. FINIS.
LET the Reader note that there was a mistake in the Bils sent to the Ministers of every Parish for Thanksgiving, for in the note given by direction from the Lord Generall, there was onely mention made of 95. Colours of the Marquesse of Newcastles in the field; the transcriber of the note mistooke, and saith there were 95. Colours taken. Which when his Excellency heard of, he was very much displeased,
