E2520A 49520885 174128
THE ANSWER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS TO The Citisens of Londons Petition for Peace: Wherein they declare their Re∣solution concerning the same Likewise their Propositions to the Knights Gentry, and Trayned Bands of the county of Essex, Concerning the Proceedings in this city, and the Affairs of the whole KINGDOME. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parli∣ment, that these Particulars be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. Decmeb 20. London, printed for Richard VVest. 1642.
THE RESOLVTION OF THE LORDS aad COMMONS In this present PARLIAMENT Concerning the Citisens of Londons petition for peace. THe Honourable Houses of Parlia∣ment, having taken into serious consideration the late petition of the Cittisens of London, wherein they most earnestly desire an accommodation of Peace, between his Maiesty and both hou∣ses,
but in such away, that they do not care if it be with the losse of their Reli∣gion and Liberties. But his Majesties great Counsell, the Worthies of Israell, out of their pious and Religious care to the publique Good, ha∣ving ever since the first time of their fit∣ting, laboured by all possible means that might be to settle this Kingdom in a happy and glorious Union: and hath also ever since the beginning of these pre¦sent distractions in this Kingdome, both by their humble Petitions and Messages to His Maiesty, most earnestly desired a Peace and Union, and that these differen∣ces which are now in dissent betwixt his Miiesty and both houses, might be com∣posed and brought to a full-period, so that it is to be admired at, that these Ci∣tisens which hath now petitioned for peace, should presume so farre, knowing that the Honourable houses of Parlia∣ment hath oftentimes petitioned to His Majesty for the same.
And therefore to satisfie the Desires of all the aforenamed persons, both houses have have thought fit and meet to de∣clare this their full will and pleasure un∣to them, viz. THat whereas divers of the aforesaid persons have framed a petition for Peace, and presented it to the House of Commons, most earnestly desiring an an∣swer of the same, after some time spent in debate thereof, the house returned this answer, That ever since their first sitting it hath alwayes bin their care to preserve the peace of this Kingdom, and that they have and do still labour after peace by all possible means, so as the same might bee obtained in a safe and honourable way, but to have a peace without securing of our Religion, Lawes, and Liberties, and without bringing Traytors and Delin∣quents to punishment, which are and have bin the only causers of this warre, there can be no warre so perilious and grievous as such a peace.
The Parliaments propositions to the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty of the County of Essex. WHereas it doth appeare to the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that his Majesty hath sent out divers Commissions for the levying of more Forces, to the great hazzard of Religion: but for preventing of these designs, the Honourable Court of Parlia∣ment have agreed that these following propositions shall be forthwith printed, and sent down to the County of Essex, viz. I. That you shall take speciall care to stay search, and examine, all suspitious persons and carriages, and to search or cause to be searched all suspitious places. II. That you shall seize upon all Horses, Arms, Ammunition, Money, or any other provision whatsoever, which you suspect
is raised or provided for the fomenting or maintaining any such unnaturall and unlawfull warre against the Parl. and Kingdom. III. That you shall conduct and lead all such forces of horse and foot as shall bee appointed by the E. of Essex, and shall fight with, kill and slay all such as shall oppose you. IV. That you are hereby authorized and required forthwith to disarm all popish Recusants, and other dangerous and ill-affected persons, as well Clergy-men as others, as have testified their ill disposi∣tions to the King, Parliament and King∣dome. It is likewise reported to the house that His Maj. being now grown stronger and abler as hee conceives to make good his own ends by Armes his confidence in the papists doth more clearly appear, per∣sons imprisond for priests & Iesuits have bin released out of the Gaol of Lancaster
profest papists have bin invited to rise and take up Armes. A true and brief Relation of the late wofull battell fought upon Sonday last in the fore noon by Prince Rupert and Col. Brown. PRrince Rupert having information of the last great Overthrow given to the L. Grandison at Winchester, he was much perplexed in mind, taking a great and solemn Oath to be revenged upon the said Col. Brown, but he fayled of his design; for although upon Sonday last he advanced near to C, Brown with about 3000. horse, giving him battell; yet such was the wisdome and policy of C. Brown and Sir W. Waller, that dividing their ar∣my in two divisions▪ being in number a∣bout 1200. horse and Dragoons, they char∣ged the Prince with such a desperate & violent charge, that there fell neer upon 500. of the Princes soldiers to the ground, and after 3. hours fight, Newes came that Ser j. Major Skippen were comming, which caused the enemy to leave the field. FINIS.
