W2311 49521032 174249
ARTICLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the Third, King of Great Britain, and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Fourteenth, the Most Christian King, Concluded in the Royal Palace at Ryswicke the 10/20 Day of September. 1697. By Command of Their Excellencies the Lords Iustices. W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEINTIENDRAY royal blazon or coat of arms London Printed, and Re-Printed in Dublin at the Post-Office Coffee-House by J. Brent, J. Brocas, and S. Powell. 1697.
ARTICLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The Most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the Third, King of Great Britain, and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Fourteenth, the Most Christian King, Concluded in the Royal Palace at Ryswicke the 10/20 Day of September. 1697. I. THAT there be an Universal Perpe∣tual Peace, and a True and Sincere Friendship between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the III. King of Great Britain, and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the IV. the Most Christian King, Their Heirs and Successors, and be∣tween the ingdoms, States and Sub∣jects of Both, and that the same be so Sincerely and Inviolably Observed and Kept, that the One shall Promote the Interest, Honour, and Advantage of the Other, and that on both sides a Faithful Neighbourhood and true Observation of Peace and Friendship, may daily Flourish and Encrease.
II. That all Enmities, Hostilities, Discords and Wars, between the said King of Great Britain, and the Most Christian King, and Their Sub∣jects, Cease, and be Abolished, so that on both sides They Forbear and Abstain hereafter from all Plundring, Depredation, Harm-doing, In∣juries, and Infestation whatsoever, as well by Land as by Sea, and on Fresh Waters, every where; and especially throughout all the King∣doms, Territories, Dominions, and Places, belonging to each other, of what Condition soever they be. III. That all Offence, Injuries, Damages, which the said King of Great Britain, and his Subjects, or the said Most Christian King, and his Sub∣jects, have suffered from each other, during this War, shall be forgot∣ten, so that neither on Account of them, or for any other Cause or Pre∣tence, neither Party, or the Subjects of either, shall hereafter do, cause or suffer to be done any Hostility, Enmity, Molestation, or hindrance to the other, by himself or others, Secretly or Openly, Directly or In∣directly, by Colour of Right, or Way of Fact. IV. And since the Most Christian King was never more desirous of any thing, than that the Peace be Firm and Inviolable, the said King pro∣mises and Agrees for Himself and His Successors, That He will on no Account whatsoever disturb the said King of Great Britain in the free Possession of the Kingdoms, Countries, Lands or Dominions which He now Enjoys, and therefore Engages His Honour, upon the Faith and Word of a King, that He will not give or Afford any Assistance, directly or indi∣rectly, to any Enemy or Enemies of the said King of Great Britain; And that He will in no manner whatsoever favour the Conspiracies or Plots which any Rebels, or ill-disposed Persons, may in any Place Excite or Contrive against the said King; And for that End Promises and Enga∣ges, That He will not Assist with Arms, Ships, Ammunition, Provisi∣ons, or Money, or in any other way, by Sea or Land, any Person or Persons, who shall hereafter, under any pretence whatsoever, Disturb or Molest the said King of Great Britain in the free and full Possession of His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Dominions. The King of Great Britain likewise Promises and Engages for Himself and Successors, Kings of Great Britain, That He will Inviolably Do and Perform, the same to∣wards the said Most Christian King, His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Dominions. V. That there be a free use of Navigation and Commerce between the Subjects of both the said Kings, as was formerly in the time of Peace, and before the Declaration of the late War, so that every one of them
of either of the said Kings with their Merchandises, and may there Continue and Trade without any Molestation, and shall use and Enjoy all Liberties, Immunities and Priviledges granted by solemn Treaties, and Antient Custom. VI. That the Ordinary Administration of Justice shall be Restored and Set open, throughout the Kingdoms and Dominions of both Kings, so that it shall be Free for all the Subjects of Either, to Claim and Obtain their Rights, Pretensions and Actions, according to the Laws, Con∣stitutions and Statutes of each Kingdom. VII. The Most Christian King shall Restore to the said King of Great Britain, all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever Situated, which the English did Possess before the Declaration of this present War. And in like manner the King of Great Britain shall Restore to the Most Christian King all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies, wheresoever Situated, which the French did Possess before the said Declaration of War. And this Restitution shall be made on both Sides, within the Space of Six Months, or sooner if it can be done. And to that end immediately after the Ratification of this Treaty, each of the said Kings shall Deliver, or cause to be Delivered to the other, or to Com∣missioners Authorized in His Name for that Purpose, all Acts of Con∣cession, Instruments, and necessary Orders, duly Made and in proper Form so that they may have their Effect. VIII. Commissioners shall be appointed on both Sides, to Examine and Determine the Rights and Pretensions which either of the said Kings hath to the Places Situated in Hudsons-Bay; But the Possession of those Places which were taken by the French, during the Peace that preceeded this present War, and were retaken by the English, during this War, shall be left to the French by Vertue of the foregoing Article. The Capitulation made by the English on the Fifth of September, 1696. shall be Observed, according to it's Form and Tenor; The Merchan∣dises therein Mentioned shall be Restored; The Governour of the Fort taken there shall be set at Liberty, if it be not already done; The Dif∣ferences arisen concerning the Execution of the said Capitulation, and the value of the Goods there loft, shall be adjudged and determined by the said Commissioners; who immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty, shall be Invested with sufficient Authority for settling the Limits and Confines of the Lands to be Restored on either side, by virtue of the foregeing Article, and likewise for exchanging of Lands,
as may conduce to the mutual Interest and Advantage of both Kings. And to this end the Commissioners, so appointed shall within the space of Three Months from the time of the Ratification of the present Treaty, meet in the City of London, and within six Months, to be reckon∣ed from their first Meeting, shall Determine all Differences and Disputes which may arise concerning this matter; After which, the Articles the said Commissioners shall Agree to, shall be Ratified by both Kings, and shall have the same Force and Vigour, as if they were inserted Word for Word in the present Treaty. IX. All Letters, as well of Reprisal as of Marque and Counter-Marque, which hitherto have for any cause been granted on either side, shall be, and remain Null and Void; Nor shall any the like Letters be hereafter granted by either of the said Kings against the Subjects of the Other, un∣less it be first made manifest, that Right hath been denied; and it shall not be taken for a denial of Right, unless the Petition of the Person, who desires Letters of Reprisal to be granted to him, be first shewn to the Minister, residing there on the part of the King, against whose Sub∣jects those Letters are desired; That within the space of Four Months or sooner, He may inquire into the contrary, or procure that satisfaction be made with all speed from the Party offending to the Complainant. But if the King against whose Subjects Reprisals are demanded have no Minister residing there, Letters of Reprisal shall not be granted, till af∣ter the space of Four Months, to be reckoned from the day on which his Petition was made and presented to the King, against whose Subjects Reprisals are desired, or to his Privy Council. X. For cutting of all Matter of Dispute and Contention, which may arise concerning the Restitution of Ships, Merchandises, and other Mo∣veable Goods, which either Party may complain to be taken and detain∣ed from the other, in Countries, and on Coasts far distant, after the Peace is Concluded, and before it be notified there; All Ships, Merchan∣dises, and other Moveable Goods, which shall be taken by either side, after the Signing and Publication of the Present Treaty, within the space of Twelve Days in the British and North Seas, as far as the Cape St. Vin∣cent; Within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape, and on this side of the Equinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean and Mediteranean Sea as elsewhere; Lastly, Within the space of Six Months beyond the said Line throughout the whole World, shall belong and re∣main unto the Possessors, without any Exception or further Distinction of Time or Place, or any Consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.
XI. But if it happens through Inadvertency or Imprudence, or any other Cause whatever, that any Subject of either of the said Two Kings, shall do or commit any thing by Land or Sea, or on Fresh Water, any where, contrary to the present Treaty, or that any Particular Article thereof is not Fulfilled; This Peace and Good Correspondence between the said Two Kings shall not on that Account be Interrupted or In∣fringed, but shall remain in its former Force, Strength and Vigour, and the said Subject only shall Answer for his own Fact, and undergo the Punish∣ment to be Inflicted, according to the Custom and Law of Nations. XII. But if (which God forbid) the Differences now Composed be∣tween the said Kings should at any time be renewed, and break out in open War, the Ships, Merchandises and all kind of Moveable Goods of either Party, which shall be found to be and remain in the Ports and Do∣minions of the Adverse Party, shall not be Confiscated or brought under any Inconveniency, but the whole space of Six Months shall be allowed to the Subjects of both of the said Kings, that they may carry away and transport the foresaid Goods, and any thing else that is theirs, whither they shall think fit, without any Molestation. XIII. For what concerns the Principality of Orange, and other Lands and Dominions belonging to the said King of Great Brittain; The sepa∣rate Article of the Treaty of Nemeguen, concluded between the Most King and the States General of the United Provinces the 10th day of August 1678. shall, according to its Form and Tenor, have full Effect, and all things that have been Innovated and Altered, shall be restored as they were before. All Decrees, Edicts, and other Acts, of what kind soever they be, without Exception, which are in any manner contrary to the said Treaty, or were made after the Conclusion thereof, shall be held to be null and void, without any revival or consequence for the future: And all things shall be restored to the said King in the same state, and in the same manner, as he held and enjoyed them before he was dis∣possed thereof in the time of the War, which was ended by the said Trea∣ty of Nemiguen, or which he ought to have held and enjoyed according to the said Treaty. And that an end may be put to all Trouble, Differences, Processes, and Questions, which may arise concerning the same, Both the said Kings will name Commissioners, who, with full and summary Power, may compose and settle all these Matters. And forasmuch as by the Au∣thority of the Most Christian King, the King of Great Britain was hindred from enjoying the Revenues, Rights and Profits, as well of His
Principality of Orange as of other His Dominions, which after the Conclu∣sion of the Treaty of Nemiguen, until the Declaration of the present War, were under the Power of the said Most Christian King, The said Most Christian King will Restore, and cause to be Restored in reality, with Effect, and with the Interest due, all those Revenues, Rights and Profits, according to the Declarations and Verifications that shall be made before the said Commissioners. XIV. The Treaty of Peace Concluded between the Most Chistian King, and the late Elector of Brandenburg at St. Germains in Laye the 29 June 1679. shall be Restored in all its Articles, and remain in its former Vigour between His Sacred Most Christian Majesty and His Electoral Highness of Brandenburg. XV. Whereas 'twill greatly conduce to the publick Tranquility that the Treaty be observed, which was Concluded between His Sacred Most Christian Majesty and His Royal Highness of Savoy, on the 9th of August, 1696. 'tis Agreed that the said Treaty shall be Confirmed by this Ar∣ticle. XVI. Under this present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those who shall be named by either Party, with common consent, before the Exchange of Ratifications, or within six Months after. But in the mean time, the Most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM King of Great Britain, and the Most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Most Christian King, gratefully acknowledging the sincere Offices and Indefatigable Endeavours, which have been employed by the Most Serene and Mighty Prince Charles King of Sweden, by the Interposition of His Mediation, in bringing this Happy Work of the Peace, with the Di∣vine Assistance, to the desired Conclusion; And to shew the like Affe∣ction to him, 'tis by consent of all Parties Stipulated and Agreed, That His said Sacred Royal Majesty of Sweden, shall with all His Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and Rights be Included in this Treaty, and comprehended in the best manner, in the present Pacification. XVII. Lastly, The Solemn Ratifications of this present Agreement and Alliance made in due Form, shall be delivered on both sides, and mutually and duly Exchanged at the Royal Palace at Ryswik in the Province of Holland, within the space of Three Weeks, to be rekoned from the day of the Sub∣scription, or sooner if it may be. In Testimony of all and every the things before mentioned, and for their greater Force, and to give them all the Vigour and full Authority they ought to have, the Underwritten Ambassadors Extraordinary and
Plenipotentiaries, together with the Illustrious and Most Excellent  Extraordinary Ambassador, Mediator, have Signed and Sealed the pres Instrument of Peace. Done, &c. Signed by the English and Frenc Ambassadors, and by the Mediator. Separate Article. Besides all that is Concluded and Stipulated by the Treaty of Peace Sign this present Day, the 20th of September; It is moreover agreed by the present Separate Article, which shall have the same Eorce and Effect as if it was in∣serted Word for Word in the said Treaty, That the most Christian King shall Covenant and Agree, and by the present Article He does Covenant and Agree, That it shall be free for the Emperor and the Empire, until the First Day of November next, to accept the Conditions of Peace lately proposed by the Most Christian King, according to the Declaration made on the First Day of this present Month, unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise agreed between His Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and His Most Christian Majesty. And in case His Imperial Majesty does not within the time prefixed accept those Conditions, or that it be not otherwise agreed between His Impe∣rial Majesty and the Empire, and His Most Christian Majesty, the said Treaty shall have its full Effects, and be duly put in Execution according to its Form and Tenor; And it shall not be lawful for the King of Great Britain, directly or indirectly, on any Account or Cause whatsoever, to act contrary to the said Treaty. FINIS.
