C5912A T.2030[19] R29326 99889600 11076600 201503
CONSIDERATIONS on the Nature of Par∣liaments, and our present Elections. IT is amazing that a People so zealous for their Liberties, sould neglect the natural, safe, and certain way of securing them, when they have often had recourse to the most vio∣lent Remedies, and have run the utmost hazards to secure their Property. This is the only Country in Europe that enjoys ny freedom under a King, and it morti∣fies any thinking Man when he considers in how many successive Reigns our Con∣stitution has been aim'd at, how preca∣tiously we hold it now, and how often the opportunities of a secure Establish∣ment have been trifled away, when ob∣in'd by the boldest Attempts that were ade successful by an apparent Povi∣ence. As the Restoration of K. Charles II. o the last Revolution was the work f the People of England: nothing could ve brought it about in so miraculous a manner, but the weight of the whole Na∣tion in opposition to the Conspirators a∣gainst our Constitution. And if the suc∣ceeding Parliaments (which are call'd the Representatives of the Nation) have not establish'd by proper Laws those Liber∣ties, and that Government for which the People drew their Swords, it must be concluded, those Assemblies did not tru∣ly represent that People. Whether they have done so ought well to be consider'd; and if they have not, to find where the fault lay, were a useful discovery: and it is highly neces∣sary that the Boroughs of England should be well apprised of the present circum∣stances of Affairs, and of the sentiments of Mankind at this time; that by a pro∣per and discreet choice they may secure at once the Happiness of their Country, and their own Reputation, which are both in danger. The opinion of the universal Corrupti∣on of this Age cannot be conceal'd; it is made evident by those that Elect, by those that are Elected; buying Elections, and selling of Votes are Consequences. And if this should appear to be the present Case, such a House of Commons cannot pass for a Representative of the People, but a Re∣presentative of a few dissolute, mercenary Persons, possest of Voices in the Boroughs, of England. The consequences of such Thoughts they will do well to consider: which must induce all true English-men (at a proper time) to seek other methods of being better represented. When I speak of a natural, safe and certain way of preserving the Liberties of England, I mean the securing a free, un∣ingag'd House of Commons, consisting of the Rich, Honest and Able Men of the Kingdom. When the balance of the Go∣vernment went out of the hands of the Nobility and the Church-men, if a suffi∣cient Provision had been made for this, now happy had we been, and what Mis∣chiefs and Dangers had been prevented to this Nation? From Henry the 7th to his time our Annals had contain'd the Names of Princes on the Throne fit to have been the Predecessors to our glorious King: but true it is, he must have lost his Title of Deliverer, as we had saved the Pce of our Redemption; for our Con∣sttution would have preserved us from
those Dangers and Violences from which he came to free us, and we had not had a whole Generation conspiring for a hun∣dred years together (tho in different ways) against our establish'd Govern∣ment, when sworn to support it. If our new Barrier had been well fortified, and if our Representative of the People had been contrived to answer in deed to the Name, all our Kings had been Q. Eli∣zabeths. But our Elections in inconsi∣derable Boroughs, and our Members being qualified to serve two Masters, were such mistakes in our Fundamen∣tals, that as they have produc'd our past Misfortunes, they must produce the like under bad Princes, or evil projecting Ministers. A House of Commons chosen truly by the People, incapable of Pension, and Place; and the King and Kingdom had been incapable of Misfortune: they had been out of the reach of all human Power, and, with due submission, above Fate; since such a Government would have made us the proper Objects of Divine Pro∣tection, and not only have secured our Greatness and Glory, but our Religion and Morals too, which I fear are all going together. In such Circumstances we should have had no cause to fear the Scotish cunning of K. James I. No King of Scotland could have made a Scotch Parliament of such an English Assembly. Such a Monster as Buckingham, and upon so monstrous a foot of Favor, could never have grown to such an exorbitant size under such a Con∣stitution: he had soon been prevented in the apparent prostitution of our Wealth, in his apparent neglect of the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom, in his apparent and treacherous dealings with the French, and the publick Enemies: his Iniquities had never been screen'd by a Party; in a word, he had not fallen a Victim to a private Hand. Under such a Government his pious Son had persued the like measures in vain: his French Wife, his scandalous Fa∣vorites, his unlaudable Bishops, his own insolent and unconstant Temper could never have brought him to the Block: all the Blood shed to no purpose in those Wars had been sav'd; he could never have lost his Life, nor his King∣doms; he would only have lost his Title of Martyr. Under so just a balance of Power, as the Sons would have avoided the ill Con∣sequences of their Father's Fate, so would they probably have avoided all the French Infection which they receiv'd in Body and Mind: They had not receiv'd (Sons of the Protestant Martyr) the French Religion, and above all Contagions a French Incli∣nation, the most fatal Poison that could en∣ter the Blood of an English King. Such a Government would soon have discover'd the Protestant Mask K. Charles II. only pull'd off at his death. Such a Parliamen∣tary Constitution would not have suffer'd the avow'd and open Apostacy of the next Heir; the Bill of Exclusion had then past, and had prevented the setting up, the pulling down the late King with such hazard and expence to this Nation. Such an Establishment would have prevented that late damnable invented Project o corrupting Parliaments (which I must mention in this place, because it began a this time) that cursed Project, which de¦feats all our hopes, which poisons us in our mothers milk, which murders us by the hands of our Parents, which infect the only Cordial that can preserve ou Being, which makes us accessory to ou own Fate, betray'd by those we chuse to represent us, made slaves by our Protec∣tors, and given up by those elected t defend our Liberties, (but of this, and the terrible Consequences I shall take far∣ther notice.) Such a Constitution would
have prevented that Inundation of Pro∣aneness, Leudness, and Immorality, in∣roduc'd by K. Charles II. and his Athe∣ical Wits, to fit the Nation for the in∣ended Yoke of Popery and Slavery. To hat end was all Learning and Virtue ex∣loded in his Reign, scorn of Religion, ontempt of a publick Spirit, derision of etters; and a pretending Wit above rule, earning, or Scruples, being the sure and nly recommendations to his Favor, and ublic Imployments. No Government t must leave Mankind, as the Deity dos is Creatures, in a state of Freewill, and erefore in an exercise perhaps of pri∣at vices, or conceal'd villanies: but in ch a true English Establishment we had ever seen a rampant Erench Whore, o∣enly governing our Councils; we had t seen an English King (well under∣anding Seafaring matters) an open In∣ructor to his Brother of France in the ysteries of Navigation, Building and rade. And to evince, as I go along, the terest of King and People equally to bsist in a steady, good, and incorrupti∣e Administration, the Elder Brother d never died an unnatural death in such  well regulated Protestant State, as ould not have admitted of a bigotted, adstrong, Popish Successor. But let us ave this artful King, trick'd in his ricks, outwitted by such a Brother, plot∣d against by his Son, unpitied by his bjects, tho making way for such a Suc∣ssor, abandon'd at last by his Bishops, d with nothing to save him from a fu∣re Account, but Extreme Unction from e Priests of the Whore of Babylon. And now to the last, and in my opinion e best of the wicked Reigns; for the oject of a Standing Army under a Po∣sh King did but hasten our Deliverance,  did the Expedient of an Heir under a elly of Clouts. The Son must really be t, and the Army must be Protestant, I do not say really so, for the Name will do But I shall say less of the living Prince, be∣cause of his Misfortunes. He lives, and without a Crown, which is Punishment great enough for Follies having the excuse of Conscience, and Mistake. Yet I can hardly contain when I remember he is the cause, that all Mankind have been getting our Wealth, while our own recompence is, that we have got rid of himself. How∣ever I forgive him all the rest, but having left behind that worst of Evils, a pretence to a Protestant Army, in a good Reign, and in times of Peace: and I will only lay to the charge of his Brother of blessed memory, all the Mischiefs arising from corrupted Parliaments. Now to this great point, and our most pressing Danger, and the present and future Remedies of them. I have hi∣therto bin shewing what Violences, what Infamies, what Follies, an uncor∣rupted Parliamentary Constitution would have prevented; which evinces sufficient∣ly what we have to expect in future times, if a secure Settlement be not ob∣tain'd under a good King against the notorious increase of Corruption in our Age. It is now come to such a height, that it may almost be said, A wise Prince must comply with it: for as in a weak and low condition, the Physician must not apply the proper Re∣medy till the Patient has strength to bear it; so in our low and corrupted State, when Patriots must be hired to serve their Country, when Whigs go resty without Pension or Place, and begin with untime∣ly barking against the Government in War, to conclude with prostitute baw∣ling for it after a Peace; I say, when this is our case, till effectual Laws have re∣cover'd our Constitution, it must be con∣fest, our Princes have an excuse for practi∣sing the base arts of Corruption, especi∣ally in times of eminent danger, which
allow of no delays. This makes it plain that amongst Men, Lawgivers must only seek for coercive Honesty; and Legisla∣tors remembring that most necessary part of the most perfect Prayer, Lead us not into Temtation, should have that principally in view for King and People, that neither be led into it. No Emperor but envies the least Bird upon the wing: but since Flying is impossible, the great Vicegerents of God upon Earth are content to walk upon two Legs with common Porters; and either Kings must drop from Heaven, and then let them be Jure divino, or Mankind must be Slaves, unless they provide such happy and irresistible Laws as may restrain the love of Power, as well in Kings, as in Statesmen. I will only desire the ex∣ample may be given me, of the best of Kings succeeding a bad one, who ever made it his choice to give up any Autho∣rity or Acquisition, tho obtain'd by his Predecessor by means he would not have practised himself. Since then the Evils of bad Princes are permanent, and the good Establishments of just ones often overthrown by those that are Arbitrary, what Methods for the good of Mankind and Society, but to find Chains strong enough to bind a Tyrant, which can only be made here in England, when a good King with upright Ministers beat the An∣vil, and uncorrupted Parliaments find Fire and Materials? The highest Compliment I can make this King is to say, This is the time for so glorious a Work, and we have great reason to expect his utmost assistance: For in truth, Deliverance and Reforma∣tion are his very Title. There is this un∣answerable Argument to prove it must be now or never: Some Infections must be check'd in time, or Remedies will come too late; and I am sure we must flux now, or never expect to see a sound Nose on the face of the Government. Such a precarious Peace as we have obtain'd is hardly a Blessing: but because it sets Parliaments at liberty to settle our shat∣ter'd State, let no time be lost then, when we are so unsecure of its lasting. But as I would willingly give some hints that may be serviceable at all times in the great Cause of Liberty, so I shall take notice, and that only from Observati∣ons of the last Reigns, what are the most dangerous Symptoms threatning a People with loss of Liberty: and when most of those Circumstances concur at once (any one of which dos threaten ruin) then I need not say a Government is most in danger, and that the speediest and strongest Antidotes should be pro∣vided against the influence of so many malignant Constellations join'd together. To begin then with what the Reign of K. James the 1st will afford us: The most dangerous Circumstance that could attend a Nation was a reasonable obliga∣tion to set upon the Throne a Prince born and bred up in another Country, who must retain a Forein Heart, who must be partial to the Poople, to the Customs of his native Land; who must therefore be unacquainted with the Men, Manners, Privileges, and I aws of those Territo∣ries he is newly come to govern. This Partiality is natural, and for that reason justifiable: and therefore as it seldom happens but that Princes transplant them selves to a richer Soil (as was the case o K. James) so the Wealth of the mor opulent Nation must always be prosti¦tuted to raise and supply the Favorite of the poorer; and 'tis all can be expec¦ted, that they be not raised by hasty an unmerited Favours: besides, it is almos impossible but the Interests of the Tw Nations or People must interfere, if h retains the Jurisdiction of both, as thi Scotch Prince did. How perplext must
the best of Kings be in his divided thoughts d inclinations? and where, and to hom must Nature and Education incline m? It may happen, as in this case, at the unforc'd Constitution of one ountry allow'd a greater Power, and eater Prerogatives than was consistent ith the Laws of the other. How shall e spirit of a Prince brook the refusal  that in one place, which he was us'd  the submission to elsewhere? How n he easily change a Bent created per∣ps by Nature, and confirm'd by Cu∣om? In one Country requir'd to head rmies, in another oblig'd to encourage eets: In one Country Troops are the pport of Mens Property, in the other ey must prove the ruin of their Liber∣es; this distinction Princes cannot ea∣y make. Religion too, the great guide f Mens Actions, or at least their pre∣nce, differs almost in all Countries, en where it agrees in name: and we ow by bloody experience how little e Protestant Religion of the Scots did gree with our Episcopacy. Innumera∣e are the Mischiefs arising from such a ircumstance; but I confine my self on∣ to what were the apparent dangers in e case before us. Another dangerous Symptom appear∣g in the Reign of K. Charles the 1st as this, That all his arbitrary Designs ere carried on, and disguis'd under the ask of the most precise Piety. Such pious Projects as arose from Insolence nd Pride, that were carried on by each of Faith, that tended to the effusi∣ of the best Blood in the Nation, were lways transacted in Forms, with Fast∣g and Prayers. As his Shipmony was aintain'd by his Judges, so were all his ther Expedients to inslave the Nation reach'd for by his Church, and labor'd or by his Bishops. Another threatning Circumstance was the advantage with which K. Charles the 2d came to the Throne. The Nation was then intoxicated with Joy: and he made as ill use of that opportunity, as Noah's Daughters did of their Father's Drunkenness; as they went in to him, so he got in to his People, and with all sly Arts and Corruption began the fatal (well-improv'd) Project of bribing Parliaments. And that none might have a scruple of Conscience against this highest of Crimes, betraying their Country, Religion in his time was the jest of his Favorites: but for himself, he had a different one rea∣dy for every Nation, and sort of People he had to do with; a Papist in France, a Presbyterian in Scotland, a Churchman in England, a Quaker with Penn, an Atheist with Hallifax. A most dextrous practice this in all Princes that persue it, who thus easily impose on good people willing to be deceiv'd. Another certain warning of ensuing mischief (the very Porpoise before the Storm) is a Standing Army; which tho it prov'd unsuccessful in K. James's time, yet it immediately preceded his intentions of subverting all our Laws, Human and Divine. He thought his Pro∣ject as infallible as his Pope, when so many of his Troops were Papists and Fo∣reiners; being secure too of Ships from abroad to transport more Strangers when wanted. But all this was spoil'd with one word, Popery. Heaven had in store an Antidote against a Popish Army, pray God preserve us at all times from a Protestant one. Now having recapitulated all these Circumstances of approaching ruin, which we so narrowly escap'd in the foregoing Reigns, what would become of us if these difficulties should bear upon us (as in a Hurricane) all at once? Whenever they do, well may the Nation fear their impending Fate. Yet after all I say, a
free uncorrupted Parliament would soon dispel these Clouds. Under such a Govern∣ment as I have mention'd, K. James the 1st had bin compell'd to have made use of English Councils in governing an English Nation: he had bin oblig'd to have pro∣vided for his Scots Favorites out of his Scotch Revenue: he had no doubt bin supplied with the Mony of England, but forced to have laid it out for the Ho∣nor and Interests of that People. Sup∣pose the Nation prepossest for him as they were for K. Charles the 2d, reliev'd from long Wars, from Confusion, from Cromwels and Usurpers; such a Parlia∣ment would not then have sat still in idle rejoicing, but wisely have prevented the Causes of future mourning: nay, give him the Standing Army of the unfortu∣nate Prince of his name (let it be a Pro∣testant one too) yet such an Assembly with their steady Wisdom and Vigor would have rescued their Country from all these dangers. All I can allow, but the Circumstances of K. Charles's corrupt∣ed Parliament: for the Incorruption of that is my only Remedy to all other E∣vils; when that falls out with the rest, there is nothing left but for honest men to show the Nation the Precipice upon which they stand: And much may be expected from so brave a People, when wak'd out of their Lethargy, and well apprised of their danger. I shall conclude this part with the Questions of K. James the 1st upon his accession to the Throne, Do I make the Bishops? Do I make the Judges? If to this he might have added, Do I make the House of Commons? To such fatal Interrogatories the Answer is too plain. Having treated (and with a Freedom an Englishman may well take) of the Circumstances of the last Reigns, I come to a Subject with more difficulty to be handled. What the People and Parli∣ament have to do at present may well be gather'd from the foregoing Considera∣tions, yet I must say something of the Revolution, and what has hapned since, were it only to acknowledg the Obliga∣tions we owe to our present King. The Oppressions and Dangers from which he reliev'd us were so grievous, and the Ad∣vantages we might have procur'd our selves by his coming were so great, that we ow him the utmost Gratitude, not to be overpaid by any thing but by such a confidence in his Virtue, as (forgetful of Times past and to come) should make us neglect the Opportunity he has given us of securing to our selves, the never being so much oblig'd to any other. This were the worst requital we could make him, to let it be possible by our negligence, that any person should ever rival him in his glorious Title of Deliverer. Our present King has now the same Game he has all his Life bin succesfully persuing abroad, and the same business he has bin bred up to in other Countries; but he has now other Tools to work with, a divided and corrupted People. His Declaration assures us, he came to secure our Constitution, so as no ill Prince, no evil Ministers should be able to violate it for the future. I shall not now repeat what he has done in person towards all this; it were unnecessary Flattery to re∣peat Actions done in the face of the Sun: but my business at present is to consider what has bin deficient; and, as I pro∣pos'd at first, to give some hints where the fault lies, and how it came about that we have bin expos'd to such hazards, and are yet unsecure; and this to the end the Scene of his great Life may be perfected, and his Promises made good to us, in an Establishment secur'd against future At∣temts. I must confess I cannot wholly acquit the Convention, and other following Par∣liaments.
I doubt all the unnecessary hazards to which we have been expos'd, all our unsuccesful Undertakings, all the misgiven and mispent Treasure, all that is deficient, or left undone to the com∣pleating our Security, must in a great measure be laid to their charge. It is well known, many in Pamphlets, more  Discourse, accuse them both of weak∣ess and corruption: But they should onsider that such a War was what ne∣er came afore into the hands of a Parli∣ment; the dangers and difficulties suc∣eeding and increasing from year to year, ere enough to amaze and distract the reatest Assembly. I shall be far from assing so hard a Judgment upon them; y only wish is, if they have done well, at they may never do otherwise; if ey have committed errors, the like may ever happen. My Ambition is their lory; only out of zeal to their Honor,  shall take notice of some Complaints ade by others; and from my self take e liberty to say, that this ensuing Par∣ment made free by a happy Peace, ust make the Nation so for ever, or for er lose their Reputation. This is the Time in which Parliaments ould exert themselves for the Nations appiness, and their own Fame. All ankind have observ'd, this is the second volution unimprov'd by Parliaments the same Age; the one as ineffectual the good of England in the hands of triots, Whigs and Dissenters, as the er was in the hands of Cavaliers and urchmen: Which makes Men apt to clude, the fault lies in that part of our nstitution on which we most rely. And  common reason given by all why Par∣ents have mismanag'd, is, that they  so manag'd themselves: They do not y suppose them subjected to the power ings, to the influence of great Men, he arts of old and crafty Statesmen, but accuse them now of being led by beardless Politicians, by upstart Prenti∣ces in business, neither supported by Fortune, Dignities or Experience, and only buoy'd up by projecting Insolence. If this were the case, to what are we re∣duced? This is not Phaeton unfortunate∣ly conducting the Horses of the Sun, but a Carrier driving Pack-horses, and Beasts of Burden, which jog on their appointed Stages for their pensions. The propos'd limits of a Sheet, and not the Subject, confine me; and therefore I shall repeat but one Objection made to the Wisdom of our National Assemblies, which is, that the Members of a Con∣vention freely chosen, brought together at this Revolution, and miraculously de∣liver'd from the highest Oppressions, should admit of the old Underminers of our Liberties for the new managers of Reformation: and this I may say as to their Integrity, who would have admit∣ted of such Corrupters, but to be cor∣rupted? It may very well be said to the justifi∣cation of some; When there was no Go∣vernment, no Ministers, no Mony, no privy Purse, who could influence? It must be confest (and here is the fatal Error) if there was Corruption, it was from within: Nay it is plain, they must bribe themselves, and only with hopes and expectations; they were qua∣lify'd by the Constitution to have places, every Fool was well qualify'd in his own thoughts, and every Knave betray'd his Trust and his Country to make him∣self worthy. Men have not only alter'd in our times, but Parties have chang'd their principles and practices: if so, what cau∣tions can be great enough in such an Age? I come therefore to those considerations, what wise and honest Men should do in this critical juncture. I shall propose
preventing Physick, safe, were there no present Disease, were there no Corrupti∣on in our Land, were all upright from the Lord to the Commoner: Yet I doubt the Golden Age would not succeed, were all wise as Solomon, and after God's own heart as David; we know the fol∣lies committed by the one, the impieties by the other; let no Man depend too much upon himself, let no Government depend upon Men. Presumption is the highest Sin, and Prevention the highest Wisdom. I doubt not but some will think, and more will say, I have writ a tedious Pre∣face to a very short Treatise; that with∣out so much repetition, without enume∣rating so many Diseases, and times of In∣fection, I might sooner have given my short Receipt, which is this; Good People of England, elect those to represent you this Parliament, who most probably will secure your being truly represented for ever: in other words, Those who have Virtue enough to incapacitate themselves from any Ser∣vice but that of their Country, while they take that Trust upon them. Now towards making such a Choice, my Instructions shall be as short as my Advice; Chuse Rich Men. For you may know who are Rich, and cannot know who are Honest: One you think honest may take Mony, but one that is rich do's not want it. Let no Character of Party recommend or prejudice: Poor Whigs, poor Tories, want equally Places, and will act alike to get and keep 'em; bu be sure if they want Mony much, they have not much Ambition. Therefore a∣void the younger Sons of Lords, who ful of Pride, with empty pockets, will en¦deavour, at the Nations cost, to becom rich Commoners. It is needless to ad¦vise against those whose Actions have dis¦cover'd them in foregoing Parliaments those worst of Villains, who began lik Patriots, to conclude like Parasites. Thus I conclude, like a Quack, under¦taking my Remedy shall cure all Di¦stempers, whether they lie in the Heart o the Brain. No matter what sort of Me conspire, whether the bold Projects (fla¦ming like Comets in the Sky) threate multitudes, or whether the softer Me¦thods (like Mines under ground) wor hidden mischief. Such a National A¦mbly, under the Qualifications I hav mention'd, would repel the Bashaw, an defeat the Courtier, and prove strong ¦nough to secure us from the most dange¦ous Designs, those drest up with Zea and disguis'd by Improbability. Such  Parliament would secure us from Relig¦ous Leudness, Protestant Arbitrarines and Parliamentary Slavery. THE END.
