E857 190.g.13[170] R39431 99890526 193972
blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT C. R. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE At the Court at Whitehall, The Third of January, 1678/9. Present, The Kings Most Excellent Majesty. His Highness Prince Rupert Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord Privy Seal Duke of Monmouth Duke of Lauderdale Marquess of Worcester Lord Chamberlain Earl of Oxford Earl of Salisbury Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Northampton Earl of Peterborough Earl of Strafford Earl of Sunderland Earl of Essex Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl of Ailesbury Earl of Carbery Viscount Fauconberg Viscount Newport Lord Bishop of London Lord Bishop of Durham Lord Berkeley Lord Maynard Mr. Vice Chamber Mr. Secretary C Mr. Secretary H Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Master of the Ordnance Mr. Speaker. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty (at the humble desire of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled) did by His Royal Proclamation, bearing Date the Thirtieth day of October last, Straitly Charge and Command all persons being Popish Recusants, or so reputed, That they should on or before the Seventh day of November then next ensuing, Depart from His Majesties Royal Palaces of Whitehall, Somerset House, and Saint James's, the Cities of London and Westminster, and from all other places within Ten miles distance of the same; And whereas His Majesty hath beén Informed, That several Popish Recusants, and persons reputed to be such, have since the late Prorogation of the Parliament, taken the boldness to resort to the said Cities of London and Westminster, and other places within the said distance; At which their presumption His Majesty is most highly Offended, and is Graciously pleased this day in Council to Order, That all Iustices of the Peace, and other His Majesties Ministers and Officers, do within their several Precincts within the said Cities of London and Westminster, or within Ten miles distance of the same, make Diligent and Speédy Search and Inquiry after all such Popish Recusants, or others reputed so to be, who have returned, or do presume to stay within the said Places contrary to the Purport of the said Proclamation, and them and every of them to proceéd against with the utmost Severity, according as they are by the said Proclamation, and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, Required and Impowered to do. Robert Southwell. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678/9.
