E942A 21.h.3[199] R227918 99887575 190921
blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT W. R. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION. Tho. Cantuar. Sunderland, Romney, Orford. WHereas We have received Information, That several Bills of Credit is∣sued out of the Exchequer pursuant to several Acts made the last Session of this present Parliament, have beén Forged and Counterfeited by Altering the Sums therein contained, and by Forging Endorsements thereupon. And upon Examination it doth not appear, That there have beén more than Five of the said Bills Counterfeited and Altered, which Five Bills are secured, so that no Person can receive any further Prejudice thereby. And whereas several of the Persons concerned in the said Forgery and Counterfeiting are Apprehended, and in Custo∣dy for the said Offence, but others (viz.) Domingo Antunes a Portuguese, and Robert Marriot, a Taylor, who lately lived in Arundel-street, who were principally concerned therein, have Absconded from their usual Places of Abode, and are fled from Iustice: We therefore (with the Advice of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council) have thought fit to Issue this Proclamation, hereby Com∣manding all His Majesties Loving Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend the said Domingo Antunes, and Robert Marriot wherever they or either of them may be found, and to carry them be∣fore the next Iustice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to remain until they shall be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do hereby Require the said Iustice, or other Chief Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to His Majesties Privy Council, or to one of His Majesties Principal Secretaries of State. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all His Majesties Loving Subjects (as they will Answer the contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways Conceal, but Discover, Take and Apprehend the said Domingo Antunes and Robert Marriot, or either of them, to the end they may be proceeded against for such their Offence, according to Law. And We do hereby Promise and Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said Domingo Antunes and Robert Mar∣riot, or either of them, and bring them before such Iustice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, shall receive as a Reward for each of the said Persons, the Sum of One hundred Pounds; which said Sum of One hundred Pounds the Commissioners of His Majesties Treasury are hereby Direct∣ed to Pay accordingly. And We do hereby further Promise and Declare, That if any of the Persons concerned in the said Forgery and Counterfeiting (except the said Domingo Antunes and Robert Marriot) shall Discover and Apprehend the other Persons concerned in the said Forgery and Counterfeiting, or any or either of them, and bring them before such Iustice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, such Person shall not only have and receive the said Reward of One hundred Pounds, but shall also have His Majesties Gracious Pardon for such his Offence. Given at the Court at Whitehall the Twenty fourth Day of September, 1697. In the Ninth Year of His Majesties Reign. God save the King. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.
