E2678 [ocm]12152246 197250
AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMONS Assembled in Parliament: In Vindication of Thomas Brown, Maxi∣millian Bard, &c. Commissaries for seizing of Horses, Mares and Geldings, for the Parlia∣ments service. Together with an Order of the said House, who disclaim a former Order dated the 26 of January (under the Title of An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament) concerning the seizing of Horses by the said Commissaries. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Ordinances be forthwith Printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the middle Temple. May 17. 1643.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parli∣ament. Die Jovis. 26. Januarii. 1642. IT is this day ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment assembled, That the Ordi∣nance of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, dated the 15. day of Novem∣ber last past, granted to Maximilli∣an Bard and Thomas Brown and o∣thers, for the taking and seizing of Horses, Mares, and Geldings, is hereby revoked and made void and of none effect; And that if the said Maximillian Bard, and Thomas
Brown, or any others, shall seize or take any Horses, Mares or Geldings hereafter by colour of the said Or∣dinance, shall be proceeded against as Fellons, according to the Lawes of this Land. Die Jovis, 26. Januarii, 1642. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed and pablished. Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. Die Veneris, 3. Febr. 1642. Resolved, &c. THat this House did not assent to the making of any such Ordi∣nance as is printed under the Name
of the Lords and Commons of the 26. of Ianuary, concerning the com∣missaries taking of Horses, &c. Nor to the Printing of that Ordinance, as it is set down in that Ordi∣nance. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Veneris, 3. Febr. 1642. REsolved upon the question by the House of Commons, That all the Commissaries named in the Ordinance for seizing Horses, shall have thanks given them here at the Barre. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Lunae, 15 Maii. 1643. WHereas Tho: Brown, Maxi∣millian Bard, Will: Dodson, Nicholas Alvie, Rob: Norwood, John Styles, William Booth, Thomas Mason, Will. Barton, Mr. Willi∣amson, Tho. Flaner, Richard-Over∣ton, George Day, Joh. Hynd, Daniel Waldoe, Walter Story, and Samuel Haisnett, and their substitutes were first by order of the House of Com∣mons, and then by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, autho∣rised and commanded Commissa∣ries to search for, seize, and take hor∣ses, Mares, and Geldings, with Saddles and Bridles, and to deliver them away upon VVarrants from
the Lord Generall the Earl of Essex, which Ordinance is since revoked: It is now declared by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the said Maximillian Bard, Tho: Brown and the rest of the commissaries have in execution of the said Order and Ordinance, done an accepta∣ble service to the commonwealth: And it is ordained, That the said commissaries and their substitutes, shall for all things done in pursu∣ance of the said Order and Ordi∣nance, and other Orders; and also for their former seizing of the Hor∣ses, by warrant from the Committee for the defence of the Kingdom, or by Authority derived from both or either House of Parliament, have the protection of this House for
their Indempnity; and if any person shall molest, traduce, or falsly de∣fame the said commissaries, or any of them, for any thing done in ob∣servance of the command of both or either the Houses of Parliament, such person upon complaint thereof made, shall receive condigne pu∣nishment; and the examination of such defamation and abuse is refer∣red to the Committee for Examina∣tions, who after examination are re∣quired to make Report thereof to this House. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
