E3358 [ocm]11998231 196601
Christ's Submission TO HIS FATHERS WILL. Set forth In a SERMON Preached at Thrap∣ston in Northampton-shire. By NICOLAS ESTWICK B. D. Rector of Warkton in Northampton-shiere. Imprimatur Joseph Caryl. printer's device of George Miller, featuring an anchor held by a hand from the clouds (McKerrow 233) ANCHORA SPEI LONDON, Printed by George Miller dwelling in Black-Friers, 1644.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. Christian Reader: BY Gods providence we are reserved to sad and peri∣lous times, which some of Gods servants have fore∣seene and given us warning of them. Mr Hilder∣sam (to name no more) a godly, painfull and learned Minister, now with God, applies that speech of the Prophet Jeremy to our daies, Jer. 6.4. Woe unto us for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out: And he addes, We in England, Hilders. lect. 5. in Psal. 51. and if ever peo∣ple in the world, have cause to looke for evill and troublesome times; our skie is now red and lowring, and he is a senslesse and secure hypocrite, that doth not expect some great storme and tempest: When I read this passage, out of love to my country, I pray∣ed to God that he might proove a false Prophet, and I reasoned thus within my selfe; true, our sinnes are not tongue-tyed, but they cry a∣loud to the righteous Judge for vengeance; yet God is a free Agent and a mercifull Father; and we are ignorant of the times of Gods visitati∣on, for we know not when the sinnes of a Nation are ripe for Gods sickle, nor whither it will please the Lord to suffer the tares to grow up with, and for the sake of the good corne; and whither the prayers of his faith∣full servants, which stand in the gap may not keepe off the judgements from us: But in vaine it was to flatter our selves with hopes of impu∣nity. This skilfull workeman, observing the holy Scriptures, and
Gods dealing with his owne children in covenant with him in former times, could rationally conclude that some great evill was approaching towards us: Luther Prefat. in Hos. Propb. There is, I confesse, a great difference betwixt Gods servants in these dayes, and the Prophets of old, as Luther hath wise∣ly observed, for these holy men had certain revelations of certain punish∣ments to be inflicted on certaine persons at a certaine time, but we only in generall can threaten sinners, nor have we a certaine revelation whi∣ther they shall be punished by the Turke or any other plague. And as Gods servants on earth, so his tokens from heaven prognosti∣cated evill daies; these are as smoake which are the fore-runners of the fire ready to flame out; I will record but one instance, the Lord enclo∣sed us all in a dreadfull tent, directly over our heads, and compassed us in round with pillars of terrible darknesse, fire and bloud, a yeare before that unparalled Gun-powder-treason, and at the instant detection ther∣of strange lights and flashings were seen, so that the heavens seemed to burne over us; these were faire warnings to all for good, if men had grace to make good use of these warnings. Tertullian tels us, that strange fires hung over the wals of Carthage — And these are the signes of Gods wrath at hand, Tertull. ad Sca∣pulam. which we must, by what meanes we can publish, declare and deprecate as those devout Jewes did in the booke of the Maccabees, 2 Mac. 5.2, 3, 4 and they which expound them in another sense shall in time (saith the Father) feele his supreme and universall wrath. These strange and fierie impressions in the aire should have frighted us out of our security and fiery lusts. Nor have we only heard that God was angry with us, and seen the smoake, a signe of his wrath kindling against us, but we have seen and felt the flames therof in many particulars. 1. Anno Christi 1607. D. Benes. 20. le. on Amos. M. Brinsley 3. par. of the true watch, c. 3. The Lord caused the swelling waters of the Seas to breake into the firme land in divers parts of this Realme, and then many perished in six and twenty Parishes in Monmouth-shiere alone. He taught us hereby, that if he had enlarged the commission of the waters, we should all have perished; This was a judgement on the borders of our king∣dome, and the losse of our brethren was justly a terrour to us all: be∣cause Gods feare, the bancke which would have stopped the inundati∣on of sinne, was broken downe, God sent an extraordinary inundati∣ons of waters. 2. To this I may adde, that the heavens have wept over us, and tho∣rough that unseasonable raine left an evident print of Gods displeasure
to be remembred (saith mine Authour) almost in every bit of bread; And hence the earth like Aegypt, when Nilus over-flowes too much, being surcharged with moisture, was not able to yeeld its wonted fruit∣fulnesse; this judgement pinched especially the poore people; Lamen 5.10. the skins of many of them were, if not blacke like an oven, yet pale and withe∣red, because of the terrible famine; because we would not weepe for our sins, the heavens did weepe over our heads, and there was want of the food of our bodies, because we regarded not the food of our soules. 3. The Lord sent an extreame frosty winter, and smote the fish in the waters, the fowles of the air, our sweet and pleasant flowers, and threat∣ned the famishing of our cattell: Was God angry with these creatures? Hab. 3.8. No verily, not with them, but with man, and smote them for the sin of man, and in them he read us a lecture of his displeasure towards us, be∣cause we loved these things too much, the Lord deprived us of them, and convinced us of our hard and frozen hearts by the frozen season. 4. Sometimes the Lord hath made our heavens as brasse, and in stead of fruitfull clouds drawne up by the Sunne, Deut. 28.23. we had clouds of dust raised by the feet of men and beasts, whereby our grasse was withered, our fruits parched with extreme heat and great drought; This yeare deserved a name equivalent to that in France, 1539. the yeare of ro∣sted vines; because our hearts were drie and barren, Serres. French. histor. I. 1. p. 521. the Lord to mind us hereof sent dry and barren weather. 5. Hath not God proclaimed his wrath, as it were, by sound of trum∣pet, and shot his Arrowes of the plague and infectious diseases which have roved up and downe many years together to shoot at Cities and vil∣lages, which hath killed many thousands of our brethren and sisters? A great and continued plague, argues a great and continued wrath: God sends unusuall diseases on our bodies, for our refusing the health of our soules. 6. Nor have we only at home felt the wrath of God heavie upon us, but his heavie hand hath followed us abroad into forraigne Nations: Gods blessing hath not gone along of late yeares with our undertakings: because we relied not on the Lord, but on the arme of flesh, our valiant sculdiers, our strong Ships: Therefore the Lord hath frustrated all our hopes of our warlike expeditions, and blasted all our chargeable prepara∣tions, which have been without benefit to our kingdome, and some of
them to our disgrace in the sight of strangers: O Lord what shall we say when England turneth their backs before their enemies. 7. Iosh 7.8. But evident it is that no warnings from heaven or earth, no words, threats, judgements or mercies which we abundantly enjoyed did tho∣roughly reforme us, and therefore the Lord hath drawn out of the trea∣sures of his wrath, a sharpe and a terrible Sword, and hath justly pla∣gued us with warre, for refusing the peace of our soules; this is Gods most dreadfull judgement, and hath many great evils waiting on it or following it at the heeles, and in divers circumstances is most terrible to us.  First, because it is an unnaturall warre; English men doe not fight against strangers, Isa 19.2. but Egyptian-like they sheath their Swords one in the bowels of another.  2. Nor is this warre limited to a corner or part of the kingdome, but this fire flames over all the kingdome, and all mens hands doe kindle this fire.  3. Neither are they all which live to∣gether unanimous in heart one way, nay I thinke I shall not erre by saying there is not a City or Village,  nor scarce a numerous family which is not divided in it selfe; and this is a griefe that a man must be forced to strengthen their hands which fight, as he supposeth, for a bad cause, and to these burthens, as the case stands, he may with a good con∣science submit his shoulders. Crispine the E∣state of the Church. Life of Henry 2. This puts me in mind of the factions, which openly appeared in the daies of Frederick the second, There was no Towne in Italy (saith mine Authour) without this division: Some say this Emperour called the faction which adhered to the Pope in the Germane tongue, Guelphes, that is Wolves, and those that stood for him he called Gibellines, i. two wals, because he leaned on them as an house doth upon two strong wals. I forbeare to mention those evils which are in the eyes of every simple man, but my soule grieveth for these particulars. 1. First, because I cannot see that in the heat of this flame we have turned to our God; we may observe, that sinners are no changlings: they walk on still in those crooked waies which are without all controver∣sie the waies of death. 2. I doe observe that difference of opinion hath begot a strange alie∣nation of affection, and made a kind of separation betwixt loving friends and godly Christians. 3. Hence are vented rash and impious censures, and not seldome unjust imputations to blast their credit, which are not of their iudgment and from which evils they are as free as they themselves are.
4. And sometimes out of misguided zeale there are false and trea∣cherous informations against them to the powers, whereby they which fain would live peaceably in the land are endangered to be molested, as touching their persons, and to be ruined in their estates, and there will not be wanting some which will justifie them, and the reason is only this. Such men will not goe along with them in their cause. I remember a Story which by changing the termes is appliable to both sides. Boni∣face 8. on Ashwednesday did not cast ashes on the head, as the man∣ner was and is among the Papists, of Porchetas Arch-bishop of Ge∣noa, but he threw them into his eyes, and in stead of saying, Centur Magd. 13. Cont. c. 7. Remem∣ber O man that thou art ashes, and shalt be turned into ashes, said, Remember O man that thou art a Gibelline, and with the Gibel∣lines shalt be turned into ashes: And not long after this contumely and despite done unto him deprived him of his Bishoprick. I doe from the bottome of my heart wish that the Lord would say to us as sometimes he did to Ephraim: Is England my deare sonne! Is he a pleasant child! Since I spake against England, I doe ear∣nestly remember England still; Ier. 31.20. therefore my bowels are trou∣bled for England, I will surely have mercy upon England: But I greatly feare when I looke upon the practises and courses of men, that the hands of the Lord will be stretched out still against us, and that this devouring Sword will not yet be put up into the scabbard. In these sad times give me leave to incite you to put in practise especi∣ally these duties. 1. Labour soundly to informe your judgements, and use such helps which may satisfie your consciences, and then without hopes or feares imbrace that side which you have apprehended to be right: For what will it avail you to have quietnesse abroad and to raise up warrs at home in your owne bosomes? What to be commended of all men, yea of truly gracious, and to be condemned by your owne hearts? And then albeit you should erre, your errour simply as an errour would not be a dam∣ning errour, and then you should not hang in suspence and change this way and that way according to the various successe of warre, but you would alwaies be the same, though you were sure your cause should lie in the dust. You will resolve rather to suffer for your consciences, then you will deny the truth, and actively helpe forward the contrary prevai∣ling party. 2. Examine your hearts sincerely by the Scriptures in the presence
of God, and repent of all your knowne sinnes, and then albeit you should heare of no peace in England, you shall have peace with God which is best of all. 3. Pray affectionately for the peace of England. I am sure we have a rule for this: You will say an honourable warre is better then a dishonourable peace; be it so, pray then that we may have peace upon such termes, that it may be safe for our Church and State, and honoura∣ble for the King and Parliament. 4. Live by faith, rely on the never failing promises of God; then may you lift up your heads in the worst times, Hab. 2.4. and being armed with this shield, no evils shall be able to conquer, no not to hurt you; but in greatest straits, 1 Sam. 30.6. you may with David comfort your selves in the Lord your God. 5. Learne to submit to Gods holy will in all judgements, whither they be particular or generall. To help you to conform to Gods will I have published this short Treatise, which I composed on a very sad occasion, which I will be bold to relate unto you. It pleased God two yeares since and upward, to take to his mercy my eldest daughter; this cup was the bitterest (I speake of particular af∣flictions) which was since my being, put into my hands to drinke: I lo∣ved my daughter too much, and therefore I grieved too much for her death; my judgement informed me that I had no reason to mourne so long and so much as I did for her, but the strength of mine affection to her did by fits and for a time captive the use of my judgement. Yet I had cause to love her very much; for she was of a sweet and loving dis∣position, very apt to learne any thing that she was put to learne; She was a dutifull and obedient, and which is best of all, a gracious child, and to speake a great deale in a few words, she, in the space of eighteen years, which was the short terme of her lift, did not much or often dis∣please me. One thing I cannot forbeare to mention, She was very care∣full to keep holy the Lords day, the whole day, and I do professe that I never did know any of her age and Sex that excelled her in this parti∣cular. It hath bin my constant course to call my Family to a reckoning touching the Sermons which they heard on that day. On a time my re∣verend friend Mr Mede was at my house, and when the Repetition, a Psalm and prayer were ended, he openly blamed me for requiring so much of my daughter, then being about 12. years old: but he was de∣ceived; there was no cause for me to set her a taske: Such was her
willingnesse, chearfulnesse, and unwearied diligence, that she would re∣hearse more then in reason could be required of her, and as she grew up, so her profiting in the best things did evidently appeare, insomuch that some yeares before her death, she did not onely helpe the Family by rea∣ding the fore-noone Sermon after dinner, and as the phrase was by tea∣ching one maid at least, but she would repeate the heads and summe of one of my Sermons with that grace of speech and understanding that I admired her, and for her commendable qualities did often blesse God, as Leonides did for his Origen, Euseb. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c. 2. for making me so happy a Father of so good a child. A great helpe to her was this, she had learned Cate∣chismes. These things have I written, that I might have a ground to put the Governours of Families in mind of their duties, and I doe intreate them all which shall reade these rude lines,  that they would be carefull in their own persons to keepe holy the Lords day,  and doe their utmost that their children and servants doe keepe it holy too;  that they would examine them,  what they have profited by the Sermons which they heard on that day; And lastly instruct them in the grounds of Christian Religion, they then should find by Gods blessing the fruit hereof would be sweet and profitable both for themselves and theirs. Henry Smith Art of lear∣ning, p. 298. Consider advisedly what a godly and excellent Preacher saith, If people understood the Lords prayer, the ten Commandements, and the Creed, they would learne more, I speake by tryall, saith mine Authour, in a moneth then they have gathered in twenty years. When I was in my mourning condition for my daughter, I used the best meanes I could to asswage my griefe: and with other helps I often thought upon the words of our Saviour in his bitter agony, Not my will, but thy will be done, which did wonderfully support me, I meditated and penned a Sermon on that Text, which I preached at Thrapston Lecture in Northampton-shire more then two years since; My sorrow was lately renewed by the death of a precious wo∣man Mrs East a Londiner; a kinde and loving daughter in law she was to me; she was devout and religious; she spent much time in pray∣er and reading privately; in company her discourse was not vain, but fruitfull and savoury for the good of the soule; she walked with God her selfe, and stirred up others to leade a godly and righteous life: I re∣flecting on the premisses, and considering the personall crosses, which all men are to undergoe, and chiefly the common calamities of the time. I
was willing to put that Sermon in print, thus conceiving that as I my selfe found good by the matter of it, as I was penning it, and have rea∣son to believe that some Auditours received good by it, when they heard it preached, so my hopes are that some faithfull souls, and distressed Chri∣stians will receive some good by reading it. This doore you will say is too big for a little house, a long Epistle suites not well with a short Discourse, I answer, my heart herein I know, is approved of my God, and my desire to promote the good of o∣thers will be I hope my sufficient excuse to the Readers, which that they may effectually finde by it, and the Sermon it selfe, the blessing of God goe along with them both, for the benefit of all those which shall reade them. So affectionately prayeth, An unworthy Servant of Jesus Christ Nicolas Estwick.
Christ's Submission TO HIS FATHERS WILL. LUKE 22.42. Neverthelesse not my will but thine be done. ALl Gods works are justly to be admired, but above them all the worke of our redemption by Iesus Christ is wonderfull: herein, as in no other for degree, the wisdome, the love and the mercy of God are manifested; and his hatred and detesta∣tion of sinne are clearly revealed, which in re∣gard of his positive decree could not be removed, but by the full satisfaction of his owne dearest sonne, who for our sakes like the shadow in the diall of Ahaz, went back and abased himselfe by taking our nature into the unity of his person, that we might be reconciled to God: Nor did he come into the world as Adam in perfect strength and beauty, but in the flesh of a poore babe and a crying infant, he was coinfantiatus homini, as S. Irenaeus. advers. haeres. l. 4. c. 75. Irenaeus speaks e∣legantly, in stead of a Cradle of Ivory, he was laid in a manger, and for robes of estate, he was swadled in poore clouts. What would we thinke if a great King for the good of his Subjects should become a beggar? But it is a greater wonder that the Sonne of God should take our nature on him, and then especially when we were traitors to God: For betwixt a King and the
meanest Subject there is some proportion, but betwixt the Sonne of God which is infinite, and that which is finite, Philosophers say there is none; A prevalent Oratour he should be accounted which could intreat a King of the least Iland in the world to leave the glory of his kingdome and to exchange it for a base condition, and yet the Lord our God hath changed his highest estate in heaven with the basest here on earth; the greatest glory with the grea∣test infamy, the place which hath superiority over all, with that which is to serve all. Follow him further and you shall find him hungry and thirsty, faint and weary: You shall see him sweat drops of bloud, his flesh torne and rent for us, and you shall heare him crying out in the anguish of his Spirit, My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me? Looke upon our Saviour Christ, and we can never sufficiently wonder at this, that he which creates all things, should be made a creature; he who was God the Word, should not be able to speake a word; Ausber. in A∣pocal. Centur. 10. c. 4. that he who was the life of Angels should stand in need of milk to preserve his life; that he which gives strength to all things should become weake himselfe: That he which supports the whole world, should lie in his mothers lap, and hang upon his mothers brest, that he which watcheth for us con∣tinually, yet should himselfe stand in need of sleepe: a wonder it is that he should be subject to thee, to whom the most glorious Angels are subject, Petr. Chrysolog. Ser. 70. that he should be fed with bread that feedes all: That his actions should be searched unto, who is the sear∣cher of all hearts: An admirable thing that he who was the im∣passible God should voluntarily submit himselfe to torments, that he which gives life should loose his life, and that the resurrecti∣on of all men should be buried; in this glasse of our Saviour we may see and runners may reade how displeasing to God sin is. 1. If we consider how dearly his Father loved him. 2. And how excellent his Person was, the astonishment of Angels. 3. And how bitter his passion was; no suffering like to his. 4. And how holy he was in his nature, and in all his actions. God strikes to death our sinnes thorough the body and the soule of his own Sonne, who gave himselfe a ransome to purchase the freedome of slaves, yea of enemies: Wonder at this worke O
earth, and be amazed at it O ye heavens, behold a true ballance to weigh sin in this ballance. This is my preface which agrees well to the Story in hand, I will now by the assistance of our good God, and your accusto∣med patience, enter upon the text, the summe whereof is no∣thing else, but our Saviour Christs renouncing his own will, and submitting to Gods will. First I will speake of the meaning of the words. 1. Not my will] A doubt I know will arise in your minds, Not my Will. how Christ should pray for that, and will that, which is not agree∣able to the will of his Father? Touching the prayer of Christ, I answer that he was heard in regard of the conditions of his prayer, Father if it be possible let this cup passe, and if it be thy will; but he was not heard in regard of his prayer absolutely considered, without limitations; and tou∣ching the will of Christ, this is not meant of the will of Christ as God, for so it is all one with the will of his Father, but it is meant of the will of Christ as man: The Schoole-men have a fit distin∣ction to resolve this scruple: there is, voluntas rationis, Lombar. lib. 3. Set. dist. 17. and volun∣tas sensualitatis, conceive the meaning thus: Our Saviour Christ when he considered death, as simply death, and accompanied with the wrath of God, so did he with a sudden wish of humane harmelesse infirmity shun it; but when he considered death ad∣visedly with the concurrent circumstances, as willed of God, and as the price of the redemption for the elect, so did grace subordi∣nate nature to it selfe instantly, as to a greater good; it is good for the creature to live, nature teacheth this principle; but it is better to obey Gods will by suffering according to his will: this is voluntas rationis, and thus did he immediately subject his hu∣mane affection, to the divine disposition, saying, Not my will, but thy will be done. For the better understanding of Gods will, Thy will. it will not be a∣misse to premise and unfold the distinction of the will of God which is so triviall in the Schools. There is voluntas beneplaciti, or , Walaeus contra Corvinum, . 144. Mat. 11.26. the will of Gods good pleasure, the inward decree of Gods will,  signifies not alwaies Gods love: for Gods will was to reprobate some men, and to hide the mysteries of the Gospell from them, but it notes out the
rectitude of his counsell: and there is also, voluntas signi, the will of the signe; the first is properly Gods will alwaies. The se∣cond is his will metaphorically; but when it fals in with the will of Gods good pleasure, and it is ascribed to God for no other end, but even humanum dicere, for our infirmity: God speaks with us in our owne language and termes, to worke the better on us; be∣cause those actions which proceeding from us are signes indeed, that we doe truely will such actions, such things, therefore are they said by a Metaphor or borrowed terme to be also the will of God, when all of them, to speake properly, are not Gods will. Now this will of the signe is a temporall action, or thing which in us usually is a signe, token or argument that we doe will that which hath this signe attending it. The Schoole-men commonly doe reckon up five, and some o∣thers which have more narrowly sifted the point have added a sixth. 1. First, commanding a thing to be done; when a Master com∣mands his servant, this is a signe that his Masters will is that such a service should be done. 2. Secondly, 'tis a signe also of his will when he gives advice and counsell, yea and perswades to doe a thing by vveighty rea∣sons. 3. Thirdly, forbidding a thing to be done and using motives a∣gainst the doing of it. All these three are usually done by Mini∣sters in the Lords name to all their charge: and yet in regard of God we cannot inferre from hence that God doth will them in truth to every particular person in our Congregations.   True it is that if a reprobate should doe that necessary duty as he ought, to which he is exhorted, and shun those sinnes, because they offend a gracious God, from which he is dehorted, this obedience would be acceptable to God and rewarded too; this for distinction sake, Divines call  and not . For whatsoever God wils thus, that shall be most certainly effected; is not our God in hea∣ven, and doth he not whatsoever he will? His will is infinite and cannot be over-mastered, not this resisted. 4. Fourthly, our permitting sinne and suffering it to be done, when we could hinder it, is a signe that vve doe vvill and like sin,
and sinnes so permitted by us shall be added to our owne score of sins, but it is not so in God, vvho is not bound to hinder sin, and though his vvill be to permit it, yet doth his vvill loath and hate sin committed. 5. Estius. in l. 1. distin. 45. s. 7. Estius addes a previous disposition and preparation to doe a thing, vvhich is a fore-running signe that we will do it. To draw a sword against an enemy is a signe that we will fight, that Abra∣ham stretched out his hand, was a signe that he truly intended to kill his sonne Isaac, we commonly say, such a man will decay, such a house will fall, because they are in the next disposition and preparation to decay and fall; thus it is with men; but we can∣not alwaies argue from such fore-going signes, that Gods will was truly to effect what was signified by them; Exod. 32. This is cleare in the case of the Israelites and Ninivites, whom the Lord threat∣ned to destroy, Chrysost. Homil. 55 ad pop. An∣tioch. we may rather conclude as St Chrysostome doth ex∣cellently speake, They had been destroyed, if the Lord had not threat∣ned to destroy them, the message of (a conditionall) destruction was a means to make void the very message it selfe of destruction. And here by the way you may take notice of the weaknes of the Arminians objection against our doctrine of predestination and free will as delivered by our Church: if there was such a peremptory reprobation (say they) without prevision of finall impenitency, if we have no power to receive grace tendered to us in the ordinan∣ces, then God doth but delude and mocke us, perswading us to beleeve and repent, when we have no will at all to beleeve or re∣pent. This doctrine (say they) doth deeply charge the Lord with hypocrisie and dissimulation, and consequently it is to be rejected. And truly thrice damned be that doctrine that directly casteth the least aspersion, much more such foule an attainter on our most pure and most holy God blessed for ever. First, by this which you have heard it evidently appeareth and that also by the concurrent suffrages of the most acute Schoole∣men, that neither commands nor perswasions are evident argu∣ments of Gods good-will and pleasure; when we say God wils a∣ny thing by the will of his precept, or by his revealed will and not will it by the will of his decree or good pleasure, it is in ef∣fect thus much, that God commands men to doe that vvhich for just causes he will not give them grace to doe, but suffers them
to do the contrary, and in his wisdome and power ordering their sins to his owne glory. So that there is no contradiction be∣twixt these two, but take them in their true meaning according to these different respects, and they well accord together. 2. Exod. 3.19. Secondly, We have a ruled case in Gods booke, touching Pharaoh, Moses was sent unto him in the name of the Lord, and yet the Lord told him before he vvas sent, That he would not let Is∣rael goe out of his Land. Must Moses therefore forbeare to speake to Pharaoh in the name of the Lord? Or did the Lord mock Pha∣raeh to speak unto him to that purpose? Let them answer this and they may see that they have answered themselves. 3. Thirdly and directly, I answer thus, he is said to mocke and to delude one, which makes a shew to doe that, which he hath no intent to doe, if his offer was accepted, thus God never deals with any man; that which he commands them to do, it is their duty to doe: True it is they cannot doe that which is comman∣ded, but they may blame themselves, and God is not bound to set up these bankrupts againe, and give them a new supply of suffici∣ency to do that which is commanded, which if they could do (as I said before) God would accept of their service and reward them for it; it is not just, not equall that God should change his righte∣ous law, and fit it to mans corruption: but great reason there is, that our hearts like crooked timber, should be framed according to the rule of Gods most holy law. 6. Sixthly, the doing of an outward worke is a signe of the in∣ward will, and in this all agree, that whatsoever God doth, that he truly and properly wils, and we may infallibly from Gods out∣ward worke as from an effect, assure our selves that it is Gods will it should be so: Certainly and alwaies the will of the signe, and the will of Gods good pleasure are coincident, doe meet together saith Thomas. Now Gods will here vvas the vvill of Gods good pleasure: Aquin. 1. p. q. 19 Art. 12. and this vvill was not secret and unknowne to our Saviour that he should die for man, but manifestly knowne unto him, and there∣fore albeit this vvas a bitter cup to drinke, yet being Gods will that he should drinke it, he submitted to it. Hence I doe ob∣serve, We ought to conforme our wils in case of all crosses and death it selfe
to the holy revealed will of God. When God reveales his will to us by any crosse, by any outward event on our selves or others: The outward worke is a booke written in great text letters what is Gods good pleasure towards our selves or others; so long as Gods will is secret, 'tis not necessary we should conforme our wils to his, but we may in some cases laudably, nay we must differ from this will of God, August. Enchi∣rid. c. 101. as St Austin teacheth us in the example of a sonne, holily wishing and praying that his father might live, when Gods will is that he should die, and ungodly wishing that he might die, when Gods will is that his father should die: but when once the will of God is made knowne to us by the event, or otherwise, as here it was to our Saviour, then must we say, Not my will, but thy will O God be done. Requisite it is before I proceed further, because this doctrine is built upon a particular example, to shew when we can from thence warrantably deduce a true instruction generall to all: to raise a point alwaies as belonging to all, from the particular pra∣ctise of our Saviour Christ is to build on the sands, I mean without a good foundation to that purpose. We must consider Christ as man and as Mediatour. As God we ought not to attempt the imitation of our Saviour Christ in workes miraculous, as raising the dead, &c. Canier. Pan∣strat Tom. 3 l. 19. c. 7. nor can we in his workes of mediation, satisfying the wrath of God by his suffe∣rings, dispensing the Spirit, governing the Church; Joh. 13. yea when Christ is to be followed by us, we must distinguish betwixt the individuall fact of our Saviour, and the reason of it, our Saviour gave us an example to wash Disciples feet, as he did, which binds us not to that particular of washing: but to acts of humility and curtesie one towards another; nor are we bound to the circum∣stance of time and place to preach in Judea, and to baptize in Jor∣dane, as some have superstitiously done; nor are we to follow Christ in his naturall actions, as eating and drinking, but so farre forth as they are cloathed with morality. We ought to follow him in his temperance and moderation in them both. But now in such things which our Saviour Christ did, which do appertain to all men as a duty to doe, we must propose our Saviour as a pattern of imitation; he is as a looking-glasse, wherein we may see how to order and governe our selves, he is a true guide and leads us both
by his heavenly doctrine and example to life everlasting. And this is agreeable to the point in hand, it belongs to us as it did to Christ, to submit our wils to the will of God, nor can any man looke to have Christ his Saviour, except he make him his sampler. Well then, as by our active obedience, we are to labour that our doings may be pleasing to God: so in regard of passive obe∣dience, we must indeavour that what God inflicteth on us may be pleasing to us: This doth the Lord require in that excellent phrase to accept of the punishment of our iniquity, Levit 26.41. Mat 26.24. the originall is,  which the Septuagints doe translate by the word , to be well pleased with them, and as our Saviour Christ exhorteth, to take up our crosse. Let us lay all we have downe at the feet of our God, and let us be contented that he should dispose of our health, of our wealth, of our lives, and of all that doth belong unto us. Our soules must stand like Elijah in the mouth of of the Cave, ready to come out, when God shall call us, and with Abraham at the doore of his tent, ready to entertain death, or any evill which God shall fend. Neither doth this doctrine take away all passion for our owne misery, or compassion for the misery of others; for we must look upon these evils with a double aspect, Exod. 14.20. which are like the cloud that went with the Israelites, blacke to the Egyptians, but light to Gods people:  Consider them as they are simply evils, and such evils as doe deprive us of Gods good blessings;  take instance in sicknesse,  as it deprives us of health, and the death of our friends, as it deprives us of the life of our friends, and the comforts we re∣ceived from them. Yea moreover, consider them as they are the prints of Gods displeasure, Azor. Instit. Moral l. 2. par. 1 and in these respects we may, nay I fay more,  we ought to grieve for evils, but now consider them as Gods works,  and such as doe proceed from his most holy will, and as they are by his infinite wisdome directed to just and holy ends,  in these respects we ought to be well pleased and contented with them: These workes are then like to those double faced pi∣ctures, looke on them one way, and you shall behold an ugly vi∣sage, but change your posture and looke on the other side, and you shall fee a beautifull person: and as Luther saith, Looke up to God, and we have wherein to rejoyce, but looke into our selves and we have
cause to mourne: therefore let there be joy in mourning, Luther. Tom. 1. fol. 39. and mourning in joy, Gaudium in abscondito, luctus in cognito. The point in hand is clearly proved by Scripture: holy Job, when one sad Messenger trod on the heeles of another, as one wave in the tempestuous Sea follows another, Job 1.21. reverently submit∣ted and piously acknowledged, The Lord hath given and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. When old Eli heard from young Samuel the fearefull judgements which God would send upon his family, he replied piously, It is the Lord, 1 Sam. 3.18. let him doe what is good in his eyes. When David fled from Absolom his most unnaturall sonne, he said thus, If the Lord thus say, behold I have no delight in thee, loe here am I, 2 Sam. 15, 26. let him doe to me what seemeth good to him. If the Lord will have me to be driven from my king∣dome, and my sonne who is a tyrant and murtherer of his bro∣ther, a paricide (in intention and endeavour) injurious and fu∣rious to raigne in my stead, I am content, Chrysost. Hom. 3. in Mat. and doe thanke him for innumerable afflictions, wherewith he hath chastised me; many which have not the lest part of Davids vertues, when they are cros∣sed, fear not to wound themselves with a thousand blasphemies, but David did not so, he referrs himselfe and his cause to God, Let him doe what is good in his eyes. O most notable practise of a distres∣sed King to be highly commended and imitated of every good Christian in his distresse. Be alwaies thinking thus, and saying thus, let the Lord doe to me what is good in his eyes. This was also the mind of godly Hezekiah, when he received a message from the Lord, that the Babylonians should be masters of all his treasure, and that they should leade his children captive into Ba∣bylon: Did he fret? Was he discontented? Was he cast downe with sorrow? No verily, he meekly submitted himselfe to the Lord, saying, Good is the word of the Lord. 2 King. 20.19. The Saints in the Acts of the Apostles will freely give us their suffrage, for they under∣standing that St Paul had a resolute purpose to goe to Jerusalem, albeit they did certainly know that there be should suffer much for the name of the Lord Iesus, ceased further to trouble him by their intreaties, using this golden sentence, Act. 21.14. The will of the Lord be done. These are faire torches to shine before us, and may serve as the fiery pillar to the Israelites to illighten, direct and comfort us in
all our miseries. Aug. de Sym∣bolo ad Cat. S. Austin saith excellently, As it pleaseth the Lord, so come things to passe; because it pleaseth him, let it please me too; that which pleaseth our good God, let it not displease his unwor∣thy servants; that which pleaseth the Physitian, let it not displease the sick Patient. And that wee may stand alwaies thus affected with the Lords doings, let us weigh these reasons, and they will pre∣vaile. First, because all crosses doe befall us, as the Disciples said in the Acts of the Apostles, by the will of God, and the will of God made knowne unto us is the rule and law of all created wils, in∣somuch that Luther commends this saying of D. Duther. Ress ad Prierat. ad 40. Chrys Homil. 26. in Genes. Gen. 8.13. Zanch. de natu∣ra Deil 3. c. 4. q. 12. John Thaulerus, as most true and theologicissimum, if heaven was open before thee, yet oughtest thou not to enter into it, till thou hadst learned it was the will of God, thou shouldest enter; This may be colle∣cted from the practise of upright Noah, albeit he had been many moneths together in the Arke as an intolerable prison destitute of fresh aire, yet would not he when the waters were dried up, go out of the Arke, till God commanded him. The will of God is an unerring guide, which we may safely follow; for Gods wor∣king will is alwaies most holy and just, neither can God will a∣ny thing effectually, but it is therefore good, because God doth will it. Nor are we thus to conforme vvhen vve can see a cause, but vve ought so to doe, vvhen vve can see no reason of Gods actions; vvhen vve cannot fully comprehend, vve cannot justly reprehend them; 'tis true and knowne by experience, that vvhen an unskil∣full man comes into an Artificers shop vvhich is skilfull and ex∣pert in his trade, August. in Psa. 148. he is ready to find faults; but a vvise man vvill not doe so; he vvill say the Artificer knows the reason of all his a∣ctions, though I doe not, and if a cunning and wise trades-man makes nothing in vaine; can we with any shew of reason thinke ('tis S. Austins inference) that God doth any thing without cause? Surely we cannot, we ought not I am sure. Secondly, it is the property of true friends to will and nill the same things: Jam. 1.23. if we be the friends of God, as it was Abrahams ho∣nour so to be stiled, and as we desire to be reputed, our hearts will be conformable to Gods heart; as the Lords heart is in any
businesse affected: our hearts too will in some measure be dispo∣sed to affect the same; where there is betwixt husband and wife true conjugall love and friendship, the inferiour will yeeld a∣gainst particular inclination to the superiour; it must be so, saith the wife, my husband will have it so, and my desire must be sub∣ject to his. We may learne this from carnall friends, which knit fast their affections by furthering the earnall desire of their lovers, 2 Sam. 13.5. as Jonadab did Ammons the Kings sonne, and Subjects will usually doe such things which will please their Soveraignes, 2 Sam. 3.36. what plea∣sed King David, pleased all his people. If amongst men that is the most firme, true and indissoluble friendship which doth arise from similitude of manners, then must we carefully indeavour, if we would be counted the friends of God, not to dislike in any thing what our good Lord doth like; if we are inflamed with the fire of his love, then will wee like and approve whatsoe∣ver the Lord our God doth like and approve; 1 Sam. 16.1. and if we dislike his actions, the Lord may checke us as he did Samuel, how long wilt thou mourne for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from raig∣ning over Israel? As if he should have said, doth my will so dis∣please thee, that thou preferrest a sinfull man before my plea∣sure? Thirdly, I reason thus; That which we pray to God for that we might doe, that must we labour to put in practise, or else we pray in vaine, and our hearts and our tongues are strangers in our petitions. Now this is the summe of the third Petition of the Lords prayer, in respect of passive obedience, Thy will be done on tarth. Simply to suffer is not to doe the will of God, but the vi∣gour and acting of our graces in our sufferings, makes us to be ac∣ceptable to God, and makes them to be comfortable and profita∣ble for our selves; 'tis undoubtedly true: we must rather approve Gods will, then what our reason will suggest. Why not? we cannot be ignorant that the Lord hath all good things in store for his children; if they want what their hearts desire, it is not for want of good will in God, but because it is best for them to want it. Now if we doe not thus, what follows? We preferre our owne wils which are corrupt before Gods will which is most pure, and we are like to Absalom: 2 Sam. 15.34. Thy matter is good (saith he) and O that I was made judge in the land, I would doe every man ju∣stice,
and in effect (with reverence be it spoken) we thus do say, if I had been God. I rather would have done thus, I would not in diverse particulars have done as God hath done. Such desperate speeches were uttered by Alphonso the 10h. Spanish History l. 12. king of Castile, which very thought cannot, much lesse can such impious words be excu∣sed from blasphemy. Joseph we know at first was displeased with his Father for lay∣ing his right hand on Ephraim, Gen. 18.17. and his left hand on Manasseh his eldest sonne; where God layes the right hand we wish for the left, and vvhere he layeth his left hand, we are displeased that he layeth not on his right hand there; have not vve in this forgotten our prayer, thy will be done. Such as vvill not resigne themselves to Gods vvill, are, as it vvere, Gods counsellours, nay controlers, saying, thus might God have done better, else vvhy doe vve not submit to him? Is not this malapert saucinesse against our great God, at least unadvised ignorance in no case to be ex∣cused? Fourthly, that vvhich vve receive purely from Gods vvill is most acceptable to him, provided that vve receive it chearfully and for love of his holy vvill, vvhere there is the least of our owne vvils, there is most of Gods pleasure, and the simple and pure accep∣tance of Gods will, makes our grace most excellent, and our per∣sons more accepted and rewarded of God; it is better without comparison to doe all we doe in reference to Gods vvill, vvhich containes all perfections in it, then for any other end; for every worke takes it's goodnesse from the end for which it is done, ha∣ving in it selfe no more goodnesse then it receiveth from the end, so that if it be done for some end that is base, the vvorke it selfe, though for the outward matter it be glorious, is base: if the end be high, the vvorke is high, if it be higher and better, the vvorke is higher and better; a higher and better motive vve cannot have then the will of God, nor any like unto it; for that is immediately God himselfe, which is the so∣veraigne good; a man may submit for many ends, viz. to exte∣nuate vice, to attaine unto vertue, to avoid hell, and to attaine heaven, to imitate our Saviours example; all which are good, though some of them are better then others, but to submit, be∣cause it is Gods vvill is farre more excellent then all the rest,
which have their end and object only on the creature directly, but indirectly on the Creatour. It was very commendable in the young sonne of Mustapha, being educated at Prusias, and an Eu∣nuch being sent to dispatch him out of the way, and this being told unto him, Busbequ. Lega∣tion. Turcicas lib. Epist. 1. p. 63. that hee was commanded by the Emperour to be put to death, the child answered, Ex disciplina Gen∣tis, that hee did not receive this as a commandement of the Emperour, but as a commandement of God himselfe, and so offers his necke to the butcher: and if Mahumetans doe this, should not Christians much more submit to the Lord of all the world? The last reason shall be this, that vvhich vve know, when we are perfected as vve should be, when our wils shall be thoroughly compleat, we shall then cordially vvill vvith all our hearts, that ought we now to approve, what lies in our power: We are not in this our pilgrimage purged from all drosse and corruption, yet ought we to strive now, as S. Paul did unto perfection; Phil. 3.14. vve ought to endeavour now to conforme our wils to the wils of the blessed Saints and Angels in heaven. This is an undoubted truth, but we know-that vvhen vve shall be blessed and happy with Christ in his kingdome, when we shall know no man according to the flesh, that we shall then both will and like whatsoever our Lord and God willeth and liketh: we shall feeke nothing, intend nothing, desire nothing, but Gods will to be done, Beatus dies ille, Potrus Chryso∣log. Serm. 68. happy is that day which joyneth and equalleth the wils of those that are earthly to those which are heavenly; that there should be one and the same will betwixt different substances; this is faithfull peace, unshaken concord, perseverant grace, when ac∣cording to the order of the Lord our only God, The Family which is diverse in nature is one in will, (saith S. Chrysologus.) When we are in heaven we shall like whatsoever the Lord liketh, even the damnation of all impenitent sinners, were they in this life our nearest friends or most intimate acquaintance. Luther. Tessera∣decas cens pro∣laborant Spect. seu cap 4. This is no new point or strange divinitie; For hell it selfe (saith Luther) is full of God, and the chiefe good, no lesse then heaven, for the justice of God which shines forth in the damnation of the wicked, is God himselfe, and God is the chiefest good, and therefore as his mercie, so his justice and mercy are highly to be loved and praised. Whence it follows by
necessary inference that we ought now in this life to approve all Gods works. Why should we not? Is there not the like reason founded on the eternall law? Or have Saints in heaven another rule to walke by, which appertaine not to men which live on earth? No such matter. Nay this supposition is more then any temporall evill, If God should reveale to the Church the reproba∣tion of a sinner, August lib. 21. de civit. Dei. c. 24. the Church ought no more to pray that such a man might be saved, then they are allowed to pray for the salvation of devils and of damned spirits (saith S. Austin) to whom our charitie exten∣deth not, as being uncapable of beatificall vision. Hence it followeth that the doctrine of Durandus and some o∣ther Popish Divines is false and erroneous; Use 1. of Refu. they hold that a man is not bound in his crosses to conforme his will to Gods will, but it is enough (they say) for him to be patient when he is crossed, and that his will is not contrary to the will of his Creatour, though it be not conformable to it. And in this case I wish we could goe thus farre, though in dutie we ought to goe farther then so. They say a man is not bound to wish for miseries and to love them.  True, a man ought not absolutely to wish for future evils, and indiscreetly to pull them on his own head, because he knows not what future contingencies shall be, and if he did know, yet he knows that Gods will is that he should not draw them on himself, but to carry himselfe when they are sent of God, as a Christian ought to doe. They object againe, if we ought to conforme our wils to the will of God, then ought we neither to resist enemies invading us, nor prevent diseases growing upon us, nor quench a fire consu∣ming us. I denie the consequence, such absurdities follow not from any thing I have delivered. This is a ruled case; as the will of God is made knowne unto us, so ought we to conforme unto it; but when evils are comming on us, we may be Gods law without sinne, and we cannot but sinne against the will of God, if wee should not labour to prevent such mischiefes, if lawfully we can; thus when an enemy is fighting against us. We know that it is Gods will that an enemy shall fight against us, and thus we ought to will and approve it; but sithence it is not apparent to us that
we should be vanquished by an enemy. We may use all lawfull meanes for our defence, and so to doe is, juris naturalis. The like may be said of curing diseases, quenching fires or of any other e∣vils; but if God should reveale unto us, that an enemy should take a City, and send us word to yeeld it into their hands, as he did King Hezekiah by Ieremie the Prophet, then should we sin, Ier. 38.17, 18. if we did not conforme to Gods will thus manifested to us. I need spend no more words by way of confutation; such Po∣pish Divines which oppose this truth are opposed almost unani∣mously by the Doctours of their own Church. See Gregor. de Va∣lentia Tom. 2. disput. 2. p. 8. Estius in Lombar. lib. 1. dist. 48. nor would I have named this Use, but that I conceive the discussion of these objections will give some light to weaker Christians to understand the better the main proposition. 2. This point affords matter of reproof to many persons, 2. Use of repr. which are ready, when they are crossed by the working of the creatures, to looke on them only, and not at all to cast up their hearts to the feat of Majesty, as Christ did in this text, in his bitter passion to the will of God. When there came a voice from heaven to Christ, Ioh. 12.28. Some of the people that stood by said it thundred, others said that an Angell spake to him. When God layes his hand upon us by fire, warre, pestilence, or otherwise, we with those Jewes, doe not acknowledge that God speakes unto us, we will rather attribute these things to nature, to the aire, to starres, to the malice of e∣nemies, then to God, as though there was an opposition and not a subordination betwixt God and all the creatures in their operati∣ons, and so we resemble the uncleane dogs which gnaw the stone that is cast at them, and doe not regard the hand that cast it, or like the wilde beasts, which breake their teeth on the chains that binde them, or those which use the armour ointment, which doe anoint the instrument that woundeth, but apply nothing at all to the wounded person, Isa. 8.21. and perhaps like the Iewes cursing their King and their God, which was no God, this is an unreasonable act; as if a Traitour sentenced to die by his. King and his Peeres, should fall foule upon his executioner, or pick a quarrell at the axe, or as if a sicke Patient to whom a wise Physitian prescribeth a bit∣ter potion for the recovery of his health, should fall out with the Apothecary for ministring it; Numb. 22. Cursed Balaam fals out with his
Asse and beats it, the covetous wizard ascribes nothing to himself, nothing to his owne sinne. Balaams evill is an hereditary evill to most sinners at this day, in their crosses, still the Asse is beaten, they curse, they smite, they accuse this or that creature, and sometimes doe as foolishly, Boter. lib. 1. Relat. as Stories report Zerxes that great King of Persia did, who understanding that the Bridge, which is called the Saddle to ride the Sea-horse, which he had made over the Hellespont, was broken downe with impetuous waves, caused three hundred stripes (full wisely you may imagine) to be in∣flicted on that Sea by way of revenge. Aquin 1.29.46. art 7. Thus apt are sinners to wreake their choler, not out of reason, but imagination, upon in∣animate creatures the instruments of their evill, and no marvell then if sinners looking no higher then the creatures, are ready with Ephraim in the pride and floutnesse of their hearts to say, The bricks are fallen down, Isa. 9.10. but we will build with hewen stones, the Sy∣comors are cut downe, but we will change them into Cedars. We will make our houses more sumptuous and more magnificent then they were before, and so they make a reckoning to repaire all their o∣ther losses. Nor are the bad onely apt to transgresse in this kind, but good ones do often faile by their unreasonable anger against such things as doe crosse them. Cassian. de spir. Irz. l. 8 c. 18. This Cassian an ancient Father speakes out of his owne knowledge, that when religious persons were separa∣ted from the world and lived in desarts, they would be angry with their pens when they writ not well, with their pen-knives, when they did not cut well, with their flint if it did not strike fire well, he saith, they could not digest the perturbation of their minds, August. l. 14. de civit. Dei. c. 15. but by venting their rage against those insensible things, or against the devill himself. For this kinde of revenge (saith S. Austin) to break or cast away a naughty instrument is a shadow of retribution, when the doers of evill shall suffer evill. But we need not range abroad into the world for examples in this kind, . Iustin. Martyr. in resp. ad Oxthod q. 15. Job 11. Jer. 20.14. we have store in the word of God. Thus holy and pa∣tient Iob cursed the day wherein he was borne, and the night wherein he was conceived; he complaines that he died not in the wombe, and that he sucked his mothers brest. Did not Iob a wise-man much forget himselfe? Neither was this Iobs fault alone, but we reade that the Prophet Ieremy fell into the same errour, Cursed be the
day (saith he) wherein I was borne, let not the day be blessed; Cur∣sed be the man that brought tidings to my Father, saying, a man child is borne unto thee. 1 Chro. 15.2, 13. 1 Sam. 6.7. A great and an unreasonable fault of a great Pro∣phet. And was not King David greatly displeased, because the Lord smote Ʋzzah, and made a breach in the carriage of the Arke? He considered not in the meane time, as afterwards he did; that his owne ignorance, and the ignorance of others was the true cause thereof, for the Arke should not have been carried on a Cart as now it was, perhaps in imitation of the Philistines, which having taken it, and as a token of their victory carried it a∣way; but being plagued of God they sent it backe againe on a cart to the coasts of Israel: Thus they should not have done, Exod. 25.14. Numb. 4.15. & 7.9. and God that spared the Philistines in this being ignorant would not spare his owne, not knowing or not regarding his expresse law, which was to carry it by staves put into the rings of the side of the Arke, and so to be borne on the Levites shoulders, which they were not to touch with their hands. But who can sufficient∣ly wonder at the Prophet Ionah? he was displeased because his gourd was smitten, and being demanded of God, Jona. 4. if he did well to be angry. Yes (saith he) I doe well to be angry even to death. What was the matter Ionah? Be like it was for some great sinne, for his owne or others sinnes against God. Not for sinne; but God had smitten him in his conceit. Why? he smote the gourd, his shade against the parching heat, and it withered, and therefore I do well to be angry to death. And dost thou well to be angry with thy good God Ionah? These are recorded to warne us to take heed of this sinne, as he that is corrected justly, Chrysest Homit. 88 an Mat. if he christianly demea∣neth himselfe, shall be deemed by many to be unjustly tormented; so he that is wrongfully vexed, if he be not patient, will be judged to be justly afflicted, and he will be derided as a slave to anger, subjecting the noblenesse of his mind to a furious passion; nor will I say he is a free man, albeit he was Lord over a thousand ser∣vants. Secondly, are all evils according to the will of God? Use 2. Reproof Iustly then are stoicall Christians reproved, which are senslesse in their evils, and like Ionah doe fall a sleepe in a great storme, or like to drunkards which being smitten doe feele nothing, Prov. 23.34. Jer. 5.3. which moved the Prophet to complaine that the Lord had smitten his people, but
they grieved not. Isa. 42.25. Yea, he burned them by the fury of his anger, and the strength of battell; Yet (saith another Prophet) they laid it not to heart, Num. 12.14. they were even as a lumpe of dead flesh, altogether unsensible of Gods stroake. If our Parents should be offended with us and smite us, would it not trouble us? How much more should it trouble us when our God by his stroakes shewes himselfe displea∣sed with us: If we lay it not to heart when God beats us on the coat, we shall move him to smite us on the bare skins, and if yet we remaine insensible the Lord may adde more plagues and in∣crease his terrours, from our goods to our bodies, from our bo∣dies to our minds, from our persons to our children: First, doth the Lord shoot some warning peece, if we strike not our sailes looke then for the murthering shot; he can make the proudest spirits stoupe, and cry out with Iulian the Apostate, who recei∣ved a mortall wound, Theodor. l. 4. bis. c. 25. Eccl. 7.14. which proved very seasonable and profita∣ble for the whole world, saith Gregor. Nazianz. vicisti Galilaec, O (Christ) thou Galilean thou hast overcome me. To shut up this Use, my counsell is to thee (my brother)  see the evill and by it apprehend the Lords displeasure, and so be thou according∣ly affected with it. The third Use is of Exhortation to perswade you all to labour to conforme your wils in all your sufferings to the will of God. Use of Exho. This is a notable meanes for any one to enjoy good and comforta∣ble daies, and who is he that would not leade a comfortable life? There can be no better meanes then this to submit our wils in all the various occurrents of this life to the will of God; This point I know, is a very hard taske for flesh and bloud to performe, e∣specially then to doe it when the hand of the Lord lieth heavy up∣on us: 'Tis one thing to contemplate this truth, and another thing when we are put to the tryall, to practise it; nor is it a dif∣ficult matter, when we our selves are well to give this whole∣some counsell to our brethren in distresse, but to submit willing∣ly to Good, when we are very ill and doe live in great distresse, is a high point of learning; but this we ought to do, and that we may do it, as we ought, let us put in practise these helps. First, Helpes 1. Remove the causes which hinder us from submitting to Gods will; this will be as a sweet perfume to take away the evill savour of these evils, and as the Unicornes horne dipt in the foun∣taine,
it will make these unsavoury waters wholesome to us. The first impediment which I will name is impatiency, Tertullian. de patientia. which is the daughter of anger, and the mother, I say not as Tertullian of all, but of many sinnes: Hence doe arise unbeseeming com∣plaints in our miseries; I doe not condemne all complaints, Bald. Cas. consc. l. 2. cap. 5. casu 4 com∣plaints in our distresse which arise from the consideration of our sinnes, the cause of all our woes, and from the extremity of pain,  which mooved Christ himselfe who was without sinne to roare in his agony and to make a loud complaint and which tends to moove  the Lord to compassionate us in our misery,  are lawfull, but those complaints which issue out of impatiency are alwaies unjust. Impatiency makes a man live continually upon selfe created rackes, Psa. 22.1. and to rubbe out his wretched dayes in perpetuall discontent, it razeth out the memory of good things already received, and it makes us account those blessings which are heaped upon us as no blessings at all, and when our hearts are a sepulcher to burie them, the Lord may justly not o∣pen his hands to blesse us with an addition of new mercies, yea and recover his blessings out of our hands. And I pray what hath your impatiency availed you? Are not you in all your tossings like a wind-mils sailes, still in the same place, in the same condition. You may (my brethren) vexe your soules with peevishnesse, and when you have done all that possible you can, Hos. 2.9. when you have wrestled what you can with supreme majesty, you shall find that your estate is no whit bettered thereby; what God hath purpo∣sed, rage you never so much, shall come to passe, and if there be not a voluntary submission to Gods will, there must be a violent subjection, yea and impatiency makes the smarting wound the deeper, it gives afflictions teeth to eat out the very heart of an im∣patient man, and like Actaeons dogs to devoure it's master, as the bird in the net by struggling is more entangled, or as a man by kicking against the thorne is more deeply pierced. Beware my beloved of this sinne, whereby you grieve both God and good men, and glad in a sort the devill and wicked ones which are your enemies, and most of all do hurt your selves. Sure∣ly the due consideration of this one thing, it is the will of God to send this punishment, should be enough to make us abandon this great and fruitlesse sinne, and to play the men in all kinds of such
evils whither they be ignominious or glorious; we digest not a blow from our equals, but a blow from our King we can well di∣gest, if God the King of Kings laies his hands on our backes, let us beloved lay our hands on our mouthes. I am sure this stopped Davids mouth from venting fretfull speeches. I held my tongue and said nothing. Psal. 39.9. Amos 5.13. Why didst thou so David? Because thou Lord didst it; and God gives this testimony of such an one, that he is a prudent man that keeps silence at an evill time. A second cause to be removed is pride, which is an inordinate love of thine owne supposed excellency; to love a mans selfe in piety, I know, is gracious, and he is the best friend to himselfe, which in this way loves himselfe the best; but by selfe love, I meane an inordinate love of a mans owne pleasure, ease, profit or honour, which hinders the sight of his love from flaming upward to God, or forwards to his friends, or backward to his enemies, or inward to his soule, 2 Tim. 3.2. or downeward to the needy: This selfe∣love is as a captain among vices, set in the first place by the Apo∣stle, as the leader of all the rest; 'tis a furious passion springing from ignorance of God, and of a mans selfe, from the want of re∣generation and the love of God, and his children. Now when such a man hath made an idoll of himselfe, and the utmost end of all his actions, then as he will in body endure any labour to finde out his supposed good, so will his soule endure many a lash to sa∣tisfie his brutish desire, and when he is crossed, then will his tur∣bulent heart rise up against the crosse, and he is ready to storme a∣gainst Gods providence, and will with his ill-favoured tongue be ready to say; What meanes the Lord to deale thus with me? Who can endure this misety: Am I a greater sinner then other men? Should such a man as I am be so molested and disquieted? Would God he would either take this trouble from me, or take me out of this trouble. Thou foole knowest thou not that this e∣vill is according to Gods will? He meets thee in thy crooked pathes, as sometimes he did Balaam by his holy Angell, though now thou dost not see him, and if thine eyes were open to behold him, as the wizards were, thou wouldest abhorre thy selfe, and fall downe flat on thy face to worship God: Be perswaded then I pray you in Gods feare to crucifie pride and self love, and to pra∣ctise self-deniall.
Thus much be spoken of the first meanes, the removall of some of the impediments which hinder us: The second and direct followeth. Secondly, Helpe. consider that all the crosses which doe befall thee are just, and that the Lord doth thee no wrong thereby; when the Lord had smitten the Jewes in their corne and wine, he exhor∣teth them to consider their owne wayes; without consideration we shall be meere Barbarians to the judgements, and the judge∣ments will be meere torments to us; the heaven when it is as brasse, speaks to us, complaine not of me, but of your owne sins; the earth when it is as iron speakes thus, complaine not of me, but of your owne sinnes; and every crosse cryeth in the same lan∣guage, complaine not of me, but of your owne sinnes; If God should make all our dayes miserable, it was but just; If his wrath should seaze on our bodies, names, braines and consciences. If on our wives, children and goods, all were but just. Carionis Chro∣nicon. unctum  Phil. Melan. & Pemew. l. 3. p. 367. Take an exam∣ple out of the history of Mauritius that unhappy Emperour, who having lost the love of his Subjects, the Souldiers proclaime Pho∣cas Emperour in his place. Mauritius lay sicke at Chalcedon. Pho∣cas crowned at Constantinople, posted thither, kils two sonnes of Mauritius, and his three daughters in his sight, and then his god∣ly wife Constantina, in acting hereof Mauritius uttered this me∣morable sentence, Righteous art thou O Lord and just are all thy wayes. And this is true not only concerning particular men, but whole Churches, it was just with the Lord to clense his floore in Canaan with the Philistines fanne, and to purge the gold of Ju∣dah in the Babylonish fornace, and to wash the streets in Italy, Jer. 51.2. and in Rome it selfe by the Gothes inundation, to prune his vine in Greece, Egypt, and divers other countries with the Mahumetan knife, and to rectifie in some places the disorders of reformed Professours by the sword of Antichristians. And now for the sins of this ungratefull Nation to threaten our destruction by our unna∣turall and civill commotions, and I pray God they prove not a desperate Physick, but such which may produce a perfect health to our Church and State. Doe you then say for every evill that doth befall you, we know, O Lord, that thy judgements are right: Psal. 119.75. Mic. 7.9. And with the Church in Micah, I will beare the indignation of the Lord, because I have sin∣ned
against him, Lam. 1.18. D. Leyfield ci∣ted by M. Ga∣taker Ser. on Gen. 32.10. and with mournfull Ierusalem, The Lord is righ∣teous, but we have sinned against him; and with the Rabbi called Rabbi Gam-Zoth, this too, because hee used alwaies to say, whatsoever befell him, this is good too, and this too, and this too. 3. Consider advisedly of the gracious dealing of God towards thee, he might vex thee a thousand times more then he doth: and a wise man will argue as Iob did, Shall we receive good of the Lord and not evill? Nay suppose thou shouldest finde here for a pint of honey a gallon of gaul; for a dram of pleasure, a pound of paine; for an inch of joy, an ell of sorrow, and that miseries should en∣compasse thy life, as the Ivie doth the oake, yet doe thou thinke hereof as the Iewes did of the Babylonians captivity, which is called the evill, the onely evill, yet did Gods people take notice of some mercy, Iob 2 10. Ezr. 7.5. & 9.13. Lam. 3.2. some mitigation of the rigour of justice in the most extreme affliction that ever befell them. Thinke I pray you advisedly of this true Axiome of divinity, in what case soever thou art, thou hast cause to thanke God that it is not worse with thee; Is thy apparell, thin, course and beg∣garly? thou deservest not rags? Is thy fare and diet homely and penurious? thou dost not deserve the crumbes that fall from rich mens tables, nor the huskes that swine do feed on; Dost thou live diseased in body or distracted in mind? thou deservest to be in hell; and thou hast cause to thanke God that thou art not frying in those slames with many reprobates: Have in your mouthes alwayes that which Vigilius, a constant and a patient Pope had in the midst of all his sufferings, Plania in vita Vigilij. that he deserved greater miseries; well may we endure the aking of our teeth, if we consider we deserve gna∣shing of teeth for ever. Well may we endure a burning feaver, if we consider that we deserve hell-fire; alas our paines be consola∣tions, and our briars be roses, in respect of those which live in perpetuall death, over-charged with torments, infinitely heavier then ours are: It is an excellent speech of holy Salvian. Whatsoe∣ver our miseries are, they are testimonies of an evill servant and a good Master; Salvian. l. 4. de Gubern. Dei. how testimonies of an evill servant? because by them we suffer in part what we deserve; how are they testimo∣nies of a good Master, because by them he sheweth us what we deserve, and yet layeth not upon us so much as we deserve. And
Luther adviseth us thus to meditate on the death of Christ for our profit, our evils are nothing to Christs sorrow, Luther. Conc. 2. de pass. Chr. Erasm. lib. Eccl. and withall the lowest and meanest member of Christ in any Condition is more excellent then the highest Monarch in the world, as the foot of a man is better then the eye of a dog, or the head of an asse. 4. Consider that the time of bearing crosses in this present world is but very short, a cubit as it were; Ezek. 41.4. we have no reason to dreame of many daies here, for so length of sorrow might discourage us; our fansied yeares may want moneths, our mon∣eths daies, and our daies may want hours. Our Saviour com∣forts his Disciples, that a little while it is, and then ye shall see me: Ioh. 16.16. 1 Pet. 5.10. Rom. 16. 20. Isa. 54.9. we shall suffer saith S. Peter but a while, the God of peace shall tread downe Sathan under your feet , in a swift time saith the Doct∣our of the Gentiles, that is our comfort, and supports a Christian when he is ready to faint, that his misery is not long lived. We do heare to the ioy of our hearts, that it is but for a little mo∣ment that the Lord forsakes his people; on this ground are the beleeving Hebrewes exhorted and comforted, Heb. 10.37. Ruffin. l. 1. his. 3. c. 34. yet a little while and he that shall come will come and will not tarrie. These evils are but clouds which will soone ride away, as S. Athanasius fore∣told of Iulians persecution; true, our senses may deeme afflictions to be long, and that Gods mercies, as Luther saith, are a Center, but his wrath an infinite Spheare. Hence do Gods servants in a publique calamitie expostulate with the Lord in these sad termes, Wherefore dost thou for sake us for ever? Lam. 5.20. Psal. 13.12. & 778, 9, 10. Luther. in Isa. 54. cap. why hast thou left us to the length of daies? and will the Lord absent himselfe for ever. And will he have no more compassion on us. Because we are only taken up with the present evil; men heare nothing, see nothing, feele nothing but the present evil, whereas in truth his wrath holds but a minute of time and is as a center, but his mercies are a spi∣rituall Spheare without end of daies. A hard service, yea a base servitude may be well endured a few yeares, and so will our short afflictions, if we consider wel what good they do produce, when they are Christianly endured, even a weight of glorie; were a man a galley Slave under the cruel Turke seven yeares with full assurance, that he should have after they were expired a temporal Kingdome, he would undergoe it willingly, and choose rather to be a slave on those termes then to
be a free-man without them. I am sure (saith one) he could be contented every day to endure the torments of hell for a long time, Augustin. in Manuali. c. 15. so that afterwards he might see Christ in glory, and be associated to the Saints in happinesse; If we would in our serious cogitations run thorough the streets of the heavenly Jerusalem, if we would visit the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all departed Saints, and behold the crowne of everlasting glory, which the Lord hath in his hands to set upon our heads, this would enable us to demeane our selves as Christians ought to do in this our con∣flict, and the meditation hereof would be as the salt of the Prophet cast into the bitter waters of Jericho, it would doubtlesse sweeten them were they never so bitter to us. 5. Labour to have thankfull hearts to God in regard of the good issue, joyfull fruit, and pleasant benefit of afflictions; affli∣ctions to Gods people are like a waspe, which hath lost her sting, she makes a noyse to waken us or to keepe us watchfull, and by Gods blessing a stinging serpent is turned into a flourishing rod; and to speake the truth, we are as much beholding to the Lords afflictions as to his comforts. Afflictions are a holy vomit which the Lord gives to purge out our sinnes, which in taste is better at first, Apoc. 10.10. Ps. 145.10. yet gives it ease at last, and is cleane contrary to the booke which S. John was commanded to rule, which was in his mouth sweet as honey, but in his bowels like bitter gall; the Heathen people which are without God and without Christ are thankfull for their lives, health, successe, prosperitie, but Christians are bound to out-strip the Heathen, which know not God in Christ, and they much savour God in all his workes: And therefore it followeth that God is to be praised for them; D. Sl. on 1 Thes. 5.18. and a Doctour of our Church, now with God, sets downe a false rule on his text, In all things be thankefull. Whatsoever is no fit matter for prayer, is no fit matter for thankesgiving, That we may pray for crosses, I find not (saith he) warranted by any Scripture, nor practised by any Saint: to wave that assertion, albeit particularly we have no warrant to pray for crosses; yet indefinitely and generally we may pray for all the furtherances of grace and glorie, referring the par∣ticulars to our wise and loving God, Rom. 8.28. who will turne all things, we are sure to the good of those which love him, and so by con∣sequence and implicitely, wee pray for afflictions, if it shall seeme
good to the Lord to fend them for our good, and upon this un∣doubted ground, it followeth, that the former rule of that lear∣ned man is not sound, for a man ought particularly to be thank∣full to God, when his will by the event is manifested to us, as now in my case it is, for what it was not lawfull for him particu∣larly to pray for, when Gods will was unknowne unto him. We take bitter physicke from the hands of our Physitians, and we suf∣fer Chyrurgeons to search our wounds, and we usually thanke them and bountifully reward them too; If the vine, the fruit whereof cheareth the heart of man, could speake to the Gardi∣ner who pruneth it, would it not thanke him for cutting it, though it be not done without effusion of teares? D. Featley, Ser. 26. I have read that the Persian Nobles counted it an exceeding great grace to be scourged by their Prince, and thanked him that he would take paines with them; and shall not we much more praise the divine Majestie, that he vouchsafeth to chasten us for our good. Wee would have alwaies prosperitie, but the Lord knows it, Plin. Iun. l. 7. Epist. 26. Max∣imo. and we by experience may see it, that affliction is often better for us. Plinie a Heathen man tooke out this lesson from his sicke friend; We are best (saith he) when we are fieldy. What sick man is temp∣ted with covetousnesse and lust? He is not subject to love, nor greedie of honour—he envies no man, he admires no man, he despiseth no man, malignant speeches neither winne his attenti∣on, nor please his inclination; What Philosophers labour to teach us in many words, yea in many volumes, I can comprehend in this short precept, let us continue such men in our health, Talianus. Cent. Magd. 2. p. 122. as we promised to be in our sicknesse. And Talianus an ancient Father reports that this was one fruit of the persecution of the Primitive Church, that not only men and women, but virgines and maids as they were spinning, were wont to be talking of the word of God, edified one another by instruction, a rare thing then it was for Christians to denie or contemne the word of God, to be drunkards, adulterers or to tell a lie: Chrysost Hom. 40. ad pop. An∣tioch. Then might we have seene (faith S. Chrysostome) good Christians, for no man respected his wealth, no man respected his countrie, no man respected wife, no man respected his children in comparison of Christ, all their care was to save their souls. Ideus. Homil. 62 ad pop. Antioch. And speaking of his own time when religion was countenanced by authority, he faith, let a man en∣ter
into the house of those that marry, & into the houses of mour∣ners; into the prisons and theaters, into banquetting houses and hospitals of the sicke, and observe the great difference betwixt their severall carriages: What lightnesse (saith he) irreligion and profanenesse shall he see in the one, what prayer, devotion, holy conferences and other religious exercises shall he observe in the other; and as crosses are a means to make us better, so thank∣fulnes to God is a meanes to ease us in our crosses, when once we come to see that they are died and fanctified in the passion of Christ, and begin to blesse God, our evils will be mitigated; let any man make try all hereof (saith Luther) and he shall present∣ly finde ease, Luther. pro la∣borant. spect. 7. as I have often found it true by mine owne experi∣ence. Luther. in Psal. 18. Chrysost. homil. post redit. prio∣ris exilij. He cannot feele afflictions, saith Chrysostome, which in his afflictions praiseth God. The devill is disgraced, God is honou∣red, and nothing is more holy then that tongue which in adver∣sity gives thankes to God, verily it is not inferiour to the tongue of Martyrs. Sithence this is so, and a truth not to be denied, we ought to be thankfull to God for all crosses. 6. In all your crosses set your faces the right way; do not you in your sicknesse cry, come physicke helpe us, in heavinesse call not, come musicke, merry companions comfort us; in warre, cry not, come souldiers helpe us: much lesse doe you in your di∣stresse repaire to the professed instruments of the devill for helpe by such meanes which are superstitiously ceremonies, and in re∣gard of beliefe prerequired to their efficacy idolatrous; Orig. l. 3. in Iob these are the seduction of Satan, the irrision of devils, the dreggs of idola∣try, the infatuation of foules, and the scandall of hearts, as a counterfeit Origen saith well. Goe not I say to the meanes under God without God, Isa. 30.2. as the Israelites in their wants went to Moses, give us, say those rebels, water; as Rachel went to Iacob, Give me children or else I die, as the Iewes went to the Egyptians to strengthen themselves, trusting in the shadow of Egypt; but this is idolatry, which robs God of his glory, and steales away the heart from the Lord, as Absalom did the peoples from allegiance to King David, and thus doe the Papists by an unmannerly pro∣fanenesse, which makes them guilty of unthankfulnesse and diso∣bedience, Plin Natur. histor. l. 21.7. goe to Angels and Saints, which they have proper for every infirmitie, as the Heathen people had gods for every disease.
The truth is all the meanes in the world may say, as the King of Israel did to a distressed woman, which cried to him for helpe, 2 King. 6.17. If the Lord helpe thee not, how should I helpe thee? Let us then my brethren goe to our God, as the Saints before us in the depth of their misery have done, and visit him not using fretfull complaints, but with groanes powring out our prayers into his eares, for he hath not onely kindly invited us, but per∣emptorily commanded us so to do. Pray I beseech you that God would uphold you being under any crosse with his assisting grace: You are in Gods hands as a staffe is in yours; if he holds you up, then you stand; if he lets his hold goe, then doe you fall; prayer is , a familiar conversation and conjunction of man with God, by prayer we doe converse with God, and so doe submit to his holy will, if we respect the efficacie of prayer, Psa. 50.19. Climacus. Scala Paradis. gradu. 38. it is the reconciliation of God (saith the same Father) it is the bridg to passe over temptation; it is the fortresse of afflictions, the de∣struction of warre, the axe of desperation, the demonstration of hope, the solution of sorrow and the diminution of anger. Prayer must be alwayes, and in your afflictions most of all your companion; it must travell with you by day, awake by night with you, it must not forsake you in sicknesse or in health, Ps. 130.1. Iob 16.20. Hebr. 5.7. Iam. 5.13. Isa. 45.11. on the sea or on the land, living nor dying. David prayed in his affli∣ctions, and so did Iob, and Christ did so, and St Iames exhorts all afflicted men to doe so: fervent prayer will have no deniall, yea it so farre prevaileth with the Lord of all the world, that with reverence be it spoken, he is contented to be commanded by us, , and to be, as it were, at the service of our prayers, in∣somuch that I dare boldly say, there was never City of refuge more free for man-slayers, never holes in the rocks more open for the Doves, never was lap of a mother more ready to receive her crying babe, then are the eares of a compassionate God open to heare the cryes of his children; the Lord that rules our hearts, if we pray will over-rule them in all the crosses which doe befall us to submit to his holy will. Be perswaded thoroughly of the little worth, of the emptines, of the uncertainty and insufficiency of all outward things. These are the lame legs, whereon all worldly things do stand, all world∣ly comforts leave us in our extremities, and are like rotten stakes
and flags, which men being ready to sinke do catch at: these help them not, these beare them not above water, but are drawn down under water with them. If we consider well of the vanity of all creatures, as of riches, friends, of our own bodies and all their adjuncts, then shall not we expect any great matters from them, nor immoderately be disquieted for the losse or impairing of them: 1 Cor. 7.29. 'Tis an excellent rule which the Apostle gives, They that have wives, let them be as though they had none; and they that weepe as though they wept not, and they that rejoyce as though they rejoyced not. As if he should have said, in your affections and actions about these things, August. tract. 20. in Iohan. carry your selves very indifferently, as if you were minding or doing some thing else: use the world as a traveller doth his Inne, his table, bed, not with a purpose to abide there, to set up his rest there, but shortly to leave them; or as a man holdeth mony committed to his custo∣dy, readie every houre, when it is called for to restore it to the ow∣ner. Wouldst thou refrain from immoderate grief in losses, rejoyce not then too much in out ward blessing: Be not too glad when the Sunne shines, and you will not be too sad, when the eye of the world is under a cloud. If our hearts be weaned from the love of this world, if the best things, for which our fouls were created, redeemed and sanctified be in request with us, we shall not be dejected for the things of this world. It is a rule in Opticks, the higher you ascend upward, the greater will heavenly things seeme to be, and these earthly things will seeme the lesser, and so it is in our spirituall ascensions, the more heavenly minded we are, the greater will heavenly beau∣ty appeare to us, and the lesser will all earthly things seeme to be in our eyes; when we doe then immoderately complaine and say thus, I thought to have found such and such comfort in my chil∣dren, Ezek. 24 25. to instance in them only; what doth this argue but that we over-prized these blessings, and promised to our selves too great matters from them; yea and by doting on them, and lifting up our souls to them, as the words are in the originall, making them the desire and joy of our hearts, do move the Lord justly to deprive us of them, and so we are in the losse of them ready to mourn without measure, and complain as Micah did of the children of Dan, You have taken away my gods, Jud. 18.24. the things I made my idols, and what have I more?
We reade that when some admired at the goodly building of the Temple, that our Saviour mildly checked them, Luk. 21.6, 7. and in effect said, Are these the things which you behold? I tell you the time will come when all that glorious fabrique shall be demolished, and one stone shall not be left upon another: So say I to you (my brethren) are your children and riches the things you looke will prove never fading fountains of comfort to you, I tell you, you deceive your selves, and you shall finde them dried up like Iobs brooke in Summer, when you have the greatest need of them. We see how the Iews were deceived, needs would they go down to Egypt, where they promised peace unto themselves, that they should see no more warre, nor have hunger of bread: Thus did those rebellious Jewes perswade themselves; but what saith the Lord, The Sword which you feared, shall overtake you there, Jer. 42.14. you shall die of the famine and of the pestilence, and none of you shall remain. Thus are the wicked frustra∣ted of their expectation, yea and good men too; many times those things from which we promised to our selves the greatest com∣forts, prove the greatest crosses to us. God in his just judgement makes them barren like beautifull. Sarah, they do not yeeld us that contentment which we expected from them, and that is for our own good, lest our affections should be placed more on the crea∣ture, then on the Creatour blessed for ever. Lastly, Have a lively faith in the Lord our Saviour, Hebr. 10.38. The just shall live by faith, and that comfortably in despight of any opposition; faith will carry a man above all fears, and above the reach of all e∣nemies, yea faith will supply all wants; if we be poor, it will en∣rich us; if in straits, it will enlarge us; if weak, it will strengthen us; if we be full of sorrow, it will make us rejoyce; if we be dead, it will quicken us; live by faith and you shall live chearfully and comfortably in the saddest condition that can befal you, and if thou art overcome by afflictions, 1 Cor. 10.13. I will say it is for want of faith that thou art overcome; faith is an antidote against the plague, the affli∣cted mans comfort, and a blessed tryumph in and over all troubles: Put case thou art a poor man, art not thou rich enough, when the Lord is thy portion? Put case thou art an exiled man, is not this comfort enough, that God is with thee in banishment? Put case thou art a despised man, is it not enough for thee that the Lord re∣spects thee? Believe and thou shalt in all estates have happinesse e∣nough
without the happines of the world: he is the happiest man that can live alone without externall comforts, that can be content with God alone; a strong man needeth not these crutches to goe withall, nor a healthfull man the assistance of friends to raise and hold him up. Psal. 84.11. God is a Sun, if he shines on us it is day, yea and a joyfull day; if he sets, 'tis night to us, though all the stars, all crea∣tures shine on us. Let us therefore (my brethren) lay fast hold on Gods promises by faith; these are firme grounds to build upon, and strong props to support our faith. The Iudge of all the world moderates and sets bounds, and saith to every calamity as to the Sea, Hither shalt thou come, Job 38.11. and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be staied; and he knows our strength, and wil not suffer our enemies to fight against us with greater temptations then we be able to beare: 'tis a speci∣all art of faith to lay hold on God, when there is no helpe on earth to lift up our hearts to heaven; and then to put the most terrible supposition, albeit the foundations of the earth should totter, and mens hearts should quaile for feare, though the powers of heaven should be shaken, Isa. 26.20. and nothing could be expected but lamentable times, yet might we lift up our hearts with joy, there is a river of God that will refresh us, and there are chambers of divine pro∣tection for a Christian to enter into: 'tis the glory of our faith so to looke on our miseries that we can looke beyond them, and to see with faithfull Israel the land of promise through the red Sea, the wildernesse, Giants and walled cities; and with patient Job to see a Redeemer, and a resurrection thorough ulcers, discom∣forts of friends, his wife, through the malice of Satan and through the seeming wrath of his God; to see with Steven Christ standing at Gods right hand thorough a showre of stones, yea the sweet rayes of Gods favour through the thickest clouds of his wrath. FINIS.
