I465 G. 5869[41] R226136 99886530 186750
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other ON SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE JE MEINTIENDRAY BY THE Lords Justices AND COUNCIL. A PROCLAMATION. CHARLES PORTER, THO: CONINGESBY. SInce it hath pleased Almighty God of his great Goodness to the Protestant Subjects of this Kingdom, to raise up His most Excellent Majesty King WILLIAM to deliver them from the miserable Effects of that Violent and Arbitrary Power under which they lately groaned, and not only to bless His Arms the last Summer with a signal Victory against the Common Enemy, but also to prosper them with Success at the opening of this present Campaign, which gives Vs ground to hope for a speedy reduction of the rest of the Kingdom to Their Majesties Government, if the Progress and Continu∣ance of these Blessings be not obstructed by the Impiety and Prophaneness of the People. We think it above all things necessary to implore the Divine Assistance, in the most publick and Solemn manner, that He would be pleased to perfect the Work that He has so happily begun, and to turn our present War and Distra∣ctions into a settled Peace and Tranquility; for which end We do hereby Order and appoint, that Friday, the third day of July next ensuing, be solemnly and strictly observed and kept in all places of this Kingdom now under Their Maje∣sties Government, as a day of publick Fasting, Prayer and Humiliation, for pre∣venting the Iust Indignation of Almighty God against Vs for Our Sins, and for
Imploring His Blessing on Their Majesties Government, and on Their Forces now abroad for the Reduction of the rest of this Kingdom to Their Obe∣dience, And that constantly during the War, the first Friday in every Month be set apart for the same Godly ends and purposes; And for the better preparing and Instructing Their Majesties Subjects of this Realm in their Duty on the said days and times of Assembly, We have appointed a Form of Prayer to be Composed, Published, and Vsed on this Occasion in all Churches, Chappels, and other publick Places of Divine Worship in the Reduced parts of this King∣dom, And We do hereby strictly Charge and Require all Their Majesties Good and Loving Subjects to Assemble together in their respective Parish Churches, or other Publick Places appointed for Divine Worship, at the Times, and for the Ends aforesaid. And that all Deans, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and others, having Cure of Souls, do Officiate accordingly in their respe∣ctive Churches, Chappels, and other places set apart for Divine Service, And that they give notice hereof to their respective Congregations, by read∣ing this Our Proclamation the next Sunday before every Monthly Fast du∣ring this present War. Given at the Council-Chamber the 15th day of June, 1691. Fran. Dublin, Drogheda, Anth. Meath, Rob: Fitz-Gerald, Char: Meredith Ri: Reynell, Jno Hely, God Save the King and Queen. Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties on Ormonde-Key.
