I491 G. 5869[71] R226181 99886560 186780
monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR JE MEINTIENDRAY HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other BY THE Lords-Justices and Council, A PROCLAMATION. CHARLES PORTER, CONINGESBY. FOrasmuch as We are certainly Informed from several parts of the Kingdom, That the French Privateers which do Infest the Southern and Western Coasts of this Kingdom have fre∣quently received Intelligence and had Provisi∣ons from Fishing-Boats and other Boats be∣ing generally Mann'd with Irish Men and Pa∣pists who have made out to them when they have been near any of the Ports, by which means and the Encouragement of such Ill dis∣posed Persons, they have taken advantage to surprize some Vessels in Harbour, and have o∣therwise done great mischief to many of their Majesties good Subjects. For prevention whereof for the future We have thought fit hereby to pub∣lish and declare that for the space of One Month from the date hereof no Fishing-Boat whatsoever shall go out either a Fishing or upon any o∣ther purpose from any Port or Creek on the Southern or Western Coast between the Towns of Wexford and Sligoe (except it be from these par∣ticular places following, viz. The City of Cork, the Town of Youghall, the Town of Kinsale, the City of Waterford, the Town of Dungarvan, the Town of Wexford, and the Town of Galway, nor shall any Fishing-Boat go or Sail from any of these places unless Mann'd with at least one third Protestants. And all Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, Of∣ficers of the Customs, and all other their Majesties Officers both Civil and Military are to take Care that this Our Proclamation be duely Obser∣ved, and that all such Persons be Prosecuted with all severity who shall Transgress the same. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin, the 20th. day of May, 169. Fran. Dublin, Longford, VVill. Kildare, Fz. Villiers, Ri. Reynel, Ri. Pyne, Jno Hely. God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY: Dublin, Printed by Andrew Crook Assignee of Benjamin Tooke, Printer to the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesties on Ormond-Key. 1691.
