I847 21.h.3[111] R228431 99887817 190833
.W .3. R .M .2. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other BY THE Lords Justices of Ireland. 29. Sept. 1690. SYDNEY. THO. CONINGSBY. WHEREAS it is of great Importance, as well to the Inhabitants of the City of Dublin, as also that part of Their Majesties Army that is Garisoned here, That the Markets of the said City be well supplied with Provisions, which for some time hath been Obstructed by the Abuses committed on the Persons, Horses and Goods of People going to the said Markets, by several Officers and Sol∣diers, for their own private Advantage, though under the pretence of Their Majesties Service; We do therefore strictly Charge and Command all Their Majesties good Subjects within this Kingdom, That they do not, upon any pretence whatsoever, presume to di∣sturb or prejudice any Person or Persons repairing to the said Markets of the City of Dublin, nor Press any Horse or Horses of any persons whatsoever within Ten Miles of the said City, without special Warrant in Writing first had and obtained from Us for that purpose, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril. Given at Their Majesties Castle of Dublin, the 16th day of September 1690. and in the Second Year of Their Majesties Reign. JO. DAVIS.
.W .3. R .M .2. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and thistle on the other BY THE Lords Justices of Ireland. SYDNEY. THO. CONINGSBY. WHEREAS the City of Dublin hath usually been furnished with Coals from Whitehaven and Moston, and other Parts and Places in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, from which Parts very small Quantities have of late been imported, by reason that the Mariners and Sea∣men that should import the same are under ap∣prehensions of being Pressed, and taken out of their Vessels, under pretence of Their Majesties Service; We have, for the prevention of the great Inconvenience which would arrive to the said City of Dublin, by the want of Fuel this Winter-Season, thought fit hereby to give Our Protection to all such Ships and Mariners as shall be employed in Transporting Coals from any part of England or Wales unto the said City of Dublin; And We do hereby accordingly strictly Charge and Require all Commanders of Ships, Press Masters, and all other Their Majesties Subjects, not to molest or disturb any of the Ships aforesaid, nor Press any of the Mariners belonging to such Ships, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril. Given at Their Majesties Castle of Dublin, the 16th day of September 1690. and in the Second Year of Their Majesties Reign. GOD Save the KING and QUEEN. JO. DAVIS. Dublin: Printed by Andrew Crook, Assignee of Benj. Tooke, Printer to the King and Qeens Most Excellent Majesties; And Re-printed at London for Him. 1690.
