J945 R235022 [ocm]31355686 173691
The Royal Patient Traveller▪ OR, The wonderful Escapes of His Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the Se∣cond from Worcester-Fight; And his making a Hollow Oke his Roy∣all Pallace. The going in a Livery Cloak with Mis. Lane. And the Discourse between the Kings Majesty, and the Cook-maid im∣ploying the King to wind up the Jack; but being not used to do it, did wind it up the wrong way. To the tune of, Chivy Chase, Or, God prosper long our Noble King depiction of disguised person on horseback (Charles II?) depiction of lady (Jane Lane?) GOd hath preserved our Royal King the second of that name, And those that will not pray for him, indéed they are too blame: For thousands have against him spoke, but I shall it disclaim, And with all others have a care how they should do the same, David we read had enemies that did him sore annoy, So CHARLES the Second had the same, who is fair Englands joy. In May it was the twenty nine, King Charles of high Renown. Being his birth-day (as 'tis known) to London came to town. But had you séen the tryumph made, And Bonfires flaming high. and all the people for to cry God save his Majesty. I will rejoyce at his happiness, and pray he long may reign, And of some passages he had with honest Mistris Lane, From Scotland he to Worcester came though friends did look about, Yet Cromwel came with a mighty Force and did give him the Rout. A journey lone I am sure he had with frinds the loving Scot, King Charles mounting himself so brave, three times his Horse was shot. The King did therefore for his safety, make friends to have some pitty, For so our Saviour he doth say as I write in this Ditty: If persecution being great, of such then have a care, So at that time 'tis very true one did cut off his Hair. His Princely cloaths he off did strip, and did himself disguise, So of King Alfred I have read, that was a Prince most wise. A Chain of gold that he had then, worth hundreds without doubt He gave away unto a friend, who lead him there about, Into a wood where Inns was none nor Lodgings there bespoke, The best of Lodgings he could get, was in a hollow Oke. O happy Oke (saith Mistris Lane, that ever I did sée, A Pallace for a Prince thou wast but he will go with me.
depiction of King Charles II with royalist guard HEr Serving-man King Charles be∣came For so he thought it best. And she to frée him from his foes. Did travel towards the West. For all the Land was up in Arms in City and in Town. And for King Charles to find him out, it was a thousand pound. But Mistris Lane vertuous and wise, so much did understand, What woful hunting they did make, for Charles of fair England. Tor through a town they then must pass, for there was no back Lane The Horses héels then up did trip, and down fell man and Dame. The Souldiers séeing of the same, at them did laugh and jéer, And she suspition for to shun, struck him a Box on the Ear. With angry words she séemed to speak, I think I am well mann'd, For such another I am sure is not within the Land, To second it her brother in Law so much in anger spoke, Well, must my Father then said he carry your mans Cloak, It was too heavy then (said she) what néed you be so cross The burthen off it was so great it threw us off the horse. Her nimble tongue and wit in prime, and being a Lady gay, The Souldiers laughing at them then did let them pass their way, God fréed them from their Enemies For with him there is pitty, At the thrée Crowns King Charles then lay which is in Bristow City, For in the Kitchin he was plac'd by his most loving friend, And modestly he there did stand, fearing he should offend, It made the Kitchin-maid much muse, she could not understand, That in the Kitchin by her stood King Charles of fair England. For being by the fire-side, She asked what Country man, At Brumingham the King replyed and a Naylors son. With bobs and spéeches for some Sluts, in words they are not slack, At her command King Charles must be for to wind up the Iack. Though mildly he did take this task, it séems he did want skill, The wrong way he did go about and did do it some ill: Great Clownish booby she him calls yet he was méek and mild, And though she us'd such taunting words He at her did but smile, He venters to another house, Where people came so thick. That all the day his Chamber kept. as if he had béen sick. But comming down one night indéed, he spyed a servant id, And for a glass of Wine he craves, because he was a cold. The Butler quickly him descri and knew he was the King, With hat in hand thus did he say, you may have any thing. So easily his Majesty, although in cloth so plain, No notice of his words he takes, to his Chamber goes again, The Butler being not satisfi'd, with courage spake he can, Of master Lastel he must know how long he had that man. And whispering he told him then, I know it is my Liege, And do not do him any wrong, I do you now beséech. Designs still failing, yet no dobut, to God he still doth yéeld, And to a trusty friend he went, that then was in the field. And for thrée wéeks the King conceal and then did back return, And for a time he made a stay, it séems in fair London: Where he beheld such things as was sad to his tender heart, Some grief at that time did he féel, from London did he part. A Master of a Ship at last it seems was a good man, Dd Hoise up sail, and so to France, as I do understand. By Henry Jones of Oxford: Printed for the Authour▪
