11393 S109824 99845468 10370
❧ OF THE PREPARATION TO THE CROSSE, and to Deathe, and of the comforte vnder the crosse and deathe, two bokes very fruictefull for deuoute people to rede, translated from latyn to englysshe, by Rycharde Tracy. 1534
TO THE RYGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS syngular good lorde and mayster, Lord Thomas Crumwel, Lorde Priuy seale, Rycharde Tracy desyreth and wy∣sheth bodely prosperous helth, and to the soule eternall lyfe and felycitie. WHEN I consider the weake frailtie of man, and howe naturallye we be subiecte to many troubles, aduersi∣ties, and temptations, as well of the body as of the soule, and also when I call to my remembraunce the wordes of Christe, spoken to his elect,Ioh. 16. That in this world they shulde suffer persecution and op∣pression, and lykewyse the sayinge of the apostel Paule,2. Tim. 3. That al they
whiche wyll lyue godly in Christe Iesu, muste suffer persecution: I thynke surely, that euery chrysten man dothe expect Christes promi∣ses, and constantly beleueth, that the scriptures shalbe fulfilled and founde true. Wherfore seing there is no euasion nor meane, to escape the aduersities, temptations, and crosse, whiche god shal laye on the shulders of his electe, and nature is so inconstant, frayl, and weake, that of our own myght and power we are not able to resyste, nor can not wyllyngely and paciently su∣steyne and beare such aduersities, and crosse, it behoueth euery chri∣sten man, to serch out and prouide some godly consolation and reme∣dy to comforte and make stronge his mynde, that he may paciently suffer all tribulation, all tempta∣tion,
al aduersitie, which god shal sende to hym, alwaye reknowle∣gynge, that there is no power but of god, and that god wyl not send to his electe any suche crosse, but therwith he wyll also gyue grace and meane paciently to suffer the same, so that he shall not be found disobediēt to the good wyl of god. Of the cōfortes agaynst the crosse of tribulation, one in especiall of late I founde. Not a yere paste it pleased God to sende me some ad∣uerse tribulations, whiche were to stronge for Nature to suffer and beare pacientely: but my chaunce was so good, throughe the merci∣full prouydence of god, that in my troubles this lyttel boke was sent me from a frende: whiche when I had red ouer, and delyberately per¦used,
it animated & made me strōg not onely paciētly to suffer al mine aduersities, but also for theym to gyue god ryghte hartye thankes, that it wolde please hym of his a∣bundante mercy and goodnesse to remembre me, his miserable crea∣ture with his so ernest a token and moste sure pledge of his godly fa∣uour and loue, accordynge to his promyse,Hebr. 12. which is, whom the lord loueth, hym he chasteneth, yea and he scourgeth euery sonne that he receyueth. For in the readynge of this boke, I receyued suche conso∣lation and cōfort, that I thought it moste necessary, yea and expedi∣ent (seinge I haue by experyence felte, what good fruyte commeth therof) to translate the same in to englyshe, and so to put it forthe in
printe, that it myghte be the more common, and that many chaun∣synge to fall into lyke crosse of ad∣uersitie, maye be partakers and optein like consolation, as I haue receiued therby. And I haue dedi∣cated this boke to you my syngu∣ler good lorde & master, for as mo∣che as I euydently perceyue, that you are endewed not onely with godly knowledge and doctryne, but also haue a right feruēt zeale, good mynd, and desyre to set forth all suche thynge as may be for the vtilitie helpe and comforte of the hole congregation and churche of this realme. Therfore with al hu∣militie I desyre your accustomed benignitie to accept this the firste fruite and labour of me your pore seruant, which am, and shall be e∣uer
redy and glad with al diligēce, to do you the seruice that I can, & dayly pray almyghty god, to pre∣serue you in longe lyfe, welth, ho∣nour, and prosperitie. Amen.
❧THE PREPA∣RATION TO THE crosse, and howe it muste be paciently borne. FOR as moche as Christe comman∣deth vs to denye ourselues, and to folowe hym, and suffer the crosse, he commaundeth vs also, to pre∣pare vs to suffer the crosse paci∣ently, sayinge:Matth. 16. If any man wyll come after me, let hym denye hym selfe, and take vp my crosse, and folowe me. And who so euer doth not beare my crosse, and folowe me, can not be my discyple. Soo councelleth the wise man, saying:Eccle. 2. Sonne, whan thou doest come to the seruice of god, stande in righ∣teousenes and feare, and prepare thy soule to suffer temptation. but
bycause there be dyuers crosses, ne lest a man paraduenture shuld take a straunge crosse, which per∣teyneth not to hym, that is to say, shulde feine to him selfe newe tur∣mentes, as prescript dayes of fa∣stynge, vowed chastitie, shurtes of heare, disgysed garmentes, and such other trifles, which god hath not commaunded: therfore Christ hath put to this terme, sciliceth (his owne) whiche is as moche to saye, that euery man study to mortifie his owne fleshe, & the synne, whi∣che reygneth in him, beinge euer redy to suffer what soo euer god dothe sende hym. ¶What the crosse is. Cap. i. A CROSSE is euery afflic∣tion and tribulation, or eue∣ry aduersitie and heuines sent by
god, to euery kynde of lyuynge, throughe faythe, and the word of god: when that euery thyng doth not prospere, euen as a man wold haue it: whiche in some place is called lernynge, or correction, and temptation, a rodde, and a staffe. Wherfore it is a folishe and an he¦uy crosse, whiche we by our owne presumption do take vpon vs not commaunded of god, as the prie∣stes of Ball, and all hypocrites do take vppon them. But that is the trewe crosse, whiche god doth lay vpon vs, whiche when it is layed vpon vs, we suffer paciently, eue∣ry body in his vocation and kynd of lyuinge, as to gette our breade with the sweate of our counte∣nance, and women to bring forthe theyr chyldren in peynes, to suffer paciently the good wil of the lord,
to mortifie our mortall membres vppon the erthe, to be euer busily occupied in the commaundemen∣tes of the lord, and for the word of god, to suffer al scornes, and moc∣kes, lyes, persecutions, and not to feare the moste cruell, ye euen the most shameful death. Therfore to suffer a crosse, is nothing els, then to suffer pacientely, what so euer come to vs, by the godly and bene¦uolent wyll of the lorde. ¶Two kyndes of crosses. Cap. ii. THERE BE two kyndes of crosses, the oone a straunge crosse, the other our owne, the one of the faythefull, the other of the wycked. for the vnfeythful be pu∣nished, that they may be an exam∣ple of theyr owne iniquytie, and that they be perpetually condem∣ned:
but the feythful be punished, that they maye be made stronge, and that the lorde be gloryfied in them. So strange punishementes be a warninge to put the faythful in mynde of the good wyll of the lorde. For the lorde doth punyshe some in this lyfe, that he may pro∣uoke suche as maye be made hole to repentaunce, as the scripture saythe:Prou. 19. When the mocker or scor∣ner is punyshed, the vnlerned is made wyser.Gen. 8. So the angell dydde shewe Abraham, what shulde be∣come of the Sodomites, that he myght teache his chyldren the iu∣gement of god. Also Christe saith,Luc. 13. that all shal peryshe, as they were kylled of Pylate, if that they doo not repente.
¶Howe the feythfull be tempted. Capi. iii. THe faythful be tempted with a natural and spiritual tem∣tation, an outward & an inward, that is of the fleshe, of the worlde, and of the dyuell. For the crosse signifieth as wel the inward tem∣tation as the outwarde. Of the fyrste speketh the apostell,1. Cor. 10. Let no temptation take you, excepte the naturall temptation, that is eue∣ry persecution, whiche maye hap∣pen in this worlde, whiche dothe not hurte the lyfe, but rather pro∣uoketh to the blessed lyfe: but the spirituall or inwarde temptation, is the inwarde feare of synne and deathe, it is the afflyction or temp¦tation of the conscience, such tem∣tations be mooste greuouse, and where god is not, they brynge the
tempted to deathe eternal. Of the whiche Paule to the Hebrewes saythe: It is impossible that they,Hebre. 6. whiche ones be enlyghtened, and haue tasted the good word of god and the vertue of the worlde to come, if they slyde and fall agayn, to be renued by repentaunce: as Demas, Hymeneus, and Phile∣tus, professynge the faythe, dyd fall from it. and that is synne to deathe, synne in the holy gooste, synne of vnbelefe, synne of spiri∣tuall pryde. Wherfore Christ dyd commande vs to pray,Luc. 11. Let vs not be led into temptation. They that beleue, do synne, but they fal not vtterly away: so that they consent not to the fleshe, the world, and the deuil, but by the grace of god they be preserued and go awaye, ha∣uinge victory and triumphe.
¶The crosse is of god onely. Cap. iiii. FYRSTE, we muste consider, that in all our afflictions, no calamitie or pensiuenes falleth on vs by fortune or chaunce, but by the appoynted councell of god, by his wyll and sufferaunce, as wit∣nesseth holy scripture.Exod. 20. Feare not, for god commeth not, but for to trie vs.Deut. 13. The lord your god trieth you, to make it knowen, whether ye loue or not.Iob. 9. The lorde hath gi∣uen, the lorde hath taken awaye. The lorde kylleth,1. Samu. 2. and gyueth life agayne, he bryngeth euen to hell, and backe agayne.Prouer. 3. Refuse not the chastising of god, neyther grudge thou when he correcteth the. For whom god loueth, he correcteth: and yet delyteth noo lesse then the father in the chylde.Psal. 65. for thou hast proued vs o god, and haste tryed
vs, as the syluer is tryed by fyer. Thou hast ledde vs into a snare, thou hast laden our backes ful of troubles, thou haste appoynted mē to be heades ouer vs, we haue passed thorow fier and water, and yet hast thou refreshed vs.Psal. 118. It is for my welthe, that thou haste broughte me vnder, to lerne thy ryghteousenesse.Psal. 20. Blessed is that man, which is vnder the loue and nurture of the lorde.Hiere. 31. Thou haste stryken me, and I haue repented, thou hast chastened me lorde, and I am taughte as one vnder age, wylde, and vntamed.Threno. 3 Whoo can say, that any thynge, can be done, without the lordes commaunde∣mente? From the mouthe of the hyghest gothe there not good and yll? By which saying the prophet rebuketh the wycked, whiche de∣nie,
that afflictions happen by the councell and prouydence of god. Suche also rebuketh Sophon,Sopho. 1. I shall viset men drowned in theyr dregges, whiche say in theyr har∣tes, The lorde wyll not doo bothe good & yll.Matth. 10. Are not two sparowes solde for a farthynge, and yet not one of them falleth on the erthe, without the wil of your father?Roma. 11. Al thynges are of hym, by hym, and in hym.1. Cor. 11. While we iudged, we are punished of the lord, lest we shuld with the world be condemned. ¶It is vndoubtedly noo smalle comforte, to be assured, that the crosse is of god, and that we are chastened of god, and not of the dyuell, or els of any wycked man: which vtterly can haue no power vpon vs, not so moch as to moue one heare of our hed, besyde the
wyll of the lorde, without the suf∣feraunce of god, as Chryste hym selfe comforteth vs, saying,Matth. 10. Euen the heares of your headde are all nombred. As thoughe he shoulde saye, if god be carefull for the spa∣rowes, how moche more shal he be carefull for you? whiche are his people and shepe of his pasture, that nothyng happen rashely vn∣to you, without his beneuolente wyll. Seinge also that the dyuell had no power vpon swyne, moch lesse vppon them that are godly, whom he can not hurt at al.Matth. 9. for so the euāgelistes wryte, that the di∣uelles prayed Christe, and sayde, If thou caste vs forthe,Marc. 5. suffer vs to enter into the herde of swyne. And he sayde vnto them, Goo ye. They haue then no power vppon the holye, no trewely not on the
swyne, excepte that god shall suf∣fer them, no they dare not, nor can not any thynge agaynst them, but by the sufferaunce of god. for god alone bindeth this dragon, and he alone louseth him, as Christ saith, No man can enter into the house of a stronge man,Marc. 3. and spoyle him of his vessell and treasure, oneles he fyrste bynde the stronge man. For the dyuel is chayned & bound so strayghtly, that he may do no∣thynge, before that god appoynt hym,Iob. 1. as it is written in Iob. The lorde sayde to Satan, Lo, al that he hath, are in thy hande, but ex∣tende not thy hande vppon hym. Satan dothe nothynge, but that, that god suffereth and wyll. Also all the godly (as the sonnes of god) are euer in goddes presence. For whome the lorde euer careth
for, tenderynge them, nuryshyng them, kepynge and defendynge them, from all yll. what greatter comfort then can there be of faith, as a sure rocke, then that the god∣ly ar well assured and know, them selues euermore set before the lor∣des eyes, and to be kept vnder his hande? Can mysery oppresse the? can the crosse? can sinne? can deth? can hell? Be assured, that thou art in the presence of god. they shall not preuayle, the lorde careth for the, the lordes eye is dyrected to∣warde the. whom then shalt thou feare, if by faythe thou be made the sonne of god? God careth for the, yea and sendeth his aungel∣les to kepe and defend the, accor∣ding to the wytnes of Dauid,Psal. 90. He hath commaunde his aungels of the, to kepe the in all thy wayes.
The aungell of the lorde shall be sente abrode, among al them that feare hym, and shal delyuer them. And if god giue lybertie to the di∣uell, to tempte vs, let vs surelye beleue, that with that temptation god shall gyue increase: that is, that the temptatiō shall be for our welthe and profytte, and that we shalbe able to suffer.1. Cor. 10. He shal strike and his handes shall make hole. Temptations also haue theyr ly∣mittes,Iob. 5. nother can they ouerpasse theyr ende appoynted. And as the see is compassed rounde with bor∣ders, euen so haue al crosses their borders and endes, beyonde the whiche they maye not ouerpasse. Let euery one therfore, whiche is of god, and beleueth in god, kepe him selfe: and the wicked or yl shal not touche hym.1. Ioh. 5. For that thou∣sand
wily craftesman gothe forth and tempteth the godly, as he tem¦ted Dauid, Adā, and Peter, with a thousande snares: but he hath neuer the victory. In the crosse or temptatiō, god hath one purpose, and the dyuel an other. Wherfore there ar two kyndes of tēptation, bothe common to the godlye and vngodly, although dyuersly. The one kinde is, when god trieth men with moch aduersitie, that as wel the mekenes, as the faythe of the godly, maye shyne forthe, and be made more open, not to other one∣ly, but to theym selues also: and contrary wyse, that the wycked∣nes of the wycked, (whiche they without shame deny, or els vnder some false colour of religiō cloke) may openly apere, and also be pu∣nished. The other kynde is, when
we are tempted by suggestions of the dyuell, and affections of the fleshe, and oftentimes vnder such temptations they fall and lye vn∣der, where some so fall to euerla∣stynge deathe, that they neuer a∣ryse agayn, other after their fal ar made more lowe and more ware. God therfore correcteth, to make hole, and not to dystroye: he pu∣nyssheth the godly, for that they shuld not be condemned with this frowarde worlde, to proue and ex∣ercise theyr fayth, to mortifie their flesshe, and to kendell in theym a more feruent desyre of the euerla∣stynge lyfe to come: last of all, lest they shuld by reason of great gif∣tes, be blowen vp with pride: and therby they are proued also, to be the very trewe sonnes of god, and not vnlauful and bastardes. But
the dyuel tempteth to distroy, and to drawe into desperation and vn¦belefe.Luc. 22. Act. 5. He roted in the hart of Iu∣das, to deliuer vp Christ. He tem∣ted Ananias and Saphira, and had the mastry. He tempted Iob,Iob. 1.2. and was redy to destroy hym, if he had ben soo suffered.Matth. 4. He tempted Christ, but he preuayled nothing. He was busy with the apostels, to syfte them as wheate, but the lord prayed, and he wanne nothynge. He styrred vp Dauid to number Israell, he obeyed the temtation,Para. 22. and brake the precept of god. So Peter forsware Chryste, and yet they obteyned mercye. Thus he runneth about, sekynge whom he may deuoure. So the godly ouer come in temptation, althoughe somtyme through the good coun∣cell and prouydence of god, they
be ouercome: but al thinges wor∣keth with them to their welth, and for the best. Wherfore we pray our father, that he leade vs not in to temptation, that he wyl not tempt vs aboue that we shall be able to beare, but to make with the temp∣tation increase, and delyuer vs from yll. Satan therfore nor da∣reth nor can do any thing against the holy, but by gods sufferance. Al thynges are done after goddes arbitrye or wyll, withoute whose becke or graunt, no aduersitie can happen. God sendeth afflictions, somtyme by him selfe through his owne wyl onely, sometyme by his minysters, for he bothe dystroyeth the wicked with the countenance of his wrothe, and also by contra∣ry angelles and persecutours he suffereth his sonnes to be exercy∣sed.
For god gyueth power some∣tyme to the dyuell, to assaute the ryghtuouse man: but bycause his cursednes is insaciable, tyll he de∣uoure a man all together, there is a lawe prescribed vnto him, beyōd the whiche he may not tempt. For god is faythefull, and measureth our fyghte or battayle accordyng to our strengthes. wherfore let no mannes hart fayle hym, god kno∣weth, howe farre it is expedyente, that our mekenesse be exercysed, that from henseforth, we maye be mete to do greatter thynges. For vndoubtedly if god had not kno∣wen the strength and cōstancie of Iob his souldiour, he wolde not haue gyuen so moche lybertie to Satan, agaynst him, sodenly and at ones to despoyle, one so ryche, so blessed of al his substance, and
to plucke hym from all his felyci∣tie. After we are wel taught these thynges of goddes prudencie, we shall the easier beare the crosse. ¶Crosse is the worke of the good wyll and mercy of god. Cap. v. IT IS not inoughe, to fele and consyder, that we are afflycted throughe the councell and wyll of god, but we must moreouer mark the cause and intente of his godly wyll, for reason iudgeth, that we ar punished, to the ende to be hurt or dystroyed: and examples lyke∣wise moue vs, of them that haue bē punished and cast of from god, as of Pharao, Saul, and other lyke, but we must forsake reason, and fle such examples, and cleaue to the worde of god. The word of god teacheth, that we suffer affli∣ction,
to our helth and saluation. For afflictions are not signes of wrathe and displeasure, but of grace and fauour. God calleth to repentaunce, and by affliction he in a maner speketh and declareth, that he wyll forgyue. For as bap∣tisme, or eatynge of the lordes bo∣dy, do wytnesse vnto vs, that we are forgyuen: euen so nerehande affliction maye be called a certain sacrament. For it sygnifieth, that god wyll forgyue. And why doth it so signifie? for euen as other sa∣cramentes haue the worde of the element: so to afflictiō is the word annexed, wherby is promysed grace, for soo sayth Paule.1. Cor. 11. while we are punished, we are corrected of the lorde, leaste we shulde with this world be condempned. Affli∣tion calleth to repentaunce, that
we peryshe not. And he correcteth the sonne,Psal. 50. whome he loueth. It is good for me, that thou haste broughte me vnder, that I maye lerne thy rightuousenes.Esai. 26. Lord in tribulation haue they visited the: it is thy lerning to them, that they shulde crie to the in anguishe and sorowe.Esai. 28. Trouble gyueth vnder∣standyng agayne. To the ende to doo his owne worke, he dothe an other worke. that is, to the intent to make safe, he chasteneth and scourgeth.Psal. 50. A troubled spirite is a sacrifice to god. A sacrifice is that that pleaseth god. Wherfore for so moch as affliction pleaseth god it signifieth not those which ar af∣flicted, to be reproued, and cast of from god, for he wyl not the death of a synner,Ezech. 33. but that he conuerte and lyue. We must therfore in af∣fliction
stedfastly beleue, that our trouble commeth not by chaunce, but that it is gouerned of god. Moreouer, that god wyll not vs therfore to be troubled, to hurte and dystroy vs, but to calle vs to repentaunce, to exercyse vs and saue vs, as holy scripture euerye where declareth.Psal. 102. He wyll not styll be angry, he wyll not continually threten vs. He hath begonne,Hosie. 6. and wyll make vs safe, he shall stryke and make vs hole.Hos. 144. The lorde lyf∣teth vp al them that fal, and pluc∣keth vp all those whiche are broi∣sed.Esai. 49. Can the woman forgette her babe, that she haue not compassi∣on of the chylde of her wombe? And if she be forgetfull, yet wyll not I forget the.Matt. 16. So Christ com∣forteth his. The womanne, when she bryngeth forthe:Esai. 46. whiche are
borne of my wombe, whiche are borne of my bealy, euen to the old age I my selfe wyll carie, euen to the hoore heares, I haue done it, and I wyll beare, I wyl cary and make safe.Mich. 4. Morne and be busy o doughter of Sion, as a woman traueylinge, for nowe thou shalte go forthe from the citie, and shalt dwell in a region, and shalte come euen to Babilon, there shalt thou be delyuered, there shall the lorde redeme the.Iob. 33. Teachynge them, he instructeth with lernyng, to pluck a man from those thinges, which he hath done, and to delyuer hym frome pryde.Gen. 22. So Abraham was tempted to be tried, that his faith mought be made noble and mani¦fest, he tempted hym, and setteth forthe before vs suche example to folowe, when he tempteth and tri∣eth
our faythe.Iob. 1.2. So Iob was tem∣ted of the lorde, that his faythe mought be made more clere. So Dauid,2. Par. 13. Tobi. 2. so Manasses on euery side vexed, repēted. Also Tobias was therfore made blynde, to gyue ex∣ample of pacience, to his after cō∣mers. Likewise Iudith. we ought to be myndfull, howe our fathers were tempted, to be tried.Matth. 15. Soo it happened in the woman of Cha∣naan.Matth. 9. And to the womanne labo∣rynge with the issue of bloud. by whiche examples we are taughte and cōfirmed, to be plucked from god by no temptations, by no op∣pressions, by no chastisynges, be they neuer so great: but the more that god tempteth vs, chasteneth, and repelleth, so moche the more let vs crye to hym, tyll he gracy∣ously here vs. It is therfore noo
¶The godly are the fyrst that are afflicted, and they are afflicted of god, to theyr good and welthe. Cap. vi. Hiere. 25. et. 49.LO IN the citie, in whiche my name is called vpon, begin I to punisshe, and shall ye be as in∣nocentes, and without punyshe∣mente?Ezechi. 9. The lorde commaunded them that distroyed Hierusalem, to begyn at his sainctuarye.1. Pet. 4. The tyme is now, that iugement must begyn at the house of god. If the iudgement of god begynne at the godly, what ende taryeth theym, whiche beleue not the gospell of god? but the godly, when they are punished, they ar punished of god to theyr welthe and good, as the epistell wrytten to the Hebrewes, dothe clerely testifie.Hebre. 12. Whome the lord loueth, him he correcteth. and he beateth euery chylde whom he
receyueth. if ye suffer chastisynge, god offereth hym selfe vnto you, as to his sonnes. What sonne is he, whom the father chasteth not? If ye be withoute chastesynge, whose partakers ar al the sonnes, then are ye seruauntes, and noo sonnes at al. So Salomon:Prou. 3. The chasteninge of god thou shalt not refuse, and neyther grudge thou, when he shal correct the, for whom the lord loueth, hym he correcteth, and delyteth hym selfe, as the fa∣ther in the sonne.Apoc. 3. Whom so euer I loue, I rebuke, and chaste. The godly therfore ar chastened of the mercifull god, to theyr welth and good, and those whiche are moste corrected, are moste loued of god. As Tobias was chastned for his profyte.Tobi. 2. Gen. 37. Ioseph throughe the op∣pressiō of his brethern, was made
ruler of Egypt.Exod. 1. By reason of the tyranny of Pharao, the chyldren of Israell encreased, and were made innumerable.Num. 21. The people hurt of serpentes cried. So he af∣flicteth the holy bicause they shuld not be in securite without al feare but that theyr repentance shal in∣crease, & theyr faith be confyrmed, when they fele them selues to be holpe: Although we knowe, that no man is scourged of god, with∣out his deseruyng.Roma. 3. For euery man is a lier and a sinner, and no fleshe shall be iustified before the face of god.Gen. 6. For all fleshe hath corrupted his way. Wherfore al fleshe is pu∣nished, and yet we knowe that not alway the godly are punished for synnes, but somtyme to proue the fayth of the afflicted. As Iob, Da¦uid, and many other, or to declare
and make manifest the maiestie of his name. Soo he punysshed the Israelites in Egypt by Pharao, that he might be glorified in Pha¦rao, and make his name clere in all the worlde.Ioh. 9. So of the manne borne blynde from his natiuytie, nother this man hath synned nor his parentes, but that the workes of god moughte be manyfeste in hym. And when god doth afflicte his people for theyr synnes, he dothe not therfore afflycte them, that by theyr afflictiōs, they shuld satisfie for theyr synnes. For the passion and sufferynge of Iesus Christe only, is the raunsome and expiation of our synnes. But ther¦fore he afflicteth, that by affliction he maye dryue synners to repen∣taunce. For repentaunce or pe∣nance cometh fyrste by the know∣lege
of synne: and then by faythe, that our synne is forgyuen vs for goddes promise sake: and of faith burgeth forthe the callinge on the name of god. ¶In tribulation we muste praye. Cap. vii. HERE are we taughte, what a chrysten man muste doo in temptation, whenne he seeth hym selfe forsaken of al men, that is, to praye, and not to ceasse to praye, but to praye in feyth, mystrusting nothinge,Ia. 1. for he that mystrusteth, is lyke the raige of the see, whiche is caried with the wynde, and tos∣sed and dryuen with vyolence. Whiche thinge also Chryste war∣ned vs of,Matt. 16. sayinge. Watche and praye, that ye entre not into temp∣tation. So lyke wyse Salomon: Sonne,Eccle. 38. in thy syckenesse despyse
not thy selfe, but pray to the lorde, and he shal heale the. Therto god hath also commaunded, that we shulde in tribulation call on hym: yea and calleth that inuocation or crying on hym, a sacrifice, the true and mooste accepted honour. For so saythe the psalm.Psal. 49. Call to me in the day of thy trouble. And he ad∣deth promyses, And I wyll dely∣uer the, and thou shalt honour me And he sayde before in the psalm, that he regarded not the oblatiōs of beastes and such other workes, but that he delyteth in this sacri∣fice. if that we cal on hym in trou∣ble, and beleue, that he wyll helpe vs: and when we are holpen, to gyue thankes, and preache his be¦nefyte. And soo lyke wyse he cal∣leth the hope,Psal. 4. wherby we tary his helpe in affliction, sacrifice. Sa∣crifice
you the sacrifice of iustice, and hope ye in the lord. as though he shulde say, that hope is a sacri∣fice, wherby we yelde iustyce to god, that (seinge he hath soo pro∣mysed) he wyl plucke vs out, and delyuer vs: for soo moche he is ryghtuouse and true. Thou seest then, that christian pacience hath euer hope annexed: but that hope beholdeth no creatures, but onely the word and promyse of god, and holdeth hope agaynste hope, as sayth Paule: that is when al cre∣atures fayle, and shewe no helpe at all, yet is there hope, that god wyll helpe. And thoughe he gyue vs not those thynges, whiche we wolde, or by that waye or meanes that we wyll, yet gouerneth he so the ende, throughe his wysedome and goodnesse, that we perysshe
not, and that our prayers be not spente in vayne. Paule teacheth the same in this gradation. Tri∣bulation bryngeth pacience, when he commeth thither, and teacheth vs, that we ought to holde a sure hope in tyme of trouble, and ad∣deth a promyse.Roma. 4. Hope maketh vs neuer a shamed. We muste ther∣fore beleue, that we are harde of god, that god wyll helpe vs, and that we are defended of god. For so the psalmes commaunde vs to beleue and praye.Psal. 17. And in my trou¦ble haue I cried to the lorde, and to my god haue I called, and he hath graciousely frome his holye temple harde my voyce.Psal. 80. In trou∣ble thou hast called on me, and I haue delyuered the, I haue gra∣ciously herde the, in the darkenes of trouble. He hath cryed to me,Psal. 9.
and I wyll here hym. I am with hym in trouble, I wyll delyuer hym, and he shall glorifie me. Of this matter we haue noo fewe ex∣examples. Chyldren prayed in the myddes of the fornace, and they were harde and delyuered.Danie. 3. Dani∣el in the myddes of captiuitie, prai¦ed, and in the den of lions, and he was preserued.Daniel. 9. Susan forsaken of all men, prayed, and she was harde.Ionas. 2. Esai. 38. Ionas in the bealy of the fyshe, prayed. Hezechias syckened euen to the deathe, he tourned his face to the wall, and prayed to the lorde, and the lord harde hym, and was made hole.4. Re. 20. Luc. 22. Christ in the time of his tribulation and passiō prai∣ed, sheding forth dropes of bloud. Stephan in the myddes of theym that stoned hym,Act. 7. prayed. Whyle Peter was kepte in pryson,Act. 12. there
was prayer made of the congre∣gation for hym. Suche examples oughte to styrre vp our myndes and our faythe, to praye more dy∣ligently, and with a more feruent¦nes. For affliction, and the great waylynges and sorowe of the af∣flycted, are regarded of god, soo moche, that noo more acceptable sacrifice can be offered to god, thē if ye offer a contrite and an hum∣ble harte, whiche god neuer refu∣seth, as sayth the prophete.Psal. 112. Who is lyke the lorde our god, whiche dwelleth in the hyghe, and yet re∣gardeth and beholdeth lowe thin∣ges? Whom shall I loke on,Esai. 66. but on the poore and cōtrite in spirite, and hym that feareth my worde. The lorde is nyghe them,Psal. 36. whiche haue a troubled harte. We are taught also, that the lorde behol∣deth
and hereth the prayers and crye of synners, of those synners, whiche althoughe they haue com∣mitted neuer so filthy offences, yet beleue that the lorde god is theyr god, for his promyse made to A∣braham: that is, whiche beleue, that they haue god the father pa∣cified in heauen for Iesus Chri∣stes sake. and through this fayth call to god, and are hard: through this faythe, theyr synnes commyt∣ted, ar washed away. And the prai¦er of the afflycted gothe throughe to the trone of the grace of god. This faythe is moche worthe, to perswade the hart of the afflycted in temptation, that his prayer is harde. And for as moche as god is more redier to here, then we to praye, we ought surely to beleue, that our prayers are not ydel, but
that they please god, and are vn∣doubtedly harde, as Sirach also doth warne vs:Eccle. 18. Before thy pray∣er, prepare thy soule, and be not, as a man that tempteth god, that is, lyfte vp thy mynde with a sure confidence, that god wyl here the, but not for thy worthynesse: But fyrste, bycause thou arte sure, that god hath commanded vs to pray, and for bycause god hath promy∣sed graciously to here vs. Secōd∣ly, for bycause thou haste a forme and maner of prayer assygned of hym. Wherfore we nede not to feare, that our prayer shuld offend hym, for god casteth of no manne that commeth vnto hym, yea he calleth all men vnto hym, whiche are troubled in hart:Matth. 11. Come to me all ye that labour and are laden, and I shall refresshe you. Mary
Magdalyn was a synner, whiche afterwarde she beganne to washe Christes fete with her teares, she harde of Chryste.Luc. 7. Thy synnes are forgiuen the. Also the thefe, in his extreme sufferynge, went to ioye. Lyke wyse of zach. Matth. Pe∣ter.Matth. 9. For he came not to calle the ryghtuouse, but synners. He came to seke the loste shepe, and loste dram or grote.Luc. 18. He hath promysed to them that repente, remission of synnes, and receyueth them in to his fauour, as the prodigal sonne. If we confesse our synnes, he is feythefull and ryghtuouse to for∣gyue vs our synnes,1. Ioh. 1. and to clense vs from al iniquitie.Psal. 31. I haue said, I wyll confesse agaynste my selfe, my vnryghtuousenes, and thou haste forgyuen the wyckednes of my synne. Also if the wycked shal
repent from all his synnes,Ezech. 18. which he hath done, and shall kepe al my preceptes, and wyll kepe iudge∣ment and iustice, he shal lyue, and shall not dye. ¶Of prayer and the maner of prayer in tribulation. ¶PRAYER is the desyre of the harte for any thynge, to be requi∣red of god, it is the pensyfe syghe of godlye myndes, whiche calle on the name of the lorde. We are commaunded to praye:Matt. 16. 1. Tes. 5. Colo. 4. watch and pray. Also, Aske and ye shal haue. Aske and it shal be gyuen you. al∣so, Praye contynually. Agayne: Be busy in prayer, and watche in it.Luc. 18. For god dothe not onely suffer vs to praye, but also commaun∣deth, as he hath commaunded vs, not to kyll, not to committe adul∣tery. Wherfore lyke as they sinne,
that kyll, or robbe, euen so do they that neuer praye. ¶Whose preyars are hard of god. Eccle. 9.¶THE desyre of the pore, god he∣reth. The praier of him that meke neth him selfe, penetrateth & goth throughe the cloudes.Psal. 101. He hath re∣garded the praier of the meke, and hath not despysed theyr prayers. The lorde is nyghe all them,Psal. 144. Ioh. 4. that crye vnto hym in truthe. Suche worshyppers god requireth, whi∣che worshyp hym in spiryte.Psal. 33. The ryghtuouse haue cryed, and the lorde hath hard them, and he hath delyuered them from al theyr tru∣ble.Psal. 60. From the endes of the worlde haue I called to the, whē my hart was dysmaied, and in a rocke hast thou exalted me.Psal. 119. To the lord haue I cried in my trouble, and he hath graciousey harde me.Esai. 66. He behol∣deth
the lowly and broken in spi∣rite, and suche as feare his worde. Partes of trewe prayer, are the promyse, faythe, the affecte, to de∣syre in the name of Chryste, and thankes gyuynge. ¶The promyse of god. ¶VVHAT so euer ye aske the fa∣ther in my name,Ioh. 14. he shall gyue it you.Psal. 49. Crye on me in the day of thy trybulation, and I wyll delyuer the, and thou shalte gloryfie me. He shall gyue good thynges to them that aske hym.Matth. 11. Marc. 11. I saye vnto you, what so euer thynges ye aske in your prayer, beleue that ye shal receyue, and they shal happen vn∣to you. Aske, and it shall be giuen you.Matt. 18. If that two of you agree of any thynge vpon the erthe, what so euer thynge they shall requyre, it shalbe giuen them of my father,
which is in heuen.Hiere. 33. Call to me, and I wyll gracyousely here the. In prayer, goddes promyse muste be consydered, howe god hath pro∣mysed, that he wyll here vs. For he whiche hath commaunded to praye, hath promysed that he wyl bothe here vs and helpe vs. ¶Faythe. Ia. 1. 1. Ioh. 5.¶VVE muste praye with a confi∣dence, doubtyng nothynge. This is the confidence, whiche we haue towarde hym, that what soo euer we desyre, accordynge to his wyll, he hereth vs. A prayer withoute fayth obteyneth nothinge at god∣des hand. We must therfore pray in faythe. And if we aske in fayth, he hereth vs. Fayth is assuredlye to beleue, that god forgyueth vs our synnes, for Christes sake, and not only forgiueth our sinnes, but
also is present with vs, ruleth and gouerneth vs, that he maye make vs safe. In this faythe if we aske any thynge, god dothe graciouse∣ly here vs. For god wyll gyue all thinges to thē that beleue in him. ¶To aske in the name of Iesu, ¶IS to haue a respect, to the glo∣ry and wyll of god, that the name of god maye be glorifyed. For the ende of euery prayer, is the glory of god. To aske therfore in the name of Iesu, is to aske and de∣syre the glory of Chryste, and the spredynge abrode of his name. ¶The affecte to desire any thinge. ¶THE lordes prayer teacheth playnely, what thynge we shulde praye for. More ouer, fayth, hope, loue, pacience. We must also pray, that we be not tempted, for prayer onely obteyneth the victory of all
temptations. Also for publike and common necessities, for offycers, for peace. ¶Thankes gyuyng. Psal. 49. Psal. 115.¶OFFER TO god, prayse. To the shal I sacrifice the host or ob∣lation of prayse, and I shall calle on the name of the lorde.Psal. 33. I wyll blesse the lorde at all tymes, his prayse shal euer be in my mouthe. None turned agayne,Luc. 11. to gyue glo¦ry to god, but the straunger. The faythfull gyue thankes, that they ar delyuered of theyr trouble, they magnifie god, and preache forth, his gyuynge of benefyes: but god oftentymes deferreth to here, to exercise the faythe of the godly, as it apereth in Syrophenisse, al∣so Luc. 18. and yet stynte not they to praye,Luc. 18. nor mystruste god, al∣thoughe they obteyne not streight
wayes, that whiche they aske and desyre, but continue styll in pray∣er. For continuance in praier hath the rewarde.Daniel. 9. He continued in prai¦er, he praied the hole day through euen to euentyde, and was visited of Gabriell. We must prescrybe or appoynte no tyme to god.Iudith. 9. He that continueth knockynge, to hym it shall be opened. God gaue not to Abraham streyghte wayes, that which he promised. Therfore must we saye, If thou wylte lorde,Marc. 1. Iob. 13. thy wyll be fulfylled. Althoughe he shall kyll me, yet shall I truste in hym. ¶We oughte to be pacient in affliction, not to be angry, nor to speake yuell of god. Cap. viii. PACIENCE, is to feele and consider, that god doth scorge
vs, to call vs to repentaunce, and therfore gladly to suffer the hand of god, and to haue a confidence, that god wyl forgiue vs, and that he wyll delyuer vs. Of this paci∣ence to godward, spryngeth forth pacience towarde men. For when the harte is at peace with god, it tarieth helpe of hym, and vtterly setteth aside lust to auenge. Thus pacience can neuer be, but when by fayth we are assured, that we please god, and that at lengthe it shall come to passe, that we shalbe saued. Christen pacience therfore, is the comfort and ioye of the hart in afflyctions, to whome there is annexed hope. For faythe present∣ly receiueth reconciliation and for¦gyuenes of synne, & a promyse of the ende. Hope taryeth and loketh for the ende to come, as sayth Esai
In silence and hope shall be your strengthe.Esai. 20. For Hope hath his eye to the wyll of god, and knoweth, that god hath care on hym. And it shall come to passe, that god wyll gouerne the endes accordynge to his promyse, althoughe there ap∣pere no helpe at all, in any crea∣tures, as it is spokē of Abraham. Agaynste all hope, he beleued in hope. that is, althoughe in the hole compasse of nature, there be no hope at al, yet beholdynge the worde of god, felte inwardly, that that whiche god hadde promysed, shoulde come to passe. Who (as saythe Paule) calleth those thin∣ges whiche are not, as thoughe they were? Therfore the mynd is quiete in christen pacience. For it consydereth, that afflyctions are not yll, nor are layed on vs of god
to our destruction. For he is well assured, that he is temted through the good wyll of god, and exercy∣sed to repentaunce for his helthe. And for as moche as the mynd is fyxed towarde this wyl of god, he is not angrye with god. For he knoweth, howe this calamitie or trouble commeth not by chaunce or fortune without a cause, but ra¦ther reioyseth in affliction. that is it that Esai speaketh. In silence and hope shall be your strengthe. that is, be ye not angry in god or with god.Psal. 5. Be ye angry, but synne not, that is. Be ye not angry with god, bicause he suffereth you to be punyshed, and doth not by and by helpe you, be ye not for that mo∣ued, to exercyse vengaunce, or to forsake god: but speake closely within your hartes, that is, consi∣der
the word, and accordyng ther∣unto suffer affliction. Suche pa∣cience is stedfaste and sure, yea e∣uen when al mannes comfort and councell forsake vs. whiche thing holye scripture euidently proueth euery where. for he wyl not be for∣getfull of the poore continually. The paciēce of the poore shall not peryshe at length. Tary the lorde,Psal. 26. do manfully, comforte thy harte, and suffer the lord.Esai. 30. In silence and hope, shall be thy strengthe.Thren. 3. It is good to loke for the helthe of the lorde in silence.Eccle. 2. What soo euer is layde on the, receyue it, and when thou arte brought lowe, haue pa∣cience. He that is pacient,Prou. 14. is ruled with moche wysedome. He that is impatient, sheweth forthe his fo∣lyshenes. In your pacience shall ye pocesse your soules.Matt. 10. Roma. 5. Afflyction
bringeth forthe pacience, pacience probation or triall, probatiō hope, and hope shall neuer be a shamed. So Dauid,2. Re. 16. paciently suffered the persecution of his sonne, and the curse of Semei. Iob is a notable exāple of pacience. The lord gaue the lorde hath taken away. Abra∣ham was pacient,Gen. 12. when his wyfe was taken away, and set in Pha∣raos house. Chryste is the onely captayne and moste perfecte exam¦ple of pacience. So farre is it of, that aduersities shuld noy or hurt vs, that they are very profytable vnto vs. For the good, the more they ar afflycted, the more pacient they are, knowynge that through moche trouble, is the way of hea∣uen. for they knowe, that by moch pacience, they ar tried and proued as Peter sayth.1. Pet. 1. wherby the triall
of our faythe, maye be more pre∣ciouse then golde, whiche pery∣sheth and is tried by fier. wherfore a proffe or triall helpeth to the in∣crease of hope. For when we consi¦der, that in no suche so great affli∣tions, we are not forsaken, we ga∣ther confidently, that neuer after this shal we be forsaken. we ought therfore pacientely to suffer those ylles, which happen on vs in this worlde. for if we be impacient, we be not christians. For as many as haue ben sythen the begynnynge of the worlde hytherto, godly and christian men, they haue al ben af∣flycted with manyfolde troubles. But forbycause, they haue ouer∣come thē with pacience, their hope set and fyxed in god, therfore they ar made safe, as witnesseth the ex∣amples of the holy, from the fyrste
Abel, vnto those ryghtuouse whi∣che in these days ar on lyue. Wher¦fore it behoued euen Chryste hym self, by the crosse, to entre into life. And this in all aduersities is gret comforte, and of great strength, to knowe, that god requireth paci∣ence, and that myngled with ioy. But mans reason perceyueth not that,Colo. 1. but god teacheth it. For our reason is therfore troubled & vex∣ed in persecution, bycause it thin∣keth, that we ar afflycted, bycause god other hateth vs, or dothe not regarde vs, nother wyl helpe vs. These false opiniōs god plucketh from vs, and teacheth vs, that we ar afflycted, not bycause he hateth vs, but bycause he wyll other a∣mende vs, or when we be amen∣ded, so to continue, accordynge to that sayinge: He correcteth the
sonne whom he loueth. Agayn: I wyl not the deathe of a synner.Ezech. 18. A∣gayne, He hath concluded all vn∣der synne, not to dystroye all, but to haue mercye on all. And this thynge engendereth gladnes in our myndes, to knowe and fele, that it pleaseth god, to haue vs afflycted. For we must be lyke the ymage of his sonne. More ouer, that in our affliction he wyl helpe vs, and kepe vs, and also comfort vs with the holy gost, and set our conscience at peace, and make vs be gladde in god, so that we desire helpe of hym. For he commaun∣deth, that we shulde loke for helpe at his hande, accordynge to this: All they that tarye the,Esai. 49. shal not be confounded. And god commaun∣deth lykewyse, that we shuld aske helpe of hym. Call on me in the
daye of trouble, and I wyll dely∣uer the, and thou shalte gloryfie me. Of this pacience and comfort god alonely is the auctour, which also giueth pacience.Psal. 70. Psal. 61. Hiere. 29. For thou art my pacience o lord. yet o my soule be vnder and subiecte to god. for of hym is my pacience. Thynke the thoughtes of peace, that I maye gyue you the ende and pa∣cience.Rom. 15. The god of pacience and comforte. &c. This christian paci∣ence hath certayne condycions, wherby it is knowē, to be the true pacience. Fyrste it grudgeth not, nother excuseth it selfe, as though it shulde suffer vnworthily for his synnes. wherfore he sitteth downe and holdeth his peace, as Hiere∣mie saythe.Thren. 3. He sytteth alone, and speketh no worde, for he hath laid a yocke vpon hym. Secondely it
casteth all carefulnes on god,1. Pet. 5. and committeth it selfe al hole to god, that goddes wyl be done, and not his. Thyrdely, it humbleth hym selfe, and casteth of ryotte, and the pleasure of the worlde. Fourthly, he is mery and redye to suffer yet more heuyer and more greuouse ylles. ¶Socour in affliction muste be asked of god. Capi. ix. VVE MVSTE loke for helpe in al afflyctions, for god pro∣myseth his helpe, sayenge. I am with you, feare ye not, I wyll strengthe you. Agayne,Ioh. 15. Without me, ye are able to doo nothynge. But when he is presente, we are able to doo all thynges throughe hym. And if he be with vs,Roma. 8. who shall be agaynste vs? Of what
daunger shall we be aferde of? he hath promysed trewely to be with vs, vntyll the ende of the worlde, and vndoubtedly he wyll be. Let vs cal therfore on his helpe, he is trewe, and is redy to al them that call on hym in truthe.Iudit. 6. Iudith de∣syrynge helpe of god, sayd: Helpe me thy handemaiden,Hest. 14. which haue none other helpe but the lorde. Giue vs helpe from the holy place or elles,Psal. 19. he sendeth helpe from his holy place. and from Sion wil he defende the.Psal. 69. O god gyue hede to∣warde my helpe, and hast to helpe me o lorde. Blessed is that man, whose helpe is of the.Psal. 83. Psal. 107. Helpe vs from tribulation. For vayn is the helthe of man.Psal. 120. My helpe is of the lorde, whiche made heauen and erthe. In tyme of tribulation we oughte from aboue to loke for the
helpe of god: but the maner, tyme, and kynde of helpe is vnknowen vnto vs, that fayth and hope may haue place, which sticketh to those thynges, whiche are not sene nor harde. Do not therfore in tyme of trouble runne without thy selfe, but tary within thy selfe, and tary the strength of the lorde: He wyll come, if thou departe not: he wyl strengthe the, if thou seke none o∣ther strengthe. For he commeth not to them that flee, but to them that tarye boldelye. Tribulation must not be ouercome with flight, but with constancye, and stycking in the faythe of the name of god. Also the helpe of the lorde is ouer them, that onely put theyr confy∣dence and truste in god: he is redy with all his angelles, when al o∣ther thynges forsake theym: he hath
a respect to his in afflyction conti∣nually. He kepeth them, and com∣forteth them.3. Re. 17. To Helias when he was fled and was hungry, he sent a rauē which brought him bread. Agayne,2. Re. 19. he sente hym bread & wa∣ter by his aungell. He was with the elder Tobie,Tobi. 5. Hest. 9. and at length he∣led hym of his blyndenes. He tur∣ned the waylinge of the Iewes in to ioye.Iudit. 10. He wrought meruaylous∣ly with the Betulians, which cri∣ed vpon hym.Daniel. 5. He was with Da∣niel and the chyldrē in the fornace of fier, that the fier shuld not hurt them.Dani. 14. When Daniell was in the den of lyons in Chaldee, the lorde sent hym his dynner from Ieury. Susan was lefte comfortles and in desperation, and yet in extreme daunger, god delyuered her, and considered her anguyshe.Ionas. 2. He pre∣serued
Ionas in the bealy of the fyshe, that he shulde not peryshe, which yet had deserued death. He was with Peter in prison, and de∣lyuered hym.Act. 12.23 He broughte Paule forthe of pryson, to whome god spake by a visyon in the nyghte. Feare not, but speake, and holde not thy peace. And for as moche as I am with the, noo man shall drawe nyghe to hurte the. Wher∣fore Paule cryeth on this maner: As the passions and sufferynges of Christ do habounde in vs,2. Cor. 1. euen so do consolations and comforte by Christe. We must therfore aske helpe in tyme of trouble, of god onely: whiche of hym selfe, and by hym selfe, defendeth euerye man, that is his, and not by the helpe of man. Of whiche thyng there be examples, howe ofte tymes he
holpe the people of Israell, when none of all the people about them were with them, but all agaynste them, alonely with his presence, throughe his trewe worshyppe in Hierusalem & Sion.Psal. 19. He will send helpe vnto the frō his holy place, and out of Sion shall he defende the. And as often as they loked not for helpe out of Sion, but out of Egypt, or from the Assirians, so oftentymes they fell, and were worse hurte, as men whiche claue to a staffe of a rede. For helpe or so¦cour required of creatures, is not onelye vayne, but is also to our hurte and losse, as Luke telleth, of the woman, whiche hadde the course of bloud, whiche bestowed in vayne all the substance she had on phisitions, and receyued helthe by fayth onely in Chryst. For god
deliuereth when most nede is, that his glory maye shyne the brygh∣ter. Therfore the wyl of god must be loked on, and our helpe & hope maye be affyxed in nothynge els, then in god, whiche is an helper in tyme conuenient: Whiche hath fyxed his eyes vpon the.Psal. 31. For the eyes of the lorde are on the rygh∣tuouse, and his eares redy to their prayers.Psal. 33. We may put no affiance nor truste in man, nor in mannes helpe, but in god onely.Psal. 59. Vayne is the helthe of menne. Cursed is he that trusteth in man,Hiere. 17. and maketh flesshe his defence, and his harte departed from god.Deut. 17. Esai. 31. Thy kynge shall not increase his horses. Wo to them whiche go downe into E∣gypt, hopynge in the helpe of hor∣ses. Some in horses,Psal. 19. and some in chariottes, but we in the name of
the lorde.Psal. 146. Nor hath he delyte in the strengthe of the horse, nother yet pleasure in the legges of men. The lorde delyteth in theym that feare hym, and in them that putte theyr hope in hym. ¶Yet in afflyction or syckenes, medicyne and councell are not to be des∣pised. Cap. x. FOR GOD by instrumentes performeth his wyll, and doth and worketh all thynges in theyr order by meanes, as clerely testifi∣eth holy scripture.Esai. 38. Esai comman∣ded to take a cluster of fygges, & to playster them vppon Ezechias wounde, and so to be made hole. This is certaynely a great prayse and defence to physicke.4. Re. 20. 2. Par. 32. For god wil not the vse of his creatures to be neglected or dyspysed. He con∣demneth
onely the faythe and con¦fidēce in creatures. And although he mought easyly haue healed E∣zechias, with one worde: yet wold he doo it by medycine. Soo he mought bringe forth and increace chyldren of mannes body, other∣wyse or by some other maner, but yet he wyll do it by the womanne. Wherfore let vs vse thynges, as god hath created them, with than¦kes gyuyng, and let vs onely put no confidence in them: as we rede that Asa dyd,2. Co. 15. whiche in his sycke∣nes sought not the lorde, but phi∣sitions. Hope must chiefely be put in the lorde, and afterwarde lette vs vse the helpe of physitions, as the benefytte of god. Moreouer, we muste consider, that god hath created medycine, as wytnesseth Iesus Syrach:Sirach. 3 Honour the phy∣sition
for necessyties sake, for the hyghest hath created hym. For of god is al remedy. &c. Besyde that, amonge the people of god, there were euer physitions, and Luke hym selfe the euangeliste was al∣so a phisition.Colo. 4. But yet (as I said) we muste put no confidence in the phisition, but rather in god. For phisike without the workynge of god, helpeth nothynge, as wyt∣nesseth the historie of the woman,Matth. 9. whiche twelue yeres suffered the fluxe. For the outwarde phisike is deceytfull, and nothyng at all, ex∣cepte helthe be inwardely gyuen of god. The woman is not repro∣ued, bycause she spente moche on physitions, but rather is priuyly shewed, that physycke is vayne, when it is attemted without god. So maye we not despise phisicke,
whom the hyghest hath created of the erthe: so that we renounce our wyll into the hande of god, which is the chiefe poynt, that is by phi∣sicke, other to heale vs, or to kyll vs. This is the stronge faythe in god, throughe which, no sickenes is so greuous and vncurable, whi¦che is not made hole. This faythe I saye, is nothynge elles, but the most lyuely opinion and vndoub∣ted trust in the mercy of god, wher¦by a man vndoutedly perswadeth hym selfe, that he is in the fauour of god, and that god is courteyse and forgyuynge hym al thynges, that he hath other doone or sayde. Courteyse, in good thinges: forgi¦uynge, in yl thynges.Rom. 10. This faith commeth by herynge, and hering by the word of god. Phisicke ther¦fore may not be despised. For god
is the aucthor and creator of thin∣ges, in whiche also he worketh as by a meane. Soo Helizeus toke salte and caste it into the fountain of waters, whiche were verye yll, and vnholsome, and made the wa¦ters hole. Agayne. He purged and ryd the lepre of Naaman,4. Re. 2. captain vnder the kynge of Syria, in the water of Iordan.4. Re. 5. Water without the worde and promyse of god, is nothyng. as if any other had was∣shed hym selfe a hundred times in Iordan, he shulde not haue bene clensed. Naaman is clensed, for he had a promyse. Be thou wasshed, and thou shalt be hole. When he regardeth not this promyse, but onely the water, he erreth, and ta∣ryeth in leprosye, and so shoulde haue perished, and haue bē a blas∣phemer agaynste god, onelesse he
had ben warned of his seruantes. He came therfore with faythe, and was made hole.Ioh. 9. Soo Chryste to make the blynde man hole, made clay with spyttell. Agayne.Matth. 9. The hem of christes garment touched, delyuered the woman frome the fluxe of bloud. The voice of Christ called forthe Lazarus. The voyce of Christ called forth vncleane spi¦rites from men. The shadowe of Peter expelleth syckenes. So mo¦che can the creature do, taken into the handes of the almyghty, whi∣che hath not this strengthe of na∣ture, but of the euerlastyng word of god. of whome it receyueth the strength of doinge, that it resteth not, but is euer workynge and myghtye. For there is nothynge made of god in vayne, althoughe it be neuer soo vyle. For therfore
god created those vile thynges, to signifie, that he him selfe worketh in those abiecte and vyle thinges: but the wycked doo attrybute the strengthe of curynge, healynge, multiplieng, and bringyng forth, to the erthe, nature, and herbes: but the faythefull attribute it, to the lyuynge worde of god, and to the present power of god. For god worketh all thynges, by the erthe, herbes, and other his creatures, as by instrumentes: but yet we ought not to attribute those thin∣ges to trees & herbes, althoughe god vse those thīges for our sake, but to god, which worketh al thin¦ges, in all thynges, that all thyn∣ges maye be referred to theyr first well sprynge. Wherfore it is sure, that god by instrumentes dothe worke, clense, heale, and make
safe. So god only fedeth vs,Matt. 6. your heauenly father fedeth them, yet vseth he bread as an instrument to fede by.Psal. 104. Bread confyrmeth the harte of man. Agayn. God alone kepeth vs and defendeth vs, ac∣cordynge to this.Psal. 227. Except the lorde do kepe the citie, he that kepeth it, watcheth in vayne, and yet he ke∣peth it, with the mynistery of an∣gelles and gouernours. Fynally, god is the auctour and lorde of al thynges, he hath his organes and instrumentes, with the which, as with meanes he doth what he wil. ¶In afflyction no tyme may be appoynted to god, nother yet maner wherby we wolde be delyuered. Ca. xi. THERE IS no time nor mea∣sure of afflyction, to be pres∣crybed or lymytted to the lord, al∣though
he deffer the matter a lōg season, as it apereth in the .v. cha∣piter of Iohn,Ioh. 5. that the infirmitie of the sycke was prolonged vntyl the .xxxviii. yere, by the wyll of god, vntyll Chryste shulde come and be glorified. So let vs beleue certaynly, all our afflictions to in∣dure the longer, throughe the myghtye wyll and worke of god, that at the laste the lorde be glori∣fied in vs.Ioh. 9. A certayne manne was borne blynde, and dyd continue so blynde vntyll he came to the per∣fect aege of a man. but wherfore? Veryly, that the worke of the lord myght be shewed in hym. In like wyse the Israelytes were not one∣ly greuouselye punysshed vnder Pharao in Egypt, but also a long season, not that they shulde be de∣stroyed, but rather that the name
of the lorde shulde be glorified in them. Iob also was cast into gre∣uouse hel paynes many monthes, that by the continuaunce of his peynes, it myght be made many∣feste, that all men were lyers, and god onely trewe. that is, that the name of god by hym myghte be glorified. In lyke maner Ioseph, hauynge knowlege by his dreme, yt he shulde be a gouernour, was kepte longe tyme, partely vnder greuouse seruitude and bondage, and partely in prison. but for none other cause, but that the name of god, by hym delyuered from soo lowe humilitie, and broughte to so great honour, myght be glory∣fied. God wyl therfore helpe when nede shall require, whenne we be compelled to despeyre in all hu∣mayne helpe, and when all carnal
councell shall deceyue vs, for god onely wyll be gloryfied.Ioh. 2. Chryste dyd not chaunge water into wyne at the begynnynge, but dyd tarye vntyll it appered manyfestly to al the gestes, that there lacked wine. that the glory onely to god and to none other myght be gyuen. It semeth oftentymes, that god doth leaue his elect in the middel of all yll, but sodeynely he helpeth and gyueth socour, specially when all thynge is broughte to desperati∣on: and besyde al hope, with some rare and seldome shewen myracle he helpeth, althoughe natural re∣medy do lacke, and trouble aboūd on euery syde, soo that it semeth, that the lorde hath forgotten his elect: but afterwarde he fayleth not to deliuer them out of the mid¦des of al theyr troubles more glo∣riousely.
He myght haue let Pha∣rao, that he shuld not haue puni∣shed the chyldren of Israell, but when all mans helpe was past, he delyuered his people from Pha∣rao in the red see. The lorde dothe prolong helpe for our vtilitie and profyte, that he myghte exercyse and proue faythe by temptation: so that he onely might possesse the title and name of a helper, that we myght lerne the better to truste in god, and to haue compassion vp∣pon other that be tempted. as in the psalm.Psal, 17. And thy lernynge hath corrected me for euer, and thy dis∣ciplyne shal teache me.Hebre. 2. So Paule speaketh of Chryste: It behoueth that Christe, in all thynges shuld be made lyke his brethern, that he myghte be mercyfull ouer theym. We ought not therfore to despeire
in the tyme of afflyction, specially when we knowe certaynely, that the terme and ende of punishment and payne, is to be prescribed, ly∣mitted, and appoynted of god, as the prophetes beare witnes. Whē the yeres beginne to be fullfylled,Hiere. 29. I wyl viset you, and rayse vppon you a good worde.Hiere. 30. Also, and the daye shall be, that I wyll breake his yoke from thy necke, and strā∣gers shal beare no more rule ouer it.Esai. 28. Abac. 2. He whiche shall beleue, shall make noo haste. He whiche yet se∣med a farre of, shall appere at the ende, and shall not lye, althoughe he tary, yet loke for hym, for he is commynge, and at the last he shal come, and shal not be slowe. wher∣fore we muste saye:Matt. 6. Marc. 1. The wyll of the lorde be fulfylled. Also, Lord, if thou wylte, thou mayste make
me cleane. Also Paule sayth.1. Cor. 10. The lorde is faythefull, whiche wyll not suffer you to be temted aboue your myght, but shall gyue with temptation power to resyste, that you maye be able to suffer.Iob. 13. Al∣thoughe he kyl me, yet I wil trust in hym.Psal. 22. If I shall walke in the myddell of the shadowe of death, I wyll not feare euyl thynges, bi∣cause thou arte with me. Iudith in the .vii. and .viii. chapiter, is a good exaumple. The people of Israell were forty yeres in desert. God dydde not gyue to Abraham shortely that whiche he promysed. So Chryste sayde his houre was not yet come.Ioh. 2. Matt. 14. Matth. 4. The womanne of Chananie is a good example. Al∣so Chryst was tempted of the dy∣uell in wyldernes forty dayes.
¶It is a great comfort to them that be in af∣fliction, to remembre, that Christe was also tempted and exercised with yll as we be wont to be ex∣ercised. Cap. xii. FYRST VVE se Christ temp∣ted: in whom we haue an ex∣ample of pacience and longe suf∣ferynge. This is our captayne, whom we ought to folowe in suf∣ferynge, ne leste it shulde be heuy to vs, when we be tempted and punished in this worlde, other of the dyuell or of his membres. For as the apostell saythe.Hebre. 5. We haue a bishop tempted in al thynges lyke to vs, without synne. And for as moche it choseth him so to be tem∣ted, he myght the better helpe thē that be tempted, Therfore Christ was delyuered to the dyuell to be tempted, as he was after betray∣ed
to the Iewes to be crucyfyed: that we, which be tempted, by him and in hym myght lyue. And fur∣thermore, that by his temptation he shulde ouercome, leste we shuld obey and be ouercome in tempta∣tion: and by that his deathe he myght redeme vs from perpetu∣all deathe. Therfore let vs not be angry, nor take it greuously, whē we be let flyp by god our father in to diuers temptatiōs, tribulatiōs & afflyctions: Bycause no man is tēted, excepte the lord wyl. nor the dyuel hath no power to hurte any man, excepte the lorde wyll per∣mytte and suffer hym. And when so euer he shall suffer hym to tēpt, yet he wyl not suffer vs to be tem∣ted aboue our power. We haue not onely Christ for our example, but also the godly bothe prophe∣tes
and apostelles, whiche in lyke wyse be tempted, persecuted, sto∣ned,2. Cor. 11.12. kylled, & crucified. as Paule of hym selfe wytnesseth. It is a great comfort to the godly, when for the name of Christ and his ho∣ly gospell, they suffer persecution, imprisonment, & at the last death, in whiche troubles yet ioye and afflyction haue place and be mixt to gether. If they be punisshed, it is ioye and comforte to theym, to haue Chryst and al good and ho∣ly men felowes with them in their afflictions.1. Tes. 1. as Paule saythe. Re∣ceyuynge the worde with greatte afflyction, and ioye of the holye goste. So Chryste dothe comfort his electe,Ioh. 16. sayinge: In the world you shall haue afflyction, but be of good comforte, I haue ouer∣come the worlde. You shall wepe
and lament, and the worlde shall reioyce: you shall mourne, but your mournynge shal be tourned in to ioye.Ioh. 15. Matt. 16. The seruaunte is not better then the mayster. He that wyll folowe me, let hym deny him selfe. &c. He which dothe not take vp his crosse and folowe. &c.Matt. 16. Marc. 8. He that wyll saue his soule, shal lose it. &c. and he whiche wyll lose his soule for my sake, shall fynde it euerlastyngely. For the gospell is the worde of the crosse, who soo e∣uer preacheth it trewely, and con∣fesse it, muste nedes suffer afflycti∣on. For the gospell dothe reproue the worlde, and condemneth those thynges, whiche be in the worlde, but the worlde can not suffer that. Therfore he punysheth, persecu∣teth, and kylleth the godlye. We haue exāples inowe. Cayn killed
Abell, Esau persecuted Iacob, Saul Dauid, Pharao Moysen, the Phariseis Chryste, the Iewes the Apostelles, Herode Iohn the baptist. If therfore we be lykewise punyshed, and tempted, there chā∣seth no newe thynges to vs. But let vs remembre Chryste and his apostels our examples, which ad∣monished and warned vs of such thynges, which were in lyke wyse punished, & dyd teache vs, that al suche as wold lyue godly & meke∣ly in Christ,2. Tim. 3. Acto. 14. shulde suffer persecu∣tion. And by many troubles we muste entre into the kyngedome of god. ¶It is great comfort in affliction that no man can hurte the faythfull, except Chryste wyll. Cap. xiii. ALTHOVGHE the worlde and the dyuel be neuer so fu¦riouse
and madde, yet the faythe∣full can not be hurte.Psal, 3. I wyll not feare a thousand people, compas∣syng me about, bicause they stand vnder the wynge of god. Also all the creatures canne not hurte the faythefull, except god wyll. The water did not hurt the Israelites: the fyre dyd not hurt the thre chil∣dren, beinge in the furnace: the li∣ons dyd nothynge hurte Daniel: Dauid plucked a beare out of the mouthe of a lyon, as the epystel to the Hebrewes wrytten, clerely wit¦nesseth. If the faythefull perysshe in battayle, it is the good wyll of god. whitout whose wyll and suf∣feraunce, no aduersytie can come vnto them. And he that hurteth one faythfull, doth not hurte him but god. For god dothe reuenge the wronge done to the faythfull,
as it were done to hym selfe. And if any aduersite or heuynes, hang ouer the people of god, god regar¦deth and taketh that euen as he hym selfe were punished, and gre¦ued: but the reuengynge therof, is to be lefte to god. For god ma∣keth hym selfe defender of all be∣leuers:Deut. 32. he dothe take theym, and caryeth them vpon his shulders. Therfore god hath charge ouer the godly, whether they liue or dy. nor he doth not leaue them in the middel of their trouble and crosse, but then he is more nere thē, and can not forget his electe. He is the god of Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob,Matth. 10. where soo euer they be. So Christe, The heares of your hea∣des be nombred.Ioh. 7. The Iewes dyd seke to kyll Chryste, but his tyme was not then comen.Ioh. 8. No man did
set handes vpon him, bycause his houre was not yet comme.Ioh. 10. They went aboute to take hym, but he dydde escape from the myddell of theyr handes. Notwithstandyng the wycked do often ouercome the godlye, and god dothe suffer the wycked to preuayle agaynste the good: but throughe that rod, the lorde doth call his to repentance, and teacheth theym in feare. So Cayn preuayled agaynste Abell, the Sodomites agaynste Loth, Esau agaynste Iacob. The Phi∣listians often dydde ouercome the Israelytes, Abymelech ouercame Sichimites, Saul agaynst Da∣uid, Herode agaynste Iohn, the Iewes ageynst Christe, Acab and Iesabel against Heliā, the Iewes ageynst Stephin, the turke often ouercometh the christiās. In these
examples it is greate comforte to the godly, whiche suffer wronge: to whom the lorde saythe,Psal. 31. I wyll fixe mine eies stedfastly vpon the. That whiche was done in the be∣ginning of the world, is done also euen vnto the ende of the worlde. ¶The wycked thynke, that they ouercome, when that they kyl, and caste other into exyle, and thynke that the lorde dothe forsake them, when he dothe not delyuer theym from deathe and persecution, by some vysible myracle. Surelye, Chryste was soo delyuered from deathe: and so all they, whiche do beleue in Chryste, by Christ be de∣lyuered from deathe. God wolde not graunt (if he dyd not certayn∣ly know) that of persecution, and suche other ylles, whiche be wont to chaunce to his electe, greattest
profyt to come vnto them. He suf∣fereth them to be cast into pryson, into ylles, and into death, that he maye declare therby, that he hath both power and wil to saue them. Suche diligent care hath the lord ouer the godly. God with all his angelles is redye, when all other thynges do forsake. Wherof the psalm saythe, Bycause my father and mother haue forsaken me, the lorde hath taken me. Forther, it is a great comfort to the godly, that the wycked (whom god dothe vse as a rodde, to scourge the godlye people) go not clere awaye with∣out punishement, whome he ma∣keth other shamefullye ashamed, or throughe theyr owne councell, he dothe take them, and bryngeth theym into the same dystruction, whiche they theyr selfes haue stu∣dyed
& founde out for other. As it is right before god, that he shulde rewarde euery man accordyng to his workes. What is soo iuste be∣fore god? as that they whiche doo oppresse the godly in this worlde, and throughe persecution make them exiles, in the worlde to come shall suffer the same persecution, whiche they haue doone to other: The godly, that they maye be in reste with other saynctes, whiche commynge from greatte trouble, shall nowe receyue the kyngdome eternal. For when we be gon here hence, all labour and sorowe shall ceasse, and reste and ioye shall fo∣lowe: and to the wycked shall fo∣lowe cleane contrary, lyke as (we rede in the gospell) dyd folowe to the ryche glotten. Sonne remem∣bre.Esai. 10. &c. Wo be to the Assure, the rod
of my angre & fury, I wyl teare ye, & breke the, as the bough of a tree. Also Paule, It is ryght (sayth he) before god, to gyue afflyction to them, which do punyshe you, and to you whiche be punished, release and delyueraunce therof.Rom. 9. Exod. 9. Daniel. 5. Esai. 10. Micha. 5. Exam∣ples hereof be Pharao, Baltha∣sar, Daniel, Sennacherib, Saul, Absalom, the Phariseis, Caiphas and Pilate. The cause is, for he that hurteth one faythefull, hur∣teth not onely hym but god: the whiche dothe reuenge the iniurye and wronge done to the faythful, as iniurie done to hym self. as the lorde sayde to Samuell:1. Re. 8. They haue not cast the away but me. He forbiddeth to touche his faythful, sayinge,Psal. 104. Do not touche myne an∣noynted, and say not yl of my pro∣phetes.Hiere. 2. They whiche deuour Ia∣cob,
do synne, and yll shall come vpon them.Zacha. 2. He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of myne eye. They that spoyle the,Hiere. 10. shalbe spoi∣led. Also Christe, He that hereth you, hereth me: and he that des∣piseth you, despiseth me. And soo god dydde speake from heauen to Paule,Acto. 9. saying, Saul Saul, why doste thou persecute me? ¶The goodnesse of god is not to be despised, or lyghtly regarded before afflyctions. whirby god wyl punishe and gyue warnynge. Capi. xiiii. GOD THERFORE giueth warnynge and monition be∣fore, that men shulde repente, and so repentynge, shulde beleue and receyue grace: and they whiche wyll not beleue, shuld be without excuse, and suffer punisshemente iustely.Gen. 6. So Noe in his tyme dyd
admonishe men an hūdreth yeres. And Lothe dyd warne the Sodo∣mites.2. Pet. 2. Gen. 19. Also Egypte was in peryll to peryshe, thē Moyses was sent. It was shewed before by the pro∣phetes, that the .x. trybes shulde be caryed to Babylon, Hierusa∣lem shulde be ouerthrowen by the Chaldees, and the peple broughte to captiuitie. Hieremie was sente, whiche preached forty yeres.Daniel. 3. Na∣bugodonosor was made a frayde in his dreame. Soo Chryste dyd bewayle and shewe before the de∣struction of Hierusalē. The place of repentaunce with god is before the sentence gyuen: but not so, if it be wrytten: the folyshe virgins dyd aske oyle in vayne, when the yates were shutte vp. Esau mur∣ned to late, when Iacob had go∣ten the blessynge. So the psalm,
Seke the lorde whyle he maye be founde. Kyng Balthasar dyd not seke the lorde, nor dyd not fynde hym: but Nabugodonosor dyd seke hym, and dyd fynd hym. Also the vnfaithful ministers bounden both hand and fote, were cast out into outwarde darkenesse. When the wrothe of the lorde is consum∣mate or at the full, the godlye be punysshed with the wycked. The iugement of god, when he is an∣gry, is gyuen vppon all, as well good as yll,Esai 64. Psal. 43. as Esai teacheth. Al∣so the psalm, The godly conceyue a hope of felycitie and grace, as they do confesse: We haue not for∣gotten the.Psal. 76. The lorde shal not cut awaye his mercye for euer. And they whiche be chastened do suffer iudgement, and at length do ob∣teyne mercy. He wyl not be angry
for euer.Psal. 67. Therfore the lorde dothe punyshe all the godly, whiche do repent, with peynes in this world, as he punysshed Dauid, that he myght make them more lowlyer: he dothe instructe them with ler∣nynge, and maketh them more cir¦cumspecte and ware. God doth e∣uer send before bothe messengers and tokens, that men myghte re∣pente: and to theym, whiche wyll not repent, no excuse shall be left: as the prophetes, Chryst, and his apostelles did warne men in theyr tyme, as it is written:Prouer. 1. Wysedome sitteth without the dores, and pre∣acheth in the stretes, and cryeth a∣loude. &c. He councelleth and stir∣reth his to repentaunce, that they maye feare, ne leste he caste them amonges the blasphemers. But they be not cast away, the whiche
made aferde by goddes worde, do beleue Chryst: but rather Christe draweth them to hym self, saieng, Come to me all you which labour and be burdened and ladē, and I wyll refreshe you. But thou wylt saye: The proper worke of god is to fauour and to haue mercy, and therfore he wyll reuoke his sen∣tence. It is trewe. for it is a strāge worke to hym to be angry: for ve∣rely, he wolde not the deathe of a synner, but rather that he shulde be conuerted and liue. But vnder this condition, he wyl reuoke his sentence, if we knowlege our syn∣nes:Ezech. 18. wherby we haue prouoked god to wrothe, and do repent. If the wycked do repent. &c. But Re∣pentaunce is conuertion and tur∣nynge of the wycked man, whose two partes be contricion & faith.
Contrition, is to knowledge the synne, and by the iudgement and sentence of god, truely to be made afrayde, sayinge, We haue sinned onely to the: beholde,Psal. 0. thou art an∣grye. Also, I am he whiche haue synned. But Fayth is a constante truste of mercy, by the whiche we decree and recken surely, that our synnes be forgyuen vs for Chry∣stes sake: Then shall god reuoke his sentēce, when there is yet time to pacyfie god. as we rede in Io∣nas of the drownynge of the Ni∣niuites. And the word of god was spoken to Esai: Go and say to E∣zechias, This sayth the lorde god of Dauid thy father, I haue hard thy prayer, and seene thy teares & wepynges, beholde, I wyll adde and put to thy days fyftene yeres &c. So Chryste dyd set forthe the
fayth of the woman of Chananie, whiche before he semed to put a∣waye. Is god therfore to be este∣med mutable? no: for althoughe he reuoketh the sentence, whiche he wylleth to be secrete and hydde from vs, yet he doth not chaunge his eternall councell: but for this cause those thynges be doone by the godly prouydence of god, that the feyth of the ryghtuouse might be proued. Therfore the decreed purposes of god be irreuocable, and can not be called ageyne. nor any man lyuynge canne breake or disapointe the decree and purpose of god, as Esai witnesseth, saying. The lorde of hostes hath decreed it,Esai. 14. who cā breke or make it voide? he hath put forthe his hande, who can turne hym ageyne? So Na∣um.Naum. 1. Who canne stande before the
face of his wrothe and indignati∣on? And, who is able to resyste in the wroth of his fury? Surely, no man nor creature can breake the decreed appoyntement of god, or resiste his wrothe. The decree of god may be broken by repentāce: that is, by sorowe, that the synne is done: and by fayth, which doth certaynely beleue and fele, that al our sinnes be forgiuē vs for Chri∣stes sake. This faythe doth ouer∣come the iudgement of the lawe. (whiche is the decree of god) whi∣che is his wroth.Ezec. 22. Wherof Ezechi∣el speaketh: The lorde saythe, I haue serched for a man, the which wolde make vp the hedge, and set vp hym selfe in the gap before me in the londes behalfe. It is said to Moyses, Let me destroy this peo∣ple. He whiche sayth, let me, doth
sygnifie and declare, that he maye be letted, whiche by no carnal ar∣mure, no walles of defence, nor by no mannes wisedome, is or can be brought to passe, but by the onely faythe in the worde of god, which is Iesus Chryste. ¶There be dyuerse craftes of the dyuell, wherby he tempteth, and where one crafte profyteth nothynge, he ad∣deth many other. Ca. xv. THE diuel hath not one grin, snare, or deceyte, but diuerse. For he gothe about to deceyue fa∣sters and solitarie people or cloy∣sterers, by one polycie, and other which be conuersante in the mul∣titude and common people, by an other crafte: but agaynste all the assautes of the diuel, there is none so sure and redy a remedy at hād, as the continuall medytation of
scripture:Matth. 4. as Christe dydde ouer∣come all the assautes of the dyuell by the onely meditation and reci∣tell of the scriptures. For that is the only commoditie and profyte, the continual meditation of scrip∣ture both by daye and nyght. and so Paule saith,Ephe. 6. Take you the hat∣tes of helth, the sworde of the spi∣rite, whiche is the worde of god, wherby we defende all his fyrye dartes and weapons, and vtterly extinguyshe them. Wherfore it is beste remedy in the begynnyng of all temptation, to checke the diuel in the mouthe, that it becommeth not vs to do that, whiche he styr∣reth and suggesteth vs to do, spe∣ciallye, bycause god prohybiteth and forbyddeth it to be done. that, he can not by any meanes suffer: nor he wyll not be smytten downe
nor dryuen away with one stroke or twayne, but he wyl come again as often.1. Pet. 5. For he walketh aboute as a rorynge lyon, sekynge whom he may deuour. Whom you must resyst with stedfast faythe, saythe Peter. For the dyuell knoweth howe to bryng forthe the wytnes∣ses of scriptures, but falsely of his spirite of errour. 1 If thou be tempted in pryde or vayne glory, answere hym agayne. 1. Pet. 5.IT IS wrytten, God resysteth the proude, but to the lowely he gyueth grace.Eccle. 11. Matth. 16. Ashes and yerthe, why arte thou proude? He whiche exalteth hym selfe, shall be made lowe. and he that lowely meketh and submytteth hym selfe, shall be exalted. So Moyses and Aaron in the begynnynge were lowelye,
but at the laste they were greate. So Ioseph was lowely in Egipt, Daniel in Babylon was lowely, the apostelles were fyshers. Pride dydde ouerthrowe Lucifer out of heauen. So Pharao, Nabugod∣onosor, Balthasar, Holofernes, and other proude kynges: pryde hath cast them down into extreme mysery.Luc. 2. The lord hath put downe the myghty from theyr seate, and hath exalted the lowely. 2 If thou be tempted in wrothe or anger. SAy, It is written,Ia. 1. The wrothe of a man dothe not worke the iustice of god.Ephe. 4. Psal. 9. Leuiti. 19. Lette not the sonne go downe vpon your wrothe. Be ye angry, and do not synne. Thou shalte not hate thy brother in thy harte, but shalte tell thy neygh∣bour his faute, that thou beare
not synne for his sake: nor thou shalte not haue in remembraunce the wronge of thy citizens. For wroth ingendreth hatred, and ha∣tred manslaughter: and Cayn by hatred killed his brother.1. Ioh. 4. And eue¦ry one, which hateth his brother, is a mankyller. To hate a man is not only to be of a strange mynde towarde hym, but to denye your neyghbour suche workes, as bro∣therly loue doth require. 3 If thou be tempted in feastynge, or glo∣tony and drounkennesse. Luc. 21.SAy, It is wrytten, Take hede to your selues, ne lest your har¦tes be ouercome with feastynge and dronkennes.Proue. 23. Whoo is accur∣sed? be not they whiche delyte in moche drynking of wyne, and stu∣dye howe to drynke of cupfulles?
Wo be to you,Esai. 5. whiche be stronge to drynke wyne, and expert to set vp drounkennes. Also, Wo be to you, that ryse vp earelye, to vse your selues in drounkennes, and yet at night are more superfluous with wyne.Prouer. 2. Wyne maketh scor∣ners, and drounkennes prepareth brawlynge or chydynge.Ose. 4. Fornica∣tion, wyne, and dronkennes take away the harte. Also dronkardes shall not possede the kyngdome of god. Be you not drounken with wyne, in the whiche is lechery. It is not vnlaufull to drynke wyne, the scripture wolde that the body shulde be chastised, that he be obe∣dient and submyt hym selfe to the spirite, as Paule saythe. Be you fulfylled with the holye goste, as he wolde saye: Be you sober: for so you shall be apt to the mocions
of the holy gost. Empty fasters al so waxe mad, nor be not mete nor apte for godly thynges. 4 If thou be tempted in auaryce or couetousenes, Matt. 10.SAy, It is wrytten. What pre∣uayleth it to a man, if he wyn all the worlde, and yet lese his soule? Take hede & beware of co∣uetousenes.Luc. 12. Hebr. 13. Let your maners be far from couetousenes, & be ye con¦tented with the thinges whiche ye haue. Who yt desyreth to be made riche,Eccle. 11. shall not be without synne. Of this thyng are examples. Gie∣si Helizeus seruante,2. Re. 5. was stryken with the leprosy. Agayne, Acham was stoned.Iudic. 7. The ende or intent of couetousenes, is to lyue longe, to lacke nothynge, that he be not in danger or losse of any thing. It is the fountayne & roote of vnbelefe.
The lord therfore wil, that we put our confidence in him, that we cast al our carefulnes & hope in hym: and then shal it come to passe, that he shall prouide al thynges mete and necessary for vs. Infidelytie then alonely in all matters ma∣keth vs so carefull and pensyfe, for bycause we trust not God, nor beleue stedfastly in hym. 5 If thou be tempted with hungre, pouertie, or carefulnes of lyuynge, SAy, It is wrytten: Man shall not lyue in bread onely, but in euery worde that procedeth frome the mouthe of god.Psal. 33. They whiche seke the lorde, shal want no good∣nes. I haue bene yonge,Psal. 36. and am waxen olde, and I haue not seene the ryghtuouse forsaken.Psal. 54. Lay thy care on the lorde, and he shall no∣rishe
the.Psal. 44. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest euery creature with thy blessynge.Psal. 146. Whiche gyueth meate to the hungry. Be ye not careful. Chryste fed with fyue barly loues and two fysshes,Matt. 6. fyue thousande men.Marc. 6. 3. Re. 17. The rauens brought meate to Helias. Also, the angel brought meate frome heauen to Helias. Therfore the care of temporalle thynges muste be left to god: For fode is gyuen, and is not gotten with labour, yet god wylleth vs to labour.Gen. 3. Psal. 127. In the sweat of thy face. &c. For thou shalte eate the labours of thy handes. We muste therfore labour, for bycause we ar made for that purpose: and for-bycause soo is the wyll of god, to whose deuyne wyll we must obey. Also he hath inioyned vs to la∣bour, to macerate and mortifie the
fleshe, to profyte our neyghbour, and to prouide for our necessitie. 6 If thou be tempted of ydelnes, SAy thou:Gen. 3. In the sweate of thy face, shalt thou eate thy bread. For the lorde hath appoynted the chyldren of Adam to labour,Prouer. 6. At the example of the Pismyre. And Chryste was a carpentar,Matth. 13. and wrought with his handes tyll the tyme of his preachynge. Agayne, Noe planted a vineyard.Gen. 9. He whi∣che tylleth the londe, shalbe satis∣fied.Proue. 12. Consider thou godly chrysti∣an, how god curseth ydelnes, and howe moche he abhorreth it. For experience teacheth, that frome thens spryngethe forthe all kynde of vice. Ezechiell sayth, The sinne of Sodom was pryde, plenty of breade, habundance, and ydelnes.
Wherfore god hath commaunded vs to labour, and hath blessed thē that labour. for without the bles∣singe of god all labour is in vain. 7 If thou be tempted of securytie to be without feare. Matt. 25.SAy thou, Watche ye, for ye knowe not the houre. He that studyeth, let hym take hede he fall not. Adam stode not in paradise. The people of Israell, as often∣tymes as they were made fat, and increased to a multitude, so often∣tymes fell they backewarde, and forgatte theyr lorde god. Dauid, when he was at reste, and sittyng at home without resistēce, he was made an adulterer and a murthe∣rer, and nombred the peple in his great fury.Daniel. 4. So Nabugodonosor counteth hym selfe happye. The
ryche man in the gospell promy∣synge hym selfe ease and rest, dyd here. O fole. &c.Luc. 12. Ezechias in try∣bulation continued ryghtuouse. in prosperitie he was ouercome of vayne glory. For the lord forsoke hym, and his harte was auanced. and therfore is securitie reproued. for throughe it, is neglected the commaundement of god. Christe sayde before, that the housholder being absent, and al were aslepe, came the ennemie & sowed cokell. 8 If thou be tempted of fornication and adultery, SAye thou, It is wrytten:1. Cor. 6. He which cleaueth to an harlot, is made one body with her.1. Tes. 9. This is the wyll of god, your sanctificati∣on, that ye absteyne from fornica∣tion. Nother horemaysters,1. Co. 6. nor
adulterers shal inherite the king∣dome of god. Sodom and Gomer shewe manyfestly, how moch god punisheth that synne. Also of the same synne, there are other pey∣nes, execution, induration, and the contempte of god. Also Dina the doughter of Lya, for whose whoredome were the Sichimites kylled. Agayne, the commaunde∣ment is, thou shalt not commytte adultery. Let there be no harlotte of the doughters of Israell: no∣ther horemaisters of the sonnes of Israell. but thou wylt say, Howe can I auoyde this yll? with pray∣er to god, to gyue the continencie. Also by the word of god and auoy¦dyng it, as sayth Paule. Flee for∣nication. Ioseph is an example, whiche fled bycause he wolde not be kendelyd with the fylthye loue
of the wyfe of a nother. 9 If thou be tempted with lyinge or lyghte wordes, SAy thou: That lyenge is for∣beden in the law: that we shuld not speake false thynges. Thou shalte fle lyenge. Ye shall not lye.Exod. 23. Leuiti. 19. Psal. 5. Ephe. 4. Thou shalt dystroy all them that speake lyes. but lyenge set asyde, let euery man speake the truthe to his neyghbour, for as moche as we be members to gether. Peter kylled Ananias and Saphira, bi∣cause they lyed. I saye vnto you,Matt. 10. that of euery ydel worde that man shall speake, they shall gyue ac∣compte in the daye of iudge¦ment. Agayne, Let no fylthy communica∣tion go forth of your mouthe.
10 If thou be tempted of confessynge the gospell, or sufferynge persecution for the gospell, Matt. 10.HE THAT receyueth not my crosse, and foloweth not me, is not worthy of me.Matt. 16. If any wyll come after me, let him forsake him selfe, and take his crosse, and fo∣lowe me. For he that wyl saue his soule, shall lese it. Contrarywyse, he that leseth his soule for my sake shall fynde it. He that wyl confesse me before men, I wyl confesse him before my father.2. Tim. 2. I am afflycted and persecuted for the gospell, as a wycked dooer. Iohn bare the crosse for the truthe sake. So the Apostelles reioysed, bycause they were coūted worthy. So Daniel. For chrystian men are hated of the world, and despised in this world. Therfore this world knoweth not1. Ioh. 2.
you, for bicause it knewe not him: whiche speake yll of you.1. Pet. 4. Io. 15.16. 1. Tim. 3. The ser∣uaunt is not aboue his lorde: All they whiche wyll lyue godly. 11 If thou be tempted of the faythe of thy pa∣rentes: as wherfore beleuest thou not that, whiche thy forefathers haue beleued, BE YE not made lyke to your fathers. and I haue sayde,2. Para. 3. These euer erre in hart.Psal. 94. Zacha. 2. Be ye not as your fathers were. We muste not consider our parentes, nor kin¦red, nor longe custome, but onely the wyll of god: the wyl of god is to beleue. This is the wyl of god,Ioh. 6. that ye beleue in hym, whome he hath sente. 12 If thou be tempted of straunge relygion or of worshyppynge of saynctes, pyctu∣res, ymages, or men, SAy thou, It is wrytten,Deut. 6. Thou shalte worshyp thy lorde god,
and hym onely shalte thou serue. Wherfore I wyll gyue godly ho∣nour to no creature vnder heuen, but to the lyuynge god onely.Philipp. 2. For to me (sayth he) shall euerye knee bowe, of all in heuen, in erthe, and in hel.Exod. 41. Agayne, I wil not giue my glory to any other. Here if thou be tempted of blasphemie, thou maist suffer it in noo case. and when the name of god is blasphemed, we must crye, and also set our lyfe in ieoperdy, if nede so be. For no tem∣tation dothe so seperate vs frome god, as dothe blasphemye. 13 If thou muste dye, and leane wyfe, chil∣dren, and thy dere frendes, SAy, The lorde shal be theyr de∣fender. for god bothe wyll and is able to cherysshe myne, to nou∣ryshe and defende them.Exod. 22. Psal. 36. For he is the father of the fatherles and wi∣dowes.
I forget thynges behynde my backe,Philipp. 3. and indeuour my selfe to those thynges, that are before my face. Agayne,1. Cor. 7. They whiche haue wiues, let them be as though they had none. and they that wepe as thoughe they wepte not. We muste be dylygente, that we leaue our wife and children wel instruct and taughte in the feare of god. For the feare of god is better and more preciouse, then a chest full of golde and syluer. 14 If thou be tempted of condemnation, that thou arte condemned of god. SAy thou,Roma. 3. That is no condem∣nation to them which are graf¦fed in Christe. that is, synne canne not dampne them, be it neuer soo moche in them: for they are made one body throughe fayth. For the synne, whiche they haue, is forgi∣uen
them, and is not imputed vn∣to them for Chrystes sake, in whō we are graffed, whiche is the hed, and we the membres.Ioh. 3. He that be∣leueth in the sonne, hath euerla∣styng lyfe.Rom. 10. Psal. 36. Al they which beleue in hym, shal not be confounded. Whē the rightuouse falleth, he shal not be broysed, for the lorde setteth his hande vnderneth hym.Prou. 24. The righ∣tuouse falleth seuē tymes in a day. 15 If the dyuell saye, thou arte a synner, and arte not graffed in Christe. CHRISTE CAME into the worlde to make safe synners. For the deathe of Chryste hath sa∣tisfied for all synnes,1. Tim. 1. through his strokes,Esai. 53. are we all made safe. For he hath borne our synnes in his body.1. Pet. 2. Ephe. 1. by whom we haue redempti¦on throughe his bloude. I came not to calle the ryghtuouse, but
synners. They whiche are hole,1. Ioan. 2. nede not the phisition. And if any doo synne, we haue an aduocate and spokesman to the father, Ie∣sus Christ. The godly haue synne also, but god imputeth it not.Psal. 31. The sayntes do euer pray, Forgyue vs our trespaces. If we confesse,1. Ioh. 1. that we haue synnes, he is faithful and ryghtuouse to forgyue vs our sin∣nes, and to clense vs from all ini∣quytie. We haue many exaum∣ples. Marye Magdalyn, also Paule was a blasphemor, of the thiefe whiche went from extreame punishement to ioye, of zacharie. Matth. and Peter. 16 If he continue and saye, but thy synnes passe the sonde of the see. AS FAR as the east differeth from the west,Psal. 104. so far of hath he made, that our synnes are from
vs.Esai. 1. If thy synnes be as redde as scarlet, yet shall they be as whyte as snowe: and if they be as red as purple, yet shall they be as whyte as woll.Psal. 31. I haue sayde, I wyl con∣fesse my vnryghtuousnes agaynst me, and thou haste forgyuen the wyckednesse of my synne.2. Re. 12. I haue synned lorde.Esai. 38. &c. And the lord hath taken thy synne frome the. Thou haste caste all my synnes behynde thy backe.Miche. 7. And he hath throwen al our synnes in the bottome of the sees,Ezech. 18. If the wycked shall repente. &c. For god hath promysed remis∣sion of sinnes to them that repent. 17 If he saye, suche promyses are made to the godly, thou arte an apostata and a loste man. Luc. 15.AND the prodigall sonne was loste, and an apostata, yet he founde grace▪ so great is the loue
of god towarde vs, he wyl saue al them that wyll knowlege theym selues. He hath so great care euen for the leaste, that are loste, in the syght of the worlde. Examples ar Dauid, Peter, and the thefe, and also Paule: God sometyme suffe∣reth his sayntes to erre for a sea∣son, but he calleth again at length He bryngeth theym in to dyuerse troubles, that they maye knowe hym. He yeldeth theym vp some∣tymes into the handes of Satan, and his membres, that they maye knowe howe moche easyer it is to serue hym, then the prynce of this worlde. The confession of the pro∣digall chylde is greate:Luc. 15. Father I haue synned agaynste heauen and agaynste the. So Dauid,Psal. 50. Esai. 64. I haue done yll agaynste the. Lo all oure rightuousnes are as a blody cloth
of a woman.Luc. 1. This mekenesse god beholdeth, he is moued with mer∣cye, as the father of the prodygall chylde.Rom. 5. We are therfore receyued without all our meryte or deser∣uynge, for we are yet ennemies. 18 But god hereth no synners nor strayers awaye, SAy thou, It is truthe, god he∣reth not synners, which repent not, whiche sorowe not, nor are borne agayne by faythe: those are the vngodly and hypocrites, whi∣che praye not to god: and if they praye, yet praye they not in fayth. Then shall they call on me,Prouer. 1. and I wyll not here theym. Soo in the psalm,Zacha. 7. They shall crye, and I wil not here them. But he graciously hereth the contrite, and them that repente, and are borne agayne by faythe in Christe.Psal. 50. A contryte and
humble harte o god, thou wylt not despise.Iaco. 5. The busye prayer of the ryghtuous is moche worthe. 19 But thou commest very late with thy contricion. CONTRARY wyse answere thou,Luce. 23. None commeth to late into the vyneyarde of the lorde, as witnesseth the hystory of the thefe, whiche was full of wycked dedes, and yet sayde to Iesus, Remem∣bre me lord, when thou shalt come into thy kyngedome. And Iesus sayde vnto hym, Trewelye I say vnto the, this daye. &c. 20 But he hadde a stronge faythe in god, whiche thou lackest, ANSVVERE, Therefore pray I with the apostels,Luc. 17. O lorde increase faythe within vs, helpe our vnbelefe.
21 What if all holy scripture be false, for they were men, which spake it and wrote it? SAy thou contrary, Moyses, the prophetes, and apostelles were truely men, but yet they neyther spake nor wrote with the spirite of man, but with the spyrite of god, they set not forthe theyr owne do∣inges, but those thynges whiche eyther they sawe with theyr eyes, or receyued of the lorde. So sayde the lorde to Moyses:Exod. 4. Who hath made the mouthe of man? Or who hath made the dome and the deffe? the seinge and the blynde? not I? Goo forthe then, and I wyll be in thy mouthe, and wyll teache the what thou shalt speake. Say not, I am a chylde,Hiere. 1. for thou shalte go to all those, to wome I wyll sende the to, & thou shalt speake al that, that I shall commaundethe.Luce. 21. He
gyueth the apostelles both mouth and wysedome. Agayne, Ye are not whiche speake, but the spirite of your father. So Paule:Rom. 15. I dare not speke any thyng, which Christ hath not wroughte by me.1. Pet. 4. 1. Ioh. 1. If any man speake, let hym speke as the wordes of god. that we haue hard, that we haue seene with our eyes.Luc. 1. as they haue delyuered vs, whiche from the begynnyng haue seene it with theyr eies.2. Pet. 1. But those thinges which we haue sene with our eies. Al scripture heuēly inspired.2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 1. The prophecie in old tyme, was not gi∣uen by the wyl of man, but the ho∣ly men of god spake, dryuen with the holy gost.Ephe. 5. As it is nowe reue∣led to his holy apostelles and pro∣phetes by spirite:Matt. 22. So Christ cōfir∣meth Dauides wrytynges. Howe doth Dauid thē in spirite call him
lorde? Certaynely I am fully per∣swaded, and doute nothinge at al, that the holy scriptures are inspi∣red from heauen. 22 If the temptator saye, thou haste not kepte the lawe of god, wherfore thou arte accursed. SAy thou: Christ, whiche was made a curse for vs,Galath. 3. hath rede∣med vs from the curse of the lawe. Agayn,Ephe. 2. Euacuatyng, and taking awey the lawe of commaundmen∣tes set in decrees.Colo. 2. Takynge away the handewrytynge agaynste vs, which is in decrees, and is contra∣ry to vs.Roma. 6. For ye are not vnder the lawe, but vnder fauour, delyue∣red from synne. For the deathe of Christ hath delyuered vs from the lawe. For truely by Christes deth, we are now in conscience fre from the lawe, that is, from the wrothe
of god, and euerlastynge deathe. For the lawe can not be fulfylled of nature, for it is spirytuall, as vndoubtedly the apostels decreed. The yocke that neither. &c. Again,Acto. 15. Deuter. 5. Luc. 18. who can gyue them such a minde? Whiche is impossible to men. 23 If he say, thou must forsake the worlde. VVhat then? Answere thou cō∣trary wise. I shal obteine he∣uen. For blessed ar the dead,Apoc. 14. 1. Ioh. 5. Ibidem. which dye in the lorde. Agayne: All the world lieth in wickednes. Agayn, All thyng whiche is borne of god, ouercometh the world: and this is the victory, which ouercometh the world, our fayth. Who is he, whi∣che ouercometh the worlde, but he that beleueth, that Iesus is the sonne of god? I am sure therfore in Christe. All the worlde shall pe∣ryshe with his lustes and desyres.
Agayne.1. Ioan. 3. Loue not the worlde, no∣ther those thynges whiche are in the world. We ar strangers in this worlde, and citizens of heauen. Ye sonnes of men, howe longe are ye harde harted?Psal. 4. Why loue ye vany∣ties and seke lyes? Agayne: Howe lōg loue you infancy or childhode, and foles desire those thinges, whi¦che are hurtfull? Agayne: Vanitie of all vanities,Eccles. 1. and all thynges ar vanitie.1. Ioh. 2. The cause is this: for all thynges whiche are in the worlde, as luste of the fleshe, concupiscēce of the eyes, and pryde of lyfe, are not of the father, but of the world, and the world passeth, and his lust also, but he that dothe the wyll of god, taryeth for euer. The ende.
❧THE PREPARA∣TION TO DEATHE, AND howe they which be in point of deathe, shulde be comforted, the .ii. boke. ¶What is deathe. Cap. i. DEATHE IS NO∣thinge els but a se∣paration or diuisi∣on of the soule frō the bodye. It is a quiet rest from the afflyctions and troubles of this worlde, in the whiche they that be deade, be so refreshed and newely made, that from thense they shall ryse far aboue all other most hap∣pye, not into a lyfe which shall dye ageyne, as it is in a slepe, but into an euerlastynge life. ¶What is the cause of deathe. Cap. ii. THE CAVSE of deathe is synne: For out of synne deth
flowed, and is the punishement, or peyne, or rewarde of synne, or the reuengeaunce of yll thynges, as the holy scripture beareth witnes, Fyre,Eccle. 39. hayle, hunger, and deathe, be created for punishement, as wit¦nesseth the psalme. For anger and dethe be in his indignation,Psal. 29. and lyfe in his wyl:Roma. 6. Hiere. 3. The wages or re∣warde of synne is death. In what daye so euer thou shalte eate of it (that is, thou shalte synne) therof thou shalt dye. God dyd not make deathe,Sap. 1. nor doth not reioyce in the destruction of the lyuynge. Also, Throughe the malyce and enuy of the dyuell,Sap. 2. death hath entred. And Paule saythe.Rom. 5. By one man synne entred into the world, and through synne deathe.Ezech. 33 And in Ezech. I wil not the deathe of a synner, but ra∣ther that he conuerte and tourne
from his synne and liue: Also, The soule whiche shall synne, shal dye. Therfore where deathe is, there necessaryly synne dydde go before, whiche dwelleth in vs, whiche we haue by inheritaunce, whiche is spronge forthe into vs all: of the whiche synne the fyrst father to vs was Adam, from whom we haue by inherytaunce origynall synne, whiche is a naturall dysposytion and inclination, to synne, whiche hath with hym in felowship blind∣nesse of harte, dulnesse towardes vertue, the loue of hym selfe, the hatred of god, fleynge frome the crosse, hatred of the lawe, and dis∣daynynge of his neyghbour. For by Adams disobedience our fleshe is become disobediente to god, soo long as it is not enspyred with the holy gost: and for the sayde synne
of Adam, al we be called synners: And so in hym we be all deade: for we be his flesshe and his chyldren of his owne substaunce: He is the grayne and sede, of whom all we be spronge out. As he is deade, so shall we dye: and frome Adam is spronge into vs, bothe orygynall synne, and deathe, the peyne of synne, is come forthe: And the ty∣ranny of the dyuell, to whom our nature is subiecte, and in whome the dyuell vseth crueltie, and doth exercise it with feare and all kyn∣des of myserye, and also doth kyl: And moreouer enforceth to al ma∣ner of vnhappines, to blasphemy, murther, and hatred. ¶Two maner of deathes. Cap. ii. THE ONE is of the body or of nature, to whome all men
be subiecte: for al haue sinned, and haue broken the lawe of god: that is, when this bodyely lyfe is bro∣ken aweye, when we gyue vp the goost, and do not occupie this mor¦tall lyfe: As it is wrytten to the Hebrewes:Hebre. 9. It is ordeyned and de∣creed, that all men shall dye ones: and after that iudgement. By A∣dams synne nature is subiecte of necessitie to dye, as Iesus Sirach wryteth.Eccle. 40. There is a heuy yocke vp¦pon the chyldren of Adam, frome the daye of the commynge oute of theyr mothers wombe, vntyll the daye of theyr burial, into the mo∣ther of all. The other deathe is of the soule, or of fayth, or of helth. When the vnbeleuers, drowned in theyr wyckednes, not carynge for god, nor desyrynge god, nor as∣kyng forgyuenes of god, be made
bondemen to eternall darkenesse, which is called euerlastyng death: Whiche is a perpetuall feare of conscience throughe the wrothe of god,Sap. 5. whiche Satan doth encrece. Exaumple of these two maner of deathes is the riche gloton,Luc. 16. which beinge deade, was buried in hell, and Lazarus the begger beinge deade, and caryed of angelles into the bosome of Habram. This man hath comforte: and contrary wise, the ryche man was punyshed and buried in hel: that is, he died with an yll conscience: he sawe in his deathe his owne wyckednesse and damnation, as al wicked men do. This is the worme,Esai. 66. whiche dothe not dye. Euen then the folishe vir∣gins do first see,Matt. 25. that the wise haue oyle. Then it commeth to remem∣brance, to whom they haue doone
bothe good and euyll: There the lawe dothe fyrste shewe hym selfe (the gospell beinge taken awaye) thenne they seke for grace, but all to late and in vayne.Prouer. 1 There god dothe cut of all hope of recouerye of helthe or fauoure: the sentence of the cruell iudgement of god is then, as sayth saynt Iames:Iaco. 2. Iu∣gement without mercy shall be to them, whiche haue not done mer∣cy. I haue hūgered,Matt. 25. and you haue not gyuen me. &c. Therfore the worde of god doth teache vs, how we shulde avoyde eternal punish∣ment, and howe we shal be saued: whiche if we neglect, & set nought by, there is no cause why we shuld haue any further hope. Of these two kyndes of dethes the psalmes make mention:Psal. 33. The deathe of sin∣ners is yl. And contrarywyse, The
deathe of saynctes is preciouse in the syght of god.Psal. 113. Psal. 6. Matt. 7. Matt. 11. Also, Go frome me all you workers of iniquitie: I knowe you not: Come to me all you that do labour and be burde∣ned, and I wyll refreshe you: Also In theyr synne they shall dye. And Paule sayth:Philipp. 3. Whose ende is death Also of the feythefull is wrytten: They shall not faute, al they whi∣che truste in hym,Psal. 33. The Lord doth kepe theyr bones, and one of them shall not perysshe, or be broken.Rom. 8. There is no damnation to theym whiche be in Christe Iesus.Apoc. 14. Bles∣sed be the deade, whiche die in the lorde. As there is two lyues, a yerthely and an eternall lyfe: soo there is two deathes, the one a tem¦porall, the other an euerlastynge deathe. The erthly lyfe hath a be∣gynnynge and a endynge, and is
subiect to many miseries: and this lyfe no christen man dothe greatly esteme, but saith daily with Paule Christ is my lyfe,Philipp. 1. and death is lu∣cre. And if it fortune me to lyue in the fleshe, then it is profytable to me to worke: and what I shall chose, I know not, I am constrai∣ned of these twayne, desyrynge to be dissolued, and to be with Christ: whiche thynge is moche better for me, but to lyue in the flesshe, is more nedefull for you.Galath. 6. Soo in an other place, God forbeade, that I shulde reioyce in any thynge, but in the crosse of our lorde Iesus Christ, by whom the world is cru∣cyfyed vnto me, and I vnto the worlde. I lyue, but not I onely:Gala. 2. but Christ liueth in me. for in that that I lyue in the fleshe, I lyue in the faithe of the sonne of god, whi∣che
loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me. Therfore he that knoweth not Christe, nor doth not truste in hym, feareth death, as that which threteneth and bryngeth eternall ruine and destruction: but he whi∣che knoweth Christ, and hath him doth not feare death: whom Christ beinge victor, hath ouercome and ouerthrowen. ¶To the efecte and faythfull, eternall deathe by Christe is ouercome. Cap. iii. THIS is the great comfort of them, that be in the painges of deathe; whiche comforteth and lyfteth vp the fearefull myndes: that is, that Christe hath vtterlye abolysshed deathe, takyn awaye synne, and that surelye throughe Christe, they shall obteyne remys∣sion of synne, be reputed ryghtu∣ouse,
and haue euerlastynge lyfe. Therfore Christ, ye promised sede, the sonne of god, came downe frō heuen, and became manne: by his crosse, deathe, and resorrection, hath saued vs, and delyuered vs from eternall deathe: and he pay∣ed for vs all our dette, as it is writ¦ten in the epistle to the Hebrewes: Ones he is offered,Hebre. 9. that he shulde take awaye the synnes of manye. Also,1. Pet. 3. He hath ones suffered for our synnes. And,1. Ioh. 1. The bloude of Iesu Chryst hath made vs cleane from all our synne. And,Matth. 1. Thou shalte call his name Iesus. for he shall saue his people frome theyr synnes. Also,Hebr. 2. That through death he shulde put awaye hym, whiche had rule ouer death, that is the di∣uell, that he myght delyuer them, whiche all theyr lyfe were brougte
in bondage, through feare of deth. For verylye he hath delyuered vs from the power of Synne, that it shulde not kyll vs: frome the po∣wer of deathe, that it shoulde not condemne vs: from the power of affliction, that it shulde not greue vs: from the power of the dyuell, that he shoulde not destroye vs: & hath restored vs to iustice, ioy, lyfe, and to the beste and mooste myghty god, that is, he hath made vs fre men and partakers of god, whiche before were captyues and bondmen to the deuyl. So our in∣iquities dyd cast vs hedlynge into the depenesse of hell, and there did drowne and bury vs: but god mo∣ued with mercy, hath caste all our iniquities vpō the shulders of his sonne, delyuerynge vs all frome synne deathe and hell, hath satis∣fyed
for vs, whiche of god is made to vs wysedome, iustice, holynes,1. Cor. 1. and redemption. Whiche hath gi∣uen hym selfe for our synnes, that he myghte delyuer vs frome this present yll world: And vnder such forme by Christe we be delyuered frome deathe synne and hell, that they vtterlye haue noo maner of ryght in vs, nor can not destroye and damne vs, As Osee sayth:Osee. 13. I wyll delyuer them from the hand, that is, from the power of hel, frō deathe I wyll redeme them: O deathe, I wyll be thy deathe. O hell, I wyll be thy bytte. Deathe,1. Cor. 15. where is thy stynge? Hell, where is thy victory? Thankes be to god whiche hath gyuen vs vyctorye throughe our lorde Iesus Christe. So great is the power of faythe, and we be broughte into so greate
lybertie: throughe fayth. We fele punishemente in this worlde, but through fayth we peryshe not. We be kylled, but we shal not dye: We bren in hel fyer, but we be not con∣sumed in dede: and soo of all the reste, whiche be not taken awaye frome the beleuer.Ioh. 16. In the worlde saith he, ye shal haue affliction. &c. Nor the beleuers be not delyuered from the felynge of theym in this world, but they be delyuered from the power and rule of them, and the stynge is taken from theym, wherby all men dyd peryshe. The christen man is therfore sure, that as deathe eternall coulde not pre∣uayle agaynste Christ, so lykewise ageynst him it hath no power. For Christ hath taken away sinne, brin¦gynge in iustice: he hath strange∣led deathe, gyuynge lyfe: He hath
obteyned victorye ouer hel, admi∣nistringe eternal glory. For as in Adam all dyed: soo in Christe all shall be reuyued. For by Adams disobedience synne death punysh∣ment, and that moste cruell tirant Satan dyd chalenge bothe ryght and rule ouer all, howe many soo euer were borne of hym. The lawe of synne is to kyll: the wages of synne is death: the ryght of death is to damne, the ryght of afflycti∣ons is to greue & make heuye: the ryght of the dyuell is to destroye: Into al these rightes and powers Adam by his disobedyence, hath caste vs. And Adam then had ben vtterly extinct and vndone, if that he hadde not be comforted ageyne & reuyued with the word of grace. But he was receyued vnto grace, and the father dyd take from hym
feare of deathe and anguyshe: for he did fele and perceyue the wroth of god, and god to be his ennemy, and also all creatures, soo that he could not tel, which wey to tourne him: This feare I say, the father hath taken away frō him through the most swete absolution and pro¦myse of grace, when he sayde vnto the serpent:Gen. 3. I wyl put enmite be∣twyxte the and the womanne, and that sede shal al to breake thy hed. This worde when Adam dyd here and beleue, he was holpen and de∣lyuered, and came from hell, and nowe beleued the worde of god: thinkyng vnder this forme: This god hath spoken, whiche can not lye or deceyue. In this faythe A∣dam dyed, and after Adam all the faythfull vnto Aabraham, whiche dyd also cleaue faste to this word,
thynkynge thus: he wyl come, yea suerly at the laste he wyl come: by∣cause the lorde hath so promysed, whiche canne not lye: and in this faythe they were saued. ¶Althoughe the godly dye, yet they shall lyue. Cap. iiii, THE godlye and iuste people haue most comfort, although in this lyfe they be put to deathe, and seme to be forsakē of god, cast into hell, and as shepe ordeyned to be slayne:Roma. 8. As scripture wytnesseth of them. For thy sake we be iuged as shepe ordeined to be slayne. Al∣so, I thynke veryly,1. Cor. 14. that god hath shewed, that we whiche be the last apostelles, are as it were apointed to suffer deathe: For we,2. Cor. 4. whiche lyue, be alway delyuered to death for Iesus sake: yet they do not dis¦peyre,
no not in death, but as they which be sure, that they shall passe through deathe to life eternal, and crye to god, and suffer the hand of the lorde, and be pacient, and put theyr hope in god. Also they haue this comforte, that their deathe is good and precyouse. They also knowe, that throughe Chrystes deathe, deathe is ouercome and a∣bolyshed.1. Cor. 14. Osee. 3. Gen. 3. Deathe is supped of in victory. O Deathe, I wyll be thy deathe: The sede hath broken the heade of the serpente. Therfore if any man taken in the panges of deathe, do holde faste and beleue this worde: in the myddel of death he shall haue lyfe. for verylye the christyans doo lyue, when they be estemed and thought to dye.Sap. 5. 2. Cor. 6. Ioh. 16. The rightuouse shal lyue for euer. And soo Paule saythe: Beholde we be
euer as dyenge, and yet we lyue: Also Christ sayth.Ioh. 16. In me you shal haue peace, but in the worlde, you shall suffer oppression. And,Sap. 3. The tourment of death shal not touche them. Also,Esai. 26. Thy deade personnes shal lyue, they shal ryse with theyr bodyes. He shall not taste deathe.Io. 5. et. 11 And he whiche beleueth in me, al∣thoughe he were deade, yet he shal lyue. They shall not taste deathe.Marc. 9. Sap. 2. The iuste man, althoughe he be preuented with deathe, yet he shal be refreshed. Also,Psal. 15. Thou shalt not suffer thy holyon to se corruption. Also,Psal. 32. Ioh. 5. et. 11. et. 3. That he may pulle out from deathe the soules of them. He shal passe ouer from deathe to lyfe. He shall not see eternall deathe. He shall not dye for euer: He dothe not peryshe, but hath eternall lyfe: Seke god,Psal. 68. and your soule shall
lyue:Esai. 55. Bowe your eares, and come to me: here you, and your sowle shall lyue. ¶These places ought to be well noted, for the comforte of them, be∣fore whose eies deathe is presente: whiche if they beleue in Christe, they be not loste, but haue eternall lyfe. Therfore they be not called onely deade, but the deade of god, as suche as dye in the lorde: for suche do ryse ageyne in glory, and none other,Danie. 12. as it apereth ī Daniel. ¶The deathe of the godly, is a slepe. Ca. v. CHRISTE calleth the death of the godly, a slepe. Lazarus our frende slepeth.Ioh. 11. For by the bene¦fyte and goodnes of Christ, death is made a slepe, which by his deth, hath changed deathe into a slepe. So Paule dothe call the feythful,1. Thes. 4.
whiche be deade, slepers, sayinge. I wyll not you to be ignorante of them, that slepe. So Steuē slept.Acto. 7. And so the godly to the outwarde syght, and perceuerāce, dieth. But withoute doubte that death is but a slepe. For how many so euer dye in Christe, all slepe in hym, and he shall reyse them in the laste daye. I haue slept, and do slumber,Psal. 3. and I haue rysen. Here slepe betoke∣neth deathe of the body, as in Ge∣nesis, Abram slepte with his fa∣ther.Psal. 4. Psal. 15. I wyll slepe and rest in peace to god with other. Also, My fleshe shal rest in hope. Therfore in deth not so moche the deathe it selfe, as suer lyfe and resurrection, is to be considered to theym, whiche be in Christ, accordynge to Christis say∣inge. He that shall kepe my word,Ioh. 8. shall not see deathe euerlastynge.
Howe shall he not see deathe? shal he not fele it? Shal he not dye? no veryly, but he shal se onely a slepe, and beholdyng stedfastly with the eies of faythe in the resurrection, by deathe he shall so passe awaye, that surely he shall not see deathe? And death veryly to hym shal not be deathe. ¶All these thynges be begonne in baptisme, and be fynysshed in the ende of lyfe.Rom. 6. For we be buryed with him throughe baptisme in to deathe. Therfore faythe exercised with diuers passions, causeth, that naturall deathe to the faythefull, is but a slepe. For the faythful die suerly in hope, and loke after the laste daye and the commynge of Christe: This securitie they gette in this lyfe by the spirite of fayth, that they maye saye with Paule:
By hope we be made safe?Roma. 8. Rom. 5. And a∣gayne. Hope dothe not confound. That is to dwell in the Paradyse of god, the kyngedome of heauen in the churche of the lyuinge god: And the lord sayth,Leuit. 26. Esai. 31. To slepe with out feare. To syt in the beautie of peace, in the tabernacles of fayth, and truste, and in a ryche reste. ¶Baptisme is a comforte in the poynte of deathe. Cap. vi. SVCHE as be at the poynte of deathe, ought to take comforte and be stronge, in that they know, they carye with them bothe letter and token, which is baptime: wher by theyr death is incorporate with the deathe of Christ, and that it is not theyr deathe, but the deathe of Christe. Wherfore let them suerly truste, that they shall ouercome,
as the deathe of Christ hath ouer∣come. For baptime is a sure token of the passynge ouer from deathe to lyfe. And as we knowe suerlie, that Christe passed through death to lyfe: So let vs not doubte, but that we shal suerly passe throughe deathe to lyfe. Christe hath ouer∣come synne and death: Let vs no∣thynge doubte, but that we shall ouercome synne & deathe. Synne shal not beare rule ouer you.Rom. 6. a Fi∣gure of this thynge was the pas∣synge ouer the see, whiche was the passynge ouer from deathe to lyfe. So in baptime we receiue a token of deathe: that by death of the bo∣dy, we myght trust suerly to come to the trewe lyfe. In baptime Pha¦rao, with all his hoste, dyd lye vn∣der foote to vs, that is, throughe fayth in the worde of promyse: we
haue escaped the tyrannye of the prynce of darkenesse, with all vy∣ces: so that the lorde wyll not im∣pute them to vs, nor they can not take awaye from vs the entree or goinge in to the kyngdome of he∣uen. But yet not withstandynge, synne dwellyng in our fleshe, doth not reste in the meane tyme, to as∣saulte vs, that is, vncleane affec∣tions, whiche muste be put awaye with dayly mortifieng of the flesh∣ly desyres, vntyll our baptime be fully cōplete and finished in deth. So greately the hope of all chry∣sten men dothe stande in baptime, and so beginneth from death: that deathe to vs is wynnyng, that is, an entraunce to lyfe.Roma. 6. Be you igno∣rant, that all we, whiche be bapti∣sed into Christe Iesu, are baptised into his deathe? For we be buried
together with hym by baptime in to deathe, that as Christe was rei∣sed vp from the deade, by the glo∣ry of his father: euen soo we also shuld walke in a newe lyfe.Colo. 2. You be buried to geder with him through baptime, in whom you are also ry∣sen agayne with him.Gala. 3. Who so euer of you be baptised in Christe, haue put vpon you Christe.1. Pet. 3. Baptime is the promyse of a good conscience towardes god, wherby we be sure, that god is pleased with vs. It is therfore a token, that we be dely∣uered from the dyuel, and a sygne of our translation from the kyng∣dome of Satan, in to the kynge- of Christe, that we be reconsyled vnto god, it is a token whiche bea∣reth wytnesse of the good wyll of god towardes vs. Therfore re∣member, that thou arte baptysed,
that is, that thou hast receyued re∣mission of synnes: that thou haste made a couenaunt with god, that thou arte delyuered frome the dy∣uell, deathe, and synne, reconsiled to god. This is a great comforte agaynste deathe, the dyuell, and synne. So the promyse made to A∣brahā, of the sede to come, had ben sufficiente: yet god dyd put therto circumcisiō, that Abraham might haue a sure token of goddes good¦nes towardes him, that he was ac¦cepted of god. So baptime is a to∣ken of goddes fauour and good wyll towardes vs, throughe the worde of promyse, wherevnto is knyt an ernest bargaine of a good conscience with god. For fyrst god maketh promyse with vs, that he wyl forgyue vs that faute and ble¦myshe, whiche we haue drawen by
originall synne, from our forefa∣thers, that he wyl receyue vs into his fauour, and that he wyll not onely forgyue vs our synnes, but also not ley or inpute them to our charge. We agayne do bynde our selues to god by lyke reason, that we shall mortifie our fleshe all our lyfe tyme, and purge out our olde leuen, our concupiscence, desyres, and dispositions to do synne, and vtterly to cast out all the dregges: and to wrestel agaynste and vtter∣lye forsake the worlde, the dyuell, and al theyr pompes: Therfore if thy conscience be troubled and vex¦ed with the borden of synne, thou mayst pray on this maner. O lord god, remembre thy promyse, that thou haste made to vs: thou haste promysed to vs in baptime, remis∣syon of synnes and eternall lyfe,
when thou dyddeste saye:Marc. 16. He that beleueth and is baptysed, shall be saued: nor do not make voyde thy couenaunt, nor let not thy wordes be in vayne, whiche haue passed thy mouthe.Psal. 89. Thou shalt performe that thou hast promysed, thou cāst not deny thy selfe, neyther our in∣firmitie, or infidelitfe, or any other thynge can make voyde thy feyth∣full promyse. ¶The godlye knowe the tyme of dyinge to be determyned of god. Cap. vii. VNTO the godlye this is a gret comfort, that they know that deathe is not in the power of tyrantes, nor put in the hande of any creature, leste they shoulde be troubled, ouer moche carefull for deathe: but that they maye dye as chyldren, when pleaseth the lorde.
For soo wryteth Ecclesiastes:Eccle. 3. All thynge hath tyme: and al thynges vnder heauen, haue theyr conue∣nient season: A tyme is of byrthe, and a tyme of deathe.Iob. 14. and so Iob. Thou haste appoynted to hym a a tyme, whiche he shall not passe. Also the psalme:Psal. 103. Thou hast lymit¦ted a tyme, whiche they shall not ouer passe.Psal. 38. Beholde, thou hast put my dayes to a certayne nombre. And so Christe doth comforte his. One heare shal not fall from your heade without the wyll of your fa∣ther.Matt. 10. Also, My houre is not yet come.Ioh. 2. 1. Reg. 2. Esai. 38. So the mother of Samu∣el, God dothe kyll and reuiue a∣gayne. And, The yeres of lyfe, be of the lorde. As he promysed to E∣zechias:4. Re. 20. 2. Re. 7. Beholde, I wyl adde vn∣to thy days .xv. yeres. So. When thy dayes shall be ended. For the
corporal lyfe is determined of god with certayne lymyttes: and with god is a certayne pointe and mea∣sure set to euery mannes lyfe: and also to the same, the yeres, mon∣thes, oures, and also the mynutes of houres: And also the heares of your hedde be nombred. Therfore if our heares be noumbred in the syght of god, howe moche more ar the mynutes and artycles of our lyfe nombred before hym? We can not therfore lyue any longer then the lorde hath appoynted: We shal not dye, althoughe we be in the greattest peryl and extreme ieoper¦dye, before our houre. Therfore it skylleth not what maner of death, or with what instrument, swerde, fyer, water, sodeyne death, or that thou be taken awaye by chaunce, before the course of nature requi∣reth
it. For god hath gyuen the houre, the meane, and that kynde of deathe: Whiche doth not force, whether thou dye of this death or that deathe, of a lyttell wounde or a great: of whom the tyme, bothe of our lyfe and deathe is determi∣ned and sette. Also many dye by tempestes or hayle. And yet do not thou condemne, as wycked, suche as be smytten with lightning. For the iugemētes of god be rare and vnknowen in priuate personnes: whiche for as moche as perteineth to hym, careth not, whether oone dye of this deathe or that. Many tymes innocentes and baabis do dye. But thou wylt saye, that ma∣ny dye wylfullye, throughe theyr own rashenes, the whiche myght haue lyued lenger. Somme haue cast away them selfes hedlong. &c.
Coulde they not haue preserued theyr lyfe? I aunswere noo. God gaue that houre, that meane, and that kynde of deathe. which thing experyence dothe teache. Some deadely wounded, are lyghtly hea¦led, and do lyue: Some other are scarselye hurte, and yet they die. Some Astronomers ascrybe this to the sterres, and some to fortune: but holy scripture attributeth it to god, with whom the tyme both of our lyfe and deathe is lymytted, who also careth not, whether thou dye of a great or smal wound: that he maye confounde all wysedome and mannes imagination. Soo that it is a thynge most like mad∣nesse, vayne, and frustrate, to be afrayde or curiouse of any maner of deathe. For there is noo cause why it shuld make any man aferd.
For other the appoynted tyme of deathe is not yet come, or elles if it be come, he, ouer whom it hāgeth, wolde nat prefer any pleasure be∣fore deathe. For death (as I haue sayde) hathe his apoynted tyme, lyke as Christ sayth:Luce. 21. The heares of your heade doo not fall. If che heares of your heade doo not fall without the apointed wyl of god, by what meane maye the hole bo∣dy dye without the fire wyl of god? So great is the care of god ouer the godly, whose lyfe, death, yeres, dayes, houres, and mynutes of houres, he hath in his hand, which can not die but at the houre apoin¦ted of god. ¶Notwithstandyng the vngodly shall not liue out halfe theyr dayes. Cap. viii. AS holy scripture witnesseth in all places. In the psalm.
The deceytefull shall not liue out halfe theyr days. Also Iob,Psal. 54. Iob. 16. In the tyme whiche is not his, he shall make an ende. And, The feare of the lorde, prolongeth the lyfe. the yeres of the wycked be short. For ye godly be euer redy, watchyng whē the lorde shall come, whether it be in the first watche, or in the fourth, they in the meane tyme, folowe theyr callynge, as long as the lord wyll, nothynge determyninge for them selfe, nothynge carynge for theyr lyfe, whether it shall ende on the morowe, or .x. yeres after: for they haue lyued all theyr tyme, al∣thoughe they dye yonge:Sap. 4. As the wyse manne saythe, Thoughe the rightuouse be ouertakē with deth, yet shall he be in rest. The vngod∣ly do appoynte vnto them selues longe tyme, as he whiche sayde in
Luke:Luce. 12. My soule, thou hast moch goodes layde vp in store for many yeres. They do so, and lyue so, as they shuld liue a long season: but in the myddel of theyr lyfe, beyng voyde of faythe, they be taken a∣waye, in the daye whiche they dyd not loke for, and the houre whiche they dyd not knowe.Matt. 25. So the foo∣lyshe virgins, beinge vnredye, in the myddell of theyr dayes, were called away. So for the most part alwayes, the iudgemente of god dothe catche the vngodly, care∣lesse, negligent, and not watching. So in Daniel,Daniel. 5. Balthasar the kīg was slayne in the nyght of his en∣nemies. Also in the gospell, The tumultuous seruauntes, the So∣domytes, and they whiche were in the tyme of the flodde. the vngod∣ly deathe dothe alwaye fynde vn∣redy:
but all the godly tary vntyll theyr full tyme, that is, they be e∣uer redy. ¶The godly also in the tyme of hunger, pe∣stilence, and warre, be punyshed, and dye with the wycked. Cap. ix. IT IS trewe, that the godly be punysshed with the vngodlye, where the wrothe of god is consū∣mate. For the iudgemente of god, when he is angrye, is gyuen vpon all, bothe good and bad: but the godly conceyue a hope of felycitie and fauor.Psal. 76. He shall not withdraw his mercye for euer. And soo they, that be punished, suffer iugement, and at the laste shall opteyne mer∣cy. For the godly do knowe, that god dothe punishe sinners, which doo repente in this lyfe, as he pu∣nished Dauid, that he myght hum¦ble them, enstructe theym in ler∣nynge,
and make them more ware and circumspecte. And althoughe they dye in the tyme of hunger, pe∣stilence, or warre with the wicked, yet they knowe it to be done by the good wyll of god. And bycause they know that they ones shal die: Therfore they offer them selues to the good wyll of god, which dothe al thinges after the councel of his wyll.Ephe. 1. And they knowe, that they haue a tyme apoynted to dye, and they desyre to be dyssoluyd in the tyme of dienge appoynted by god, and to be with Christ. Otherwise, Nother pestylence, hunger, nor warre can hurte the godly, except the appoynted tyme of deathe, or∣deyned of god, be present. For god can well delyuer his, as he dyd in tymes paste delyuer Lothe, Noe, Daniel, Ieremy, and other: as
Iacob being caryed with his chil∣dren in to Egipte: And lyke wyse the Israelytes in Egipt.2. Pet. 2. For these coulde not dye, but in theyr houre: So al the feythful can not dye, al∣though they be in the greattest pe∣ryll, and in extreme desperation, but in theyr houre. Then wher∣fore shall they feare deathe? They can not lyue lenger then the lorde hath appoynted, nor die any soner. ¶To whom they that dye oughte to com∣mytte theyr spirite. Cap. x. STEVEN dydde yelde vp his spirite into the hādes of Christ For it is he that hath ouercome deathe,Acto. 7. & in death he doth quicken vs. This is he, which sayd:Matt. 12. Come vnto me al you that labour and be burdened, and I wyl refreshe you. And farther, this is he, whiche
oughte to be called vpon, that he delyuer vs in afflyction, and re∣ceyue our spiryte in the houre of deathe.Luc. 23. So dyd Chryste, Father I commende my spiryte in to thy handes.Psal. 30. So Dauid: Lord, I com¦mende my spirite into thy handes. There it shall be suer, vnder the shadowe of thy winges, thou shalt kepe it vnhurte: and that whiche is taken away, thou shalte restore. Let the spirite retourne to the lord whiche dyd gyue it.Eccle. 12. Also Christ to the thefe.Luc. 23. This daye thou shalte be with me in Paradise. This Pa¦radise is a true and perfyte quiet∣nes in Christ, amiable, ioyful, and moste swete: And so Lazarus re∣sted in the bosome of Abraham, to whom Lazarus soule was caryed by angelles, that is, he is contey∣ned in the handes of our god and
of the lorde Iesu Christe, and lea∣deth the moste pleasante lyfe. For the bosome of Abraham, is the pro¦mise made to Abraham of the sede whiche is Christe, in whom all the godly from Abraham vnto Christ, were kepte: and as many as dyd beleue, were preserued.Philipp. 1. So Paule desyreth to be loused, and to be with Christ. And in an other place Whether we lyue or dye, we be the lordes. Therfore the hande of the lorde receyueth the soules of suche as be faythfull, and they rest qui∣etly in the hande and word of god, vntyl the day of iudgement come. For they be in peace, and entred in to rest. Tourne my soule in to thy rest. For they be in pleasure, in ioy,Sap. 3. Hebre. 4. Psal. 114. in blessednes, in suertie, in Christ, and with Christ in comforte.
¶The body is buried, but it shall ryse agayne in the laste daye. Cap. xi. IT IS the onely comfort of the godly, to holde suerly in all ad∣uersitie this article of our faythe, that is to saye, the resurrection of the flesshe, the whiche oughte to comforte the ryghtuouse: bycause through the grace of god they shal be reuiued, and reysed vp, as well the body as the soule, the soules to iustice, the bodyes to glorye. This hope the wycked haue not. For theyr bodyes shall be the more pu∣nished and ouerthrowen downe to the grounde, althoughe they haue semed here to be mighty: but their bodyes shal be reysed vp and quic¦kened by the worde of god, to whō all thynges obeye. Of whose pro∣myse the very emptye and dry bo∣nes shall be partakers.Ezec. 37. This saith
the ruler, the lorde of these bones: Beholde, I doo brynge into you a spirite, and you shal be quickned, and I wil put vpō you sinnowes, and I wyll reyse vp fleshe vppon you, and I wyll couer you with a skynne, and I wyll put in you a spirite, and you shal lyue, and you shall well knowe, that I am the lorde.Iob. 19. Thou shalte reyse vp my skynne, which this flesshe beareth. And I do knowe, that my redemer dothe lyue, and at the last he shall reyse me vp of dust, and shal com∣passe my body about with skynne, and in my fleshe I shall se god. ¶Veryly the holye scripture de∣clareth, that the resurrection of the deade shall be, for that the bodye, for his nature and power, shall be made perfyte in the knowledge of the lorde. The glorye of the soule
redoundeth into the reformed bo∣dy. In the meane tyme, the sowle lacketh not the knowlege of god and of his Christe. For he is with Christe, and hath in hym eternall lyfe, and moste lyuely and blessed knowlege,Ioh. 17. But the perfyt blessed∣nes is not, vntyll the bodyes be borne agayne.Danie. 12. Many, which slepe in the duste of the erthe, shall ryse agayne, some into eternall lyfe, & some into shame. The deade shall ryse agayne, and they shall be rey∣sed vp,Esai. 26. that be in graues. Thy deade shall lyue lorde, and they whiche dye in me, shal ryse again. Your bones shall blossome as the grasse.Esai. 66. Therfore we beleue, that there shall be a resurrection of this fleshe by goddes power, and that the deade shalbe quickened ageyn by the spirite of Chryste. Whiche
shall quicken your mortall bodies throughe his spirite,Rom. 6. dwellynge in you. The fyrste ground of this ar∣ticle is, that Christe is rysen. If Christe be preached,1. Cor. 15. that he hath rysen from deathe, howe can some of you saye, that there shall be no resurrection? If Christe hath ry∣sen, we shall also ryse. Christe, the fyrste begotten of the deade, hath sufficiently declared his resurrec∣tion. What so euer was in Christe the heade, the same shall be in his membres: and we ought to beleue, that we shall suerly atteyne that, whiche our heade nowe dothe ob∣teyne, accordynge to the measure of our fayth. The fruites of Chri∣stes resurrection, is our resurrec∣tion, and wakynge. for if god hath reysed vp our lorde Iesu, he shall also reyse vp vs through him. So
Paule. 1. Cor. 15. through the hole chapter. 1. Thes. 4. And the deade in Christe shall ryse.Ioh. 5. Do not meruel, for bycause the houre shall come, that all such as be in theyr graues shal here his voyce, and shal come forthe. &c. Also thy brother shall ryse.Cap. 11. Martha answered: I knowe that he shall ryse in the laste day. ¶In the panges of deathe, and in all temta∣tions, the remedies be to be lerned of the sufferaunce of Christ. Ca. xii. THE example of lyuynge and dienge is set forth before our eies in Christes lyfe and passyon: for so sayth Peter.1. Pet. 2. Christe is affli∣cted for vs, leauynge vs an exam∣ple, that we shuld folowe his step∣pes. But howe can we folowe his steppes? Here thou: If thou re∣ceyue thy crosse on the, as Chryste
techeth the. How can that be,Matt. 10. saiest thou: Beholde, take an example. If thou be punished with sickenes reken with thy selfe, howe it is not to be compared with Chrystes crowne of thorne and his nayles. If thou be restrayned of thy de∣syres and lustes, remembre Christ led hyther and thyther. If pryde styrre thy mynde, remembre Christ nayled on the crosse betwene two theues. Wherof Esai saythe.Esai. 53. And we haue sene hym, and there was no fayernesse in hym, and we haue desyred the despysynge of all men. If thou brenne in lechery, or any other yll desyre, remembre howe Christes tender flesshe was all to torne with strypes, thrist through, and al to broken. Wherof the scrip¦ture sayth,Psal. 21. They haue nombered all my bones. If thou be vexed
with enuy or desyer of reuenging, thinke with thy selfe, that Christe dyd preye to his father for theym, whiche crucified and scorned him. Whiche when he was reuyled, did not reuyle ageyne.1. Pet. 2. Esai. 53. As a shepe led to be slaine. If sinne troubleth the, caste thy selfe vpon Christe, beleue all his to be thyne, and that by his worke thou arte saued. If thou loke so onely in Christe, thou shalt haue peace, and thou shalt reioyce that god is thy god. And although thy synne be great, yet the grace of god is moche greatter. Therfore saye: Althoughe I alone hadde commytted all the synnes of the worlde, they were vtterlye none, if I maye obteyne the grace of god throughe Christe. God suffe∣reth his to fall, yea and that some∣tymes greuousely, as Dauid and
Peter: that they myghte ryse and thanke god more feruently. Ther∣fore no synner shulde despeire, se∣inge that so great men haue syn∣ned so greuously, and by the grace of god haue repented and amen∣ded theyr lyuynge. If Sathan do tempte the of predestination, whe∣ther thou be amongest them, whi∣che be ordeyned to the kyngedome of heauen, be deafe, takynge ex∣ample of Christe, whiche hanging on the crosse sayde nothynge at all to this, when they sayde: He hath trusted in god, let him deliuer him if he wyll. So Daniel,Danie. 3, When the kyng of Babylon sayd: And what god is he, that maye delyuer you oute of my handes? They aun∣swered: we ought not of this mat∣ter to answere the. Beholde, our god, whom we worshyppe, maye
delyuer vs frome this fornace of hot burnynge fyer, and out of thy handes O kynge. So thou muste commytte all the matter to god, whether thou be predestinate or no, do not curiously serche out the maieste of god,Prou. 25. lest thou be opprest of his glory. In trouble and deth it semeth to manye, that god is a slepe, and vtterly forsaketh them, as Christe cryeth. God, yea my god, why haste thou forsaken me. So the gospel setteth forthe to vs an example of them, to whome it seemed,Marc. 5. that Christe slepte in the shyppe. But nowe Christe (deathe beinge ouercome) hath promysed, he wyll be to vs a sauiour, as it is in Mat. xi. Come to me al you that labour & be bordened,Matth. 11. and I wyll refreshe you.Luce. 12. Agayne, Feare not lyttell flocke, for it hath pleased
your father, to gyue to you a kyng¦dome. Therefore by such examples of the gospell, weake men oughte to be encouraged, to whō it semeth, that Christe is a slepe: that be of inconstante and wauerynge min∣des, whiche doubte, whether god be mercifull to them, and whether god be in them. They ought to be monished, that they trust constant¦ly to Christe, that although Christ seme to them to be a slepe, yet lette them continewe, and the lorde wil reuenge and delyuer theym out of all theyr euylles, soner than it can be spoken. Esai sayth:Esai. 54. for a lyttel season at a pynche, I haue forsa∣ken the, and in greatte mercies I wyl gather the together.1. Reg Iob. 13 cap. 5. The lord leadeth downe to hell, and bryn∣geth from thense ageyne. yea al∣thoughe he kyl, yet I wyll truste
in hym. He dothe wounde, and gi∣ueth remedy: he smyteth, and his handes shall make hole. ¶They that be dienge, muste be exhorted. to forgyue. Cap. xiii. Matth. 6.BICAVSE god commandeth, Forgyue, and it shal be forgi∣uen you. and putteth thervnto a condition, He that dothe not for∣gyue his brother, to hym god doth forgyue nothynge: and if god do not forgyue synnes, we can not be saued.Luc. 16. Marc. 11. Forgyue, and it shal be for∣gyuen you. And when you shall stande prayinge, forgyue, if you haue any thynge agenst any man, that your father also may forgiue you.Matt. 5. When thou offrest thy gift at the aultare, fyrst reconsile thy selfe to thy brother.Matt. 18. If you wyl not for∣gyue eche of you, your brothers
fautes, & that with al your hartes: your father wyll not forgyue you.Colo. 3. If any man haue a quarel ageinst his brother, as Christ hath forgy∣uen you, so do you forgyue. So in the prayer of the lorde, we desyre forgyuenesse to be done to vs, as we forgyue them, whiche be our detters: that is, that we forgyue them, of whom in any thinge we haue ben hurte, eyther in dede, to be wrongefully handeled, or elles in worde to be shamefully intrea∣ted. And to theym that be at the poynte of deathe, this shoulde be mynded, If they at any tyme haue hurte or endamaged theyr neigh∣bour, or taken any thynge frome hym by extortion or robberye, or haue defamed any man. Here also they muste doo as Christe dyd on the crosse, lette them praye for all
theyr ennemies, and forgyue them theyr wronges with all theyr har∣tes. And if any thynge of theyrs be taken awaye by thefte, lette them not requier it agayn with violēce. If they haue takē away any thing of a nother mannes, let them yelde it agayne, if they may: or let them labour, that it maye be restored: nor let thē kepe secrete any thyng, but confesse theyr faute, be sorye that they haue offended, and de∣syre forgyuenesse. If for lacke of ryches they be not able to make sa¦tisfaction: it shall be suffycyente, that they forgyue other, whiche haue harmed them, other in body or goodes. If they forgyue theym with all theyr harte, god wyll for∣giue them the wrōg done to other: As Christe teacheth.Matth. 6. If you for∣gyue men theyr offences, your he∣uenly
father shall forgyue you. ¶Suche as be diynge shulde be admonished, that they receiue the Sacrament of Chri∣stes body and bloud. Ca. xiiii. IT IS a great token of the ine∣stimable loue of god and of his abundant mercy towarde vs, that in his supper he wolde shoulde be wytnessed, that Christe dothe deli∣uer and gyue hym selfe to vs, and dothe ioyne vs to hym as his mē∣bres: that we maye knowe, that the lorde loueth vs, hath respecte to vs, and saueth vs. Forthermore in this supper, we here Christ spe∣kynge to vs, fedynge vs with his body, proferyng vs, that we shuld drynke his bloud for eternall lyfe: where he saythe, Take, eate you,Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. this is my body, whiche for you is gyuen. Do you this in my remem∣braunce. Lykewise after he hadde
supped, takyng the cuppe, he said: This cuppe is the newe testament in my bloude, whiche is shedde for the remission of your synnes. Do you this as oft as you shal drinke it in the remembrance of me. Good brother, thynke that these wordes be spoken to the. prynte them most depely in thy mynde. for when he speaketh to all, he speaketh also to the, to the, to the I say, they profit All thynges, whiche Christe hath suffered, shall profite the no lesse, then they do helpe Peter & Paule. This sacramente is veryly bothe commanded & instituted of Christ him selfe, for the remyssion of our synnes and eternall lyfe. For the promyse soundeth soo, the whiche he that receyueth by fayth, and be∣leueth that whiche he saith (Gyuen for you, and Shed out for you) hath and
obteyneth without doubte remissi∣on of his synnes. ¶Diuerse consolations, that the life and tyme of affliction is shorte. Cap. xv. IT IS a greate comforte, that affliction shall not endure con∣tinually.Roma. 8. The afflictions of this tyme, are not worthy of the glory, whiche shall be shewed vppon vs. The eie hath not sene,Esai. 64. nor the eare hath not harde. &c. the ioyes that god hath prepared for his electe.1. Cor. 2. Through many troubles we must enter into the kyngedome of god.Acto. 14. Our trouble, whiche is but tem∣porall and lyght, worketh an exce∣dynge, and an eternall weyght of glory vnto vs whiche loke not on the thynges that are sene, but on them, whiche are not seene. The soules of them,Apoc. 6. whiche were kyl∣led,
cryed out vnder the aulter. to whom it was answered, that they shulde reste yet a lyttell tyme. As a lyttell mynute of an houre vntyl the wroth be passed by.Esai. 26. Also Christ in the gospel calleth the time of af∣flyction,Ioh. 16. Esai. 54, A lyttell tyme. A lyttell whyle you shall not seme. In dy∣stresse for a lyttell season I haue forsaken the: but in eternall mer∣cies I haue gathered the togeder. ¶The comfort of wydowes & Orphans. THOV wylte saye, I am now a wydowe, and haue no man, which careth for me, here Dauid, whiche saythe.Psal. 145. To the fatherlesse and wydowe thou shalte be a hel∣per.Psal. 9. Also, The poore is left to the, & also to the fatherlesse thou shalte be a helper. And Christe saythe. I wyl not leaue you fatherlesse:Ioh. 14. that
is, without helpe. So great care hath god ouer the fatherlesse and wydowes, that he wyll comforte theym in theyr trouble. Hereof we lerne, that we also shoulde be mo∣ued with pitie towardes the wy∣dowes and fatherlesse, and that we shulde aide and succour them: For this is a pure and an vndefy∣led religion before god the father,Iaco. 1. to vysete the fatherlesse and wy∣dowes in theyr trouble. God doth diligently commende to vs this sorte of men, bothe in the lawe and in all the prophetes, thretenynge greuous punyshemente to them, whiche eyther do oppresse them, or elles doo not soccour and delyuer them, when they be oppressed. Ex∣ody .xxii. Esai. i. & .x. Iere. v. & .xii. Zacha. vii. So Paule cōmandeth Timo. to honour the widowes.
¶The comforte of women trauelynge with chylde. THE chylde is in the hande of god, and is not borne, before the tyme appoynted, whiche is not in our power, but in the wyll of god, at whose hande we must loke and seke for fauor and helpe. And suerlye the lorde is nyghe to them, whiche call vpon hym in trouthe. He wyll fulfyll the wyll of theym,Psal. 144. whiche feare hym, and wyll here theyr prayer, and saue them. But we muste consyder, that all thyn∣ges haue theyr tyme, and that all thynges vnder heauen, passe forth by certayne lymyttes and spaces. There is a tyme of byrthe,Eccle. 3. and a time of dyeng. The tyme that god hath ordeyned, muste be loked for in the faythe of goddes promyse. The promyse is this, Thou shalt
bryng forth thy children, although with peyne, but he promyseth the delyuerance and byrth. This pro∣myse requireth feythe. For he that promyseth, is able to performe. And more ouer, it requireth obedi∣ence, that the woman be obediente to the wyll of god: vppon whome this crosse is layd by god the mer∣ciful father. For it is a great mer∣cye of god, that god deliuereth the soule from misery, and vexeth the body with mysery, the soule I say, is delyuered, and is the doughter of god by faythe: as Paule wyt∣nesseth, sayinge.1. Tim. 2. The woman shal be saued through bearyng of chil∣dren, if she continue in fayth, loue, and sanctification, with sobernes. And Christe saythe: The woman,Ioh. 16. when she trauayleth, is in sorowe, bycause her hour is come: But whē
she hath brought forth her chylde, she remembreth not her trybulati∣on, for ioye that a man is borne in to the worlde. ¶A comforte for them that lamente the deade. COMEN honestie and chari∣tie of our neyghbour requy∣reth, that we adorne and worship the burialles of our frendes, whi∣che slepe in the lorde, with conue∣nient mornynge. But we must not lamente and mourne of vngodly∣nesse and supersticion, as the vn∣feythefull heathen do, whiche be∣leue not the resurrectiō of the ded, which knowe not, that god liueth, and careth for vs, althoughe our frendes dye. For of theym Paule sayth:1. Thes. 4. We wyll not bretherne that ye shuld be ignorant of them that
slepe, that ye sorowe not, as other do, which haue no hope. For if we beleue that Iesus died, and rose a¦gayne: euen so them also, whiche slepe by Iesus, shall god brynge with hym. Here humanite and the workes of mercy are not condem∣ned.Gen. 23. et 50. 2. Re. 1. For Ioseph mourned his fa∣ther, Abraham lamented his wyfe Sara: Dauid bewayled Saul. and also certayne relygyous per∣sones buryed Steuen,Acto. 8. Ioh. 19. and made great lamentation vpon hym. Ni∣chodemus and Iosephe of Arama¦thie, are praysed, bycause they bu∣ried Christe. Therfore Paule con∣demneth not moderate mourning and sorowe, whiche spryngeth of faythefull charitie: but he condē∣neth the immoderate heathenyshe sorowe and mourning, as vngod∣ly and superstitious. For the hope
of Christen men is perfytely assu∣red, that the dead peryshe not, but slepe:Ioh. 11. as Christe saythe, Lazarus our frynde slepeth. Therfore to la∣ment the dead by affection of loue, is the duetie of charytie, but it is hethnishe and vngodly, to lament the deade of infidelytie. For it is gyuen vs naturally, to bewayle the deathe of them, whiche in their liues were derelye beloued of vs, but we must remembre the saying of holy Iob, The lorde hath gy∣uen,Iob. 1. and the lorde hath taken a∣waye. Some tyme our parentes, our dere frendes, our wyfe, and our chyldren be taken away from vs, that we maye lerne the wyll of god, and haue a respecte onely to god the gyuer, and not to the gyftes.
¶A consolation for them, whiche suffer for theyr offences. OF THEM whiche suffer for theyr euyll dedes,1. Pet. 2. Peter spe∣keth, sayinge: what prayse is it, if whan ye be buffeted for your fau¦tes, ye take it pacientely? And a∣gayne.1. Pet. 4. Se that none of you suf∣fer as a murtherer, or as a thefe, or as an yuell doer, or a busy body in other mennes matters. But if it chaunce so, that we must suffer for an euyll dede doone of vs, the de∣serued punishemente maye be an holy sufferynge, no lesse pleasaunt to god, than the sufferynge of the innocent martyrs. For if the euyll doer confesse his synne before god, and beleue that his synne is forgi∣uen, throughe Iesu Christe: then by Iesu Christe it is broughte to
passe, that the deserued punysshe∣ment is sanctified, to obteyne the crowne of euerlastyng glory: was not the thefe, hāging on the crosse vpon the one syde of Chrst, sancti∣fied in his punishement,Luce. 22. as soone as he aknowleged his synne, and throughe faythe commended his helthe to Christe? Was it not sayd also to hym, This daye thou shalt be with me in Paradise? Neyther is it meruayle, that euyll dooers throughe faythe, can in theyr de∣serued punishementes, be sancti∣fied as innocent martyrs. For as the martyrs in theyr sufferynge do testifie and witnesse Christ and the gospell, so euyll doers in theyr pu∣nishment, do testifie and wytnesse the lawe of god, and be examples to other, that they auoyde euyll dedes, lest they be punished in like
maner. To be an example, that mis¦cheuouse dedes be auoyded, is it not a worke of holynesse? Ther∣fore whether a man do suffer iustly or vniustely, let hym beleue in Ie∣su Christe, and his sufferynge shal cause hym to opteyne of the lord a garland that neuer shal wyther a∣way. Therfore no man oughte to dispeire.1. Tim. 2. For Christe hath gyuen hym selfe a redētion for al. There is one god, and oone mediator of god and man, namely the manne Christ Iesu, which gaue him selfe a ransome for all men. Beholde, he sayth for al. Therfore also, He wil,2. Pet. 3. that all retourne to repentaunce. And he saith,Luc. 5. I came not to cal the iuste, but synners, of whō he wold be borne. Iuda, Dauid,Matth. 1. Manas∣se, Thamar, Rachab, and Batse∣ba be examples. Therfore he com∣maundeth
the gospell to be prea∣ched to euery creature.Ezec. 18. He wyl not the death of a synner, but the helth of al men. So he calleth al to him whiche be burdened.Matt. 11. Luc. 19. So he recey∣ued to hym zache. Maudelyn, Pe¦ter, Matthei, the woman of Cana∣nee.Matth. 5. Matt. 27. So he receyued to fauour the thefe. Also he apered after his re∣surrection to Mary Maudelyne, out of whom he had expelled seuē dyuelles.Matth. 16. He admytteth and recei∣ueth Thomas the harde beleuer. He conuerteth Saul beyng a per∣secutour moste greuouse.Acto. 9. Brefely he refuseth no man, he receyueth all that repente, with a fatherlye mynde. He sheweth mercye, he ta∣keth the repentaunte to his sonne. Therfore he commandeth to pray,Matth. 6. Let thy kyngdome come, forgyue vs our trespases.Ioh. 16. Also, what so e∣uer
ye pray the father in my name, it shall be gyuen you. Aske,Matth. 7. and it shal be gyuen you: knocke: and it shall be opened vnto you. ¶Sentences out of holy scripture, to styrce vp a desyre to dye. VVE are strangers before the,1. Par. 30. as were all our fathers. Our days be as it were a shadowe vpō the erth, and here is none abiding. ¶The lyfe of man is a warfare vpon the erthe: and his days,Iob. 7. as the dayes of a hired seruaunt. ¶A man borne of a woman,Iob. 14. ly∣uynge a short tyme, is replenished with moche mysery. He commeth forth lyke a flower, and goth away lyke a shadowe, and neuer remay∣neth in one estate. ¶What man is he that lyueth,Psal. 88. & shall not se deathe?
Psal. 89.¶Our yeres passen awaye as a cop webbe, the dayes of our age be three score and ten, or in the chefest foure score yeres, and the mooste part of these, is labour and peyne. Psal. 101.¶My dayes be wasted as a sha∣dowe, and I am dryed vp as the grasse. Psal. 144.¶A man is made lyke to vanitie, his days passe away as a shadow. Eccle. 7.¶The day of death is better then the daye of lyfe. Heb. 13.¶We haue not here a dwellynge citie, but we seke for one to come. Iaco. 4.¶What is our lif? it is a vapour, aperynge a lyttell whyle, and af∣terwarde vanisheth awaye. 1. Pet. 1.¶All fleshe is as hey, and all the glory of man as the flower of hey, the hey is dryed vp, and the flower falleth. ¶FINIS.
¶THE TABLE OF THE fyrste boke. THE preparation to the Crosse, & howe it must be paciētly borne. ¶What the Crosse is Cap. 1. ¶Two kindes of crosses. Ca. 2. Howe the faithful be temted. 3. ¶The Crosse is of God onely. Cap. 4. Crosse is the worke of the good wil of god. 5. ¶The godly are the fyrste that are afflycted of God, to theyr good and welthe. Cap. 6. ¶In tribulation we muste pray. Cap. 7. Of prayer, and the maner therof in tribulatiō. Whose prayers are harde of god. The promyse of god. Faythe. To aske in the name of Iesu. The affecte to desyre any thynge. Thankes gyuynge. ¶We oughte to be patient in affliction, not to be angry, not to speake euyll of god. Cap. 8. ¶Soccur in affliction must be asked of god. 9. ¶Yet in affliction or syckenesse, medycine and councell are not to be despised. Ca. 10. In affliction no tyme may be apoynted to god, nor way wherby we wolde be delyuered. ca. 11. ¶It is great comfort to them that be in affli∣ction, to remember, that Christ was also tem∣ted, and exercysed with yl, as we be wont. 12. ¶It is great comfort in affliction, that no mā cā hurt the faithfull, except Christ wil. Ca. 13
¶The goodnes of god is not to be despysed, or lightly regarded before afflictions, wher∣by god wyll punishe & gyue warning. Ca. 14. ¶There be dyuerse craftes of the dyuel, wher¦by he tempteth, and where one crafte profy∣teth nothynge, he addeth many other. Ca. 15. ¶If thou be tempted in pryde, or vayenglo∣ry, answere hym agayne. ¶If thou be tempted in wrothe or anger. ¶If thou be tempted in feastynge, or glottony and dronkennesse. ¶If thou be temted in auarice or couetousnes. ¶If thou be tempted with hunger, pouertie, or carefulnes of lyuynge. ¶If thou be tempted of idelnes. ¶If thou be temted of securite. ¶If thou be temted of fornication & adultery. ¶If thou be tēted with lying or light wordes ¶If thou be temted of confessyng the gospel, or sufferynge persecution for the gospell. ¶If thou be temted of the faythe of thy pa∣rentes: as wherfore beleuefte thou not that, whiche thy forefathers haue beleued. ¶If thou be temted of strange religyon, or of worshypping of saynctes, or ymages, or men. ¶If thou must dye, and leaue wyfe, chyldren, and thy dere frendes. ¶If thou be tempted of condemnation, that thou arte condemned of god. ¶If the dyuel say, thou art a synner, and art
not graffed in Christe. ¶If he continue and say, but thy synnes passe  the sonde of the sea. ¶If he say, suche promyses are made to the  godly, but thou art an apostata, and a lost man. But god hereth no sinners nor straiers away. But thou comest very late with thy contricion. ¶But he had a stronge faythe in god, whiche  thou lackest. ¶What if all holy scripture be false, for they  were men, whiche spake it, and wrote it. ¶If the temptator say, thou hast not kepte the  lawe of god, wherfore thou art accursed. ¶If he say thou must forsake the worlde. The table of the seconde boke. VVHAT is deathe. Cap. 1. ¶What is the cause of deathe. Ca. 2. ¶Two maner of deathes. Cap. 2. ¶To the electe and faythfull, eternall deathe by Christe is ouercome. Cap. 3. ¶Although the godly die, yet they shal liue. 4. ¶The deathe of the godly is a slepe. Cap. 5. Baptisme is a cōfort in the poynt of deathe. 6. ¶The godly knowe the tyme of dyinge to be determined of god. Cap. 7. The vngodly lyue not out halfe theyr dayes. 8. ¶The godly also in the tyme of hunger, pesti∣lence, and warre, be punished, and dye with the wycked. ca. 9.
¶To whom they that dye ought to commyt theyr spirite. cap. 10. ¶The body is buried, but it shall ryse agayne in the laste daye. ca. 11. ¶In the panges of deathe, and in all tempta∣tions, the remedies be to be lerned of the suf∣feraunce of Christe, cap. 12. ¶The dieng, must be exhorted to forgiue. 13. ¶Suche as be dienge shulde be admonysshed, that they receyue the sacrament of Christes body and bloude. ca. 14. ¶Diuerse consolations, that the life and tyme of affliction is but shorte. ca. 15. ¶The comfort of wydowes and Orphans. ¶The comfort of womē trauailing with child ¶A comfort for them that lament the deade. ¶A consolation for theym, whiche suffer for theyr offences. ¶Sentences out of holy scripture to styrre vp a desyre to dye. ¶FINIS. ¶LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Ber∣theleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad imprimen∣dum solum. ANNO. M.D.XL.
