11488 99841396 5977
A very briefe and profi∣table Treatise declaring hovve many counsells, and vvhat maner of Coun∣selers a Prince that will gouerne well ought to haue. The Booke speaketh. All you that Honors woulde atcheeue, And Counslers eke desire to bee, Of selfe loue flee the false beleeue, And learne my lore that you may see What worthynesse in you doth reygne, Such worthy state thereby tatteyne. IMPRINTED at London by Willi∣am Seres.
Firmo Appoggio. 1570
To the ryght Noble Erle of Leycester, one of hir highnesse most Honora∣ble, wise, and graue Counselers. FOR LACK OF BET∣ter habilitie, I am bolde after my olde wonte, to presēt your Honor with Inke and Paper, more to doe my bounde dutie in shewing my selfe thank∣full towardes you, for your great benifites bestowed on mee: than for any profite or pleasure, that I know your Honor can reape any waye of my rude wryting. And yet a∣mongst al the tryfles that euer I wrote, there was none in mine opinion that ought to please you better than this little Treatise, representing vnto you as it were in a glasse, manye of those good vertues and qualities that do raigne in you, & ought to raigne in cuery other good counseler. Which Treatise was first written in the Spanishe tongue by a Spanyard called FEDERIGO FVRIO, and af∣terward trāslated into the Italian tongue by
another Spanyard called ALFONSO D'VLLOA, but not with so good grace as I beleeue it had in the Spanishe, which in deede I neuer sawe, and therefore though my very friend May ster Iohn Baptist Castiglion one of the Gromes of hir Highnesse priuie chamber, vpō good zeale he had to profite many, de∣liuered me the saide booke at my last being at the Court, earnestly requesting me to put the same into our vulgar tong, yet I would not altogither trāslate it, but thought it best to make a briefe collection of the substance thereof, cutting of all superfluous talke, and yet leauing nothing out (I trust) that was necessary to be spoken. But how soeuer it be I most humbly beseech your Honor to take it well in worth, and in pervsing the same to conceyue of my labour bestowed therin, with that fauourable iudgement, which you haue alwayes vsed towardes mee, in all my other doings, and therwith to continue still my good Lord, euen as I think my selfe bounde to continue your faythfull seruant. Thus leauing to trouble your Honor any further: I pray God to graunt you helth & long lyfe, with much prosperitie. From Newton Flotman the first of Aprill. 1570. Most bounde to your Honor Thomas Blundeuill.
With what order and methode the Institution of a Prince ought to be written. WHO so vvill write the Institu∣tion 1 of a Prince, ought to deuide hys vvorke into fiue partes. The first vvhereof vvould containe three Bookes, and the first Booke must shevv vvhat a Prince is, hovv he vvas first ordained, & to vvhat ende, vvhat povver hee hath, vvho gaue it him, & vvho may take it from him. The second booke muste declare vvhat Artes and Sciēces are required in a Prince that vvill gouerne vvell. The
thirde booke must shewe vvhat morall vertues a Prince should haue, and hovv to vse them. The seconde part must treate 2 of the Princes education, of his Schoolemaysters, gouernours, seruantes, friendes and louers, of his house and householde: and therefore as the Phisitians doe deuide mannes lyfe into seauen ages or times, so this part would be likevvise deuided into seauen bookes, the first treating of the Princes infancie, the seconde of his childehood, and all the reast of hys other ages or times. The thirde part vvoulde con∣tayne 3 three Bookes, the one vvhereof must shevve the dutie of the subiect in euerye poynt tovvardes the Prince, and the o∣ther,
the dutye of the Prince to∣vvards the subiect: vvhereby it shall plainely appeare, vvho is a Traytour, and vvho is a fayth∣full subiect, and also vvho is a iust Prince, & vvho is a tyrant. The fourth part vvould shevv hovve a Prince ought to rule 4 and raigne, so as he may escape and ouercome all diffycultes that may chaunce any maner of vvaye, vvhich are not easily knovvne, by cause they are di∣uers, according to the diuersitie of the kingdome, or principali∣tie: vvhich is gotten & posses∣sed by one of these foure waies: That is, either by inheritaunce, by election, by forcyble con∣quest, or else by pollicye: it is requisite therefore that this part
be deuided into foure Bookes, euery one treating of ech of the sayde kindes of possession. Finallye, bicause the Prince 5 can not heare all, see all, knovve all, and prouide for all, alone of himselfe: the fift part therefore ought to treate of the councell, and counselers of a Prince tea∣ching him hovve to make hys counsell, and vvhat maner of counselers to choose, of vvhich part mine Aucthor aboute nine yeares past tooke vppon him to vvrite, deuiding the sayde part into eyght bookes: but as yet he neuer set forth more (that I knovve) than the fyrst Booke, the effect vvhereof hereafter fo∣lovvith.
VVhat a counsell is, and hovv many counsells a Prince ought to haue. A Counsell is an assembly of vvise and discreete persons chosen by the Prince to coun∣sell him in all his affayres, both of peace and vvarre, in such sort as he by their helpe maye go∣uerne hys Realme vviselye, and foresee all daungers that may bety de, so as in all his do∣ings and enterprises, he maye haue good successe, or at the least, as little euill successe, and as seldome as maye bee. And though that the Counsell and the Prince maketh in deede but
one entyere thing, in that it hath but one heade vvhich is the Prince, yet it is necessarye that the saide counsell be deui∣ded into manye partes, vvhich though they haue dyuers offi∣ces, yet they shall make but one body, no more than the se∣uerall partes of mannes bodye, seruing to dyuers purposes. VVherefore it is meete, first to shevve hovve manye seuerall counsells a Prince that vvil go∣uerne vvel ought to haue. And than to euerye one of those counsells, hovv many counse∣lers, hovv manye Presydents, hovv manye Secretaries, and hovv many Clarkes be neede∣full, and also vvhat qualities be requyred in those men, that
they may be able and sufficient to serue the turne. Also vvhat prerogatiues, preheminences, and authorities they ought to haue: Againe, hovv they ought to bee assembled, vvhere, in vvhat tyme, and vvhat houre, then vvhich matters ought to be first propounded, to vvhom the Bylls of remembraunce for dispatch and al other vvritings ought to bee delyuered, vvho ought to solicet the matters, and hovve they should be en∣tred into the bookes, and many such lyke things. Furthermore to shevve hovve one counsell ought to ansvvere another or∣derly, to the intent there be no confusion nor mingle mangle of matters. And lastly, to shevv
them vvhen they haue all de∣termyned vppon some matter, hovve and in vvhat sort they shall make relacion thereof vn∣to the Prince before they make any final resolution or conclu∣sion. Follovving then this or∣der, mine author sayth, that if the Prince minde to gouerne his state vvell, and to dispatche manye matters speedilye, hee ought to haue seauen counsells euery one differing from other in affayres, offices, and in au∣thoritie. And first he beginneth vvith the counsell of reuenevves, The Esche∣quer. not for that it is first by vvor∣thynesse, but (as I take it) for that it is first by order of na∣ture, taking here perhaps the
Princes reuenevves to bee the matter, vvithout the vvhich nothing can be done, to vvhich counsel belongeth these points here follovving. To gather vp his reuenevves. To see that they bee not vva∣sted. To encrease them by all con∣uenient meanes. To consider from vvhence, hovv and in vvhat tyme extra∣ordinary These thin∣ges belong to our high Courte of Parlament. reuenevves maye bee best leuyed, to appoint taskes, and subsedies, tolles, and cus∣tomes, and to reforme them vvhen they be eyther to much or to little, vvithout damma∣ging the vveale publique, to a∣bridge superfluous, and to en∣crease necessary expences.
The seconde is the counsell The priuie counsell which for worthinesse woulde be first placed. of the state, vvhose office and dutie consisteth in these points here follovving. First, to see vvhether such officers and go∣uernours as serue vnder the Prince as vvell in peacible as in vvarlike affayres, doe their du∣tye or not. To knovve hovve long their tyme of seruice en∣dureth, vvhyther they ought to be chaunged or not, & vvho ought to be chosen to serue in their roomes. Moreouer, to see that all charges both ordinary and extraordinarie, as vvell for matters of peace, as also of vvarre, be payde in due tyme by vertue of their vvarrant di∣rected to the counsell of the re∣uenevves, vvhich haue autho∣ritie
to receyue, but not to dis∣burse one penny vvithout spe∣ciall vvarrant from this coun∣sell, vvhich onely hath povver to distribute the Princes mo∣ney. Also to consider vvyth vvhome eyther peace, vvarre, league, or truce, is to bee made. Agayne, vvyth vvhome the Prince ought to ioyne in true, or fayned friendship, and hovv farre, hovve much, in vvhat sort, and at vvhat time, vvhi∣ther secretelye or openly hee ought to ayde his friends. And therefore this counsell hauing so great matters in charge, de∣serueth vvell to bee the heade and chiefe of al the other coun∣sells. The thyrde counsell is for The coun∣sell
of war, whereof Englande hath most neede. matters of vvarre, and there∣fore mine author calleth it the counsell of vvarre, vvhose of∣fice is to see that the Prynces Tovvnes, Portes, & Frontiers, be vvell fortifyed, and to vn∣derstande the vvhole Arte and Discipline of vvarre, to the in∣tent the Prince and his realme maye not onely bee defended from all forreyne povver, but also get the victory of his eni∣mies, vvith vvhome he shall hap to ioyne in battayle. And therefore this counsell besides being skilfull in Fortification, in taking of musters, in tray∣ning of Souldiours, and in set∣ting of battayles ought also to haue in prompe memory al the former vvarres of the Prince
and of his predicessors, and to knovve hovve and vpon vvhat occasion those vvarres vvere first begonne, follovved, ended, and vvhat successe they had, and hovve those vvarres diffe∣red one from another by rea∣son of tyme, and vvhat condi∣cions of peace haue bene offe∣red or receyued, & vpon vvhat causes. Also to consider as vvell the force of the enimy and of his allyes and confederates, as of the Prince and his confede∣rates, and to compare them to∣gither, that they may knovve vvhyther they bee equall in povver, or that the one excel∣leth the other, & vvherin, as in men, armor, discipline, vittails, same, credit, money, friends, al∣lyes
and such lyke, vvythout due consideration of vvhiche things, he that beginneth anye vvarre, endeth the same for the most part to his great losse, shame, and reproche, and ther∣fore hovv necessary this coun∣sell is to a Prince, it is easie y∣nough to see. The fourth counsell is for Purueyours prouision of vittailes, and ther∣fore it may be vvell called of vs the counsell of vittelers, or pur∣ueyours, vvhose charge is to furnishe the vvhole state vvith vittailes both in time of peace, and vvarre. And therefore this counsell had neede to knovvc euery part of the Countrie, and vvhat it is able to yeelde and to keepe bookes of remembrances
that maye shevve them at all tymes vvhat store of vittaylc there is, and vvhat is lacking, vvhat commeth in, or goeth out by sea or by land, also from vvhence they are brought and vvhyther they are caryed, by vvhat vvaye, by vvhome, in vvhat sort, hovv much, and at vvhat tyme, and such like mat∣ters appertayning to their of∣fice. And to this counsell the Prince shall doe vvell to referre al matters touching lycences of carying out corne, or other vit∣tayle, graunting lycence to no person to carrye oute of the realme any vittayle, vvithout the consent and aduise of thys counsel, vvherby the state shall not onely haue sufficient al∣vvayes
for themselues, but also many tymes such aboundance as they may helpe their friends and louing neighbors, in their neede, vvhereas contrarivvise for lacke of this counsell ha∣uing this authority, the realme many times suffereth great fa∣mine by meanes that a fevv co∣uetous persons preferring their ovvne priuate lucre before the profite of the vvhole common vvealth, by money and friend∣ship doe procure licences of the Prince, to cary out into forrein places that vittayle, vvhereby the common vvealth at home should be susteyned. Yea, and many tymes for vile lucre sake and hope of greater gaine, doe rather relieue the enimies, than
the friendes of the state, vvhich through vnkindenesse by them conceyued causeth offence, yea and sometime breach of friend∣ship. Moreouer for lack of this counsell, vvarres are made ma∣ny times in Countries, vvheras no meate is to be had for man, or beast, so as the armye is no sooner in the fielde, but it suf∣fereth extreeme hunger, and is therby forced to returne imme∣diately home agayne vvyth shame ynough, or to make peace, or truce, eyther oute of tyme, or else vvith such condi∣cions, as are not meete, nor ho∣norable, vvhereby the Prince loseth his estimation amongest straungers, and getteth the ha∣tred of his ovvne people. For
tvvo thinges makes the people to loue the Prince, that is, to be defended from the oppression of the mightye, and to bee in league vvyth those Nations, vvithout vvhome they can not vvell traffique. The fifte counsell is touch∣ing matters of lavve, vvhose The cōmon place. charge is to appoint as manye and as fevve officers as shall seeme requisite to minister iu∣stice These pointes also doe belong to our high Courte of Parlament. in ciuill causes through∣out the vvhole state, and thys counsel must haue authority to make lavves, to repeale lavves, to reforme lavves, and to inter∣prete lavves, for lack of vvhich counsell great vvrongs are suf∣fred, and many disorders com∣mitted in all common vvealths
to the great decay of the state, and setting vp and aduauncing of a fevv Lavveyers and aduo∣cates, vvhich in these dayes may boldly rob and spoyle the poore commons, vvithout any feare of punishment or correc∣tion. The sixt counsell is touching The kings bench. cryminall causes, and therefore it may be called the counsell of correction, thys counsell must haue authoritye to iudge and giue sentence of all crymes cō∣mitted any maner of vvay, and to punishe the offenders accor∣ding to the lavves of the coun∣trie. The seauenth counsell is tou∣ching The White∣hal, or court of revvards. revvardes to be giuen by the Prince to such as deserue,
and therefore it maye be verye vvel called the revvarding coū∣sell, for the office of this coun∣sell is to knovv vvho deserueth vvell, and vvho doth not, and to enforme the Prince thereof, to the intent the Princes beni∣fites be not euill bestovved: and therefore the Prince shall doe vvell, not to giue any tevvarde vvythout the aduice of thys counsell. And for lack of such a counsell, vve see for the most part in Princes Courts that the vertuous sort vvhich commō∣ly be no crauers, are sildome or neuer considered, and such as least deserue, are alvvayes best revvarded. The Prince being thus furnished vvith these dy∣uers counsels shall bee able to
dispatch more matters, than vvhen the vvhole charge lyeth onely vpon tvvo or three per∣sons, by vvhose long delayes the Princes subiectes are novve forced to consume themselues in continuall vvayting, for dis∣patch of businesse, and yet as mine author sayth, the ambiti∣on and couetousnesse of some counselers is such, as they can not suffer to haue any partiners in their doings, bicause they vvill haue all the honor, and all the gayne to themselues, estee∣ming more their ovvne priuate lucre, than the profite of the common vvealth, vvhich kinde of men are vnmete to be coun∣selers, bee they neuer so vvise. And to the intent that these
seauen counsells before men∣tioned, may not be reduced all to one, in such sort as tvvo or three persons should rule all, as commonlye is seene in most places novv a dayes. It is requi∣site therefore that no counseler be suffred to be of diuers coun∣sells at once, but to tende one alone, medling vvith no mat∣ters of any other counsell, but onely vvith those, vvhich ap∣pertayneth to that counsell, vvherevnto hee is called. But novve, to order these seauen coūsells rightly, it vvere neede∣full to vvryte seauen Bookes, declaring al the particuler parts and circumstaunces that belong vnto euery one of the said coū∣sells, but for so much as it vvere
a superfluous thing to repeate in euery one of those bokes, all the qualities that be requisite in those counselers that are to bee admytted into any of the fore∣say de counsells, and speciallye such qualities, not differing ve∣rye much one from another. I thought it best therefore to spende this booke in making one discourse of that matter for all, vvhich here follovveth. VVhat a counseler is, and vvhat qualities he ought to haue. A Counseler is a sufficiēt per∣son, chosen by the Prince,
meete to serue in some one of the foresaide counsels, and able to discharge hys dutie therein. In vvhich definition tvvo thin∣ges are to be considered, that is, the sufficientcie of the manne, and the choyse of the Prince, of both vvhich things vve minde to speake: but first of the suffi∣cientcy of the manne, vvhich consisteth in tvvo poynts, that is, in the qualities of the mind, and in the qualities of the bo∣dye. The qualities of the minde requisite in anye counseler in generall, are in number as mine Author sayth. XV. that is, 1 To be vvise. 2 To be eloquent. 3 To speake dyuers languages.
4 To be a good Hystoriographer. 5 To be a good Morall Philosopher. 6 To be politique. 7 To be a traueler. 8 To knovve the force as vvell of hys Prince, as of his enymies and neyghbours. 9 To loue hys common vvealth, and to preferre the profite, and honor thereof before his ovvne gaine and estimation. 10 To haue a right iudgement in all thinges vvithout partialitie, esteeming honestie and truthe more than friende or kinsman, and to be no maintainer of any sect or faction; vvhich be pe∣rillous members in anye com∣mon vvealth. 11 To be iust in correcting the
euill vvithout rygour, and in revvarding the good according to their due desertes. 12 To be liberall. 13 To be benificiall tovvards his common vvealth. 14 To be affable, that is to saye, courteous and gentle, in hys speech and behauiour tovvards all sortes of men, both poore and ryche. 15 And finally, to haue a noble, stovvte, couragious, and con∣stant minde, not fearing to lose both lyfe and goodes for the truth sake. All vvhich qualities mine author might easily haue reduced into these fiue generall kindes: that is, Prudence, Scy∣ence, Iustice, Fortytude, and Temperaunce, For vnder Pru∣dence
are comprehended the first, the sixt, seauenth, & eyght quality, for there is, PRVDENTIA, MONASTICA, DOMESTICA, and PO∣LITICA. The first vvherof, teach∣eth a man to gouerne himselfe, leading a sole lyfe, the seconde, to gouerne a familye, and the third, to rule a common vvelth, vvhich requireth suche pollicie and experience as he talketh of. Vnder Science may be compre∣hended the seconde, the thirde, the fourth, and fift qualitie: and vnder Iustice, the ninth, tenth, leauenth, tvvelfth, & thirteenth qualitie: vnder Temperaunce, the fourteenth: and vnder For∣titude the fifteenth, and manye others, vvhich mine Author as I suppose leaueth out of pur∣pose,
thinking these sufficient (as I take it) yea, and perhaps more than are to bee founde in some counselers in these daies, and therefore though I haue a good vvyll to treate of these thinges in another order, yet for his sake that delyuered mee the booke, I vvill follovv mine Authors order, briefely decla∣ring the vses of the foresayde fifteene qualityes, and vvhat causes mooued hym to thinke them most necessary for a coū∣seler, & finally hovv the Prince shall knovve by tryall, and not by relation, vvhither his coun∣seler hath such qualities or not: VVherby it seemeth that mine Author supposeth, the Prince to bee endued vvyth all these
qualities hymselfe, for other∣vvise I see not hovv he should bee able ryghtlye to iudge of them. VVell then the first qualitie A liuely vvytte. is, as he sayth, to haue a quicke and liuely vvytte, vvhich is the beginning, meane, and ende of all noble enterprises, vvithout the vvhich all other vertues do little preuayle. For vve see by experience that the rude vvytte vvith great labor & dilygence, sildome or neuer, attayneth to that knovvledge or iudgement, vvhich the fine vvyt getteth in short space, & vvith little paine. Neyther doe rude vvyttes euer attempt anye vvorthye enter∣prise: vvherefore to haue a fine vvyt is a thing most needefull
to anye counseler. VVhiche, vvhyther he hath so or not, the Prince ought to knovve by tryall of the manne, and not by information or relation of o∣thers. And such tryall is to bee had tvvo maner of vvayes, by his vvordes, and by his deedes, for the vvise man commonlye doth not talke of such matters, nor in such sort as the common sort doth, neyther be his vvor∣des or phrases lyke vnto theirs, his talke is graue and vvise, hee is readye in aunsvvering, and quick of vnderstanding, and ea∣sie to bee vnderstoode in decla∣ring any thing. He is pleasaunt in matters of sport, and in ear∣nest causes graue and circum∣spect. And finally, he is able to
vse talke meete for all compa∣nyes, vvythout breaking the bounds of comelynesse, due to his calling. Novve as touching his deedes they are knovvne by his actiuitie, and by hys dily∣gence vsed in reading, vvriting, and conferring vvith vvise and learned men, and in practising vvyth men of experience, and vvith men of dyuers nations. For vvith suche the vvise man vvill acquaint himselfe, to the intent he may knovv all things and bee ignoraunt in nothing. But the dull and grosse vvytted man doth cleane contrarye, for he giuing himselfe to sloth, to belly cheere, to levvd company and to vaine pastimes, abhor∣reth the companye of the vvise
and learned sort & vtterly neg∣lecteth all vertuous exercyses. The seconde qualitie, meete for a counseler is to be eloquent Eloquence. to the intent he may be able to persvvade or disvvade, to ac∣cuse, or to defende, to prayse, or disprayse, to reioyce or to sor∣rovv vvith others, to entertaine Ambassadours vvyth pleasaunt talke or to doe any message, or Ambassage from the Prince, al∣so in time of tumults and com∣motions, the eloquent counse∣ler vvith his authority & good persvvasion, maye cause much quietnesse, and profite the com∣mon vvealth dyuers vvayes. Novve vvhy ther the counseler be eloquent or not, the Prince maye knovve partlye by hys
vvords, and partly by his deeds, for by oft talking vvith him, he shall knovv his order of speech, vvhat vvordes and phrases hee commonly vseth, and he maye cause hym to tell some tale or Hystorye, marking him hovve he beginneth, deuideth, follo∣vvith, and endeth the same, and vvith vvhat grace & proprietie of vvords, also hovv he delateth or abridgeth the same. Againe, the Prince may knovv hym by his deeds, by considering vvhat Maysters he had to teache him, also vvhat diligence he vsed, & vvhat time he emploied therin, vvhyther he made anye vvorke or not, & to examine the same: or fayning that hee hath some Ambassage of importaunce to
sende somevvhyther, he maye cause him to endight the same in his ovvne presence. The thirde qualitie of the Knowledge of tongues. minde meete for a counseler is to haue dyuers tongues and languages, to the intent that vvhen hee is sent in message to any forreyne Prince, hee shall not neede the helpe of anye trussheman or Interpreter to tell his tale. VVhich Interpreters many tymes by adding to, or taking fro, doe hynder the same, or else do not tell it vvith such grace, nor to so good purpose as he hymselfe vvoulde. Moreouer, by hauing the tong of the countrie, vvhere he ser∣ueth, he shall the better vnder∣stande the maners, rightes, and
customes, and all the secretes of the same, and Spies vvill more gladly conferre vvith him, and reueale to hym alone, that vvhich they vvould not vvyl∣lingly doe in the presence of a thirde person. And the Prince of the country vvill delight the more in him, vvho sometyme shall haue occasion to declare some secret to the Ambassador or messenger, vvhich he vvould haue no other man to knovve, therefore hovv needefull thys qualitie is to a counseler, it is easie ynough to see, vvhiche quality, vvhither the counseler hath or not, the Prince ought to knovve by tryall, as by ma∣king him to vvryte or speake some thing in those tongues
vvherein he should be skilfull. The tongues necessarye for an English counseler in mine opi∣on are these. Latten, Frenche, Spannishe, Flemmishe, highe Dutch, and Italian, for vvith all these nations vvee haue manye tymes to doe. The fourth qualitie belon∣ging Reading of Hystories. to a counseler, is to bee a good Hystoriographer, that is to saye, to haue seene and redde as vvell the Hystories of olde tymes as of late dayes, and spe∣cially those that appertayne to the state vvherein he serueth. And also the Hystories of the friends, neighbors, and enimies to the same state, vvhereby more knovvledge and experi∣ence is to bee gotten, than by
any thing else, for Hystories be no other thing but a collecti∣on of dyuers experiences of all tymes, and of all sortes of men. VVherfore, a dyligent Hysto∣riographer, vvhich readeth to further his knovvledge, and not to please his eares, can be igno∣rauut in nothing that apper∣taines to gouernement, be it in time of vvarre or peace. For he seeth & knovveth al the sleytes & fine pollicies that hath beene vsed in eyther of both tymes. Neyther is it possible for anye man, liue hee neuer so long, to get by hys ovvne experience, the tenth part of that knovv∣ledge vvhich a diligent reader of Hystories shall obtayne in fevve yeres. For vvhereas the
man of experience in his tyme perhaps seeth a small number of battayles, skirmishes, besie∣gings, sedicions, tumults, brea∣king vp of vvarres, leagues, pea∣ces, and such lyke matters, the Hystoriographer knovveth an infinite number of such things, togither vvith the beginning, proceeding, and ending of the same. Also he knovveth the best vvaye of gouernment, belon∣ging to a common vvealth or kingdome, and hovve to main∣taine the same, and to encrease the povver thereof, by reason that he hath redde of so manye common vvealthes and king∣domes, and knovvne by vvhat meanes they haue increased or decayed, therefore nothing is
more necessary for a counseler, than to bee a diligent reader of Hystories, vvhich vvhither he be so or not, the Prince maye knovve by tryall, as by asking hym suche questions as these are, hovv many chaunges hath the crovvn of England, Fraunce or Spayne suffred? vvhat fami∣lies hath possessed it? by vvhat meanes, hovv long time, and vvhat vvas the cause of euerye chaunge? and hovve manye of euerye familye raygned, and vvhich of those had most or least fame? hovv many vvarres euery one of them made, for vvhat cause, vvith vvhom, and in vvhat time, and hovve such vvarres vvere first begonne and ended? also to aske hym vvhat
notable battayles hath beene euer since the birth of Christ, eyther in Englande, Fraunce, or Spayne, vvho hath vvonne, & vvho hath lost, & to shevv the cause thereof. Also to aske him vvhat seditions and tumultes hath bene in any of those coū∣tries, vpon vvhat cause such se∣ditions vvere made, vvhat hurt or good they dyd, and hovve they vvere appeased, to vvhich and such like questions, if the counseler can aunsvvere readi∣ly, there is no doubt but he is a good Hystoriographer, and can vse hys knovvledge to good purpose, vvhen tyme and occa∣sion shall serue. The fifte qualitie is to bee a good Morall Phylosopher, to Morall Philosophy.
the intent hee maye perfitely knovve the ende and true vse of euery vertue, vvherin it consis∣teth, and hovve farre it exten∣deth, for lack of vvhich knovv∣ledge, many doe accompt rude∣nesse & ignoraunce to be plaine dealing, pride to bee magnani∣mitie, modestye to be covvard∣lynesse, and foolishe hardinesse to be fortitude, and to be short, doe take vertue for vice, & vice for vertue. In all counsells and deliberatiōs, the first thing that men doe consult of, is vvhither the thing they go about, be ho∣nest or not, & if the counseler knovveth not vvherein hones∣tie consisteth, and hovve farre it extendeth, he can neyther make vvise deliberation, nor good re∣solution.
Moreouer, in appoin∣ting offices to meete persons, & in revvarding euery man accor∣ding to his deserts, the knovv∣ledge of the vertues is so neces∣sary, as a counseler can not bee vvithout it. The Prince maye knovve vvhyther his counseler hath suche knovvledge or not, by demaunding hym such lyke questions as these are. VVhat things bee needefull to the ob∣taining of the chiefe felicitie in thys lyfe? vvhat is Prudence? vvhat is Iustice? vvhat is For∣tytude? and vvhat partes they haue, vvhyther it be better for a Prince to be couetous or pro∣digall, and vvhich of those ex∣treemes dravve nighest to the vertue of liberalitie? vvherein
clemency doth consist, & vvhi∣ther it be better to be ouer mer∣cyfull, or to seuere, and hovve many vvayes a man maye of∣fend against Fortitude? Againe, vvherein magnificencie doth consist, and vvhat contraries it hath. The Prince also maye knovve hys councelers skill in these matters by hys doinges, studies, and trade of lyfe. The fixt qualitie is to be pol∣litike, that is to say, to be prac∣tised Pollicie. in gouernement, both in time of peace and vvarre, for the office of the Prince, is not onely to gouerne vvell his peo∣ple, but also to defende them from all violence. And there∣fore the counseler had neede to be skilfull as vvell in martiall
affayres, as in cyuill gouerne∣ment. And first as touching cy∣uill gouernmēt, he must knovv that euerye common vvealth consisteth of tvvo parts, vvhich I maye call here for difference sake, the body and the soule. By the body I meane the habitati∣ons or dvvelling places, vvher∣in the aire first is to be conside∣red, as vvhyther it bee hote, colde, or temperate, then the scyte thereof, as vvhyther it be neare to some Sea, running streame, or standing vvater, also vvhyther such scyte be high, or lovv, dry, or moyst, in fruitfull soyle or barren grounde, nighe to, or farre fro the enimie. Al∣so to vvhat vvindes it is most subiect, for according to these
considerations, the streetes in Cities or tovvnes ought to bee made, vvyde, or strayte, open to one vvinde, and shut to ano∣ther, according as they be good or hurtfull, the market places aptly placed, and the houses built in such order, and hauing such shape, as is most necessary and conuenient to serue al pur∣poses. VVherby it seemeth by my Authors vvordes, that the counseler had neede to be skil∣full in Architecture, vvhich in deede is a noble Scyence, and necessary to all men, but speci∣allye to counselers and Magi∣strates. By the sovvle of the common vvealth, is ment the gouernmét of the same, vvher∣in first is to bee considered, of
vvhat maner of forme it is, as vvhither it be gouerned by one onely King or Prince, as the Kingdome of Spayne, Portu∣gale, and Castyll: or by noble men onely, as Venice novve, or as Sparta in olde tyme past: or by the cōmon people, as novv in oure dayes the Cyties of Svvyzerland, called the Can∣tovvnes: or by the king and his nobles, as the Kyngdome of Denmarke, and as Rome vvhen it had kings: or by the king and his commons, as for a certayne tyme the Empire of Persia vvas gouerned: or by Nobles and commons togyther, as Rome after they had put dovvne there kings and chosen Consulls and Trybunes: & the lyke gouern∣ment
vvas in Lacedemony and Athens, & in our tyme in Flo∣raunce and Seane, and dyuers other common vvealths in Ita∣lie: or vvhither it be gouerned by a king, his nobles, and com∣mons, all three togither, as the Empire of Almanie, the king∣dome of Pollonia, of Arragon in Spayne, and also of Eng∣lande, and in euerye one of these gouernments, the coun∣seler ought to knovve hovve, and by vvhat meanes the state may be preserued, augmented, or decayed, vvhat perilles maye happe, and hovv the same may be remedyed vvith lest trouble, coste, and expences. VVhat lavves and Magistrats are most meete and necessary for euerye
gouernment. For it is vnpossi∣ble for the counseler that is ig∣noraunt in these thinges, to re∣medy all such disorders as may chaunce. Neyther can he coun∣sell his Prince hovve to behaue himselfe vvyth this friende, or that confederate, vvith this or that foe, nor knovv hovv much the one may further hym, and the other hynder hym. Thus muche of cyuill gouernment. Novve as touching Marshall affayres or vvarlyke pollicye, the counseler ought to knovve such circumstaunces as doe be∣long to a good Souldiour, Cap∣taine, or generall, as hovv Soul∣dyours are to be leauied, mus∣tred, and armed, hovve they should Marche, hovv to be en∣camped,
hovv to fight, hovve to retire, hovv a Campe should be fortified, and hovv a tovvne should be besieged or defended, and finally, all such thinges as doe appertayne to the Arte of vvarre. But novve to knovve vvhyther the counseler be thus pollitike or not, the prince may trye hym, by asking these or such like questions here follo∣vving. As vvhyther it be bet∣ter to builde a Citie in a ferty ll or barren soyle? vvhich vvinds are to be barred from an habi∣tation or dvvelling place? hovv manye vvayes a state or king∣dome is vvoont to bee lost? by vvhat meanes the good go∣uernement of anye common vvealth is decayed? of vvhat
causes seditions and rebellions doe spring? hovv they may be oppressed? vvherin the povver of a Prince doth consist? vvhy∣ther in riches, or in good Soul∣diers? hovv manye vvaies one Prince vvythout slaunder may make vvarre vppon another Prince, that hath giuen no iust occasion therevnto? vvhyther it be better to tarie the enimye at our ovvne home, or to seeke him at his home, hovv manye things a Prince hath to consi∣der before he enter into vvarre? and being entred, hovve many before he fight anye battayle? and hauing fought, hovv many things he hath to consider after he hath vvonne or lost the vic∣torie. To vvhich and such like
questions, if he can rightly and readily ansvvere, he is vvorthy to bee called a pollitike coun∣seler. The seauenth qualitie belon∣ging to a counseler is to bee a Traueling of Coun∣tries. traueler and to haue seene not onely all the terretories of hys Prince, but also manye other Countries, and specially those that bee eyther friendes or eni∣mies to his prince, so as he may vnderstande their gouernment both in time of peace & vvarre, and their reuenevves as vvell ordinary as extraordinary: also hovv the Princes and the sub∣iects of those countries do like one of another, and hovv they agree or disagree amongest themselues, of vvhat povver
they be, vvhat Forts & Holdes they haue, hovv they are main∣tayned and kept, vvhat trade of lyfe and trasfique the common people vseth, of vvhat nature, disposition and manners they be, and such like things necessa∣rie to be knovvne. VVythout consideration of vvhich things, vvho so traueleth into straunge countries spendeth his tyme in vayne, as the yong Napolitan that had beene at Rome, and at hys returne, coulde render no good accompt of his trauelle to the Prince that gaue him leaue to go abroade, but onely hovv he had seene vvalles, tovvers, cvties, tovvnes, hvlles, dales, floudes, trees, and busshes, of all vvhich things he had plenty at
home, and therefore vvas com∣maunded by the Prince from thencefoorth to tarye styll at home. But the vvise traueiler obserueth such profitable thin∣ges as are before tolde, and ma∣ny more very diligently, & by comparing the straunge coun∣tries first one vvith another, & then all those vvith his ovvne, is able to iudge of the gouern∣ment of hys ovvne countrie, hovve good or euill it is, and knovveth hovv to roote out all abuses and euill customes, and to plant good in their stead. He knovveth hovve to entertayne straungers, be they friends, foes, or nevvtralls, by reason that he is acquainted vvith their man∣ners and conditions, & can ap∣ply
his vvordes, vvryting, and deedes, according as the condi∣tion of the men, of the matter, of the tyme, and of the Prince shall require, knovving both the commodities and discom∣modities of tymes and places, vvherby the Prince or his coū∣sell can neuer bee decey ued in any thing, by vvrong or false information of straungers, ney∣ther shall hee neede to depende vppon their iudgement. The Prince to knovve vvhy ther his counseler bee a traueiler, and vvhat profite hee hath reaped thereby, maye question vvyth him in this vvise. Hovv many myles contayneth the length of Fraunce, and hovv many in breadth, and also hovv manye
in circute, vvhat notable cities, tovvnes, and Vniuersities it hath? & specially vvhat holdes and Fortes? And on vvhat side the countrie is most easie to be inuaded, vvhat floudes and streames it hath that bee not vvádable, vvhat vertue or vice is most proper or peculyer to the French men, and in vvhat thing they most delyght? also vvherin the nobilitie of Fraūce differeth from the nobilitie of Englande? and vvherein their people differ from oures? hovv much their buildings differ frō oures? vvhich of the tvvo kings of Fraunce and Englande hath most absolute povver? vppon vvhat occasions and hovve the people of Fraunce is vvont to
vvithstande their prince? And vvherein their seruitude diffe∣reth from the seruitude of our people? hovv the king of Fran̄ce leauyeth his Souldiours? hovv they are exercised and trayned? And in marching through the countrie, vvhat order is taken and vvhat prouision is made, that the poore countriemen be not spoyled nor molested by them? The like questions may bee demaunded of anye other countrie, or vvythout asking these questions it is easie to per∣ceyue by his ovvne talke of the countries vvhere he hath bene, vvhat profite he hath gathered. For if he be alvvayes ready ey∣ther to condemne straunge coū∣tries and their customes or go∣uernment
and to prayse hys ovvne, or else contrary vvise to prayse the others & to dispraise his ovvne, vvithout due consi∣deration or comparison had: it is an euident signe that hee maketh no distinctiō of things, and vvhereas is no distinction, there can be no choyse or elec∣tion, and vvhere election vvan∣teth, there is no vvisedome nor iudgement, and vvhere vvise∣dome and iudgement fayleth, all things fayle. The eyght qualitie requisite in a counseler, is to knovve as Knowledge of the Prin∣ces power. vvell the strength and povver of his Prince, as also of his al∣lyes, friendes, neyghbours and enimies, for vvant of vvhich knovvledge, manye tymes the
Prince is counseled to vvarre vvith those, vvith vvhome he ought to lyue in peace, and to make peace vvith those vvyth vvhome he should rather haue vvarres. And the Prince maye try the knovvledge of his coū∣seler in thys behalfe, by asking him these or suche lyke questi∣ons. As vvhat ordinary or ex∣traordinarye reuenevves hys friendes or foes haue? vvherof such reuenevves do rise? vvhat Souldyours they are able to make? hovve they are leauyed, armed, trayned, and exercysed? vvhat Captaines they haue? of vvhat thinges necessarye to maintaine vvarre, their coun∣tries haue eyther plentye or lack? and such lyke.
The ninth qualitie requisite in a counseler, is to loue hys The zeale and true loue of the Counseler towardes his country. common vvealth, so vvell as he doth alvvayes regarde the pro∣fite and honour thereof, more than his ovvne, esteeming in respecte thereof, neyther hys goodes, dignitie, lyfe, nor fame, vvithout vvhich loue, he can neuer bee so carefull, for the preseruation of hys common vvealth, nor so diligent in do∣ing his duetie, as hee ought to be, vvhich loue or zeale, vvhy∣ther the counseler hath or not, the Prince may knovve, partly by hearing his opinion in such matters as doe redovvnde more to the Princes peculier profite, than eyther to his honor, or to to the profite of the common
vvealth. As vvhyther vppon some fained cause, it be good to breake a league or truce made vvyth some Prince? or to de∣pryue Cyties or tovvnes of their liberties? or to charge the commons vvith some extreme subsedie, taske, loane, beneuo∣lence and such like. And partly he may knovv him by his con∣ditions. For if he be eyther an hipocrite or dissembler, a coue∣tous person or a flatterer, ready to vpholde the Princes vvordes vvith yea and naye, affirming alvvayes that the Prince maye doe vvhat him lysteth, and that he can not erre: it is vnpossible that such one can loue his com∣mon vvealth, but must needes be a great enimy thervnto.
The tenth qualitie is to haue a right iudgement in all things, Vpright iudgement. and to heare al men indifferent∣lye, vvythout partialitie or re∣spect of persons, and to thinke hymselfe more bounde to right and Iustice, than to Lorde or Duke, to friend or kinsmā. For the counseler is a publique per∣son, and therefore ought to bee voyde of all priuate affection, louing in general all good men for their vertue, and hating the euil in like maner for their vice, of vvhat countrie or nation so∣euer they be. For though there be many nations, yet there bee but tvvo sortes of people, that is eyther good or euil. Notvvith∣standing of those that be good, vvee are bounde both by Gods
lavve and mans lavve, to pre∣ferre in some respectes, our Pa∣rents, kinsmen, and country∣men before others. The Prince may knovv vvhither his coun∣seler hath this qualitie or not, by obseruing his doings, and marking vvhyther he be a pro∣curer of fauour, lyuing, office, or dignitie for his kinsmen, or others that bee not vvorthye therof. Agayne, vvhyther he be factious, that is to saye, fauou∣ring and maintayning one part of the state more than another, as the Nobles more than the cōmons or contraryvvise. And vvhyther he vpholdeth the Ec∣clesiasticall povver, more than the lay povver, vvhich kinde of men are perillous in all commō
vvealthes. For so as their facti∣on may stande, be it by right, or by vvrong, they care not vvhat mischiefe they doe, ha∣uing no regarde to the commō vvealth at al. Neither is it good for a Prince to admyt into hys counsell, anye man that hath beene knovvne to bee an open enimie to any dominion, Pro∣uince, Citie, or tovvne, that is subiect to the Prince, or to suf∣fer any such to beare rule in a∣ny of those places. For man be∣ing naturallye vindicatiue, ha∣uing once gotten povver to ex∣ecute his desire, vvill vndoub∣tedly vvhen he seeth his tyme, vnder the colour of Iustice, re∣uenge his priuate vvrong, vvith the publicke svvorde. Neyther
is it good to put anye man that is the heade of any faction, in authoritie, or to make more accompt of hym, than of the contrarye part: for that bree∣deth disdayne and hatred in that part, not onely against the partie so promoted, but also a∣gainst the Princes ovvne persó, for his partialitie shevved ther∣in, vvhich thing hath brought many Princes to their destruc∣tion. The leauenth qualitie belon∣ging to a counseler, is to bee a Iustice. iust man, vvylling to giue eue∣ry man his ovvne, according to his desartes, that is to saye, to chastice the euill vvithout cru∣eltie, and to revvarde the good vvith such revvarde as is due to
their vertue. The iust manne is faythfull and perfite in all hys doings, and therfore is beloued of both yong and olde, of rich and poore, and all men dare boldly commyt to hym them∣selues, their vvyues, their chil∣dren, their goods, their honor, and their lyues. The Prince may knovve vvhyther his coū∣seler be a iust man or not, part∣ly by his vvordes, and partly by his deeds, for his talke is graue, vvise, and full of truth, he al∣vvaves speaketh plainely, euen as his heart thinketh, he is no tatler, no tale teller, nor carryer▪ of nevves, no euyll reporter, slaunderer, or backbyter of the absent. For to carry tales pro∣ceedeth of a vile and base cou∣rage,
and they that vse it, are neuer faythfull. He is no hypo∣crite or dissembler, nor double of hys tongue, speaking one thing in presence, and another thing in absence, neyther vvill he report anye thing out of the mouth of hearesay, that lying Author, but onely that vvhich he hath seene or felt, he reproo∣ueth the euill courteously, and praiseth the good vvithout flat∣terie, for he vvill neyther flatter nor be flattered, yea rather hee louing nothing but truth, ha∣teth all lyers, flatterers, scof∣fers, iesters, & raylers. Novv as touching the deedes of the iust man, they are easily knovvne. For hee lyueth quietly conten∣ted vvyth hys ovvne, seeking
neyther honour nor ryches by any other meanes than by ver∣tuous trauell: VVhereby if he did not seeke preferment, hee should shevve hymselfe to bee vniust. For as it is ambition in him that is vnvvorthy to seeke honour or dignitie by fauour, money, or by anye other vn∣lavvful meanes, so is it covvard∣lynesse of courage in hym that vvell deserueth, not to seeke by vertuous meane hys due re∣vvard. Moreouer, the iust mans house and family is vvell orde∣red, and his seruaunts are mo∣dest, he dealeth vvith all men iustly, he payeth his dettes tru∣ly, he is no maintainer of busie bodies, nor byer of other mens dettes or doubtfull tytles, he is
no vvrangler in the lavve, but fleeth all occasion of sute, con∣tention, quarrell, stryfe, & sedi∣tion, and finallye he is louing, kinde, faythfull, friendly, chari∣table, and thankefull. VVhich vertues togither vvith the rest before mentioned, vvho so hath not, is no perfite iust man. The tvvelth qualitie requisite in a counseler is to bee liberall, Liberalitie. that is neyther to be couetous, nor yet prodigall, but to vse the meane betvvixt them bothe, vvhereby hee shall procure the loue and good vvill of the peo∣ple, vvhereas the couetous coū∣seler is hated of all men. For he hath al things to be solde, in so much as hee vvill neyther heare suters nor speake for su∣ters
vvithout revvarde, & such one vvith money is easily cor∣rupted, to betraye both Prince and Countrie, so as he maye doe it couertly and safely, he is also readie at all times, to agree to the confiscation of another mans goodes, be it by right or by vvrong, bicause his parte is therein. Againe, the prody gall coūseler on the other side vvith vvastfull spending, by little and little consumeth himselfe, and so looseth his reputation, and at length becommeth as euill or vvoorse than the couetous counseler. The Prince maye knovve vvhyther his counseler be liberall, couetous, or prody∣gall by his doings, for if he bee lyberall, he keepeth good hos∣pitalitie,
and he is good to the poore, and readie to relieue the necessitie of such as vvant, as in helping vvyth hys money and friendship to bestovve ho∣nest maydes in mariage, to re∣deeme poore prisoners and cap∣tyues, and also to pay the dettes of his honest friendes, that are falne into decaye, and to helpe such as are like to deserue vvell of the common vvealth. But if he be couetous he doth none of these thinges, for all is little y∣nough for himselfe, hath he ne∣uer so much, he lyueth misera∣blye scratching all to himselfe, and in any seruice of the Prince seeketh his ovvne gaine, & not the honor of his Prince, or the profite of the common vvealth,
he is euer crauing of the Prince and putting in billes of remem∣braunce eyther for himselfe, or for some of hys. Agayne, the prodigall counseler vvasteth his substaunce in making superflu∣ous bankets, in gaye and costly apparel, in Iustings, Torneis, in Musike, dauncing, on Havvkes and Hovvndes, on flatterers, iesters, and scoffers, and in kee∣ping a rable of ydle seruauntes vvithout any purpose, vvhich things vvhen hee is no lenger able to maintayne vvith his ovvn goods, then he is ready to take of other mens, and spareth not to rob both Prince & com∣mon vvealth, so as he may haue vvherevvith to feede his vaine delightes. VVhereby it appea∣reth
that both the couetous & prodigall counseler haue regard onely to themselues, and not to the Prince, or to the common vvealth. But the lyberall coun∣seler contraryvvise regardeth onely the profite and honor of his Prince, and therefore it is the Princes part to make much of such, and to enriche them by giuing them both lands, fees, & offices, to the intent that they hauing sufficient to maintaine their callings, neede not to feke any bie meanes to enrich them∣selues, and thereby fayle in do∣ing their dutie eyther tovvards him, or the common vvealth. The thirteenth quality requi∣site in a counseler, is to be bene∣ficiall Beneficial∣nesse. to his countrie, vvhich
vertue diffreth from liberality, for liberallitie consisteth in gy∣uing money or moneys vvorth as it ought to be giuen. But be∣neficialnesse, called in Latten BENEFICENTIA, consisteth in doing good turnes and friendly pleasures, as in helping the co∣mon vvealth and all the mem∣bers thereof vvith his good ad∣uise and counsell, by procuring the profite thereof, by comfor∣ting the afflicted, by praysing the good, and reproouing the euill, by defending, helping, and furthering vvyth hys fauour, povver, and authoritie suche as deserue vvell, vvhyther they require it or not: finally, hee is alvvaies ready to traueile vvith the Prince & his officers about
anye thing that is needefull to the common vvealth, & there∣fore he is vvell vvorthy to bee called a father of the common vvealth. Thys man is easely knovvne to the Prince by hys doings, and therfore there nee∣deth no further tryall to bee made of him. The fourteenth quality requi∣site in a counseler, is to be affa∣ble, Affability. that is to saye, gentle and courteous both of speeche and behauiour. For such one is ea∣sie to be spoken vvith, and re∣ceyueth both poore and riche vvith a chearefull countenance, ready at all times to heare their sutes vvith a pacient and atten∣tyue eare, vsing no frovvning lookes, nor frovvard ansvvers,
he vvill not be offended vvith euery vvorde that shall be vn∣aduisedly spoken by the suter, or by his inferior. Neyther is he captious, taunting, disdaine∣full, scornefull, or ouer seuere in his speeche, he commendeth vvithout flatterie, and reproo∣ueth vvithout villanye, he pro∣miseth vvith grauitie, and de∣nyeth vvith such curtesie, as the suter departeth thervvith vvell satysfied. The Prince shall knovve him by his conditions and behauiour in this sort. For the courteous man is alvvayes merrie and pleasaunt, vvatch∣full, diligent and circumspect, he goeth cleanly apparelled and loueth good companye, hee is not factious or partial, but vni∣uersall
and friendly to all men, he is free of speech, and a great enimy to all dissimulation and hypocrisie, he is neyther colo∣ricke nor provvde, for the cole∣ricke man is vvhote and hastie, and vvil be offended vvith eue∣ry little trifle, and in his fuerie vvyll neyther heare reason, nor speake reason. Againe, the provvde man is spitefull, and full of disdayne, esteeming no man but himselfe: vvherefore neyther of these men can be af∣fable or courteous, and therfore vnmeete to be counselers. The fiftenth quality requisite in a counseler is Fortytude, or valyaunt courage, vvhereby he is made stovvte and constant in the defence of right, & truth,
esteeming in respect thereof, neyther goods, lyfe nor honor. Againe, he is able to beare both prosperitie & aduersitie, vvith a contented quiet minde, so as he vvill not be puffed vp vvith the one, nor oppressed vvith the o∣ther. For hee contynueth al∣vvayes one, and is Lorde of himselfe, and therfore the more able to prouide a ready remedy for a soden mischiefe, as vvell in his ovvne behalfe, as also in the behalfe of his Prince and common vvealth in tyme of seruice, and to encourage both Prince and people vvhen neede requyreth. The Prince shall knovv him by tryal in this ma∣ner. For the valyant man is al∣vvayes an earnest louer of the
truth, and a cruell enimie to all lyers, flatterers, scoffers, & tell tales, vvhich are the corrupti∣on and plague of all Courts, for by their meanes, the Prince syldome or neuer heareth the truth, vvhereas contrarivvise, this man letteth not to speake the truth to the Prince at all tymes vvythout respect of fa∣uour, or feare of displeasure, & boldly reprooueth the abhomi∣nable lyes of the false flatterers, for this man is no hypocrite or dissembler, but free of hys speech, and iust in his dealings. Let the Prince therefore chose suche a man to be of his coun∣sell, and vtterly refuse him that is a friend to flatterers, and ies∣ters, or that vvill hide the truth
from him, let him also bevvare of the couetous man that lo∣ueth money, for he in hope of gaine vvill sell both his ovvne freedome and other mens. And finally let him neuer admyt in∣to his counsell a covvarde, or faynt hearted man, that is not able to suffer the losse of things transitory, as of vvyfe, children, friendes, ryches, or suche lyke, but vvill mourne and sorrovve vvithout measure. For suche one is an effeminate and chyl∣dishe person, and not vvorthy to serue in that place. Hauing hytherto treated suf∣ficiently Qualities of the body. of the qualities of the minde that bee requyred in a counseler, vvee come novve to speake somevvhat of the quali∣ties
of his body, not of all, but of those that be most needefull, to bee considered. VVhich as mine Author sayth be in num∣ber fiue, hys age, complexion, stature, making, and counte∣nance, vvhich some call fauour or feavvter of the face. And first as touching his age, Age. as he had neede to bee no lesse then thirtie yeres olde, so is it not good, that he be more than three score, for before thirtie yeres of age, mans vvytte for the most part is not stayed, his experience is small, and his pre∣sumption great, he is hote and high minded. Againe, hee can not be so graue as he ought to be, neither vvil the people haue any great credit in hym, yea,
rather they vvill mourmour a∣gainst him, and saye that hee is a verye yonge counseler. And therefore suche had more neede to go to schoole, and to follovv their learning, and to traueile coūtries to get langua∣ges, to follovve Campes and Courtes, and to see the diuersi∣tie of customes, lavves, and go∣uernments, that they may haue knovvledge, iudgement, and good experience of things, be∣fore they bee made gouernours or rulers. Againe, vvhen a man passeth three fcore, then his me∣mory faileth, his vvyttes vvan∣der, and through his experience hee becommeth vvylfull fro∣vvarde and obstinate, he is also colde in all his doings, and ta∣keth
not occasion vvhen it is offered. Also his body is vveake and feeble, and not able to tra∣ueile in the Princes causes, and to be short, he is rather a bur∣den and trouble to the Court, than othervvise. And therefore it is meete for such one to bee discharged of all seruice, and to be sent home revvarded by the Prince according to his deserts, to the intent he maye quietly spend the rest of his olde yeres at his ovvne home in the ser∣uice of God. And yet I vvyll not denye, but that there bee some of greater age, vvhiche haue both liuely vvyttes and strong bodies, and that there be yong men also not arryuing to thirty yeres, that be both graue,
vvise, and of good experience. But I speake of the most part, vvishing the Prince alvvaies to chose those that be of a meane age betvvixt both, vvhich being neyther to greene nor yet to drye, are the stronger and the more stayed, and the better able to serue the Prince, both vvith spirit & body at al assayes, yea, and the people also vvyll con∣ceiue the better opiniō of them, and haue them in the more re∣uerence. The complexion of the coū∣seler, is a thing not lightly to be Complexiō, regarged, for most commonly as men bee eyther vvell or evill complexioned, so are they vvel or euill conditioned, of com∣plexions there be foure kindes,
that is, sanguyne, colerique, fleg∣matique, and melancolique, of vvhich mine Author only prai∣seth the sanguyne & colorique, affirming suche as bee of that temperature, to bee most ser∣uiceable, eyther vvith spirite, or body. For in such do naturally raigne great gifts of the minde, as vvytte, memory, discourse, iudgement, iustice, loue, affabi∣litie, fidelitie, bounty fulnesse, magnanimitie, and fortytude. Againe, their bodies are health∣full, liuely, nymble and strong, and able to endure traueile and payne, vvhich kynde of men as they are partly knovvne by their doings: so mine Author vvould haue the Prince also to consult vvyth his learned Phy∣sitians
touching that matter. Fot to iudge vvel of complexti∣ons is a thing chiefely appertai∣ning to their Arte. And as for the flegmatique and melanco∣lique persó he vtterly reiecteth, saying, that the flegmatique man is rude, dull, heauie, and ignorant, and as for the melan∣colique man he is vvorst of all the rest, for he according to the nature of the humor, vvhich chiefely raineth in him, is cold, drie, and earthly, and therefore base and vile of courage heauy, sorovvful, miserable and vaine, an enimye to all noble deuises and vvorthy enterprises and so superstitious as those vvhich haue beene of that complexion haue vvith their dreames, false
visions and foolishe fantasies, confounded all the religions of the vvorld. And besides all this, the melancolique man is super∣stitious out of measure, and very enuie it selfe. For hee is a member of the frovvarde Pla∣net Saturnus, vvhereof suche complexioned men are called Saturnij, vvhiche bee most ab∣horred of the Astrologers, in so muche as Apolonius Tianeus did not let to vvryte, that hee once founde in the Citie of Ephesus a melancolique manne, vvho vvith his presence corrup∣ted the vvhole Citie in suche sort, as there grevve thereof a most terrible pestilence: vvher∣fore suche complexioned men are farre vnmeete to bee of a
Princes counsell. The meane stature in a coun∣seler is most laudable, that is to Stature▪ say, to be neyther to highe, nor yet to lovve, to fatte, nor yet to leane, for the long and leane man, and speciallye if he haue therevvith a long neck, is vtter∣ly condemned of the Phyloso∣phers, and iudged to bee some great lovvte and good for no∣thing Againe, to be ouer lovv, is as great a deformitie, for the lovve men bee they neuer so vvise, yet the people vvill haue them in no reuerence at all, but ieast of them, and call them dvvarffes. And most common∣ly such little men be also hasty, provvde, and presumptuous▪ vvherefore it is good that the
Prince chose for his counselers men of a meane stature, and therevvith neyther to fatte, nor yet to leane. For the ouer fatte man bellyed lyke a barrell, and likewise the ouer leane mā sha∣ped like a dried Congre, besides gyuing vvyth their presence cause of laughter, are thervvith sildome seene to be seruiceable. The body of a coūseler ought to bee vvell proportioned, ha∣uing Proportion of body. all his partes and mem∣bers aunsvverable one to ano∣ther in due proportion, so as there be no lack nor superfluitie in any part, as for example hys head maye not be to great, nor to small for his bodye, or one shoulder hier than another, nor one arme longer than another,
nor he maye not by defect of nature be crooke backte, splaye footed, squynt eyde, or lacke an eye, an arme, a hande, a legge, or foote, or any other part, nor likevvise haue more than hee ought to haue, for such defects of the bodye as come not by misfortune, but proceede ey∣ther of the vvant or superflui∣tie of nature, do betoken great imperfections of the minde, vvhich hath bene so much ob∣serued of the naturall Phyloso∣phers, as thys Prouerbe Cauc, asignatis did rise thereof, and is obserued of al men euen at this daye, in so much as no man al∣most vvyll take a common ser∣uaunt vvith anye suche defect, hovve much more then ought
a Prince to bevvare hovve he chooseth any such to be of hys counsell. A good visage and comblye countenaunce is verye requisite Vysage. also in a counseler. For that maketh him to bee both loued and reuerenced. His head ther∣fore vvoulde be rounde and of meane bignesse, and hys face vvould be somevvhat long, ra∣ther than altogither round, and therevvith neyther to blovvgh∣tye, nor yet to shrympe, his for∣head vvould be high, large and playne vvithout any vvrincles, his eyes neither to great nor to little, but in a meane betvvixt both, and therevvith not hea∣uye or dull, nor yet vvanton or often rolling to and fro, but
quick, liuely, and steadie, hys nose neyther to long nor to short, to great nor to small, nor ouer flat, or turned vpvvard, but playne and smooth, and to bee somevvhat hooked is no euill grace, for it betokeneth vvise∣dome and stovvtnesse of cou∣rage, his lippes vvould be ney∣ther to thick nor to thinne, nor hang ouer lovve dovvnvvarde. And to be short, all the parts of his face vvould be so proporti∣oned, as his countenaunce may bee alvvayes both graue and a∣miable. And thus vvee ende vvith the qualities of the body requisite in a counseler, vvherin vvee maye seeme perhappes to some folkes to be more curious than is needefull, thinking ma∣nye
of those thinges that vvee haue spoken, to be but tryfles and thinges of small vvaight, and yet suche tryfles are not to be passed ouer vvith silence: For truely vvhosoeuer vvill treate of any matter absolutely, must leaue nothing out, but must ex∣presse euery little part. And vve daylie see that if any man bieth a house, hee vvyll not onely vevve the bevvtiful places ther∣of, as Hall, Parlour, chambers, and such lyke, but also all the houses of offices, yea euen those that are not meete to be named. Againe, if a Prince be desirous to buye a horse, hee vvill tho∣rovvly vevve euerye parte and member of him, yea, and vvill not let to open his mouth vvith
his mouth, vvyth his ovvne handes, to see his teeth, and to knovve his age, hovve much more carefull then ought he to be in choosing of his counseler, into vvhose handes hee must commit both his goodes, hys lyfe, and his honor. Of the Princes choyse. WE say de in the beginning, vvhen vve defined vvhat a counseler vvas, that tvvo things in that definition vvere to bee considered, that is to saye, the sufficientcy of the man, and the choyse of the Prince, and that suche sufficientcy did consist in the qualities of the minde, and
in the qualities of the bodye, of both vvhich qualyties hauing hy therto sufficientlye treated, vve minde therefore novve to speake somevvhat of the Prin∣ces choyse. Touching vvhich matter mine Author hath set foorth nine remembraunces or aduertisementes to be obserued by the Prince vvhen he choseth a counseler, vvhereof bicause some bee rather confirmations of those that go before, than nevve precepts: And againe, by∣cause some are to be considered by the Prince before hee cho∣seth, and some to be obserued after he hath chosen: I thought good therefore to reduce them into a lesser number, and to make no more seuerall precepts
but sixe, declaring those first that are first to be considred, and then the others consequentlye, vvherein though I shall some∣vvhat differ from mine Author in order, yet in matter nothing at all. First, then the Prince hath to The first aduertise∣ment. consider, that all the honor, and dishonour, fame, and infamye, profite and losse, preseruation and destruction, as vvell of him∣selfe, as of all his people, vvholy dependeth vppon the good or euill choyse, of his counselers, for if they be vvell chosen, the Prince is iudged as vvell of straungers as of his ovvne sub∣jectes to be vvise and carefull of his common vvealth, and for that, they extoll him vvith infi∣nite
prayses, and his subiectes are readye at all tymes to obey both him & his counsell, thin∣king themselues to bee in great safetie, vvhilste they are gouer∣ned by suche vvise counselers, assuring themselues that all things must needes prosper that they take in hande. But contra∣rivvise if the counselers be euill chosen, then they condemne the Prince of great follye, they bee vnquiet and alvvayes murmu∣ring against the counsel, saying, that all vvyll come to naught. And if there be anye noyse or likelyhood of vvarre, they trē∣ble and quake for feare, bicause they mistrust the vvisedome, manhoode, and pollicie of their gouernours, saying, that they
haue not one man able to de∣fende them, and if anye thing succeede vvell, contrarie to the peoples expectation, they im∣pute it rather to chaunce, than to anye vvisedome or foresight of the counsell: vvhereas on the other side, if the counselers be vvise men, the people cōcey∣ueth such an opinion of them, as they vvill not beleeue that they erre, vvhen they erre in deede, for vvise men sildome erre. VVherefore, sith so many euils doe rise of the euil choise, and so many good things of the good choyse, the Prince there∣fore in mine opinion can not be to choyse in his choyse, and so let this suffice, for the first ad∣uertisement.
Secondly, the Prince to the The second aduertise∣ment, intent he may haue a plentyfull choyse of men meete to serue his turne had neede not onely to consider of suche as keepe in his Court, and be nigh about him: but also to seeke to be in∣formed of so manye as hee can besides, giuing charge and com∣mission to his Lieutenants and chiefe officers abroade in euery Sheere, to learne by diligent in∣quirie, vvhich men in their ly∣mittes, be knovvne to be most sufficient to such purpose, and to sende vp Kalenders of their names vnto the Prince, to the intent that hee maye sende for such as hee shall thinke good, pretending onlye to knovve them & to be acquainted vvith
them himselfe: appointing some reasonable allovvance to beare their charges in iorneying to & fro. By this meanes the Prince shall haue choyse of many, a∣mongst vvhom it is more like∣ly to finde out some one excel∣lent man, than amongst a fevv. And besides that, he shal vvinne great loue, and fame of his peo∣ple, and encourage all estates, to endeuour themselues, to get vvisdome and knovvledge, and to folovve such vertuous exer∣cises, as they may deserue ther∣by to be named and numbred amongst those, that are thought meete for such purpose. And by this meanes also, the Prince shall knovve vvhat able men he hath vvithin his realme, of
vvhat skill they be, and vvher∣in they are most meete to serue hym, at any time that he shall haue neede to employe them. And though hee shall sildome haue neede to chose aboue one, or tvvo, to serue him as coun∣selers: yet he must shevv him∣selfe courteous tovvards all the rest, & praise their vvell doing, exhorting them to contynue still therein, and therevvith put them in good hope of prefer∣ment in tyme to come, revvar∣ding some vvith offices, some vvith fees, and some vvith mo∣ney, and some he maye retaine in his Court, and discharge the reast, vsing himselfe in such sort tovvardes them all, as they all may haue cause to bee satisfied
and contented. Thirdly, if the Prince bee a Lorde of dyuers countries and The thirde aduertise∣ment. nations, I vvoulde not vvishe him to bee altogyther vvedded vnto his ovvne natiue countri∣men, but rather to choose some of euery one of those countries to be of his counsell. For the Prince is a publique person, and therefore ought to be vvithout priuate affection and respect, or partialitie, yea he ought to bee a naturall father to all his true subiectes, of vvhat countrie so∣euer they be, and stepfather to none, to vvhose counsell, if any of the subiects be vvronged or grieued, they haue onely to re∣paire for redresse. But if none of their ovvne countriemen be of
the counsell: hovv or vvhen I pray you shall they bee harde? for vvho knovveth their cus∣tomes, their humors, desires, commodities, discommodities, gaynes, and losses so vvell as they? or vvho vvill be so ready to heare their causes, sutes, and complaints as their ovvne coū∣trymen, vvhich are forced by lavve of nature to loue them, and to tender them. Besides this if the Prince shoulde haue no counselers, but of hys ovvne countrymen, all the other coū∣tries vvould thinke that eyther hee did not esteeme them, or counted them as slaues, or at the least did not truste them. VVherof the first vvould breed hatred in them tovvardes the
Prince and the counsell, the se∣conde vvoulde cause them to seeke libertie, and to make con∣spiracies and rebellions, and the thirde vvoulde make them to become vnfaythfull, disobedi∣ent, and obstinate subiectes. VVherefore these things being vvell vvayed and considered, I beleeue the Prince shall finde it muche better to choose hys counselers out of all such do∣mynions as are subiect vnto him, then out of one, or tvvo onely. Fourrhly, the Prince maye not be to hastie, but take good The fourth aduertise∣ment. deliberation in making hys choyse of suche men as are na∣med vnto him, resoluing vpon none of them all, vntill he hath
thorovvly tryed them, as vvell by report of the counttye from vvhence they come, as also by his ovvne examination. And first as touching the report of the countrie, it shall be necessa∣rie for the Prince, as vvell to a∣uoyde the fauourable, as slaun∣derous tales that maye be tolde hym, to giue euerye man leaue to accuse the persons vvhome he mindes to make his counse∣lers, subpenatalionis, that is to say, that the accuser shall suffer the payne or penaltie of the cryme, vvherof he accuseth the partie, if hee can not duely prooue it. And the Prince on the other side must take such order as the defendant may not hinder, or stop by his authoritye, povver,
or friendship, anye accusation that may be made against him. And sith all men are subiect to affects, the blinders of all truth: I vvoulde vvishe the Prince in these causes, before due try all had, to giue no credit to the re∣port of anye man, be he noble, or vnnoble, spiritual or tempo∣rall. By this meanes the Prince shall be sure to haue none but good men to bee of his coun∣sell, for the cuill vvill not bee ouer hastie in seeking aduance∣ment by suche kinde of try all. Truely the Romaines in olde tyme did verie straightly exe∣cute this kinde of discypline in choosing theyr Magistrates, vvhereby as theyr common vvealth greatly then florished:
so aftervvarde for lack thereof, it quickly decayed and came to naught. Novve as touching the Princes examination to bee made by hymselfe, I saye by himselfe, and not by his Depu∣tie, he hath to examine vvhat sufficientcie is in the person to be elected, by considering and measuring euery part of hym, both soule & body. To vvhich ende mine Author hath made and discribed vnto him hereto∣fore tvvo apt measures to mea∣sure vvithall, the one of fiftene partes, & the other of fiue, that of fiftene partes serueth to mea∣sure the soule, and the other of fiue parts to measure the body. To vvhich measures thoughe very fevve are to he found, that
are aunsvverable in euery con∣dition: yet let those that are more aunsvverable be alvvayes chosen before those that be lesse aunsvverable, and let those that haue more giftes of the minde and lesse of the body, be prefer∣red before those that haue more of the bodye, and lesse of the minde. And if anye tvvo that stande to be elected, be equall in both giftes, and yet be not of like birth, povver, and authori∣tie, or if the Prince perhaps fa∣uoreth the one more then the other vpon some affection, or for some seruice done, then it is good reason that suche person bee chosen before the other. VVherfore sith such things are to be considered, vvhen com∣parison
is made, mee thinkes mine author should haue done very orderly, to haue added also vnto his tvvo measures before descrybed. A thirde measure, briefly contayning some of the chiefe giftes of Fortune, as no∣ble lynage, honors, ryches, fa∣uoure of the Prince, and suche lyke. VVhich kinde of measure mine Author left out as I sup∣pose, bicause hee thought that such as vvere aunsvverable to the tvvo first measures, ought of duty to be promooted by the Prince to honours and lyuing, and that they deserue to bee lo∣ued as vvel of the noble men, as to be honored of the common people. But sith noble birth, is a gifte that hath beene alvvayes
much esteemed, and that vvof∣thily, so long as the successors doe not degenerate from their Predicessors: And that suche giftes comes not immediately from the Prince, but requy reth contynuaunce of time, to bee perfite in his kinde: (for it is an olde saying, that the Prince may make a noble manne, but not a Gentle man): Also sith there be manye other giftes of Fortune vvhich man maye ob∣tayne, vvithout the Prince: as honors gyuen by straūge Prin∣ces, ryches, goodlucke in anye thinge that he taketh in hande, be it in seruice of the Prince or othervvise, also friendship, loue and fauour, as vvell in straunge countries as in his ovvne, and
many such like: It had bene ne∣cessary, I say to haue added also this thirde measure, to the in∣tent that the Prince might haue a trinitie of measures to mea∣sure both the length; breadth, and deapth of hys counseler. vvhiche three measures, if the Prince do righly vse in making his choyse it shall vvell appere that hee chooseth vvith judge∣ment, and not for fauour or vp∣on any vvyll or povver. For all offices, as mine author saith, are vvoont to bee giuen but three maner of vvayes, that is eyther for the deserts & sufficientcy of the receyuer, or for tho fauour & affection of the Prince borne tovvards the partie, or else for that the Prince of his owne po∣vver
vvill haue it so vvhere∣of the first belōgeth to the iust prince, and the other tvvo to the vniust tirant. And truely he did very vvel in saying that offices bee gyuen but three manner of vvayes, for othervvise it might haue beene obiected, that offi∣ces manye times doe passe by a fourth vvaye, vvoorser than all the rest, and that is, by vvay of sale for filthy lucre sake, vvher∣by for the most parte, iustice is bought & sold, the Prince euill serued, & the poore people pilde and povvld. Thus then hauing shevved hovve the Prince should choose no man to be of hys counsell, before due try all had, and also hovve such try all is to be made, I leaue to speake
anye further, touching this ad∣uertisement, the last of those that are to be considered by the Prince, before he chooseth any man to be of his counsell: for the other tvvo aduertisements here follovving, are to be put in execution after he hath chosen. Fiftly, then the Prince ha∣uing made his choyse in suche The fift ad∣uertisment. sorte as is before taught, shall doe vvell vvithin tvvo or three dayes after, to call the nevve elect vnto hym, and in open presence of his Court & hous∣holde, briefly to tell him hovv hee hath chosen him onely for his vertues and good desertes, and vvhat credit both hee him∣selfe and all his people hath in him, & vvhat shame it vvould
be vnto him, if he shoulde not vvith his doings ansvvere both his and their expectation. That done, he must commende vnto him both the honor and profite of his state, friendly requiring him, yea, and straightlye char∣ging him to admonishe hym, and vvith all due reuerence to correct him, vvhen hee seeth it needefull, and in anye vvise to be playne vvith him, and to tell him the truth vvithout all flat∣terie or dissimulation, bicause he vvas chosen chiefely for that purpose. For as it is not meete that euery man should tell the Prince of his faults: so is it re∣quisite that some should admo∣nish him vvhen he erreth. For othervvise, Princes should be
in vvoorse case than all men, being vtterly destitute of fayth∣full friendes, vvhose office is to speake the truth, & to tell their friends friendly of their faultes at times conuenient, and not to flatter at any tyme. Neyther let the Prince bee vnvvylling to heare the truth modestly tolde, and in due tyme, at his counse∣lers handes: Yea rather let him encorage him thervnto though it be against the stomake, for o∣thervvise he shal be ouervvhel∣med vvith lies, and forged tales, and neuer heare the truth. Fr∣nallye, as the Prince must put him in feare of harde punish∣ment, if he shal leaue to doe his duetie so must hee lykevvise put him in hope of due revvard,
if he contynue in his vvell do∣ing. VVherby the Prince shall both vvynne to hymselfe the prayse and loue of his people, and also make his nevve chosen counseler, the more careful and diligent in his vocation. That done, let him be solem∣ly The sixt ad∣uertisment. svvorne to be true and fayth∣full to the Prince, and to pro∣mise before God to be diligent and carefull in procuring the vvealth, profire, and honour of hys Prince, and of the common vvealth, and to deale truely and iustly vvith all estates, vsing in∣differencie vvithout corruptiō, svvaruing from iustice at no time, either for meede or dreed, for loue or hate, for friende, or foe. Moreouer, neuer to haue
priuie conferēce vvith the Am∣bassadors or messengers of for∣reyne Princes, vvithout speciall commission from the Prince, nor to recey ue revvarde, fee, or yerely pention, of any forraine Prince. For by such meanes the princes secretes are many times reuealed, and the causes of for∣raine princes more fauoured, than the princes ovvne causes, or those of the cōmon vvealth. The coūseler being thus sworne the prince shal be assured of him and may the better trust hym. And if the counseler shoulde chaunce to fayle in his dutye, after he hath taken his othe, the Prince maye the more iustly punish him as a contempnor of God & of his soueraine. Again,
the counseler vvill be the more circūspect in his doings, & the lesse bolde to commit any trea∣chery. Furthermore, by meanes of his oth he may the more safe∣ly & boldly denie the vnright∣full & vnreasonable requests, of his parentes, kinsfolkes, friends, and seruaunts: yea, rather both they, and all others knovving him to be svvorne, vvill be a∣fray de to make anye sute vnto him, that is not iust or reasona∣ble. And here endeth the sixt and laste aduertisement, the vvhich togither vvith the other fiue before declared, doe com∣prehende the full effect of the nine aduertisements or memo∣rialles set foorth by myne Au∣thor.
The effect of my Authors Peroration or con∣clusion. THus you haue heard vvhat a counsell is, and hovv the Prince that vvil gouerne vvell, ought to haue seauen counsels, differing one from another in offices, officers, and in authori∣tie. You haue heard also vvhat a counseler is, and vvherein his sufficientcy consisteth, that is to say, in hauing fifteene qualities of the minde, and fiue of the body. Finally, there haue bene declared vnto you certaine ne∣cessary aduertisments to be ob∣serued by the Prince, vvhen he chooseth his counseler. And
this is the somme and effect of all that mine Author thought meete to treate of in this his firste of those eyght Bookes, vvhich he hath promised to set foorth touching thys matter, vvho vvisheth that he had bene as able to frame such a counsell in deede, as hee hath heare des∣crybed in vvryting, for then he vvoulde haue set foorth to the vvorlde a visible example of the goodnesse thereof, to bee seene and felt, rather than this ima∣gined patterne, to be considered onely vvith the minde. And bi∣cause he doubteth not but that some vvyll bee readye to finde faultes vvith this his vvorke: he briefely aunfvvereth to such obiections as maye be lay de a∣gainst
him. And first vvhereas it maye bee obiected, that it is not a meete thing for a Prince to take such paine, and to trou∣ble himselfe in making so pre∣cyse a choyse. He aunsvvereth that it is no trouble or paine at all, in respect of the great ease, rest, and quietnesse, that he shall thereby purchase to hymselfe, vvhen he shall haue to deale in great affayres, and matters of vvayte: be it eyther in time of peace or vvarre, for be they ne∣uer so troublous or vvaytie of themselues: yet to him hauing such counsells and counselers, they shall seeme very easie and light. Some againe vvill obiect that the Prince is free, & that he maye giue & dispose his offices
as him pleaseth best. VVhervn∣to mine author ansvvereth that the freedome or libertie of the Prince is no freedome, vvhen it passeth the bounds of reason, and that in preferring vvill be∣fore reason, he ought rather to be called a tyrant than a Prince. Thirdly, it may be sayde, that it behooueth Noble men & Gen∣tlemen, to bee revvarded accor∣ding to their birth and calling, vvhich mine Author denyeth not, and yet therevvith sayth, that it is not al one thing to re∣vvarde a noble man & to make him a counseler, sith there bee meanes ynough to revvard him vvythout that, vnlesse he bee meete for it. Fourthly, it may be obiected, that there are no
such counselers as he hath des∣crybed, to hee founde in all the vvorlde. VVherevnto he aun∣svvereth, that there are a num∣ber of good men and verie suf∣ficient in all conditions to bee had, if the Prince choose them for their vertue and deserts, and not by his ovvne affection, fa∣uour, or povver. And thoughe there were not, yet if the Prince vvould doe as he ought to doe, he might make men of stones. For to vvhat soeuer the Prince is giuen, be it to vice, or to ver∣tue, all men vvill follovve the same. And therfore if the Prince delight in vvise, learned, and vertuóus counselers, mine Au∣thor sayth, that he dare aduen∣ture his heade that a number of
Barrons and Knightes in fevve yeres, vvoulde become most sufficient counselers. And for proofe thereof, vvisheth that some Prince vvoulde put these his preceptes in vre, not doub∣ting, but that in so doing, hee should quickly see such an alte∣ration in his Courte, as those that doe novv leavvdely spende their tyme in ydlenesse, vayne pastymes, and in vvantonnesse of life, vvould giue themselues to lavvdable exercises, and ther∣by make the Court to become a schoole of vertue, and knovv∣ledge. VVhich should be to the great honour of the Prince, to the profite of the common vvealth, and to the glorye of God, vvho giue grace to all
Christian Princes, so to order their courtes, and to giue such ensample themselues, as the cō∣mon people may learne therby, to liue in the feare of God, & to doe that vvhich is acceptable in his sight, and thus I ende thys treatise. FINIS.
