12386 S119057 99854264 19673
THE HISTORY OF THE Noble Marques. woodcut of woman spinning thread, stag hunt in background
woodcut of a queen
THE PLEASANT AND SWEET HISTORY of patient Grissell. Shewing how she from a poore mans Daughter, came to be a great Lady in France, being a patterne for all vertuous VVomen. Tanslated out of Italian. woodcut of a woman spinning thread, stag hunt in background London printed by E.P. for Iohn Wright, dwelling street at the signe of the
woodcut of lady with man and woman following
The pleasant and sweet History of patient Grissell shewing how she from a poor mans Daughter, came to bee a great Lady in France: being a patterne for all Vertu∣ous Women. CHAPTER I. How and in what place the Noble Maquesse was dwelling. IN the Countrey of Salusa, which lyeth neere Itay and France, there lived a noble and worthy Pince, named Guater, Marquesse and Lord of Salusa, a man of such vertues that the world did ring of: beloved of his subiects for his good parts, that before his dayes nor since was very few the like, for his continuall care of his subiects good, and they in their dutiful∣nesse,
sought to out-strip him in love, from his youth, his onely exerise was hunting, wherein he tooke such delight, that nothing was more plea∣sing unto him: withall, the subiects loyalty to this worthy Prince in their carefulnsse, that such excellent ver∣tues should not faile for want of issue, intreated him by humble petition to marry, that from his loynes their chidren might enioy the like happi∣nesse. This speech thu spoke to the Prince drave such love and affction into his minde, that most graciously he made them answer, that when it shoud please Go that hee should see one that he could lve, ee most wil∣lingly wud fulfil their good and honest requst: with ll this answer gave them such content, that they prayed earnestly to see that day. CHAP. 3 Of the good and honest life of faire Griss, and hr old father Inicol. NEre to the famous City of Sa∣se was a poore village named Clu, in the way going to a great and
spacious Forrest, where the Noble Mar∣qe used daily his pleasure in hunting; the poorer sort got their living, som by spin¦ning som carding others by keeping sheep, amongst the rest of the inhabitants, there was an old man named Ianicola, whose wife being dead, shee left him one onely Daughter named Gissell, who by the Countrey manner, was named the faire. These two lived contentedy together the aged Father goes to get wood for fire the Maid makes his bed, gets his breakfast ready against his comming home, drives her sheepe to the common sets her house in order, and fals to her ordinary worke of spinning: when the old man comes home, she sets his meate, makes much of him, shewes al the obedience that may be to the aged man; he in requitall of her love as an incouragement to all obedint children, powrs out his hearty praers in her behalf, praying the Almighty God to blesse her, & to give her that happines which belongs to so good a child, no doubt but his petition was heard for God gave a bessing to her, as you may hear by the happy comming of the Marquesse that way, which may seeme suddenly after.
woodcut of knight on horseback CHAP. 3 How the Marquesse of Salusa, riding a hunting fell in love with the faire Grissell. A Nbe Marquesse, As he did ride a hunting
hard by a Forrest side, A faire and comely Maiden, As she did sit a spinning, his gentle eye espide, Most faire and comely, And of comely grace was she, although in simple attire, She sung full sweetly, With pleasant voyce melodiously which set the Lords heart on fire, The more he lookt, the more he might, Beauty bread his hearts delight, And to this comely Damsell then he went. God speed (quoth he) thou famous flower, Faire Mistresse of this homely bower, Where love and vertue dwels with sweet content, With comely gesture And modest mild behaviour, she bid him welcome then, She entertaind him In faithfull friendly manner, and all his gentlemen. The noble Mrquesse In's hart felt such a flame, which set his sences at strife;
Quoth he faire Maiden Shew me soone what is thy name, I meane to make thee my wife. Grisse is my name quoth she, Far unfit for your degree, A silly maiden and of parents poore. Nay Grissell thou art rich he said, A vertuous faire and comely maid, Grant me thy love and I will aske no more. CHAPTER 4. How the Marqusse married faire Grissel, an how the Lords desired him to put her away, because she was of so meane a blood. AT lngth sh consented, And being both contented, they married were with speed: Her countrey russet Was chang'd to silke and Velvet, as to her state agreed; And when that she Was trimly tyred in the same, her beauty shined most bright, Farre staining every,
Other faire and Princely Dame, that did appeare in her sight. Many envied her therefore, Because she was of parnts poore, And twixt her Lord and she great strife did raise. Some said this, and some said that, And some did call her beggars brat, And to her Lord they would her oft dispraise. O noble Marquesse, Quoth they why dost thou wrong us thus basely for to wed, That might have gotten An honourable Lady into your Princely bed? Who will not now, Your noble issue still deride, which shall hereafter be borne: That are of blood so base, Borne by the Mothers side, the which will bring them in scorn▪ Put her therefore quite away, And take to you a Lady gay, Whereby your linage may renowned be. Thus every day they seem'd to prate
That malic't Grissels good estate, Who all this while tooke it most patiently. CHAP. 5 How the noble Marquesse had two children by patient Grissell, how he sent for them, and told her they must be murthered, and of her patience. When that the Msrquesse, Did see that they wre bent thus against his faithfull wife, Whom he most dearely, Tenderly and entirely, beloved as his life: Minding in secret For to prove her patient heart, thereby her foes to disgrace, Thinking to shew her A hard discourteou part; that men might pitty her case. Great with child this Lady was, And at last it cme to passe, Two godly children at one birth e had. A son and daughter God had sent, Which did her father wel content,
And which did make, their mothers heart full glad, Geat royall feasting Was at these childrens christenin and princly triumph made, Six weeks together, All Nobles that came thither, were entertain'd and staid, And when all these pleasant Sportings quite were done, the Marquesse a Messenger sent, For his young daughter An his pretty smiling sonne, declaring his full intent, How that the Babes must murthred be, For so th Marquesse did decres, Come, let me have the children then he said. With that faire Grissell wept full sore, She wrung her hands and said no more My graciou Lord must have his will obey'd.
CHAP. 6. Of the gret sorrow that Patient Gris∣sel, made for her Children. SHe tooke the Babies, Even from the nursing Ladies, betweene her tender armes, She often wishes With many sorrowfull kisses, that she might ease their harmes; Farewell, farewell, A thousnd times my children deare. never shall I sée you againe: 'Tis long of me Your sad and wofull Mother here, for whose sake both must be slaine. Had I béene borne of royall race, You might have liv'd in happy case, But you must dye for my unworthinesse. Come messenger of death (quoth she) Take my dearest Babes to thée, And to their father my complaints expresse. He tooke the children And to his noble Master,
be brought them both with speed, Who in secret sent them Vnto a noble Lady, to be brought up indeed; Then to faire Grissell, With a heavy heart he goes, where she sate mildly all alone, A pleasant gesture, And a lovely looke she shwes, as if no griefe she had knowne. (Qd he) my children now are slaine, What thinks fair Grissel of the same, Sweet Grissel now decare thy mind to me. Sith you my Lord are plas d with it Poore Grissel thinks the action fit, Both I and mine at your command will be. CHAP. 7. How patient Grissel was parted from the Nobe Marqusse, and sent to her Father again, and of a great mar∣riage was prepared the se∣cond match of the Marquesse. MY Nobles murmur, Faire Grissell at thy honour,
woodcut of gentleman with sword and I no ioy can have, Till thou be banisht, Both from the Court & presence, as they uniustly crave, Thou must be stript Out of thy stately garments all, and as thou cam'st to me, In homely gray, Instead of bisse and purest Pall, now all thy cloathing must be; My Lady thou mst be no more, Nor I thy Lord, which grievs me sore The poorest life must now content thy mind, A groat to thee I mst not give, Thee to maintaine while I doe live,
Against my Grissell such great foes I find. When gentle Grissel Did heare these wofull tidings, the teares stod in her eyes, Nothing she answered, No words of discontentment did frm her lips arise; Her Velvet gowne. Most patiently she stripped off, her Kirtle of silke with the same, Her russet gowne Was brought againe with many a scoffe to beare them her selfe she did frame When she was drest in this array, And was ready to part away, God send long life unto my Lord (quoth she) Let no offence be found in this, To give my Love a parting kisss. With watery eyes farewell my deare said he.
woodcut of woman with fan CHAP. 8. How patient Grissell was sent for to the wedding, and of her great hu∣mility and patience. FRom Princely Palace, Vnto her fathers Cottage, poore Grissell now is gone; Full sixteene winters She lived there contented; no wrong she thought upon,
And at that time through All the Land the speeches went, the Marquesse should married be Vnto a noble Lady great, Of high descent, and to the same all parties did agree. The Marquesse sent for Grissel faire, The Brides bed chamber to prepare, That nothing therein might be found awry, The Bride was with her Brother come, Which was great ioy to all and some, But Grissel tooke all this mo st patiently. And in the morning, When as they should be wedded, her patience there was tride, Grissel was charged Her selfe in friendly manner for to attire the Bride: Most willingly She gave consent to doe the same, the Bride in bravery was drest, And presently The noble Marquesse thither came, with all his Lords at his request. O Grissell I would aske of thee,
If to this match thou wilt agree, Methinks thy lookes are waxed wondrous coy. With that they all bgan to smile, And Grissel she replide the while, God send Lord Maquesse many yeeres of ioy. CHAP. 9. How the Marquesse being moved with her patience gave her two children were friends, and after lived in peace. THe Marquesse was moved To see his best beloved thus patient in distresse. He stept unto her, And by the hand he tooke her, these words he did expresse: Thou art my Bride And all the Bride I meane to have, these wo thy own children be. The youthfull Lady On her knees did blessing crave, her Bother as well as she, And you that envied her estate, Who I have made my loving mate,
Now blush for shame, and honour vertuous life. The Chronicles of lasting fame, Shal evermore exiolthe name, Of patient Grissel, my most constant Wife. CHAP. 10. Of the great feast that was made for pa∣tient Grissel, and her children, and old Ianicola. THe Lords & Gentlemen being asto∣nished looked one upon another, and séeing no remedy but that the noble Mar∣quesse had set an unremoveable love up∣on her, besought her to pardon them of their envy towards her and to take them into her favour, which she with a modest behaviour promised to doe; the noble Marquesse séeing all in peace, ordained a great and sumptuous feast; where pati∣ent Grissel sate Mistresse of the feast, the Marquesse on her right hand, on her left, her aged Father, old Janicola; her two children betweene them both, the Lords and Gentlemen doing them service. This feast continued fourtéene dayes, to the comfort of the Comomns.
When this solemne feast was ended, the Marquesse, to shew his love to his Grissell, made her Father one of his coun∣sel, and Governour of his Palace, where for many yeares, he lived in the love of the whole Court: the noble Marquesse and his faire Grissel lived almost thirty yeeres, saw their childrens children, and then dyed, beloved and bewayled of their subiects, CHAP. 2. The Authors perswasion to all Women in Generall. THus you may see by this History, you that are women, the great good which commeth by patience and humi∣lity, for had this vertuous woman bin of a churlsh and crabbed disposition, she had lost that grat estate which she had, be∣sides the happy love of a worthy and lo∣ving husband: Therfore, ye women, as you are helpers for men, & were so crea∣ted for that use, give no distaste to your loving husbands: & men likewise, be not bitter to your wives, for the world hath not many Grissels; for man and Wife living lovingly and peaceably in this
world, shal dye with a good conscience, and enioy the happinesse of the world to come, which shall have no end. FINIS.
