13999 99840048 4519
THE ANCIENT, Honorable, Famous, and delightfull Historie of Huon of Bourdeaux, one of the Peeres of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne. Enterlaced with the loue of many La∣dies, as also the fortunes and aduentures of Knights errant, their amorous Seruants. Being now the Third time imprinted, and the rude Eng∣lish corrected and amended. LONDON ❀ Printed by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be sould by Edward White, at his shop at the little North dore of Poules at the signe of the Gunne. 1601.
❧ The Printer to the Historie ensuing. THe foundation of all true fame and repute, which in this world is most to be reckoned of and esteemed, (according to the opini∣on of all Writers both ancient & moderne) consisteth in bold, honourable, and heroy∣call resolution, which enflames the soule with a continu∣all thirsting desire, of pursuing braue and generous pur∣poses, perfourming of high and aduenturous acons, which (when their bodies are mantled vp in the obcure moulde of the earth) leaueth their names cannonized in Fames aeternall Calendar, and renownes them as rare pre∣sidents to all following Posterities. And from so perfect ground of good and laudable example, the young infant spirits of latter grow'th, raking vp the embers of their worthy proceedings, the sparke of glorious imitation cat∣cheth hold of their warme and forward desires, and so en∣kindling further till it breake foorth into a flame: burnes vp and consumes all conceits of cowardise, and as an en∣lightned Beacon on a Promontorie toppe, calles & inuites them to the like honourable atchieuements. Hence en∣sued that desertfull and well worthy to bee remembred purpose, of Sir Iohn Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, when not onely in this woorke of Huon of Bourdeaux, but many other famous Translations of like consequence by him perfourmed, he gaue witnesse to the world of so labouri∣ous an endeauour, and (as it were) squared out an excel∣lent
platfourme for generous imitation. But let me not herewithall forget, that the right noble Earle of Hunting∣don Lord Hastings, was a continuall spurre to him in the pursuite of such paines, and likewise a cheerefull encou∣rager of me in the imprinting, assisting euer both with his purse and honourable countenance, the trauaile that sorted to so good example. Which being now fi∣nished and made compleat, with better abili∣tie of will, then other perfourmance: we leaue to the gentle acceptance of such, as knowe how right∣ly to iudge, and kindly to entertaine: to o∣thers our paines are not im∣parted. FINIS.
The Table. HOw the Emperor Charlemaine required his Barons that they wold choose one among them to gouerne his Empire. Chap. 1. The conclusion and answeare that the Barons made. And what counsaile the dishonourable Lord Earle Amerie gaue to the Kinge, against the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great mis∣cheefe afterward ensued. And of the good aduice that Duke Naymes gaue to the Emperour. Chap. 2. How Charlemaine sent two Knightes to the Duchesse of Bourdeaux, to commaund her to send her two Sonnes to his Court. Chap. 3. The answeare that the Duchesse of Bourdeaux made to the Emperours Messengers. Chap. 4. Howe the Emperour was content with the report of the two Knightes: and how the Traitour Earle Amerie went and complained to Charlot the Kinges Sonne. Chap. 5. How the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin tooke leaue of the Duchesse their Mother, and how in their way they ouer-tooke the Abbot of Cluny their Vncle, going towards Paris to the Emperour Charlemaine. Chap. 6. How by the counsaile of Earle Amerie they ran first at Gerardin Bro∣ther to Huon, and bare him to the earth, and sore wounded him, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull. Chap. 7. How Huon of Bourdeaux was sorrowfull when he saw his Brother Ge∣rard so sore wounded, and how he slew Charlot: and how he came before the King at Paris and appeached him of Treason. Chap. 8. How the King was sore displeased with Huon, because he had appea∣ched him of treason: and how Huon shewed all the manner why he slew the Knight that wounded his Brother. Chap. 9. How Charlot the Kings Son was brought before him dead, and of the great sorrow that he made: and how Earle Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and how the King would haue run vppon Huon, and of the good counsaile that Duke Naymes gaue to the King. Chap. 10. How the Traytour Earle Amerie charged Huon before the Emperour, that he trayterously with treason pretended, had slaine the Kings Sonne, and in that quarrell he appealed Huon to Battaile. Chap. 11. How the Abbot of Cluny would prooue, that the saying of Earle Ame∣rie
was false and vntrue: and howe the Earle did cast his Gage against Huon, who tooke it vp. Chap. 12. Howe those two Champions came into the field whereas they should ight, accompanied with their friends. Chap. 13. How the two Champions made their Oathes vppon the Reliques, that their sayings were true, and what the king sayd. chap. 14. Howe Huon of Bourdeaux and Earle Amerie fought together before kinge Charlemaine: and how the Traitour Amerie was slaine by the no∣ble Prowesse and chiualrie of Huon. chap. 15. How after the Emperor Charlemaine had seen Earle Amerie was slain, he commaunded expresly, that Huon should auoide the Realme and Em∣pire, and to be banished from thence for euer. chap. 16. How king Charlemaine sent Huon to doe a Messuage in Babilon to the Admirall Gaudise. chap. 17. How the noble Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the King, and of all the Lordes and Barons, and road with the good Abbot to Cluney. chap. 18. How Huon came to Rome, and was confessed of the Pope who was his Vncle, and of his departing: and how he came to Brandis, where he found his Vncle Garyn of St. Omers, who for the loue of Huon passed the Sea with him. Chap. 19. How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Brandis, and Garyn his Vncle with him: and how he came to Ierusalem, and from thence into the De∣ser, whereas he found Gerames, and of their conference. chap. 20. How Gerames went with Huon and his companie, and so came into the wood, whereas they found king Oberon, who coniured them to speake nto him. chap. 21. How King Oberon was sore displeased, in that Huon wold not speake: and of the great feare that he put Huon and his companie in. chap. 22. Howe King Oberon Dwarfe of the Fayrey pursued so much Huon, that he constrained him to speake to him at last. chap. 23. Of the great maruailes that Oberon shewed vnto Huon, and of the  that fell. chap. 24. Of the great gifts that Oberon gaue to Huon, as his Horne of Iuorie, and his Cup, the which were of great vertues: and how Huon after thought to prooue the vertue of them, whereby he was in perill of death. chap. 25. How Huon arried at Tormont, and foūd a man at a gate, who brought him to lodge at the Prouosts house in the Towne. chap. 26.
Howe Huon gaue a Suppper to all the poore men of the Citie, and how the Duke was Vncle to Huon: and howe the Duke had Huon into his Ca∣stle. chap. 27. How the Duke thought to haue murdered Huon his owne Nephewe, whiles he sate at the Table. chap. 28. How by the ayd of Greffrey and of the Prisoners, Huon was succoured, and slew all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after besieged the Ca∣stle. chap. 29. How King Oberon came and succoured Huon, and slewe all the Pay∣nims, except such as would bee christened: And howe Huon slewe the Duke his Vncle. chap. 30. How king Oberon forbad Huon, that hee should not goe by the Tower of the Gyant, to the which Huon would not accord, but went thether, whereby hee was in great danger of death. And of the Damsell that hee found there, who was his owne cozen borne in Fraunce. chap. 31. How the Damsell cozen to Huon, shewed him the Chamber whereas the Gyant slept, and how he went and awaked him: and of the good ar∣mour that the Gyant deliuered to Huon. chap. 32. How Huon slew the great Gyant, and how he called Gerames and his companie to him, and of the ioy that they made for the death of the Gy∣ant. chap. 33. How Huon departed from the Castle of the Gyant, and tooke leaue of his companie, and went alone afoote to the Sea-side, whereas he found Mallabron of the Fairey, on whom he mounted to passe the sea. chap. 34. How Huon passed the Sea vppon Mallabron, who bare him to Babi∣lon: and how Huon came to the first gate, and so to the second. chap. 35. How Huon passed the Fourth gate, and how he came into the Garden whereas the Fountaine was, and of that which he did there. chap. 36. How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his messuage to the Admi∣rall, and how he slew many Paynims, and was afterward taken, and put in prison. chap. 37. Of the great complaints that Huon made being in prison, and howe the Admirals Daughter came to comfort him, and how she departed not well content with Huon. Chap. 38. Howe Huon made great complaints for the famine that hee endured, and how the faire Esclaremond came again to comfort him, conditional∣ly that Huon would fulfill her desire. Chap. 39. How Gerames and his company departed from the Tower & the Dam∣sell
with him, and came to Babilon: and of the manner that Gerames vsed to know some newes of Huon. Chap. 40. How Gerames and the faire Escleremond went to the Prison to comfort Huon and the other Prisoners. Chap. 41. How the great Gyant Agrapart, eldest Brother to Angolofer whome Huon slew, assembled his people and came to Babylon, to haue the Tri∣bute of the Admirall as his brother had: and of Battell hand to hand that he desired of the Admirall Gaudise, the which was agreed to. Chap. 42. How the Admirall Gaudise tooke Huon out of prison, and armed him to fight with the Gyant Agrapart. Chap. 43. How Huon fought with Agrapart the Giant, and discomfited him, and deliuered him to the Admirall, who had great ioy thereof. Chap. 44. How the Gyant Agrapart cryed mercie to the Admirall: and howe Huon desired the Admirall Gaudise to leaue his law, and to be christened. Chap. 45. How Huon seeing that the Admirall wold not forsake his beleefe, blew his Horne, whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admirall was slain and all his men. And how Huon and the faire Escleremond were in perill of drowning, by reason that he brake the commaundement of King Obe∣ron. chap. 46. How Huon and Escleremond arriued in an Isle all naked, and how the Pirats of the Sea tooke Escleremond and left Huon alone, and bound his handes, feete, and eyes. Chap. 47. How the faire Escleremond was led away by the Pirats of the Sea: and how the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne deliuered her out of their hands. chap. 48. How the Pirate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he sent to  the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the answeare that he had . chap. 49. How King Oberon at the request of two Knightes of the Fayrey, called  and Mallabron the monster of the Sea, went and succoured Hu∣on▪ and carried him out of the Isle of Noysant. chap. 50. How Huon found a Minstrell, who gaue him cloathing and meat, and tooke Huon with him as his Varler, and went to Mombrance. chap. 51. How Huon and his Maister Mouflet arriued at Mombrance, and how  spake with King Iuoryn. chap. 52. How King Iuoryn caused his Daughter to play at the Chesse with Hu∣on, vppon condition that if he were mated, he should then loose his head:
and if she were mated, Huon should haue her loue: and how Huon won the game. Chap. 53. How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poore horse, and went after the Armie to Anfalerne. Chap. 54. Howe Huon fought with Sorbryn and slewe him, and wanne the good horse Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted and wanne the Battaile, and was brought with great tryumph to Mombrance. chap. 55. How Huon was had in great honour, and sate at the Table with King Iuoryn of Mombrance. chap. 56. How the old Gerames arriued at Anfalerne by fortune, and the Admi∣rall Gallaffer entertained him to maintaine his warre: And how the faire Escleremond spake with him. Chap. 57. How King Iuoryn came againe before Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought together, and at laste they knewe each other. And how they entred into Anfalerne, and shutte the Admirall Gallaffer with∣out. Chap. 58. How Iuoryn caused Mouflet the old Minstrell, to bee brought to the gibet to haue been hanged: and how he was rescued by Huon. chap. 59. How the good Prouost Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arriued at the Port of Anfalerne. Chap. 60. How Huon and Gerames, and all their companie, with the faire Ladie Escleremond, departed from the Castle of Anfalerne, and sayled thence on the Sea. Chap. 61. How Huon and his companie arriued at the Port of Brandis, and from thence went to Rome to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and the faire Escleremond, and of their departing from thence. chap. 62. How Huon and his company arriued at the Abbey of Maurise, where hee was receiued by the Abbot & Couent, with great reuerence. chap. 63. How the good Abbot sent word to Duke Gerard of Bourdeaux, howe his Brother Huon was in the Abbey of Maurise. Chap. 64. How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practised Huons death: and how the Traytour Gerard came to see his Brother Huon, who with great ioye receiued him. chap. 65. How these twoo Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and how the Traytour Gerard beganne to fall at rude words with Huon, when they approached neere the wood whereas Gybouars lay in ambush. chap. 66. How these Traytors slew all Duke Huons companie, except Gerames,
and Escleremond, and Huon himselfe, the which all three were fast bound handes and feete, and blindfold, and so brought to Bourdeaux and were put in prison. Chap. 67. How the Traytours returned to the Abbey of Saint Maurise, & slew the good Abbot, and tooke away all the Treasure that Huon had left there. Chap. 68. How the Traitour Gerard shewed to King Charlemaine, how his Bro∣ther Huon was returned to Bourdeaux wthout doing of his Messuage to the Admirall Gaudise. Chap. 69. How the King commaunded that Huon should be sent for from Bour∣deaux, to the intent that he should die. Chap. 70. How the Emperour Charlemaine went himselfe to Bourdeaux, to cause Huon to be slaine, for the great ill will that he bare to him. Chap. 71. Howe the Twelue Peeres drewe to counsaile, to giue sentence vppon Huon, either with him or against him. Chap. 72. Howe the Peeres layde all the deede vppon Duke Naymes, to giue the iudgemnt vppon him: But for all that euer he could say or doe, the king dged Huon to die. chap. 73. Howe King Oberon came to succour Huon, and made Gerard to con∣fesse all the treason that he had purchased against Huon. Chap. 74. How King Oberon caused to bee hanged the Foure Traitours, Gerard, Gybouars, and the two Monkes, for their false witnes: and of the Peace made betweene Huon and Charlemaine: And how King Oberon gaue to Huon his Realme of the Fayrey. chap. 75. How King Oberon departed, and tooke leaue of King Charlemaine, &  Huon and Escleremond: and also how King Charlemaine departed from ourdeaux. Chap. 76. How King Oberon deuised with his Knightes, in the Cittie of Momur in the Fayrey, of the deeds of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which shold happen after to him. Chap. 77. How Huon tooke homage of his men, and chasticed his Rebels, and of three Pilgrims, by whome much ill fell after, as yee shall heare. chap. 78. How Duke Raoul of Austrich, by the report of the Pilgrims, was en∣amoured of the faire Escleremond, and of the Yourney that was proclai∣med, to the entent to haue slaine Huon. Chap. 79. How after that Duke Raoul had beene at Bourdeaux in the guise of a Pilgrime, to see the faire Ladie Escleremond, hee then returned againe to
Ʋyennae. Chap. 80. How Duke Huon tooke leaue of the Duchesse his Wife, and howe hee arriued at Mayence, and went to the Pallaice. chap. 81. How Huon slewe Duke Raoul in the presence of the Emperour, sitting at his Table, and of the maruailes that he did: And how in the chace that was made after him, hee strake downe the Emperour, and wan his good horse. chap. 82▪ Howe Huon after that hee was mounted vppon the Emperours good horse, he arriued at Colleyne, where he found his men: and how he depar∣ted thence. And of the Emperour who lay enambushed in a wood, abi∣ding there to haue slaine Huon. chap. 83. Of the great Battaile within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Em∣perour of Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the True that was taken betweene them. chap. 84. How Huon graunted the Truce to the Emperour, and how the Prouost of Coleyne came and assayled Huon, not knowing of any Peace taken be∣tweene them. Chap. 85. How Huon arriued at Bourdeaux, and of the counsaile of the faire Es∣cleremond his wife, the which he would not beleeue nor follow. chap. 86. How Huon had great ioye for the birth of the faire Claret his Daugh∣ter. chap. 87. How the Emperour assembled a great Hoast and came before the Cit∣tie of Bourdeaux. chap. 88. How the Emperour of Almaine besieged the Citie of Bourdeaux: and how Huon made him readie to fight with his enemies. chap. 89. Of the great Battaile that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon hadde great losse, and the old Gerames taken. Chap. 90. How the Emperour raysed vp a pare of Gallowes, to hange vp the old Gerames, and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken Prisoners. Chap. 91. How Huon yssued out of Bourdeaux, and rescued the old Gerames and his companie, whome the Emperour would haue hanged. Chap. 92. How the Emperour assayled the Citie of Bourdeaux two times, where∣as he lost many of his men. Chap. 93. Howe Huon sent Habourey his Messenger to the Emperour, to require peace, and of his answeare. chap. 94. How Huon yssued out of Bourdeaux, and came to the Tents, & fought with the Emperour. chap. 95. How Huon made another yssue out of Bourdeaux, and tooke away all
the beasts that were in the pastures without the Towne, pertaining to the Emperours hoast. Chap. 96. How Huon of Bourdeaux made him readie to go to seeke for some suc∣cour: And of the sorrow that the Duchesse his wife made. Chap. 97. How Huon departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, and sayled vntill he came into the hye Sea, and had many great fortunes. Chap. 98. How Huon arriued on the perillous Gulfe, whereas he spake with Iu∣das: And how e arriued at the Port of the Adamant. chap. 99. How Huon deuised with his Patron, in regarding of the Castle of the Adamant. Chap. 100. How a Galley with Sarazins came and assayled Huon, who were all slaine, and also all Huons men, and howe Huon went to the Castle of the Adamant and slew the great Serpent, and of the maruailes that he found there. Chap. 101. How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and slewe him within the Castle of the Adamant. Chap. 102. Howe after that Huon was departed from Bourdeaux, the Emperour made diuers assaults to the Citie, but he could not win it, for the defence of the good chiualrie that was within it, and of the ambushment that was layd by the counsaile of Duke Sauary, whereby the Cittie was taken and wonne. chap. 103. Of the death of the olde Gerames, and of the taking of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the comming of the Duchesse with the Emperour: and of the deliuering vp of the Castle to the Emperour. Chap. 104. How the Duchesse Escleremond deliuered her Daughter Clariet to  vnto the Abbot of Cluny, of whome the Abbot was right full. Chap. 105. Howe the noble Duchesse Escleremond yeelded vp the Castle o the Emperour, and how she and her companie were Prisoners in the Citie of Maence. chap. 106. How there arriued at the Castle of the Adamant a Shippe full of Sara∣ns, wherein was the Bishop of Millaine: and how Huon caused them to be christened, and then he brought them into the Castle, whereas they  great store and plentie of victuals. chap. 107. Howe Huon sawe a Shippe arriue at the Port of the Castle of the Ada∣mant. chap. 108. How Huon  by a Griffen out of the Castle of the Adamant, and how he slew the Griffen,  other young Griffens: And of the
Fountaine of the faire Garden: and of the fruite of the Tree neere to the Fountaine. chap. 109. How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and slew her. chap. 110. How an Angell appeared vnto Huon, and commaunded him to gather three Apples of the Tree by the Fountaine, and no more: And howe the Angell shewed him tidinges of his wife the faire Escleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet, and shewed him the way that hee should goe from thence. chap. 111. How Huon of Bourdeaux sayled in a rich Shippe, and of the perillous Gulfe that he passed by: and how he arriued at the Port of the great Cit∣tie of Thauris in Persia. chap. 112. How Sir Barnard departed from the Abby of Cluny, and went to seeke for Huon his Cozen, whome hee found at the Port of the great Cittie of Thauris. chap. 113. How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowledged them∣selues each to other, and shewed the discourse of their aduentures. chap. 114. Howe the Admirall of Persia did great honour to Huon of Bourdeaux, and led him into his Pallaice, whereas hee was receiued with great ioye and triumph. chap. 115. How the Admirall, by reason of the Apple that Huon gaue him to eat, he became of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereby he and all the people of Persia and Media were christened, and of the great honor that the Ad∣mirall made vnto Huon. chap. 116. Of the complaints that Huon made to the Admirall of Persia vpon the Emperour of Almaine, and of the succours that the Admirall promised to Huon. chap. 117. How the Admirall of Persia assembled much people, and he and Hu∣on with all their Armie, tooke the Sea and came to the Port before the Cittie of Angory, whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sa∣razins, readie to defend the Port. chap. 118. How the Admirall and Huon tooke the Port, and fought with the Ad∣mirall of Angory, and discomfited him and tooke the Cittie, and how af∣terward Duke Huon went into the Deserts of Abillant, to search aduen∣tures. chap. 119. How Huon went so long in this Desert, that hee found Cain, and spake with him a long season: & how he beguiled Cain & depard. chap. 10▪ How Huon departed from Cain, & passed the Sea in a Vess guided by
the Diuell, who beleeued it had beene Cain, and Huon arriued at a Cittie called Colanders, whereas hee found the Admirall of Persia and Barnard his Cozen, who had layd siege to the Citie. Chap. 121. How Huon of Bourdeaux had great ioy, when he saw the Admirall of Persia before Colanders, where he fought with the Sarazins. chap. 122. How the Citie of Colanders was taken by the Admirall of Persia, after he had wonne the Battaile, and of the great ioy that was made vnto Hu∣on, when hee was knowne by the Admirall of Persia and Barnard his Co∣zen,. chap. 123. How the Admirall of Persia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and all their hoast passed by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the Citie of Ierusalem to the holy Sepulchre, and was nobly receiued by the King of Ierusalem: and how the Souldans Messenger came and defied the Admirall of Persia. chap. 124, Of the answeare that the Admirall of Persia made vnto the Souldans Messenger, and of the report that he made to his Maister. chap. 125. Howe the Admirall of Persia sent for his men that lay at Napelous, and caused them to withdraw towards Rames, and howe they departed from Ierusalem: and how he went to fight with his enemies. chap. 126. Now speake we of the great Battaile that was in the plaines of Rames, betweene the Souldan of Babylon and the Admirall of Persia, the which was discomfited by the Prowesse of Huon of Bourdeaux. Chap. 127. How the Admirall of Persia and Media found Huon, whereas he had fought with fortie men Sarazins, and how the Souldan fled to Acres, and how the Admirall of Persia and Media besieged him there, and of the strange Vision that Huon had in the night, chap. 128. How Huon counsailed the Admirall of Persia, to rayse vp his siege be∣fore Acres for diuers reasons, and to returne into Persia. chap. 129. How the Admirall of Persia a greede to the counsaile of Duke Huon, and praised his saying: and of the faire offer that the Admirall of Persia  vnto Duke Huon of Burdeaux, chap. 130. How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of all the other Lordes of Persa, and went and tooke shipping at the Port of Thesre, and how he arriued at Marsellis, without finding of any strange aduenture. Chap. 131. How the good Abbot of Cluny layd an ambushment of men, betwene Mascon and Tournous, against the Emperour of Almaines Nephewe, who was there slaine and all his men, whereof the Emperour was so
sore vexed and troubled, that he tooke the Duchesse Escleremond out of prison to haue burnt her, and the three Hundred prisoners of Bourdeaux, to haue hanged them all. chap. 132. Haw King Oberon sent two of his Knights of the Fayrie, that is to saye Mallabron and Gloriant, to deliuer the faire Escleremond, who should haue beene burnt, and the three Hundred Prisoners that shoulde haue beene hanged, who were all delyuered by the afore sayde Knights▪ chap. 133. How the Emperour Tirrey made the noble Ladie Escleremond to bee well serued and apparelled, and all the other Prisoners, but about three weekes after, hee made the Ladie and the prisoners to be put againe into prison, whereas they were in great miserie. chap. 134. How Huon departed from Marsellis, and came to his Vncle the Ab∣bot of Cluny in habit disguised, and vnto him discouered himselfe, wher∣of the abbot had great ioy, and so had Clariet his Daughter. Chap. 135. How Duke Huon shewed to his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, all the ad∣uentures that he had, since he departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux: and how he gaue the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the abbot became againe to his beautie, that hee had when hee was but of Thirtie yeares of age. chap. 136. How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the Citie of Mayence vppon Friday: and how he came nere vnto the Emperours Oratorie. chap. 137. How Huon did so much with the Emperour Tirrey, that he had peace with him, and his wife rendred vnto him, and all his Landes and Signio∣ries: and how the Emperour brought him vnto the abby of Cluny, where∣as they found the Abbot in armour, not knowing any thing of the peace that was made. chap. 138. How the Emperour made good chere vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. Chap. 139 How the Emperour arriued at Cluny, and how the abbot set vpon him, and of the peace that was made, and how the Emperour conueyed Huon to Burdeaux, and rendred vp all his Lands and of the parting of the Em∣perour, & how Huon made prouision to goe to king Oberon. chap. 140. How Huon deuised with the Duchesse his Wife of his departing, and how shee would, goe with him: And how hee left his Daughter & Land and Signiories in the keeping of his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny and with Barnard his Cozin, chap. 141.
How Huon tooke leaue of his Daughter, and of the good Abbot his Vncle, & of Barnard his cozin, & entred into the Riuer of Gerone the Duches with him: and of the strange Fortunes that they had. chap. 142. How Huon lost all his men, and the Ship brake in peeces: and how he and the Duchesse saued them selues vpon a board, and came and arriued at the Castle of the Monkes. chap. 143. How Duke Huon made semblance to haue slaine the Monke, holding him fast with the stole, to the entent that hee shoulde shew vnto him the troth. chap. 144. How the Monke bare Huon and Escleremond ouer hils and Valleys in the ayre, vntill he came into the countrey of King Oberon. chap. 145. How Kinge Oberon crowned Huon and Escleremond, and gaue them all his Realme and dignitie that he had in the Land of the Fayrie, and made the Peace betweene Huon and King Arthur. chap. 146. Of the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed. chap. 147. How the Kinge of Hungary, and the Kinge of England, and Florence Sonne vnto the King of Aragon, desired to haue in mariage the faire La∣die Clariet, and how shee was betrayed by Brohart, and howe Barnard was drowned, and of the euils that the Traytour Brohart did vnto the La∣die Clariet, and how he dyed at the last. chap. 148. When the Traytour Brohart drowned Barnard, and of theyr aduen∣tures, and how Brohart was slaine. chap. 149. Of the great sorrow that was made at Blay, by the abbot of Cluny, and by the Princes of the noble City of Bourdeaux, for the faire Ladie Clariet that was stollen away: and of the sorrow that was made, when they saw Barnard brought in dead by Six men. And of the punishment that was done to the Lineage of the Traytour Brohart. chap. 150. How the Ladie Clariet al alone came to the Sea-side, whereas arriued the Kinge of Granado in a Ship, who tooke away Clariet, and of other matters. chap. 151. How the King forbad his Son Florence, that he should not be so har∣ as to fall acquainted with the faire Ladie Clariet, and how Florence promised the King his Father, to deliuer into his hands the King of Na∣arre prisoner, in case that he would bee content at his returne, that he might haue the new found Damsell, the which the King granted, but he did it not, for he had drowned her, if Peter of Aragon had not bene, who rescued and saued her from the death. chap. 152.
How Florence went to fight with his enemies: and how Sir Peter of A∣ragon returned towards the Towne, to bring thether Prisoners: and how he rescued the faire Damsell Clariet from drowning, and how afterward King Garin caused the Damsell to be closed vp in a Prison. chap. 153. How Florence discomfited his enemies, and tooke the King of Nauar, and led him into the Towne, and deliuered him to the King his Father: and how Florence deliuered him again quit, because that his Father shew∣ed vnto him, that the faire Damsell was drowned. Chap. 154. How king Garyn put his Sonne Florence into a Tower in prison: And how the Damsell escaped out of the Tower, and spake with Florence her Louer at an arch vppon the Garden-side, and how they were espyed: and how she thought to haue drowned herselfe. Chap. 155. How the first Watchman found out the Damsell, and ledde her into a great wood there by, and afterward the same Watchman deliuered Flo∣rence out of prison, and shewed him the place where the Damsell was: and how Florence and Clariet entred into the Sea: and how the king went af∣ter his Sonne, and the Watchman taken. Chap. 156. Of the great debate that was in the Pallaice for the Watchmans sake, whom the king would haue had to be hanged: and how the king of Na∣uarre tooke the Citie of Courtoys, & how he departed thence. chap. 157. Howe the Ship wherein Florence was and his Loue, was taken by the Sarazins, and all their companie taken and slaine, and led to the Castle of Anfalerne. Chap. 158. How Sorbarre the captaine comforted Florence and Clariet: and how there arriued Foure Ships with Christian men by fortune of the Sea, and how Florence was knowne by them. Chap. 159. How Sorbarre and Florence and their companie went into the Towne, and robbed and spoyled it, and so tooke the Sea with great ioye and tri∣umph, and the faire Ladie Clariet with them, and tooke their course to sayle towards the Realme of Aragon. chap. 160. Howe king Huon King of the Fayrey, sent twoo of his knightes to the two Kings: And how he appeared between them with a great number and of the Peace that he made between them. chap. 16. How Florence and Clariet arriued there with their companie, & came to king Huon: and of the great ioy that was made at their comming, and howe there they were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed be∣tweene the two Kinges. chap. 162. How king Huon and Queene Escleremond departed, and how he gaue
great rich guifts vnto the two Kinges, and to all other Lordes, Ladies & Damsels: And of the sorrowe that was betweene the Mother and the Daughter, at their departing. chap. 163. How Queene Clariet was brought to bed of a Daughter, at which de∣liuerance the Queene dyed: and how when the young Damsell came to the age of Fifteene yeares, the King her Father would haue had her in ma∣riage, wherewith all his Lordes were sore troubled. chap. 164. Of the great sorrowe that the Damsell Ide made, when shee heard her Father, how he would haue her in marriage: And how by the meanes of a noble Ladie and Sorbarre shee departed at midnight, and went at the aduenture that God would send her. Chap. 165. How Kinge Florence was sorrowfull, when hee was aduertized of his Daughters departing, who was apparelled like a man: and howe shee came into Almaine▪ and how she found certaine Theeues in a Forrest, and how she came to Rome to the Emperour like a Squier. chap. 166. Howe the Damsell Ide was entertained with the Emperour of Roome, and howe the Lady Oliue his Daughter was enamoured of Ide, weening she had beene a man: and how the King of Spaine came before the Cittie of Roome: And how the Damsell Ide tooke the King of Spaine in Battell, and discomfited him. Chap 167. How the Emperour of Rome highly receiued the noble Damsell Ide, and of the honour that was made vnto her: and how the Emperor made her Constable of his Empire. And how the King of Spaine was deliue∣red out of prison, and made homage to the Emperour. Chap. 168. How the Emperor gaue his Daughter in marriage to the Damsell Ide, knowing none other but that she had beene a man, and how she was ap∣peached by a Varlet, that heard their deuises whiles they were in bed to∣gether, whereby the Emperor would haue burnt the Damsell. chap 169. How God made great miracles for Ide, for he made her to change from the nature of a woman & to become a perfect man, wherof the Emperor and Oliue had great ioy and so Ide and Oliue lay together, & ingendred a Son named after Croissant: and of the death of the Emperor. chap. 170. How Kinge Florence sent twoo Knightes to Rome to the Emperour his Sonne, desiring him to come & see him, and to leaue the Empire of Rome to his Sonne Croissant, and to set noble men about him to guide him: and also to bring with him the Empresse, the faire Oliue. Chap. 171. How the Emperor Ide and the Empresse Oliue gaue good instructions to their Son, when they departed from Rome, & how they arriued at Cour∣toys,
and came to Florence, who with great ioy receiued them as his Chil∣dren. Chap. 172. How Croissant was so bountifull and so liberall, that he gaue away all the Treasure that his Father had left him, so that at last he had no more to giue, and so was constrained to goe seeke his aduenture, hee and a Var∣let alonely. chap. 173. Howe they of Rome sent to King Guymart of Puille, to the entent that he should come and gouerne that Countrey, & to be their Lord, because Croissant was a child, and had giuen and wasted all that he had: and how Guymart came thether, and was receiued as Lord. chap. 174. How Croissant ariued at Nise in Prouaunce, and came to the Earle Re∣mon, who was besieged by the Sarazins: and of the honour that the Earle Remon did to Croissant, and howe hee gaue him his banner to beare, and made him Knight: And of the great enuie that the Earles Sonne had at Croissant. Chap. 175. How Croissant did maruailes in the Battaile, by whome the Sarazins were discomfited and slaine, whereof the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber were right ioyfull. Chap 176. Of the great honour that the Earle Remon did to Croissant: and howe hee would haue giuen him his Daughter in marriage, whereof the Earles Son was sore enuious, and thought the same night to haue murdered the noble Croissant in his bed, but he fayled, for the noble Croissant slew him, and afterward fled away as fast as he might. Chap. 177. How Croissant departed from Nise with his Sword in his hand: And howe the Earle Remon was sorrowfull for the death of his Sonne, and chased after Croissant, but he could not bee found. Chap. 178. How Croissant arriued in the Subburbs of a little Towne called Floren∣colle, & lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they fell at strife▪ and how Croissant slew them and fledde, and was in great danger. And how hee came into the Cittie of Rome, whereas there was no man that would giue him one morsell of bread: and how he went into an old Pal∣laice and lay vppon a burden of strawe. chap. 179. Howe the Emperour Guymart spake and rebuked the Burgesse that spake ill of the noble Croissant: and howe the Emperour bare mete and drinke to the place whereas Croissant slept. And of the maruailous great Treasure that hee found in a Chamber in the sayde ould Pallaice▪ and of that which was shewed and declared to him by twoo Knightes whome he found there. Chap. 180.
How the two Knightes that kept this Treasure, spake with the Empe∣rour Guymart, and shewed him the manner how hee should know Crois∣sant. And of the maruaile that Croissant had when he awoake, and saw the meat and drinke by him. Chap. 181. The proofe that the Emperor Guymart made to knowe Croissant, vnto whome he gaue his faire Daughter in marriage, and deliuered him all his Signiorie and Inheritance, whereof great ioye was made at Rome. Chap. 182. How the Emperor Guymart promised Croissant, that within three daies he should haue his Daughter in mariage: And how the Emperour Guy∣mart led Croissant to the olde Pallaice, and shewed him the great Trea∣sure that the two Knightes kept for him. Chap. 183. Of the great Treasure that they had, and how Croissant wedded the no∣ble Damsell, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feast that was there made. Chap. 184. FINIS.
THE ANCIENT, Honorable, and famous Historie, of Huon of Bourdeaux, a Peere of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne. &c. Chap. I. ¶ How the Emperour Charlemaine required his Barons that they would choose one among them to gouerne his Empire. IN the time, by computation cal∣led ye yéere of grace, which was Seauen Hundred, Fifty and Six yeares after our Sauiors sufferings: Charles the Great, more vulgarly kno∣wen by the name of Charlemaine, a right royall, religious and warlike Prince, rai∣ned as KING in Fraunce, and Emperour of Roome. Whose course of time was applyed to many high and heroycall enter∣prises, wherein the fauour of heauen was euermore so
assistant to him, as his owne heart & good hopes crow∣ned him with the honour of many succesfull Victories: enabling all his endeauours with the ayd of diuers no∣ble Princes and Barons, whose Chiualrie and right knightly perfourmances, entitled him to the conquest of Almaigne, Sclauonia, Spaine, Saxonie, and a great part of Affrike, in all which attempts it is not to be doubted, but both he and they had their handes full of busie im∣ployments. But let it suffice, God was their guide, Religion the cause, Honour the obiect, and perpetuall Fame the reward, which both led him and his traine to these worthy attempts, and still brought them backe with the due to their valorous Enterprises: extending both his and their renowne to all parts of the world, and registring their names in the Kalender of neuer dy∣ing memorie. AFter that this righte noble Emperour Charle∣maine had lost his deare Nephews Rowland and Oliuer, and diuers other Barons and Knightes in the vnfortunate and dolorous Battaile that was at Rownseuall, where was so great and lamentable a losse, as all the twelue Peeres of Fraunce were there slaine, except the good Duke Naimes of Bauier: On a day the Noble Emperour held open Court at his chéefe Citie of Paris, where were assembled many Dukes, Earles, and Barons, being the Sonnes, Nephewes, and kindred to the Noble Princes before slayn and dead in the foresaid Battaile, by the falshood and great trea∣son doone and contriued by Duke Ganelon, the Noble Emperour being euer after in gréefe and heauinesse, by reason of the great annoyance and displeasure that hée had by his said losse, and also bicause he was growen verie féeble, through the great age that now was stollen vppon him. Thus when the King, Princes, & Barons
were there assembled, the Emperour called his Lorde▪ before him, and seating himselfe in his royall Chaire of Estate, his Barons, Lordes and Knightes likewise placed in their seuerall degrees, hee called foorth Duke Naymes, and thus began. Honourable old Naymes, and all you my Barons he∣ther summoned by our royall commaundement, I shall not néede to tell yée, bycause it is to you all most appa∣rant, howe longe I haue gouerned this Kingdome of Fraunce, and likewise swayed the imperiall Diadem of Roome: In all which time I haue found your duty and seruice so agréeable, as I cannot but thanke Heauen for so gracious good fortune. And now bycause I know cer∣tainly, yt my life by course of nature cannot long endure, for this reason principally I haue caused you all to bée assembled here together, to declare to you my pleasure and will, wherein I require and heartily desire you, that yée will counsaile together and take aduice, which of you best may and will vndertake the Gouernance of my Realme, for I can no longer beare the trauaile and paine belonging to the ruling thereof, but will from hencefoorth liue the residue of mine age in peace and ser∣uice of my Lord God: Wherefore as much as I may I desire you all to aduise me which of you all shalbe there∣unto thought most able. Yée all know, that I haue two Sonnes, that is to say, Lewes who is too young, and Charlot whome I loue well, and he is of age suffi∣cient to rule: but his manners and conditions are not méete to haue the gouernance of such two Noble States as the Realme of Fraunce, & the holy Empire of Roome, for yée know well in dayes past, by reason of his pride, my Realme was likely to haue béen destroyed, and I to haue had warre against you all, when by his rashnesse he slewe Baldwin, son to the good Duke Ogier the Dane, whereon so many mishaps ensued, that it will neuer be
raced out of remembrance. Therefore so long as I liue I will not consent that he shall haue the gouernment, though he be rightful inheritor, & that after me he ought to haue the Signiorie: but instantly I entreat your noble opinions, what in this case I were best to doe. Chap. II. ¶ The conclusion and answeare that the Barons made▪ And what counsaile the dishonorable Lord Earle Ame∣rie gaue to the King, against the twoo Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux: whereby great mischiefe afterward ensued. And of the good aduice that Duke Naymes gaue to the Emperour. WHen Duke Naymes, and all the Ba∣rons being assembled together in a pri∣uate parte of the Pallaice, there they were somewhat long together: but at last they all concluded, that to Charlot the Kinges eldest Sonne appertayned the gouerning of the said Realmes. Then they retur∣ned to the King, and shewed him the conclusion where∣vpon they were agréed, of which the Emperour was right ioyfull. Then he called before him his Son, and shewed him many faire reasons before all his Barons, but therewith stepped foorth a fellon Traytour, who had too much secrecie with the Emperour, and likewise had the gouernance of Charlot the Kinges Sonne, who did nothing but by his direction: this Knight was cal∣led Earle Amerie, and was Son to one of the Nephews of the Traytour Ganelon: In this manner then hee spake to the King. Right royall Emperour, whence proceeds it, that you are so forward in deliuerance of
your Kingdome, to the weake gouerning of Charlot your Sonne? forbeare this hastinesse: and first for a proofe of his ablenesse in such a case, giue him a Land that ought to be yours, and as yet is not, and where you haue as yet neither fealtie nor seruice. This Land is in the possession of two proud Boyes, who these Seauen yeares passed would not serue you, nor since their Fa∣ther Duke Seuin dyed, would doe you any obeysance: the eldest is named Huon, and the other Gerard, they kéepe Bourdeaux and all the Land of Aquitaine, & thinke great scorne to hold their Lands of you. But my Lord, if you will giue me men and authoritie, I will bringe them as Prisoners into your Pallace, where you may doe your will with them, and then the Land that they hold you may giue to Charlot your Sonne. Amerie (quoth the Emperour) I giue you great thankes that you haue aduertised me of this matter: I will that you take of your best fréends, and beside them you shall haue of mée thrée Thousand Knightes, well chosen and proo∣ued men of warre, and I will that you bring to mée the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin, that is to say, Huon and Gerard who in their pride set nothing by mée. When Duke Naymes (beeing there present,) heard the words of Amerie, and sawe how the Emperour con∣sented to his desire he stept foorth boldly, and beholding Amerie stearnly, thus spake. My Soueraigne Lord, the ill is great, but the sinne farre greater, when men of no truth or certaintie are so highly listned vnto. As for Duke Seuin, is it not well knowne my Lord, what true and honorable seruice all his dayes he did you? and can you then bee so easilye woone to disenherite his Children? Consider good my Lord, that the reason why as yet they haue not tendered their dutie in your presence, is nothing else but their want of years for such allegiance, and their Mother likewise déerely respecting
them, is loath to leaue their companie so young. And would your Highnes but be aduised by me, you should not so rashly depriue them of their Landes: but rather, as best becommeth a vertuous Prince, and in some re∣gard of their Fathers good Seruice, first send twoo of your Knightes to the Duchesse, & let them in your name commaund her Sonnes personall appearance at your Court, in case of seruice and dutifull homage: which if she or they shall refuse to doe, then may you iustly pro∣céede otherwise against them. But I dare (my Lord) engage mine honour, that send them shée will, & that onely a Mothers loue and care of her Children, hath béen the reason of their absence all this while. Chap. III. ¶ How the Emperour Charlemaine sent two Knightes to the Duchesse of Bourdeaux, to commaund her to send her two Sonnes to his Court. WHEN the Emperour Charles hadde heard Duke Naymes speake, he said: My Lord, I know for certainty yt Duke Seuin hath alwaies serued vs truely, and the reasons that you haue shewed are iust: Therefore I graunt that it shall bée as you haue aduised. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I most humbly thanke your grace. Then incontinent the king sent for two knights, and gaue them in charge to go to Bourdeaux to doe his Messuage to the Duchesse, and to the Sonnes of Duke  the which they did & so departed from Paris, with∣out resting past one night in a place, vntill they arriued at Bourdeaux, & then incontinent they went to the Pal∣lace, whereas they found the Duchesse, who was as
then but newly rysen from dinner: and when she was aduertised of their comming, shée came in hast to méete them, accompanied with Huon her Sonne who was by her, and Gerard came after with a Sparrow-hawke on his fist. When the Messengers saw the Duchesse & her two goodly Sonnes, they knéeled downe, and salu∣ted both her, and her two Sonnes from King Charle∣maine, saying: Ladie, to you we be sent from our Em∣perour Charles, who by vs sendeth vnto you his saluta∣tions of honour and amitie. When the Noble Ladie vnderstood that they were Messengers sent from ye great Emperour Charles, she arose and embraced them, and sayd, that they were right welcome vnto her. Ma∣dame, (quoth they) our Emperour hath sent vs vnto you, and commaundeth you to send your twoo Sonnes to serue him in his Court, for there are verie few in his Realme, but they are come to his seruice, except your Sonnes. And Ladie, since you know right well, that the Landes you enioy appertaining to your Sonnes, is holden of the Emperour Charles, by reason of his royall prerogatiue in Fraunce, great maruaile is in many that you haue not sent them ere this time to doe him seruice, as other Dukes and Princes in like case haue done. In this respect he commaundeth you, both for your own good & conseruation of their Landes, that you send them vnto him: or if you doe not, know then for certaine, that he will take frō you those Lands you hould, & giue them to the Prince Charlot his Sonne: This is the summe of our Messuage, & wée attend your answeare. Chap. IIII. ¶ The answeare that the Duchesse of Bourdeaux made to the Emperours Messengers.
WHen the good Lady had well vnderstood the Messengers, she an∣swered them gently in this maner. My Lordes and honourable Freendes, the reason why I haue not sent my Sons to the Court before this time, to serue my Lord the King as dutie required, was in regarde of their tender yeares, and some respect of loue to Duke Seuin their Fa∣ther, and bycause I knew certainlye, that my rightfull Lord the Emperour Charlemaine loued alwayes Duke Seuin, I neuer feared that he would take displeasure with his Children, these thinges haue béene the princi∣pall cause why I haue not sent them all this while to serue the King. Therefore let my entreats preuaile so much with you, as to be a meanes to the Emperour and al ye other Barons, to hold me and my Children excused in this case, for the fault is onelie mine, & not in them. Then Huon stept foorth before his mother and sayd, Madame if it had béene your pleasure, you might haue sent vs before this time: that is true (quoth Gerardine) for wee are ould ynough to haue our knighthood. The Ladie heheld her two Sonnes, and wéeping said to the Messengers: Sirs, you may returne to the King, how∣beit you shall rest you this night in my house and to mo∣rowe depart at your pleasure, and you shall recommend me and my Sonnes to the Kings good grace, and to the other Barons and Knightes, and among other salute Duke Naymes, who is néere kinsman to my Sonnes, and desire him for the loue of Duke Seuin, to stand a continuall fréend vnto them. Madame (quoth the Mes∣sengers) haue you no doubt of that, for Duke Naymes is a noble Man and a true Knight, nor will he at any time be in place where any ill opinion shal passe against them. Then the Duchesse commaunded her Sonnes,
that they should make ye Kings Messengers good chéere, and to bring them into their Chamber to rest them, the which they did, and were serued and feasted as apper∣tained to their woorth. Then the next morning they re∣turned to the Pallace, whereas they found the Duchesse and her two Sonnes, and they humbly saluted the La∣die. When the Duchesse sawe them, she called Huon and Gerardin and said: My Sonnes, here in the pre∣sence of these two Knightes, I say that at Easter you shall go to our Soueraigne Lord the Emperour Charle∣maine, and when you bée in the Court, serue your So∣ueraigne Lord well and truely as subiects ought to doe, bée diligent at all times to serue him faithfully, & kéepe companie with Noble men, such as you sée to be of good & vertuous condicions, be not in place where ill woords be spoken, or ill counsalie giuen, fly from the companie of them that loue not honour and troth, open not your eares to héere Lyers, or false Reporters, or Flatteres, haunt often the Church, and giue largly for Gods sake, be liberall and courteous, and giue to poore Knights, fly the companie of Ianglers, and all goodnesse shall follow thereby. I will there be giuen to each of these Knights a Courser and a rich Gowne, as it appertaineth to the Messengers of so noble an Emperour as Charlemaine is, and also each of them to haue a hundred Florents. Ma∣dame, (quoth Huon) your pleasure shalbe accomplished: then the two Sonnes caused to be brought before the Pallace two goodly Horses, and presented them to the two Knights, and gaue each of them a rich Gowne, and a hundred Florents. Whereof the Messengers were ioyfull and thanked the Duchesse and her two Sonnes, & said that their courtesie should be remembred in time to come, howbeit they knew well it was done for the honour of the King: then they tooke leaue of the Duchesse and of her two Sonnes, and so departed, and road with∣out
let vntill they came to Paris, whereas they found the Emperour in his Pallace sitting among his Barons: the King perceiued them, and incontinent called them to his presence, & ere they had leasure to speake, the Kinge had them welcome home, and demanded of them if they had béen at Bourdeaux, and spoken with the Duchesse & the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin, & whether they would come and serue him in his Court or not? Dread Lord (quoth they) we haue béen at Bourdeaux, and done your message to the Duchesse, who right humbly receiued vs, and gaue vs gentle entertainment: when shée had heard vs speake, and knewe that wée were your Messengers, shée made vs the best chéere that shée could deuise, and sayd that the cause why shée had not sent her Sonnes to your Court before this time, was by reason of their young age, and shée humbly requireth your grace, to hold both her and her two Sonnes excused, and that at this next Easter shée will send them to your Court. As for her Sonnes, trust mée my Lord, they are two such louely Gentlemen, as wée tooke great delight in behol∣ding them, especially Huon the eldest, he is so fayre and so well fourmed, that nature cannot amend him. Also my Lord, for the loue of you, shée hath giuen each of vs a goodly Horse, and a rich Gowne, and a hundred Flo∣rents of gould. My Lord, the goodnesse, the valour, and the courtesie that is in the Duchesse, and in her Sonnes cannot be recounted: and on their behalfe are we to entreat your Maiestie, to retaine them alwayes in your fauour and good grace, and to pardon the fault of their long absence. Chap. V.
¶ How the Emperour was content with the report of the two Knights, and how the Traytour Earle Amerie went and complayned to Charlot the Kings Sonne. WHen the Emperour had heard the Messengers speake, hée was right ioyfull and said: I haue alwayes heard say, yt a good Trée bringeth foorth good fruit, I speake it in the behalfe of Duke Seuin, who in his time was a va∣liant & true Knight, and by that I sée that ye twoo Chil∣dren resemble their good Father. I perceiue they haue receiued my Messengers right honourably, and with great reuerence haue giuen thē no meane gifts, which shalbe vnto them auailable in time to come, for they shall no sooner be come into my Court: but in despight of a∣ny that shall speake against them, I will doe for them in such wise, that it shall bée an example to all other to doe well, for I will make them (for loue I bare to their Fa∣ther, of my priuie Counsaile) and turning then to olde Duke Naymes, sayd: My Lord, alwayes your kindred haue béen good and true, and therfore I will, that Ame∣rie bee banished from my Court, for hée nor euer any of his lineage, gaue as yet any good counsaile. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I knew wel the long absence of Duke Seuins Sonnes, was for none other cause but by reason of their youth. When Earle Amerie heard the King speake, and sawe beside howe hée was offended against him, hée was sorrowfull, and so departed secretly from the Court, and sware that he would prouide for the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin such a traine, as should cost both their liues, and hazard the heauinesse and trouble of all Fraunce beside. So hee went to his lodging sorrowfull and in great displeasure, and then he imagined and stu∣died
on the matter, and how to bring about his Enter∣prize, then he departed from his lodging, and went vn∣to Charlot the Kinges Son, with whome he was right priuie, hée found him sitting on a rich bed, communing with a young Knight, then Amerie shewing a verie sad countenance, the teares in his eyes and trecherie in his heart, knéeling downe before Charlot, who had of him great pitie to sée him in that case: the Prince tooke him vp, and demaunded wherefore he made that sorrow, and whether any man had displeased him. My Lord, (quoth Amerie) my gréefe is not without great cause, for ye two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux shall come to the Court, and (as I haue heard say) the King hath promi∣sed that at their comming they shall bée made of his pri∣uie councell, so that none other about the King but they, shall haue any honour or reckoning made of them. And assure your selfe my Lord, that if the State be thus ad∣uaunced: they that now are greatest about his Maie∣stie, shall then scarce haue a looke, or any countenance at all. So that within short while, the best partes in your Fathers Kingdome will they be Lords of, and you your selfe if you suffer this, will hold no grace or fauour with the Emperour. Therefore my Lord I require you to helpe me now in this businesse, for in time past, Duke Seuin their Father by great wrong and treason, tooke from me a strong Castle of mine owne, and I neuer dyd him displeasure, therefore you ought to ayd me in this serious matter, for I am of your linage, deriued of the Noble Quéene your Mother. When Charlot had well vnderstood Earle Amerie, hée demaunded in what manner he might ayd him. Sir, (quoth he) I will shew you, I shall assemble the best of my linage, and you shall let me haue of yours thrée∣score Knights well armed, and I shall lye in the way to méete with the two Boyes, and I shall lay the ambush∣ment
in a little wood, a league from Montleherry on the way to Orleance, by ye which way they must néeds come, & there we shall set on them and slay them, so that none shall dare to speake thereof, and if it be knowne after, who dare speake against you, or weare any healme in féeld against you? Sir (quoth Charlot) qualifie and ap∣pease your sorow, for I shall neuer haue ioy in my heart vntill I be reuenged of those two Boyes, goe and make readie your men, and I shall prepare mine, and I will goe my selfe with you, the sooner to make an end of this businesse. When Amerie heard Charlot so liberally to of∣fer himselfe to goe in his ayd: he thanked him, and em∣braced his Leg, and Sicophant-like would haue kissed his Shooe, but Charlot would not suffer him: but tooke him vp, and said. Sir hast you, and now be diligent, that this businesse may come to a good end. Amerie de∣parted from Charlot right ioyfull, and at the day appoin∣ted he ceased not day, nor night, to assemble his men and his néerest fréends, and in the Euening before he came to Charlot, who was as then also readie with his men, and as secretly as they might they departed about the houre of midnight out of Paris all armed, and they stay∣ed not vntill they came to the place appointed, to tarie the comming of the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin. Now I will leaue to speake of them, and returne to the twoo Sonnes of Duke Seuin, Huon, and Gerardin. Chap. VI. ¶ How the two Sonnes of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the Duchesse their Mother, and howe in their way they ouer-tooke the good Abbot of Cluny their Vncle, going towards Paris to the Emperour Charle∣maine.
YOu haue heard here be∣fore how ye Kings Messengers depar∣ted frō Bourdeaux, then the two Sons made them readie to goe to the Court, richly apparelled, and well fournished of euerie thing néedfull, aswell of gold and siluer and other apparell of silke as to their state ap∣pertained: then there assembled the Barons of ye Coun∣trey, to whom they recommended their Lands and Sig∣niories, and did choose out ten Knights and foure Coun∣cellors to ride with them, to aid and to gouerne their bu∣sinesse. Then they sent for the prouost of Gerone called Sir Guyre, to whom they recommended all the affaires of Iustice. Then when Huon and his Brother had cho∣sen them that should goe in their companie: they tooke their leaue of the Duchesse their Mother, and of the Ba∣rons of ye Countrey, who sore did wéepe bycause of their departure, for the which they had good occasion so to do, and more if they had knowne the haplesse aduenture, that afterward befell them on the way. Or had the good Duchesse but dreamed thereof: shee would neuer haue suffered them to departe from her, for after there fell such mischéefe, that it is a lamentable thing to recount it. Thus the twoo Brethren departed and kissed their Mother sore wéeping. Then they tooke their Horses and their companie, and in passing by the Stréets of the Towne, the people made great sorrow for their depar∣ting, and sore wéeping, prayed to God to be their guide and conduct. The wéepings and lamentations were so extreame, that the twoo Brethren could not haue so firme courage: but that they gaue many a sore sigh at the departing out of the Towne, and when they had ridden a certaine space, and that their sorrow was somewhat appeased, then Huon called his Brother Gerard & sayd:
Brother we go to the Court to serue the King, where∣fore wee haue cause to be ioyfull: therefore let vs twoo sing a song to refresh vs. Brother (quoth Gerard) my heart is not very ioyfull, to sing or make any sport at all, for this night I dreamed a maruailous dreame, mée thought thrée Leopardes assayled mée, and drewe my heart out of my bodie: but me thought you esaped safe and sound, and returned backe. Wherefore deare Bro∣ther, if so it be your pleasure, to withstand my dreame, which makes me dread our iourney to be dangerous: might I preuaile with you, we would ride backe againe to Bourdeaux to our Mother, who will bée ioyfull of our returne. Brother (quoth Huon) and God will, we shall not returne for feare of a dreame, it should be foreuer to our reproach and shame, I will not returne to Bourdeaux vntill I haue séene the King. Therefore swéet Brother dismay you not, but rather make good chéere, our Lord Iesus Christ shall guide and conduct vs in sauegard. Thus these two Brethren road night and day, so long vntill they perceiued before them ye Abbot of Cluny with a thirtie Horse in his companie, as he was going to the Kinges Court. When Huon perceiued that companie, hee called his Brother Gerardin and said: Loe yonder I sée men of re∣ligion holding the way to Paris, and you knowe well when wee departed from the Duchesse our mother▪ shée charged vs that we should alwaies company with good people, therefore it is good that we make hast to o∣uertake them. Brother quoth Gerardin, your pleasure he fulfilled, so they rode so long that they ouertooke the Abbot who regarded on the right side, and sawe the two Brethren comming to ouertake him. Then hée steede still and saw Huon, who came riding on before, Huon saluted him humbly, and the Abbot in like manner to him, and demaunded whether he rad so hastily, & from
whence he came, and what he was, and who was his Father. Sir (quoth Huon) since it is your pleasure to know, Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux was our Father, it is Seauen yeares since he departed this life. And Sir be∣hold héere my Brother, who is younger then I, and we are going to noble King Charlemaines Court, to reléeue of him our Lands and Countrey, for he hath sent for vs by two noble Knights, and Sir we are in doubt of some trouble by ye way: when the good Abbot vnderstoode that they were Sonnes to Duke Seuin, he was right ioyfull, and in token of true amitie he embraced them one afte another, and said: Deare fréends haue no doubt, for by the grace of Iesus Christ I shall conducte you safely to Paris, for Duke Seuin your Father was my Coozen Ger∣maine, therefore I am bound to ayd you, and know for troth, that I am sworne of the great councell with King Charlemaine, and if there be any that will mooue or stirr against you, I shall ayd you to my power, wherefore you may ride surely in my companie without any doubt. Sir (quoth Huon) I thanke you: thus they road tal∣king with the Abbot their kinsman, and that night they came to Montleherry. Then the next daye they arose béetimes and heard Masse, and afterward tooke their Horses, and they were in all a fourescore Horses, & they road so long, vntil they came to a little wood-side, where∣as Charlot and Earle Amerie lay closely ambushed, there they espyed Huon & Gerard riding before, whereof they were ioyfull. Then Amerie said to Charlot: Sir, now is the time come, to bee reuenged of the dammage that Duke Seuin did to mée, yonder I sée his twoo Sonnes comming, if they bée not incontinent slayne by vs, wée are not worthy to haue any Land or life: And Sir, by their death you shall be Lord of Bourdeaux, and of all the Duchy of Aquitaine.
Chap. VII. ¶ How by the councell of Earle Amerie they ran firste at Ge∣rardin Brother to Huon, and bare him to the earth, and sore wounded him, whereof Huon was right sorowfull. WHen that Charlot vnder∣stood Earle Amerie, he stretched him in his stirrops, and tooke a speare with a sharpe head, and yssued alone out of the woode: when Amerie sawe that Charlot went out of the wood alone, he drew a little out of the way, and sayd to his men: suffer Charlot alone, there néed none goe to ayd him. This said the false Traytour, bicause he desired no∣thing else: but that one of the Sonnes of Duke Seuin might slay Charlot, and so himselfe detecting them of the murder, by this meanes he might compasse his damnable intent. Charlot came against these twoo Brethren, the Abbot of Clu∣ny saw Charlot comming all armed, and saw in the wood a great number of armed men more, then hee stood still, and called Huon and Gerard, and said: Déere Nephewes, I per∣ceiue in yonder wood a Knight all armed, and the wood full of horsemen, I cannot tell what they meane. Haue you done any wrong to any man? if you haue done, or hold any thing that is not your owne, step foorth and offer him reason, and promise to make amendes. Sir, (quoth Huon) I know no man liuing that I or my Brother haue done vnto him any displeasure, nor we know not that any creature doth hate vs. Then Huon said to his brother: Brother ride on before, and méete with yonder Knight, & demaund what is his plea∣sure. Gerard road foorth & met with Charlot, and demaunded what his pleasure was to haue, or whether he was kéeper of that passage or not, and demaunded any tribute or not, if he
did he was readie to pay it. Charlot answeared him fiercely and said: What art thou? Gerard answeared and sayd: Sir, I am of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and Son to Duke Se∣uin, whome God pardon, and héere after commeth Huon mine elder Brother, and we are going to Paris to the Kings Court, to reléeue our Lands and our Fées, and to serue him, and if there be any that wil any thing with vs, let him come to Paris and we shall doe him reason. Hold thy tongue, (quoth Charlot) whether thou wilt or not I will haue reason for some wrongs done me by thy Father Duke Seuin, for he tooke thrée of my Castles from me, and I could neuer know the reason thereof. But now since thou art héere, I will be reuenged of the wrong that thy Father did to me, for as long as thou and thy Brother be aliue, I shall neuer haue ioy in my heart: therefore stand on thy ground, for before it bee night I shall make thy life depart from thy bodie. Sir, (quoth Gerard) haue pitie of me, you may sée I am but na∣ked without armour. It shall bée greatly to your shame and reproach, if I be thus slaine by you, it neuer commeth of a gentle courage, or a Knight to assaile any person without armour or weapon: howbeit Sir I crie you mercie, well you sée that I haue neither Sword, Shéeld, nor Speare, to defend mée withall, you may sée yonder comming my elder Brother, who shall be readie to make you amends if any harme hath béen done vnto you. Peace, quoth Charlot) there is as now nothing so deare vnto me, as can mooue mée contrarie But that shamfully I shall put thée to death, be∣ware of mée. Gerard who was but young, was in great feare, and called vpon our Lord God, and turned his Horse to come againe to his Brother. But Charlot who was in his desperate moode, ouched his Speare, ran after Gerard, and strooke him on the side with such force, that the Speare ran through part of his bodie, and so bare him to the earth, weening he had béen slaine: howbeit the stroake was not mortall, although insooth verie dangerous, for he was so sore urt, that he could not remooue for paine that he felt. The
good Abbot of Cluny beheld Gerard in such sort borne to the ground, (ouercome with great gréefe) hée said vnto Huon: Ah Coozen, I sée yonder your Brother Gerard slaine, the fight whereof slayeth my poore heart. Alas Sir, (quoth Hu∣on) for Gods sake councell me in this heauie case, what will the Duchesse our Mother say, when she knoweth that my Brother is slaine, who so louingly hath nourished vs both. Ah my deare Brother Gerard, nowe I sée well your dreame is too true. Alas that I had beléeued it, for if I had, this had not happened. Ah Sir, (quoth Huon) to the Abbot, I desire you to assist mée, for if I should likewise be slaine, yet I will goe and demaund of yonder Knight, for what occasi∣on he hath slaine my Brother, nor I shall neuer returne vn∣till I haue slaine him, or he mée. Ah faire Nephew, (quoth the Abbot,) beware what you doe, haue no trust to bée suc∣coured by me, for you know well in this case, that I cannot ayd you, I am a Priest, and therefore may not bée where a∣ny man is slaine. Sir, (quoth Huon) of such companie as yours is, we might well forbeare. Then Huon beheld hea∣uily the Ten Knights that came with him from Bourdeaux, and said: Sirs, you that are come hether with mée, & haue béen nourished in my house: how say you, will you ayd mée to reuenge the death of my Brother, and to succour me a∣gainst these false murderers that hath laine in waite & slaine my Brother Gerard? Sir, (quoth they) were we sure to dye in the quarell, yet we should ayd and succour you, there∣fore goe forth and haue no doubt: and then they road forth with such small defence as they had. Then Huon spurred foorth his Horse with such fiercenesse, that he made the earth to tremble vnder him, and his Knights followed him with hardy courage, determining to doe valiantly. When the good Abbot saw his Nephew depart and his companie, hée had great pitie on him, and prayed our Lord God to defend them from death. And the Abbot with his companie fol∣lowed softly after Huon to sée what end the matter shoulde came vnto. Huon road so long vntill he came whereas his
Brother lay sore wounded. Then he cryed aloud: my right deare Brother, if there be any life in your bodie answere me and shew me how you féele your selfe? Brother (quoth Ge∣rard) I am sore wounded, I cannot tell if I may scape aliue, thinke on your selfe, it is no losse of mée, fly you away, yon∣der you may sée how the wood is full of armed men, and they  for nothing but to slay you as they haue done me. Chap. VIII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux was sorrowfull when he saw his Brother Gerard so sore wounded, and how he slew Charlot: and howe he came before the King at Paris and appeached him of treason. WHen Huon heard his Bro∣ther, he was verie sorrowfull, & said: that he had rather dye then depart without re∣uenging of him, and God wil I shall not de∣part till I haue slayn him that hath brought you into this perill: then he spurred his Horse and follow∣ed after Charlot, who was returning to the wood to his com∣pany: but when Charlot perceiued how Huon followed him, he turned his Horse and beheld him fiercely. Then Huon cri∣ed with a hye voyce, and said: Villaine, what art thou that hast slaine my Brother, where wert thou borne? Charlot answeared and sayd: I was borne in Almaine, and I am Sonne to Duke Thyrey: Huon beléeued he had sayd troth, for Charlot had a disguised Shéeld, because he would not bée knowne. Ah, (quoth Huon) God giue thée shame for ye fact, why hast thou slaine my Brother? Then Charlot answered boldly and sayd, thy Father Duke Seuin tooke from me thrée Castles and would neuer doe my right: therefore I haue slayne thy Brother, and in likwise so shall I thée.
Then Huon in great rage said, false, vntrue Knight and murderer, before it be night I shall quittance this wrong vppon thine owne head. Then Charlot said, beware thée of me, for I defie thée. Huon who had no armour to defend him, tooke his Cloake of scarlet and wrapped it about his arme, and drew his Sword, and spurred his horse, & came against Charlot with his Sword in his hand, and Charlot on the other part came against him with his Speare in the rest, and strooke Huon about the right arme, so that the stroake passed through the doublenesse of his Cloake, and through his Gowne and Shert, and myst his flesh. Thus Huon e∣scaped that stroake and thanked God thereof: then he lifted vp his sword with both his handes, and let the bridell of his horse go, and so with all his might & vertue, he stroke Char∣lot on the healme in such wise, that the cirkle nor coft of stéele could not defend him: but that ye sword went into his brayn, and so he fell to the earth and neuer arose after: thus Char∣lot was slayne miserably. Then the Traytour Amerie be∣ing in the wood, perceiued well how Charlot was slayne, whereof he thanked God and said, Charlot is dead God bée thanked, for by that stroake I shall bring Fraunce into such a trouble, that I shall attaine to all my desires. Then Hu∣on séeing Gharlot dead, returned to Gerard his Brother ly∣ing still on the earth, brought him Charlots horse, and de∣maunded if he might ryde or not. Brother, (quoth Gerard) I thinke yes, if my wounde were bounde fast I would as∣say. Then Huon alighted, and tooke a péece of his sheart, and therewith bound his brothers wound, & then Huons knights came vnto him, and holpe to set Gerard vpon his horse: but for the paine that he suffered he swounded twice, then when he came againe to himselfe, they set him vpon an amblinge Palfray, and a Knight behind him to sustaine him vp right. Then he sayd vnto Huon: Brother I desire you let vs de∣part from hence, without going any further forward, rather let vs returne to Bourdeaux to the Duchesse our Mother, for
I doubt if we goe any further, that some great ill shall come vnto vs: I promise you if we be perceiued by them that bée in the wood, and that they knowe that you haue slayne him that hurt me: I feare me they will slay vs all. Brother, (quoth Huon,) by the grace of God I shall not returne for feare of death, vntill I haue séene the King to appeach him of treason, when vnder his conduct and commandement we be thus betrayed, and watched by the way to murder vs. Brother, (quoth Gerard) as your pleasure is, so bée it. Then they road foorth the way to Paris faire and easily, bycause of Gerard who was sore hurt. Then the Knightes that were ambushed in the wood, said to sir Amerie: Sir, what shall we doe? sée Charlot is slaine and lyeth in the playne, and if we shall goe after them that hath done this déede, it shall bée ill done of vs if they escape away aliue. Then sir Amerie an∣sweared and said: Let them goe, God curse them, let vs follow them a farre off, vntill they come to Paris, and let vs arie with vs the bodie of Charlot, and bring it to the King, and there you shall see what I shall say, and if you will agrée to beare witnesse of that I shall say to the King, I will make you all so rich that yée shall neuer be poore after. They an∣sweared, they would fulfill his pleasure, then they went out of the wood, and came there as Charlot lay dead, then they tooke him vp and layd him before Earle Amerie on his horse necke, and so road foorth: but mischéefe and mishap followe them, for as much as in them lay, they laboured to haue Hu∣on iudged to death. Thus they road the hye way to Paris, and the Abbot of Cluny, who was ridden on before, looked be∣hind him, and sawe the two Brethren comming after him, then he taried, and demaunded of Huon what aduenture hée had found. Sir, (quoth he) I haue slayne him that hath sore hurt my Brother, where he thought to haue slaine me, but thanked be God. I haue left him dead in the place. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) I am sorrie thereof, but séeing it is done, if any hurt come thereby, and that you be accused before the King, I shall ayd you with all my power. Sir,
(quoth Huon) of that I thanke you, then Huon looked behind him, and saw where Earle Amerie with all his power came faire & easily after him, therewith his heart trembled. Then he said vnto the Abbot: Sir, what shall I doe? yonder I sée them approach that desire my death, they bée the same that lay in the wood watching for vs. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) haue no doubt, for they that come after vs come but a soft pace, they make no semblance to ouertake you, let vs ride on a good pace, we shal be anone at Paris, it is now but two miles thether. Then they road on, and rested not vntill they came to the Pallaice, and béeing there alighted, Huon went vp, holding his Brother by the one hand, and the Abbot by the other hand. There they saw the King sit∣ting among his Barons, then Huon saluted Duke Naymes and all the other Barons and said: Health and faire hap to all these noble Lords, but shame and dishonour to my Lord the King, for there was neuer heard of a fowler trea∣son, then the King hath practised against vs, séeing that by his Messengers & his Letters Patents he hath sent for vs to doe him seruice, the which commaundement we haue in all dutie obayed as to our Soueraigne Lord, but by false trea∣son waight hath béen layd secretly for vs, and a close ambush to haue murdered vs by the way, first they assayled my bro∣ther héere present, & by them he was brought into such dan∣ger, that they left him for dead, and afterward they set vpon me to haue slayne mée, but by the ayd of our Lord Iesus Christ, and with my Sword I so defended me, that he that thought to haue slayne vs, I haue slayne him.
Chap. IX. ¶ How the King was sore displeased with Huon, bycause hee had appeached him of treason: and how Huon shewed all the manner why he slewe the Knight that wounded his Bro∣ther. WHEN the King had heard Huon, he said: Knight beware, and thinke well what thou hast sayd héere before all my Barons, for neuer in all my life did I either act, or giue my consent to any trea∣son. But by the faith that I owe vnto my maker, and by my beard, if it be so that thou canst not prooue this that thou layest to my charge: I shall cause both thée and thy Brother to dye an euill death. When Huon heard the King how hée tooke his words, he stept foorth and sayd: Great King, be∣hold héere my Brother, who by thy meanes is sore hurt and in ieopardie of his life: And so did take off his Brothers Gowne and his Dublet to his shyrt, and he did open the great wound, so that the bloud ran out aboundantly, euen that it enforced Gerardin to fall in a swound before the King and his Barons, through the great anguishe that he felt: whereof the Emperour tooke such compassion, that he could not choose but much bemone him. And therefore immediat∣ly sent for his Surgeons, causing thē to search his wounds, demaunding if they could saue his life or no, and when they had thorowly searched the wound, they said: Sir, by the help of God within this moneth he shalbe whole and sound. The King was glad of that answeare, and beholding Huon said: Since thou layest this déed to my charge, thou must thinke, that thou hast touched the royall reputation of a King, and that in such sort, as verie hardly may the condition of Ma∣iestie
endure it. But by my Countreys honour, and by the Crowne that I iustly beare vpon my head, if I may knowe who hath done this heynous offence: I shall doe both thy Brother and thée such right and iustice, as it shall remaine for a perpetuall memorie of due honour, and that your selues shall report, you haue no cause to complaine. My Lord, an∣sweared Huon, I humbly thanke you, for through obaying your commaundement this mischéefe is fallen vnto vs. I cannot thinke nor know that any time of our life eyther I or my Brother did euer wrong or trespasse to any creature: but thus (by your Kingly pacience) the case happened. After we departed from Bourdeaux, wée found no aduenture, but when we came within a League of Montleherry, wee met with our Vnckle the Abbot of Cluny, and so fell in companie with him, to conduct vs to the Court, and so we road toge∣ther vntill we came on this side Montleherry, then we sawe a little wood, and by the brightnesse of the Sonne we saw the healmes, and speares, and shéelds of them that were ambu∣shed in the wood, and that one came out of the wood all armed his speare in his hand, and shéeld about his necke, and hée came a soft pace towards vs, then all we stood still, and sent my brother to the knight to know whether they were Spies or men to kéepe the passage, to the entent, that if they deman∣ded any Tribute, they should haue right of vs, if they would haue any of vs. When my brother came néere to ye Knight, he demaunded what we were, and my brother said how we were the Children of the Duke of Bourdeaux, and were com∣ming by your commaundement to your Court to reléeue our Lands and Fées of your grace: then the Knight sayd, how we were the same persons that he sought for, and sayd how that a Seauen yeares passed, Duke Seuin our Father had ta∣ken from him thrée Castles, the which was neuer so: then my brother offered him, that if he would come to Paris before you and your Barons, he should haue right done to him if he had any wrong done to him. Then the Knighte answeared, that he would not doe soe, and therewith suddainly couched
his speare, and stroake my brother as you sée, he béeing vn∣armed, so that he fell to the earth, wéening he had béen slain, and then he road againe faire and easily toward the wood. When I saw my brother borne to the earth, I had such sor∣row at my heart, that I could tarie no longer to be auenged, then I demaunded of mine Vnckle if he would ayd me, he answeared and said no, bycause he was a Priest, so hee and all his Monkes departed and left me alone, then I tooke the Ten Knightes that came with me out of my Countrey, and so I road as fast as I could, to the entent that he should not escape that had so wounded my brother, and assoone as hee saw that I followed him, he returned against me, then I de∣maunded of him what he was, he said, he appertained vnto Duke Terrey of Arden, then I demaunded why he had slayn my brother, he answeared and said, in likewise he would serue me, and therewith he couched his speare, and stroake me on the side through my Gowne and Dublet, and hurt not my flesh, as it was the pleasure of God: then I wrapped my Mantle about mine arme, and drew out my Sword, and with both my hands as he passed by me, I gaue him such a stroake that I cloue his head néere to the téeth, and so he fell downe to the earth dead. I know not what he is, but what∣soeuer he be, I haue slayne him, and if there be any that will demaund right in this cause, let him come into your royall Court before all your Péeres, and I shall doe him reason, if it be found that I haue done any wrong. When I had slayn him, I layd my Brother vpon the dead Knightes horse, and ouertooke the Abbot mine Vnckle. Then as I road and loo∣ked behind me, I saw them that were ambushed in the wood come ryding after, & one Knight came before the rest, bring∣ing vppon his horse the said dead Knighte, I know well if they bée not come, they will soone be héere. When Kinge Charlemaine vnderstood Huon, he had great maruaile what Knight it was that was slaine, and sayd vnto Huon, know for troth I shall doe you reason, for I know none so great in my Realme whosoeuer it be, but if I can prooue on him any
point of treason, I shall cause him to dye an euill death, for the matter toucheth me right néere, séeing vnder mine assu∣rance and by my commaundement you are come hether. Then the King commaunded that Gerard should be had to a goodly Chamber, and well looked vnto, the which was done. Chap. X. ¶ How Charlot the Kings Son was brought before him dead, and of the great sorrow that he made, and how Earle Amerie appeached Huon for the death of Charlot, and how the King would haue run vpon Huon, and of the good counsaile that Duke Naymes of Bauier gaue to the King. WHEN Huon of Bourdeaux and the Abbot of Cluny his Vnckle heard the good will of the King, and the offer that he made, they knéeled downe to haue kissed his foote, and thanked him of his courtesie, but the King tooke thē vp, then the Abbot sayd, My Lord, all that my Nephew Huon hath sayd is true, the King said, I beléeue you well, the Kinge did to them great honour, and feasted them in his Pallaice royally: but hée had great desire to know the troth of this case, and said: Hu∣on, and you the Abbot of Cluny, know for certaintie, I haue a Sonne whome I loue entirely, if you haue slayne him in doing such a villainous deede as to breake my assurance, I doe pardon you, so that it be as you say. My Lord, (quoth Huon) for that I thanke your grace, and surely the truth is as I haue shewed you. Then the King sent for Charlot his Sonne, so he was searched for in his lodging, & newes were returned, how he was departed out of the Towne the night before, so the Messenger departed, and when thy came into
the stréete, they saw where Earle Amerie came ryding with Charlot dead on his horse necke, & they heard in the Stréetes Lords, Knights, Ladies, and Damsels making great cries, and pitious complaints for Charlot the Kings Son whom they sawe dead. The Messengers were amazed at these ex∣clamations, but at last they perceiued it was for the death of Charlot, then they returned to the Pallaice, But by reason of the outcries and pityous moane the people made, with of∣ten repetition of Charlots name, (all which the Emperour leaning at a windowe confusedly heard) his heart waxed woondrous heauie, saying: Mée thinkes I heare such sor∣row as hath not béen vsuall, and my Sonne Charlots name is tossed too and fro in this outcry, it maketh me feare that it is my Sonne whome Huon hath slain. Then calling Duke Naymes vnto him, requested him to goe foorth, and resolue him in this matter. Then Duke Naymes departed, and incontinent hée en∣countred Charlot borne dead betwéene foure Knightes vpon a Shéeld, when he sawe that, he was right sorrowfull, so that he could not speake one word, then the vnhappie Earl Amerie went vp into the Hall, and came before the King and all his Barons, and there he layde downe Charlot. When Charles sawe his Sonne so slayne, the dolour and sorrow that he made was vnspeakable, it was pitie to sée him, and Duke Naymes was as sorrowfull as any other seéing the pi∣tyfull aduenture, and also the moane that the Lords made: then he came to the King and said. Good my Lord, comfort your selfe in this misaduenture, for by ouer-gréeuing at this ill hap, you can winne nothing, nor recouer your Childe a∣gaine, you know right wel, that my Coozen Ogier the Dane slew my Sonne Bertrand, who bare your Messuage of defi∣ance to ye king of Pauey, yet I did suffer it without any great sorrow making, bycause I knew well sorrow could not re∣couer him againe. Naymes (quoth the king) I cannot for∣get this, I haue great desire to know the cause of this déede. Then Duke Naymes sayd to Duke Amerie: Sir, know you
who hath slayne Charlot, and for what cause? Then Earle Amerie stept foorth and said with a loud voyce; Great King Charlemaine, why demand you any further, when you haue him before you that hath slayne your Sonne? and that is Huon of Bourdeaux, who standeth héere in your presence. When the King heard what Earle Amerie had sayd, he loo∣ked fiercely vpon Huon, and had strokē him with his Scep∣ter, but for Duke Naymes, who blamed the King and sayd: Forbeare my Lord, what meane you to doe this day? to re∣ceiue the Children of Duke Seuin into your Court, and hath promised to doe them right and reason, and nw would slay them? so may all such as shall heare of the matter say, that you haue sent for them to no other end but to murder them, and that you sent your Sonne to lye in waight for them, to haue slayne them. By this may be discerned, that you for∣get  Maiestie of a King, and expresse actions vnsée∣ming Charlemaine: demaund of Earle Amerie the cause why he had foorth Charlot your Sonne, and why that he assailed the two Brethren. Huon being there in presence, was great∣ly abashed at the Kings furie, receiuing him first so kindly, and now would kill him, he was in great feare, and as much as he might he drew backe from the King, and was greatly agreeued for that he had slayne the Kings Sonne not know∣ing him. And blame him not to be much troubled in mind, when he sawe no man that appertained to him, to ayd him, or to maintaine his right, but onely the good Abbot of Cluny his Vnckle, who could giue him none other ayd but with his words: yet he tooke on him courage, and right humbly said to the King. My Lord, I require your grace touch me not, but know for troth, he that lyeth there dead before you, I slewe him in my defence, and not knowing that he was your Sonne Charlot, for if I had known him, I would in no wise haue touched him, and you may well know my Lord, if I had knowne that it had béene he, I would not haue come to you for rescue, I would rather haue fled away so farre that no man should haue heard any tydings of me: therefore for
Gods sake I require you as heartily as I can, let mee haue right, I submit my bodie to abide the iudgment of your no∣ble Péeres, & if it can be prooued that I slew Charlot know∣ing him to be your Son, then my Lord, let me haue a sham∣full death: then all the Peeres & Barons being there, said with a hye voyce, how he had spoken reasonably, and that if Earle Amerie would any thing say to the contrarie, it was time then to speake and to shewe it. Chap. XI. ¶ How the Traytour Earle Amerie charged Huon before the Emperour, that he trayterously with treason pretended had slayne the Kinges Sonne, and in that quarrell he appealed Huon to battaile. WHEN the King had heard Huon speake, he beheld Duke Naymes, and desired him to giue his aduice. My Lord, (quoth ye Duke) I can say none other thing vnto you but as I sayd before: demaunde Earle Amerie why he led forth your Sonne all armed, and kept the ambushment in the wood to set vpon the two Bre∣thren, or else what was it that hee sought for there. Then Earle Amerie said: My Lord, I shall shew you the troth, and if I doe otherwise, let me dye a shamefull death. True it is, this night passed your Son sent for me, desiring me to ryde with him on hawking, and I desired him to abide vntill the morning, but he said that he would néeds go afore night, then I graunted to goe with him, so that he would ryde ar∣med, for I doubted the men of Arden, to the entent that if we met with any of them, wee might be able to resist them, and so we did, thus we road out of this towne and came into a little wood, and there we cast off our Hawkes, and there
we lost one of them, and therewith the same way came the Children of Duke Seuin, and there we saw Huon the eldest who is héere present, who had taken vp our Hauke, & your Sonne came in courteous maner vnto him, and desired him to render againe his Hauke, but the Traytour would not in no wise, then Gerard the yonger brother came to your Son, and they stroue so together that your Sonne stroke him, then Huon without any word speaking, lifted vp his sword and so villaynously slew your Sonne: then hée and his Bro∣ther ranne away so fast, that we could not ouer-take them, whereof we were sory. Thus he knew well your Sonne, and he slewe him, and if he will say to the contrarie, heere is my Gage, which I present héere before you, and if hée be so hardy as to take it vp, I shall make him confesse ere it be night, that it is true that I haue said: and this I will prooue with my bodie against his. Chap. XII. ¶ How the Abbot of Cluny would prooue that the saying of Earle Amerie was false and vntrue: and how the Earle did cast his Gage against Huon, who tooke it vp. AFter that Earle Amerie had ended his tale, the Abbot of Cluny stept forth and said to the King: My Lord, you neuer heard so false a tale before as this Traytor Amerie hath sayd, for I and foure more of my Monks being Priests here present, are readie to sweare and take our solempne oathes, that the saying of this Tray∣tour is false, and therefore there ought no Gage to be laid in that cause, séeing there is true witnesse of the matter. Abbot (quoth the King) the witnesse is to be beléeued: Sir Amerie how say you thereto? My Lord, (quoth he) I would be loath
to speake against the Abbot, but the troth is as I haue sayd, the Abbot may say as it please him: but if Huon be so hardie to deny this that I haue said before you, let him come into the field against me, and before it be night, I shall cause him to confesse it openly. When the Abbot heard this, he grew offended, and looking stearnly vpon Huon, sayd: Faire Nephew offer your gage, for the right is with thée, and if thou be vanquished in this quarell, if euer I returne into mine Abbey, there is no Saint in my Church, but I shall with a staffe beat and breake them al to peeces, for if God will suffer such a wrong, I shall giue such strakes vpon the shryne of Saint Peter, that I shall leaue neither gould nor precious stone whole together. Vnckle, (quoth Huon) & God will, I shall not let to take vp his gage, for I shall prooue that falsly and vntruly, Sir Amerie lyeth, as an euill and a false Traytour, and shall make him to confesse, that I neuer knew that he that I flew was the Kinges Sonne. Then the King said, that Huon must giue hostage. My Lord, (quoth Huon) you shall haue my Brother, I cannot deliuer you any that is so néere or deare to me as he is, for héere I haue ney∣ther Coozen nor Kinsman that will lay in hostage for mée. Faire Nephew (quoth the Abbot) say not so, for I and my Monkes will be pledges for you, and if any thing should fall vnto you otherwise then well, which God forbid, then shame haue King Charlemaine, without hée hang vppon gallowes both me and all my Monkes. Go too Abbot (quoth the King) you say ill, for I would neuer doe that: then sayd the King to Amerie, bring in pledges for your part. The Traytour answeared: My Lord, héere be two of my Nephewes shall be pledges for me. I am content (quoth the King) vppon this condition, that if thou be vanquished or discomfited, I shall cause them to dye an euill death. Then the pledges sayd, that they would be no pledges vpon that condition, let other be pledges who would: but they said, if the king would take them on the loosing of their Lands, they were content, and the King graunted them.
Chap. XIII. ¶ How those two Champions came into the feeld whereas they should fight, accompanied with their freends. THus as ye haue heard, both parties deliuered pledges, then the King to be in the more suertie, put them both in a Tower vntill the day of the Battaile: then the feeld was ordained, for the King hadde sworne that his Sonne should not be buried, vntill he that were vanquished were hanged, if he were not slaine in the feeld. Then he commanded Duke Naymes to be ready with an hundred Knights to kéepe the féeld, and to sée that no trea∣son should be done: for he said, he had rather loose the best Citie of his Realme. My Lord (quoth Duke Naymes) by the grace of God the matter shalbe so ordered for the suertie of both parties, that none shall haue wrong: the which thing was done so diligently, that euerie thing was ready, so both parties were brought into the Church of our Ladie in Paris, accompanied with their fréends, as such a case requireth: with Amerie was his next fréends, all issued of ye genealogie of Ganelon, and when they both had heard Masse, each tooke a draught of wine, and then they were richly armed & moun∣ted vpon good Horses, and so tooke the way to the féeld, the Stages were filled, and the King and his Barons there pre∣sent, abiding for the two Champions, who came one after another through the Stréets. First came Earle Amerie, and he road vntil he came into the féeld, and then he alighted and saluted the King and all his Barons. Then Huon came a∣none after, accompanied with a goodly sort, there were lea∣ning in the windowes Ladies and Damsels a great num∣ber, all who prayed our Lord Iesus Christ to ayd and defend
Huon from the Traytour Amerie. The people complained, and thought it vnpossible that Huon should resist against Earle Amerie, bycause Huon was so faire and young, but of the age of foure and twentie yeares. But as he was faire, so was he well made of bodie, no Knight more gallant and séemely, nor none more repleat with vertue: therefore hée was much bemoned both of men and women that sawe him passe by. And because Earle Amerie was a big boned man, a valiant and an expert Knight in armes, none stronger in all the Kinges Court, he was inward with the King & wel-beloued: euerie one greatly pityed that he was such a tray∣tour, for a worse could not be found in any Realme, hée had great trust in his owne strength, and little regarded Huon of Bourdeaux, thinking hee should not long endure against him. But there is a common prouerbe, which hath beguiled many a man, it is sayd, that a small rayne abateth a great wind, for if our Lord Iesus Christ will saue Huon, the force and puissance of Earle Amerie shal doe Huon but little hurt, for the right excellent partes and great courage that was in Huon, defended him, as you shall heare hereafter. Chap. XIIII. ¶ How the two Champions made their oathes vppon the re∣liques, that their saying was true, and what the King said. THus Huon road vntill hee came into the féelde, where he saluted the King & all the Barons right humbly, then he approached to the relikes, and there made his solempne oathe in the presence of Duke Naymes of Bauier, who was kéeper of the féeld, affirming that when he slew Charlot, he knew him not to be the Kings Sonne, and that as he was true Knight, and loyall liege∣man
to the Emperour, whatsoeuer Earle Amerie had sayd was false and vntrue, and that he lyed like a false Traytor, and so kissed the Reliques. When Huon had thus taken his oath, Earle Amerie stept foorth all afraid, and swoore that Huons oath was false, and that surely he knew it was Char∣lot when he slewe him, bycause he claymed his Hauke, the which Huon had taken vp, and that he would cause him to confesse ere it were night. When he had sworne, he thought to haue returned to his Horse, but stumbled so, that he had néere hand fallen to the earth. All that sawe it, tooke it for an ill sinne, and iudged in their minds, that the matter was likely to goe euill against Earle Amerie. When both these Champions had taken their oathes, and that Duke Naymes had caused the féeld to be auoided, hauing set the Kéepers of the féeld in due order as appertained thereto: then the twoo Champions leapt vpon their Horses, their Speares in their hands, & their shéelds about their necks, thē a cry was made, that none should be so hardie to mooue or to make any token vnto any of the partes vpon paine of death. After this crie made, the noble Emperor Charlemaine being full of yre and displeasure, caused againe to be proclaimed, that if it fortu∣ned that the vanquisher should slay his enimie in the féelde, before he confesse the treason for the death of his Sonne: that then the vanquisher should loose all his Lands, and himselfe to bée banished out of the Realme of Fraunce, and out of the Empire of Roome, foreuer. After proclamation was ended, Duke Naymes and the other Barons & Péeres came to the King and saide: Alas my Lord, what will you doe? this that you haue proclaymed, is against all the Statutes of the noble Realme of Fraunce and Empire of Roome, for often times it happeneth, that one of the Champions is slaine, and haue no power to speake, shall therefore the conquerour bée so much iniuried? for the great renowne which so long time hath béen spread abroad of you, let it not now be wronged & blemished? let it not be sayd, that you who haue liued in so great dignity all the daies of your life, that now in your lat∣ter
dayes you should become weaker then a Childe: of the which words the King tooke small regard. Chap. XV. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux and the Earle Amerie fought to∣gether before Kinge Charlemaine: and how the Traytour Amerie was slain by the noble prowesse and chiualrie of Hu∣on. WHen King Charlemaine had heard Duke Naymes, hee swoore by Saint Denis of Fraunce, and by his crowne and beard, that it should be as he had said, nor otherwise he would not doe it. Then the noble Barons were sorrie and sore displeased, and they de∣parted from the King and said: that by all likelyhood from thence forward Right should haue no place in his Court. Many noble Princes and Barons murmoured sore at the Proclamation that was made, & the two Champions drew apart and each of them fiercely regarded other. Then Earle Amerie spake aloud and said: thou Huon of Bourdeaux false trayterous Knight, this day I shall cause thée to confesse thy falsenesse, howbeit I haue great pitie of thée, in regard of thy youth, if therefore thou wilt confesse this murder that thou hast done, I shall desire King Charlemaine to haue compassi∣on vpon thée. When Huon heard the Traytour so speake, for anger he blushed red and sayd: Ah thou false and most disloyall Knight, thy venomous words so full of bitternesse doe nothing at all abash me, for that good right that I am in shall ayd me by the helpe of our Lord Iesus Christ, and I shall so punish thy trespasse, that this day I shall make thée to confesse thy falsenesse, haue thereof no doubt. Therewith ouched their Speares, and gaue such carrier to their horses,
that it séemed the thunder had fallen from heauen, and with their sharp Speares they encountred in such wise, that their Speares brake to their hands, so that the shiuers flew vp high into the ayre and into the Kings Stage, and both their Horses fell to the earth, and the Knights sore astonied with their falling. Then verie boldly they reléeued themselues with their Swords in their handes, and so approached each to other, and fought each with other so long while, that Hu∣ons Horse strangled sir Ameries Horse, who when he saw his horse slaine, stoutly stept to Huon for to haue slaine him: but Huon met him valiantly, and lifting vp his Sword, gaue the Earle such a stroake that he was astonied therewith, and staggred backe more then two paces and a halfe, hardly hol∣ding himselfe from falling to the earth, so that all that saw them, had maruaile of Huons vertue & force, séeing the great strength yt was in sir Amerie. Then when Earle Amerie felt himselfe in such perill, he began to despise the name of God, and of the glorious Virgin Marie: howbeit as well as hée might hée approached to Huon, and with his Sword gaue Huon such a stroake on the helmet, that all the flowers and precious stones there flew abroad in the féeld, and the cirkle of the helmet all to broken, and the stroake was so puissant that Huon was therewith sore astonied, and perforce was faine to fall on one of his knées to the earth, the other Legge but weakly supporting him. There was present in the féeld Lords and Knights, & one of the Abbot of Clunyes seruants, who when he saw the great stroake that Huon had receiued, he departed out of the féeld, and went into the church where∣as he found his maister the Abbot at his prayers for the good spéed of Huon his Nephew, to whome the seruant said. Ah my Lord, pray heartily to our Lord Iesus Christ to succour your Nephew, for I saw him faine to knéele vpon one of his knées, in great doubt of death. Then the good Abbot with∣out any answeare, lifted vp his hands toward Heauen de∣uoutly, and weeping, prayed to God to ayd and defend the honour of his Nephew, and to maintaine his right. Thus
Huon béeing in the féeld in great doubt of his life, féeling the sturdie strength of Earle Amerie: called with a good heart to our Lord Iesus Christ, requiring him to aide his right, the which he knew to be most true. When Earle Amerie sawe that Huon had receiued of him such a heauy stroake, he said: Huon I beléeue thou wilt not endure long, better it were that thou confesse the déede before I slay thée, for ere it bée night I shall cause thée to waue in the wind. Hold thy tonge thou false Traytour (quoth Huon) thine ilnesse shall not aid thée, for I shall bring thée to that point, that all thy fréends shall haue shame of thée. Then Huon aduaunced him and made semblance to haue striken Amerie on ye helmet, and A∣merie lifted vp his Shéeld to haue receiued the stroake, but when Huon saw that, he turned his stroake to a reuerse, and stroake Amerie vnder the arme with his sharpe Sword, so that he stroake off his arme, the which fell downe in the féeld Shéeld and all. When Earle Amerie sawe & felt that maruailous stroake, and that he had lost his left arme, and saw it lye in the féeld, hee was full of paine and sorrow, and aduised himselfe of a great treason, then he spake to Huon and saide: Ah Noble Knight haue pitie of me, for wrongfully and without cause I haue appeached thée of the death of Charlot the kings Son, for I know in troth you knew him not, but he is dead by my meanes, for I brought him into the wood to haue murde∣red you and your Brother: I am readie to acknowledg this before the King and all his Barons, and to discharge you thereof: therefore I pray you kill me not, I yéeld me vnto you, take heere my Sword. Then Huon came vnto him, and put downe his arme to haue taken the Sword, but then the false Traytour Amerie with a reuerse stroake, strooke Huon vpon the arme, thinking to haue striken it off, but he fayled: howbeit he gaue him a great wound in the arme, so that the bloud ran downe. When Huon saw this horrible treason, he said: O thou vntrue and false Traytour, thine esse can no longer saue thée, for thou shalt nuer doe trea∣son
more: then Huon lifted vp his Sword, & gaue the Earle such a maruailous stroke betwéen the healme and the shoul∣der, that he strooke off his head cleane from the bodie, so that the healme and head fel one way, and the body another way. Alas what hap was it to Huon, that he did not remember before he slew Amerie, the Proclamation that the Emperor had made before, for afterward Huon suffered so muche wrong and iniurie, as might mooue the verie hardest heart to compassionate his case, and as you shall more at large vn∣derstand in the following discourse. Chap. XVI. ¶ How after the Emperour Charlemaine had seene Earle Ame∣rie was slaine, he commaunded expresly, that Huon should auoid the Realme and Empire, and to be banished thence for euer. WHen that Duke Naymes, who kept the féeld, saw how by Huon the Earle was slaine, he was right ioyfull, and came to Huon and demaunded how hée did. Sir, (quoth he) thanked be God I féele no dolour nor gréefe: then they brought him to the Pallaice to the King, who was departed out of the féeld. When he saw the Earle slaine, and was thereof right sorrowfull, then he demanded of Huon and of Duke Naymes, if they had heard Earle Amerie confesse the treason that hée had layde to Huon for the death of Charlot his Sonne. My Lord, (quoth the Duke) I thinke he did confesse it, but I heard it not, for Huon pressed so sore vpon him, that he had no leasure to doe it. Then Charlemaine sayd: Ah Earle A∣merie, I know certainely thou didst neuer that treason, nor neuer thought it: wherefore thou art slaine wrongfully and
without cause, for there was neuer a truer Knight thē thou wert, & I am sure if thou hadst done it, thou wouldest haue confessed it before me. Then the King sayd vnto Huon, I charg thée incontinent to auoid my Realme, out of the which I banish thée foreuer, nor shalt thou euer enioy one foote of Land in Bourdeaux nor in Aquitaine, & also I forbid thée that thou neuer be so hardy as to go to Bourdeaux, for by my ho∣nour and crowne, if I may know that thou goest thether, I shall make thée to die an euill death, nor there is no man li∣uing, though he be neuer so néere a fréend vnto me, but if he make any request for thée, I shall neuer loue him, nor he shall neuer after come in my sight. Then Huon said, Alas my Lord, what iustice is this? haue I done any more then knighthood bound me too? haue not you and your Barons séene him discomfited in playne Battaile, that hath brought you into all this trouble? vndoubtedly my Lord, if you doe to me as you say, God in heauen be my witnes, that neuer more wrong was done to any noble man. This is but bad remembrance of the good seruice that the noble Duke Seuin my Father hath done vnto you, for by this you shew great example to all your noble Barons and Knights, for them to be well aduised, how from henceforth they order themselues, and how to trust in you, when that by your owne obstinate opinion, founded vpon an euill ground, and against all Sta∣tutes royall and imperiall, thus to execute your owne vn∣reasonable will. Certainly if it were any other Prince be∣side you, that should doe me this great wrong: ere I would consent so to be dealt withall, many a Castle and many a good towne should be destroyed and brought to ruine, & many poore men more impouerished and disenherited, and many a good Knight brought to death. When Huon had thus spoken to the King, Duke Naymes stept foorth and sayd to the King: My Lord, what meane you to doe? you haue seene that Huon hath done no more then his dutie, hauing brought his enemy to confusion and slayn him, you may wel thinke that it was the worke of God, that such
a Child should bring to shame and discomfite such a puissant Knight as was Earle Amerie. Therefore my Lord, if you doo as you haue said, neither I nor any other man shall euer trust you, but euerie one farre & néere that shall heare of this crueltie, will report that in the end of your daies you are be∣come sencelesse, & more like a Tyrant then a wise Prince. Then Huon desired▪ all the Barons that were there present, that they would all require the King to haue more respect of him, séeing they were all bound so to doe, in that he was one of the Péeres of the Realme. Then al the Princes and Ba∣rons (holding Huon by the hand) knéeled downe before the King, and Huon said: Séeing it is so my Lord, that your displeasure is such againste me as you haue expressed: Let your Barons and my selfe obtaine but this fauour at your handes, that I may be confined to my owne natiue Coun∣trey for euer, there to lead a poore & priuate life, neuer to be admitted to your presence againe, & for this grace we shall all right humbly thanke you. Chap. XVII. ¶ How King Charlemaine sent Huon to doe a messuage in Ba∣bylon to the Admirall Gaudise. WHEN the Emperor had heard Huon speake, he said incontinent: a∣uoid out of my sight, for when I remem∣ber my Sonne Charlot whome thou hast saine, I haue no part of mée but it trem∣bleth for the displeasure I haue to thée, and I charge all my Barons héere present that they neuer speake to me more for thée. When Duke Naymes heard the King say so, he said vnto all the Barons: My Lords, you that he héere present, haue well heard the great vnreaso∣nablenesse
that ye King offers to one of our Péeres, ye which as yée know well it is against right and reason, and a thing not to be suffered. But bycause we know certainly the King is our Soueraigne Lord, we must suffer his pleasure: but from hencefoorth, since he will vse himselfe so, and do things against all reason and honour: I will neuer abide an houre longer with him, but will depart and neuer returne againe into the place, whereas such extremitie & vnreasonablenes is vsed: I will goe into my Countrey of Bauier, and let the King doe from hencefoorth as he list. Then all the Barons departed with the Duke from the King, without speaking any one word, and so left the King alone in his Pallaice. When the King sawe the Duke depart & his other Lords, he was right sorrowfull and in great displeasure, and said to the young Knights that were left about him, howe that he ought in nature to take heauylie the death of his Sonne who was slaine so disloyally, and could not likewise but gréeue, to sée how his Barons had abandoned him and left him a∣lone: therefore there is no remedie I sée well, but I must be forced somewhat to follow their wils, & therewith he wept pitiously, and incontinent went foorth and followed them, saying: Duke Naymes and all you my Barons I desire you to returne againe, for of force I must graunt your requests, although it be against that promise yt I made before. Then the Duke and all the rest returned to the Pallaice with the King, who sat downe on a bench of gould and his Barons about him. Then he sent for Huon, who knéeled downe be∣fore the King, requiring him humbly of mercie and pitie, to whom the King said: Huon, séeing thou wouldest be at peace with me, it is requisit that thou performe whatsoeuer I en∣ioyne thée. Else my Lord, (said Huon) God forbid, there is no man in the world owes you more obedience then I doe, or shall more gladly vndertake whatsoeuer your highnesse shall please to commaund me, dreadlesse of death or any dan∣ger, be it to goe to Hell gates, to fight with the fiendes there as sometime did Hercules, if I may thereby be reconciled to
your grace. Huon (quoth the King) I thinke to send thée in∣to a worse place, for of fiftéene Messengers that I haue sent, there was neuer any returned againe: I shall shew thée whether thou shalt goe, séeing thou wilt that I shall haue mercie of thée. Thou must goe to the Citie of Babylon, to the Admirall Gaudise, and there doe as I shall appoint thée, but beware on paine of thy life that thou fayle not to doe it. When thou commest thether, mount vp into his Pallaice, and there tarrie vntill he be at his dinner, and when thou se∣est him sit at the table, then thou to be armed with thy sword naked in thy hand, and the verie greatest Lord that thou sée∣est sit at his Table, whether he be King or Admirall, thou shalt strike off his head: and after that, enquire for faire Es∣cleremond Daughter to the Admirall, and kisse her there o∣penly in his presence and before all other there present, for I giue thée to vnderstand she is the fairest mayd that is now liuing, this being done, thou shalt say to the Admirall Gau∣dise, that I commaund him to send me, a thousand Haukes, a thousand Beares, and a thousand Waighters all chained, and a thousand young Varlets, and a thousand of the fairest maydens in his realme. And also thou to bring me thy hand∣full of the heare of his beard, and foure of his greatest téeth. Alas my Lord, (quoth the Barons) wée sée well you desire greatly his death, when you charge him with such a Messu∣age. That is true, (quoth the King) for without I haue his beard and his great téeth brought me hether vnfaynedly: Let him neuer returne into Fraunce, nor come into my pre∣sence, for if he doe, he shalbe hanged and drawen. My Lord, (quoth Huon) haue you shewed me all your pleasure? Yea, (quoth the King) my will is as I haue said, if thou wilt haue peace with me. My Soueraigne Lord, (quoth Huon) by the grace of God I shall finish your messuage, the feare of death shall not let me to doe it. Huon (quoth the King) if God of his grace will suffer thée to returne againe into Fraunce, I charge thee be not so hardy to come vnto Bourdeaux▪ nor to any part of thy Countrey vntill thou hast spoken with mée,
if I finde thée dooing contrarie, I shall cause thée to die an ill death, and vpon this, I will thou layest vnto me good hosta∣ges. My Lord, (quoth Huon) héere be Ten Knights, whom I shall leaue with you for suerty, to the entent that you shall be content with me: howbeit my Lord, I require your grac to suffer the Knights that came with me from Bourdeaux to goe with me to the holy Sepulchre. I am content (quoth the King) that they go with thée thether or else-where. My Lord (quoth Huon) I thanke your grace. Then Huon made him readie to fournish his voyage. Chap. XVIII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux tooke leaue of the King and of the Barons, and rode with the good Abbot to Cluny. AFter that King Charlemaine had giuen Huon the charge of his messuage: the King called before him Gerardine Bro∣ther to Huon, and deliuered to him the go∣uernance of all his Brothers Lands in his absence vntill his retourne. And thus whē Huon was readie, he came to the King and to the Barons, to take his leaue of them and the Abbot of Cluny, who said they would goe with him part of his way, so likewise did Twelue of the greatest Princes & Ladies accompanie him for twoo daies iourney: and when they came to the towne of Troy in Champaine, Duke Naymes tooke leaue of his Coozen Huon, and gaue him a Sommer charged with gould, and kissed him at their departing. Then Gerard his Brother tooke his leaue and also kissed him: but know for troth the kisse that he gaue him, was like to the kisse that Iudas gaue to his Maister, the which was dearely bought as héereafter yée shall heare. Thus Duke Naymes and Gerard departed & tooke their way to Paris, but the Abbot and Huon rested not
vntill they came to the Abbie of Cluny, where they were re∣ceiued with great ioy and well feasted. Then the next mor∣ning Huon departed, and tooke leaue of his Vncle sore wée∣ping, desiring him to recommend him vnto his Mother the Duchesse and to Gerard his Brother: the Abbot promised so to doe, and gaue Huon his Nephew a Mulet charged with money currant in Fraunce: thus he departed and tooke the way to Roome. Now leaue we to speake of Huon, and shew of Duke Naymes and Gerard, who returned to Paris, where Gerard required the King, that it would please him to receiue his homage for the Lands of Bourdeaux, to the entent that he might be aduaunced, and to be in the State of one of the Péeres of Fraunce, the which thing Duke Naymes would not consent nor agrée vnto, but said to the King: My Lord, you ought not to suffer that Huon should be disenherited, where∣of Gerard was not content, but Duke Naymes set litle there∣by, for he loued Huon entirely, so this homage was delayed. Then Gerard returned to Bourdeaux, where he was well re∣ceiued: but when the Duchesse saw him & not Huon to re∣turne, she was sorrowfull in her heart, and then she deman∣ded of Gerard, why that Huon his brother was not returned with him? Then Gerard shewed her all the whole matter and aduenture, and of the departing of Huon, & of the man∣ner of his voyage, whereof the Duchesse had such sorrowe, that she fell sicke, and so lay nine and Twenty daies, and on the Thirtieth daye she dyed, and rendred vp her Soule vnto God: whereof all the Countrey was sorrowfull. Gerard nobly buried her in the Church of Saint Seueryn by ye Duke her husband. Amon after married him to the Daughter of Duke Gilberd of Cecill, who was the greatest Traytour and moste cruell that might be heard of. And Gerard Amons Sonne in law learned his wayes, and followed his conditi∣on, for he dealt so ill with the towne of Bourdeaux, and with the Countrey about, that pitie it was to heare the poore peo∣ple, to wéepe for the losse of Duke Seuin and of the Duchesse, and prayed to God for the good returne of their Lord Huon:
Nowe wee shall leaue to speake of them and returne vnto Huon. Chap. XIX. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux came to Roome, and was confessed of the Pope who was his Vncle, and of his departing, and how he came to Brandis, where he found his Vncle Garyn of Saint Omers, who for loue of Huon passed the Sea wyth him. Here before you haue heard, how Huon departed from his Vncle ye Ab∣bot of Cluny, and so longe hée road with his Knights, that he came to the City of Roome: where hee was lodged in a good Hostrey. Then Huon arose in the morning, accom∣panied with Guichard whom he loued well, and with the o∣ther Knights that came thether with him, and went to the Church of Saint Peter and heard Seruice, and when that Seruice was done, the Pope came out of his Oratorie: then Huon came vnto him and humbly saluted him, the Pope be∣held him and demaunded what he was? Sir, (quoth he) my Father was Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who is deceased: then the Pope stept vnto him & embraced him, and sayd. Faire Nephew you are welcome, I pray you shew me how doth my Sister the Duchesse your Mother, and what aduenture hath brought you hether? Sir, (quoth he) I desire your ho∣lynesse, that you will heare my confession a part, for I haue great néede thereof. Faire Nephewe (quoth the Pope) it pleaseth me right well to héere you: then the Pope tooke him by the hand, & went with him into his Oratorie, and there Huon shewed him all the aduenture that he had since he came from Bourdeaux, and of the voyage that Charlemaine had set
him to doe, and what he had to say to the Admirall Gaudise: all which being declared and done, he required pardon and penaunce for his sinnes. The Pope said, he would assigne him no penaunce, for the Emperour Charles had done that alreadie, and which was so great, that no humane bodie could suffer it, nor durst vndertake to doe it. Then the Pope gaue him absolution of all his sinnes, and louingly led him into his Pallaice, where he was honourably receiued with great ioy. After they had dyned and deuised together a great space, the Pope said vnto Huon: Faire Nephew the way that you must goe, is to goe to the Porte of Brandis, there shall you find my Brother Garyn of Saint Omers, who is your Vncle, to whome I shall write a Letter, to the entent that he shall haue knowledge of you, for I know well he will haue great ioy of you, he hath the kéeping of the Orientall Sea, he shal adresse you, and deliuer you Ship or Galley such as shall bée necessarie for you. Most holy Father, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke you. Well (quoth the Pope) this night you shall abide here with me. Sir, (quoth he) I require you to let me depart, for greatly I desire to sée mine Vncle Garyn. When the Pope saw that he would néedes depart, he deliuered him his Letter, and sayd: Faire Nephew, salute from me my Brother Garyn your Vncle. Sir, (quoth he) I shall do your commaundement: then the Pope gaue to Huon great and rich presents, and to all them that were with him, and hée kissed his Nephew at his departing, Huon tooke leaue of thē all wéeping, and so departed, and entred into the Riuer of Tiber in a rich Shippe, the which the Pope had well garni∣shed for him. Thus hee had good winde, so that anone they arriued at Brandis, but whiles he was on the water, hee wept sore and pityously complayned, in that he was so departed out of his Countrey: then his men comforted him, and shewed many faire examples to comfort him. Sir, (quoth Guichard) leaue your sorrow, for gréefe and sadnesse cannot auaile you, you
must put all to the mercie of our Lord God, who neuer for∣getteth them that loue him: shew your selfe a man and no Child, to the entent that we that be with you may be reioy∣ced, for the sorrow that we sée you in, doth sore trouble vs. Deare fréend (quoth Huon) since it is so, I shall follow your will: and thus they arriued at the Port of Brandis. Then they yssued out of their Shippe, and tooke out their Horses, and there they saw Garyn sitting before the Port, in a lodge (well and richly hanged) in a goodly Chaire. When Huon saw him sitting, he saluted him, thinking that he was Lord of that Countrey: then Garyn beheld Huon and began to wéepe, and said. Sir, it doth not appertaine vnto me, that you should doe me so great honour as you doe: for by that I sée in you, I am constrained to wéepe, bycause you resemble so much to a Prince of the Realme of Fraunce, called Duke Seuin, who was Lord of the Citie of Bourdeaux, the great loue that euer I bare vnto him, caused me to wéepe: there∣fore I require you tell me, where you were borne, and who be your Parents and fréends? for Duke Seuin wedded my Sister the Duchesse Aclis. Sir, (quoth Huon) séeing you will néedes know what I am, I may well shew it vnto you, for that Duke was my Father, and the Duchesse Aclis is my Mother, we are two brethren, I am the eldest, & the youn∣ger is still at Bourdeaux to kéepe our Land. When Garyn vnderstood that Huon was Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourde∣aux, the ioy that he had could not be expressed, then he embra∣ced Huon all wéeping and said: Right deare Nephew, your comming is to me the greatest ioy in this world, so he knée∣led downe and would haue kissed Huons féete: but Huon re∣léeued him incontinent. The ioy that was betwéene them two was so great, that all that saw it had maruaile thereof. Then Garyn demaunded of Huon and said: Faire Nephew, what aduenture hath brought you into these parts? Then Huon shewed him from point to point all his businesse, and the cause why he was entred into that Enterprize. When Garyn had heard all, he began to wéepe, and yet to
comfort his Nephew, he said: Faire Huon, whereas lyeth great perils, there lyeth great honour, God ayd you to es∣chew and to finish this great businesse, all is possible to God, and to man by meanes of his grace, a man ought neuer to b abashed for worldly matters. Then Huon deliuered his Letters to his Vncle Garyn, who gladly receiued them, and read the contents thereof at large. Then he said, Faire Nephew, there néede none other recommendations but the sight of your presence, for it appeareth well by your counte∣nance, that you be the same person that our holy Father ma∣keth mention of, surely your comming séemeth to mée faire and good, and you be arriued at a good Port, for I promise you faithfully, I loue well my Wife and my Children: but the great loue that I haue vnto you for the loue of your Fa∣ther Duke Seuin, and the Duchesse your Mother, who was mine owne deare Sister, I abandon all that I haue to serue you and kéepe you companie, both with my bodie and all that I haue. Knowe for truth, I haue thrée good Galleys & three great Shippes, well fournished of euerie thing for the warre, the which I shall lead with you, for as longe as life abideth in my bodie, I shall not abandon you: but I shall ayde you in all your Enterprizes. Faire Vncle, (quoth Huon) for the great courtesie that you offer mée, I can but thanke you: then Garyn tooke Huon by the hand, and led him into his Castle, whereas hée was richly receiued. Garyns Wife and foure of her Sonnes came vnto Huon, and he full courteously kissed the Ladie and her foure Children his Coo∣zens, great ioy was made there in the Hall, and the Tables set for Supper. Then Garyn called his Wife and said, Ma∣dame, this young Knight that you sée héere, is my Nephew and Coozen to your Children, who is come hether for refuge, to haue counsaile and ayd of me in a Voyage and Enterprise that he hath to doe, and by the grace of God, I shall go with him to ayd and to conduct him: wherefore I pray and com∣maund, that you take in rule all my affaires and kéepe your Children. Sir, (quoth she) séeing it is your pleasure thus to
doe, and that you will goe with him, your will let be fulfil∣led: howbeit I had rather you abode then went, this shée spake sore wéeping. The next day in the morning, Garyn (who had great will to serue and please his Nephew) ordained a great Shippe to be made readie well fournished with Bisket, Wines and flesh, and all other manner of victuals, and with munition of warre as it appertained, and put therein their horses and armour, gould and siluer, & other riches necessarie for them: then they tooke leaue of the Ladie, and so lest her sore wée∣ping. Thus Garyn and Huon entred into their Ship and all their companie, there were Thirtéene Knightes and Twoo Varlets to serue them, for they would haue no greater num∣ber. Chap. XX. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Brandis, and Ga∣ryn his Vncle with him: and how he came to Ierusalem, and from thence into the Deserts, whereas hee founde Gerames, and of their conference. WHen Huon and Garyn were entred into their Ship, they hoysed vp their Sailes, and sayled night and daye, so that at last they arriued safely at the Port of Iaffe, where they tooke landing and drew out their horses, and road foorth so the same day, that they came to Rames, and the next day to the Citie of Ierusalem: that night they rested, and the next day they did their Pil∣grimage to the holy Sepulchre, and there deuoutly heard Seruice, and offered according to their deuotion. When Huon came before the holy Sepulchre, he kneeled downe vp∣on his bare knées, and all wéeping made his prayers to our
Lord God, requiring him to ayd and comfort him in his voy∣age, so that he might returne againe into Fraunce, and to haue peace with King Charlemaine. And when they all had made their prayers and offered, Huon and Garyn went into a little Chapell vpon the mount of Caluerye, whereas nowe lyeth the bodies of Godfrey of Bullen, and Bauldwin his Bro∣ther: there Huon called vnto him all those that came with him out of Fraunce, and said. Sirs, you that for the loue of mée, haue left your Fathers and Mothers, Wiues and Chil∣dren, Lands and Signiories, for this courtesie that you haue shewed mee, I thanke you. Now you may returne into Fraunce againe, and humbly recommend mée to the Kinges good grace, and vnto all the other Barons: and when you come to Bourdeaux, do my dutie to the Duchesse my Mother, and to Gerard my Brother, and vnto the Lords of my Coun∣trey. Then Guichard and all the other Knights answeared Huon, and said: Sir as yet we will not leaue you, neither for death nor life, vntill we haue brought you vnto the red Sea: why then (quoth Huon) for the great seruice and cur∣tesie that you offer mee, I thanke you. Then Garyn called two of his seruants, and commaunded them to returne vnto his wife, and to desire her to be of good chéere, and that short∣ly he would returne, the which thing they did, and returned and did their messuage. When Huon vnderstood that his Vncle Garyn was dispo∣sed to abide with him he sayd: Faire Vncle, you shall not néede to trauaile so much, I would councell you to returne vnto your Wife and Children. Sir, (quoth Garyn) & God will I shall not leaue you no day, vntill you returne your selfe. Vncle, (quoth Huon) I thanke you of your courtesie: then they went to their lodging and dyned, and after dinner tooke their horses, and so road by Hils and Dales, so that if I should recount all the aduentures that they found in their way, it should be too long a processe to shew it: but as the true Historie witnesseth, they suffered much paine and tra∣uaile, for they passed such Deserts, whereas they found but
small sustenance, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull, for the loue of them that were with him, and began to wéepe, and to remember his owne Countrey, saying: Alas noble King of Fraunce, great wrong and great sinne you haue done me, thus to driue me out of my Countrey, and to send mée into a strange Land, to the entent to shorten my dayes: I pray God to pardon you therefore, then Garyn and the other Knights comforted him, and said: Alas Sir, dismay you not for vs, God is puissant ynough to ayd vs, hée neuer fayleth them that loueth him. Thus they road forth in the Desert so long, vntill at last they saw a little Cottage, before the which sat an old ancient man with a long white beard, and his heare hanging ouer his shoulders: when Huon perceiued him, he drew thether, and saluted the olde man in the name of God and of the bles∣sed Virgin Marie: then the ancient man lifted vp his eyes and beheld Huon, and had great maruaile, for of a long sea∣son before he had séene no man that spake of God, then he be∣held Huon in the face, and began sore to wéepe, and stepping vnto Huon, tooke him by the Leg & kissed it more then twen∣tie times. Fréend (quoth Huon) I desire you shew me why you make this sorrow? Sir, (quoth he) about thirtie yeares passed I came hether, and since that time I neuer sawe man beléeuing on the Christian faith, and now the regarding of our visage, causeth me to remember a noble Prince that I haue séene in Fraunce, who was called Duke Seuin of Bour∣deaux: therefore I require you shew me if euer you saw him, I pray you hide it not from me. Fréend (quoth Huon) I pray you shew me where you were borne, & of what lineage and Countrey you be of? Nay sir, (quoth he) that will I not doe, first you shal shew me what you be and where you were borne, and why you come hether? Fréend (quoth Huon) sée∣ing it pleaseth you to know I shall shew you: then Huon and all his companye alighted, and tyed theyr Horses to Trées. When Huon was alighted, he sat downe by the old man
and said. Fréend, since you will néedes know my businesse, I shall shew you: know for troth, I was borne in the Citie of Bourdeaux, and am Son to Duke Seuin, and Huon shew∣ed him all his whole case and Enterprize, and of the death of Charlot, and how he discomfited Earle Amerie, and howe that Charlemaine hadde chaced him out of Fraunce, and of the Messuage that he was charged to say vnto the Admirall Gaudise, affirming all to be for certaintie. When the oulde man hadde well heard Huon, he began sore to wéepe. Sir, (quoth Huon) since it pleaseth you to know of my sorrowe, Duke Seuin my Father is dead seauen yeares past, my Mo∣ther I trust be aliue, and a Brother of mine whome I haue left with her. And nowe sir séeing you haue heard of mine affaires, I require you giue me your counsaile and aduice, and also if it please you, to shew me what you be, and of what Countrey, and how you came into these parts? Sir, (quoth the old man) know for troth, I was borne in Geron∣ill, & am brother to the good Prouost Guyer: & when I de∣parted thence I was a young Knight, & haunted the Iustes and Tourneys, so that on a daie it fortuned at a Tourney that was made at Poytiers, I slew a Knight of a noble bloud, wherefore I was banished out of ye Realme of Fraunce. But my brother the Prouost made such a request to Duke Seuin your Father, that by his meanes my peace was made with the King, and my land saued, vpon condition that I should goe to the holy Sepulchre, to punish my bodie for the Knight that I flew, and to forgiue my faults. Thus I departed out of my countrey, and when I had done my voyage, I thought to haue returned, but as I departed out of the Citie of Ieru∣salem, to take the way to Acres, passing by a wood betwéene Ierusalem and Naples, there came vpon me ten Sarazins, who tooke me and brought me to the Citie of Babilon, where∣as I was in prison two yeares complet, whereas I suffered much pouertie and miserie: but our Lord God, who neuer fayleth them that serueth him, and haue in him full affiance, he sent me the grace, that by the meanes of a right noble La∣die
I was brought out of prison in a night, and so I fled in∣to this Forrest, whereas I haue béene this thirtie yeares, & in all this space I neuer saw nor heard man beléeuing in Ie∣sus Christ: thus I haue shewed you all mine affaires. When Huon had heard the Knights tale, he had great ioy, and embraced him and saide, howe often times he had séene Guyre his Brother the Prouost wéepe for him, and when I departed from Bourdeaux, (quoth he) I deliuered vnto him all my Lands to gouerne: wherefore I require you shewe mée your name? Sir, (quoth he) I am called Gerames, and now I pray you shew me your name? Sir, (quoth he) I am na∣med Huon, and my younger Brother is called Gerard. But sir, I pray you shew me how you haue so long liued héere, & what sustenance you haue had? Sir, (quoth Gerames) I haue eaten none other thing but rootes & fruites that I haue found in the wood: then Huon demaunded of him if he could speake the language Sarazin? Yes sir, quoth he) as well or better then any Sarazin in the Countrey, nor there is no way but that I know it. When Huon had heard Gerames, then he demaunded fur∣ther of him, if he could goe to Babilon? Yes sir, (quoth Ge∣rames) I can goe thether by two wayes, the most surest way is hence about fortie dayes iourney, and the other is but fif∣téene dayes iourney: but I councell you to take the longe way, for if you take the shorter way, you must passe thorow a wood about sixtéene Leagues of length, but the way is so full of the Fayryes and srang things, that such as passe that way are lost, for in that wood abideth a King of the Fayryes named Oberon, he is of height but of thrée foote, and crooked shouldered, but yet he hath an Angell-like visage, so that there is no mortal man that séeth him, but that taketh great pleasure to behold his face, and you shall no sooner be entred into that wood, if you go that way, but he wil find ye meanes to speake with you, and if you speake vnto him, you are lost for euer, & you shall euer find him before you, so that it shall be in manner impossible that you can scape from him, with∣out
speaking to him, for his words be so pleasant to heare, that there is no mortall man yt can well scape without spea∣king vnto him. And if he sée that you will not speake a word vnto him: then he will be sore displeased with you, and be∣fore you can get out of the wood, he will cause raine & wind, hayle and snowe, and will make maruelous tempests, with thunder and lightenings, so that it shall séeme vnto you that all the world should perish, and he will make to séeme before you a great running Riuer blacke and déepe: but you may passe it at your ease, and it shal not wet the feet of your horse, for all is but fantasie and enchauntments that the Dwarfe shall make, to the entent to haue you with him, and if you can kéepe your selfe without speaking vnto him, you may then well escape. But Sir to eschew all perils, I councell you to take the longer way, for I thinke you cannot escape from him: and then you be lost for euer. When Huon had well heard Gerames, he had great mar∣uaile, and he had great desire in himselfe to sée that Dwarfe King of the Fayryes, and the strang aduentures that were in that wood: then he said vnto Gerames, that for feare of a∣ny death hée would not leaue to passe that way, séeinge hée might come to Babilon in fiftéene dayes, for in taking ye lon∣ger way hée might perchaunce find more aduentures, and since he was aduertised, that with kéeping his tongue from speaking, he might abridge his iourney: he sayd, that sure∣ly he would take that way whatsoeuer chaunce befell. Sir, (quoth Gerames) you shall doe your own pleasure, for which way soeuer you take, it shall not be without me, I shall bring you to Babilon to the Admirall Gaudise, I knowe him right well, and when you bée come thether, you shall see there a Damsell, (as I haue heard say) the most fairest creature in all Inde, and the onely and most swéetest, and most courte∣ous that euer was borne, and it is shee that you séeke, for shee is Daughter to the Admirall Gaudise.
Chap. XXI. ¶ How Gerames went with Huon and his companie, and so came into the wood, whereas they found King Oberon, who coniured them to speake vnto him. WHen Huon had well heard Gerames, how he was minded to goe along with him: hée was thereof right ioyfull, and thanked him of his courtesy and seruice, and gaue him a goodly horse, whereon he moun∣ted, and so road foorth together, so long that they came into the wood whereas King Oberon haunted most. Then Huon who was wearie of trauaile, and what for famine and for heate, the which he and his companie had endured two dayes without bread or meat, so that he was so féeble that he could ride no further, and then he began pi∣tyously to wéepe, and complayned of the great wronge that Kinge Charlemaine had done vnto him, and then Garyn and Gerames comforted him, and had great pitie of him, and they knew well by the reason of his youth, hunger oppressed him more then it did to them of greater age. Then they alighted vnder a great Oake, to the entent to search for some fruit to eate, they glad thereof let their horses goe to pasture. When they were thus alighted, the Dwarfe of the Fayry Kinge Oberon came ryding by, and had on a Gowne so rich, that it were maruaile to recount the riches and fashion thereof, & it was so garnished with precious stones, that the clearnesse of them shined like the Sonne. Also he had a goodlie bow in his hand, so rich that it could not be estéemed, and his ar∣rowes after the same sort, and they were of such a nature or qualitie, that any beast in the world that he would wish for, the arrowe would arrest him. Also he had about his necke
a rich Horne hanging by two Laces of gold, the Horne was so rich and faire, that there was neuer séene any such, it was made by foure Ladies of ye Fayries in the Isle of Chafalone, one of them gaue to ye horne such a propertie, that whosoeuer heard the sound thereof, if he were in the greatest sickenesse in the world, he should incontinent be whole and sound: the Ladie that gaue this gift to the Horne, was named Glorian∣da. The second Ladie was named Translyna, she gaue to this Horne another propertie, and that was, whosoeuer heard this Horne, if he were in the greatest famine of the worlde, he should be satisfied as well, as though he had eaten al that he woulde wishe for, and so likewise for drinke as well, as though he had droonke his fil of the best wine in al the world. The third Ladie named Margala gaue to this Horne yet a greater gift, and that was, whosoeuer heard this Horne, though he were neuer so poore or feeble by sicknesse, he should haue such ioy in his heart, that he should singe and daunce. The fourth Ladie named Lempatrix, gaue to this Horne such a gift, that whosoeuer heard it, if he were an hundred dayes iourneys of, he should come at the pleasure of him that blew it farre or néere. Then King Oberon, who knew well, and had séene the four∣téene Companions, he set his Horne to his mouth, and blew so melodious a blast, that the fourtéene Companions being vnder the Trée had so persit a ioy at their hearts, that they al rose vp and began to sing and daunce. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what fortune is come vnto vs? me thinke we be in Paradise, right now I could not sustaine my selfe for lacke of meat and drinke, and nowe I féele my selfe neither hungrie nor thirstie, from whence may this come? Sir, (quoth Ge∣rames) knowe for troth, this is done by the Dwarfe of the Fayrye, whome you shall soone see passe by you. But Sir, I require you on ieopardie of loosing of your life, that you speake to him no word, without you purpose to abide euer with him. Sir, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt of me, séeing I know the ieopardie. Therewith the Dwarfe began to
crie aloude and saide: Yée fourtéene men that passe by my wood, God kéepe you all, and I desire you speake with mée, and I coniure you thereto by God almightie, and by the christendome that you haue receiued, and by all that God hath made: answeare mée. Chap. XXII. ¶ How King Oberon was right sorrowfull and sore displeased, in that Huon would not speake: and of the great feare that he put Huon and his companie in. WHEN that Huon and his companie heard the Dwarfe speake, they mounted on their Horses, and road away as fast as they might, without speaking of any word, and the Dwarfe séeing how that they road away and would not speake, hée was sorrowfull and angrie. Then hée set one of his fingers on his Horne, out of the which yssued such a winde and tempest so horrible to heare, that it bare downe Trées, and therewith came such a raine and hayle, that it séemed that heauen and the earth had fought together, and that the world should haue ended, the beasts in the woods brayed and cryed, and the foules of the ayre fell down dead for ye feare that they were in, there was no creature but he would haue béen afrayd of that tem∣pest. Then suddainly appeared before them a great Riuer, that ran swifter then the birds did flye, and the water was so blacke and so perilous, & made such a noyse, that it might be heard ten Leagues of. Alas (quoth Huon) I see well now we be all lost, wée shall héere be oppressed without God haue pitie of vs, I repent me that euer I entred into this wood, I had béen better to haue trauailed a whole yéere, then to haue come hether. Sir, (quoth Gerames) dismay you not, for all this is done by the Dwarfe of the Fayrye. Well, (quoth
Huon) I thinke it best to alight from our horses, for I thinke we shall neuer escape from hence, but that we shalbe all op∣pressed. Then Garyn and the other Companions had great maruaile, and were in great feare; Ah Gerames, (quoth Huon) you shewed mee well, that it was great perill to passe this wood, I repent mée nowe that I had not beléeued you. Then they sawe on the other side of the Riuer a faire Ca∣stell, enuyroned with fourtéene great Towers, and on eue∣rie Tower a clocher of fine gould by séeming, the which they long regarded, and by that time they had gone a little by the Riuer side, they lost the sight of the Castle, it was cleane va∣nished away: whereof Huon and his companie were sore a∣bashed. Huon, (quoth Gerames) of all this that you sée dis∣may you not, for all this is done by the crooked Dwarfe of the Fayrye, and all to beguile you, but he cannot gréeue you, so you speake no word: howbeit ere we depart from him, he will make vs all abashed, for anone he will come after vs like a mad man, bicause you will not speake vnto him: but sir I require you as in Gods name, be nothing afrayd, but ride foorth surely, and euer beware that you speake vnto him no word. Sir, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt thereof, for I had rather he were destroyed, then I should speake one word vnto him, then they road to passe the Riuer, and they founde there nothing to let them, and so road about fiue Leagues. Sir, (quoth Huon) wée may well thanke God that wee bée thus escaped this Dwarfe, who thought to haue deceiued vs, I was neuer in such feare during my life god confound him: thus they road deuising of the little Dwarfe, who had done them so much trouble.
Chap. XXIII. ¶ How Kinge Oberon▪ Dwarfe of the Fayry pursued so much Huon, that he constrained him to speake to him at last. WHen Gerames vnderstood the companie, howe they thought they were escaped from the Dwarfe, he began to smile, and said: Sirs, make no brag∣ing that you be out of this danger, for I beléeue you shall soone sée him againe, and assoone as Gerames had spoke the same words, they sawe be∣fore them a bridge the which they must passe, and they sawe the Dwarfe on the other part, Huon sawe him first and said, I sée that Diuell who hath done vs so much trouble. Oberon heard him and saide: Fréend thou doest me iniurie without cause, for I was neuer Diuell nor ill creature, I am as o∣ther be, but I coniure thée by the diuine puissance, to speake vnto me. Then Gerames said: Sirs, for Gods sake let him alone, nor speake no word to him, for by his faire language he may deceiue vs all, as he hath done many other, it is pity that he hath liued so long. Then they road forth a good pace, and left the Dwarfe alone sore displeased, in that they would not speake to him: then he tooke his Horne and set it to his mouth and blew it. When Huon and his companie hearde it, they had no power to ride any further, but they began all to sing. Then Oberon the Dwarfe said, yonder company are fooles & proud, that for any salutation that I can giue them, they disdaine to answeare mée: but by the God that made me, before they esape me, the refusall of my words shalbe déere bought. Then he tooke againe his Horne, and strooke it thrée times on his bowe, and cryed out aloud & said: Yée my men, come and appeare before me. Then there came to
him about foure hundred men of armes, and demaunded of Oberon what was his pleasure, & who had displeased him? Sirs, (quoth Oberon) I shall shew you: howbeit I am grée∣ued to shewe it, héere in this woode there passed fourtéene Knights, who disdaine to speake vnto me: but to the entent that they shall not mocke me, they shall déerely buy the refu∣sing of their answeare: Wherefore I will you goe after them, and slay them all, let none escape. Then one of his Knights said: Sir, for Gods sake haue pitie of them. Cer∣tainly (quoth Oberon) mine honour saued, I cannot spare them, since they disdaine to speake vnto me. Sir, (quoth Glorianda) for Gods sake doe not as you say: but sir worke by my counsaile, and after doe as it pleaseth you. Sir, I counsaile you yet once againe goe after them, then if they do not speake, we shall slay them all: for surely Sir, if they sée you returne againe to them so shortly, they will be in great feare. Fréend (quoth Oberon) I shall do as you haue coun∣sailed mee. Thus Huon and his company road forth a great pace, and Huon said: Sirs, we are now from the Dwarfe about fiue Leagues, I neuer sawe in my life so faire a crea∣ture in the visage, I haue great maruaile how he can speake of almightie God, for I thinke he be a Deuill of hell, & since he speaketh of God, mée thinkes we ought to speake to him, for I thinke such a creature can haue no power to doe vs any euill, I thinke hee be not past the age of fiue yeares. Sir, (quoth Gerames) as little as he séemeth, and that you take him for a Child, he was borne fortie yeares before the nati∣uitie of our Lord Iesus Christ. Surely (quoth Huon) I care not what age he be of, but if he come againe, ill hap come to me if I kéepe my words and speach from him, I pray you be not displeased. And thus as they road deuising fiftéene dayes, suddainly Oberon appeared vnto them, and said: Sirs, are you not yet aduised to speake vnto mée? yet againe I am come to salute you in the name of the God that made and fourmed vs, and I coniure you by the puissance that he hath giuen me, that
you speake to me, for I repute you for fooles, to thinke thus to passe thorow my wood, and disdaine to speake to mée. Ah Huon, I know thée well ynough, and whether thou wouldst goe, I know all thy déedes, howe thou slewest Charlot, and after discomfited Amerie, and I knowe the Messuage that Charlemaine hath charged thée to say to ye Admirall Gaudise▪ the which thing is impossible to be done without mine ayd: or without me thou shalt neuer accomplish this Enterprize. Speake to me, and I shall doe thée that courtesie, that I shall cause thée to atchiue thine Enterprize, the which is else im∣possible without mée, and when thou hast atchiued thy Mes∣suage, I shall bring thée againe into Fraunce in safegard. I know the cause that thou wilt not speake to mée, it is by rea∣son of old Gerames who is there with thée: therefore Huon beware of thy selfe, go no further, for I know well it is thrée dayes passed since thou diddest eate any meate to profit thée, if thou wilt beléeue me, thou shalt haue ynough of such sus∣tenance as thou wilt wish for: and assoone as thou hast dy∣ned, I will giue thée leaue to depart, if it be thy pleasure, of this haue no doubt. Sir, (quoth Huon) you bee welcome. Ah (quoth Oberon) thy salutation shalbe well rewarded, knowe for truth, thou neuer diddest salutation so profitable for thy selfe, thou mayest thanke God, that he hath sent thée that grace. Chap. XXIIII. ¶ Of the great maruailes that Oberon shewed vnto Huon, and of the aduentures that fell. WHen Huon had well heard Oberon, he had great maruaile, and deman∣ded if it were true that hee had saide? Yes truly (quoth Oberon) of that make no doubt. Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile
for what cause you haue alwayes pursued vs. Huon (quoth Oberon) know that I loue thée well, bicause of the truth that is in thée, and therfore naturally I loue thée, and if thou wilt knowe who I am, I shall shew thée. True it is, Iulius Cae∣sar engendred me on the Ladie of the secret Isle, who was sometime well beloued of the faire Florimont, of Albania. But bicause that Florimont who as then was young, and he had a Mother who did so much, that she saw my Mother and Florimont together in a solitary place on the Sea side: when my Mother perceiued that she was espyed by Florimonts mo∣ther, she departed and left Florimont her louer in great wée∣ping and lamentations, and neuer saw him after. And then shee returned into her owne Countrey of the secret Isle, the which now is named Chafalone, whereas she married after, and had a Sonne who in his time after was King of Egpt, named Nactanabus, it was he as it is said that engendred A∣lexander the great, who after caused him to die. Then after a Seauen yeares, Caesar passed by the Sea as he went vnto the place whereas he fought with Pompey, in his way hee passed by Chafalone, where my Mother fetched him, and hée fell in loue with her, bicause she shewed him that he should discomfite Pompey, as he did. Thus I haue shewed you who was my Father, at my birth there was many Princes and Barons of the Fayry, and many a noble Ladie that came to sée my Mother whiles she trauailed of mée, and amonge them there was one was not content, bicause shee was not sent for as well as the other, and when I was borne, shee gaue mee a gift, the which was, that when I should passe thrée yeares of age, I should grow no more, but thus as you sée mee nowe, and when she had thus done, and sawe that she had thus serued me by her words, she repented her selfe, and would recompence mee another way. Then shee gaue me another gift, and that was, that I should be the fairest creature that euer nature fourmed, as thou mayest s mée now: & another Ladie of the Fayry named Transtyna, gaue me another gift, and that was, all that euer any man can
know or thinke good or ill I should knowe it. The third La∣die to doe more for me, and to please my Mother the better, she gaue me, that there is not so farre a Countrey, but that if I wil wish my selfe there, I shal be there incontinent with what number of men as I list, and moreouer if I will haue a Castle or a Pallaice at mine owne deuice, incontinent it shall be made, and assoone gone againe when I list, & what meat or wine that I would wish for, I should haue it incon∣tinent, and also I am Kinge of Momur the which is about foure hundred Leagues from hence, and if I lit incontinent I can be there. Know for troth that thou art arriued at a good Port, I know well thou hast great néede of meat, for this thrée dayes thou hast had but small sustenance, but I shall cause thée to haue ynough, I demaund of thée whether thou wilt haue meat and drinke héere in this meadow, or in a Pallaice, or in a Hall, commaund whereas thou wilt, and thou shalt haue it for thée and thy companie. Sir, (quoth Huon) I will follow your pleasure, and neuer doe nor thinke the contrarie. Huon (quoth he) as yet I haue not shewed all the gifts that were giuen me at my birth. The fourth La∣die gaue me, that there is no bird, nor beast be they neuer so cruell, but if I will haue them, I may take them with my hande, and also I shall neuer beséeme elder then thou séeest me now, and when I shal depart out of this world, my place is appointed in Paradise, for I knowe that all things created in this mortall world, must néeds haue an end. Sir, (quoth Huon) such a gift ought to be well kept. Huon (quoth Obe∣ron) well you were counsailed when you spake to me, you had neuer before so faire aduenture, shew me by thy faith, if thou wilt eate, and what meate thou wilt haue, and what wine thou wilt drinke? Sir, (quoth Huon) so that I had meate and drinke I care not what it were, so that I and my company were filled and rid from our famine. Then Obe∣ron laughed at him and said: Sirs, all you sit down here in the meadowe, and haue no doubt but all that I will doe is done by the puissance of our Lord God: then Oberon began
to wish, and saide vnto Huon and his companie: Sirs a∣rise vp quickly, the which they did, then they looked before them, and sawe a faire and a rich Pallaice garnished with Chambers and Halles, hanged & bedded with rich cloathes of silke beaten with gold, and Tables ready set full of meat. When Huon and his company sawe the rich Pallaice before them, they had great maruaile, and Oberon tooke Huon by the hand, & with him mounted vp into the Pallaice: when they came there, they found seruants there readie, bringing vnto them Basons of gould garnished with precious stones, they gaue water to Huon, and he sat down at the Table, the which was furnished with all manner of meate and drinke that man could wish. Oberon sat at the tables end vpon a bench of Iuorie, rich∣ly garnished with gould and precious stones, the which seat had such vertue giuen vnto it by the Fayrie, that whosoeuer by any subtil means would poyson him that should sit there∣on: assoone as he should approach néere to the seat he should fall downe starke dead. King Oberon sat thereon richly ap∣parelled, and Huon who sat néere vnto him began to eate a great pace, but Gerames had small appetite to eate, for he be∣léeued that they should neuer depart thence: when Oberon sawe him he said, Gerames eate thy meat and drinke, for as∣soone as thou hast eaten, thou shalt haue leaue to goe when thou list. When Gerames heard that, he was ioyfull, then he began to eate and drinke, for he knew well that Oberon would not doe against his assurance. All the companie did well eate and drinke, they were serued with all thinges that they could wish for. When Huon sawe how they were all satisfied and repleat, and had well dyned, he saide to Kinge Oberon. Sir, when it shall be your pleasure, I would you should giue vs leaue to depart. Huon, (quoth Oberon) I am right well content so to doe, but first I will shewe you my iewels: then he called Clariand a Knight of the Fayrey, and saide, Fréend goe and fetch to me my Cup, he did his com∣maundement, and when Oberon had the Cup in his hand,
he said vnto Huon, Sir, behold well, you sée that this Cup is nowe voyd and emptie: that is true Sir, (quoth Huon.) Then Oberon set the Cup on the Table, and saide vnto Hu∣on: Sir, behold the great power that God hath giuen mée, & that in the Fayrie I may doe what is my pleasure: then hée made ouer the Cup the signe of a Crosse thrée times, and incontinent the Cup was full of wine, and then he said. Be∣hold Sirs, you may well sée that this is done by the gace of God, yet I shall shewe you the great vertue that is in this Cup, for if all the men in the world were héere assembled to∣gether, and that the Cup were in the handes of any man, be∣ing out of deadly sinne, he might drinke thereof his fill: but whosoeuer offers his hand to take it, being in deadly sinne, the Cuppe doth loose his vertue, and if thou mayest drinke thereof, I offer to giue thée the Cup. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, but I am in doubt that I am not worthy, nor of valour to drinke thereof, nor to touch the Cup, I neuer heard of such dignitie as this Cup is of: but Sir, knowe for truth, I haue béen confessed of all my sinnes, and I am repentant and sorrowfull for that I haue done, and I doe pardon and forgiue all the men in the world, whatsoeuer iniurie hath béene done vnto me, and I knowe not that I haue done wronge to any creature, nor I hate no man: and so hée tooke the Cup in both his handes, and set it to his mouth, and droonke of the good wine that was therein at his plea∣sure.
Chap. XXV. ¶ Of the great gifts that Oberon gaue vnto Huon, as his Horne of Iuorie, and his Cup, the which were of great vertues, and how Huon after thought to prooue the vertue of thē, where∣by he was in great perill of death. WHen Oberon sawe that, hee was right glad, and came and embraced Hu∣on, saying that he was a noble man, and I giue thée (quoth he) this Cup as it is, in the manner as I shall shewe, that in any wise for any thing for the dignitie of the Cup, be thou euer true and faithfull, for if thou wilt worke by my counsaile, I shall aide thée, and giue thée succour in all thine affaires: but assoone as thou makest any lye, the vertue of the Cup will be lost and loose his bountie, and beside that, thou shalt loose my loue and aide. Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall right well beware thereof, and nowe Sir I require you suf∣fer vs to depart. Abide yet, (quoth he to Huon) yet I haue another iewell, the which I will giue thée, bicause I thinke there bee truth and noblenes in thée: I will giue thée a rich Horne of Iuorie, the which is full of great vertue, & which thou shalt beare with thée, it is of so great vertue, that if thou be neuer so farre from me, assoone as thou blowest ye Horne, I shall heare thée, and shalbe incontinent with thée, with a hundred thousand men at armes for to succour and ayd thée. But one thinge I commaund thée on the payne of loosing of my loue, and on ieopardie of thy life, that thou be not so har∣dy to sound the Horne, without thou hast great néede there∣of, for if thou doe otherwise, I vowe to God that created mée, I shall leaue thée in as great pouertie and miserie as e∣uer man was, so that whosoeuer should sée thée in that case,
should haue pitie of thée. Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall right well beware thereof, now I desire you let me depart. I am content, (quoth Oberon) and God be thy guide. Then Hu∣on tooke leaue of the Kinge Oberon, and trussed vp all his baggage, and did put his Cup into his bosome, & the Horne about his necke: thus they all tooke their leaue of King Obe∣ron, & all weeping embraced Huon, who had maruaile why he wept and said, Sir, why doe you wéepe? Fréend, (quoth Oberon) you may well know, you haue with you two things that I loue dearely, God ayd you, more I cannot speake to you. Thus the fourtéene Knightes departed, and so they road foorth about fiftéene Leagues or more, then they sawe before them a great déepe Riuer, and they could finde no guide nor passage to passe ouer, and so they wist not what to doe, then suddainly they sawe passe by them a seruant of King Obe∣ron, bearing a rod of gold in his hand, and so without spea∣king of any word, he entred into the Riuer, and tooke his rod & stroke the water therewith thrée times, then inconti∣nent ye water withdrew a both sides in such wise, that there was a path that thrée men might ride a froont, and that done he departed againe, without speaking of any word. Then Huon and his companie entred into the water, and so passed thorowe without any danger, and when they were past they looked behind them, and sawe the Riuer close againe, and ran after his old course. By my faith, (quoth Huon) I thinke we be enchaunted, I beléeue surely King Oberon hath done this, but séeing we be thus scaped out of perill, I trust from henceforth we shall haue no more doubt. Thus they roade foorth together singing, and oftentimes spake of the great maruailes that they had seene King Oberon doe, and as they road, Huon beheld on his right hand, and sawe a faire mea∣dowe well garnished with hearbes and flowers, and in the middest thereof a faire cleare Fountaine: then Huon roade thether, and alighted, and let their Horses goe to pasture, then they spread a cloath on the gréene grasse, and set there∣on
such meate as Kinge Oberon had giuen them at their de∣parting, and there they did eat, & drinke such drinke as they found in the Cup. By my faith (quoth Huon) it was a faire aduenture for vs when we met Oberon, and that I spake to him, he hath shewed me great tokens of loue, when he gaue me such a Cup, if I may returne into Fraunce in sauegard, I shall giue it to Charlemaine, who will make great ioy ther∣with, and if he cannot drinke thereof, the Barons of Fraunce will haue great sport thereof. Then againe he repented him of his owne words, and said, I am a foole to thinke or to say thus, for as yet I cannot tell what end I shall come to, the Cup that I haue is better worth then two Cities, but as yet I cannot beléeue the vertue to be in the Horne as Oberon hah shewed, nor that he may héere it so farre off, but what∣soeuer fortune fall, I will assay it if it hath such vertue or not. Alas Sir (quoth Gerames) beware what you doe, you knowe well when wée departed what charge he gaue you, certainly you and we both are lost if you trespas against his commaundement. Surely, (quoth Huon) whatsoeuer for∣tune fall, I will assay it, and so tooke the Horne and set it to his mouth, and blewe it so loud that the wood rang: then Gerames and all the other began to sing and to make great ioy. Then Garyn said, Faire Nephewe blowe still, and so Huon blew still with such force, that Oberon who was in his wood about fiftéene Leagues of, heard him clearely, and said: Alas my fréends, I heare my fréend blowe, whome I loue best of all the world, alas what man is so hardy to doe him any ill, I wishe my selfe with him with a hundred thousand men at armes, incontinent he was nere to Huon with a hun∣dred thousand men at armes. When Huon and his compa∣nie heard the Hoast comming, and saw Oberon come ryding on before them, they were affraid, and it was no maruaile, séeing the commaundement that Oberon had giuen them be∣fore. Then Huon saide, alas Sirs, I haue done ill, nowe I sée well we cannot escape, but that we are likely all to die, certainly (quoth Gerames) you haue well deserued it, houlde
your peace, (quoth Huon) dismay you not, let me speake to him; therewith Oberon came to them and saide: Huon, what meaeth this? where are they that will doe thée any ill? why hast thou broken my commaundement? Alas Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall shew you the truth, wée were sitting right now in this meadowe, and did eat of that you gaue vs, I beléeue I tooke too much drinke out of the Cup that you gaue me, the vertue of the which we well assayed: then I thought to trye also the vertue of the rich Horne, to the en∣tent that if I shoulde haue any néede, that I might be sure thereof, now I know for troth, that all is true that you haue shewed me: wherefore Sir in the honour of God I require you to pardon my trespas, else sir, héere is my swoord, strike off my head at your pleasure, for  know well without your ayd I shall neuer come to atchieue mine enterprise. Huon quoth Oberon, the bountie and great troth that is in thée, cō∣streyneth me to giue thee pardon, but beware from hence∣foorth, be not so hardy as to breake my commaundement. Sir quod Huon I thanke you: well quoth Oberon, I knowe surely that thou hast as yet much to suffer, for thou must passe by a citie named Tormont, wherein there is a Tyrant called Macayr, and yet he is thine owne Vncle, brother to thy father Duke Seuin: when he was in Fraunce he had thought to haue murdered king Charlemaine, but his treason was knowne, and he had béen slaine if thy Father Duke Seuin had not béen: so he was sent to ye holy Sepulchre, to do his penaunce for the ill that he had dne, and so afterward there he renounced the faith of our Lord God, and tooke vp∣pon him the Paynims Law, the which he hath kept euer since so strongly, that if he heare any man speake of our lord god, he will pursue him to death, and looke what promise that hée maketh, he keepeth none, therefore I aduise thee trust not on him, for surely he will put thee to death if he may, & thou canst not escape if thou goest by that City: therefore I coun∣saile thee take not that way if thou be wise. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your courtesie loue and good councell I thanke you,
but whatsoeuer fortune fall to me, I will go to mine Vncle, and if he be such a one as you say, I shall make him to die an ill death, and if néede be I shall sound my Horne, and I am sure at my néede you will ayd me. Of that you may be sure (quoth Oberon,) but of one thing I forbid thée, be not so har∣dy to sound thy Horne without thou bée hurt, for if thou doe the contrarie, I shall so martir thée, that thy bodie shall not endure it. Sir, (quoth Huon) bée assured your commaunde∣ment I will not breake: then Huon tooke leaue of King Obe∣ron, who was sorrie when Huon departed. Sir, (quoth Hu∣on) I haue maruaile why you wéepe, I pray you shew mee the cause why you doe it? Huon (quoth Oberon) the great loue that I haue to thée, is that causeth me to doe it, for as yet hereafter thou shalt suffer so much ill and trauaile, that no humane tongue can tell it. Sir quoth Huon ye shew me many things not greatly to my profite: Sure quoth Oberon, and yet thou shalt suffer more than I haue spoken of, and al by thine owne folly. Chap. XXVI. ¶ How Huon arriued at Tormont, and found a man at a gate, who brought him to lodge at the Prouosts howse in the towne. AFter that Oberō had shew∣ed Huon part of that should fall to him, and was departed, Huon and his company thē mounted on their horses, and so rode foorth so long, till they came to the cittie of Tor∣mont. Gerames who had béen there before, when he saw the citie, he said to Huon: Alas sir, we be ill a∣riued, behould here we be in the way to suffer much trouble. Sir quoth Huon, be not dismaide, for by the grace of god wée
shall right well escape, for who that God will aide, no man can hurt. Then they entred into the Citie, as they came to the gate, they met a man with a bowe in his hand, who had beene a sporting without the Citie, Huon road formost and saluted him in the name of God, saying: Fréend what call you this Citie? The man stood still, and had maruaile what men they were that spake of God, he beheld them and said, Sirs, the God in whose name you haue saluted mée, kéepe and defende you from incombrance: howbeit, I desire you in as much as you loue your liues, speake softly that you bée not heard, for if the Lord of this Citie knowe that you bée christian men, he will slay you all, sirs you may trust me, for I am christened, but I dare not be knowne thereof, I haue such feare of the Duke. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray thée shew me who is Lord of this Citie, & what is his name? Sir, (quoth he) he is a false Tyrant, when he was christe∣ned, he was named Macayr, but he hath renounced God, & he is so fierce and proud, that as nowe hee hateth nothing so much, as them that beléeue in Iesus Christ: but Sir, I pray you shewe me whether you will goe? Fréend, (quoth Huon) I would gladly goe to the red Sea, and from thence to Babi∣lon, I would tarie this day in this Citie, for I and my com∣panie are sore wearie. Sir, (quoth he) and if you will be∣léeue me, you shall not enter into this Citie to lodge, for if the Duke knewe it, none could saue your liues, therefore if it be your pleasure, I shall lead you another way beside the Towne. Sir, (quoth Gerames) for Gods sake beléeue him that counsaileth you so truly. Know for troth, (quoth Huon) I will not doe thus, I sée well it is almost night, the Sun goeth lowe, therefore I will lodge this night héere in this Towne whatsoeuer befall, for a good Towne should neuer be forsaken. Sir, (quoth the strange man) séeing it is so, for the loue of God I shall bring you to a lodging, whereas you shalbe well and honestly lodged, in a good mans house that beléeueth in God, named Gonder, he is Prouost of the City, and well beloued with the Duke. Fréend, (quoth Huon)
God reward thée, so this man went on thorow the Towne, vntill he came at the Prouosts house, whome they founde sitting at his gate. Huon that was a faire speaker, saluted him in the name of God, and the Prouost arose vp, & beheld Huon and his companie, and he had great maruaile what they were, séeing they saluted him in the name of God: then he said. Sirs you be welcome, but a Gods name I desire you speake softly that you be not heard, for if the Duke of this Citie knewe this you should vtterly bee loste: but if it please you to tary this night héere in my house, for the loue of God, all that I haue in my house shall be yours to doe there∣with at your pleasure, I abandon all to you, & Sir, I thanke God I haue yt in my house, that if you abide héere this twoo yeare, you shall not néede to buy any thing without. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this faire proffer I thanke you, and so he and his companie alighted, and there were seruants ynough to take their Horses and to set them vp: then the Host tooke Huon and Gerames and the other, & brought them to Cham∣bers to dresse them, then they came into the hall wheras they found the Tables set and couered, and so sat downe, & were richly serued with diuers meats. When they had done and were rysen, Huon called Gerames and said: Sir, goe in hast into the Towne and get a cryer, and cause to be cryed in eue∣rie market place and stréete, that whosoeuer will come and sup at the Prouosts house, aswell noble, as vnle men, women and children, rich and poore, and all manner of peo∣ple of what estate or degrée soeuer they be: shall come mer∣rily and fréely▪ and nothing pay neither for meat nor drinke, whereof they should haue as they wished, and also hée com∣maunded Gerames, that all the meat that he could get in the Towne, he should buy it, and pay readie money for ye same. Sir, (quoth Gerames) your pleasure shall be done. Sir, (quoth the Host) you know well, all that is in my house, I haue abandoned vnto you: therefore sir you shall not néed to seeke for any thing further, take of my goods at your plea∣sure. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, I haue monney
ynough to fournish all that néede, and also Sir I haue a Cup of great vertue, for if all the people that be within this Citie were héere present, they should haue drinke ynough by rea∣son of my Cup, the which was made in Fayry Land. When the Host heard Huon, he began to smile, & beléeued that those words had béene spoken but in iest. Then Huon, not well aduised, tooke the Horne of Iuorie from his necke, and tooke it to his Host to kéepe, saying: mine Hoste, I take you this to kéepe, for it is a precious thing, therefore kéepe it surely, that I may haue it againe when I demaund it. Sir, (quoth he) I shall surely kéepe it, and when it please you it shall bée readie: and so tooke the Horne and layd it vp in a Coffer. But after fell such an houre, that Huon would haue had it rather then all the goods in ye world, as you shall heare more hereafter. Chap. XXVII. ¶ How Huon gaue a supper vnto all the poore men of the Ci∣tie, and howe the Duke was Vncle to Huon: and howe the Duke had Huon into his Castle. THVS when Gerames had this commaundement of Huon, he went in∣to the Citie, and made to be cryed in diuers places as he was commanded to do. When this crye was made, there was no Begger, Vacabound nor Ribauld, Iugler, Minstrell, old nor yong, but by great flockes they came all to the Prouosts house, in number more then foure hundred, and Gerames bought vp bread, meat, flesh and other victuals, all that he could finde in the Citie, and payed for it: thus the supper was dressed, and euerie man set at the Tables. Huon serued them with his Cup in his hand, and made euerie man to drinke of that
he put out of his Cup into other pots, and yet euer the Cup was full. When the people had well eaten and dronken the good wines, and were well chased in their braines, some be∣gan to sing, and some to sleepe at the Table, and some did beat their fysts vpon the boards, that it was maruaile to sée the life that they led: whereof Huon had great ioy. The same time the Dukes Steward came into the Towne, to buy his Maisters Supper: but he could neither find bread nor flesh, nor no other victuals, whereof he was sore displeased, and then he demaunded the cause, why he found no victuals as he was accustomed to doe? Sir, (quoth the Butchers and Bakers) in the house of Gonder the Prouost is lodged a yong man, who hath made to be cryed in all the City, that al beg∣gers and ribaulds should come to Supper at his lodging, and he hath bought vp all the victuals that he could get in the Towne. Then the Paynim in great despight went to ye Pal∣laice vnto the Duke, and said. Sir, I can get nothing in the Towne for your Supper, there is a young man lodged in the Prouosts house, that hath bought vp all the victuals, to giue a Supper to all the beggers, vacabounds and ribaulds that can be found in the Towne. When the Duke vnderstood that, he was sore displeased, and swoore by Mahound, that he would go see that Supper: then he commaunded all his men to be readie in harnesse to goe with him, and as he was going out of his Pallaice, a Traytor who had stollen priuily out of the Prouosts house, whereas he had been at supper with other, said to the Duke: sir know for troth, there is in your Prouosts house a knight, who hath giuen a Supper to all people that would come the∣ther, and so there is no begger, no ribauld nor other that would sup, but are come thether, and Sir, this Knight hath a Cup Letter worth then all this Citie, for if all the people betweene East and West should dye for lacke of drinke, they should haue all ynough, for as often as you will emptie the Cup, it will be full againe incontinent. When the Duke heard that, he had great maruaile, and saide, such a Cuppe
were good for him, and swoore by Mahound that he would haue that Cup: let vs go thether, for my will is to haue that Cup, and all those Knights shall loose their horses and bag∣gage, I will leaue them nothing. Then he went foorth with thirtie Knights, and rested not vntill he came to the Prouosts house, and founde the gates open. When the Prouost perceiued him, he came to Huon and saide: Alas Sir you haue done ill, héere is come the Duke in great displeasure, if God haue not pitie of you, I cannot sée how you can escape without death. Sir, (quoth Huon) dismay you not, for I shall speake so faire, that he shall be content: then Huon with a merrie chéere came to the Duke, and said: Sir, you be welcome. Beware, (quoth the Duke) come not néere me, for no christian man may come into my Citie without my Licence, wherefore I will thou knowest, that you shall all loose your heads, and all that you brought hether. Sir, (quoth Huon) when you haue slaine vs, you shall win thereby but little, and it were great wrong for you so to doe. I shall tell thée, (quoth the Duke) why I will so do, it is bycause you be christian men, therefore thou shalt be the first, shewe me on thy faith, why hast thou assembled all this companie héere to Supper? Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue done it bicause I am going to the red Sea, and bicause these poore men will pray to God for me, that I may safely returne: Sir this is the cause that I haue made them to sup with me. Well, (quoth the Duke) great folly hast thou spoken, for thou shalt neuer sée faire day, you shall all loose your heads. Sir, (quoth Huon) leaue all this, I pray you and your comapanie sit downe, and eate and drinke at your pleasure, and I shall serue you as well as I can, and then Sir if I haue done any wrong, I will make you amends in such wise that you shall be content: for if you doe me any hurt, it shall be to you but a small conquest. Sir, me thinks if you will do nobly, you should somewhat forbeare vs, for as I haue heard say, you were once christened. Then the Duke said vnto Huon, thou hast sayd well, I am content to
sup, for as yet I haue not supped. Then the Duke com∣maunded euerie man to be disarmed, and to sit downe at the Table, the which they did, and Huon and Gerames serued them, and they were well serued at that supper: then Huon tooke his Cup and came to the Duke and said. Sir, sée you not héere this Cup, the which is voyd and emptie? I sée well (quoth the Duke) there is nothing therein. Then Huon made the signe of the crosse ouer the Cup, and incontinent it was full of wine, he tooke the Cuppe to the Duke, who had great maruaile thereof, and assoone as the Cuppe was in his handes, it was voyd againe. What, (quoth the Duke) thou hast enchaunted mee? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am none Enchaunter, but it is for the sin that you be in, set it down, for you are not worthy to hold it, you were borne in an euill houre. How art thou so hardy (quoth the Duke) to speake thus vnto me? I repute thee for a proud foole, thou knowest well it lyeth in my power to destroy thée, there is no man dare say the contrarie, yet I pray thée tell me thy name, and where thou wert borne? and whether thou goest? and of what kinne thou art? Sir, (quoth Huon) for any thinge that may fal vnto me, I wil not hide my name nor kindred: therefore Sir, know for troth, I was borne at Bourdeaux vp∣on Gerone, and am Sonne to Duke Seuin, who is dead sea∣uen yeares passed. When the Duke heard how Huon was his Nephew, he saide: The Sonne of my Brother? Ne∣phew, why hast thou taken in this Citie any other lodging but mine? shewe mée whether thou wilt goe? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am going to Babilon to the Admirall Gaudise, to doe to him a Messuage from King Charlemaine of Fraunce, by∣cause I slewe his Sonne there: so he shewed his Vncle all his aduenture, and how the king had taken away his Land, nor should he haue it againe, vntill he had done his Messu∣age to the Admirall. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Duke) in like wise I was banished the Realme of Fraunce, and since I haue denyed the faith of Iesus Christ, and since I married héere in this Countrey a great Ladie, by whome I haue
great Lands to gouerne, whereof I am Lord: Nephew, I will that you shall goe and lodge with me in my Castle, and to morrow you shall haue of my Barons to conduct you vn∣till you come vnto Babilon. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you, since it is your pleasure, I will goe with you to your Pallaice. Then Gerames priuily sayd vnto him, Sir, if you goe thether, you may perhaps repent your selfe: so it may well be, (quoth Gonder the Prouost.) Then Huon comman∣ded to trusse vp all their geare, and to make readie their hor∣ses, and tooke with him his Cup, but he left still his Horne with the Prouost. Thus Huon went with his Vncle vnto his Castle, and lay there all night: the next morning Huon came vnto his Vncle to take his leaue. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Duke) I require you to tarie vntill my Barons come, that shall conduct you in your iourney. Sir, (quoth Huon) séeing it pleaseth you, I am content to abide, and so they sat them downe to dinner. Chap. XXVIII. ¶ How the Duke thought to haue murdered Huon his owne Nephew, whiles he sat at the Table. WHen this Traytour Duke sawe his Nephewe sit at the Table, hee called to him a Knight borne in Fraunce called Geffrey, who came out of Fraunce with the Duke, and had in like manner denyed the law of Christ, and he was se∣cret with the Duke, then the Duke priuily sayde vnto him. Fréend, go and arme an Hundred or Six score Paynims, and cause them to come hether, let them slay my Nephew, and all that are come with him, for if one escape, you shall loose my fauour. Sir, (quoth Geffrey) your will shalbe done,
then Geffrey went into a Chamber, whereas there was two Hundred Armours hanging, when he came thether, he said within himselfe. Alas good Lord, this villaine Traytour would slay the Sonne of his Brother, who when I was in Fraunce did me once a great courtesie, for I had béene dead & slaine if Duke Seuin his Father had not succoured me: it is reason for that he did then to mée, to render againe some re∣ward vnto his Sonne, God confound mee if he hath any ill for me, but I shall rather cause the false Duke to buy deare∣ly the treason that he would doe vnto his Nephewe. The same season there was in the Castle about Seauen-score Prisoners all French-men, who were taken vpon the Sea, and the Duke kept them in prison, to the intent to put them to death, he was so cruell against all christian men: but God who neuer forgetteth his seruants, sucoured them. This Geffrey went to the Prison, and said to the prisoners: Sirs if you will saue your liues, come out and follow me. Then the prisoners incontinent yssued out of the Prison, and fol∣lowed Geffrey, & he brought them into the Chamber where∣as all the harnesse hanged, and caused them all to be armed, and said: Sirs, if you haue courage and will to issue hence, it is time now you shew your vertue. Sir, (quoth they) to dye in the quarrell we shall doe your commaundement, to come out of bondage into fréedome. When Geffrey hearde them, he was right ioyfull, and sayd: Sirs, know surely, that there is héere in this Pallaice at dinner ye Son of Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, and he is Nephewe to the Duke Lord of this house, who was once christened, and hath denyed the faith of our Lord God, and he hath commaunded me to cause Seauen-score Paynims to be armed, to come and to slay his Nephewe and all his company. Thus when they were all armed, and Swords by their sides, they followed Geffrey to the Pallaice: and when they entred, Huon sayd to the Duke his Vncle. Sir, these men in harnesse that enter into this hall, be they such as ye haue commaunded to come hether to conduct me in my iourney? No Huon quoth the Duke: it is
otherwise then thou thinkest, thinke surely to die there is no remedie: thou shalt neuer sée faire day more. Then he said: Sirs step forth, looke that no christian man escape you, but let them all be slaine. Chap. XXIX. ¶How by the ayd of Geffrey and of the Prisoners, Huon was succoured, and slew all the Paynims, and the Duke fled, and after besieged the Castle. WHen Huon sawe the malice of his Vncle and his false treason: he was sore abashed, and arose vp suddainly, and put his helmet on his head, and tooke his Sword in his hand. Then Geffrey came in, and cryed Saint Denis you noble French-men, take héede that no Paynim escape aliue, but slay them all with sorrow. The French-men drew out their Swords, and fought with the Paynims on all parts, so that within a short time they were all slaine. And when the Duke sawe howe they were no Paynims that slewe his men, hée was in great feare of his life, and so fled away into a secret Cham∣ber. When Huon perceiued that they were French-men that had thus succoured him: he pursued the Duke with his Sword in his hand, all bloudy with the bloud of the Paynims that he had slaine, and when the trayterous Duke saw that his Nephewe so followed him, hee fledde from Chamber to Chamber, vntill hee came to a windowe opening vppon the Garden side, and so leapt out thereat and ran away: where∣of Huon and Geffrey and the other French-men were right sorrowfull. Then they closed the gates, and lifted vp the bridges, to the entent that they should not be taken within, then they came into the Hall, whereas one tooke acquain∣tance
of another, whereof they had great ioy. But if God had not succoured them, their ioy had béen turned to sorrow, for the Duke who was escaped, when he came into ye towne, he made a crye, that as many as were able to beare armour, should come vnto him, so that he and all that he could make, came with him before the Pallaice, being more then Tenne Thousand persons, and they all sware the death of the chri∣stian men within the Pallaice. When the Duke saw that hée had such a number, he was ioyfull, and then he comman∣ded his Engins to be raised vp, and Ladders on euerie part, and there with Pikes and Mattockes they brake downe a corner Tower, and the christian men within defended them selues valiantly. But their defence had little auailed them, if our Lord God had not mightily succoured them. When Huon knewe the danger that they were in, hée was sore dis∣pleased, and sayd: Ah good Lord, I ought to be sore agréeued, when I see that wée be thus kept in by mine Vncle, I feare me we shall neuer sée more dayes. Then Gerames said: Sir, for the loue of God blowe nowe your Horne. Alas (quoth Huon) it is not in my power to doe it, for the Prouost Gon∣der hath it in kéeping. Ah Huon, (quoth Gerames) in an ill houre we were acquainted with you, for nowe by your fol∣ly and pride, we are in the way of distruction. Thus as they were deuising, Gonder the Prouost came to the Duke, and said: Sir, I haue great maruaile that you will thus de∣stroy your owne Pallaice, great folly you doe therein, ra∣ther I would councell you to leaue this assault, and let there be a peace made betwéene you and your Nephew, vpon con∣dition to let him and his company go safely away. Prouost (quoth the Duke) I pray  goe and doe the best that thou canst, I will do as thou doest counsaile me. Then the Pro∣uost came to the Pallaice, and sayd to Huon: Sir, for Gods sake speake to mée. What art thou quoth Huon? I am your Host the Prouost, and I require you in as much as you loue your liues, kéepe well this Pallaice. Sir, (quoth Huon) for your good counsaile I thanke you, and I desire you for the
loue that you beare me, and in that you would help to saue my life, as to deliuer me againe the Horne of Iuorie that I tooke you to kéepe, for without that I cannot escape death. Sir, (quoth the Prouost) it is not farre from me, and so tooke it out of his bosome, and deliuered it vnto Huon in at a windowe vpon the Garden side. Chap. XXX. ¶How King Oberon came and succoured Huon, and slewe all the Paynims, except such as would be christened: And how Huon slewe the Duke his Vncle. WHen Huon saw that he was possessed of his Horne of Iuorie, hee was ioyfull, the which was no maruaile, for it was the only suertie of his life. Then hée set it to his mouth, and began to blowe it: then Gerames said. Ah Sir, you should ne∣uer bee so lighte to discouer your secrets, for if this Prouost had béene vntrue, he might haue discouered all you secrets to the Duke, whereby you had béene lost and dead, therefore neuer discouer your secrets more: and also Sir I require you as yet blowe not your Horne, for you bee not as yet hurt, King Oberon commaunded you so at his departing. Why (quoth Huon) will you then that I tarrye vntill I be slaine? surely I will blowe it without any longer tarying, and so he blewe it so sore that the bloud came out of his mouth, so that all that were in the Pallaice began to singe and to daunce, and the Duke and al such as were at the séege about the Pal∣laice, could not rest but fell to singe and to daunce. Kinge Oberon, who as then was in his citie of Momur, saide on high: Ah I heare my fréend Huons Horne blowe, where∣by I knowe well he hath some businesse in hand, wherefore
I wishe my selfe there as the Horne was blowne, with an Hundred Thousand men well armed. He had made no soo∣ner his wish, but he was in the Citie of Tormont, whereas he and his men slewe downe the Paynims, that it was mar∣uaile to sée the bloud run downe the Stréetes like a Riuer. King Oberon made it to be cryed, that as many as would re∣ceiue Baptisme, their liues should be saued, so that thereby there were many that were christened. Then King Oberon came to the Pallaice, when Huon sawe him, hee went and thanked him of his succour at that time of néede. Fréend, (quoth Oberon) as longe as you beléeue and doe my com∣maundements, I shall neuer fayle to succour you in all your affaires. Thus all that were in the Towne and would not beléeue in God, were slaine. Then the Duke was taken & brought to the Pallaice vnto Huon, when he sawe his Vncle taken, he was ioyfull, and then the Duke sayd: Faire Nephewe, I require you haue pitie of me. Ah vntrue Traytour, (quoth Huon) thou shalt neuer depart hence aliue, I shall neuer respite thy death; then with his sword he strooke off his Vn∣cles head, then he made his bodie to be hanged ouer ye wals of the Towne, that his ilnesse might alwayes be had in me∣morie, and to be an example to all other: thus that Coun∣trey was deliuered from that Traytour. Chap. XXXI. ¶How King Oberon forbad Huon, that he should not goe by the towre of the Giant, to the which Huon would not accord, but went thether, whereby he was in great danger of death. And of the Damsell that he found there, who was his owne Cosen borne in Fraunce.
YEE haue all heard howe King Oberon came & succoured Huon, and when all was done, then he said vnto Hu∣on. My deare Fréend, I will take my leaue of thée, for I shall neuer sée thée again, vntill thou hast suffered as much paine and ill, and pouerty and disease, that it will be hard to declare it, and all through thine owne folly. When Huon heard that, being affrayd, he said: Sir, mee thinkes you saye great wronge, for in all things to my power I will obserue your commaundement. Fréend, (quoth Oberon) séeing thou wilt doe so, remember then thy promise, and I charge thée vpon paine of thy life, & loosing for euer my loue: that thou be not so hardy, as to take the way to the Tower of Dunother, the which is a maruay∣lous great Tower standing on the Sea-side. Iulius Caesar caused it to be made, and therein I was longe time nouri∣shed, thou neuer sawest so faire a Tower, nor better garni∣shed with Chambers and glasse windowes, and within hanged with rich Tapestrie. At the Entrie of the gate there are two men of brasse, each of them holding in their handes a layle of yron, wherewith without cease day and night they beat by such a measure, that when the one striketh with his layle, the other is lifted vp readie to strike, and they smite so suddainly, that a swallow flying cannot passe by vnslayn. And within this Tower there is a Gyant named Angolofer, he tooke from mée the Tower and a stronge Armour of suche vertue, that whosoeuer hath it on his bodie, cannot be hurt nor wearie, nor he cannot be drowned in no water, nor bur∣ned with fire. Therefore Huon, (my fréend) I charge thee go not that way, as much as thou fearest my displeasure, for against that Gyant thou canst make no resistance. Sir, (quoth Huon) know for troth, the day that I departed out of Fraunce, I tooke vpon me, that any aduenture that might be heard of, though it were neuer so perilous, that I would ne∣uer
eschew it for any feare of death: and therefore Sir I ha rather die then to forsake to fight with yt Gyant, there is n man shall let me, & Sir I promise you ere I returne againe, to conquer your sayde stronge Armour, it shall doe me good seruice héereafter, it is a thinge not to bée forsaken, and if I néede of your ayd, I shall blowe my Horne & you will come and succour me. Huon (quoth Oberon) by the Lord that sa∣ued me, if thou breakest the Horne in the blowing, thou shalt haue no succour nor ayd of me. Sir, (quoth Huon) you may doe your pleasure, and I shall doe mine. Then Oberon departed without more speaking, & Huon aboad in the Citie, the which he gaue to Geffrey and to the Prouost his Host, & all the Land that his Vncle held. Then he made him readie, and tooke gould and siluer plentie, and tooke his leaue of Geffrey and of his Host and of all other, & so he and his companie departed, and so road ouer Hils and Dals, night and day a certaine space without finding of any aduenture worthy to be had in memorie. At last he came néere to the Sea-side, whereas the Tower of the Gyaunt was, when Huon saw it, he sayd vnto his companie. Sirs, yonder I sée a Tower, the which was forbidden me by O∣beron, but as God help me, before it be night I will sée what is within it, whatsoeuer come thereof. Then Gerames be∣held the Tower, and began to sorow, and said: Ah Huon, he is a foole that agréeth to the counsaile of a Child, Sir, for Gods sake beware that you breake not the commandement of King Oberon, for if you doe, great ill is like to come vnto you. Sir, (quoth Huon) if all the men nowe liuing shoulde forbid mee to goe thether, I would not obay them, for you knowe well, I departed out of Fraunce for none other thing, but to search the strangest aduentures, and I demaund no∣thing else but to find aduentures, therefore speake no more to the contrarie, for ere I sléepe I will fight with the Gyant, for though he be more harder then yron, yet I shall slay him, or he mée: and you Gerames & all the other, abyde you héere in this meadowe vntill I returne againe. Sir, (quoth Ge∣rames)
in wéeping, it sore displeaseth me that it will bee no better: therefore I recommende you vnto the sauegard of God. Thus Huon departed and left his companie heauily com∣playning. Huon armed himselfe, and so tooke his way, and kissed all his men one after another, and tooke with him his Horne and Cup, so all alone on foot he went foorth, & rested not vntill he came to the gate of the castle of Dunother, there he saw the twoo men of Brasse, that without ceasing beate with their layles, he beheld them well, and thought it was in a manner impossible to enter without death. Then he be∣gan to consider hereon with himselfe, how King Oberon had shewed him the troth, and thought without the aide of the grace of God, it were impossible to enter, whereuppon he beheld all about, if there were any other place to enter, at last he saw neere to a piller of marble, a Bason of gould fast tyed with a chaine, then he approached neere thereto, and drew out his sword, wherwith he strake thrée great stroaks on the Bason, so that the sound thereof might well be heard into the Castle. Within the Tower there was a Damsell called Sibilla, when she heard the Bason sound, she had great maruaile thereat, then she went to a window, and looked out and saw that Huon would enter, whereuppon she went backe againe and said, ah good Lord, what knight is yonder without that would enter? if the Gyant awake, anone he will be slaine, for if there were a Thowsand Knights toge∣ther, they should all soone be destroyed: surely I haue great desire to know what he is, and where he was borne, for as me séemeth he should be of Fraunce, to know the troth I wil goe to the window againe, to sée if I may haue of him any knowledge. Then shée went out of her chamber, and went to a window néere to the gate, and looked out and saw Huon all armed abiding at the gate, then she beheld the blazure of his shield, wherein was portrayed thrée crosses of gould, whereby she knew well he was of Fraunce. Alas quod shée, I am but lost if the Gyant know that I haue béene héere,
then she returned againe in hast, and went to the Chamber dore whereas the Gyant lay and slept, and she perceiued hée was yet a sléepe, for he rowted that it was maruaile to héere. Then she returned againe quickly to the gate, and opened a wicket, out of the which there yssued such a wind, that if caused the two men with their flayles to stand still in rest, when shée had opened the wicket, hastily shée returned into her Chamber, and when Huon sawe the little wicket open, he aduaunced himselfe & entred, for the two men with their flayles were in rest, then hée went further thinking to finde them that had opened the wicket: but hée was sore abashed when he could finde no creature, there were so many Cham∣bers, that he wist not whether to goe to finde that he sought for. Thus he searched all about, and at last hée sawe about a Pillar fourtéene men lye dead, whereof hée had great mar∣uaile, and said, that he would returne backe againe, then he went out of the Hall and came to the gate, wéening to haue found it open: but it was closed by it selfe, and the men a∣gaine did beat with their flayles. Alas, (quoth Huon) nowe I sée well I cannot escape from hence, then he returned into the Castle, and hearkened about, and as he went searching carefully, he heard the voice of a Damsell pitiously wéeping. He came there as she was, and humbly saluted her, and said: Faire Damsell, I cannot tell if you can vnderstand my lan∣guage or not, knowe of you I would, wherefore you make this great sorrowe? Sir, (quoth she) I wéepe because I haue of you great pitie, for if the Gyant heare within (who is yet a sléepe) hap to awake, you are but dead & lost. Faire Ladie, (quoth Huon) I pray you shew me what you be, and where you were borne? Sir, (quoth shée) I am Daughter to Guinemer, who in his time was Earle of Saint Omers, & am Néece to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux. When Huon heard that, right humbly he kissed her, and saide. Madame, knowe for troth, that you are my néere Kinsewoman, for I am Sonne to Duke Seuin: I pray you shew me what aduenture hath brought you into this Castle.
Sir, (quoth she) my Father had deuotion to sée the holy Se∣pulchre, and he loued me so well, that he would not leaue me behind him, and as we were on the Sea néere to the Citie of Escalone in Surry, there arose a great tempest vpon the Sea, that the winde brought vs néere vnto this Castle, and the Gyant being in his Tower, saw vs in great danger of drow∣ning, & that we were driuen into this Port, he came downe out of his Pallaice, and slewe my Father, and all them that were with him except my selfe, and so brought me into this Tower, whereas I haue béen these Seauen yeares in great distresse and miserie. And nowe Coozen, I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether into this strang Coun∣trey? Coozen, (quoth he) séeing you will knowe of my ad∣uentures, I shal shew you the troth, King Charlemaine hath sent mee in messuage to the Admirall Gaudise in Babilon, I beare him a Messuage by mouth and by Letters, and as my way lay, I am come by this Tower, and I demaunded of a Paynim who was within this Tower, and he answeared me and sayd, howe héere should bée a great and an horrible Gy∣ant, who hath done much euill to them that haue passed this way. And I thought to passe this way, to fight with him and destroy him, and to deliuer the Countrey of him, and I haue left my companie héere by in a Valley to tarie for me. Deare Coozen, (quoth she) I haue great maruaile that you would take on you such a folly, for if ye were Fiue hundred men together well armed, yée durst not all abide him if hée were armed with his armour, for none can endure against him, therefore Cosin I counsell you to returne backe againe ere he doe awake, and I shall open you the wicket, so that you shall passe out without any danger.
Chap. XXXII. ¶How the Damsell cosen to Huon, shewed him the chamber whereas the Gyant slept, and how he went and waked him, and of the good armour that the Gyant deliuered to Huon. WHen Huon had well vnder∣stood the Damsell, he said, Cosen know for troth, ere I depart hence, I will sée what man he is, it shall neuer be said (to my re∣proch) in the court of any Prince, that for feare of any miscreant I should be of so faint a courage, that I durst not abide him, certainly I had rather die than such a fault should come to me. Ah Cosen quoth shée, then I sée well both you and I are destroyed, but séeing it is thus, I shall shew you the chamber whereas he sléepeth, and when yée haue séene him, yet then yée may returne. First goe into this chamber that you sée héere before you, wherein yée shall find bread and wine and other victuals, and in the next you shall find clothes of silke, and many rich iewels, then in the third chamber yée shall find the foure Gods of the Paynims, they be all of fine massie gould, & in the fourth yée shall find ye Gyant lying a sléepe on a rich bed: then sir if ye were of my mind, I would counsell you to strike of his head sléeping, for if he awake, you cannot escape without death. Ladie quoth Huon, and god will, it shall neuer be said to my disgrace, that I should strike any man without his knowledge. Then Huon departed from the Ladie, his sword being in his hand and his helmet on his head, and his shield about his necke, and so entred into the first chamber, and then into the second and third, wheras he saw the foure Gods: when he had well regarded them, he gaue each of thē a stroake with his sword, and then he entred into the chamber whereas the Gyant lay
sléeping, Huon noted him aduisedly, and the bed that he lay on, the which was so rich, that the valew thereof could not be prized, the curtaines, couerings, and pillowes were of such riches, that it was great beautie to behould them. Also the chamber was hanged with rich clothes, & the floare couered with carpets, whē Huon had well regarded all this, and well considered of the Gyant, who was xvij. foote of length, and his body fournished thereafter and all his other members, but a more fowler & hideous creature was neuer séene, with a great head, great eares, and a camelled nose & eyes burning like a candle. Ah good Lord (quoth Huon) I would King Charlemaine were héere to sée vs twoo fight, for I am sure then ere he departed, my peace should be made with him. Lord god, I humbly require thée to be my succour against this enemy, for if it be not thy good pleasure, against him I can no while endure. Then Huon fiercely aduanced foorth, and made the signe of the Crosse, casting in his mind what he might doe, for he thought if he slew him sléeping, it should be a great reproch to him, and it would be said that he had slaine a man dead, whereupon he said to himselfe: shame haue I if I touch him ere I haue defied him, then Huon cryed out aloud and said: Arise thou heathen hound, or else I shall strike off thy head. When the Gyant heard Huon speake, he awaked fiercely, and beheld Huon, and rose vp so quickly, that in rising he brake the bedsted that he lay vpon, then he said to Huon. Frend, they that sent thée hether, loued thée but little, nor doubted not me. And when Huon heard the Gyant speake french, he had great maruaile and said, I am come hether to see thee, and it may be so, that I haue done it vnaduisedly. Then the Gyant said, thou sayest troth, for if I were armed as thou art, Fiue hundred men such as thou art could not endure me, but yt they should all die, but thou seest I am naked, without sword or weapon, yet for all that I doubt thée not. Then Huon thought in himselfe, that it would be a great shame to him, to assaile a man without ar∣mour or weapon, wherefore he said: Goe and arme thée, or
incontinent I shall slay thée. Fréend quoth the Gyant, this that thou sayest, procéedeth of a good courage & of courtesie. Then he armed him, and tooke in his hand a great fawchin, and Huon was withdrawne into the Pallaice abiding for the Gyant, who tarried not long but came to Huon, & said: where art thou, behould me héere ready to destroy thée, with∣out thou make good defence? yet I desire thee tell me what thou art, to thintent that I may (when I haue slaine thée) tell how I haue slaine such a one, that by his folly came to assaile me in myne owne Pallaice. Great pride it was in thée, that thou wouldest not strike me ere I was armed, but whosoeuer thou art, thou séemest sonne to a noble man: I pray thée shew mee whether thou wouldest goe, and what mooued thée to come hether, to thintent that I might know the troth of thine enterprize, that when I haue slaine thee; I may make my vaunt to my men, that I haue slaine such a man, that thought scorne and disdaine to strike me ere I was armed. Paynim quoth Huon, thou art in a great folly, when thou so rashly reputest me for dead: But seing thou wouldst know the troth, I am a poore knight, from whome king Charlemaine hath taken my Lands, and banished me out of the Realme of Fraunce, and hath sent me for to doe a messuage to the Admirall Gaudise at Babilon, and my name is Huon, Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux. Now I haue shewed all the troth of mine enterprize, and now I pray thée tell me where thou wert borne, and who engendred thée, to thintent that when I haue slaine thée, I may make mine a∣uaunt in king Charles Court, and before all my frends: that I haue slaine such a maruaylous great Gyant as thou art. Then ye Giant said, if thou slay me, thou maiest well make thy vaunt, that thou hast slaine Angolofer the Gyant, who hath xvij. brethren, of whome I am the yongest. Also thou maiest say, that vnto the drie trée and to the red sea, there is no man but is tributarie to me. I haue chaced the Admirall Gaudise, to whome thou saiest thou goest, & haue taken from him by puissance diuers of his Cities, and he doth me yéerely
seruage, by the tender of a Ring of gould, to buy his heade withall. Also I tooke from Oberon the Fayrie King, this pu∣issant Towre, who for all his enchaunting & Fayries could not resist me, and also I tooke from him a rich Armour, thou neuer heardst of such another, for it hath such vertue, that whosoeuer can put it on, can neuer be wearie nor discōfited. But there is in it, another especiall vertue, for he that must weare that armour, must be without spot of deadly sinne, & also his mother must be without carnall copulation with any man, except with her owne husband, I beléeue there cannot be found any man that may weare this Armour. Al∣so it is of such vertue, that whosoeuer hath it on his bodye, cannot be grieued neither with fire nor water. By Mahoūd I haue prooued it, and because I haue found such courtesie in thee, that thou gauest me leaue to arme me: I will giue thee leaue to assay if thou canst put on that Armour, in re∣gard I know, that neither thou, nor any knight else can be able to doe it. Then the Gyant went to his coffer, and tooke out the Armour, and came to Huon and said: See, heere is the good armour, I giue thee leaue to assay to put it on thy body. Then Huon tooke the Armour and went back a little, and put off his owne armour, and tooke that belonging to ye Gyant, and incontinent did it on his bodie, then hastily he put on his helmet, and tooke his shéeld & sword in his hand, and deuoutly thanked our Lord God of this great grace. Then the Gyant said, by Mahound, I had little thought thou hadst been such a man, that Armour becommeth thee exceeding well, nowe I haue quit the courtesie that thou shewedst mee, therefore I pray thee put off the Armour, and deliuer it me againe. Not so sir by your leaue, answeared Huon, this Armour is meeter for me, than such a Helhound as thou art, therefore know for troth, I will not render it againe for xiiij. of the best Cities between this and Parys. Friend quoth the Gyant, seing thou wilt not render me a∣gaine the Armour, I am content to let thee depart hence without any hurt or damage, and also I will giue thée my
Ring of gould, the which the Admirall Gaudise gaue me, for I know well it will stand thee in good stead, if thou thinkest to fournish thy messuage, for when thou comest to the gate of his Pallaice, and sayst how thou art a messenger sent frō kyng Charles, thou shalt find foure gates, and at euery gate foure Porters, so that at the first gate, if it be knowen thou be a frenchman: one of thy hands shalbe cut of, and at the second gate thy other hand, and at the third gate one of thy féet, and at the fourth the other foote, and then shalt thou bee brought before the Admirall, and there thy head striken off. And therfore to escape these perils, & furnish thy messuage, and to thintent that thou maiest surely retourne, giue me a∣gaine my Armour and I shall giue the my ring of gold, the which when thou but shewest it, thou shalt be receiued with great honor at euery gate, and then thou maist go & retourne surelye into the Pallaice at thy pleasure, and no man to let thee, for if thou hadst slaine Fiue hundred men, there shalbe none so hardy as to touch thée, nor to doe thee any yll if thou hast this Ring about thée, for when I haue nede of men or mony, I cannot lacke if I send this ring for a token, therfore I pray thee let me haue againe my Armour. Chap. XXXIII. ¶ How Huon slew rhe great Gyant, and how he called Gerames and his company to him, and of the ioy that they made for the death of the Gyant. WHen Huon vnderstoode the Paynim, he said. Ah thou fell and false decei∣uer, know for troth, if all the Preachers be∣twéen the east & west preached to me a whole yeare, and that thou wouldest giue me all that thou hast, and thy Ring therewith: I would not ren∣der
againe the good Armour that is now on my bodie, first I slay thée, & then, as for thy Ring that thou praisest so much: I will likewise haue it whether thou wilt or not. When the Gyant had well heard Huon, and saw that in no wise he could get againe his Armour: he was then sorowfull, and because he saw how Huon reprooued him, therewith he was so sore displeased, that his eyes séemed like twoo burning candels, then he yet demaunded of Huon, if he would doe none otherwise. No truly quoth Huon, though thou be great and strong, I haue no feare of thée, seing I haue on this good Armour: therefore in the name of god and of his diuine pu∣issance I defie thée. And I thée quoth the Gyant, for all the Armour thou canst not endure against me. Then the Gyant approched to Huon, and lift vp his fawchin thinking to haue striken him, but he fayled, for the stroke glent, and the faw∣chin light vpon a piller, and entred into it more then twoo foot, then Huon (who was quicke and light) behoulding the maruaylous stroke, quickly stept foorth with his good sword in his hand, and seing how the Gyant had his fawchin stic∣king fast in the piller, he strake the Gyant on both ye armes néere to his hands in such wise, that he strake off both his hands, so that they with the fawchin fell downe to the earth. When the Gyant felt himselfe so sore hurt, with paine ther∣of he gaue a maruaylous crie, so horrible, as though all the Towre had fallen to the earth: whereat the Damsell Sibylla being in her chamber, was sore abashed, she went out of her chamber and found a staffe by the way, she tooke it vp in her hands, and came to the Pallaice whereas she heard the cry, and met the Gyant flying away to saue himselfe, but the Damsell well aduised, when she saw that he fled, she cast the staffe betwéene his legges, so that thereby he fell to the earth, and Huon who came after him with his sword in his hand, he hasted him, & gaue the Gyant many a great stroke, and the Gyant cryed out so high, that it was very terrible to heare him. Then Huon lift vp his sword, and gaue him such a stroake in the necke, that his head flew to the earth, then
Huon wiped his sword, and put it vp into the sheath, and he came to the head thinking to haue taken it vp, and to haue set it on the height of the Towre, but the head was so great and heauy, that he could not remooue it nor tourne the bodie, then he smiled and said. Ah good Lord, I thanke thée of thy grace, that thou hast giuen me the puissance to slay such a creature, would to god that this body and head were nowe in the Pallaice of Parys, before Charlemaine Kinge of Fraunce, so that he knewe that I haue slaine him. Then Huon went to a window and looked out, and saw where his company were, than said he to them on hie. Sirs come vp hether, ye may doe it surely, for this Pallaice is woonne, & the Gyant slaine. When Gerames, Garyn, & the other heard that, they were ioyfull and thanked our lord god, then they came to the gate, and Sybilla the Damsell went & opened the wicket, whereby the enchantment fayled, then they entred & followed the Damsell, who brought them into the Pallaice to Huon, and when they saw him, they all wept for ioy, and embraced and kissed him, and demanded if he had any hurt. Sirs quoth Huon, I thanke god I féele no hurt, and then he brought them where as the Gyant lay dead, when they saw him, they had maruaile how he could be slaine by Huon, they were affraid to sée him lye dead. Then Gerames demanded of Huon, what was the Damsell that was there, and Huon shewed how she was his coozen, and shewed thē all the ma∣ner how she came thether: whereof they had great ioy and embraced her, then they all vnarmed themselues, and went to supper, and eate and dranke at their pleasure, but their ioy endured not long, as yée shall heare héereafter.
Chap. XXXIIII. ¶ How Huon departed from the castle of the Gyant, and tooke leaue of his company, and went alone a foot to the sea-side, whereas he found Mallaborn of the Fayrie, on whome he mounted to passe the Sea. YE haue heard here before, how Huon conquered the Giant, the which was great ioy to all his companie, then the next day Huon called them all together, and said. Sirs, yée knowe well the enterprize that I haue taken on me to doe, touching the Admyrall Gaudise▪ therefore it is conuenient, that as shortly as I can, to doe my messuage that I am charged by king Charles to doe to the Admirall Gaudise: wherefore I desire you all, to kéepe good and true companie with this no∣ble Damsell, & also I require you to tarrie héere xv. daies, and then if I retourne not, goe you all into Fraunce, and take this noble Damsell with you, and salute from me king Charlemaine and all the Péeres of Fraunce, and shew them the hard aduentures that I haue had, and how I am gone to perfourme his messuage. When his companie vnder∣stood that he would depart, they were sorowfull and saide. Sir, yée desire vs to tarrie héere xv. daies, know for troth, wée shall tarrie héere for you an whole yéere. Sirs quoth he I thanke you, then he made him readie to depart, and ar∣med him, and tooke his Cuppe and Horne, and also the Gy∣ants Ring, the which he did put about his arme, and then he kist his Coosen and all the others, and they all made great lamentation for his departing. Then they went vp into the Pallaice, & looked out at the windowes after Huon as long as they might sée him: Huon went foorth till he came to the
sea-side, the which was not farre from the Castle, and there was a little Hauen, whereas alwaies was wont to lye some manner of ship or vessell to passe ouer the Sea. And when Huon came thether, though nowe at this instant there was none at all, finding no meanes for passage, he said. Ah good Lord, what shall I doe, that I can finde heere no boate or vessell to passe in? alas in an ill houre I slew Charlot, wher∣by I am thus still in danger, howbeit I did it in mine owne defence: great wrong therefore king Charles hath done, to banish me out of mine owne Countrey. These and the like complaints made Huon there being alone, and began sore to lament, but sodainly on his right hand he saw a great beast come swimming towards him, like a Beare, Huon beheld him, and made on himselfe a signe of the Crosse, and drew out his swoord to defend himselfe, as thinking the Beast would haue assailed him: but he did not, but went a little off from Huon, & shooke himselfe in such wise, that his skinne fell off, and then he was as faire a man and as well fourmed as could be séene. Then Huon had great feare and maruaile, when he saw that this Beast was become a man, yet he ap∣proached neere to him, and demaunded what he was, and whether he were an humane creature, or els an ill spirite that was come thether to tempt him, and said, right nowe thow didst swimme in the sea, & trauersed the great waues in guise of a maruailous beast: I charge thee in the name of God thou do me no hurt, but shew me what thou art, for I beleeue thou art of king Oberons company: Huon quoth he, dismay thou not, I know thée right well, thou art Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, Royall king Oberon hath sent me to thee: once it happened me to breake his commaundment, wherfore he hath condemned me to be this xxx. yéeres like a beast in the Sea. Frend quoth Huon, by the Lord that four∣med me, I will trust thée till I be past the red sea. Huon quoth Mallaborn, know for troth, I am sent hether for no other cause, but to beare thee whether thou wilt, therefore make thee readie, and recommend thy selfe to the sauegard
of our Lord Iesus Christ, and than let me alone. Than Mallaborn entred againe into the Beasts skinne, and said to Huon. Sir mount vpon my backe. Chap. XXXV. ¶ How Huon passed the Sea vpon Mallaborn, who bare him to Babilon, and how Huon came to the first gate, and so to the second. WHen Huon sawe the Beaste enter againe into his skinne, and that hee taried for him, he made the signe of ye crosse, and prayed god to saue and conduct him, & so leapt vpon him, & the Beast entred into ye Sea, and swamme as fast as though a bird had slowen, so that within a short space he trauersed the great Ryuer of Nyle, the which cometh from Paradise, and which is a dangerous Riuer, for the multitude of Serpents and Crocodilles that be therein: howbeit, there were none that did him any trouble. Then when they came to land, Huon was ioyfull, and Mallaborn said: Right déerely shall I aby the time that thou wert borne, or that euer I knew thée, for the intent to doe thée pleasure, I shall endure yet x. yeares like a Beast in the Sea, and xxx. yeares I haue béen so already, so that my time is in all xl. yéeres. I haue great pitie of thée, for there is no man borne of a woman, that knoweth the ill and pouertie that shall fall héereafter to thée, and I shall suffer much for ye loue that I haue to thée: how∣beit, I shall take it in patience. Yonder thou maiest sée the citie whether thou wouldest goe, moreouer, thou knowest what hath been commaunded thée, & what thou hast to doe, and yet whatsoeuer fall, breake not the commaundement of king Oberon, and alwaies be true & say the troth, for assoone
as thou makest any lye, thou shalt loose the loue of king Obe∣ron: thus God be with thée, for I may no longer tarrie. So he went againe into the Sea, and Huon tarried there a∣lone, recommending himselfe to our lord god, and so tooke the way to the Citie, and there entred in without let of any man. So soone as he was entred, he met a M. Paynims go∣ing a hawking, another M. coming homeward, and a M. horses led to be new shod, & a M. coming frō shooing, than he saw a M. men playing at the Chesse, & another M. that had played and béen mated, & another M. talking & deuising with Damsels, and another M. comming from drinking of the Admirals wine, and another M. going thether. When Huon all armed had gone a great space in the Citie, he had great maruaile of that he had seene, and that he had met such multitude of people. And he studied thereon so much, that he forgat the Gyants Ryng on his arme, and the men that he met had great maruaile of him to sée him goe all armed a foote, and yet he went still forward. Alas poore vnhappie Huon, that could not remember the Gyants Ring about his arme, for lacke of remembrance thereof, he suffered after so much trouble, that there is no humane tongue can tell it, as yée shall heare hereafter. At last he came into a great place before the first gate of the Pallaice, whereas there stoode a great Vine trée set vpon bricke pillers of diuers colours, vn∣der the which the Admirall Gaudise one day in the wéeke would come thether, and vsed to giue audience to all Su∣ters. When Huon had regarded all this, he came to the first gate of the Pallaice, & there he cryed to the Porter & said. Friend, I pray you open the gate, and the Porter said, with a good will, if thou be a Sarazin thou shalt enter. Then Huon (as vnaduised, and forgetting himselfe, and not once thinking on king Oberons commaundement, or of the Gy∣ants Ring about his arme, the which if hee had shewed foorth, hee shoulde not haue néeded to haue made any lye) when hee had heard the Paynim demaund whether he were a Sarazin or no: he said yes, than the Porter said, than may
you surely enter. So Huon passed the first bridge and gate, and when he came to the second, he remembred himselfe how he had broken king Oberons commaundement, wherewith he was so sorowfull at his hart, that he wist not what to do, and sware thē that he would neuer lye more. Then he tooke the Ring in his hand, and came to the second gate, and said to the Porter: Thou villaine, he that died on the crosse, cō∣found thee, open this gate, for I must enter. When the Por∣ter heard him speake so fiercely, he said, who is it, that the first Porter was so hardy to suffer to enter in at ye first gate? I shall shew thee quoth Huon, séest not thou this Ring, the which is a token that I may passe and goe whereas me list. When the Porter heard him and saw the Ring, he knew it well, and said: Sir, ye be welcome, how fareth the Lord ye ye come from? Huon, who would not lye, passed the bridge and gaue no answere, and so came to the third gate: where the Porter came to him, and Huon shewed him the Ring, then the Porter let downe the bridge, and opened the gate, and with great reuerence saluted Huon, and suffered him to passe. When Huon was thus passed the thrée bridges, then he remembred how he had made a lye at the first bridge, and said to himselfe. Alas, what shall become of me, seeing I haue so lightly broken my promise to him that hath done so much for me? alas, I forgot the Ring that was about mine arme, how be it, I trust that Oberon will not be displeased for it, seeing I did it not wilfully, but that I forgat it: I trust he will take no more regard to this déede, then he did when I blew ye Horne without any cause, thus Huon passed the thrée gates of the Pallaice.
Chap. XXXVI. ¶ How Huon passed the fourth Gate, and howe he came into the garden whereas the Fountaine was, and of that which he did there. WHen Huon saw that he had passed the thrée gates, he went on to the fourth gate, with the Ring in his hand, for he met with no man, but that still did him honour when they saw the Ring: then he said to ye fourth Porter, thou villaine Por∣ter, I charge thée foorthwith open the gate. When the Por∣ter heard him he had great maruaile, & said, what art thou that art armed, and speakest so fiercesly to me? lay away thine armour, and then shew me what thou art & whether thou wilt goe, for armed as thou art it is not possible for to enter, shew me by thy faith how thou hast passed the thrée o∣ther bridges. Than Huon said, hould thy peace Paynim, I am a Messenger sent frō noble king Charlemaine, and whe∣ther thou wilt or not I will passe this way and goe to the Pallaice to the Admirall Gaudise: there is neyther thou nor any other shall lett me, behould this token that I shew thée. The Paynim knew it anon, and let downe the bridge, and opened the gate, and knéeled downe and kissed and embra∣braced his leg, desiring pardon of him in that he had caused him to tarrie so long: Paynim quoth Huon, good day mayest thou haue. Sir quoth the Porter, ye may goe to the Admi∣rall, who will make you good chéere and great honour, for there is nothing that yée can desire, but it shalbe graunted vnto you, yea and if it be his only Daughter, for loue of the Lord from whome yée bring this Ring for a token: and sir, I require you how doth the Lord Angolofer▪ commeth hee
hether or not? Porter quoth Huon, if he come hether, all the Diuels of hell muste bringe him hether, and therewith hee passed foorth without any more wordes, but he said to him∣selfe. Ah good Lord Iesus Christ, helpe and aid me in all my busines, I was tempted with an euill spirite, when I made the lye at the first gate, I did it by lightnesse of courage and for lacke of remembrance, whereof I am right sorie. Huon thus being in displeasure with himselfe for the lye that hee had made, went forth till he came to the Pallaice, and en∣tred into a faire garden, wherein the Admirall tooke often∣times his pastime, for there could no trée, frute, nor flower be wished for, but there they might be found both in sōmer & winter. And in the middest of this garden there was a faire Fountaine comming out of the Ryuer of Nyle that cōmeth from Paradise, the which fountaine as then was of such vertue, that if any sicke man did drinke thereof, or washed his handes and face therin, incontinent he should be whole, and also if a man had béen of great age, he should retourne againe to the age of xxx. yéeres, and old women to become as fresh and lustie as a maide of xv. yeares. This Fountaine had that vertue by the space of lx. yeares, but x. yeares after that Huon had béen there, it was destroyed and broken by the Egiptians, who made warre on the Admyrall that was as then in Babylon. And when Huon had washed his handes and face in the Fountaine, and dronke of the water, he be∣held ye Pallaice, and thought it maruaylous faire, and whē he had well regard it, he saw a little beside the fountaine a great Serpent, who kept the Fountaine, to thintent that none should be so hardy as to drinke or touch ye Fountaine: for if a traytour, or any man that had falsefied his faith did touch it, he could not escape without death. But when the Serpent saw Huon, he enclined himselfe, without making of semblance to do him any ill. Huon sat down by the Foun∣taine, and began gréeuouslye to lament, and said. Ah good Lord, without thy succour it is impossible for me to depart hence aliue. Ah noble king Oberon, forsake me not nowe in
this néede, for the trespas that I haue done ought to be for∣giuen me, séeing I did it negligently for lacke of remem∣brance, certenly I will know, if for so small a cause yee will leaue me, wherefore whatsoeuer fall, I shall prooue & assay to know the troth, then he tooke his Horne and blew it so fiercely, that king Oberon heard it being in his Forrest, & when he heard it, he said. Ah good Lord I heare the false Knight blow his Horne, who setteth so little by me, for at ye first gate that he passed by, he made a false lye: by the Lord that fourmed me, if he blow till the vaines of his necke bur in sunder, he shall not be succoured for me, nor for any man∣ner of mischiefe that may fall to him. Then Huon being in the garden blew so lowde, that the Admirall, who was set at his dinner, arose from the boord with all his Lords, and all other ladies and Damsels, knights and squiers, boyes, and scullions of the kitchen, and all other came into the Pallaice to the Admirall, and began to daunce and singe, and made great ioy, the more that Huon blew his Horne, ye more they daunced and sang. And when Huon left blowing, than the Admirall called his Barons, and commaunded them to be armed, and said. Sirs goe into this garden, for surely there is some Enchaunter, therefore take héed that he escape not, but bring him aliue to me, for I will know of him the cause why he hath done this déed, for if he escape, he will doe vs more ill. When Huon had blowen a longe space, and sawe no body come to him, he was sore abashed, and thā he began to lament and said. Ah good Lord god, now I sée well mine end approcheth, when king Oberon fayleth me, in whom I haue all my trust in life and death. Ah déere Lady Mother and brother Gerardine, I shall neuer sée you more. Ah noble king Charlemaine, great wrong haue yée done to me, thus to banish me without desert, for that that I did was in my de∣fence, god forgiue it you. Ah king Oberon, well mayēst thou be reputed for an vnkind creature, thus to leaue me for one small fault, certenly if thou be a noble man, I hope thou wilt pardon me, at least, I put all to god, and to him I submit
me. And whatsoeuer fall, I will enter into the Pallaice, & doe my Messuage that king Charlemaine hath commaunded me to doe. So he made him readie, and departed from the Fountaine, thinking he should finde the Admirall at din∣ner at that time. Chap. XXXVII. ¶ How Huon came into the Pallaice, and did his messuage to the Admirall, and how he slew many Paynims, and was af∣terward taken, and put in Pryson. WHen Huon had been a cer∣ten space at the fountaine, he departed all armed, and mounted vp the degrees of the Pallaice, the same time the Admirall had caused twoo of his principall goddes to be set in the middest of the Pallaice, richly adorned, and before thē twoo great torches burning, so that no Sarazin passed by them, but made to them great reue∣rence, but Huon passed by them, and would not once looke on them, nor speake to no man that hée met, whereof they had all great maruaile and sayd one to another, so that Huon ea∣sily heard them. I beléeue this man, who thus entred into ye Pallaice all armed, is some messenger sent from some great Prince to the Admyrall, and then Huon saw a Paynim King speaking to the Admyrall, who was newly come to the Ad∣mirall, bicause the same day the Admirall Gaudise should haue deliuered to him his Daughter the faire Escleremond in mariage, and Huon sawe well, howe hee was the greatest Prince that as then was there with the Admirall, then Huon sayd to himselfe. Ah good Lord, if I acquite my selfe truly to King Charlemaine, I must slay this Paynim king, I thinke it be he that I looke for, séeing he sitteth so néere to the Admi∣rall,
god confound me▪ but incontinent I will strike of his head, and then let our Lord Iesus Christ do with me at his pleasure. Then Huon came nere to the table, and drew out hys sword, and therewith gaue the said King suche a stroke, that his head fell on the table, so that ye Admyrall was ther∣with all bloody. Then Huon with a hye voyce said. Ah good Lord, what a good beginning is this, the rest I remit to our Lord Iesus Christ whome I require to aid me to perfourme the rest of mine enterprise, in this point I haue nere quit my selfe agaynst king Charlemaine. Then the Admirall said to his Barons, take this man that hath doone me this offence, as to murder this king itting at my table, if he escape, looke me neuer in the face. Thē the Paynims assailed Huon on all sides, and cast at him darts and swords to haue slaine him. But his good Armor saued him from the death, and with his sword he slew many a bolde Paynim, so that none durst ap∣proch néere him. When he saw that he was sore oppressed, he tooke his Ring from off his arme, and cast it on the table be∣fore the Admirall and said. Sir Admirall, beware on paine of thy lyfe, of doing to me any hurt or damage, by this token that I shew thee. Whan the Admirall saw the Ring, hee knew it well, then hee began to crye, that no man should be so hardye as to touch him that hath slayne the Paynim King, and euery man let Huon in rest, wherof he was right ioyfull, than he said to the Admirall, Sir, I will from hence forth that thou do as I commaund thee. Friend quoth the Admi∣rall, thou mayest do in my Pallaice what thou wilt, what∣soeuer thou commaund shalbe done, no man shall say the cō∣trary. Than Huon saw where his daughter the fayre Escle∣remond sat by her Father, and Huon went to her, and kissed her iij. times before her Father, whereat the Damsell was much abashed, but she saw him so fayre, and felt his mouth so sweet, that she thought without she might haue him to her Louer, she should dye for sorow, so that she changed colour, and blushed as ruddie as a rose. Whan Huon had kissed the ladie, than he went to the Admirall and said. Sir Admirall,
know for troth that I am christened, and am a Messenger sent from noble king Charlemaine to thée, bicause there is no Prince christian nor heathē, but that obeyeth his cōmaun∣dement, except thy selfe: therefore by me hee sendeth thee worde, that since the dolorous day of battaile at Ronceuaux, whereas he lost his twoo Nephews, Rowland and Oliuer, he neuer since assembled so much people, as he will do this next sommer to come vpon thée both by water and by land, with∣out thou wilte beleue in the lawe of Iesus Christ, therefore if thou wilt beléeue me, be christened, or else this mischiefe will fall vpon thée. Speake no more of that quoth the Admi∣rall, for I had rather be hewen and slaine, then to leaue my law and beléeue vpon thy god. Sir Admirall quoth Huon, moreouer king Charles commaundeth thée to send him a M. Sparhawkes, a M. Goshawkes, a M. Beares, and a M. wayters chayned together, a M. yong Varlets, a M. faire Damsels, and also a handfull of thy beard, and Foure of thy great téeth. Ha quoth the Admirall, I sée thou art hardy and outragious, to demaund of me this that thou hast said. And also I haue great maruaile of thy Maister, that he is so foo∣lish as to commaund me by thee, to send him my beard and great téeth, before this time he hath sent me more than xv. Messengers, & hath demaunded part of this that thou spea∣kest of, but all xv. haue been hanged, & nowe thou art come by thy folly to make vp the xvj. But by reason of the Ring that thou bearest, we dare not touch thée: I pray thée there∣fore by the faith and law that thou art of, shewe mee what Diuell hath giuen thée that Ring. Than Huon sore abashed, as he that durst not make a lye, for feare of king Oberon, said. Sir, not for doubt of thée, or of any Paynim héere, I will not spare to shew thee the troth, know then that with this good sword I haue slaine the Lord Angolofer the Gyant. When ye Admirall heard that, he said to his Lords. Sirs looke that this Villaine escape not, for by all the Gods that I beléeue on, I shall neuer haue ioy in my heart vntill I sée him takē. Then Paynims and Sarazins on all parts assayled Huon,
when he saw that, he commended himselfe to our Lord god, and thought he should neuer sée faire day more, and so with his sword in both his hands he defended himselfe nobly, in slaying and cutting off handes, and féete of the Sarazins, & of many he made the braynes to flye abroad on ye pauement, great terrour it was to behould, for by reason of his good Armour, there was no Paynim could do him any damage, but they gaue him way, and durst not approch néere him. Huon being full of yre as he fought, he saw on the one side of the Pallaice an Arch in the wall, and so euer still fighting he drew thether, and set his backe to the arch, to thintent that none should come behind him. There he fared like a wilde Boare in the wood▪ and defended himlelfe in such wise, that whome soeuer he touched with a full stroke, had no néede af∣ter of any surgeon, thus a long space Huon endured, and had no great harme. But the force of the Paynims was so great, that it was not possible for him to sustaine long, for he wax∣ed so wearie, that his stroakes féebled, oftentimes he called vpon god, and on the other part the Admirall cryed to his men and said. Ah yee fainte harted slaues, great shame is to you all, that one man shall so long endure against you, that ye can neither take him nor slay him. Then the Paynims whē they heard the Admirall so dispraise them, they came in a great rage all at once vppon Huon, whereas he was alone vnder the arch, and a Paynim who was Nephew to the Ad∣mirall, came vpon Huon, but when Huon saw him approch, he lifted vp his sword, and gaue the Paynim such a stroake on the helmet, that he claue his head to the breast, and there∣with his sword fell out of his hands, and another Sarazin tooke it vp, then all the Sarazins at once ran vppon Huon & tooke him, and then tooke from him his Horne and his Cup, and put off his armour: whan he was vnarmed, the Sara∣zins beheld him well, and many said, how they neuer saw so faire a man before, affirming, that if all Frenchmē were such as he, there were no King able to resist them.
Chap. XXXVIII. ¶ Of the great complaints that Huon made being in prison, and how the Admirals Daughter came to comfort him, and how she departed not well content with Huon. WHen Huon was disarmed, the Paynims tooke and brought him before the Admirall, who was right ioyfull when he sawe Huon, and called his Barons & de∣maunded of them, what death the Caytiffe should die that had done them such damage, as to slay one of his most puissant Kings, and also his Nephew, beside many others. Then they all answeared with one voice, that hee should be slaine aliue incontinent. Then stept foorth an old ancient Admirall of Six score yéeres of age, who was of ye Admirals priuie counsell, and he said. Sir Admirall, yée may not doe thus, for the loue of this good day, the which is the feast of Saint Iohn, according to our law, there is none ought to die on that day, but Sir, respite his life for a whole yéere, and then shalbe the feast of your Gods, on that day ye ought to deliuer xj. Champions, to doe with them you Sa∣crifice: let this man be one, and another may come by that time, and which of the twoo Champions be ouercome, yée shall make your sacrifice to your Gods of him. Thus ye pro∣mised your Gods to doe, the first day that yée tooke on you the Signiorie of Babylon, and Sir, if it were not for that this man hath slaine one of your Kings, and your Nephew, ye ought not to slay him, but rather to thanke him, for by him, the man that you ought most to hate in the world, is slaine, that is Angolofer, and now by his death yee are out of all seruitude & bondage, and by this man set at libertie. When the Admirall Gaudise had well heard the Paynim, he saide,
séeing it is so that ye giue me this counsell, and that of right mine Auncestors haue euer accustomed the same: I will not doe the contrarie, but it shall be as ye haue said. Then was Huon led with iiij. Paynims to a darke prison, and the Iay∣lor was commaunded to giue him meate and drinke suffiti∣ent. When Huon saw how he was in prison, he was right sorowfull and began to remember ye noble Duches his Mo∣ther, and Gerard his brother, and said. Ah Oberon, how is it that art so vnkind & outragious to me, for so little an offence to suffer me to endure this great misery? for I know well it is not vnknowen to thee, that the offence that I haue done, was but only by forgetfulnes. Now let vs leaue speaking of Huon, and say somewhat of faire Escleremond Daughter to the Admirall: when shee saw that it was night, and shee all alone in her bed, shée remem∣bred the French knight, who had kissed her iij. times in the presence of her Father, and shee was in great sorow bicause he was put in prison, & said to her selfe: Without he were a Knight of great enterprize, he would neuer haue béen so hardy to haue done as he hath done this day in diuers man∣ners. Wherefore she said, he was well worthy to be belo∣ued and succoured. Then incontinent shee arose and made her readie, and priuily she tooke a torch of waxe in her hand, and lighted it, and issued out of her chamber as priuilye as she could. It was about midnight, and euery man was a sléepe in the Pallaice, she went strait to the prison, & came at so good a time that she found the Iaylor fast a sléepe, then she stole away the keyes, and went and opened the prison dore. But when Huon saw the torch light, and the dore of ye prison open, he was in great feare, least they would take him out to put him to death, or to doe him some other displeasure, whereupon he began to make pitifull complaints, The La∣die who could well speake french, vnderstood all Huons com∣plaints, and remembred his name, bicause the day before she had heard himselfe shew her Father his name, then shée said. Huon, dismay not, I am Escleremond Daughter to the
Admirall, whome this day passed thou didst kisse iij. times in the presence of my Father, if it be so that thou wilt fulfill my will, I shall put to my endeauour to deliuer thée out of prison, for I am so affectionate towards thée, that euer since thou didst kisse me, I haue none other thought nor immagi∣nation but only on thée, & how to bring thée out of the dan∣ger that thou art in. Madame quoth Huon, god reward you for your great courtesie that ye would do vnto me, but faire Lady Escleremond, you are a Sarazin, and I am christened: True it is, that I did kisse you, but that was by the com∣maundement of king Charlemaine, who sent me hether so to doe, but else I had rather to haue been heere in perpetuall prison, than to haue touched any part of your bodie or mouth so long as ye be a Sarazyn. Huon quoth ye Ladie, seing thou art of that mind, thou shalt end thy daies heere in prison mi∣serably, and neuer trust me, but if I can, I shall cause thee deerely to aby the refusall that thou hast made me. Then the Lady Escleremond parted from the prison, and came to the Iaylor and awaked him, and said: Friend, I charge thee on paine of thy life, that to this french Prisoner within thy keeping, for these iij. daies and iij. nightes thou giue him neither meate nor drinke. Madame quoth the Iaylor, your commaundement shalbe fulfilled. Then the Lady in this dis∣pleasure went againe to her bed, right pensiue and full of fantasies, and Huon was iij. daies and iij. nights without meate or drinke, and on the iiij. day he said all sorowing. Ah good Lord, I see well I must heere die for hunger, I hū∣bly require thee to ayd and succour me, and graunt me thy grace, that I neither consent nor doe any thing that shall be against thy pleasure or against thy holy law, for any tribu∣lation that can come to me. Thus noble Huon complayned all sorowing, & there was no creature that had heard him, but he would haue been partaker of his great sorowes.
Chap. XXXIX. ¶ How Huon made great complaints for the famine that he endured, and how the faire Escleremond came againe to cō∣fort him, conditionally that Huon would fulfill her desire. Thus (as haue ye haue heard before) Huon complayned pitiously, for he had been iij. daies and iij. nights without sustenance, and the Lady Escleremond who caused it, came euery morning and euening to the prison to heare what Huon would say, and euer shee would demaund of Huon, if he were any otherwise aduised to answere her or not, and euer she found him at one point. But at the last, when she saw that he still continued in that minde, then she demaunded of him, that if she deliuered him out of prison, whether he would then promise her to lead her with him into Fraunce, and take her to his wife when hee came there, if thou wilt promise me this (quoth shee) thou shalt haue meate and drinke sufficient at thy pleasure. Madame quoth Huon, I promise you faithfully, that vp∣pon your forsaking Paganisme, and conuersion to our chri∣stian faith: I shall doe your pleasure, whatsoeuer happen to me thereby. Then know for troth quoth the Lady, that for the loue of thée I will become christened, and beleeue in ye law of the Lord Iesus Christe so soone as we come into any place whereas it may be done. Huon thanked her, and then she caused him to haue meate and drinke, whereof he was ioyfull, and she called the Iaylor and said. Goe thy way in hast to the Admirall my Father, and tell him that the french knight is dead iij. daies past, through féeblenes & hunger. Ladie quoth the Iaylor, I am ready to doe your commaun∣dement, and so he went to the Admirall and said. Sir, the
french Knight that was in my keeping, is dead by famine iij. daies past. Alas quoth the Admirall, I am sory therfore, but seing it will none otherwise be, I must passe it ouer as I may, but I had rather that he were aliue. And thus as ye haue heard, Huon was deliuered from death, for it is a commō, but a very true saying, that one day of deliuerance, is worth a hundred yeeres of endurance. Then the Iaylor returned to the prison vnto the Ladie, and shewed her what he had said to the Admirall. Well frind quoth the Ladie, if thou wilt be secret, I shall make thée rich for euer, helping to aide me in such things as I would haue thee. Madame quoth he, to die in the quarrell, I shall doe you seruice such as you commaund me, the feare of death shall not let me to doe it. Now let vs leaue speaking of Huon, who was oftentimes visited with the Iaylor, and had all things as he desired, and was well lodged at his pleasure. And let vs now speake of Gerames, and of them that were with him in the Castle of the Gyant. Chap. XL. ¶ How Gerames and his company departed from the Tower and the Damsell with them, and came to Babilon, and of the manner that Gerames vsed to know some newes of Huon. WE haue heard heere before, how Huon departed from the Tower of the Gyant, and left there Gerames and all his company with ye Damsell his Coozen: they taried there iij. moneths, and neuer heard any thing of Huon, wherof they were sorowfull. They went foorth one morning, and came to the Sea-side, to sée if they might heare any newes of their Lord Huon, and as they loo∣ked
vpon the Sea, they espied a shippe charged with xxx. Paynims and great riches, and Gerames saw how the ship was coming to that Port, wherfore he said to his company: Sirs, let vs go and see if we can learne any tiding of Huon by them. Then they went to the Port, and by that time that the Maryners had cast their anchor, then Gerames demaun∣ded of them whence they were, and whither they would go. Sir quoth they, we would goe to Mesque, to pay to Ango∣lofer the great Gyant, a Tribute that we are bound euery yeere to pay, therefore Sir we desire you to shew vs where we might find him. And when Gerames saw that they were all a land out of the ship, he said, Ah ye vnhappie Paynims, ye shall neuer depart hence, for he that ye demaund for is dead, and all ye shall beare him companie▪ Then Gerames saide to his company, sirs let all these Paynims be slaine, and then incontinent they set vpon thē, so that all the Paynims were slaine, not one escaped aliue, for the christian men were armed, and the Paynims with∣out armour or any weapon, for otherwise they durst not come on land for feare of the Gyant. Then Gerames entred into the ship, and tooke all that they found there and bare it into the Tower, and then they went to dinner and made great ioy for that aduenture, and after dinner Gerames said. Sirs if wee were now in Fraunce, and that king Charle∣maine should demaund of vs what is become of Huon: yée know wel there is none of vs can tel whether he be aliue or dead, for if we should say that he is dead, and he afterward retourne home, then we should be reputed for false men euer after both we and our children, for a man may be a Priso∣ner xiiij. or xv. yeeres, and yet come home againe at the last safe and sound. But sirs if yee will be ruled by me, we shall doe like true men: we haue as now in this port a good ship well fournished with euery thing, and we haue heere gould and siluer plentie, and we shall soone vittaile our ship, and then let vs take the Sea, and neuer rest sayling vntill wee heare some newes of our Lord Huon, & if we doe thus, then
wée doe as true men ought to doe, and I desire you all euery man shew his aduice herein. Then without taking of any longer respite, they answered all with one voice, that they were readie to accomplish all that he had deuised. So they tooke gould and siluer and all their riches, and bare it into the shippe, and fournished it with wine, bisket, salt flesh, & artillerie, and when their shippe was garnished, they put in their horses and their armour, and they all xiij. Compani∣ons entred into the ship, & the Damsell with thē, then they wayed vp their anchors, & hoysed vp their sayles, and so left the Tower of the Gyant all voyd and no man therein. And thus they sayled along the coast, vntill they came into the high sea, and so long they sayled till they came to Damieta, & there they entred into the Riuer of Nyle, and so long they sayled therein, that they arriued at Babylon, and came to the Port, and tooke out their horses. Gerames that knew well the language, and the manner of the entring into all the iiij. gates, said to his companie. Sirs lets vs mount on our horses, and let vs enter into the Citie, to see if we may heare any newes of our Maister Hu∣on. Thus they roade foorth and entred into the Citie, & then Gerames said. Sirs, wée will goe to the Pallaice, but when we come there, ould you all your peace, and suffer mee to speake, wherein it is conuenient that yee all agree to my wordes, and say not the contrary. They answered and said, they were content so to doe, and thus they roade together through the towne, Ah good Lord quoth Gerames, I beséech thee of thy grace to grant vs, that we may heare some good tidings of our maister Huon of Bourdeaux, for whome we be heere in ieoperdie of death, so they passed all the iiij. brid∣ges and gates, by reason that Gerames shewed foorth suche reasons that the Porters were content. Then they came be∣fore the great hall, & there they alighted & mounted vp all xiij. and the Damsell with them, and when they were in ye hall, they saw the Admirall Gaudise sitting on a rich chaire garnished with gould & pretious stones, and Gerames that
could well speake the Sarazine language, came before the Admirall and said. The same god that causeth the wine and corne to grow, saue and keepe the Admirall Gaudise, whome I see there it∣ting among his Barons. Friend quoth the Admirall, thou art welcome, I pray thee shew me what thou art, and whi∣ther thou wouldest goe? Sir (quoth Gerames) to tell you plainely, I am come from the good citie of Mombrance, and am Sonne to king Iuoryn. When the Admyrall heard that, he rose vp on his féete and said: Thou art welcome the son of my brother, faire Nephew, I pray you shew me how doth my brother Iuoryn? Sir (quoth Gerames) when I depar∣ted from him, I left him in good health, and he saluteth you by me, and hath sent heere to you xij. french men by me, the which were taken vpon the sea, as they were going on Pil∣grimage to the holy Sepulchre of Christ in Ierusalem, and he desireth you to put them in prison, vntill the day of Saint Iohn the Baptist, at which day you must make the feast of your Gods, and then to bring them into the meadow heere without, and there tye and binde thē to stakes, and let your Archers shoot at them, to thintent to know who shooteth best. As for this Damsell that is héere with me, she is to be put to your Daughter, to teach her to speake perfectly the french language. Faire Nephew (quoth the Admirall) as he hath appointed it shalbe done, and I giue you power to cōmaund euery thinge in this house at your pleasure, and I pray you shew me what is your name? Sir quoth he, I am called Ieracle. Well (quoth the Admirall) from hence foorth I re∣taine you to be as my chiefe Chamberlaine, and I will that yee haue the key of the prison in your kéeping, and therein to put these Captiues, and doe with them at your pleasure, ex∣tend vnto thē what kindnesse you please, but let them haue meat & drinke suffitient, that they die not with famine, as but lately died a French man that was sent to me by king Charles of Fraunce, who was called Huon of Bourdeaux, the which was a right faire yong man.
When Gerames heard that, he had neuer before greater sorow at his heart, for then (hearing of the death of Huon) his displeasure & anger was so great, that he had néere hand runne vpon the Admirall, and he was so vexed in his mind, that he tooke vp a staffe that lay by him, and gaue each of the French men such stroakes on their heades, that the blood ran downe: but they suffered it and durst not stirre, they were in such feare of the Admirall, but they cursed Gerames for his stroakes, who did it for the nonst. And when the Admi∣rall sawe how hee had well beaten the frenchmen, he said: Faire Nephew, it seemeth well by you that you loue these christian men but little. Sir quoth he, I hate these christian men more then any men in the world, for Sir all the waye that I haue come, I haue thus beaten them thrée times in euery day, in the honour of my God Mahound, and in des∣pight of their law and God on whome they beléeue. Thus then Gerames departed from the Admirall, and led with him the xij. french prisoners, beating them till he came to ye pri∣son, and none of them durst speake one word, but to them∣selues they cursed Gerames. And as they went towards the prison they met with the Lady Escleremond, and she said, Co∣sin, I am right ioyfull of your comming, but if I durst trust you, I would shew you a secret matter, so that you promise not to discouer me. Cousin quoth Gerames, by the faith that I owe to my god Mahound, ye may well shew me your will and pleasure, for if mine eyes were to be drawne out, I shal neuer discouer you. And when the Damsell heard that pro∣mise, she said. Deare Cousin, it is a v. months passed since there came to my Father the Admirall a french knight, with a messuage from king Charlemaine, who called himselfe Hu∣on of Bourdeaux, who when he had done his messuage, hee slew a Paynim king as he sat at the table by my Father, & after came & kissed me thrée times before my Fathers face, and after that slew many Sarazins, wherefore at last hee was taken Prisoner, and put in prison whereas he is yet, howbeit I made my Father beléeue that he is dead with fa∣mine,
yet deere cousin he is as yet aliue, and as well serued of meat and drinke as my father is. When Gerames vnder∣stood the Damsell Escleremond, he was both sorowfull & an∣grie, for he thought that the Damsell did it to deceaue him, and to cause him to shew forth the secretnes of his minde, & bicause he was in doubt thereof, he passed foorth and made no manner of answeare to the Damsell, but came to the pri∣son, and put in the Prisoners rudely, and the Damsell re∣turned right sorowfull in that she had shewed so much of her minde to Gerames whome she tooke for her Cousin. When Gerames had put the xij. Frenchmen in prison, he returned right sorowfull, and Huon being in the prison, had greate maruaile what prisoners they were that were let downe in∣to the prison, for he could not sée thē the prison was so darke, then he drew néere to them to heare them speake, and at last one of them began to make his complaint, and said. Ah good Lord Iesu Christ succour vs, for thou knowest well, this that wee suffer we haue not deserued, but it is for the loue of our yong Lord Huon of Bourdeaux, we haue loued him so well, that now wée be lost for uer, except deere Lord thou haue mercie vppon vs. When Huon had heard what they said, then he knew well that they were christened & french∣men, and then he coueted much to know what they were, & so approched néere to them and said. Sirs, yée that be heere, I pray you shew me what yée be, and how yee be come hi∣ther? Sir quoth one of them, true it is that v. moneths passed, there departed from vs a young knight, with whome wee came out of the Realme of Fraunce, and he was borne in Fraunce, and sonne to a noble Duke, called Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, this Knight slew Charlot sonne to King Charle∣maine by misaduenture, wherefore hee was banished out of the Realme of Fraunce, and sent by king Charlemaine to do a messuage to the Admirall Gaudise, and he is dead in prisō as it is shewed vs, and sir wée came to séeke for him, & are betrayed by one of our owne companie.
When Huon heard him speake, he knew him well, & said. Sirs, be of good comfort and make good chéere, for I am Hu∣on, safe and in good health, thanked be god and the Admi∣rals daughter, who is so enamoured of me, that she hath sa∣ued my life, yée shall sée soone how shée will come and visite me. But I pray you sirs what is become of ould Gerames, whether he be left behind to kéepe ye Tower, with the Dam∣my cousin whome I left in your kéeping? Sir quoth they, a worse creature or more false Traytor was neuer borne, for he hath betrayed vs, and hath beaten and put vs in pri∣son: and as for the Damsell, shee is with the Admiralls Daughter. When Huon perceiued that all they were of his companie, he went & embraced them and said. Sirs knowe of a suretie, that all that Gerames hath done, is done to the intent to deliuer vs all out of prison, I doe so well know the troth of Gerames. Sirs make good chéere, for assoone as night commeth, wée shalbe visited with great ioy. Sir quoth they, surely wee beléeued that Gerames had forsaken the faith of Christ, and was become a Sarazin, for he hath made the Admirall beleeue, that he is sonne to his brother king Iuo∣ryn of Mombrance. When Huon heard that, he had great ioy at his heart and said. Ah good Lord, the troth of Gerames and loue that he hath alwaies shewed to me, shalbe to vs right profitable, in the despight of king Oberon, who hath forsaken me for a small offence, by Gerames we shalbe deli∣uered out of this pouertie and danger. Now leaueth the Historie to speake of Huon and his companie being in pry∣son, and returneth to the ould Gerames, who studied and practised for the deliuerance of Huon and his company.
Chap. XLI. ¶ How Gerames and the faire Escleremond went to the Pryson to comfort Huon and the other Prisoners. NOw sheweth the Historie, that when Gerames was retourned to the Admirall, he said. Sir the French men that I brought, are fast in prison and well bea∣ten. Faire Nephew quoth the Admirall, they haue had but an euill neighbor of you. Then Gerames went into his chamber, and studied how he might fournish the Prisoners with vittailes, & did so much that he had sufficient, and when night came, he went with his vittailes to ye prisō, for he might do there what he listed, for euery man was ready to doe him any seruice. When he came to the prison dore, he sent euery man away and taried there alone, and he had not béen there longe, but that the Ad∣mirals daughter came thether. When Gerames saw her, he wist not what to thinke, but said. Faire cousin, I pray you shew me what you doe heare at this houre? Déere cousin quoth shee, the great trust that I haue in you, hath made me to come hether, bicause to day I discouered to you all my se∣crets, and what I am intended to doe. Therefore let me in∣treat you, that you would leaue the law of Mahdund, and receiue the christian faith, and then to goe with mee into Fraunce together with these Prisoners, and we shall well find the manner how to depart, and we will take with vs al the prisoners that ye haue put in prison. When Gerames had heard the Lady, he was right ioy∣full, for then he knew well that shee went not about to des∣crie him, but that she did it of good heart and good will that she bare to Huon, howbeit, hee thought that hee would not
discouer himselfe to her, vntill the time he knew the troth of Huon, wherfore he answered the Damsell angerly and said. O thou false and vntrue maide, how art thou so hardy as to speake or thinke thus? surely the Admirall thy Father shall know it assoone as he commeth out of his chamber, and then shalt thou be burned and the Frenchmen hanged. Alas Sir quoth shee, yet I pray you let mee goe into the prison with you, to thintent yt I may sée Huon once yet before I die, for the loue of whome I am content to die, for if he die I will not liue one day after, therefore let me once take my leaue of him. Well quoth Gerames, for this time I am content that ye goe with me, then Gerames tooke a torch in his hand, and opened the dore & entred, he was no sooner entred, but Huon knew him, and went and embraced him, and said. Ah my true louer, blessed be the houre that I found you, then they all clipped and embraced him, when the Lady saw their ma∣ner of saluting she was ioyfull, for then she saw well, that her intent should be more surely compassed, & then she came to Huon, & demaunded if they were his seruants that made so great loue together? Madame quoth Huon, surely all these that be heere be my men, boldly ye may trust them, for there is none of them but that they shall do your commaundment. Huon quoth the Damsell, their comming pleaseth me right well, then Huon said to his companie. Gentlemen and my deare friends, forbeare this extremitie of kindnesse to me, and bestow it vpon this noble Ladie, for by her wee shalbe deliuered, and it is shee that hath saued my life, thē they all together humbly thanked her. Sirs quoth she, if yée will worke by my councell, I shall shew you how I may aid you to deliuer you frō hence. First let me vnfainedly perswade ye that I doe firmely beléeue in Iesus Christ, and at this day there is no man that I more hate than the Admirall Gaudise my Father, bicause he be∣léeueth not in our Lord Iesus Christ, for hee hateth so the christian men, that he cannot abide to heare any speaking of them, for he beléeueth but vpon Mahound and his Idols,
therefore my hart cannot loue him, if he did otherwise, I would purchase to him none ill for all the good in the world, but I shall shewe you what yee must doe. When it is the houre of midnight, I shall bring you all into my chamber, whereas I will prouide Armour for you all, and there yée shall all be armed, then I shall bring you into the Admirall my Fathers chamber, whome yee shall find sléeping, and there yee may slay him, and as for mee, I will bee the first that shall strike him, and when he is slaine, then shall wée depart surely. When Huon had vnderstood her, he said, Madame, and god will your Father shall not be so slaine, ye day shall come that ye shall otherwise deliuer vs, wée thanke you that yee so much desire our deliuerance, but I thinke it good that you and Gerames depart hence for this time, for it is néere hand day, to thintent that our busines be not perceiued. Then the Lady and Gerames departed, and closed againe the prison dore, and went vp into the Pallaice, as if they had not béene there at all. And thus euery day Gerames & the Lady went to visite the Prisoners, and bare them euery thing that was néedefull for them. Gerames was alwaies with the Admi∣rall, and did what he would, for there was not any Pay∣nim that durst do contrarie to his commaundment. Now leaue wée to speake of the Admirall, of Gerames and of Huon and of all them that were in prison, vntill such time as wée may returne to them againe.
Chap. XLII. ¶ How the great Giant Agrapart, eldest brother to Angolo∣fer whome Huon slew, assembled his people and came to Babylon, to haue the tribute of the Admirall as his brother had, and of the battaile hand to hand that he desired of the Admirall Gaudis, the which was agreed vnto. IT hath beene sufficiently declared heere before, how Huon slew the Gyant Angolofer, the which Gyant had Seauentéene Brethren, all elder than himselfe, who liued distant from him in diuers seuerall places. It was no longe while after, but that his elder Brother named Agrapart, was aduertised of the death of his Brother, which he tooke to his hart excéeding heauilie. Now you must vnderstand, that he was in all respects of as huge stature as his brother, for he was xvij. foote of length, and in bignes he was made therafter, he was a foot betwéen ye browes, & his eyes more redder and burning than a brand of fire, and the gristle of his nose as great as the nostrill of an oxe, and he had twoo téeth issuing out of his mouth more than a foot long each of them: but if I should describe his foule figure at the full, it would annoy all the hearers thereof, therefore yee may well beléeue when he was in his displeasure, that he had a feare∣full countenance to looke vpon, for then his twoo eyes séemed like twoo burning torches. When he was certenly aduerti∣sed of the death of his brother, he sent ouer all his countrey, that euery man should come to him in armour, and so they did, and when they were come, he declared to them ye death of his brother Angolofer, & said how it was his mind to goe to Babylon to ye Admirall Gaudise, there to take possession of
the landes and signiories that were his brothers, and also to haue the tribute that was due by the Admirall, then all his Lds said, Sir, commaund at your pleasure, and wee shall obay it. Well sirs (quoth he) then I will that euerye man mount on their horses to goe towards Babylon, and so they all obayed, and got on their horses and departed, & rode so long, that they came into a plaine néere to the citie of Ba∣bylon, there were about Ten Thowsand men together, and Agrapart said, Sirs tarie yée all héere till I come againe, for I will goe all alone and speake with the Admirall Gaudise. Then he armed himselfe, and tooke a great fawchin in his hand, and departed all alone, and so went and entred into the citie of Babylon, and so past the Foure gates, there was no Paynim that durst say him nay, and he rested not vntill he came to the Pallaice, the same time as the Admirall was sitting at dinner & Gerames with him, then the Gyant came to the table, & said. The same god Mahound vnder whome we liue, confound the Admirall Gaudise, as an ill caytiffe and a false Traytour. When the Admirall heard himselfe so highly abused, he said to Agrapart, in this that thou hast said, thou lyest falsely, thus shamefully to rebuke me in mine owne Court before all my Lords: therefore shewe mee the ause why thou doest me this iniurie? Admirall quoth hee, it is bicause there is come into thy Court he that hath slaine my Brother, whom incontinent thou oughtest to haue slain likewise, wherefore if it were not for mine owne honour, with my fist I would strike thée on the face, thou hast put him in prison, without any more hurt dooing vnto him, therefore thou traytour théefe, by Mahound be thou cursed, thou art not worthy to sit in a seate royall, therefore arise vp, it is not méee for thée to sit there. And therewith hée drew the Admirall so rudely out of his chaire, that his hat and Crowne fell downe to the earth, whereat the Admirall was sore abashed. Then Agrapart sat downe in his chaire & said, thou false Traytour, my Brother is dead, therefore from hencefoorth
thou shalt be my Subiect, for it appertaineth to me to haue the Lands that my Brother had, and the Tribute that thou wert woont to pay vnto my Brother, or else I shall strike off thy head: howbeit I will not doe against right, for if thou wilt prooue the cōtrarie, or find two Champions to be so har∣dy, that for thy loue they dare or will fight with me in plaine battaile, I shall fight with them, or more if thou wilt send thē to me. And if it be so, that I be ouercome & discomfited by any of thē, I am content that frō hence foorth thou shalt hould thy landes franke & frée, without any tribute paying. But if it fall out so that I conquer thē both, then thou to be my subiect, and to pay me tribute for euer, & also to pay me for a due taxe euery yéere Foure Ducates of gould as thy head money. Agrapart quoth the Admirall, I am content thus to do, and to appoint twoo of my men to fight with thée. Chap. XLIII. ¶ How the Admirall Gaudis tooke Huon out of prison, and ar∣med him to fight with the Gyant Agrapart. WHen the Admirall had heard the great Gyant, he said alowd: where bee the twoo gentle knights, that will for euer be my friends? now is the time come, that all the goodnes and great gifts that I haue giuen among you, is now to be rewarded. If there be any of you that will fight against this Gyant, I shall giue him my Daughter Escleremond in mariage, and after my death to haue my Heritage, no man shall be so bold as to say nay thereto. But for any faire wordes or promises that the Admirall could make, there was no Paynim so har∣dye to vndertake it: whereuppon the Admirall made great sorow, and began to lament, and when the Gyant Agrapart
sawe him, he said. Thy lamenting cannot auaile thée, for whether thou wilt or not, it must beheeue thée to pay these iiij. péeces of gold yerely, for I am sure there is no Paynim that dare fight against me. When the faire Ladie Escleremond saw her Father wéepe, it sore gréeued her hart, and she said, O my Father, if I knewe that it should not displease you, I would shew you one thing which should bring you out of this doubt. Daugh∣ter quoth he, I sweare by Mahound, I will not be displea∣sed whatsoeuer thou sayest. Sir (quoth shée) I did once de∣lude you, in telling you that the French-man that brought you the Messuage from king Charlemaine, was dead in pri∣son: but sir credite me he is as yet aliue, if it please you I shall fetch him to you, and without doubt I dare warrant you, that he will take on him this Battaile against the Gy∣ant, for he shewed you how he slew the other Gyant Ango∣lofer, therefore I haue hope by the ayd of Mahound, in like∣wise he shall slay his brother this Gyant Agrapart. Daugh∣ter (quoth the Admirall) it is my pleasure that ye shall fetch the Prisoner to me, for if he can discomfite this Gyant, I am content that he & all his company, shall depart franke & frée at their pleasure. Then the Lady & Gerames went to the prison, & tooke out Huon & all his company, & brought them before the Admirall. Then the Admirall earnestly beheld Huon, and had great maruaile that he was in so good case, yet his colour was somewhat pale, by reason of lying so long in prison, then the Admirall said. Friend it séemeth by thy lookes, that thou hast had no ill imprisonment. Sir quoth Huon, I thanke your Daughter therefore, but I pray you shew me for what cause yée haue as now sent for me? Frend (quoth the Admirall) I shall shewe thée, behould yonder Sarazin that is armed, who hath challenged to fight with me hand to hand, or against twoo of the best men that I haue, and I can find none so hardy that dare fight against this Paynim: but if it be so that thou wilt take vpon thee this enterprise for me, I shall then deliuer thée and all thy
company, quite to goe into thy country at thy pleasure, and safely to conduct thée to the Citie of Acre. And also I will giue thée a Sommer with gould, the which thou shalt pre∣sent frō me to king Charlemaine, and euery yere from hence∣foorth to send him like present as for my head money, and to make such assurance as his councell can deuise. Also if hee haue any warre, I shall send him twoo M. men of armes payed for a whole yere before hand, and if it be so that he de∣sire mine owne person, I will then passe the sea with a C.M. Paynims to serue him: for I had rather to be in serui∣tude there, than to pay iiij.d. to this Gyant. And moreouer, if thou wilt abide héere with me, I shal giue thée my daugh∣ter Escleremond in mariage, and the halfe of my Realme to maintaine thine estate. Sir quoth Huon, I am content this to doe, so that I may haue mine owne Armour, and my rich Horne of Iuory and my cuppe, the which were taken from me when I was yéelded Prisoner. Frend quoth the Admi∣rall, all shalbe deliuered to thée, thou shalt not loose the value of one peny. Then the Admirall sent for the Horne, Armour and Cup, and deliuered them to Huon, whereof he had great ioy, but when Agrapart saw & knew, that the Admirall had found a Champion to fight with him, hee saide to the Admi∣rall. Sir, I will goe out and speake with my Knights, and in the meane time let thy Champiō be ready apparelled, for I shall not tary long, beside, I shall neuer haue ioy at my hart, till I haue torne his hart out of his bodie: therewith he departed and went to his men, and Huon put on his coate of mayle, and then he tooke Gerames his horne of Iuory, and said: Friend, I pray you kéepe my Horne till I returne a∣gaine. Then he went & prayed to our Lord, to forgiue him his sinnes, and to succour & ayd him to discomfite that foule end the Gyant, and when he had made his praiers to god, he put on his armour as quickly as though he had neuer béen in prison, wherby he knew well that god was pleased with him, and then he said. Ah noble king Oberon, I pray thée séeing God is pleased
with me, put away thy displeasure and pardon me, for the breaking of thy commaundement I haue béen sore punished, and I pray thee be not displeased if I spake any hasty worde being in prison, for famine caused me to doe it. In the brea∣king of thy commaundement, I confesse I did ill therein: yet it was but by negligence and forgetting. Alas Sir, re∣member but what courtesie ye shewed me, when yée found me in the wood, and gaue me your rich Horne and Cup, by the which often times I haue been succoured: therefore sir now I require thée to pardon me all my trespasses, and helpe me at my néed, for I sée well, without it be by ye grace of god & your helpe, there is nothing can saue my life, thus he be∣sought god of pardon, and to giue him grace to destroy his e∣nemy, who was so horrible to behould. And when he had made his prayer, there came a Sarazin to Huon & said, Sir héere is your owne swoord that yée lost when yée were taken. Friend quoth Huon, yee do me great courtesie, God giue me grace to reward thée. Then he did on his helmet and girt on his sword, and the Admirall sent him a good horse the best in all his Court, for he was not so faire, but he was in goodnes aboue all other. When Huon saw him, he was right ioyfull & thanked the Admirall. As for his rich fourniture I make no mention thereof, the saddle, harnesie, and bridle were so rich, that the value thereof could not be estéemed. Then Huon made the signe of the crosse, and mounted on his horse armed at all points, and so rode out of the Pallaice into a faire meadow, and there made a course to assay his horse, & then he rested him before ye Admirall, who leaned in a win∣dow in his Pallaice, and when he beheld Huon, he said to his Lords. Trust me these Frenchmen are to be doubted & feared, for Huon is a goodly yong man, and great wrong it had been if he had béen slaine. The Admirall commaunded the field to be kept with a Thowsand Sarazins, to thintent that no treason should be done, or any iniurie offered to his faire séeming Champion.
Chap. XLIIII. ¶ How Huon fought with Agrapart the Gyant, and discom∣fited him, and deliuered him to the Admirall, who had great ioy thereof. WHen Huon hadde made his course, he came into the field whereas his enemie was ready, and when Agrapart saw Huon, hee said. Thou that art of so great courage as to fight against me, howe néere of kinne art thou to the Admirall, séeing that for the loue of him thou wilt put thy selfe in aduenture of death? Paynim quoth Huon, know for troth, that I am nothing of kinne to the Admirall, but I was borne in the Realme of Fraunce, and if thou desire to know what I am, I say vnto thée, that I am he that slew thy Brother. For that (quoth the Pay∣nim) I am the more sorowfull, and yet againe ioyfull, in that Mahound hath done mée the grace, to haue power to reuenge his death: but if thou wilt beléeue and worship my God Mahound, and forsake thy beléefe and goe with me in∣to my countrey I shall make thée so great a Lord, that of all thy kinne there was neuer any such. And I shall giue thée my sister in mariage, who is a foote greater than I am, and is as blacke as a cole. Paynim quoth Huon, I care neyther for thy land nor for thy sister, but all the diuels in hell kéepe them both: beware thou of me, for I shall neuer ioy in my hart, vntill the time that I haue slaine thee as I haue done thy brother: I defie thée in the name of god, and I thée quoth the Gyant, in the name of Mahound. Then they went a sunder to take their courses, and they ran each at other and met so fiersly, that their speares brake in péeces, and the encounter was so rude, that by force of the
shocke both the horses fell to the earth, but the Champions quickly recouered, and came each vpon other. Agrapart tooke vp his fawchin to haue striken Huon, but he stept a litle on the one side, whereby the Paynim missed his stroke, & Huon lifted vp his sword and strake the Gyant on the helmet so maruailous a stroke, that he strake of a quarter therof, and wounded him sore, and the stroke descended downe and cut of his eare, so that the black blood ran downe to the ground. Then Huon said, Paynim thou wert vnhappie when thou camest hether, thou mightest haue béen content with ye death of thy Brother, and not to come hether to haue as much thy selfe, for thou shalt neuer sée faire day more. When the Gyant saw him selfe hurt, he had great feare and said: Cursed be he of Mahound that forged thy swoord, I had rather I had béene bound to haue paid a great summe of money to haue saued my life, than to be slaine héere: ther∣fore I yéeld my selfe to thée, take héere my swoord, I pray thée doe me no hurt. Paynim quoth Huon, haue no doubt, séeing thou doest yéeld thée to me, there is none so hardy that shall doe thée any displeasure. Then Huon tooke the Paynim by the arme & brought him into the Citie, whereof the Ad∣mirall and all his Lords had great ioy: but the inward con∣tent that Escleremond had, passed all other. When Gerames saw how the Gyant was ouercome, he came to the Admiral and said. Sir Admirall, know for troth that I am christe∣ned, and I am not your Nephew: I came hether but only to search for my Lord Huon, & the better to know the troth, I said I was sonne to Iuoryn of Mombrance your brother, thereby to know the certentie what was become of Huon, for I knew well he was sent to you from king Charlemaine on a Messuage.
Chap. XLV. ¶ How Agrapart the Gyant cryed mercie to the Admirall, and howe Huon desired the Admirall Gaudise to leaue his law, and to be christened. WHEN the Admirall heard Gerames, he had great maruaile and said, it is hard for any man to beware of the craft and subtiltie that is in a Frenchman. Then the Admirall sawe where Huon was com∣ming vp the steps, and bringing with him the Gyant, whereon the Admirall and all his Lords came & met him, and Gerames & his company with him, who were right ioyfull when they saw him come. When Huon sawe the Admirall, he tooke Agrapart by the hand and said to the Admirall. Sir, I deliuer him into your handes, that this day did you so great iniurie, euen he that drew you out of your chaire, I deliuer to you, to doe with him at your plea∣sure. When Agrapart saw that, he knéeled and said, Sir Admirall, he hath much to doe that foolishly thinketh, I say this by my selfe, for to day when I came to you, I thought my selfe the most puissant man that raigned on the earth, & thought that yée were not sufficient nor worthy to serue me: but often times rash beléeuing deceaueth his maister, for I thought that for x. men I would not once turne my chaire to haue regarded them, but otherwise is fallen to me, for I am discomfited alonely by one man, and am taken and brough into your hands, therefore ye may do with me at your plea∣sure, yet sir I require you haue pitie on me, and pardon the outrage that I haue done vnto you. Then the Admirall answered & said, how he would par∣on him on the condition, that he should neuer after trespas
him nor any man in his country, and beside that, to become his man, and to doe him homage before all them that were there present. Sir quoth Agrapart, I am readie to fulfil your pleasure, and then he did homage to the Admirall in the pre∣sence of all thē that were there, and in ioy they sat all downe to dinner. The Admirall made great honour to Huon, and caused him to sit by him, then Agrapart and Gerames, and al the other Frenchmen sat downe. As for their seruice, and many dishes of sondrie sorts of meates, I leaue speaking of them. Huon, who had great desire to accomplish his enter∣prize drew out his Cup, the which Gerames had before deli∣uered to him with his Horne of Iuory, and then said to the Admirall. Sir yée may sée héere this rich Cup in my hand, the which yee see is all emptie. Sir quoth the Admirall, I sée well there is nothing therein. Now Sir quoth Huon, I shall shew you how our Law is holy and diuine, then Huon made the signe of the crosse thrée times ouer the Cup, the which incontinent was full of wine, whereat the Admirall hadde great maruaile. Sir quoth Huon, I present you this Cuppe, that yée may drinke thereof, and then shall yée tast the good∣nes of the wine. The Admirall tooke it in his hand, and in∣continent the Cuppe was voyde and the wine vanished a∣way, whereat the Admirall had great maruaile and saide, Huon yée haue enchaunted me. Not so Sir quoth Huon, I am no Enchaunter, but it is because yée be full of sinne, for the law that yée hould is of no worth, the great vertue that god hath put in this cuppe, is by reason of the signe of the crosse that I made, whereby yée may perceyue that my say∣ing is true. Huon quoth ye Admirall, yée néed not to trouble your selfe to speake to me to forsake my beléefe and to take yours, but I would know of you, whether you will abide heere with me, or else goe into Fraunce, for that I haue pro∣mised you I shall fulfill it. Ah Sir Admirall quoth Huon, I know well you will kéepe couenaunt with me in that yee haue promised me: but Sir aboue all other matters, I pray you haue pitie on your owne soule, the which shalbe dam∣ned
in hell without yée leaue your beleefe, in that it is ney∣ther good nor iust, without yée doe thus, I sweare by my faith, that I shall call hether many men of armes, that all ye houses in your Pallaice and Citie shalbe full. When the Admirall heard Huon say so, he beheld his owne men & said. Sirs, heere yée may well heare the pride that is in this Frenchman, who hath been more than halfe a yéere in my prison, and now he threateneth to slay mee, because I will not take on me his law and leaue mine owne. I haue great maruaile where he should find such store of men as he hath said, or what lets me to slay him at my pleasure? Sir quoth Huon, yet I demaund once more of you if ye will doe as I haue said. Huon quoth the Admirall, beware on paine of your eyen, and as much as you loue your life, that ye speake no more to me of this matter, for by the faith that I owe to Mahound, if all King Charlemaines Hoast were heere assē∣bled, it should not lye in their power to saue your life. Ad∣mirall quoth Huon, I am in doubt that too late yée will re∣pent you. Chap. XLVI. ¶ How Huon seeing that the Admirall would not forsake his beleefe, blew his Horne, whereby Oberon came to him, and how the Admirall was slaine and all his men. And how Hu∣on and the faire Escleremond were in perill of drowning, by reason that he brake the commaundement of king Oberon. WHen Huon saw that the Ad∣mirall would not leaue his Law to receiue christendom, he set his Horne to his mouth, & blew it with such violence, that the blood issued out at his mouth, so that the Admi∣rall and all other that were there put the tables from them,
and rose and all that were in the Pallaice began to sing and daunce. The same time king Oberon was in his wood, & hearing the Horne blow, said. Ah good Lord, I know sure∣ly that my friend Huon hath great neede of mee, I pardon him of all his trespasses, for he hath been sufficiently puni∣shed, & nowe I wish my selfe with him with an C.M. men well armed, for there is not in all the world so noble a man as Huon, it is great pitie that his hart is so light and muta∣ble. Then incontinent he with all his companie were in the Citie of Babylon, whereas they began to slay all such as would not beleeue on Iesus Christ, and then Oberon went to the Pallaice with all his Chiualrie, and euery man with his sword naked in his hand. When Huon saw Oberon, hee embraced him and said, I ought greatly to thanke God and you, that yée be come so farre off to aide me in all my busi∣nesse. Huon quoth Oberon, as yee beleeue me, and worke by my councell, I shall not faile you: then on all sides they slewe the Paynims, men, women, and children, except such as would bee christened. Oberon came to the Admirall & tooke him, and deliuered him into the handes of Huon who had thereof great ioy, and then Huon demaunded of the Admi∣rall what he was minded to doe, if he would leaue the lawe of Mahound, and take christendome. Huon quoth the Admi∣rall, I had rather be hewen all to péeces, then to take your law and forsake mine owne. Oberon then said to Huon, why doe yée tarrie to put him to death, whereupon Huon lifted vp his sword and therewith strake the Admirall, that his head flew from his shoulders, and Oberon said to Huon. Now it lieth well in thy power to be quit with king Charlemaine: then Huon tooke the Admirals head, and opened his mouth, and tooke out his foure great téeth, & then cut off his beard, and tooke therof as much as pleased him, then Oberon said. Now thou hast in thy hands the Admirals téeth and beard, looke as well as thou louest thy life, that thou keepe them well. O Sir quoth Huon, I require you to put them in such
a place, where they may bee well kept, and so that I may haue them againe in time of need, for I feele my selfe that my heart is so light, as either I shal forget thē, or else looe them. Of this that thou saiest quoth Oberon, I thinke thou speakest wisely, therefore I doe wish them in Gerames side, in such manner that they shall doe him no hurt. He had no sooner spoken the word, but by the will of God, and ye pow∣er that he had by the Fayrie, they were closed in Gerames side in such wise, that no man could sée them, then he said to Huon. Friend I must goe to my Castle of Momur, I de∣sire you to doe well, yée shall take with you Escleremond daughter to the Admirall. But I charge you on paine of your life, and in as much as yee feare to displease me: that ye be not so hardy as to company with her bodily, vntill yée e married together in the citie of Roome, for if thou doest the contrarie, thou shalt find such pouertie and miserie, that though thou hadst double the mischéefe that thou hast hadde nce thou camest out of Fraunce, yet can it be nothing in regard of that, that shall fall to thée hereafter if thou breake my commaundement. Sir quoth Huon, by the pleasure of our Lord Iesus Christ, I shall well beware of doing of any thing against your pleasure. Then Oberon apparelled a rich shippe, well garnished with chambers, and hanged so richly, that it was incredible to be heard or seene, there was no cord, but it was of gould and silke, if I should shew you the beautie and riches of this shippe, it would be ouer long to recite it. When the shippe was fournished with vittailes, then he put therein his hor∣ses, and Oberon tooke leaue of Huon, and kissed and embra∣ced him greatly lamenting. When Huon saw him wéepe, he had great maruaile and said Deare Sir, for what cause doe you weepe? Huon (quoth he) the thing that mooueth me thus to do, is bicause I haue great pitie of thée. For if thou knew∣est the pouertie and miserie that thou shalt endure, there is no member that thou hast but it would tremble for feare: for I know for certen, that thou hast so much to suffer, that
no humane tongue can rehearse it, and then Oberon depar∣ted without more speaking. When Huon sawe Oberon de∣part, he was right pensiue, but his swéetnes of youth put him out of his sorow. Then hee made his ordinance in the citie, and christened the faire Ladie Escleremond, and after∣ward did marrie his Cousin Sibilla to an Admirall of the countrey who was newly christened, and Huon gaue to thē the Citie of Babylon, and all that longed thereto. Then he made and ordayned a little ship, to goe with his owne ship, to thintent to send a land for vittailes when need should re∣quire. Then he and his companie went into his great ship, and so tooke his leaue of his cousin that was newly married, who was right sorowfull for his departing. Then they set vp their sayles, and had a good faire wind, and so sayled till they were out of the riuer of Nyle, and so passed by Damieta, and came into the high sea and had wind at will. And on a day as they sat at dinner and made good chéere, for by reason of his Cup they had wine at their plea∣sure: Ah good Lord quoth Huon, I am greatly bound to thanke king Oberon, that I haue such a Cup and Horne & Armour, for whensoeuer I shall blowe my Horne, I can haue men ynough to come to aide me, and also I haue the Admirals eard and great téeth, but specially the faire La∣die Escleremond, whome I loue so perfectly, and am so ena∣moured with her faire body, that I can no longer endure it. How be it, the Dwarffe Oberon to mocke me, hath forbid∣den me strictly, that I should not touch her in any wise. But I will that he well know, that in this case I will not obey him, for she is mine own, therfore I will do with her at my pleasure. When Gerames heard him, he said. Alas sir, what will yée doe? Yée know well Oberon neuer as yet made any lye, but alwaies ye haue found him true, for if hee had not been so, both you and wée all had béene lost before this time. And now againe you would breake his commaundement, if yee touch this Ladie ere the time come that he hath set you, great misfortune shall fll thereby. Gerames quoth Huon, for
you nor for any other will I forbeare, but ere I depart I will haue of her my pleasure, and if any of you be affraid, I am content he shall depart in this little ship, and goe where he list, and take vittaile into it for his prouision. Sir quoth Gerames séeing yée will doe none otherwise, I am right so∣rowfull, and I will depart, and so will all our other compa∣nie. Then Gerames departed out of the great shippe, and en∣tred into the little shippe, with the xiij. in his companie, and Huon tarried still with the Ladie, and when he saw that all his company was departed, he went and made readie a bed, and said to the Ladie. Madame surely I must now haue my pleasure of you, when shee heard Huon, shée fell downe sore weeping, and humbly desired Huon that he would forbeare her companie vntill he time that they should be married to∣gether, according to the promise that he had made to king Oberon. Faire Ladie quoth Huon▪ no excuses can auaile, for it must be thus, then he tooke the Ladie, and made her goe to bed, and there they tooke together their pleasures. He had no sooner accomplished his will, but there arose such a mar∣uailous tempest, that the waues of the sea séemed so great and high as mountaines, and therewith it blew and thun∣dred and lightned, that it was very fearefull to behould the sea, and the shippe was so sore tormented, that it burst all to péeces, so that there remained but one péece of timber, whereuppon Huon and the Ladie were. And it happened so well for them, that they were néere to an Isle, and thither the winde draue them, and when they saw that they were there arriued, and that they were on the land: they both kneeled downe, and thanked our Lord Iesus Christ, that they were so well escaped the perill of drowning. The other companie that were in the little shippe, draue at aduenture in the sea, and they cried to our Lord Iesus Christ to saue them from drowning, for they had séene well how the shippe with Huon and the Ladie was broken in the sea: wherefore they thought surely that Huon and the Ladie were perished.
Now let vs leaue speaking of them, returning againe to Huon of Bourdeaux and the faire Escleremond. Chap. XLVII. ¶ How Huon and Escleremond arriued in an Isle all naked, and how the Pyrates of the sea tooke Escleremond and left Hu∣on alone, and bound his hands, feete, and eyes. WHEN Huon and Esclere∣mond saw how they were driuen a land al naked, pitiously weeping they entred into he Isle, wheras there dwelt neither man nor woman, but the earth was so faire and gréen, that great ioy it was to sée it, it was likewise so faire & hot, that they hid them selues in the greene grasse, to thintent they should not be perceaued, still the Lady wept pitiously, and Huon said vnto her. Lady bée not abashed, for if we dye for loue, wée shall not be the first, for Tristram died for the loue of the faire Isoluda, and shée for him, and so all wéeping they clipped and kissed eche other. And as they lay wrapped in the gréene grasse, there ariued Tenne Sarazins in a litle vessell, who entred into the Isle to take fresh water and other things that they needed, then they said eche to other, let vs goe foorth into this Isle, and see if wée can find any aduenture: these men were Pyrates of the sea, and had serued before the Admirall Gaudise Father to Escleremond. Huon (who was with his Louer in the gréen grasse) heard how neere to them people was comming, hée thought to go to them to sée if he might get any meate. Deere Louer quoth Huon, I pray you goe not hence till I returne. Sir quoth shée, God be your guide, but I requyre you to re∣turne againe shortely. Then hee departed all as naked as he was borne, and so came to thē before they had dyned, where
he saluted them & desired them humbly for the loue of God to gyue hym some bread. One of them aunswered and saide, Fréend, thou shalt haue ynough, but we pray thee shew vs what aduenture hath brought thee hether? Sir quoth Huon, the tempest of the sea hath brought me hether, for the shippe that I was in is perished and all my companye. When they heard him, they had great pity, and gaue him two loaues of bread. Huon tooke them & departed, and than∣king them went backe to his Loue, and gaue her parte of the bread, whereof shée was not a little glad. Then the Pyrates that had giuen Huon the bread, said one to another, this man that is thus gone from vs, surely it can not be but yt he hath some other company, therfore let vs goe presently after him, and peraduenture wée shall finde out his company, for mee thinkes if he were alone, hée would not so haue come to vs. Let vs go and sée quoth all the other, and not returne till we know the troth. Than they went all together, & followed Huon as priuilie as they could, and when they came néere whereas hée was, they saw him and the Ladie hard by him eating of the bread that they had giuen him, there they stood still & aduised them, to sée if they could haue any knowledge of him or of the Lady. Now among them there was one that said: Sirs, neuer beleue mée, but this Ladie is the faire Escleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, and hée that is with her, is the same Frenchmā that fought with Agrapart & slew him, and also the Admirall, it is happy that we haue found them and specially that he is naked without armour, for if that he were armed, our lyues were but short. When they knew certainely that it was Escleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, then they approched néere to them, and cryed aloude and saide. Madame Escleremond, your flying away auayleth you no∣thing, for by you and your meanes, your father hath been slaine by the theefe that sitteth there by you, therefore wee shall bring you to your Vncle Iuoryn of Mombrance, who shall take of you such correction, that ye shalbe an example
to all other, & the leachour that is by you, shalbe there slayne before your face. When the Lady saw these Paynims, she was right sorowfull and sore discomforted, then she kneled down and held vp hir handes, & prayed them humbly, that they would haue pitie on the frenchman, & as for her owne life, shée did put it to their owne pleasures, either to slay hir or to drowne her, or else to bring her to her Vncle. And sirs (quoth shee) I sweare by Mahound, that if ye will grant my request, if I can be agreed with mine Vncle Iuorin, I shall doe you all such pleasures, that ye and all yours shall be rich for euer after, for little shall yee winne by the death of one poore man. Ladie quoth they, we are well content to leaue him héere, but wée shall doe him all the shame and rebuke that we can, that hee may remember it for euer after. Then they tooke Huon, and laide him on the grene grasse, and did blind his eies, and binde his hands and féet, so that the blood burst out at his nayles, wherby hée was in such distres, that hée swon∣ded three times, and pitiously called on our lord god▪ to haue pitie of him and to forgiue him his sinnes. When the swéet Escleremond saw her Louer Huon so handled, and that shee should depart from him: to shewe the pitifull complaints that shée made, it were impossible. Also Huon made pitious complains when his Loue Escleremond departed, the which gréeued him more then his own paine that hée suffred. Now wee shall leaue speaking of him, and say what happened af∣terward to the faire Escleremond.▪
Chap. XLVIII. ¶ How the faire Escleremond was led away with the Pyrates of the sea, and how the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne deliue∣red her out of their hands. NOw sheweth the Historie, how that when these théeues had takē and bound Huons hands, féet and eyen, they left him alone in the Isle, and tooke the faire Es∣cleremond and brought hir into their shippe. Then they gaue hir a gowne and a mantell furred with ermyns, for they were Robbers of the sea, and had much goods in their shippe, then they sayled foorth night and day, at last a wind tooke them, that whether they would or not, they arriued at the Port of Anfalerne, and at the same time the Admirall there was newly risen from his din∣ner, and stood leaning out at a window in his Pallaice, and when hée perceiued the shippe that lay at anchor in the ha∣uen, and saw the banners and streamers wauing with the winde, thereby hée well perceiued, that the ship pertayned to Kinge Iuoryn of Mombrance, whereuppon hée with his Lords went downe to the hauen. Then he cryed out aloude, & said. Sirs what marchandize haue ye brought? Sir quoth they, we haue brought sendals & clothes of silke, wherefore sir if we shall pay any Tribute or custome, wee are redie to pay it at your pleasure. Then Galaffer the Admirall said, I know well ynough if yee should pay any tribute, yee should not choose but doe it: But sirs I pray you tell mee, what Damsell is that which I sée in your shippe sore wéeping. Sir quoth they, it is a slaue a Christian woman whome we bought at Damieta. The Ladie heard well how the Admirall demaunded for
her, and likewise what answere the Mariners had made, then shee cried out aloud and said. Alas Sir Admirall, for the loue and honour of Mahound, I pray you haue pitie on me: for I am no slaue, but I am Daughter to the Admirall Gaudise of Babylon, who is dead and slaine by a Frenchman, the Mariners heere haue taken me, and would carrie me to mine Vncle king Iuoryn of Mombrance: and I know surely that if he had me, he would burne me. Faire Lady (quoth the Admirall, dismay you not, for yee shall abide with mee whether they will or not, then he commaunded the Mari∣ners to bring the Ladie to him, but they answered that they would not so doe, then the Admirall commaunded to take her from them perforce, and then they of the shippe began to make defence: But anon they were all slaine, and the Lady taken and brought to the Admirall, who had great ioy ther∣of, howbeit he was sorie, because one of them that were in the ship scaped away and fled to Mombrance, notwithstan∣ding the Admirall cared not greatly for it séeing he had the Ladie, whome he brought into his Pallaice. When the Admirall saw her so excéeding faire, hee was taken in her loue, so that incontinent he would haue marri∣ed her after the Sarazins law, whereof shee was right so∣rowfull and said. Sir, reason it is that I doe your pleasure, séeing yée haue rid me out of the handes of these Pyrates of the sea. But sir I require you for the loue that ye beare me, that yee will forbeare your pleasure at this present time, for Sir I haue made a faithfull vow and promise, that for a yeere and a day from henceforth, I will not lye with nor touch any man boldly, for the which vow sir I am now so∣rie, euē for the loue that I beare to you, but Sir I am right ioyfull that yee will doe me so much honor, as to haue me to your wife, our great god Mahound reward you. Now sir, for the loue of him I pray you be content, vntill my vow be accomplished. Faire Ladie quoth he, know for troth, that for the honour of my God Mahound, but more for the loue of you, I am content to tarrie this yeere, yea and if it were
Twentie yeeres, to be sure of your loue then. Sir quoth she, Mahound reward you, but she said to her selfe. Ah deare Lord god Iesu Christ, I humbly require thée to giue me that grace, to kéepe my troth to my Louer Huon: for ere I shall doe the contrarie, I shall suffer as much paine and gréefe as euer womā did, and I will neuer breake my troth for feare of death. Now leaue we to speak of her, and say somewhat of the theefe that scaped out of the shippe. Chap. XLIX. ¶ How the Pyrate fled to Mombrance to Iuoryn, and how he sent to defie the Admirall Galaffer of Anfalerne, and of the answeare that he had there. YE haue heard heere before, how the faire Escleremond was receiued by the Admirall Galaffer, and of the manner yt shee found to keepe her selfe true to Huon, and how one of the Mariners scaped away and fledde by land till at last he came to the Citie of Mombrance, where he found Iuoryn, to whome he shewed all the whole matter as ye haue heard, and how his brother the Admirall Gaudise was slaine by a young french knight, and how he and his companie found the said knight and his Néece the faire Escleremond, whom they had thought to haue brought to him. But (quoth he) the Admirall Ga∣laffer hath taken them from vs by force, and hath taken our shippe, and slaine all your men that were within it, so that none escaped but I alone. When king Iuoryn vnderstood the Mariner, he said. Ah mightie Mahound, how hast thou suffered that my brother Gaudise hath thus pitiously been slaine, and also my Néece his Daughter to consent thereto? certainely the gréefe that I féele at my heart, constraineth
mée rather to desire death than life. And also moreouer, to see him that is mine owne Subiect and houldeth his landes of me, to keepe my Néece, and thus to slay my men. Alas, I cannot well say what I should doe therein, a little thing would cause me to slay my selfe. Then in great displeasure he called his Lords and caused the Mariner to come before them, & there he made him to shew again all the matter b∣fore them, both how his brother the Admirall Gaudise was slaine, and also how the Admirall Galaffer held his Néece by force, and how he had slaine his men, which when the Lords had heard, they said thus to Iuoryn. Sir, our aduice is, that yée should send one of your secret messengers to the Admirall Galaffer, and commaund him in∣continent to send you your Néece, and to make amends for that he hath slaine your men, and that he send you word by writing, what cause hath mooued him thus to doe, and if it be so, that pride doth so surmount in him, that hee will not obey your commaundements, then by a iust quarrell ye may goe and make warre vpon him, and take from him all his lands that he houldeth of you. When Iuoryn vnderstood his Lords, he said, Sirs I perceaue well your opinion is good, and then a Messenger was appointed, and his charge giuen him, and so he departed and rode so long till he came to An∣falerne where he found the Admirall Galaffer, whome he sa∣luted in the name of Mahound, and then hee declared his Messuage at length, but assoone as Galaffer had heard his messuage, he said. Friend, goe and say to king Iuoryn, that as for the deliuerance of his Néece, I will not doe it, and as for his men that are slaine, it was through their owne folly, and as touching that I should come to him, I will not come to him, let him do what he can, but if he come to assaile me, I shall defend as well as I can. When the Messenger heard that, he said. Sir Admirall, séeing yee will doe none other∣wise, in the name of our god Mahound, and in the name of great king Iuoryn, héere I defie you, & he sendeth you woord by me, that he will leaue you neither Citie, Towne, nor
Castle, but he will put them all to flame and fire, nor leaue you one foot of land, but also if he may take you, ye shall die a shamefull death. When the Admirall saw how hee was defyed, hee was more inflamed then a burning fire-brand, and said to the messenger. Go and say to thy Lord, that I set nothing by his threatning, and if I may know when hée commeth, I shall do him that honour, that I will not abide till hée enter into my country, but I will méete with him before, and say vn∣to him from me, that if I can take him, I shall soone ryd his soule out of his body. So the messenger departed, and came to Mombrance, where whē Iuoryn saw him, he said▪ Frend, what saith Galaffer? will hée send me my Néece? Sir quoth the messenger, hée will not doe it, hée saith hée doubteth you nothing, and if yee be so hardy as to come and assayle him, then hée will meet with you before, and fight with you: and I heard him sweare, that if hée may take you, hée will slay you without mercy. When Iuoryn heard that, hée swet for anger, & was in that case that hée could not speake one word of a long space, but when hée had somewhat asswaged his yre, hée sware by his God Mahound, that hée should neuer haue ioy nor mirth at his heart, till hee had destroyed the towne of Anfalerne, and slaine the Admirall Galaffer. Then in hast hée sent for all his Lords, and with them concluded to send for all his men of warre, and gaue them day to be with him within xv. daies before Mombrance, the which thing was done, for at that day they were all assem∣bled as ye shall heare heereafter. Now leaueth the Historie to speake of them, and returneth againe to speake of King Oberon.
Chap. L. ¶ How king Oberon at the request of twoo Knights of the Fay∣rie, called Gloriant and Mallaborn the monster of the Sea, went and succoured Huon, and carried him out of the Isle of Noysant. NOw the Historie sheweth, that King Oberon (the same time that Hu∣on was in the Isle of Noysant) was in his wood, where for the most part hee was ac∣customed to be conuersant, bicause ye place was very much delectable and farre from people, there hee sat him downe vnder a faire oake, and hee began to weepe and complaine. When Gloriant a knight of the Fairie, saw him, he had great maruaile, and demaunded of him why he lamented so much? Gloriant quoth king Oberon, the periu∣red Huon of Bourdeaux causeth mee thus to doe, whome I haue alwayes perfectly loued, and yet he still trespasseth my commandements, for when I departed from him, I caused him to haue the Admirall Gaudise at his pleasure, and also I made him to haue the faire Escleremond the Admirals Daughter, and also I haue giuen him my rich Horne of I∣uorie and my good Cup, the which he hath lost by his pride and folly and therefore he hath been punished, and now hee lyeth all naked bound handes and féete, and his eyes blind∣folded in an Isle, in the which place I will suffer him to die most miserably. Not so Sir, (quoth Gloriant) for the honour of our Lord Iesus Christ, call to your remembrance, howe that by Gods owne mouth, Adam and Eue were forbidden from the eating of the fruit that was in Paradise, yet they by their fragilitie brake Gods commaundement, how∣beit our Lord God had great pitie of them. And therefore
Sir, I pray you haue pitie of Huon, then Mallaborn stept foorth and sayd. Alas Sir, for the honour and reuerence of our Lord God, I desire you to graunt me this one time, that I may goe and ayd him. When Oberon sawe he was so earnestly desired of Glori∣an and Mallaborn, he was sore displeased, and answearing, sayd. Mallaborn, it pleaseth me so well, that this Caytiffe Huon who endureth so much paine be visited by thée: there∣fore I condemne thée to bee xxviij. yeares a Monster in the Sea, beside xxx. yeares that thou art enioyned too alreadie. Now I will that thou giuest him none other counsaile nor aid, but alonely to beare him out of the Isle that he is in, and to set him on the maine Land, then let him goe whether hée will, for I desire neuer more to see him. Also I will that thou bringest againe vnto me, my rich Horne of Iuorie, and my rich Cup, and my Armour, fetch them there as hee hath lost them. Alas Sir, (quoth Mallaborn) great paine you put him vnto, when for so smal an offence you are so sore displea∣sed with Huon. And as for ye Armour that you would haue againe, you know well how Huon of Bourdeaux did conquer it, and hée had been lost if it had not béene, great ill you shall doe if you cause him not to haue it againe. But Sir, since I haue Licence to bring him out of the Isle, I pray you shewe mée in what place is the Isle whereas he is. Then Gloriant sayd, Brother Mallaborn, this Isle is néere vnto Hell, and it is called the Isle Noysant. Well, (quoth Mallaborn) then I commend you all to our Lord Iesus Christ, and so he de∣parted and came to the sea-side, and when he came there, he leapt into the Sea, and began to swim as fast as the bird fly∣eth in the ayre, and so arriued in the Isle Noysaunt, and so came vnto Huon whome hée found sore wéeping, and sayd. Sir Huon, I pray our Lord Iesus Christ to succour and aide thée. Ah deare God, (quoth Huon) who is that that speaketh vnto me? Huon, (quoth hée) I am a man who loueth thée, and am called Mallaborn, and am a beast of the Sea, who hath before this time borne thée ouer the salt water to Babi∣lon.
Ah Mallaborn déere Brother, (quoth Huon) I require thée vnbind mée, and bring me out of this dolorous paine. With a right good will, (quoth Mallaborn) then he did vnbind him and opened his eyes. When Huon sawe that, hée was right ioyfull, and demanded who sent him thether. Huon, (quoth he) knowe for troth, that it was King Oberon, and whereas I was condemned before to be a beast of the Sea Thirtie yeares, now for thy sake I must endure so eight and Twen∣tie yeares more, yet I care not for the paine, for the loue that I beare vnto thée, there is no paine impossible vnto mée to beare: but I must carie againe vnto Oberon the rich Horne and Cup and Armour, for so I haue promised King Oberon to doe. Ah, (quoth Huon) I pray to our Lord Iesus Christ to confound the Dwarfe, who hath caused me to endure all these paines for so small an occasion. Huon, (quoth Malla∣born) you doe ill to say so, for you haue no sooner spoken it, but that King Oberon doth know it. Certainly, (quoth Hu∣on) I care not what he can doe, he hath done me so much ill, that I can neuer loue him: but Sir, I pray thée tell me, if thou wilt beare me hence, or else whether that I must abide héere for euer. Fréend, (quoth Mallaborn) I will beare thée out of this Isle, and set thée on the maine Lande, other ayd may I not doe thée, and then Mallaborn tooke vppon him a∣gaine his beasts skin, and sayd: Sir, leape vppon mée, then Huon leapt vppon his backe as naked as euer he was borne, and Mallaborn leapt into the Sea, and began to swim, and came to the mayne Land, and sayd. Fréend Huon, more ser∣uice can I not doe vnto thée at this time, but I recommend thée to the kéeping of our Lord God, who send thee comfort, I now must goe and séeke for the Horne, Cup, and Armor, the which thou wert woont to haue and enioy, and I am to beare them vnto King Oberon, for thus haue I promised to doe. Now Huon was there all alone and naked, pitiously com∣playning and sayde. Ah good Lord, I require thée to ayde
mée, I know not where I am, nor whether I may goe, yet if I had cloathes to couer my naked skinne, I should haue some comfort, for then I might goe and séeke some aduen∣ture: greatly I ought to hate the crooked Dwarfe Oberon, who hath brought me into all this paine, but by the faith yt I owe vnto God, séeing he hath left me thus, from hence∣foorth to doe him the more spite, I shall make lyes ynough, I shall not leaue for him, whom I recommend now to a hun∣dred Thousand Diuels. When he had béen there a certen space all alone, hee arose and looked all about him, to sée if he might perceiue anye man passe by, from whome hee might haue any succour, for he was néere famished for lacke of sus∣tenance: howbeit, he thought to depart thence to séeke some aduenture, so he went on his way, and hée went so far, that he found an aduenture such as you shall heare, for our Lord Iesus Christ neuer forgetteth his Seruants. Chap. LI. ¶ How Huon found a Minstrell, who gaue him cloathing and meat, and tooke Huon with him as his Varlet, and went to Mombrance. WHen Huon hadde gone a great way, hee beheld on his right hand, and saw néere him a little wood by a faire meadow-side, and therein was standing a great Dake full of leaues, and there be∣side was a cleare Fountaine, and there he saw an ancient man with white haires sitting vnder the Dake, and before him he had a little cloth spread abroad on the grasse, and thereon flesh and bread and wine in a Bot∣tell. When Huon saw the old man, he came vnto him, and the ancient man sayd. Ah thou wild man, I pray thée for the
loue of Mahound doe me no hurt, but take meat and drinke at thy pleasure. When Huon sawe him, he espied lying be∣side him a Harpe and a Vyoll, whereon he could well play, for in all Pagany there was no Minstrell like him. Fréend, (quoth Huon) thou hast named me right, for a more vnhappy man then I am, there is none lyuing. Fréend, (quoth the Minstrell) goe to yonder Male and open it, and take what thou likest best to couer thy naked skinne, then come to mée and eat at thy pleasure. Sir, (quoth Huon) good aduenture is come vnto mée thus to find you, Mahound reward you. Sir, (quoth the Minstrell) I pray you come and eate with me, and kéepe me companie, for you shall not find a more so∣rowfull man then I am. By my faith, (quoth Huon) a com∣panion of your owne sort haue you found, for there was ne∣uer man that suffered so much pouertie as I haue, praise be vnto him that fourmed me, but séeing I haue found meat to eat, blessed be the houre that I haue found you, for you séeme to bee a good man. Then Huon went to the Male and tooke cloathes, and then came vnto the Minstrell, and sat down, and did eat and drinke as much as pleased him. The Min∣strell beheld Huon, and sawe that he was a faire young man and a courteous, and then hee demaunded of him, where hée was borne, and by what aduenture hee was arriued there in that case that he was in. When Huon heard how the Minstrell demaunded of his estate, he began to study in himselfe, whether he should shew the troth or else to lye, then he called to our Lord God, and sayd. Ah good Lord, if I shew to this man the troth of mine aduenture, I am but dead: and King Oberon, for a small offence thou hast left me in this case, now if I shewe the troth of my life to this man, I am but dead, I shall neuer trust thée more, but I will now put all my trust in God, for the loue that I haue to my Loue, thou hast mee in hate, but séeing it is so, as often as I haue néede I shall ly, nor I shall not leaue it for feare of thée, but rather do it in despite of thée: then Huon saide to the Minstrell. Sir, you haue demanded
of mine estate, and as yet I haue made you none answeare, the troth is, I find my selfe so well at mine ease, that I for∣gat to answeare you, but I shall nowe shewe you séeing you would know it. Sir, of certaine I was borne in the coun∣trey of Affricke, and fell in company with diuers Marchants by the Sea in a Shippe, thinking to haue sayled to Damie∣ta, but a great misfortune fell vppon vs, there arose such an horrible tempest, that our Shippe perished and all that were within it, none escaped but I, and I thanke Mahound that I am escaped aliue: therefore I desire you now to shew mée your aduenture, as I haue shewed you mine. Fréend (quoth the Minstrell) séeing you will knowe it, knowe for troth, I am named Mouflet, I am a Minstrell as thou séest héere by mine Instruments, and I say vnto thée, that from hence to the red Sea, there is none so cunning in all Instruments as I am, and I can doe many other things, and the dolour that thou séest mee make, is bycause of late I haue loste my good Lorde and Maister the Admirall Gaudise, who was slayne miserably by a Vacabond of Fraunce called Huon, that Ma∣hound shame him, and bring him to an ill death, for by him I am fallen into pouerty and miserie, I pray thée tell me thy name? Sir, (quoth Huon) my name is Solater. Well, (quoth the Minstrell) Solater, dismay thée not, for the great pouer∣ties that thou hast suffered, thou séest what aduenture Ma∣hound hath sent thée, thou art nowe better arayed then thou wert, if thou wilt follow my counsel thou shalt haue no néed, thou art faire and young, thou oughtest not to be dismayed, but I that am old and ancient haue cause to be discomforted, séeing in mine olde dayes I haue lost my Lord and Maister the Admirall Gaudise, who did me so much good and profit, I would it pleased Mahound, that he that slewe him were in my power. When Huon heard that, he spake no word but cast down his head. Solater, (quoth the Minstrell) séeing my Lord is dead, I will goe to Mombrance to King Iuoryn, to shew him the death of his Brother the Admirall Gaudise, and if thou
wilt abide with me, so that thou wilt beare my Fardell and harpe a foote, ere it be halfe a yéere past, I warrant thée thou shalt haue a Horse, for whensoseuer thou shalt heare me play vpon my instruments, all the hearers shall take therein such pleasure, that they shall giue mee both Gownes and Man∣tles, so that thou shalt haue much adoe to trusse them in my Male. Well Sir, (quoth Huon) I am content to serue you, and to doe all your Commaundements. Then Huon tooke the Male on his necke and the Harpe in his hand, and Mou∣flet his Maister bare the Vyoll, and thus the maister and the seruant went on their way to goe to Mombrance. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) my heart ought to bée sorrowfull when I sée my selfe in this case, that nowe I must become a Min∣strels Varlet: Gods curse haue Oberon the Dwarfe, who hath done mee all this trouble. Alas if I had nowe my good Armour, my Horne, and my Cup, I would reckon al the sor∣row that I haue endured as nothing. But when I had xiij. Knights to serue me, how is this chaunce now turned, that I my selfe must serue a poore Minstrell? When Mouflet heard Huon make such sorow within him selfe, hée said. Déere brother Solater take good comfort, for before to morow at night, thou shalt see the good cheere that shall bee made to mée, wherof thou shalt haue part, and of all the goodes that I can get. Maister quoth Huon, Mahound reward you for the goodnes that ye haue shewed mée, and shall do, thus the maister and the seruant went foorth toge∣ther deuising, at last Huon espied behind them coming certē men of armes, houlding the waye to Mombrance. Maister quoth Huon, héere behind vs are coming men in armour, I know not whether they will doe vs any hurt or not. Solater quoth Mouflet, bee not abashed, wee will abide héere, and know whether they will goe, and within a while the man of war came to them, who were in number Fiue .C. persons, the minstrell saluted them and said. Sirs, I pray you shewe mee whether ye will goe. Frend quoth one of them, bicause we sée that ye be a gentle minstrell, I shall shew you, we are
going to king Iuoryn of Mombrance, who will néeds goe and make warre vppon the Admirall Galaffer, bicause that now of late, the Damsell Escleremond daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, passed by Anfalerne, who should haue béen brought to her Vncle king Iuoryn of Mombrance, but the Admirall Galaffer tooke her by force, and slew all them that ledde her, and hath maryed the faire Escleremond, whereof King Iuoryn is as sorowfull as may be, and for that cause we be sent for by king Iuoryn, who is minded to assemble all his power, to go & destroy the Admirall Galaffer. Now I haue shewed you the cause of our going to the Citie of Mombrance. Chap. LII. ¶ How Huon and his Maister Mouflet arriued at Mom∣brance, and how Huon spake with king Iuoryn. WHen Huon of Bourdeaux vnderstood the Paynims, how they were going where the Ladie Escleremond was, he was surprized with ioy, & said to his Mai∣ster. Sir, I require you lette vs goe to the warres with them. Solater quoth Mouflet, beware what thou sayest, for where as warre is, I would not come there for any thing. Thus they went foorth vntill they came to Mombrance, and went straight to the Pallaice, whereas they found King Iuoryn and all his Barons, when the Minstrell saw him, hee saluted him in the name of Ma∣hound, and sayde. Sir, I am right dolorous for the newes that I bring you, for Sir, your Brother my Lord and Mai∣ster the Admirall Gaudise is pitiously slayn. Mouflet, (quoth Iuoryn) these newes hath béen brought vnto mée before this time, whereof I am much agréeued, and also I am sorrie for my Néece the faire Escleremond, who is kept from mée by the
Admirall Galaffer, and for any Messuage that I can send to him, he will not send her backe to mée. But by ye faith that I owe to my God Mahound, I shall make him such warre, that the memorie thereof shall bee had an Hundred yeares héereafter. For I shall leaue him neuer a foote of Land, but I shall bring all into fire and flame, and cleane destroy him, and in the despite of his téeth, I will sée my Neece Esclere∣mond, and if I may get her, I shall cause her to be striken al to péeces, and burne her into ashes, for my Brother is dead by a Villaine of Fraunce, vppon whome shée was amou∣rous. When Huon heard him speake of his Lady, his heart rose, & made promise in himselfe, that ere the moneth was past, he would goe and sée her, and find the meanes how to speake with her. Then King Iuoryn called Mouflet the Minstrell, and sayd: Fréend, I pray thée doe some thinge to make mée merrie, for by reason of the displeasure that I haue had, my ioy is lost therefore it were better for me to take some mirth, then to bee long in sorrow. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) I am rea∣die to doe your pleasure, then hée tooke his Vyoll, and playd thereof in such wise, that it was great melodie to heare it, for al the Paynims that were there had great ioy and mirth, and made great feasting, when Huon heard it, he said. Good Lord I require thée, that this great ioy may turne to mée, as to heare some good newes of her who I desire so sore to sée. When the Minstrell had finished his song, the Paynims did of their cloathes, and some gaue him their Gownes, & some their Mantles, hee thought himselfe right well happie that could giue the Minstrell any thing. Huon had ynough to doo to gather together the cloathes that were giuen him, and hée put them into his Male, whereof Huon was ioyfull, bicause he should haue the one halfe. King Iuoryn beheld Huon, and sayd vnto them that were about him, great dammage it is that so faire a younge man should serue a Minstrell. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) be not a∣bashed though this young man doe serue me, hee hath cause
so to doe, for when your Brother was dead, I departed from thence to come hether, & by the way I found a great Dake, vnder the which I sat downe to rest me, and there by was a great Fountaine faire and cleare, there I spread abroad a Towell on the grasse, and set thereon bread and such meate and drinke as I had, and the same time this young man ar∣riued and came vnto mee all naked, and prayed me for the loue of Mahound to giue him some of my bread, and so I did and cloathed him as you sée, and I did so much for him, that he promised to serue mée, and to beare my Fardell and my Harpe, and moreouer, when I came to any passage of wa∣ter, hee would cast me in his necke as light as though I had béen nothing, (he is so strong) and beare me ouer. Ah poore Catiffe, (quoth King Iuoryn) hast thou liued so longe, & can∣not perceiue why he doth it? he abideth vntill thou hast got∣ten some riches, and then he will cut thy threat and cast thée into the Riuer, and then goe away with all thy riches, cause him to come and speake with mée. Sir, (quoth Mouflet) hée shall come to you, and so he called Huon, and brought him to King Iuoryn. My fréend, (quoth the King) I pray thée shewe me where thou wert borne? for I haue pitie of thée, to sée thée in so low estate, as to bee Varlet to a Minstrell, it were better for thée to serue some Prince, or helpe to kéepe a Towne or a Castle, rather then thus to loose thy time. I wote not what I should thinke therein, but that it séemeth to mee that thou art of a faint courage, what hath mooued thée thus to doe? thou sée∣est thy Maister hath nothing, but that hee getteth with his Vyoll, canst thou find none other meanes to liue by more ho∣nestly? Sir, (quoth Huon) I can Crafts ynow, the which I shall name vnto you if you will heare me. Say on, (quoth Iuoryn) for I haue great desire to know what thou canst do: but of one thing I aduise thée, make no vaunt of any thing, without thou canst doe it indéede, for in euerie thinge I will prooue thée. Sir, (quoth Huon) I can mew a Sparrow-Hauke, and I can chase the Hart and the wilde Boare, and
blow the prize, and serue the hounds of their rights, and I can serue at the table before a great Prince, and I can play at Chesse and Tables aswell as any other can doe, and I ne∣uer found man could winne of me if I list. Chap. LIII. ¶ How king Iuoryn caused his Daughter to play at the Chesse with Huon, vpon condition, that if he were mated, he should loose his head: and if shee were mated, Huon should haue her loue, and how Huon wonne the game. WHEN king IVORIN heard Huon, he said, hould thée to this, for I shall prooue whether it be true that thou saiest or not. Yet Sir (quoth Huon) I pray you let mee shew farther what I can doe, and then assay mee at your pleasure. By Mahound quoth the king, I am content that thou shalt shew all that thou canst doe. Sir quoth Huon, I can right well arme me, and set the helmet on my head, and beare a shield & speare, and runne and gallop a horse, and when it commeth to the point where strokes should be giuen, yée may well send foorth a worse than I. Also Sir, I can right well enter in∣to Ladies chambers, to embrace and kisse them, and to doe them any seruice. Friend quoth Iuoryn, by that which I heare by thée, thou canst doe more things than should turne to good, but to prooue thée, I shall cause thee to be assayed at the play of the Chesse: I haue a faire Daughter, with whome I will that thou shalt play, vpon condition, that if she winne, then thou shalt loose thy head, but if thou canst mate her, then I promise thée that thou shalt haue her to thy wife, to repose with her at thy pleasure, and a C. markes of money therewith. Sir quoth Huon, if it were your pleasure▪
I would be glad to forbeare that enterprise. By Mahound quoth the king, it shalbe none otherwise, come thereof what will. In the meane season that this Bargaine was making, a Paynim went into the Ladies chamber, and shewed her how there was with the king her father a young man, who had made promise, how he should play at the Chesse with her vpon condition, that if he lost the game, hee should then loose his head, and if he chaunced to win, then he to haue you to his wedded wife, and a C. Markes of money. But Ma∣dame quoth he, I assure you he that shall play against you, is the fairest man that euer I saw, pitie it is that he should be a varlet to a Minstrell as he is. By Mahound quoth the Ladie, I hould my Father a foole, when he thinketh that I should suffer a man to die for winning of a game at Chesse. Then Iuoryn sent for his Daughter by twoo Kings, who brought her to ye King her Father, then Iuoryn said. Daugh∣ter, thou must play at Chesse with this young Varlet that thou seest héere, so that if thou winne, then he shall loose his head, and if he winne, then I will that hee shall be thy hus∣band, to doe with thee at his pleasure. Father quoth the La∣die, séeing this is your pleasure, it is reason that I doe it whether I will or not. Then shee beheld Huon, whome shee saw to be right faire, and said to her selfe. By Mahound, for the great beautie that I see in this young man, I would this game were at an end, so that I were his wedded wife. When then Ladie was come, their places were made re∣die, then shee and Huon sat downe, and king Iuoryn and all his Barons sat downe about them to sée them play, then Huon said to the King. Sir I require you, that you nor none other doe speake in our game, neither for the one partie nor for the other. Friend quoth the King, haue no doubt thereof, and for more suretie, the King caused to be proclaymed tho∣row out all his Pallaice, that none should be so hardie as to speake one word vpon paine of death. Then the Chesse were made readie, and Huon saide: Ladie, what game will yée
play at? Friend quoth she, at the game accustomed, that is to be mated in the corner, then they both began to studie for the first draught, there were Paynims that beheld Huon, but he cared not for any of them, but studied on his game, the which they had begun so, that Huon had lost most parte of his Pawnes, wherewith he changed colour and blushed as redde as a rose. The Damsell perceiued him, and said, Friend, whereon doe yée thinke? yee are almost mated, a∣non my Father will strike of your head. Madame quoth he, as yet the game is not done, great shame shall your Father haue, when yée shall lye all night in mine armes, and I be∣ing but a seruant to a poore Minstrell. When the Barons heard Huon say so, they began all to laugh, and the Ladie, who was so surprised with the loue of Huon, (in regard of the great beautie that she saw in him) that she forgat all her play to thinke of him, whereby she lost the game, whereof Huon was right ioyfull, and called the King and said. Sir, now may yée sée how I can play, but if I would studie but a little more, I could mate your Daugh∣ter whereas I list. When the King saw that, he said to his Daughter. Arise, cursed be the houre that I begate thee, for great dishonour hast thou now done to me, that heretofore hast mated so many great men, and now I see heere before my face, that a Minstrels varlet hath mated thée. Sir quoth Huon, trouble not your selfe for that cause, as for the wager that I should winne therby, I am content to release it quite, let your Daughter goe into her chamber, and sport her with her Damsels at her pleasure, and I shall goe and serue my Maister the Minstrell. Friend quoth the King, if thou wilt shew me this courtesie, I shall giue thée an hundred Markes in money. Sir quoth Huon, I am content with your pleasure, and the Ladie went her way sorowfull, and said to her selfe. Ah false sainted heart, Mahound confound thee, for if I had knowen that thou wouldest thus haue refused my compa∣nie, I would haue mated thée, and then thou hadst lost thy
head. Thus the matter passed till the next day, then king I∣uorin made proclamation through out all the citie, that eue∣rie man should be armed and mounted on their horses, and that it was his minde to set forward towards his enemies. Then euerie man armed them and mounted on their horses, many helmets glittered against the sunne, and many trom∣pets & drums began to sound, such brute was made within the citie that it was maruaile to heare it. Chap. LIIII. ¶ How Huon was armed, and mounted on a poore horse, and went after the armie to Anfalerne. WHen Huon saw how he had not wherwith to arme him, his heart mour∣ned right sore, for gladly hee woulde haue gone foorth with other, if he might haue had any horse to haue ridden on, wherefore hee came to king Iuoryn and said. Sir I require you to let mee haue a horse and armour, that I may goe with you to the Battaile, and then shall yee sée how I can aid you. Friend quoth Iuoryn, I am content that ye goe with me. Then the King commaunded one of his Chamberlaines to deliuer him a horse and armour, and the Chamberlaine said. Sir, be∣ware what yee doe, for oftentimes such flying vagabounds are of a light courage, if he haue a horse and armour, he may assoone goe to your enemies part, as to kéepe with you, and neuer trust me, but he is some counterfeit varlet. When the King heard him say so, he saide, it may well bee, yet let him haue a good armour, and helmet and shéeld, and let his horse be but of a small valew, to the intent that he shall not goe farre of though he would. The same time there was a Paynim, that heard the king
grant, how Huon should haue armour, he went to his house, and tooke out of his coffer an old rusty sword, and brought it to Huon, and said Frend, I sée wéell yée haue no sword to aid your selfe withall, and therefore I giue you this sword, the which I haue long kept in my coffer: the Paynim did giue it to Huon in a mockery, for he thought the sword to be but of a small value. Huon tooke the sword, and drew it out of the sheath, & saw letters written thereon in french, saying, how this sword was forged by Galams, who in his dayes forged thrée swords, & that same sword was one of the three, and the second was called Durandell, and the third Courtayn. When Huon had read the letters, he was right ioyfull, and said to the Paynim. Friend, for this good swoord that yee haue geuen mee, I thanke you, and I promis you if I may liue long, I shall reward you with the double valew therof. After that Huon had this sword there was brought vnto him a good Armour, helmet, shéeld, and speare with a rusty head, Huon cared little for it, by reason of the great desire that hee had to come to ye place whereas hee might shew his strength & vertue, thē there was brought to him a leane horse pilled, with a long necke and a great head. When Huon saw that horse, he tooke him by the brydle, & leapt vpon him without any foote in the stirrop, in the sight of a M. Paynims that were there present, & some said it was not well done to giue him a horse, the which could not serue nor aid him in time of need. When Huon was mounted on his leane féeble horse, hée was sorowfull, for well hee perceaued how they mocked him, and said softly to him selfe, Ah yee false Paynims, if I may lyue a yeere, I shall quitte your mockes. Then Huon rode foorth with others, but for all that hee could doe with his spurres, the horse would goe but his own soft pace, wherat diuers Paynims mocked him. Thus king Iuoryn departed from Mombrance with his great armie, and tarried in the fields for his men, & when they were all assem∣bled together, then hee departed and tooke the way to Anfa∣lerne, the which was distant of but foure leagues, and when
they came there, they ran before the citie, and draue away all the beastes, béeues and muttons, and sent them to Mom∣brance. Then when the Admirall Galaffer saw king Iuoryn before his citie, and had driuen away all the pray aboute the towne, he was so sorowfull that hee was neere hand out of his wit, and then hée saw the faire Escleremond before him & said. Madame, the great loue that I haue set on you, is this day derely bought, for by your occasion I sée my country de∣stroyed, and my men slayne and led in seruitude. Sir quoth shée, I am sory thereof, it lyeth in you to amend it, seeing this ill is come to you by me, then it is in you to render me to king Iuoryn, and thereby ye and your country shalbe in rest and peace. Faire Ladie quoth Galaffer, by the grace of Ma∣hound, for any feare that I haue of Iuoryn your Vncle, I will not render you into his handes, vntill I haue had of you my pleasure. Sir, (quoth shée) you may do with mee as it shall please you, after that the twoo yeares bee past for the accomplishing of my vow. Madame quoth Galaffer, before I will render you to your Vncle Iuoryn, I shall haue neuer a foot of land, for first it shall be cleane distroyed. Chap. LV. ¶ How Huon fought with Sorbryn and slew him, and wanne the good Horse Blanchardyn, whereon he mounted and wan the Battaile, and was brought with great tryumph to Mom∣brance. WHen Sorbryn (Nephew to the Admiral Galaffer) heard his Vncle make such sorow, hée said to him. Faire Vncle, be not dismayed, though Iuoryn hath taken and slaine some of your men, and driuen a∣way your beastes: for eche one of yours, if I lyue, I shall
render againe to you foure, I shall tell you how, I will goe and arme me and issue out, and shew to Iuoryn, that if hee will set one or twoo of the hardiest men of all his hoast to fight with me, and that if it be so that I be ouercome, then you to render his faire Néece Escleremond to him, to do with her at his pleasure: and that if I discomfite his men, then let him depart, so that for all the damage that he hath done to you in this warre, hee will render againe to you the dou∣ble thereof, for better it were that this warre should end by two men, rather then so much people should be destroyed. Faire Nephew quoth Galaffer, I neuer heard a better word, I am well content if ye will haue it thus. Then Sorbryn went and armed him selfe, he was a goodly knight, for in all ye Paynims lands there was not his Péere, nor none that approched neere to his valiantnes. When hée was armed, then Blanchardyn his good horse was brought to him, the goodnes of this horse excéeded all other, and of beau∣tie there was none like him, he was as white as snowe, the freshnes of his apparell, it was so riche and goodly, that I cannot make due mention thereof, for no man could estéeme the valew of the riches of the brydle, saddle, and harnesse. Then Sorbryn leapt vppon his horse without any stirroppe, and tooke a great speare, and so rode out of the Cittie, and when hée saw king Iuoryn a farre of, hée cryed aloud & said. Ah thou Iuoryn of Mombrance, the Admirall Galaffer hath sent mee to thée, and willeth that thou doe arme one of thy valiantest men of thy Court, and let him come against me, and if hee can vanquish me, then hee shall deliuer to thée thy Néece Escleremond: but if I ouercome thy man, then thou to retourne to thy Citie, and suffer thy Neece to remaine still with him, and also thou to restore all the damages that thou hast done to him and his in this warre. When Iuoryn heard the Paynim, he looked about him, to sée if any of his men would take on him this enterprise to fight with Sorbryn, but there was no Paynim that durst speake one word, for they feared Sorbryn for the fiercenes that was in him, and they
said amonge themselues, that whosoeuer did fight against him, was like miserably to finish his dayes. The same time that Iuorin spake with Sorbrin, Huon was among the other Paynims, & heard what Sorbryn had said, and also he saw yt no man durst goe against Sorbryn, then as well as hée might, he got himselfe out of the presse vpon his leane horse, & strake him with his spurres, but for all that hée could doe the horse would neither trot nor gallop, but go still his own pace. The old Minstrell beheld Huon his Var∣let, who made him readie to fight against the Paynim, and saw that he was so ill horsed, he cryed on hye and sayd. Sir King Iuoryn, it shalbe vnto you great dishonour, when such a Horse that is nothing woorth you haue deliuered vnto my Varlet, who gooth for your sake to fight with Sorbryn, with whome none of your other men dare fight, great sinne it is that he hath not a better Horse. Then Huon sayd vnto Sor∣bryn: Sarazin, I pray thée speake with me. Fréend, (quoth Sorbryn) what wilt thou with mée? Paynim, (quoth Huon) I require thée to prooue thy vertue against mée. Then (quoth Sorbryn) tell mée, art thou a Paynim or a Sarazin? Fréend, (quoth Huon) I am neither Paynim nor Sarazin, but I am christened, beléeuing in ye law of Iesus Christ, and though thou séest mée but poorely apparelled, despise me not, for I am come of a noble extraction, wherefore I require thée on thy lawe that thou beléeuest on, let mée not goe without battaile. Fréend, (quoth Sorbryn) in this request thou doest great folly, for thou desirest thy death, I haue pitie of thée, & therefore I councell thée to returne backe. Paynim, (quoth Huon) I had rather dy then to returne ere I haue iusted with thée. Then they went each from other to take their course, but for all that euer Huon could doe, his horse would not ad∣uance foorth, whereof Huon was sore displeased, and sayd: Ah verie God and man, I desire thée to giue mée the grace, that I may winne this Horse that this Paynim doth ryde vppon. When Huon saw that his horse would neither go forward
nor backwarde, hée set his Shéeld against his enemie, & Sor∣bryn came running like the Tempest, and with his Speare strooke in Huons Shéeld such a stroake, that the buckles nor any thing else coulde resist the stroake, but the Sheeld was peirced through-out, but the good armour saued Huon from all hurts, and hée remooued no more for the stroake then if it had béen a strong wall, whereof Iuoryn & all other had great maruaile, and said one to another, how they had neuer séene before so great a stroake, nor a goodlyer receit thereof with∣out falling to the earth, euerie man praised greatly Huon that he held himselfe so firmly. By Mahound, (quoth Iuo∣ryn) our man is fierce and of great hardynesse, I woulde hée were mounted now vpon my horse. And Huon who had re∣ceiued the great stroake, in great yre cast downe his Speare, and tooke his Sword with both his handes, and gaue there∣with the Paynim a great stroake as he passed by him a hye vppon his healme, the stroake was so puissant, that neither the healme nor coiffe of stéele could resist the stroake, but that his head was clouen to the shoulders, and so hee fell downe dead in the féeld. Then Huon who was quicke and light, tooke yt good horse Blanchardine by the reyne, and alighted from his own horse without féet in the stirrop, leapt vppon the Paynims horse, and left his owne in the féeld, and when hée saw himselfe on Blanchardine, he smoat him with his spurres to prooue him, when the horse felt the spurres, hée began to leape and gam∣bould, and gallop as it had béen the thunder, and the Pay∣nims had maruell that he had not fallen to the earth, so whē he had well prooued him and turned him in & out, he thought hee would not giue him for the value of a Realme, then hee came vnto King Iuoryn with twentie ganulds. By Ma∣hound, (quoth Iuoryn) this Varlet séemeth rather Sonne to a King or Prince, then to be a Varlet to a Minstrell, then he came vnto Huon and embraced him, and made him great re∣specte, and the Paynims that were within Anfalerne, with the Admirall Galaffer yssued out of the Citie, and when Ga∣laffer
saw his Nephew slain, he road about him thrée times, and made a pitious complaint, and said. Ah right deare Ne∣phewe, I may well complaine, by reason of your youth, when I sée you thus pitiously slaine, certainly, if I liue long, your death shall dearely be bought, so he caused the dead bo∣die to be carried into the Citie with great lamentations, and then hee and his men entred into the Battaile, where was great slaughter made on both parts, but among all other Hu∣on did maruailes, he slew and beat downe, & tare of helmets, and strake out braines with the pummell of his Sword, hée slew and beat downe all that came within his stroake, his prowesse was such that no Paynim durst abide him, but fled as the Shéepe doth from the Woolues, he did so much by vertue of his armes, that within short space hee brought all his enemies to playne discomfiture, so that the Admirall Ga∣laffer with much paine fled and entred into the Citie, right sorrowfull for the losse that he had receiued that day, for the third part of his men were slaine in the Battaile, and all by the valiantnesse of Huon, the which was so great, that King Iuoryn and his Barons stood still to beholde his valyant déedes. And as Huon fought, hee spyed out the Paynim that had giuen him his Sword, then hée remembred the promise that he had made him, and he lifted vp his Sword, and strake a∣nother Paynim therewith, so that hee claue his head to the breast, and so hee fell downe dead, and Huon tooke the Pay∣nims horse, and gaue the horse to him that had giuen him the good Sword, and sayd. Fréend, take well in woorth ye gift of this horse, fr a reward for the good Sword that you gaue me. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I thanke you. In bréefe, Huon did so much, that there was no Paynim that durst a∣bide him, but fled and entred into the Citie of Anfalerne, then they closed their gates and lifted vp their bridges, and King Iuoryns men departed with the bootie that they had wonne: then with great triumph Huon was conuayed, riding chéeke by chéeke by Kinge Iuoryn, and so brought to Mombrance,
whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and the Admi∣rall Galaffer was entred into Anfalerne, in great sorrow for Sorbryn his Nephew who was dead, & also for his men that he had lost in battaile, and when he was vnarmed, hee cau∣sed his Nephew to be buried with sore wéepings and lamen∣tations. Nowe let vs leaue speaking of them, vntill wee haue occasion to returne vnto them againe. Chap. LVI. ¶Howe Huon was hadde in great honour, and sat at the Table with King Iuoryn of Mombrance. WHen Iuoryn was entred in∣to Mombrance, hee went & vnarmed him, & his Daughter came vnto him to make him reuerence, and when hee sawe his Daughter, hée kissed her and said. Déere Daughter, thou wert mated in a good houre by the Minstrels Varlet, for in the day of battaile that we haue had against the Admirall Galaffer, he was discomfi∣ted by the only prowesse of this Varlet by whom thou wert mated, thanked be my God Mahound, for by him I haue o∣uercome mine enemies, and beside that, he fought hand to hand against Sorbryn Nephew to the Admirall Galaffer, and hee slew him, but if I may liue one yeare, the great seruice that he hath done vnto me, shalbe euen right well rewarded: Father, (quoth the Ladie) you are bound so to doe. Then Kinge Iuoryn went vp into his Pallaice, and his Daughter with him, and Huon went to the lodging where as the Minstrell was lodged, where hee vnarmed him, and went with his Maister to the Pallaice, but when King Iuo∣ryn saw them, the King aduanced foorth, and tooke Huon by the hand, and sayd. Fréend, you shall goe with mée and sit
at my Table, for I cannot doe you too much honour, for the good seruice that you haue done vnto mée, I abandon vnto you all my house, to doe therein at your pleasure, take all my gould and siluer, and iewels, and giue thereof at your plea∣sure: I ordaine and will, that all that you commaund shall be done, all that is heere I abandon vnto you, yea in the La∣dies chambers take there your pleasure as you list, and whē I goe out, you shall goe with mée. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the great honour that you haue done to mée, I thanke you, then they sat downe at the Table, and when they had dyned, the King and Huon sat together vppon the rich Carpets. Then Mouflet the Minstrell opened his Vyoll, and played so me∣lodiously, that the Paynims that heard him had great mar∣uaile thereof, for the Vyoll made so swéet a sound, that it sée∣med to be the Mermaides of the Sea, and Kinge Iuoryn and all his Lords had so great ioy, that it séemed vnto them that they were in the glorie of Paradise, so yt there was no Pay∣nim, but that gaue him Gownes and Mantles and other ie∣wels. The Minstrell saw Huon sit by the King, hee saide: Fréend, yesterday I was your Maister, and nowe I am be∣come your Minstrell, I thinke nowe you haue little care for me, yet I pray you come vnto mée and gather together these cloathes, and put them into my Male as you haue done ere this. When the King and his Lordes heard that, they be∣gan to laugh. Now let vs leaue speaking of them, and say somewhat of the old Gerames. Chap. LVII. ¶ How the old Gerames arriued at Anfalerne by fortune, and the Admirall Galaffer retained him to mainetaine his warre: And how the faire Escleremond spake with him,
YE haue heard heere before the Aduentures that haue fallen to Huon, & how the old Gerames and xiij. with him▪ de∣parted and left Huon, bicause he would not beléeue them whereby fell to him such ad∣uentures as yee haue since heard, and how Gerames and his companyons that were in the litle shippe, sailed forth in the tempest, without any knowledge what was become of Huon, but they thought rather hée had been dead then aliue and so within a moneth after, they were dri∣uen by another tempest to the port of Anfalerne. When Gerames saw how they were ariued there, he said to his companie. Sirs wee be not ariued at a good Port▪ in this City dwelleth a Paynim king who beléeueth not in our god, a more fierce Paynim cannot be found frō hence to the red Sea, he is called the admirall Galaffer, without god haue pitie of vs, I cannot sée but we are like to die, and we cannot returne backe. The same time the Admirall Galaffer was risen from dinner, and looked out at a windowe, and behelde the sea-side, and then he perceiued the little Shippe, where Gerames and his companie were in, when he saw it, he went downe with some of his men, desiring to knewe what they were that there arriued: then he approached to the Shippe, and said. Sirs, what men be you that are thus arriued at my Port? Sir, (quoth Gerames) wée be French-men, Pil∣grimes, and are going to offer at the holy Sepulchre, the for∣tune of the Sea hath brought vs hether, and therefore Sir, if there be any Tribute that we ought to pay, we are readie to do your pleasure. Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) haue no doubt, that by me or any of mine you shall haue any displeasure, for if yée will abide with me, you are well arriued. Sir, (quoth Gerames) I would it might please you to shewe vs the cause why: Why, (quoth the Admirall) that I shall shewe you. True it is, héere néere mée dwelleth Kinge Iuoryn of Mom∣brance,
who maketh vppon mée great warre, hée slayeth my men, and destroyeth my Countrey, whereof I haue great sorrow in my heart. Sir, (quoth Gerames) if your quarrell be iust and rightfull, we shall be all readie to aid you truely, for Sir, without your quarrell be good, wee will not abide with you. Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) I shall shew you the troth, so it was, vppon a day I stood in a window, and looked downe to ye sea-side, (as I did now when you arriued at this Port) and then I saw a Shippe comming, which tooke anker there as you be nowe, and in the Ship there was a Damsell and Ten Marriners, who thought to haue ledde her vnto Kinge Iuoryn of Mombrance, I cannot tell where they had taken her, but shée was Daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, that Mahound take his soule, and I knewe for certaine, that if King Iuoryn might haue the Damsell, hee would haue burnt her, because it hath béen shewed him, that she was the cause of the death of her Father the Admirall Gaudise, who was Brother to King Iuoryn, and so hée is Vncle to the Damsell, and when I was aduertised, that the ten Marriners would haue deliuered her into the hands of her Vncle Iuoryn, I tooke her from them, and slew them all, because they would not deliuer her to me with entreatie, and thus I haue wedded the Damsell. When Iuoryn heard this, he made mée war, and was héere before my Citie with all his puissance, & hath slayne my men, and led away all my beasts and prouision, and hath burnt and destroyed my Countrey, and euerie day he commeth and ouer-runnes all the Country, and he hath with him a young man, I know not of what countrey hee is of, but this last day hée slewe a Nephewe of mine, whome I right dearely loued, and who was called Sorbryn, hée was Sonne to my Sister, for whome I haue such sorrowe at my heart, that it cannot be appeased, and he hath led away his Horse called Blanchardyn, the which is the best horse in ten Realmes, his like is not in all the world, wherefore I desire you (as I may deserue your seruice) to abide with mée, and
to doe so much, that I might haue the saide younge man ta∣ken Prisoner, and the horse againe to me restored, and if you can this doe, I shall so reward you, that you shall alwaies be rich, and all those in your companie. Sir, (quoth Gerames) if hée come any more hether, & that you shewe mée him, I shall doe my best to bring him, and the Horse also vnto you. Freend, (quoth the Admirall) if you will shew me this courtesie, I shall abandon all my Realme to bee at your pleasure and commaundement. With these words the old Gerames yssued out of the Ship & all his com∣panie, and entred into the Citie of Anfalerne with the Ad∣mirall Galaffer, & when they came to the Pallaice, Gerames sayd. Sir, I and my companie require you to shewe vs the Damsell, for whose sake you maintaine this war. Fréend, (quoth the Admirall) if you were a young man, I would not shew her vnto you, but I see well you bee olde and ancient, wherefore no young Ladie will set any thinge by you: then the Admirall tooke Gerames by the hand, and led him into the Chamber whereas Escleremond was, assoone as the Ladie saw Gerames, she knew him, wherewith she began to chang colour, and fell down in a swound in the Chamber, making a great out-crie. When the Admirall Galaffer saw that, he was right sorrowfull, and said: Faire Ladie, why doe you make this sorrow? are you troubled at the sight of this olde man that I haue brought hether? Nay surely Sir, (quoth shée) it is for a paine that hath taken mée in the right side whereby I haue often times great annoyance: but Sir, if it were your pleasure, I would gladly speak with this french Knight, for customably they know many things, and perad∣uēture he may shew me such things as shalbe for my health, for French-men are right discréet in giuing of good counsell. Madame, quoth the Admirall) it pleaseth me well that you speake with him secretly. Then the Ladie called Gerames, and said: Fréend, I pray thee giue me some good counsaile, that I may be eased of the paine that I endure. Madame, (quoth Gerames) for the honour of you and of the Admirall
that is héere present, I shall ayd you in such wise, that you shalbe eased of the paine that you endure. Then Gerames who was subtill, well perceiued the mind of the Ladie, then he approached néere vnto her, and they sat downe together on a Couch there by. Gerames, (quoth the Ladie) I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether? Madame, (quoth he) wee bee come hether by reason of tem∣pest of the Sea, but Ladie, (quoth he) I pray you what is become of Huon? By my faith, (quoth she) I beléeue hee is dead, for when you departed from vs, such a maruelous tem∣pest rose on the Sea, that all that were in our Shippe were perished, and the ship drowned and broken in small peeces, except Huon and I, we saued vs on a Table of wood, where∣vpon we arriued in an Isle that was neere vs, and when wée were on the Land, there came vnto vs Ten Marriners, and they tooke me from thence, and it Huon there blindfold, his hands and féet fast bound, so that he had no power to reléeue himselfe, and those Ten Marriners brought me hether, and the Admirall Galaffer hath slayn them al, therefore I thinke surely that Huon is dead, Iesus haue mercie vppon him, and thus I am héere with this Admirall, who hath assured me to wed mée, but as yet he neuer medled with me bodily, but I haue made him to beléeue, that I made a vowe to Mahound for twoo yeares to come, that no man should haue vse of my body, and that is for the loue of Huon, whome I cannot for∣get, the Admirall hath beleeued me, and for as long as I liue I shall neuer forget Huon, and shall alwayes be ready to die, in the payn to kéepe me from the bodily company of any man liuing. Ah Sir Gerames, if you might doe so much, that I might escape from hence with you, you should do me a great courtesie, for if I might escape from hence and come into a christian Realme, I would yéeld my selfe into some Abbie of Nunnes, to the entent that the reasidue of my life, I might pray for the Soule of my Louer Huon. Madam, (quoth Ge∣rames) be not dismayed, for if I can escape from hence, what∣soeuer come to me thereof, I shall carie you with me. Then
the Admirall came vnto them, and sayd: Fréend, you hold ouer-long talking with the Damsell, come away, you haue taried there long ynough; then Gerames departed from Es∣cleremond, strayning her by the hand, and the Admirall Ga∣laffer tooke Gerames by the arme, and brought him into the Hall to Supper, and after Supper they communed of the Feates of the warre. Now let vs leaue speaking of them, and returne to King Inoryn of Mombrane, and noble Huon who was with him. Chap. LVIII. ¶ How King Iuoryn came againe before Anfalerne, and how Gerames and Huon fought together, and at laste they knewe each other. And how they entred into Anfalerne, and shut the Admirall without. NOw sheweth the Historie, that about twoo dayes after King Iuoryn had made his course before Anfalerne, then Huon came vnto Iuoryn & sayd. Sir, cause your men to be armed, and let vs goe visite the Admirall Galaffer, for a man that is in warre ought neuer to lye still, vntill he hath brought his ene∣mie to vtter ruine, for it séemeth that he setteth but little by you, when he kéepeth still your Neece against your will, hée being your Subiect, and one that holdeth his Lands of you. Freend, (quoth Iuoryn) you say truely, I shall doe by your counsaile, then he made to be cryed through the Citie, that euerie man should make him readie, to go with the King be∣fore Anfalerne. Huon who was desirous to haue battaile, armed him, and tooke Blanchardyn his good Horse, moun∣ted on him without any stirrop, and tooke a great Speare in his hand with a good sharpe head.
Now the same time as Huon was in the Pallaice, king Iuorins daughter was leaning in a window in her chamber, accompanied with diuers Ladies and Damsels, shee beheld Huon and shée said. By Mahound, it is a goodly sight to be∣hould yonder young man sitting on the horse Blanchardyn, how well he becommeth his armour, a goodlier man cannot be found, nor a more hardie: for the last day he slew Sorbryn the valiantest knight in all Pagany, and also wanne his good horse. But yet I am displeased with him, for that whē he played with me at the Chesse, he was not so hardy as once to embrace and kisse me, if he had, I would haue loued him in such wise, that if he had required of me my loue, I would not haue refused him, though my father had sworne the con∣trarie an hundred times: thus the Ladies and Damsels de∣uised together, but Huon set little thereby. Thus king Iuo∣ryn and his men issued out of the Citie of Mombrance, and came to the fields and then roade foorth toward Anfalerne, & at the last came before the gates of the citie, and there orde∣red them in battaile array, and Huon who had great desire to attaine to renowne, came to the gate with his speare in his hand, and cried alowd to them that were on the walles, and said. Where is Galaffer your Lord? goe and shew him, that he come and Iust against him that hath slaine his Ne∣phew, and that I will serue him in like sort if I may méete with him in Battaile, or else he shall deliuer to me the faire Escleremond. Galaffer was néere by, and heard what Huon saide, and knew well that it was he by reason of the horse Blanchardyn, whereof he was right sorowfull, & said to Gerames. Friend, I shal shew you héere him that hath done me al this ill, now I shall sée if yée will kéepe promise with me. Sir quoth Ge∣rames, take no care, for by the faith that I owe to God, I shall render to you both the horse and the man, to doe with them at your pleasure. Then Gerames yssued out all armed, well horsed, and tooke a good speare in his hand, hee was a goodly knight of his age, puissant of bodie, and in his time
greatly redoubted, and when he was on his horse, hee stret∣ched himselfe in his saddle in such wise, that his stirrops stretched out a long handfull or more, he was greatly pray∣sed of the Paynims that saw him, and then the Admirall Galaffer commaunded euery man to be armed, and he him∣selfe was armed richly. Then the gate was opened, and Gerames was the first that issued out with his company, when he was without the citie, he strake his horse with his spurres, so that he was a great space before all his compa∣nie, with his speare in his hand & his shield about his necke, and his white beard hanging downe on his brest vnder his helmet. Nowe when Huon on the other part saw Gerames comming, hee spurred Blanchardyn, and came against Ge∣rames, and so they met together without any word speaking, and strake each other on their shéeldes, so that all was bro∣ken, but their armour was so good that they tooke no hurt, but their speares brake to their handes, and the shiuers flew vp into the ayre, and the stroakes were so rude, that both the knights & horses fell to the earth, but they arose againe, and gaue each other great stroakes. Gerames who was expert in déedes of armes, tooke his sword with both his hands, and gaue Huon such a stroake on the helmet, that perforce he was faine to set one of his knées to the earth the stroake was so heauy, and if it had not béen by the grace of God, he had béene slaine, and Huon was so astonished with the stroake, that he had much adoo to re∣couer, but said: Ah good Lord succour me, and graunt me that before I die I maye sée the faire Escleremond. These words he spake openly, for he thought that Gerames had not vnderstood him, for he little thought that it had béen Gerames yt fought with him, thē he came to Gerames with his sword in his hand to haue béen reuenged, for he neuer before recei∣ued such a stroake as Gerames had giuen him. But Gerames vnderstood Huon by his words and knew him, and therwith cast downe his sword to the earth, and had such sorow that he could not speake a word. When Huon saw that, he mar∣uayled
greatly why he cast his sword to the earth, and then Huon would not touch him, but said. Paynim, what is thy mind to doe? wilt thou haue peace or else fight with me? Ah sir quoth Gerames, come foorth and strike of my head, for well I haue deserued it séeing I haue stricken you so rudely, but I knew you not, whereof I am very sory. When Huon heard him speake, anon he knew well that it was Gerames, wherof he had great ioy in his heart for finding of him. The Paynims that regarded them, hadde great maruaile what thing the twoo Champions ment or thought to do. Sir quoth Gerames, it behooueth vs shortly to determine our businesse, for I sée on all parts Paynims assemble together to behould vs, I shall shew you what is best for vs twoo to doe, leape you vpon your horse, and I shall leape on mine, then I shall take you, and lead you perforce as my prisoner to the Citie of Anfalerne, and there shall yée sée your Loue Escleremond, who will haue great ioy with your comming, and shée will tell you other newes. Friend quoth Huon, I shall doe as yee deuise, then they leapt on their horses, and Gerames came to Huon and laid hand on him, as though he tooke him Pri∣soner, and so led him toward the citie of Anfalerne, and his companie followed him, and when king Iuoryn sawe how Gerames had led away Huon as Prisoner, he began to crie & said: On forth yée Sarazins, how suffer you this yong man to be led away as a Prisoner to ye citie of Anfalerne? I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart if ye suffer him thus to be ledde away. Then the Sarazins dashed into the preasse to haue rescu∣ed Huon, and on the other part the Admirall Galaffer came & met Gerames and Huon, and then Gerames said to him: Sir, goe and fight with your enemies, behould heere the young man that slew your Nephew Sorbryn, I shall lead him into the citie and set him in sure prison, and then I shall shortly retourne againe to you to fight against king Iuoryn. Friend quoth Galaffer, I require you so to doe, and assoone as yee haue set him in prison retourne againe. Gerames departed
from the Admirall, and went to the citie with Huon and his xiij. companions with him, when they were entred into the Citie, they lifted vp the bridges and closed the gates, in the Citie there was no man of warre, for all were in the field with the Admirall against king Iuoryn, there were none but women, children & ould folkes, and when that Gerames and Huon saw how they were strong ynough for them in the Ci∣tie, they went into the stréetes and cried Saint Dennis, and slew all that they met aswell old men, as women and chil∣dren, so that within a short space they had cleane wonne the towne. Many Paynims fled and leapt into the dikes, and brake neckes, armes, and legges, then they went into the Pallaice, and there they found the faire Escleremond, & when Huon saw her, he did of his helmet, and ranne and embra∣ced her, and when the Ladie saw that it was Huon, the ioy that shee had was so great that it was maruaile to sée it, there was such ioy at their méeting that it cannot be recoun∣ted. Huon and the Ladie embraced & kissed each other many times, and she said. Ah Huon, ye be right hartily welcome, for I thought that I should neuer haue séene you more. La∣die quoth Huon, I ought greatly to loue and cherish you, and I am right ioyfull that it hath pleased God that I haue now found you in good health and prosperitie, for a more truer man than ye be there is none liuing. When all the companie had made their salutations one to another, they went to dinner and were richly serued, for there was great plentie in the citie, and the Sarazins were without the Citie, wheras they fought and slew each other, there was such slaying on both parts, that the fieldes were couered with dead men and fore wounded, many a horse ran about the field and their Maisters lying dead, these twoo Kings fought one against the other puissance against pu∣issance, and twoo Sarazins that were escaped out of the Ci∣tie of Anfalerne, came to the Admirall Galaffer and said. Ah Sir, your Citie is lost by the Frenchmen, who be entred in∣to it, there is neyther man nor woman therein but they are
all slaine, the old knight that came to you and his xiij. com∣panions be all seruants to the young man that slew your Nephew, when the twoo Frenchmen fought one with ano∣ther, they tooke togither acquaintance, and they be all sub∣iects to the young man that was with king Iuoryn, and it is he that slew the Admirall Gaudise, and discomfited the gyant Agrapart, we knew him well when he entred into the citie, we would haue shewed you thereof, but we durst not vntill yee were returned from the battaile. Now they be in your Pallaice which pleaseth them, for there is neither man nor child liuing, but all are slaine except some xxx. Ladies and Damsels, who were with her that should be your wife, and they be put out of the Citie, yée may sée them sitting with∣out the gate pitiously wéeping. When the Admirall Galaffer heard that, he was heauy & sorowfull, and said to his men that were about him. Sirs, I pray you hastily giue me some councell what I shall doe, for it is néedfull. Sir quoth they, it is now of necessitie that yée goe to king Iuoryn, and knéele downe at his foote, and pray him to haue mercie vppon you, other councell as now we cannot giue you. Sirs quoth Galaffer, I shall doe as yée haue said, then the Admirall Galaffer with his sword in his hand went through the preasse, and came to king Iuoryn, & alighted from his horse and knéeled downe before him, and said. Sir King, I yéeld to you my swoord, with the which if you please strike of my head, for well I haue deserued it. But Sir I pray you for the loue of Mahound haue mercie of me, I offer to make you such amends as you & your Lords shall iudge, so that yée will aid me to take the Frenchmen that bee in my Citie, and haue taken away my wife your Néece Escleremond. Sir, the young man that yée so loued, who came but lately to your Court with a Minstrell, is the same Frenchman that slew your brother the Admirall Gau∣dise, these tydings I haue heard by twoo messengers that knew him in your Court, and now there are with him xiij. other Frenchmen, whome I had retayned with me to main∣taine
my warre, but they be al subiects to the yong man, and now all xiii. bee in my pallace, and my wife with them. Chap. LIX. ¶ How Iuoryn caused Mouflet the old Minstrell, to be brought to the gibet to haue beene hanged, and how hee was res∣cued by Huon. IVORIN heard Galaffer, and saide, Alas, I was vnhappie that I knew not this yong man that had slaine my brother, if I had, it shold dearly haue béene bought. Therefore Sir Galaffer, cause your men to withdraw from the battaile, and I shall withdraw mine, and I shall know of my Barons what counsaile they will giue me. Then both parties blew the retrait, and King Iuoryn said to his Lords. Sirs, what counsaile will yee giue me, as touching the Ad∣mirall Galaffer? Sir (quoth they) giue him againe his lands, since he asketh mercie, if he hath done ill, he offereth to make amends. Then Iuoryn called Galaffer, and sayd: Sir Admi∣rall, I render againe to you all your lands, and pardon you of all mine ill will, and beside that, I shall helpe you to de∣stroy the Frenchmen that are in your citie of Anfalerne. Then Galaffer kneeled downe, and thanked King Iuoryn for the courtesie that he shewed him and offered to doe, and so would haue kissed his feet, but Iuoryn would not suffer him, but lift him vp. Thus these two kings agréed together, and sware toge∣ther, to haue the death of Huon and his knights. Then Huon and his companie abandoned vp the citie of Anfalerne, be∣cause hee had so few men to kéepe it, and so kept the Castle, the which was strong inough, standing on a rocke on the sea
side, it was indéede impregnable, so it were well victualled, at the corner of the Castle there was a strong towre, and vn∣derneath it was the Port whereas ships came to their an∣chor. When Iuoryn and Galaffer saw that the towne was gi∣uen vp by the Frenchmen, they entered into it with all their great puissance, and lodged about in the towne, but in ta∣king of their lodgings, Huon and Gerames, and such as were with them, shot out darts, and quarrelled in such wise, that there was not so hardie a paynim that durst peere before the Castle, if he did, he was slaine or hurt. When Iuoryn & Ga∣laffer saw the dealing of the Frenchmen, they raysed vp a gibbet before the Castle, thereby to make the Frenchmen a∣fraide, and then they tooke Mouflet the Minstrell, and bound his hands behind him so sore, that the bloud came out at the nayles, then they hanged his violl about his necke, and then he was brought before Iuoryn, who sayd to him. A thou false traitour, ill hast thou remembred the goodnesse that my brother Gaudise hath done to thee, when he that slew him, thou hast brought into my Court, thereby to do me despight. But I shall neither eate nor drinke, till thou hast thy desert, and that is to bee hanged. Alas quoth Mouflet, neuer in all my life haue I done or thought any treason, nor knew not that, that I brought to your Court, him that slew your brother the Admiral Gaudys, who was my Lord and Master, therefore Sir, great sinne it were for you to put me to death, for that I am not guiltie of. Thou lyest false traitour (quoth Iuoryn) and so commaunded a thirtie men to leade him to the gallowes, and when they were come thither, they caused the minstrell to mount vp on the ladder. The Frenchmē in the Castle had great maruaile who it should bee that they would hang vp there: and when the minstrell was aboue on the ladder, hee turned him to∣wards the Castle, and cryed with an high voyce: Ah Huon, how will ye suffer me here to die? yet remember the goodnes that I haue done to you, and the courtesie that I did, when yee came all naked, I gaue you then cloathing, and meate
and drinke, and I abandoned to you all that I had, ill it hath béen employed without ye reward mée better. When Huon heard the Minstrell, hée knew wel that it was Mouflet who had béen his maister, then hée said to his company. Sirs, I require you arme you quickely, for the Paynims héere with∣out haue reared vp a gybet, whereon they will hang a Min∣strell, who hath done me great pleasure, I would be right sorie if he should haue any ill. Then Gerames and al his companions made them ready, and issued out of the Castle with Huon, by a secret posterne, so that they that were about the gibet were not aware of of them, till Huon and his companie was among them. Huon ranne at him that should haue hanged the minstrell, and strake him with his speare cleane through, and so hee fell downe dead, and then Huon tooke downe the Minstrell, and made him to flie away to the posterne, and his violl about his necke, he that had séene him flie away, could not haue kept himselfe from laughing, for he ranne so fast, that he sée∣med to bee no old man, but rather of the age of thirtie yéere, and Huon and Gerames and his companie, slew and beate downe all the thirtie Paynimes, so that none escaped the death. When King Iuoryn and Galaffer perceiued that there was much adoe about the gibet, they sayd, Sirs, the French∣men are come out of the Castle, goe and looke that ye doe so much, that none of thē enter againe. Then Paynims on e∣uerie part issued out of their lodgings, and ranne thither hée that best might, without kéeping of any good order, & Huon and Gerames when they saw them comming, they made semblance to returne to ye citie a soft pace, and the Paynims came after them crying and howling like dogges, and when they approched néere, Huon sodainely turned, and with his speare he met so the first, that he ranne him cleane through the body with his speare, so that he fell downe dead, and Ge∣rames and his companie strake so among the paynims, that the place ranne like a riuer of bloud of the dead Paynims: Huon strake with his sword with both his hands, hée strake
none with a full stroke, but that he claue the head to the téeth, but finally, the force of the paynims was so great, that at length they could not abide it. Then Huon, who was expert in déedes of armes, percei∣ued that it was time to depart, he called his men together, and went toward the posterne, the which with much payne they got in thereat, and so they entred in al xiii. companions, but yet they were so hasted and pursued, that Garyn of Saint Omer abode without, and defended himselfe valiantly: but at last he was slaine by the Paynims, then Huon was right sorrowfull, when hee saw that Garyn was not entered into the Castle, and pitiously complayned for him, and sayd. A déere cousin, who for the loue of mee haue left your wife and children, and land, and signories, I am sory of your death. Sir, quoth Gerames, leaue your sorrow, and thinke to make good chéere, and to kéepe well our fortres, our Lord God hath alwayes ayded you, and shall doe through his grace, go we vp and make good chéere, for with this sorrow wee can winne nothing. Then when they came into the Pallace, they met with Escleremond, and when Huon saw her, hee sayd: My faire Loue, this day haue I lost one of my good friends, whereof I am sorrowfull. Sir, quoth she, I am sorie thereof, but that thing that cannot be recouered, must be left, wee be all made to die, God will haue mercy on his soule, with such like worde Escleremond and Gerames appeased Huon, and when they were in the hall, they vnarmed them, and went to din∣ner, and afterwardes they looked out at the windowes, to sée the countenance of the Paynims: then Gerames sayd to the Minstrell. Mouflet my friend, I pray thée take thy violl, and giue vs a song to make vs merrie, then the Minstrell tooke his Instrument, and gaue them a most sweete song, the which was so melodious for to heare, that they all be∣leeued that they had beene in Paradice, and they all made excéeding great ioy, with such a cheerefull noyse, that the Paynims that were without, did heare it, and sayd
among themselues. Ah these French-men are people to be feared and doubted, and they were right sorrowfull for the men that they had loste by the prowesse of these Fourtéene persons. Chap. LX. ¶ How the good Prouost Guyer, Brother to Gerames, arriued at the Port of Anfalerne. WHen that King Iuoryn sawe and knewe the great losse that hée had recei∣ued, hee was right sorrowfull, and then the Admirall Galaffer said. Sir, for the honour of Mahound bee not so sore troubled, for a thing the which you shall well atchieue and bring to an end, you knowe well these French-men are as a bird being in a Cage, for they cannot escape neither by land nor by water, and they are without hope of any rescue: to day they were Fourtéene, and now they be but Thirteene, you are lodged in a good Towne, and haue the féelds and the Sea at your pleasure, it is not possible for them to escape, they haue neither Shippe nor Galley to flye in: Therefore Sir, appease your selfe, suffer them to waste their victu∣als. By these woordes somewhat King Iuoryn was appeased, and the French-men in the Castle deuised together, and Hu∣on sayd vnto Gerames. Fréend, you sée well wée be héere in∣closed, and wee can neither depart by Land nor by Sea, nor wee looke for no succour of any man liuing, and héere before vs are lodged Paynims who haue sworne our deaths. Sir, (quoth Gerames) true it is, but I hope in our Lord God that he will send vs some good aduenture, and if it please you, let vs two go downe and sport vs by the water side, néere to the
Port vntill night come. I am content, (quoth Huon) wee may goe thether and not bee séene by the Paynims, for the∣ther might come Shippe or Galley without daunger of the Towne: thether they went, and when it was néere hand night, Huon looked into the Sea, and saw a Ship comming thether-ward. Then Huon sayd vnto Gerames: Fréend▪ behold yonder commeth a Ship with full sayle, they will ar∣riue at this Port, they be Christian men I sée well by the to∣kens that the Ship doth beare, for vppon the Mast I sée a red crosse. Sir, (quoth Gerames) by all that I can sée the shippe is of Fraunce, and therefore (as I haue said to you before) God will send vs some good aduenture, & therewith by feare of the Tempest, the Shippe came into the Hauen and caste their anchors. Then Huon approached to the Ship, and demaunded for the Patron, and for the maister of them that were in the ship, then the Marriners regarded the place whereas they were, and they knew plainly by the great Tower, that they were in the Port of Anfalerne, whereof they had great feare, and sayd one to another. Ah good Lord God helpe vs, for we sée well wee are but dead, séeing wee bée arriued héere in this Port, for wée knowe well, that the Lord of this place is the most cruellest Paynim betwéen this and the red Sea. Thus they complayned them one to another, and Huon (who was néere them) vnderstood them well, and sayd. Sirs, haue yée no doubt of death, for yée are arriued at a good Port: I re∣quire you to shew me from whence you come, and what yée bée? and they answeared & sayd. Sir, séeing you can speake French we shall shew you, so that you will assure our liues. Sirs, (quoth Huon) haue no feare of death, nor of any hurt that yée shall haue, for wee that haue this place in kéeping, are French-men: therefore shew vs hardly your entents? Sir, (quoth they) since you would know what wée bee, wée are all borne in the Countrey of Fraunce, and one of vs is of Saint Omers, and some of the Citie of Paris, and of diuers o∣ther parts of the Realme of Fraunce. Fréends, (quoth Hu∣on)
I pray you shew me, if there be any among you borne in the Citie of Bourdeaux. Sir, (quoth one of them) heere is one in this ship that was borne in Bourdeaux, an ould ancient man, I thinke he be of an hundred yeares of age, his name is Guyer, and wee are going on pilgrimage for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, to visit the holy Sepulchre, but fortune by force of Tempest of ye Sea hath caused vs to arriue héere, and this Tempest hath endured these thrée dayes and thrée nights passed, whereby wee be so wearie and so sore trauai∣led, that wée can doe no more. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray you shew him foorth, that you speake of. Then the Patron of the Ship commaunded, that the old man of Bourdeaux should come forth, then Guyer the Prouost came to Huon and sayd. Sir, behold me héere, what pleaseth it you to say vnto mée? When Huon saw him, he knew in∣continent that it was Guyer the Prouost, and sayd: Fréend, I require you shew mee where you were borne? and what hath mooued you to come hether, séeing the great age that you be of? and to shew me what is your name? Sir, (quoth he) I shall shew you the truth, I had a Lord whome I loued en∣tirely, hee was Sonne to Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, and hee was called Huon, and it fell so out, that after the death of his Father about a Seauen yeares, King Charlemaine sent for him to doe his homage to receiue his Land of him, the young man by the commaundement of his Mother, he and his bro∣ther Gerard with him tooke their way towards Paris, and by the way King Charlemaines Sonne called Charlot, was ly∣ing in a wood by the counsaile of certaine Traytours, and there lay in a waight to haue slaine Huon and his Brother Gerard, but the case fell otherwise, for Huon slew Charlot not knowing who it was, wherefore Kinge Charlemaine bani∣shed him out of the Realm of Fraunce, and charged him ere he returned, to goe to Babilon to do a Messuage to the Admi-Gaudise. But his Brother Gerard aboad still at Bourdeaux to kéepe the heritage, and then the Duchesse his Mother was so full of sorrowe, that her Sonne was so banished without
cause, that shee tooke thereof such a maladie, that shee dyed thereof about fiue yeares past, and so thereby Gerard is Lord and Gouernour of all the Lands, and hee is married to the daughter of ye most cruellest Tirant from thence into Spaine, and this Gerard hath learned of him many ill customes, and hath left all the good wayes that was vsed in the dayes of Duke Seuin and of the Duchesse his Mother, and hee hath raysed vp in all his Landes new Tayles, and Gables, and Impositions, and chaced and put from him all noble men, hee destroyeth the Burgesses and Marchants, Widdowes & Orphelings, there can no man shew you the ill that hée hath done and doth dayly, and he hath disenherited me. And on a day the Barons of the Countrey desired me, that I would take the paines to goe and search aswell by land as by wa∣ter, if I might finde the young Lord Huon who is our right∣full Lord, it is now about two yeares that I haue searched for him in diuers Countreys, but I coulde neuer heare one word of him, whereof I am right sorrowfull, & to séeke him I haue spent all my gould and siluer: howbeit, these good Marchants haue taken me into their Ship, and for the loue of God, they thought to haue brought me into Fraunce, but by fortune we be héere arriued at this Port. Chap. LXI. ¶ Howe Huon and Gerames, and all their companie, with the faire Escleremond, departed from the Castle of Anfalerne, and sayled thence on the Sea. WHen Huon vnderstood the Prouost Guyer, he said vnto Gerames. Sir, come foorth, héere I haue found your Bro∣ther. Then Gerames came to his Brother, and embraced and kissed him all wéping,
and said: My deare fréend and Brother, you be right hear∣tily welcome. Ah Brother, (quoth Guyer) nowe I care not whether I liue or die, séeing I haue found you, and if it were so that yet once ere I dyed I might sée my Lord Huon: then I cared not howe soone I dyed. Ah deare Brother, (quoth Gerames) you shall not die so soone, and yet you shall sée Hu∣on, whose presence you so sore desire, it is Huon to whome you haue spoken all this season. Then Huon sore wéeping came and embraced Guyer, and said: My deare Fréend, your comming is a ioy to my heart, for a more truer Knight cannot bee found. Sir, (quoth Guyer) doe you know mée? Yea truely, (quoth Huon) and do you know mée? Yea Sir, (quoth Guyer) you are greatly desired in Fraunce, and Bro∣ther Gerames, I desire you to shew me where you haue béen since I sawe you, for it is about Fortie yeares since you de∣parted out of Fraunce: then Gerames shewed him all his life, and shewed at length how he found Huon. Longe they were talking together, whereof they of the Ship were right ioyfull, for then they sawe well they were arriued at a good Port, and then Huon said to ye Marriners. Sirs, I pray you make this night no great noyse, nor make no fire, nor shewe no light, for héere before the castle is lod∣ged two Admirals Paynims, who haue swoorne that they will neuer goe hence vntill they haue vs at their pleasure: therefore I counsaile that wee may escape out of this castle, wée bée hére about thurteene persons, and with vs a noble Ladie, wherefore I require you let vs come into your Ship or else we be all lost, and feare not but you shall be well paid for your labour, ye shall haue gold and siluer as much as yée will desire. Sir quoth the Patrone, yée néed not to speake of any gold or siluer, for this our ship is yours to do therewith at your pleasure. Sir quoth Huon, I thanke you of your cour∣tesie, I pray you and your company come with me into the castle, and I shall charge your ship with gold and Siluer, and rich iewels and pretious stones, that you and all yours shalbe rich for euer, this must be done in hast, before the Pay∣nims
héere without perceiue vs, for if they perceiue vs, wee shal neuer get hence, but incontinent they will send some of their shippes and take this shippe. Sir quoth the Patrone, wee are ready to obey your com∣maundement, and then the Patron and xxiiii. Maryners went with Huon into the Castle, and charged all the treasure that was within the castell, and other riches that Huon and his company had taken in the towne, they bare all into the ship, and vittayles sufficient, then Huon tooke Escleremond by the hand all smiling, and said. Fayre Ladie, one thing I demaund of you, be yee not displeased to leaue that country & land where as yée were borne? Sir quoth shée, I haue long desired to sée the day that I now doe sée, therefore well wée may thanke our Lord God, that hath giuen vs that grace to be set out of the handes of the enemies of the faith of Christ, wherein wée ought to beleue, then Huon entred into the ship, and the faire Escleremond and Gerames and all the other cō∣pany, so they were in number within the ship some xxxiiij. persons, and with them was Mouslet the Minstrell, & when they were all entred into the ship, and the ship charged with all things necessarie, they weyed vp their anchors, and hoy∣sed vp their sailes, and had so good and fresh a wind, that they were within a while farre from the lands of the twoo Admi∣ralles Sarazins. They sayled so long, that ere it was day light, they were passed the coast of the Roades, & so came by the Isle of Creet: and so by the aid of God and good wind, they arriued at the Port of Brandis. And so about noone, the Admirall that lay at siege before the castell of Anfalerne, had gread maruaile that they could sée no man stirring within the castle, then a Paynim said to Iuoryn. Sir, know for troth, that within the castle yée shall find no man, the Frenchmen are all fled, but wée cannot tell how. When the twoo Admirals heard that, they were sore troubled, and in hast they set foorth a Galley and xxx. Paynims therein, commaunding them to goe to the Posterne, which they did incontinent, and when
they came there, they found neyther man nor woman, but found the Posterne open, and so they entred into the castle, and so opened the broad gates, and the twoo Admirals en∣tred in sore displeased that the Frenchmen were so escaped. Now let vs leaue speaking of them, and retourne to Huon, who was arriued in sauegard at the Port of Brandis. Chap. LXII. ¶ How Huon and his company arriued at the Port of Brandis, and from thence went to Roome to the Pope, who wedded together Huon and the faire Escleremond, and of their de∣parting from thence. WHen Huon and his com∣pany saw how they were arriued at the Port of Brandis, they issued out of their shippe, and deuoustly went to the church of our Lady, and there gaue laud & praise to our Lord God, that had brought them thether in such sauegard, then they went to Garyn of Saint Omers lodging, when they came there, the Ladie of the house (who was right wise and courteous) came to Huon & said. Sir, of your comming I am right ioyfull: but Sir I pray you where haue you left Garyn my Lord and husband? for séeing I sée him not with you, my heart trembleth, for feare least he be dead, or else of some great incumbrance happened vnto him. Madame quoth Huon, to hide the troth from you, cannot cause you to haue him againe, for it hath pleased god that he is departed out of this world: wherefore I will coū∣sell you as much as yée may leaue dolour and heauinesse, for wée must all come thereto, and I repute you so wise, that yée know well that for any sorow or wéeping that ye make, yée cannot haue him againe. When the Lady had heard Hu∣on,
she fell downe in a traunce, more like to be dead then a∣liue, than Huon and his companie set her vp, and comforted her as much as they might, then Escleremond tooke & brought her into her chamber, and did so much with her faire & swéet words, that somewhat shée appeased her, and then sore wée∣ping shée came to Huon, and he said. Madame appease your selfe, and praye for him, for wee must all passe the same passage. With these wordes and such other the Lady was appea∣sed, then they washed and went to dinner, and after Gerames and other of his company went into the towne, and bought horse and Mules to ryde on, and bought rich gownes all in one liuery, there they tarried about viij. daies, and on the ix. day they payed the Patrone of the ship in such wise, that hee was rich euer after, and euery Mariner had a good re∣ward, whereof they thanked Huon and offered to doe him seruice. Then Huon and Escleremond with all their company tooke their leaue of their hostesse, whome they left sore wée∣ping, and at their departing Huon gaue her a rich guift, whereof she humbly thanked him, and when they were all readie and their baggage trussed vp, they depatred and tooke the way towards Roome with great ioy and gladnes: who∣soeuer was ioyfull, Guyer the Prouost was ioyfull in twoo maners, one in that he had found his Lord Huon, and the o∣ther for that he had found his brother Gerames, and also bi∣cause that his Lord Huon, had fulfilled the Messuage that King Charlemaine had charged him to doe to the Admirall Gaudise. So long they rode together, that in a morning they came to Roome, and alighted at their lodging, then they all toge∣ther went to heare diuine seruice, and as they issued out of the Church, they met a seruant of the Popes, then Huon de∣maunded of him in what estate the Pope was in. Sir quoth the Squier, he is readie to heare seruice, then Huon and his companie leapt on their horses, and road to the Popes Pal∣laice and their alighted, and then Huon held the faire Escle∣remond
by the hand, and the good Prouost Guyer held his brother Gerames by the hand, and so all the other twoo and twoo together, then they found ye Pope sitting in his throne deuising with his Cardinalles, then Huon approched and sa∣luted him humbly. When the Pope beheld Huon, he knew him incontinent, and arose vp and came to him and embra∣ced and kissed his cheeke, and said. Faire sonne Huon yee be welcome, I pray you shew me how is it with you, and shew me of your aduentures? Sir quoth Huon, I haue endured many euils and troubles ynow and all these that are come with me, but (thanked be our Lord god) it is so now, that I haue brought with me, the beard and great téeth of the Ad∣mirall Gaudise, and haue also brought his Daughter who is heere present, and Sir I require you to giue her Christē∣dome, and then I will wed her to my wife. Huon quoth the Pope, all this pleaseth me right well to doe, and the rather séeing it is your pleasure, & I desire you to tarrie héere with me this night. Sir quoth Huon, your pleasure shalbe mine. Thus Huon and his companie tarried with the Pope all that night, whereas they made great ioy, and on the nexts morning a Font was made readie, wherein the faire Escle∣remond was christened without changing of her name, and also there was christened Mouslet the Minstrell, and he was called Garyn, and when the Sacrament of Baptisme was finished, the Pope himselfe said seruice, first he confessed Huon, and assoyled him of all his faultes, then hee wedded him to Escleremond, and when diuine seruice was ended, then they went all with the Pope to his Pallaice, and there was made the solempnities of the Mariage, but to shew the maner of their seruice, with the meates and drinkes, and yt apparell of the Brides, it would be ouer-tedious to rehearse it. But one thing I dare well saie, that there had not béene séene of a long time before such a glorious and rich seast, for the Pope did as much for them as though they had béen his owne Brother and Sister, the melodie of the Minstrels that played was so swéet and delectable, that euery man was sa∣tisfied
with the hearing thereof, and specially it was mar∣uaile to heare Garyn the new christened Minstrell to play, hee played so swéetlye on his vyoll, that it was geat ioy to heare it. Thus there was great ioy in the Popes Pallaice, and e∣uen as they were well serued at dinner, so it was better at supper, and at night euery man withdrew himselfe, and the new Brydes lay together in great pleasure all that night, & in ye morning they arose and heard seruice, and then dined, and then they trussed vp al their Baggage and charged their Somers, Mules, and Mullets, and sadled their horses, and then Huon and Escleremond went and tooke their leaue of the Pope, and thanked him for the honour and great courtesie that he had shewed them. Sir quoth the Pope, if it would please you to tarrie longer heere with me, my goodes and my house should be at your commaundment. Sir quoth Huon, I cannot render sufficient thankes to your Holines for the good that yée haue done to vs: But Sir, longer I cannot tarrie, for the great desire that I haue to accomplish the rest of my businesse, therefore Sir, I recommend you to our Lord God. The Pope kissed Huon, and tooke Escleremond by the hand: thus they tooke their leaue, and at their departing, the Pope sent to them a Somer charged with gold, and cloathes of silke, and thus they departed from Rome. Chap. LXIII. ¶ How Huon and his companie arriued at the Abby of Mau∣ryse, whereas hee was receiued by the Abbot and Couent, with great reuerence.
AFter that Huon had taken leaue of the Pope, he and his companie de∣parted, and the faire Escleremond was mounted on a faire mule, and so long they rode, till they might sée ye town of Burdeux. When Huon saw it, he lift vp his hands to the heauens, thanking God of his grace, that he had brought him thether in sauegard, and then he sayd to Escleremond. Faire Ladie, yonder you may sée the Citie and Countrey whereof ye shall be Lady and Duches, though it hath béene ere this time a Realme. Sir (quoth Guyer the Prouost) it is good ye regard wisely your businesse, the which toucheth you right néere, and Sir, if you will doe after my counsell, send first to an Abby that is here by, called the Abby of Maurise, the Abbot is a notable Clarke, let him know of your com∣ming, and that ye wil dine with him. Sir (quoth Huon) your counsell is to be beleeued: and then Huon sent to the Abbot, certifying him of his comming. When the Abbot knew of Huons comming, he was right ioyfull, for he loued intierly Huon, wherefore he sore desired the sight of him, then hée called all his Couent, and charged them in the vertue of obedience, to make them selues readye to receiue Huon, the rightfull Inheritour to the country of Bourdeaux, though the kings of Fraunce be our founders. But as to our good neighbour wée will doe this reuerence, for honour is due to them that deserue it. Then the Couent as they were commaunded, ordered themselues, and so went out of the Abby to méete Huon, who when hée saw them, hée alighted on foote, and also Escleremond and Gerames and all the other, thus the Abbot and his Couent in rich cluthes séeming, mette with Huon, when Huon was néere to the Ab∣bot he was right ioyfull, and the Abbot who anon knew Hu∣on, came to him right humbly and said. Sir Duke of Bour∣deux, thanked be god that ye are come home, for your presence
hath long béene desired, then they embraced each other with wéeping teares for ioy, then the Abbot welcomed the Pro∣uost Guyer and all the other: But he knew not Gerames, for for if he had, he would haue made him great feasting. Chap. LXIIII. ¶ How the good Abbot sent word to Duke Gerard of Bour∣deaux, how his brother Huon was in the Abbey of Maurise. THVS the Abbot with his Couent brought Huon to the Abbey of Mau∣rise, and Huon and Escleremond on foot follo∣wed them, & when he came into the church, Huon offered greate gyftes, and after theyr offerings and prayers made, they went in∣to the hall, and went to dinner: how well they were lerned, it neede not to be rehearsed, they had euerie thing that née∣ded, the Abbot sate by Huon and said. Sir, I pray you shew me how ye haue done, & how ye haue ended your messuage, that ye were charged to do by King Charlemaine. Sir quoth Huon, thanked be our Lord God, I haue accomplished and done all that I was commaunded to do, for I haue brought with me the Beard and the foure great Téeth of the Admi∣rall Gaudise, and also I haue brought with me his Daugh∣ter the faire Escleremond, whome I haue wedded in the citie of Roome▪ and to morrow by the grace of God I will depart to goe to King Charlemaine my soueraigne Lord. Sir quoth the Abbot, of that I am right ioyful, but if it were your plea∣sure, I would send to certefie your comming to Gerard your Brother, that he might see you before yée depart hence. Sir quoth Huon, I am content that yée send for him. Then the Abbot commaunded a Squier of his to goe for Duke Gerard, and so he went and rested not, till he came to
Burdeux before Duke Gerard, & said. Sir, if it be your plea∣sure to come to the Abbey of Saint Maurise, there shall ye find your brother Huon,, who is come lately from beyond the sea: when Duke Gerard heard certainely, how his brother Huon was come to the Abbey of Saint Maurise, hee was so ouercome with ire and displeasure, that his visage became like a flame of fire, and sayd to the messenger: Goe and re∣turne, and say to my brother Huon, that I will incontinent come and visite him. Sir (quoth he) I shall shew him of your comming, and so departed, and came again to the Abby, and shewed Huon what his brother Gerard had sayd. And when Duke Gerard saw that the messenger was departed he was sorrowfull and pensiue, and called to him his father in law, his wiues father, who was named Gibouars, the most falsest traitour that was from the East to the West, and Gerard said to him: Sir, I pray you giue me counsell in that I haue to doe, for all the diuels in hell haue brought my Brother Huon from the parts beyond the Sea, and he is now present in the Abbey of Saint Maurise, the Abbot there hath sent me word thereof, and that I should come thether to speake with him, for as to morrow he would depart to goe to Paris to the king, so that when he is come thether, he will doe so much that all his land shalbe rendred to him, and that I shal haue neuer a foot of land left me, but that which yée haue gi∣uen me with my wife your Daughter, wherefore deare Fa∣ther in law, I pray you in this great matter to councell and aid me, or else I am but lost. Faire Sonne quoth Gibouars, dismay you nothing, for without my wit doe faile me, I thinke to play him a tourne, that it had béen better for him to haue tarried where he was, than to haue come hether to claime my land.
Chap. LXV. ¶ How Gybouars of Beam and Gerard practised Huons death, and how the traitour Gerard came to see his brother Huon, who with great ioy receiued him. THus as ye haue heard, these two traitours conspired, and then Gybo∣uars sayd to Gerard. Faire sonne, go ye your way to your brother Huon, and take with you but one Squier, and when you come there, make to him all the chéere you can, and shew him as great loue as ye can doe, and humble your selfe to him, to the intent that he take in you no suspicion. But when the morning commeth, hast him to depart, and when ye cme with him néere such a little wood, find some rigorous words to him, and make as though ye were dis∣pleased with him, and I shall be readie in that same little wood ambashed, and xl. men of armes with me. And when I see that words are betwéene you, I shall issue out and slay al those that come with him, so that none shal escape aliue, and then take your brother Huon, and cast him into prison, in one of the Towres of your Pallaice in Bourdeaux, and there miserably he shall end his dayes, and then in haste ye shall ride to Paris. But ere ye goe to Paris, ye shall take from him the Admiralles beard and great téeth, and then ye shall shew to the King, how Huon your brother is returned, without bringing either beard or téeth of the Admirall Gaudys, and how for that cause you haue put him in prison. The King will beleeue you, for he hateth Huon greatly, because of the death of his sonne Charlot, whom hee slew: for the hate that the King hath to him in his heart, shall neuer depart from him, and therefore sonne, when you be with your brother,
demaund of him, if he haue the Admirals beard and téeth or not, and whether he doe beare them himselfe, or who else, for if he haue them not, he shall neuer haue peace with the King, but he will cause him to be slaine of an euill death, ei∣ther hanged or drawne, for your brother laide hostage, pro∣mising that he would neuer returne, without he brought with him the Admirall Gaudys beard and great téeth, and also he promised, that he would neuer enter into his heri∣tage, till he had spoken with the King, and that was enioy∣ned him on paine of death. Thus as ye haue heard, these two Traitours deuised and concluded the death of Huon. Gerard (quoth Gibouars) thinke well on your businesse, and I shall goe and assemble toge∣ther fortie of my most secret seruants, and in other places where I can get them, to furnish this enterprise. Sir (quoth Gerard) I shall goe to the Abbey to see my brother, when it is a little néere to night. So when the houre came, the false Traytor departed from Bourdeaux, and with him but one Squier, and so they rode till they came to the Abbey, and there alighted, and when he perceiued his brother Huon, hee imbraced and kissed him with such a kisse as Iudas kissed Christ. When Huon saw his brother Gerard come with such hu∣militie, the water fell from his eyes with kindnesse, and em∣braced him and kissed him, and sayd. Right déere brother, I haue great ioy to see you, I pray you shew me how ye haue done since my departure? Sir (quoth Gerard) right well now I see you in good health. Brother (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile that ye bee thus come alone without company. Sir (quoth Gerard) I did it for the more humilitie, because I know not how ye shall speede with the king, nor whether ye shall haue againe your land, or no, if God will that ye shall haue it, I shal assemble al the Barons of the court to receiue you, & to make you cheere according, this Sir I shall do till you returne, for often times these great Princes are muta∣ble, & lightly beleeue, for this cause Sir, I am secretly come
to you. Brother, (quoth Huon) your aduise is good, I am content that you thus doe, and to morrow betimes I will depart towards Paris; then these two Brethren tooke each other by the hand making great ioy. Brother, (quoth Ge∣rard) I am right ioyous when I sée you thus returned in health and prosperitie, haue you accomplished the Messuage that Kinge Charles charged you withall? Brother, (quoth Huon) know for troth, that I haue the beard and great téeth of the Admirall Gaudise, and beside that, I haue brought with me his Daughter the faire Escleremond, whom I haue taken to my wife, and wedded her in the Citie of Rome, and also I haue héere with me thirtie Somers charged with gould and siluer, and rich Iewels garnished with pecious stones, whereof the halfe part shall be yours, and if I should shew thee the paines, trauailes, and pouerties that I haue endured since I sawe you last, it would bee ouer-long to re∣hearse. Sir, (quoth Gerard) I beléeue you well, but Sir, I pray you shew me by what meanes or aid you did bring your En∣terprize to an end? Brother, (quoth Huon) it was by a king of the Fayrie called Oberon, who did mée such succour and ayd, that I came to my purpose, and strooke off the Admirals head and so tooke his beard and great téeth. Brother, (quoth Gerard) and how do you kéepe them, and where? Brother, (quoth Huon) behould héere Gerames, who hath them in his side, King Oberon did set them there by the Fayrie, and by the will of God. Sir, (quoth hée) which is Gerames? Bro∣ther, (quoth Huon) héere you may sée him before you, he with the great hoarie beard. Sir, (quoth Gerard) of what Land is hée of? He is of the best Fréends that I haue, (quoth Hu∣on) and he is Brother to the good Prouost Guyer, you neuer heard speake of a truer nor more noble man, I found him in a wood, whereas hee had dwelt about Fortie yeares in pe∣nance, God ayded mee greatly when I found him, for if hée had not béene, I could not haue returned hether, much paine and pouertie hee hath endured for my sake, and nowe Bro∣ther,
I pray you shew me how ye haue done since I depar∣ted from you? it hath béene shewed me that ye are very richly married, I pray you where was your wife borne, and of what lineage is she of. Sir (quoth Gerard) she is daughter to Gybouars of Cecyle, who is a great Lord and Signior. Bro∣ther (quoth Huon) I am sorie that yee haue taken such ali∣ance, for I know him for the most vile traytour that can bee found, and the most vntruest. Sir (quoth Gerard) ye doe ill to say so, for I take him for no such person. Chap. LXVI. ¶How these two Brethren departed from the Abbey about midnight, and how the Traitor Gerard began to fall at rude words with Huon, when they approched neere the wood whereas Gibouars lay in ambush. THus as these two brethren deuised of Gibouars, the Abbot came to them, and demanded of Huon, if it were his pleasure to goe to supper. Sir (quoth Huon) when it please you, I and my brother shall be readie. The fayre Escleremond, who was wearie of tra∣uaile, was in her chamber apart, and diuers other of her company with her, whereas she supped and lay that night. Huon was somewhat troubled, because his brother had ta∣ken to his wife the daughter of a Traytour, thus they wa∣shed, and sate them downe to supper, where they were richly serued: and at another table sate the Prouost Guyer and Ge∣rames his brother, and diuers other Barons. Gerard beheld the Prouost, whom hee vtterly hated, be∣cause hee went to seeke for Huon. Hee sware to him selfe, that if hee might once goe out of the Abbey, that he should bee the first that shoulde loose his life, and hee did eate and
drinke but little for thinking to accomplish his ill Enter∣prize. When they had supped, they aroase from the board, and their bedds were made readie. Then Huon called the Abbot apart, and sayd: Sir, I haue brought hether with me great riches, I will leaue it héere with you to keepe vn∣till my returne, and I pray you for any manner of thing that may fall, deliuer it vnto no man liuing, but all onely to my selfe, and if God giue me the grace to returne, your part shall bee therein. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) all that you take mée to keepe shall bée safely kept to your behoofe, and I shall doe so that you shall bée content: then hee went to bed and Ge∣rard with him, where Gerard sayd, Brother if you thinke it good I shall call you vp betimes, for it séemeth that to mor∣row the day will be hot. Brother, (quoth Huon) I am con∣tent. Thus they lay together in one bed, but the Traytour Ge∣rard had no lyst to sleepe, for the great desire that he had to be reuenged of his Brother, who neuer did him any trespasse, but alas why did not Huon know his entent? if hée had, the matter had not gone so to passe. At last the houre came that the Cockes began to crowe, then Gerard awooke Huon, and said: Brother, it were good for vs to arise for anone it will be day, it is good to ride in the coole, but the ill Traytour, his thought was otherwise. When Huon heard his Bro∣ther, he rose vp, and euery man arose vp and made them re∣die, Sir quoth Gerames, how is it that yée be so hastie to de∣part from hence? I pray you let me sléepe a little longer. Sir quoth Gerard, that is ill said, for he that hath businesse to doe that toucheth him néere, ought not to sléepe nor rest vn∣till his businesse be finished. By my troth quoth Huon, my Brother saith troth, for I haue a great desire to speake with King Charlemaine, then euery man trussed vp their things and tooke their horses, and the faire Escleremond was readie and mounted on a stately mule, and so they all tooke their leaues of the Abbot, who was right sorowfull that they would depart so early. Then the gates were opened, and
so departed Fourtéene in a companie, and Escleremond made the Fiftéene, and Gerard rode before to lead them the right way that he would haue them to ride, and Escleremond be∣ing very sumptuously apparelled rode very soberly, and she came to Huon and said. Sir, I cannot tell what ayleth me, but my heart is so sore troubled, that all my bodie trembleth. Madame quoth Huon, be not dismaid, nor haue any feare, for yée be in a good countrey, where by the grace of god, yée shall be serued like a Princesse and Ladie of the countrey, and with those wordes speaking, her Mule stumbled on the one foot before, so that shée had néere hand a great fall, then Huon approched to her, & tooke the bridle of the Mule in his hand & said, Faire Ladie haue yée any hurt? No Sir (quoth shée) but I had almost fallen. By my faith quoth Gerames, we haue done very ill, for that wée departed from the Abbey before day light. Sirs quoth Gerard, I neuer saw men so fearefull for so small a cause. Sir quoth Gerames, I know not why yée speake it, but if I might councell yée, we would not goe one foot far∣ther, but returne againe to the Abbey till day light. By god quoth Gerard, it were great folly to returne againe now for the stumbling of a Mule, I neuer saw men so fearefull, let vs ride foorth and make good chéere, I sée the day beginneth to appeare. So they road foorth vntill they came to a crosse, whereas there was foure wayes, this was about a League from the Abbey. Then Huon rested and sayd: Loe, héere is the border of the Territorie of the Abbey of Saint Maurise, and this one way is to Bourdeaux, the which way I will not ride, for so I haue promised to King Charlemaine, to whome I neuer yet falsed my faith, if I did, it should bee the cause that I might loose my Signiorie, and this other way goeth to Rome, & this other way before vs is ye right way into Frāce, the which way I will ride and none other. So they road foorth and all their companie, and within a while they were néere to the wood, within a bow shoot whereas the Traytour Gybouars lay in ambushment.
Now when Gerard saw his houre and time to speake vn∣to his Brother Huon, he said: Brother I sée you are in mind to goe into Fraunce vnto Kinge Charlemaine, to haue your Lands and Signories, the which I am sure you shall haue, it is a long space that I haue kept it & maintained the Coun∣trey in peace and rest, and good iustice, and haue wonne but little, nor haue hadde but small profit, not the value of one pennie, and I am maried to a noble Ladie, Daughter to a great Lord, and it troubleth my heart sore when you repute him for a Traytour, if hée knewe it by likely-hood it might turne you to great folly, for wee beléeued that you should ne∣uer haue returned, therefore nowe I may say that I am not woorth a pennie: Therefore I would knowe of you, howe you would ayd mée, and what part I shall haue at your re∣turne out of Fraunce? Brother, (quoth Huon) I haue great maruaile of this that you say, you knowe well that in the Abbey of Saint Maurise I haue left Twentie Somers char∣ged with fine gould, and I haue saide vnto you, that your part shall bée therein as much as mine, nor I shall haue no penny but that one halfe is yours. Brother, (quoth Gerard) all this suffizeth not to me, for I would haue part of the Sig∣norie to maintaine mine estate. When Huon vnderstood his Brother, his bloud roase into his face, for hée sawe well his Brother searched all that he could to fall at debate with him, and Gerames who was sage and wise, perceiued anone that the matter was like to goe euill, and sayd vnto Huon. Sir, graunt to Gerard your Brother his demaund, you are both young inough to conquer Landes. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I am content that he shall haue Bourdeaux or Gerone, let him take which hee list. Brother, (quoth Huon) shewe which of these two you will haue, and I will haue the other.
Chap. LXVII. ¶ How these Traytours slewe all Huons Company, except Ge∣rames, and Escleremond, and Huon himselfe, the which all three were fast bound handes and feete and blindfold, and so brought vnto Bourdeaux and were put in prison. WHen the false Traytour Gerard saw and vnderstood his Brother, how hée did graunt him his desire, & saw how that in no wise hée wold striue with him: hee was therewith so displeased that he was néere hand in a rage, then he came to the Prouost Guyer, and sayd. Guyer, Guyer, false Traytour, by thée and by thy purchase I am like to loose all my Signorie, but by the faith that I owe vnto him that cre∣ated mée, before I die I shall strike off thy head, nor I shall not let to doe it for any person, and therewith when he sawe his time, he cried his word and token, and Gybouars who was in the wood with Fortie men armed, brake out with their speares in their rests, and when Huon perceiued them, it was no maruaile though hee was abashed: then humbly he besought our lord God to saue his body from misfortune, and gladly hée would haue returned to the Abbey, but hée was so sore ouer-layd that hee could not, then hée drewe out his Sword, and gaue therewith the first that came such a stroake, that he claue his head to the téeth, and so fell dead to the ground, and Huon strake so vppon the right hand and vppon the left, that whosoeuer he strake a full stroake, née∣ded after no Surgion, if hée had béene armed hée would not lightly haue béene taken without great losse, but his defence could not auaile him, for he and all his companie were vnar∣med, and all the other Fortie were cleane armed, & they all
fought cruelly, in such wise that within a while Twelue of Huons men were slaine in the place, & none escaped aliue ex∣cept Huon, who was beaten downe to the earth & his hands bound: then Gerard the Traytour came to Gerames, who was beaten downe by force, and then hee cut open his right Side, and tooke out thereof the Admirall Gaudise beard and foure great teeth, the which were set there by Kinge Oberon of the Fayrie. Huon séeing the old Gerames lying on the earth, hee sayd with a hie voice vnto Gerard: Brother I pray you shew me that courtesy, as not to slay that old Gentleman, but saue his life. Brother, (quoth Gerard) that hée hath, let him keepe, other hurt hee shall none haue at this time, then they bound his eyes, and then they came to Escleremond, who lay on the earth in a swound they bound her hands and eyes, and so set her whether shée would or not vppon a horse, and Huon as he was blindfold, hée heard the cries & wéepings that she made, then he sayd: Brother Gerard, I pray you for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, suffer none ill to be done to that good La∣die, who is my Wife, nor no dishonour. Brother, (quoth the Traytour Gerard) thinke on your selfe, & speake no more, I shall doe as it pleaseth me. Then they set Huon & Gerams on two horses, & the false Traytour tooke the Twelue dead bodies, and did cast them into the great Riuer of Gerone, then they tooke that way to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and led the thrée Prisoners fast bound vpon thrée horses. Pitie it was to heare the noble Ladie Escleremond complaine, and she said vnto Huon: Ah Sir, you haue sayde to me, that when wée were once in your Countrey of Bourdeaux, that you woulde cause mee to bée crowned with gould: but now I sée well, yt in great paine & miserie we must vse the residue of our liues, you haue found héere an ill Brother, since hée hath purchased for you so much ill, surely there is better faith & troth among the Sarazins, then is in the people of the Realme of France. Madame, (quoth Huon) your trouble more displeaseth mée, then mine owne, God send to my Brother Gerard such re∣ward
as he hath deserued, for ye treasō that he hath done vs. Thus they complayned, and wist not whether they were caried, they entred into ye Citie of Bourdeaux an houre before day. Alas that the good Burgesses of ye City had but know∣en, how their Lord Huon was so falsely betrayed, if they had knowne it, he had béene rescued, and Gerard & Gybouars he∣wen all to péeces, but the false Gerard brought them by priuy darke Lanes to the Pallaice, for that they should not be per∣ceiued. Thus they came to the Castle, where they alighted and vnarmed them, then they tooke Huon and Escleremond & Gerames, and put them all into a deepe Prison all thrée toge∣ther, & ordained that they should haue euery day barley bread and water, and commaunded the Iaylor to giue them none other thing, & also commaunded, that neither man nor wo∣man should speake with them, the Iaylor promised so to doe, for he was seruant to Gybouars, & such as the Maister was, so was the Seruant. Thus Huon betraied pitiously by his Brother Gerard, & set in prison, and with him his wife Es∣cleremond, and Gerames wounded on the Side as he was. Now wee will leaue to speake of this pitious company, enduring great sorow in the horrible prison in the greate Tower of Bourdeaux. Chap. LXVIII. ¶ How the Traytours returned to the Abbey of St. Maurise, and slewe the good Abbot, and tooke away all the Treasure that Huon had left there. THus as ye haue heard here before how Gerard and Gybouars had put in prison Huon and Escleremond and Gerames in great miserie, and when it was day, Ge∣rard and Gybouars departed out of Bourdeaux and all their company, and road againe vn∣to the Abbey, and so came thether to dinner, then Gerard
sent for the Abbot to come and speake with him. When the Abbot heard how Gerard was come againe to the Abbey, he had great maruaile, and so came to Gerard and sayd: Sir, you be welcome, I pray you what aduenture hath brought you hether againe so shortly? I had thought that you had been gone with your Brother Huon. Sir, (quoth the Trai∣tour) after that my Brother Huon was departed hence, hée remembred his riches that he left with you to kéepe, and by∣cause he shall haue great neede thereof, to giue gifts vnto the great Princes and Lordes that be about King Charlemaine, to the entent that his businesse may take the better effect: Therefore my Brother hath sent mée vnto you, desiring you to send his goods vnto him by mée. Sir, (quoth the Abbot) when your Brother Huon departed hence, true it was, that hée left with mée his riches to kéepe, and charged mée, not to deliuer it to any person liuing, but all onely to his owne per∣son: Therefore Sir, by the faith that I owe vnto my Pa∣tron Saint Maurise, I will not deliuer vnto you one penny. When the Traytour Gerard vnderstoode that answeare, he sayd: Dane Abbot thou lyest, for whether thou wilt or not, I will haue it, and no thankes to thée, and yet thou shalt also repent thy woords. Then Gerard sudainly tooke the Ab∣bot by the haire of the head, and Gybouars tooke him by the one arme, and did so strike him with a staffe, that hee all to bruzed him, and then did cast him to the earth so rudely, that his heart burst in his bodie, and so dyed. When ye Monkes saw their Abbot slaine, they had great feare, & so fled away, and the two Traytours with their Swords in their hands, went after them with sore threatnings, & when the Monks sawe howe they could not escape for the two Traytours and their men, they fell downe on their knées, humbly praying them to haue pitie of them, and they would shew them all the gold & treasure that was in the house, to do therewith at their pleasure. Then the Traytour Gybouars said how the Monks had spoken well, & when the Monkes saw how they had peace, they shewed to ye two Traitors the place where ye
treasure was, and deliuered to them the keyes, so they tooke away all the treasure that Huon had left there, and besides that, all the treasure of the church, crosses, sensers, chalesses, copes, and candlestickes of siluer, all they tooke and caryed away, & if I should recite all the riches that they had there, it should be too long to be rehearsed. In that house there was a Monke who was cousin to Gibouars, whome the twoo Traytors made Abbot of that place, so when they had atchieued their enterprise, they departed with all that ri∣ches, wherewith was charged xv. strong Sommers, they left not in the Abbey the value of a Florent, for euerie thing that was good they tooke with them, and so road vntill they came vnto Bourdeaux. Nowe as they passed through the Towne, they were greatly regarded of all the Burgesses of the Citie, who had great maruaile from whence their Lord came with so great riches. These Traytours passed foorth vntill they came to the Pallaice, and there they discharged their Somers, then Gerard tooke the Treasure that fiue of the Somers did carie, and laid it in his Chambers and Coffers, then hée ordained that Ten Somers should be trussed foorth to goe to Paris, and sent them forward, & sayd how hée would follow soone after. Then he and Gibouars dyned, and after meat they mounted vppon their Horses, and the new Abbot Coozen to Gibouars with them, and two Squiers and about sie other Seruants, and so road in hast to ouer-take their Somers with their treasure, and so within two Leagues they ouer-tooke them, & so then they all together road so long, vntill on a Wednesday they came to Paris, they lodged in the Stréete next vnto the Pallaice in a good Hostrie, and were well serued, and so rested vntill the next morning: then they arose and apparelled them in fresh array, and they led with them fiue of their Somers with riches, and two of them they presented to the Quéene, & the other thrée to the King, where∣fore they were receiued with great ioy, then after they gaue great guifts to euerie Lord in the Court, and specially to the Officers, wherefore they were greatly praised.
But whosoeuer tooke any guift, Duke Naymes would take neuer a penie, for he thought that all that riches was not well gotten, and that they did it for some craft, thereby to attaine to some false & damnable enterprise, this Duke was a noble, wise, and a true knight, and of good councell, and he very well perceiued their malice. Then the King commaunded the thrée Coffers to be brought and set in his chamber, and would not looke into them vntill he had spo∣ken with Gerard, whome he caused to sit downe by him, and Gibouars in like manner, and also the new Abbot, for it is an old saying and a true, that they that giue are alwaies welcome. Gerard quoth king Charlemaine, yée be welcome: I pray you, shew me the cause of your comming. Sir quoth Gerard, I shall shew you, the great businesse that I haue to doe with your Maiestie and your Lords, hath caused me to giue these large guifts that I haue giuen to you and o∣thers, and Sir I am sorowfull at my heart for that which I must shew you, and I had rather be beyond the Sea, then to shew you that thing which I must néedes doe, for to hide it, that cannnot auaile me, yet I neuer shewed any thing in all my life with so ill a will, for I shall be blamed of many persons, howbeit, I loue better to defend mine honour then I loue all the world beside. Gerard quoth the King, yée say troth, for better it is to shew the troth, then to be silent in so great a matter which so much toucheth your honour. Chap. LXIX. ¶ How the Traitour Gerard shewed to King Charlemaine, how Huon his brother was retourned to Bourdeaux, without doing of his Messuage to the Admirall Gaudise.
SIr, quoth Gerard, true it is that you haue made me Knight, and beside that, I am your liege man, wherfore I am bound to kéepe your honour to my power, for I am certaine I shall shew you such newes, that all that bee in your Court will be sorrowfull, much more my self. Gerard quoth Charles, come to the point, & vse no more such language nor such ceremonies, by that I sée in you, it is but euill that you will say. Sir quoth hee, but late as I was in my house at Bourdeaux, and with me diuers Lords and Knights, as we were deuising together, I saw my Brother Huon enter into my house, and thrée with him, the one was a yong damosell, and the other an old man cal∣led Gerames. When Duke Naymes of Bauyer heard Gerard, he had great maruaile, when he sayd that Gerames was one of them, and sayd: Ah deere God▪ I heare that, which with great paine I can beleeue, for if it be the same Gerames that I thinke it be, he and I were companions together at a tourney holden at Chalons in Champanie, where he slew by misaduenture, the Earle Salamon. Sir, quoth Gerard, I shall shew you as I haue begunne, true it is, when I saw my brother Huon, I was greatly abashed, howbeit I did him honour, and made him good cheere, and made him and all his companie to dine: then after dinner I reasoned with my brother, and demaunded of him, if he had beene at the holy Sepulcher of our Lord God. But when hee saw that I demaunded that of him, he was sore abashed, so that hee wist not what to an∣swere, and then I perceiued by his words that hee had not beene there. And then Sir, after I demaunded of him, if hee had furnished your message to the Admirall Gaudys, but hee could giue me no answere, nor say any words that I could beléeue, and when I saw that I could find no truth in any of his words, I tooke him, and set him in prison, howbeit, it
was full sore against my will, but I considered in my selfe, that I must owe vnto your grace, faith & fidelitie, and that I am your man, and that for no man liuing, (though he were neuer so néere of my kinne) yet I would not be found with any treason, and therefore Sir, my Brother, his wife, and his Companion, I haue retained them in my prison: where∣fore Sir, it is in you to doe herein what it shall please you best. When all the Princes and Lords that were there vn∣derstood the words of Gerard, and that he had taken his Bro∣ther Huon, and had put him in prison, there were none but that were sorry thereof, and many (for the loue that they bare to Huon) began to wéepe, and demaunded of Gerard, who had done that déed, saying, surely it is done by some manner of treason. Chap. LXX. ¶ How the King commaunded that Huon should be sent for from Bourdeaux, to the intent that he should die. WHen the Emperour Char∣lemaine vnderstood Gerard, he arose vp on his féet, sore troubled and full of yre, for by Gerardes wordes, the ancient hate and dis∣pleasure that the King had to Huon for the death of Charlot his sonne, was renewed in his heart, and said openly that euery man might heare him. Lordes that be héere present, before you all I summon them that were Pledges for Huon, in such wise, that if the Traitour Huon be not rendred into my hands, to doe with him my pleasure: I shall cause thē to be hanged & drawne, and there is no man in my court that may be so hardy, as to speake or desire the contrarie, but I shall cause him to die a shamefull death. And when he had thus said, he sate him
downe againe, and called Duke Naymes to him and said. Sir Duke, ye haue heard what Gerard hath sayd of his bro∣ther Huon. Sir quoth the Duke, I haue well heard him but I beléeue the matter to be otherwise then hee hath sayd, for there is no man will say the contrarie, but that all that Ge∣rard hath sayd, is done by false treason, and you shall finde it so, if the matter be wisely enquired of. Sir quoth Gerard, you may say as it pleaseth you, but I take God to witnesse, and my father in Law Gibouars, and this good notable religious Abbot, and his Chaplaine, that all that I haue sayd is true, for I would not for any thing say that which is not iust and true. Then Gibouars and the Abbot his Chaplaine answered and said, how it was true that Gerard had sayd. By my faith quoth the Duke Naymes, all you foure are false lyars and theeues, and the King is ill counselled if he beléeue you. Nay∣mes (quoth the King) I pray you how seemeth it vnto you, this matter betwéen the two brethren? Sir quoth the Duke, it is a great matter, he that is here before you, is the accuser of his brother, and hath set him in prison, & now he is come and accuseth him here before you, because hee knoweth well he cannot come hither to defend himselfe. I should do a great euil déed, if I had a brother that were banished out of France, and if hee came to mee for refuge, and I then to take him, and set him fast in prison in mine owne house, and then af∣ter to goe and complaine vpon him, to the intent to purchase his death. I say there was neuer Noble man would thinke so to doe, and they that haue done thus, are all false Tray∣tours: all Noble men ought not to beléeue any such, and spe∣cially he that will purchase such a deede against his owne brother, I know well, al that they haue imagined and done, is by false treason, therfore I say according to the right, that all foure are false Traytours, and I iudge for my part, that they are worthie to receiue a villanous death, for they are foure false witnesses. When Gerard heard Duke Naymes, he changed colour,
and waxed as white as snow, repenting in himselfe the déede that he had done to his brother, hee cursed to himselfe Gybouars, in that hee beleeued his counsell, yet hee answered Duke Naymes and sayd. Ah Sir, ye doe me great ill to owe me your ill will. Gerard (quoth the Duke) it is for the ilnesse that is in you, ye that would be one of the Peeres of France: certainly of such a Councellor as you bée, the King hath litle néede, I had rather haue lost one of my hands, then I should once haue consented thereto. Duke Naymes, quoth the King, I will you cause to come before me, all such as were pledges for Huon at his departing. Then the Duke caused them to appeare before ye Kings presence, of whom there were diuers Dukes and Earles. Then King Charlemaine sayd, Sirs, ye know well yee bee pledges for Huon of Bourdeaux, and you know the paine that I laide on your heades, if Huon did not accomplish my message that I gaue him in charge, the which hee hath not fulfilled, wherefore without you deliuer Huon into my handes, yee shall not escape, but that ye shall die all. Sir (quoth Duke Naymes) for Gods sake I require you, be∣leeue me at this time, I counsell you to take a good number of your notable men, & send them to Bourdeaux, and let them take Huon out of prison, and bring him to you, and heare what hee himselfe will say, and if it be true that Gerard hath sayd, then I desire you to haue no pittie on him, but I beléeue surely yee shall finde the matter otherwise then Gerard his brother hath sayd. Naymes quoth the king, your saying is reasonable, I accord thereto, I will he be sent for. Chap. LXXI. ¶ How the Emperor Charlemain went himselfe to Bourdeaux, to cause Huon to bee slaine, for the great ill will that he bare to him.
YE haue heard before, how the good Duke Naymes did so much, that King Charlemain was content to send for Huon, but the king was sore displeased with him, that hée would not abide so long as to send for him, but he made himself rea∣die to go thether in person with all his traine, and comman∣ded that the pledges should be set in prison till his returne: but the good Duke Naymes became pledge for them all to bée forth comming, and so they went not to prison. The King made him readie, and tooke with him twelue of his Péeres, and so tooke their way towards Bourdeaux: God aide Huon, for hee was now in perill of his life, if God had not pitie on him. Thus as I haue shewed you, King Charlemaine nobly accompanied, rode so long by his iourneyes, that hee came within the sight of Bourdeaux, and when he approched neere to the Citie, Gerard came to the king and said. Sir if it please you, I would gladly ride before you into the Citie, to ordain to receiue you accordingly. Gerard quoth the King, it is no néede that you goe before to prepare for my comming, there be other that shall goe before, you shall not goe till I goe my selfe. When Duke Naymes heard the kings answere, hee said to the king. Sir you haue answered like a noble Prince, blessed be he that counselled you so to say: thus the king rode forth, without giuing any knowledge of his comming, and so entered into the Citie of Bourdeaux, and rode to the Pal∣laice and there alighted. Then dinner was made readie, & the King sate down and Duke Naymes by him, and at other bordes other Lords and knights, and there they were richly serued: great brute was made in the Pallaice, so that Huon being in prison, had great maruel of the noyse that he heard, and demaunded of the Gailer what noyse it was that hee heard aboue in the Pallaice: the Gayler answered with
great pride and despight, and sayd, It néedes not you to de∣maund, for you are like to know it too soone, but since you would know it, I shall shew you the truth, it is king Char∣lemaine and all his Barons, who are come hether to iudge you to be hanged. Goe thy way false traitour quoth Huon, canst thou not shew to me none other tydings but that? thus Huon answered the Gayler, and there was as great brute in the Citie as in the Pallaice, with lodging of the kings men. The Commons and Burgesses of the Citie of Bourdeaux had full great maruaile, why the king came thether at that time so sodainely, and the king sitting at the table made good heere, but Duke Naymes who sate by him, began to wéepe, and could neither eate nor drinke, he rose vp then sodainely, so udely that hee ouerthrew cuppes and dishes vpon the ta∣ble. Naymes quoth the King, you haue done ill thus to doe. Sir quoth Duke Naymes, I haue good cause thus to doe, and I haue wondrous great maruaile that I sée you so doted, I am in such sorrow thereby, that I am néere hand out of my wits: how is it that you be come into the Citie of Bourdeaux, for to eate and to drinke, and to take your ease? you néede not to haue gone out of France for that, for you had meate and also good wines sufficient at home in your owne house. Ah right Noble and worthie Emperour, what meane you to do? it is no small matter to iudge to death one of your twelue Peeres, & it is not possible to giue any true iudgement, when you and we are full of wine and spices. But Sir sayd the Duke, by the Lord that mee fourmed, that whosoeuer this day doth eate or drinke wine, as long as the life is in my bo∣die, I shall neuer loue him. Naymes quoth the King, I am content with your will. Then the King commanded that the table should be auoy∣ded & commanded incontinent Huon to be taken out of pri∣son and brought before him, they that had commission to doe it, went to the prison, and there they tooke out Huon and his wife Escleremond, and old Gerames, and they were all three brought before the King and his Barons. Huon sawe
where King Charlemaine sate among all his Lordes, and they all arose when they saw Huon and his companie so pale and ill coloured, by reason of the noysome prison that his brother had put them in, and Escleremond and old Gerames were greatly regarded: and when the Pledges sawe Huon before the King, they said. Sir, now yée may sée Huon for whom we be pledges, wee trust now to be quit and dischar∣ged, it lyeth now in you to doe with him at your pleasure. Sirs (quoth ye King) I hold you quit, you may go from hence forth where you please, for Huon cannot now scape our handes, then Huon kneeled downe before the King right humblie, and when Duke Naymes saw him, the drops fell from his eyes, and sayd to the king. Sir I require you giue Huon audience, and heare what hee will say. I am content quoth the King, let him say what hee will, then Huon knee∣ling on his knées sayd. Sir, in the honour of our Lord Iesus Christ, I first crie mercie to God, and to you and to all your Barons I com∣plaine me of that false traitour that I sée there, who was my brother, if there had béene any faith or troth in him, but I be∣leeue in all the world cannot be found so cruell and false a Traytour, for Cayne that slew Abell his brother, was neuer so false nor so cruell. When all the Lords heard Huon, they al beganne to weepe, saying each to others. Ah good Lord, where is the beautie become that was woont to be in Huon? we haue séene him so faire, that no one could passe him in beautie, and now wee sée him pale and leane and ill colou∣red, it appeareth well, he hath not béene alwayes in the La∣dies Chambers, nor among damsels to sport and to play with him. Thus they deuised of him, and tooke no heede of Gerard who was by them. Then Huon spake againe, and sayd to the King. Sir, true it is, the message that you gaue me in charge to doe vnto the Admirall Gaudys, I haue doone to the ve∣rie vttermost as you haue commaunded vnto mee, and I haue passed the Sea, and came vnto Babilone to the
Admirall Gaudys, & there I required of him in the presence of all his Lords, to haue his beard & foure great téeth. But when he had heard my demaund, he held it for a great folly, and so incontinent he cast me into prison, whereas I had di∣ed by famine, if the Admirals Daughter had not béene, whome yée may sée yonder sitting by the piller, and also by the aid of good King Oberon whome I ought greatly to loue, he is a king of the Fairie right puissant, and is in the Citie of Momur, and he knowing of the perill that I was in, had pitie on me, and came and succoured me in such wise & with so great a puissance, that in Babilon he slew al such as would not beléeue in our Lord Iesus Christ. Then he tooke me out of prison, and then we entred into the Pallaice, and there wee slew all such as wee found there. Then I went to the Admirall Gaudys and strake off his head, and then I cut off his beard, and opened his mouth and drew out foure of his great téeth, and when I had them, then I desired king O∣beron to aid me, and to finde the meanes that I might safely bring the Beard and Téeth to your presence, and to shew me where I might best kéepe them. Then the good king O∣beron, by the grace of our Lord God and by the puissaunce that God had giuen vnto him, he closed them within the side of Gerames, so that they could not be perceiued, and Sir know for troth, ye neuer heard of such a man. Now when I saw that I had fournished your messuage, I retourned, & tooke with me the faire Ladie Escleremond Daughter to the foresaid Admirall Gaudys, and the Twelue gentlemen that went with me out of Fraunce, who alwaies haue béen with me. And Sir, if I should shew you the great paines and pa∣uerties that I and they haue suffered, it would be too long to rehearse, but I may well say, if the grace of God had not been, I had neuer come hether againe, if I had had x. liues I could neuer haue escaped the death. Next after all these paines and trauailes that I and they that were with mee suffered, by the grace of God we came and arriued at Rome, whereas the Pope receiued me with great ioy, & there wed∣ded
me to Escleremond the Admiralles daughter, whom you may sée yonder all desolate, and full of displeasures, and not without cause. When the Barons that were there heard the pittious complaints of Huon, euerie man of pitie beheld the Lady, who pale and ill coloured sate sore wéeping, so that such as regarded her, were constrained to take part of her sorrow, there was no man but they began sore to wéepe, and Huon who was before the King, was sorrowfull to sée his wife make so great dolour. Then hee sayd vnto the King. Sir, if you will not beleeue my saying, send to Rome to the Pope to know the truth, if you proue my words contrarie, I sub∣mit my selfe to receiue such death, as you and your Barons can deuise, if the Pope doe not beare witnesse of that I haue sayd, God forbid that I should shew you any thing other∣wise then truth. I haue sayd nothing, but hee shall shew to∣kens that my saying is true, and I can say more if I would shew all, but it is not néedefull that I should make a long sermon. But Sir, thus as I haue shewed you, I did returne from the place that you sent me to, and Sir know for truth, I came not so vnprouided, but that I brought with me great plentie of gould and siluer, and my companie came all with mee, and I purposed not to rest in any place till I had spoken with your grace, for the great desire that I had to see you, and so along I rode till I came to an Abbey heere hard by, a foure leagues hence called Saint Mauris, because the Ab∣bey was of your foundation, and not pertayning to the land of Bourdeaux, for I would not haue entred into this towne, because of the commandement that you gaue me. Thus I came and lodged me in the Abbey, and the Abbot receiued me with great ioy, and hee sent word of my being there to my brother Gerard, and the traytour came to mee like a false traytour, and brought with him but one Squire, whereby now I may perceiue, that in him was nothing but falsenesse and treason. Huon quoth Duke Naymes, your rea∣son is good, for if he had beene true as he ought to haue been,
he ought to assemble the Barons and Lords of the Country, and so to haue come with them, and haue receiued you with reuerence and honour. Sir quoth Huon, it is true, but the Traytour did otherwise, for when hee was come to mee, by great subtiltie hee demaunded how I had sped in my iour∣ney, and whether I had spoken with the Admirall Gaudys or not, and declared to him your message, and if I had brought with mee his beard and foure great teeth: and I shewed him I had accomplished your whole commande∣ment, then the vnhappy Traitour demaunded where I kept them, and I shewed him, for I had no mistrust in him. Then he so exorted mee, that at the houre of midnight hee made me to arise hastily, and mkde me and al my company ready, and so leapt on our horses and rode forth our way, and when  came to a crosse way, and saw that I tooke the way into France, he beganne to speake rigorously, to haue occasion of some strife betwéene vs, and neere thereunto was a little wood, whereas there lay in ambushment Gibouars and his companie, fortie men of armes well armed, and they came and ranne at mee and my companie that were vnarmed, whereby they found in vs but small resistance, and so finallie the twelue Gentlemen that were with mee, were all slaine and all to hewen, and then they tooke their dead bodyes and did cast them into the Ryuer of Gerone, then they strake me to the earth, and bound fast mine féete and handes, and blindfolded mine eyes, and in like sort they did to my wife, and then they came to Gerames, and the Traitour my Bro∣ther came to him, and with a sharpe knife opened his side, and there  tooke the beard and foure great treeth of the Admirall Gaus, the which were set there by king Oberon, the  Traytour knew the place whereas they lay, by rea∣ that I had shewed him therof before, would to God that the same time that hee came to Gerames to doe that cruell  that Gerames had beene armed, I am sure then the  durst not haue regarded him, to haue done him , but Sir when he had taken out the beard and téeth,
then he bound Gerames handes and féete, hurt as he was, as Sir ye may know the truth by him. Then Gerames stept forth and lift vp his cloake, and shewed the king the wound in his side, the which euerie man might sée that was there. Sir quoth Huon to the king, when he had done all this, hee set vs on three leane horses, and so brought vs into this towne bound hands and féete, and then set vs in a déepe pri∣son, and so hath kept vs hetherto with bread and water, and so hath taken from vs all the riches that wee brought with vs, and Sir, if hee be so hardie to say the contrarie, that it is not true that I haue sayd, let him and Gybouars, like tray∣tours as they be, arme themselues, and I shall fight against them both, and if I can conquere them both, whereof I haue no doubt (with the aide of our Lord God) then let them haue as they haue deserued: and if I cannot ouercome them, nor make them to shew the truth, I will that then incontinent you cause me to be drawne and hanged. By my faith quoth Duke Naymes, Sir, Huon can say nor offer no more, for hee offereth to proue the contrarie of that Gerard hath saide. Sir quoth Gerard, my brother sayth at his pleasure, because hee knoweth well that I will not striue a∣gainst him, because he is mine elder brother, let the king doe as it shall please him, as for me, I neuer consented to doe so cruell a deede as hee layeth to my charge. Ah good Lord quoth Duke Naymes, how the false Traitour can cloke and couer his ilnesse. Huon quoth Charlemain I cannot tel what you haue done, but I will you shew mee the beard and oure great teeth of the Admirall Gaudis. Sir quoth Huon, I crie you mercie, I haue shewed you how they be taken from me, by the false traytour my Brother Gerard. Huon quoth the Kinge, yée know well at your departure out of Fraunce, I charged you vppon paine of your life, that i by aduenture you returned againe into France, that you should not bée so hardy as to enter into this Citie of Bourdeaux, vntill you had spoken with mee first, and to keepe mee promise, you deliuered to mee Hostages, the which I haue quit séeing I
haue you in my handes, it lyeth now in mée either to hange you or to draw you, or to giue vnto you any other iudgment, for at your departure you were agréed that I should so doe, and by the faith that I owe vnto Saint Denis, before it bee night I shall cause thée to bee hanged and drawne, and that shall I not let so to doe for any man liuing, for nowe I take you in your owne house. Sir, (quoth Huon) God forbid that a Kinge of Fraunce should doe so great a crueltie. My Lord, I crie you mercie, for Gods sake doe not to mee so great an out-rage, for you may knowe right well that perforce I was brought hether, and therefore great King, I require you let mee haue right∣full and true iudgement. By my faith Huon, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is but a small request that you make, for your right is so cleare, that if reason may be shewed to you, there is no man can say the contrarie, but that your Lands ought to bee rendred vnto you franke and frée, and your Brother Gerard to bee hanged and strangled. Then the Duke said to the King: My Lord, I require you haue pitie of Huon, and doe nothing to him but right, and you shall doe great sinne without you doe him right. Naymes, (quoth the King) you know well it is in mée to cause Huon to die, but séeing that he is one of my Péeres, I will order him by iudgement. When the Lordes and other Knightes heard the King say so, they were right ioyfull, for then they beleeued that the King would haue pitie of Huon, but whosoeuer was ioyfull, yet Duke Naymes was not content, and sayde to the King: My Lord, by that I sée and heare, you beare Huon but small oe, seeing that you will put him to iudgement, considering his deedes and sayings to be true, and namely whereas hee ffereth to prooue it by the holy Father the Pope, then Huon with-drew backe and leaned him to a piller there by. Then the Kinge called vnto him all his Peeres and Lordes, and . Sirs, I require you by the faith and truth and homage that you beare vnto mée, that for me, nor for mine amitie,
that you ayd not Huon against mée, nor lay nor doe no false∣hood, but the most rightfull iudgement that you can make, doe, I charge you giue true iudgement, without any fauour or partialitie. When the Lords heard the King say so vnto them, and that he coniured them so sore to doe right and iu∣stice, well they perceiued, that the King had great hate vnto Huon, and that the death of his Sonne Charlot was not for∣gotten out of his mind. Then they all together drew apart into a Chamber, right pensiue and mourning, and they sat downe on benches, and beheld each other without speaking of any word a long space. When Duke Naymes saw that, hée arose vppon his féet and sayd: Sirs, yée haue heard how the King hath charged vs to say the troth, wée may perceiue well by him, that hee beareth great hate vnto Huon, who is one of our Companions, and therefore Sirs, I require you, that euerie man by himselfe will say his aduise as hée thin∣keth. Chap. LXXII. ¶ How the Twelue Peeres drew to counsaile, to giue sentence vppon Huon, either with him or against him. THen there rose vp a knight called Gaulter, hée was yssued of the lineage of Ganelon, who was one of the Péeres of Fraunce, then hée sayd. Sirs, as for mée, I say, séeing the case as it is, that Huon by right iudgement ought to bee hanged and drawne, for as yée know well, the King hath founde him in the Citie of Bourdeaux: therefore I say that the King may (without doing any sinne) put him to death, and Sirs, if yee thinke that I haue sayde good reason, agrée yée then to the same, and let Gerard his Brother be Lord and Maister of all
the Landes and Signiories that should appertaine vnto Hu∣on. I consent and will as much as toucheth my part, that Gerard be one of the Péeres of Fraunce, in the place of Huon his Brother, and when Gaulter had ended his reason, Henry of Saint Omers spake and sayd. Sir Gaulter, goe and sit downe, your wordes can beare none effect, for they bée of no valure. But Sirs, (quoth hée) shortly to speake and righteously to iudge, I say that it is rea∣son, that Huon be restored to all his Landes, for his déede is well prooued and by good witnesse, as our holy Father the Pope, for wee may beléeue surely, that Gerard his Brother that thus hath betrayed him, hath done it by false couetous∣nesse: therefore I say and iudge that Gerard bee drawne at horse tayles, and then hanged vntill hée be dead. Then hée sayd no more, but sat downe againe. When Henry of Saint Omers had sayd his reason, yt Earle of Flaunders arose vp and said to Henry. All that you haue sayd, I will not consent thereto, but I shall shewe you mine aduise what ought to bée done. Sirs, yée all knowe well the world, the which as nowe is little woorth, for nowe adayes cannot be found such true Fréends as were woont to bée, yée may well sée by these two Brethren, ye strife that is betwéene them is foule and dishonest, wée should doe well, if we could find the meanes by any manner of wayes to appease them, and therefore I counsaile, let vs all together goe to the King, and desire him to haue mercie & pitie of both these twoo Bre∣thren, and that it might please him to appease them, & ren∣er to Huon all his Landes, and if wee could bring it to this point, it should bée a good déede as to accord them together. Chap. LXXIII. ¶ How the Peeres layd all the deede vppon Duke Naymes, to giue the iudgement vpon him: But for all that euer he could say or doe, the King iudged Huon to die.
AFter that the Earle of Flan∣ders had spoken, the Earle of Chalons rose vp and said. My Lord of Flanders, your rea∣son is good, and you haue spoken like an Noble man: but I know surely, that the King will doe nothing at our desires. But Sirs if ye thinke it good, let vs all put the whole matter vp∣on Duke Naymes of Bauyer, and all that hee will say, let vs agrée thereto, then all the Lords accorded together, and sayd how the Earle of Chalons had sayd right well. Then they came to Duke Naymes, and desired him that he would take the charge of that matter vpon him, and whatsoeuer he did, they were all agreed thereto: when the Duke heard them, he stood still a certaine space, and beganne to studie on the matter, and tooke all the tenne Peeres to counsell with him. And when the faire Escleremond saw Huon her husband in that danger, among them with whom he should haue béene in ioy, then she beganne sore to wéepe, and sayd. Ah Huon, I sée here great pouertie, when in the same proper towne whereas you ought to be Lord, to be in this danger, and be∣side that, ye are not beleeued nor heard of any man that is here, for any proofe or witnesse that yee can say or shew. King Charlemaine will not beléeue that you haue béene in the Citie of Babylone, and yet surely there you haue beene, for I saw you there slay my Father the Admirall Gaudys, and tooke his beard, and drew out of his mouth foure of his grea∣test teeth, great pitie it were if you should die for your truth and faythfulnesse, but the thing that most feareth me, is that I sée none that be héere likelie to be a Noble man, except the King, (who is chiefe of all other) and yet me thinkes hee is full of falshood, for I sée none other but he that séekes your death. But I promise to God, that if hee suffer you to haue this wrong and thus to die, I say then as for my part, that Mahound is better worth then your King Charlemaine, and
it be so that you receiue death without a cause, I will neuer more beléeue in your king, but renounce his law, and beléeue in Mahound. There were many Lords and knights that heard the La∣dies words, whereof they had such pitie, that the most part of them beganne to wéepe. And when Huon heard his wife, he turned toward her, and sayd. Ladie I desire you to leaue your sorrow, and trust in God almightie, who so oftentimes hath succoured vs, you know not what he will doe, let vs bee content with his good pleasure. Thus with such words Hu∣on appeased the fayre Escleremond. And Duke Naymes, who was in counsell with the other Peeres, sayd to them. Sirs I haue great sorrow at my heart bicause of these two Bre∣thren, so that I cannot tell what counsaile to find: I desire you all in this waightie matter to counsaile me, and shewe mee your opinions therein. Sir, (quoth the Lords) other counsaile you shall not haue of vs, for we haue layde all the matter vppon you, to doe therein what it shall please you. Sirs, (quoth the Duke) to dissemble the matter auayleth not, but since that Huon must passe by iudgement, how say you, shall he be hanged or drawne? Sir quoth Gaulter, who was the first speaker, mée thinkes he can escape none other∣wise? Ah Traytour quoth the Duke, thou liest falsely, for it shall not follow after thy councell, whether thou wilt or not, there is no man this day that shall be so hardie as to iudge him to die, therefore Sirs yet shew me againe, whe∣ther yée will agrée to my councell. Sir quoth they, wée haue laid the charge vpon you, the which we will all abide by, but whosoeuer was glad, Gaulter was sorowfull & angrie, for he would haue consented to the death of Huon. Then all the Barons right sad and pensiue went out of the counsell Chamber, and they could find no manner of wayes how to saue Huon, but they all prayed to God to aide and succour him. And Huon seeing the Barons comming so sadly together, thought that the matter was not at a good poynt, whereby hee beganne sore to weepe: when Esclere∣mond
and Gerames saw the sorrow that Huon made, they had great pitie thereof. Then Huon beheld Duke Naymes, for he knew well all the matter lay in his hands, he feared greatly the iudgement that should be made vpon him and said. Thou very God and man, as I beléeue verily that thou didst die on the holy crosse to redeeme vs all, and that on the third day thou didst rise from death to life: I require thee humbly in this great neede to succour me as truely as I am in the right, for more wrong no man can haue. Then the Duke Naymes of Bauier came to the king, and sayd. Sir, will it please you to heare what we haue deuised? Yea quoth the king I desire nothing else to know. Well Sir quoth the Duke, then I demaund of you, in what place of your Regi∣on thinke you to iudge one of your Peeres of Fraunce? Naymes quoth the King, I know well you be a Nobleman, and all that you say is to deliuer Huon of Bourdeaux, but I will ye know, all shall not profite him. Then the Duke sayd, Sir to say so ye doe great wrong. Therefore sir regard well in what place you will haue one of your Peeres iudged, if you know not where it should be done, I will shew you. In your Realme are but three places to doe it in: The first is the Towne of Saint Omers, the second is Orleance, and the third is Paris, and therefore Sir, if you will proceede vpon Huon by iustice, it is conuenient that it bee done in one of these three places, for here in this town he cannot be iudged. Naymes quoth the King, I vnderstand well why you say this, I well see and perceiue, that you entend to none other end, but to deliuer and quit Huon: I had thought to haue en∣treated him by the order of iustice, to the intent that none of you should haue reprooued mee, therefore I ordained that he should haue beene iudged by you that bee the Péeres of France, and I sée well you haue done nothing therein, and therefore as long as you liue, you shall meddle no more with that matter, but by the beard that I beare on my chinne, I shal neuer dine nor eate meat after this dinner, til I sée him hanged and drawne, for all your bearing of him against me▪
Then he commanded the tables to be set vp, and when Ge∣rard vnderstood the king, he was ioyfull thereof in his hart, but he made no semblance of ioy, because of the Lords that were there present. When Huon and Escleremond had heard how the King had sworne the death of Huon, the dolorous weepings and teares that they made were so extreame, that hard it were to declare it, and Escleremond sayd to Huon. Ah Sir, now I see well that great pitie it shall be the departing of vs two, but if I had a knife, I would not abide your death, but first I shoulde slay my selfe before this false and vntrue king. Her complaints were so pitifull, that most part of the Lords wept for pitie, and the old Gerames sorely wept and sayd: Ah good Lord God, in what howre was I borne? in great dolour and paine haue I continued my youth, and now in mine age thus shamefully to die? Thus all three made such sorrow, that it would haue made a hard heart to lament. All three thought no otherwise but to die, because they had heard King Charlemaine make such promise, but that which God will saue, no man can let: and god saue the good king Oberon, for king Charlemaine shalbe forsworne, as ye shal heare hereafter. Now let vs leaue speaking of this pitious companie, and speake of the noble king Oberon of the Fayrie, who as then was in his wood. Chap. LXXIIII. ¶ How king Oberon came to succour Huon, and made Gerard to confesse all the treason that he had purchased against Hu∣on his brother.
YE haue heard before, how King Oberon was displeased with Huon, bicause he had broken his commandement. But when Huon had béen at Rome, and con∣fessed all his sinnes, and was assoiled of the Pope: then King Oberon was content, and in his heart for∣gaue all the ill will that he had to Huon, and as he sat at dy∣ner he began to wéepe. When his Seruants saw that, they had great maruaile, and sayd vnto him: Sir, we desire you to shew vs, why you doe weepe and be so troubled? there is some displeasure done vnto you: therefore for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, wee desire you hide it not from vs. Sirs, (quoth the Kinge) I remember nowe the vnhappie Huon of Bourdeaux, who is returned from the farre parts, and he hath passed by Rome, and there hath taken his Wife in mariage, and is confessed of all his sinnes, for the which sinnes he hath béen by me sore punished. But it is time if e∣uer I will doe him any good, now to ayd him and to succour him against King Charlemaine, for he hath sworne neuer to goe to bed, vntill he haue hanged & drawne the poore Huon, but by the grace of our Lord God, Charlemaine shall bée for∣sworne: for at this time I shall succour and ayd him, for he is as now in such a danger, that without he be succoured, in∣continent death is néere him, he was neuer in his life in such perill. He is now in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux, & his Wife the fayre Escrelemond and the old Gerames, with fetters on their feete, being in great sorrow, and king Charlemaine is set at dinner, and hath made his oath to hang Huon, but yet whether hee will or not, he shall be periured, for I will goe to my Fréend Huon and helpe him at his neede, therefore I wish my Table and all that is thereon, neere to King Char∣lemaines Table, and somewhat aboue his about two foot hy∣er, & also I will, bicause I haue heard say, that often times of a little Castle commeth a greater: therefore I will that
on my table be set my Cup, my Horne, and my Armour, the which Huon conquered of the Gyant Angolaffer, and also I wish with me a C.M. men of armes, such as I was woont to haue in battaile. He had no sooner said the words, but by the will of god and the puissance of the Fayrie, his table and all that king Oberon had wished, was set iust by king Char∣lemaines table, more higher and greater then his was. When king Charlemaine saw the table, and the Cuppe, Horne, and coate of maile, he had great maruaile, and said to Duke Naymes: Sir Duke, I beléeue you haue enchaun∣ted mée. Sir, (quoth the Duke) neuer in my life I mele with any such matter: the Lords & such as were there, were greatly abashed howe that matter came to passe. Gerames who sat néere to Huon, when he saw the Table, the Cup and horne of Iuorie, & the Armour thereon, he knew them well, and said to Huon. Sir, be not dismayed, for on yonder Ta∣ble that you may sée, is your Cup & horne of Iuorie, and coat of maile, whereby I perceiue that you shall bée succoured by King Oberon. Huon beheld the Table, & had great ioy when he saw it, then he lifted vp his hands to heauen and thanked our Lord God, that hée would visit such a poore sinner as hee was saying: Ah Kinge Oberon, in many great needs haue you succoured me. Therewith arriued King Oberon in the Citie, whereof the Burgesses & the Commons were greatly abashed, when they saw such a number of men of war enter into their citie, without any knowledge before. When king Oberon was within the Towne & all his company, he said to his Lords: Sirs, looke that you set good watch at euery gate, so that no man go out, the which they did diligently, for at e∣uerie gate they set x.M. men. Then King Oberon tooke the way to the Pallaice, and at the gate he left x.M. men, com∣manding them vpon payn of their liues, that they should not suffer any man to passe out, and also he commanded, that if they heard him blow his Horne of Iuorie, that incontinent they should come into the Pallaice to him, & slay all such as they should find there. Then king Oberon went vp into the
Pallaice, and many of his Lords with him, he was richly apprrelled in cloath of gold, and the border thereof was sette with rich precious stones, goodly it was to behold, for a fay∣rer little person could not be found: hee passed iust by King Charlemaine, without speaking of any word, and went so néere to him, that he shouldred him so rudely, that his bonnet fell from his head. Ah good Lord quoth Charlemaine, I haue great maruaile what this dwarfe may be, that so rudly hath shouldred me, and almost ouerthrowne my table, he is fierce when hee thinkes scorne to speake to me, howbeit, I will see what hee will doe, I cannot tell what hee thinketh to doe, but me seemeth hee is right ioyfull, and also he is the fayrest creature that euer I saw. When Oberon had passed by the King, he came to Huon and wished the fetters from all their féete, and led them before Charlemaine without any woord speaking, and caused them to sit downe with him at his own table that he had wished thither: then he tooke his cup, and made thereon thrée crosses, then incontinent the cup was ful of wine, then King Oberon tooke it, & gaue it to Escleremond to drinke, and then to Huon, and so to Gerames, and when they had all three dranke well, he said to Huon. Friend arise vp, and take the cuppe and beare it to King Charlemaine, and say vnto him, that he drinke to you in the name of peace, if hee refuse it, hee did neuer such a follie in all his life. King Charlemaine, who sate néere to them at his owne table, hea∣ring king Oberons words, wist not what to thinke, and so sate still and durst not speake one word, for the great mar∣uailes that he saw there, and no more durst none of his men, for they were so abashed, that there was none there but that gladly would haue béene a hundred leagues thence. But whosoeuer was afrayde, Gerard was not verie well plea∣sed. Then Huon rose from Oberons table, and tooke the cuppe, and went therewith to king Charlemaine, and deliuered it to him. The king tooke it, & durst not refuse it, as soone as it was in his hands it was drie & voyde, & not a drop of wine therin.
Fellow quoth the King, you haue inchaunted me. Sir quoth Oberon, it is because you are full of sin, for the cup is of such dignitie, that none can drinke thereof without he be a noble man, and cleane without deadly sinne, and I know one that ye did not long agoe, the which as yet you were neuer con∣fessed of, and if it were not to your shame, I should shew it héere openly, that euery man should heare it. When the Em∣perour Charlemaine heard King Oberon, hee was abashed, and afraid that King Oberon would haue shamed him open∣ly: then Huon tooke againe the cuppe, and then incontinent it was full of wine againe, and then Huon bare it to Duke Naymes, who sate next to Charlemaine. Naymes tooke the cup and dranke thereof at his pleasure: but all the other could not touch the cup they were so full of sinne. Then Huon re∣turned to king Oberon, and sate downe by him, then Oberon called to him Duke Naymes, and commanded him to rise from Charlemaines table, and to sit downe by him at his ta∣ble, the which Duke Naymes did, for hee durst not say nay. Then Oberon sayd to him. Sir Duke Naymes, right good thanks I giue you, in that you haue béene so true and iust to Huon, and thou King Charlemaine that art Emperour of the Romaines, behold here Huon, whom wrongfully and with∣out cause you haue disenherite, and would take from him all his lands, hee is a Noble man and true, and besides that I say vnto you for truth, hee hath done your message vnto the Admirall Gaudys, and I ayded to bring him to his death, and then hée tooke out of his mouth foure of his grea∣test téeth, and also did cutte off his white beard, and I did lose them within the side of Gerames by the will of God, this that I haue sayd, you may bee surely beléeue, for at all these déedes I was present. Sée yonder false Traitour Ge∣rard, who by his malicious intent hath done this treason, and to the ende that you may know the matter more surely, you shall heare it confessed by his owne mouth. Then Oberon sayd to Gerard, I coniure thée by the diuine puissance and power that God hath giuen mee, that héere
before King Charlemaine and all his Lords, thou shew and declare ye troth of this treason, which thou hast done against Huon thy Brother. When Gerard vnderstoode Oberon, hee was in such feare that hée trembled for dread, for hée felt in himselfe, that hee coulde haue no power to hide the troth of the treason, & then he sayd. Sir, I sée well to hide the troth cannot auaile mée, therefore true it is, I went to the Abbey of Saint Maurise to sée my Brother Huon, and Gybouars ac∣companied with Fortie men at armes, wee departed from this Citie and layde our ambushment in a little wood about twoo Leagues from this Citie, to watch when my Brother Huon should passe by that way. Gerard, (quoth King Obe∣ron) speake out hyer that you may the better be heard, and that euerie man may heare the treason & falsenesse that you haue done vnto your Brother. Sir, (quoth Gerard) I wote not what to say, for I haue done so ill and falsely against my Brother, that more ill I could not doe, and I am ashamed to recount it. But to say truely, that before it was midnight, I made my Brother to rise and to depart from the Abbey, and when wee came néere the place where as my Father in law Gibouars was with his ambushment, I began to striue with my brother so highly, that Gibouars might heare mee, who when he heard me speake, he brake forth of his ambush∣ment, and ranne at my brothers companie, and so slew them all, except these three that be here, then we tooke the dead bo∣dies, and did cast them into the Riuer of Gerone, then wee tooke Huon and his wife, and the old Gerames, and bound their handes and féete, and blindfolded their eyes, and so brought them on thrée leane horses into the Citie, and I tooke out of the side of old Gerames the beard and foure great téeth, the which (if it please you) I shall fetch from the place where I left them. Gerard quoth Oberon, you shall not neede to take that la∣bour, for when it shall please me, I can haue them without you. Well Sir quoth Gerard, thus when I had set them in prison, I went backe againe to the Abbey, and then I de∣maunded
of the Abbot and Couent, where the treasure was that my Brother had left there, and that hée should deliuer it to me, bearing him in hand that my Brother Huon had sent for it. The good Abbot would not deliuer it to me, where∣fore Gybouars and I slew him, & then wée made this Monke héere the Abbot, who is néere of kinne to Gybouars, to the en∣tent that he should ayd to beare vs witnesse, and to iustifie our sayings. Then we tooke all the treasure that was there, and brought it hether, then I charged Tenne Somers, the which I had with me to King Charlemaines Court at Paris, the which treasure I gaue part thereof to the King, and to other, by whom I thought to be aided to performe mine vn∣happie Enterprize, and I beléeued surely, that by reason of the riches that I gaue, that my Brother should haue recei∣ued death, and thereby I to haue béene Lord and Maister of all his Landes and Signiories, and all this treason that I haue shewed, Gybouars caused me to doe it, or else I had ne∣uer thought to haue done it. Gerard, (quoth King Oberon) if it please our Lord Iesus Christ, you and he both shalbe hanged by the necks, there is no man liuing shall saue you. Sir Emperour Charlemaine, you haue well heard the confession of Gerard, of ye great trea∣son that Gybouars and he haue done vnto Huon: but by the Lord that fourmed me to his semblance, both they two and the Abbot and his Chaplaine, shall bée hanged for their false witnesse. By the faith that I owe to Saint Denis, (quoth King Charlemaine) they cannot escape it. Sir, (quoth Duke Naymes) it is great sinne to trouble a noble man, you shall doe well if all foure be hanged. When all the Lordes heard Gerard confesse that great treason that hée had done vnto his Brother, they blessed them, and had great maruaile of the false treason that the one Brother did to the other.
Chap. LXXV. ¶ How King Oberon caused to be hanged the foure Traytours, Gerard, Gybouars, and the two Monkes, for their false wit∣nesse, and of the peace made betweene Huon and Charle∣maine: And how King Oberon gaue vnto Huon his Realme of the Fayrie. WHEN King Oberon had heard Gerard confesse the treason done to his Brother, and heard howe Gerard had offered to goe and fetch the beard & great téeth, and how he had denied him to goe: then he sayd, I wish them here vpon this Table, he had no sooner made his wish, but they were set on the Table, whereof all such as were there hadde great mar∣uaile. Sir, (quoth Huon to King Oberon) humbly I require you, that of your grace you will pardon my Brother Gerard all the ill that he hath done against me, for he did it by Gybo∣uars, and as for me, héere, and before God I pardon him, and Sir, if you will doe thus, I shalbe content therewith. And to thentent that we may vse our liues from henceforth in good peace and loue, I will giue him the halfe part of my Lands & Signiories, and Sir, in the honour of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, haue pity of him. When ye Lords that were there present vnderstood Huon, they all for pity began to wéepe, & sayd among themselues, that Huon was a noble knight, and that it had béen pity if ye matter had framed otherwise. Sir Huon, (quoth Oberon) it is not necessarie to request this, for all the gold that is in the world shall not respit their deaths. I wish by the puissance that I haue in the Fayrie, that here beneath in the meadow there be a paire of Gallows, and all iiij. thereon hanged. Incontinent it was don, & all iiij. han∣ged: thus as ye haue hard ye traitors were paid their deserts.
When king Charlemaine had séene the great maruailes that were done by king Oberon, he sayd to his Lords. Sirs I beléeue this man be some God himselfe, for there is no mortall man can doe this that he hath done. When Oberon vnderstood the Emperour, he sayd. Sir know for truth I am no God, but I am a mortall man as you be, and was engen∣dred on a woman as you were, and my father was Iulius Ce∣sar, who engendred me on the Ladie of the Secret Isle, who had béene before louer to Florymont sonne to the Duke of Al∣bany, she bare me nine moneths in her wombe, and I was begotten by Iulius Cesar, when he went into Thessaly after Pompey the Great, he was amorous of my mother because she prophesied that my Father Iulius Cesar should winne the battaile as he did, and when I was borne, there were with my mother many Ladies of the Fairye, and by them I had many gifts, and among other there was one, that gaue mee the gift to be such a one as you sée I am, whereof I am sory, but I cannot be none otherwise, for when I came to the age of thrée yéeres, I grew no more, and when this Ladie sawe that I was so little, to content againe my mother, shee gaue me againe, that I should be the fairest creature of the world, and other Ladyes of the Fairie gaue me diuers other gifts, the which I ouerpasse at this time, and therefore Sir know for truth, that aboue all things God loueth faith and troth, when it is in men, as it is here in Huon, and because I know for certaine that he is true and faithfull, therefore I haue al∣waies loued him. After that king Oberon had ended his words, and shewed the Emperour Charlemaine of all his estate, he called Huon and sayd. Sir arise vp, and take the beard and the téeth, and beare them to king Charlemaine, and desire him to render you your landes as he promised. Sir quoth Huon, I ought so to doe, then Huon came to King Charlemaine, and sayd. Sir by your grace, and if it may please you, receiue here the beard and téeth of the Admirall Gaudis. Huon quoth the King, I hold you quit, and I render to you all your lands and signio∣ries,
and pardon you of all mine ill will, and put all rancour from mée, and from hencefoorth I retaine you as one of my Péeres. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke God and your grace. Then the Emperour Charlemaine clipped and kissed Huon, in token of peace and loue. When the Lords saw that, they wept for ioy, and than∣ked God that the peace was made, and especially Duke Naymes was ioyfull: then within a while diuers of ye Lords departed from the Court. Then king Oberon called Huon vnto him and sayd: Sir, I commaund you as dearely as you loue mée, that this same day foure yeare to come, that you come into my Citie of Momur, for I will giue you my Realme and all my dignitie, the which I may lawfully do, for at my birth it was giuen me that I might so doe, for it ly∣eth in mée to giue it whereas I thinke best, and bicause I loue you so entirely, I shall set the crowne vpon your head, and you shalbe King of my Realme. And also I will, that you giue vnto Gerames all your Landes and Signiories in these parts, for he hath well deserued it, for with you and for your loue, hee hath suffered many great trauailes. Sir, (quoth Huon) séeing this is your pleasure, I ought well to be pleased therewith, and I shall accomplish all your comman∣dements. Huon, (quoth Oberon) know for troth, I shall not abide longe in this world, for so is the pleasure of god, it be houeth me to go into paradice, where as my place is appoin∣ted in the fayrie, I shall bide no longer, but beware as dearly as you loue your life, that yée faile not to be with me at the daie that I haue appointed, beware that yée forget it not, for if yee faile, I shall cause you to die an ill death, and there∣fore remember it well. When Huon heard king Oberon, he was right ioyfull, and stooped downe to haue kissed his féet, but then Gloriant and Mallaborn tooke him vp. Then said Huon: Sir, for this great guift I thanke you.
Chap. LXXVI. ¶ How King Oberon departed, and tooke leaue o f king Char∣lemaine and of Huon and Escleremond, and also how king Charlemaine departed from Bourdeaux. WHen king Oberon had im∣parted to Huon as much as he would that he should doe, then he said to Huon, how he would depart, and tooke leaue of him, and kindly embraced him: then Oberon stoode still a little while and beheld Huon and be∣gan to lament, when Huon sawe that, he was sorie in his heart and said. Ah Sir king, I desire you to shew me why you make this sorow at your departure? Huon quoth Obe∣ron I shall shew you, it is for pitie that I haue of you, for I sweare by him that created me, that before I shall sée thée a∣gaine, thou shalt suffer so much paine, trauaile, pouertie, hunger, thirst, feare, and aduersitie, that there is no toong can tell it, and thy good wife shall suffer so much, that there is no creature that shall sée her, but shall haue great pitie of her. Ah Sir quoth Huon, then I require you to aide & com∣fort me. Huon quoth Oberon, what comfort would ye haue of me? Sir quoth Huon, I desire you to let me haue your horne of Iuory, to thintent that if I should haue any néed, that you may succour me, for so well I know you, that you will come and succour me. Huon, (quoth Oberon) séeing I haue agréed you with Charlemaine, trust not on me to be suc∣coured in any of your businesse, suffice you with the gift that I haue giuen you, euen all my Realme and puissance that I haue in the Fayrie, trust on none other succour of mē. Sir, I am sorrie thereof quoth Huon, yt it may be none otherwise. Then King Oberon tooke leaue of King Charlemaine, and
of Duke Naymes, and of all other Lords there present, and went to Huon and embraced him, and tooke his leaue of him, and of Escleremond and Gerames, and sayd to Escleremond: I commend you to God, and desire you, if you haue done well hetherto, that you will perseuere euer better and better, and beare alwaies fayth and honour to your husband. Sir quoth she, I pray God I liue no longer then, if I doe the contrary. Thus King Oberon departed, and after his departure, king Charlemaine made readie his companie, and tooke leaue of Huon and of Escleremond and Gerames, and they brought the King about two leagues off, and then tooke their leaues of him, & of Duke Naymes, and of all the Lords. Then the king sayd Huon, if any war be moued against you, or if that you haue any great affaires to do, let me haue knowledge there∣of, and I shal come and succour you, or else send you such aide as shall bee sufficient. Sir quoth Huon I thanke your grace, and so tooke his leaue of the king, and returned to Bourde∣aux, whereas he was receiued with great ioy. Now let vs leaue speaking of Huon, and speake of Oberon of the Fayrie. Chap. LXXVII. ¶ How king Oberon deuised with his knights, in the Citie of Momur in the Fayrie, of the deedes of Huon of Bourdeaux, and of that which should happen after to him. WHen King Oberon was de∣parted from Bourdeaux, he came to his Citie of Momur, and there he began sore to wéep, Then Gloryant demaunded of him, why he made that sorrow? Gloryant quoth Obe∣ron, it is for the vnhappy Huon, he is alone, and I know well hereafter hee shall be betrayed, and all for Escleremond his wife, for though that hee haue ere this time suffered great trauaile, and much trouble and pouerty,
yet I know surely, that he shall suffer more then euer he did, and hée shall haue no succour of any man liuing. Why Sir, (quoth Gloriant) how can that be? for Huon is a great Lord, and hath many fréends, and is the most hardiest Knight now liuing, and hée is at accord wich King Charlemaine, there∣fore he were a great Foole that would make him any warre, or doe him any displeasure. Well, (quoth Oberon) God aid him in all his affaires, for ere it be long hée shall haue much to doe. Thus Oberon entred into his rich Pallaice, and sayde a∣gaine. Ah deare Knight Huon. I knowe well you shall bee betrayed for the loue of your Wife, who is faire and good, and if you take not good héede, you shall leaue her and your selfe in great perill of death, and if you escape the death, yet you shall suffer such paine and pouertie, that there is no Clearke liuing so sage that can put it in writing. Sir, (quoth Gloriant) mée thinkes this cannot bée, séeing the loue that is now betwéen him and Charlemaine. Gloriant, (quoth Oberon) yet I say againe vnto you, that before this yeare be passed, Huon shall be in such distresse and so hardly kept, that if he had Ten Realmes, he would giue them all to be out of that danger that he shalbe in. Then Gloriant was pensiue, and said. Alas Sir, for Gods sake neuer leaue Huon your fréend in such danger, but rather succour him. Nay surely, (quoth Oberon) that will I not doe, séeing I haue promised him my dignitie and Land, he shall not be aided nor succou∣red by me, for he shall be closed in such a place, that I would not goe thether for Tenne of the best Cities of the world. Nowe let vs returne vnto Huon, being in his Pallaice at Bourdeaux.
Chap. LXXVIII. ¶How Huon tooke homage of his men, and chasticed his Re∣bels, and of three Pilgrimes, by whom much ill fell after, as yee shall heare. AFter that king Charlemaine was departed from Bourdeaux, & that Huon was returned, he assembled al his Barons, to whome hee made good chéere, and there they tooke their Landes and Fées of him, and made their homage. Then hée tooke a Thousand chosen Knights with him, & road to his Lands, and tooke possession of Townes and Castles, and was o∣bayed in euerie place: except of one named Angelers, who was Coozen germaine to Amerie, whom Huon had slaine be∣fore at Paris, before the Emperour Charlemaine for the loue of Charlot. This Angelars was false and a Traytour, and hee had a strong Castle within thrée Leagues of Bourdeaux, he would not hold of Huon, nor obay him though he was his Leige-man. When Huon saw that he wold not hold of him, nor doe him homage: he was sore displeased, and made pro∣mise, that if that he might get him perforce, he would surely hange him vp, and as many as were in the Castle with him. Then Huon assailed the Castle, and they within defended themselues valiantly, so that many were hurt and slaine on both parts, Huon was there eight daies, and could not win the Castle: then Huon ordained before the place a paire of Gallowes, and vppon the ninth day he made a fresh assault by such strength, that hee wanne the Castle and entred per∣force. Angelars was taken and Fortie men with him, and they were all hanged on the Gallowes. Then Huon gaue
the Castle vnto one of his Knightes, and then hee departed, and went to the Castle of Blay, whereas hee was receiued with great ioy. And the faire Escleremond was in the Pal∣laice at Bourdeaux, well accompanied with Ladies & Dam∣sels, and as they were deuising together, there entred into the Pallaice thrée Pilgrimes, who right humbly saluted the Ladie Escleremond. Sirs, (quoth the Lady) I pray you shew mee out of what Countrey yée are come? Madame, (quoth one of them) knowe for troth that we are come from Ierusa∣lem, and haue made our offering to the holy Sepulchre, wée haue suffered much pouertie in our iourney, wherefore La∣die wee require you humbly for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, to giue vs some meat. Sirs, (quoth shée) you shall haue ynough, and then she commaunded two of her Knights to sée that the Pilgrimes should haue meat and drinke, and so they were set at the end of the Hall, and a Table couered for them, and thereon bread, flesh, and wine, they were well serued. Then ye Duchesse Escleremond went to visit them, and demaunded where they were borne? and whether they would goe? Madame, (quoth they) wee bee all thrée borne at Vyenna, and thether wee would returne. Sirs, God bee your guide, (quoth the Ladie) and she gaue them Ten Flo∣rents, whereof they had great ioy & thanked the Duchesse: but alas, that guifte was ill bestowed, as you shall heare héereafter. They departed & tooke their way, and trauailed so longe, that vpon a Tuesday they arriued halfe a League from Ʋy∣enna, and there they met Duke Raoul who was going a kau∣king, hée was a great and puissant Lord of Lands and Sig∣niories, and hardy in déedes of armes, great pittie it was that he was such a Traytour, for a more subtill man coulde not be knowne, for all the daies of his life he was euer a moo∣uer of warre and strife, and to doe treason without hauing regard either to kinne or other, God confounde him, for by him and his cause Huon suffered so much ill, that it cannot bee recounted. This Duke Raoul was to marrie, thus as
hée was in the feelds a hauking, and twentie Knights with him, he met the said thrée Pilgrimes, and anone hee knewe them. Then he road vnto them and said: Sirs, yée be wel∣come home, they were ioyfull, when they sawe the Duke their Lorde salute them so humbly, and for ioye thereof they shewed him such newes, that by the occasion thereof, twen∣tie Thousand Knights lost after their liues, and Raoul him∣selfe receiued the death, and Huon had such trouble, that hée had neuer none such before, as you shall heare héereafter. Then the Duke said to the Pilgrimes: Freends, I pray you shew mee, by what Countreys you haue passed to come hether. Sir, (quoth they) we haue passed by Fraunce, and first we were at Bourdeaux, and there we found the Duches Escleremond wife to Huon of Bourdeaux, of whome you haue head so much speaking, for she is so faire and so well fauou∣red, so swéet, pleasant and gracious as can bée deuised, shée is Daughter to ye Admirall Gaudise, whom Huon hath slaine and taken her to his wife, great pitie it is that Huon should haue such a wife, for she were méeter to be wife to a puissant Kinge, for whosoeuer had such a wife to lye by, might well say that there were none like her in all the world, would to our Lorde God Sir, that shee were your wife. When the Duke heard that, hee chaunged colour, and greatly coueted the Ladie in his heart, so that he was striken with such vio∣lent and burning loue, that he had to the Ladie Escleremond, as he promised and sware that he would haue her whosoeuer sayd the contrarie, and said that he would slay Huon, & them haue Escleremond to his Wife. Thus Duke Raoul sware the death of Huon, & then hée departed from the Pilgrimes: ill was bestowed the almes that Escleremond had giuen them.
Chap. LXXIX. ¶ How Duke Raoul of Austrich, by the report of the Pilgrims▪ was amourous of the faire Escleremond, and of the Tourney that was proclaimed, to the entent to haue slaine Huon. THus Duke Raoul returned to the Citie of Vyenna right pensiue, & sent for his priuie counsaile, and then he com∣maunded them to assemble as many people as they could, bicause he sayd that he would goe to his Vncle the Emperour of Almaine, to whome he sent a secret Messuage, that hee should cause a Tourney to bee proclaimed in some conuenient place, to the entent that the Knights of Almaine and of other Countreys should assemble there. The false Traytor did it for a craft; to the entent that Huon by his prowesse and hardinesse shold come to that Tourney. The Messenger roade foorth vntill he came to Strasbrough, whereas hee found the Emperour who was vncle to Raoull, for he was the Emperours bro∣thers sonne. When the Emperour heard the messuage, hee was ioyfull, and not a little pleased to heare such newes frō his Nephew Duke Raoull, whome he loued entierly, and to doe him pleasure, he sent to all Lands vnder his obeysance, to all Knights and Squiers, such as of custome were woont to iust and tournay, desiring them to come at a day assigned to the citie of Mayence, for there he would kéepe open Court. Now the Emperour knew not for what entent his Ne∣phew Raoull had deuised that tournay: Alas he did it but to find the place to slay Huon, to thintent to haue his wife Es∣cleremond. Then Duke Raoull assembled his Barons, espe∣cialle such as he had perfect trust in, he shewed them at large the cause why he had assembled all the people to goe to the
tournay. Therefore Sirs quoth he, I will that yée sweare to me the death of Huon of Bourdeaux, for I will that yée and I put all our vttermost to slay him, and then I will wed his wife, of whome I am so amourous, that I cannot sléepe nor take any rest. The same time that they thus made promise and sware the death of Huon, there was among them a var∣let with Duke Raoul, who in his youth had serued Huon of Bourdeaux: now when he vnderstood, that if Huon came to ye Tournay, there hee should be murdered: as priuily as he could, he departed from Ʋyenna, and neuer rested vntill hee came to the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas he found Duke Huon in his Pallaice with his Lords, who had béen before aduertised, that there should be held a great Tournay at Mayence in Almaine, and he deuised with his Lords how to goe thether. The same time the Varlet came thether, and humbly sa∣luted Duke Huon, who said to him: Friend where hast thou béen so long? Sir quoth the Varlet, I come now from Vy∣enna in Austrich, where Duke Raoul who is Lord thereof, hath proclaymed a Tourney in euery Countrey, but Sir, if you goe thether, you shall bée slaine, for this Tourney is de∣uised for none other entent, bicause it is too well knowne, that there can bee no hye déedes of armes done in any place, but that you will bee present at it. And when they haue slayne you, then Duke Raoul will haue the Duchesse your Wife in mariage: therefore Sir, (for Gods sake) aduise you well that you come not there, in as much as you loue your life, for you cannot escape, there be twentie Thousand men that haue sworne your death, therefore if you enter in∣to the Tourney, you can neuer escape the death, and I haue heard Duke Raoul sweare, that when he hath slaine you, hée will keepe all your Landes. When Duke Huon had heard the Varlet, hee sware by God and made a solemne promise, that Duke Raoul should dearely buy his false treason. Then the Duchesse Escleremond knéeled downe before Hu∣on and sayd: Deare Lord, I desire you to forbeare your go∣ing
thether at this time, for I haue heard often repeated, that this Duke Raoull is puissant and hath great Lands, & besides is Nephew to the Emperour of Almaine, and also I haue heard say, that a faller Traytour there is none ly∣uing in this world. Madame quoth Huon, I haue well heard you, but by the Lord that fourmed me to his Image, though I should loose halfe my landes, yet will I goe to sée the Traytor, what, thinketh he to abash me with his threa∣tenings? If I may méete him at the Tournay, or in any other place where soeuer it be, though he had with him ten Thowsand men of armes, and that I had alonely but my swoord in my hand, I shall slay him whatsoeuer should fall thereof, and let our Lord God do with me as it shall please him: I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart till I haue slaine him. When the Duchesse heard Huon how he would doe none otherwise, and that shée could not let him of his enterprize, she was sorrowfull and said. Sir, séeing it is your pleasure, reason it is that I must be content, but yet Sir I desire you to take with you x.M. men well armed, to thintent that ye be not found vnprouided: so that if ye be assayled, yet yée may be of sufficient puissance to resist your enemies, and that it will please you to suffer me to goe with you, and I will he armed with my shéeld and swoord by my side, and if I may méete Duke Raoull, I shall giue him such a buffet, that I shall strike him from his horse, for I am so displeased with him, that there is no ioynt in me but in trembleth for anger, and I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart till I be re∣uenged of him. When Huon heard the Duchesse his wife, he was well comforted, and began to laugh and said. Faire Ladie, I giue you great thankes for your wordes, but yee are too farre gone with child to ride armed, it is a vij. mo∣neths past since yée were first with child, then Huon made to be proclaimed in all his lands, that euery man should be readie to goe with him to the Tourney at Mayence. The Dukes entent was anon knowen throughout all the coun∣trie,
so that it being spread abroad, the brute therof came to the hearing of the Duke Raoull, and when he heard that Hu∣on would come to the Tournay hee was not a little ioyfull thereof, then hee sware he would go and sée Escleremond in the guise of a Pylgrime, and then hee putte on a beggers garment, and tooke a staffe and a wallet, hée shewed his intent to them of his priuie Councell, they would haue stop∣ped his going, but they could not. Thus he apparelled himselfe like a beggar, and with an hearbe rubbed on his face and handes, that such as had not séene him otherwise apparelled, could not haue knowne him, hée was so foule and blacke, then he desired his men to kéepe secret his enterprise. Then hee departed from Vyenna, and neuer rested till hee came to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and so went vnto the Pallayce, where hée founde Huon a∣mongst his Barons making great chéere and feast, for vnto him were come diuers Lords and Knights, deuising of the Tourney that should be holden at Mayence. Thus Raoull came before Huon, and desired him for the honor of our Lord God to giue him some meat and almes. Friend quoth Huon, thou shalt haue inough, but I pray thée tell me from whence thou commest, and whether thou wilt go, and of what coun∣trie thou art. Sir quoth Raoull, I was borne in the countrey of Berry, but it is xx. yeres past since I was there, when I de∣parted thence I was but yong, for if I saw my father or mo∣ther now before me I should not know them, & Sir I came frō beyond the Sea, wheras I haue been prisoner among ye Sarazins, the space of 14. yéeres in a strong Castle, where I haue suffered much disease of hunger and cold, and at the last I escaped, by reason of a yong man, to whome I pro∣mised that if hée could bring mee to Acre in sauegard, that I would then giue him twentie Duckets of gold, the yong man was couetous to haue the money, and founde the meanes that hee brought mee to Acre, whereas I founde a kinsman of mine, who payed the yonge man the money the which I had promised vnto him, and also hee gaue
me fifteene Ducates, the which I haue spent with comming hether. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray vnto God to ayd thée, for if thou wert not so ill apparelled, thou shouldest séeme a man of a high lineage, for it séemeth to me if thou wert well armed & weaponed, and were in some businesse, thou wert like ynough to be feared. Chap. LXXX. ¶ Howe after that Duke Raoul had beene at Bourdeaux in the guise of a Pilgrime to see the faire Ladie Escleremond, he re∣turned againe to Vyenna. AFter that Huon hadde long deuised with Raoul, hée washed & sat downe to diner and the Duchesse his wife by him, then Huon commaunded that at the end of the Table right before his Table, Raoul the Pilgrime should bee set, and there hee was well serued: but Raoul had litle care either of meat or drinke, for his thought was of another matter whereupon he sore studied, for before him he saw the noble Duchesse Escleremond, of whom he was so amourous, that he could not withdraw his eies from her, for the more he beheld her, the more hee was embraced with her loue, he thought he neuer sawe before so faire a Ladie in all his life, so that for the great beautie that was in her, hée changed often times his colour, but it could not bee percei∣ued, bicause he was so blacke and foule with rubbing of cer∣taine hearbes, and he sayd within himselfe, that whosoeuer had such a Ladie to his Wife, might well make auant to be the happiest man of the world, euen hee that might but haue his pastime with so faire a Ladie, & swre by the Lorde that fourmed him, though he should bée damned in hell for euer, he would slay Huon and haue his Wife in mariage, and all
Huons Lands to be his for euer. Alas that it had not pleased our Lord God, that at this houre Huon might haue knowne the treason of Raoull, hee shoulde then haue bought it full dearely. When the Traytour had eaten and made good théere, Hu∣on gaue him a Gowne, shirt, hose and shooes, and monney for his dispence, Raoul tooke it, he durst not refuse it but than∣ked Huon, and so tooke his leaue and departed, hee durst no longer tarie for feare of knowledge, and assoone as hée could he departed out of the Towne: of his iourneys I will make no long rehearsall, but he laboured so long that he arriued at Vyenna, then he went to his Pallaice, whereas he was well receiued of his Lords, and they laughed when they saw him in that apparell. Then within a while after hee made him readie, and his men who were a great number, and so depar∣ted from Vyenna, and tooke the way to Mayence. When his Vncle the Emperour of Almayne was aduertised of his comming, he went and met him without the Towne to doe him the more honour, and when he saw him, he was ioyfull and kissed him, and said: Faire Nephew, I am glad of your comming, I haue long desired to sée you. The good Empe∣rour knew nothing of the treason, that his Nephew had pur∣chaced against Huon of Bourdeaux, for if he had knowne it, to haue dyed in the quarrell, he would neuer haue consented to that treason. Thus hand in hand the Emperour and his Nephew Raoul entred with great ioy into the City of May∣ence, wheras they were highly receiued, great ioy was made at their comming, much people were in the Towne come thether to Iust and Tournay, and many other to behould the Tryumph. Now let vs speake of Huon of Bourdeaux.
Chap. LXXXI. ¶ How Duke Huon tooke leaue of the Duchesse his Wife, and how he arriued at Mayence, and went to the Pallaice. WHen Huon sawe his time to depart from Bourdeaux, to goe to the Tour∣ney at Mayence, he made readie his traine, and tooke with him tenne Thousand men of armes for the guard of his person, of the best horsemen in all his Countrey: then he tooke his leaue of the faire Escleremond his Wife, who began sore to weepe when she saw his departure, right swéetly they kis∣sed together at their departing. Then he tooke his Horse, and hee and his companie departed from Bourdeaux, and re∣sted not vntill he came to Coleyne on the Rheine, there hee ta∣ried two dayes to refresh him, and vpon the third day he ar∣med himselfe, and called his companie before him and said: Sirs, I will take my leaue of you all, for none of you shall goe with me, be nothing abashed, for hée that alwayes hath saued mee out of all perils, will not forsake mee at this time. When his men heard him, they had great maruaile that he would take his Voyage alone, and hee saide vnto them. Sirs, haue no doubt of me, for I shall not die vntill mine houre be come. They of Coleyne enquired nothing of their e∣state, for as then there was no warre, and they beléeued that they would goe to the Tourney. When his Lords saw that he would thus depart, they were sorrie that he would goe to the Tourney alone, and said one to another, we feare great∣ly that he shall neuer returne againe, & wee shall neuer haue such another Maister againe. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you shall not need to take any sorrow for mée: for certainly I knowe
well, if any perilous businesse should come to mee, that I should be aided by King Oberon: but he needed not to haue said so, for when Kinge Oberon departed from him, hee had him not to trust vpon any ayd from him, and therefore Huon was a foole and ill aduised to trust thereon, or to vndertake so perilous an Enterprize as he did, wherby he was in great perill of death, as yee shall heare héereafter. When Huon was readie, he leapt vpon his horse without any stirrop, cleane armed as he was, and after stretched him so in his stirrops, that the leathers strained out thrée fingers, he was a puissant Knight armed or vnarmed, and greatly to be feared, hee tooke leaue of his men, and left them wéeping in that Citie of Coleyn. Then hee road towards the Citie of Mayence, and so long he road that he had a sight of the Citie, and then he saw about in the meadow many Tents and rich Pauilions, pitcht vp with pummels of fine gould shining a∣gainst the Sunne. Huon behelde them well, and so passed foorth and entred into the Citie, whereas he saw euerie stréet full of Knights and Squiers, abiding there vntill the day of the Tourney. Huon passed foorth vntill he came to the Pal∣laice, whereas hee founde the Emperour and his Nephewe Raoul, whom Huon loued but little, as he shewed well short∣ly after as yée shall heare. When Huon was come before the Pallaice, hee sawe the Emperour and Raoul his Nephew going vp the staires: then Huon met with a great Almayne, and said to him. Fréend, I pray thée shew mée what be yonder two Princes that goe vp the staires, and that so much honor is done to them? Sir, (quoth he) the first is the Emperour, and he that followeth is his Nephew Duke Raoul, he was Sonne to the Emperours Brother, the Tourney that shalbe made, is done for the loue of him, & at his request, and after the Tourney, he thinketh to marrie a great Ladie, whose name shall not bee knowne till the Tourney be done. When Huon heard that, hee blu∣shed in the face for the great yre that he was in, for he knew well, that Raoul (if he could find the means) would haue from
him his Wife the faire Escleremond: but he promised in his mind, that first hee should dearely buy her. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I desire you to do so much for me, as to hold my horse vntill I returne againe out of the Hall, and that I haue spo∣ken with the Emperor and with his Lords. Sir, (quoth the Squier) with a good will I shall héere hold your horse vntil you come. Nowe God ayd Huon, for ere he might returne againe, he was in great perill of death, as ye shall heare. Chap. LXXXII. ¶ How Huon slew Duke Raoul in the presence of the Emperor, sitting at his Table, and of the maruailes that hee did: And how in the chace that was made after him, he strake downe the Emperour, and wanne his good horse. HƲon who was ful of ire and displeasure, went vp into the Pallaice, and came into the Hall, whereas hée found ma∣ny people, there was the Emperour, who had newly washed his handes, and was set at the Table. Huon pressed foorth before the Table with his Sword in his hand, and said. Noble Em∣perour, I coniure thée by the great vertue diuine, & by your hopefull part of Paradice, or that your Soule is to be dam∣ned, if case be that you say not the troth, and giue true iudg∣ment without falshood, nor to spare to say ye troth for no man liuing, although he be your néerest Parent. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) say your pleasure, and I shall answere you. Sir, (quoth Huon) if you haue wedded a Ladie, & loue her dearely, and that she be faire, good, swéete, and sage, and re∣pleat with all good vertues, and that you know surely, that she loueth you entirely, as a good true wife ought to loue her Lord and Husband, and then a Traitour priuily to purchase
your death for loue of your Wife, and if by aduenture afterward you find him in the féeld, or in town, meadow or wood, in Pallaice or in Hall, and that you might accomplish your thought and your desire, against the same Traitour who did purchace the said treason against you: I demaund then of you, if you would slay him or not? Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) you haue coniured me, and I shall answeare you to the troth. Not for the value of ten Cities I will not lye, therefore know for troth, if I hadde a Wife such a one as you speake of, adorned with such faire vertues, and whereof there bee many such: Howbeit, if I had such a one as you recite, and that I knew surely that she loued me entirely, then if I knw any man liuing that wold purchase me such a treason, although he were my neere Pa∣rent, if I might find him in what place so euer it were, and though I should be slain in the quarrel, there should neither be Church nor Aulter that should saue his life, but that with my two hands I should slay him: and also my heart should serue me further, that after I had slaine him, I would draw out his heart out of his bodie, and eat it for despite. When Huon heard the Emperour, he sayd: Oh right noble and ver∣tuous Emperour, iust and true iudgement you haue giuen, the which I repeale not, but I shall shewe you what hath mooued me to demaund of you this iudgement, if such a case should haue fallen vnto you. And Sir, to the entent that you shall know the troth what hath mooued me thus to doe, you may sée héere before you he that would do in like case against me, which is your Nephew Raoull, who hath purchaced my death like a cruell and a false Traytor, to the entent to haue Escrelemond my Wife and all mine heritages: the iudge∣ment that you haue giuen is iust and true, you shall neuer bee blamed in any Court, but you shall therein bee named a noble Prince, and therefore Sir, hauing found him so néere me, that purchaceth for my death and shame, I should neuer be worthy to appeare in any Princes court, without I were reuenged of him, and I had rather die then to forbeare him
any longer. Therewith he drew his Sword, and when Raoul saw the clearenesse of the Sword, he was affraid bicause he was vn∣armed: howbeit, he thought that Huon would not haue béen so hardy, as to doe him any hurt in the presence of his Vncle the Emperour: but when hee saw that Huon did lift vp his Sword to strike him, he was in great feare, & fled to the Em∣peror to saue his life, but Huon perceiued him so quickly, that he strake him with a reuerse stroke in such wise, yt he strake off his head from his shoulders, and the bodie fell downe be∣fore the Emperour, & the head fell vpon the Table in the dish before the Emperour, whereof he had great dolor. God giue me good lucke, (quoth Huon) this Traitour shall neuer be a∣mourous of my wife, for now I am sure inough of him. The Emperour who sat ye Table, had great sorow at his heart when he saw his Nephew dead before him, then he cried a∣loud and said. Sirs yée my Barons, looke that this Knight escape you not, I will neuer eat nor drinke vntill I sée him hanged, I should haue great sorrow at my heart if he should escape. Huon vnderstood him well, and feared him but litle, but with his sword he layd on round about him, and strake off armes, handes, and legs, so that there was none so hardy that durst approch néere to him, he slew so many that it was fearefull to behold him, within a short space hee had slaine moe then eight and Twentie, and the Emperour was in such feare, that hee wiste not howe to saue himselfe, for the great maruailes that he saw Huon do, he doubted bicause he was vnarmed, and Huon cried and saide: Traytours I doubt you nothing. Then on all parts Almaines and Baui∣ers assailed Huon, but hee defended himselfe by such force and puissance, that by the murder that he made, the bloud ranne vpon the pauement like a Riuer. Huon might haue tarried too long, for the Emperour and his men went and armed them, & Huon who saw well, that hée could not long endure without great perill of death, stri∣king with his sword round about him, he withdrew backe
downe the staires of the Pallaice, and none durst approach neere him, bicause they were vnarmed and for feare of him. Huon by his hie prowesse, for all his enimies, came vnto his horse and mounted vpon him, and so yssued out, and there was a Knight called Galeram, who was coozen Germaine to Duke Raoul, and he was cleane armed and mounted on a good horse, and hee followed Huon and said: Abide Vil∣laine, thou haste slayne Duke Raoul my Coozen, without thou returne vnto mée, I shall strike thee behind. When Huon heard him, hée sware he had rather die then to refuse to turne vnto him, then hee turned, and they cou∣ched their Speares, and they met so fiercely together, that they gaue each other maruailous great stroakes, Galerames Speare brake all to peeces, and Huon who had employed all his force and vertue, strake Galeram vppon the Sheeld with his Speare, the which was bigge and strong, so that Gale∣ram fell out of his Saddle so rudely, that in the fall hée brake his necke, and so lay dead vppon the earth, and Huon who thought hee had not béen dead, returned againe to him, but when he saw that he stirred not, he departed thence: but hée taried verie long, for he saw well hee was closed in round a∣bout, & saw well without God had pitie of him, hee was not like to scape without death or taken Prisoner. They cast at him Darts and Swords, and one with a sharpe Swoord came vnto him and gaue him a great stroake, but his good Armour saued his life, for all the stroakes that hée had recei∣ued, he neuer remooued out of his Saddle. When Huon saw in what danger hee was, he called vpon the Lord God humbly, praying him to deliuer him out of that perill, with his sword he did maruailes, hee slew and claue heads to the braine, that hee séemed rather a Spirit of hell then a man, for he that had seene him, would haue sayde that he had beene no mortal man. Hee saw passe by him a Knight of Almayne, called Sir Hans Sperguer, as he passed by, Huon gaue him such a stroke that hee claue him to the gyrdle: whereof the Almaynes were so abashed, that none
durst approach néere to him, they feared him sore. Alas that his men at Coleyne had not knowne what case he was in, they were so farre off. Huon who fared like a wilde bore, he layd on round about him, so that his sword was all bloudy, of the men that hee had slaine and maimed. They cast darts at him so, that at last his horse was slaine vnder him, wher∣of he was sorrowfull: howbeit like a couragious Knight, with his sword still fought valiantly with his enemies, and he saw where the Earle of Seyne came to him, to haue striken him with his sword, but Huon met him so hastily, that hee had no leysure to strike him, and Huon gaue him such a stroke, that his helmet could not saue his life, for Huons sword entred into his braine, and so he fell downe dead a∣mong the horse féete. Huon who was quicke and expert, tooke the dead knights horse, and leapt vppon him, and when he saw that he was new horsed againe, he was ioyfull, and then hee was able to depart in despight of his enemies: but the Emperour who had great sorrow at his heart for the death of his nephew Raoull, made great haste after Huon with ten thousand men with him, and so came from Mayens all on the spurre, desi∣ring to ouertake Huon, and so rode on before his men, for his horse was so good, that hee would runne as fast as a byrde could flie, in all the world there was no horse like him. The Emperour on this horse followed Huon, and as he rode, hee saw all the way dead men lie that Huon had slaine, he spur∣red his horse, that anon he ouertooke Huon, and sayd. Thou Traytour, turne thy shéeld towards me, or else my Speare shall goe through thy bodie: for the sorrowe that lyeth at my heart, for loue of my Nephew whome thou hast slaine, con∣strayneth me to make hast to be reuenged of thée, nor I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I haue slaine thée, much it greeueth mee that I am constrayned to slay thee with my Speare, for I had rather hang thée. When Huon heard the Emperour who was so néere him, & saw how he was moun∣ted on so good a horse, he called vpon our Lord God, & desired
him of his grace to ayd him to conquere that horse, and when he saw that the Emperour was farre before his men, he tur∣ned his horse head towards the Emperour, and couched his speare, and the Emperour came against him like the tem∣pest, and they mette together so rudely, that their speares were pearced, so that the Emperours speare brake all to shi∣uers, and Huons speare was so rude & strong, that he strake ye Emperour with such puissance, that hee was striken from his horse to the earth sore astonied, so that he wist not where he was, and Huon who had great desire to haue the Empe∣rours horse, alighted quickly from his owne horse, and tooke the Emperours horse and mounted on him, and was thereof right ioyous, then he sayd to himselfe, that hee doubted not them all, he strake the good horse with his spurres, and found him quicke and light vnder him. There he left the Emperour lying on the earth, who was not a little content that he was so soone succoured, for if the Almaines had not quickly come, Huon had slaine him, but when the Almaynes came to their Lord, and found him ly∣ing on the earth, they beléeued verily he had beene dead they beganne to make great sorrow, and the Emperour who was come againe to himselfe sayd. Syrs, thanked be God I féel no hurt, but I may well ride, but I haue great sorrow at my heart, that Huon hath thus ledde away my good horse, and is escaped away, and also hath slaine my two nephewes: but Sirs I counsell you that none follow him, for it shall be but a lost time, for the good horse that is vnder him and he that is on him is so valiant in armes, yt he is greatly to be doubted, therefore I counsell let vs returne backe again, for we may loose more then wee shall winne, but by the grace of God, ere it be thrée moneths past, I shall assemble such a number of men, that the vallies and mountaines shall bee full of men, then I will goe to the Citie of Bourdeaux, and will not de∣part thence till I haue woonne it, and if I may get Huon, I shall make him die of an euill death, and shall take and wast all his lands.
Chap. LXXXIII. ¶ How Huon after that he was mounted vpon the Emperours good horse, he arriued at Coleyn, where he found his men, and howe hee departed thence: And of the Emperour who laye enambushed in a wood, abiding there to haue slaine Huon. THus as yee haue heard Hu∣on departed with the Emperors good horse, and left the Emperour lying on the earth, who commaunded his Barons to returne backe, and not to follow Huon any further. Therewith there came to the Emperour a Knight called Godun, he was borne at Norembridge, and he sayd. Sir, if you will beléeue me, and doe after my councell, you shall doe otherwise, you shall returne to Mayence this night, and ordaine foure Thousand of such men as you haue heere, and send them within two Leagues of Coleyne on the hye way into Fraunce, and there you shall find a little wood, and there let them lye enambushed till Huon passe by them, for I know well he will goe straight to Coleyne this night, & lodge in a French-mans house that dwelleth there, and in ye morning surely he will depart thence, and so passe by the said ambushment, so that it shall not be possible to saue himselfe alone, but either he shall be slaine or taken. When the Emperour heard Godun, he said: Sir, you haue giuen me good counsaile, and this is likely to be done, but it were conuenient to send more then foure Thousand, for the great desire that I haue to get him into my hands, constrai∣neth me to cause him to bee taken, to the entent to be reuen∣ged of him: therefore I would goe my selfe, and take with mée ten Thousand men, and shall go and ly in the place that
you haue appointed, for I shall neuer haue perfect ioy at my heart as long as Huon is aliue, for he hath caused much sor∣row at my heart, for the death of my two Nephewes whom so pitiously hee hath slaine, let vs take our way about twoo Leagues beside Coleyne, néerer wee will not approach, to the entent that our comming bée not knowne. Then hee chose out ten Thousand of the most valiantest men in his compa∣nie, and the rest he sent backe to Mayence. Thus the Em∣perour road foorth, and road so long that day and night, that an houre before it was day he came to the sayd wood, and there layd his ambush. And Huon rode so, after he was de∣parted from the Emperor, that late in the Euening he came to Coleyne, whereas hee was receiued of his men with great ioy, then Gerames said. Sir, I require you shew vs of your aduentures, then Huon shewed them euerie thing, and the manner how he had slaine Duke Raoul, and how hee depar∣ted from Mayence, and how he was pursued, and howe hee wanne the Emperours good horse: whereat Gerames and all the other had great ioy, and thanked God of his faire ad∣uenture, and hadde great maruaile howe hee escaped: but they knewe nothinge what the Emperour was about to doe, nor that hee was in the woode abydinge there for Huon. That night Huon and his companie were at Coleyne ma∣king good chéere, and the next morning they heard seruice, then they mounted on their horses & issued out of the towne, they were to the number of thurteene Thousand hardy figh∣ting men, and when they were out in the feelds, Huon like a good man of warre said. Sirs, I desire you let vs keepe to∣gether, and ride like men of warre, to the entent that we be not suddainly taken, and so they did: the day was faire and cleare, they might well be perceiued a farre off, as they were by the Emperour of Almaine, who lay enambushed for Huon, the Emperour espied them firste, and sayde to his compa∣nie. Sirs, yonder a farre off I sée many people comming towarde vs, they séeme vnto mée men well expert in armes,
neuer beléeue me but they be Frenchmen, and he that is their Captaine is Huon of Bourdeaux, he is not come hether like a small Personage, but he is highly accompanied like a great and mightie Prince: I sée well he is valiant by that he hath done, hee is so noble & hardy that none may be com∣pared to him, you haue well séene, howe that hee all alone came into my Pallaice, and there slewe my Nephew Duke Raoul, wherewith my heart is in great displeasure, hee is greatly to bee doubted, for without God helpe vs, wee shall haue ynough to doe with him, would to God that hee and I were at accordment and agréed, for he is so noble and so vali∣ant that he feareth no man. You haue well séen since he de∣parted from Mayence, he hath slaine more then fortie of my men, and hath borne me to the earth, and he hath taken from me my good horse, whereby he may be wel assured, that there is no man shall take him if he be vppon his backe: howbeit we must set vpon him, for my heart shall neuer be in ease as long as he liueth: therefore Sirs, I desire you euerie man, this day shew the loue that you beare vnto me, and the saue∣gard of your liues, for to fly away auaileth not: therefore Sirs, set on together, and doe so that wee may haue the first aduantage. Chap. LXXXIIII. ¶ Of the great Battaile within two Leagues of Coleyn, between the Emperor of Almaine and Huon of Bourdeaux, and of the Truce that was taken betweene them. HƲon who roade before his Barons deuising with old Gerames, regar∣ded on his right hand towards ye litle wood, and he saw in the wood great clearenesse, by reason of the Sunne shining on the healmes
and on the speares poynts, whereby he perceiued plainely, that there was much people hidden in the wood, hee shewed them to Gerames and to his other companie, and sayd: Sirs bee in a surety, that without battaile we cannot scape, héere is the Emperour who lyeth in waite for vs. I desire you let vs doe so, that hee shall haue no cause to make any auaunt of vs, yonder you may sée them, how they set themselues in order to abide vs, therefore let vs quickly sette on them: and so they did in such wise, that with the very running of their horses the earth trembled, and the sunne lost his light, by reason of the powder that rose vp into the ayre from both parts. Huon who ranne before on his puissant horse, behelde Godun who was formost in his companie, hee ranne at him with a strong speare, so that he ranne him cleane through the body, so that hee fell downe to the earth, and with the same speare Huon met Crassyn Polinger, who bare the Emperors banner, Huon strake him so fiercely, that he bare horse and man and banner all to the ground, whereof the Almaines and Bauiers were sorrowfull. Huon did so much ere his speare was broken, that he first bare fiue to the earth, so that they had no power after to reléeue themselues, there were many speares broken, and many a knight borne to the earth, and there dyed among the horse féete, for the father could not helpe the sonne, nor the sonne could not helpe the father, and many a horse ranne abrode in the field, and their Maisters lying dead in the bloud and myre. Huon who rode about in the battaile slaying and wounding his enemies, behelde on his right side, and saw the Earle Sauary slaying many of them of Bourdeaux. Ah good Lord quoth Huon, if yonder knight raigne long, he shall doe me great damage. Then hée rode to him, and gaue him such a stroke with his sword, so that he strake off his shoulder and arme so rudely, that it fell vpon the earth, so that for the great paine that the Earle Sauary endured, he fell from his horse, and there was slaine among the horse féete, whereof the Emperour (who was
there by) right sorrowfull when he saw another of his ne∣phewes slaine, and sayd. Ah Huon, of God bee thou cursed, since thou hast slaine so many of my friends, I shall neuer haue ioy in my heart, till I haue thée in my hands to hang thée. Sir (quoth Huon) ere you haue taken me, you are like to loose more of your friendes, and beware of your selfe, that you come not into my handes, by your nephew Raoull yee haue all this damage, who by his falsenesse thought to haue betrayed me, and to haue had my wife: if I haue slaine your nephewes and your men, I haue doone it in defending mine owne body, I say to you if you bee not well aware of me, I shall bring you to the poynt that it shall be hard for you to be carried away in a litter. Huon quoth the Emperor, the great hate that I haue to thée for the death of my ne∣phewes, makes me féele much dolour at my heart, that I had rather die then that I should not bee reuenged of thée, therefore beware thou of mée, for I shall neither eate nor drinke, till I haue thée either quicke or dead. Then they two went backe to take their course together, but ere they met, the Almaynes came running thether, for the feare that they had of loosing their Emperour, and on the other part came thither the olde Gerames, who fought so fiercely, that whomsoeuer he strake with a full stroke, had no neede of any Surgion, and his companie fayled not for their parts, and Huon with his good sword opened the thick prease, so that the Almaynes greatly doubed him. Huon with his noble chiualrie, caused his enemies to recule backe halfe a bowes shoote. Then there was a knight of Almain saw well, that without some remedie were found, the Emperour and his companie were like to be slaine, he went out of the battell as priuily as he could, and ranne on the spurres, and rested not till hee came to Coleyn, where incontinent he rode to the Prouosts house, and found him in his house newly reine from masse, then the Knight sayd to him. Sir Prouost, if euer you will sée the Emperour aliue, cause the commons of this Citie to be armed, and come and succour the Empe∣rour
hastily, for when I came from him he had great neede of ayde: there is Huon of Bourdeaux, who hath slayne thrée of his nephewes, and this other day he was lodged in this Citie, the Emperour knoweth well that you knew nothing thereof, for Huon had lodged his men in the suburbs, and in other little houses, because hee would not be perceiued. Syr Prouost make haste in this businesse. When the Prouost heard what daunger the Emperour was in, he sounded the watch bell, and made to be cryed in euery stréete, that euery man that was able to beare armes, should arme them, and goe out into the field to succour the Emperour, who was in great daunger of his life. When the Bourgesses of the towne heard that crie, euery man ar∣med them as well as they could, some were harnessed be∣hind, and some in a Iacke all smoked, and with staues and other weapons, what a foote and a horse backe, there went out of the Citie twentie thousand men, if you had séene the horsemen, you would haue laught at them, for it séemed they were set on horse backe in despite, there was neuer séene so rude a companie it was no maruaile, for they were not ac∣customed to ryde in harnesse. The Prouost went before, and exhorted them to doe their deuoirs, so they tooke their way to come to the battaile, whereas Huon and his companie did part of their willes, and the Emperour séeing that, he began to loose his men and place, hee rode searching in the battaile for Duke Huon, whereas he found by aduenture Huon, who had then newly slaine by aduenture the Emperours Senes∣chall. When that the Emperour sawe him slaine, he was right sorrowfull, and in a great rage he cryed to Huon and sayd: Thou knight that neuer art satisfied to shedde the bloud of my men, to abate my linage and force, I pray thée turne thy shield vnto mee, for if thou knewest the great hate that I beare thée, thou wouldst neuer appeare before me. Sir quoth Huon, I maruell that you so sorely hate me, & haue tarryd so long for reuēge, therfore beware, for if I can I wil send you
after your Nephewes, whome yée say that yée loue so well. They tooke their course with great and rude speares, and so came together like the tempest, and met so rudely, that the buckles of their Armour all to brast, and the Emperours speare brake all to péeces, but Huons speare was bigge and strong, & therewith he strake the Emperour with such pu∣issance, that his speare ranne through his shoulder, so that the Emperour fell to the earth so rudely, that with the fall he brake the bone of his thigh, whereby he was in such do∣lour that he swounded. And when Huon saw him lye on the ground, hee came to him with his swoord in his hand, and would haue slaine him if he had not béene succoured: but there came so many Almaines, that whether Huon would or not, they tooke the Emperour and bare him out of the field, and laid him in the wood, and then demaunded of him how he did. Sirs quoth he, I am sore hurt, for my thigh is bro∣ken, whereby I endure more gréefe than I can abide, but as for death, I trust by the grace of god I shall escape it. When they heard that, they were all ioyfull, and said: Sir, know for troth, that your men are sore discomfited, for they be so sore oppressed by Huon and his men, that wée feare all your men will be slaine, wée will goe againe to the battaile, and leaue some with you to looke vnto your Maiestie. Well quoth the Emperour, but your force nor your defence cannot auaile you any thing against Huon, nor against his men. But I shall shew you what yée shall doe, yée shall send quickly to Huon, and desire him in my name to cease slaying of my men, and that there may be a truce had betwéene him and me, for the space of halfe a yéere, for within that time I hope to finde some other treatie that hee and I might be friendes: and if he refuse this, then I see none other reme∣die but that wée shall be all slaine or taken, and then he will cause me to die in some noysome prison. Sir (quoth his knights) we shall doe your commaundement, but we feare sore that we shall not be heard. Sirs quoth the Emperour, goe to him and doe the best yée can.
Then they returned to the battaile, whereas they founde their companie readie to flie away, for they were neere all slaine and taken, the Knights from the Emperour came to Huon, and desired him in the name of the Emperour that he would cease the battaile, and sound the treatie, and they would do likewise in the same manner, and that there might be a firme truce betweene them for halfe a yeere, and in that season they trusted that some good wayes would be found, that the Emperour and hee might be good friendes together. Sirs (quoth Huon) if the Emperour your Master had mee in that danger which he is in, hee would not suffer me to scape aliue for all the gold in the world, howbeit, I am content that he haue truce for halfe a yeere, the which I shall surely kéepe on my part, and if I be assayled, I shall defend mee, and if so be that hee come to Bourdeaux to assayle mee, by the helpe of God and my good friendes, I shall doe the best that I can. But if he will haue peace with mee, and pardon mee his displeasure, for the death of his nephewes, I shall be rea∣die to make peace, and I shall make amends for al wrongs, though I was not the beginner. Then Huon caused the retrait to bee sounded, and in like∣wise so did the Almaynes, who had thereof great ioy: it came to them at a good poynt, for else all had béene slaine or foyled. When he had the vpper hand, now that he pursued still his chase, for then he might haue had an end of that warre, and neither shield nor speare more broken, whereas after many a man was slaine, and was the cause that the Citie of Bourdeaux was lost, and the fayre Escleremond taken and set in prison in the Citie of Mayens, and Huon suffered so much paine and trouble, that no mortall man can shewe it. Thus as you haue heard Huon granted the truce, and so both parts withdrew, whereof the Emperour and his companie were right ioyfull. Then Huon called his companie, and shewed Gerames and his Lords how he had graunted truce to the Emperour for halfe a yeere, and therefore I charge you all not to breake the peace: the Emperour was glad when hee
heard it, for he knew well hee had scaped a great daunger. Then he charged all his men on paine of death, that they should not breake the truce. And Sirs (quoth he) I pray you make readie a litter that I may be carried to Coleyne, for the paine that I féele in my legges causeth all my bodie to tremble, and when I come there, I will tarrie till I bee whole. Sir (quoth his Lords) your commandement shal be done, then they layde the Emperour in a litter, sore com∣playning the losse and death of his nephewes and Lordes that were slaine, and his legge gréeued him sore. Then Huon sayd to Gerames, Sir thanked be God we haue vanquished the Emperour, and slaine many of his men, therefore it is good that we returne now to Bourdeaux, I haue great desire to sée my wife Escleremond, who thinking long for my com∣ming, I am sure shee is sorrowfull that I haue tarried so long Sir (quoth Gerames) if ye haue great desire to returne, so haue al other of your seruants, they would gladly see their wiues and children, and some would sée their louers. Chap. LXXXV. ¶ How Huon graunted the truce to the Emperour, and howe the Prouost of Coleyne came and assayled Huon, not know∣ing of any peace taken. WHen Huon vnderstood the old Gerames, he had great ioy, then he soun∣ded the Trumpets with such brute, that maruaile it was to heare, and commanded euery man to set forward towards Bourde∣aux. Then he beheld on his right hand, and saw them of Coleyne comming in a great number, they were well néere twentie thousand Burgesses and other, they came with banners displayde readie to fight. When Huon
saw them, he had great maruaile from whence they should come so hastily. Then he sayd to his men: Sirs, I perceiue cléerely we be betrayed, for if I had pleased, the Emperour nor his men could not haue escaped, he hath falsely betrayed me, since vnder the colour of truce they come to set newly vpon me. Thus Huon sayd by the Emperour without cause, for hée knew nothing thereof, nor that any succour should haue come to him. Sirs (quoth Huon) let vs rest here, and tarrie till they come néerer to vs, then let vs set on them with such haste, that they shall not know what to doe. Sir (quoth his men) haue no doubt, wee shall not faile you for feare of any death, we trust to slay so many, that the earth shall bee couered with the dead bodies of your enemies. Huon ordered his battaile, and the Prouost of Coleyne comforted his men, saying: Sirs, our Emperour is discomfited by Huon and his companie, who be yonder abiding before vs, they thinke to depart in sauegard, but they haue no power to doe so, for the most part of them are sore hurt, and their horses sore tra∣uailed, wherefore they shall the sooner be discomfited. Then the Prouost and his men ranne quickly vpon Huon and his men, there beganne a fierce battaile, wherein many a most valiaunt man lay on the earth dead, and at the ve∣rie first brunt there were so many slaine, that the whole fielde was couered with dead and maimed men: some were ouerthrowne without any hurt at all, and yet they could neuer rise, because of the great prease of the horses that did runne ouer them. Huon who was very full of ire, be∣cause hee had thought that vnder the colour of truce he was assayled, he ranne fiercely at a knight, who had doone verie great hurt among his men, it was he that went to Coleyne for that succour, and Huon strake him cleane through the body with his Speare, so that he fell downe dead to the earth. Then Huon cryed his crie to call his men together, hée layd on the right side and on the left, so that hee did cutte
of armes and legges, and raced their helmets from their heades, he séemed rather a man of the Fayrie then a mortall man. But he had much to doe, for his men who had fought all the day, were sore trauayled and wearie, howbeit they defended them selues right valiantly, and slew so many of the Commons of Coleyn, that the bloud ran on the ground in great streames, and the Emperour who issued out of the wood in his Lyttour, when he came into the field, he heard the brute and crie of the Battaile, wherewith he was so a∣bashed. Then he demaunded what noise it might be. Sir (quoth a Knight) it is the good Prouost of Coleyn, who hath brought with him the Commons of the Citie of Coleyn to aid and succour you. Sir, (quoth the Emperour) and he shall dearely buy it: howbeit, I thinke hee knoweth not of the Truce that we haue taken with Huon, for if I knew that he was aduertised therof, I should cause him to die an il death. Goe to him and command him that incontinent he goe to Huon, to make amendes for his trespasse, and if he will not doe it, I charge you incontinently to slay him. When the Emperour had giuen his commaundement to one of his knights, he rode as fast as he might to ye Prouost, who was right sorrowfull, for that he had lost foure thousand of his Commons, & the knight was slain that came to him. Then the Emperours knight sayd. Sir Prouost, ye haue doone right ill, séeing ye haue broken the truce that was made be∣twéene him and Huon, if the Emperour may gette you, yée shall neuer sée fayre day more, without incontinent ye goe to Huon, and deale so with him that he be content, so that no reproch be layd to the Emperor. When the Prouost and his companie heard the Emperors commandement, they were sore abashed, & reculed back. And the Prouest, who was in great feare for that hee had done, and desiring to accomplish the Emperours commandement, strake his horse with his spurres, and rested not till he hrd found Duke Huon. Then he lighted a foote, and tooke his sword and sayd. Ah right no∣ble and vertuous Prince, I desire thée in the honour of Ie∣sus
Christ haue pitie on me, and pardon me the iniurie that I haue done against you, the which I haue done without the knowledge or licence of the Emperour, who will cause mee to die a shamefull death without yee pardon mee, for all I knew not of the truce betwéene you and the Emperour, for I thought he had beene dead: Sir that which I haue done, was to the intent to rescue my rightfull Lord, and thereby I haue lost this day more then foure thousand Burgesses and commons of the Citie of Coleyn, and the most part of my best friends, and therfore Sir, I pray you haue pittie on me, else the Emperour will slay mee, or sette me in perpetuall pryson. Chap. LXXXVI. ¶ How Huon arriued at Bourdeaux, and of the counsell of the fayre Escleremond his wife, the which he would not beleeue nor follow. WHen Huon vnderstood the Prouost, he had great pitie, and though that he ought in reason to pardon him, séeing that that hee had done was in a iust cause, and that hee was not aduertised of the truce taken betweene the Emperour and him. Then Huon approched to the Prouost and sayd: Friends arise vp, I pardon you this trespasse that you haue done for your Lord, and it is but reasonable, since ye knew nothing of the truce, ye haue done as a true subiect ought to doe to his Lord, and I cannot bee angry with you for the same. Then the Prouost tooke leaue of Huon, and returned to the Emperour, who was then néere to Coleyn, and Huon rode forth towards Bourdeaux, and so on a Wednesday about din∣ner
he entred into Bourdeaux, wheras he was receiued with great solemnitie of the Bourgesses, and of all the Clergie of the Citie. Then he alighted at his Pallaice, wheras he was by the Duchesse Escleremod wel receiued with great ioy, and she demaunded of him if hee were well and in good estate. Fayre Lady (quoth Huon) thanked bee our Lord God I am in good health. Sir (quoth shee) of your comming I am right ioyous, and I desire you to shew me of your aduentures. Madam (quoth Huon) know for truth I haue béene at May∣ens, whereas I found the Emperour, and with him Duke Raoull his nephew, who had proclaimed a tourney, and be∣cause he was aduertised of my comming, his intention was that if he had found me there, hee had concluded with his men to haue slaine mee, but by the grace of God I haue done so much, that in the presence of the Emperour his vncle, and all them that were there present, I strake off his head, be∣cause he made his auaunt, that as soone as he had slaine me, he would haue had you to his wife, and all mine heritage. And when I had slaine him, I departed in haste to Mayens, and it was not long after, but that the Emperour followed me with all his men, mounted vpon the good horse that yee haue séene, who is so good, that I beléeue surely there is not such another in the world, and the Emperour who had great desire to reuenge the death of his nephew Duke Raoull, vaunced himselfe a bow shoote before his companie, and cryed after me with many iniurious words. And when I saw that he was farre off from his men, I turned toward him, and ranne and bare him to the earth, then I tooke the good horse and mounted on him, and let mine owne go, and whn his men sawe him lying on the earth, they feared lest he had beene dead, they assembled about him, and tooke no héede to follow mee, because they knew well it was but a folly to follow me, séeing I was mounted on the Emperors good horse. Thus I departed from them, and went and lay all that night at Coleyne, whereas I found my men, whom I had left
there when I went to the Emperours Court all alone, the next day I departed, but I was not gone farre out of Coleyn, when the Emperour and tenne thousand men mette me in the way, whereas they had lien in a little wood in waite for me. Then they ranne at me and at my men, there was a great battaile on both parts, and many slain and wounded: but I did so much by the grace of God & my good company, that I ouercame them, and I slew two of his nephews, and I bare the Emperour to the earth, and when he saw that the losse of the battaile ranne on his side, he sent to mee then a messenger to haue truce for halfe a yeere, the which I gran∣ted, because I thought I had doone him displeasure inough, as in slaying of thrée of his nephewes. Thus we departed, & as he returned, I met the Prouost of Coleyn, who brought with him twentie thousand men to haue rescued the Empe∣rour, and so we fought together. But as soone as the Empe∣rour was aduertised thereof, hee sent and commaunded that he should no more fight with mee. Then the Prouost came to me and cryed me mercie for that which he had done, excu∣sing himselfe that he knew nothing of the truce. Then wee made to sound the retrayt on both parts: and thus wee de∣parted without any more strokes giuing, whereof I thanke God that I am thus scaped. Sir (quoth Escleremond) ye ought to thanke God that hee hath sent you that grace, for I haue heard say, that the Em∣perour of whom you haue slain his two nephewes, is great, puissant, and a rich Prince, right sage and expert in the wars, wherefore it is to be feared, that he will not lette the matter thus to rest. Madam (quoth Huon) I know well this that you say is true, I thinke well he be displeased with mee for the death of his nephewes, and many other of his kin, thus as I haue said I iusted with him two times, and at the second time I strake him to the earth in such wise that hee brake his thigh, so that hee was constrained to bee borne thence in a litter, and it hath beene told me since, that the losse of his good horse gréeueth him more then the losse of
his men. Lady to shew you the perils and aduentures that I haue had since I departed from you, it would be too long to shew you. But surely I thinke as soone as the truce is expi∣red, that then the Emperour with all his puissance wil come and besiege me here in Bourdeaux, for it hath béene shewed me of troth, that then the Emperour hath so made his oath and promise, and hath sworne by his crowne imperiall, that he will not depart hence till he haue taken and destroyed the Citie. Sir (quoth Escleremond) if you will beleeue me, ye shall resist this, and I shall tell you how, ye know well I haue a brother called king Salybraunt, who is king of Bougye, the which extendeth on the one side néere to Mombraunt, and on the other side néere to Trypoley in Barbary, he may leade in battaile a hundred thousand men, and Sir, surely hee is a good Christian, howbeit there are but few that know it, verily he hath beleeued in Iesus Christ, and Sir if you will goe to him and desire his aide, by the same token, that when you were prisoner in Babylon, I discouered the secrets of my minde to him, and shewed him of the loue betwéene you and me, and how ye would leade me into Fraunce, whereof hee was ioyfull, and desired me affectuously that I should doe so much to you, that we might come and see him in his own Realme. But the aduenture fell so, that our departing fell other∣wise then we had deuised, he was there, and saw howe my father was slaine, and all such as were with him, then for feare he ranne away, and did hide him in a garden behinde the Pallayce, and there tarried till it was night, and then he stole away and went into his owne Realme, there shall yee finde him if you will goe thither, I know surely that hee will make you excéeding great good chéere, and will not refuse for to ayde and succour you, for hée will bee so excéeding puis∣saunt and mightie, that hee will bring with him more then a hundred thousand Sarizens, and also Sir, I would counsaile and aduise you, for to take along wyth you some fiue or sixe Priestes well furnished wyth Oyle
and creame, for assoone as hee hath his men out of his owne Countrey, hee will cause them to be christened, and such as will not, he will cause them to die an ill death. Sir, I re∣quire you beleeue my counsaile at this time, for you knowe well, that out of Fraunce you shall get no succor, for if some would, yet they dare not for doubt of King Charlemaine, the hate that he hath to you is not yet quenched, for the death of his sonne Charlot he will neuer forget, and Sir if yée goe not to my brother for succour, yée may happen to repent it, and peraduenture it may be too late, and doe as he doth, that shutteth the stable dore when the horse is stollen. Thus the faire Ladie Escleremond exhorted Duke Huon her hus∣band, whome shée loued entierly. Chap. LXXXVII. ¶ How Huon had great ioy for the birth of Claryet his Daugh∣ter. WHen Huon had well heard his Wife, hée said: My right deare La∣die and Companion, right well I know the great loue that you beare to mee, the which hath constrayned you to say thus, whereof I thanke you. But by the Lord that vpon the Crosse died for to redeeme humane Lineage, I will goe to no place, nor send for any succours, vntill I sée them before my Citie, and that I haue cause to labour for succours, nor vntill I feele the stroaks of Almaines and Bauiers, that they can giue when they be out of their owne Countrey, nor as longe as my sheeld is hole and found, first I thinke they shall feele the sharpnesse of my Speares head and good Sword, and yet by Gods grace I shall not aban∣don you, nor leaue my City and good Burgesses, for it might
greatly bée layd to my reproach if I should thus goe away. Alas Sir quoth Escleremond, yée may well know that this that I haue said, is for the feare that I haue of you, for I haue béene well aduertised, that the Emperour sore hateth you, and not without cause, for his Nephewes and Lords that yée haue slaine, and therefore Sir if ye will beléeue me, yée shall haue men to defend you brought hether by the king my brother, so that when the Emperour is come into your land, it shall lie in you either to make peace or warre at your will: reason it were, that you made him some amends for the hurts that yée haue done vnto him. And on the other part, if he will haue no peace, thē it shall lie in you to make him such warre, so that he shall not depart without your a∣gréement and to his great losse. Sir, the feare that I haue to loose you, constrayneth me thus to say, I haue heard it of∣ten times said, that the entrie into warre is large, but the issuing out therof is very straight, nor there is no warre but it causeth pouertie. But séeing it is your pleasure not to be∣léeue me, it is reason that I must be content that your plea∣sure shalbe fulfilled: then they entred into other deuises, and great ioy & feasts were made in the Pallaice at Bourdeaux between Huon and the Lordes of the Countrey. At last the faire Ladie Escleremond, who was great with child, fell vpon trauayling, and shée prayed to god for helpe, and suffered great paine, whereof Huon had great pitie whē he heard thereof, for the loue betwéene them was excéeding great, at last the Lady was brought to bed of a faire Daugh∣ter, whereof Huon thanked God: then entred into the La∣dies chamber a great number of the Ladies of the Fairie, and came to Escleremonds bed-side and said. Ladie, yée ought  to thanke God, for yée haue brought foorth the fairest & best creature that as now is in the world, and to whome our Lord god hath graunted most graces at her birth, for a more faire, me dest, wise, and courteous hath not béen borne this C. yéeres past, for shée shall haue such destinie & fortune in this world, that of the Realme of Aragon shée shall bee
crowned Quéene, and shée shall so gouerne her selfe, that shée shalbe accounted of, as if she were a Saint in Paradice. At Tortouse there is the Church where she is honoured, the which is founded in her name, and is named Saint Clare. Escleremond was ioyfull of the wordes of these Ladies of the Fairie, and great ioy & feasting was made euery where for the birth of this Child, who was greatly regarded of the Ladies of the Fayrie, and they said each to other, that this Child was the fairest creature in all the world, they tooke this Child each after other, and blessed it thrée times, & then they layd it downe and departed suddainly, so that no man wist not where they were become, whereof all the Ladies and other had great maruaile. This tidings was brought vnto Huon, he was right ioyfull and sayd: A worthy King Oberon, I beleeue surely that as yet you haue not forgotten me: now I doubt nothing the Emperour nor all his puis∣sance, séeing you haue remembraunce of mee. Then Huon came into the Hall, and thether his Daughter was brought vnto him to sée, hée tooke her in his armes and shewed her to his Lords, who were very ioyfull to sée her. Then shee was borne to the Church, and with great solemnitie christened, and named Clariet, bicause she was so faire and cleare to be∣hold. Then shee was brought to the Duchesse, who had of her great ioy. When the Duchesse had kept her Chamber a Moneth, then she was churched, whereof all the Court was ioyfull, and such feasting was made, that if I should shewe you the riches and noblenesse that was there shewed, it should be ouer-long to rehearse. Therefore I wil leaue spea∣king thereof at this time vntill another season.
Chap. LXXXVIII. ¶ How the Emperour assembled a great hoast, and came vnto Bourdeaux. YE haue at large heard here before, the manner and cause why this war was mooued, betweene the Emperour of Almaine and Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, the which after the Truce was expired, & that the Emperour was hole of his thigh that Huon had broken: he published the war againe, and sent ouer all his Empire, that euerie Duke, Earle, Baron, Knight and Squier should come to him, and Souldiers from all parts, and that with∣in a Moneth they were to be at the Citie of Mayence, to the entent to make warre vppon Huon of Bourdeaux. This com∣maundement was published, and such diligence was made, that by the day appointed, euerie man was come to the City of Mayence, and lodged in the Citie, and in Pauilions about the Citie: there were assembled more then fortie Thousand, and all men well appointed for the warre. When this Em∣perour who was named Tirrey saw them, he was verie ioy∣full, and sore threatned Huon, and made promise to all his Barons that hee would neuer returne into his owne Coun∣trey, vntill hee had first slaine Huon, who hadde doone him so great damage. Then hee commaunded his Constables and Marshals to be readie to depart the next day, & to take the way towardes Coleyne with all his Artilerie and carriage, the which was done. The next day the Emperour entred into the feeld, & so road towards Coleyne, and when the Emperor was with∣in a League, then there met with him the old Sauarie his Brother: who was Father to Duke Raoul slaine by Huon.
when these two brethren met together, there was great ioy made betwéene them. But then Duke Sauary beganne to wéepe, and sayd to his brother the Emperour. Sir of your comming I am right ioyfull: But when the pitious death of my deare beloued sonne your nephew Raoull commeth to my minde, there is no member of me but for dolour and dis∣pleasure trembleth, nor I can neuer haue perfect ioye at my heart, as long as he that hath done mee this displeasure li∣ueth. This Duke Sauary was a noble man, but betwéene him and his sonne Raoull was great difference: for the Duke Raoull was the vntruest Traitor that euer liued: the which wickednes procéeded by the Duchesse his mother, who was daughter to Hurdowin of Fraunce, the most vntruest and falsest Traytour that as then liued in the world. When the Emperour heard his brother speake, the teares fell from his eyes, and he embraced him & sayd. My right deare brother, your dolour much displeaseth mee, for your dolour is mine, and thereof I will haue a part, and if ye haue much ioy, my part shall likewise be therein. But it is not possible for vs to haue him againe for whom we make this sorrow. God ayde Huon now frō his enemies, for they greatly desire his death: yet oftentimes they that desire another mans death, auaun∣ceth their own. Thus as you haue heard, the Emperour and Duke Sauary entred into the Citie of Coleyne, whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and so rode to the Pallayce, and there they supped. I will make no long rehearsall of the good chéere that they made there. Then after Supper they went to their rest, and the next morning rose and heard ser∣uice, and tooke a sop in wine, & then departed out of Coleyne. It was a goodly hoast to behold, they and their carriage and their artillerie reached foure leagues of length. Thus they all had sworne the death of Huon, they passed by high Bor∣goyn and by Dolphinne, and so passed the riuer of Roan, and so into the countrey of Bourdeaux. Now I will leaue speaking of them till another season.
Chap. LXXXIX. ¶ How the Emperour Tirrey of Almaine besieged the Citie of Bourdeaux, and how Huon made him readie to fight with his enemies. THus you haue heard heere before, the deuises that the Duchesse Escle∣remond had made to her husband Huon, who as soone as she was churched, Huon sent his commaundement through all his coun∣trie, euery man to be readie in armes, and to come to Bourdeaux, because he was aduertised of the com∣ming of his enmies. The messengers made such diligence, that within fifteene dayes after euerie man was come to Bourdeaux, and there Duke Huon receiued them with great ioy. Then he repayred the Citie and the towres and walles, and it was well furnished with victuals and artillerie, as in such a case it well appertained, for at that time the Citie of Bourdeaux was not so strong as it is now, when Duke Hu∣on saw the Citie so well garnished with men and victuales, he was right ioyfull, and then he called to him the old Ge∣rames, and sayd: my right deere friend, ye see wel this warre that is apparent betweene the Emperour and mee, and now we be wel aduertised of his comming, who is ready to come with all his , to besiege this our Citie, and therefore my heartie deere friend▪ who hath ayded me in so many busines∣ses, I pray you counsell and ayde me now, for in all the con∣duct of my warre, I will that ye haue the charge, and that you will comfort my men well, so that of vs there be no euill report mae, and that our enemies haue no cause to prayse the warre that they haue against vs, nor that when they bee returned into their countries, that they make not their a∣uaunts
among their wenthes and their louers. Sir quoth Gerames, I thanke you of the honour and great trust that you haue in mee, howbeit, ye haue many other more sage and hardie then I am; to whom this great charge should better appertaine then to me. But Syr, as for me, I shall so acquite me, that I trust I shall not be repre∣hended. Thus as you haue heard, Huon made his deuises among all his Barons, and made all his ordinances for the defence of the Citie, and the manner of their issuing, and appoynted men for their rescue in reculing. And the Emperour was entred into the Countrey of Bourdeaux with a mightie ar∣mie, burning and destroying the Countrey, whereof the poore people were sore abashed, because they neuer had war before, and thus the Emperour neuer rested wasting and destroying the Countrey, till they came before the Cittie of Bourdeaux, and there hee pitcht vp his tents and pauillions, and the Emperour lay on the way leading to Paris, on the o∣ther part Duke Sauary father to Raoull was lodged by the Emperours marshalles, so that all the Cittie was closed round about. Huon who was within the Cittie, beheld their countenaunces and manner of their lodging: he commaun∣ded that all his men should be readie to issue out vpon their enemies, the which they did. Then Huon armed himselfe verie richly, and mounted vpon his good horse, the which was the Emperours, and sware that ere he returned again, he would shew his enemies what they of Bourdeaux could doe. When hee was mounted on his good horse, hee came into the Citie, and found the old Gerames readie apparel∣led with all his companie. Then he appoynted fiue thousand men to keepe the Citie, and twentie thousand men to goe with him. Thus Duke Huon made his ordinances. Yee may well imagine that the sorrow was great that Escleremond made for the Duke her husband, she was right wise, she fea∣red to loose him, because she knew him so aduenturous, and that his enemies were of so great number, but right
pitiously weeping, shee made her prayers to the Lord God deuoutly, that hee would keepe and defend Huon her hus∣band and all his men from danger and losse, and to send him peace with his enemies. Chap. LXXXX. ¶ Of the great Battaile that was before Bourdeaux, whereas Huon had great losse, and the old Gerames taken. THus as you haue heard, Bourdeaux was besieged by the Emperour of the high Almaynes, and by his brother the Duke Sauary with a great number of men. Then Huon issued out, and when hee was past the port, hee made haste, to the in∣tent to surprise his enemies, for at that time the Emperour was set at dinner. Then Huon and his companie all at once dasht in among the tents and Pauillions, and beate them down to the earth, so that they that were within were much abashed, for they thought verily that Huon durst neuer haue issued out of the Citie against him and the great number that hee was of. Huon layd on round about him, so that who soeuer met with him, had no néede of a leches craft. Also the old Gerames did maruailes, and so did the Bourdeloies, ma∣ny a rich tent and Pauillion was beaten to the ground, and they within slaine and all to behewen, and Huon who was mounted on a good horse, met a Knight of the Emperours house, and he gaue him such a stroke with his sword, that he cloue his head to the teeth, and then he stroke another, that his head, helme and all fell to the earth, they that sawe that stroke were sore abashed. The Emperours men assembled together by heapes, but by the mightie prowesse of Huon, anon they were againe de∣parted,
for he was so doubted and feared, that none was so hardie to approach néere him. The crie and voyce mounted so high, that the Emperour who was at dinner, when hee heard them crie, he rose from the table and demaunded what noyse it was? Sir (quoth a knight) who was fledde and sore hurt, know for truth that your enemie Huon is issued out of Bourdeaux, and hath done so much hurt, that he hath slaine a quarter of your hoste, and without that you doe rescue your men verie shortly, your losse is like to be excéeding great, for I haue séene Huon your enemie mounted vppon your good horse, whereon he doth great maruailes, for there is none that méeteth him but he is slaine, he is so cruell and hardie. When the Emperour heard the knight, he swet for displea∣sure, and incontinent he armed him, and issued out of his tent, and mounted on his horse, and found his men readie. Then he saw Huon mounted on his good horse, whereon hee sayd to his men. Sirs I require you at this time putte to your paines, that I may be reuenged on my enemie, who before my face yonder killeth my men, he is so valiant, that whomsoeuer he striketh with a full stroke, is but dead, great domage it was when he slew my nephewes, whosoeuer can deliuer him to me quicke or dead, shall be my friend for e∣uer, and I will shew him that courtesie, that Escleremond who is so fayre, I shall giue her vnto him in marriage, and all the Court of Bourdeaux. Then such as heard the promise, made them ready for the couetousnesse of that gift: But some hasted so much to ac∣complish the Emperours will, that it was too late after for them to repent. It is an old saying, that an ill haste is not good, some hasted so much, that afterwards bought it too déere, as you shall heare héere. After these wordes spoken by the Emperour, such as desired to accomplish his will, ranne in altogether into the Battaile against the Burdeloyes, where was great slaughter made on both parts. Huon who had great desire in his heart to slay his enemies, did so much by his prowesse, that hee reculed his enemies to their tents,
and it had béene ill with them if Duke Sauary had not res∣cued them, he with his great prowesse made them to recouer againe the fielde, and there was a sore battaile on both the parts. The old Gerames that day slew many a man, but hée aduentured himselfe so farre forth among his enemies, that his horse was slaine vnder him, so that hee was constrained to fall to the earth, and then hee was taken and led to the Emperours tent, and great fetters clapt vpon his legges: a∣las that Huon had not knowne thereof, if he had, he should not haue béene ledde away without great losse. But he was in the Battaile doing maruailes in armes, he held his sword in his hand, tainted with bloud and braines of men that hee had slaine, there was none so hardie that durst approach néere vnto him, he cryed still Bourdeaux, to draw his men to∣gether, and dashed into the greatest prease, and strake on all parts, in such wise, that his enemies still gaue him place, for none durst abide his strokes. Now the prease was so great of the men of Duke Saua∣ries, that he had great paine to breake in among them, hée fought so, that hee séemed rather a man of the Fayrie, or a Spirit, then a mortall man, euerie man had great maruaile of the prowesse that hee and his companie shewed. Then came against him the old Duke Sauary, with a burning de∣sire to be reuenged for the death of his sonne Raoull. And Hu∣on perceiued him well, and made such haste, that the Duke had no leysure to giue the first stroke, for Huon gaue him such a stroke with his sword, that hee cutte a quarter of his shield cleane off, and the stroke glyded to the horse necke by such vertue, that it strake off the horse head cleane, so that thereby the Duke fell to the earth, and if he had not béene wel succoured, he had béene slaine, but there came to him so ma∣ny men, that whether Huon would or not he was succou∣red, and mounted vpon a new horse. When Huon sawe that he was escaped, he called vpon our Lord God, and sayd. Ah good Lord, if I tarrie héere long, I sée well that my force shal but little profit me, for there be twentie against one.
Then hee called certaine of his Lordes that were about him, and sayd. Sirs, I perceiue well our force cannot long endure, therefore it is better to depart betimes, then to tar∣rie too long. Sir (quoth they) as it shall please you, so then they turned them towardes Bourdeaux a soft pace, and Huon did as the shepheard doth goe behinde his shéepe, so went hée with his sword in his hand, defending his companie from his enemies, right sorrowfull and angrie for the losse that he had that day, for in the morning when he departed from Bourdeaux, hee had twentie thousand of good fighting men, and at his returne he sawe well that he had not aboue foure thousand, wherewith he was sore displeased, and oftentimes by the way turned and returned to his enemies. At last hee met with a Knight named Iozeram, and gaue him such a stroke, that he fell downe dead to the earth, whereof the Em∣perour Tyrrey was sore displeased: for hee was his cosin germaine, and after that he slew foure other Knights of Al∣maine. Then he returned againe after his men, and so ledde them forth still as the shepheard doth his sheepe, and often∣times turned and returned vpon his enemies, so that there was none so hardie that durst approach néere him. Therewith thither came the Emperour, richly armed with armes imperiall, and mounted vppon a puissant horse. Then hee cryed, on forth my Barons, take héede that this traitour Huon scape not away, if I may haue him in my hands, all the gold in the world shall not redeeme him from hanging. Huon who heard the Emperour sayd: Ah false olde dotard, thou lyest falsely, I was neuer traitour. Then the Emperour ranne at Huon, and strake him on the shield, and strake it cleane through, and the speare brake all to péeces: but Huon with his sword strake the Emperour on the Hel∣met, so that the circle sette with stone and pearle was beaten to the earth, and if the horse had not swarued, the Emperour had not scaped aliue: neuerthelesse the stroke light so on his shoulder, that the sword pierced the maile, & gaue him a déep wound, & further the sword descēded to the bow of the saddle,
so that the horse was stroken nigh asunder in two péeces, and so the Emperour and the horse fell downe to the ground together, so that if he had not béene rescued by the Almaines he had béene slaine. Huon was sorie when he saw the Empe∣ror so scaped with his life, then he turned and rode towards Bourdeaux after his men, who tarried still for him, and Huon did so much by his prowesse, that for all the Emperour and his men he entred into the Citie of Bourdeaux. But as then hee knew not that the olde Gerames was ta∣ken prisoner, so thus as you haue heard Duke Huon entred into Bourdeaux with foure thousand men, of whom the most part were sore hurt, then he rode to the Pallaice, and there alighted. Then he looked about him, and was sore abashed when he saw not Gerames by him, then he demanded if any man knewe where hee was. Sir (quoth a Knight named Gallerance) know for truth that hee is taken prisoner, and is in the hands of your enemies, for to haue ayded him I was wounded in thrée places, and néere hand slaine, I employed my force to haue succoured him, but I could finde no remedie. When Huon heard that, hee praysed greatlie Gerames force and vertue, and greatly complained and said. Alas that I had not knowne of his taking ere I returned, I would sooner haue dyed, but that at the least I would haue taken some man sufficient to haue redéemed him againe out of danger. A lamentable thing it was to heare Duke Huon, what sorrow hee made for his friend Gerames, but his com∣plaints could not auaile him, his Lords sayd, Sir by the grace of God you shall haue him againe safe and aliue. Sirs quoth Huon, it shall be a great aduenture without they put him to death. Then Huon mounted vp to the Pallaice, whereas he met Escleremond his wife, whom hee kissed and embraced manie times. Sir (quoth the Ladie) I pray you shew mee of your newes. Ladie (quoth Huon) they be but poore and dolorous, for of twentie thousand men that I had with me out of this Citie, I haue brought home aliue but foure thousand, and
yet the most part of them before wounded, and beside, the old Gerames is taken prisoner, who hath suffered before this time so many paines and trauailes for my sake. Alas Sir quoth the Ladie sore wéeping, I had rather you had beléeued me, and that you had gone and sought for succour of my bro∣ther, who would not haue fayled you, but would haue come with you with so much people and puissance, that the Em∣perour should not haue durst to haue abiden you. Madame (quoth Huon) speake no more thereof, for the losse of as much as tenne Cities be in value, I would not haue gone thither, nor to none other part for any succour, nor yet will not, till that I sée mée more oppressed then I am as yet, I might well be reputed for a coward and recreaunt, thus to abandon my Citie, I had rather be dismembred into pée∣ces, then for feare I should leaue you, it would be greatlie to my reproch in the Courts of hie Princes, and when I come there, to be marked with the finger for that great default. Sir (quoth Escleremond) your pleasure is mine, since that you wil haue it so, but I am right sorrowful for the old Gerames, who is prisoner in the tents of your enemies, who hath suf∣fered for your sake many great pains and pouerties, I can∣not be but sory when I remember him. Madame (quoth Hu∣on) as yet Gerames is not dead, I hope by the grace of our Lord God that we shall haue him againe aliue. Sir quoth she, I pray to God that it may be so. Now let vs leaue spea∣king of Huon, and speake of the Emperour, who lay sore hurt on the earth. Chap. LXXXXI. ¶How the Emperour raysed vp a paire of Gallowes, to hang vp the old Gerames, and all the Bourdeloyes that were taken prisoners.
YOu haue alredy heard here before recounted, howe Huon entred into Bourdeaux, after hee had beaten downe the Emperour Tirrey, whome he left lying vpō the earth, and had beene flaine, if his men had not quickly rescued him: now his men were sorrowfull, for they feared hee had been dead, and vn∣laced his helmet, and was right ioyful when they found him aliue. Then they demaunded and said: Sir, we desire you shew vs in what case you feele your selfe? Sirs, (quoth he) I am sore hurt, whereby I feele great paine, this enemie Huon hath brought me into this case, I was foolishly coun∣sailed when I came hether to seeke for him, for if I had tari∣ed still at Mayence, I beleeue to do me displeasure he would haue come thether: sirs, I pray you beare me into my Tent, that my wound may bee searched, then hee was borne into his Tent & vnarmed, and layd vpon his bed, and he swoun∣ded thrice for paine of his hurt. And when he came to him∣selfe, and his woundes were searched by his Surgions, hee demaunded where ye Knightes of Bourdeaux were, they that were taken in the Battaile, and demaunded that they should be brought to his presence. Gerames was brought before him, who was great & pu∣issant, with a beard as white as snow, hee was a faire ould Knight to behould, his visage plaine and smiling, he seemed to be a man of high affaires, when the Emperour saw him, he said: Thou old Catiffe, shew me what thou art, beware and shew me the troth? Sir, (quoth Gerames) know well that for feare of any death I shall not spare to say the troth, ing you will needs know what I am, I am named Ge∣rames, and am Huons Seruant, whome I loue naturally, and also I am his kinsman, whereby I haue the more cause to loue him, and I haue slaine diuers of your men. Well, (quoth the Emperour) I repute thee for a Foole to giue mee
this knowledge, for by the grace of God, to morow early ere I eate or drinke, thou shalt be drawne & hanged, & xl. of thy company yt were taken with thée in the battaile. Sir quoth Gerames, of this that you shew me I giue you no thanke for it, but I hope by the aid of Iesus christ, yt I shal do you more damage ere I die. Ah Villain quoth ye Emperor, great mar∣uaile I haue of thée, that thus before me thou doest vse these threatnings, & yet thou séest how thou art my prisoner, & that it lyeth in me to put thée to what death it pleaseth me, know for troth, & if it were not so late of the day as it is, I wold not suffer thée to liue one houre. But ere I sleepe I shall cause a Gallowes to be made, whereas thou and thy company shall be hanged, and I shall cause thée to be hanged so néere to the Citie, that if Huon be so néere kin to thée as thou sayst, he wil shew how well he loueth thée, he may haue great olor, whē before his eyes he shall sée his coozen and his men hanged, & then afterward I wil assaile the citie, & take it perforce, so yt then Huon in any wise shall not escape out of my hands, & so to be hanged with other, & the faire Escleremond shalbe burnt or condemned to prison, and then I will burne all the Citie and destroy it cleane. Sir quoth Gerames, you may say your pleasure: but in the doing is all the matter, & when the Em∣perour saw that Gerames doubted not the death, he was sore abashed. Then he commanded incontinent Gallows to bée raised vp, so great, to hang thereon the fortie prisoners, & to be set on a little rocke neere to the Citie of Bourdeaux, to the entent that Huon and his men might sée them plaine, therby to abash them, the which was done, so the matter rested vn∣till the next day in the morninge. And when it was day, Huon within the Citie rose and came to his Pallaice, and regarded out at his windowes, to sée and behold the hoast of his enemies, and as he stood, he espied the newe Gallowes standing on the rocke: then hee called his Lordes and sayd. Sirs, neuer beleeue, but yonder Gallowes that I see newe raysed, is for none other entent, but for to hang thereupppon my men that bee taken and my good Freende old Gerames:
whereof I am verie sorrowfull. Therefore Sirs, quickly make you readie, and mount vppon your horses, for ere they be hanged, we will prooue our selues against them: looke to∣ward the Hoast, and sée when they bée comming toward the Gallowes, and when you sée them, be readie on horse-backe and open the gate, that we may issue out all at once, and let vs neuer thinke to returne vntill we haue rescued our men, for I purpose neuer to returne into this Citie, vntill I haue deliuered them out of the hands of our enemies. Then they armed them about seauen Thousand by tale, of good men of armes well horsed, readie at the gate to depart when time came. Now wée will leaue speaking of Huon, and speake of the Emperour. Chap. LXXXXII. ¶How Huon yssued out of Bourdeaux, and rescued the ould Gerames and his companie, whom the Emperor would haue hanged. THe Emperour, who hadde great desire that Gerames and his company were hanged, caused thē to be brought forth by couples, one fast tyed to another, and Ge∣rames was the formost, who then right ten∣derly began to weepe when he saw himselfe in that case. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I require thee haue mercie on our soules, & kéepe and defend my good Lord Duke Huon, who by the commandement of King Oberon, should giue me his Duchy, and he to haue king Oberons dignitie of the Fayrie after foure yeares passed: I cannot say what for∣tune will fall, but I may well say, that I shall neuer come to greater honor, yet I am comforted in yt I am so old, it is good reason that I be content to haue liued so long, it is now time
that I depart out of this world. Then the Emperour called vnto him a Knight, and said: Sir Othon, I will that incon∣tinent you take three Thousand men, and take these Priso∣ners, and hang them vp all vppon the Gallowes that were made yester-night late, and if it bee so that Huon yssue out▪ looke that you quit your selfe valiantly, and if you haue néed of any ayd, take my horne and blow it, for I haue ready ap∣pointed ten Thousand men to succour you if need bée. When Othon heard the Emperour, hee was right sorrie to haue that euill office, for in his youth hée was brought vp in the house of Duke Seuin Father to Huon, and somewhat he was of his kin, but as then hee had slaine a man, where∣fore he fled from Bourdeaux, and came and serued the Empe∣ror at Mayence, wherefore he was right sorrowfull to haue that Commission: then hee sayd vnto the Emperour. Sir, mée thinkes you doe ill to cause them to die so hastily, better it were to abide to sée what end your warre will come vnto, and also if it fortune that any of your Lords to be taken here∣after, for one of them you might recouer him againe, and if you slay them, then if any of your Barons happen to bee ta∣ken, they shall die of like death: and therefore Sir, if you wil beléeue me, you shall forbeare slaying them at this time, and Sir, if you will giue me licence, I will doe so much to Duke Huon, that for the offence that he hath done vnto you, hee shall make you amends at your owne pleasure, and hee shall goe vnto some holy Pilgrimage, to pray for the Soules of your Nephews, and other of your lords that he hath slain, and he to haue with him two Hundred men in their shirtes, and so to goe to the holy Sepulchre at his owne charge and coste, and hee to hould of you all his Landes, and to doe you homage. Then the Lordes that were there present, all with one voice sayd vnto the Emperour: Sir, the counsaile that sir O∣thon hath giuen vnto you, is worthy to bee beleeued, wée all agree thereto, and desire you so to doe, but when the Empe∣rour heard them, he was sorowfull and sore displeased. Sir,
(quoth Othon) you may surely know, if you hang any of them that be taken, if Huon happen to take any of your men, hee shall neuer escape vnhanged and drawne. When the Em∣perour had heard Othon speake, he was so troubled & angry, that it seemed by his face, that for verie anger he was neere hand in a rage, and said. Behold sirs this Foole, who would let mee to take vengeance on them that so sore haue troubled me, he hath heard me ere this time sweare and make solemn promise, that I would neuer returne into my Countrey, vn∣till I had hanged and drawne Huon of Bourdeaux, for by that Lord that made mée to his similitude, I knowe no man this day, though he were neuer so neere a kin to me, except mine owne Brother, but I shall make him to be slaine, if he speak any more to me for respiting of their liues, nor I shall neuer loue him, for I make a vow to our Lord God, that I will ne∣uer returne into my Country, vntill I haue taken this Citie perfore. Sir, (quoth Othon) séeing it is your pleasure I shal speake no more thereof, but I beleeue it will bee longe here∣after before you finde any that will be glad to doe your plea∣sure. Othon, (quoth the Emperour) dispatch the matter, and reuenge me vpon the old Gerames and vpon all his com∣panie. Sir, (quoth Othon) it is conuenient that I doe it sée∣ing it is your pleasure: then without any more words he de∣parted, and tooke Gerames and the other Prisoners, and went with them towards the Gallowes. Gerames went before with the haulter about his necke sore weeping, and all his companie after him, so that at the laste they came to the place of execution, where the Ladders were set vp, and then the hang-man came vnto Gerames and said: Come on thou old Dotard, thou hast liued long inough, thou shalt no more see him whome thou louest so well, and I hope shortly he shal beare thée company wauing in the wind. When Gerames heard him, he beheld him fiercely and sayd: Ah thou vnhappie Villaine, if one of my handes were loose, thou shouldest neuer sée faire day more, how art thou so har∣dy, to say or to thinke so villainous a worde, of the best and
most valiantst Knight now liuing? Then Othon came to them, and hearing the hangman how hee reuiled Gerames, he sayd. Ah thou base slaue▪ thinkst thou not that this knight hath not inough to suffer though thou dost not reuile him? if thou thy selfe were in that case that they be in, and they in the citie of Bourdeaux, thou wouldest soone repent thy saucie words, and therewith hee lift vp a staffe that he had in his hand, and strake the hangman therewith, that he fell down to the earth: then hee sayd. Ah thou false theefe, doe thine office and speake no words: whereupon the hangman durst speake no more, but then he tooke Gerames by the halter that was about his necke, and so mounted vpon the ladder and Gerames after him, who made pittious complaints for Huon his good Lord. The same time that Gerames mounted vpon the first step of the ladder, they within the Citie vpon the walles percei∣ued it, and saw euidently, that without the prisoners were spéedily rescued, their liues were lost, then they said to Huon. Sir, if you tarrie any longer, your men shall be all hanged, for yonder wée sée one of them is mounted on the ladder, who hath a beard as white as the snow. When Huon heard that, he was sore displeased, and sayd. Ah good Lord, I know surely that it is my true friend Gerames, whom they would first put to death, therefore Sirs, I require you quickly let vs issue out at the gate, for if Gerames bee not presently suc∣coured, the Traitours will putte him to death, but if that I may come time inough, his perill shall bee dearely solde to them. Hereupon Huon with seuen thousand fighting men, issued out at the gate so fiercely, that the earth seemed to groane vnder them, their horses made such a thundering, and so within a short spare (by a secret way) they came to the place whereas the gallowes stood. Huon was the first that arriued there, and he marked well the hangman that should haue hanged Gerames, and gaue him such a stroke with his speare, that he ranne him through, so that hee fell from the ladder dead, so was Gerames reuenged of ye iniury
that hee had done to him before: then Huon saide, Gerames come downe of the Ladder, and arme you in some armour of them that shall bée heere slaine. Gerames thanked our Lord God, and came downe the ladder, and then thether came Huons companie, who vntyed all the other Prisoners: then began a sore Battaile, the Almaines would not fly, the which Huon séeing, cried to them and said: Yée false Traytours, your deaths are iudged, deare shalbe sould to you the offence that yée haue done vnto mee, when yée would slay thus my men with so villainous a death, better it had béen for you to haue been at Mayence, hidden in the laps of your Mothers and Louers. When they vnderstood Huon, anon they knew him, wher∣of they were sore abashed, then Huon met with a Knight of Almayne, and ran him cleane through, and so hée serued thrée other, then he drew his sword wherewith he did great mar∣uailes, for ere he ceased, he slew fourteene, and also his men did maruailes in armes, so that within a short space the Al∣maines were discomfited, so that none escaped away aliue, except Sir Othon, who valiantly defended himselfe. But when he saw that his force would not helpe him, hée yéelded himselfe to Huon, and gaue him his sword, and cryed him mercie, and sayd. Sir, I beséech you slay me not, but haue pi∣tie on me, and I promise you faithfully, that against my wil I came hither, but I was forced so to doe by the Emperour, and first I desired respite. Insomuch that the Emperor was sore displeased with me, I intreated for a peace to haue been made betwéene you and him, but my words could not pre∣uaile. Sir I am your kinsman, & was brought vp in Duke Seuin your fathers house, and there I serued a maister who did beate mee, and when I felt my selfe strong and of age, I was displeased that he did beate me so without a cause, & I slew him & fled away, and came to Mayens, and euer since I haue serued the Emperour, who is come hither to besiege you. Friend (quoth Huon) feare not your death, but I pray you from hence forth ayde and serue mee, as ye ought to doe
to your louing friend. Sir quoth Othon, God shame mee if I doe the contrarie, but I shall serue you truely as long as life is in my body. Then Huon came to the foote of the ladder, whereas hee found Gerames as then not vntied, Huon embraced and kis∣sed him often times, and sayd. Right déere friend, I am right glad at my heart when I see you whole of body, and then hee went to the other and losed them, and vnbound their eyes, and sayd. Sirs arme your selues with the harnesse of them that bee dead, for a man that is armed hath the aduantage of others that bee not armed. It was néedfull for them to be armed, God defend them from euill, for anon after they had so maruailous a reencounter, that they had neuer the like be∣fore, for the other tenne thousand men came to reuenge them that were dead, they hoped to haue come time inough, but they fayled, for they came too late, Huon had taken of al them their truage. When Huon saw that he had done that which he came for, he returned him towardes the Citie, but he was so pursued, that he was neere surprised and stopped from en∣tring into the Citie. When Huon saw his enemies com∣ming, he cryed aloude to his men, saying. Sirs, let vs turne vpon them that come toward vs, to the intent that they shall not make their auaunts, that they haue caused vs to flie a∣way before them: then hee and all his men turned against their enemies with a most valiaunt courage, and at that méeting many speares were broken on both parts, and ma∣ny a knight borne to the earth, that had neuer the power af∣ter to reléeue themselues, there was such a slaughter on both parts, that it was pittie to sée them. And great maruaile it was to see Huon, how he beate downe his enemies, & claue helmets, and rased them from the heads of his enemies: hee dealt in such wise, that no Almaine durst abide his strokes he was so doubted and feared, hee made the thicke prease to breake a sunder, and flie away before him, and by him was Sir Othon, who that day did many a noble deed of armes, for next Huon (aboue all other that day) hee bore the price.
Finally, Huon and Othon and his other men did so much, that the Almaines were chaced to their Tentes, and many slaine in the chace and sore hurt, so that they neuer road vp∣pon horse-backe after. Sometime it fortuneth, that it is folly to venture too much forward, and too late to repent af∣terward: I say this for Huon and his company, who were gone so much forward, that in great dauger they returned to the Citie, for the Almaines (who were thirtie Thousand men ready before their Tents) when they saw Huon and his men chace their company, they set foorth againste Huon: and when Huon saw them, hee sayd vnto his men. Sirs, it is good that wee recoile into our Citie, for yonder I see comminge  then thirtie Thousand Almaines as fast as they can: so when Huons company saw them, they doubted greatly, and not without cause, for they had beene before at two great skirmishes, whereby they and their horses were wearie and sore trauailed, the which was no maruaile, so by the counsaile of Huon, they returned a false gallop toward their Citie, and the Almaines were at their backe, and cha∣ced them so quickly, that more then fiue Hundred Almaines entred into the Citie with them of Bourdeaux. But they that kept the gates that day were wise and discreet, for as soone as they perceiued that Huon and his company were entred, and with them about fiue Hundred of their enemies: they woulde keepe their gates no longer open, for feare that their enemies should haue entred with too great a number, so that for hast they cut asunder the cord yt held vp the Port∣lloys, the which fell downe by such force, that it fell vpon the horse of an Almaine that was vnder it, the which horse was cutte cleane assunder, so that the man and the fore part of the horse fell within the gate, and the hinder part of the horse fell without, whereat the Almaines that followed after were sorrowfull and angrie, that they had not come thether sooner. Then they returned to their Tents, complaining for the great losse and damage that they had sustained that day, by
the high prowesse of Huon and his men, and also they that were entred into the Citie were sore abashed, when they sawe themselues encloased within the Citie. When Huon perceiued it, he had great maruaile, that they were so entred in among his men, for he knew not thereof, and yet he him∣selfe was the laste that entred, then hee sayde. Ah yee false Traytours, yee shall all die an ill death: and then he sayd to his men. Syrs, slay them all, then incontinent they aligh∣ted, and kneeled downe before Huon, and required him to haue mercie and pitie of them, and to saue their liues, and put vs in prison (quoth they) we be all men of a noble line∣age, and it may bee so, that by vs yee may haue peace with the Emperour. Then Gerames sayd vnto Huon: Sir, I re∣quire you to haue pitie of them, and put them not to death, for so it may bee that by them you may haue peace with the Emperour. Freend, (quoth Huon) I am content to doe at your pleasure, as you will haue me doe: then he commaun∣ded that they should all bée vnarmed, and they all made pro∣mise vnto Huon not to depart without licence. Gerames, (quoth Huon) I will that these Prisoners bee brought vp in∣to the Borough, and there parted and set into diuers houses that be sure, and let them haue all things necessarie for their liuing: then Gerames deliuered them to the keeping of such as hee trusted, and so each of them was kept in a courteous Prison. Now let vs leaue to speak of Huon and of his Pri∣soners, and returne to the Emperour. Chap. LXXXXIII. ¶ Howe the Emperour assayled the Citie of Bourdeaux twoo times, whereas he lost many of his men.
AS you haue heard here be∣fore, how Huon chased his enemies to their tents, and how it was time for him to re∣turne to his Citie, and how hee was so pur∣sued by the Almaynes, that more then fiue hundred of them entred into the Citie, and were closed within it, and the residue returned to their tents, sorrowful and angrie for the great losse that they had. So when they were returned, the Emperour demaunded what tydings, and how they had spedde, and if they had not taken Huon quicke or dead. Sir (quoth a knight) it is follie for you to speake thus, for Huon is no man so lightly to bee taken, for the fiftie men that you sent to haue beene hanged, be rescued by Huon, and the three thousand men that you sent with them are all slaine, and diuers other sore hurt and in perill of death, and besides that, fiue hundred men of the best of your friendes are entred into Bourdeaux: for wee so hastily pursued Huon and his men, that entring into the Ci∣tie, fiue hundred of our men entred into the Citie, entermed∣led with Huons men, and there they be inclosed within: ther∣fore Sir we aduise and counsell you, that you agrée with Huon, for if you doe not you shall loose all your men, for Hu∣on is so fell and cruell, that hee will hange vp your men, as ye had thought to haue done his, of whom one of them was his cosin, you may doe as it pleaseth you. When the Emperour heard his Barons, what counsell they gaue him, he was verie sorowfull and sayd. Sirs ye do me great wrong, to require me to make any peace with Hu∣on, since ye know wel what ath and promise I haue made, that I will neuer be at peace with him, & to the intent yt ye shall speake no more therof, know for troth, that if X.M. of my néerest friends were taken by Huon, I would rather suf∣f them to die a shamefull death, then to agree to any peace with Huon till I haue slaine him, and his Citie be burnt
and destroyed. Sir (quoth they) séeing it is your pleasure, yée may do as you thinke best. Sirs, (quoth the Emperour) I will that yée assemble all mine hoast, and send to my Bro∣ther that hée bring all his men, & then with all our puissance we will assaile the Citie, and that none be so hardie as to recule back vntill the Citie be taken: this was proclaymed through the Hoast, and euery man was readie to assaile the Citie, and the cheefe Captaine was Duke Sauary, who brought all his men in good order to the dikes, well fourni∣shed with ladders and other necessarie things pertaining to assault. The same time Huon and his men were vnarmed and go∣ing to dinner, but when he heard the noise and crie without, he tooke a sop in wine, and armed him & all his men, and e∣uery man went to the walles to their defence, and Huon & old Gerames, Othon, and Barnard a valiant knight mounted on the towre ouer the gate, and the Almaines on euery part entred into the dikes, and raysed vp many a scaling ladder to the walles, but they within cast them downe, so that they had no power to rise vp againe, for there was cast downe vpon them earth, timber and stones. Fierce was the assault that the Almaines made, & they within made noble defence, for Huon and Gerames shot so with their crosbowes, thar at euery shoote they slew some man or sore wounded him, and long endured this assault, so that finally the Almaines were constrained to recule backe a bow shoote, whereof they with∣in were very ioyfull. Then the Emperour Tirrey being sorrowfull and full of rage, came to his men, and rebuked them shamefully, com∣maunding them that incontinent they should returne again to assaile ye Citie, saying that they should not faile to winne it. Then the Almaines (to please their Lord) retourned in great hast with their ladders & pikes, and came into ye dikes whereas then there was no water, & raysed them vp to the walles: but they were no sooner vp, but they within beat them downe againe, and put them in danger of their liues,
for they cast downe Timber, stones, and faggots, with fire and hoat oyle and lead vppon them, so that the assailants were faine perforce to recoile backe, and they within shot ar∣rowes so thicke, that it seemed like snowe. The Emperour was sore displeased and Duke Sauary, when they saw none other remedie, many were slaine and sore hurt, and the Em∣peror and Sauary his Brother seeing that they could nothing profite, sounded the retrait, and so returned to their Tents, sore displeased for their great losse that they had, for they lost that day more then two Thousand men, lyinge dead in the feeld and in the Dikes, and more then thrée Thousand sore hurt. Then Duke Sauary sayd to the Emperor: Sir, me thinks it is but folly to assaile this Citie, it is strong, and well fur∣nished with men and good Knightes to defend it, wherefore we may well perceiue, that without great damage we can∣not winne it, without it be by famine, for hee that is Lorde thereof is hardy and cruell, and to be feared and doubted, for he is expert in armes, wherefore it is impossible to take the Citie perforce. When the Emperour vnderstoode him, hee was right sorrowfull, and made againe newe promise, not to depart thence, vntill hee had Huon at his pleasure. Huon, who little set by the threatnings of the Emperour, went in∣to his Pallaice, and said to his men: Sirs, we ought great∣ly to thanke God for the defence of our Citie, many Almains ee slaine and hurt, I doubt them nothing, for our Citie is strong, & before it be lost, it will cost many men their liues. I desire you all take good héed that we be not beguiled. Sir, (quoth they) we shall take good héed thereof, as well for you, as for the sauegard of our liues. Thus Huon and his men deuised together, howbeit, they were sore greeued, for at the beginning they were about twentie Thousand men, & then they were not aboue six Thousand. Now let vs leaue spea∣king of them, and speake of the Emperour, who was right sorrowfull for his losse.
Chap. LXXXXIIII. ¶ How Huon sent Habourey his Messenger to the Emperour, to require peace, and of his answeare. WHen the Emperor hadde heard Duke Sauary his Brother speake, he made a solemne oath, that whatsoeuer fortune should fall, hee would not depart thence Winter nor Summer till hee had wonne the Citie, and then he sent for his Réerband, as farre as his Empire stretched, commaunding euerie man to come to him all excuses layd apart, and so they did. Now of their comming by the way I make no mention, but so long they trauailed, that they came within a League of Bourdeaux, and when the Emperour knew thereof, he had great ioy, and mounted on his horse with other Lords with him, and road & met them, and spake to them and made them good cheere. Thus his force encreased, & Huons diminished daily, often times Huon issued out vpon his horse called Am∣phage, & made daily many great Skirmishes, sometime hée wan, and sometime hee lost, he slew many Almaines, so that they all feared him, for there was none that durst abide him, his horse was so cruell, that none durst approach néere him without he were slaine, & Huons men quit them valiantly, so yt if they lost at one time, they wan iij. times for it: but their force could not long endure, for their enemies were so many & they so few, & they had made so many issues, that they had lost many of their company, for of xx.M. they were left but v.C. men, wherof Huon was sorowfull. Now when he saw yt he had but v.C. men, he called to him Gerames, Othon, Bar∣nard, & Richard, saying. Sirs, I see that euery day we dimi∣nish, wherfore we cannot long endure against the Emperors
force, therefore I thinke that it were good that wee sent to the Emperor, to know if he wil heare speaking of any peace. Sir, (quoth they) wee thinke your aduise right good, and it were good to knowe if hee will agrée thereto or not. Then Huon called Habourey his Messenger, and commaunded him that incontinent he should goe to the Emperour, and say vn∣to him: that if it bee his pleasure to heare speaking of any peace, I shall (quoth he) condescend therto, and to make him amends at his pleasure, for the wronge and damage that I haue done vnto him and his men. Also shew him, how that I will become his man, and doe him homage for all the Landes that I haue, the which I was woont to hould of the King of Fraunce: but séeing I haue no succour from him, I am driuen perforce to purchase for my profit in some other place. And besides that shewe him, that the fiue Hundred Prisoners that I haue of his men, I shall deliuer them quit without any raunsome paying, and also when Lent com∣meth, I and a Hundred knightes with me at my cost & char∣ges, shall passe the Sea and goe to the holy Sepulchre, to pray for the Soules of his Nephews that I haue slaine, and for all other that haue been slaine by occasion of this warre. Sir, (quoth the Messenger) I am readie to fulfill your com∣maundement whatsoeuer fall thereof, and so hee departed & went to the Emperours Hoast, & entred into the riche Tent, and then hee kneeled downe before the Emperour and sayd. The almightie God, who on the Crosse dyed to saue all humane kinde, kéepe and defend from all ill the Emperour & all his Barony: Sir, Duke Huon of Bourdeaux sendeth to you salutation and good amitie, requiring you in the ho∣nour of god, that he may haue peace with you, by that hee will become your liege-man, and doe you homage and hould his Landes of you, and will deliuer quite the fiue Hundred men of yours that he hath in prison in the Citie, and more∣ouer, hee offereth himselfe and a Hundred Knights to passe the Sea this next Lent, and to goe to the holy Sepulchre, to pray to our Lord God for the soules of your Nephewes that
be dead, and for other that by him and by his meanes haue beene slaine in this warre. Sir if it please you this to doe, ye shall doe a great almes deede, for life cannot bee had againe to them that bee dead. When the Emperour Tyrrey had wel heard Habourey the messenger, he became as red as a brand of fire, and regarded the messenger fiercely, and sayd. Auoyd my sight thou false varlet, but that I doubt to be reprooued, I should cause thée to be hewen in peeces, but a messenger ought not to be touched for any words that hee can speake, but say to thy Lord, that by him and by his meanes I haue lost more then twentie thousand men, beside my thrée Ne∣phewes & my yonger brother, but by the Lord that died on the Crosse to redeeme vs all, I will neuer haue peace with him, till I haue him at my pleasure, nor neuer returne thou againe hither to mee, nor none other, vpon any such message. When Habourey the messenger heard the Emperour, hee was in great feare, and would gladly haue béen in Bourde∣aux, then he departed without any more speaking, and rested not till hee came to Bourdeaux, where hee went to the Pal∣laice, wheras he found Duke Huon, then he sayd. Sir I haue béene with the Emperour, and shewed him at full all your message, but his answere will not serue to your demaunde, for he sayd to mee, that he will haue no peace with you, till he haue you at his pleasure, to doe with you what hee will, and thus I departed from him, and left him sitting at his ta∣ble at dinner. Chap. LXXXXV. ¶ How Huon issued out of Bourdeaux, and came to the tents and fought with the Emperour.
WHen Huon vnderstood the Messenger, hee was full of anger and dis∣pleasure, and saide. Sirs, I commaunde you all in hast to goe and arme you, for ere euer the Almaines bee risen from their din∣ners and armed, I shall make them so sorrowfull, that they shall curse the houre that euer they were borne, for I had ra∣ther die then to leaue them in this point, for I will goe serue them of their first messe. Then euery man armed him, and Huon leapt vpon his good horse Amphage, and then he tooke his leaue of the faire Escleremond his wife, and so departed out of Bourdeaux with his company, and road towardes the Emperours Tents. The same time the Emperour was ri∣sen from his Table, and he had ordained three hundred men on horsebacke to keepe the Tents whiles he was at dinner: then Huon and his company came so quickly, that hee was among them ere they perceiued any thing, and he cried Bour∣deaux, and strake a Knight with his Speare cleane through the body, so that he fell dead to the earth, then he ran at ano∣ther, and serued him in likewise, and so he slew foure before his Speare brake. Then he drew his Sword, & beat down men and horses, and brake the thickest presse, so that euerie man gaue him way, and Gerames, Othon, Barnard, and Ry∣chard and all his company did maruels in armes, & so much they did, that within a short space the iij. hundred Almaines that were set to keepe the Tents, were all slayne. Then Hu∣on and his company entred in among the Tents and Paui∣lions, where they bet downe the Tents, & such as they met were slaine: then the Almaines on all parts armed them, and the Emperour sounded his Trumpets & armed him: he was so sorrowfull and angry, with the trauell & damage he was put too by Huon, that hee enraged and was néere out of his wit, for night and day he could take no rest. When he was armed, hee mounted on his horse, and xx.M. Almaines with
him, and they all sware the death of Huon, whome God de∣fend, for if he long taried there, he should be in danger of his life. But he was wise and discréet in Feats of armes, & hée looked towards the Emperours Tent, and sawe well twen∣tie Thousand men readie to come vpon him, then he said to his men. Sirs, it is time that wee retire to our Citie, wee may well now goe without blame, for we may no longer ta∣rie heere without great danger. Sir, (quoth Gerames) wée bee readie to doe your commaundement, then they tooke the way to returne to the Citie, but the Emperour who greatly desired the death of Huon, he & his men pursued Huon as fast as their horses could goe, & when the Emperor was néere to Huon he said. Ah thou false Traytour, so many times thou hast troubled and angered mee, that longer I will not suffer thée to liue, turne toward me, for with thee I will iust, or else I shall slay thée flying: I had rather to die, then not to take of thée vengeance for the hurts that thou hast done to mée. When Huon heard how the Emperor called him Traytor hee was sore displeased, and turned his horse towardes the Emperour and sayd. Ah false old Churle, whereas thou say∣est I am a Traytor, I shall shew thee how thou lyest false∣ly: then they ran eache at other with their Speares in their restes, so that they met so rudely, & strake each other on their sheelds by such force, that their sheeldes burst assunder, the Emperour was a puissant Prince, so that his Speare burst all to péeces, but Huons Speare was strong and held, where∣with he gaue the Emperour such a stroake, that Sheeld nor Holberd coulde not warraunt him, but that the Speare en∣tred into the Emperors side, so that if he had not swarued a∣side, he had not escaped death, that stroake was so sore, that the Emperour sell to the earth in such wise, that néere hand he had broken his neck with the fall, and so lay in a swound. Huon séeing the Emperour lying on the earth, in great rage and displeasure, he desired to haue slaine the Emperor, then he drew out his Sword, & turned to strike off his head: the which he had don, if he had not ben rescued: but ye Almains frō
all parts came thither, so that they rescued the Emperour from death, and sette him on a horse with much paine, then he thanked our Lord God that he was so well escaped, and made a vowe to God, that he would neuer more fight with Huon hand to hand, but hee would pursue him to the death if he could. Chap. LXXXXVI. ¶ How Huon made another issue out of Bourdeaux, and tooke away all the beastes that were in the pastures without the towne, pertaining to the Emperours hoast. WHen Huon sawe that hee could doe no more at that time, and that the Almaines encreased in great number to haue assayled him, then he spurred his good horse Amphage, who made such leapes, that it séemed hee had flowne in the ayre, he had his sword in his hand, and stroke therewith so great strokes, that none durst approach neere him. Thus he rode after his men, and led them towards the Citie as the shepheard doth his shéepe, for as soone as his enemies approached néere him, he shewed them his shield and his speares poynt, and as hee rode, there came a yong knight named Gerard, right hardie and valiant in armes, hee was bastard sonne to the Empe∣rour, who greatly desired in his heart to winne honour and prayse: hee sawe Huon mounted on his good horse, and sawe likewise that no man durst approach neere vnto him, hee came after him and cryed. Ah thou false Traitour, to flie a∣way it shal not auaile thée, for I bring thy death in the point of my speare, with the which I shal slay thee flying, without thou turne to mee, for ere thou scape me, I shall cause thée to be hanged in the sight of them within Bourdeaux.
When Huon vnderstood the Knight, and saw the great hate and rage that he was in, and hearing how he called him Traitour, he thought and sayd to himselfe, that he had rather die, then he that had sayd these words should haue departed without feeling the sharpenesse of his speare, the which hee couched in the rest, and spurred his horse, who ranne like the thunder, and he gaue the knight such a horrible stroke, that neither his shield nor his armour could saue his life, for his speare pierced through both his sides, and hee was cleane borne ouer his horse upper starke dead. Go thy way quoth Huon, thou shalt neuer haue power to doe any man displea∣sure any more▪ and then he drew his sword, wherewith hee dealt such discipline among the Almaines, that all fledde be∣fore him. Gerames, Othon, and Bernarde, and Richard em∣ployed their forces and vertues right valiantly, but the Al∣maines did so much, that Huon lost part of his men, and the rest he ledde with him, oftentimes hee turned and returned against his enemies, but whatsoeuer force or prowesse hee shewed, if he had not in haste gone away, he nor neuer a one of his men had escaped without death, for more then thirtie thousand Almaines were néere him, and all those desired his death, but God gaue him that grace, that hee and the small number that he had left, entred with him into the Citie, and the gates were clo, and the Emperour in great displea∣sure returned to his tent, and by the way hee found his ba∣stard sonne dead, for whome he made such sorrow, that his Lords nor his brother could not appease him, and so hee cau∣sed him to be borne to the tents, and was greatly complai∣ned of all the Barons, for hee was like to haue beene a ve∣rie noble man. And Huon went to his Pallaice, where he found the faire Escleremond, who demaunded how he did. Right well Lady, quoth Huon, thanked bee God I am returned in sauegard, but I haue lost many of my men, and therwith he wept, and the Ladie comforted him so much as shee might. Then the Emperour being in his hoast, knowing for truth that Huon
a small companie in the Citie, and that he thought hee could do him but small damage from thence forth,  and came and lay neerer the Citie, and dressed vp his  and mountaines to breake the wlles, and made e∣uerie day bttering at the walles, and they within defended hem valiantly, for with their crosbowes many men both within and without were slaine. This siege endured from the beginning of August to the Easter after, whereof Huon was sore displeased, and verie much complayned for the losse of his noble Barons, and other good men that hee had lost. Also hee saw his towres and gates so beaten, and his e∣nemies lying before the Citie, and looked for no succor from any part, and that he had with him not aboue thrée hundred knights, and a hundred men to keepe the Citie withall, then he called Esleemond his wife, and sayd. Madame, I know well you indure trouble and displeasure inough, and there∣fore I pray you if you can giue me any good counsell, giue it me now, for the rage and displeasure that I haue at my heart troubleth so mine vnderstanding, that I cannot tell what to do, now on the other part I see my Citie besieged, and my men slaine, and I can get no agréement with the Emperour, for he is sore displeased with mee, that I can neuer haue his loue, hee hath slaine my men, whereof I am so sorrowfull, that my heart neere fayleth me. Sir (quoth Escleremond) yee doe great wrong to say these words before mee, or in this sort to complaine your dama∣ges, if you would haue beleeued mee, then you had gone to my brother for succour, who would haue come with you, and brought you such a number of men, that the Emperour durst not haue abidden you, and also to haue made therby my bro∣ther a Christian man, for hee hath beléeued in our Lord God this seuen yeeres past. Madam quoth Huon, all that you say might haue beene done, but I hadde rather haue lost three such Cities as this, then to haue left you and my Lords and good Burgesses whome I loue so faythfully: if I had but a thousand Knights to defend my Citie, with an ill will I
should depart from you, for I am assured, that if I goe and seeke for succour, both I shall haue paine inough, and yee that shall abide heere, are like to haue more, for I know well that the Emperour so hateth vs, as hee setteth all his intent to haue vs, and if hee take you, you shall be in great perill, and if I tarie here with you, and goe for no succour, this Ci∣tie will bee taken or famished, and both you and I be de∣stroyed: the Emperour who loueth vs but a little, and not without a cause, i he may take mee, I shall die a shamefull death. It is no maruaile if hee be displeased with mee, for I haue slaine his sonnes and nephewes, and many of his best friendes, if he may take me, I shal haue no pitie shewed me, and I know well without I haue some succour, my ende is at hand. Wherefore Madame, I thinke it best that I goe to your brother for succour, for I sée that I haue tarried ouer∣long. Sir quoth Escleremond, ye speake of this verie late, for now ye know well, that all our bread and wine, and flesh, and fish begins to faile vs, and all our other victuals, where∣fore it cannot be long after your departure, but that this Ci∣tie wil be taken and destroyed, and the men within slaine, and I ledde into great misery, yet for all that I would not coūsel you to abide here, but I pray you make hast to depart. When Huon heard her, he began to weep, & abashing his cheere to the earth, and studying a little, hee sayd▪ Madame I thinke vpon one thing, the which to you will be profita∣ble, whereby you shall haue victuall inough to liue an whole yéere. Sir quoth she, of that I thanke God if it may so come to passe. Madam quoth Huon, I shall tell you how this City may be reuitayled without any great losse of any men, true it is, that here without in the medow, there are two hundred men set there by the Emperor, to keep the beasts pertaining to his host, the which are without number, what in beefes, kine, & hogs, and more the ten thousand shéep, which beasts ere I sléep, I will bring into this Citie, and then ye may slay them and poder them in salt, so that ye shall haue no famine for a whole yeere.
Sir, (quoth she) I pray vnto God you may bring it well to passe: thus they taried vntill supper time, and after when it was night, and that they thought that they of the hoast were a sleepe, and saw that the weather was troubleous, euen as they would desire it, he armed him and all his men, and set men at the gate to defende him at his recoiling. Then hee mounted vppon his good horse, and he opened the gate, and yssued out as priuily as hée might, and tooke the way to the meadow and came thether: and Huon then cried and sayde. Ah ye Villaines this pasturage is mine, I come to challeng it, in an euill houre yee put your beasts heere to pasture, yee shall make me amends, for all the beasts that I find héere in my pasture, I will goe and pound them, and if the Emperor will haue them, hee must buy them and make amendes for their forfaite, and yee that bee the Keepers shall dearely a∣bide it. When the kéepers heard Huon speake, they had great feare, and they thought to haue gone and taken their hor∣ses, and so to haue defended themselues: but Huon and his companie gaue them no leysure so to doe, for Huon with his speare strake one starke dead, and after he slew the second, then the third, and fourth, and so slew very many as long as his Speare held: then hée set his hand on his sword, where∣with he claue asunder healmets and sheelds, and beat down men on euerie side, and Gerames, Othon, & Richard did ve∣rie valiantly, and so much did Huon and his men within a short space, that the twoo Hundred men that kept the beasts were all slaine, except one who escaped, and ranne to the Emperours hoast, where he shewed the Emperour, how Huon and his men were issued out of the Citie and that all the kéepers of the beastes were slaine, and the beasts taken and driuen into the Citie. When the Emperour heard these tidings, he was right sorrowfull, and armed him and his men, and leapt on their horses and ranne towards the Citie, to stoppe Huon from entring into the Citie: but before they came thether, all
the beastes were entred into the Citie. Nowe when Huon saw the Emperour comming, he said vnto his men: Sirs, I require you let vs turne vpon our enemies who commeth after vs, for I would faine shew them, how men that com∣meth from foraging can runne with their Speares. Then they turned against the Almaines, so that each of them re a man to the earth, and they drewe their Swords, and stewe men round about them, and Huon vpon his good horse Am∣phage held his Swoord in his hand, all to be sprinkled wth the bloud of his enemies, wherewith he cut off armes, legs, and hands, he was more doubted then the Deuill, for by his prowesse hee did so muh, that his enemies fledde before him and made him way, so that in despite of all the Almaines, af∣ter that he and his men had slaine foure Thousand of his e∣nemies, he entred into the City with al yt pray of his beasts, wherewith the Emperour and his men that followed, were sore displeased for the losse that they had receiued, & for that Huon was so escaped from their hands, and that he had ta∣ken away their beastes and slaine his men. Thus as yee haue heard, Huon entred into the Citie of Bourdeaux with all his pray. Chap. LXXXXVII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux made him readie to go to seeke for some succour: And of the sorrow that the Duchesse his wife made. AFter that Huon was entred into the Citie, he went to his Pallaice, and there found the Duchesse Escleremond, who vnlaced his helmet, and clipped and kissed him, and saide. Sir, I pray you howe haue you done? Faire Ladie, (quoth he)
we haue slaine many an Almaine, and haue brought away the pray, for in all the Emperours hoste we haue not left neither Porke, Kine, nor Mutton: we haue brought all in∣to this Citie thanked bee God, so now I shall leaue you in more suertie in mine absence, for you haue nowe victuall inough for a whole yeare. Nowe I will goe to your Bro∣ther, and if I find that hee will bee christened, I shall bring him with me: if not, I shall defie him and slay him, with∣out he will beleeue on Iesus Christ whatsoeuer fortune fall. Sir, (quoth Escleremond sore wéeping) haue no doubt of that, for it is more then seauen yeres since he desired to be christe∣ned: wherefore Sir, I require you loue my Brother. Ma∣dame, (quoth Huon) I shall doe your pleasure: then he cal∣led to him his priuie friends, and saide. Sirs, yée knowe well what danger and perill we be in: and because in all thinges néedefull, there ought to be made prouision with diligence, this Citie is now well prouided of victualles, wherefore yée shall not néede to make any issu∣ing out, without yée sée great aduantage: & as for assault, if yée defend it well, it is impregnable for our enemies to win it, but if yée be to yéeld it vp, beware what yée doe, for the great hate that the Emperour hath against vs, peraduen∣ture will constraine him to breake his promise, if yée be ta∣ken by force or by this meanes, yée shall all die miserably, and my wife bee murdered in prison, or else miserably to fi∣nish her dayes, and my little Daughter Clariet, whome I loue so dearely, shee shalbe lost, and my Citie destroyed and brought to vtter ruine: wherefore I commend vnto you my wife and my Daughter, and all the rest vntill I returne a∣gaine: the which shalbe shortly if I may, and I shall bring with mee such succour, that yee shall all bee ioyfull thereof. Sir, (quoth Gerames) God giue grace to send you againe in sauegard, you knowe well that you leaue vs in great po∣uertie and feare: wherefore wee all desire you not to forget vs, and therewith they all wept. Then Huon sayd, I pray yee▪ make no such sorrow or my departing, for yee know the
businesse that causeth mee to depart: for without I goe for some succour, yee know well we are but dead, and Gerames I giue you the keeping of my wife and Child, ye are bound to serue me truely, for in you I haue my perfect trust. Sir, (quoth Gerames) haue you no doubt, but that as longe as I haue life in my bodie, I shall not faile them in life nor death. When Huon heard Gerames say so, he began sore to wéepe, and the faire Ladie Escleremond began to make such sorrow, that great pitie it was to see her: she wrang her hands and tore her haire, and made such out-cries, that euerie man had pitie of her, yet they comforted her as much as they might. But shee had great cause to weepe and to be sor∣rowfull, or before Huon returned to Bourdeaux, shee and all they that were with her suffered so much pain and pouerty, that to shew it would cause a hard heart to weepe for pitie. And after that Huon had thus spoken to his companie: hee entred into his Chappell, and was confessed of the Bishops of the Citie, and receiued the Sacrament. Then the Bishop gaue to Huon a stoale that was hallowed and of great ver∣tue, and saide. Sir, I require you for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, keepe well this stoale, for such an houre may fall that it will stand you in good stead. Huon right hum∣bly tooke it, and thanked the Bishop: it did him good ser∣uice afterward, for on a day as hee passed, he had thereof so great neede, that he would not haue forborne it for fourtéene good Cities, as yee shall heare more heereafter. Chap. LXXXXVIII. ¶ Howe Huon departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, and say∣led vntill hee came into the hye Sea, and hadde many great fortunes.
WHen Huon had taken the the halowed stole, hee deliuered it to his Chaplain, who was a wise man, & of a holy life, and commaunded  to keepe it well. Then he toke fiue knights to haue with him, and his Chaplayne and a clack to serue him▪ Then Huon went to his wife, and kissed her at his de∣parting, and she fell in a swound in his armes, and Huon , releaued he and sayd. Fare Lady▪ I require  making of this sorrow. Ah good sir (quoth she)  ought to bee sorrowfull, since ye leaue mee besieged with them that desire your death. Madam, (quoth Huon)  you not, for by the grace of God I shall make a short returne. Then he clipped and kissed her, recom∣ding her to our Lord Iesus Christ. Then Huon and such as were appoynted to goe with him, departed out of the Pallaice, and went to a backe posere vpon the riuer of Ground, where there was a shippe ready, and richly garni∣shed with all things conuenient, there Huon being armed and his men, entred into the shippe, and had no horse with them▪ When Huon departed, hee deliuered his good horse to the éeping of sir Bernarde his cosen, and tooke his leaue of Germes and of all his other companie, & so hoysed vp sayle, and  was day in the morning, hee was more then two  from Bourdeaux. Then Huon regarded the Citie, and re weeping, did recommend it to our Lord Iesus Christ, humbly requiring him to haue in his sauegard, his , wife and child, and all other that were within it. Thus  Huon sailed along the riuer of Geround, pitious∣ly complayning for his wife the fayre Escleremond, and for hi ayre daughter Claryet, whom he could not forget, for he had so great doubt to loose them, that when hee remembred them hee wept. They sayled so long, that they entred into
the high Sea, and hee had good cause to weepe and  great sorrowe: for hee  till the  had taken it: , Huon  in his Shippe,  his heart gaue him, that before hee  Citie of Bourdeaux, the Citie should bee taken and his  Escleremond  therefore he , that if it so , and if euer he returned  end  thereof, he would  the Emperour : and that Castle nor Towne should no saue him. There was a notable knight with Huon, who said  him: Sir, leaue your musing, and put your trust in God, hee shall ayd you and succour you in all your  your Wie, and keepe your Citie  fort your selfe no further,  thnke of God, and  vnto him to giue you the grace to accomplish your Voyage, the  I hope you shall not faile of, if you thus de. When Huon heard him, hee was much comforted, and thanked the Knights and so sayled oorth, vntill they were  the Sea, and lost their right way, for the hippe turned n the right hand, and losse the way that they should haue saled, and  vnto places not knowne to any of the , whereof the Pa∣tron was sore abashed in himselfe, without making any know∣ledge thereof, and so long they sayled with winde and weather, that they arriued at a Port whereas they found many boats, there they cas their anchor, and went a  them∣selues. Then Huon called to him the , and demaunded of him if he could sayle . Sir, (quoth the Maister) I was  no winde to goe thether, it were a  me to sayle thether,  by that straunge Sea. But I  heere in this Port whereas you are nowe, to  Patrone that can bring you  (quoth Huon) I pray you to doe so much as to get me . Sir, (quoth  doe what I can: then h and Huon  Shippe, and from boat to boat to get a Pilot,
to an auncient man, who sayde that he could well bring them thither, and sayde how that hee had beene there before that time. Friend quoth Huon, if hee will bring me to the Realme of Aufamie, I shall giue you gold and siluer plentie. Sir quoth the old Patron, I shall doe your pleasure, but Sir, one thing I say to you, know for troth the voyage is very daungerous for to passe, and a verie long voyage, for it will be halfe a yeere re you can come thither, and beside that, wee must passe by a perilous Gulfe, the which is reputed to be one of the mouthes of hell, and if by aduenture or fortune of the winde, that wee bee blowen neere vnto it, wee shall neuer depart, but be lost foreuer. When Huon heard the Pilate, hee beganne to weepe and complaine for his wife and his deere daughter, whome he had left in the citie of Bourdeaux in great daunger to be taken. For he saw well then, that hee could not returne for the space of a whole yeere with any succour: howbeit, hee left not his voy∣age, then hee commaunded his seruaunts to discharge all his baggage and victualles out of the one shippe into the other, and when the newe shippe with the newe Patron was readye in all things, Huon entred into it. Then the new Patron deman∣ded of the old marriner, the cause why they came thither, and from whence they came. Sir, quoth hee, true it is, wee came from the citie of Bourdeaux, the which standeth vpon a notable riuer, and when we were entred into the sea, a sore winde rose vpon vs, in such wise, that wee were constrained to abandon our shippe to the winde and weather, and fortune of the sea, the which hath brought vs hither. Friend quoth the newe Pa∣tron, as soone as yee were out of the riuer of Gerone, if yee had turned your sterne towards the sea roade, yee had neuer come hither, and within a moneth yee should haue come to the realme of Aufamie, whereas now ye be verie farre off. When Huon vnderstood the cause of their comming thither, he was right sorrowfull, and sore displeased if he could haue amended it. But his displeasure could not helpe him, but rather hinder him▪ therefore he lette it passe, and so tooke leaue of his first Patron, and lift vp their anthors and sayles, and when they
were in the sea, the winde arose, and increased more and more for the space of sixe weekes that the wind changed not, so that if God had suffered the winde to haue continued one moneth or sixe weekes longer, they had come to the place whereas they would haue beene. But ere that they came there, they suffered much paine, for there arose vppon them such a winde and tempest, that they were forced to auayle their sayles. The heauens waxed darke, the moone was couered, the torment was great and daunge∣rous, the waues of the sea were of a great height, & terrible to beholde, whereby, whether they would or not, they were constrained to goe as the winde would leade them, theyr for∣tune was so great and terrible, that there was neuer seene such a mightie storme before, whereof Huon and his men, and his Patron were greatly afraide, & specially the Patron more then Huon was, hee was sore discomforted, and pittiously he called on our Lord Iesus Christ, requiring him to bring them to a good Port, there was neither marriner nor Pa∣tron, but all were sore afraide, nor they wist not where they were. They were in this torment for the space of ten dayes, in all the which time they neuer sawe the cleerenesse of the sunne, for the great darkenesse that was there as then, the which did verie greatly annoy them. And when it came to the eleuenth day, and that the torment and winde beganne to a∣bate, and the sea waxed peaceable and still, therewith Huon and his companie wer well comforted: the heauen cleered by, and the glorious sunne cast out his rayes along vpon the sea. When the master of the shippe saw the fortune of the Sea, and that the great torment beganne to cease, hee caused one of the marriners to mount vppe into the toppe, to see if hee might dis∣crie any lande, but hee could see none, whereof the Patron was greatly abashed, and sayde howe that hee knewe not in what Countrey hee was, for hee neuer sayled in those parts, and sayde to Huon. Sir, it is fiftie yéeres since that I first vsed the sea▪ but yet I neuer sayled in these parts, whereof I haue great maruaile. When Huon heard that, he was sore displea∣sed and sayde. Sir lette vs take the aduantage of the wind,
and let our Shippe driue vnder the conduct of our Lord Iesus Christ, I hope that our Lord God will not suffer vs to bee pe∣rished in this Sea. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) I doe agree well to your saying, and so let vs doe: then they turned their hel∣, and tooke the winde into their full sayle, the winde was ood and fresh, and the Sea very meeke and peaceable, so that within a short space they had sayled a great iourney. When Huon called vppon our Lorde God, and helde vp his handes towards heauen and said. Thou verie God, who in  transitrie world diddest vouchsafe to be borne in the  of a maide, and afterwards diddest raigne héere vpon earth xxxi. yeres, and then didst suffer death and passion vp∣pon a Friday, and after that didst rise from death to life, and wentst into hell, & drewest out soules out of paines infernall: Euen so as I beleeue that this is true, I require thée to haue pitie and compassion vpon vs, and giue vs grace that wée may safely escape out of this perillous Sea, and to kéepe and saue my déere and louing wife Escleremond and my Childe, and my noble Lords whome I left in the citie of Bourdeaux in great pe∣rill of their liues, and giue mee the grace, that I may bring with me such succour and aide, that thereby I may bring them out of the danger that they he in. Chap. LXXXXIX. ¶ owe Huon arriued on the perillous Gulfe, where as hee spake with das, and howe hee arriued at the Port of the . WHen Huon had made his prai∣ers to God, he beheld into the Sea, and sawe a farre off like a great péece of Canuasse, and there by he heard as great a noyse, as though there had beene a Thousand Smithes, and a Thousand Carpenters, and a Thousande
great running Riuers together, all beating and labouring to∣gether. Huon who heard this great noise, had great feare thereof, so that hee wite not what to doe, and so were all those that were in his companie, the Patrone commaunded a Mar∣riner to mount vp into the top of the Ma, to see what  it was that made all that noyse, and so hee did, and  round about him and beheld that way, and at  the daungerous Gulfe, whereof hee hadde heard often times spoken, and thereof hee had such great feare, that neere hand hee had fallen downe into the Sea, hee came downe and saide vnto the Patrone. Sir, wee bee all in the way to bee lost, for wee bee neere one of the Gulfes of hell, whereof Huon and the Patrone and all other had such great feare, that they all trembled. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) knowe for troth, that it is impossible to escape out of this perilous Gulfe, for all the Seas, and waters and Riuers there assembleth together, and perforce wee muste passe that way, which when Huon heard: then hee beganne pitiously to complaine, and sayd. Ah sweete and loouing wife Escleremond, I see nowe clearely that our loues muste depart, the beautie and the bountie that is in you I cannot forget. Alas I shall neuer see you more, I pray to our Lord Iesus Christ to giue you that grace, as to bee a∣greed with the Emperour Tirrey, to the entent that in peace and rest you may vse the residue of your life: for as for mee, I shall neuer bring you any succour or ayd. Then hee studied a long season, and then sayd againe. Good Lord I thanke thee, and since it pleaseth thee that I shall passe out of this world: I humbly require thee to receiue my Sle into thine handes, as for my bodie and life I care little for, see∣ing it pleaseth thee that I shall thus end my dayes, and depart this life. Then Huon lefte his weeping, and the winde ceased and the sayle abated: yet neuerthelesse the shippe still went foorth a∣lone in such wise, as though it had flowne vppon the Sea. Sir, (quoth the Maister of the Shippe) you may see euident∣ly, that wee neede not to trauaile our selues to guide our Ship, for the Gulfe that is so neere vs, draweth the Shippe vnto
him in such haste as yee may see, and anone yee shall see that we shall tumble therein. Maister quoth Huon, it is conuenient now that wee abide the aduenture and fortune of the sea, such as our Lord God will sende, lette vs trust in him, and desire him that his pleasure be fulfilled, and more I cannot striue. Then Huon Chaplaine confessed them one after another, and then incontinent the great noyse ceased. But they came thi∣ther at a good poynt, for the verie same time, (as theyr good fortune was,) the Gulfe was full and plaine, so that a shippe might passe ouer it without daunger, as well as in another place of the sea, and when the Patron sawe that, hee sayd to Huon. Sir, wee ought greatly to thanke our Lord God, for wee are now come at such a time, that the Gulfe is full and plaine, so that wee may passe ouer surely without any danger. When Huon heard that hee was right ioyfull, and all weeping he kneeled downe, and so did all the companie, and deoutly they thanked our Lord God, that hee had sent them that good grace. Then Huon rose vp, and sawe beside him a great peece of Canuasse, and the waues of the sea beating against it with great violence, whereof he had great maruaile. For the waues of the sea beae so sore against the cloath, and with so great vi∣olence, that they reculed backe, and for all the beating of the sea against the canuasse, yet it brake not. Then Huon hearde a voyce crying an hie, and pittifully complayning, saying. O verie God, in an ill howre I was borne, when I sold the puis∣sant God▪ who did mee that fauour, as to take me as one of his disciples and Apostles, and for the goodnesse that hee did mee, I rendered him an euill reward: for the diuell, the enemie of all humane linage, entred into my body, the which was full of sinne, and exhorted me to sell my God & good Lord, for thirtie pence of money, that was then currant in the country of Iude, and vnhappie that I was, if I had trusted in his great mercy, all the trespasse that I had doone had beene forgiuen mee. But pride and misbeleefe, and false hope that was in mee with the iuell, who blinded mine vnderstanding, and would not suffer me to haue any hope of grace, or pardon for my trespasse, for of
my sinne I neuer had repentance. And the Diuell doubting to haue lost mee, put mee into despiration, whereby I loste the grace of God: for if I would haue asked mercie of my Lord God, hee would haue pardoned mee of all the trespasse that I had committed against him: Alas poore Caytiffe that I am, from hence shall I neuer depart, but alwaies to remaine in this torment and paine. When the Maister of the Shippe heard this voyce, hee de∣maunded of him and sayde. What art thou that thus pity∣ously complaineth? I commaund thee to shewe mee, and whether there bee any man liuing in this world that can ayde and succour the, and cast thee out of the torment and paine that thou art in. When the voyce heard him, hee spake no more woordes, nor made no answeare at all: then Huon ad∣uaunced himselfe to the board of the Shippe, beeing desirous to know what thing it was that made that pitifull complaint, and saide. Thou that so sore doest complaine and mourne, I coniure thee in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by all his power, and by the blessed Virgin Saint Marie his Mo∣ther, and by all the Saints and holy Angels and Archangels, that are in the Realme of Paradice, and by all that euer God hath made and created in Heauen and in earth, that thou aun∣sweare and shewe mee what man thou art, and who hath put thee heere in this miserie? and wherefore thou art heere? and whether thou maist come to vs or not? and what is thy name? and why that this Canuasse is heere set, wherefore it serueth? and also shew me if euer thou shalt depart from hence or not? When this voyce had heard Huon coniure him in such wise it aunswered him shortly, and sayd. O thou mortall man that hast coniured mee so sore: and also hast desired for to knowe my name, I shall shewe vnto thee for certaintie, that my name is Iudas, and I am the selfe same man that sould our Lord Iesus Christ to the Iewes for thirtie pence, then be∣ing currant money in the countrey of Iude, and deliuered into their hands my right deere Lorde and Maister, who so much honoured me, as to account me as one of his Apostles, and by a false and a fained loue, I kissed him on the mouth, for to
which was he. And after I saw him beaten  as yee may read in the holy  and , who therein haue made  passion,  I had betrayed my   my  sore displease,  crie  I did commit  olly, for he was so , that if I had cried him mercie, hee . But the Diuell  is enemie to , would not suffer me to do it▪ for I went  and hanged my selfe on a tree, and when I was  in the place whereas yee sée  I shall remaine  & paine,  from hence, for now it is too late to  grace, for iudgement is giuen vpon me.  suffer this torment and paine continually,  and euers of the world doe assemble toge∣ther , euen heere as I am in this Gulfe, where I am sore  and greatly tormented, by the great  and course  I am tormented, and cannot by  shall come out of this great torment nor ▪ that yee demaunde whereto it serueth, and , knowe for a troth, that on a day I  of God, nor I  gaue after any thing  as long as I liued, and therefore when I was  God would, that the good deede that I  this  for his sake, should not bee  our Lorde God would that this  right side, to the intent for to , and from the great waues of the sea,  against mee, as you haue  against this Cas, I had no grace for  God for my trespasse the deuill was , wherefore let euerie man take example by  he hath space: and thus I haue shewed  quoh Huon, I beléeue if thou wilt yet cry , he will haue mercie and pitie on thee.
Nay, nay quoth Iudas, to pray now cannot auayle me, for I am damned for euer, and if yee will beleeue mee, beware, and tarrie not here too long, for if ye doe, ye shall neuer de∣part hence, for the Glfe which is now full and plaine, it will not continue long, but that the sea will issue out, and al the riuers within it: yee were happie that yee came at the howre that you did, for anon the waters will issue out with such aboundance, that the waues that will rise shall seeme like high mountaines. It is more then two hundred yeeres since there passed any ship this way, but that men, ship and all were swallowed into the Gulfe: wherefore Huon I counsayle thee, that incntinently thou depart hence, with∣out thou wilt bee lost foreuer, it is time that thou depat hence whilst the Gulfe is full, for it will not long rest, but that the waters will issue out with such a brute and noyse, that if ye be fiteene leagues off, ye shall well heare the tor∣ment that it will make. If ye had come but halfe an houre sooner then yee did, ye had neuer escaped the great daunger thereof. When Huon vnderstood Iudas, he had great maruaile, & ioyned his hands toward the heauen, thanking God of the grace that hee had sent him. Then Huon desired the Patron that they might depart from thence in haste: Sir (quoth he) it shall bee done. Then they drew vp theyr sayles and depar∣ted, and they had not sailed a league, but that the saw a farre off great brands of fire burning, issuing out of the Gulfe so long and so high, that they had neere hand come to ther ship: and the waues that issued out of the Gulfe, were as high as mountaines, and they approched so nere vnto their shippe, that they had like to haue perhes, for there  was neere hand full of water, so that they had  to  to lade out the water and were fayne to abate theyr sayle, and the wa∣ter that ssed out of the Gulfe drae them so orftly, that a bird could not die no faster then they went. In that case they wee a moneth, and durst neuer hoyse vppe sayle, but thus they draue a great season without seeing of any land,
then Huon called vppon God, and saide. Ah verie God, I hadde rather haue tarried still in mine owne Countrey, and haue taken such fortune as it should haue pleased thée to send mee: then heere to bée lost in this strange Sea. Deare La∣ie Escleremond, I pray vnto God to keepe you and Clariet my Daughter, for I thinke that I shall neuer see you more. Thus Huon complained, sayling in the Sea in feare of his life, and thus they were in the daunger of this Gulfe fiue weekes, and neuer coulde see lande, whereof they were in great feare, often times they prayed to our Lord to haue pity of them. Then Huon desired the Patrone to mount vp to the Mast, to see if he might see any land, and the Patrone who great∣ly desired so to doe, anone hee mounted vp, and regarded on all parts, to see if hee might espy any land. At last he saw a farre off an hye rocke, and on the height thereof they sawe a thicke wood, and at the entrie of the wood hee sawe a little house, whereof hee thanked God, and descended downe and shewed Huon what hee had seene, and sayd. Sir, yonder a farre off I haue seen a great Rocke, and on the height there∣of a great thicke wood, and therein I haue séene a little house or hermitage, the house is white, I cannot tell what it is, but by the grace of God ere it be night, wee shall land there and refresh our selues. When Huon heard that, hee was right ioyfull and thanked God: then they drew to that Port, and had good wind and a fresh, wéening to haue come thether the same night: but they sayled foure daies and foure nights, and could come no neerer to the wood then they were before, whereof they had maruaile, for it seemed to them euer, that the wood and the house roase vp higher and higher, and then they could not tell whether they went, for if they had known, they would not haue gone thether for al the gold in the world, for if God had not had pitie of them, they were all likely to haue beene lost, for the place that they sawe a farre of was a Castle, and therein cloased the Rocke of the Adamant: the which Castle was dangerous to approach, for if any Ship
come neere it, and haue any yron nayles within it, and that a shippe come but within the sight thereof, the Adamant will draw the Shippe vnto him. And therefore in those parts the Shippes that sayleth by that Sea, are made and pinned with woodden nayles, and without any manner of yron, otherwise they be lost and perished, for the propertie of the Adamant is to draw yron to him. Thus Huon and his company were there the space of sixe dayes, going and sayling about the Rocke of the Castle of the Adamant: But if they had had a good wind the first day, they had arriued euen at the white house that they saw first in the wood, the which was the fairest and most richest house in the world, within the which was so much gould and riches, that no man liuing could esteeme the value thereof, for the Pil∣lars within that huse were of Cassedony, and the wals and Towers of white Alablaster. There was neuer described in Scripture nor Historie, the beautie of such a Castle as this was, for when the Sun cast his rayes on it, it seemed a farre of to be of fine christall, it was so cleare shining. In this Ca∣stle was neither man nor woman, but dead mens bones ly∣ing at the gate of this Castle, and at the Port there lay many Shippes, so that their Mastes seemed a farre off to bee a great Forrest. Chap. C. ¶ How Huon deuised with his Patrone, in regarding of the Ca∣stle of the Adamant.
THis castle was set on a rock of the Adamant one, from the East to the west was not so strong a Castle, for if all the world had come before it and men with∣in to defend it, could neuer be wonne by a∣ny mortall men. The forrest that so seemed to them a farre off, were the as of shippes that had beene there arriued by constraint of the Adamant, but for all the shippes that were there, there was no man liuing therein, yet there lay bones of men that had died by famine & rage. Huon and his cmate had great maruaile, for when they approached  to the Castle, they  forced to strike sayle, for the daant drew the shippe so sore, that if they had not quickly striken their sayle, their shippe had broken all to péeces, and they all béen drowned in the sea. The ship went so fast, that it was maruailous to consider it, and then the Patron of the shippe, who was wise and discreet, knew anon how they were néere to the Castle of the Adamant, be∣cause their shippe went so fast without sayle thetherward, faster than if they had had a full winde in all their sailes, and they could not turne their ship any way from that part, for they would gladly haue returned, but it would not bee, because the Adamant drew the yron so sore to him by nature. When the Patron saw that néedes they must arriue there, he began pitiously to lament, and saide to Huon. Sir, our Lord God hath created vs in this world to liue and to die, and there is none but must passe the passage of this, and be∣cause wee knowe surely that no creature can escape that, therefore we ought to be content with that which can be none otherwise: Sir I say this, that we must all dye. When Huon heard the Patron, he had great maruaile and said: Patron, I pray you shew me the cause why yée say thus? in this Castle that we see before vs, are there any Sarazins within it, or spirits of hell that haue sworne our
death? surely I doubt them not, make good cheere, and bee nothing abashed, take good courage and ioy, or by the ayd of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by the force of my armes, and good Swoorde, if there bee any man within the Castle that will resiste againste vs, I assure you I shall soone deliue you from him. Anone you shall see what I can doe, I neuer  in all my life so faire a Castle, I cannot tell whether they with∣in will defend vs the entrie into the Port or not: if they will haue any Tribute of me, I shall gladly pay it, so they demaund nothing else, and if I see that they will demaund any thinge else of mee, I shall shewe them howe my Sword can answeare it, for I had rather to die, then in any Princes Court it should bee layd to my reproach and shame, that for any man I should retire backe one oote for feare or doubt of any death, for I will neuer bee taken aliue, thereby to dye in prison. Sir, (quoth the Patrone) your force and great prowesse can nothinge a∣uaile you, for if wee were as stronge and as great as euer was Sampson, it should nothing aduantage you, I shall shewe you the cause why. The Castle that you see yonder before you, is the most fairest and strongest Castle in all the world, it is set and compassed round about with a Rocke of Adamant stones, the which naturally doth drawe vnto it all manner of yron, as you may well see by our shippe that goeth so fast without any sayle: the Adamant doth drawe it, because of the anchors and nayles that bee in our Shippe, the wood that seemeth to bee a Forrest, are the Mastes of such Shippes as hath there arriued, and are drawne thether by the Adamant. When Huon vnderstood the Patrone, hee was right sorow∣full, and no maruaile, then pitiously hee complayned for his wife and for his Childe, for hee sawe well that hee could not escape the death, nor neuer depart from thence: then hee wept pitiously and sayd. Ah good Lord, who in this world hath for∣med me, I require thy grace, that thus (poore sinner that I am) enclined to all misfortune, that it may please thée to receiue my soule into Paradice, as for my life I make none account there∣of. But I pray thee good Lorde to saue my Wife and Childe, whome I haue lefte in daunger of death, or else in shamefull
imprisonment. And with those woordes the Shippe entred into the Port with such a force and puissance, that it ranne in amongest the other Shippes, so that if the shippe had not been stronge, and the other shippes rotten, Huons shippe had béene broken all to peeces, for it ranne vnder the water thrée or foure of the other olde shippes, and was not broken thanked be al∣mightie God. Then hee looked into the Hauen, and sawe so many shippes, that hee had great maruaile thereof, and hée was sore dismayed and abashed, in that hee sawe neither man woman nor Child stirring abroad. Also hee looked about him and behelde the Castle, the which was so faire and rich, that there was none such throughout all the world. Then hee thought to send thether one of his companie, for to know what people were within the Castle, but hee sawe well that there was no way to enter, but by a straight way of thrée Hundred and fourscore gréeces of height, the way was so straight and narrow, that no man but one at once coulde mount vp the de∣grées, he had great maruell & was sore troubled in mind, when hee sawe no man comming from the Castle. Then hee called one of his Knights and sayd: Sir Arnold, I will and command that you goe vp into this Castle, to see what people bee within it, either Sarazins or Paynims: knowe who is Lord thereof, and say how that I greatly desire to be acquainted with him: if you can doe so much that I may bee acquainted with him, then I and my men will mount vp together vntill some good aduen∣ture fall, for I hope in our Lord God that wee shall escape this daunger. Sir, (quoth Arnold) I shall doe as you haue com∣maunded mee. Then he departed, and went from one shippe to another vntill hee came to the land, and then hee went to the , and ound the degrees and mounted vp: but before hée came to the Castle gate, hee rested himselfe thrée times, and when he came to the gate, hee rested him he was so wearie, and beheld the gate, the which séemed vnto him maruailously faire and rich: then hee beganne to crie and call, to the entent that some man should come and to speake with him, and when hee sawe that none did speake, hee stode and hearkened if any per∣son were comming to open the gate: but none appeared, and
then hee knocked and called againe, and sayd: Porter that art within, come and open the gate, or else cursed be thou of God: this Arnolde hadde a good occupation to knocke, crie, and call, for within was neither man woman nor Childe that would o∣pen the gate, when hee sawe that, hee was neere angrie with displeasure, and looked downe vnder the gate to knowe if hee might espie either man or woman to speake vnto, then hee tur∣ned him round about and looked on the right hande of the Hall dore, and there hee sawe an horrible Serpent, the which kept the Castle and Pallaice, it was a maruailous great Serpent, higher then any horse, his eyes like twoo Torches burning: when Arnold sawe him, hee was right sorrowfull and sore dis∣pleased, and when the Serpent heard the knocking and great noyse at the gate, braying and crying he came toward the gate: and when Arnold sawe the Serpent with great furie approa∣ching to the gate, hee fledde away in so great hast, that he néere hande (with verie feare) fell downe the staires, hee rested not vntill hee came to the shippe whereas Huon was, and saide. Sir, I haue beene aboue at the gate of the Castle, and called and knocked thereat more then the space of an houre: but there was neither man, woman, nor Childe that did appeare, and when I sawe that, I layde mee downe and looked vnder the gate, to knowe if I might see either man or woman to speake vnto, but I could neuer sée any creature, but a great and a hor∣rible Serpent higher then a great horse, with eyes redder then fire, with maruailous great tallons and and taile, there was neuer man sawe a fowler figure of a beast. Alas, (quoth Huon) nowe I sée we be all but dead, for wee haue nothing to eat nor drinke, wherefore wee shall die for famine and rage. But if I may enter into the Castle, I shall giue that Serpent such a stroake, that hee shall neuer hurt any man liuing. Alas what haue I said, my hardinesse nor my prowesse cannot helpe me, for I see well that I and all you must die, for it is impossible for vs to depart from hence. Then the Patron sayd to Huon sore weeping. Sir, it behoo∣ueth vs to part our victuall, if you will sustaine the right & cu∣stome of the sea, whē men come to such a case, yt there is no reme¦die
to get any fresh victuall, then it is reason that the Lord and Captaine to haue the one halfe to his part, and the other part  to bee deuided amongest his men. Maister, quoth ) you may doe your pleasure, doe as you shall thinke ▪ the Patrone caused all their victuals to bee brought  was deuided, the Patrone was a wise man.  that, hee began to weepe, hee did eate but , because his victuall should endure the , all that but little auailed, for before fifteene ▪ all their victuals were spent, except Huons  man part, and kept for  other men had. And as they were in this  a Galley wherein were Thirtie men  and Pirats of the Sea, they came and arri∣ued eere  the Shippe whereas Huon was in, not knowing what place they were in: when they arriued it was in a darke night, they had great maruaile of Huons Shippe wherein they sawe great light, and then they sayd one to another, it is hap∣pie for  that wee haue found heere this faire Shippe, it can ot ee but it is rich and full of goods: they shall not escape vs,  shal bee ours, for therin are ut fewe men to defend the Shippe. Chap. CX. ¶ Howe a Galley with Sarazins came and ffyled Huon, who , and also all Huons men, and how Huon went to  of the Adamant and slewe the great Serpent, and of  that hee found there, WHen Huon saw the Galley a∣riue and going to his Shippe, hee hadde great maruaile what men they were, then he aligh∣ted a torch, and toke it in his hand▪ and came  on the Shippe and sayd. Sirs of this  well arriued heere, wee haue great ioy of your
companie, whē the Sarasins heard Huon, they perceiued by his language, that he and his companie were Christian men: then each of them beheld other, smiling for ioy, one of them turned his spéech, and spake good Spanish, and sayde to Huon: Fel∣low it is no néede for vs to hide what wee bée: all wee that thou séest héere bee Sarasins, and ye be Christned, wherefore we will haue al the riches that is in your ship, and beside that, all your heads shall be striken off, and your bodyes cast into the sea. Paynim, quoth Huon, ere thou hast our shippe at thy com∣mandement, first thou shalt buye it déerely. Then Huon cryed to his men that they should arme themselues to defende them from the Paynims, the which they did diligently. And Huon who was readie armed, and by that time the Sarasins were entred into the shippe. Huon was readie before them, with his sword in his hand, wherewith he strake the first that he mette with all, in such wise, that his head flew from his shoulders. Then he strake another, and claue him to the throat, and so the third and the fourth were shortly slaine, he layd on so rounde a∣bout him, that his enemies were afrayde to behold him. Then the cheefe maister of the theeues came and rebuked his men, because they had suffered Huon to doe them so much hurt and domage, he approached to Huon to haue striken him, but Huon, who was light and expert in déedes of armes, auoyded his stroke, and strake the Sarasin with a reuerse, that his head flew from his body a great way off. Then Huon cryed Bourde∣aux, to reioyce his men, and to giue them courage. Also Arnolde who had seene the Serpent in the Castle, did maruailes, and beate downe his enemies, whereof Huon had great ioy. And there was a great mightie Sarasin, who came behinde this knight Arnold, as he fought with another Sarasin, and he gaue Arnold with an axe such a great stroke, that hee claue his head to the téeth, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull, and sayd, hee had rather die then the death of Arnold should not be reuenged. Then hee approached neere vnto the same Paynim, and lif∣ting vppe his Sworde with both his handes, hee strooke the Sarasin on the shoulder, that the sword entred into the breast. And the Patron of Huons Shippe, vnarmed came into the bat∣taile
with a great staffe in his handes, wherewith hee laid vp∣pon the Sarazins in such wise, that such as hee strake needed after no Surgion. Then a Sarazin aduised him, and came and gaue the Patrone such a stroake with a Swoord vppon the head, that his head was clouen to the braine, wherewith Huon was right sorrowfull and sore displeased. But it was not long before he reuenged his death, for hee strake the Sara∣zin such a stroake, that hee claue him to the breast, and when the Patrones Seruaunts sawe that their Maister was slayne, they all made great sorrowe, and disarmed as they were, they came and entred into the Battaile with great staues in their handes, and fought with them fiercely. But the Sarazins who were all armed, had anone slayne them all, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull and angry, for hee hadde then with him lest aliue no moe but foure men of de∣fence. And the Sarazins, who in the beginning were Thir∣tie, were all slayne except seauen persons, they greatly feared Huon, for they sawe well that none coulde endure against his stroake, and then they fledde out of Huons shippe and entred into their owne Galley. But Huon and his thrée Knightes that were with him, followed them so fast that they slew them all, and caste them into the Sea. Then Huon and the thrée Knightes that were with him, tooke all the flesh, bread, and wine that was in the Galley, and bare it into their shippe, whereby they liued more then seauen Monethes. And then when their victuals begann to fayle, then they were right sor∣rowfull, they had no victuall to liue by longe, and yet they did ae but little, so they beganne to be pale and leane through fa∣mine, pitiously Huon complayned and sayd. Oh yee my déere and true Freends, who for my loue haue left your Lands, your Wiues and Children, nwe I peceiue yée must néedes die for th ag of famine: las poore Cayliffe that I am, I shall not longe liue after you, great pitie it was to heare the complaints that Huon made, who saw that he must folow the same daunce. Then hee sayd: Ah faire Ladie Escleremond, I shall neuer see you more, I pray vnto our Lord God that hee will comfort you in all your affaires, as for mee poore soule, it is impossible to
liue foure dayes longer. After that hee had made this pitifull complaint, hee beheld the thrée Knights, who rendred vp their soules and died through hunger. The pitifull complaints that then he made was pitie to heare, he had no hope to be aided by any mortall man, wherefore he knew surely that hee could not liue aboue twoo dayes longer. Then all weeping, hee went from his Knightes that lay there dead, and went to the board of his shippe, and looked into the Sea to see if hee might espie any manner of Shippe comming thether. For hee thought that if any shippe came thether of the Sarazins, hee woulde haue some victuals or else to dye in the quarrell. Thus Huon was there alone without any company, sore weeping and al∣most dead through famine. When Huon sawe that no manner of shippe was comming thether, hee was right sorrowfull. Then hee turned him and regarded the Castle, the which seemed vnto him maruailously faire and great, and sayd. Ah good Lord, how can it be that this faire and rich Castle should bee voyd without man or wo∣man? I haue great maruaile of that sir Arnold shewed mee, for he shewed me that within the Castle there was neither man nor woman, and howe that there should bee a great Serpent, I cannot tell whether it be true or not, or whether hee spake it for feare, but by the grace of God (though I shall die in the qua∣rell) I will knowe the troth, for I were as good to die by the horrible Serpent, as to die for hunger. Then hee tooke his good Sword, and put on his helmet, and tooke his sheeld, and did so much with going from shippe to shippe, vntill hee came to the gate of the land. And then with much paine hee moun∣ted vp the degrees, and so came to the Castle, and then he sat downe and rested him, and beheld the faire Castle, he thought that he neuer saw none such before, for the wals and Towers were of fine Alablaster cleare shining, and the Towers richly couered with fine goulde of Arabia: when the Sunne cast his rayes and spheares thereuppon, it cast so great a light, that it gaue light a farre off, and when hee had longe beheld it at his pleasure, hee sawe the gate the which was faire and rich, that great beautie was to beholde it: for the twoo leaues of the gate
were couered with fine goulde, intermedled with other rich ouerages. And on his right side he saw by the gate a window, and ouer the same there was written in Letters of gould, saying: Let a∣ny man beware how he entreth into this Castle, without hee bee the worthyest Knight of all other, or else it were folly to assay it. For he shall find there such aduentures, as if his bodie were harder then a stethye of steele, yet hee should be but dead and lost, with∣out hee bee of that puissance, to resiste againste the great Serpent and vanquishe him, many men haue assayled, that neuer coulde speed, and he that will enter into the Castle, behold a little purse that hangeth on the right hand of the gate, where he shall find the key for to open the gate. When Huon had read the writing, hee began sore to muse in himselfe, and said: Good Lord, since thou hast saued mee from so many perils in time past, I hum∣bly require thee at this time to ayde and succour mee: and to giue me that grace, that I may vanquish this horrible Serpent and bring him to the death, for I had rather die in fighting like a valiant knight, then to die for famine. Then Huon arose vp, and went to the purse, and tooke out the key, and opened the gate and entred, and closed the gate againe after him. Chap. CII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux fought with the horrible Serpent, and slew him within the Castle of the Adamant. WHen Huon was entred into the Castle, hee sawe before the Hall dore the horrible Serpent, who was risen vp: his skin was of diuers colours, and it was so hard, that no yron nor steele could enter into it. When Huon sawe the beast so great, hee doubted him∣selfe, and called vppon Iesus Christ, requiring him to haue pi∣ty vppon him, and to giue him the grace to slay that dreadfull
beast: when the beast sawe Huon, hee had great maruaile, for hee had beene there a long space that neuer man came there, he stretched out his clawes, and cast his tayle round about him, and came hastily against Huon, who when he sawe the beast approach neere to him, hee made the signe of the Crosse vppon his forehead, recommending himselfe to God, with his Sword in his hand and his sheeld before him, and hee fiercely marched towards the Serpent, he was so hideous and fearful to behold, that the beast seemed rather an enemie of Hell, then any other beaste, his bodie was maruailous great with an ougly head, with twoo eyes bigger then twoo basons full of burning fire, and when hee came neere vnto Huon, hée lifted vp one of his pawes, thinkinge to haue drawne downe Huon to the earth, hee strake vpon Huons Sheeld with such force, that hee pulled it from his shoulder, leather nor buckle could not resiste it, and then with his teeth and nayles hee tare the Sheeld all to pee∣ces: Huon who was legier and light, leapt by the side of the Serpent, and gaue him a great stroake with his Sword vppon the eare, that he thought to haue clouen asunder his head. But hee coulde doe it no more hurt, then if hee had striken vppon a stethy, so that his Sword rebounded againe, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull, and said: Ah good Lord, nowe I sée well that my dayes are at an end. Ah faire Ladie Escleremond, I pray our Lord God to saue you and my Daughter Clariet, for this day you shall loose mée. Then hee aduaunced him to the Serpent, and gaue him a great stroake vppon the haunch behinde, and if hée did but little with his first stroake, hee did lesse hurt with that stroake, for hee could in no wise cut through the Serpents skinne, where∣fore hee was in great feare: and the Serpent when he felt him∣selfe striken cast his tayle rounde about Huon with such force, that hee ouerthrew Huon to the earth, yet hee quickly releeued againe. Then he saw by the gate a great square Speare with a sharpe broad head, and then hee put vp his Sword, and tooke the Speare in both his handes, and came with all his force and strength against the Serpent, who came and encountred him with open mouth to haue swallowed Huon▪ but Huon
who was strong and light, tooke the speare and layd it on his arme, and saw the Serpent with his mouth open, hee strake the Speare into the mouth of the Serpent so deepe, that with the head of the Speare, he cutte his heart asunder, when the Serpent felt himselfe hurt to the death, hee cast out a terrible crye, so that all the place sounded, and so that the noyse might be heard a league off. Thus the horible Serpent was slaine. When Huon saw that hee was dead, hee kneeled downe and lift vp his hands to heauen, thanking our Lord God for his grace. Then he arose, and went to the Serpent and behelde him, for hee was hidious and fearefull to behold, he was eigh∣teene foote long. When Huon had well beheld him, he went and sate downe by the hall doore for to rest him for he was so wea∣rie and faynt with the bloud that hee had lost, and with sweat, that he had much paine to draw his breath, the which was no maruaile, for hee had neither eate nor drunke of all that day. When he had well rested him, then he arose vp, as desirous to know whether any man or woman were within the Castle or not, to speake vnto them, he entred into the hall, the which he maruailously regarded, it was so fayre and ritch to beholde, that there is no Clarke in the world can discribe the beautie and richesse thereof: the rich Chambers that were on the side of the hall, were all composed and made of whie marble poli∣ed, the posts were couered with fine golde, at the ende of the hall there was a chimney, whereof the two pillars that sustai∣ned the Mantle trée were of fine Iasper, and the Mantle was of a rich Calsedony, and the Lintell was made of fine Emera∣is, rayled with a wing of fine gold, and the Grapis of fine Saphers. This chimney was so rich, that none such could bée ound, and all the Pillars in the hall were of red Calsedonie, and the pauement was of fine Amber. When Huon had well beheld this Hall, hee looked towards the Chambers, & ouer the doore of euerie Chamber was writ∣ten in letters of gold, the which shewed where the keyes were of euerie chamber: Huon who could well reade the letters, and vnderstood it, he found a purse, wherein were the keyes of euerie chamber, all of fine golde: he tooke one of the keyes, and
opened one of the Chamber doores, and entred into the Cham∣ber. Then he looked all about the Chamber, and sawe it garni∣shed and hanged with the most richest cloathes that euer were séene, the benches and bedsteads were all of white Iuorie, so richly entrayled, and wrought and garnished with precious stones, that no mans tongue could describe the beautie and richesse thereof, all was made by enchauntment. This Pallaice was exceeding great and large, and well garnished with chambers. When Huon had well beheld this chamber, hee was greatly abashed, that hee could neyther see man nor woman. Then he looked ouer another Chamber doore, where there was also written in letters of gold, according as it was written ouer the first doore. Then Huon tooke the key, and opened another doore, and entred into that Chamber also, and there he found a great quantitie of gold and riches, and rich Iewelles, with other most precious stones, that great beautie it was for to behold. Ah good Lord (quoth Huon) I would neuer haue beléeued that in all the world there had beene so much riches, as I sée héere present before mée: then anone he sawe another chamber, and tooke the key and entred therein, and for all the riches that he sawe before, there hee found much more, there were Presses made of fine Iuorie, very richly wrought and entrayled, so that there was no beast nor birde, but there it was most cunningly wrought, in the which Presse were gownes and roabes of most fine gold: and most rich mantles furred with Sabyles, and all other things the which were ap∣pertayning vnto the apparell of man-kinde, and the beds so richly couered, that it was impossible to be described by anie mortall man, this chamber was so fayre and rich, that Huon could neuer bee satisfied with beholding and viewing thereof, there were windowes verie richly glazed, opening vppon a Garden side, the which Garden was so fayre, and so well gar∣nished with flowers of most precious swéete smelling, and of all manner of trees charged with fruits, so good and so delici∣ous to eate, that the verie smell of them would haue satisfied a mans appetite.
Huon who saw this fayre garden, desired greatly to enter into it, to gather some of that fruit, hee looked ouer the doore and found the purse with the key therin, and then he opened the doore and went into the garden, and gathered of the fruite at his pleasure, and did eate thereof, for hee had a great desire to eate, hee thought the fruit maruailous good. If I should shewe or discribe the beautie of this garden, it would be ouer∣long to resite, there were so many sundrie fruits, so fayre and so sweete of smelling, that a sicke man of any infirmitie, would soone haue recouered his health. Also there were herbs and flowres so sweet and delightfull, that all the garden seemed to be full of balme. When Huon had beene there a good space, and had well eaten of the fruite at his pleasure, hee returned backe into the chamber that hee came from, and then hee vn∣armed him, and putte off all his cloathes, and tooke out of the Presse a fine shirt, and doublet, hosen, and shooes, gowne, coate, and cappe, such as he would choose, for there was no man to say him nay, when hee was thus newly arriued, there could not bee founde a more goodlier man, according as the Chronicle sayth, I beléeue hee was borne by the Fairie, as then there could not bee found so goodly a man liuing. When he was thus apparelled, he went from chamber to chamber, alwayes hearkening whether he could heare the voyces either of men or women, but as long as hee continued there, he could heare nothing, whereof hee was right sorrowfull. There hée continued eight dayes, without eating of any thing, sauing of the fruits of the Gardine, whereby hee waxed féeble and aint, the which was no maruaile, for hee had béene there eight dayes without eating either bread or flesh, he was so féeble, that hee thought he could not long indure there without death. Then he prayed vnto our Lord God for to comfort and streng∣then him out of that great daunger: most pittiously hee com∣playned for his wife and childe, saying: Ah my deere Wife, God ayde and succour you in all your affayres, for ye shall ne∣uer haue any succour and ayde of me more, for I tarrie but for the howre of my death, the which is nowe neere at hand approaching vnto mee, for I am so sore and grieuously bitten
with famine, that I haue much paine to sustaine my selfe. Thus Huon was eight dayes in the Cale of the Adamant, e∣uerie day eating of the fruits of the gardine, and at night hee lay euer in the  bed in the chamber. Now let vs leaue spea∣king of him, and let vs turne to the Duchesse Escleremond, who was besieged within the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas she was in great displeasure, and not without a cause, for shee suffered much paine and trouble. Chap. CXII. ¶ How after that Huon was departed from Bourdeaux, the Em∣perour made diuers assaults to the Cittie, but hee could not win it, for the defence of the good chiualrie that was within it, and of the ambushment that was layd by the counsell of Duke Sa∣uary, whereby the Citie was taken and wonne. YE haue heard before, howe Duke Huon departed from his Citie of Bour∣deaux, wheras hee left the Duchesse his wife, who was in great displeasure when she sawe the departing of her husband, she greatly com∣playned, and sayd: Ah my right eere Lord, your departure ought geatly to greeue mee, I feare you shall not come in time to succour, and to bring me out of the danger that I am in, for it is impossible for vs long to endure against this Emperour. Aas I haue more soro for my daughter▪ thē for my selfe: and I am sorrowfull for my Lords and ▪ who for the loue of you and mee are in pell of thir ▪ had beene better for vs to haue tarryed still in  come hither to uffer all these tomens, pines, and , and at last painefull deah: with saying of these  Duchesse fell in a trce among her Lords.  releeed ▪ & sayde discomfort you  but take good  and  your men, who haue great desire to defend
Citie, for the sauegard of their owne bodyes and liues, thus to make sorrow, ye can winne nothing thereby, but loose more to more: haue no doubt that Huon your husbande will leaue you at this poynt, hee is gone to your brother for succour, hee will not long tarrie, and he will bring you such succour, that the Emperour nor the Almaines shall haue no leysure to grant him the victorie. Thus Gerames comforted the Duchesse, who was glad for to heare Gerames, and thus as they deuised together, the Emperour who was aduertised of Huons departing, and how he was gone for succour, he assembled his Councell into his tent, and there hee shewed and declared the great losses that he had suffered, as well of the death of his nephewes, as of other of his friends and kynne, and the great domage that by Huon he had suffered, and sayde. Sirs, all this ye know well, his ac∣quaintance hath cost vs déerely, ye haue all heard how he is de∣parted to séeke for succour, but I cannot tell to what part hee is gone. As for the Realme of Fraunce, I know right well hee shall haue no succour there, for as it hath béene shewed mée of ate, that the right Noble and victorious Prince Charlemaine is dead, who loued Huon but little, because of his sonne Char∣lot, whome Huon slew, and Charlemaine hath left behinde him but one sonne named Lewes, who is but of a yong age: and I beléeue if hee were of full age, that he would rather come for to succour me then Huon, who slewe Charlot his brother, therfore it can be no otherwise, but that he is gone into some far coun∣trey for succour, therefore I thinke it best that in the meane time ere he returne, that on all sides let vs continually assaile the Citie, and let euerie one doe their part, to bee reuenged for the death of their friendes, which are héere slaine by them within the Citie. When the Lordes heard the Emperour, all with one voyce aunswered and sayd. Syr, the reason which you haue shew∣ed vnto vs, is to bee kept and done, and wee shall goe arme vs and make vs all readye, to the intent to come to your inten∣tion, the which is verie good and reasonable. Then they sounded al their hornes and busins, and euerie man speedily
armed himselfe, and came with Ensigne displayde to assayle the Cittie, and they that were within, as well as they could they defended the Citie: they which were without, reared vppe ladders against the walles with mightie strength, but they which were within did beate them down into the Dikes, and then they did cast downe vppon them hote leade and boy∣ling Dyle, and quicke Lyme, and great stones, and fagots burning, so that they which were down in the Dikes, had no power for to reléeue themselues againe, but there most misera∣bly dyed vnder the ladders. There was on both parts excee∣ding great shooting wyth Crosbowes, and slinging of stones so thicke, that they seemed like vnto snow flying in the ayre, maruailous it was to beholde the olde Gerames, howe hee exhorted his companie for to doe well, and also the Duchesse Escleremond, with her daughter in her armes, crying vnto her men, and sayde: Yee my deere Lords and Knights, fight lusti∣ly, but to your paynes, for to defende your bodyes and your liues, your wiues, and your children, to the intent that the Almaynes make not their bragges and vaunts of theyr win∣ning of this most noble Citie by theyr assaults, the which is so goodly and rich, for Sirs, I knowe right well yee shall not a∣bide this trouble for no long season, for Duke Huon your right∣full Lorde will shortly ayde and succour vs all. Then all the noble Barons, Knights, and Burgesses, hearing the excée∣ding great comfort of the Noble and vertuous Lady the Du∣chesse Escleremond, with a maruaylous great courage and va∣lour they came to theyr defences, and behaued themselues so valiantly, that theyr enemies were forced to retyre backe with great losse and domage, whereof the Emperour and his Lords were right sorrowfull, and they within the Citie right ioyfull of the great victorye the which God had giuen them that day. Then euery man went vnto his lodging, and made great ioy, and the Emperour and his men withdrew themselues in great displeasure for his losse. When the Emperour was vnarmed, and had well refre∣shed himselfe, then hee sayde vnto his Lordes, Sirs, wee haue beene a long season before this Citie, and haue sustained ma∣ny
losses, therefore sirs I require you to counsell mee what is  do, this Citie is strong, and wel furnished with knights and men to defend it, by vs it will neuer be wonne: without vicualles aile them, but I thinke they haue but small store of , therefore I desire you to shew me your abuises, whe∣ther  shall depart from this Citie without more doing, or  here vpon such fortune as God will send vs. When the Emperour had sayd as much as hee pleased, then the Duke Sauy his brother rose vp and sayd. Sir, me thinkes if it may  beleeued, that this Citie cannot long endure, and the cause  I shall shew you: ye knowe well that Huon their Lord is  to seeke for succour, on the other side, they within the Ci∣tie haue but fewe men, and but ill furnished of victualles, within the Citie there is an old knight, who is a valiant and a hardie knight, and therefore it were profitable to studie howe he might bee taken or else slaine, this should greatly aduaunce your enterprise, of the which ye cannot fayle, if you wil beléeue my counsell as I shall shewe you. True it is that this day wee haue had great losse, and receiued great domage, whereof they within are ioyfull, wherefore it were good to send certain mut∣ons and beasts in the night time, with a few keepers: sende them into the medow neere vnto the Citie, and I am sure that when the olde knight knowes thereof, the which he shall know by the watch men on the towres and walles, then incontinent he  out  such power as hee hath, to take the beasts  bring them into the Citie. And to the intent that they all neuer returne againe into the Citie, incontinent ere the  a good number of Béefs and Muttons. Then  armed tenne thousand men, and send them to a  whereas the gallowes is raysed, and when they  that they within the Citie bee issued out to fetch the  the tenne Thousand men drawe neere to the gate ▪ to the etent that they without shall not enter  to their great losse. And if you will thus doe, I put  that before it be midnight they shall bee all taken , and the matter may so come to passe, that you shall enter into the Citie at your pleasure.
Thus I haue shewed you as I thinke best, if any man know any better way, let him speake. Then euerie man regarded the Emperour, and sayde, Sir the counsaile that Duke Sauary hath giuen you, wee thinke that a better counsayle cannot bée giuen to any Prince. When the Emperour vnderstod the counsaile of his brother Duke Sauary, and that all his Lordes did allow the same, hee was right ioyfull, and sayde that it should bee so done. Then he called his marshall, and comman∣ded that it should be done according as his Brother had deui∣sed it before, the which was done verie diligently, and sent with him fiftie men, with sixe hundred muttons, and two hun∣dred beasts néere vnto the Citie, and then layd theyr ambush∣ment of tenne thousande men by the little mountaine: it was darke night, and the Moone was not risen, whereby they within could not perceiue them, the which turned to theyr great losse and damage, for all those that issued out of the Citie of Bourdeaux were slaine and taken prisoners, as ye shal heare hereafter. Chap. CIIII. ¶ Of the death of the olde Gerames, and of the taking of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the comming of the Duchesse with the Emperour, and of the deliuering vp of the Castle to the Empe∣rour. YE haue heard before, howe the Emperour assayled the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the great losse that he sustained, wherof Gerames and they within the Citie were right ioyfull, and made great feasts, and thanked our Lord God. Then after Supper Gerames called all the knights and other together, and sayde. Sirs, ye haue séene this day the great assault that the Emperour and his men haue made to this Citie, but thanked be God the losse
is returned to them, for there are dead and wounded a great number of them, and many of them are sore wearyed with tra∣uaile, and thinke now for to rest themselues, and now is their howre that they be sette at Supper, and customably they sitte euer long at their Table, farre longer then French men doe: wherefore I thinke best, that incontinent without delay we should arme our selues, and issue out of the Citie, and goe to their tents and rayse them, and then lette vs doe there as good Knights ought to doe, to the intent that good songs may bee made of vs, and that the Almaines haue no cause to say, but that wee bee as good men as they bee. Sir (quoth Othon and Barnard) we be readie thus to doe. Sirs (quoth Gerames) let vs make haste, that we may returne againe ere the Moone riseth. Then they armed themselues. Alas what an il aduenture came to them at night, for the most part of those that issued out, were taken and slaine. Ah good Lord, what a losse fell to the Citie of Bourdeaux. Ah noble Lady Escleremond, yee may well weepe and complaine all your dayes, for sorow, paine, and dolour ap∣proacheth néere, whereby ye are like to beare such diseases and pouertie, that no man liuing can recount it, nor yee shall neuer bee out of that daunger and trouble, till yee be deliuered by the good Duke Huon your husband. When Gerames and his companie were readie, they moun∣ted on their horses, and issued out at the gate as priuily as they could, so that they were not perceiued by them that were set to watch for them, nor they heard not when they were in the field, they rode a false gallop to the tents, the which they might well e cleerely by the lights that were in the tents: when they came neere, they dashed their spurres to their horses, and cryed Bourdeaux, and srake and cut asunder the cordes and stayes, so that many tents fell to the earth, and such as came out were slaine, a great noyse and crie beganne to rise in the hoast, and euerie man ranne to their armour, and Gerames and his com∣panie slew many of their enemies, and made them for to flie before them, it was dreadfull for to beholde the damage that they did there. But finally the losse fell vpon them, for the Em∣perour and all his men were readie, when Gerames sawe howe
all the hoast was mooued, then he sayd to his companie. Sirs, it is time for vs to retyre backe, for we may tarrie héere too long, yonder commeth the Emperour with a mightie armie to close vs in, it is needfull for vs to make haste, that wee may goe away in safetie. Then altogether in one companie they re∣turned, and went the way towards Bourdeaux. But they had not gone farre, ere that they were ouertaken by the Almaynes, & they layd on on all parts with their swords & speares. Then Gerames turned him to an Almaine, and with his speare ran him cleane through, and in drawing out his speare, hee fell downe dead to the earth, and then he strake another, whome also he slew. He did such déedes of armes, that ere his speare brake, hee slewe fiue of his enemies, whereof the Almaynes were sore abashed. He brake the prease in such wise, that none durst approach néere vnto him, right well did Othon and Ber∣nard, and such as were with him. But when the Duke Sauary, who with tenne thousand men lay in ambushment néere vnto the Citie, had heard the greate noyse and crie, hee suppo∣sed that they within the Citie were issued out. When Gerames and his companie sawe howe they were inclosed both before and behinde, they were sore abashed. When Gerames sawe that their force and powers could not auayle them, but that either they must bee taken or slaine, then earnestly he called vpon our Lord Iesus Christ, requiring him to saue and defend his good Lord Huon of Bourdeaux, and the Duchesse Escleremond his wife. And he cryed to his com∣panie & sayd. Sirs, I pray you hartily at this time shew forth your Prowesse, and behaue your selues so valiantly, that this Emperour & Almaines haue no cause to make their auaunts, that they haue found vs as men amazed, but let vs shew them how our swords can cut. Then all together they assayled their enemies in such wise, that at ye first brunt the Almaines were constrayned to retyre backe, and Gerames did such déeds, that none durst approach néere vnto him. Then the Duke Sauary with ten thousand men came vpon them sodainely, the which was no equall part, and also the Emperour with his great battaile came also vpon old Gerames and his companie, who
had gotten themselues into the subburbs of the Citie, and a mightie wall behind them at theyr backes, whereas they did stand at a bay against the Almaines. Gerames was in the mid∣dest of them, and vnderneath his helmet appeared his long white beard, and the Emperour who had great shame, that so few men in number should kéepe a baye against his highnesse, and doe vnto his men so great damage, he perceiued where the old Gerames was, who had oftentimes slaine many of his men, and done him so mightie damages, that hee thought hee could neuer be reuenged thereof sufficiently, and thought that if hee should haue scaped then aliue, that hee would doe him much more hurt and damage after, and sayd to himselfe, that hee had rather die incontinent, then he should not as then bee reuenged on him, and therewith incontinent he couched his Speare and ran at old Gerames on the one side ere he was aware, so that the Emperour ranne him cleane through the bodie, so that the gen∣tle knight Gerames fell to the earth, and died incontinent: great damage fell that day to Huon of Bourdeaux, for he lost the truest and best friend that he had. Alas for that pitious iourney that fell that day to them of Bourdeaux. They had good cause for to wéepe, alas good Duchesse Escleremond, what losse haue yee receiued, to loose him, who was your cheefe comfort and re∣fuge, ye might haue called him more then father. Ah right no∣ble Ladie, there neuer came to you a greater mischiefe, then ye haue by the death of Gerames, who lieth dead euen now among the enemies. When the Almaines sawe that Gerames was dead, then they fought so, that within a short space all them of Bourdeaux were slaine, and not one scaped aliue, except Barnard, who was on the puissant horse Amphage: for the gambaudes and worke that he made, not an Almaine durst approach neere him, for Bernard next vnto Huon, was the most valiaunt knight of his body, that was as then liuing, for when the Almaines sawe him vpon that horse, they chased him no further, but they went to theyr tents, and Bernard ceased not till hee came vnto the gate of the Citie, the which was opened, when hee was entred, and the gate closed againe, the Burgesses and comunaltie saw
how Bernard came in all alone, they demaunded of him, and sayd. Sir, where is your captaine and the old Gerames. Then sore wéeping, he shewed them at length the pittious and do∣lorous aduenture, the which when they heard, they made such cries and wéeping, that pittie it was for to heare and to sée them, the bruite and noyse was so great and loud, that the La∣die Escleremond heard it, whereat she maruailed, and stood in a great feare. Therewith Syr Bernard entred in at the Castle gate, and so mounted into the hall, whereas hee found the Du∣chesse Escleremond, who was sore abashed when she sawe Syr Bernard come alone, who shewed her the great losse that he had sustained that day, wherwith for inward sorrow she fell down in a swound, and so lay a long space as though she had beene dead. Then the Ladyes and Damsels sore wéeping reléeued her, and then shee cast out a great crie, wringing her handes, and tearing her hayre, and sayde. Ah Huon my right déere Lord, this day yée haue lost your most sorrowfull and dolorous wife and well beloued daughter. Then the Ladies, & Damselles, and other wiues, who had lost their husbands, fathers, and brethren, came into the Ca∣stle, and made such cryes and sorrow, that the noyse thereof was heard into the Emperours hoast without, and it was shewed the Emperour, that the noyse and brute that was made within the Citie and Castle, was for the losse they hadde receiued that day. And then they sayde, that it should be good that the next morning euerie man should be readie to goe and assayle the Citie, and sayd, that if euer they would winne it, the howre then was come. When the Emperour had heard that reason, he sayd that the aduise was very good, and that he would that it should so be done, hee gaue the charge thereof to his Constable and Marshalles: & so the next morninge his hoast was readie, and the Emperour commanded to set for∣ward, and then they came before the Citie garnished with all things néedfull and necessarie for assault: and they marched forward, and approached the Citie, and when they came there, they gaue a great crie, and entred into the Dykes, and reared vp their ladders to the walles in diuers places, so that they
that were within were sore afrayd. For within were but Bur∣gesses and Marchants, who could but little skil of warre, how∣beit, they mounted vpon the walles, and defended their Cit∣tie. But the Citie was so sore assayled on all parts, that the de∣fendants wist not where to make resistance, the shotte of them without slew so thicke, that none within durst appeare vppon the walles: whereby they entred perforce into the Citie, and slew as many as they mette withall in their entring. And then they went vnto the gate, and opened it, so that the Empe∣rour and all his Lords entred into the Citie. Then euerie man went abroade in the stréetes, to take prisoners, and to spoyle mens houses. When the Emperour saw hee was Lord of the Citie, hee caused it to be proclaimed in euerie streete, that no man on paine of death should wrong any woman, or deflowre anie mayde, nor to breake any Church, nor to set any house on fire, and also such as were in any Church for sauegard, that they should goe at their pleasure, without any trouble or danger ei∣ther of body or goods, for the Emperour, who was a wise Prince, thought in himselfe, that great damage and pittie it would bee, to destroy and putte to ruine such a famous Citie, so strong and well furnished with Burgesses and Marchants. When such as were fledde into strong places for refuge, vn∣derstood the Emperours commaundement, euerie man and woman returned to their owne houses, so that there was but little damage done, and that was done by them that entred first. When the Lady Escleremond saw how the Citie was taken, ye may bee sure she was right sorrowfull. For first shee saw her Citie taken by the enemie, and her selfe closed within the Ca∣stle ill furnished with victualles, and much people with her, whereby she saw cleerely (without God did ayde her) that her death approched neere. Then pitiously she complayned to God and sayd. Verie God on whome I beléeue firmely, and for whose sake I haue left my first misbeleefe, and forsooke my pa∣rents and friends to take to my husband a Christian man, to the intēt to receiue thy law, O God I require thee of thy grace to haue pittie vpon mee poore desolate creature, and to keepe
and defend my deere children from all ill incombrances, for if it be thy pleasure to saue my childe, I am content to abide what fortune it shall please thee to send mee, and beside that, I re∣quire thy grace to saue and keepe Huon my deere Lord and husband. Then all wéeping she called vnto her sir Bernard, and said▪ Right deare Fréend, I can take no counsaile nowe but of you, you sée well howe our deathes approache, and that it is impos∣sible for vs to kéepe and defend this Castle against the Empe∣rour, who hath wonne the Citie, and I doubt if he enter into this Castle perforce, wée shall bee the first that shall receiue death, and because I sée well that I cannot escape from hence, I require you my deare Fréend, and by the troth that you beare vnto Huon my Lord and yours, that incontinent you take my deare Daughter Clariet whome I hold héere in mine armes, and finde some meanes that you may depart out of this Citie, and beare her straight to the Abbey of Cluny, the which is in Burgoyne, and deliuer her into the kéeping of the Abbot there: and recommend me vnto him, hée is Vncle to my Husband Hu∣on, and great Vncle to my Childe. Lady, (quoth Bernard) I know well that if I be taken here, I shalbe vtterly slaine: how∣beit, if I could sée or knowe that my abiding héere could aid or succour you, both for mine honour and for the loue of my good Lord and Maister Huon, I woulde neuer depart hence from you, but my resistance and force is but of small value, and be∣cause I woulde serue you as I am bounde to doe, I am readie sournished to take vppon mee that aduenture, as to beare your Child away, and to set her in sauegard by the grace of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. When the Duchesse vnderstood Barnard, she was well com∣forted, and as for her selfe shee regarded neither her life nor death, when shee knewe that her Child should be saued. Then shée deliuered her Childe vnto Barnard, to the entent that in the night time hée should yssue out. Then the Emperour and his Lordes came before the Castle: and when the Duchesse knewe that, shee came to the gate, and at a windowe shee desired to speake with the Emperour, who was there readie present and
said. Madame, say what you will to mée at your pleasure: and when shée sawe the Emperour, shee sayd. Sir, I knowe well that you are the head and cheefest of all the christened and noblest, whereby you are bound to defend and to kéepe from ill all noble men and women, I that am the Daughter of an high and mightie Emperour, and that for the loue of my good Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, haue forsaken mine owne false bée∣léefe, to beléeue vppon the Christian faith: Sir, I require you (for his sake that made and created you) to haue pitie and com∣passion of mée, and of all those that be héere with mée, & to re∣spite our liues, and to put from you all rancour and malice, and pardon them that nothing had to doe with the beginning of this warre. When the Emperour hadde heard the reasonable request of this faire Ladie, hee cast from him all the mortall hate that hée had vnto her, and vnto them that were within the Castle with her. Then hée mooued with pitie and compassion of the noble Ladie, aunsweared and sayde: Madame, for the loue of our Lord Iesus Christe, I repell from mée all my displeasure, so that you render vnto mee this Castle, and to put it vnder mine obeysance to vse it at my pleasure, and to yéelde your bodie as my Prisoner, and all those that be within, and thus you shall haue all your liues saued. Sir, (quoth the Duchesse) laude and praise bee giuen to our Lord Iesus Christ, for this grace that you shewe vnto mée and to my companie. Then the Em∣perour went backe, and made expresse commandement throuh∣out the Citie, that no man should bée so hardy, as to doe any hurt or iniurie to any manner of person within the Citie, but to suffer euerie man to abide in their owne houses peaceably without killinge, whereof the Burgesses and communaltie of the Citie, were right ioyfull. Thus as yée haue heard the Ci∣tie of Bourdeaux was taken by the Emperour, who was chosen in Almaine: and committed by the Emperour Charlemaine vn∣till his Sonne Lewis shoulde bée of full age, and able to rule the Empire.
Chap. CV. ¶ How the Duchesse Escleremond deliuered her Daughter Clariet to Barnard, to beare vnto the Abbot of Cluny, of whome the Abbot was right ioyfull. YEE haue heard the pitiful ta∣king of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and of the trea∣tie and appointment that the Duchesse Escle∣remond had made with the Emperour, & when shee had made her appointment, shee went vn∣to her companie pitiously weeping, and shewed them all the manner of her treatie, whereof euerie person was glad that their liues should bée saued, but they made great sorrowe, for that the Duchesse should become a Prisoner, and then she cal∣led Barnard, and sayd. Sir, when it is night, yssue out by the Posterne with my Daughter Clariet, and beare her vnto the good Abbot of Cluny, who is her great Vncle. Madame, (quoth hée) bée of good cheere, and by the grace of our Lord and Saui∣our Iesus Christ, I shall not rest twoo nights in one place, vn∣till I haue deliuered your daughter vnto the good Abbot of Clu∣ny her great Vncle. Then Barnard tooke leaue of the Duchesse, who kissed her Daughter at her departing, sore wéeping and pitifully complayning. There was a Posterne that opened into the féeldes, and it was so small that Barnard was faine to leade his horse in his hand, the night was dark, but he knew well the waies, & after∣wards he mounted on his horse with the Childe in his armes, and so road foorth and passed the Landes of Bourdeaux, and was neuer séene by any mortall man vntill the next day, he road so all the night that his horse was wearie. And when hee sawe that hee was past all daungers and escaped all perils, then hee road at his ease for loue of the Child, and he complained great∣ly for the good horse Amphage, that Huon had left in his kéeping
vntill his returne, but hee durst not take that Horse with him, for feare that hée should haue dealt the worse with the Ladie Escleremond, the which had béene true, for the Emperour loued the horse so well, that he desired more to haue the horse againe, then for to winne the Citie, and therefore Barnard durst not take the Horse with him. So long Barnard road, that hée ar∣riued at Monglew, the which is called Lyon on the Riuer of Roane, and from thence hée road to Mascon, and from thence he rested not vntill he came to the Abbey of Cluny, and then hée a∣lighted, and desired to speake with the Abbot: and when the Abbot sawe Barnard with a Child in his armes, hee had great maruaile thereof: and when Barnard sawe the Abbot, all wée∣ping hee saluted him and said. Sir, the right desolate Duches of Bourdeaux, your Néece and wise vnto the Duke Huon of Bourdeaux your Nephew, hath sent héere vnto you her Daugh∣ter Clariet. Then the good Abbot embraced him, and tooke the child and kissed it more then twentie times, and demaun∣ded why hée brought the Child vnto him. Sir, (quoth Barnard) the Citie of Bourdeaux hath beene besieged by the Emperour of Almaine, and so straightly kept, that it was néere hand fami∣shed, many Knightes that were within are slaine, so that Hu∣on your Nephewe, by the counsaile of the Duchesse his wife, and consent of all his companie, is departed out of Bourdeaux to séeke succour of the King of Auphamie brother vnto Esclere∣mond Huons Wife, and so it is a longe time since hee departed, and wée neuer could heare word of him, and thus hée left vs in Bourdeaux, and our chéefe Captaine was the old Gerames your Coozen, who was Brother to the good Prouost Guyer, and so it was that vppon a night wée yssued out and roade to the Empe∣rours Tents, and slewe many of our enemies, and when wée sawe our time wee returned towardes our Citie, but by some spie wée were perceiued when wée yssued out, whereby the Emperour knowing thereof, sent Duke Sauary his Brother with tenne Thousand men to lye in ambushment néere to the Citie, so that when wee hadde thought to haue entred into the Citie, Duke Sauary was before vs with tenne Thousand men, there wée fought a long space, but finally the old Gerames and
his companie were all slaine, none escaped but my selfe, and that was by reason of my horse, so I entred into the Citie, whereas there was made great sorrow, and the next day the Emperour with great assault wanne the Citie, and came to the Castle whereas the Duchesse was, who saw well that shée could not long hold the Castle, shée made her treatie to saue her bodie and her companie, and so they are all Prisoners: before she deliuered vppe the Castle, shee deliuered me her daughter, and so I issued out at a Posterne priuily, and was not percei∣ued, therefore Syr your Néece hath sent you her daughter, to the intent that for the loue of her father, and of her yee would kéepe and nourish her, till her father Duke Huon were re∣turned. When the abbot vnderstood Bernard, he beganne to weepe, and tooke the childe in his armes, and kissed her oftentimes, and sayd. My deere childe, if it please our Lord God I shall bee to you both father and mother, and shall nourish you vntill yee be great, and then marrie you vnto some mightie Prince, in whome it shall lie to conquers your heritage, lands, and sig∣nories, for I haue here in my house such treasure, that it is suf∣ficient to conquer a whole Empire. Then the Abbot sent for a noble Ladie of the countrey, and a nurse, and deliuered vnto them the child for to keepe and to nourish, for a fayrer creature of her age was neuer seene. Then the Abbot sayd to Barnard, Sir yee shall abide heere still with mee, vntill the childe bee of age, or else till her father bee returned. Now lette vs leaue to speake of this young child Clariet, and of the Abbot, and re∣turne to speake of the dolorous companie that were in the Ca∣stle of the noble Citie of Bourdeaux. Chap. CVI. ¶ How the Duchesse Escleremond yeelded vp the Castle to the Emperor, and how she and her companie were prisoners in the Citie of Mayence.
YE haue well heard heere be∣fore, that after the departing of Barnard from the Castle of Bourdeaux, with Claret Huons daughter, how the Emperour had made a trea∣tie with the Duchesse Escleremond, for the de∣liuerance of the Castle, the which passed: and on the next mor∣ning the Duchesse spake with the Emperour, who with all his men was there readie before the place, abiding to haue the de∣liuerance of the Castle. And when hee saw the Duchesse at a window ouer the gate, he sayd. Madame, I will that the pro∣mise that yee made mee yesterday ye performe, or else I will do according as I thinke best. Syr, (quoth the Duchesse) I am readie to fulfill my promise, so that ye promise me againe, that my body, and all Ladyes and Damselles and other shall be sa∣ued, and not touched by no villaine, nor no ill done vnto our bodyes. Madame (quoth the Emperour) all this that you re∣quire heere, I promise to performe: but you, and all such as be with you shall bee my prisoners. Sir (quoth the Duchesse) my life and my bodie, and all such as be here with mee, I put them in the sauegard of God and of you. Then she descended downe, and came into the hall, where∣as she found her company making great sorow each to other, for they knew not where euer they should méet againe or not. Then the Duchesse commaunded to open the gate, the which was doone immediatly. Then the Emperour and all his Lords entred into the Castle, but hee would not goe into the hall, till he had all the Ladyes and other brought out, to the intent that they should make no request to him, and he ordained a thou∣sand Knights of the most auncient men of his hoast, and then be deliuered the Duchesse, and sixe Ladyes with her, and al the other prisoners, as well they that were within the Castle, as o∣ther that hadde beene taken before at diuers skirmishes, & sent them straight to the Citie of Mayence, and sette them all in prison in Towres and other places, but the duchesse was putte all alone in a strong towre, within the which there was a déep
dungeon, and therein shée was set, out of the which shee neuer yssued vntill shee was deliuered by Huon her Husband. Then the Emperour being in the Castle of Bourdeaux sent ouer all the Countrey, that all such as were aliue should come and do their homage vnto him, and take their Landes of him, the which they did according to his commaundement. Then hée made his Prouosts and Officers to doe iustice both in the Citie and Countrey: and after that the Emperour had béene there eight dayes, he went out of the Citie, and road and tooke possession of Blames and Gerone, and set there his Officers, and when hee hadde full possession of al the Countrey, hee left Keepers in the Countrey, and so returned to the Citie of Mayence, whereas hee was receiued with great ioy and triumph. Nowe lette vs leaue to speake of the Emperor Tirrey, and speake of Duke Hu∣on of Bourdeaux, being in the Castle of the Adamant, in great pouertie and famine. Chap. CVII. ¶ How there arriued at the Castle of the Adamant a Shippe full of Sanazins, wherein was the Bishop of Mllaine, and how Huon caused them to bee christened, and then hee brought them into the Castle, whereas they found great store and plentie of victu∣als. YEE haue heard here before, howe Huon was in the Castle of the Adamant in great pouertie and famine, whereas he had beene tenne dayes without meat and drinke, except Apples and fruit that grew in the Gar∣den, whereby he became so féeble and weake, that he had scarre power to sustaine himselfe vppon his feete, hee found there ri∣ches inough gould and siluer, apparell and Iewels, and riche bedding, so that he wanted nothing except victuall, and as hee walked in the chamber whereas the treasure lay, he beheld an
Arch vaulted richly, painted with gould and azure, vnder the which stoode a riche chayre, and therein a coushin of cloath of gould, bordered with pearles and precious stones. Huon who was wearie of walking, sat downe in the chaire to reste him. Then he beganne sore to muze, casting downe his lookes to the earth, and by reason that his long Mantle had swept the pow∣der away from the pauement, there appeared letters of gould written vpon the pauement, & he red them, and the tennour of them was: Whosoeuer reads this Letter, shall find that vnder this pauement, there is a Celler with victuall both bread, flesh, and wine, and of all sundry meats for man or woman to eate of. But the Letters sayd, that whosoeuer should enter into this Celler, except he be without deadly sinne: as soone as he toucheth any of the meat, suddainly he shall die. When Huon had read all the Letters, hee hadde great maruaile and feare, and thought within himselfe, that when hée departed from Bourdeaux, hee was confessed before his Priest died, and since that time hee could not remember any thinge that hee had committed that should bee deadly sinne: and then hee made his prayers to our Lord God deuoutly sore weeping, and when hee had ended his prayers, as hee kneeled vppon his knees before the chaire, hee sawe hanging vppon the side of the chaire a little key of gould, he tooke it vp in his hand, and beganne to muze on the writing that sayd: Whosoeuer enters into this Castle, though they be va∣liaunt and wise or noble Knightes, yet they shall not knowe well what to doe. Then he said vnto himselfe, rather then I should die for famine, it were better to die shortly then longe to endure in this hunger and thirst. Then Huon recommended himselfe to the ayd and helpe of almightie God, and tooke the key and opened a little wicket and drew the dore vnto him. Then he looked downe into the Celler, the which was as cleare, as though the Sunne in the middest of the day hadde entred in at the windowes, and so hee went downe about Seauen-score greeces: then hee regarded on the right hand, and saw a great Ouen with twoo mouthes, the which cast out a great clearenesse, then he saw néere there∣unto Ten faire young men, they were all of the Fayrie, foure
of them made the Past for bread, and two deliuered the loaues to other twoo, and they did sette them downe vppon a rich cloath of silke: then the other twoo men tooke the loaues and deliuered them vnto one man by twoo loaues at once, and hee did sette them into the Ouen to bake, and at the other mouth of the Ouen, there was a man that drewe out the white loaues and Pastes, and before him there was another young man that receiued them, and put them into Basketts which were richly painted. When Huon had well aduised them, he had great maruaile, and came and saluted them, saying: Sir, I pray to our Lord God to saue you and all your companie, and when they heard Huon speake, they gaue vnto him no manner of answeare, but beheld each other, and when Huon saw that none of them wold make him any answere, he was sore abashed and greatly trou∣bled in his mind: howbeit he sayd. Sirs, you that be héere, I coniure you in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, and of the Angels and Archangels, and of all the Court celestiall, that yée answeare mee to that I doe de∣maund of you. Then they all ceased from their labour and businesse, and be∣held Huon, and rubbed off the paste & meale from off their hands and fingers, and the Maister of them beheld Huon and saide. Fréend you do vs great wrong to coniure vs, we will that you well know, if you were either Sarazin or Paynim, you should neuer depart from hence without death: your troth and noble∣nesse hath preserued you, you ought greatly to thanke God, I knowe well that you haue great hunger, for it is Tenne dayes since you did either ate or drinke any thinge, except all onely of the fruit that you founde in the Garden, the which as yet is not ripe nor readie to eate. Therefore Huon faire Sir, I know well that you haue great hunger, and therefore if that you will drinke or eate, enter into yonder rich Chamber the which you sée open, where you shall finde the Table readie set, and the cloth layd, and the pots of siluer, and the vessell of gould borde∣red with precious stones and pearle, and the Basons of gould and Ewers with water to wash your hands, and there sit you
downe at the Table, and there you shall find meats and drinks such as you will with for, and as long as you will tarie here in this Castle, you shall haue euerie day like seruice or better if you list, for any meat that you will wish for, you shall haue it at your pleasure, and of wine in likewise twoo times of the day without you will fast. But sir, I require you of one thing, that from henceforth you do not coniure me nor any of my com∣panie, and then you shall haue euerie thinge at your desire. Sir, (quoth Huon) from henceforth I shall not speake vnto you, so that by the coniuration that I haue coniured you, you will shewe mee what people you bee that abide heere in this Castle: and what you call this Castle, and who is Lord there∣of, and by whome all the riches that is heere within is kept: I will goe eate some meat, and then I pray you for to shewe it vnto mée? Then they answeared Huon right fiercely and said: Ah thou false and vntrue Knight, for to demaund any such thing of vs, at this time I shall shewe you, but afterward, by mee nor by none other of my company, you shall neuer heare word spo∣ken. Sir, (quoth Huon) the requeste I am sorrie of: and I heartily desire you yet, if heereafter I speake vnto you alone, that you will answeare mee. Nay surely, (quoth hee) that will I neuer doe, but I shall shew you that I haue promised, seeing you are so desirous to know it. Sir, knowe for troth, that Iulius Caesar Father to the good and noble King Oberon, caused this Castle to be made by craft of the Fayrie, the which Castle cannot bee gréeued nor taken perforce: so it fortuned vppon a day that Iulius Caesar, after hee had vanquished the great Pompey, he came into Alexandria to olomeus King of Egipt, and discomfited him and tooke from him all his Landes, to giue it vnto his Sister the faire Cle∣tra, who was Quéene of that Land, and after shee maried Marcus Antonius, and after that Iulius Caesar had this done, to refresh him, he came hether with the Queene of the priuie Isle, and brought her the same night into this Castle, and there were thrée Kinges of the lineage of Tholomeus, who when they knewe that Caesar was in this Castle, they made an armie,
and with many Shippes and Galleys, they came and layde seege before this Castle, and lay at the seege a long space, and could not hurt it the value of one pennie, so long they lay héere, that they were sore displeased therewith, and so they thought to depart home into their owne countreys, but by reason that their shippes were nayled with yron nayles, they could not de∣part from hence, for the Adamant stone that by nature draw∣eth the yron vnto him, and so they lay heere so longe, that they al died miserably for famine and rage, for no shippe can depart from hence without it be pinned with nayles of wood, and not of yron. And whereas you demaund, from whence commeth the Treasure that is heere within this Castle? Knowe for a troth, that it was the riches that these thrée Kinges lefte in their shippes when they dyed, the which Treasure after that they were dead, Caesar caused it to be brought into this Castle, and before hée dyed, hee deliuered vnto mee the kéeping of this Castle and Treasure. And I and Fortie other of my fel∣lowes, are heere condemned by the Fayrie to abide heere vnto the end of the world. Nowe when that tidinges came to the knowledge of the noble Kinge Oberon, that his Father Iulius Caesar was slaine, and murdered within the Senate of Rome by them whome hee trusted well, King Oberon tooke such displea∣sure, that he made promise and assurement, that hée would ne∣uer come heere more, and no more he hath done: for he thought if he should haue come hether againe, that hee should haue dyed for sorrow, for the great loue that he had vnto his Father Iulius Caesar. And since you will knowe my name, I am called Glo∣riadas, and this Castle is called the Adamant. Nowe I haue shewed you the troth of your demaund, and one thing I say vn∣to you, you shall neuer depart from hence as long as you liue, without you flye in the ayre as a bird doth flye: nowe I haue shewed you your desire. When Huon vnderstood him, he was right sorrowfull: and so after hee had well eaten and drunken at his owne pleasure, hee tooke his leaue and departed, and came vnto a dore of a chamber, and sawe Letters of goulde written ouer the dore, whereby hee had knowledge where the key was, hee tooked it
and opened the dore and entred into the Chamber, and sawe how that all the Chamber was made of Christall, and painted richly with gould and Asure, and there was the protraiture of all the Battailes of Troy, and all the déedes of Alexander: and vppon the pauement was spread abroad, Roses, flowers, and hearbes swéete smelling aboue all other sauours in the worlde, and in the Chamber there were diuers birdes flyinge about, singing so maruailous sweetly, that great ioye and melodie it was to heare them: the riches and great beauty of that cham∣ber could not bee described. Huon had maruailous great plea∣sure to behould it, and there hee sawe a Table set full of meate, and there by stood great pots of gould garnished with precious stones full of wine, there was no meat in the world but that there it was readie: Huon had good appetite to eate, for he had eaten but little before, by reason of the talking that he had with Gloriadas: and then two young men brought him a Bason of gould broadered with pearles to wash his hands, and another brought him a Towell to wipe his handes. Then Huon sat downe at a rich Table, the which was bordered with precious stones, the cloath that lay vpon the Table was of silke richly wrought, Huon did eate his meate, for hee hadde good appetite thereto, a goodly young man carued for him, and another bare his Cuppe, many folkes there was, to haue done seruice vnto any creature liuing in the world, and hée spake vnto them, but none would answeare him one word, wherewith hee was an∣grie and sore displeased: but when he saw that there was none other reamedie, hee did let it passe and forgat it, because of the swéete melodie that the birds made: often times he wished for his Wife the faire Escleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and for Gerames, Barnard, and Richard, and his other company that hee left at Bourdeaux. Thus Huon was serued in the Castle of the Adamant, and when hee hadde dined, the Seruants tooke vp the Table, and brought him water and a Towell for to wash his handes, and en he rose vp from the Table, and went downe into the Sel∣ler, whereas he sawe euerie thing as he had seene before, he sa∣ them in passing by, but they made none answeare, so hee
came vnto greeces and mounted vp, and then went and spor∣ted him from chamber to chamber, and then into the Garden, wherein hée tooke great pleasure: and when the time came for to eate, hee returned into the Seller, and so into the Chamber, whereas hee found euerie thing readie as hee had done before: but hee was sore and greatly displeased, that they that serued him would not speake no word. Thus Huon was there a whole Moneth, and tooke such pleasure there, that hee recouered his heath, and strength, and beautie, greatly hée was annoyed that there was no man there that would speake one word vnto him: oftentimes hee wished himselfe at Bourdeaux with a hundred Thousand men at armes to giue battaile vnto the Emperour who had done him so much dammage. And vppon a day as Huon walked in the Hall saying of his prayers, he looked out at a window into the Sea, and hee sawe a farre off a Shippe comming with full sayle to arriue at the Port, and they were about Foure-score Mar∣chants all of Spaine, and they knew not what Port they did ar∣riue at. Chap. CVIII. ¶ Howe Huon sawe a Shippe arriue at the Port of the Castle of the Adamant. WHen Huon saw this Shippe arriue at the Port, hee greatly complayned for them, and sayd: Ah good Lord, what a sorte of good Marchants haue heere beene lost, if they of yonder Shippe knewe there∣of, they would not ariue here by their wils, and so then hée sawe the Shippe come in with such a force, and it dashed in so sore amongest the other olde Shippes, that the Shippe was neere hande perished. But the other Shippes were so old that they were rotten, so that thereby the new Ship
was saued, who hadde beene twentie dayes in torment on the the Sea, so that the men that were within it were sore trauay∣led and faint for famine, that they were scarce able to sustaine themselues vppon their féete. When Huon saw them arriue, all wéeping hee complayned for them, for he saw well that they were all lost, and that they shoulde neuer depart from thence, when the Shippe was arri∣ued, the Marchants within it called vppon Mahound to ayde and to succour them, and the Maister of the Ship stood vp and went a shoare, and looked towards the Castle, and sawe Huon where hee stood leaning in a window: whereof they had great ioy, thinking that they were arriued at a good Port, supposing that he that they sawe there before them, had beene the Lord of the Castle, because he was so maruailous richly aparelled, and then they saluted Huon in the name of Mahounde their God. When Huon heard that, hee knew surely that they were Sara∣zins, and he that could very wel speake the Spanish language, answeared to the Maister and sayd. Freends, you that be here arriued, shew mée (I pray you) the troth from whence you are come? and what you be? for be you sure that as longe as you liue you shall neuer depart from hence, and without you haue victuals brought with you, you are all arriued at an vnfortu∣nate place. Then the Maister trembling said, Sir know for troth, that I am of the countrey of Spaine, and dwelling in the Citie of Luysarne, and they that are come hether with me, are all Mar∣chants of Portugall, and are come from the citie of Acre, and there wée charged our shippe with Marchandize, and we had a maruaylous good wind vntill wée were passed the straites of Morrocco, and that wée were néere to our owne countrey, and then suddenly a great tempest arose and tooke vs, and draue vs off from the coast of our owne Countrey a great distance, and this tempest hath continewed these twentie daies past so ex∣treamely, that wée were faine perforce to abandon our shippe to the raging of the Sea and winde, euen as the shippe would goe at aduenture, but at the last by good fortune wée chaunced to arriue by a great rocke and there wee cast anchor: and pre∣sently
after that we were arriued there, we went vp into the Rocke, and there we found the Bishop of Lishborne and one of his Chaplaines with him, who came thether driuing vpon a mast of a shippe that had béene perished, but all the rest of his company were drowned by misfortune at sea. Then the Bi∣shop and his Chaplaine humbly prayed me to haue pitie vpon them and to saue their liues, and to take them into my shippe: whereuppon I had compassion on thē, and (as one verie glad and willing to deliuer them from that danger) I tooke them in∣to my shippe, and gaue them meate and drinke & other thinges such as I had, for they had béen almost dead by famine if I had not succoured them, and yet I thinke that they will not liue vntill to morrow at night, for truly I haue no more victualles, neyther for my selfe nor for such as be within my shippe: thus Sir I haue answered to your demaund, and therefore I desire you in the honoure of God and of Mahound, to shew me to whome this Castle doth appertaine, and who is Lord thereof? and what is the name thereof, and of this Port whereas wée be arriued? Friend quoth Huon, know for troth that this Ca∣stle and Port is the place in the world most hated and doubted of Paynims and Sarazins, and I shall shewe you the cause why this Castle is set on a Rocke of Adamant stones, so that if any shippe chaunce to come hether by aduenture, it can ne∣uer depart from hence againe. For the Adamant is of that nature, that it draweth alwaies vnto him the yron: and there∣fore any shippe that is nayled or haue in it any yron, and by chaunce come neere this Port, by force it shal be constrained héere to arriue. When the Marchant heard Huon, hee beganne sore to wéepe and lament, and so did all the other and sayd. Sir, wee are sore dismayed and abashed, of these words that you haue said. Freend, (quoth Huon) all that I haue sayd is of troth: but sirs, if you will beleeue mée, and take vppon you christendome, and beléeue vppon the faith of Iesus Christ, and beléeue firme∣ly in him: you and all such as be in your shippe, I shall bringe you into such a place whereas you shall haue meat and drinke at your pleasure, and apparell as rich as you shall demaund,
and then I shall shewe you so much gould and riches, that you shalbee satisfied with the beholding thereof. Therefore if you will beleeue vppon God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ, you shall haue all this that I haue said before, or else you shall al die of rage and of famine miserably. When the Patrone had well heard Huon, hee sayde: Sir, knowe for troth, it is about Seauen yeares past since I belée∣ued vpon the faith of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and Sir, I thanke you of the courtesie that you haue shewed vnto mee, and from hencefoorth I submit my selfe to the sauegard of almightie God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ. When Hu∣on heard that, he was right ioyfull, and sayd. Fréend, goe to thy Shippe, and remooue all thy companie to beleeue vppon Iesus Christ, and shewe them what perll and daunger they be in now, and what wealth they shall haue if they beleeue vppon almightie God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and also shew them what pleasure they shall finde in this place, and if they will not, thou mayest well say that they are come to their laste and shortly, and the twoo men that thou hast saued, cause them to come hether vnto mée. Sir, (quoth the Patron) I shall send them vnto you, and then he departed and entred into his Ship, and there he shewed his companie all that he had heard of Hu∣on, and what he was commaunded to say vnto them. When the Marchaunts who were all Paynims had heard their Pa∣tron declare in what case and perrill they were in, they all an∣swered, how that they were all readie to doe his pleasure and to receiue christendome, whereof the Patron was right ioyfull to heare them say so. Then the Patron sent for the Bishop and his Nephew who was his Chaplaine, and saide, Sirs, in the Castle there is a Lord, who prayeth you that incontinent yée will come a land and goe to speake with him. When the Bishoppe heard the Patrone, he arose vp with much paine for faintnesse by reason of famine, and said, how that hee would gladly fulfill his com∣maundement. Then he and his Chaplaine departed out of the Shippe, and came to the staires and mounted vp to the Castle, but they were faine to rest them by the way diuers times, and
when they came vnto the gate, they maruailed greatly of the great beautie and rich worke that they sawe there, and so they came vnto Huon, who taried for them at the Hall dore. When they came neere vnto him, they humbly saluted him. Sirs, (quoth Huon) God saue you, and I pray you shewe mee the troth what Countrey you be of? Sir, (quoth the Bishop) see∣ing it is your pleasure to knowe, I shall shewe you the troth. Sir, I was borne in the Cite of Bourdeaux, and am Bishoppe thereof, and haue beene this Twentie yeares, and a deuoion tooke me to goe a Pilgrimage to the holy Sepulchre, but God would not suffer vs so to doe: for when we were departed from Lishborne, a great wind and torment arose vppon our Ship, the which was faire and rich and wel furnished with Marchants, and so by fortune our Shippe ranne against a Rocke, so that our Shippe burst all to péeces, and there all our company were drowned, except my selfe and my Chaplaine, who is my Ne∣phew, and wee twoo saued our selues vppon the Maste of our Shippe floating vppon the Sea, so that by the grace of God, the Ship that is heere beneath arriued by fortune at the Port neere vnto the Rocke, and I prayed him in the honour of God and of his Sonne Iesus Christe to saue our liues, and the Pa∣trone had pitie & compassion of vs, and tooke vs into his Ship, and did so much for vs as though we had beene his Brethren. Sir, thus I haue shewed you our aduenture: and Sir, I re∣quire you to pardon mée in that I so stearnly behold you, but I shall shew you (quoth he) the cause why I doe it, mée thinks I see before me the good Duke Seuin of Bourdeaux, who swéet∣ly nourished mee in my youth, you greatly resemble vnto him, and hee set me to schoole at Paris, and then hee sent mee to Rome vnto our holy Father the Pope of Rome, to whom I was a ki, and hee did mée much good, and hee gaue mee the Bishoprice of Millaine: Duke Seuin is dead, God bee with him, and hee had twoo Sonnes the eldest called Huon and the other Gerard, Huon was sent for to Paris by Kinge Charlemaine, and by the way there fell vnto him a maruailous aduenture, for hee shewe the Kinges Sonne Charlot in his owne defence, not knowing that it was the Kinges Sonne: wherefore the King banished
him out of the Realme of Fraunce, and sent him to the Admi∣rall Gaudise in Babilon to doe his Messuage, and afterward hee returned into Fraunce: and since hee hath hadde great warre with the Emperour of Almaine, more I cannot say, and I am right sorrie that I knowe not where he is become, for my Fa∣ther who was Brother to the good Abbot of Cluny, longe agoe nourished Huon vp in his youth, before his Father Duke Seuin died, my Father did teach him: wherefore I haue great sor∣row and gréefe at my heart that I knowe not where hee is be∣come, since the peace was made and concluded betweene him and the King of Fraunce. When Huon hadde well heard the Bishoppe and vnderstood him, his bloud changed, and embracing him sweetely, he said: Sir, you are my Coozen, & I am Huon, who passed the sea and went to the Admirall Gaudise, and slewe him, and ledde away with me his Daughter the faire Escleremond, who was marri∣ed vnto me by our holy Father the Pope, and I haue left her in the Citie of Bourdeaux in great pouertie and miserie, besieged by the Emperour of Almaine, I beleeue surely that she is taken by this time. When the Bishop heard Huon, hee began sore to weepe, and Huon embraced and kissed him, and sayd. Coo∣zen you are happie to find me heere, or else shortly you had béen dead. Sir, (quoth he) I ought greatly to thanke God there∣of. But Sir, I require you to giue mée some meat, for I am so sore punished with hunger and thirst, that I am néere hande famished, and can scarce sustaine my selfe vppon my féete. Coo∣zen, (quoth Huon) by the grace of God I shall bring you to such a place, whereas you shall haue meat and drinke at your plea∣sure, and such as you will with for. Then Huon tooke him by the hand, and brought him into the Pallaice and through the Chambers, the Bishoppe was great∣ly abashed to sée the riches that he saw there. Then they went downe into the Seller, the Bishop beheld the manner of euerie thing, and had great maruaile that none of them that hee sawe there would not speake any word, hee passed by them with Hu∣on and saluted them, and then he entred into the rich Chamber, whereas the Table was readie and Seruants to giue them
water, and they all thrée sat downe: and then Huon sayd vnto the Bishoppe. Coozen, I coniure you by the Sacrament that you haue receiued, that you nor your Chaplaine be so hardy as to eat one morsell of meat, if any of you bee in any deadly sin, if you be, incontinent confesse you to your Chaplain, and hee vnto you: for if you doe otherwise, you shall no sooner eate one morsell, but incontinent you shall die. When the Bishop had well heard and vnderstood Huon, hée hadde great maruaile and said: Coozen, by the grace of God I féele my selfe in good estate not to abide death, for when I de∣parted from Rome, both I and my Nephewe were confessed of the Pope, and assoyled of all our sinnes, and since wée entred into the Sea wee haue committed no sinne. Then Huon sayd: Cozen, seeing that you be both in this case, you may eate and drinke at your pleasure, and so they did, for they had great néed thereof, they all thrée were richly serued, they had euerie thing as they wished for, the Bishoppe and his Nephew did eat and drinke, and they were greatly abashed of the great riches that they saw there, and they were rauished at the swéet singing of the birds, and the hearbes and flowers that were there spreade abroade smellinge so swéetely, that they thought themselues in Paradice, and they had great maruaile to see the Seruants to serue them so peaceable, but they would neuer speak one word, they woulde gladly haue demaunded the cause why, but Huon hadde expresly charged them that they shoulde make none in∣quirie. Thus they passed their dinner in great ioy, and thē washed theyr hands & arose vp from the Table, and the Bishop and his Chaplaine sayde grace deuously. Then Huon tooke the Bi∣shoppe by the hand, and sayde: Cozen, wee will goe vp into the Pallaice, and then you shall goe downe into your Shippe, and shew them without they will die incontinent, let them be chri∣stened, and dresse vp Tubbes with water of the Sea, and hal∣lowe you it and christen them therein, and I shall come after you with my sword and cleane armed, to the entent that if they refuse thus to doe, I shall strike oft their heades. Sir, (quoth the Bishop) I shall doe your pleasure.
Then Huon armed himselfe, and went after the Bishoppe and his Nephewe downe to the shippe, and when they came there, they found Elinas the Maister of them, who had preached so much vnto the Sarazins, that hée had conuerted them all ex∣cept Tenne, they bare him in hand that they were glad to bee christened, but theyr thoughtes were otherwise, for they Ten had concluded in their courages, not to renounce the Lawe of Mahomet, for to beleeue vppon Iesus Christ, but they were content to be christened, to the entent that they would not die there for famine. When Huon and the Bishop was come vnto them, the Bi∣shop sayd: Sirs, I require you all to shew me your intention, that if with a good heart not coloured, you will become christe∣ned and beléeue on the Law of God the Father, and of his Son our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and leaue the false and detestable Lawe of Mahound, the which is nothing woorth. Sir, (quoth they all) shortly deliuer vs, for wee bee so hungrie and thirstie, that we are almost famished, the which ouer-pres∣seth vs so much, that we can no longer endure nor suffer it: and when Huon had well heard them, he humbly thanked our Lord God, and had great ioy thereof, and the Bishop and his Chap∣laine confessed them all, and assoyled them of all their sinnes, and in twoo great vessels christened them all. Then they all cryed vppon Huon, and sayd: Sir, for the loue of our Lord God giue vs some meate. Sirs, (quoth Huon) you shall haue in∣continent ynough, so that you shall bee satisfied. Then Huon and the Bishop and his Chaplaine all thrée went into the Ca∣stle, and charged vpon their neckes meat ynough, and brought it into the Shippe, and caused all the Marchants to sit downe, and the meat was set before them, and the wine powred out in∣to Cuppes, among other sat the tenne Sarazins, who had re∣ceiued the christendome faintly and falsely, and at the first mor∣sell that they did put into their mouthes, suddainly they died: the other Marchants when they sawe that, they were greatly abashed, and regarded each other, and durst not approach to touch the meat, for they had thought that they should haue all died. Sirs, (quoth Huon) be not dismayed nor abashed at this,
for these tenne men that are dead, did baptize themselues but all onely to saue their liues and to haue meate, and not with a good conscience, nor for ye loue of almightie God, who hath all mens heartes at his pleasure: therefore be not afraid, eate and drinke at your ease, for yee shall want nothing, but haue all thinges at your wish. When the other Marchants vnderstood by Huon, how that they that died were no true Christian men, they were greatly abashed, and so fell to theyr meate and drinke: and when they had eaten and drunken at their pleasures, they arose and tooke all the riches that were in the Shippe and carried it vp into the Castle, and when they came there, they had great ioy and plea∣sure, to beholde the Hals and rich Chambers that were there: so much gould and siluer and other riches they sawe there, that they hadde thereof great maruaile. Then they beheld the rich beddes, and Chambers apparelled whereas they might rest them: and then they sawe the faire Garden so pleasant and de∣lightfull to behold, that the more they regarded it, the fairer it seemed vnto them, the place was of length and breadth a bowe shoote and more. And when the houre came for supper, then Huon ledde them downe into the Seller, and after into the rich Chamber, whereas there was meat and drinke plentie, and af∣ter Supper they went againe into the Pallaice, and lay in the rich beds that they found there readie, and in the morning the Bishop and his Chaplaine did sing Masse before Huon, and all the other that were there present, and when they woulde eate, they went to the place accustomed, and there they founde al∣wayes readie euerie thing that they desired or wisht for, in the day time they would bee in the Garden to sport them, often∣times the Bishop preached vnto them, and confessed them of all their sinnes. Thus they were there all together the space of one Moneth in great pleasure and solace, but whosoeuer had ioy, Huon had none, for his abiding there greatly greeued him, for oftentimes hee would complaine for his Wife the faire Ladie Escleremond, and for his Daughter Clariet, and sayde. Madame, as often as I remember what danger I haue left you in, my heart néere
departeth out of my bodie: Ah cursed Emperour, thou causest me to suffer much ill, when I thinke that by this time thou hast taken my Citie, my Wife, and my Child, and set them in thy Prison, I would if it were the pleasure of our Lord God, that they were heere with mee: then I would neuer depart from hence, and no more I shall doe, without it be by the grace of God. Ah noble King Oberon, you haue giuen me the realme of the Fayrie, if it might bée your pleasure now so much to suc∣cour mée, as to deliuer me from hence, and to ayd me to destroy this Emperour who hath done me so much ill: for euer were I bound to your Mightinesse. Chap. CIX. ¶ How Huon was borne by a Griffen out of the Castle of the Ada∣mant, and how he slewe the Griffen, and fiue other young Grif∣fens: And of the Fountaine of the fayre Garden, and of the fruit of the Tree neere to the Fountaine. THus as yee haue heard Huon passed away the time in the Castle of the Ada∣mant, and vppon a day hee leaned and looked out at a windowe into the Sea-ward, and hee sawe a farre off a great birde come flyinge the∣ther-ward, this bird or foule was bigger then any horse in the world, whereof he had great maruaile. Then he sawe where it came to the same Port, and lighted vpon the Maste of a great Shippe, and saw how with the weight of the Foule, the Mast had neere hand broken asunder. Then after he sawe the Foule alight downe into the Ship, and tooke with his tallants one of the Ten men that died because they would not beleeue firmely vpon God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ, they could not putrefie, but lay still in the Shippe al whole and found: then the Foule lifted him vp into the ayre, and carried him away as lightly as a Hauke would carie a Pigeon. Hu∣on
who sawe this had great maruaile, and beheld the Griffen which way she did fly, and as farre off as he might sée, he sawe to his similitude a great Rocke, as white to the sight as Chri∣stall, and then he said to himselfe, I would to God that I were there, I think it be some place inhabitable, and then he thought within himselfe to come thether againe the dext day, to sée if the Griffen would come againe to fetch his pray, if hee did, he thought if he would be out of the Castle, the Griffen might bear him armed as surely, that hee should doe him no hurt with his tallants, thinking to lye downe armed with his Sword in his hand among the dead men, and when the Griffen had brought him where his young birdes were, then to fight with the Grif∣fen, yet he thought before he would thus doe, he would againe sée if the Griffen came, and held the same way that she did be∣fore, for he thought surely that if she returned to the same place, it must needes bee some Land, and hee thought that it were a thing impossible to get out of that Castle by any other manner of wayes. Then Huon returned againe to the Garden to the Bishoppe and vnto the other companie, and made no semblance of that he hadde thought to doe, and then hee talked with them of diuers matters. And when the time came, they went to eat and drink as they had been accustomed to do before. When night came, and that Huon was in his bedde, he lay and studied of the con∣uayance of the Griffen, desiring greatly for the day light, to goe and see if the Griffen returned to fetch her pray. When day came, Huon aroase and heard seruice, and then hee went to the window, and looked there so longe, that at the laste hee sawe a far off where the Griffen came flying from the place as shee had doone the day before, and came and sat downe vppon the same Maste, beholdinge the dead men that lay vnder her, which of them she might take to her pray: Huon beheld her, and sawe howe that she was a cruell Foule. Her necke was maruai∣lous great, her eies as great as a Bason, and more redder then the mouth of a fournace, and her tallants so great and so long, that fearefull it was to behold her, and then at last she lighted downe into the Shippe, and tooke one of the dead bodies in her
tallants, and so mounted into the ayre, and flew the same way as she did the day before. Huon beheld the Griffen well, and saw how that she flew to the white Rocke. This Rocke was called the Rocke of Alex∣ander, for when Alexander passed the deserts of India, and went to speake with the Trées of the Sunne and of the Moone, hee came vnto the same Rocke, and at his returne, he bathed him in a Fountaine neere to the Rocke, and there hee taried a cer∣taine space, and sawe there many thinges. Now let vs leaue speaking of this Rocke, and returne vnto Huon, who fixed his courage, that hee determined to bee borne from thence by the Griffen, and sayd within himselfe, that he hadde rather aduen∣ture death, then to abide any longer there: for hee had so great a desire to see his Wife and his Child, that he put from him all feare of death. When Huon sawe that the Griffen was gone with her pray, he went to the Bishoppe and vnto his companie, and shewed vnto them all that hee had seene and thought to doe: and when they all had heard Huon, they beganne pitifully to weepe, and wrang their handes, and did tare their haire, making the grea∣test sorrow and greefe in the world, and cryed out and said: Ah Coozen, (quoth the Bishop) by the grace of God you shall neuer take vppon you such a follie, you ought not io seeke your owne death, sooner then it is the pleasure of God that your houre bée come: Sir, for Gods sake forsake vs not, but tarrie heere with vs. Freendes, (quoth Huon) when I remember the danger that I left my wife and my child, and my Citie and Lords, and Burgesses and Communaltie in, my heart is so sorowfull and so agreeued there at, that it neere hande slayeth mee, you shall abide heere in the sauegard of our Lord God, and I will take the aduenture that God will send me, and I pray you to speake no more vnto me in this matter, for by the grace of God I will venture it. When they sawe that they could not turne Huon from his Enterprize, the sorrowe that they made no man can declare, that night they passed in great sorrowe and dolour, vntill the next morning that Huon arose. Then hee came to the Bishop,
and was confessed and receiued at his hand, then he dined wel with his companie, and then after dinner hée went and armed himselfe in double armour, and with maile vppon his Legges and helmet vpon his head, and guirded his Sword about him, and when hee was readie and that it was time to depart, hee tooke his leaue of the Bishop and of all the other, and commen∣ded them all into the sauegard of almightie God. When the good Bishop sawe his departure, hee made great sorrow and so did all the other, but none of them durst speake any more vn∣to him: the Bishop embraced him at his departing, and sayde. Coozen, into the sauegard of almightie God and of his Sonne our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ I commend you, and that he may of his grace preserue you from all your enemies. Sir, (quoth Huon) the great desire that I haue to ayd and succor her, whome I left in great pouertie and doubt of her life, constray∣neth me thus to depart, for if I goe not by this meanes, I must euer abide heere, and then I shall breake my promise vnto her, but by the grace of God I will keepe my faithfull promise. Thus I recommend you vnto God, and then he departed from them, and passed out of the gate, and went downe the staires, and so came into the shippe, and then hee looked into the Sea, and sawe where the Griffen was comming, and when hee per∣ceiued that, he lay downe among the dead men with his sword naked in his hand, and held it vpon his thigh▪ because it should not fall into the Sea, and assoone as hee was layd crewling a∣monge the dead men, the Griffen came, and alighted vppon the shippe Mast as she was accustomed to doe, and she was so hea∣uie and so great (as is aforesaid) that the Mast was neere hand broken asunder. When Huon saw that, he was in great feare, and called vp∣pon our Lord Iesus Christ for aid and succour, and to saue him from the cruel Griffen, and the Grffen looking for her pray, saw where Huon lay armed, whereby hée seemed more greater then any of the other dead men, the Griffen desired to haue him vnto her nest, to giue him vnto her young birds: and then she came downe into the shippe and tooke Huon in her clawes, and strai∣ned him so faste by both sides, that her clawes entred into the
flesh for all his armour, so that the bloud yssued out, and Huon was in that distresse, that all his bodie trembled, and pitiously he called vppon our Lord God for ayd and succour, but he durst not stirre for any paine that he felt, the Griffen did beare him so hie and so farre, that in lesse then thrée houres she did beare him vnto the white Rocke, and there layde him downe, and for tra∣uaile that the Griffen had, she flew down the Rocke to a Foun∣taine to drink, the which Fountaine was of such great vertue, that the bountie thereof could not bée described, and Huon who lay vppon the Rocke, was sore wearie and faint, for the bloud that hee had lost, hee thought within himselfe, that if euer hee woulde escape from that daunger, it was time for him then to shewe his Prowesse: then he arose vp and looked round about him, and sawe how that there was neere him a faire Forrest, and then hee prayed vnto our Lord God to ayd and succour him to depart from thence in sauegard, and that hee might once a∣gaine returne into his owne Countrey, to see his Wife and Child whome hee so well loued: then anone he saw the Griffen, who had seene Huon rise vp, then she came with her mouth o∣pen to haue deuoured Huon: but hee was replenished with his Prowesse, and came against the Griffen, who had her pawes readie open to haue griped Huon, but hee who was light and quicke, gaue the Griffen such a stroake with his Swoord, that he strake off one of her feete by the ioynt, and so the Griffen fell to the earth, and gaue such a crie, that the young Griffens being in their nest in the Forrest heard the crie, and knewe well that it was the voyce of their Mother, Father they had none, for he was slaine but a little before by a Kinge of Persia with his Ar∣chers, because the Griffen had slaine the Kings Horse for meat for his young ones. Thus when they heard the crie of theyr Mother, they arose vp into the ayre, they were fiue in number, they came all at once with open winges vppon Huon, and when he saw all fiue comming vppon him, he had great feare, he strake the first vpon the necke, in such sort, that hee strake off the head cleane from the bodie: then the second seazed Huon by the maile, that if hée had not striken off her Legge, hee hadde borne him vp into the
ayre, but Huon gaue him such a stroake, that the Legge hanged still at the lappe of the maile, and hee tooke it off with his hand and cast it to the earth, and with another stroake hee slew that Griffen,: and then came the third and gaue Huon such a buffet with his winges, that it made Huon to kneele downe vpon one of his knées. Then Huon strake that Griffen such a stroake on the wing, that it fell cleane from the bodie. And the fourth hée strake off his Legges, and with another stroake strake off his head, and then also he slew the other with the one winge. Then came the fifth Griffen, who was bigger then any of the other Griffens, and then Huon strake at him, and the Griffen reared vp his féete and spreade abroade his winges, and gaue Huon such a recounter, that the noble Knight was striken to the earth. When Huon felt himselfe hurt and lay vppon the earth, hee called vppon God for ayd and succour, for hee thought that he should neuer haue risen more, and wished himselfe at that time that hee had taried still in the Castle of the Adamant with his companie, who for sorrowe that they had when Huon went in∣to the shippe, they durst not abide the comming of the Griffen, but went and did hide themselues in the Castle, and Huon who was sore wounded with this fifth Griffen, rose vp as well as he might, and came to the Griffen, who was ready to destroy him with his beake and nailes. Thus Huon like a vertuous and a hardy Knight tooke courage, and lifted vp his Swoord with both his handes, and strake the Griffen such a stroake vpon the heade, that hee claue it to the braynes, so that the Griffen fell downe dead to the earth. Chap. CX. ¶ How Huon fought with the great Griffen, and slew her.
WHen Huon sawe that hee had slaine the fiue young Griffens, hee thanked our Lord God for the grace that hee had sent him, as to ouercome such fiue terrible Foules: then he sat downe to rest him, and layd his Sword by him, thinking that they had beene all slaine, but it was not long, but that the great Griffen who had brought him from the Castle of the Adamant, came vppon him with thrée feete, and beating with his winges, and when shee sawe her young ones slaine, she cast out a great crie, so that all the Valley rang there∣of. When Huon sawe her comming, he was in great feare, for hee was sore wearie with trauaile and losse of bloud, that it was paine to sustaine himselfe: howbeit, hee sawe well that it was great neede to defend himselfe, and then hee came to the Griffen to haue striken her, but hee could not, the Griffen was so neere him beating with her winges so fiercely, that Huon fell to the earth, and his Sword fell out of his handes, whereof he had great feare, for he thought himselfe neuer so neere death in all his life as hee was then, he called then right pitiously for ayd and succour of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Griffen did eat him maruailously with her beake, winges, and tallants, but the noble coats of maile that he had on were so strong, that the Griffen could not breake them, but if the Griffen hadde not lost before one of her Legges; and lost so much bloud as she had done, Huon could neuer haue escaped without death, the Grif∣fen so sore defoyled and beat him, that hee could not in no wise arise vp againe. Then Huon remembred himselfe, howe that hee had by his side a rich knife, the which he brought with him from ye Castle of the Adamant, he drew it out, and therewith strake the Grif∣fen vppon the breast sixe great stroakes, euerie stroake as déepe as the knife would goe, and as his fortune was, this knife was of length two foote, and therewith the Griffen fell downe dead. Then Huon arose and put off his helmet, & lifted vp his hands vnto Heauen, and thanked our Lord God of his victorie, and
he was so sore trauailed, and charged with bloud and sweat, that hee put off his helmet and beheld round about him, and could see nothing to trouble him. When hee had taried there a certaine time, hee arose vp and looked downe the Rocke, and hee saw a Fountaine in a faire meadowe: then he went down and came thether, and he sawe the Fountaine so faire & cleare, that he had great maruaile thereof, he sawe the workemanship thereof rich, all of white Iasper wrought richly with flowers of fine gould and Azure, and when hee sawe the water so faire, he had great desire to drinke thereof, then hee did off one of his double armours to be the more lighter, and so approached vnto the Fountaine, and sawe the grauell in the bottome all of pre∣cious stones, and then hee put off his helmet, and dranke of the water his fill, and he had no sooner droonke thereof, but incon∣tinent hee was hole of all his wounds, and as fresh and lustie as hee was when hee came from the Castle of the Adamant, whereof hee most humbly thanked our Lord and Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ. This Fountaine was called the Fountaine of youth, the which was of such vertue, that whatsoeuer sicknesse a man or woman had, if they bathed them in the streame of that Foun∣taine, they should be hole of all infirmities. Then Huon vnar∣med himselfe, and put off all his cloathes and bathed himselfe in the streame, to wash away the bloud and sweat that his bo∣die was coloured withall, and when hee was cleane washed, he armed himselfe againe with one of his armours, and left off the other. By this Fountaine there grew an Apple Trée char∣ged with leaues and fruite, the fairest that might bee founde. When Huon saw the Trée charged with so faire fruit, he arose vppon his feete and approached vnto the Trée, and tooke there∣of a faire Apple and a great, and did eat thereof his fill, for the Apple was great, & he thought that hee did neuer eate before of such a fruit. Ah good Lord, (quoth he) I ought greatly to laud and praise thée, séeing thou hast thus replenished mee this day with such a Fountaine and such fruit. Then hée looked vppon his right hande, and sawe a great Orchard full of Trées, bea∣ring good fruit of diuers sorts, that great beautie it was to be∣hold
them. This Garden was so faire, that it seemed rather a Paradice then a thing terrestriall. For out of this Garden there yssued such a smell and odour, that Huon thought that all the balme and spicerie in the world could not cast out so swéet a smell. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) what place is this that I am in? for if the Griffen had not béen here, I would haue thought that I had béen in Paradice: good Lord God I pray thee to aid and succor mee in all mine affaires and enterprizes, and at this time that I be not lost nor dead. Chap. CXI. ¶ Howe an Angell appeared vnto Huon, and commaunded him to gather three Apples of the Tree by the Fountaine, and no more: and how the Angell shewed him tidings of his wife the faire Escleremond, and of his Daughter Clariet, and shewed him the way that hee should goe from thence. THus as yee haue heard Huon deuised by himselfe at the Fountaine, then hée went againe to the Trée, and saide that hee would eat of that fruit, and gather thereof as much as should suffice him for sixe dayes, and in that space he trusted to come to some place, whereas hee should haue meat sufficient. Thus as hee was going towards the Trée, suddainly there appeared vnto him a light shining, that hee thought hee was rauished in Heauen a∣mong the Angels, therewith hee heard a voice Angelicall that said: Huon, know for troth, that our Lord God commandeth thée, not to bee so hardy as to gather any more fruite of that Tree, except thrée Apples, the which God is well content that thou shalt gather, and no more, heereafter they shall serue thée well, so that thou doest kéepe them cleane and worthily as they ought to be kept, it shall not bee long ere thou shalt haue great neede of them, the fruit of this Trée is called the fruit of youth,
it hath such vertue, that if a man of Four-score, or of a Hun∣dred yeares of age doe eate thereof, hee shall become againe as young as he was at the age of Thirtie yeares, in yonder Gar∣den thou maist goe and gather there of the fruit at thy pleasure, and eate what thou list: but eate no more of this that thou hast eaten of, and therefore beware I charge thée, gather no more thereof, except the said thrée Apples. Knowe for troth that if thou breakest my commaundement, the fruit shall bee dearely sold vnto thee. Sir, (quoth Huon) laud and praise be giuen to our Lord God my Creatour, when hee sheweth his grace vnto mée that am so poore a sinner, and that hee will thus visit mée, I shall neuer consent to breake his commaundement, I had rather die then so to doe: my bodie and my Soule I recommend vnto his good grace. But thou the Messenger of God, I require thee to shew me how doth my wife Escleremond and Clariet my Daugh∣ter, whome I haue left in my Citie of Bourdeaux, besieged by the Emperour Tirrey of Almaine, I haue great feare that they be famished within the Citie, and my Lords and company that I left there with her slaine and dead. Fréend, (quoth the voice) know for certaine, that the Citie of Bourdeaux is taken, and all thy men dead or taken, and thy wife in prison in the great To∣wer of Mayence, whereas the Emperour Tirrey keepeth her straightly, and thy Daughter Clariet is at Cluny in the Abbey, whereas shee is well serued, and the Abbot who hath alwaies loued thée, he hath her in his keeping, and shée is as well cheri∣shed there, euen as she were his owne Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) and why was shee brought thether? Huon, (quoth the Voice) knowe well that Barnard thy coozen Germaine brought her thether. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray you to shew me if Gerames, Richard, and Othon be aliue or not? Freend, (quoth the Voice) at the taking of the Citie they were slaine by the Emperour. When Huon had well heard those pitifull tidings, he began tenderly to weepe, complayning for the faire Escleremond his wife, and for the death of the old Gerames, and said: Fréend, I require you to shew mee if euer I shall escape, considering that
I am heere closed in with the Sea, the which goeth round a∣bout this Rocke, I sée no way to goe out thereof, gladly I would knowe if euer I shall returne into my Countrey, to sée my Wife and Daughter who are in great feare and daunger. Huon, (quoth the Voice) comfort thy selfe, thou shalt sée them againe, thy Wife Escleremond and thy Daughter Clariet, and thy good Citie of Bourdeaux, but ere thou shalt come there, thou shalt suffer much paine, and bee in great feare and danger, the Emperour Tirrey hath conquered all thy Countrey, and Geron∣nell is vnder his obeysance with the Citie of Bourdeaux. Then Huon sware and made promise, that if our Lord Iesus Christ would giue him the grace that he might returne into his own Countrey, that surely he would slay the Emperor Tirrey what∣soeuer end come thereof. Messenger of God, I require you to shew mée by what manner of wayes I may passe out of this Rocke. Huon, (quoth the Voice) goe to the said Trée, and ga∣ther the thrée Apples, (as I haue saide vnto thée before) and keepe them well and cleanly, for thou shalt heereafter haue so much profit by them, that at the end thou shalt come vnto thy desire and will, and shalt bee out of thy great paine, trouble, and thought, take this little path that thou séest here vppon thy right hand, and so goe thou downe vnto the foote of the Rocke, and there thou shalt find a faire cleare water, and thereuppon a faire shippe, enter into it, but first goe into the Garden, and gather fruit to serue thée as long as thou shalt be in the shippe, then vnloose the shippe from the chaine that it is tyed by, and let the shippe goe whether as it will, vntill it commeth to the Port whereas thou shalt arriue: but bee thou sure before thou com∣mest there, thou shalt be in as great feare as euer thou wert in all the dayes of thy life, nor thou wert neuer in so great perill, I commend thee into the sauegard of our Lord Iesus Christ, I goe my way, and leaue thee héere. Then Huon knéeled downe and held vp his hands, and said: Ah thou verie Messenger of God, I require thee to haue me re∣commended vnto my Creatour. Huon, (quoth the Voice) be of good comfort, for as longe as thou art true and faithfull, thou hat haue ayde and succour of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus
Christ, and shalt attaine to thy desires, but ere thou commest thereto, thou shalt suffer much paine and feare: but after (as I haue said) thou shalt haue wealth inough, & exalt al thy Feends. Huon was glad of that the Voice had said vnto him, but he was in great displeasure, in that his Wife the faire Escleremond was Prisoner in the great Tower of the City of Mayence, and of the death of the old Gerames and of other his Lordes & Ser∣uants, and said to himselfe, if I may, the Emperour shall deer∣ly abuy that bargaine. Then Huon went to the Garden, and gathered fruit to bear into the Shippe: and then hee went to the Fountaine, where∣as the Trée of youth was there by, and there by the commaun∣dement of the Angell, hée gathered thrée Apples, and trussed them safely: and then he dranke of the Fountaine at his plea∣sure. Then hee departed, and tooke the little path, the which was betweene the Garden and the streame that yssued out of the Fountaine, the which streame ranne and fell into the great Riuer whereas the Shippe lay, and when hée was entred in∣to this streame, he sawe the goodlyest precious stones that euer he sawe, they were so faire and so rich, that the value of them could not bee esteemed, the grauell of the streame that yssued out of the Fountaine were all precious stones, and they cast such light that all the Mountaine and Rocke did shine thereof, whereof Huon had great maruaile. Also he sawe the Shippe so faire, that he was thereof greatly dismayed and abashed, the Riuer ioyned to the rich Garden, whereas Huon had gathered fruit of Fourteene sorts, the which hee put into the Shippe, and then recommending himselfe to our Lord and Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ, he entred into the Shippe, and vntyed the ship from the chaine: then the shippe departed from that Port, this Ri∣uer was called Diplayre. Thus this shippe went as fast as though a bird hadde flowne, and thus as yee haue heard Huon sayled all alonge in this Shippe vppon the Riuer of Diplayre, right desirous to bring out of danger his Wife the faire Ladie Escleremond.
Chap. CXII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux sayled in a rich Shippe, and of the pe∣rilous Gulfe that he passed by: and how hee arriued at the Port of the great Citie of Thauris of Persia. THus as yee haue heard, was Huon vppon this rich Riuer in his Shippe, the which was bordered with white Iuorie, and nayled with nayles of fine gould, and the fore Castle of white Christall, mingled with riche Casidony, and therein a Chamber, the sealing wrought with starres of gould and precious stones, the which gaue such clear∣nesse in the darke night, as though it had beene faire day, and the bedde that Huon lay vpon, there is no humane tongue can estéeme the value thereof, therein lay Huon euerie night, and in the day came abroad in the Shippe, it was yrkesome to him for that hee was alone without companie, and sayled euerie day betwéene two Rockes without sight of any Towne or Vil∣lage, man or woman: and when hee had béene in this Shippe thrée dayes and thrée nights, hee beheld before him, and sawe how the two Rockes beganne to drawe together and couer the Riuer, and it séemed vnto his fight, that the Shippe should en∣ter into a darkenesse: howbeit, the Riuer euer still kept his full breadth, but the néerer he came, the darker the passage séemed: and when the shippe came néere vnto it, shee went so fast, that Huon thought that no bird in all the world could flye so fast, and then it beganne to be sore blacke and darke, and the wind rose and it hayled so extreamly, that hee thought the Ship should haue perished, and Huon was so cold, that hee wiste not howe to get him any heat. Then he heard pitifull voyces speaking diuers languages, cursing the time that euer they were borne. Then hee heard thunder, and saw lightning so often, that cer∣tainly hee thought to haue beene perished, and neuer to haue
escaped out of that danger. Thus Huon was in this shippe in great feare of loozing of his life, and when he was hungrie, hee did eat of the fruit that he had brought thether, then againe he was comforted, in that the Angell had said vnto him, that he should sée again his Wife Escleremond, and his Daughter Clariet. When hée had beene in this case the space of thrée dayes, he sat downe vpon the Sea board of the Ship, and then hée heard such a brute so great and so horrible, that if the thunder had fallen from the Heauens, and that al the Riuers in the world had fallen downe from the Rockes, they could not haue made so hideous a noyse as the Tempest of the Gulfe made, the which is betweene the Sea of Persia and the great Sea Ocean, it was neuer heard that euer any Shippe or Galley escaped that way without perishing. When Huon saw himselfe in that danger, deuoutly hee called vppon our Lord God, and said. Ah good Lord, now I sée and perceiue, that without thy ayd and succour I am lost and come to my end, but séeing that it is your pleasure and will that I shall perish héere, I beséech your beneuolent grace to accept my Soule into your fauourable handes. Huon had no sooner spoken those words, but a winde aroase with so great a Tempest, that hee thought then surely to haue beene cast away. Then he saw comming against him great barres of yron red hoat, that fell downe from on high into the Riuer before Huon in such sort, that when they fell into the water, by reason of the heat of the barres troubled so the wa∣ter, that fearfull it was to behold it. Thus Huon was a great space, before he could passe the Gulfe, the which was so perri∣lous, and the Shippe went so sore by force of the wind, so that the shippe went out of the middest of the streame, and was neere to the Land, so that the Ship was grounded, and could goe no further. When Huon saw and perceiued that the Shippe was vpon the grounde, hee thought then surely to haue béene drowned. Then hee tooke an anchor and put it into the water, to knowe how many foote the water was of déepenesse, and hee found it but fiue foote. Then hee tooke one of his anchors and cast it
a shoare, and then drewe by the coard, vntill the shippe came neere to the bancke-side, then hee yssued out of the Shippe and leapt a land, and then hee sawe suddainly about him a great clearnesse, whereof he was greatly dismayed and abashed, and wist not what to thinke: then hee sawe before him that all the grauell in the water were mingled with precious stones, and when Huon saw that, he tooke a scoope and cast into the shippe so much of those precious stones, that it gaue as great a light as though tenne Torches hadde beene burning, and so much of this grauell Huon did cast into the Shippe, that hee was wea∣rie of labour, and when hee sawe the Shippe sufficiently char∣ged, then hee entred againe and drewe vp the anchor, and tra∣uailed so sore, that hee brought againe the shippe into the mid∣dest of the streame, then the ship went so fast that a bird could not haue followed it. Thus he was tenne dayes before he could passe that Gulfe, and thus day and night hee sayled with great feare, and sore oppressed through hunger and thirst, for hee had nothing to eat nor drinke but fruit, so that thereby hee was waxed so feeble, that he could scarce sustaine himselfe vppon his feete, and vpon the eleauenth day at the Sunne rising, hee sawe appeare the clearnesse of the day light, and then he was out of the darknes, and entred into the Sea of Persia, the which was so pleasant and peaceable, that great pleasure it was to behold it, and then the Sunne arose and spread abroad his streames and spheares vppon the Sea, whereof Huon was so ioyfull, as though he had neuer felt paine nor feare: then a farre off hee saw appeare be∣fore him a faire great Citie, and in the hauen therof there were so many shippes and Galleys, that their Mastes seemed to bée a great Forrest, whereof Huon hadde such ioy at his heart, that he knéeled downe lifting by his hands vnto Heauen, and hum∣bly thanking our Lord God that hee had saued him from this perilous Gulfe. This Citie was called the great Citie of Thauris in Persia, the Lord thereof was a puissant Admirall, who had made to be proclaimed and published, that all manner of Marchaunts by land or by Sea that would come to his Citie, should haue frée
going and frée comming without lette or disturbance, either in their bodies or goods, whether they were christian men or Sa∣razins, so that if they lost the worth of a penny, they should haue againe foure times the value thereof, and the same time that Huon came and arriued at that Port, was the day of their frée Feast: wherefore there was so much people of diuers Landes, that they could not well bee numbred. When Huon was come into the Port, hee cast his anchor neere vnto the bancke-side, and was right ioyfull when hee sawe himselfe that he was vp∣pon the firme land: and then hee had great desire to knowe in what place hee was arriued in, and whether hee was arriued at a good Port or no? Now lette vs leaue speaking of the good Duke Huon, vntill wee haue occasion to returne vnto him a∣gaine. Chap. CXIII. ¶ How Sir Barnard departed from the Abbey of Cluny, and went to seeke for Huon his Cozen, whom he found at the Port of the great Citie of Thauris. YE haue heard heere before, howe after the taking of Bourdeaux, Barnard who was Cozen vnto Huon, had borne Clari∣et Huons child into Burgoine, and deliuered her to bee kept with the good Abbot of Cluny. Af∣ter that Barnard had taried there the space of eight dayes, he was wearie with being there, and vpon a day hee sayde vnto the Abbot. Ah Sir, I would at the taking of Bourdeaux, I had béen slaine with my Cozen Gerames, for when I remember my good Lord Huon, my heart fayleth mee in such wise, that it is great paine for mee to beare the sorrow that I endure, and afterward when I remember the Duchesse Escle∣remond his Wife, who endureth such miserie that it is pitie to thinke thereof, doubleth the sorrowe and greefe that I haue at
my heart. Alas, what shall Huon say, if hee returne and find his Citie taken, his men taken and destroyed, and his Wife in Prison in great pouertie and miserie? I feare mee that hee will die for sorrowe. Alas, I sée all that I haue is loste for the loue of Huon my Lord, for the which I care little for, if hee bee in safetie aliue, and that hee may returne againe, and I am in great displeasure, that wée can heare no newes of him since hée departed from Bourdeaux, I shall neuer rest as longe as I liue vntill I haue found him, or heare some certaine newes of him. Cozen, (quoth the Abbot) if you will enter into this enquest, you should doe mee great pleasure, and for the great desire that I haue had, that you should goe this Voyage, I will giue you a Thousand Florents towardes your iourney. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I thanke you. Then the Abbot deliuered him the money, and Barnard made him readie to depart the next day, and so hee did, and tooke his leaue of the Abbot and departed, and rested not vntill hee came to Ʋenyce, whereas hee found Galleys readie to goe to the holy Sepulchre, whereof hee was right ioyfull, and so sayled foorth vntill they came to the Port Iaffe, whereas hee went a shoare with other Pilgrims, and euer as he passed by the other Ports, he euer demanded for Huon, but he could neuer find any man, that coulde shewe vnto him any manner of newes of him, and then he departed from the Port Iaste and went vnto Ierusalem, whereas he taried eight dayes. Then when hee had done his Pilgrimage, he tooke forth his iourney vnto Kayre in Babilon, and when he came to Gasere, which standeth at the entring of the Desarts, hee met with many Marchants, who were going to the frée Feast which was holden in the great Citie of Thau∣ris. Then hee thought to demaund of them whether so much people were going, and all in one companie, and he spake vn∣to a Marchant of Geanes, and demaunded of him whether so much people went together in one companie, for they were to the number of six-score Marchants christian men, and hee. Then the Marchant saide: Sir, as mee thinketh by you, you are of the Countrey of Fraunce, I shall shew you whether we goe: Sir, within this eight dayes the frée Feast shalbe at the
great Citie of Thauris, whereas there shall come a great num∣ber of Marchants, as well Christian men as Sarazins, as wel by land as by Sea, and there is nothing in this mortall world but there you shall find it, and heare of all manner of newes, from all the parts of the world. Nowe I haue shewed you whether wee are going, I pray you shewe mee whether you would goe and whome you doe seeke for? Sir, (quoth Barnard) knowe for troth that I am of the Realme of Fraunce, and I doe séeke for a Knight who is Lord of Bourdeaux, and is called Huon, and it is longe since I departed out of my Countrey, and I could neuer heare any thing of his life nor death. Sir, (quoth the Geneuoys) if euer you shall heare of him, (if you will beléeue mée) you shall goe with vs into the Realme of Persia, to the frée Feast at the great Citie of Thauris. Sir, (quoth Barnard) in a good houre I haue met with you, I shall not leaue your companie vntill you come there, to sée if God will send mee so good fortune as to find him that I seeke for. Then the Marchants departed, and road all together vntill they came vnto the great Citie of Thauris, and when they were lodged, they went about their marchandize whereas they ly∣sted. Thus Barnard was eight dayes in the Citie going heere and there, euer enquiring newes for him whome he sought for: and vppon a day he went down to the Port vnto the Sea-side, whereas many Shippes and Galleys lay at anchor, and as hée looked about, he saw neere to the Sea-side a little proper Ves∣sell maruailously faire, and the neerer he came vnto it, the fai∣rer and richer it seemed, for he saw great clearnesse and shining within it, by reason of the rich stones that were therein, wher∣of he had great maruaile, and especially because hee saw with∣in the Shippe but one man cleane armed, hee wist not what to thinke, but he thought that he was christened: then he approa∣ched neere to the Shippe and saluted Huon, and sayde. Sir, God giue you good aduenture, for me thinkes you bee a Chri∣stian man. Fréend, (quoth Huon) God saue thée, me thinkes by thy speach, that thou wert borne in the good Countrey of France, by reason that thou speakest French, for I haue great
ioy when I heare that language spoken: and fréend, I require thée to shew me where thou wert borne, and what thou séekest for heere? Sir, (quoth Barnard) séeing you will know of my businesse, I shall shew you, as he that is right sorrowfull and heauie, and little shall you winne thereby when you doe know it, but séeing that it is your pleasure, I shall shewe you the troth. Sir, I was borne in the good Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas I haue left my house and heritage, to séeke for my good Lord somtime Lord of the same Citie, and he was called Duke Huon, who went from Bourdeaux to séeke for some succour whiles the City was besieged, and so it is, my Lord Huon returned not, nor it can∣not bee knowne where he is become, and because the Citie at his departing was beséeged by the Emperour of Almaine, and the Citie but ill fournished with victuall to maintaine it long, and also it was so sore beaten with Engins, that the Emperor wanne the Citie perforce, and slew all those that my Lord Hu∣on had lefte there, except thrée Hundred, the which were taken Prisoners by the Emperour, and led into the Citie of Mayence, with the noble Duchesse Escleremond wife vnto my good Lord Huon, and shee is kept in a straighc Prison, whereas she spen∣deth her dayes miserably, whereof my heart is in such sorrowe and gréefe, that when I remember them, it neere hand slayeth my heart. When Huon hadde well heard and vnderstood Barnard, hee knew him well, but hee had no power to speake any word vnto him, his heart was so full of sorrow and gréefe, for that his Co∣zen Barnard had shewed him, and the chéefest of his sorrow was for the trouble of his wife the faire Lady Escleremond, who was in great perill of death. Thus Huon was a great space, and could speake no word for sorrow and gréefe, and wist not what to doe: and also hee saw his Coozen Barnard, who hadde taken great paines to search for him, whereof hee had such pitie, that the teares fell from his eyes. When Barnard saw that the Knight gaue him no answeare, and beheld vnder the ventaile of his helmet, the teares of wa∣ter fell downe from his eyes, hee was thereof so dismayed and
abashed that he wist not what to say. Then hee sayde: Sir, mee thinkes you are a Christian man, and because I see and perceiue in you that you are a man, that hath beene in many places and Countreys: therefore I desire you to shewe mee, if you heard euer any manner of speaking of my good Lord Huon Duke of Bourdeaux, whome I haue sought for in many Coun∣treys both by land and by Sea, and I could neuer heare any certaine tidings of him, whereof I am right sorrie, for if I can heare no word of him by you, I will neuer hope more to haue any knowledge of him: I thinke I shall haue some knowledg by you if he be aliue, for if I knowe nothing by you, I will ne∣uer séeke him further, but I will goe into a Desart vnto some solitarie place, and there to doe penance, and to pray vnto God for my good Lord Huon, and to pardon me of all my sinnes and offences, and I require you in the name of our Lord and Saui∣our Iesus Christ, to shewe mee what you bée? and where you were borne? and from whence you come, that hath brought in your shippe so great riches, for I knowe certainly, that in all Fraunce cannot bee found the value of so great riches: nor the puissant Charlemaine coulde neuer assemble together such riches as you haue in your Shippe. When Huon had well heard Barnard, hee sayde: Freend, I haue great maruaile of that I heare you say, for in my Shippe I knowe neither gould nor siluer, nor none other thing but my bodie and mine armour. Sir, (quoth Barnard) beware what you say, for the riches that I see in your Shippe, if you will sell it, you may fill againe your shippe with monney, if you will beleeue me, the Treasure and riches that you haue brought in your Shippe, the value thereof cannot bee estéemed. When Huon heard that, he had great maruaile and was right ioyfull, then he looked downe into the bottome of the Shippe, and saw the rich stones there lying among the grauell, the which he ne∣uer tooke heede of before, for when he did cast it into his Ship, hee thought all had beene but grauell to ballaice his Shippe withall, that it might sayle the more surely. Then Barnard sayd: Sir, I pray you hide it not from mee, where haue you had this Treasure and in what Countrey? all the stones that
bee there I knowe the vertue of them all, for since I came out of my Countrey, I was a whole yeare with the best Lapidarie and knower of stones that was in all the world, and he taught me his Science: Sir, surely the place whereas you had them in is of great dignitie. Freend, (quoth Huon) I shall shewe you the troth, fortune brought me by the Gulfe of Persia, where∣as as I suffered much paine and trouble, but thanked be God, I escaped from that hard aduenture, the force of the winde that came out of the Gulfe, draue my Shippe out of the streame to the land, and when I sawe that I was so néere to the land, I went out of the shippe and tooke a scoope, and therewith I did cast into the shippe some store of the grauell that lay by the sea side, to ballays my shippe therewith, not knowing that any precious stones had beene amonge the grauell: and when I thought that I cast in sufficient, I entred againe into my ship, and so sayled foorth more surely then I did before, there I had these stones that be in this shippe: the which yée say be of so great value. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I pray you wherefore serueth yonder foote of a great Foule or beast, that I see hange yonder in your Shippe, I cannot tell whether it be of a Foule or of a Dragon, for it is a fearfull thing to behold. Fréend, (quoth Huon) anone I shall shew you, but first I pray you shewe mee, what vertue and bountie are in these stones, the which you haue so much praised: and also to shew me vnto whome this noble Citie ap∣pertaineth. Sir, (quoth Barnard) this Citie is called Thauris, whereof is Lord a rich Admirall, who is Lord of all Persia and of Media, who when hee shall bee aduertised of your comming hether, he will haue of you Tribute as hee hath of other Mar∣chants, and as for your stones, twoo of them that I sée yonder if you giue them for your Tribute, hee will bee well con∣tent: and Sir, I shall aid you in your marchandize to the best of my power, the Admirall is a noble man in his Lawe, and of great credence. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I thanke you for the courtesie that you shew mee: but Sir, I pray you shew me the stones that be of so much vertue, I would haue the best laid apart from the other. When Barnard heard howe Huon de∣sired
him to shewe the vertue of the stones, then especially hee shewed Huon sixe stones, and he drew them out from the rest, and laide them vppon Huons shéeld, and so chose out Thirtie o∣ther, and shewed them all vnto Huon, and sayd. Sir, these Thirtie stones that I haue layde vppon your sheeld, are of so great value, that there is neither King nor Emperour that can pay the value of them, and especially of fiue of them: and when Huon heard that, he was right ioyfull. Then hee would hide no longer himselfe from Barnard, and also because of the great heat that hee was in, he did put off his helmet, the which hee kept on all that season, because he would first know of Barnard some tidings ere hée would be knowne vnto him, for hee knew his Coozen Barnard well ynough at his first comming vnto him. Chap. CXIIII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux and Barnard his Cozen, acknowled∣ged themselues eache to other, and shewed the discourse of their aduentures. WHen Barnard sawe Huon put off his helmet, hee became as ruddie as a Rose, and was so rauished that he wist not what to say or thinke, and sayde: Sir, I cannot say truly what you bee, but you re∣semble so much like Huon whome I séeke for, that I cannot tel whether you be he or not. Coozen, (quoth Huon) come hether vnto mee and embrace me, I am hée whom you doe seeke for, and so they embraced each other in such wise, that of a long space they could not speake one to another, at last Huon sayde. My right deare Coozen, I pray you shewe vnto mée all the newes that you know of Bourdeaux since my depar∣ting. Sir, (quoth Barnard) I shall shewe you that I would faine know my selfe, but first Sir, I pray you shew vnto mee
the aduentures that you haue hadde since your departing from Bourdeaux. Coozen, (quoth Huon) if I should shew you all the Aduentures and Fortunes that I haue had since my departing from you, it would be ouer-long to rehearse it: but breefely I shall declare it vnto you. When I was vppon the Sea, a great Tempest rose vppon vs, the which continued the space of Ten dayes without cea∣sing, and then Huon shewed him how he was in the Gulfe, and what perill he was in there, and how he spake with Iudas, and how he arriued at the Castle of the Adamant, and how his com∣panie there died by famine, and how he entred into the Castle and slewe the Serpent, and shewed him of the beautie and ad∣uentures that were in the Castle: and how he was borne vnto a Rocke by a Griffen, and how he slew the fiue young Griffens, and afterward the great Griffen, whose foote was in the Ship the which hee shewed vnto Sir Barnard: and discoursed of the Fountaine and Garden, and Trée of youth, and of the Shippe the which they were in, and how he found it by the Riuer, and how by the voice of the Angell he entred into the Shippe: and afterwards hee shewed what great paine and perill hée suffe∣red in passing the Gulfe of Persia: and howe hee was perforce driuen a shoare, and there he cast in the stones thinking it had been grauell: and how he was as then come and arriued at the great Citie of Thauris in Persia. When Barnard had well heard and vnderstood Huon, he em∣braced him, and sayd: Ah right deare and vertuous Knight, to whome in prowesse and hardinesse none can bee compared, of your comming I ought to bee ioyfull, and I thanke our Lord God of the grace that he hath sent you. Sir, (quoth Huon) I ought greatly to thanke our Lorde Iesus Christ, in that I sée you in good health, and nowe I pray you to shewe mee what hath fallen in the Countrey of Bourdeaux since I departed from thence. Then Barnard all wéeping shewed him euerie thinge as it had fallen, and shewed vnto Huon the manner howe the good Citie of Bourdeaux was taken, and of the death of the old Gerames and his companie, and of the taking of the noble Du∣chesse the faire Escleremond: and how the Emperour held her
in prison in the Citie of Mayence, in great pouertie and misery, and of his Daughter Clariet, howe he had brought her vnto the Abbey of Cluny, and set her in keeping there with the Abbot her Coozen. When Huon had well vnderstoode Barnard, hee made great sorrow in his heart and sayd, if God would ayd and helpe him, hee would cause the Emperour to die an euill death. Sir, (quoth Barnard) will you appease your selfe, if you haue trust in our Lord God, desire of him aid & succour, and let the whéele of fortune runne, and if you doe thus and take in woorth any thing that is fallen vnto you, you shall not faile but come vnto your desire: thus with such words Barnard appeased Huon his Coozen, and thus they deuised together of diuers things. Coo∣zen, (quoth Huon) I pray you to shewe mee the vertue of these precious stones that you haue layd aside from the other. Sir, (quoth Barnard) the fiue that lyeth there by themselues haue great vertue, this stone is of such great vertue, that he that bea∣reth it vppon him cannot bee poysoned, also it is of such digni∣tie and woorth, that whosoeuer doe beare it, may go and come thorow fire without féeling of any heate, though hee were in a hot burning Ouē, also if a man fall into the water, hauing this stone about him, hee cannot sinke nor drowne: Sir, this is the vertue of this first stone. Then Huon tooke it and kept it for himselfe: and then Bar∣nard tooke vp another and sayd. Sir, heere is another stone of such vertue, that a man bearing it about him, can haue nei∣ther hunger, thirst, nor colde, nor shall not waxe elder by sée∣ming neither in bodie nor visage, but he shall euer seeme to bée of the age of Thirtie yeares, nor fasting shall not impaire him. Then Huon tooke that stone and put it into his bagge, and said that hee would keepe that stone for himselfe. Well, (quoth Barnard) Sir, heere is another of such bountie and vertue, that he that beareth it cannot bee hurt in armes, nor vanguished by his enemies, and if any of his kinne were blind, and touch but his eyes with this stone, incontinent he shall sée againe, and if the stone be shewed vnto a mans eyes, he shall incontinent bée blind, and if a man be wounded, doe but turne this stone in the
wound, and incontinent he shall be whole. When Huon heard that, hee was right ioyfull, and said that hee would keepe well that stone. Sir, (quoth Barnard) heere is another, the which hath so great vertue, that if a man or wo∣man bée neuer so sicke, shewe them but this stone, and inconti∣nent they shall be whole of any manner of maladie, and also if a man were closed in prison, in chaines and fetters, handes and feet, doe but touch them with this stone, and the chaines shall breake, and also if any man haue any cause to be pleaded in any Court before any Iudge, be his matter rightfull or wrongfull, hee shall winne his cause whether it bee for Landes or Goods, and also if a man haue this stone in his hande and close it, hee shall bee inuisible and may go whereas he list and shall not bee seene. And you shall sée the proofe, for as he had this stone in his hand, he closed it, and incontinent he was inuisible, so that Huon could not see him, whereof he was not content, for he fea∣red least that hee had lost his Cosen Barnard foreuer, and sayd: Ah good Lord, thou hast giuen mee the grace to find my coosen Barnard, who should haue kept me companie vntill I had retur∣ned into mine owne countrey, and now I see well that I haue lost him. When Barnard hearde Huon, hee laughed, and Huon who heard him, groaped all about with his armes abroad, vntill at last he embraced him, and held him fast, and when Barnard felt that, hee opened his hande, and then Huon sawe him againe, whereof hee was right ioyfull, and blessed him at the vertue of that stone, and tooke it and layde it vp amonge the other in his bagge, and sayd how that he would keepe that stone especially, because it was of such a woonderfull great vertue. Thus Barnard did choose out the stones one from another, and there were so many good stones, that the value of them coulde not be esteemed: then hee turned vp the bottome of the grauell to seeke out the best, and among other hee did choose out a Car∣bouncle, the which cast out such a light, as though twoo Tor∣ches had beene light. Barnard tooke it and deliuered it vnto Huon, and said: Sir, bee you sure that whosoeuer beares this stone vppon him, may goe drie footed vppon the water, as sure
as though hee were in a Vessell, and also if a man goe in the darke night, he shall sée as well as though he had the light of sixe Torches, and if a man bee in battaile, hauing this stone about him, hee cannot bee ouercome nor hurt, nor his horse weari nor faint, nor hurt nor wounded. When Huon heard that, hee smiled, and tooke the stone and put into his bagge among the other. Thus as they were deuising together, there came vnto them diuers Marchants Sarazins, who with great maruaile beheld this little shippe, and they sawe it so faire and rich, and so wel garnished with precious stones, that they thought that all the marchandize that were in the Hauen, was not halfe the value and woorth of that they sawe there, then they approached vnto the shippe and saluted Huon, and sayde: Sirs, is it your plea∣sure to sell vs any of your stones, wee are heere diuers Mar∣chants, that will bee glad to buy of them, if yee please? Sirs, (quoth Huon) as for mée, as this day I will sell none vntill to morrow in the morning, and then if it please yée, you shall haue of them: therewith the Marchants held their peace and spake no more, but there came so many Sarazins and Paynims to behold the Shippe, that great maruaile it was to behold them: so that the newes thereof spread abroad in the City, and the Ad∣mirall was aduertized thereof, who incontinent accompanied with his Lords, came to the Port side, whereas this Ship lay at anchor. When the Admirall was come thether, he beheld the Ship, the which hee thought faire and rich, and how that there was neuer Kinge nor Emperour that euer behelde any such, and it shined so cleare by reason of the stones, that the Admirall and all such as were with him, thought that it had been the Sunne shining in the middest of the day. Then hée approached vnto the shippe, and found there Huon and Barnard, the Admirall sa∣luted them, and said: Sirs, it appeareth well that you be Chri∣stian men, it is conuenient that you pay mee the Tribute that is accustomed to be payd in this Citie. Sir, (quoth Huon) it is good reason and right, that we pay you as we ought to doe. Sir, heere is twoo stones the which I giue you, and I desire
you to take them in woorth: the Admirall tooke the stones and beheld them well, and said. Fréend, nowe you may goe and come into this Citie, to make your marchandize at your plea∣sure to your most profite and gaine, for the guift that you haue giuen me is to me more acceptable, then if you had giuen mee the value of foure of the best Cities in all this Countrey, right ioyfull was the Admirall, for hee knewe well the vertue of the stones, the one of them was of such bountie and dignitie, that the bearer thereof could not bee poysoned, nor no treason could be done nor purposed, comming in the presence of him that bea∣reth this stone, but incontinent the dooer should fall downe dead: and the other stone had that vertue and dignitie, that the bearer thereof coulde neuer bee perished by fire nor water, nor destroyed by yron, for though hee were all a day burning in a hot Ouen or Fournace, hee should not loose one haire of his head, nor perish in the Sea. Fréende, (quoth the Admirall) the courtesie that you haue done vnto mee this day shall be well rewarded, I will and commaund that throughout my Realme as well of Persia as of Media, that you shall goe at your plea∣sure to sell your Marchandize, and no man shall let nor trouble you: but one thinge I would desire of you to shewe mee, what aduenture hath brought you hether? and of whence you bee, and of what Countrey? and in what place you haue founde these stones, whereof you haue so great plentie? howbeit I vnderstand your language, whereby I knowe that you bee French-men, longe agoe I was in Fraunce and dwelt there, and serued in the Court of Kinge Charlemaine, and was neuer knowne, and I haue great maruaile where you haue found so many goodly stones, it is neere hand a Hundred yeares since I was guirded with a Swoord: but I neuer sawe so rich stones heere before.
Chap. CXV. ¶ How the Admirall of Persia did great honor vnto Huon of Bour∣deaux, and ledde him into his Pallaice, whereas he was receiued with great ioy and triumph. WHen Huon of Bourdeaux had well heard and vnderstood the Admirall, he re∣garded him much, because hee was a faire olde man, and séemed to be a noble man, and sayd. Sir, because I knowe and sée apparantly in you great noblenesse, troth, and fréedome, I shall shew you at length all mine aduentures, without hyding of any thinge from you. Sir, knowe for troth, my name is Huon, and I was borne in the Countrey of Fraunce in a Citie named Bourdeaux, and I departed from thence about two yeres past, since the which time I haue suffered much paine and po∣uertie. When I departed from thence, I had with mee Sea∣uen Knightes, and my Chaplaine and a Clarke to serue him, and we tooke our Shippe at Bourdeaux, and wee sayled downe the Riuer vntill wee came into the maine Sea, then the wind rose against vs, and so continued a long space, so that our Pa∣trone knew not where he was, and so at the last we came to a Port, whereas wee found many shippes of strang Countreys, and there we got vs a new Patron, and as shortly as we might wée sayled foorth on our iourney. But when wée were come againe into the hye Sea, a great Tempest arose so that wee were neere hand all perished: this Tempest endured Tenne dayes, so that wee were faine to abandon our shippe to the wind, and vppon the eleauenth day we arriued at the perilous Gulfe, whereas wee found Iudas, who betrayed our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, wee were then in such feare, that wee looked for nothinge but when wee shoulde perish and end our liues: but God alwayes his Seruants and such as beleeue in
his holy Lawes, and keepe his Commaundements, will euer kéepe and preserue them, hee sent vs a wind, the which draue vs from that perilous Gulfe, and brought vs vnto the Castle of the Adamant, and there hee shewed the Admirall at length the beautie of that Castle, and howe there arriued a shippe with Sarazins who were Pirats of the Sea, and howe they fought together, and also he shewed him all the aduentures of the Ca∣stle that he had there, as well of his men that dyed by famine, as of them that hee left there, and also hee discoursed howe hee ame by victuls, and also hee shewed how hee departed from thence, and was borne away by the Griffen, and how he strake off one of her Legges when hee fought with her, after the Grif∣fen had set him vppon the Rocke, the which Legge hee shewed vnto the Admirall, whereof he had woonderfull great maruell: and then also he shewed him how he fought with the fiue young Griffens, and slew them, and also of the old Griffen, and also of the Fountaine wherein hee bathed himselfe, and of the faire Garden, and of the Trée of youth that stood by the Fountaine, and of the vertue of the fruit thereof, and howe hee did gather of the same, and more woulde haue done, but that hee was for∣bidden so to doe by an Angell sent from God, but before I was commaunded to the contrarie, I did both eat of the fruit, and dranke of the water of the Fountaine▪ whereby I was whole incontinent of all the great wounds that the Griffens had giuen mée when I slewe them. And Sir, (quoth Huon) knowe for troh, that of this Trée I gathered thrée apples by the comman∣dement of the Angell, and haue kept thm surely: then the An∣gll shwed mée the way howe I shoulde goe from the Rocke, and vnder the Rock side I found a great faire Riuer, and there I found this shippe that we be now in, and entred into it: and then there came a wind (quoth he) and draue my shippe so fast, that a bird could not haue ouertaken it. Then hee discoursed vnto the Admirall, howe hee passed by he Gulfe of Persia, and what torments hee suffered there, and howe hee was there ten dayes and how he was driuen to the share, whereas he found hose precious stones, and he thought that it had beene nothing  graull, and that hee purposed nothing else but to ballice
therewith his ship, that the ship might sayle the more surely, and he saide. Sir, God vppon whome I stedfastly beleeue so aided and succoured mee, that I am escaped from thence in sauegard. When the Admirall had well heard and vnderstood Huon, hee had great maruaile, for hee neuer heard before of so great and woonderfull aduentures, and was sore dismayed and aba∣shed, and saide. Fréend, I haue great maruaile of that I haue heard you say, for it is neere hand six-score yeares since I came first into this world, and I neuer heard that euer any man e∣scaped aliue out of the Gulfe of Persia: therefore you may well say, that the God vpon whome you doe stedfastly beleeue, hath shewed that hee loueth you well, when hee hath saued and pre∣serued you out of that perilous Gulfe, your God is puissant, and loueth all men that stedfastly and vnfainedly beleeue in his holy Lawes, and keepe his Commaundements, and hee is false and vntrue that beleeueth not in his Lawes, but hee loueth you well, when hee hath deliuered you out of twoo such Gulfes, and also from the Castle of the Adamant, from whence none can depart nor neuer did, nor I thinke neuer shall: and also hath suffered you to slay the Griffens, surely you ought to loue him that hath giuen you that grace, and for the great mar∣uailes that he hath done vnto you, I will be christened and re∣ceiue your Lawe, but I feare me if my Lords and men knewe thereof, they would slay me shortly, for against them all I can∣not resist. Sir, (quoth Huon) to the entent that you should haue the fir∣mer beléefe in our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ, I haue three Apples, the which haue such vertue in them, that if you will beleeue in our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, I shall giue you one of them, the which you shall eate, and incontinent af∣ter you haue eaten it, you shall become young againe of the age of Thirtie yeares, and you shall be as faire and as lustie, as you were when you were of that age, there is not so olde a man nor so crooked, if hee eate of this and beleeue firmely and vnfainedly in our Lord Iesus Christ, but hee shall become as yong and as lusty as he was at Thirtie yéeres of age. Freend,
(quoth the Admirall) if it bee so, that by eating of this Apple I shall become as young and as lusty as I was at Thirtie yéeres of age, whatsoeuer come of mée, I will bee christened and be∣leeue in the Lawe of Iesus Christ, the feare of death shall not let me to doe it, for too longe I haue beleeued in this false and detestable Lawe of Mahomet, for if I hadde neither seene nor heard no more then you haue shewed vnto mée, I ought to be∣leeue yet in your Law, and I shall doe so much, that I trust I shall cause all my Realme to beleeue in the same. Sir, (quoth Huon) and if you doe as you say, you shall be saued, and I shall giue you the Apple, the which you shall eat in the presence of all your Lordes and men: and when they shall sée you waxe young againe, know for troth, that maruaile thereof shall cause them to beleeue in our Lord Iesus Christ, and to renounce their false and detestable Law of Mahomet. Fréend, (quoth the Admi∣rall) I beleeue well that which you say, and I shall vse my selfe after your aduise. Then the Admirall tooke Huon by the hand, and went toge∣ther out of the shippe, and Huon left Barnard there to keepe it, many people were come thether to sée the Shippe, and also for the great maruailes that they had heard fallen vnto Huon, and they beheld Huon, and hadde great maruaile of the honour that the Admirall made vnto him, for hee led him still by the hand ntill hee came to his Pallaice, as they passed through the Ci∣tie they were greatly regarded of men of sundrie Nations, for Huon was so faire in his visage, and so valiaunt a Knight in ature, that none could bee found as then that might bee com∣pared vnto him. When Huon was come to the Pallaice, whereas hee was honourably receiued with great ioy, the Admirall made him great feast and chéere, and the Tables were set vp, and they sat downe to dinner: of their seruice and meats I will make no long rehearsall, but when dinner was done, the Admirall com∣maunded Carpenters to make a great scaffold of Timber be∣fore the Pallaice, the which was couered with rich cloathes of gould and silke, and thether was brought a riche Standard of gould with other thinges, and then hee commaunded through∣out
the Citie, that all his Lordes and Barons of his Realme that were come thether vnto his frée Feast, that they should all come vnto him at an houre appointed, the which they did, there came so many strangers and other, that there were mo assembled together then a Hundred and Fiftie Thousand men. When they were all there assembled together, then the Ad∣mirall holding Huon by the hand, mounted vpon the rich stage, and diuers other great Lordes with him, and when they were there, the Admirall stoode vp, and sayd with a hye voice vnto the Lordes and to the people. Sirs, yée that bee come hether by my commaundement, knowe for troth, the great loue that I haue had vnto yée and haue, mooueth me to say and to shew you the way, how that I and al you may come to eternall Sal∣uation, for if wee die in this case that we bee in, wee shall bee all damned and loste by the false and detestable way that you and I doe hold: therefore I counsaile and pray you, for the loue that you haue longe borne vnto mee, that you will leaue with mee the Law of Mahomet, and beleeue in the Law of our Sa∣uiour and Redéemer Iesus Christ, who is worthy and holy, as yée may sée by the euident miracles that he hath shewed for this poore Knight that yée sée héere by mée. Then the Admirall shewed vnto the people all the maruailous aduentures that had fallen vnto Huon, that is to say, how he had béene at the Castle of the Adamant, and how the Griffen did beare him from thence, whome hee slewe and fiue of the young Griffens, and also of the Fountaine and Garden, and of the fruit of the Trée of youth, and how he had passed the two Gulfes, whereas he had taken the rich stones that he had brought thether, the which thinges could not haue been without the ayd and helpe of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and also hee shall shew before you eui∣dent Miracles, that Iesus Christ will doe for me if I will take his Lawe, for hee sayth vnto mee, that if I will beleeue in his God, hee will make mée to eate of such a holy fruite, by the which I shall become againe but of the age of Thirtie yeares, and as lusty as I was at that time: and therefore Sirs, if Ie∣sus Christ will doe this for me, I will be christened. Then all
the people answeared and sayd: Sir, if this that you haue sayd come to proofe, wee shall be all content to bee christened, and to beleeue vppon the Lawe of Iesus Christ, and to leaue the law that wee haue longe kept, but wee are hard of beleefe that this shall bee, for if it be so, there was neuer heard of such a won∣derfull Miracle. Chap. CXVI. ¶ Howe the Emperour, by reason of the Apple that Huon gaue him to eat, he became of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereby hee and all the people of Persia and Media were christened, and of the great honour that the Admirall made vnto Huon. WHen Huon hadde well heard and vnderstood the Lords and the people, how they were content to leaue their Lawe and to beleeue vppon Iesus Christ, he was right ioy∣full, and thanked God with all his heart: then Huon sayde vnto the Admirall. Sir, eate of the Apple that I haue giuen vnto you, and then the people that be here assembled, shall sée what grace our Lord God shall send you, the Admirall tooke the Apple and began to eate thereof, and as he did eate hee beganne to change colour, his haire and his beard the which were white, beganne to change and waxe yellow, before the Apple was cleane eaten he was cleane chan∣ged, and his beautie and strength as he was when he was but of Thirtie yeares of age. Then generally all the people that were there, with one voice cried and required to bee cristened, whereof the Admirall and Huon were right ioyfull, because they sawe that the good will and desire of the people was to re∣ceiue Christendome. When the Admirall felt himselfe againe younge and lusty, the ioy that he had at his heart could not be declared, the people also were right ioyfull, the Admirall who was a goodly Prince,
tooke Huon by the hande and sayde. My right déere Fréend, blessed be the houre that you came hether, for me and my peo∣ple you haue brought vs into the way of Saluation, and deli∣uered vs out of darkenesse, therefore I will from hencefoorth, that in all my Realme you shall haue your part as well as my selfe, and I will and commaund that you be so obayed: then he embraced and kissed Huon more then Tenne times, saying: Fréend, blessed bee the good houre that euer you were borne, and happie was that woman that bare you in her bodie, the Paynims and Sarazins that were there, séeing the great beau∣tie that the Admirall was of, and also the woonderfull great Miracle that they had seene, sayd one to another, how they ne∣uer hadde heard of such a Miracle, and how that from thence∣foorth they that would beleeue vppon Mahound, were accur∣sed and vnhappie, for they sayd that his beleefe, his lawe, & his doctrine, was of no valour: then they cryed with a hye voice. Oh right noble and puissant Admirall, desire that noble man that is there with you, that hee will cause vs to receiue Chri∣stendome. And as then in the Citie there was a Bishop of Greece, who was come thether in ambassage to ye Admirall from the Empe∣rour of Constantinople, who hearing the will and desire of the people, was right ioyfull, and hee came vnto the Admirall and to Huon and sayd. Sir, it shall bee no daunger for you to bee christened, for Sir, I am heere readie to doe it. Then incon∣tinent there was brought foorth Fortie great Vessels full of cleare water, the Bishop did hallowe them, and christened the Admirall, and named him Huon, because Huon was his God∣father. Then afterward all the Lords and people were chri∣stened, and receiued the Lawe of our Sauiour and Redéemer Iesus Christ. When they were all christened, the Admirall with great triumph and ioy, returned vnto his Pallaice leading Huon by the hand, and great ioy and feasting was made that day in the Citie, and especially of the Christian Marchants that were there, among the which there were about fiftéene Priests, and they all aided the Bishoppe to christen the people, the number
could not be declared of the men, women, and children that re∣ceiued that day christendome. The Admirall being in his Pallaice, making great ioy and Feasting with the noble Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, sayd vnto him: Freend, well you ought to render thankes to our Lord Iesus Christ, séeing by you these two Realmes, that is to say Persia and Media, are reduced and brought vnto the Christian faith and Lawe, and I will that you knowe, that you may well say that in these two Realmes you may commaund any thing at your pleasure, without fin∣ding any person to doe or say to the contrarie of your will and pleasure, and to the entent that you shall surely beleeue what great loue and affection I beare vnto you: I will that mine all onely Daughter you shall haue to your wife, so that you be not bound vnto none other. Sir, knowe for troth, the great de∣sire that I haue to haue you tarie still heere with me, mooueth mee thus to doe, I haue none other heire but my Daughter, whereby after my death you shall bee Lorde and heire of the Realmes and Dominions that I hold, and in the meane sea∣son, I will that the moitie of the reuenewes of these Realmes and Dominions shall bee yours, for your companie pleaseth mée so entirely, that I would neuer haue you to depart from hence. Chap. CXVII. ¶Of the complaints that Huon made vnto the Admirall of Persia vppon the Emperour of Almaine, and of the succours that the Admirall promised vnto Huon. WHen Huon had well vnder∣stood the Admirall, hee saide: Sir, knowe for troth, that it is foure yéeres passed since I was maried vnto a noble Ladie, who passeth in beautie all other that be aliue in these dayes, and when I remember her, all my bodie and heart trembleth
for sorrow, when I thinke of the trouble, displeasure, and po∣uertie that shee is in: and therefore Sir, I thanke you of the great honour and courtesie, that of your bountie you offer mée, I pray vnto God that hee may reward you. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) seeing it is so that you haue a Wife, I hold you wel excused: but I pray you to shew vnto me, for what cause your Wife is in such case, or what Christian Prince is so hardie as to trouble you, or to doe you any displeasure? Sir, (quoth Hu∣on) when I came out of my Countrey, I left my Citie of Bour∣deaux besieged by the Emperour of Almaine, who hath taken my Citie and slaine my men, and some hee keepeth in seruage, and my Wife put in prison, and there kept in great pouertie and miserie, the which when I remember, sorrowe and gréefe so sore gripeth my heart, that all my members and ioynts trem∣ble with displeasure. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) I pray you to leaue your sorrow and displeasure, and cast it from you, and take ioy and comfort, for by the holy law that I haue receiued, I shall so ayde and succour you, that the Emperour who hath done vnto you so many displeasures, I shall make him such warre, that whether he will or not, for the dammage and losse that you haue had and receiued, I shall constraine him to make full restitution, for I shall lead with me in your company such number of people, that all the Valleys and Mountaines shall be couered with them. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courtesie and succour that you offer me I humbly thanke you, but if it please our Lord and Saui∣our Iesus Christ, who hath ayded mee out of many perils, I hope that he will so aide mee, that I shall not neede to make a∣ny warre to destroy the Christian bloud, but Sir, first I shall goe to the holy Sepulchre, and then I will returne into my Countrey, and doe what I can to get my Wife out of daunger and the paine that shee is in. Sir, the wife that I haue wed∣ded, was Daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, who held as then Babilon and all the Realme of Egipt. Then Huon shewed him all the matter how he came by the faire Escleremond, whereof the Admirall was sore abashed, for the great maruailes that hee hadde heard Huon declare, and so
were all other that heard it, and said one to another, that with∣out Huon had beene well beloued of our Lord Iesus Christ, hée could neuer haue escaped the death, with one of the least ad∣uentures that he had shewed vnto the Admirall. Sir, (quoth Huon) the Emperour of Almaine hath taken my Citie and my Wife, and destroyed my men, and hath taken into his handes all my Lands and Signiories, but by the grace of God, I shal doe so much to get them againe, and if I cannot attaine there∣to, then I shall returne againe vnto you to haue your succour and ayd. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) put all melancholy from you, for if you giue mee knowledge that you cannot haue your wil of this Emperour, I shall bring you people innumerable, that all Christendome shall tremble for feare of you, and shall render vnto you your wife and al your Lands and Signiories, and your men that bee in prison or in seruage, and I shall put the Emperour into your hands, to doe with him your pleasure, or else I shal not leaue in all his Land neither Citie nor towne standing vppon the earth. Sir, (quoth Huon) of this I thanke you heartily, but Sir, I must woorke another way first, for when I escaped from the Gulfe of Persia, I promised vnto God, that before I went in∣to mine owne Countrey, to goe and visite the holy Sepulchre in Ierusalem, and to make warre vppon the Sarazins, before I made any warre vppon any Christian men, but Sir, if I may get of the Emperour by faire speach my Landes and my wife, I shall serue him with all my heart, for as long as I liue I shall make no warre against any christian man, if I may haue right and reason shewed vnto mee. Sir, (quoth the Ad∣mirall) of this that you say I giue you good thankes, but by the grace of God I shall goe with you the Voyage to the holy Sepulchre, and take with mee fiftie Thousand men, to make warre against the Paynims and Sarazins such as beleeue not in God, and I shall put to my paine with all my power, to ex∣alt and encrease the lawe of our Lord Iesus Christ. Sir quoth Huon, you haue sayde nobly, if you thus doe, great grace and glorie perpetuall you shall deserue, whereby you shalbe crow∣ned aboue in the Emperiall Heauen. Nowe leaue wee to
speake of this matter. Chap. CXVIII. ¶ Howe the Admirall of Persia assembled much people, and hee and Huon with all his armie, tooke the Sea and came to the Port before the Citie of Angory, whereas they found a great number of Paynims and Sarazins, readie to defend the Port. AFter that the Admirall and Huon had deuised together of many thinges, the Admirall sent out his letters and bréefes, commaunding through-out Persia and Media men of warre to bee readie, and gaue them a day to bee readie to goe with him, certifying them, that his Nauie of Shippes should be readie for the trans∣porting of him and them, the which was done, and euerie man came at the day that was assigned. In the meane season, Hu∣on and Barnard went oftentimes together, and visited the Ci∣tie of Thauris, whereas much honour was made vnto them, whereof Huon and Barnard oftentimes thanked God, of the good aduenture that he had sent them. Thus as yée haue heard, the Admirall of Persia assembled a great number of people, and made him readie and entred in∣to his shippe, and all other into diuers Shippes, and shipped their Armour and horses, and Huon who desired to please the Admirall, tooke his owne little Shippe and discharged it, and tooke all the precious stones & did put them into another ship, the which the Admirall had deliuered to serue him, and then he sayd vnto the Admirall. Sir, I know well that the little ship that I came in hether, is not to serue in the warres, and there∣fore Sir, as it is I doe giue it vnto you, whereof the Admirall had great ioy, for in all the world there was none such of beau∣tie nor of riches. Then Huon gaue the Admirall all a Bushell of the stones and vnto the Lordes together, and they thanked Hu∣on
of his courtesie and Larges, of all the stones he kept to his owne vse but thrée Hundred, and gaue away all the residue. Then hee entred into the Shippe that was appointed for him, and then euerie man entred into their Shipps, the which were well fournished and victualed for the wars: then the Admirall tooke his leaue of his Daughter, who pitifully wept at her Fa∣thers departing, and then they weighed vp anchors and hoysed vp the sayles, and they had such good winde, that anon they were farre from the Port: A goodly sight it was to beholde the Nauie, for at their departing they made such great noyse with Trumpets, Drummes, and Hornes, that all the Sea did ring thereof. Great ioy and gladnesse had Huon and Barnard of the grace that God had sent them, so longe they sayled with good winde and sayle, that they entred into the great Sea of Caspis, and then they saw a farre off a faire City standing by the Sea-side, called the Citie of Angory, wherein there dwelt an Admirall right puissant and rich, and the same time he was in one of his Towers of his Pallaice, and when he saw and perceiued such a puissant Nauie come sayling so fast towardes his Citie, hee had great maruaile, and was sore dismayed and abashed, for he knewe well that the Shippes were of Persia, by the penons and banners that hee sawe wauing vppon the shippes, and vpon the other part he sawe in the toppes and fore-castles, baners stan∣ding all of white, and therein red crosses, then he said vnto his Lordes that were about him. Sirs, I am greatly dismayed and abashed, what meaneth yonder great fléete, séeing this Ci∣tie was wonne by Reignard of Montauban, there came neuer Christian man heere, and I haue more maruaile to sée the ban∣nrs and armes of Persia, the which these Christian men doe bear vpon their shippes. Then the Admirall went downe, and published in the Citie that euerie man should arme them, and goe to the Port to de∣fend it, that the christian men should not land there, then the crie and allarum began in the Citie so great and horrible, with the noyse of Trumpets, and Drummes, Hornes, and Basons, so that the noyse of them range vppon the Sea, so that the Ad∣mirall
of Persia and Huon, and such as were vpon the sea might well heare them. Then the Admirall said vnto Huon: Sir, I see and perceiue well that at our landing wee shall haue great battaile and resistance. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you what people be they that haue that City in guiding, and who is Lord thereof? Sir, (quoth the Admirall) knowe for troth, that this Citie is great and well peopled, they beleeue not in God, and about Twentie yeares passed this Citie was wonne by a Lord of Fraunce, called Reignard of Montauban, and hee made it to bee christened, and then about eight yeares after, it was wonne againe vpon Christian men by the Admirals Sonne, the which Admirall was Lord thereof when it was wonne. And now againe they bee all Paynims and Sarazins, as you may sée vpon the sea-side they are readie to abide for vs and to defend their Port. Sir, (quoth Huon) we ought greatly to thanke our Lord Iesus Christ of this faire aduenture, when we sée before vs the enemies of our Christian faith, and by the grace of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, this day we shall doe so much, that the Citie and the Inhabitants therein shall be in our handes to vse them at our pleasure. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) I beséech almightie God to giue vs the grace that it may be so, great grace our Lord God shall doe vnto vs if wee may winne this Citie. Then the Admirall caused his men to bee armed, and then they sawe halfe a League from the Citie a Port or Hauen, the which was not kept nor defended, because the Admirall of An∣gory would not yssue out farre from his Citie, vntill hee sawe what countenance the christian men would make. Then the Admirall of Persia and Huon aduanced themselues so forward, that they cast out their anchors, and launched out their boats well garnished with men Archers and Crosbowes, so that they landed at this Port in sauegard & without any danger. Then the shippes drew to the land, and vnshipped their Armour and Horses, and so euerie man landed, except such as were assigned to keepe the shippes, and then euerie man mounted vpon their horses, and ordained three Battailes, the first was led by Hu∣on, and with him twentie Thousand men of hautie and hye
courage: the second was ledde by a great Lord of Persia, who was Marshall of the Hoast, the third guided the Admirall of Persia, who road from ranke to ranke, admonishing his men to doe their endeauours valiantly, then a soft pace they drewe in battaile array towards the Citie. Chap. CXIX. ¶ Howe the Admirall and Huon tooke the Port, and fought with the Admirall of Angory, and dicomfited him and tooke the Citie, and howe afterward Huon went into the Deserts of Abil∣lant, to search aduentures. WHen the Admirall of Ango∣ry sawe and perceiued, that the christian men hadde taken land and were readie to giue bat∣taile, and were comming towardes the Citie, hee ordained & ranged his Battailes, and de∣uided them into foure parts, and set them to be led and guided by such as hee thought best, then he aduaunced forward, and was to the number of fiftie Thousand men. When these twoo Hoastes sawe each other, there was none of them but that feared the death, the day was faire and cleare, and so they approached, and all at a rush on both partes dashed together in such wise, that by reason of the pouder and dust that did rise by their horses, the Sunne that was faire and bright waxed darke, and he shot on both partes flewe so fast and as thicke, as though it had snowed. At their first méeting many speares were broken, and many a Knight borne to the earth, so that they could neuer be releeued after, but lay on the ground among the horse feete and there died in dolour, there were ma∣ny horses running abroad, trayling their bridles after them, and their Masters lying dead vppon the earth in the bloud and in the myre. Great slaughter there was made vppon both parts, and Hu∣on
who went breaking the great preasses whereas hee slewe so many Paynims, that euerie man feared him, he saw where the Admirall of Angoryes Nephew was, who had slaine a chri∣stian Knight, and they ranne so fiercely each at other, that the Paynim brake his speare vppon Huon, and Huon fayled him not, but gaue him so maruailous and so great a stroake, that his Speare passed through his bodie, and so he fell downe to the earth and died. Then Huon ranne at another, and gaue him such a maruailous stroake that it passed through his sheeld and bodie, and with drawing out of the speare, hee fell to the earth and neuer reléeued after, and so they thrée and foure more hee serued in like manner, and did so valiantly behaue himselfe, that he slewe eight before his Speare brake, and then he drew out his Sword, and therewith hee did such déedes, that it was fearfull to behold him, hee cut legges and armes, and rassed off helmets, so that none of his enemies durst approach néere vn∣to him, but they fledde before him, as the birde doth before the Hauke, hee brake asunder the thicke preasses, hee did so to bee feared that his enemies left him, for hee neuer strooke any man with a full stroake, but hee that receiued it was slaine. Also with him was Barnard his Coozen, who euer followed him, and did maruailes in armes, for hee was a sharpe and an eager Knight. And also the Admirall of Angory enforced himselfe to doe dammage vnto the Christian men, hée sawe where the Ad∣mirall of Persia was slaying of his men, and came and ranne at him, and the Admirall of Persia sawe him, and encountred with him by such force and puissance, that each of them bare the o∣ther to the earth, then quickly they releeued themselues with their Swords in their hands, willing both of them to slay each other, the which had beene done indéede, if their men had not come and succoured them, but thether came so many on both parts, that the twoo Admirals hadde no power one of them to touch the other. With great force came thether Paynims and Sarazins, so that the Christian men could not remount vp againe the Admi∣rall of Persia, but was faine to fight a foote, and hadde beene in great ieopardie and danger, if Huon and Barnard had not come
and rescued him, they came thether hastily, when they heard the showting and crying that was made about the Admirall of Persia, and they brake asunder the great preasse of the Pay∣nims. And when they saw Huon approach neere vnto them, they were sore afraid, and they knewe him well and parted, and spread abroad and durst not abide, and Huon seeing the Admirall of Persia a foot among his enemies, with his Sword valiantly defending himselfe, which should but little auailed if he had not beene quickly succoured: and when Huon sawe him hee sayde. Oh right puissant Admirall haue no doubt, then Huon tooke a Speare out of the handes of a Paynim whom hée had slaine, and therewith he ranne at the Admirall of Angory, and gaue him so horrible and so vehement a stroake, that the Speare passed through his bodie more then a foote, and so hee fell downe dead among his men, whereof the Paynims were sore dismayed and abashed, when they saw their Lord lye dead vppon the earth, and then Huon quickly tooke the Admirals horse by the raine of the bridle, and came vnto the Admirall of Persia, whereas he was fighting a foote, and said: Sir, mount vppon this horse, for the Paynims and Sarazins are discom∣fited. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) blessed bee the houre that e∣er you were borne, for by your excellent Prowesse I am saued and all mine Hoast, and haue vanquished and ouercome mine enemies. Then the Admirall mounted vppon the good horse, whereof he was right ioyfull, and so he and Huon and Barnard dealt such stkes amonge the Paynims and Sarazins, that they were constrained to y and to turne their backes, and then they were chaced by such force, that they entred into the Citie one with another▪ then the Christian men sewe the Paynims and Sa∣razins, men, women, and children, that great pitie it was to  lye dead vppon heapes in the stréets, so that the bloud of them that were slaine, ran through the streets to the horse pastours: finally by the hye prowesse of Huon, and by the puis∣sae of the Admirall of Persia, the Paynims and Sarazins were discomfited in the Citie of Angory. When the slaying was ceased, and that the Admirall and
Huon sawe how that they hadde ouercome their enemies, they ceased slaying of the people, and they went into the Temples, Towers, and Pallaices, wherein many Paynims and Sara∣zins were withdrawne, they were taken to mercie, promising to saue their liues, if they would leaue the false and detestable Lawe of Mahomet, and beléeue in our Sauiour and Redéemer Iesus Christ, and so many were christened, and such as would not, were slaine. When the Admirall and Huon sawe that the Citie was become christened, then they set their Officers, Prouosts, and Baylifes to gouerne the Citie, and with them two Thousand persons to keepe the Citie. Thus they taried there by the space of Eight dayes, and thē they made readie to depart, and trussed & new vittayled their shippes, and then they entred into their shippes, and the trom∣pets, busins, and tabors made great noyse, and the Marriners weyed vp their anchors and hoysed vp their sayles, and sayled so long vntill they were out of the Sea of Caspus and entred in∣to the great floud of Euphrates, the which descendeth into the great Sea, and when they were passed the Riuer, they coasted the deserts of Abilaunt, the season was faire and cleare and the wind fresh. Thus as they sayled by this great sea, the Admi∣rall and Huon stood at the boord side of their shippe, and deuised of their aduentures, and praysed God of his grace for that he done vnto them: Huon quoth the Admirall, I haue great de∣sire to sée the holy Citie where our Lord God was crucified and laid in the Sepulchre. Sir quoth Huon, by the grace of God wée shall right well and shortly come thether, and I hope hée shall doe vnto vs farre greater grace yet, as to ayde vs to con∣quer and to destroy all those in our way, that beléeue not on our holy Lawe, for that is the chéefest entent of our Voyage. Thus they deuised together the space of eight dayes, without finding of any aduenture, and so vppon an Euening, Huon all alone stood leaning ouer the shippe board, beholding the Sea the which was plaine and peaceable, and then hee remembred the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife, therewith the teares ran tenderly downe his visage, and said. Ah right noble Ladie, when I remember what peril and daunger that I left you in,
and in what pouertie and miserie you bee in nowe, I haue no ioynt nor member but that tremblesh for the displeasure that I am in, and for feare least that the false Emperour cause you to die ere my returne: then he beganne to make great sorrow and gréefe, but Barnard who was not farre from him, said. Ah Sir, you knowe well that in all the fortunes and aduentures that haue come vnto you, God hath ayded you and saued you from the perill of death, therefore take good comfort to your selfe, and laud and praise our Lord God for that he sendeth vn∣to you, and doubt not if you haue perfect hope and trust in him, he will ayd and comfort you, and he neuer forgetteth them that with good heart serue him. Thus with such wordes Barnard comforted Huon, and then the Admirall came and leaned down by Huon, and they deuised together about diuers and sundrie matters. The same time there arose vp a wind and Tempest so great and so horrible, that the sayles were broken in diuers places, and some Mastes brake and flew ouer the boards of the shippe, the sea beganne to bee rough and furious, so that euerie man thought to haue beene perished, the fortune of this Tempest was so horrible, as euerie man deuoutly called vpon our Lord God to saue them from the perill and daunger that they were in. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray you to shewe mee what Coun∣trey is yonder that I see before mée, we were happie and fortu∣nate if wee might arriue there, and cast our anchors vnder the Rocke that I see there? Sir, (quoth the Admirall) wée bée ar∣riued at an euill Port, for wee bée néere to the Deserts of Abi∣launt, vppon yonder Mountaine that you sée is conuersant an enemie, who hath caused many a ship and Vessell to be drow∣ned in this Sea, whereby wee bée all in great daunger to bee lost, for none can approach to this Rocke, but that he is stran∣gled and slaine by the enemie that is there: then euerie man was in great feare, and the Admirall said vnto the Marriners. Sirs, I pray you if it may bee, let vs drawe out of this quar∣ter. Sir (quoth Huon) mee thinkes you are too sore dismay∣ed & aashd, for by that Lord that made me to his semblance, I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I knowe why that
enemie causeth them to perish so fast this way, I shall neuer rest vntill I haue spoken with him, and if hee doe any thinge contrarie to my pleasure, I shall strike off his head. Huon, (quoth the Admirall) I haue great maruaile of that you doe saye, for if there were fiue Hundred such as you bée, within one houre you should bée all dead and stangled. Sir, (quoth Huon) doubt not you that, for though I should die in the quar∣rell I will goe sée him, and knowe the cause why hée letteth or troubleth this passage, before it be three dayes to an end, I shal goe and speake with him what fortune soeuer commeth there∣of. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) in you it is to doe your owne will, for since it pleaseth you I must bee content, but if you would beleeue mée, you should not take vpon you that Voyage and Enterprize. Sir, (quoth Huon all smiling) I haue my hope and trust in almightie God, who hath heeretofore saued me from death, and so I hope he will doe yet, for it is a common prouerbe sayd, hee whome God will ayde and succour no man can hurt. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) I pray vnto our Lord God to defend you from all euill, and to giue you the grace to returne againe in sauegard. Sir, (quoth Huon) I thanke you heartily. Then Barnard arose vp and saide: Deare Coozen, I require you to let me goe with you, and then the Admirall sayd. Sir, I desire you to bee content, that I and Barnard may keepe you companie, and wee shall haue with vs for the more sauegard of our persons foure Hundred hardy Knights. Sir, (quoth Hu∣on) by Gods grace I will goe alone, none shall goe with mee but my selfe and Iesus Christ and his blessed Mother, in whose sauegard I commit my selfe. When Barnard heard that, hee had great sorrowe at his heart, and so had the Admirall when they sawe that they could not turne Huon from his dangerous Voyage and Enterprize. Then Huon armed himselfe, and tooke leaue of the Admirall and of the other Lords, and of Barnard, who made great sorrow for his Coozen Huon, who all alone would goe into the Deserts to seeke aduentures. When Huon hadde taken his leaue, hee was set a shoare, and made the signe of a crosse vpon his breas:
then hee mounted vppon the Mountaine, but ere hee was the halfe way, a great wind arose vppon the Sea, so that the Tem∣pest was great and horrible, whereby the cordes and cables of the shippes with the Admirall burst asunder, and so perforce they were ain to take the Sea, and sayle at aduenture as wind and weather would serue them, whereuppon they were cast out of that great Sea, whereof the Admirall and Barnard and all the other Lordes had great feare, and greatly complained for Huon, who alone without companie was mounted vppon the Mountaine, and as hee was going, hee looked downe into the Sea, and sawe the maruailous Tempest that was in the Sea, so that of two Hundred ships that hee had left there with the Admirall, he could then sée no more but two together, for al the rest were seperated one from another in great perill and danger. Then hée began pitifully to wéepe and complayne for his Wife the faire Escleremond, whome he thought then ne∣uer to sée more, because hee was in that Desert, and sawe the shippes driuen from the land in great feare of loosing. Then he kneeled downe, and held vp his handes vnto Heauen, requi∣ring our Lord God of his pitie and grace to ayd and to giue him comfort, that hee might escape from thence aliue, and to saue the shippes, and to bring them againe in sauegard to the place from whence they departed. Then gréeuously he complained for his wife and Daughter, and sayde: Ah right noble Ladie Escleremond, when I remem∣ber the paines and dolors and pouerties, that by my cause you suffer and haue suffered, all my body sweateth by paine and do∣lour: Alas, I had thought in short space to haue aided and suc∣coured you, but nowe I sée well that our departing is come for euer more, in yonder perilous Sea I sée my Coozen Barnard and diuers other Lords, that by my cause are in the way of perditi∣on without God doe ayd and succour them, whome I humbly require to send them that grace, that they may arriue at some good Port, and that I may sée them once againe, to the entent that I may fight against the Paynims and Sarazins, in exal∣ting the Law of Iesus Christ. Thus Huon of Bourdeaux made his prayers to our Lord Iesus Christ.
Chap. CXX. ¶ How Huon went so long in this Desert, that he found Cain, and spake with him a long season: and how hee beguiled Cain and departed. AFter that Huon hadde thus made his prayers vnto our Lord God, he arose vp and blessed him with the signe of the crosse, recommending himselfe vnto our Lord God, and came to the toppe of the Mountaine, but when hée was there, all his bodie trembled with trauaile, so that he was verie faint and féeble. Then hée looked round about him, and sawe in a faire meadowe a cleare Fountaine, thether he went to refresh and to rest him, then he layde him downe vppon the grasse to refresh him before hee would drinke, he was so hot, and when he was well cooled, hée came to the Fountaine and dranke thereof a little, and washed his hands and face, and then he went further into the Forrest, and could find neither Towne nor Castle, Garden nor Trées with fruit, whereof hée was right sorrowfull and sore displea∣sed, and so searched all day to find some man or woman, but al was in vaine, and when he sawe that the Sunne went to rest, and could find no creature, he was sore discomforted, he chose out a Trée, and there vnder layd him downe and slept, and in the morning when he saw the Sunne rise, and that his beames spread abroad vppon the earth, he arose and blessed him, and so went foorth into the Desert, and found neither man nor wo∣man, beast nor birde, wherewith being sorrowfull and an∣grie, deuoutly hée called vppon our Lord God, praying him to haue in his tuition and kéeping his bodie and soule, and that he might yet once sée his Wife the faire Escleremond, and Clariet his Daughter. He went so long in this Desert, that at last he came to a plain
of thrée bowe shoot large, and in the middest thereof he sawe a Tunne made of the heart of Oake, bound all about with bands of yron, and it turned and rowled in the playne, and neuer pas∣sed out of the circuit of the plaine, and beside the Tunne he saw where there lay vppon the ground a great mall of yron, great maruaile had Huon, when hée sawe this Tunne roule about thus without cease like a Tempest, and as it passed by Huon, hee heard a pitifull voice within the Tunne sore complaning, and when hee had heard it two or thrée times, hée approached néere to the Tunne and sayd. Thou that art in this Tunne, speake vnto mée, and shewe mée what thou art, or what thing thou hast néede of, and why thou art put there? Then when he that was in the Tunne heard Huon, he rested still and spake no word: and when Huon saw that it would not speake, he sayd. Whatsoeuer thou art, I coniure thée by him that created all the world, and by his Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, whom he sent downe to suffer death and passion vppon the Trée of the Crosse, to redéeme his Fréends, who by the sinne of Adam and Eue were in Limbo, and by his glorious Resurrection, and by his Angels and Archangels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, and by all his holy Saints I coniure thée to shewe mee what thou art, and why and for what cause thou art set heere in this Tunne? When hee that was within the Tunne heard howe sore hee was coniured, he answeared and said. Thou that hast coniu∣red mée, thou doest great euill to cause me to shew thée the troth, know surely that I haue to name Cain, and Sonne I was vn∣to Adam and Eue, and am hee that slewe my Brother Abell, by false and cursed enuie that I had vnto him, because his oblati∣ons and Dismes that he made vnto God were exalted, and the fume thereof went vpward to Heauen, and those that I made the fume went downe-ward, and when I sawe that, I slewe and murdered my Brother Abell, wherefore, and for the great sinne that I haue committed, I am damned to bee and to suffer this martirdome within this Tunne, wherein I am closed burning, and with Serpents and Toads héere within deuou∣ring mee, and yet I cannot die, and héere I shall bee vntill the
day of Iudgement, and then my paine shall be doubled. Now haue I shewed thee thy demaund, wherefore I repute thée for a foole, when thou art so hardy as to enter into this Desert, whereas neuer man entred and departed without death, for know for troth, that hether repaireth twoo enemies Féends of Hell, who shall slay thée and beare thy soule into Hell, with∣out thou wilt doe as I shall shew thée. Fréend, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to shew me what it is that thou speakest of, or what thing thou wilt that I should doe and I will doe it, to the entent that I may depart from hence, there is nothing in the world but I shall doe it for thée, so thou wilt shewe mée the way howe I may depart from hence. Fréend, (quoth Cain) I shall shewe thée what thou shalt doe, thou shalt take this mall of iron that thou séest there, and strike therewith so long vppon this Tunne vntill thou hast broken it, to the en∣tent that I may yssue out, and when I am deliuered, I shall set thée in sauegard in Ierusalem or in France, or in what coun∣trey soeuer thou wilt wish. If thou wilt doe this that I haue sayd, and deliuer me from this torment: I shall set thée where∣soeuer thou wilt be in any Land Christian or Heathen, and if thou doest not this that I haue saide, before it be night I shall cause thée to die with great tormentes, for anon thou shalt sée come hether two Diuels of Hell, foule and hideous to behold, and they shall stangle thée and beare thy soule into Hell. Ah good Lorde, (quoth Huon) humbly I require and beseech thée to saue mée from this torment. Cain, (quoth Huon) thou speakest mée faire and sayest as thou list, but I will not deliuer thée out of this Tunne, vntill first thou shewest mée how I may depart from hence. Then Cain sayd, if thou wilt promise mée by thy faith, and by thy part of Paradice to deliuer mée out of this Tunne, I shall shewe thée the manner howe thou shalt escape from hence. Cain, (quoth Huon) haue no doubt, and that I promise thée to kéepe my faith, so thou wilt shew mee the man∣ner howe I may depart out of this Desert, I shall deliuer thée out of thy torment. Then Cain said: thou shalt goe by this lit∣tle path that thou séest héere by vppon thy right hand, the which shall bring thée straight to the Sea-side, the which is not farre
from hence, and then goe downe the Mountaine, whereas thou shalt find a shippe, and therein but one man, but before thou doest enter into the shippe, blesse thrée times, for hée that thou shalt finde there is a Féende of Hell, and shewe vnto him howe thou art Cain, escaped out of the rowling Tun, and bid him to passe thée ouer, and say that thou wilt goe and slay all the Christian men that bee in the world, and bring their soules into Hell, and when hée heareth thée say thus, hee wlil passe thée ouer in safetie, for it is longe since that hee hath taried for mee, because he thinketh that I should escape out of this Tun: but thou must take with thée this mall of yron vpon thy necke, to the entent that hee shall the better beleeue thee, and surely he will then passe thee ouer. Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee is this of troth that thou hast sayd? Fréend, (quoth Cain) I lye neuer a word. Now I pray thée seeing I haue shewed thée the manner how thou mayest e∣scape, take this Mall of yron, and breake asunder this Tunne that I am in, that I may be deliuered out of this paine and tor∣ment. Cain, (quoth Huon) I pray thee to shew mee who is hee that did put thée into this Tun, and what is his name? Sir, (quoth Cain) know for troth that God of Heauen set me héere, because I had displeased him for slaying of my Brother Abell, wherefore I haue suffered so much paine and sorow, that more I cannot endure: and therefore yet againe I pray thee to deli∣uer mee from hence. Cain, (quoth Huon) God forbid that I should deliuer thee, séeing our Lord God hath set thee there: Know for troth, that thou shalt neuer depart from thence except it bee by his commaundement, for there thou shalt bee euer for mee, I had rather bee periured then to vndoe that thing which God will haue done, to punish thee for the euils that thou hast done. I knowe well, as for the euill that I haue done, as in breaking of my promise to thee: God will lightly pardon mee for it, abide thou there with thy cursed sinnes, for sure by mee thou shalt haue none other ayd.
Chap. CXXI. ¶ How Huon departed from Cain, and passed the Sea in a Ʋessell guided by the Diuell, who beleeued it had beene Cain, and Hu∣on arriued at a Citie called Colanders, whereas he found the Ad∣mirall of Persia and Barnard his Cozen, who had layde siege to the Citie. WHen Cain had well vnder∣stood Huon, he said: Ah thou false Traytor, by whom I am beguiled and mocked, thou art not worthy to be beleeued in any thinge that thou sayest, thou lyest worse then a Dogge. Oh thou false periured Traitour, thou hast ill kept thy promise, thou art not worthy to bee belee∣ued. Cain, (quoth Huon) other good gettest thou none of mee, for thou art not worthie to bee heard, when thou hast staine thy deare Brother by false enuie and cursed treason, whereof thou art full: goe thy way false Traytour, too much euill cannot bée done vnto thee, bee content with the Tunne that thou art in, thou néedest not feare of any refreshing nor of more furthering for mee, well hast thou deserued it, but within short time thou shalt haue worse paine and sorrow. Ah Traytour (quoth Ca∣in and false lyer, thou hast lost thy part of Paradice. Thou lyest, (quoth Huon) vnto thee ought to bee kept neither faith nor promise, because thou hast slaine Abell thy Brother: where∣fore thou art now punished and well hast thou deserued it. Ah thou false lier, (quoth Cain) subtilly thou hast deceiued and moc∣ked mee by thy false words and subtilties, I see well that thou wilt goe from hence and leaue me still in this paine. Certain∣ly, (quoth Huon) that which I promised thee was but to be∣guile thee, for as by mee thou shalt not come out, without hee commaund it that set thee heere. Well Huon, (quoth Cain) know for certaine, that in all thy life thou wert neuer better
counsailed, for if thou haddest deliuered me out, incontinent I would haue strangled thee. Ah false Feend, (quoth Huon) yet hast thou no repentaunce of thine euill that thou hast done. I will goe my way, and thou shalt abide heere still in great pain and torment foreuer, therewith Huon departed, and tooke the Mall vppon his necke, and entred into the little way that Ca∣in had shewed vnto him. Now we will leaue speaking of Huon, and speake of the Ad∣mirall of Persia, and of his Armie vppon the Sea. Vppon the second day the Tempest ceased, and the Sea waxed calme and faire, then the shippes drew againe together as it pleased God, and arriued at a noble Citie, the which was as then in Arme∣ called Colanders, a great and a faire Citie, but after it was destroyed by the noble Duke Ogyer the Danoyse, he went into Iia. The Admirall and his company greatly complayned for Huon whome they had so lost, they thought neuer to sée him more, and Barnard his Coozen made such sorrow that great pit∣tie it was to see him, the Admirall and all his Lords sore wept and pitifully complayned for Huon, they thought neuer to see him agayne, but hee that our Lord Iesus Christ will haue sa∣ued cannot perish, for Huon the same time came downe the Mountaine, to come vnto the Port whereas the Vessell lay and the Diuell within it. When Huon sawe the Vessell and the Feend within it, who was so hideous and horrible to behold, that it was maruaile to see, hee séemed well to bee the Diuell of Hell, his head was as great as an Oxe head, his eyes more edder then two burning coales, his téeth great and long, and as rough as a Beare, hee cast fire and smoake out of his gorge like a Furnace, it was no maruaile though Huon doubted him, for when hee sawe him so foule hee had great feare, and so lent himselfe to a Rocke the better to behold him, and then hee bles∣sed him with the signe of the Crosse, recommending himselfe to the sauegard of our Lord God, but it fortuned so the same time that the enemie sawe him not. Ah good Lord, (quoth Huon) I pray and require thee humbly to counsaile mee, in what man∣ner I should trust in this foule Féend who is fearfull so behold, I maruaile how I might bee acquainted with him, whether I
might trust to be in the shippe with him, certainly I haue great doubt that hee will cast me into the Sea, or else slay mee on the other side of the Sea, I wotte not what to doe, for I must bee faine to trust him, or else to returne into the Desert, whereas I shall die with famine, and neuer more sée wife nor child: but séeing it is thus, I shall aduenture my selfe with him, and if I may escape from this aduenture, I shall goe to the holy Sepul∣chre, whereas our Lorde Iesus Christ was quicke and dead, and then I shall make warre vpon the Sarazins. Then Duke Huon tooke vppon him heart and courage, and with the Mall vppon his necke hee marched foorth fiercely: then hee called the enemy and said. Oh thou that kéepest this Vessell and passage, passe me incontinent ouer this Sea, and set me a land vpon the other side. When the Diuell sawe Huon with the Mall vppon his necke, and speaking so fiercely, hee said: What art thou? whether wilt thou goe? or what doest thou seeke for héere? or how art thou so bold to come hether? thou shalt neuer goe fur∣ther, but I shall cast thee into the Sea or strangle thée, and then beare thy Soule into Hell. When Huon heard him, he beganne to tremble, but he was nothing abashed, for if he hadde fainted or taried to haue made answeare, hee had incontinent béene destroyed and slaine, but like a hardy Knight full of great Prowesse, and firme in the faith of Iesus Christ, sayde. Hold thy peace thou Foole, for I am Cain, for whome thou hast taried héere so long, I came euen now out of the rowling Tunne vpon the Mountaine, hast thée and passe mée ouer this arme of the Sea, for I shall find neither man nor woman that beléeueth in Iesus Christ, but I shall slay him, to the entent that hell may be filled with their soules. When the Féend heard Huon say so, he had great ioy, and said. Cain, why hast thou made me tarie héere so long as I haue don? I am ioyfull of thy comming, for I could neuer haue departed out of this place, without thou haddest béen deliuered out of the Tunne: therefore Cain come on thy way, enter into this Ship presently, and I shall bring thée whereas thou wilt be, gladly I will passe thée ouer the Sea, to the entent that thou shouldest slay Christian men and Sarazins, to haue their Soules into
hell. Then Huon entred into the Ship, recommending himselfe to our Lord Iesus Christ, and sayde. Quickly passe me ouer: Before Huon thought that he had gone but two Leagues, he was ouer on the other side, whereof Huon had great maruaile that hee was so soone ouer, and thanked our Lord God that hee was out of that daunger: then hee tooke leaue of the enemie, and sayde. Farewell, I will returne againe shortly, within these thrée dayes thou shalt heare tidinges of mee, and then the Féend answeared shortly and sayd. Cain, goe thy way quick∣ly and hast thée, to the entent that when thou returnest into hell, thou shalt haue good chéere of our Maisters, who greatly desire thy comming. Then Huon departed quickly, he thought euer that the Diuell had followed him, and hee went so longe that hee approached to a Citie called Colanders, glad was Huon when hee had lost the sight of the euill Spirit, and in the Eue∣ning he entred into the Citie of Colanders with the Mall vppon his necke, the Paynims and Sarazins that were within the Citie had great maruaile, when he came alone afoote cleane ar∣med into the Citie, and among other, there was one demaun∣ded of him what hee was, and why hee went so alone armed? Then Huon answered him fiercely to abash him therewith, and said: I am Cain, who by mine ilnesse slew Abell my Brother, wherewith God was angrie with mée, but before it bee longe time I shall take such vengeance, that as many men or women or children as I find beléeuing in the Lawe of Iesus Christ, I shall destroy them all in such wise, that the Paynims and Sa∣razins shall haue no doubt for any euill that they shall doe vnto them, for I shall destroy and slay them all, neither sparing old nor young. When the Paynims heard that, they were right ioyfull, and that night serued Huon well and made him a great feast, because they trusted that hee should destroy all Christen∣dome, and saide among themselues, that as then hee was wel∣come thether, because the Citie the day before was besieged by the Admirall of Persia. Thus Huon had great ioy and feasting made vnto him, and after Supper he was brought into a faire and rich Chamber, wherein hee lay and slept soundly vntill the
next morning. Chap. CXXII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux had great ioy, when he sawe the Ad∣mirall of Persia before Colanders, where he fought with the Sa∣razins. AFTER that the Admirall of Persia had left Huon in the Desert of Abillaunt, and how he had a great storme vppon the sea, and at last their Shippes assembled together, and arriued at the Port before the Citie of Co∣landers, in the which Citie Huon was now in, who was right ioyfull, when he knew that the Admirall was come thether to lay siege to the Citie, and the Admirall and his companie was sorrowfull because they had lost Huon, and especially Barnard his coozen, for he thought neuer to haue seene him againe: but hee had shortly tidinges of him as yée shall heare after. When the Admirall was arriued at the Port, they armed themselues, and ordained their men as well as they might to assayle the ci∣tie of Colanders. They yssued out of their Shippes, and came marching towards the City and made a great assault, and then the Paynims and Sarazins armed them on all sides, and went to their defences: then the Captaine of the Towne came vnto Huon, and said. Come on foorth Cain, it is time for you to shew what you can doe, for héere without are christian men assay∣ling the Citie, I pray you spare them not, for wee haue great trust in you. Sirs, (quoth Huon) séeing I am in this citie, yée néede not to feare any person, anon yée shall sée what I can doe. Cain, (quoth the captaine) I pray you goe on before and wee shall followe you. Well, (quoth Huon) with this Mall I shall astone them all, the Paynims had great ioy of his words, wéening surely it had been Cain. Then Huon armed himselfe, and hee had a good horse brought vnto him, whereuppon hee
mounted: then he and the Paynims yssued out of the citie, and found as then the Admirall of Persia and all his companie readie arriued in Battaile. And when hee sawe that the Sarazins were yssued out, hee sette vppon them fiercely, and Huon, who was ioyfull of the aduenture that was fallen to him, hee stept out apart to behold the battaile, and wold not meddle, because hee had beene so well receiued and feasted in the citie by them of the Towne: and hee well perceiued, that the assaults were of the Realme of Persia, and howe the Admirall and his coozen Barnard were there, whereof he had such ioy, that hee wept for gladnesse, and thanked God of the good fortune that he had sent him, and said. Ah good Lord, thou oughtest greatly to be pray∣sed, for thou neuer faylest them at time of néede that serue thée, nowe I may well say, that with thy gracious ayd, yet I shall once more see my Wife and my child: thus Huon saide to him∣selfe, beholding both Battailes fighting. Chap. CXXIII. ¶ How the City of Colanders was taken by the Admirall of Persia, after he hadde wonne the Battaile, and of the great ioy that was made vnto Huon, when hee was knowne by the Admirall of Persia and his Cozen Barnard. WHen the Admirall of Persia sawe and perceiued, that they of the Towne were yssued out, he marched foorth his Bat∣tailes, and set vpon his enemies, there was great slaughter made on both parts: but at the last they of the Citie had the worst, for the christian men were of a greater number then the Paynims and Sarazins that were yssued out, wherefore they were con∣strained to graunt the Victorie to their enemies, the Paynims retired & fled towards their citie, and the Admirall & Barnard with their company chaced & slew them that it was pity to sée it.
Finally, the Admirall oppressed them so sore, that hee entred into the Citie with them, and Barnard and his companie, and slew and beat down the Sarazins, that great maruaile it was to see the bloud that ranne through the stréets. When the Ad∣mirall saw that hee had the victorie, then hée commaunded to cease slaying, and that all such as would beleeue in our Lorde God, their liues should bee saued and their goods, and so all such as would not bee christened, should bee slaine incontinent and none spared, the which was done, many of them receiued Christendome, and as many as woulde not receiue it, were all slaine. Thus as this Citie was taken, then Huon (who was en∣tred into the Citie with the Admirals men) came to the Pal∣laice, whereas hee sawe the Admirall and all the Barons and Barnard his Coozen, Huon had still his Mall vppon his necke, and when he came into the Hall he put off his helmet, and salu∣ted the Admirall and all the other that were there. When the Admirall and his Lords saw Huon, the great ioy that they had no tongue can tell. Oh right déere and vertuous Knight, (quoth the Admirall) your comming doth so reioyce me, that I cannot tell whether I dreame or not, you are much bound vn∣to God, that hee hath giuen you the grace to saue you from pe∣rill. Then the Admirall embraced Huon, and you may well know that Barnard his Coozen had great ioy, and so had all the other, and then the Admirall sayd vnto Huon. Sir, I pray you to shew mee what aduentures you haue had since you departed from vs? Then Huon shewed them all as yée haue heard héere before, and how he escaped. When the Admirall and the other vnderstood Huon, they were neuer so amazed and abashed in all their liues, of that hée was so escaped from the handes of the Diuell, and sayd that hée was much bound vnto God, they were all glad and right ioy∣full for the comming of Huon, and especially Barnard. Then the Captaine of the Citie who had newly receiued Christen∣dome, came vnto Huon and sayd: Sir, I require you to desire the Admirall to bée my good Lord and Maister, for I promised faithfully to abide heere in this Towne as his good and true
Seruant, keeping firmely the christian faith, the which I haue newly receiued. When Huon saw the Captaine, who had re∣ceiued him into his house at his first comming into the Citie, he went vnto the Admirall, and said. Sir, I require you to giue the keeping of this Citie vnto this noble man, and he to hold it as his owne, and to doe homage vnto you for it. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) all that you will I am agréeable vnto, I graunt it him for the loue of you. Then Huon thanked the Admirall, the Captaine seeing the great and rich guift that the Admirall had giuen vnto him for the loue of Huon, he had great maruaile of the great Larges and courtesie that was done vnto him by the meanes of Huon, and then hee kneeled downe before them and thanked them, and did homage vnto the Admirall in the presence of all the Lordes and Barons, and promised truely to keepe the Citie, against all men that would doe any dammage thereunto, nor neuer to yeeld it vp vnto any person, but all onely vnto the Admirall or vnto him that shall haue his Com∣mission: thus as yee haue heard the Citie of Colanders was taken. Chap. CXXIIII. ¶ Howe the Admirall of Persia and Huon of Bourdeaux, and all their Hoast passed by Antioch, and by Damas, and came to the Citie of Ierusalem to the holy Sepulchre, and was nobly re∣ceiued by the King of Ierusalem: and howe the Souldans Mes∣senger came and defied the Admirall of Persia. WHen the Admirall and Huon saw this Citie wonne and brought vnder their obeysance, and hadde established there a newe Lorde and Captaine, and set Prouostes and Baylifes and other Officers, then they tooke aduise together, & determined since they were a and, to send backe againe their Nauie of shippes into Persia,
and they to goe by land to the Citie of Ierusalem, for they hadde from thence as they were but Tenne dayes iourney vnto An∣tioch, and so to passe by that Citie, and then vnto Damas, and so to Ierusalem, and there to doe their offering, and if by aduen∣ture they founde in their way either Kings or Admirals, that would let or trouble them in their passing, they sayd that they were of puissance sufficient to resist against them, and then they sayd, howe that from Ierusalem the Admirall might returne by land into Persia, vnto the Riuer of Euphrates, and there his Na∣uie to méet him, and so to conuay him vnto his Citie of Thauris▪ and Huon to returne vnto laffe, and from thence by water to returne into Fraunce. Thus they concluded to doe, the which aduise was lauded and praised of all the Lordes and Barons of the Hoast. After this conclusion thus taken, the Admirall commaunded his shippes to be discharged of all thinges necessary to be caried by lande, the which was done diligently according to his com∣maundement, their horses were sette a lande, and their Tents and Pauillions trussed vppon Mules and Cammels and Dro∣modaries, the which cariage séemed a great Hoast there were so many together, the noyse and brute that they made séemed to be a new world, and when all the shippes were discharged, the Patrons and Maisters of the Shippes tooke their leaue of the Admirall, who commaunded them expresly to abide for him in the Riuer of Euphrates, and so they did accordingly. Nowe lette vs leaue speakinge of them, and returne vnto our former matter. When these Shippes were departed and euerie thinge trus∣sed, then the Admirall commaunded through-out all the Coun∣trey, that all Marchants and other able to doe it, should send af∣ter his Hoast bread, wine, and flesh, and bisket to vittaile his Hoast, and the charge to sée this done was giuen to the newe Admirall of the Citie of Colanders, the which he did diligently. When the Admirall of Persia sawe his time to depart, he made it to bee proclaimed through-out the Citie by a Trumpet, that euery man should make him ready to depart the next morning, to goe whether it pleased the Admirall: this was done so, that
at an houre before the next day there was great brute and noise made in the remoouing: then the Admirall and Huon made them readie, and mounted vppon their horses, and yssued out of  Citie, and etred into the féelds, and then the whole Hoast tooke the way towards Antioch: Of their iourneys I make no  fall, they road foorth so that they passed by low Armenia,  th hye Ermine, and so vpon a Monday they came before , whereas they lodged that night a longe by the the , without that any person of the Citie made any  or to let them, but they brought out of the  bread, wine, and flesh, and other thinges  their companie, whereof the Admirall and Huon  ioyfull, and gaue them great thankes, and for that  woulde not suffer that any of his Hoast  hurt or dammage vnto any person of the Citie.  buy when they had dyned, they tooke their way to  the Citie of Damas, and as they went thether-ward, they ooke certaine Townes and Castles, and brought them vnder their obeysance, and such as were taken perforce, and  not beléeue in our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ, incontinent they were all slaine, and brought to vtter ruine and destroyed. wasting and destroying the Countrey in their way, at last they came before the Citie of Damas. When they came thether▪ they lodged about the Citie in the Gardens and ▪ and constrained them within the Citie to bringe them , the which they did, for doubt of the destroying of their  and fruits: there they lay one night, and the next day  the way to Ierusalem, and hadde diuers Battailes by the way, but they were of so great puissance that none could  them. So longe roade this christian Hoast, that they came and lodged before Npelous, and there left their hoast: then the next morning, the Admirall and Huon, and diuers of the great Lords and Barons of Persia accompanied with them,  from Napelous to the number of foure Thousand vali∣ Knights, to guard them into the Citie of Ierusalem, thether they came about noone, whereas they were receiued with great
ioy of Kinge Thibault, and of the Patriarke and Arch-priest, who as then were in the Citie of Ierusalem, whome the Empe∣rour Constantine had left there, and ordered for the keeping of the Citie. When the Admirall of Persia, and Duke Huon and Barnard, and other went and offered to the holy Sepulchre, then they went to the Temple of Salomon, and vnto the holy Temple of Simeon, whereas they made their offerings, and the next Pilgrimages vnto all the holy places in the Citie, with great deuotion and reuerence. When they had accomplished their holy Pilgrimages, they returned to the Pallaice of the King of Ierusalem, whereas they were greatly feasted and honourably receiued, of their seruice I will make none account, but one thing I dare well say, that there was neuer Kinge nor Admirall better serued. And as they sat at dinner, there entred a Sarazin oule and blacke, cal∣led Trampoiguyffle, the which is as much to saye as Balaach. Then he said a hye before the Table, the same God that made the Firmament, and that downe to vs sent his holy Prophet Mahomet to teach vs his holy Lawe, he saue and keepe Sapha∣din Souldan of Babilon and of Egipt, and may confound them that be his enemies. To the Admirall of Persia and of Media, the Souldan sendeth word by mée, that wrongfully and with∣out cause thou goest and destroyest his Countrey and his peo∣ple, not giuing him any knowledge why thou doest so, & there∣fore by me he sendeth thee word, that am his secret Messenger, that he will assigne vnto thee the day of battaile, that is vpon Thursday next comming, between Rames and lafte, whereas there is a plaine Countrey, and hée will that thou knowest for certaine, that if he take thée, thou shalt be hanged and slaine all quicke and neuer sée faire day more, and al other that I sée heere sitting at this Table.
Chap. CXXV. ¶ Of the answere that the Admirall of Persia and of Media made vnto the Souldans Messenger, and of the report that he made vn∣to his Maister. WHen the Admirall had well heard and vnderstood the Souldans Messenger, he beganne to smile and said. Tell thy Mai∣ster, that I set nothing by his threatning, nor by nothing that he can do, nor I will not leaue for all his saying, to destroy and to take his Townes and his Castles, and to slay all them that will not be∣leeue in the Lawe of Iesus Christ, and say vnto him from me, that I am not in minde to retire backe, but by the ayde of God my creatour, I shall come and meete with him, so that he shall not neede to tarrie for mee, and I shall fight with him my puis∣sance against his, to shew him howe they can doe that beleeue in Iesus Christ. Goe thy way and say vnto thy Maister, that he shall not find me flying, for any feare that I haue of any man beléeuing in the false and detestable fayth of Mahomet. Then the Admirall commaunded to giue the Messenger meate and drinke, and fortie Florents, the Messenger refused it not but tooke it, and thanked the Admirall, and when hee had dyned, he taried not night nor day vntill hee came to the Citie of Gase∣re, whereas he found the Souldan and al his Armie, the which was a great number, for they were a Hundred Thousand men, and all they threatened the death of the Admirall of Persia, but it is a comon saying, yt many things lacketh of foolish thoughts and so did they. When the Messenger was arriued at Gasere, hee came before the Souldan, and made his reporte what an∣sweare the Admirall had made him, and when the Souldan had well heard and vnderstood the Messenger, hee hadde great maruaile of the great outrage that hee thought to be in the Ad∣mirall
of Persia, in that hee durst abide him, and sware by his Lawe, that if hée might haue the vpper-hand of the Admirall, that he would slay him quicke. Then he commanded his Hoast to dislodge, and to take the way towardes Escalonne, the which they did. Chap. CXXVI. ¶ Howe the Admirall of Persia sent for his men that lay at Nape∣lous, and caused them to withdrawe towards Rames, and howe they departed from Ierusalem: and howe he went to fight with his enemies. AFter that Trampoiguyfle the Messenger was departed from Ierusalem, and returned to his Master the Souldan: then the Admirall of Persia and Huon of Bourdeaux, who were in the Pallaice with the Kinge of Ierusa∣lem, thether they called all their counsaile, and when they were all assembled, the Admirall sayd. Sirs, I pray you to counsaile me, in what manner I shall vse my selfe, to goe and meete with the enemies of the Christian faith, the which are come against vs: therefore I desire euery one of you to shew me your opinions what in this case is best to be done. Then Thibault King of Ierusalem arose vp, and sayd. Sir Ad∣mirall of Persia and Media, mée thinkes you should not abide them heere, but rather you ought to depart, and to goe against your enemies, for if you abide for them in this Citie, you shall doe great dammage to this countrey, for wée haue truce with the Souldan for fiue yeares, the which with our honour wee cannot breake, for if we would haue made warre against him, we could not haue resisted against him, and also wee are far off from Fraunce, to seeke for succor and ayd there: thus the King spake no more. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux sayd: Sir Admirall, the King of Ierusalem hath shewed you the troth, for
if wee should abide heere, it should bee alwaies to our reproach and shame, if this holy Citie should bee lost, the which was wonne by twoo noble Emperours of Rome and of Greece, for the King that is heere, his honour saued and the suertie of his countrey, may not breake the Truce that hee hath taken with the Souldan of Babilon: and therefore mine aduice is, that as  as we may commaund your men that be at Napelous,  to dislodge and to meete with you at Rames, and then when you haue somewhat refreshed your Hoast, then set forward to∣wards your enemies, (as the Kinge of Ierusalem hath said) for  were great folly to giue them leasure to come too farre for∣ward, first let them knowe, how the Swords and Speares of the Persians and Medians can strike, who sometime did  in armes, wherefore it is reason that they followe nowe thir Predecessors. When Huon had finished his reason, the Admirall and all the other Lords that were there, praised and held that counsaile good, that was purposed by the King of Ieru∣salem and of Huon, and then they departed and returned to their Chambers and Lodgings. Then the Admirall commaunded hastily his Hoast to withdrawe towards Rames, whereas hee would tarie for them, the which thing was done diligently, and the Hoast rested not vntil they came vnto Rames, whereas they ound readie the Admirals Harbingers, who had alreadie ap∣pointed their Lodgings. Thus after that the Admirall had written to his Marshals of his Hoast, then hee tooke his leaue of the King of Ierusalem, and in like wise so did Huon and Barnard his coozen, without knowledging of himselfe to the King of Ierusalem. Then they departed from the holy citie, and road so long that they came to the Towne of Rames, whereas they found their Hoast lodged. Then they rested them there vntill the next day, and then the Admirall commanded them to dislodge, and to make them rea∣die to take the way towards Escalonne. A goodly sight it was to see the Hoast dislodge, Huon had thereof great ioy, for hee de∣sired rather to slay the Paynims, then to bee in chambers with  and Damsels. When they were all in the feelds, the Admirall ordained his Battailes, the first guided Huon of Bur∣deaux
and Barnard his coozen, he had with him twentie Thou∣sand Persians fierce and hardy, the second Battaile ledde the Marshall of Persia, with twentie Thousand of good mn of warre, the third Battaile led the Admirall of Persia and of Me∣dia, and with him thirtie Thousand of the most valiantest men in his hoast, and when euerie thing was ordained as it apper∣tained, hee went and visited them, exhorting them to doe well their deuoyre, and prayinge them to quit themselues vali∣antly: then hee came vnto Huon, and said. Oh right deare and vertuous Knight, garnished and repleat with al prowesse, all my hope I put in the strength and vertue of your armes and bodie: therefore I pray you this day to shewe out your great vertues wherewith you are garnished, for especially for the loue of you and for your bountie, I haue taken and receiued the holy baptisme, whereof I laud and praise our Lord God of his grace that hee hath done vnto mee: therefore I desire you this day to shew vnto the Sarazins, that your Sword is to be feared. Sir, (quoth Huon) God giue mee grace to bee such a one as you say, and to performe in me that which lacketh: and Sir, I trust by me it shall not be let, but that this day our ene∣mies shall haue no cause to praise nor to make their boast, and therefore Sir, let vs ride foorth surely, for by the grace of God I haue hope, that this day we shall make our enemies so much adoe, that they shall haue scarce time and leasure to graunt vn∣to vs the Victorie. Now as the Admirall and Huon were thus deuisinge toge∣ther, they sawe before them a farre off, the ayre waxe thicke, and that the Sunne lost his clearnesse, whereof they had great maruaile, because they sawe a little before the Sunne shine so faire and cleare, there as they were anon they perceiued, that the darknesse arose by reason of the dust rising of the Horses of their enemies, who were hastily comming towardes them to haue taken them in their lodginge, whereby they came all out of order, trusting al in their great number of men, for they were more then a hundred Thousand, fearfull it was to sée them comming, so fast they roade that the one hoast might sée the o∣ther. When Huon had well perceiued them, and saw their de∣meanour
and disorder, hee saide vnto the Admirall: Sir, well you ought to praise our Lord God, for this day hee shall bring your enemies into your handes to slay them at your pleasure: therefore Sir, I counsaile you, that incontinent we hasten and set vppon them, to the entent that they shall haue no time nor leasure to assemble together to bring themselues in good order, if wee doe thus, there is no doubt but by the grace of God wee shall shortly discomfite them before they bee assembled. Sir, (quoth the Admirall) your opinion is good and reasonable, let it be done as you haue deuised. Then the Admirall commaun∣ded the Marshals and Captaines of his hoast to march forward his Battailes against his enemies, and then Trumpets and Drummes began to sound, that it was maruaile to heare them, and then they sette on towardes their enemies. When the Souldan and they of his hoast sawe the Persians comming a∣gainst them readie ranged in battaile, hee called vnto him his Kinges and Admirals, who were fiftéene in number, and sayd vnto them. Sirs, it were good that our men rested still a sea∣son, that wee may order and range our Battailes, for yonder we may sée well our enemies comming. Then stept foorth the Admirall of Dorbrey, who was horrible and great to behold, he was fiftéene foote of height, and road vppon a goodly splayed Mare, the most fairest and greatest that euer was séene, shee had a great horne in her fore-head, if shee were any thing cha∣fed, none durst approach néere vnto her but alonely her Kéeper, this Admirall was foule and great, hee rather séemed a Féend of Hell then any humane creature, and when he came vnto the Souldan, euerie man made him way: then hee sayd vnto the Souldan. Sir, I haue great maruaile of thée that thou art so affraid for a small number of men, who are comming towards their deaths. Sir, know for troth, that before you can order your men in battaile array, I shall discomfite your enemies, and deliuer vnto you the Admirall of Persia either quicke or dead. When the Souldan had well heard and vnderstood the Admirall of Dorbrey, hee sayd: Sir Admirall, I put all the conduct of mine hoast into your hands, I haue great affiance in the vertue that is in you, and in the strength of your armes, the
which are greatly to bée feared: then the Souldan commanded all his hoast to set vppon their enemies, and said. Séeing the the Admirall of Dorbrey is with mee, I feare no man of Persia nor of Media, and so spurred his horse, without making of any good order. Chap. CXXVII. ¶ Now speake wee of the great Battaile that was in the playnes of Rames, betweene the Souldan of Babilon and the Admirall of Persia, the which was discomfited by the Prowesse of Huon of Bourdeaux. WHen Huon who led the first Battaile of the Persians, beheld and saw how the Sarazins came on without any good order or conduct, hee sounded his Trumpets, exhor∣ting his men to doe well and valiantly, and commaunded his Constables and Marshals to march forward, and so did the Admirall and his company, and they ioyned néere one to another, to the entent each of them to succour other. When Huon sawe his enemies approach, and that it was time to set vpon them, he commaunded his Archers and Crosbowes to shoote, and so they did, that by reason of the shooting of both partes, it séemed like a cloud, that thereby and with the dust together it darkened the light of the Sunne, and then Huon ouched his Speare, and ranne at him that bare the Souldans Standard, who was comming before all the other, to cause his company to follow the faster, Huon gaue him such a stroake with his Speare, that he pierced him cleane through the bodie, so that hee fell from his horse with the Standard, whereof the Sarazins were sore abashed and displeased, then they approached and came to rayse vp againe their banner, but Huon and the Persians encountred them so fiercely, that many were slaine on both parts: he that had séen Huon howe he slew
and beat downe the Paynims and Sarazins, would haue said that hee was no mortall man, but rather a man of the Fayrie, for the great prowesse and maruailes that he did, for he caused the Paynims whether they would or not to retire backe, and to forsake the banner that lay vpon the earth, for before he de∣parted from thence hee slewe fiue Kinges and twoo Admirals, Huon was so feared, that there was none so hardy that durst approach néere to him, aad also his Coozen Barnard was great∣ly to be feared, and he euer followed Huon as néere as he could, then there ioyned the Battailes of the Marshals, and the Ad∣mirall of Persia set vppon the Souldans battaile, and the Bat∣taile began so great and horrible, that a hundred yeares before were séen none such, so valiantly did the Admirall of Persia and such as were in his companie. When the Souldan sawe his menne so slaine, he was right sorrowfull and sore displeased, and sayde vnto the Admirall of Dorbrey: I may well curse the day and time that I beléeued you, for by you I haue lost my banner, and I sée my men slayn, for if I had ordered my battailes before, this mischiefe had not hapned, nor that which is apparant to fall, and then the Soul∣dan couched his Speare, and strake therewith a Knight who was great Maister of the house of Persia in such wise, that the Souldan ranne him cleane through, and so he serued the second, third, and fourth, and when his Speare was broken, he drew out his Sworde and did therewith great dammage, great crie and noyse was made when the battailes ioyned, there might haue béene seen many horses running abroad in the field, tray∣ling their bridles after them, and their maisters lyinge in the field amonge the horse féete, and a horrible thinge it was to see and to heare the complaints and cries, that the wounded men made among the horse féete, hauing no power to relieue them∣selues, but there died and finished their dayes miserably, great crie made the Sarazins and Persians that fought together, and especially whereas Huon fought and searched the Rankes, and brake the great preasses, he beat downe and confounded al that came before him, so that none durst abide before him, for by that time hee had slaine sixe of the Kinges, and fiue Admi∣rals
beside many other, so that the noise and crie came to the hearing of the Admirall of Dorbrey, who did great distruction among the Persians, so that it was an horrible thing to sée and behold, and when hee heard how that there was a Knight that did great dammage and hurt among them, and had slaine di∣uers Kinges and Admirals, hee said vnto a Paynim who had brought vnto him those tidings and newes. Goe thy way and shewe him vnto me that hath done vs so great damage. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I shall shew him vnto you, but I will ap∣proach to him no néerer then I am, now you may sée him yon∣der how he fighteth, and maketh our men to retire backe from him, for there is none so hardy that dare approach néere vnto him. Then the Giant beheld Huon, and sawe howe hee made the Paynims to retire backe, and then hee strake his Mare with his spurres, and Huon who well perceiued and sawe him com∣ming, feared him: howbeit, he refused him not, but came with his Sword in his hand then against the Sarazin, and the Sa∣razin (who bare a great hatchet vppon his necke) sawe Huon comming, and strake at him, but as God would haue it he mist him, for if the stroake had lighted vppon hm he had béen slain, the stroake alighted vppon the crooper of his Horse, so that the horse fell downe dead and Huon vppon his backe, and hee was not so soone relieued, but that the Gyant tooke him by the ar∣mour, and cast him before his Saddle as lightly as though it he had béen but a feather, and so hee held and caried Huon with the one hand and fought with the other hand. When Huon felt himselfe so taken, he cryed and called vppon our Lord God, and prayed him to haue pitie and compassion of Escleremond his Wife, for hee sawe well that his life was determined. The Gyant who was right ioyfull, in that hee had taken Huon who had done the Sarazins so much dammage, hee desired to finde the Souldan to make him a present of Huon, so that with the hast that he made hee strake his Mare, and shee began to leape and gambauld, and beganne to runne, and as fortune was, she ranne among the broken speares and dead men that lay vp∣pon the ground, so that shee stumbled, & thereby knéeled to the
earth, and the Gyant thought to gaue relieued her but he could not, by reason of the weight that lay vppon her neke, and by the great swiftnesse of her running, she was faine to fall down to the earth. When Huon saw and well perceiued that, he was light and quicke, and arose vppon his feete, and when he sawe the Giant fallen downe and beganne to relieue, he hasted him, and lifted vp his Sword with both his handes, and gaue the Gyant such a stroake vpon the helmet, that he claue his head to the braines, so that therewith he fell downe dead to the earth, and then Hu∣on seazed vppon the Mare by the raines of the bridle, and leapt vppon her and had great ioy, and so had the Persians, and the Admirall had great ioy, for it had beene shewed him how the Gyant had taken Huon, and that he was escaped and had slaine the Gyant. When Huon felt himselfe vpon the strong Mare, hee dashed in amonge the Paynims and Sarazins, and mette with the King of Olyfarne, whome hee gaue such a stroake, that he claue his head asunder: then he ranne at the Admirall of Or∣cay, who was Brother Germaine vnto the Souldan, he gaue him such a stroake vppon the shoulder, that hee strake off his arme, so that it fell downe to the earth, shéeld and all, and when the Admirall felt himselfe hurt and wounded, hee would haue fled away, but Huon sitting vppon the Mare, who was the swiftest of pace in all the world, ranne after him, and when Hu∣on had ouertaken the Sarazin, he gaue him such a stroake vp∣pon the head, that he claue it to his téeth, and so hee fell downe ad to the earth, whereby the Paynims and Sarazins were o affrayde, that after that they durst not assemble together. This was shewed vnto the Souldan, howe the Gyant was slaine and fiue other Kinges and Admirals, and his Brother also slaine, and all by the hands of one Knight, and also he saw his Battaile sore broken, and how they beganne to flye: where∣fore he sawe well that if he taried there long, he should be either slaine or taken, then the King of Antiphoney, who was néere paent to the Souldan, came vnto him and sayd. Sir, thinke how to saue thy life, for if thou tariest long heere, there is none can saue thée, for if the Knight that is with the Admirall of Per∣sia
happen to come hether, thy life is lost: therefore I counsaile thée to depart and saue thy selfe, or else thou art but dead. Then the Souldan and about Twentie men with him departed, and tooke the way by the Sea-side to goe towards Acres, the which as then appertained vnto the Sarazins, and Huon who was mounted vppon the puissant Mare, beating downe his ene∣mies, so that none durst abide his stroakes, and the Admirall of Persia following him, regarding that by the hye prowesse of Huon his enemies were confounded and discomfited, and saw well how that there was no humane bodie that had any power to resist against him, and escaped without death: then hee sayd vnto all his Lords and to Barnard. Sirs, (quoth the Admirall) yonder before you yee may sée maruailes and thinges incredi∣ble to be declared, for you may sée that there is none so puissant and strong that can resist against my Fréend Huon, I would to God that he were vnmaried, then hée should neuer depart from mée, for I woulde then giue him my Daughter in mariage, I shall bee verie sore displeased and discomforted when hee shall depart from me. Thus as yee haue heard the Admirall of Persia and Media sayd vnto his companie, and so slaying and beating downe the Paynims and Sarazins that fledde, the Admirall and Barnard followed Huon, but by reason of his good horse hee was so farre before them, that they could not ouertake him, for hee desired nothing so much as he did to ouertake the Souldan, who was flying as fast as hée might towards the Citie of Acres. When the Admirall saw that he could not ouertake Huon, then he and Barnard entred in among the Sarazins who were flying away, the Admirall and Barnard slewe and beat them downe, that great pitie it was to sée and behold them, for with the bloud of the dead Paynims and Sarazins their swoordes were taynted all red, if I should shew all the hye Prowesse and maruailous déedes that were done there that day, it would bée ouer-long to rehearse, but I dare well say, that by the great prowesse of Hu∣on, the Battaile was vanquished and cleane discomfited, the Persians and Medians chaced the Paynims and Sarazins, and slewe and did beat them downe: the chace endured more
then foure Leagues, and the Admirall had great maruaile that he could not ouertake nor heare any thing of Huon, who chaced still the Souldan and followed him so long, that Huon found the Souldan all alone, for his men could not follow him so fast, be∣cause their Horses were so wearie that they coulde not goe no further, the Souldan road vppon a puissant and a goodly horse, and Huon who followed him vppon the puissant Mare, anon o∣uertooke him, and when he came néere to the Souldan, he said. Oh thou traiterous Souldan, great shame and reproach thou maist haue, when thou flyest away thus all alone without any company, turne thy shéeld against mée, or else I shall slay thée flying. When the Souldan had well heard Huon, hee hadde great maruaile and was greatly feared, for hée knew well that it was he by whome he had receiued so great losse and damage, and by whome many Kinges and Admirals had béene slaine, and thought to himselfe, if hée returned not, that hee should bee slaine, wherefore he tooke courage to himselfe, seeing that Hu∣on was alone aswell as he, and also hee thought, that it should not be long before he was succoured with some of his men that followed him: and therefore like a hardy Knight he turned his horse head towards Huon, who fiercely ranne one at another, and gaue each other great stroakes. But it had béene vnto the Souldan but small profite if hee had not béene rescued by his men, for if they had not come when they did, Huon had slaine him: but thether came about fortie Knightes Sarazins, and they all ranne at Huon, who was sore dismayed and abashed when he sawe himselfe so inclosed with his enemies: howbeit, hee might haue saued himselfe well ynough if he had listed to haue fledde away, but for any feare of them hee would not flye, and he dealt such stroakes amonge them, that there was none so hardy that durst approach néere vnto him, so sore they feared him, for hee strake none with a full stroake, but that his head was clouen to the braines or to the teeth, so that hee needed af∣ter no Surgeon. When they sawe that they could not take nor slay him, they were right sorrowfull and angrie: then the Souldan cryed and sayd. Sirs, vppon him, great shame it is vnto you all, when
by the bodie of one man you are so put barke, and you sée well that he hath no succour, goe and slay the Mare that hee rydeth vppon with speares and darts, then he shall be soone ouercome, and you know well that it is he whome I haue suffered at my great losse and dammage, it is he that hath slaine my men, and by him I haue lost the Battaile, if he escape from you, yée ought neuer to be séene in any Princes Court. When the Paynims and Sarazins had well vnderstood their Souldan, then they sore oppressed Huon, who did great maruailes in armes, but his puissance & vertue should but little haue auailed him, if he had not béen shortly aided & succoured, and also by reason of the rich stones and pearles that were vppon him: then the Pay∣nims and Sarazins who of fortie were left aliue but twentie eight, they saw well that they could not ouercome Huon, with∣out they slew the Mare first that hee road vppon: therefore they cast at her Darts and Iauelins in such wise, that finally they slew her vnder him, whereof Huon was right sorrowfull and sore displeased, and was as then in great feare of his life, then he called vppon our Lord Iesus Christ to haue pitie and com∣passion of his soule, for he saw that his life was at an end, and said. Deare Lord Iesus Christ, I pray thee by thy swéet mer∣cie to haue pitie and compassion of my Wife Escleremond, who is in great perrill and pouertie for the loue of mee, without a∣ny desert of her part, and also I recommend into thy sauegard my litle Daughter Clariet. After that Huon had made his prai∣er vnto our Lord God, he tooke his shéeld and his sword in his hand afoote, and he saw where there grew a bush, he went the∣ther and set his backe thereunto, that the Sarazins and Pay∣nims should not come behind him, and so he stood at a bay like a wild Boare baited with Houndes, there was not so hardy a Paynim or Sarazin that durst assayle him, they cast at him speares and darts, but they could neuer hurt his flesh, he coue∣red himselfe so well and so surely with his sheeld, that nothing could pierce him. The Souldan séeing that nothing could hurt him, he said to his men: Ah yée false and vntrue Cowards, of Mahomet be yée cursed, when yée cannot slay nor take one man alone, and then
the Souldan approached vnto Huon, and gaue him a great stroake, so that he brake his sheeld in two peeces, whereof Hu∣on then was in great feare of death. Then the Souldan drew backe, and looked behind him into the playnes of Rames, wher∣as the great Battaile had beene: and then hee sawe comming the Admirall of Persia with twentie Thousand men, and they came to seeke for Huon, and when the Souldan sawe that suc∣cour was comming vnto Huon, the which he knew by reason of the great baner of Persia: then the Souldan said vnto his men. Sirs, let vs leaue this enemie, who by force of armes cannot be ouercome nor vanquished, let vs saue our liues, for yonder I sée comming the Admirall of Persia, and if we tarie long héere we shalbe all slaine and destroyed. Néere vnto them was the sea-side, about a League from Iaffe the way towardes Surrey, there was ready a Galley, the which the Souldan had sent the∣ther from the Citie of Escalonne, the Souldan road thether, and his men left and did forsake Huon, who was right wearie and could not long haue endured, nor had not endured so longe but for the vertue of the riche stones and pearles that were about him. The Souldan to saue his life, hee and his men did so much, that they came vnto the place whereas the Galley was, and entred into it in as great hast as they could by any meanes for the sauegard of their liues, and they did forsake their horses vppon the Sea-side. Chap. CXXVIII. ¶ How the Admirall of Persia and of Media found Huon, wher∣as he had fought with Fortie men Sarazins, and how the Soul∣dan fled to Acres, and how the Admirall of Persia and Media besieged him there, and of the strange Ʋision that Huon had in the night.
AFter that the Souldan was thus fled and departed, the Admirall of Per∣sia and Media came to the place whereas Hu∣on was sore wearie of trauaile, and sawe lying about him a great number of men slaine, whereof they had great maruaile, the Admirall séeing Huon alone, began sore to wéepe for pitie and for ioy that hee hadde, and saide. Oh right noble and valiant Knight, most excellent of all other liuing in the world, to whom in Prowesse and valour none can bee compared, you are the mirrour of all Knightes, the Temple of truth, the comfort of widdowes and Orphelings, to whom God hath giuen so great vertue and grace, that none can report the bountie that is in you, by whome the honour of the Persians and Medians this daye is saued and kept, I desire you right hartely my deare Freend, to shew mée if you haue any hurt, whereby you should bee in any perill or daunger. Sir, (quoth Huon) it appertai∣neth not vnto me to haue such hie words or prayses to be giuen, I ought to haue none other praise but as one of your other Knightes, whereof you haue so many noble and valiant that they cannot be numbred: but Sir, know for troth, this grace and glorie commeth of our Lord God, who hath aided and suc∣cored you, reporting how that you haue in him perfect affiance, and then the Admirall alighted, and came and embraced Hu∣on, and after him came Barnard, sore wéeping for compassion and for ioy that he had found his Coozen Huon in sauegard, and came and kissed him more then ten times and sayd. My right deare Lord and Maister, well you may thanke our Lord God for his goodnesse alwayes towardes you, who hath saued you from so many perilous and dangerous aduentures, whereof I thanke our Lord Iesus Christ that hath giuen you such grace, and then he was of all the Barons greatly feasted, and they had al great maruaile of the perils and aduentures that Huon had escaped: wherefore they sayde, that they ought greatly to laud & praise God, in that Huon was arriued in their Countrey, by
whome they were reduced and brought to beléeue in the faith of Iesus Christ. Thus deuised the Lordes and Barons amonge themselues, and behelde the dead men that lay about Huon, and when they had beene there for a season, and sawe that the Souldan was fledde, then a Horse was brought vnto Huon and hee mounted vppon him, and then they departed from thence, and came vn∣to the place whereas the Battaile hadde béene, whereas they found thrée-score and fourtéene Thousand men lye dead vppon the earth, beside them that were slaine in the flying in that chace, whereas there were slaine twelue Thousand men, be∣sides the Prisoners: Great goods the Persians and Medians wanne there, the which was parted and deuided to such as it appertained, so that they were all made rich. Then the Ad∣mirall and Huon departed from the playnes of Rames, and then they went and lodged in the Towne, and in the morning they determined to tarie there three dayes to refresh them, and vp∣pon the fourth day they departed, because it was shewed them how that the Souldan was departed from Sayre, and gone by sea with a small companie to the Citie of Acres. Then the Admirall and Huon drewe their Hoast towards Napelous, and there taried two dayes, and from thence they went to Iene, and so to the Citie of Nazareth, and visited that holy place, where∣as the Angell brought the salutation Angel-like to the Virgin Marie. Then from thence they went to the Castle of Saffet, and tooke it with assault, and slew all them that were within it, except such as would beléeue in our Lord Iesus Christ: and then from thence they went and lodged within halfe a League of Acres, and there pitcht vp their Tents and Pauillions, and when they were all lodged, their Foragers ranne abroad, and brought to the Hoast great plentie of victuals, often times they skirmished before the Citie of Acres. But they coulde neither finde man nor woman that durst yssue out to doe any deede of armes, there they lay eight dayes, and no man did them any dammage, for the Paynims and Sarazins were so affraid for the great losse and dammage that they had suffered, that they durst not stirre nor make any semblance. And the Souldan
who was within, wrote Letters into all his Countreys, as well into Arabia, Egipt, Barbary and Europe, as to all other his Fréends, that they would come and succour him at his neede, he sent diuers Messengers both by land and by sea, and also hée sent into Antioch and into Damas, and to all other places wher∣as he thought to haue any ayd or succour: and vpon a day two Foragers of the Admirals went foorth vppon the Sea-side, and they found by the way Trampoiguiffle the Souldans Messen∣ger, they tooke and brought him into the Admirals Tent, and there hee was examined, and his Letters taken from him, the which were seene and read before the Admirall and Huon, the which when they heard it and the contents therof, thereby they knewe somewhat of the Souldans counsaile, then they tooke the Messenger, and brought him before the Citie of Acres, and made there a paire of Gallowes, and hanged vp the Messenger within the sight of the Souldan, and of them there within the Citie. The same day the Admirall assembled his Lordes and Ba∣rons in his Tent, and said vnto them. Sirs, all you that bee heere assembled, know, that I haue great desire to know what thing is best to be done, and how we shall vse our selues in this warre that we haue begunne, you know well that the Victorie by the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by the hye prowesse of Huon wee haue now obtained, and haue heere our enemie inclosed, who cannot flye except it be by the sea: therefore I de∣sire you all, that euerie one of you will shew your aduise what is best to be done, and that to morrowe about this time to giue me an answeare. Then all the Lordes and Barons aduised together, and so amonge them was diuers opinions and rea∣sons, howbeit, they departed euerie man to their owne lodging, because they had day of answeare, and the next day following: thus the day passed without any thinge done, and at night eue∣rie man went to rest, except such as had the charge of the watch that night, who went not to bed as is the order and custome of the warres. Huon taried all that night in the Admirals Tent, and about the houre of midnight Huon dreamed in his sleepe, and thought that he was at the Citie of Mayence in prison, and
sawe the Emperour of Almaine take Escleremond his Wife out of prison, and she séemed vnto him pale and leane and ill colou∣red, and howe shee was in her Kirtle, and her haire hanging about her shoulders, and ten men leading her out of the Town to be burnt, and he thought that she made pitious complaints for Huon her Husband, and for Clariet her Daughter. And al∣so hee thought that he saw passe through the streets three Hun∣dred Genlemen, who had beene taken at Bourdeaux when the Citie was taken, and he thought that he saw diuers Gallowes made, and howe the Emperour had sworne to hang them all, so that hee thought that hee was right sorrowful and sore grée∣ued in his mind, to see that companie led toward their deaths, for in his sleepe hee thought verily that all this had beene true and that he could not helpe it. Thus as Huon was in this paine sleeping, he gaue an horri∣ble crie, so that the Admirall and Barnard awoake therewith in hast, thinkinge it had beene their enemies that had entred to haue slaine them: then they heard Huon say. Oh good Lord, I pray thée euen for thy Sons sake and by thy pittie and grace to succour and comfort my good Wife, for certainly I cannot tell but my heart thinketh, that the false Emperour will cause her to die and all the other Prisoners. Then the Admirall and Barnard arose vp and came vnto Huon, and had well heard his complaints, and sayd. Ah Sir, discomfort not your selfe, nor giue no faith nor credence to dreames, for the Emperour will neuer doe such a villany, as to put to death so noble a Ladie, it is nothinge but your thought and remembraunce that you haue dayly, the which in the night representeth vnto you slée∣ping. Ah Sir, (quoth Huon) I cannot beleeue but that my Wife hath somewhat to do. Alas too long haue I taried here, but if your warres were at an end I would gladly go my way, for I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I may knowe the troth. Then they arose for it was day, and the appointed houre was come that al ye Lords of the counsaile should assemble toge∣ther in the Admirals Tent, and euerie man sat downe vppon benches well couered with cloath of gold, and other rich clothes of silke, and when they were there assembled, the Marshall a∣rose
vp, for he was a right sage & wise man, and sayd. Sir Ad∣mirall, wee haue communed together, and debated the matter at length, and wee haue had diuers opinions, but wee bee all concluded to say nothing, vntill that Huon who is there by you hath shewed first his opinion, what hee thinketh is best to bee done in this matter, for it is good reason that hee bee heard to speake first, and then the Admirall beheld Huon, and sayd. My deare Freend, you heare what my Lordes and Barons haue concluded together, and how they all rest vppon you, that first you shall say your aduise: wherefore I require you for the loue of our Lord God, to shewe mee what I ought to doe as you thinke best. Chap. CXXIX. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux counsailed the Admirall of Persia, to rayse vp his siege before Acres for diuers reasons, and to returne into Persia. WHen Huon hadde well vnder∣stood the Admirall, and that he had well heard the Lordes and Barons, that their opinions was that they would not speake vntill hee had first shewed his aduise and opinion: then hee said vnto the Admirall. Sir, if it be your plea∣sure, I ought not to beginne first this reason, for you haue ma∣ny Lordes that can speake better in this matter then I, but sée∣ing that it is your pleasure and theirs, I shall shewe vnto you shortly mine aduise, and as I would doe if I were as you are. Then Duke Huon of Bourdeaux sayd: Sir Admirall of Persia and of Media, it is a long season since you departed from your Countrey, Landes and Signiories, and not without great tra∣uaile and much paine, and that God hath done you that grace, that with one Armie all you haue passed and taken Castles, and haue slaine and destroyed the Countreys, and men of the
Souldans of Babilon and of Egipt, and haue béen at the holy Ci∣tie of Ierusalem, the which is in the middest of his Countrey, & after that the Souldan hath fought with you with people innu∣merable, whom you haue discomfited and slaine almost all they that were with him. And also God hath giuen you the grace, that you are safely escaped with little losse or dammage, and now you haue in this Citie before vs besieged and inclosed in, the Souldan your enemie, who night and day doth imagine howe hee may recouer his losse, as you may well knowe by his Letters sent by his Messengers, the which you haue séene and red the contents of the same. And Sir, you may well thinke, that hee hath sent diuers other Messengers aswell by Land as by Sea to his Fréendes, to seeke for succour and for ayd, in the intention to bee reuenged of you: wherefore I counsaile you, séeing you are so farre off from your Countrey, as shortly as you can to depart from hence, and to rayse your siege and to re∣turne into your owne Countrey, your men be wearie and sore trauailed, and the Souldan is in his owne Countrey, hée will alwayes assemble great numbers of people, and alwayes hee may haue succour and victuals, the which you cannot doe nor haue, for héere without great paine you shall haue no victuall, for the Country is sore fowled and oppressed, and you can haue no succour from any part, wherefore of necessitie you must de∣part, the which you may doe without any losse. For you may passe the Riuer of Euphrates, before his people bee assembled to doe you any dammage, and when the spring time of the yeare commeth, if it bee your pleasure, you may returne with such number of men as you shall thinke best, for you are of puissance so to doe. Sir, this that I say, is for nothing that I would for∣sake or leaue you as long as you be in these parts, I had rather die, although it be so as you well knowe, that the thing that I ought most to desire, is to depart from you and to goe into my owne Countrey, whereas I haue left my Wife, my Daughter and my Countrey in great pouertie and daunger of death and destruction.
Chap. CXXX. ¶ Howe the Admirall of Persia agreed well to the counsaile of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and praised his saying: and of the faire offer that the Admirall of Persia made vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. WHen the Admirall had well hearde and vnderstoode Huon, hee behelde his Lordes, and all wéeping saide. Sirs, all you that be my men, you haue all well heard Duke Huon, who hath shewed his aduice and opini∣on: and therefore I commaund and desire you all to shewe mee what you thinke by the saying of Huon: then they all with one voice sayd. Sir, a more noble or profitabler counsaile no mortall man can giue, for your wealth and suerty of your person and of vs all, there was neuer man spake better, and therefore all we pray and counsaile you to vphold the coun∣saile that hee hath giuen you. Then the Admirall séeing that all his Lordes and Barons agréed to the counsaile that Huon had giuen him, hee sayd: Sirs, as for mée since yo re agréed thereunto, I am readie to beléeue all good counsaile, there was neuer a higher counsaile giuen vnto any Kinge or Prince, and when the Admirall had saide, howe that hee would beleeue the counsaile that Huon had giuen him, hee called then Huon vnto him, and sayd. Sir Duke of Bourdeaux, the pillar, shéeld, and sword of the Christian faith, and the Defendour of the Persi∣ans and Medians, I knowe well that by right I ought not to kéepe you, for it is good reason that you returne thether where as you were borne, and to ayde and comfort your true Spouse and Wife, for whome you be in great discomfort and not with∣out cause, and therefore for the goodnesse and honour that wée haue found in you, wée offer to goe with you in our owne pro∣per persons, with all our Armie and more, to the number in∣estimable,
and to aide to reuenge you of the false Emperour of Almaine, who hath doone to you so much ill and dammage, or else if you will returne vnto vs into Persia at this next springe time, we shall deliuer vnto you such puissance, and my selfe to goe with them into Almaine, so that the Valleys and Moun∣taines shall bee full of people, and wee shall doe so much by the grace of our Lord God, that wée shall deliuer the Emperour in∣to your hands, to doe with him at your pleasure. When Hu∣on had well heard and vnderstood the Admirall of Persia and of Media, who offered him so great an offer, hée sayd. Sir, of the courtese and kindnesse that you offer mee, I thanke you with all my heart, God forbid that I should be the causer of destruc∣tion of Christian bloude, first I will assay with all swéetnesse and reasonable offers, as much as in mee is possible to doe, to present and offer vnto the Emperour, to the entent that I may attaine to his loue and to haue peace, the which thinge I will and desire to doe with all my heart. And if it be so, that he will not encline neither to right nor reason, then Huon will come to you, and vnto all other that I thinke or knowe to bee my Fréends, and then desire you all of your courtesies for ayd and succour. Chap. CXXXI. ¶ How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of all the other Lordes of Persia, and went and tooke ship∣ping at the Port of Thesayre, and how he arriued at Marsellis, without finding of any strange aduenture. WHen the Admirall had well vnderstood Huon, he sayd. My right deare and wel-beloued Fréend, I giue you good thankes of that you say, you may bee sure that if you haue any neede, and that you can make no appointment with the Emperour,
the offers that I haue made vnto you I shall vphold, and suc∣cour you in mine own person. Sir, (quoth Huon) I most har∣tely thanke you, for I am much bound vnto you: wherefore I am yours. Then the Admirall tooke Huon by the hande, and sayd. Sir, I see well that wee two must part, the which grée∣neth mée sore, but since it is thus I must suffer it, and I knowe well that you thinke longe vntill you bee gone, the seruice that you haue done vnto mee I cannot recompence it, for our tw wayes are contrarie, yours is by water, and mine is by land. And therefore at the Port of Thesayre there is a riche Shippe, the which was wonne vppon the Souldans men, I giue her to you, enter into her at your pleasure, and therewith I giue you tenne Somers charged with gould, and Tenne other charged with cloathes of gold and silke, and you may take with you all the French men that be in this hoast, such as followed vs when we departed from Ierusalem, lette them goe with you into their Countrey, and after that you are departed, I shall rayse my siege and returne into Persia. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your guift and of your courtesie I thanke you. Then the Admirall sent these Somers to the Port of Thesayre, and there all the riches were put into the Shippe that were giuen vnto Huon, and then hee deliuered to Huon to serue him, all the Pilgrims that were there of Fraunce, & the Admirall gaue them rich guifts, where∣of they were right ioyfull, and of the faire aduenture that was fallen vnto them, for they had more monney at their departing, then they hadde when the came out of their owne Countrey, whereof they thanked the Admirall, and promised to doe true seruice vnto Huon, and not to leaue him vntill he had atchieued all his businesse. Then Huon made him readie, and tooke with him t great Griffens foote, and the Admirall and his Constables and Mar∣shals and the other Lordes of the Hoast leapt vppon their Hor∣ses, and conuayed Huon and his companie to the Port of The∣sayre, whereas his shippe was readie fournished, with victuall and other things appertaining thereto: then Huon all wéeping tooke his leaue of the Admirall and of the other Lords and Ba∣rons, for whose departing they were right sorrowfull, and so
returned to their Hoast before Acres, deuising of the great va∣lour, prowesse, and courtese that was in Huon. Then the Ad∣mirall commaunded priuily the next morning to dislodge and depart, the which was done. Thus the Admirall departed from the Citie of Acres, and tooke his way towards Persia, and he found vppon the Citie of Euphrates all his shippes, and so with them hee sayled into his owne Countrey. And Huon and Barnard his Coozen, and di∣uers other Knightes and Squiers of Fraunce, and when they were in their shippe, they weighed vp their anchors and made sayle. Then they passed the Gulfe of Sathale, and then passed by the Rhodes, and by Sardaine, and so long they sayled with∣out danger or lette, that they came and arriued at the Port of Marsells, and there they went a shoare with great ioy, and dis∣charged the shippe, and then Huon gaue the shippe to the Pa∣tron that had brought them thether, whereby the Patron was riche and thanked Huon. When they were all a land, they conuayed all their baggage into their Lodging in the Towne, whereas they rested about eight dayes. Nowe let vs leaue to speake of Huon and of them that were with him, and let vs speake of the Abbot of Cluny. Chap. CXXXII. ¶ How the good Abbot of Cluny layd an ambushment of men of armes, betweene Mascon and Tournous, against the Emperour of Almaines Nephewe, who was there slaine and all his men, whereof the Emperour was so sore vexed and troubled, that hee tooke the Duchesse Escleremond out of prison to haue burnt her, and the three Hundred Prisoners of Bourdeaux, to haue hanged them all.
YEE haue well heard in this Historie, how Barnard departed from the Ab∣bey of Cluny, to go and search for his Nephew Huon, and the Abbot seeinge that hee coulde heare no newes of Huon, nor of Barnard his Coozen who was gone to séeke for him, he was right sorrowfull and sore displeased, that he could haue none o∣ther knowledge, but the thing that caused him to passe the mat∣ter the more easier, was because of Clariet Huons Daughter, whome he kept, and shee was all his comfort, she was so faire and so swéet, that none were like her in beauty and in good ver∣tues, and againe when hee remembred the Duchesse her mo∣ther Escleremond, whome he knew was in great pouertie and miserie, he was therewith so sore displeased, that all his mem∣bers trembled. So vppon a day it was reported vnto him by a notable man, that as he came from Saint Iames and by Bour∣deaux, how that a Nephew of the Emperours should goe from Bourdeaux to the Citie of Mayence, to his Vncle Tirrey the Em∣perour of Almaine, and howe hee should haue with him a great number of the Burgesses of the Citie of Bourdeaux as Priso∣ners, because vppon a day they spake of Huon their naturall Lord, and also how that he should carie with him, the Tribute and monney of the Rents and Reuenewes of the Countrey of Burdeloys, and such monney as euerie man was bound to paye vnto the Emperour. When the good Abbot of Cluny was aduertised of the com∣ming of the Emperours Nephew, whome he reputed as his e∣nemie, hee assembled a great number of noble men, the most part appertaining vnto the Duke of Burgoyne, who as then was Father to Gerard of Roussellon, being at that time but three yeares of age, and when the Abbot had assembled a great num∣ber of men, he chose the Lord of Vergier to be Captaine and lea∣der of that companie, and then he sent out his Spies to knowe certainely which way the Emperours Nephewe should come, and at the last hee had certaine knowledge that hee was lodged
at Mascon, and the next day he should depart to Tournous, and then the Lord of Ʋergier and diuers other, by the commaunde∣ment of the Abbot of Cluny, went and layde their ambushment betwéene Mascon and Tournous in a Valley, so that by their Spies who laye vppon a Mountaine, they sawe the Almaines comming about the number of two Thousand horses, and the Lord of Ʋergier hadde in his companie aboue three Thousand horses, defencibly apparelled, and they were right ioyfull when they heard by their Spies that their enemies were comming: then they apparelled themselues to abide their enemies, who were come so forwarde, that they were past their first ambush∣ment, and were entred into the Valley. When they of the first ambushment and they of the second ambushment sawe their time, they yssued out, and brake vpon their enemies, and made a great crie, so that within a short space their enemies and the most part of them were slaine, not one that escaped, but either he was slaine or taken, they could not saue themselues, because vppon the one side was the Mountaine and vpon the other side the Riuer of Some, and before and behinde their enemies were they themselues. The same time the Emperours Nephewe was slaine, who was a goodly Knight, and the Emperour had before sent him to Bourdeaux, to gouerne the Land and Coun∣trey of Burdeloys, and he had ben there the space of foure yéeres, of whose death the Lord of Vergier was sorrie, for he had rather that he had béen taken Prisoner, then they tooke his bodie and buried him in the chiefe Church of Tournous, whereas they lay all night with their Prisoners, who were to the number of eight Hundred, they of Bourdeaux that were taken as Priso∣ners were right ioyfull, when they were thus escaped from the handes of the Almaines. After this discomfiture they returned to the Abbey of Cluny, whereas they were receiued with great ioy of the Abbot and of the Couent, then the Lord of Ʋergier shewed the whole dis∣course of their discomfiture, and then the booties were deuided amongest them that had wonne, and all the men of warre de∣parted except a Thowsand men, whome the Abbot retayned for the sauegard of the towne of Cluny, who made many skir∣mishes
with the Emperours menne. And after this discomfi∣ture, the newes thereof was presently brought to the Citie of Mayence to the Emperour Tirrey, who was right sorrowfull for the death of his Nephew who was his sisters sonne, by reason of the sorrow and great displeasure that he had, for hee was thrée dayes after before he would come foorth of his cham∣ber, and on the fourth day he sent for all his Lords and Coun∣cell, and to them he made his complaints, how by the occasion of Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, he had lost foure of his Nephews and his Bastard sonne, and said. I ought greatly to be grée∣ued, when I cannot bée reuenged of Huon, I thinke hee shall neuer returne againe, but séeing it is so that I can take no ven∣geance of him, I shall take it vppon his Wife Escleremond, and vppon the thrée Hundred Prisoners that I brought out of Bur∣deaux, but by the same Lord that made and fourmed mee to his semblance, I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart nor eate nor drinke, vntill I haue seene Escleremond burnt in a fire, and the thrée Hundred prisoners hanged and strangled, and I wil that each of you knowe, that he that speaketh to me first to the con∣trarie, I shall hate him euer after. When the Lords had well heard the Emperour make that promise, there was none so hardy that durst speake one woord: then the Emperour com∣maunded in hast great plentie of thornes to be caried out of the Citie, vnto a little Mountaine there beside, and there by to be reared vp certaine Gallowes, to hange thereon the thrée Hun∣dred Prisoners. All this was done as hee commaunded, for more then tenne Load of thornes were caried out to burne the noble Ladie Es∣cleremond, and she was sent for out of the prison by foure hang∣men, and the Prisoners with her were brought into the Citie, and all to bée beaten by the way. When the noble Ladie saw how shee was dealt withall, shee pitiously complained for her good Husband Huon, and for her Daughter Clariet, and saide. Ah my right swéet Lord and Husband Huon, at this time shall bee the departure of vs two, and then shee called vppon our Lord Iesus Christ, praying him by his grace and pity to bring her soule into Paradice: thus crying and complayning, the no∣ble
Ladie was ledde through the Towne, and then Ladies and Burgesses and Maidens of the Citie ranne to their windowes and dores, and beheld the dolourous and pitifull companie lea∣ding towardes their deaths: then they sayd a high. Ah right noble Ladie, where is become the great beautie that you were woont to bee of? for now your Visage is pale and discoloured that was woont to be so faire, and nowe so loathed and disfigu∣red, where is become your faire haires that nowe bee so blacke and rugged, for the great pouertie that you haue endured? A∣las noble Ladie, great pitie and compassion we haue to sée you in this estate if we could amend it: thus as this Ladie was led through the Towne, she was bemoned of them that sawe her, the three Hundred Gentlemen were also led forth, and the Em∣perour Tirrey and his Lords road after them, for his desire was to see the noble Ladie burnt, and the other Prisoners hanged: hee made hast, because of the sorrow that hee had for the death of his Nephewe and of his men, who were newly slaine by the meanes of the Abbot of Cluny. When they were yssued out of the Citie of Mayence, Duke Hildebert a néere kinsman of the Emperours, was comming into the Citie the same time that the Ladie was ledde foorth, and hée sawe how rudely they dealt with the Ladie: and when he sawe her, he knew well that it was the faire Ladie Esclere∣mond, but when hee sawe her at that point, the water was in his eyes, and he sayd vnto them that ledde her. Sirs, go not too fast, vntill I haue spoken with the Emperour, the which they did gladly. When the noble Ladie Escleremond had well heard and vnderstood the Duke, shee had some little hope, shee turned her eyes towards him, & sayd. Ah right noble Prince, haue pittie and compassion of mee, for I haue done nothinge whereby I should deserue to die. When the Duke had well vnderstood her, he had such pitie that he could speake no word, his heart was so full of sorrowe, and then he road as fast as he might to méet with the Emperour, and passed by the thrée hun∣dred prisoners, and had great pity and compassion of them, and so he came vnto the Emperour all wéeping, and said. Ah right noble Emperour, I require you in the honour of the passion
of our Lord Iesus Christ, haue pitie and compassion of this do∣lourous companie, that are likely to die this day, remember that it is nowe in the holy time of Lent, wherefore I require you to respite their liues vntill it be past Easter, and Sir, hum∣bly I require you, for all the seruice that I and mine haue done vnto you, graunt me but this request for my reward, the which is both reasonable and iust, great wronge you doe to reuenge your anger vppon this noble Ladie, you haue chaced her out of her Countrey, Landes and Signiories, the which you hold in your handes, and take the Reuenewes and profits thereof▪ if you bee not sufficed with this, I doubt that our Lord Iesus Christ will be sore displeased with you. When the Emperour had well heard the Duke his Cozen, hee stoode still and spake hastely, and sayd. Faire Coozen, I haue well heard you, and therefore I answeare you in briefe wordes, how that if all the men that bee in mine Empire, and all the Priestes and Friers were here, and did preach vnto me a whole yeare, desiring me to respite this Ladies death and the other that be with her: I would doe nothing for all them, and therefore speake no more to me in that matter, for by the beard that hangeth vnder my chinne, since I cannot haue Huon her husband at my will, I shall neuer eat nor drinke vntill I haue séene her burnt and the other persons hanged. For when I remember the death of my Nephewes and of my deare Sonne, the which haue béen slaine by Huon, there is no member in my bodie, but that trembleth for sorrow and displeasure. When the good Duke Hildebert vnderstood the Emperour, hee had great sorrowe at his heart, and departed without any word speaking and without any leaue taking, but returned from thence, and hee became full of yre and displeasure, then the Emperour Tirrey cryed with a hye voyce and sayde, howe that he would shortly dispatch the matter, to sée ye Lady burnt, and ledde to the hill whereas the fire was readie. When the Ladie perceiued the place whereas shee should die in, shee cast out a great crie, and made a pitifull complaint to our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, and sayd. Ah right sweet Lord Iesus Christ, thou knowest that for the loue of thée I am christened, to beléeue in
thy Lawes wherein I will liue and die, and I sée well that my dayes are but short, and thou knowest well that there is no cause wherein I haue deserued death: therefore I require thee humbly to haue pitie and compassion of my Soule, and that thou wilt vouchsafe to kéepe and preserue my Husband Huon, and my Daughter Clariet. Thus as yee haue heard the noble Duchesse Escleremond made her complaints, her handes bound and kneeling vppon her knées before the stake, abiding for the houre of her death. Nowe let vs leaue to speake of this noble Ladie, vntill we haue occasion to returne againe: and speake of the noble King Oberon and of his companie. Chap. CXXXIII. ¶How King Oberon sent twoo of his Knights of the Fayrie, that is to saye Mallabron and Gloriand, to deliuer the Duchesse Escle∣remond, who should haue been burnt, and the three Hundred Prisoners that should haue been hanged, who were all deliuered by the sayd Knights. NOwe sheweth the Historie, that the same day that the Duchesse the faire Ladie Escleremond shoulde haue béene burnt, Kinge Oberon of the Fayrie was in his Pal∣laice of Momur, whereas he had holden a great Court and a sumptuous, for his Mother the Ladie of the priuie Isle was there, and also the noble Quéene Morgue say, and the Damsell Transeline her Néece, with di∣uers other Ladies of the Fayrie, and diuers Knighte of the same making great ioye. King Oberon was sitting  throne, garnished and bordered with fine gould and precious stones, and as hee sat, hee fell in a great studie, and therewith the droppes of water fell out of his eyes, and he began to wéepe and complaine so sore, as though he should haue been drowned with droppes of water: and when these Quéenes, Ladies, and
Damsels sawe him make such sorrow, they had great maruell, and there was Gloriand the good Knighte of the Frayrie, and Mallabron, who were right priuie and wel-beloued with King Oberon, and when they saw the Kinge make such sorrow, they were sore dismayed and abashed, and Sir Gloriand saide. Sir, what man is liuinge in this world, that hath displeased you or done any thing against you? Gloriand, (quoth the Kinge) the displeasure that I haue is for the faire Ladie Escleremond, wife vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux my verie good Fréend, she is as now led out of the Citie of Mayence, and brought vnto a great fire, wherein the Emperour Tirrey will burne her, and other three Hundred poore Prisoners to bee hanged, and I may not ayd nor succour them, and I am right sorrie thereof for the loue of Huon, who is as now passed the Sea, and is in the way re∣turning home-ward, and hee hath had such aduentures, that there is no humane bodie could suffer, nor beare the paines and trauailes that hee hath endured, nor the maruailous aduen∣tures that hee hath borne, and he hath had so many Battailes, that it were great maruaile and woonderfull to heare them re∣hearsed. And now whereas hee thought to haue had rest, and to haue found his Wife the faire Ladie Escleremond aliue, who shall now be burnt except shee bee shortly aided and succoured, I am sure that hee will die for the sorrowe and griefe that hee will haue at his heart. When Gloriand and Mallabron had well hearde and vnder∣stood Kinge Oberon, they kneeled downe before the King, and sayde. Sir, wee desire you to succour this noble Ladie, for the loue of her good Husband your deare Fréend Huon. Gloriand, (quoth the noble Kinge Oberon) that will I not doe, but I am well content, that hastely you goe and deliuer the good La∣die, and the other Prisoners that be with her, and say in my be∣halfe to the Emperour Tirrey, that hee be not so hardy as to doe any ill to the Ladie, or to any of her companie, but say that I will and commaund, that he respite their liues vntill the holy Feast of Easter be passed, and that the Ladie and the other Pri∣soners he cause to be returned againe into the Citie of Mayence, and that the Ladie be set in a Chamber at her libertie and plea∣sure,
and let her be bathed and washed and newe arrayed, and lette her haue foure noble Ladies to seue and accompanie her, and that she haue meat and drinke as good and as plentifull, as though she were his owne proper Daughter, in like wise lette all the other Prisoners be serued, and say that I will and com∣maund that hée doth thus vntill the time that Easter be passed, and shew him that he bee not so hardy to breake or trespasse a∣gainst my commaundement. Then Gloriand and Mallabron tooke leaue of the Kinge, and of all other that were there, and then they wished themselues in the place, whereas the Ladie and the other prisoners were, where the Lady as then was vp∣pon her knees before the fire sore wéeping and complayning, and abiding the houre of her death, the which had beene néere vnto her, if she had not béen shortly succoured, for they were a∣bout to haue bound her to the stake. When Gloriand and Mallabron came braying in the ayre like thunder, & they were not séen of no person but alonely of the Ladie, and when they were come and sawe the fire a kindling, they tooke the tenne Villaines that would haue cast the Ladie into the fire, they tooke them, and cast them all Ten into the flaming fire, where∣as they were shortly burnt, and beside them there were diuers other burnt, whereof such as were there had so great feare; that none durst abide there: then the two Knights came to the La∣die and loozed her, and sayd. Madame be of good comfort, wée are two Knights sent hether from king Oberon, to succour and to bring you out of the perill and danger that you be in. Sirs, (quoth the Ladie) it is not the first time that the noble King O∣beron hath succoured vs both mee and my husband, God of his grace rewarde him. Madame, (quoth Gloriand) bee merrie and make ioy, for your good husband Huon is come on this side of the Sea, whome you shall sée within short time. When the good Ladie had well vnderstood Gloriand, shee had such ioy, that of a great space she could speake no word shee was so rauished, but at last she said. Sir, I ought greatly to loue you for bring∣ing me such tidings: and then they sayde vnto her. Madame, rest you héere a season, vntill wee haue deliuered the other Pri∣soners, whome we sée yonder leading toward their deaths, and
shortly we shall returne againe vnto you. Therewith they departed from the Ladie, and left her vpon her knées holding vp her handes vnto Heauen, and deuoutly rendring thankes to our Lord Iesus Christ, for the succor and aide that he had sent her. Then Gloriand and Mallabron came to the Gallowes, and there vnloozed the thrée Hundred Priso∣ners, and sew diuers of them that were sent thether to doe exe∣cution, whereof all they that were there present had great mar∣uaile, and did woonder thereat, when they saw their company slaine and could not sée them that did it, but they thought that there were a Thousand Knights, by reason of the great brute and noyse that the two Knights of the Fayrie made, whereof they had such feare, that they fled away and ranne to the Em∣perour, who was sore dismayed and abashed of that aduenture, for it was also shewed vnto him, that the Ladie was rescued, and they could not tell by whom, but they sayd that they heard a great brute and noyse: then also the Emperour saw, how the people came running towards him flying from the Gallowes, and they shewed to him all that they had séen and heard, wher∣of the Emperour and all his Lordes had great feare and were sore abashed. Ah Sir, (quoth the Duke of Austrich) it hadde beene better for you to haue beleeued Duke Hildebert your Coo∣zen: knowe surely, that you haue greatly displeased our Lord Iesus Christ, since that you would doe such cruell iustice in the holy time of Lent. Thus after these two Knights of the Fay∣rie hadde rescued the good Ladie and the other Prisoners, they tooke them and the Ladie and brought them vnto the Empe∣rour, and shewed themselues openly, and when they were in the presence of the Emperour and the Prisoners with them, and the Emperour saw that there were but twoo Knightes ar∣med vppon horse-backe, hee set little by them, and said. How are you so bolde and so hardy, to deliuer and to take out of my mens handes those that are condemned to die by iustice? and besides that you haue slaine many of my men, and nowe bringe them into my presence whom I haue condemned to die: where¦fore I will that you well know, that before I eat or drinke you and all they shalbe hanged, and the Ladie Escleremond burned,
nor I shall not depart from hence vntill I haue seen you all dye the death. Then Gloriand and Mallabron lifted vp their visors, and shewed their faces, and they séemed vnto all them that sawe them, that they neuer sawe before two so faire Knightes in all their liues. Then Gloriand sayde vnto the Emperour: Sir, of you nor of your threatninges wee make thereof but little ac∣count: but Sir, knowe for troth, that the noble King Oberon commandeth you by vs, in as much as you feare your life, that you bee not so hardy, any further to doe any ill or iniurie, nor commaund to bee done vnto this noble Ladie that is heere pre∣sent, nor to these other Prisoners, vntill Easter day bee past. And also Kinge Oberon commaundeth you, that you doe keepe this Ladie in your house, cloathed and apparelled, and as well gouerned, and to bee accompanied with Ladies and Damsels to serue her honourably, as well as if she were your owne pro∣per Daughter, and that in like wise these Prisoners to be new∣ly arrayed and ordered, aswell as other Knights of your house, and Sir, we warne and charge you, that in this that wee haue sayd, that you do not the contrarie for any thing that may fall, for if you do otherwise, there is no mortall man shall saue your life: thus the right noble Kinge Oberon commaundeth you to doe, who is Soueraigne Lord and Gouernor of all the Realme of the Fayrie. When the Emperour Tirrey had well heard these Knightes of the Fayrie thus speake vnto him, and sawe howe they were armed with their Swordes in their handes, taynted with the bloud of his Almaynes, hee had great feare and beheld his Ba∣rons, and sayde. Sirs, I pray you to giue me some good coun∣saile in this serious businesse, wee haue well heard much spea∣king of King Oberon, and of his great Acts and déeds: where∣fore I feare him much, yée may wel sée what two of his knights haue done, they haue rescued them that I haue condemned to die, and slaine diuers of my men. Also you heare, what word he sendeth me by his two Knights, that I should keepe this la∣die and the other Prisoners honourably, and that I should not be so hardy, to put them to any danger vntill Easter be passed.
Then an ancient knight sayd: Sir, know for troth that King Oberon is puissant and wise, for there is nothing in the world but that he knoweth it, and also as often as hée list, hee can bee whereas he will wish himselfe, and with as great number of people as hee list: and therefore Sir beléeue surely, that if you doe otherwise then he hath commaunded you to doe, these twoo knightes of his that be héere present, haue puissance sufficient to destroy you, and Kinge Oberon to sit still at home: therefore Sir mine aduise is, that you answeare these two knights, that all that Kinge Oberon hath commaunded you to doe by them, that you will doe it surely: and then all the other Lordes gaue the Emperour the same counsaile. When the Emperour had well heard and vnderstood his Lordes and Barons, he turned him vnto the two Knightes of the Fayrie, and said. Sirs, yée shall salute me to King Oberon and say, that as for me, I shall doe euerie thing as hee hath commaunded me to doe to the best of my power. Sir Emperour, (quoth Gloriand) if you will doe as you say, the king will take you for his Fréend, & there∣vppon we commend you to God. Thus the two knights departed, so that the Emperour nor none other person knew not where they were become, where∣of euerie man had great maruaile and were sore abashed. And thus Gloriand and Mallabron within a while came to the City of Momur, whereas they found king Oberon, to whome they shewed all that they had done. Well, (quoth king Oberon) as now the Lady Escleremond and the other Prisoners are at their ease and well serued, but before a Moneth be passed, they shall dearely aby the ease that they bee in nowe, for the Emperour hateth them so sore, because of the malice that he beareth vnto Huon of Bourdeaux, that he will set them all againe into Prison in great pouertie and miserie, and when Easter is passed, hee will burne the Ladie Escleremond, and hange vp all the Priso∣ners except they bee rescued againe. Sir, (quoth Gloriand) I cannot beléeue that the Emperour dare doe it, or thinke so to doe. Gloriand, (quoth the noble kinge Oberon) know surely, that the great hate that is rooted in the heart of the Emperour, shall constraine and vrge him thus to de. Nowe let vs leaue
speaking of the noble king Oberon, and speake of the Emperour Tirrey. Chap. CXXXIIII. ¶How the Emperour Tirrey made the noble Ladie Escleremond to be well serued and apparelled, and all the other Prisoners, but about three Weekes after, hee made the noble Ladie and the sayd Prisoners to be put againe into prison, whereas they were in great miserie. NOwe sheweth the Historie, that after the two knightes of the Fayrie were departed, and vanished away out of the pre∣sence of the Emperour, and that the Emperor was returned into the Citie of Mayence, with the ladie Escleremond and with the other Pri∣soners, whereof the Burgesses, Ladies, and Damsels of the ci∣tie had great ioy of their good aduenture, and the Emperour had them into his Pallaice, and deliuered vnto them Cham∣bers well drest and hanged as it appertained thereunto, and the noble Duchesse Escleremond hadde foure ladies to serue her, and she was bathed and washed, and new apparelled, as well and as richly as though shee had beene the Emperours owne proper Daughter, so that within a short space she came againe to her beautie, and to be as faire and well fauoured as euer she was, and in like wise so did all the other Prisoners, who were kept also in faire and rich Chambers and new apparelled, and had their ease and pleasures as other knights of the Emperors Court had. But assoone as thrée weekes were passed, the great hate that the Emperour had vnto the noble ladie and to the other Prisoners, constrained him to take from them the ioy and ease that they were in: and turned the same into pitifull weepinges and great lamentations. And the Emperour Tir∣rey sware, that for all kinge Oberon, or for any thinge that
he could doe, he would neuer be in peace in his heart, vntill he had set all the companie againe intd prison, and besides that, he sware that Easter should not bee no sooner past, but that the Ladie Escleremond should bee burnt and all the other prisoners hanged, and vppon them to take vengeance in the despite of Huon of Bourdeaux, who had done him so much trouble that hee could not forget it. Then hee commaunded to take againe the Duchesse Esclere∣mond, and to put her and all the other prisoners into the prison againe, the which was done according to his commandement. Then the Duchesse Escleremond and all the other Prisoners were right sorrowfull, and were in great feare, and saide each to other. Alas now our deathes approach, and when that the Ladie sawe that she was set againe in prison, she began sore to weepe and complaine for the Duke Huon her Husband. Too longe (quoth shee) you tarie, for I sée none other way but that my death approacheth, for you shall not come in time, well may I curse the houre that euer I was borne, for in all my life I haue had but sorrowe and heauinesse and dolours in supporta∣ble, better it had been for mee to haue béen dead, then to spend my life in this darke Prison, right deuoutly shee called vppon our Lorde Iesus Christ to haue pittie and compassion of her. Thus was this noble Duchesse set againe in prison, and also the thrée Hundred Prisoners, whereas they suffered great fa∣mine and pouertie, for other thing had they not to liue by, but Barley bread and cleare water. Now we will leaue to speake of them, and speake of Duke Huon, who was arriued at Mar∣sellis. Chap. CXXXV. ¶ How Huon departed from Marsellis, and came to his Ʋncle the good Abbot of Cluny in habite disguised, and vnto him dis∣couered himselfe, whereof the Abbot had great ioy, and so had Clariet his Daughter.
AS yee haue heard heere be∣fore, howe Huon was at Marsellis, and after that hee had iourned there foure dayes, hee made him readie to depart, & bought Mules and horses for himselfe, and for Barnard and for his companie, and then hee charged his Somers, and vppon one of them hee trussed the Griffens foote, the which was great and horrible, and couered it because eue∣rie man shoulde not sée it. When hee was readie and euerie thing trussed, hee departed from Marsellis, and roade so by his iourneys, that hee passed by Prouence, and came vnto Masco∣noys, and vppon a Thursday at night he arriued at the Towne of Tournous. And when they had supped, hée called Barnard his Coozen, and sayd. Coozen, I pray you to stay héere, for I wil goe to sée mine Vncle the good Abbot of Cluny, and Clariet my Daughter, whome I sore desire to sée, and shortly I shall re∣turne againe vnto you, I will goe priuily disguised, to the en∣tent that I will not bee knowne. Sir, (quoth Barnard) séeing that it is your pleasure, we must be content. Then they went to bed, and in the Morning Huon arose vp, and apparelled him∣selfe like a Pilgrim, with a staffe in his hand and a bag about his necke, and with great boots vppon his Legges, hee hadde a great beard and long haire: wherefore hee séemed well a Pil∣grime that came out from a farre Countrey, and so he had done indéede. When Barnard, and his company sawe him so apparelled, they laughed and saide. Sir, it appeareth well by your man∣ners, that you are escaped out of some good place, it séemeth to vs, that if you will shake your staffe, you will make the money to auoyd out of mens purses, you are so bold a beggar. When Huon heard them, hee laughed, and tooke leaue of them, and departed all alone with his bagge about his necke, so afoote hée went vntill he came vnto Cluny, and then he came vnto the Ab∣bey gate, and called the Porter vnto him, and sayd. Fréend, I pray you to let mée enter, then hée opened the wicket and be∣held
Huon, who séemed to him to be a tal and a goodly man, and sayd. Pilgrime, enter when you please. Then Huon entred in at the wicket, and sayde vnto the Porter. Fréende, I come straight from beyond the great Sea, and haue kissed the holy Sepulchre, and haue suffered much paine and pouertie, and because before this time I haue béene héere with the Abbot of this place, therefore I thought that I would not passe by with∣out speaking with him, I pray you to shewe mee that courte∣sie, that I may speake with him, for hée will soone know mée. Sir, (quoth the Porter) it séemeth vnto mee by your manners, that you séeme to be a man of a good place: therefore I giue you leaue to goe into the house at your pleasure, and you shall finde our good Abbot in his Hall, whereas hee is communing with his Brethren, certainly, I knowe well that you shall bee wel∣come vnto him, if hee haue of you any knowledge, for a more noble man, courteous, and liberall you shall not find vpon this side of the Sea. Fréend, (quoth Huon) your courtesie may a∣uaile you. Then Huon went into the Hall, whereas hee found the Ab∣bot with his Brethren, and then hee saluted the Abbot and all his Couent. Fréend, (quoth the Abbot) you are welcome, I pray you to shewe mée from whence you come? Sir, (quoth Huon) I shall shew you the troth, I come now from beyond the Sea, from the holy City of Ierusalem, whereas I haue kissed the holy Sepulchre, and where our Lord Iesus Christ was quicke and dead, I haue béen in those parts more then Seauen yéeres, and the cause why I am come hether to sée you is this, I found there a young Knight of mine age, named Huon of Bourdeaux, and he sayd that he is your Nephew, and when he saw that I would depart from thence to come into his Countrey, he hum∣bly prayed mée to recommend him vnto you: and therefore I am come vnto you to doe his messuage, for he and I hath been together in diuers Battailes, and great amitie haue béen be∣tweene vs. When the good Abbot had well heard and vnder∣stood the Pilgrim, many teares fell from his eyes and trickled downe his chéekes, when he heard his Nephew Huon named, and saide. Fréende, I pray you (if it bee true as you say) to
shew mée the troth if you haue séen my Nephew Huon, for it is he that I loue best in all this world, and desire most to sée him, and I pray you to shewe vnto mée what is his minde, either to returne hether or else to abide there still? I would to God that I were in debt to pay a thousand Markes of gould, so that hee were as now héere in this Hall. Sir, (quoth Huon) your Ne∣phew whome you desire so much to sée, before a Moneth be past he will (by the grace of God) bee héere with you, and Sir, hee shewed mée at my departing from him, that he hath a Daugh∣ter whom you haue nourished and brought vp, and he charged me greatly that I should desire of you to sée her before I depar∣ted from you, he knoweth not whether she bee aliue or dead, I woulde gladly sée her if it were your pleasure. Fréend, (quoth the Abbot) right gladly you shall sée her, I shall cause her to come hether, and then you may sée her at your ease, and I dare well say vnto you, that in all the world you shall find no fairer nor a sweeter creature, nor more wiser of her age nor better learned, and yet she is but Ten yeares of age. When Huon vnderstood the Abbot, you may well know that hee hadde great ioy at his heart priuily, and thanked our Lord Iesus Christ. Then the Abbot called vnto him a right notable Knight named Sir Emerie, and commaunded him to goe and fetch thether his Néece Clariet, the Knight went into the cham∣ber, whereas the faire Ladie was with other foure noble La∣dies, who had brought her vp: then Sir Emerie saluted the La∣die and the other that were with her. When the young Ladie perceiued Sir Emerie, she arose vp and rendred to him his salu∣tation, and right humbly saying. Sir Knight I am ioyfull of your commig, I pray you to shewe mee of your newes and ti∣dinges. Certainly faire Ladie, (quoth the Knight) hether is come a Pilgrim, who is come from beyond the Sea, and hee hath shewed vnto the Abbot your Vncle tidinges of your Fa∣ther Duke Huon: therefore your Vncle desireth you to come and speake with him. When the Ladie heard speaking of her Father, with all her heart she desired to knowe some certaine tidinges, and then shee and her Damsels departed out of the Chamber, and came into the Hall to the Abbot her Vncle, ac∣companied
with twoo notable Knightes, then shee entred into the Hall richly apparelled, no man could describe her beautie, for shee was so well fourmed, that nature her selfe could not a∣mend her, her skinne was as white as the flower in the mea∣dowe, and coloured like the red Rose, her haunches lowe, and her pappes somewhat rysing, her throat smooth and cleare, her chinne vaunted, her mouth as vermeill as a Rose, her téeth small and well ranged and white, her face white and well co∣loured mingled white and red, her eyes smiling, her chéere a∣mourous to behoulde, her nose straight, her fore-head white, her haire yellowe, and her eares gentle and close, I cannot de∣uise the tenth part of her excellent beautie, none could regard her nor looke vppon her but that praised and loued her, all her beautie and sweete demeanour, and great humilitie that was in her, if I shoulde héere describe it, it would bee ouer-long to rehearse. When Huon had well séene his Daughter Clariet who was so faire, hee gladly behelde her without making of any know∣ledge. Then the Abbot tooke his Néece by the hand, and ledde her vnto Huon, and said. Pilgrim, how say you by her, shee hath not beene sore trauailed nor much come in the Sunne, I haue kept her a long time, and if she be garnished with beauty, in like wise so she is with witte and bountie, shee is Daughter vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, the man that I most loue in this world, I woulde to God that I did sée him as I doe you nowe, but if God send mee life and health, this Ladie shall bee richly maried, I will giue her goods that she shalbe rich and puissant. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray to our Lord Iesus Christ to giue her good fortune, and that shee may bee so maried, that her bloud thereby may be lifted vp and exalted: then the faire Ladie Cla∣riet sayd vnto Huon. Sir Pilgrim, I pray you to shewe me, if you know any tidings of my Father Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. Faire Ladie, (quoth Huon) hee and I together haue beene a long time beyond the Sea, and Companions together, and we sought the Souldan of Babilon that nowe is, it is not hee that was set there by Huon, after that he had slaine the great Admi∣rall Gaudise, it is another, who since that time conquered both
the Citie and the Countrey of Egipt, many aduentures Huon and I haue suffered, but at the end wee discomfited the Soul∣dan, and his men are slaine and destroyed. Pilgrim, (quoth the faire Ladie Clariet) I require you to shew me if you know, whether my deare Father will returne hether again or no? the which is the thing in the world that I most desire? Faire La∣die, (quoth he) I answeare you, that before twoo Moneths bee passed, you shall sée him héere in good health. I pray vnto our Lord God (quoth the Ladie) that it may be so, that he may de∣liuer my Mother out of the prison, whereas shee is in great po∣uertie and miserie. When Huon had well heard and vnderstood his Daughter, he would no longer hide himselfe, but sayd. My right deare Daughter, before August be passed, I shall deliuer her or die in the paine, for I shall make such warre against the Empe∣rour Tirrey, that yet before I die I shall strike off his head from his bodie, whatsoeuer fall thereof. When the Ladie heard Huon, how he sayd that hee was her Father, shee changed co∣lour, and blushed as ruddie as a Rose, and thought to her selfe by the words that he spake, that hee was her Father, whereof she was right ioyfull, and said. Ah Sir, I pray you if you bee Duke Huon of Bourdeaux my Father, to shew me. My right deare Daughter, beléeue it surely, for I will no longer hide it from you. When the Ladie heard that he was her Father, she clipped him and Twentie times kissed him. Then the Abbot came and embraced him and sayd. My right deare Nephewe, the ioy that my heart hath of your comming, is to mee so accep∣table, that I cannot tell whether I dreame or not that I sée you heere, and then againe hee embraced him, making the greatest ioy in the world. Also there was Clariet his Daughter, who embraced and kissed him: then all that were in the house came thether to make great chéere and feasting. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I am sore abashed that you be returned with so small a companie. Good Vncle, (quoth Huon) it could bee none otherwise, I haue had such fortunes vppon the Sea, that the most part of my men are dead and perished, & some by ma∣ladie, and some are returned into their owne Countreys, and
especially they that went with me are abiding at the Rocke of the Adamant, and there all be dead by famine, and they that were my Guides to haue brought mee vnto Euphame, are in like wise dead there. Then Duke Huon beganne to shewe vnto the Abbot all the aduentures that he had, since he departed from the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, there were some that heard it, that tooke it for a mocke and a lye, he shewed of so many great maruailes, they thought that the most part of them were lyes, and one saide to another: Great aduantage haue these Vagabounds to lye, be∣cause they finde no man to say them nay, and if any man say nay, their answeare is readie to say, go and sée: then the good Abbot sayd. Faire Nephew, if I were of the age to beare ar∣mour, gladly I would goe with you to ayde you to destroy this Emperour, who hath done you so much ill, I shall send for such a number of men of warre, and pay them with my Treasure, the which I haue long time gathered together, and shall ayde you to make such war, that it shall alwayes be had in remem∣brance, or else I would die in the paine and all they that should goe with me, and to cause him to make you amends, of all the ils and dammages that he hath done vnto you, yet somewhat I haue done alreadie, for it is not long since, that one of the Em∣perours Nephewes were slaine by my men, and all they that were with him slaine or taken, for Nephewe, I haue gathered together a great Treasure, that I may therewith entertaine a hundred Thousand men for two yeares, without selling or lay∣ing to pledge any foote of Land appertaining to my Church, but as now I am so old that I cannot ride out, for I am a hun∣dred and fourteene yeares of age: and therefore séeing that I cannot goe with you, I shall abandon vnto you all my Trea∣sure, and take thereof as much as it shall please you. Sir, (quoth Huon) you make me so great an offer, that once before I die, I trust to render vnto you the double value, by the grace of God.
Chap. CXXXVI. ¶How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux shewed to his Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, all the aduentures that hee had, since he departed from the noble Citie of Bourdeaux: and how he gaue the Abbot the Apple of youth, whereby the good Abbot became againe to his beautie, that hee had when hee was but of Thirtie yeares of age. WHen Duke Huon of Bour∣deaux had well vnderstood the good Abbot his Vncle, and sawe the faire offer and ser∣uice that he had offered vnto him, he saide. Sir, of your courtesie and Larges, and all the good that you haue done vnto me and to my Daughter Clariet, God reward you for it: true it is, after that I had fought with the Griffens, I came vnto a faire Foun∣taine, and there by was a Trée growing charged full of faire fruit, the Trée was called the Trée of youth, of the which I ga∣thered three Apples, whereof you shall haue one and shall eate it, and assoone as you haue eaten thereof, thereby you shall be∣come as young and as strong and lusty, as you were when you were of the age of Thirty yeares. Then there was a Monke in the house, called Dan Iohan Saliuet, who beganne to laugh, and hasted him to speake and sayde. Ah Sir, what is it that you say, these two Thousand yeares there was neuer man at the Tree of youth, therefore this tale is not to be beléeued, and when Huon heard the Monke, he waxed red for anger, and lif∣ted vp his staffe, and would haue striken therewith the Monke, and if he had not skipt backe, and sayd. Ah thou false Monke, thou lyest falsely, I haue been there, and that thou shalt sée the proofe thereof, whether I say true or not. Then the Abbot came betwene them and stopped the stroake, and sayd vnto Huon.  ight deare Nephewe, appease your selfe, and then hee
sayd to the Monke. Ah thou rude Groome, by the faith that I owe vnto my Lord Saint Bennet, for thy words thou shalt bee sore punished, then he caused the Monke to be set in prison, and then the Abbot sayd vnto Huon. Sir, I pray you to be no lon∣ger displeased. Then Huon tooke one of his Apples, and gaue it to his good Vncle the Abbot, and sayd. Sir, take this Ap∣ple, the which I gathered of the Trée of youth, I gathered ther∣of thrée, and one I gaue to the Admirall of Persia, and another I kept for my selfe, the which I giue you, and I woulde haue gathered moe, but I was forbidden by an Angell sent from our Lord Iesus Christ: and Sir, knowe for troth, that the Admi∣rall of Persia before I gaue him the Apple, he was of the age of Six-score yeares and more, but assoone as hee had eaten there∣of, he became as faire and as strong, as when he was of Thir∣tie yeares of age, and hee is as now one of the fairest Princes in the world. By the which Miracle, he and all his people of his Realme did forsake the false and detestable Law of Maho∣met, and tooke vpon them the beliefe of our Lord Iesus Christ, and were christened, and they that woulde not were hewen all to péeces, and after that for the loue that he bare vnto mée, hée passed the Sea with mee with great puissance, and wee entred into the Souldans Lande, whereas wee discomfited him in plaine Battaile. When the good Abbot had well heard and vnderstood his Nephew, he had great ioy, and tooke the Apple, and made there∣on the signe of the Crosse, and did eat it vp euerie whit, where∣by incontinent in the sight of all them that were there present, he became into his first youth, as he was when hee was but of the age of Thirtie yeares, his white beard fell away and a new beard came, his iawes that were leane and pale, the flesh grew againe new quicke flesh, so that he became a faire young man, and well fournished of bodie and members, a fairer man could no man sée, nor lighter, nor lustier, whereof hée had such ioy at his heart, that he ran and embraced Huon, and kissed him more then Tenne times. When they that were there present saw that great maruaile, they were greatly abashed, & said one to another, that Huon was worthy to be beléeued, for out of such a
Princes mouth (quoth they) neuer yssued a lye, there was much ioy made, the Tables were set and they went to dinner, there satte the Abbot and Huon and Clariet his Daughter: Of their Seruice and meates I will make no rehearsall, for they were richly serued. After that they had dyned and grace sayd, all the Monkes of the Couent came and knéeled downe before Huon, and humbly required him of pardon for Damp Iohan Sa∣liuer, who was too hasty to speake, and all was through negli∣gence of youth and ill aduised. When Duke Huon saw all the Monkes before him vppon their knées, desiring him to pardon the Monke of his folly, hee sayd vnto them. Sirs, I am con∣tent to fulfill your desires, for I am not come hether to trouble any man. When the good Abbot had well heard Huon his Ne∣phew pardon his Monke, hee thanked him and said. Sir, by Saint Bennet, if you had not pardoned him, he should not haue come out of prison this yeare. Then the Monkes went to the Prison, and they shewed vnto the Monke that was in prison, what maruailes were done in his absence, and howe their Ab∣bot who was a Hundred and fourtéene yeares of age, was now become of the age of Thirtie yeares. Sirs, (quoth hée) I am glad of my deliuerance, but I cannot beléeue that it is so as you say, nor I will not beléeue it vntill I sée it: then hee went into the Hall, whereas the Abbot and Huon were together, and when hee sawe the good Abbot young againe, then hee kneeled downe and cried Huon mercie, and equired him of pardon, the which Huon graunted. Then there was great ioy, and the Abbot sayd. Nephewe, send for men of warre on all sides, and I shall pay their wages to the number of twentie Thousand men, for I haue gould and siluer ynough, and let vs send for all our Fréends, and we shall bee a great number of men able to fight with the Emperour, who hath wrongfully and without cause disenherited you, and keepeth your Wife in prison, whereof my heart is so sorrowfull that I can no longer endure it. Sir, (quoth Huon) if I can finde any other way to come to peace with the Emperour, then my Speare and shéeld and no man slaine, I would thinke then that I had well sped, for if I might doe so much with the Em∣perour,
that he would render vnto me my Landes and Signi∣ories, and my Wife and men, and that thereby I might be∣come his Liege-man, I would then thinke that I had made an honourable end, for I haue done him great dammage. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) I woulde faine knowe by what manner you coulde bring this matter about. Vncle, (quoth Huon) this night I will studie vppon the matter, the which I trust in our Lord Iesus Christ to bringe to a good and prospe∣rous end. Chap. CXXXVII. ¶ How Huon of Bourdeaux departed from Cluny, and went to the noble Citie of Mayence vppon a Friday: and how he came nere vnto the Emperours Oratorie. After that Huon and the good Abbot had deuised together of diuers things, Huon wrote a Letter vnto his men being at Tournous, that they should come vnto him to the Abbey of Cluny, hee sent a Gentleman of the Abbey to fetch them, and when hée was come to Tournous, and had deliuered his Letters vnto Barnard, they made them readie, and trussed their Somers and departed from thence, and they road so longe, that they came in at the gates of the Abbey of Cluny, the same time Huon and the Ab∣bot were leaning out at a window, the Abbot saw fiftéene So∣mers charged, and seauen Mules and Mulets, whereof he had great maruaile of whence they were, and said to Huon. Faire Nephew, can you tell vnto whome appertaine these Somers, or what be they that bringeth them? Sir, (quoth Huon) know for troth that I haue conquered them, and they are mine, and yonder is Barnard that doth conduct them, who hath had much paine and trouble before hee could find mee. Faire Nephewe, (quoth the Abbot) great ioye I haue at my heart, that hee hath
sought you so long to find you at the last, nor I could not haue sent a more noble man, you ought greatly to loue him, and also he is our Kinsman, and alwayes hee hath beene vnto you true and faithfull. Sir, in him I haue found all that you say: and Sir, the great Somer that you sée yonder with twoo great Coffers well banded, they be full of precious stones, and Iew∣els more woorth then foure good Cities, I will leaue them héere with you to keepe for the marriage of my Daughter, and with those words hee kissed her. Deare Nephew, (quoth the good Abbot) and besides that you will giue her, I shall depart with her largely of my Treasure. Therewith Barnard came thether and all the other of his companie, and when the Abbot perceiued Barnard, he came vn∣to him right ioyfully with his armes abroad and clipped and kissed him, and made vnto him great feast and chéere and to all his companie. Then Duke Huon and the good Abbot his Vn∣cle, and the faire Ladie Clariet his Daughter, went into their Chamber and discharged the Somers, and opened euerie Cof∣fer. When the Abbot had séen the riches that were in them, hee was neuer so abashed and sayd. Ah Duke Huon faire Ne∣phewe, I thinke you haue brought hether riches to buy there∣with the whole Realme of Fraunce. Then Duke Huon tooke a Coller of gould full of precious stones, that the clearnesse of them illumined all the house, and Huon did put the Coller a∣bout his Daughters necke, and kissed her mouth and sayd. My deare and louing Daughter, I giue you this Coller, I neuer gaue you any thing before, it is so rich that the stones therein are woorth a Realme or a Duchy. When the Ladie saw the rich Coller, shée was right ioyfull, and kneeled downe before her Father, and humbly thanked him: then Huon shewed all his Treasure vnto his good Vncle the Abbot, and when all had beene séene and viewed, the Abbot did put them into the Cof∣fers. Then Huon apparelled himselfe with rich apparell, and he seemed then to be a Prince of high degrée, he was so faire to behold, that all such as sawe him had great pleasure to behould him, there hee made good chéere and feasting for the space of right dayes, and vppon the ninth day in the Morning, he de∣parted
from thence priuily, and tooke Barnard with him with∣out the knowledge of any person except the Abbot, vnto whom he sayde. Faire Vncle, I and Barnard will depart, and I re∣quire you to let no man liuing know of my departing, as long as you can keepe it secret, vntill you doe héere from mee some tidings. Sir, it shall bee done, (quoth the Abbot) and I com∣mend you to the sauegard of our Lord Iesus Christ, and I be∣séech him humbly that you may haue peace with the Emperour Tirrey. Then Huon and Barnard departed before any man were ri∣sing, and they tooke their way towards the Citie of Mayence, and rested not vntill they came to Coleyne, and the next Mor∣ning they road vntill they came within a League of the Citie of Mayence, and then they entred into a wood, & there they aligh∣ted. Then Huon apparelled himselfe like a Pilgrim in habite hose and shooes, and he tooke a hearbe and rubbed therewith his Visage, in such sort, that hee séemed that hee had beene in the Sunne Ten yeares, so that he was vnknowne, and Barnard that was with him coulde not knowe him by the face, and then Barnard laughed: then he tooke his staffe and scrippe, and saide vnto Barnard. Sir, goe your way before into the Citie with our horses, and take none acquaintance of mee though you sée me, and take vp some small lodging, so Barnard went on before, and Huon faire and easily went after him, and so entred into the Citie, and hee had with him the Thirtie rich stones in his bosome. When hee was entred into the Citie, hee rested not vntill he came to the Pallaice, and as hee went vp the stayres, he met the Steward of the Emperours house, vnto whome hée sayd. Sir, I pray you in the honour of our Lord Iesus Christ to giue mee some meate, for I am so hungrie that I can scarce goe vppon my Legges, nor I haue no monney to buy mee one morsell of bread. When the Steward had well heard and vn∣derstood the Pilgrim, hee beheld him well, and sawe howe his staffe shaked in his hand, the which he thought had béene with féeblenesse and pouertie, and hadde of him great pitie and com∣passion, and demaunded of him from whence hee came? Sir, (quoth Huon) I come straight from the holy Sepulchre, and I
haue endured much pouertie and miserie. Fréend, (quoth the Steward) I pray you to tarie for me héere a little season, vntil I haue been in the Prison to carie meat vnto the Duchesse Es∣cleremond, and to the other Prisoners, who crye out through fa∣mine and rage that they be in, for if they bee longe in this case that they bee in now, they cannot endure it, for the Emperour hath taken such an inward hate against her, and against them that are in prison with her, that he hath made promise, that as∣soone as Easter is passed the Ladie shall be burnt, and the other Prisoners al hanged, and this day is Shroue Thursday, so that they haue to liue but fiue dayes, and I am right sorrie for the noble Ladie, that our Emperour will put her to death without a iust cause. When Huon had well heard that, hee hadde no member nor ioynt but that trembled, and he cast downe his Visage, and be∣ganne pitifully to wéepe, and suffered the Steward to passe and spake no woorde vnto him, but returned into the Towne, and went and lodged in the Towne right heauie and sorrowfull: howbeit, he was right ioyfull, in that his Wife was aliue, for he greatly feared that she had been dead. He lodged in a nota∣ble Burgesses house, who receiued him wel for the loue of God, but whatsoeuer he had there he could neither eat nor drinke, for the sorrowe and gréefe that he had at his heart: then hee sayde vnto his Host. Sir, to Morrowe is good Friday, the which day I thinke the Emperour will giue great Almes. Fréend, (quoth his Host) you may surely beléeue, that the Emperour will giue as to morrow great Almes, hee will giue of his goods so largely vnto all poore men, that if they come vnto him that day they shall bee all satisfied, you shall not finde a Prince that doth giue greater Almes, and of one thing I aduertise you: the Emperour hath one custome, that the first poore Pilgrim that commeth vnto him to morrowe shalbee happie, for there is no∣thing in the world be it neuer so deare, but if hee demaund it of the Emperour, it shall not bee denied him, it must bee at the same houre and time that the Emperour goeth vnto his Chap∣pell to say his Orisons. When Huon had well vnderstood his Host, he beganne to reioyce, and thought within himselfe, that
if hee could in any wise, hee would bee the first that should de∣maund Almes of the Emperour, but that should be neither gold nor siluer, it should bee his Wife and his men that hee hath in Prison: and also if he may he will aske therewith his Landes and Signiories. Then the Host went to his rest, and Huon abode in his Chamber alone, and slept not of all the night, but thought how he might deliuer his Wife, and the other Prisoners that were with her, and all the night he was at his prayers, humbly de∣siring our Lord God to counsaile and to ayd him to recouer his good Wife Escleremond. Early in the Morning hee arose and made him readie, and tooke his scrippe and staffe, and went straight to the Pallaice, and sat down vpon the greeces where∣as the Emperour should passe: at which time the Emperour was newe rysen, and there were many other Pilgrimes that were there abiding for the Emperours comming, and euerie man coueted to haue the first guift, but Huon did so much by his subtiltie, that hee was the first that entred into the Chappell, and none other perceiued him, and he did hide himselfe closely in a corner néere vnto the Emperours Oratorie, and there hee sat still without any word speaking, abiding there for the com∣ming of the Emperour. Chap. CXXXVIII. ¶ How Duke Huon of Bourdeaux did so much with the Emperor Tirrey, that he had peace with him, and his Wife rendred vnto him, and all his Landes and Signiories: and how the Emperour brought him vnto the Abbey of Cluny, whereas they found the good Abbot in armour, not knowing any thing of the Peace that was made.
NOwe sheweth the Historie, that anon after that Huon was entred into the Chappell, the Emperour came in and kneeled downe before the Aulter, and made his pray∣ers, and many poore men were there abiding the end of his prayers, and no man saw Huon whereas hee was hidden closely in a corner hard by the Empe∣rours Oratorie. When the Emperour had made his prayers, hee arose and turned him to haue gone into his Oratorie, and Huon who had great desire to bee the first, and to haue the first guift of the Emperour, hee drewe out of his bagge a rich stone, the which was of such vertue, that whosoeuer did beare it about him could not bee ouercome with his enemie, nor coulde not be drowned nor burnt, the stone had such great vertue, that none could esteeme the value thereof: and besides that it cast such clearnesse in the Chappell, that the Emperour was aba∣shed thereat, nor hee knewe not from whence that light should come. Then hee beheld Huon, and Huon did holde the stone in his hande, and shewed it vnto the Emperour: and when the Emperour sawe the rich stone, he greatly desired to haue it, and aduaunced himselfe, and tooke it out of the Pilgrimes hand, who presented it vnto him. When the Emperour had the stone in his hand, he had great ioy at his heart, for he was cun∣ning in the descrying of stones, and sware to himselfe, that the Pilgrim should neuer haue it againe for any thing that he could doe, but he thought within himselfe that if he would sell it, hee would giue him as much gould and siluer as hée could reasona∣bly demaund, or else he thought to kéepe it still whatsoeuer fell thereof: and then the Emperour sayde vnto Huon. Pilgrim, I pray thee to shewe vnto mee where thou hast gotten this rich and bountifull stone? Sir, (quoth Huon) I haue brought it from beyond the Sea. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) wilt thou sell it, and I shall giue thée for it whatsoeuer thou wilt haue? and to bee in the more suertie to beare away my guift that I will giue thee for it, I shall cause thée to bee conducted
into thine owne Countrey wheresoeuer it bee. Sir, (quoth Huon) I will giue it vnto you with a good heart, so that it bee true that mine Host hath shewed vnto mee this day, for he hath shewed vnto me that your custome is, that the first person Pil∣grim that commeth vnto you vppon this day being good Fri∣day, should haue of you a guift such as hee would demaund, af∣ter that you haue made your prayers to our Lord God. Pil∣grim, (quoth the Emperour) he that shewed thée that, sayd that which is true: and therefore whatsoeuer thou demaundest, ei∣ther Borough, Towne or Citie, or what thing soeuer it be, I promise faithfully to giue thée, whosoeuer bee displeased there∣with I graunt it to thée, therefore demaund whatsoeuer thou wilt. Sir, (quoth Huon) of your grace and faire guift, I most har∣tely thanke you: therefore Sir, with a good heart I giue you that stone, the which I deliuered vnto you but euen now, in the recompence of the courtesie and guift that you haue graunted vnto mée, the which shall be neither gould nor siluer: and Sir, because I know certainely, that the renowme is ouer all the world, that you are a iust and a true noble man, and that which you promise you will vphold and kéepe, and neuer swarue from your promise, and because that I know surely, that the promise that you haue made vnto mee you will vphold, of whatsoeuer guift I desire to haue. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) I will that you well knowe, that if you demaund foure of my best Ci∣ties, I shall giue you them, séeing I haue made that promise, and if God bee pleased I shall not goe from my promise, for I had rather that one of my handes were cut off, then I should be found false in my wordes: and therefore demaund, and surely you shall haue your demand without any deniall. Sir, (quoth Huon) I hartely thanke you, and would haue kissed his féete, but the Emperor would not suffer him but tooke him vp. Sir, (quoth Huon) first, and before all other thinges I desire of you pardon, of all the ill déedes and trespasses that I or my men haue done against you, and if you haue in your Prison either men or women appertaining vnto mee, or of my lineage, that you will deliuer them all vnto mee: and also if you haue any
thing of mine, either Towne or Citie, Borough or Castle, I require you by the promise that you haue made vnto mee, to render them vnto me quite: Sir, any other thinge I demaund not. Pilgrim, (quoth the Emperour) make no doubt to haue that which I haue promised vnto you: therefore I graunt all your desire, but I require you humbly to shew vnto mee what man you bée, and of what Countrey, and of what Lineage, seeing you haue desired of me such a guift? Sir, (quoth Huon) I am hee that sometime was Duke of Bourdeaux, whome you haue so much hated, I come now from beyond the Sea, where∣as I haue endured much paine and pouertie, I thanke our Lord Iesus Christ that I haue done so much, that I am nowe agreed with you, and I shall haue againe the Duchesse Esclere∣mond my louing Wife, and my men, and my Landes and Sig∣niories, if you will bee as good as your word, and vphold your promise. When the Emperour had well heard and vnderstood Huon, all his bloud beganne to change, and hee was a great space be∣fore he spake any word, hee was so sore abashed, but at the last hee sayd. Ah Huon, are you hee by whome I haue suffered so many illes and dammages, and haue slaine so many of my Ne∣phewes and other of my men? I would not haue thought that you would haue beene so hardy, to haue shewed your selfe be∣fore mée, nor to haue come into my presence, you haue well o∣uercome me and enchaunted mee, I had rather haue lost foure of my best Cities, yea▪ and all my Countrey burnt and destroy∣ed, and my selfe banished out of mine owne Countrey for thrée yeares, rather then you should haue thus come to my presence: but séeing that it is thus, knowe for troth, that which I haue promised vnto you I shall vphold and keepe, and from hence∣foorth in the honour of the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, and of this good day, vppon the which hee was crucified and put to death, I pardon you all mine ill will and good will, I shall not bee periured, your Wife, your Landes and Signiories, and your men, I shall render them into your hands, speake thereof who liste, otherwise it shall not bee, nor I will neuer doe the contrarie. Then Huon knéeled downe before the Emperour,
and right humbly thanked him, and desired him to forgiue him all his trespasses. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) God forgiue thée, and as for me, with a good heart I doe pardon you. Then the Emperour tooke Huon by the hande, and tooke him vp and kissed him verie kindlye, in token of good peace and amitie. Sir, (quoth Huon) great grace haue I found in you séeing you kéepe and vphold your promise: but Sir, if it please our Lord God, your guerdon shall be double. Huon, (quoth the Empe∣rour) I require you to shew me of your newes and aduentures that you haue had since you departed from the Citie of Bourde∣aux. Sir, (quoth Huon) with a good will after that your di∣uine Seruice is done, and the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ read. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) I giue you good thankes for that you say. Then the Emperor tooke Huon by the hand, and led him into his Oratorie with him, whereas they heard the diuine Seruice, whereof many Knightes and Lordes were sore abashed, and had great maruaile what Pilgrim it was that the Emperour did so much honour vnto. After that the diuine Seruice was done, the Emperor returned into his Pal∣laice holding Huon by the hande, and dinner was made radie, and they washed their handes and sat downe to dinner: and when dinner was done, and the Tables taken vp, then in the Emperours presence, and of all the other Lordes there, Huon shewed all his aduentures. First, hee shewed howe hee had passed the Gulfe and spoken with Iudas: and afterward howe by fortune of the Sea he arri∣ued at the Castle of the Adamant, and how his Companie dyed there by famine: and declared the beautie of the Castle, and of the great riches therein: and afterward how hee was caried from thence by a Griffen to a great Rocke, and how he slew fiue young Griffens, and the old Griffen that brought him thether, whereof he hath left at Cluny the foote of the same: then he she∣wed of the Fountaine, and of the Trée of youth, and howe hee gathered thereof thrée faire Apples, and more hee would haue gathered, but that our Lord God commaunded him by his An∣gell, that he should not be so hardy as to gather any more. And after that he shewed, howe that he passed the Gulfe of Persia in
reat perrill and daunger, and sayd furthermore. Sir, when I was passed that Gulfe, I gathered many precious stones, that which I haue giuen you was one of them, the which stone is of great vertue: and then I came to the great Citie of Thauris in Persia, whereas I found a noble Admirall an old auncient Knight, and he shewed to me great courtesies, and I gaue him one of mine Apples to eat, and assoone as hee had eaten thereof, he became to be as young as he was when he was but of Thir∣tie yeares of age, and I thinke that from thence hether cannot be found a fairer Prince, and hee was before of Six-score and Seauen yeares of age: and Sir, because I desire with all my heart to haue your good grace, and that good peace and firme may bee had betwéene you and mee, I will giue you the third Apple, the which I kept for my selfe, by the which if you doe eat it, you shall become againe as young and as lusty and as stronge, as you were when you were but of the age of Thirtie yeares. The Emperour, when hee heard that the Apple that Huon would giue him to eat, should cause him to returne to his yong age againe, hee was so ioyfull, that hee neuer made such chéere before in all his life to any man as he did then vnto Huon, and sayde, howe that hee would bee his Fréend for euer, and neuer faile him, and sayd. Fréend, I abandon my bodie and goods at your pleasure, and I giue you two good Cities to encrease your Signiorie, and besides that I promise you, if you haue a∣ny businesse to doe, I shall succour you with fortie Thousand men, and shall ayde you as the Father should doe the Sonne. Therewith Huon would haue kneeled downe to haue thanked the Emperour, but hee would not suffer him: and then Huon tooke the Apple out of his bagge, and deliuered it vnto the Em∣perour, the Emperour who was sore desirous to knowe if hee should waxe young againe, by reason of eating of the Apple, he called vnto him his Lordes and Barons, to the entent that they should sée that maruaile, and when the Emperour had the Ap∣ple in his hand, hee put it into his mouth, and did eate it euerie whit, and as hee was eating thereof, his age chaunged into youth, and by that time hee had eaten all the Apple, his white
beard fell off, and the skinne chaunged like a man of Thirtie yeares of age, and also his face and all his bodie that before was all wrinkled and rugged and pale, became then as white and as ruddy, and felt himselfe as light and as fresh, and a quicke to doe any thing and as strong, as he was when he was of the age of Thirtie yeares, whereof all that were there pre∣sent had great maruaile, and were right ioyfull of that aduen∣ture, that was fallen vnto the Emperour whome they loued, then they sayd. Sir, such a guift was neuer giuen to any Em∣perour or King, well you ought to praise our Lord God, what∣soeuer losse you haue hadde or receiued, that euer you were ac∣quainted with Duke Huon. Chap. CXXXIX. ¶ Howe the Emperour made good cheere vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux. WHen the Emperour saw him∣selfe waxe young againe, he was so ioyfull that hee wist not what to doe, then hee clipped and kissed Huon more then Ten times, saying. My right deare Fréend, I pray you to forgiue mée all the illes and dammages that I haue done vnto you, and for the paine and sorrow that I haue caused your noble Wife and men to suffer: then the Emperour called vnto him two of his Lordes, and sayd vnto them. Sirs, I will that all the poore people that be in my Chappell this day bee newly apparelled, and to haue meat and drinke sufficient, for the loue of the passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, who this day hath done mee that grace that I am returned from age to youth. Sir, (quoth they) your commaundement shall bee done: then they went and executed his pleasure. Then Duke Huon approa∣ched vnto the Emperour, and sayd. Sir, I humbly desire your grace to deliuer my Wife Escleremond, and my men out of Pri∣son.
Sir, (quoth the Emperour) it is good reason that I doe it: then he sent for the Iaylour, who had the Ladie and the o∣ther Prisoners in his kéeping, and commaunded him that the Ladie Escleremond and the other Prisoners should bee brought into the Hall, the Iaylour went to the Prison and Huon with him, and when they came thether, Huon went to the dore and cryed out aloud, and sayd. Ah my right swéete Sister, I be∣léeue that you haue béen but ill lodged héere, I haue great feare that by reason of the paines that you haue endured, you cannot long continue, certainly if you die I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart. When the Duchesse Escleremond hadde well heard the voice of him that spake at the dore, shée stood still and studied what voice it might bee, for shée thought within her selfe▪ that she had heard that voice before that time, and when she had mu∣zed a little while, she thought that it should be the voice of Huon her Husband, whereof she had such ioy and mirth at her heart, that of a great season shee could not speake but fell in a swound in the Prison: and when shee reuiued and came againe to her selfe, shee cryed out and sayde. Ah my right deare Lord and Husband, long haue you left me in paine and miserie, all alone in this stinking and horrible Prison, in the hands of them that loue you nothing, and haue suffered much paine, cold, and hun∣ger▪ and haue endured great pouertie, and in great feare of death and desperation. When Huon had wll heard and vnderstood his déere Wife, who spake so pitiously, (sorrow and gréefe so closed his heart) that hee had no power to speake one word, and the teares fell from his eyes, and trickled downe his chéekes for the pitie that he had of his louing Wife Escleremond: and also the Iaylor for verie pitie tht hee had was constrained to wéepe, and so went downe into the Prison and brought the Ladie vp: and then Huon and she beheld each other, and could speake no word of a great space, but renue and embraced and kissed each other, and so fell downe to the ground both in a traunce, and they lay vn∣till other Knightes came thether, fearing that they had beene dead, there was none but that wept for pitie. Then the Em∣perour came thether himselfe, and sore wept and repented him∣selfe
of the illes that he had done to the Ladie and made her o suffer: and then the Knightes and Lordes reuiued them, then they clipped and kissed together, and Huon sayd. Faire Ladie I require you to pardon mee in that I haue taried so long from you, and haue left you in such pouertie, paine, and daunger of death, and haue escaped, for the which I humbly thanke our Lord God of his grace. Sir, (quoth shee) we ought greatly to thanke almightie God, when hee hath sent vs that grace to sée each other, and to come together againe, and that you haue peace with the Emperour. Then the Iaylour went to all the Prisons, and tooke out all Huons men and brought hem vnto him, and they had great ioy when they saw their Lord & Mai∣ster in sauegard, and thanked our Lord God, and humbly salu∣ted Huon, and sayd. Sir, blessed bee the houre of your com∣ming, whereby wee are deliuered from the paines, trauailes, and pouerties that we haue been in. My right deare Freends, (quoth Huon) thus goeth the world, you and I are bound to thanke our Lord God for that hee sendeth vnto vs. Then the Emperour tooke Huon by the one hand, and Escleremond by the other, and ledde them into his Pallaice, whereas the Tables were set, and there sat downe together the Emperour and Huon and the Duchesse, and all the Prisoners at another Table, and were all richly serued: Of their meats and Seruices, and ioy that they made, I will make thereof but small rehearsall. And when they had all dyned, the Emperour ordained Lades and Damsels to serue the Duches Escleremond▪ and ordained Cham∣bers for the Duke and her, and for all the other, they were there serued of all thinges that they desired, and they had new appa∣rell according to their degrées. Anon the newes and tidinges were knowne in the Citie, of the Peace made betwéene Huon and the Emperour, and how hee had his Wife the Duchesse Escleremond rendred vnto him, and his men deliuered out of prison, whereof Brnar (as hee was in the Towne hearkening for newes) was right ioyfull, and went in hast vnto the Pallaice, whereas he found Huon in his Chamber with his Wife the faire Esleremond and assoone as hee sawe the Duchesse, the water fell from his eyes for ioy:
then he saluted Huon and the Duchesse, and the Ladie knew him incontinent and said. Ah sir Barnard, well I ought to loue and cherish you, that yée haue so sought for my Lord and hus∣band, as that now at last through your tedious trauaile you haue found him and brought him hether. Madame quoth he, I haue done nothing but what I was bound in duty to doe, I am sory for the great paines and trauaile that my Lord hath suffered, and then hée shewed such newes as he knew, whereof many great Lords and knights had great ioy to heare him for she maruayles that he discoursed vnto them. Then when they had béene there the space of Eight dayes, and that their men were well refreshed, the Emperour assembled all his Lords & said▪ Sirs it is my will, to lead and conduct Duke Huon and the Duches to Bourdeaux, and to set them in possession of their Lands and Signiories, and I will haue Ten Thowsand men to goe with mee and them, and to bring mee againe hether to Mayence, according to his commaundement the men were made readie, and when the Emperour had ordained for Huons estate as it appertained for him, and his Wife and his men, and when euerie thing was readie, they all mounted vpon their horses, and the Duchesse had a rich Littour, so they departed from the Citie of Mayence, and ceased not till they came within twoo Leagues of the Abbey of Cluny. The good Abbot, who knew nothing of the agréement made betwéene the Emperour and Huon, had gathered together of men of warre about twen∣tie Thousand, and they were lodged in the Towne of Cluny, and the Abbot was aduertised of the Emperours comming in∣to those parts, and he heard no newes of Huon, whereof he was right sorrowfull and sore displeased, and thought that the Em∣perour hadde taken Huon Prisoner: then hee yssued out of the Towne, and ranged his men in good order of Battaile, with∣out the Towne in a faireplaine, and there abiding for the Em∣perour whome he saw comming.
Chap. CXL. ¶ How the Emperour arriued at Cluny, and how the Abbot set vpon him, and of the peace that was there made, and how the Emperour conueyed Huon to Bourdeaux, and rendred to him all his Lands, and of the parting of them and the Emperour, and how Huon made his prouision to goe to king Oberon. WHen the Emperour sawe the Towne of Cluny, he demaunded of Huon if he could tell him to whome that towne appertay∣ned. Sir quoth he, it belongeth to an Vncle of mine who is Abbot thereof, and wée must passe that way, and also I must néedes speake with him before I goe to Bourdeaux. The same time the Ab∣bot, who was then mounted on a puissant and strong Courser well armed at all points, sawe the Emperour comming to∣wards Cluny, and then he said to his men. Sirs, thinke this day to doe well and valiantly, for yonder before vs we may sée the Emperour our enemie comming, wherefore wée cannot escape the Battaile, I am sure he hath taken Huon my Ne∣phew, but by the faith that I owe to my Lord and to Saint Bennet my Patron, that taking shalbe déerely bought: then they couched their speares and spurred their horses, and came running towards the Emperour: and when the Emperour saw them, hee called Huon and said. Sir, yonder yée may sée men of warre all armed come running against vs, I wot not what they meane to doe, but they séeme to be our enemies as far as I can perceiue, and they are a great number, and ther∣fore they are to be doubted and feared. Sir quoth Huon, it is mine Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, who hath raysed vp his men to succour me, for he is not aduertised of the Peace made betwéen you and mée, surely he thinketh that you haue taken me priso∣ner, and therewith the Abbot dashed in amongest the Empe∣rours
Companie, and the first that he met he ran him cleane through with his speare, and so he serued the second, third, & fourth, and when his speare was broken, hee drew out his swoord wherewith he beat downe the Almaines that it was maruaile to behould him, and then came in his men, and they did such deeds of armes, that perforce the Almaines were faine to retire backe, and many were slaine and destroyed, and cast downe to the earth. When the Emperour saw that, hee was in great rage, and sayd vnto Huon. Sir, you are greatly to blame, to suffer your Vncles men to slay mine. Sir, (quoth Huon) I am right sor∣rie for that they haue done, I am readie to make you amendes in whatsoeuer it shall please you: therewith Duke Huon road vnto the good Abbot his Vncle, and in great displeasure sayd. Vncle, you haue done great euill, and when the Abbot saw and perceiued Huon, he was right ioyfull, and hee embraced him, and said. Faire Nephew, I thought that the Emperour had taken you Prisoner, and would haue put you to death, I knew not that you had Peace with him: then he made his men to re∣tire backe from the Almaines, and then hee and Huon together came vnto the Emperour, and the Abbot saluted him, and said. Sir, I pray you to pardon me, in that I haue thus come against you, for certainly, I had thought that you would haue hanged and slaine my Nephew Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, nor I knew not that there was any Peace betwéene you: therefore Sir, I require you to pardon mée, and I offer my selfe to make you a∣mends by the aduice of your counsaile. Sir, (quoth the Em∣perour) I pardon you for the loue that I beare vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, whome I take for my faithfull and speciall fréend. Thus as yée haue heard the Peace was made betwéene the Emperour and the Abbot of Cluny. Then they road together vntill they came vnto Cluny, where the Emperour was recei∣ued with great ioy. When the good Abbot hadde receiued the Emperour and lodged him in the Abbey, then he came vnto the Duchesse Escleremond, and embraced and kissed her, and sayde. My right déere Néece, your comming vnto mee hether is great∣ly
acceptable, well I am pleased to sée you whole and in good health, and I am sore displeased for the great euils and pouer∣ties that you haue endured, if I might amend it, but since it is the will and pleasure of our Lord Iesus Christ, both you and wée all ought to be content, blessed bée his name. Good Vncle, (quoth the Duchesse) greatly wee ought to thanke and to che∣rish you, for you haue béen Father and refuge of my Daughter Clariet, whome I desire greatly to sée: then the good Abbot led the Duches Escleremond into the chamber, wheras her Daugh∣ter Clariet was, who came and knéeled downe before her Mo∣ther, and when the Duchesse her Mother sawe her, it was no maruaile though shee was ioyfull at her heart, for when shee sawe her so faire, and so well educated, you may well thinke that her ioy excéeded all other, she embraced and kissed her more then Twentie times, and sayd. My déere Daughter, since I sawe you last I haue endured great pouertie and miserie, but thankes bée giuen to our Lord Iesus Christ, and to his swéete Mother, your Father and I are come together in sauegard, and haue Peace with the Emperour: then they went into the Chamber, whereas their dinner was prepared readie for them, and there dyned together with great consolation, and all that dinner time the Duchesse could not cast her eyes from the re∣garding of her Daughter Clariet, for the great beautie that she saw and perceiued in her, and when they had dyned, the Lords and Knightes, and Squiers came to sée the Ladies as they were accustomed to doe, and as they were deuising together, Huon entred into the Chamber and the good Abbot his Vncle with him, and they sayd vnto the Duchesse. Faire Ladie you must come vnto the Emperour, and bring your Daughter with you, for he desireth greatly to sée her: then the Ladie (who was readie to doe her Husbands commaundement) went into the Hall and her Daughter with her, whereas they found the Em∣perour, who receiued them with great ioy, and tooke the yong Lady Clariet in his armes and kissed her swéetly, and sayd. My right déere Daughter, your comming hether is to me right ac∣ceptable, god performe in you that which wanteth, as for beau∣tie you want not. Huon, (quoth the Emperour) great thanks
you ought to render vnto our Lord Iesus Christ, that hee is so fréendly vnto you, as to send you such a Child as this Ladie that is héere before mee, for I thinke that of beautie, this day there is no Ladie nor Damsell that is liuing in this world, that is able to compare with your Daughter. Sir, (quoth Huon) I pray vnto our Lord God to performe in her that which shee wanteth: great pleasure had the Emperor to behold the Dam∣sell, and so had all other Lords, Ladies, and Damsels that were there present. Thus as yée haue heard the Emperour was receiued at Clu∣ny, and was greatly feasted by the Abbot there, for assoone as the Emperour was come thether, the good Abbot sent ouer all the Countrey for Ladies and Damsels to feast the Emperour, and there they were thrée dayes with great Iusts and sports, and when they departed, there was neither Ladie nor Dam∣sell, but that the Emperour gaue her some guift: the fourth day after that the Emperour had heard Seruice, and his baggage and cariage readie, then he and Duke Huon, and the Duchesse Escleremond, and Clariet her Daughter departed from Cluny, and with them the good Abbot, who brought them vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, for he loued so well Huon and the Duchesse, and Cla∣riet whome he had brought vp, that he would not abandon them so soone. Huon sent Barnard before vnto the Citie of Bourde∣aux, signifying vnto them of the Citie of the Emperours com∣ming and his, and of the Peace made between the Emperour and him. Barnard departed, and was well receiued at Bourde∣aux: then he assembled together all the Burgesses of the Citie, and shewed vnto them of the Emperors comming thether, and with him Duke Huon, and the Duchesse Escleremond, and Clariet their Daughter, and of the Peace that was made between the Emperour and Duke Huon, this newes was sent incontinent to Blaye and to Geronnill, and ouer all the Countrey of Burdeloys, and then all the noble men aswell as Burgesses came hastely vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, for to receiue their rightfull Lord Duke Huon, and when they were there assembled, they moun∣ted vppon their horses, and road foorth to meete the Emperour and Duke Huon their naturall Lord, they were together about
sixe Thousand horses: when they approached néere vnto the Emperour, they saluted him, vnto whome the Emperour sayd openly. All yée Sirs, noble men and Burgesses, that haue be∣fore this time made vnto mee fealtie and homage, I deliuer you quite into the handes of your right naturall Lord, as you haue beene before time, and I quit clearely your homages and fealties done vnto mée: then they all thanked the Emperour of his good iustice and reason, that hee had alwayes done vnto them in the season whiles they were vnder him, the Emperour was right ioyfull that they so praised him before Duke Huon, and then they came vnto Duke Huon, and to the Duches Escle∣remond his Wife, and to Clariet their Daughter, and did vnto them their reuerence accordingly. Thus they came vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas they were ioyfully receceiued, and a cloath of estate was borne before the Emperour, vnder the which he road, still holding Huon by the hand vntill they came vnto the Pallaice, the stréets were strewed with gréene hearbs and rushes, and hanged richly, the windowes garnished with Ladies and Damsels, Burgesses and Maydens, melodiously singing, whereof the Emperour was right ioyfull, the Chil∣dren running in the Stréetes and crying noel, noel, for the great ioy and mirth that they had of the comming of their Lord and Ladie. When they were come vnto the Pallaice, they alighted and went to their Chambers readie appointed for them, if I should rehearse the ioyes, and sports, and solemnities that was made at the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, it would bee too tedious and o∣uer-long to declare it, for the feast and chéere was such, that no man as then liuing had séen any such, the which endured for the space of Eight dayes, during the which time, the Emperour declared vnto them of that Countrey, the Peace that was made betwéen him and Duke Huon, and how hee would deliuer all his Landes and Signiories into his handes, and clearely ac∣quit euerie man of their fealtie & homage to him made, where∣of euerie man was ioyfull, and vppon the Ninth daye that the Emperour should depart, he called Duke Huon vnto him, and sayd. My right déere Fréend, he that I loue best in this world,
if any warre or businesse happen to fall vnto you, let mée haue knowledge thereof, and I shall send you fortie Thousand men at armes, and my selfe in person to come to ayde and succour you. Sir, (quoth Huon) of the courtesie that you offer mee I hartely thanke you, and alwayes I shall repute my selfe as your true Seruant and faithfull Fréend. Then the Emperor went to the Duchesse Escleremond, and tooke his leaue of her, and of the faire Ladie Clariet her Daughter, and embraced and kissed them at his departing, and so hee did all the other Ladies and Damsels, and gaue euerie one of them some guift, hee gaue rich guiftes vnto the Duchesse and to her Daughter, and then he tooke his leaue and mounted vppon his Horse and so yssued out of the Citie of Bourdeaux, and Duke Huon and the good abbot of Cluny conuayed him about twoo Leagues: then they tooke their leaue of the Emperour and of his Lords and Knightes, and returned vnto the noble Citie of Bourdeaux. Then after that Huon had soiourned there about Eight dayes, he road vnto Geronnill and to Blames, and vnto all other townes and Castles, where he was receiued with great ioy and mirth, and set Officers in them: then hee returned againe vnto the Citie of Bourdeaux to the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife, and after that he had taried there about a Moneth, Duke Huon de∣uised with his Wife in the presence of the good Abbot his Vn∣cle, and of Barnard his Coozen, and sayd. My right déere wife, hee that remembreth not the goodnesse done vnto him, may bee reputed as vngratefull, I say it, because you know well that King Oberon hath done vnto vs great good, and hath deliuered vs out of many great perils of death, and as you sawe but late∣ly by the twoo Knightes that rescued you from the death, and from the daunger that you were in, and you knowe well that the last time that Kinge Oberon departed from Bourdeaux, hee gaue mee all his Realme of the Fayrie, and the puissance that he hath there, and he made mée to promise him, that after that Foure yeares were passed, that I should come vnto him, and that he would then put me in possession of his Realme, and hée saide that if I failed my day, hée would vtterly destroy me, you know well what hath fallen vnto me (before this) by breaking
of his Commaundement: and therefore déere Lady and Wife, it is necessarie that I goe vnto him, and I shall leaue with you Barnard, who shall haue the kéeping of my Landes and of you, and as for my Daughter, I will leaue her with the Abbot héere mine Vncle, who I desire héere before you, that hee will kéepe and gouerne my Daughter Clariet, and with him I will leaue all my riches and precious stones that I brought with mée, to the entent to marrie her, so that it be to a man of great valour, but I will not that shee bee maried vnto any person for riches, but a person that is worthy and valiant I would should haue her, for she hath and shall haue riches ynough for her selfe, and for a man of great authoritie. Faire Nephew, (quoth the Ab∣bot) your going shall be displeasing vnto me, if I might amend it, if God will, no man liuinge shall haue your Daughter my Néece in marriage, except hee bée a man of a high Parentage, and garnished with vertues and good manners, and as for your riches, pearles, and Iewels, shee shall not néede to haue any thereof, for I haue Treasure and riches ynough to marrie her nobly. Chap. CXLI. ¶ How Duke Huon deuised with the Duchesse his Wife of his de∣parting, and how shee sayd that she would goe with him: And how hee left his Daughter and Land and Signiories in the kee∣ping of his Ʋncle the good Abbot of Cluny, and of Barnard his Coozen. WHen the Duchesse Esclere∣mond had well heard her Husband the Duke make his deuises, to goe vnto Kinge Oberon, you may well beléeue that she had great dolour and gréefe at her heart: and then all wéeping shée kneeled downe before her Husband, and said. My right deare Lord, and if God will, you shall not goe
on foote but that I will goe with you, if you take any ill or an∣noyance I will haue my part, and if you haue any good aduen∣ture I will haue my part with you, for your long absence hath béen right hard for mée to endure. Faire Ladie, (quoth Hu∣on) I pray you to forbeare your going, and abide héere with your Daughter, for the Voyage shall bée sore for you to doe: here I shall leaue Barnard my Coozen, and mine Vncle the good Abbot, and they shalbe vnto you as Fathers. Sir, (quoth she) I shall haue many sorowes to abide héere without you, I had rather to endure whatsoeuer God shall send vs together, then to abide héere without your companye. Thus yée haue heard héere before, that for any excuse or reason that Huon could shew vnto the Duchesse his Wife, he could not turne her from her opinion, but that shee woulde in any wise goe with him. When Huon saw that, he sayd. My right déere Ladie, since it is your pleasure to go with mée, and to be content what∣soeuer God doth send vs either good or euill, your companie pleaseth mée well, and I am right ioyfull thereof. When the good Abbot and Barnard had well heard and vnderstood the will and pleasure of Duke Huon, and of the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife, they were sore displeased therewith, if they could in any wise haue letted them, but they could not turne him for any thing that they could doe: then Huon sayd vnto the good Abbot. Faire Vncle, I leaue with you my Landes, Signiories, and my Daughter vntill I returne againe, the which shall bée as shortly as I may. But of force now I am driuen, to goe and take possession of the Realme that Kinge Oberon hath giuen to mée: Therefore faire Vncle and Coozen Barnard, vnto you I recommend my Daughter whome I loue entirely, and all my Landes and Signiories, I leaue all in your kéeping vntill my returne, and with you mine Vncle I leaue all my precious stones and Treasure, for the mariage of my Daughter whom I leaue in your kéeping. Faire Nephew, (quoth the good Ab∣bot) séeing that it is your pleasure, I shall kéepe her as well as though she were mine owne Child. Good Vncle, (quoth Hu∣on) I pray you that the Griffens foote that I brought with me, may bée sent vnto the young Kinge Lewis of Fraunce, and
salute him from mee, and present it vnto him to doe therewith his pleasure. Sir, (quoth the good Abbot) before Easter bee come your Messuage shall bee done, and that being done, the young King was ioyfull thereof, and caused it to bée hanged in his Pallaice: and afterward by King Phillip it was hanged in the holy Chappell, whereas it is vntill this day. Now let vs leaue speaking of the Griffens foote, and returne to our former matter. Chap. CXLII. ¶ How Huon tooke leaue of his Daughter, and of the good Ab∣bot his Vncle, and of Barnard his Cozen, and entred into the Riuer of Gerone, and the Duchesse with him: and of the strange Fortunes that they had. WHen the good Abbot and Barnard had well vnderstood Huon, and hadde heard his will and pleasure, they answeared, that as for his Lands and Signiories, and for his Daughter hee should not need to care: but they sayd, that it greatly displeased them the Voyage that they were in minde to doe, but since it was his plasure so to doe, it was reason that they should bee content: and then hee ordained that Barnard shoulde make readie a little Ship, apparelled and garnished with victuals and other things necessarie, and that another great Shippe to be made readie at the mouth of the Sea, to enter into it when they were out of the Riuer of Gerone, the which thinge was done. Then hee tooke sixe Knightes and a Dozen Seruants of his owne, and when Huon saw euerie thing readie, and had shewed his Enterprize vnto his men, and to the men of his Countrey, and that euery thing was readie fournished: then hee tooke his Daughter in in his armes, and kissed her more then Ten times, and in like wise so did Escleremond her Mother, and her heart was so closed
with sorrow and gréefe, that shee could speake no word, for the departing from her Daughter, you may well thinke that great was the sorrow there at their departing, for he that had beene there, and seene the dolour and pitifull complaints that the La∣die Clariet made, for the departing of her Father and Mother, with whome shee had not beene no long season, there is not so hard a hert, but that needs he must haue taken part of her sor∣row, for there was neuer séene so heauie a departing. Then Huon all wéeping embraced the good Abbot his Vncle, who gaue Huon at his departing a hollowed stoole, the which afterward did good seruice vnto Huon and to Escleremond. Al∣so Huon tooke leaue of Barnard his Cozen, then the Duchesse sayde vnto the Abbot and to Barnard. Sirs, vnto you twoo I due recommend my Daughter. Thus Huon departed, and they went to the Posterne, and there they found readie their little Shippe, and they entred into it, and so made sayle downe along the Riuer of Gerone, and when they came to the mouth of the Sea, they tooke their great Shippe, and so made sayle and had good wind, so that shortly they were farre off from a∣ny land, and were in the hye Sea for the space of Sixe dayes, and vppon the Seauenth day a wind arose with such an horri∣ble Tempest, that they were driuen into the great Spanish Sea, and were so far from any land, that they wyst not where they were, and euer the Tempest encreased in such wise, that there was neuer none such seen nor heard of before, the waues were like Mountaines, and like to haue swallowed vp the ship, so that sometime there entred into the Shippe a Tunne of wa∣ter at once. Chap. CXLIII. ¶ How Huon lost all his men, and the Ship brake in peeces and how hee and the Duchesse saued themselues vpon a board, and came and arriued at the Castle of the Monkes.
WHen Duke Huon of Bour∣deaux, and the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife sawe these great and suddaine tem∣pests, they were in great feare of death: & they greatly complained for their Daugh∣ter Clariet, whome they had left at Bourde∣aux. Then Huon, who had with him in his bagge Nine of his déere precious stones, hée drew out two of them, and knew the vertue and bountie of them, and gaue his wife one of them and sayd. My déere and louing Wife, hold this stone in your hand and haue no feare, for the vertue of the stone will not let you perish, nor me neither: he that had heard the cryes and la∣mentations that the Marriners made, would haue had pittie and compassion of them, for they saw well that they should all perish. And Huon and Escleremond were vpon their knees sore weeping, holding each other by the hande, humbly praying to our Lord Iesus Christ to haue pittie and compassion of them, and to bringe them vnto some Port in sauegard of their liues: great and horrible was the Tempest and long endured, so that the healme, Ma, and sayles burst all to péeces: and when the Shippe was without a sterne to guide it, the great waues en∣tred into it, so that the Shippe was full of water, whereby it was constrayned to sinke into the Sea, in such sort, that it was all couered with water, and all that were within were drow∣ned and perished, except Huon and Escleremond, who satte toge∣ther vpon a Table floating vpon the Sea, so that by the grace of our Lord God, and by the great bountie and vertue of the precious stones that were vppon them, they were saued. And when they saw their Shippe all to péeces, and their men drow∣ned and perished, and themselues floating vppon the Sea, whereof Huon hadde such sorrowe and greee at his heart, that great pittie it was to sée him, and saide. Ah good Lord, why was I euer borne into this world, when I am so vnfortunate, that I can haue no men to serue mée, but at last they end their liues in my seruice miserably? Ah my God, why doest then
suffer mée so longe to liue? Then the Duchesse comforted him as much as shée could, and said. Ah Sir, leaue your sorrowe, and pray vnto our Lord God for his mercie and his grace, and to haue pittie and compassion of vs, that wée might arriue at some good Port. Thus the noble Duchesse Escleremond comforted Duke Hu∣on her Husband, howbeit, shee was in as great feare, and not without a cause: and thus they floated vppon the Sea, greatly bewailing the death of their men, whome they sawe perish be∣fore their eyes. Then Huon as farre off as he might sée, he saw a Castle standing vppon a Rocke, the which séemed darke and blacke: and then hee lauded and praised our Lord God, pray∣ing him humbly to bring them thether in sauegard. Then the Sea was peaceable, and the Tempest ceased, and the winde fresh, the which draue them in a short space vnto the Port vn∣der the Rocke: and when they were neere to the land, Huon and the Duchesse waded vnto the lande, holding each other by the hand. When they were vppon the drie land, they kneeled downe and lifted vp their eyes vnto Heauen, and made their deuoute prayers vnto our Lord Iesus Christ, desiringe him to haue pitie and compassion of the Soules of their men that they sawe drowned and perished: then they arose vp and saw a litle path way lying straight towardes the Castle, and they entred into it, and when they were néere vnto the Castle, they sawe a great Riuer running round about it, and sawe that the Castle was of maruailous great beautie, thinkinge that they neuer sawe none such before, the Towers were couered with gliste∣ring gould, shining so bright as though the Sunne did shine thereon: Also they sawe an auncient Church adioyning to the Castle, with a goodly Steeple full of bels, the which beganne to sound, whereof Huon had great maruaile, for he sawe neither man nor woman comming nor going, and when hee had well regarded the Castle, hee came vnto the gate, and saw how that there were thrée bridges to passe before he could enter. When Huon saw that, hee sayd. Ah good Lord, in all my life I neuer sawe so faire a Castle, hee that is Lord thereof séemeth to bee a great and a noble man, for if there were within it but Fortie
men to keepe it, and garnished with victuals, it would neuer be wonne for any man liuing. So long Huon beheld this Ca∣stle, that he had forgotten his sorrow, the Castle pleased him so well, and sayd vnto the Duchesse his Wife. Madame, I be∣léeue surely that this is the Castle of Momur, appertaining vn∣to King Oberon, wee may well thanke our Lord God that hee hath brought vs hether, we shall sée him, you knowe well that hée hath promised to giue mee his Realme and all his dignitie. Sir, (quoth the Duchesse) I haue heard say before this, that Momur is a great and a noble Citie, and full of people of all sorts: wherefore, you may well perceiue that this is not that Citie, it may well bee that this Castle is his. Madame, (quoth Huon) the King hath that puissance, that he may make Citie or Castle at his pleasure. Sir, (quoth shee) I beleeue it well. Then Huon tooke his way to the gate, and as hee went deuising with the Duchesse Escleremond his wife, hee sawe be∣fore him foure Monkes in white apparell: & when they came vnto him, they sayd. Sir, Duke of Bourdeaux, of your com∣ming we are right ioyfull, for a more noble man came not heere of a long season. God blesse you and the Duchesse your Wife. Sirs, (quoth Huon) God saue you, I pray you to shew me what you be? and who hath shewed you my name, and who is Lord and Gouernor of this Castle? Sir, (quoth one of the Monkes) this Castle is ours, and heere is no Gouernour but I and my Brethren, wee make none answeare vnto any Lorde liuing: therefore if it please you to enter, wée shall make you as good feast and chéere as wée can, if it please you to tarie Eight or fif∣teene dayes you shall bee welcome, and when you depart, wee shall giue you to carie with you meate and drinke, sufficient to serue you and your Wife for Fifteene dayes, and you shall haue neede thereof, before you finde out Kinge Oberon. Sirs, (quoth Duke Huon) of your courtesie I most hartely thanke you. Then Huon entred into the Castle with them, and came in∣to a great Hall, well garnished and adorned with rich Pil∣lers of white Marble, vawted aboue, and richly painted with gold and Azure, and set full of rith precious stones, the which
cast a great light, for by reason of the precious stones, at mid∣night it was as bright as at noone dayes. Huon and Esclere∣mond thought that they neuer sawe so rich a thing. Madame, (quoth Huon) this place is delectable: then they were brought into a rich Chamber, whereas the Tables were set, and gar∣nished with euerie thinge that a man coulde wish for. Then there came in many Seruants, some brought in the Basons of gould adorned with precious stones, and some brought in the Towell and water, and they gaue the water vnto Huon and Escleremond to wash their handes: then they satte downe at the Table▪ and did eate and drinke at their pleasure, for they had their meat and drinke at their wish. When they hadde eaten at their pleasure, and the cloathes taken vp, then there were Spices brought, and Huon did eate thereof, but Escleremond would not so much as taft thereof: then they were brought in∣to a Garden to sport them, and when they were there, they thought that they had been in Paradice, for the sweetnesse of flowers and fruites vppon euerie Trée, and they heard diuers kind of birdes sing melodiously. Sirs, (quoth Huon vnto the the Monkes) well you ought to thanke our Lord Iesus Christ, that he hath giuen you such a place to serue him in: and Sirs, I pray you when it is midnight, awake me, to the entent that I may ryse to go and heare your Seruice when you doe it. Sir, (quoth one of them) I shall awake you when the time is, that you may come and héere vs. Sir, (quoth Huon) therein shall you doe me great pleasure. Then Duke Huon and ye Duches Escleremond were brought into a rich Chamber, well fournished with cloathes of gold and silke, wherein was a rich and sumptuous bedde, wherein Hu∣on and the Duchesse his Wife lay together: the Chamber was faire and rich, for all the night it was as cleare as though the Chamber had been full of Torches, by reason of the shining of the precious stones, for there was no bench nor Post, but that were set full of riche stones, the riches of that Chamber coulde not e described, and therein was painted with gold and azure all the Battailes of Troy. And in this riche Chamber and bed they slept, vntill the houre of midnight was come: and then
all the Monkes arose, and the bels began to ring to Seruice, then there came a Monke vnto Huon, and awaked him, and sayde. Sir, it is nowe time that you arise, for it is past mid∣night, make you readie to come and heare our Seruice. Then Huon arose, and called vp the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife, then shee arose, and thus they made them readie and went vn∣to the Church, the which was paued with a white Marble, powdered with flower deluces of gould, intermedled with red Roses, and the Vault was checkered with Amber and Chri∣stall, and at euerie point a rich stone, whereby there was such clearnesse, that there néeded no Candle light. When Duke Huon and the Duchesse Escleremond had well séene and beheld the great beautie and riches of the Church, they were sore abashed, and made the signe of the Crosse vpon their fore-heads, for the maruailes that they sawe there: then they entred into the Quier, and knéeled downe before the hye Aulter, and made their prayers vnto our Lord God, desiring him to be their sauegard, and to conduct them surely vnto King Oberon. Then the Abbot beganne Seruice, and read the first Lesson, and when he was in the halfe thereof, he held his peace, and departed cleane out of the Church, then the Priour began another Lesson, and in like wise left it in the middest and de∣parted out of the Church, thus euerie Monke did one after a∣nother, and there were twoo and Thirtie Monkes, and in the middest of euerie Lesson and Psalme, they departed out of the Church one after another. When Duke Huon saw and heard that, he was sore dismayed and abashed, and sware that before the last Monke departed, hee would knowe the cause why they did so: and then hee went vnto the last Monke, who woulde haue gone out of the Church, and Huon tooke the hallowed stole that hee had in his bosome, and did cast it about the Monkes necke, & held it fast with both his handes. When the Monke saw how hee was holden, hee was sorrowfull and angrie, and did what he could to haue escaped, but he could not: and when he saw that he could not escape, he embraced Huon, and prayed him humbly to lette him goe after his Brethren. Certainely, (quoth Huon) out of my hands you shall not escape, vntill you
haue shewed mée why you sing your Seruice after the manner that you doe, and euer to leaue the one halfe vnsonge, and why the Abbot and the other Monkes doe depart one after another, without any word speaking vnto mée, and except you shew me the troth, with my sword I shall strike thy head to the braines. Then simply the Monke fained to wéepe, and prayed Huon to suffer him to depart, and sayd. Sir, I am he that yesternight brought you to your Chamber and made your bed. Then Hu∣on (who had his Sword in the one hand, and the stole in the o∣ther hand) saide: Except thou shewest vnto mee my demaund shortly, I shall strike off thy head. When the Monke heard that, hee was in great feare, and stood still as though hee would giue none answeare. And when Huon saw that, hee lifted vp his Swoorde to haue striken him, but then incontinent the Monke ioyned his handes and cryed for mercie, and promised him to shew him the troth of his demaund. Chap. CXLIIII. ¶ How Duke Huon made sēblance to haue slaine the Monke, hol∣ding him fast with the stole, to the entent that he should shew vnto him the troth. THen Huon put vp his sword, and the Monke beganne to speake, and saide. Sir, know for troth, that all we that bee héere are of ye euill Angels, that were chaced out of Paradise with Lucifer, who by his pride would compare with God, hee made vs beléeue, that we should be as good as God himselfe, and wee beléeued him, but as for vs that be héere in this house, God was with vs dis∣pleased, and thereby wee were condemned to bee conuersant a∣broad in the world, among men and women when we list, and some be in the likenes of Beares, and some like wary woolues, and thus wee shall bee vntill the day of iudgment, and some o∣ther
there be that be Tempters of men and women, desiring to bring them to damnation, and some there bee in the ayre, and followeth the Thunderinges and Tempests, and some bée vp∣pon the Sea, and drowne many a man, and perish the shippes, whereof but lately you were in ieopardy, for if it had not béene for the great vertue and bountie that is in the precious stones, that you and your Wife beare about you, both you and your Wife had been perished for euer. And other there bee that are in the bottome of hell, whereas they torment the poore Soules, and there is Lucifer, and they that be most euill with him, and though they were once faire, now they bee foule and misfigu∣red, and they shall neuer depart from thence, but wee that bee héere yet, wée hope to come vnto Saluation, but thus we shall bee as longe as it pleaseth God. Then Huon demaunded the cause, why they beganne the Lessons in their Seruice, and to leaue it in the middest, and euerie Monke to depart so one af∣ter another. Sir, (quoth the Monke) our Lord Iesus Christ as yet hath not giuen vs that dignitie nor power, to make an end of our diuine seruice, but we haue that grace in this world, that we haue all our desires, and to bee conuersant among the people as well as they of the Fayrie, there is nothing but by wishing wee can haue it incontinent, and when wee will it is in our power to make Towne or Castle set vppon hye Rockes closed in with Riuers bearing shippes, and we haue Minstrils, Hals, and Chambers, garnished and ordained as you haue séen héere within. Also wee haue wine and victuals, and fishe and flesh at our pleasure, this Castle and Church that you sée, was yesternight made by the Fayrie, but one houre before that you came hether, heere was neither Tower nor wall, nor water nor Rocke, and nothing but a faire great meadowe, the which you shall soone perceiue: and Sir, we be those that haue the conduct of all the Fayrie in the world. Now Sir, I haue shewed vnto you what we bée and all our secrets, the which was neuer shewed before vnto any mortall man, whereby I shall suffer of our Abbot such punishment, that there was neuer so ill aduenture that fell vnto mée before: therefore Sir, now I haue shewed vnto you euerie thing, suf∣fer
mee to depart vnto my companie. Monke, (quoth Huon) I will not let thée go, vntill thou hast shewed vnto me, by what manner of way I may goe vntill I haue found Kinge Oberon: thus Huon and the Monke talked together, vntill it was faire day light. Then Huon looked round about him, and saw nei∣ther Castle nor Church, Rocke nor Riuer, but hee sawe that they were in a faire meadowe, whereof Huon and Escleremond were sore abashed, and blessed them, hauing great maruaile of that they had séen: then the Monke desired Huon to let him go. Monke, (quoth Huon) to drawe or to struggle cannot auaile thee, for thou shalt not escape out of my handes, vntill thou hast shewed me the Citie of Momur whereas King Oberon is. Huon, (quoth the Monke) I am content to doe it, but first, I pray thée to take from my necke the stole. Monke, (quoth Huon) thy reasoning cannot auaile thée, for thou shalt not es∣cape from me, vntill thou hast set both me and my Wife néere vnto the Citie of Momur, for thou shalt goe with vs foote by foote. Well, (quoth the Monke) since it is thus, I am content to fulfill your pleasure, but one thinge I say vnto you, you ne∣uer did a wiser deed, then that you would not let me goe away, for if the stole were not, wherewith you doe hold me, and the precious stones that you haue about you, you shold neuer haue departed from hence, I thought to haue beguiled you, so that you might haue let mée gone my wayes whether I would goe. Monke, (quoth Huon) if I can, you shall not depart from me, vntill you haue set mee and my Wife within the Citie of Mo∣mur. Sir, (quoth the Monke) that will I not doe, nor I can∣not doe it though I would, but I shall sette you both vppon the Mount of Hircama, and from thence you may well sée vnto the Citie of Momur, and all the countrey of the Fayrie, and then I will returne vnto my companie, who by this time are passed the great Sea of Trtay. Monke, (quoth Huon) I am con∣tent, so that thou wilt sette vs in that place, whereas wée may see the Citie of Momur.
Chap. CXLV. ¶ How the Monke bare Huon and Escleremond ouer hils and Ʋal∣leys in the ayre, vntill hee came into the Countrey of Kinge O∣beron. THen the Monke tooke Huon vppon the one arme, and Escleremond vpon the other, but alwayes Huon held the stoale still a∣bout the Monkes necke, to the entent that the Monke shoulde not beguile him, and thus by the Fayrie and enchauntment, the Monke bare Huon and Escleremond vnto a hye Rocke to rest them, and from thence hee bare them as fast as the bird flyeth in the ayre, at last they alighted in a faire meadowe: then the Monke said. Sir, in an euill houre I met with you, for you haue caused me to suffer great paine, and nowe Sir, I can goe no further, for you are now in the Land of King Oberon whereas wée haue no puissance, but first I will bring you vnto your lodging where∣as you shall rest: then before them they sawe a Castle newly made, the which was so faire, rich, and strong, that if I should describe it to the vttermost, it would be ouer-long to rehearse. Then the Monke tooke his leaue of Huon, and of the Duchesse Escleremond his Wife, and left them in the Castle that hee had made. Huon suffered him to goe, and thanked him of his cur∣tesie, the Monke suddainly vanished away they wist not whe∣ther, and then Huon and his louing Wife entred into the Ca∣stle, and came into a rich Chamber well fournished, and there they found a Table sette with diuers meates and drinkes, but there was no man to speake vnto: then they sat downe at the Table, and did eat and drinke at their pleasure, and then they went from thence, and when they were gone a little way, they looked behind them, and saw neither Towne nor Castle, wher∣of they were sore abashed, and recommended themselues vnto
our Lord God: then they went foorth into the meadow, and could see neither Towne nor Castle, House nor Village, nor man to demaund the way of: and they went so long, that they came to the foote of a Mountaine, whereon they mounted with great paine and trauaile, and when they were vppon the toppe of the hill, they rested them, and then within a little season, Huon sawe appeare before him a great Citie, and vpon the one side thereof a faire and rich Pallaice, the wals and Towers of the Citie and the Pallaice, were al of white Marble pollished, the which did shine so bright against the Sunne, as though it had been all of Christall: then Huon said vnto his Wife. Ma∣dame, yonder before vs we may sée the noble Citie of Momur whereas King Oberon is. Sir, (quoth Escleremond) our Lord God hath done vnto vs a great grace, in that hee hath brought vs hether in the sauegard of our persons. Then they went foorth vntill they came néere vnto the Citie of Momur, and before the Citie they sawe a maruailous great Riuer and verie déepe, and two bowe shoots in largenesse, and it was maruailous pleasant to behould, and when they came to the Riuer-side, they founde there a man with a little Vessel, awaiting vppon all them that woulde come vnto the Citie to passe them ouer. Then Huon and Escleremond his Wife entred into the little Shippe, and saluted the Guider thereof, but hee woulde giue them none aunsweare, but maruailously behelde them, and when they were ouer, the Marriner who was na∣med Clarimodes, and he was Sonne to a Damsell of the Fay∣rie, then he demaunded of Huon, what he and his Wife were, and sayd, mée thinkes you be none of the Fayrie, wherefore I am not content that I haue passed you ouer. Then Huon gaue him none aunsweare, but went foorth and entred into the Citie, and as they passed, they were greatly regarded of them within the Citie, and sayd one to another, it is great maruaile to sée these two persons enter into this Citie, for King Oberon (who lyeth sicke in his bedde) gaue great charge vnto Clarimo∣des, that no straunger should passe the Riuer to enter into this Citie. Huon heard them, and was thereof right sorrowfull, when he heard that the King lay sicke in his bedde, so he passed
foorth and came vnto the Pallaice, euery man there beheld him and his Wife, and had great maruaile to sée any mortall per∣sons to enter into that Pallaice, and they were thereof abashed and wist not what to thinke. At the same time, Mallbron and Gloriand were walking together in the hall, they saw Huon and Escleremond entring into the Hall, and incontinent they knew them, and came vnto them and embraced them, and sayd. Ah noble Duke Huon and Duchesse Escleremond, you are welcome, of your comminge wee are right ioyfull: then Mallabron went from them, and went into the Chamber whereas the King lay sicke, and sayd. Right déere Sir, your good Fréend Huon and Escleremond his Wife, are come into your Hall. When the King heard that Huon and Escleremond were come, for the great ioy that he had, he quickly arose out of his bedde. Therewith Gloriand, Huon, and Escleremond entred into the chamber where King Oberon was: and when the King saw them, he came vn∣to them, and sayde. My right déere Fréende Huon, and you my déere Loue Escleremond, of your comming I am right ioy∣full, then hee embraced and kissed them both more then Tenne times, and sayde. Huon, my right déere Freend, for the great truth and noblenesse that I find in you, I shall make you King of all the Fayrie, and your Wife Escleremond shall be Lady and Quéene of the same, and besides that, I will giue vnto you all my dignitie. When the Kinge had well saluted them, then hee sat downe vppon a Couch, and made Huon and Escleremond to sit downe before him, and then hee commaunded Gloriand, that inconti∣nent he should fetch vnto him his bowe, and when hee had it in his hand, hee tooke an arrow and did shoot therewith: then in∣continent it séemed that all the world had arriued in the Town and Pallaice, there came thether so many Knights and Ladies of the Fayrie, that all the Towne and Pallaice was full: and when they were all assembled together in the Pallaice, Kinge Oberon commaunded to carrie him into the great Hall in his rich Couch, then he commanded silence to be kept among them all, and then he sayd. Lordes and Ladie that bée héere assem∣bled, all yée knowe, that euerie mortall thing cannot long en∣dure,
I speake it for my owne selfe, because I am Sonne to a mortall man, and was engendred vppon the Ladie of the pri∣me Isle, who can neuer die because shee is one of the Fayrie, engendred of a man of the Fayrie, and Daughter to a woman of the Fayrie, and whereas it is so, that Iulius Caesar was a mor∣tall man, therefore it behooueth me to passe out of this world by the commandement of our Lord God, who hath ordained that it should be so. And because of my loue, during the time that I haue béen conuersant héere with you, therefore I will not leaue you without a Lorde, but first in my life dayes I will puruay you of one, who shall bee Duke Huon, whome I loue well and déerely, and also I will that his Wife the Duchesse Esclere∣mond shall abide with him, for in no wise I will seperate them asunder: therefore I ordaine, that Huon who is héere present, be your King and Lord, and Escleremond your Quene and La∣die, and from hencefoorth I put my Realme and dignitie into his handes, and I will that hee vse it as I haue done in my life time, howbeit, King Arthur hath sore pressed vppon mee to haue my Realme and dignitie, but I will that none shall haue it but alonely Huon of Bourdeaux, who is héere present, and whome I will crowne King in all your presence. Chap. CXLVI. ¶ How the noble Kinge Oberon crowned Huon and Escleremond, and gaue them all his Realme and dignitie that he hadde in the Land of the Fayrie, and made the Peace betweene Huon and King Arthur. WHen the people of the Fay∣rie both Knightes and Ladies, had well heard and vnderstood King Oberon, they were right sorrowfull, in that hee should leaue them, and sayd. Sir, since it is your pleasure, and that it is your will, o reason wee must bee content to receiue Huon of
Bourdeaux for our kinge, and Madame Escleremond his Wife for our Quéene. When the King vnderstood his Lordes and people, then he caused to be brought thether two Crownes, the one was set vppon Huons head, and the other vppon Esclere∣monds head: then Oberon sent for his Horne. Napkin, and Cup, and the good Armour, & hee deliuered them vnto Huon, to doe with them his pleasure, great ioy and feasting was made in the Pallaice, by the Knights & Ladies of the Fayrie. Then king Huon looked out at a window, and sawe vpon the Moun∣taine that he passed ouer at his comming thether, a great num∣ber of Tents and Pauillions: and hée sayd vnto King Oberon. Sir, vppon yonder Mountaine I see a great number of men as∣sembled, and many Tentes and Pauillions picht vp. Huon, (quoth king Oberon) know for troth, that it is kinge Arthur, who meeneth to haue my Realme and dignitie, but hee cometh too late, for the promise that you made vnto me you haue kept, therefore he fayleth and commeth too late: for if you hadde not come, I had giuen him my Realme and dignity, I know well, that hee will be heere soone to see me, and hee will be sorrowfull and angrie of your comming hether, but if I can I shall doe so much, that you shall bee both in peace and rest, for good reason it is that he doe obay you. Therewith kinge Arthur and all his Chiualrie entred into the Citie of Momur, and came & alighted at the Pallaice, and with him his Sister Quéene Morguele Fay, and Transeline their Néece, they came and saluted king Oberon, who receiued them with great ioye, and sayde. Great kinge Arthur, you are wel∣come, and Morgue your Sister and Transeline your Néece, and Sir, ray you to shewe mée, what faire Childe is that I sée there before your Sister Morgue? Sir, (quoth Arthur) hee is called Marlyn, and is Sonne to Ogier the Dane, who hath wed∣ded my Sister Morgue, and I haue left him in my Countrey, to rule it vntill I returne. Sir, (quoth king Oberon) the child shall haue good fortune, hee shall bee in his time feared and re∣doubted▪ for Ogier his Father is a good and a valiant knight: And noble kinge Arthur, you are welcome, and of your com∣ming I am right ioyfull, I haue sent for you, to shewe you the
pleasure of our Lord God, that I shall depart out of this world, and to the entent that you should be content, in that I haue gi∣uen you heretofore in the Fayrie so much dignitie and puis∣sance, wherewith I desire you to be contented, for behold here Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and his Wife the Duchesse Esclere∣mond, vnto whome I haue giuen my Realme and my dignity, to vse it as I haue done héeretofore: and therefore I pray and commaund you, that you will obay him as Kinge and Soue∣raigne of all the Fayrie, and you to liue together with good loue and peace. When King Arthur heard King Oberon, he answeared fierce∣ly, and sayd. Sir, I haue well heard you, and you know well, that your Realme and dignity you gaue me after your decease, and now I sée well, that you haue giuen it to Duke Huon: Sir lette him goe into his owne Countrey, and vnto his Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas hee hath left his Daughter Clariet, and let him goe and marrie her, for as heere he hath nothing to doe, I hadde rather to bee cleane exiled for euer and chaced out of my Realme, then I should obay him or doe vnto him any homage, for he shall haue nothing to doe ouer mee, without hee winne it with the point of the Sworde. When Kinge Huon hadde well heard King Arthur of Brittaine, he answeared fiercely, and said. King Arthur, knowe for troth, for all your wordes and threat∣ninges I will not spare to say vnto you, that whether you will or not, it must behooue you to obay and to be vnder me, since it is the pleasure of my Lord Kinge Oberon heere present, or else you may depart, and go and dwell in the Countrey of Brittaine. Then King Oberon seeing appearance of great war to bee moo∣ued betwéene these two Kinges, hee spake and sayde, that hee would haue their euill will layd downe, and neuer to haue war betwéen them: and sayd vnto King Arthur. Sir, I will that you hould your peace, for if you speake one worde more against Huon the Soueraigne King of the Fayrie, that hee would con∣demne him perpetually to be a warre-wolfe in those parts, and there to end his dayes inpaine and miserie, but if hee will be∣léeue him, hee woulde agrée them together: then Kinge Arthur stood still and would speake no word. Then Morgue and Tran∣seline
fell downe vpon their knées, and desired King Oberon to haue pitie of King Arthur, and to pardon him of all his ill will, and after that Morgue had spoken, then Kinge Arthur kneeled downe, and sayd. Right déere Sir, I pray you to pardon mée, in that I haue spoken so much against your pleasure. Arthur, (quoth Kinge Oberon) I will that you well knowe, that if it were not for the loue of your Sister, who hath desired mee to pardon you, I would haue shewed you the power that I haue in the Fayrie, the which from hencefoorth I giue vnto Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and all the dignitie and puissance that I haue vsed in all my life. Then Duke Huon thanked Kinge O∣beron right humbly of his courtesie. Chap. CXLVII. ¶ Of the Ordinances that the noble King Oberon made before he dyed. WHen King Oberon had depo∣sed himselfe of his Realme and dignitie, and that he had put all his puissance into the hands of Huon, then he sayd vnto King Arthur. Sir, because I desire with all my heart, that after my decease Huon and you shoulde liue together in good peace and loue: I giue you all my Realme of Boul∣quant, and all the Realme that Sbilla holdeth of me, to do there∣with at your pleasure, and of all the Fayries that bee in the plaine of Tartary, I will that you haue so much puissance there, as Huon hath héere. Prouided, that héere before me you make homage vnto him, and that good peace and loue may be be∣twéene you. Then Arthur, Morgue, and Transeline, and all the other Lordes and Ladies that were there, thanked King Obe∣ron and sayd, how that they neuer heard nor saw so rich a guift giuen before, as that Kinge Oberon had giuen vnto Kinge Ar∣thur. Then King Arthur in the presence of King Oberon, came
and made homage, and kissed Duke Huon, then Kinge Oberon and all the other hadde thereof great ioy, because of the Peace made betwéene those two Kinges, and great feasting and ioy was made in the Pallaice: for all the most noble Lordes and Ladies of the Fayrie were there assembled, there was great so∣lemnitie made. Thus as they were in this great ioy, kinge Oberon féeling that his last end approached, for hee knewe the day and houre, then (séeing that in his life time he had prouided a King for his Realme) he humbly thanked our Lord God, of the graces that he had giuen him in this world: then hee called before him Hu∣on of Bourdeaux, and kinge Arthur, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and sayd. Sirs, I aduertise you, that longe I shall not abide among you, therefore Huon, for your bountie and noblenesse wherewith you haue béene alwayes indued, I haue chosen you among other to haue the kéeping and Signiorie, and the mini∣stration of all the Fayrie, as well of the Countrey of warre∣wolues, as of other thinges secret reserued, and not to bee she∣wed to any mortall men: and also I haue giuen you my digni∣tie and puissance, to doe therewith as I haue done in my time, & because I haue thus chosen you, therefore I will, that when I depart out of this world, that you doe make a newe Abbey of Monkes, the which I will bee set in the meadowe héere before this Citie, because all my dayes I haue loued this Citie, and I will that in the Church of the same Abbey, you doe burie my bodie as richly as you shall thinke conuenient, and I recom∣mend vnto you all such as haue well serued me, and I will that you retaine them into you Seruice. When King Oberon had sayd as much as pleased him, Huon answeared & sayd. Déere Sir, of the great goodnesse and honour that you haue done vn∣to me, I thanke you, and all that you haue ordained or will do, by the grace of God it shall be done, in such wise, that my soule shall beare no charge for it at the day of Iudgement. When the Lordes and Ladies that were there assembled heard the words of king Oberon, and saw well that his last end approa∣ched néere, she cryes and clamours that were there made was great maruaile to heare, and especially there was such wée∣pings
and lamentations in the Citie, that great pittie it was to heare it, for they were aduertized that kinge Oberon drewe néere vnto his last end, who lay in his rich Couch in the mid∣dest of his Pallaice, making his prayers vnto our Lord God, and holding Huon by the hand, and at the last, hee sayd. My right déere Fréend Huon, pray for mee, and then hee made the signe of the Crosse, and recommending his Soule vnto God, the which incontinent was borne into Paradice, by a great multitude of Angels sent from God, who at their departing made such shining and clearnesse in the Pallaice, that there was neuer none such seene before, and therewith there was so sweet a smll, that euerie man thought that they had been ra∣uished into Paradice, whereby they knewe surely that kinge Oberons Soule was saued. When king Huon, and king Arthur, and Quéene Escleremond, Morguele Fay, and Transeline, and king Carahew, Gloriand, and Mallabron, and all other knightes and Ladies, knew that king Oberon was dead, there is no humane tong can tell the cries, wéepings, and complaints that were made there for the death of king Oberon: hen his bodie was taken, and borne to the place where his Sepulcher was deuised, the which king Huon caused to be made right richly, and sounded there an Abbey as king Oberon had deuised. After the Buriall, they returned to the Pallaice, whereas the Tables were set, and there sat thrée crowned kinges, and two excellent Quéens full of great beau∣tie, at the vpper end of the Table sat king Huon, and next vnto him king Arthur, and then king Carahew and the two Quéens, and the other Ladies departed, and went and dyned in their Chambers, and they were all serued of euerie thinge that was necessarie. And after dinner and grace sayd, king Arthur, and king Carahew tooke their leaue of king Huon, and of Queene Escleremond, and so departed euerie man into his owne Coun∣trey, and Morgue and Transeline tarried a certaine space with Quéene Escleremond in great ioy and solace. Now let vs leaue speaking of kinge Huon and Quéene Escleremond, who tarried still in the Fayrie, and shall do vntill the day of Iudgment, and et vs returne vnto our former matter, and speake of faire Cla∣riet
Daughter vnto King Huon, who was at the noble Citie of Bourdeaux. Chap. CXLVIII. ¶ How the Kinge of Hungary, and the Kinge of England, and Flo∣rence Sonne vnto the Kinge of Aragon, desired to haue in mari∣age the faire Ladie Clariet, and how shee was betrayed by Bro∣hart▪ and howe Sir Barnard was drowned, and of the euils that the Traytour Brohart did vnto the faire Ladie Clariet, and how he dyed at the last. YE haue heard heere before, how King Huon and Quéen Escleremond when they departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux, they left their Daughter in the kéeping of the good Abbot of Cluny her Vncle, who grew and dayly amended, in such sort, that when shee came to the age of Fifteene yeares, for her excellent beautie her renowme was so great in euerie Country, that there was ney∣ther King nor Duke but desired to haue her in mariage, so that the Abbot and Barnard her cozen, hadde great businesse to giue each of them their answeare to be content. One was the King of England, another the king of Hungarie, and the other was Florence Son vnto the king of Aragon, but especially the kinge of Hungarie would haue hadde her: the good Abbot answeared the king of Hungaries Ambassadours, and so to all the other, that vntill he had heard some newes from Duke Huon her Fa∣ther, hee coulde not agree to any marriage for her: but if they woulde returne againe by the Feast of Saint Iohn next follow∣ing, then he would be content, to hold a day of communication of marriage in the Towne of Blay, whereto the kinge of Hun∣garie was content, and so were all the other Ambassadours. And when the day came, the good Abbot tooke his way vnto Blay, to bee there against the comming of the Kinges of Eng∣land,
Hungarie, and Florence Sonne to the king of Aragon: the good Abbot left the Ladie Clariet in the keeping of Barnard her coozen, who loued her entirely, and when the Abbot was come vnto Blay, hee made the Towne to bee hanged richly for the comming of the sayde kinges. And the third day after the Ab∣bot came thether, first came to the Towne the king of England, who anon after he was alighted and somewhat rested, he leapt vppon his horse againe, and went a hunting into the landes, then afterward came the kinge of Hungarie, in goodly array, he alighted at the Pallaice, whereas the Abbot receiued him with great ioy, then afterward entred Florence with a noble companie. The Abbot did salute them all one after another, saying, how that he and the whole Towne were at their com∣maundement, and they thanked him. There was a false Traytour borne in Bourdeaux, who had heard all the conclusion that the Abbot hadde taken with these Princes, and that was, that they should sée the Ladie, and hee that pleased her best, should haue her in marriage, this Tray∣tour that heard that conclusion, thought within himselfe, that he would let that matter if he could, and haue her himselfe: this Traytours name was Brohart, he departed from Blay, sore de∣siring to attaine to his false Enterprize, hée tooke a little Ship, and sayled incontinent vnto Bourdeaux, then in hast he went on shoare, and fayned himselfe as though he had great businesse to doe, so hée came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the faire La∣die Clariet and Barnard leaning in a window deuising together. Then Brohart saluted Barnard and the Ladie all smiling. Bro∣hart, (quoth Barnard) the matter must bee good that I sée you come smiling, I pray you to shew vnto mee how doth the good Abbot of Cluny my Coozen, and how hath he receiued the Prin∣ces that be come to Blay? Barnard, (quoth the Traytour) know for troth, that in all your life you neuer saw such noblenesse as is nowe in the Towne of Blay: and therefore Sir, hastily be∣fore the matter goeth any further, the good Abbot of Cluny (who is Vncle to my Ladie héere present) sendeth you word by mée, that incontinent assoone as night commeth, that priuily my La∣die Clariet be made readie, and apparelled and disguised like a
man, and you and I to bringe her vnto Blay to her Vncle the Abbot of Cluny, and that to morrowe about noone you ordaine Damsels to come after, and to bringe with them all her riche roabes and apparell, to array her therein when time shall bee, and that wee take with vs some of her apparel to put on when shee comes there, vntil all her other apparell commeth, and the cause why that her Vncle sendeth now for her so priuily, is that she should see all them that desireth her in marriage, for out of the Chamber whereas shee shalbe in, shee shall see them all one after another out at a secret windowe. When Barnard heard the vnhappie Traytour, wéening that all that he had sayd had béen true, because he was a man of credence, therefore he belée∣ued his wordes. Alas, why did he so? for a more vild Tray∣tour there was not from thence to Rome, his Father and his Brethren were so all, but Barnard beléeued him, because hee went with the Abbot: then Barnard sayd vnto Clariet. Ladie, you must make you readie, to depart assone as night cometh, and you must be apparelled as Brohart hath shewed, to the en∣tent that you bee not perceiued, vntill you come to Blay to your Vncle the Abbot. Barnard, (quoth the Ladie) since it is the pleasure of mine Vncle and of you, it is great reason that I doe it, then she went into her chamber, and apparelled her with her priuie Damsels, and they laughed at her when they saw her in mans apparell, and the cruell Traytour did so much, that hee got a little Shippe, and brought it readie to the Posterne of the Pallaice, and he had gotten ready a great stone, and tyed there∣to a cord, then he came vnto Barnard, and sayd. Sir, it is full time to depart, that we may bée at Blay before it bee midnight. Then Barnard came to the Ladie, whome hee founde readie to depart, and saide all smiling. Faire Ladie, you resemble well to bee a gentle Squier, Barnard put his sword about him, and tooke the Ladie by the arme and sayd. Come on Companion, it is time wée goe. Brohart went on before, and Barnard and the Ladie went after arme in arme, and so went on to the Po∣sterne so primly, that no man perceiued them, then Brohart en∣tred into the Shippe first, and tooke Clariet by the hand, and led her to the end of the Shippe, and then Barnar entred, Brohart
softly did let the stone slip into the water, and held the cord still in his hand, and sayd vnto Barnard. Sir, I doe this, because the Shippe shall not goe too fast, vntill we bee past the middle of the streame, and sayde vnto Barnard. Sir, holde you this cord in your hand, vntill we be past the hye streame, and then wee shall drawe it vp againe. Barnard (who thought none ill) did as the Traytour saide: then they tooke the healme in their handes, and so departed a long the Riuer of Gerone. Chap. CXLIX. ¶ when the Traytour Brohart drowned Barnard, and of theyr ad∣uentures, and how Brohart was slaine. WHen Brohart saw that they were farre off from the Towne, and that the night was darke, he came vnto Barnard and sayd. Sir, quickly drawe vp the stone by the corde out of the water, then Barnard stouped downe low to drawe it vp, and Bro∣hart tooke Barnard by one of his legges before hee was aware, and with all his strength hee tumbled him ouer the ship-board into the water, whereas hee was drowned: the which was great pitie, for a more truer Knight could not be found. When the faire Ladie Clariet saw that Brohart had cast Barnard ouer the ship-board, shee gaue a great crie, and shee came vnto Bro∣hart and drewe him by the haire. When that the Traytour saw that the Ladie tare his haire, hee tooke her by the armes so fiercely, that hee cast her to the bottome of the Shippe, and did beat her cruelly, & sayd, that her cryes and wéepings could not ayd her, for whether she would or not hee would haue his plea∣sure of her. When the Ladie heard the false Traytour, shee was in great feare and beganne sore to tremble, making her prayers to our Lord God, to defend her from dishonour, and to bring her out of the handes of that false Traytour her ene∣mie,
then the vnhappie Traytour came vnto her and sayd, that it were better for her to fulfill his pleasure with good will and loue, rather then by force, or else he would cast her into the Ri∣uer of Gerone. Oh false Traytour, (quoth she) as long as thou liuest thou shalt neuer haue ioy nor pleasure of my bodie: then the false murderer did beat the Ladie that pitie it was to sée, and so he left her in a manner lying dead. When he saw that it would bee no better, hee was wearie and so fell a sleepe, the Ship went forth by force of the streame, and by that time it was faire day, so farre the shippe went that night, that they were néere to the end of the Riuer of Gerone, and the Ladie sore wéeping, beheld the Traytour how he slept, and saw lying by him a loafe of bread, the famine that she was in constrained her to take and to eat it, for she had such famine that she could forbeare it no longer, then she made her prayers all wéeping to our Lord God, requiring him to kéepe and de∣fend her virginitie, and to preserue her from that false Tirant who had betrayed her. So farre went the Shippe, that it en∣tred into the Sea, the winde was great, and they had neither healme nor sayle to aide themselues withall, then the winde tooke them, and draue them to a little Port vnder a hye Rocke in a little Isle: then Brohart awoake, and was glad when hee sawe that they were arriued neere to the Land, for hee knewe right well the countrey, and then he sayd to the Ladie. Thou eest well that thou hast no puissance to goe against my will, the which thou must néeds fulfill, for thou canst not haue any suc∣cour of any man or woman liuing, nor all thy defence can∣not auaile thee, thou séest well wee bee in an Isle whereas the Sea goeth round about it, wherefore I haue great doubt that wee shall neuer depart from hence: therefore dismay you not, for as now I will doe thée no hurt. This théefe when he sawe that he was in this Isle, he began to curse God, and the houre that euer he saw Clariet, for the false Traytour sawe well that he should die there by famine and rage, for there was no shippe to enter into the Sea, therefore he had then no mind to doe any harme to the Ladie, the which was by the grace of God, who woulde not that the Ladie shoulde bee dishonored: and when
shee saw that they were so neere the land, sore wéeping shee ys∣sued out of the boat, and ranne vp the Rocke. Nowe God de∣fend her, for the same time there was vppon the Mountaine sixe Théeues, who lay to espy the Marchaunts, and they had a little Galley lying in a little corner of the Rocke néere to them, and had couered it with bowes and gréen leaues. When Bro∣hart saw the Damsell runne away, he cryed as loud as he could and sayd. By God Madame, your flying shall not auaile you, for whether thou wilt or not, this night I will haue my plea∣sure of thée, the sixe Théeues who were vppon the Mountaine eating of their meate, when they heard Brohart crying after the Damsell, they were sore abashed, and were in great feare that they had béen espyed. Then the Damsell who ranne vppon the Mountaine, when shee sawe them, shee sayd. Ah Sirs, I pray you haue pittie of me, and ayd and succour mee against this false Traytour, this night passed hee did steale me away out of the Citie of Bourde∣aux, and I am Daughter to noble Duke Huon. When these Théeues heard the Damsell, they arose vp all, and thought that it hadde béene some fayned matter to haue beguiled them: but when they sawe Brohart follow the Ladie, then the Maister of the Theeues stept foorth and sayd. Howe is it that thou art so hardy to come vppon vs, thou art come hether to espie vs, but we shall neuer be accused by thée, thou art but ill come to this bridale. When the Traytour Brohart saw the sixe Théeues, he was sore abashed, and saw well that hée should bee faine to de∣fend himselfe, then he drew out his sword, and strake the Mai∣ster Théefe such a blow vppon the head, that hee claue him to the téeth: and when the other fiue Théeues saw their Maister slaine, they were right sorrowfull and angrie, then they assai∣led Brohart on all sides, and hee defended himselfe so well, that before he was striken to the earth, he slew foure of them, and in the meane time whiles they fought, the Ladie Clariet came to the place whereas the Théeues had béen, and there shee sound meat and drinke plentie: and when she saw the meat, she was right ioyfull and thanked God thereof, and did eat and drinke at her pleasure, and she saw that the Théeues had cast Brohart
to the earth, whereof she was ioyfull: howbeit, shee knew not what companie shee was come into, nor in whose handes shee was arriued in. When the Théeues hadde cast Brohart to the earth, they made him shew where hee had taken the Damsell, and he shewed them all the matter, and how hee had taken her to the entent to haue dishonoured her, and to haue hadde her to his Wife, and to haue caried her into some strange place vn∣knowne. When the Théeues heard what Brohart had said, they sayde. Oh thou vntrue and false Traytour, there is no torment in the world so cruell, but that thou hast deserued a worse paine, and therefore by vs thy desert shall be rewarded, then they tooke him and bound fast his féet, and hanged him vp by the féete vppon a Trée, then they made a fire, and vnder his head they made a great smoak, and so made him to die in great dolour and paine: thus ended the Traytour Brohart miserably his dayes. Then the two Théeues came to the place whereas Clariet was, and they demaunded of her estate, and shee shew∣ed them all the manner, and how shee was taken by the Tray∣tour Brohart, and shee declared vnto them what she was: then the Théeues caused her to put off her cloathes that she was in, and to put on her other rich apparell, and when they sawe her  apparelled, they thought that no Ladie nor Damsell in the world could passe her in beautie, for shee was come againe to her beautie, and she thought her selfe well assured, because shee was deliuered from the false Traitour Brohart. When one of these twoo Théeues saw the great beautie of this Damsell, he sayde vnto his fellowe: this night I will haue my pleasure of her, the other sayd, that he would not suffer that, and sayd how he was the first that ouerthrew Brohart, who had stollen her a∣way: then the other drewe out his dagger, and strake his fel∣low into the bodie to the hart, and when he felt himselfe striken to the death, he tooke courage on him, and drewe his Sword, and strake the other vpon the head to the braines, and so he fell downe dead, and the other that was wounded to the death, fell downe in like wise by his fellow dead, and so thereby the faire Ladie Clariet was left there all alone. When she saw her selfe so all alone in the Isle, whereas no habitation was, shée began
then pitiously to wéepe and complaine, saying. Oh good Lord, I pray thee by thy grace to haue pittie of me, and I require thée humbly wheresoeuer I goe, to saue and defend my virginitie, and ayd mee that I may come to sauegard. Now let vs leaue speaking of the faire Clariet, and returne to speake of the Kings and Princes that were at Blay, abiding the comming thether of the faire Ladie Clariet. Chap. CL. ¶ Of the great sorrow that was made at Blay, by the Abbot of Clu∣ny, and by the Princes of the noble Citie of Bourdeaux, for the faire Ladie Clariet that was stollen away: and of the sorow that was made, when they saw Barnard brought in dead by Six men. And of the punishment that was done to the Lineage of the Traytour Brohart. WHen these Kinges and Prin∣ces were arriued at Blay, and had spoken with the good Abbot of Cluny, they concluded betwen them thrée that the Ladie Clariet should be sent for, and he that she would fréely choose, should bee her Husband, for each of them thought themselues most faire, & thought that there could not bee found thrée goodlyer young Princes then they were, but especially Florence Sonne to the Kinge of Aragon was the most fairest. And the same time that they were determined, to send to the Citie of Bourdeaux for the Ladie Clariet there came thether the Knightes, Squiers, Ladies, and Damsels appointed by Brohart, thinking to haue found there the faire Clariet, and they brought her roabes and Iewels to apparell her withall, (as Brohart had deuised) they came & alighted at the Pallaice, the Abbot of Cluny being at the gate, and séeing the Ladies and Damsels comming, thought that it had béen his Néece the faire Ladie Clariet, he went incontinent vnto them, and demanded
where his Néece Clariet was. Sir, (quoth the Knightes) we thinke to find her héere with you, for yesternight late the Lady departed from the Citie of Bourdeaux to come to you, and Bro∣hart came for her, who with Sir Barnard went with her, and they commaunded vs that we should not faile to be héere with you at this houre: then they shewed all the manner howe Bro∣hart came, and what hee had sayd vnto them. And when the good Abbot of Cluny heard them, hee fell suddainly to the earth in a swound, so that all that were there present thought that he had béen dead, then at last he reuiued, and cast out a great crye and sayd. Ah my right déere Néece, I ought to bee sorrowfull thus to loose you in this manner, I would to our Lord God that I were vnder the earth, for I woulde liue no longer in this world. Ah thou false Traytour Brohart, thy kindred did ne∣uer good: Oh Barnard, where is become your noblenesse? yet I cannot beléeue that you bee any thinge culpable. Anon these newes were knowne in the Towne, so that all the Kinges and Princes were aduertised of the matter, and they came hastely  the Pallaice, whereas they found the Abbot in sore wée∣inges, whome they had slaine, if it had not béene for the good renowne that they knew to bee in him, therefore they forbare him: then euerie man mounted vppon their horses and roade towardes the Citie Bourdeaux, whereas they founde the Bur∣gesses and the common people in great cryes and wéepings, be∣waylinge for the noble Duke Huon and the Duchesse Esclere∣mond his Wife, and for Clariet their Daughter, who was lost and betrayed by Brohart. When the Abbot of Cluny and the other Princes were en∣tred into Bourdeaux, and saw such sorrow made there, they all  to wéeping, and as they were in this sorrowe, there came thether Siremen, bringing with them Sir Barnard dead, who they had found drowned in the Riuer of Gerone, if the sorrowe was great before, then it was more renewed when they sawe Barnard dead: if I should rehearse the sorrowe that was made that day in the Citie of Bourdeaux, aswell of the Princes as of the Abbot and common people, it should be too long to rehearse. Then the Kinges and Princes, well aduertised of the Lineage
and Parents yssued of the bloud of Brohart, and how alwayes they haue been full of treason, they were searched out in euery place of the Citie, as well men as women and Children, there were found out to the number of Thrée-score and ten persons, and they were all taken and cast into the Riuer of Gerone, to the entent that none should bee left aliue of that kindred, and ne∣uer more to be had in remembrance. After this was done, the Kinges and Princes departed out of the Citie, and road into their owne Countreys, right sorrowfull and sore displeased for the loosing of the Ladie Clariet, and the Abbot abode still at Bur∣deaux, and buried Barnard, who were sore complayned for of the people. Now let vs leaue speaking of them, and returne to the faire Ladie Clariet, who was all alone vppon the Moun∣taine. Chap. CLI. ¶ How the Ladie Clariet all alone came to the Sea-side, whereas arriued the King of Granado in a Shippe, who tooke away Cla∣riet, and of other matters. NOwe sheweth the Historie, that after the Théeues were slaine and Bro∣hart dead, the Ladie Clariet abode alone vpon the Mountaine with the dead men, shee wept pitiously, and sayd. Ah good Lord, in what houre was I borne in, alas, what ill hap and destiny haue I▪ it had béene better for mee neuer to haue béene borne, for I sée well that héere I must dye: Alas, I wot not whether to goe, for in this Isle is neither man nor woman, to whome I may goe for any refuge. Thus sore complayning, the Ladie went downe the Mountaine, and by that time the Shippe that she came in was floated away, and as shee looked into the Sea, shee sawe a great Shippe comming towards the Port, for fresh water and for wood: and when shee sawe that,
she was right ioyfull and thanked our Lord Iesus Christ, and she thought that they had béene Christian men, but they were Sarazins & Paynims, and with them was a King, who was their Lord and Soueraigne, he was king of Granado, and was returning into his Countrey, but hee had such fortune vppon the Sea, that hee was constrained to come thether: then they cast anchor an tooke land, and the King when hee saw the La∣die vppon the Sea-side, hee demaunded of her what shee was, and of what Countrey▪ Sir, (quoth shée) séeing you will know of mine estate, I shall shew you: then the Ladie shewed before all them that were there present, how shee was Daugh∣ter to Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and shewed all the aduenture that was fallen vnto her. When the Sarazin Kinge heard that, hee was right ioyfull, and sayd. Faire Ladie, it is hap∣pie for you that I haue found you, for I haue no Wife, you shall be my Wife, and ly with me this night, but first you must denie your Lawe, and beléeue vppon the Law of Mahomet vp∣pon whome I doe beléeue. When the faire Ladie heard the Paynim King, shee sayd. God forbid that I should leaue the Law of Iesus Christ to beléeue in the Law of Mahomet, I had rather haue all my members drawne one péece from another with wild horses, then to be wedded wife to such a kind of man as you bée. When the King heard the Damsell, that shee set so little by him, hee had great displeasure thereat, and lifted vp his hand, and gaue her vppon the chéeke such a blow, that the bloud ran out of her mouth and nose, so that she fell to the earth, whereof he was sore blamed of his men, and hee said vnto them. Why Sirs, did you not heare how shee despised our Law, and set no more by me then if I had béen but a boy? then he commaunded that they should take and cast her into the Sea, and he departed from her, in great displeasure that shee answeared him so rude∣ly. Then the Sarazins came and tooke the Ladie rudely, and caried her into the Ship, and so saued her, but the King knewe not thereof. Then when the King came againe to the Shippe, they drew vp their anchors, and hoysed vp sayle, and had good wind, then as the King walked vp and downe in the Shippe,
he saw the Damsell within the Shippe, whereof hee was sore abashed, for he thought that his men had drowned her, then he looked vppon her, and thought that hee neuer saw so faire a La∣die, and so he desired her with all his heart, and sayd vnto her. Faire Lady, now you be here, your deniall shall not auaile you, for this night you shall lye with mee. When the faire Ladie Clariet heard the Paynim King, deuoutly she called vppon our Lord God, and humbly required him to preserue her virginity, and to bringe her out of the handes of the Sarazins, and then she knéeled down before the King, humbly desiring him to haue pittie of her, and sayd, how she was content to follow his plea∣sure, assoone as he came into his owne Countrey. Well quoth the King, whether you will or not you must suffer my pleasure, for I will not depart from you vntill I haue lyne with you one night, and that I may hold you in mine armes: and when shée vnderstood him, shée beganne sore to weepe, desiring God to aid and succour her at that time, for otherwise shee sawe well that she was but lost. Therewith there arose so great a wind and so horrible, that the Sea that was calme and peaceable, began to arise, and the wind was so great, that whether the Sarazins would or not, it behooued them to abandon their Shippe to the winde, whereof they were in such feare, that the Kinge and all other had great doubt of their deathes, for their sayles were all to torne with the wind, and néere hand the Shippe perished, they cryed and called vpon their God Mahomet for succor and ayd. The King was in such feare, that he had now no list to desire the faire La∣die Clariet of her loue, who was sore afrayd and pale for feare: this torment & Tempest endured all the night, and they were driuen the same night beyond Ʋalencia the great, and in the morning they saw the Towne of Tours, to the which Port the wind draue them: and when the Paynims saw that they were arriued there, they were right sorrowfull, for they knew well that the Towne was christened, they sawe no way howe to es∣chew it, but they had rather to e as slaues all their liues, then to be drowned in the Sea. The same time there was arriued at the same Port, a noble
Knight named Sir Peter of Aragon, and when hee sawe the o∣ther Shippe comming to the Port by constraint of the winde, and saw well (without it were succoured) the shippe should be perished against the Rocke, whereby they within and all the ri∣ches should de perished and drowned, then he cryed to the Gal∣leys that lay in the Port, to goe and succour that strange ship, and then the Marriners went to the Sea and came to the Ship. When the Sarazins sawe that, the were in great feare to bee slaine: then there came two Paynims to the Damsell, to haue taken her and to haue cast her into the Sea. Then shee tooke the Mask of the Ship in her armes, and held it so fast, that they could not drawe her from it: then the Aragonoyse began to ap∣proach to the Shippe, and cast their hookes to ioyne together. The Ladie in the Shippe had great feare, the which was no maruaile, howbeit, she was ioyfull, when she knew that they that came were christened, then the Aragonoys by the cordes and roapes entred into the shippe: and when Peter of Aragon and his companie were entred into the Shippe, he saw the La∣die sore weeping, then hée demaunded of the Sarazins, where they had gotten that Princesse, right now (quoth hee) I sawe, howe you would haue taken her and cast her into the Sea, if I had not come hastely: then one of them said. Sir, wee bee of Granado, and fortune of the Sea hath driuen vs hether, we be readie to bee your slaues, or else to pay raunsome at your plea∣sure. Paynims, (quoth Peter) all the gould in the world shall not saue your liues, none of you shall escape, then hée comman∣ded that they should bee all slaine, and that none shall escape a∣liue, the which was done incontinent, all were slaine except the King, of whome Peter of Aragon demaunded, why hee woulde haue drowned that noble Damsell, and where they had found her. Sir, (quoth the King) we know her not, nor what she is, for we found her all alone vppon a Rocke in an Isle within the Sea. And when I saw the great beautie and bounty that was in her, I coueted her, and caused her to be put into my Shippe, thinking to haue had my pleasure of her, but shee woulde in no wise suffer mee, wherefore I was displeased with her. Well, (quoth Peter) you shall be slaine and goe after your men, with∣out
you will beléeue in Iesus Christ, and renounce the Lawe of Mahomet. Sir, (quoth the Paynim) I had rather to bee slaine all quicke, then to leaue my holy Lawe and to take that beléefe that you are of. When Peter heard him say so, hée gaue him with his sword such a stroake vpon the head, that he claue it to the téeth, and the King fell downe dead, whereof the La∣die Clariet was right ioyfull. Then Peter came vnto her, and demaunded what she was, and where the Paynims had found her? Sir, (quoth the La∣die) I was borne in a part of Fraunce, in a Towne called Naunts in Brittaine, and my Father was of Lsborne, and he had great desire to sée his Fréends, so he entred into a Shippe, and two of my brethren and my selfe, and diuers other Marchants together, and when wee hadde thought to haue entred into the Hauen at Lisborne, a great horrible winde tooke vs, so that we were faine to abandon our shippe, and to let it goe by the grace of God, and at the will of the winde and weather, then wee passed the straights of Maurocco, and there our Shippe ranne against a Rocke and burst all to péeces, so that my Father and all that were in the Shippe were drowned, and by the grace of God I sat vppon a sacke of woll, and held me fast, and then the waues brought mee to the land-side, whereof I thanked God, and within an houre after, this heathen Kinge arriued there with his companie by fortune of the Sea, and so they tooke me into their Shippe, and the Kinge enforced himselfe to haue had his pleasure of mee, and then by fortune of another Tem∣pest we arriued heere, whereas you haue slaine him and all his men. Faire Damsell, (quoth Peter of Aragon) you may thanke God that you bee come into my handes. Sir, (quoth shée) I know well that if you had not béene, I had béene lost for euer: and therefore Sir, as long as God shall giue me life, I will be glad to serue you, as the most lowliest Chamberlaine in your house, and put my bodie and honestie into Gods handes and yours. Faire Damsell, (quoth Peter) as longe as I liue you shall not lacke, for by the grace of God, your bodie and your ho∣nour shall be well saued, and peraduenture you shall haue such a Husband, that you shall thinke your selfe right happie, our
lord God did vnto you a great grace when you fell into my handes. Then Peter of Aragon tooke the Damsell by the hande, and commaunded to hoyse vp the sayles, and to returne vnto Tara∣gon a Citie betwéene Barselona and Valencia the great, whereas then was the Kinge of Aragon, and so longe they sayled night and day, that at the last they saw the Towers of Taragon, wher∣of they thanked God, and as they approached néere to the Ci∣tie, the Kinge of Aragon was in his Pallaice looking out at a window, then hee sawe comming in the Sea sixe Galleys and a great Ship, whereof he was abashed, and maruailed what it might be, for hee knew them not because of the great Shippe, then they that knew them, came to the Kinge and sayd, howe that it was his Coozen Peter of Aragon, who is come home in safetie thanked be God. Then the Kinge and his lordes with him went downe, and went to the Sea-side, whereas he found the noble man Peter of Aragon his Coozen, and all his company with him. Then the King embraced him, and said: Coozen, you are right hartely welcome, I am ioyfull of your good ad∣uenture. I pray you (Cozen) to shew me where haue you got∣ten this great Shippe, that séemeth to bee so rich? Then Peter shewed vnto him all the aduentures, and howe hee resued the Damsell out of the handes of the Sarazins, and he shewed her vnto the Kinge, and sayd. Sir, I beleeue in this world there is not a fairer, swéeter, nor more gracious creature, nor none that séemeth more to be extract of a higher lineage. The Kinge beheld the Damsell, and she knéeled downe before him. Faire Damsell, (quoth the King) I pray you to shewe mee what you bée, and of what lineage, and from whence you come? the La∣die who was in great feare to name her selfe truely, for feare least shee should be in ill handes, cast downe her head presently & began to wéepe, so that the teares fell from her eyes, and said. Sir, I require you desire no such thing of me at this time, for I knowe not who is my Parents, nor of what lineage I am of. When the King vnderstood the Damsell, and sawe howe shee wept, hee had great pitie of her, and comforted her as much as hee could: then Peter shewed vnto the King all that the Dam∣sell
had shewed him before, and she was found by the Sarazins (quoth he) whome I haue slaine, she was happie that she fel in to my handes, for by the grace of God I shall sée her well mari∣ed and set foorth. Then the Kinge and Peter went from the Shippes into the Towne, and caused the Damsell to bee brought after them, with twoo Gentlemen into Peters lodging, and as shee passed through the Towne, she was regarded with Ladies and Dam∣sels, and they all praysed her beautie, saying one to another, that there was neuer a fairer Ladie borne, nor more likely to be come of a noble bloud. Great feasting was made in the Ci∣tie, for the comming home of Peter of Aragon, and of the Dam∣sell that he had brought with him. The same time, Florence the Kinges Sonne had béene a hunting, and came home, and when hee was in the Towne, and sawe the stréets hanged, and the Ladies and Damsels and other making so great ioy and feasting, he was abashed, and demaunded of a Burges, if there were any newe wedding, and wherefore it was that the people made so great ioy and feasting? Sir, (quoth the Burges) the feast that is made now and the ioy, is for the comming home of Peter of Aragon, who hath béene so long out, for that God hath sent him good aduenture, for hée hath wonne and conquered the great Shippe of Maliga, wherein was the King of Granado, great riches hee hath wonne, and hee hath slaine all the Sara∣zins that were in the Shippe. Then Florence rested not, vntil he came to his Cozen Peter of Aragons lodging, and made him good cheere, and saide. Cozen, you are welcome home, and I am right ioyfull of your good aduenture. Sir, (quoth Peter) I thanke God I haue had good fortune, and Sir, I shall shew you one thing that I haue wonne, whereof I am most ioyfull: then he shewed him the Damsell, who was sober and sad, and shewed him how hée wanne her. When Florence saw the La∣die, his heart sprang for ioy, and the more hee beheld her, the more fairer she séemed: and the Damsell beheld him right hum∣bly, and she thought that she neuer saw a fairer young man be∣fore, nor better made nor fourmed of all his members. Flo∣rence so behelde the Damsell, by reason whereof the dart of
loue strake him to the heart, whereof the wounde coulde not be lightly healed, I may well say, that in all the world in that time could not be found againe two such persons, for the great beauty wherewith they were garnished could not be described, for God and nature had forgotten nothing in forming of them, swéetly they regarded each other, at that time if Florence had knowne, that shee had béene the faire Clariet of Bourdeaux, hee would haue married her incontinent, she was greatly taken in the loue of Florence, and so was hee with her: then hee desired with all his heart to knowe what shee was, for his heart gaue him that she should be come of some noble bloud, and sayd vnto himselfe, that hee desired much to knowe it, and that in all the world there was nothing hee loued so well, and thought that without her loue hee could not long endure, thinking to desire her to take him for her Louer, and that if shee refused him, that short should be his life, but thought to bee so bolde as to speake to her. Thus Florence taken with the fire of loue, tooke the faire Damsell by the lilly white hand, and caused her to sitte downe by him: then he drew her a little apart, to the entent that none should heare him, and then hee sayd. Faire Damsell, you bee welcome into these parts, I pray you to shew me what you be, and of what Lineage? Sir, (quoth the Damsell) little shall you winne when you know the certaine what I am, but since it pleaseth you to know I shall shew you. Sir, know for troth, I am Daughter to a poore honest man of the Countrey, and in times past was one of the Chamberers with the Duchesse Es∣cleremond of Bourdeaux, and Sir, by great treason I was stol∣len away, whereby since I haue suffered much pouertie, so that if God and this noble man Peter of Aragon had not rescued me, I had beene lost for euer, and therefore Sir, since I am poore and desolate, I require you in the honor of our Lord God, that you will not require mee of any villanie against my bodie and honestie, neither in word nor deede, and sir I beleue suerly no more ye thinke to doe, for I had rather be hewen all to péeces, then any creature should haue pleasure of my bodie without I were maried. Faire Damsell, (quoth hee) I sweare by God
that mee created, that of mee nor of any other man liuing, you shall not be desired against your honour, for I know no man li∣uing, that would require you of any dishonour, or say any thing that should not be agréeable vnto you, but I shall make him to die of an ill death, and I will that you know, that from hence∣foorth I will bee your true Louer, and none shall make depar∣ture of vs two, and if it were so that my Father were dead, I would neuer haue other Wife but you. Sir, (quoth the La∣die) I pray you to forbeare speaking of any such wordes, for it were not méete for the Sonne of a King, so to debase himselfe, as to set his loue vppon so poore a Mayd as I am, beware how you set your heart to loue, for if the Kinge your Father perceiue any thinge, that you should set your loue vppon mee, he would soone put me to death, therewith she cast downe her head, and sayd to her selfe. Ah good Lord, if this young Prince knewe surely what I were, it might well be that hee would haue mee in marriage, as yet in all my life, I neuer set my loue vppon a∣ny person, but this young man whome I neuer sawe before, it maketh me to thinke that which I neuer thought before, that it maketh my bloud and all my members to tremble, I am in worse case for his loue, then he is for me, therewith shee began sore to wéepe. When Florence saw her, he was right sorrow∣full, and sayde. Faire Damsell, I require you to take mee for your true and faithfull Seruant, otherwise I cannot sée howe I shall liue long. Sir, (quoth she) I am well content to graunt you my loue, so that your deed and thought be vppon goodnesse and honour, for if I may perceiue in any manner, that your thought bee otherwise, you haue lost my loue for euer. Faire Loue, (quoth Florence) haue no doubt thereof, that euer I shall haue any thought of villany against you. Thus as yée haue heard was the first acquaintance betwéene these two Louers, that is to say, the faire ladie Clariet Daughter to Duke Huon of Bourdeaux, and of Florence Sonne to the King of Aragon.
Chap. CLII. ¶ How the King forbad his Sonne Florence, that he should not be so hardy as to fall acquainted with the faire Ladie Clariet, and how Florence promised the Kinge his Father, to deliuer into his handes the King of Nauarre Prisoner, in case that he would bee content at his returne, that he might haue the new found Dam∣sell, the which thinge the King promised, but hee did it not, for he made the Damsell to be taken, and had drowned her, if Pe∣ter of Aragon had not beene, who rescued and saued her from the death. WHen Florence had long deui∣sed with the Damsell, he tooke his leaue of her, and of Peter of Aragon his Cozen, and then he returned to the King his Father, and the next day hee went againe to the Damsels lodging. So often he resorted thether, that great brute ranne in the Pal∣laice, and also in the Towne, how that Florence was amorous of the Damsell, that Sir Peter of Aragon had brought thether, and the matter at the last was shewed to Kinge Garyn his Fa∣ther, wherewith hee was so sorrowfull, that hee was all in a rage, and sayd within himselfe. Ah good lord, this new found Damsell will winne my Sonne if shee can, and get him from me, I know well, that by reason of the great beautie that is in her, my Sonne will be enamoured of her, but by the God that I beléeue vppon, if I sée that my Sonne either goe or come vn∣to her, (as it is sayd he doth) that acquaintance shall be déerely bought, for with mine owne hands I shall slay her. Right sor∣rowfull and angry was King Garyn with his Sonne Florence▪ and with the Damsell, then hee sent for his Sonne, and when hee was before him, the King demaunded of him fiercely, from whence hee came▪ Sir, (quoth Florence) I haue béene a spor∣ting in my Cozen Peter of Aragons house, and haue passed the
time there with the newe come Damsell, the most fairest that euer was borne, and the most gentlest and best taught, right faire and swéet are her deuises. Florence, (quoth the King) I charge thée in as much as thou fearest my displeasure, that thou commest no more at her, beware that thou fallest not en∣amoured of her, if thou doest, thou wert neuer so ill acquain∣ted with any Loue, nor there neuer came so ill aduenture to the Damsell, if shee draw thée to loue her, for if I may know that thou goest thether any more, I shall sette her in such a prison, whereas I shall cause her to end her dayes miserably. Father, (quoth Florence) mée thinkes that you doe vs great wronge, to forbid vs to play and sport together in all goodnes and honour, and God defend that I shoulde entend any wayes to deceiue her: Déere Father, remember that you haue béen young, ther∣fore suffer that youth may passe their time in goodnesse and ho∣nour with vs, as it hath done with you, nowe you are about Four-score yeares or more, you ought to thinke of nothing but to serue God, and eat and drinke and sléep, it ought not to trou∣ble you, though our youth passe the time in good workes, you ought to bee content, that we loue by amours as you haue done before this, for to the Damsell I beare all honour, and I will loue her, howsoeuer it bee taken faire or foule, there is no man liuing that shall let mee as longe as life is in my bodie, shee is faire and gentle, and it is said that I am faire, and that it were a méet couple for vs two to be ioyned together in mariage, and therefore Father, I praye you to blame mee no more nor the Damsell, for in all that I can doe, I am her Louer and shee is mine. When the King hadde well vnderstood his Sonne, in great yre and displeasure, he sayd: Oh thou vngracious Son, little thou prizest or honourest me, in that thou wilt doe thus against my will: know for certaine, if I may liue but till to morrow in the morning, I shall make a departure of your twoo loues. When Florence heard his Father, he sayd. My déere Lord and Father, if God will you shall not doe as you haue sayd, for if you doe, with mine owne handes I shall slay my selfe, for I will not liue one day after. When the Kinge heard that, hee
was right sorrowfull for feare of loozing of his Sonne, and stu∣died within himselfe what to doe, then he said. Faire Son, take thine armour, and goe and seeke aduentures as I haue done in my time, then I shall marrie thée to some Wife, such a one as thou canst finde in any Countrey, although she be neuer so great or noble, I shall cause thee to haue her, i thou wilt for∣sake and leaue this new found Damsell, for by her no wealth nor honour can come vnto thée, it should bee a great euill vnto thee, that after my daies it should bee saide, that a newe found Damsell should bee Ladie and Queene of my Realme. Thou knowest well, howe thine Vncle the King of Nauarre maketh me great warre, for a debate that is lately fallen betwéene him and me, I knowe well that now at this Moneth of Aprill, hee wil come and inuade my Realme, and therefore good Sonne, seeke for some other Wife, and let this folly passe: then I shall make thée a Knight, & then helpe to aid and defend my Realme against the Kinge of Nauarre thine Vncle, thou art bigge and strong inough to defend my Land. Good Father (quoth Flo∣rence) speake no more vnto me, for I will neuer haue no other Wife but this faire Damsell, whome I loue entirely. Sonne quoth the King, thou abasest thy selfe ouer lowe, nor there is no friend nor kindred that thou hast, that will keepe any company with thée, but they will cleane flye from thée: therefore good Sonne, put away from thée this folly, beware, in as much as thou thinkest to haue my Realme after my decease, and vppon the paine to bee banished out of my Countrey, take not her a∣gainst my will. Then the Kinge called vnto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, and charged him, that if Florence his Sonne came any more to his lodging, that he should incontinent tell him of it, for I pro∣mise (quoth hée) by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord God, if he come thether any more, I shall cause the Damsell that is in your house to be slaine. Florence was right sorrowfull, when hee heard to the pleasure of the Kinge his Father. Thus as the King rebuked his Sonne, there came in a Knight and kneeled downe, and sayd. Sir, I haue brought you ill tidings, for the King of Nauarre is entred into your Realme, and setteth all
your Countrey in flame and fire, and néere to your Citie they be to the number of more then Thirtie Thousand men, besides the great Battaile that commeth after, wherein there is about thrée-score Thousand men, they exile your Countrey, and they slay men, women, and Children, they spare neither young nor old, it is great néed that you make hast, and to bring your men together to resist your enemies. When King Garyn heard the Messenger, he was right sorrowfull, then hee called vnto him his Cozen Peter of Aragon, who was his chiefe Constable, and sayd. Sir, make readie our men to resist our enemies, then he called vnto him Florence his Sonne, and sayd. Faire Sonne, take thine armour, and shew thy vertue against thine enemies, who waste my Realme, and take vpon thée the chiefe charge, and lead mine Hoast, for I haue no puissance nor strength to do it, because of the great age that I am of, I haue liued so long that I can no more ride: therefore defend thou the Land that thou shalt hold after mee, and then thou doest as a wise man should doe. Father, (quoth Florence) by the grace of God I will put no armour vppon my backe to defend your Land, ex∣cept you will giue mee in marriage the faire Damsell that is in my Cozen Peter of Aragons house, if you will doe me that cour∣tesie, and promise mée to doe it, I shall deliuer into your hands your enemy as Prisoner, to doe with him your pleasure, other∣wise looke not that I shall doe any thing. When the King saw that his Sonne would doe none otherwise, then he commaun∣ded all his other men euerie man to arme himselfe, and to goe and resist his enemies: the which they did incontinent, and they yssued out into the fields more then tenne Thousand men, and Sir Peter of Aragon hadde the leading of them, and they were not out of the Towne aboue twoo Leagues, but they encoun∣tred their enemies, there were many speares broken, and many a Knight beaten downe to the earth and slain, and their bodies lying without soules among the horse féete, right valiantly did Sir Peter of Aragon behaue himselfe that day: but hee had not strength ynough sufficient, for his enemies encreased, where∣fore hee was constrained to retire backe towardes the Citie, howbeit, before he entred, he did great losse and dammage vn∣to
his enemies. When the Nauarnes sawe the Aragons retire into the Citie, then they pitcht vp their Tents and Pauillions about the Towne, and when king Garyn saw his men returned, then he called his Sonne Florence, and said. Sonne, take thine ar∣mour and ayd to defend the Land, the which appertaineth to thée after my decease. Sir, (quoth Florence) that will I neuer doe, without first you promise me, to giue me the faire Damsel in marriage, by that couenant, that I shall deliuer into your hands as Prisoner mine Vncle the King of Nauarre. When the King his Father heard him, hee muzed a litttle, and sayd. My Sonne, I graunt thee thy desire, so that thou wilt deliuer me thine Vncle the kinge of Nauarre, to doe with him at my pleasure, therefore take thine armour and make thée readie, thine armour is good, and thy swoorde is with the best, and if thou canst do as thou sayest, thou shalt haue the faire Damsell, howbeit, he sayd to himselfe priuily, that he had rather to loose one of his handes, then a stranger should be Quéen after him, for assoone as my Sonne (quoth hee) shall be yssued out of the Citie, I shall cause the Damsell to be drowned in the Sea, for I will not suffer her to liue, although I should bee disenherited for it. Then Florence hearing his Father, promising to him to haue the Damsll, he was right ioyfull: but he knew not the inward ill will of his Father, then hee sayd. Sir, then I re∣quire you to send for my Loue hether, to the entent that she may guird my sword about mee, whereby I shall be the more bold and hardy when I come into the Battaile. The kinge did as his Sonne required, but the Sonne knewe not the Fathers thought, the Kinge sent twoo knightes for the Damsell, and when shee came there, shee was greatly regarded of them that were there, for they had neuer séen a fairer, nor one that séemed to be extract of a hye generation. When Florence sawe her in the Pallaice, his heart rose vp, and he ranne vnto her and em∣braced and kissed her, and the Ladie suffered him with a good will: wherewith the king had at his heart such sorrow, that he had neere hand runne vppon them, but he forbare it, because he saw his Son readie to goe against his enemies, then he helped
to arme his Sonne richly, and in like wise so did the faire Damsell. When king Garyn hadde made his Sonne readie, the Dam∣sell did guird his Sword about him, then the king drew it out of the sheath, and therewith made him knight, and then his horse was brought vnto him, and hee leapt lightly vppon him, with his Speare in his hand, and helmet vppon his head, and shéelde about his necke. Then Florence sayd vnto the kinge his Father. Sir, I leaue with you my Loue, whome I loue best in all this world, I leaue her in your kéeping, for if our Lord God giue me the grace that I may returne, I shall bring vnto you mine Vncle the king of Nauarre as a Prisoner. The king graunted vnto his Sonne all that he would desire, but he knewe not the inward intention that hee was purposed to doe. Then the king commaunded Ten of his knights to sée the gui∣ding of the Damsell, and to honor her as much as they might, vntill his Sonne were out of the Citie, and then to drowne her in the Sea, to the entent that neuer more tidinges should bee heard of her. Chap. CLIII. ¶ How Florence went to fight with his enemies, and how Sir Peter of Aragon returned towards the Towne, to bring thether Pri∣soners: and howe hee rescued the faire Damsell Clariet from drowning, and how afterward Kinge Garyn caused the Damsell to be closed vp in a prison. WHen Florence was armed and mounted, hee tooke vp his horse freshly before the Damsell, and blessed him, and tooke his leaue of the kinge and of his Loue, and so de∣parted and road to the gate: and all that sawe him sayde, howe they neuer sawe so goodly a knight, nor more séeming to bee feared, then hee yssued out of
the gate, and roade towardes the Tents of his enemies, with ten Thousand good knights and hardy: the Ladies and Dam∣sels went to the wals of the Citie to behold the young knight. When the Nauarnes saw him comming, there came against him more then fiftéene Thousand men, and they came downe in a Valley by couert, to haue cutte him the way betwéene the Hoast and the Towne, but the valiant knight Sir Peter of A∣ragon (who was with Florence) espyed them, and so made hast to be afore them: and when hee sawe his time to set vppon his enemies, Florence (who was sore desirous to fulfill his promise to the king his Father) tooke his Speare, and encountred with a knight with such vertue, that he ranne him cleane through, and with drawing out of his Speare, the Nauarnes fel downe dead, then Florence sayd. God hath giuen mee a good begin∣ning, then hee drewe out his sword, and strake another vppon the helmet, in such sort, that he claue his head to the teeth, and the third and fourth hee made dolorously to die, and hee neuer ceased vntill he had slaine Tenne of his enemies. Thus vnder the meadowes of Courtoys, was a horrible Battaile betwéen the Nauarnes and Aragons, where there was vpon both partes such slaughter, that it was great maruaile to behold it. Anon Florence sword was well knowne, for by the force of his armes he brake the great preasses, for vppon whom soeuer his stroke lighted, hee was either slaine or cast to the earth, euerie man feared him so much, that none durst abide nor approach néere vnto him. The same time that Florence was in the Battaile dooing of maruailes, the faire Damsell Clariet was vppon the wals of the Citie, with other Ladies and Damsels, regarding the hye Prowesse that Florence did in the field, and the ioy that she had thereof, was soone turned into sorrow and wéepings, for king Garyn (who could not forget the mortall hate that he had to the Damsell) called vnto him Ten knightes of them that were se∣cret with him, and sayd. Sirs, this new found Damsell, with whome my Sonne Florence is in hot amours, shee displeaseth me so much, that I cannot find in my heart to looke vppon her, my Sonne thinketh to haue her in marriage at his returne,
but as long as he liueth, hee shall neuer see her more whatsoe∣uer fall thereof, therefore goe your way, and take and cast her into the Sea, amonge the greatest waues that you can finde. When these knightes vnderstood the King, who commaunded them to doe this murder, they were right sorrowfull at their heartes, but they durst not say nay, nor doe against his will, for if they had, they knewe well that they should die, and they knew that there was neither mercie nor pitie in him: therefore they durst make no semblance to the contrarie, they feared so much to displease him. Then they went and tooke the Dam∣sell whereas shee was. Sirs, (quoth shee) what will you doe with mee? wherefore doe you take mée? let mee goe, if you will haue any thing with mee, shew mée? They sayd, Dam∣sell speake no more, for your end is come, you shall neuer see faire day more: and when she saw that she was so taken with Tenne men, who went threatning to slay her, then shee cast out a great crie, and desired God to ayd and succour her. Then they bound the Damsels handes with a cord, in such manner, that her white tender skinne burst, and they bound her so sore that the bloud dropped out at her nayles. Sirs, (quoth she) I crie you mercie, little shall you winne to slay mee, you shall doe great sin, seeing I haue not deserued it. Madame, (quoth they) your wordes cannot auaile you, the Kinge will not that you shall make auaunt to haue his Sonne in mariage, for you shalbe drowned in the Sea whether you will or not, your wée∣ping shall not ayd you. Then foure Ribaulds tooke and bound her, and drew her by the haire of her head, and led her toward the Sea-side to haue drowned her, but often times it is sayd, that which God will haue saued, cannot be perished. The same season Florence was in the Battaile, whereas hee fought with his enemies, and Sir Peter of Aragon had taken many Prisoners, and hee came vnto Florence, and sayd. Ah Sir, I require you to let vs returne to the Citie, and bee con∣tent with that you haue done this day, for yonder you may sée comming al the whole Hoast of the Nauarnes, against whom it is not possible for vs to endure, for they are more then thrée∣score Thousand men, and they all hate vs to the death, you
haue done ynough & ought to be content, if they take you, none can saue your life. Coozen, (quoth Florence) I pray you before I depart, let mee Iust once with mine Vncle the kinge of Na∣uarre, whome I haue promised to yéeld as Prisoner vnto the king my Father, and thereby I shall haue in mariage the faire Damsell my Loue, and for the loue of that faire Damsell I shal make many a Nauernoys to loose their liues. Sir, (quoth Pe∣ter) since you desire your owne death, I am right sorrie there∣of, but I will no longer tarie héere, for it is not possible for vs to tarie héere, without we will bee slaine wilfully, and I haue héere many Prisoners, I will go lead them into the Citie, and then I shall returne again vnto you, to the entent that if either I or you be taken Prisoner by them, wee may bee redéemed a∣gaine. Then Peter went to the Citie with all his Prisoners, and when he was come into the Citie, hee heard a great noise about the Market place, whereof hee had great maruaile, and went thether, and then hee sawe there foure foule Villaines, drawing the faire Damsell Clariet towardes the Sea-side to drowne her. When he saw that, hee was neuer so sorrowfull in all his life before, and incontinent did let goe his Prisoners, and drew out his sword, and cryed vnto them that led the dam∣sell. Ah yée false Théeues, let the Damsell go, whom I brought from beyond the Sea, yée did neuer such folly in all your liues, and therewith hée strake the first with his Sword, in such sort, that his head slewe from his bodie, and the second hee claue to the téeth, and the third and fourth hee slewe. When the faire Ladie saw the Earle Peter, right pitifully she beganne to crie, and said. Sir, I require you to haue pitie of me, and help and ayde mee as you haue done before this time, neither Lorde nor Maister I haue none but you. Sir for Gods sake vnbind me, and put me out of this paine that I am in. Then Peter went to the Damsell, and cut the cords asunder wherewith she was bound, and for the sorrow that she was in, shée fell downe in a swound: then Peter tooke her vp and sayde. Faire Damsell, be of good chéere, for I shall helpe to saue you: the faire Ladie wept pitiously, and sayd to her selfe. Ah Huon of Bourdeaux my déere Father, the great paines and pouerties that you were
woont to suffer, you haue left mee now Inheritour to the same, alas, I know not where you nor my Mother is, I beléeue that I shall neuer sée you more. Then Peter of Aragon tooke the Damsell by the hand, and led her to his lodging in the Town, then he went to the Pallaice, whereas hee found Kinge Garyn, vnto whome he sayd. Ah thou old doating foole, wherefore, or for what cause wouldest thou haue slaine the Damsell, and she is none of yours, she is mine, I wanne her vppon the Sea and saued her life, you can make no claime to her? Thus as Peter spake to the King, there entred into the Pal∣laice two Knights, and they sayd to the King. Sir, before you is the Earle Peter your Coozen, who hath deliuered and rescued the new-found Damsell, and hath slaine the Foure men that should haue drowned her in the Sea. When King Garyn saw the Earle before him, he sayd. Why wert thou so hardy, as to slay my men for dooing of my commaundement? Then hee cried to his men, and saide: Sirs, I charge you take this Vil∣laine héere, who hath done mee this offence, for I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I sée him hanged a hye vppon a Rocke. Then his men stept forth to haue taken the Earle Pe∣ter, and when hee sawe that he approached néere vnto him, hee drew his sword, and claue the head of the first to the téeth, and he slew the second, third, and fourth, he beat downe more to the earth, then ye other that fled away, so that there was none that durst approach néere vnto him, for they were all vnarmed and hee well armed: then hée came to the King, and sayd. Ah thou false old Dotard, full of sin and out-rage, how dare you thinke to bee such an out-rage? you are not worthy to beare a crown, your Sonne Florence ought to haue it, for a Traytour ought to hould no Realme, full déerely you shall abuy the ill will of the Damsell, and the more to make him abashed, hee made sem∣blance to runne vppon the King with his sword, who for feare of him ran into his Chamber, and shut fast the dore after him, and the Earle Peter standing without, sore threatned the king, then the King said. Coozen Peter, I crye you mercie, if I haue done euill, I am readie to make amendes at your pleasure, I was sore displeased with my Sonne, and therefore I thought
to be reuenged vpon her that hath caused all this, I shall make amendes, but by the grace of God my Sonne shall neuer haue her in marriage to die: therefore I will neuer consent, that a new-found Damsell should bée Inheritour of such a Kingdome as the Realme of Aragon is. Then Sir Peter answeared and sayd: Sir beware, blame her no more, bee content with that you haue done alreadie, it may be that the Damsell is of as hy a Lineage as your Sonne, wherefore such time may come that you may be déerely rewarded, peraduenture the Damsell was stollen away by some ill Tyrant, shee hath béen ill entertained with you, when you would so cruelly haue slaine her. Cozen, (quoth the Kinge) the matter is ill come to passe, for her sake you haue slaine many of my men, the which I pardon you, but as for the Damsell, I will set her in prison in a Tower, out of the which she shall not depart, and I will shew my Sonne that shee is drowned in the Sea, and I will kéepe her in prison till my Sonne hath forgotten her, or else hath taken another wife, then I will deliuer her, and send her into some other Countrey whereas she shalbe better entertained. When the Earle Peter heard the King say so, he agréed to his saying, and thought that aduise to bee good, and was content with that he had saued her life, then the King opened the cham∣ber dore, and so came into the Pallaice, then he sent for the dam∣sell, and then shee was set in prison in a Tower, and the Kinge commaunded to a secret Seruant, that hee shoulde sée that the Damsell should want nothtng for her liuing, and charged him vppon paine of his life to kéepe the matter secret, and hee char∣ged all those that knewe thereof, in any wise to shewe Florence his Sonne nothinge of her. Then hee closed vp the dore with stone, to the entent that shee shoulde not yssue out, and left no∣thing open, but a little windowe towards the Towne of Cour∣toys, wherein her meate was put, other windowes there were opening vppon the fields, the which gaue great ligght into the house. Thus the faire Ladie Clariet was closed vp into the Tower, whereas shee hadde good leasure to wéepe and wayle. Now let vs leaue speaking of the Ladie, and speake of Florence who was in the Battaile.
Chap. CLIIII. ¶ How Florence discomfited his enemies, and tooke the King of Nauarre, and led him into the Towne, and deliuered him to the King his Father, and howe Florence deliuered him againe quit, because that his Father shewed vnto him that the faire Damsell was drowned. YE haue well heard heere be∣fore, how the Earle Peter of Aragon departed from Florence, and returned into the Citie, for he could not cause Florence to leaue the bat∣taile, whereas hee did maruailes, for the loue of the faire Ladie Clariet whome he trusted to wed: hee slew so many of his enemies, that ye fields were couered with the dead bodies. When the king of Nauarre his Vncle sawe that, hee was right sorrowfull to see his men so slaine, then hee came a∣gainst Florence his Nephewe, and sayd. Ah thou vnkind Ne∣phewe, cursed bee you, I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart, as long as I see thee aliue, thou hast done me this day great dam∣mage, I had rather dye an ill death, then not to be reuenged of thée: wherefore I require thee to Iust with me, I challeng thy Land, the which shalbe mine, thou shalt neuer be Lord thereof. Florence answeared and sayd: I shall not refuse the Iustes, then hee put vp his sword, and tooke a great speare, and so ran against the king his Vncle, and the king came against him, and they met together so rudely, that the Kinges Speare brake all to péeces, but Florence Speare was bigge, wherewith he strake the kinge so rudely, that hee fell to the earth with his feete vp∣ward, and he fell so sodenly, that he lay in a traunce, and before hee could bee recouered Florence tooke him by the ventale of his helmet, and sayd. Nauarre, before I sleepe I shal deliuer you Prisoner into the handes of a faire Damsell, whome I loue en∣tirely, for in all the world there is none like her in beautie, if
you refuse thus to doe, with my Sworde I shall incontinent strike off your head from the shoulders: the king sayd, hee was content to fulfill his pleasure and to yéeld himselfe Prisoner. Then Florence tooke his Sworde from him, and made him to mount vppon his horse, and to ride before him towardes the Towne, and deliuered him to the keeping of Tenne knightes, and Florence road after with his sword in his hand all bloudie, the crie and noyse beganne to bee great among the Nauarnes, they enforced them on all parts to haue rescued their king, but they coulde not come in time, for by that time, Florence was within the gates of the Citie, whereas hee was right ioyfully receiued. When the Nauarnes sawe howe they lost their labour, and how their king was entred into the Citie, they were right sor∣rowfull, and came before the Barriers and skirmished, and wan but little, and so returned with small profit, and sorrow∣full for the losse that they had receiued that day, for the fieldes were couered with dead men. Thus they returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and the Aragons entred into the Citie of Courtoys with great ioy, and when they were in the Citie, then Florence tooke the king of Nauarre his Vncle by the hand, and led him to the Pallaice, and there alighted and went into the Hall, whereas he found king Garyn his Father, who hadde great ioy of his comming. When he saw his Sonne Florence bring his enemie Prisoner, he embraced his Sonne, and sayd. My right déere Sonne, I am right ioyfull of your comming. Father, (quoth Florence) I haue done so much by the ayd of our Lord Iesus Christ, that I haue taken your enemie Prisoner, whom I render into your handes, to do with him at your plea∣sure. Nowe I will that you kéepe your promise with mée, sée∣ing I haue quit mine, now it is time that you deliuer vnto me the Damsell, whom I shall make Quéen and Ladie after your decease. When the king vnderstood his Sonne, he was all in a rage, and said. Faire Sonne, leaue thy folly, and take such a Wife according to thine estate, and thinke no more of that new Fondling: for know for troth, I haue caused her to be cast into the Sea, whereas shee is drowned. Thou art a Foole to
thinke that I will suffer after my decease, that a poore Caitiffe new-found, should bee Ladie and Quéene crowned of such a Realme, beware, in as much as thou thinkest to displease me, that thou bee not so hardy as to speake, or remember any more the new-found Damsell. When Florence heard the Kinge his Father say, howe the Damsell was drowned in the Sea, his bloud mounted into his face, and his heart was so oppressed and so heauie, that he had no power to speake, and such a maruailous colde sweat tooke him, that there was no vaine nor member in his bodie, but trembled for anger and sorrow that was in him, so that he had no power to sustaine himselfe, but fell downe to the earth in a great traunce, in such sort, that euerie man there thought hee had béen dead, and euerie man complayned for him, and espe∣cially the king his Father was right sorrowfull, and would as then that he had neuer begunne that matter. When Florence came againe to himselfe, hee sayde. Oh good Lorde, the earth ought to be cursed, when it sustaineth such a trayterous kinge, that hath done such a déede, great perill it is to bee conuersant with him: then Florence looked vppon the knightes about him, and sayde. Sirs, I require you, for the loue you ought of rea∣son to beare me, bring me to the same place, whereas she whom I loued perfectly was perished and drowned, for other Sepul∣cher I desire none, but the same that she hath, for the loue of her it shall please me well to bee vnder couert, vnder the waues of the Sea, whereas my Loue is, to the entent that of me there be heard neuer more remembrance. Then hee beheld the king of Nauarre his Vncle, whome hee had taken Prisoner, and sayd. Sir king of Nauarre, thou art my Prisoner, but if thou wilt ayd mee, to bee reuenged of this treason that my Father hath done: I shall then let thée goe a∣gaine frée and quit. Faire Nephew, (quoth he) leaue that folly and speake no more thereof, for it toucheth much your honour, and you shall be blamed of all them that heare speaking thereof. Sir, (quoth Florence) what is that you say? you knowe well that you are my Prisoner, and that it lyeth in me whether you shall liue or die? Faire Nephew, (quoth the king) I will well
agrée to your wordes, but if you will beléeue mee, beléeue the king your Father, & leaue to doe after your owne will. What? (quoth Florence) you know well, that in me it lyeth to strike off your head, without you will agrée vnto my will and pleasure, the which thing I will doe, except incontinent you sweare the death of kinge Garyn my Father, and that neuer to take peace with him, vntill you haue brought him to the death, vpon this condition I shall set you in sauegard: for the Traytour hath deceiued me, of ye thing that I loue best in all this world. Then the king of Nauarre sayd. Déere Nephewe, you are as yet young, I cannot tell whether your wordes and promises are stable and firme or not, for the youth that I sée in you, and also for the great displeasure that you be in now: and therefore faire Nephew, I haue great feare that you should beguile me. Sir, (quoth Florence) God forbid that I shoulde bée so deceiuable of my promise, to promise you any thinge and fulfill it not, what∣soeuer should fall thereof. At this time there were but few persons in the Pallace with the kinge, for all the Lordes and knightes were gone into the Towne to their Lodgings, to refresh them of their trauaile and wearines: therefore the king was in his Pallaice with a small companie, the which Florence had well espyed, and there was certaine of Florence knightes about him, vnto whome hee sayd all wéeping. Sirs, incontinent goe and get mee my horse, and also the king of Nauarre his horse readie at the gate, the which was done, and when they were come, then Florence sayd vnto the kinge of Nauarre his Vncle. Good Vncle, if there bee any courage in you, to be safe and out of seruage, take this sword in your hand, and let vs leaue this vnhappie king, to vse his daies in sorrow, and come and follow me. Faire Nephew, (quoth the king of Nauarre) I haue great feare that you will beguile me. Sir, (quoth Florence) thinke it not, but come after mee, and you shall sée what I will doe: then Florence departed, and the kinge of Nauarre with him, they leapt vppon their horses, and when they were vpon their good horses, there was no man at that time in the Towne abroad to let Florence of his Enter∣terprize, but thus they passed both vntill they were without the
Towne, then Florence sayd to the king his Vncle. Sir, nowe you knowe well that I haue brought you out of this Towne, and therefore I require you againe, that you neuer take peace with the king my Father, vntill you haue slaine him. Faire Nephew, (quoth the king) that which you require me to doe I shall fulfill it, and thus I recommend you to God. When the kinge sawe himselfe so well deliuered, hee was ioyfull, and so road vntill hee came to his Hoast, whereas his men receiued him with great ioy, and they demaunded how he was escaped out of the handes of Florence, then the king shewed all the man∣ner howe Florence deliuered him, whereof they had great mar∣uaile, and had great ioy of his comming: and to accomplish his promise to Florence his Nephewe, he sent to all his Realme of Nauarre, to his Fréends and other to come and ayd him. Now wee shall leaue speaking of the king of Nauarre, and speake of Florence his Nephew. Chap. CLV. ¶ How King Garyn put Florence his Sonne into a Tower in prison, and how the Damsell escaped out of the Tower, and spake with Florence her Louer at an arch vpon the Garden-side, and how they were espyed, and howe shee thought to haue drowned her selfe. WHen Florence had deliuered the king of Nauarre his Vncle, whom hee had taken before in the Battaile, then he returned againe into the Citie, and so road till he came to the Pallaice, whereas he found the king his Father, and sayd as a man almost out of his wits. Oh thou false Traytor, thou hast done so much through thine ilnesse, that I rather desire thy death then thy life. Then he sayd to the Knightes that were there present: Sirs, I pray you bringe mee to the Sea, and cast mee therein, in the same
place whereas my Loue was cast, for I will not liue one houre longer, if you doe not this, I shall slay my selfe with mine own handes. When king Garyn heard his Sonne say so, hee was right sorrowfull, and spake fiercely vnto his Sonne, and com∣maunded to take him, and to set him in prison in the Tower, in such wise that hee may bee sure of him, and sayde. Well I ought to be angrie in my heart, when this boy mine own Son thus dealeth with mee: but by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord God, the displeasure that he hath done vnto mee hee shall deerely abuy it, for as long as he liueth, hee shall haue no foote of my Land. Sir, (quoth Florence) by you, nor by your Land, nor by any thinge that you can doe, I set not thereby a button, for I hadde rather die then liue. There was no man present but that wept greeuously for pitie, and when Florence saw them wéepe, he sayd vnto them. Sirs, come vnto mee, take off my Armour, and put me into the handes of the king my Father, for I will not that any of you shoulde haue any displeasure for my sake, let mee beare the blame my selfe, séeing that I haue lost the thing that I loue best. Then the Knightes came vnto Florence, and vnarmed him, and deliuered him to the King his Father: then the king tooke him by the hand, and led him foorth rudely, and sayd: howe hée would sette him in such a place, out of the which hee should not come of a long space. The Earle Peter of Aragon had great so∣row, but hee durst speake no word, the king himselfe led him to the great Tower, and there left him sore wéeping, and ma∣king great sorrow for his Loue whom  had lost, he made such sorrow that pitie it was to heare, & when the night came, and that hee remembred the Damsell, his sorrowes beganne to re∣new. And aswell as hee made sorrowe for his Loue, the faire Damsell Clariet, who was in the same Tower immured vp in prison, thee heard the complaintes that Florence made, and so long the hearkened, that at last she thought that shee knew the voice, and sayd. Oh good Lord, what may this bee? who is this that I heare thus complaine? mée thinkes I haue heard that voice before this time, and mée thinkes it should be he that loued me so well, I will not leaue searching vntill I may know
the troth. Then the Damsell came to the dore that was new∣ly immured vp, whereby the morter was not fully drie, and shee scraped with her fingers, and with a little knife that shee had, so that at the last she scraped out a stone. Then she assay∣ed to pull out more, and so much shee did with her fingers and the knife, that shee made a great hole in the newe wall, so that shee créeped out and went into the Garden, the which ioyned to the Tower, & then shee felt by her a Roster, vnder the which shee sate downe, the Moone shone bright, whereby the Garden was as light as though it had béen cléere day. Then she tooke a faire Rose in her hand, the which smelled swéetly, and saide. Ah good Lord, I woulde that it were thy pleasure that my Lo∣uer were heere with me, I thinke hee be not farre from hence, I wish with him this swéet Rose, so that hee knew that it came from mee, I will not leaue searching vntill I haue found him, and if I cannot find him, in dolour and miserie I must end my dayes. The same time that the Damsell complayned thus in the Garden, Florence, who was in the Tower, and heard the faire Damsell in the Garden, hee knwe her well by the voice, and saide. Oh good God, what is it that I heare yonder in the Garden? Déere Louer, (quoth the faire Ladie) it is she whom you doe loue so well, I am yssued out of the Tower, wherein I haue béene in great miserie, and I cannot tell what will fall thereof, comfort mee, or else I shall die héere in great sorrow. When Florence heard the voice of his Loue, he had such ioy at his heart, that he forgat all his dolour, when hee saw that shee was not dead, then hee sayd vnto her. Ah my right swéete Loue, whether will you goe? for if the King my Father know, that you be escaped out of the Tower, incontinent hee will slay you, hee will haue no pitie of you, and I cannot succour you. Swéet Loue, I pray you to gather me some flowers, and cast them in at this window, then I shall passe my dolours the bet∣ter, when I haue in my handes any thing that commeth out of yours. Then the Damsell gathered Roses and flowers, and did cast them in to her Louer, whereof Florence had great ioy, when hee had receiued them from her, and kissed them often∣times:
then hee came to the window, thinking to haue taken his Loue by the hand, but he could not the wall was so thicke, whereof they were both sorrie. The same time whiles they were thus deuising together, the watchmen came about, whome the King had sent thether to es∣pie and knowe, if Peter of Aragon did sende vnto those Priso∣ners any comfort or ayd, and when they came thether, they hearkened, and heard the voices of those two persons, & heard well their words, and wept for méere pitie of them: then swéet∣ly one watch-man called vnto them, and sayde. Holde your peace, for if you be spyed you cannot escape the death, I haue great pitie of you both, I pray God to preserue you, for I can∣not comfort you. Then they held their peace, and so went a∣sunder, to the entent that they should not bee heard nor séene, then there came thether two other watch-men, sent thether by the King, to sée if any bodie came to the Tower, to aid or com∣fort the two Prisoners, and when they were come néere to the Tower, they sawe the newe made wall broken, then they sayd each to other: surely the Damsell is fled, and hath broken out of prison, then they cryed out, and made a great crie and sayd, the Damsell is fled out of the Tower. When the Damsell (be∣ing in the Garden) heard the noyse that the Spies made, shee was in great feare and doubt, the which was no maruaile, then incontinent as priuily as she could, she went from the Tower, and went to the end of the Garden, whereas there was a hye Rocke, and vnder the Rocke a great water and déepe, shee did clime vppon the Rocke, and sayd. Ah Florence my déere Lo∣uer, this day shall bee the departing of vs two, it must behooue me to die for your sake, shee sawe in the Garden a great num∣ber of Torches light, and men séeking all about for her, where∣of she was afrayd, and not without cause, for shee knewe well that if she were taken, she were lost for euer. Right swéetly she called vppon our Lord God, and on the holy Ghost for ayd and comfort, and saide. Alas, if I be taken, I cannot escape from the martirdome of death, but since it is thus, that we must néeds depart for euer, I had rather bee drowned then be taken, therewith shee made the signe of the crosse, recommending her
selfe to our Lord God, & therewith tumbled downe the Rocke, to haue fallen downe into the water, but as she fell, she lighted in a great bush by the way, whereby she was pricked in diuers places on her face and hands, so that the bloud followed, wher∣by shée felt such paine that she swounded. Then the noyse ran through-out the Pallaice, that the Damsell was escaped out of the Tower, in such sort, that the King was aduertised thereof, who was sorrowfull, and made promise that Earle Peter of A∣ragon should loose all his Lands and goods, for he thought that by his meanes she was escaped the prison. Cbap. CLVI. ¶ Howe the first Watchman found out the Damsell, and led her into a great wood there by, and afterward the same Watchman deliuered Florence out of prison, and shewed him the place where the Damsell was: and how Florence and Clariet entred into the Sea, and how the Kinge went after his Sonne, and the VVatchman taken. THus as the brute was in the Pallaice, for the escaping of the Damsell, the first Watch-man that first espyed the two Lo∣uers together went all about in the Garden, to sée if he could find the Damsell, he sought so long that he found the Damsell, whereas shée lay in the bush in great perill to be drowned. This Watch∣man was a wise man, and as priuily as he could he yssued out of the Garden, and went downe to the water side, and there he found a little boat, and entred into it, & so passed the vine Gar∣den as priuily as he could, so that none heard nor saw him: and when he was against the bush whereas the Damsell was, hée spake to her softly, and sayd. Faire Damsell, be not abashed, for if I may in any maner of wise I will ayd you, come down, and enter into this boat, and I shall set you in the Forrest, and
tarie there vntil I bring to you Florence your Louer, the which I shall doe by the grace of Iesus, for if I can by any manner of meanes, I shall bring him out of the danger that hee is in, be∣cause I haue alwayes loued him, and for the goodnesse that hée hath done to me, I shall now reward it. When the Damsell heard the Watch-man, for ioy thereof shée forgat all her sorrow, and incontinent aswell as she might she yssued out of the bush, and went down the Riuer side: then she entred into the boat, and the Watch-man set her ouer, and left her in the Forrest, the which ioyned to the water side, then he tooke his leaue of her, and sayd. Faire Damsell, tarie here vntill I returne againe to you. Fréende, (quoth the Damsell) I pray to God that you may so spéed as to bring hether my Lo∣uer, and to set him out of danger, and so he departed, and entred againe into the Garden, hearkening towardes the Pallaice, whereas there was great brute made for the escaping of the Damsell: But there was no doubt made of Florence, because the Tower that hee was in was stronge and thicke. Also the Chamber that he was in was not toward the Pallaice, but it lay open against the Garden: then the sayd Watch-man came to the wall side, whereas there was a straight loope hole into Florence Chamber, and he had two Goates féete in his handes, then hee called Florence, and sayd. Sir, if you will bee with your Loue, who tarieth for you in the Forrest, whereas I haue lt her in sauegard: helpe your selfe that you were out of this Tower, take heere this Goates foote, and doe you so much there within to enlarge the loope, that you may yssue out, and héere without I shall make the hole wyder. When Florence vnder∣stoode the Watch-man, hee was neuer so ioyfull in all his life, when he heard the man say that his Loue was in sauegard, & they laboured so sore, that they made the loope so large, that Flo∣rence yssued out, and then the Watch-man brought Florence to the Stable, whereas some of the Kinges horses stoode, especial∣ly there was one, whose like could not be found. This Watch-man (who had great affection and desire to doe seruice to this young Lord) did so much, that he brought vnto Florence his Armour, his shéeld, his helmet, his sword, and a good Speare,
and so Florence armed him, and leapt vpon the good horse, then the Watch-man shewed him the place in the Forrest, where∣as as hee had left the Damsell, and then hee tooke his leaue of Flo∣rence, who sayd. Fréend, the seruice that you haue done me, shall be well rewarded in time to come: then hee road foorth, and left not vntill he came whereas his Loue was: and when he saw her, his ioy was renewed, then he alighted, and kissed his Loue, and when he sawe that she was so bloudie, he hadde great pitie of her, and sayd. Deere Loue, it is néedfull that we depart before the day come: Therefore make you readie and leape vp behind me, and then Florence mounted, and she leapt vp behind him, and so departed assoone as they might. When they were in the fields, the Damsell looked backe to∣wards the Citie, and shee saw a great number of men yssuing out, then shée sayd vnto Florence. Sir, I sée well that wee bee lost, for I sée much people yssuing out of the Citie, it is not pos∣sible for vs to be saued, but that we shalbe taken, and especial∣ly I cannot escape, I sée well that nowe our loue shall depart, your Father is fell and cruell, I knowe well that hee will slay mee. Then the Watch-man came running after Florence, for feare that he had of the king, but he could not ouertake Florence who fled with his Loue behind him as fast as he might toward the Sea-side, for Florence knew well the priuie wayes, because he had often times vsed the wayes, when he was woont to go a hauking or hunting. So long he road, that he came to a lit∣tle Port, where there was a Shippe readie to depart, then Flo∣rence alighted and his Loue with him, and tyed his horse to a Trée, and then he tooke the Damsell by the hand, and came to the Maister of the Shippe, and agréed so with him, that he and his Loue entred into the ship, then they hoysed vp their sayles, and so sayled from the land, the Watch-man came to the Sea∣side, trusting to haue found Florence there, and hee was right sorrowfull when he sawe them so farre on the Sea, hee was in great feare of loosing of his life. Then Kinge Garyn came the∣ther with a great number, and when he saw the Shippe so far in the Sea, he sayd. Ah good Lord, now haue I lost my son, for I know well he is gone inyonder Shippe, and the Damsel
with him, but by the faith that I owe vnto our Lord Iesus Christ, this Watch-man shall loose his head: then the Watch-man was taken and fast bound, so that the bloud came out at his fingers ends, and sayd all wéeping. Ah good Lord, in an ill houre I was acquainted with Florence and his Loue: Alas for the goodnesse that I haue done, I shall haue a small reward this day, I am like to loose my life for loue of my Lord. Chap. CLVII. ¶ Of the great debate that was in the Pallaice for the VVatch-mans sake, whome the King would haue had to be hanged, and how the king of Nauarre tooke the Citie of Courtoys, and how he departed from thence. WHen the Earle Peter of A∣ragon saw the Watch-man taken, by whom Florence and his Loue were saued, hee was sorie to sée the man so sore beaten and threa∣tened, then he went in hast to the King, and sayd. Sir, you shew well by your workes that you haue but small reason, to suffer thus this poore man to be beaten, and that you would put him to death, for the good∣nesse that he hath done to your Sonne, he hath done therein but as he should doe, and like a true Seruant, you ought the bet∣ter to loue him, you shall doe ill to put him to death, I will that you know, that if you put him to death, I will not serue you one day longer, but I will rather goe to the King of Nauarre, and helpe to maintaine his war against you. When the King heard him so to threaten him, he swoore by God that he should repent it, and how there should no man saue the Watch-mans life. Then the poore man embraced the Kings Legge, and cri∣ed for mercie, but the King sware and made promise, howe he should bee hanged without mercie. When the Earle Peter heard that, he was verie sorrowfull: the poore man wept, and
beheld the people that were there assembled, and desired them to pray for his soule, saying, how he should die for sauing of his Lord, there was many of the poore mans kinred, they knéeled all downe before the King, desiring him to pardon him, the king answeared that hee would not. When the Earle Peter heard that, he sayd to the King. Sir, surely he shall not die, without it be by iudgement as your Lords and Counsaile shall ordaine. When the King heard that, he was sore displeased, and so en∣tred into the Citie, and set the Watch-man in prison, then hée went to his Pallaice, and Peter followed him, and accompani∣ed with many other Knightes such as loued him, and in like wise so did the poore mans kindred. When the Kinge was in his Pallaice, he commaunded a Scaffold to be made, whereon hee would haue the Watch-man to loose his head. When his Kins-men heard that, they cried for mercie, but the king would doe nothing at their desire. When the Earle Peter saw the ill will of the king, he made a token to the Watch-mans freends, (who were in number about a Hundred and Fiftie) that they should goe to such a Tower, where there was great plentie of Armour, and to breake it vp and to arme them, and so they did, and came againe to the Pallaice: and when the king saw them comming armed, hee cryed to his men, that they should arme them, and take them that were so bolde to come into his presence all armed, and when euerie man was armed, they came again to the Pallaice to haue taken the Watch-man and all his kindred, but the Watch-man and his Fréendes (who were readie in armour) set vpon the kinges men, and also Pe∣ter of Aragon and his companie aided them, so that there was so great a Skirmish in the Pallaice, that it was pitie to sée it, they cut off armes, legs, and heads each of other. Finally, the king and his men were so sore constrained, that of force they a∣bandoned the Pallace and fled away, and the king fled into his Chamber for sauegard. Anon the newes ran in the Towne, that the king was sore assaulted in the Pallaice, and in ieopardie of his life. Then all the Communaltie went and armed them, and sounded the larum bell, there was such a noyse and brute, as though all the
world had béen lost. Then a Spie went out, and shewed the king of Nauarre, howe king Garyn was assembled in his Pal∣laice within the Citie, because of a Watch-man that the King would put to death, in that hee had deliuered out of prison Flo∣rence and the Damsell his Loue. Then the King of Nauarre right ioyfull of those newes, commanded hastely his men to be readie in Armour, for he sayd that it was then time or else ne∣uer to assaile the Citie. Great desire I haue (quoth he) to bee reuenged of this King, who had wedded my Sister, whom he hath slaine, I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart, vntill I bee re∣uenged: then euerie man armed them, and so assembled toge∣ther with banners displayed, and so came in good order toward the Citie to assayle it, but when they within the Towne heard the crye and noise without, and sawe their enemies comming towards them, they went and shewed it at the Pallaice, wher∣by the strife there ceased, and then the king and all his Lordes with all his people yssued out in Battaile. Then there began a sore Battaile, and many a man slaine and maymed, but there were so many Nauarnes, that whether king Garyn would or not, perforce they were faine to abandon the Victorie to their enemies, and were faine to retire into the Towne, but their e∣nemies followed them so néere, that the kinge of Nauarre and his men entred in with them. Then the kinge of Nauarre commanded that none should be slain, without they were found in defence, for he sayd that he cared not, so he might be reuen∣ged of the king. Then the Nauarnes spread abroad in the Citie, taking pri∣soners, then kinge Garyn fled to the Minster-church, then hee stoode in the Church dore to make defence, but it could not a∣uaile him there was so many of his enemies, that he fledde to the hye Aulter for sauegard, but the kinge of Nauarre (who was entred into the Church) commanded his men to take king Garyn, the which they did. Sirs, (quoth king Garyn) yée doe me great wrong to take me in this holy place, whereas euerie man should be saued aboue all thinges, the house of God ought to be refuge for euerie man. Then the king of Nauarre (who was holden for a good holy man) hearing what king Garyn
sayd, he knewe well that he sayd the truth, and repented him∣selfe, and sayd. Faire Nephewe, for the offence that I haue committed against our Lord God, I shall amend it to the dou∣ble, so that you will pardon the Watch-man, that hath deliue∣red my Nephew Florence out of your prison, I shall then shew you this courtesie for the offence that I haue made, I and all my men shall yssue out of this Citie, without taking of any prisoner, or any manner of goods, for the loue of my Nephewe Florence whome I loue entirely, and for the goodnes of the peo∣ple, I shall goe to my Tents without, and I will graunt you a Truce to endure for a Moneth, and I promise you the Moneth once expired, I shall approach againe so nere to this Citie, that as long as life is in my bodie, I shall not depart vntill I haue taken this Citie and you, whome I take for mine enemie, to haue you as my prisoner, for I shall neuer haue ioy at my heart vntill I haue reuenged the death of my Sister your Wife. Then King Garyn sayd. King of Nauarre, of the courtesie and bountie that you shewe vnto me I thanke you, and as for the Watch-man, I doe pardon him all mine ill will, & where∣as you say that you will come so néere my Citie to winne it, when that commeth (by the grace of God, and by the helpe of my true Subiects) I shall doe the best I can to defend my selfe and my Citie. Then the King of Nauarre yssued out of the Church, and leapt vpon his horse and road to the gate, and ta∣ried there vntill all his men were cleane auoided out of the Ci∣tie, to the entent that neither Prisoners nor goods should be ca∣ried out of the Citie, whereof his men were angrie, and espe∣cially they that were poore, the other cared not greatly, because the two Kinges had béene so long fréendes together, wherefore the warre displeased them, and they were sorrie that it endu∣red so long. When the King of Nauarre saw that all his men were yssued out of the Citie, then hee withdrewe him into his Tent, and he closed in the Citie with a siege, abiding vntill the Truce was expired. Now let vs leaue to speake of this warre betwéene these two Kinges, and speake of Florence, who say∣led vppon the Sea with his Loue Clariet.
Chap. CLVIII. ¶ How the Shippe wherein Florence was and his Loue, was taken by the Sarazins, and all their companie taken and slaine, and ledde to the Castle of Anfalerne. THe Historie sheweth, that af∣ter that Florence was departed out of his coū∣trey with his Loue Clariet, howbeit, he knewe not what she was, so it was, that the Maister of the Shippe that he was in was of Marsellis, and when hee knewe that Florence was Sonne to King Garyn of Aragon, and that he had put his trust in him, then hee came vnto Florence, and sayd. Sir, the goodnesse and honour that I sée in you, causeth me to say vnto you that which I would not doe to another: I well perceiue by you, that you are in great doubt of the King your Father, least hee should follow you to get you againe, but Sir, to the entent that you shall be well as∣sured of me and of my Marriners, I put into your handes my selfe, my Shippe, and all my Marriners, and I will that they obay you as they haue done mee, and that you are Maister o∣uer vs all: and Sir, neuer thinke that the king of Aragon your Father shall trouble you, we are farre ynough from him, by the grace of God we shall so conduct you, that wee shall bring you to the holy Sepulchre, and afterward bring you backe to Mar∣sellis, and then from thence you may goe whether as it please you. Sir, (quoth Florence) of the honour and great courtesie that you offer me, I thanke you: then all they that were with∣in the Shippe sayd. Sir, refuse not to be our Maister, for if the winde had not béene against vs, wee had béene farre off by this time: Sir, haue no doubt, we shall all obey you and doe as you commaund vs, since it is so our Maisters pleasure. Sirs, (quoth Florence) I thanke you of your offer, God suffer mee to dsere it.
Florence was ioyful of the good aduenture that God had sent him, and thus hee and his Loue sayled ioyfully in the Sea of Affricke. So long they sayled, that they passed the Isles of Cor∣sia and Sardania, and Cicilie, and n a Wednesday betimes, they arriued néere to the Isle of Candy, there arose vppon them a maruailous great winde and Tempest, so that perforce they were driuen to the coast of Barbary, the Tempest was so great, that euery man was in feare of drowning, ye waues were great and fearefull, & the Damsell was in great doubt when she saw the mariners in such feare, & she called deuoutly vpon our Lord Iesus Christ, desiring him to haue pitie of her, & to bring them to a good Port. When Florence perceiued his Loue, and al the Marriners in such feare as they were, hee comforted them the best he could, but it auailed not, for the wind draue them whe∣ther they would or not towards Bongy, néere to a Citie named as then Anfalerne, wheras they were faine to cast their anchor, in great feare of loozing of their liues. Then there fell on them a Galley, wherein were a Hundred Sarazins, & another great Ship, wherein were more then foure Hundred men, and they all fell vppon Florence Shippe. When Florence sawe both the Ship and Galley set vppon his Ship, the Maister of the Ship and the Marriners began to wéepe, and said vnto Florence. Ah Sir, you and we all are lost, we shall be all slaues with the Sa∣razins, yonder Galley and shippe are full of Sarazins, and they are ready comming to sette vppon vs. When Florence heard that, he said. Sir, bée not abashed, hee whome God will saue cannot be perished, no mortall man can hurt him, lette vs put our trust in him, & take such grace as he will send vs, the great number of people cannot hurt vs, if God will ayd vs, lette vs shewe our selues like men, they bee without law and without faith, and we beléeue in God, by whome wee trust to be saued, let vs arme our selues, and shew our selues like men to defend our liues. When the Maister and the Marriners heard Florence, they sayd. Sir, into the sauegard of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to you we commit our selues: then they all armed them, and eue∣rie man stoode at their defence, and Florence sayd. Sirs, let vs
all thinke, that we now doe fight for our liues, and therefore let vs not be abashed, euerie man thinke to do his best that he can, I loue by amours, behold her here, by whome I am so mooued to doe well, and to defend both her and me. Sir, (quoth they) shame haue hee that fainteth: then the Ship and Galley came néere to Florence Shippe, then the shotte of both parts flewe so thicke as though it hadde béene snowe, there was a great Bat∣taile betwéene them, great hurt was done with casting out of barres from the tops, two times Florence entred into the Ship of his enemies, whereas he did maruailes, and slewe so many Sarazins, that the water was red with the bloud of them that were slaine on both parts, there was an horrible Battaile, ma∣ny of Florence men were slaine, the good Maister was slaine, & the most part of his men. Also from the land there were shotte Bombardes and Gunnes at Florence ship, so that thereby, and with the great barres of yron, the shippe was sore impaired, for it was striken thorow in a hundred places, in such sort, that the Sea entred in with great abundance. When the Damsell saw that mortall discomfiture, how their company were slaine, and their ship néere full of water, and saw no more persons left a∣liue with Florence but six, she was then in great feare, and she thought that shee had rather enter into the Sarazins ship, then to be drowned in the Sea, shee sawe the Galley, the which lay ioyning to the shippe, she leapt into the Galley to saue her life. When Florence sawe his Loue in the Galley, hée was néere out of his wits for sorrow, and hee sawe well, that if he tarried still in his owne shippe hée should be drowned, then he leapt in∣to the Galley whereas his Loue was, and there he slew many a Sarazin, but there was so much people, that with force of Darts and speares hée was borne downe, then they tooke and bound his handes so sore, that the bloud ran out at his nailes. Thus Florence was taken, and all his men slaine and drow∣ned, except some that were taken, then Florence wept for pitie of them, & sayd. Ah my Father, how falsly haue you wrought against me, thus by your folly I am in great daunger, I shall neuer returne into my Countrey without God helpe me, often times hée beheld his Loue, whome the Sarazins did sore beate
and ill threaten, whereof Florence had such displeasure, that he was néere hand out of his wits. Alas, (quoth he) I ought to be sorrowfull, to see her that I loue best so sore beaten and tor∣mented before my face. Oh cursed death, why sufferest thou me to liue to see this day, that my Loue shoulde bee thus dealte with, and yet I cannot helpe nor succour her? therewith hee wept, and suddainly fell in a swound among the handes of the Sarazins. When the Damsell sawe her Louer fallen in a traunce, and saw him so pale of colour, she came vnto him, and she thought surely that he had been dead, and also the Sarazins sayd the same. Then she cryed out, and said. Oh good Lord, why dost thou consent the death of my Louer? séeing that we must thus depart for euer, it is nothing the paine and ill that I suffer, but my sorrow is for the death of my Louer héere before me, I ought to be sorrowfull, when the most faire, swéete, and gentlest creature of all the world is thus dead and lost for euer, and the most valiant Knight that euer was borne: and there∣with she fel downe in a traunce by her Louer, and all that saw them thought surely that they had béen both dead without any recouerie, and had great pitie and compassion of them, then hee that was the Captaine of the towne and Castle, who was na∣med Sorbarre, came into the Shippe, and saw where Florence & his Loue lay one by another as dead, he had great pitie of them for he was a good Christian man, but he durst not be to knowe thereof for feare of slaying, hee loued God well, and did after∣ward good seruice in christendome, for by him the sayd two Lo∣uers were saued from the death, as yée shall heare héereafter. When these two Louers were come againe to themselues, the Sarazins deliuered them both into the Captaines handes, and when Florence sawe his swéete Loue by him, hee embraced and kissed her swéetely, the Captaine Sorbarre, when hee sawe the youth of these two Louers, hée had great pitie of them, but hee made thereof no semblance, hee tooke them both into the Castle with him, and the other Prisoners such as hadde taken them, brought them into diuers Towers, whereas they were kept in great miserie, for the Sarazins had no pittie of them, because they were christened.
Chap. CLIX. ¶ How Sorbarre the Captain comforted Florence and Clariet: and how there arriued foure Shippes with Christian men by fortune of the Sea, and how Florence was knowne by them. WHen the Captain of the Ca∣stle was within the Castle, and Florence and his Loue with him▪ he sayd to them. Fréends I haue great pity of you, shew me what yée be? and what fortune hath brought you hether, sée∣ing you bée so young? how is it that you would aduenture vp∣pon the Sea, wherein are so many perils? if yée shew mée the troth, yée shall looze nothing thereby, for if I can I shall set yée in such a place, whereas yée shall be in sauegard? Sir, (quoth Florence) I shall shew you all mine aduenture, whatsoeuer fall thereof. Sir, knowe for troth, that I am Sonne to King Ga∣ryn Kinge of Aragon, and I am departed from him in displea∣sure. Thus Florence shewed Sorbarre al his whole aduenture, and how he was taken by his Father, and how he escaped and his Loue also, then he said. Sir, I haue shewed you the troth, and I commit my bodie and my Loues here into your handes, for in you lyeth our liues and deathes, you may doe with vs at your pleasure, and therewith he knéeled downe, then Sorbarre tooke him vp. and sayd. Faire Sonne, bee not abashed, for I haue béene before this time in as great aduenture, haue no doubt, I shall so order the matter, that you shalbe out of all pe∣rill but keepe euerie thing secrette to your selues, then Sorbarre called vnto him Foure of his seruants, and said. I command you to vse well this Prisoner, and this Damsell, and let them haue flesh, bread, and wine at their pleasure, as I had when I was prisoner at Terrascon. Faire Son, (quoth Sorbarre to Florence) know for troth, that I was once king of Belmarin, and once I fought with Aymerie of Narbone, and I was taken by
the handes of Reynalt of Beanland, then I was brought to the Citie of Bourdeaux, whereas I sawe a noble Prince named Duke Huon, who had wedded a noble Ladie called Escleremond, Daughter to the Admirall Gaudise, and they had a Daughter well beloued of them, she was the fairest Ladie that euer I did sée, shee was not aboue at that time Sixe yeares of age, and as I heard say since, there came to Bourdeaux diuers Kinges and great Princes, for to haue hadde her in mariage, then I came priuily to mine Vncle, who gaue me this Castle to kéepe, when hee saw that I had lost all mine owne Realme, and because I was well entertained amonge the Christian men, I will that these Prisoners bee well dealt withall. Sir, (quoth his Ser∣uants) séeing that it is your pleasure, wée shall accomplish the same. Then they tooke Florence and the Damsell, and did set them in a Tower each of them in a Chamber apart, whereof they were right sorrowfull. When the faire Damsell saw that she was put from her Louer, she was right sorrie, then shee began to complaine, and said. Ah my right déere Father Duke Hu∣on, and déere Mother Escleremond, I may well hate the acquain∣tance that yée haue had with King Oberon, for by him I haue lost you both, yée haue forgotten mee in this worlde, when yée leaue me in this prison. Ah King Oberon, thou hast done mée great ill and dammage, when thou diddest giue my Father thy Realme, whereas is the Citie of Momur, and whereas now is the Duke my Father, and the Duchesse my Mother, I haue lost the flower of all my kindred, and I am sure that I shall die in this Tower with sorrowe: Ah false death, thou diddest mée great ill, in that thou tookest not me when I was yong & little, I yéeld my selfe to God, whome I require to haue pitie of me, & would to God that I were in companie with my Louer Flo∣rence, the Captaine hath done ill thus to seperate vs asunder, for if I were with him, I should the better passe the time, if his Father knew of what lineage I am of, and whose Daughter I am, he would not haue refused to haue giuen me his Sonne in mariage, but he shall not knowe for me whatsoeuer paine I suf∣fer. Florence, who was aboue in the Chamber next vnto the
Chamber whereas the faire Damsell Clariet was, who hadde well heard the complaintes that shee had made before, and vn∣derstood euerie word that shée had spoken, whereof hee was the fullest man at his heart liuinge, for if hée loued her well be∣fore, then he loued her much better, and then he looked out at a window, whereas he sawe Sorbarre walking vp and downe in the Court of the Castle. Then Florence required him, to haue ity and compassion of the Damsell being in the Tower alone. Fréend, (quoth Sorbarre) suffer for a time, I shall set you both in such a place before it be night, that you shall be both ioyfull, be not abashed, for the loue of you I shall leaue the Law of Ma∣homet, and beleeue in our Lorde Iesus Christ, for when it is night, and euerie man in bed, we shall enter into a Galley that lyeth here by, but as for your other men, that bee Prisoners a∣broad in the Towne, it would be hard for me to get them out of prison. Then I pray to God (quoth Florence) to aide and suc∣cour them in their great néede. Great pitie had Sorbarre, when he heard Florence so pitiously pray for the sauegard of his men, whome he must leaue behind him, if God succour them not: then Sorbarre saw comming to∣wards the Port foure great Ships, wherein there were more then Two Thousand Pilgrims, who were comming from the holy Sepulchre at Ierusalem, but by fortune of the sea and force of the winde, they were constrained to arriue there. Then the Captain Sorbarre went vp into the tower to sée Florence, whom he ooke by the hand and sayd. Freende, yonder you may see soe great Shippes full of people, comming hether by force of the winde, let vs goe downe and see what they bee, and who is their Captaine. Sir, (quoth Florence) I am readie to follow your pleasure, my bodie and my Loues I commit to your saue∣gard: then the Captaine sent for the Damsell, and when Flo∣rence sawe her, hée was right ioyfull, and sayd. Deere Loue, bee nothing afraid, the Captaine and I will goe downe to the Sea-side, to know what people they are that commeth in yon∣der Shippes, and anon we will returne againe vnto you. Sir, (quoth the Damsell) God be your guid. Sorbarre and Florence went downe to the Hauen-side, and when the Shippes arri∣ued,
they saw well that there was many people, and perceiued well that they were Christian men. Then Sorbarre saluted thē and sayd: Sirs, yée bee welcome, I pray you to shew me from whence you come, and what yée séeke for in these partes, and what yée bee? Then the chéefe Maister of them answeared and said. Sir, we be of the Realme of Fraunce, and we come nowe from Ierusalem, from the Pilgrimage of the holy Sepul∣chre, and the force of the winde hath caused vs to arriue heere, and if we ought to pay any thing for comming hether, wee are readie to pay it. Sirs, (quoth Sorbarre) séeing that this is your aduenture, yée are welcome hether to me, since yée be here arri∣ued, it is reason that I bee comforted and aided by you, and I say vnto you▪ that I beléeue vppon Iesus Christ, but as yet I was neuer christened, I shall shew you (Sirs) what yée shall doe, if you will beléeue mee, you neuer came to so faire aduen∣ture, yée shall goe with me into the Castle here aboue, in which place I shall fournish you all with horse and Armour, and yée shall abide in the Castle, & make no noise nor shew your selues, and I will goe to the Hauen, and garnish a Galley with all things necessarie, in this Towne there are many French men Prisoners, who were taken but lately in this Hauen, and ma∣ny were slain, and such as be taken are prisoners in this town, and early in the Morning wee will yssue out of the Castle into the Towne, and sette fire in diuers places, then the Sarazins will haue great businesse to rescue and stanch the fire, and then we will enter into their houses, and take all their goods and all the Prisoners, and all the riches that we can find in the towne wee shall put it into our Ship, and if the Sarazins come to as∣saile our Ship with Boats and Barges, then let vs defend our selues aswell as wee can, and first of all let vs goe and take all the Shippes that be in the Hauen. When the Captain of the foure Ships heard Sorbarre, they praised his aduise and good counsaile, and they all with one ac∣cord concluded to do his pleasure. Sir, (quoth Sorbarre) to the entent that yée shall beléeue me, and to haue of me no manner of suspect, if ye will haue knowledge what I am, this young man that you see by me can informe you. Sir, (quoth the Patron)
by your visage it appeareth well that all troth is in you, & that you are a noble man: therefore Sir, wée all commit our selues into your conduct and grace, but Sir, if it may be your pleasure to shew to vs, what young Gentleman this is that we sée there by you? truely Sir, you shoulde doe mee a great pleasure, for e thinkes I should haue séene him ere this. Patron, (quoth Sorbarre) since you will know it, gladly I shall shew you, sée∣ing he hath discouered himselfe to me, know for troth, that hee so Sonne to Kinge Garyn of Aragon, who by fortune of the sea arriued here, and here perforce he was taken, and his men most pat slaine, and with him was taken a noble Damsell, who is aboue in my Castle. When the Patron & they that were with him, vnderstood that it was Florence Son to the Kinge of Ara∣gon, they were thereof right ioyfull, for they were all of the Realme of Aragon, and sent forth by the King to search for Flo∣rence, they thanked God of their good aduenture, that hee had sent them to find Florence there, whom they were sent to search for: then they came to Florence, and knéeled downe before him & sayd. Ah Sir, you ought to thanke God that we haue found you, we haue maruaile why you hide your name from vs, for wée be all sent from King Garyn your Father to search for you, for if God had not sent you this good fortune, wee should neuer haue heard any tidinges of you, nor haue shewed the King your Father any thing to his pleasure. Chap. CLX. ¶ Howe Sorbarre and Florence and their companie went into the Towne, and robbed and spoyled it, and so tooke the Sea with great ioy and triumph, and the faire Ladie Clariet with them, and tooke their course to sayle towards the Realme of Aragon▪
WHen the Patron & his com∣pany knew & saw Florence, the ioy that they made could not be recounted, nor the chéere that they made to Florence when they were entred into the Castle, whereof Sorbarre had great ioye. The same season whiles they made this great ioy & feasting, there was in Sorbarres compa∣nie a Sarazin, who vnderstood the French language, and had well heard the Enterprize that the Christian men were deter∣mined to doe, and also he saw well, how Sorbarre was ioyned to their companie: then priuily he departed, and hastely he went into the Towne, and shewed the Burgesses and Commons of the Enterprize, what the Christian men had concluded to doe, & howe that Sorbarre was become a Christian. When the Sa∣razins vnderstood that, incontinent they went and armed them, and came to the Castle thinking to haue won it, but they found there such defence and resistance, that that which they did there was small to their profit, yet the assault endured vntill the next day, and at last they were constrained to withdraw from the Castle a great space. Florence, who was within cryed to them and sayd. Ah yée false Villaines, yée haue slaine my men, but if God suffer me to liue, their deathes shall bee déerely bought. When the Paynims saw that they could not attaine to the Ca∣stle, they blew the retrait, & euerie man returned to their owne house. Then Sorbarre said to Florence and his company: Sirs I aduise you to leape on your horses, for now the Paynims are returned to their Lodgings wearie of their trauaile, and many of them sore hurt, and they are in great feare, I know their con∣ditions well ynough, and because that after trauaile & labour a man is féeble and full of feare, and nowe euerie man is in his owne house and vnarmed to be at their ease: therefore I coun∣saile, that incontinent we yssue out and set vpon the Towne. Then Florence and all the other sayd. Sir, as you haue deui∣sed, we are readie to doe it, for a more noble counsaile was ne∣uer giuen.
Then euerie man made him readie, & yssued out of the Ca∣stle, and Florence and Sorbarre went before them, and rested not vntill they were entred into the Town, for their entring could not bee defended, because the Castle ioyned to a corner of the Towne: then they made a great crie, and spread abroad in the Towne, and put in fire in diuers places, and slewe downe the Paynims in the stréets and Market places, finally, they did so much by force of armes, that they brought the Towne vnder their subection, and the Inhabitants thereof all slaine, and all the Christian Prisoners rescued, who had great ioy when they saw Florence their Lord, whome they thought had béene dead. Great riches that day was wonne in that Towne, the which was giuen and parted vnto them that had deserued it, and Flo∣rence gaue to the Christian Prisoners great riches. Thus when the Towne was wonne, and the riches thereof put into their Shippes, they all departed, and sette fire on all the Citie, then they went into the Castle whereas the Damsell Clariet was, who had great ioy when she saw Florence her Louer: and then Sorbarre (who had great desire to depart from thence) tooke all the Treasure & riches and had it into their ships, and victu∣alled them with all thinges necessary, then when it was day in the morning, they departed from the Castle, and went to their Ships with great ioy, Florence holding his Loue by the hande, said vnto her. Deere Loue, king Garyn my Father hath sent to seeke for me, all about both by land and by water, and these that bee come heere with these Shippes, were sent forth by the Kinge my Father to search for me. When the Damsell heard that Florence would bring her againe to his Father, she hadde great feare and said. Sir, yu know right well the great hate and displeasure that your Father hath to you and me, for God sake sir, let vs goe some other way. Déere Loue, (quoth Flo∣rence) haue no feare of my Father, for if you had shewed your nme, & what you bee before this time it had eased vs of much paine. Ah Sir, (quoth shee) it is not as you wéene it were. Well▪ (quoth Florence) it is sufficient for me as it is: then they  vp their sayles, and so sayled vntill they were farre off  that Land, and Sorbarre was right ioyfull, in that he had
saued the Christian men, and for the loue of Florence he forsooke his owne lawe and his countrey, then hee sayd vnto Florence. Sir, my bodie and goods I abandon to you in such wise, that I shall neuer leaue you for life nor death. Sir, (quoth Florence) of the goodnesse and troth that you haue shewed mee, I thanke you, and I shall neuer haue penny worth but the halfe shall be yours. Now let vs leaue speaking of them, sayling ioyfully vppon the Sea towards Aragon, and let vs speake of king Ga∣ryn, who was besieged within the Citie of Courtoys, by his bro∣ther in lawe the king of Nauarre. Chap. CLXI. ¶ How King Huon Kinge of the Fayrey, sent two of his Knightes to the two Kinges: and how he appeared betweene them with a great number, and of the Peace that he made between them. WEll haue yee heard before, how that after the King of Nauarre had taken King Garyn prisoner, and that Truce was ta∣ken for a certaine space, and then each of them to shew their powers: so it fell, that two daies before the breaking vp of the truce, and that their ayds and pu∣issances were assembled together, the one partie within the Citie, and the other without with the Kinge of Nauarre, who sore threatned King Garyn, because hee had banished away his Sonne Florence his Nephew, and sayd, that hée had rather die then such an ill King should not be punished: this King of Na∣uarre had assembled such a number of people, that the Valleys and Hils were couered with men of warre, & the night before the Truce brake vppe, there was hearde in the ayre a fearefull voice, the which when it began to speake, the earth trembled, and thundred and lightned, in such sort, that all they that were assembled aswell they within as without, had such feare, that they were likely to haue run away. Then the voice began to
speake, and sayd. Sirs, ye that be here in the field readie to fight, of both parties, make no hast to ioyne together in Battaile, for such ayd and succour shalbe sent to you both, that yee shalbe all ioyfull. Therewith the voice passed away, and was heard no more, whereby both parties were abashed, & all the night they were at their prayers, beséeching God to ayd & succour them. King Garyn was sore abashed when he heard the voice, and said. Oh good Lorde, if these people that are assembled bee slaine by my meanes & for me, my soule shall be lost for euer. Alas my Son Florence, I was ill counsailed when I chased you away from me, and I did great sin when I put you in prison, I am wea∣rie of my life, it is no matter though I die, and I am more sor∣rie for you, (my déere Sonne) whome I haue betrayed and dri∣uen away without a cause: alas, by my meanes this Realme will be wasted and destroyed, the which you ought to haue af∣ter me. Therewith he swounded among his Lordes, so that they all thought he had béene dead, whereof they sore complained, and at last the king came againe to himselfe: then his Lordes com∣forted him, and so bad him to heare Seruice, and after seruice, there appeared sodenly before him two goodly young Knightes, the one was Gloriant, and the other Mallabron; they were twoo Knights of the Fayrey: then they all smiling saluted the King, and sayd. Royall King, Huon of Bourdeaux saluteth thée by vs, hee is King of all the Fayrey, and he will come to ayd thée and to defend thy land: also he will that thou knowest, that he is Father to the faire Damsell Clariet, whome thou namest the new-found Damsell, and because thou hast banished from thée thy Son Florence, hee will come to thée, to make the Peace be∣tweene thée and thy Brother in lawe the King of Nauarre, and hee will make the Mariage betwéene thy Sonne Florence and Clariet his Daughter. When kinge Garyn heard the Knight of the Fayrey, hee hadde such ioy at his heart, that hee wist not what to doe or say, and hee came to the Knight and embraced him all wéeping, and said. Sir, know for troth, my body, my life, and all that I haue, I submitte into the handes of the good King Huon, to do therewith at his pleasure. With those words
the twoo Knightes vanished away, no man wist how nor whe∣ther, so that euerie man had great maruaile. King Garyn and his Lordes lifted vp their hands to Heauen, making the signe of the crosse, recommending themselues to Iesus Christ, and the twoo Knightes rested not, vntill they came to the Cittie of Momur to King Huon, and shewed him what they had done and sayd to King Garyn, & shewed Huon of the day of Battaile, that was taken betwéene the two Kinges, and said. Sir, haue pi∣tie of Florence, and of Clariet your Daughter, who are as now on the Sea in a great Tempest: then Huon sayde. Surely, I & they shall be shortly before the Citie of Courtoys, with a num∣ber of people, that the earth shalbe couered with them, to the en∣tent that if either of those two Kinges doe contrary to my will, I shall destroy him for euer, for shortly I will, that my Daugh∣ter Clariet shall bee Duchesse of Bourdeloys, and shee is so faire that there is none like her, and I will shew the great loue that I beare to her. Then Huon called to him Escleremond and sayd: Ladie you shall sée this day the thinge that you much desire to sée, that is your Daughter Clariet, to whom I giue her the guift, that she shalbe beloued of euerie man, and I will that from henceforth she shall giue large guiftes and rewards to Ladies, Damsels, Knightes, and Squiers, for I will that from hencefoorth shée haue her pleasure, without suffering of any more ill or perill, for she hath suffered inough. This day was faire and cléere, & within the Citie of Courtoys there was many people assembled, and they were in great deuotion, some made seruice to be song, and some were confessed, and ordred themselues towardes the Battaile. Then King Garyn commanded euerie man to leape vppon their horses readie armed, and the King himselfe moun∣ted: then they issued out of the Citie, and commanded his Con∣stables and Marshals to ordaine Thrée Battailes in the name of God. King Garyn had assembled a great number of men, he had more then Fiftie Thousand men, there ye might haue séen Ladies, Damsels, and Burgesses that wept for feare of their Freends, whome they sawe going towards the Battaile, and they went all to the wals, Colledges, and Churches to pray to
God for the good spéed of their King, and of their Fréends. Now let vs leaue speaking of these two Kinges, who were readie in the fiels ranged in order of Battaile the one against the other, and lette vs speake of King Huon, who called before him all his Lordes of the Fayrey, there was the faire Esclere∣mond, and Gloriant and Mallabron, and many other Knights of the Fayrey: then King Huon said. Sirs, yée all knowe well▪ that by the will of God, King Oberon whiles he liued gaue me all his Realme, and Signiorie, and puissance that he had ouer al the Fayrie of ye world, thereby then I may haue all my com∣maundements fulfilled, and since God hath giuen me this gift, I will not suffer the man-slaughter and murder, that is like to be betwéene the Two Kinges of Aragon and Nauarre: there∣fore I wish my selfe with Two Hundred Thousand men well armed, and richly by séeming and all mounted on good horses: and also I wish to haue as many urnished with bowes and Crosbowes on foote. Also I wish a Hundred Thousand to be apparelled in Gownes of cloath of gould and silke, and also I wish for my Daughter Clariet, whome I haue left a long time in paine and miserie, whereof I repent me, for mine intention is to marrie her to Florence, Sonne to Kinge Garyn of Aragon, the which Florence is so faire, so hardy, and so humble and cur∣teous, that in all the world there is none like him, I wish him and all his companie, and Sorbarre with him, to be at the Ha∣uen of Courtoys. Also I wish my Tent in the meadow betwéen the hoasts of the two Kings, and I will that my Tent be such, that there be none like it in all the world, and vppon the toppe thereof I will there be pitcht a Dragon of fine gold. King Hu∣on hadde no sooner made his wish, but hee and all his company were there as he had deuised. When the king of Nauarre saw so many people, and so many Tents and Pauillions so néere him, and that he saw the rich and puissant Pauillion of Kinge Huons with the flambing Dragon, hee was greatly dismayed. Then he called his Lords and Knightes, and saide. Sirs, be∣hold what people yonder are before vs lodging, mee thinkes I neuer sawe so many together in all my life, I wot not what it should be, I am in doubt: then he called vnto him two knights
and sayd. Sirs, goe thether, and knowe what people they be, and what they meane, and whether they bee Fréendes or ene∣mies, & who is chéefe ouer them. Sir, (quoth the two knights) we will not goe thether, for we know not whether they bée our enemies or not. When the King of Nauarre vnderstoode that those knightes nor none other would goe thether, hee was sorrowfull, and as the king was thus deuising, thether came the two knightes of the Fayrey Gloriant and Mallabron, and Gloriant sayd. Kinge of Nauarre, King Huon of Bourdeaux hath sent vs to you, and commaundeth you that you make peace betwéen you and king Garyn, for he will giue his Daughter Clariet to your Nephewe Florence, who is the fairest Ladie of the worlde. When the king of Nauarre vnderstoode these twoo Messengers sent from king Huon, he was right ioyfull, and commanded al his Lords to goe with him to kinge Huon, they obayed his commaunde∣ment, and road with him vntill hee came to the rich Pauillion of king Huons, whereas they alighted and were well receiued, then the king of Nauarre saluted king Huon, who sayd. Sir, you be welcome: and then the king of Nauarre knéeled down before kinge Huon, and sayd. Sir, I am readie to fulfill your pleasure. Then Gloriant tooke the king of Nauar by the arme and raysed him vp, and set him down by king Huon and Escle∣remond: then king Huon sent for king Garyn, who incontinent came to him, accompanied with a Thousand knights, & when he was come, hee saluted king Huon, and saide. Sir, you are welcome into my Countrey of Aragon, the which I offer you to doe therewith at your pleasure, and Sir, all that you haue com∣maunded mee to doe by your twoo knightes, I am readie to ac∣complish, and there hee shewed to king Huon all weeping, the occasion of the warre and of his Sonne Florence, who for the loue of a new-found Damsell was put in prison, whereof he re∣pented him, for he sayd that there was not a fairer Damsell in the world, and for the loue of her, Florence my Sonne is depar∣ted from mee, and I thinke I shall neuer sée him more. Kinge Garyn, (quoth Huon) knowe for troth, that shortly you shall sée them both come hether to me, for I will marrie them together,
the Damsell is my Daughter, and her name is Clariet, and I will you know that she is noble, and yssued of a royall Lineage, there is none more noble in this Countrey, and she hath bought her desteny right déerely. When king Garyn knew, that the noble Damsell was Daughter to king Huon, and that he would make a marriage betwéene her and his Sonne Florence, & that they should come thether shortly, he was neuer so ioyfull in all his life before: then hee knéeled downe before kinge Huon, and cryed him mercie, and saide. Ah Sir, how may it be, that in my olde dayes such a grace may come to me, as to haue againe my déere Sonne, and that the noble Damsell (whome I haue done so much ill vnto) shall bee his wife. Then Kinge Huon rose vp and said. Noble king, haue no doubt but that you shall haue your Sonne, for I cannot so soone wish for him, but they shall be both here, wheresoeuer they bee in the worid, whereof all they that were present had great maruaile. Sir, (quoth the Quéene Escleremond) when shall the houre come that I may sée my Daughter Clariet? and Sir, you knowe well that I came hether with you for none other cause. Madame, (quoth Huon) you shall sée her shortly. Chap. CLXII. ¶ How Florence and Clariet arriued there with their company, and came to king Huon, and of the great ioy that was made at their comming, and how there they were wedded together: and the Peace confirmed betweene the two Kinges. WHen King Huon sawe the Quéene his wife weepe, his heart tendred and sayde. Ah my déere Daughter Clariet, great pitie I haue of you and of Florence the hardy: I wish you both and all your companie here at the Port on the Sea-side, as richly apparelled, as euer was Quéene or Prince departing out of their house to
bée maried, and that with you there bee Ladies and Damsels richly apparelled, & of the fairest that be in my Realme of the Fayrey: he had no sooner made his wish, but that Shippes and Galleys arriued at the Port, and anon Florence & Clariet were in the Meadow, richly accompanied with Trumpets, Harps, Viols, and Lutes, and all other Instruments, the which soun∣ded so melodiously, that it seemed to all the hearers that they were rauished into Paradise, and also there were Ladies and Damsels, and knightes of the Fayrey singing right sweetely, the hearers thought them to bee Angels of Paradice, and they were apparelled richly, and garnished with precious stones, so that with the Sun shining vppon them, they glittered in such wise, that whosoeuer had seene them, would haue thought that God and all the Court of Paradice had been there assembled. Thus Florence came with 3 Thousand men making great ioy. After him came riding the faire Clariet, vpon a rich Pal∣fray ambling so freshly, garnished and richly apparelled, that in all the world there was none such, the armour hanging full of siluer bels, making so swéet a noise, that it was maruaile to heare them, if I should discribe the beautie & riches that was on her Palfrey, it would be too long to rehearse. This Ladie Clariet was accompanied with two notable Ladies of the Fay∣rey, the one was Morgue, and the other Glorianda, who came singing after Clariet: then after came the Lady Transelina, with many Damsels of the Fayrey, great ioy there was made, and then king Huon sayd to Escleremond his Wife. Madame, it is time that you depart, for yonder I see comming toward vs my Daughter Clariet and Florence. When Escleremond heard that, she was right ioyfull, for the great desire that she had so see her Daughter: the Queene went forth nobly accompanied. Then king Huon and the other twoo kings with all their companies, with banners displayed, with great ioy and triumph, went to meet Florence and Clariet: ye may well thinke, that king Garyn had great ioy of the comming of his Sonne, and sawe such an assembly meet there together to receiue him, that he deuoutly thanked our Lord God. Thus these kinges and Princes went to meete these twoo
young persons richly accompanied, and great ioye had Clariet, when she saw the Quéene her mother before her, and she wept for inward ioy that she had, & when the Queen saw her daugh∣ter, she embraced and kissed her often times, and of a great sea∣son none of them could speake to other for ioy: then King Huon came & tooke his Daughter out of the Quéenes armes, and kis∣sed her more then twentie times. Then king Garyn came vn∣to Florence, and sayd. Déere Sonne, I haue much trespassed a∣gainst you, in that wrongfully I put you into my prison, and I complaine greatly to you of your Vncle the kinge of Nauarre, who hath wasted your Countrey. Sir, (quoth Florence) I re∣quire you to pardon mine Vncle, it is reason that I should bee content that peace be made betwéen you, and Sir, I desire you to giue mee this Damsell in mariage. Sonne, (quoth Garyn) be in suertie that you shall haue her and none other, for a more noble Lady cannot bee found in Tenne Realmes. Sir quoth Florence, I thanke you: and thus these Twoo companies ioy∣ned together, and the Kinge of Nauarre came to his Nephewe Florence, and embraced him & sayd. Faire Nephewe, of your returne I am right ioyfull. Sir, (quoth he) I am well pleased with the peace that is made betwéene my Father and you. Thus they road vntill they came to the Tents, and there a∣lighted, then king Huon called the other two kinges, and said. Sirs, how say you? will yée abide by mine aduise, and put in∣to my handes the discord that hath béene betweene you? they answeared, that they were content to doe as hee woulde haue them. Then kinge Huon sayde. Sirs, then my will is, that peace and accord be betweene you and all yours: and they libe∣rally agréed thereto, whereof kinge Huon was ioyfull. Then king Huon desired Florence to shew his aduenture, and how he was rescued by Sorbarre. Then Florence shewed al his aduen∣tures, and the other kinges were right ioyfull to heare it, and all other that heard it did greatly praise Sorbarre for his déede, and much honoured him, and made him great feasting & chéere, and caused him to be christened: then king Huon said to the two kinges. Sirs, I will that presently each of you doe pardon o∣ther of all ill will. Sir, (quoth they) wee are readie to doe it,
and so each of them embraced other, whereof king Huon hadde great ioy, and so had all other Lordes and Knightes that were there assembled. Kinge Garyn, (quoth Huon) incontinent I will, that your Son Florence haue my Daughter in mariage, and I giue them the Citie of Bourdeaux, Blames, and Geronnill, and all the appendants thereto belonging. When king Ga∣ryn heard the offer that king Huon had made to his Sonne Flo∣rence, he thanked him hartely, & so did all the other Lords, who allowed greatly that mariage. When kinge Garyn sawe the honour, loue, and courtesie that Kinge Huon did to Florence his Sonne, hee knéeled downe, and sayd. Sir, my Child and yours I commit into your handes, vse them at your pleasure: then by consent of both Fathers, they were wedded and spou∣sed together all in one day, the Feast & Solemnitie of this ma∣riage endured Eight daies, the king of Nauarre gaue vnto Flo∣rence his Realme of Nauarre to possesse and enioy after his de∣cease: Of the Feastes, Iusts, and Tourneys that was made on those Eight dayes, I make no mention thereof, for it were ouer-long to rehearse. Then king Huon gaue his Daughter Thirtie Somers char∣ged with gould and great riches, whereby the ioy encreased of all parts: then the Lordes and other people of Aragon came to king Huon, and all wéeping, they desired him to haue pitie and compassion of them, and that he might find some meanes, that they might haue some recompence for the great hurts an dam∣mages that they had receiued, by reason of the warre between these two kinges, whereby they were neere hand destroyed by the Nauarnes. When Queene Escleremond heard the people complaine, she embraced her Husband and saide. Sir, I de∣sire you (for the loue of your children) to haue pitie of these peo∣ple, who requireth for aide, for in you is all their trust. Ma∣dame, (quoth Huon) I shal incontinent shew what grace I will doe for the loue of you. Then king Huon commaunded all the people to kneele downe, and then he sayd. Sirs, all yée that be here assembled, to the entent that you shall not thinke, that the thing that I will doe should bee any witch-craft or illusion, but that it is by the will of Iesus Christ, the gift that king Oberon
gaue mee before hee dyed, the which was all the puissance and dignitie that hee had in all the Fayrey of the world: therefore knowe, that by the puissance and dignitie that our Lord God, made king Oberon my Predecessor to giue me, I will that this Realme of Aragon, whereas it hath had dammage by reason of the warre, so that the Realme is sore burnt and wasted: and I will that it be again in the same case, as it was before any war began, and that all Castles & houses burnt or beaten downe, be better thrée times then they were before, and I will that from henceforth euerie man serue God, and thanke him of this grace that he hath sent you, then he lifted vp his handes, and blessed all the people with the signe of the crosse: and assoone as he had done his blessing, euerie thing was as he had deuised through∣out al the Realme. Thus was the wil of Iesus Christ, at the instance and prayer of the noble kinge Huon. Chap. CLXIII. ¶ How King Huon and Queene Escleremond departed, and howe he gaue great rich guiftes vnto the two Kinges, and to all other Lordes, Ladies, and Damsels: and of the sorrowe that was be∣tweene the Mother and the Daughter, at their departing. WHen Kinge Huon had made his prayers to our Lord God, and that his re∣quest was graunted, hee thanked God: such Feasts, Iusts, and Tourneys as was made there during the Feast, was neuer séene nor heard of in any Cronicle heere before. Then king Huon made him readie to depart, and he gaue guifts before he departed to them that were there, and especially to Sorbarre, to whome hée recommended his Daughter Clariet, & desired him not to leaue her. Sir, (quoth Sorbarre) the great loue that I haue to you, constraineth me neuer to forsake her, nor them that shall come of her as long as life is in my body. When Quéen Escleremond
vnderstood the departing of her Lord Huon, and sawe that shee must leaue her Daughter, shee had great sorrowe at her heart, and so all wéeping shée came to her Daughter, and said. Right déere Daughter, you ought greatly to thanke our Lord God, in that hee hath cast you out of so many perils, and nowe to haue great honour, and to be exalted like a rich and puissant Ladie: therefore alwaies set your heart on God, and serue, feare, and loue him, be liberall to them that be poore, nor mocke no body, neither bee no Iangler against your Husband, nor hearken to none ill lyers, flye from Flatterers, loue your Husband, kéepe your selfe alwaies true, to the entent that none ill report bee made of you. Marke well this doctrine, for I cannot tell whe∣ther euer I shall sée you againe or not. When the faire Clari∣et heard her Mother, suddainly she began to wéepe, and sayd. Oh my right déere Lady and Mother, the departing of you and of the king my Father from me, ought sore to gréeue me, since we haue béene together so small a time, for your departing is to me so gréeuable, that it is great paine for me to beare it. Then the Mother & the Daughter clipped and kissed each other more then Twentie times, and oftener would haue done if king Hu∣on had not béene, for then hee tooke his Daughter Clariet in his armes, and kissed her often times tenderly wéeping, because he knew well that he should neuer sée her againe: then he lifted vp his hands, and gaue her and her Husband his blessing, & shew∣ed them many faire examples and doctrines. Then the noble Quéene Escleremond kneeled downe, & pray∣ed king Huon her husband, that he would counsaile and aduer∣tize them what they should doe. Madame, (quoth Huon) rise vp, for such pitie I haue of them & of you, that my heart neere hand faileth me, and I tarie here too long, for I must needs de∣part: come hether my deere Daughter and kisse me, and Son Florence, with you I leaue my Daughter, and keepe her well as longe as God will suffer her to bee with you. Then king Huon tooke leaue of the two kinges, who were right sorrowfull of his departing, and he desired them alwaies to be good Louers together, and so tooke his leaue, and sayd, I wish my selfe my Queen, and all my company, to be in my Pallaice at Momur:
he had no sooner spoken the words, but that he was there, and sudenly vanished from the twoo Kings, whereof they and all o∣ther were greatly abashed, so that they wist not what to say, & they had thought it had béen but a dreame, but by reason of the great guifts & riches that hée had left behind him among them. Then after all these thinges done, the kinge of Nauarre tooke leaue of king Garyn and departed, and his Nephewe Florence road with him foure Leagues, and then returned to Courtoys to Clariet his wife, and there they tarried two Moneths in great ioy and solace. Then after a certaine space, king Garyn (who was verie old and ancient) tooke a sicknesse, whereby he passed out of this world, for whose death, Florence his Sonne & Clari∣et wept many a salt teare. Then he was buried with great so∣lemnitie, and then by all the Lords and Peeres of the Realme, Florence was chosen and crowned King, and Clariet Quéene: great solemnty and ioy was made at their crownation. Thus with great ioy and gladnesse, Florence and Clariet were toge∣ther, so that at the last Clariet was great with child, whereof Florence and all the noble men and Commons of the Realme were ioyfull, and thanked our Lord God, and when the time came, the Quéene was brought to bed of a faire Daughter, whereof both Father and Mother were right ioyfull, the which ioy within a while after turned to sore wéeping and great hea∣uines, as yée shall heare hereafter. Chap. CLXIIII. ¶ How Queene Clariet was brought to bedde of a Daughter, at which deliuerance the Queene dyed▪ and how when the yong Damsell came to the age of Fifteene yeares, the King her Father would haue had her in marriage, wherewith all his Lords were sore troubled.
WHen Kinge Florence was ad∣uertised, that his Quéene was deliuered of a Daughter, hee thanked God, the Childe was borne to the christning into the chéefe Church, and was named Ide, the ioy of the comming of this Child, cost éerely to the Quéen her Mother, for by rea∣son of the paine that she endured, shee departed out of this life, and so dyed. The Child was brought to kinge Florence, and when he sawe her, he was ioyfull, and demanded how her mo∣ther did, and they thought that the matter could not be hidden nor kept secrette, they sayd. Sir, your Quéene is departed to God. When the king heard that, he fell downe in a swound, so that euerie man feared he had béene dead, and when he came to himselfe, hee sayd. Ah my right déere Loue, in an ill houre were you borne, for your sake I hadde forgotten all paine, and thought to haue liued in rest with you, me thinkes you be raui∣shed and stollen away from me. Ah false death, thou art har∣dy to take from me that thing which I loued best, the most fai∣rest, truest, and swéetest creature liuing. Then his Lordes came and comforted him, the cries, complaints, and wéepings rose through-out the Citie: all Ladies, Damsels, Burgesses, and Maidens, and all the Commons made great lamentati∣ons: that night the Queene was watched, and the next mor∣ning, with great cries and wéepings the Quéene was brought into the chiefe Church, her obsequie was done notably, and so layd in a rich Sepulture, the sorrowe that the kinge made was neuer none such séene. The king was visited by the Lords of his Realme, but they could not cause him to take any solace, but a lonely nowe & then to goe to see his deere Daughter the Ladie Ide, and euer when he saw her, his sorrow renewed, and shee was well nourished & brought vp: and when she came to the age of Fiftéene yéeres, she was beautifull, wise, and sage, for she was brought vp with Foure noble Ladies, and ordred as it appertained to a Kinges Child, and her Father King Florence loued her so well, that he
could neuer be satisfied with looking vppon her, often times he kissed her holding her in his armes, hee would neuer marie a∣gaine for the lone of her, so much grew and encreased this no∣ble Ide, that she came to the age of Fiftéene yeares complet, the fresh beauty and bountie that was in her, if I shoulde discribe it, it would be ouer-long to rehearse: but I dare well say, that in beautie as then she passed all other women of the world, for God and nature hadde employed all their studie to fourme her, there was neuer any man that sawe her but loued her, and so did her Father, so that on a day the king had his Lordes about him, and Sorbarre was amonge them, whome the kinge loued déerely, and the kinge séeing his Daughter Ide growe and en∣crease in all vertues, he sayd to his Lords. Sirs, it were good that there were some Wife found out for me, whom I will ma∣rie, if any such can be found, in all conditions like to her that I had before. When his Lordes heard him, they were ioyfull, in that the King would marrie againe: Alas, they knewe not the kinges inward intention, but shortly after the king knewe it, whereby much ill and mischiefe came afterward, and ma∣ny a man slaine, and many a Church burnt, as yée shall heare héereafter. Then the king wrote, and sent to all his Lords and knights of his Realme, to come to his Court at a day assigned: & when they were all come to the Pallaice, there they found the King, who humbly receiued them, and made them great feasting, and had them to diner with him. When the dinner was done, the king and all his Lords went into a Garden, whereas the king would kéepe his Counsaile, and when they were all there, and the king set in his seat, he sayd. Sirs, you know well I haue no more Children but a Daughter, who hath béene desired in marriage by diuers kinges and Princes, but I would not con∣sent to marrie her, nor I thought not to marie my selfe, for the loue of her Mother whome I so déerely loued, but nowe I am minded to marie and to take a Wife, so that shee bee semblable to her that is departed: and therefore I haue sent for you to shew you my will and pleasure. When his Lords heard him, they were ioyfull and sayd. Sir, knowe for troth, there is no
woman liuing in Christendome, but if you will haue her you shal, if she be neuer so faire or so hye of Lineage: and therefore Sir, thinke in your selfe, whether you will that we shall goe to get you a Wife. Sirs, (quoth the kinge) in this matter you shall not néed to take any paines, for the Wife that I will haue is not farre from hence, it lyeth in me to haue her if I list. Sir, (quoth the Lordes) will it please you to name her that shall be so happie. Sirs, (quoth the kinge) it is my Daughter Ide whom I will take to my Wife, for the great loue that I had to her mother. When the Lords heard that, they beheld each o∣ther, blessing themselues at the horrible and detestable wordes of the king, and looked on him maruailously. Then Sorbarre, (who was of the kinges priuie counsaile) began to speake, and sayd. Ah Sir, God forbid that such a shame should come to you, for it is worse then heathen to him that will polute his owne proper Daughter by himselfe ingendred, you shoulde not bee worthy to sitte in a royall Chaire, and you ought to bee the mirrour and example to other men how they should liue, will you then breake the Lawe that God hath giuen vs? put from you that crueltie, you shall find no man that will praise you, in so doing or thinking. When the king heard Sorbarre, hee be∣held him angerly and said. Sorbarre, (know for troth) but that I hold my selfe much bound vnto you, I would strike off your head, and there is no man that speaketh to the contrarie, but I shall put him to death. Then all the Lords together saide to the king. Sir, doe as you please, Sorbarre hath sayd as a noble man ought to doe, for if you doe otherwise, you are not worthy to beare a Crowne, and so held their peace, they durst speake no more for feare of him: and also because they thought surely, that the Diuell was with∣in him to motion any such matter. When the king heard the will of his Lordes, he sent for his Daughter hastely, who came with a smiling countenance, not knowing of the vnreasonable will of the king her Father, and when she came before him she knéeled downe, the king tooke her vp and set her betwéene his armes, and kissed her more then Twentie times. The Ladie knewe nothing of her Fathers intention, none otherwise but
that shee thought hee did it, but as a Father ought to doe with his Child: then the Lordes sayd softly one to another. Oh vn∣happie King, his thoughts bée farre vnlike to his Daughters, for if she were here alone, he would dishonour her although she be his owne Daughter. The King séeing his Daughter Ide so excellent faire, he sayd to himselfe, that without hee hadde his Daughter in marriage, he should die with rage, and the King beheld her, and made her to sit downe by him, and sayd. My déere Daughter, you are as an Orpheling on the Mothers side, wherefore I haue great pitie of you that you haue lost her, and you resemble so much your Mother, that I thinke when I sée you in the face, that I sée her before mee, and therefore I loue you the better, and for this cause it is my will to take you to my Wife, for I will haue none other in mariage. Chap. CLXV. ¶ Of the great sorrow that the Damsell Ide made, when she heard her Father, how he would haue her in mariage: and how by the means of a noble Lady and Sorbarre, she departed at midnight, and went at the aduenture that God would send her. WHen the Damsell heard her Father, her fresh red colour became pale and wanne, and she cast downe her lookes to the earth, & sayd. Ah my right déere Father, take héede what you say, for if you be heard of them that bee héere present, you shall bee greatly blamed. Then the Damsell would haue risen vp to haue gone from her Father, but the King tooke her by the hand and sayd. My Daughter, make no daunger nor refuse to fol∣low my will, for you slay me for the loue that I beare you: then all the Lords knéeled downe before the King, and held vp their handes, and desired the King for his owne wealth and honour, that he would haue pitie of himselfe and of his Daughter, and
that he would neuer thinke to doe such a déede, for if he did, hée should neuer be set by after. When the king heard his Lords, and how they reasoned with him to haue turned his mind, hee answeared as a man full of villany and yre, and saide, that in despight of them all, and whether they would or not, he would haue her to his Wife, and that if there were any so hardy as to speake to him to the contrarie, hee woulde cause them to die a shamefull death, and he sore rebuked them. When the Dam∣sell heard her Father to speake vnto the Lordes and Knightes, then she saw well the inordinate loue of her Father, and she be∣gan to wéepe, and sayd. Oh good God, I shall be shamed and lost for euer if he take me to his Wife, for both of vs cannot es∣cape without damnation: then shee thought within her selfe, that if she could in any wise escape, she would flye away so far off, that there should neuer any tidings be heard of her. Then the Kinge sent her into her Chamber with her May∣dens, who were sorrowfull and discomforted when they heard of that matter, for the King had commaunded them to kéepe her well, and to ordaine a rich bed for her, because the next day hée would marrie her. When the Damsell Ide was in her cham∣ber, she called to her an ancient Ladie, who had béene her Mi∣stresse, and then she auoided all other out of her Chamber, and made semblance to sléepe: and when she saw that al other were gone, she knéeled downe, and held vp both her hands before the Ladie, and all wéeping sayde. Ah my right déere Ladie and Mistresse, I come to you as a poore Orpheling without Father or Mother, my Mother is dead as you know well, but he that should bee my Father, would bee my Husband, the which is a thing that the earth ought not to beare, nor sustaine them that woulde liue in such manner: and therefore (déere Mistresse) counsaile and ayd this poore discomforted Orpheling, and help me, that I may bee out of the sight of him that ought to bee my Father, for I had rather goe into some farre Countrey, & there to liue in pouertie, then to end my dayes with him in doing of such a déede, and at the end to bee damned and lost. When the olde Ladie (who was right noble and sage) heard the pitiful complaint of the Damsell Ide, whome shee had nourished and
brought vp, she answeared and sayd. My right déere daugh∣ter, for the great loue that I beare you, I shall ayde and coun∣saile you, and bring you out of this doubt, as sometime did my Brother Peter of Aragon to the Ladie Clariet your Mother, hée rescued her out of the hands of the Sarazins, when she was in ieopardie of her life, for all your Father I shall not let to aide you. When the Damsell Ide heard the good will of the Ladie, how shee would ayd her, all wéeping shee kissed her, and sayd. Ah my right deere Mother, the goodnes that you doe to me God reward you for it, for it lyeth not in me: then the old Ladie ys∣sued out of her Chamber, and left the Ladie Ide verie pensiue, and went into Sorbarres Chamber, who was as then in ye Pal∣laice, for he was one of the kinges priuie Counsaile, and when he came to his Chamber, and found the Ladie there, he deman∣ded what aduenture had brought her thether, the Ladie drewe him apart, and shewed him the request and prayer of the Dam∣sell Ide, whereof Sorbarre (for the great pitie hée had of her) be∣gan to weepe, and auoided his Chamber, the better to speake with the Ladie at his ease, and they deuised together of diuers things, and at last they concluded, for the sauegard of the dam∣sels bodie, that this ancient Lady should beare to her the appa∣rell of a man, and that at the houre of midnight, she should ar∣ray her therewith, and then shew her and let her goe out of the Pallaice, and come to the stable, whereas she shall find me rea∣die, with the best horse that her Father hath, readie for her to leape vppon. When the ancient Ladie vnderstood Sorbarre, she was right ioyfull, and thought his counsaile good, and then she departed, and made readie all the apparell belonging to a man: then she came to the Damsell Ides Chamber, and shewed her the conclu∣sion that was taken betweene her and Sorbarre. When the Damsell heard that, she had great ioy at her heart, and she clip∣ped and kissed her: the Ladie was glad when she saw her som∣what comforted, and sayd. Faire Ladie, the Kinge your Fa∣ther hath ordained a bath for you: therefore goe thether and hath with other Damsels, to the intent that the Kinge doe not suspect any thinge, and when you haue bathed you a certaine
space, lette your bed be made readie, and when you are in your Chamber goe to your bed, and then commaund me and all the Damsels to goe and bath vs, & I shall kéepe them there so long a space, that they shall haue good list to sleepe, and I shall leaue heere by your bed-side all your mans apparell, and array you therein, and then guird this sword about you, and put on your spurres, and when you are out of the Pallaice, goe to the Sta∣bles, where you shall finde a horse readie for you. Then they went into the bathing Chamber, and shee in her smocke readie to goe into the bath, and all the other Damsels were ioyfull, when they saw her come thether, for they thought she had been gone to sléepe, because of the displeasure that shee hadde at her heart: then they sayd one to another, it seemeth that our Ladie is well appeased of her sorrow, me thinkes to morrow she shall be Ladie and Quéene, and she shall bee wife and Daughter to the King her Father, the which is a thing vnreasonable: then they came to her and bathed her, & feasted her as much as they might. When the Ladie Ide thought that it was time to depart, she sayd to her Mistresse and to the other Damsels, howe shee had bathed her ynough, and that she would go into her Chamber to sleepe, and bad all the other to go and bath them, and that there should no moe goe with her, but two of them to haue her to bed, and she sayd to her Mistresse, that she should goe and bring her with the Damsels, the which thing they did ioyfully: the dam∣sell departed and went into her Chamber, wrapped in a Man∣tle of scalet. When the two Damsels had brought her to bed, they tooke leaue of her and departed, and closed the dore after them, and then they went and bathed them with others: and when the Damsell Ide felt her selfe all dry, she rose and arrayed her in the mans apparell aswel as she could, and tooke the sword and guirt it about her, & put on her spurres, and then she went to a great low window on the Garden-side, and there she leapt out into the Garden as priuily as she could, and so went along by the wall side vntill she came to the Posterne, then shee went out towards the Stable, and when she came there, shee found a horse readie in Sorbarres hand, and at the pommell of the sad∣dle,
a bagge full of bread and flesh, & two bottels of good wine. Then the Damsell tooke the horse, and without any word spea∣king, shee leapt vp quickely: then Sorbarre all wéeping saide. My déere Daughter, God bee thy guide and bring thée to saue∣gard, goe thy way, and kéepe the way vpon thy left hand, and follow the Sea-side. Sir, (quoth she) for the goodnes you haue shewed me God reward you, into whose sauegard I commend you: thus departed this noble Ladie Ide, to eschew and flye from the ill and dishonorable will of her Father, and she entred into the Forrest kéeping no hye way, and so she road thrée daies along the wood, vntill she thought well that she was farre from her Countrey. Nowe let vs laue speaking of her, vntill wée haue occasion to returne to her againe: and lette vs speake of King Florence her Father. Chap. CLXVI. ¶ Howe King Florence was sorrowfull, when he was aduertised of his Daughters departing, who was apparelled like a man, and howe shee came into Almaine: and howe shee found certaine Theeues in a Forrest, and how shee came to Rome to the Empe∣rour like a Squier. YE haue heard here before in this Historie, howe King Florence of Aragon would haue his owne Daughter the Damsell Ide in mariage, against the will of al his Lords and people, after that he had spoken with her, and commanded the bath to be ordred for her, to the intent that the next day to haue her in mariage. The night approached, and after Supper the King went to his bed, and the next mor∣ning betimes, tidings was brought to the King, how the King of Nauarre was come to sée him, the King went to méete him, and made him great chéere, & so came together to the Pallaice, and then incontinent it was shewed the King, how his daugh∣ter
was fledde away, whereof the King was so sorrowfull and angrie, that no man durst speake a word to him, and hee went into his Daughters Chamber, and there he found the Ladies and Damsels that had the kéeping of her, the King would haue run vpon them, if the King of Nauarre had not béene, who let∣ted him and blamed him much, when hee knew the cause of her departing, and what the King would haue done: then came the Horse-kéeper to the King, and sayd, howe his good horse was stollen away the same night. Then the King as a man despe∣rate, commaunded on all sides men to ride after her, and who∣soeuer could bringe his Daughter againe, or else sure tidinges of her, he promised to giue him a Thousand Florents of gold. There were many, that for loue of that monney road foorth, to the number of thrée hundred, they road diuers wayes, but there was none of them that could bring any tidinges of her, and so returned to the King, who was sorowfull when he could heare nothing of her. Great lamentations there was made in the Citie, for the going away of the Damsell, because of the feare that she had of her Father, and road vpon the good horse, in the day time shee would rest her in the woods, and in the night shee would ride foorth. Thus shee paed all the Pruinces of Aragon, and she pas∣sed into Lombardy, of her iourneys and aduentures I will make no mention, because she found nothing in the way to let her, she road so long, that shee approached to the Countrey of Almaine, and when she came there her monney fayled her, whereby she was constrained to sell her horse for money to liue withall, and so went a foote, and at the last came to the Citie of Basile, and there shee tarried a season, and there spent her monney, so long shee lay there, that shee heard the Emperour of Roome sent for men all about, to ayd and succour him against the King of Ca∣stile, who made him great warre. When she said that many noble men were going to Roome, to succour the Emperour, she was ioyfull, and sayd to her Host, that if she had horse and ar∣mour, shee would goe with other into the warres, and thought within her sele, that she would gladly be acquainted with the Emperour of Roome, who was named Othon, and she thought
if she might she would take counsaile of him, & she did so much, that she fell in acquaintance with some of the Almaines, so that they were glad to see her, she séemed to them to be so faire and a young Squier, then an Almaine that was there sayd vnto her. Freend, come hether to me, and shew me what thou art? Sir, (quoth she) I am to him that my seruice may please, for I de∣sire nothing but to serue some noble man, but of late I was in Aragon, and there I serued a Lord that is dead, wherefore I am come hether for the displeasure that I haue of his death, and I can well serue a Gentleman, and kéepe his horse, and if néed be to driue his Sompter-horse, and if I come in Battaile or in Skirmish with my Maister, I thinke hee shall haue a worse then I am in his company. The Almaine hearing her so to speake, sayd: Faire Sonne, that thou sayst procéedeth of a good courage, therefore good must come to thée, yet I pray thée shew mee thy name? Sir, (quoth shee) I am called Ide. Brother, (quoth the Almaine) I entertain thée into my seruice, take héed of my horse. Sir, (quoth she) I am ready to doe you the best ser∣uice that I can, so the Almaine had her to his Lodging. Thus she then serued, that was woont to be serued, for shee feared if it should be perceiued that she were a woman, it wold be to her trouble, therefore she kept her selfe close and secret, and she continued thrée dayes with her Maister, after the other company were gone towardes Roome, but her Master might not depart so soone as the other did, for his businesse was not readie: & then thrée dayes after they departed to go to Roome, and shee was armed after the custome of the Countrey, she ser∣ued her Maister so well, that hee praysed her. So long they road, that they came and approached neere to the Countrey of Rome, so that on a day they entred into a great darke Forrest, wherein lay in ambushment about Seauen-score Spaniards, lying there to abide their aduenture, they lay in a darke Val∣ley: and when they saw the Almaines, they dispised them to the death and ranne vppon them. Then Ide (who road before her Master) couched her Speare, and strake a Spaniard there∣with cleane through the bodie, and with the drawing out of her Speare, the Spaniard fell downe dead, of the which course her
maister praised her, then the Spaniards ran in among the Al∣maines, who right valiantly defended themselues, but their de∣fence could not auaile them, for at the end they were all slaine, so that none escaped aliue, but alonely Ide, who did beare her selfe so valiantly, that shee slewe Foure of the Spaniards, but when she saw that her maister and all his companie wer slain, with her sword in her hand all bloudie, she fled away, and road out of the way, and tooke a little path, the which brought her to a Rocke, and there she alighted, and taried in the wood all that night vntill the next morning, she had so great hunger & thirst, that she was néere hand famished, for she had ridden all the day without meat or drinke, and in the morning she looked al about her, and sawe in an arbour about Thirtie Théeues, sitting at a Table eating and drinking at their pleasure: and when the Damsell saw them, for the great rage of hunger that she suffe∣red, constrained her in such wise that she forgat all feare & went vnto them. When the Théeues saw her, one of them sayd to his fellowes, I see yonder comming a Squier mounted vpon a good horse, the which shalbe ours: and when Ide approached to them, shee humbly saluted the companie and sayd. Sirs, if it may please you to let me eate and drinke with you, I will pay for my shotte. Fréende, (quoth one of them) is there any man that hath beene your guide in this Forrest? Sirs, (quoth Ide) God hath beene my conduct and none other: then one of the Theeues stept forth, and tooke her horse by the bridle, and said to his companie. Sirs, lay on, strike him downe, he shall ne∣uer eate nor drinke more, his horse shall not escape me. When the Damsell saw that she was taken, she was in great feare, & shee durst make no countenance to defend her selfe, there were so many Theeues vpon her, and she thought to humble her selfe which should bee more profit, and sayd. Sirs, why make you that hast to slay mee? little shall yee winne thereby nor looze, hold heere my sword, I yeild my selfe into your handes, and I pray you (in the honour of Iesus Christ) to giue me some meat and drinke, for I am so hungrie, that I am almost famished. Then the master Theefe sayd: Squier, haue no feare to be stri∣ken, thou shalt haue no more hurt then my selfe, but thou shalt
haue all that thou lackest, goe thy way and sit downe, and eat and drinke at thy pleasure. Sir, (quoth Ide) I thanke you. Then the Damsell sate downe with them, and did eat & drinke at their pleasure: and when they had all eaten and were risen vp, the Théeues beganne to striue among themselues, saying to their chiefe maister, howe hee had done ill that he would not suffer them to slay the Squier: then another answeared, & said. how there should be no hurt done vnto him, because hee was so faire a young man and so courteous, and sayde, that it should be great dammage to slay him, and that it were better to kéepe him still with them, and to learne him to steale and to murder men, and if he will not so doe, then it were good reason to slay him. When Ide vnderstood the Théeues, she was in great feare, & called vpon our Lord God, praying him humbly in her great néede to ayd and succour her: then the chiefe maister demaun∣ded what was her name, then shee answeared in great feare to bee slaine, and said. Sir, my name is Ide, and I am of the Realme of Faunce, and we were in company when we depar∣ted out of our Countrey about fortie Gentlemen, we were go∣ing to haue serued the Emperour of Rome, who hath now war with the King of Spaine, and we found in our way about sea∣uen score Spaniards in ambushment, lying in a Valley, so they set vppon vs, and slewe all my company, none escaped but my selfe: and therefore Sirs, I pray you let mee haue againe my horse and my sword, and shew mee the way to Rome, it would be a great almes deede to shew me that courtesie. Nay, (quoth the maister Théefe) that we will not doe, but thou shalt tarrie with vs, and learne to be a Thiefe and a Murderer, and if thou wilt not thus doe, with my Sword I shall strike off thy head. Sirs, (quoth Ide) you would haue me to do a thing that I was neuer accustomed to doe, nor none of my Lineage, nor I haue no intention to doe any such workes, therefore I pray you lette me haue my horse and my sword, then you doe me great courte∣sie, and when I am mounted vpon my horse, if one of you will defie me, and if I defend not my selfe from him, then strike off my head. I haue bought my meate and drinke verie déere, if I
should looze my horse: then the maister Théefe sayd. Because I sée that thou art so hardy, I will wrastle with thee, vpon this couenant, that if thou cast me, thou shalt be one of our compa∣nie, and if thou be cast to the earth, then I will haue thy horse and thy Sword, and spoyle thee of all thy cloathes. Then Ide sayd: I am content thus to do, so that you withdraw your men from me, and set my horse by me, and my sword tyed to my sad∣dle bowe, for it is a common prouerbe, that a man is taken for a Foole that putteth his trust in a Theefe. When the Theues heard that, they could not forbare laughing, and they had great desire to see this wrastling betwixt them, then they withdrew backe, and set his horse there by him: then the noble Damsell Ide quickly tooke the Théefe, who thought to haue borne her to the earth, but shee drew him so sore to her, that he could scarce haue any breath, and therewith shee cast him so rudely to the earth against a stone that he was therewith in a swound, and with the fall his teeth burst in his mouth. When Ide saw the Théefe in that danger, she went quickely to her horse and mounted vp: then she drew out her sword▪ and sayd. Ah ye vilde Théeues, your treason shall not auaile you, for ye haue all thought violence and treason against mee, goe & helpe your maister who lyeth yonder, I thinke he shall euer re∣member this wrasting between vs, and I haue now no doubt of you all, though you were a Hundred more, for if I can I shall make you all bee hanged and strangled, then the quickest and the lightest Théefe amonge them stept foorth & tooke him by the bridle of his horse: and when shee sawe that, shee lifted vp her Sword, and strake the Théefe vpon the hand, so that the hand flew from his bodie and hanged still vppon her bridle, then hee ranne away, thinking to die with the paine of his hande: and then she dasht in among the Théeues, for they had no weapons about them to defend themselues withall, but they were there to their folly, nor they had no feare of that which fell, nor they beléeued not that such a young Squier should haue hadde such hardnes and force: then shee fought fiercely among them, and cut off armes and shoulders, and claue some to the braines, she did so much, that she slew fiue of the Théeues before she depr∣ted,
and when she saw time to depart, she spurred her horse, for by that time the residue of the Théeues had gotten weapons, and they followed her to haue slaine her or her horse, then shée departed with the spurres, her horse was good, therefore anon she was farre from them, then the Théeues sawe they lost but their labours to follow any further: therefore they let her goe. When Ide saw that she was escaped their handes, she humbly thanked our Lord God, desiring him to ayd and conduct her in∣to some sauegard, and she road so long, that she yssued out of the great Forrest: Of her iourneys and lodging I will make no mention, but she sped so in her iourney, that shee arriued at the noble Citie of Roome, and she tooke vp her lodging néere to the Pallaice, whereas the Emperor was deuising with his Lordes of the Feats of warre: then Ide went thether, & knéeled downe and saluted the Emperour and all his Lords. When the Em∣perour and the Romanes that were there sawe the goodly yong man, who so humbly saluted them, they regarded him much, for the beautie that they sawe in him: then the Emperour sayd vnto him. Faire Sonne, shewe mee what you bee, and from whence you come, that thus commeth hether to mee? Sir, (quoth Ide) I am a Squier, that came nowe straight from Al∣maine, whereas I haue serued a certaine time, and little there I haue wonne, whereof I am sorrie, and but lately I was in place where diuers Spaniards and other were in companie, & they had great desire to make warre, and they went to the king of Spaine your enemie, but before they had gone farre, they that were in my company met with them, and there we fought together and slew the most part of them, and there I was a lit∣tle hurt: and now Sir, I am come to you to serue your grace, if my small seruice may please you, and in the best wise that I can, I shall serue you truely.
Chap. CLXVII. ¶ Howe the Damsell Ide was entertained with the Emperour of Roome, and how the Lady Oliue his Daughter was enamoured of Ide, weening shee had beene a man: and howe the Kinge of Spaine came before the Citie of Roome: and howe the noble Damsell Ide tooke the King of Spaine in battaile, and discom∣fited him. WHen the Emperor heard Ide speake, he beheld her well, and sawe how shée was bigge and great, and thought that in all his life he neuer saw so faire a young man, and as the Emperour was talking with Ide, there came to them Oliue the Emperours Daughter. Then all the Lordes rose vp at her comming, and she sate downe by her Fa∣ther, and greatly beheld the young Squier, and much she prai∣sed him in her courage, because of the maruailous great beauty that was in her, wéening that shee had béene a man. This O∣liue was so faire, so swéete, and so méeke, that (for her bountie and humilitie) she was beloued of euerie man: then the Empe∣rour demaunded of Ide what her name was, and from whence she came? Sir, (quoth she) my name is Ide, and I was borne at Terrascon, and I am kinne to Duke Naymes of Bauier, and to Aymerie of Narbon, and to Gillerme the Scot: but by the kins∣men of Ganelon, I was chased and banished out of my Coun∣trey, & since I haue endured much paine and pouertie. Then the Emperour sayd: Fréend, thou art of a good kindred, I en∣tertaine thée into my Court, for the bountie that I thinke to be in thée, and also for thy good Lineage. Sir, (quoth Ide) God giue me grace that I may doe you such seruice, that it may bee to your pleasure. Daughter Oliue, (quoth the Emperour) for the loue of you, I haue entertained this Squier to serue you. Father, (quoth Oliue) I thanke you, for it séemeth that hee is
come of a good Stocke, and I had no Seruant a great season that better contented me: then the Emperour sayd vnto Ide. My Freend, serue me well, behold héere my Daughter whom I loue entirely, and to whom I deliuer you to serue her, I haue no moe Children but shee, and therefore serue her truely, as a man ought to doe that is come of such a Lineage as you are, if you serue her well and truely, you had neuer in all your life so good aduenture. Sir, (quoth Ide) I shall doe so much, that by the grace of God, you and shee shall bée well content, and Sir, there is nothing lightly but I can doe it, to serue a noble man, and in the warre I shall defend my selfe I trust aswell as ano∣ther, and also I can serue at a Table before a King or Quéene. Fréend, (quoth the Emperour) if you can doe thus as you say, you are welcome hether, and you shall fare the better, and I am ioyfull of your comming to serue me, you shall neuer haue néede to goe out of my seruice. When Ide heard the Emperour, shee humbly thanked him: and thus was Ide entertained with the Emperor, whereas she did so much by her good seruice, that the Emperor & his daugh∣ter, and all they of the Court, loued and praised her, and the Damsell Oliue often times gladly regarded Ide, and began in her heart sore to loue her, and Ide (who perceiued her) prayed our Lord God, that he would so deale, that shée bee not accused neither of man nor woman. Shée gaue almes often times to poore men, and she visited gladly the holy Church, she demea∣ned her selfe in such wise, that of euerie man she was beloued & praised: often times shee prayed to God for King Florence her Father, although she was chased and fled out of her Countrey by his occasion and cause, yet shee alwaies prayed to God that she might be agréed with him. Thus this Damsell Ide was in this danger, seruing ye Em∣perour and his Daughter Oliue the space of two Moneths, and on a day she was in the Pallaice with the Emperour, and the∣ther came in great hast a Messenger, and came and saluted the Emperour, and sayd. Sir, knowe for troth, that the Kinge of Spaine with great puissance is entred into your Empire of Rome, and wasteth all before him with fire and sword, & many
a Romane he hath slaine, and he hath sworne by his Law, that before a moneth bee passed, hee will bee within your Cittie of Rome with all his puissance, and hee sayth, that hee will haue his pleasure of your Daughter, and to make you to die a sham∣ful death, because you haue refused to giue him your Daughter in mariage. Sir, it had béen better for you that he had maried your Daughter, then so many men should haue béene slaine, & so many Townes burnt and destroyed, and Castles beaten downe. Sir, goe quickely against him, and defend your Coū∣trey, or else you shall sée him shortly pitch vp his Tents & Pa∣uillions before this City. When the Emperour heard ye mes∣senger, he studied a great season, and looked vpon Ide, and said. Fréend, counsaile mee, for I thought full little, that these men of warre would haue come vppon me, and nowe they wast and destroy my Land. Sir, (quoth Ide) trouble not your selfe for it, comfort your selfe, and reioice your Lordes and Seruants, and lette mee haue men to fight with them, and I will looke vppon them before they come any néerer, and by the grace of God, I shall cause them to buy déerely the destruction that they haue made in your Countrey, if God saue my life, & my sword hold. When the Emperour heard the valiant courage of Ide, he prai∣sed her much in his heart, and sayd. Fréend, your reason plea∣seth mee well, and therefore I shall doe you that honour, as to make you a Knight, whereby your Prowesse and hardinesse shall increase. Sir, (quoth Ide) of the honour that you will doe to me, I am right ioyfull, and I thanke you thereof: then the Emperor came vnto Ide, and guirt about him a good sword and a rich, it was so good, that there was none like it in good∣nes, neither sharper nor harder, and then the Emperour gaue her the necke-stroake of Knighthood, and sayd. Ide, remember this order the which you haue receiued this day, and I pray God that it may be to the increase of your honour, and eue be∣ware that your thoughts be not light nor wauering, but rather sage, discréet, and temperate, and bee hardy in Battaile, and cast away from you all feare, and when you haue wonne any goods or riches, kéepe them not locked in your Coffers, but di∣stribute them to poore Knightes, the which shall increase and
exalt your honour, and alwaies loue the holy Church, if you do thus, you cannot faile to come to great honour, and euer shew your vertue against your enemies. Sir, (quoth Ide) by the grace of God I shall so doe, and there is no Spaniard but that shall wish himselfe to be on the other side of the Sea: then eue∣rie man arrayed them in the Pallaice and in the Cittie, & then Trumpets, Drummes, and Hornes beganne to sound in the Citie, so that all the Chiualrie and Communaltie of the Citie were ready armed: then they came all before the Pallaice, and presented themselues to the Emperor, who did command them that day to follow and obey the commaundement of Ide, whom he committed that day to doe and be as chéefe Captaine, & said. Sirs, looke that you doe as much for him as you would doe for me, and yée know well, that I am old and féeble, and can beare armour no longer, nor I am not able to ride as I might haue done before this time: wherefore I desire you, and also com∣maund you all on paine of your liues, to doe euerie thing as he commaundeth in stead of mee, aswell as though I did com∣maund you in mine owne person, for hee that doth the contra∣rie, he shall lose his head without any other redemption. Then they all said they would so doe since it was his pleasure. Then the noble Emperor caused Ide to be richly armed, and then deliuered him his owne horse, who was so good that his like could not be found in any Countrey, then Ide mounted vp quickly with helmet, shéeld, and a good Speare: and Ide tooke leaue of the Emperor, and of the Ladie Oliue, & so road through the Citie of Roome with all his Hoast, & when they were with∣out the Citie, Ide ordained Thrée Battailes, the two first bat∣tailes were ledde by twoo great Lordes, and the Third Ide did guide: and thus with banners displayed, they aduaunced foorth towards their enemies. The Spaniards thought sure∣ly that all had been theirs, because they saw of all the way that they had come, no manner of defence made against them, but it is an old saying, yt many things remaineth of foolish thoughts as it did with the Spaniards, for they thought surely that the Citie of Rome was wonne, but if God ayde and succour the Damsell Ide and her Chiualrie, she should take from them ere
it were night, their hope to haue any Victory. She road by her Battailes and encouraged her men, and mooued them to doe valiantly, and thus they approached towards their enemies. Great ioy and noise there was when the Battailes encountred together, the shot flew so thicke on both parts, that it séemed to be snow and hayle. Ide encountred with a Knight Nephew to the King of Spaine, hee receiued such a stroake, that for all his armour, Ides Speare went cleane through his bodie, so that ye Knight fell to the earth with his féet vpward, and so dyed mise∣rably among the horse féete: then Ide sayd, of God be thou cur∣sed, in an ill houre thou camst hether to receiue such an offe∣ring, I challenge from you all the Empire of Rome, then shée sayd to her selfe. Good Lord God, I require thée humbly this day to aid and succour me a poore fugitiue: therewith she spur∣red her horse, and with the same speare she slew another great Baron of Spaine, and so slew with the same Speare diuers o∣ther, & when the Speare was broken, she drew out her sword, the which the Emperour had giuen her: then she came to a no∣table Duke of Spaine Vncle to the King, to whome shee gaue such a stroake with her good sword, that shee claue his head to the téeth, and so he fell downe dead, then she dasht into the thic∣kest presse, and euer did choose out the greatest personages, and slew many of them, for she thought the more that were slaine of the great men, the more should her enemies bee afrayd: there∣fore she chose out such one after another. And also the Romans fought valiantly, so that by the hye Prowesse of Ide, and of the good Chiualrie of the Romanes that were with her, they made the Spaniards abashed, and caused them to flye away, and had neuer returned againe if the Duke of Argon, with thrée Thou∣sand Knightes in his companie had not béene, who made them that fled to returne againe. Then there began againe a fierce Battaile, and many a man slaine, the Romanes did valiant∣ly, by the aide and comfort of Ide their Captaine, she road into the thickest of the presse, and bare downe the Spaniards on all sides, that it was pittie to sée, great was the noise, pitiously cry∣ed out the hurt men lying among the horse féete, which were beaten downe to the earth, then the King of Spaine came into
the Battaile with his sword in his hand, and encountred with a great Lord of Rome which was Coozen to the Emperour, the King gaue him such a stroake vppon the helmet, that hee claue his head into the braines, and then the King slew another: then Ide (who saw that) was sorrowfull, and sayd. I ought little to be praised, without I reuenge the death of these two Lordes slaine by the King of Spaine: then shee road to the Kinge, and gaue him such a stroake vppon the helmet, that all the circles with stones and pearles flew downe to the earth, and stroake a∣way part of his coife, haire, and skinne, and if the King hadde not turned his head, it had béen clouen to the téeth, & the sword glaunced and lighted vpon his horse necke, and strake it cleane asunder, and so the horse fell downe dead and the King to the earth, whereof the Spaniards were sore abashed, thinking their King had béen slaine, so they fled away, and left him there lying on the earth in a traunce, in such sort, that hee could nei∣ther sée, heare, nor speake one word: then the Damsell Ide tooke him, and deliuered him to two noble Lordes of the Emperours Court, and when he reuiued, he was made to sweare and pro∣mise to be a true Prisoner. Those two Lordes went with the King of Spaine into the Citie of Rome, and presented him vn∣to the Emperour from Ide, whereof the Emperour thanked God that hee had sent Ide thether to serue him: then the King was sette in a strong Tower, and Ide was without still doing maruailes in armes, so that euerie man was abashed thereof, & the Spaniards made her way. Finally, by the hye Prowesse of the Damsell Ide, the Kinge of Spaine was taken and all his men discomfited, happie was hee that might escape to saue his life, the chase endured long, wherein many were slaine and ta∣ken. Then Ide and her companie returned to their Tents and Pauillions, and there they found great riches, the which was brought out of Spaine, and was giuen and distributed to them that had deserued it. Great ioy was made in the noble Citie of Rome, for the Battaile was well séene ouer the wals, and es∣pecially the Ladie Oliue, had well regarded the hye prowesse of Ide, whereby she loued her so in her heart, that she smiled with ioy, and sayd to her selfe. To yonder young Knight I doe giue
my loue, the which I neuer granted before to any man liuing, but it is good right and reason that I grant my loue to Ide, such like wordes Oliue sayd to her selfe. Chap. CLXVIII. ¶ How the Emperour of Roome highly receiued the noble Dam∣sell Ide, and of the honour that was made vnto her, and how the Emperor made her Constable of his Empire: And how the king of Spaine was deliuered out of prison, and made homage vnto the Emperour. AFter that the Battaile was done and finished, and the bootie distributed, Ide with great triumph accompanyed with Lordes and Knightes entred into the Citie of Roome, and the Emperour was infourmed of the comming of Ide, and of her valiant déedes, by whom the Victorie was obtained, & how that none could endure against her, whereof the Emperour had such ioy at his heart, that hee wist not what to doe, and hee thanked our Lord God, that the matter went so to his honour and glorie, therewith Ide came to the Pallaice, whereas she was receiued with great ioy with all the Colledges of the Citie, and when the Emperour sawe her, he arose and embraced her, and sayd. My true Fréend Ide, of your comming I am right ioyfull, for this day you haue done such honour to our Empire, that you ought to bée honoured for euer, and because you haue done vs such seruice, wee will that you shall bee the mirrour for all other Knightes, to encourage them to doe well: wee therefore make you our first Chamber∣laine, and high Constable of all our Romane Empire, and all my Landes and Signiories I abandon, to be at your comman∣dement in all things that you thinke reasonable to be done, for I will and commaund that all my Lordes doe obey you. Sir, (quoth Ide) of this honour I thanke you, God giue mee grace
that I may alwaies perseuer, to doe that thing which shalbe to you agreeable, and profitable to your Countreys and Signio∣ries. Then the Emperour sent for the King of Spaine out of prison, and when hee was come, hee knéeled downe and sayd. Sir, I require you to haue pitie of me: the Emperour answe∣red ercely, and sayd. King of Spaine, for what cause are you come out of your Countrey of Spaine, and thus to destroy and wast mine Empire? you haue slaine many of my Lordes and Knightes, who neuer did you any displeasure, and besides that you haue burnt many of my Townes, and beaten downe my Castles, whereof I am sorrie, seeing that I nor none of mine did you neuer any displeasure: and because that all euill ought to bee punished, and all good déedes rewarded, before euer I drinke any wine, I shall cause your head to be striken off, for a∣ny mans speaking to the contrarie, I shall not fayle to doe it. When the King heard that, he was in great feare, and humbly prayed him to haue pitie him, and sayd, how he was readie to make amends for all his trespasses, and to repaire again all the ill damages done by him, or caused to be done within the Em∣pire, and therewith to doe homage and feaultie vnto him, and to hould the Realme of Spaine of him: promising also, if any warre were made against the Emperour, hee would come and succour him with twentie Thousand men at his owne proper costes and charges, and to bee with him against all men that would trouble him: then the Emperor sayd. King of Spaine, know for troth, that for all your promise and words, I will doe but little for it, for you shall not escape from me: then the dam∣sell Ide stept foorth, and sayd to the Emperour. Sir, I haue of∣ten times heard say, that he that humbleth himselfe and cryeth for mercie, then reason requireth that hee should haue mercie graunted him: and therefore Sir, I require you to receiue this ing to your grace, and pardon his trespasse, séing the offers that he hath offered to do, yt he will become your Liege-man, & hold his Land of you, and amend the dammages that you haue suffered: he that reason offereth, ought to haue haue reason, and you ought to thanke God, since such a man as hee is, putteth himselfe into your handes. When the Emperour vnderstoode
Ide, he sayd. Fréend Ide, your wit and courtesie is to bee al∣lowed▪ and because I knowe that the counsaile that you giue mee is reasonable, I will doe as you will haue mee, take you him, and by you hee shall bee deliuered. Sir, (quoth Ide) I thanke you. When the Kinge of Spaine sawe that hee should haue grace, and that with amends making he should be deliue∣red, he thanked God, and did homage to the Emperour, and de∣liuered sufficient pledges to make restitution as he had promi∣sed: then the Emperour gaue him a safe conduct vntill he came into his owne Countrey, and all the other Prisoners were de∣liuered, such as were taken in the Battaile by the Romanes, then the King of Spaine was ioyfull, and often times thanked the Damsell Ide, by whose meanes this bountie and courtesie was shewed him. Then hee tooke his leaue of the Emperour & of Ide, and of all other Lords and Knights that were there pre∣sent, and so hee returned into his Countrey of Spaine, where∣as he was receiued with sore wéepings, for the great losse that he had receiued. Now we shall leaue speaking of him, and re∣turne to our matter. Chap. CLXIX. ¶ How the Emperour gaue his Daughter Oliue in mariage to the Damsell Ide, knowing none other but that she had been a man, and how shee was appeached by a Varlet, that heard their deui∣ses whiles they were in bedde together, whereby the Emperour would haue burnt the Damsell Ide. AFter that the King of Spaine was departed from Roome, the Emperour ho∣nored and praised much Ide for the good seruice that shee had done, who euer better and better perseuered in good seruice doing, for she did so much by her wit, that all discords and debates that were in the Empire betwéene Lordes or Neighbors, she set them in peace
and accord, wherefore the Emperour loued her in such wise, that without her he did nothing, and the Emperours Daugh∣ter Oliue loued her in such wise, that she could not liue one day without the sight of her, she was so taken with loue, thinking that she neuer sawe so goodly a young man. And so on a day, the Emperour assembled his Lords and his priuie Counsaile, to whome he shewed, and sayd, that he had but one Daughter, the which as then was of lawfull age, wherefore he would that she should be married, to the intent that she might haue heires to enioy his Lands after his decease, and sayd. Sirs, I thinke if all the world should be searched, there could not bee found a man so worthy to haue my Daughter Oliue in mariage, as our welbeloued Constable the valiant Ide, by whome so noble ser∣uice hath béene done vnto vs and to our whole Empire, for I would before I die that she should be married, and I thinke I cannot better bestowe her, for in all the world there is not a more valiaunt Knight then Ide is, nor that is more worthy to gouerne an Empire or a great Realme. When the Lords vn∣derstood the Emperour, they all allowed his mind, and counsai∣led him to doe the same: then the good Emperour called to him Ide, and sayd. My déere Fréend, for the great seruice that you haue done, I will reward you as by reason I am bound to doe, and I cannot giue you a more richer thing nor that I loue bet∣ter, then Oliue my déere Daughter, whome I will giue you in mariage, and I will that you take her to your wife, to the in∣tent that after my dayes you may gouerne mine Empire, for now I féele my selfe aged and féeble, wherefore I shall be con∣tent, that from hencefoorth you haue the gouerning thereof, and now I deliuer to you my Land in kéeping, to gouerne it as your owne. Ah Sir, (quoth Ide) what is that you say? you know well, that I am but a poore Gentleman, banished out of my Countrey, and I am woorth nothing, great dammage it should bee to so noble a Damsell, to be assigned to such a poore man as I am. Sir, I crie you mercie, humbly requiring you to take aduice, that your Daughter (who is so faire) may be married to some hye Prince & puissant, to the intent that if you should haue any busnesse, that he might be of power to ayd and succor
you, for I am poore, and ought alwaies to trauaile and to take paines, to get honour for mee, and to increase my Lineage. What, (quoth the Emperour) are you so hardy as to refuse my Daughter, by whome great wealth and goodnesse may come to you? Sir, (quoth Ide) since it is so, that it pleaseth you to shew me this honour, I will not refuse it, but Sir, I say it to this in∣tent, that you should take good aduise therein, and séeing you are content that I shall thus doe, and that it is your pleasure, I am content, and I humbly thanke your grace of the honour that you beare me. Then the Emperour sent for his Daughter, who came vnto him with a glad heart, for shée had béene aduertised of the mat∣ter why her Father sent for her, and then the Emperour sayd. Daughter, you must promise mée to doe as I shall shewe you. Déere Father, (quoth she) it is not in me, nor I will not refuse any thinge that is your pleasure. Daughter, (quoth the Em∣perour) you doe well so to answeare mée, and because I haue no more but you, that ought to haue my Realme after me, ther∣fore I will that you take a Husband to the intent that your Landes and Signiories may bee defended by him, and there∣fore, I will that you take to your Husband our Captaine the valiant Ide, whome I loue entirely, this is my pleasure and a∣gréement of all my Lordes, if it be your pleasure to haue him, he shall be King and you Quéen after my decease. Sir, (quoth the Ladie) I am readie to fulfil your pleasure and to obey your commaundements, and I thanke God of this faire aduenture that is fallen to mee this day, for I shall haue him that I loue best, I haue not nowe lost my time, when I shall haue at my will him whome I loue best in all the world▪then shee knéeled downe before her Father, and thanked him of his guilt: and then she rose and kissed her Father, and sayd. Right déere Fa∣ther, I require you to hasten that this may bee done, let vs goe to the Church to be wedded, for me thinkes we ought so to doe. When the Lordes heard the Ladie, they laughed at her hast: and then the Emperour sayd. Daughter, come foorth and fi∣ance your Husband, and you Ide approach néere, and nowe af∣ter my death I giue you all mine Empire, and I giue you my
déere daughter, in recompence of the good seruice that you haue done me. When Ide vnderstood the Emperour, all her bloud changed, and she wist not what to doe, all her bodie trembled for feare, and she called vppon our Lord God right pitiously to her selfe, and prayed him to haue pitie of her, and to counsaile her what was best for her to doe, for shée saw that perforce the Emperour would marrie her to his Daughter, and sayd. Ah my Father Florence, by you & by your disordinate rage, I am nowe brought to this case, when you made mée to depart, be∣cause you would haue had me to your wife, but before I would haue consented thereto, I had rather to haue béen burnt: there∣fore I fled away to eschewe that shame, whereby I haue béene since in many perils, from the which by the will of God I haue escaped, whereof I ought to thanke him, & I thought to kéepe my selfe within Roome secret, and that no man shoulde knowe that I am a woman: but I shall be accused by the Emperours Daughter, whose loue is so much sette on mée, that I haue no power to escape, without I steale away priuily from them all: and if I shew them what I am, I may then haue some villany and bee accused, and sent vnto the Kinge my Father, or else to send him word where I am, and then in great hast he will send for me, or else if I will escape, I must flye away ouer the Sea, howbeit, I speake but like a Foole, séeing this fortune is fallen vnto me, to haue the Emperors Daughter in mariage and his Empire, I will wed her, and doe as God will giue me grace to doe. All this the Damsell Ide spake to her selfe. Then shée sayd to the Emperour: Sir, since it is your plea∣sure to giue me your Daughter in mariage, I am ready to take her. Then they were ledde to the Minster-church, and there they were fianced, whereof great ioy was made in Roome, then the day of marriage came, and the faire Oliue was ledde to the Church betwéene two Kinges, and Ide went afore verie sadly, and so came to the Church, & there they were wedded. Then great was the triumph and ioy in the Citie of Roome, many a rich garment of gould and silke was worne that day, and euery man ran to sée the new Brides: then they went to the Pallaice and so to dinner. Of the Feasts, sports, and rich meates that
were there that day, if I should shew it, the time would bee o∣uer-long to rehearse it, but since Roome was first founded, it was not knowne that there had béen such a Feast as this wed∣ding, for no bodie thought but that Ide had béen a man: and af∣ter Supper, when it was time to goe to rest, the Brides were brought into their Chamber, then the Ladie Oliue went to her bed, then came Ide, and the Chamber auoided, and shee locked fast the dore, to the intent that none should heare them, then shee came to bed, and layd her downe on the bed-side, and sayd to Oliue. My right swéete Loue, God giue you good night, for as for me, I can giue you no good, because I féele such a disease, the which gréeueth me sore, and therewith she kissed Oliue, who answeared and sayd. My swéete Louer, you are the thinge in the world that I most desire, for the bountie and swéetnesse that I knowe in you, then doe with me as it shall please you, and to the intent that you shall not thinke, that I haue so great desire, that you should do the thing which of right ought to be done be∣twéene man and Wife, I am content to forbeare it Fiftéene dayes, and because that diuers folkes are héere about to heare vs, I am content to giue you truce, for wee shall haue time y∣nough hereafter to sport vs, and I know such noblenesse in you that I am sure you will take none other Wife, nor touch none other, but that you will kéepe your faith and troth to me, for I am chast and so shall you find me, it sufficeth me to kisse you, & as for the priuie loue, I am content for this time (since it is your pleasure) to forbeare it. Then Ide answeared: Faire La∣die, I wil not refuse your will, thus they passed that night with clipping and kissing. Then in the morning they arose and made them readie, and came into the Pallaice, the Emperour beheld Oliue his Daughter, to sée if shee were any thing chaun∣ged, and sayd. Daughter, how is it with your new husband? Sir, (quoth shee) euen as I desire, for I loue Ide my Husband better then I loue you, although you are my Father, at that word the Emperour and all his Lordes laughed: so great ioy and feasting was there made, that it endured Eight dayes. Then euerie man tooke leaue and went whether as they listed, and after the Fiftéene dayes were expired, that Ide had layne
with Oliue, Ide touched her not but with kissing, whereof O∣liue was sorrowfull, and sayde to her selfe. Oh good Lord, I was ingendred in an euill houre, when I haue married with the goodlyest person of the world, and the most worthy, and har∣dy that euer was guirt with a sword, or road on horse, he ma∣keth no semblance to doe that thinge which I haue so sore desi∣red: then she drew néere to Ide and touched her, and Ide (who knew well what her desire was) turned toward her, and wold hide himselfe no longer from her, but all wéeping cryed her mercie, and shewed her from the beginning to the ending the manner of all her aduenture, and how that she was a woman, and was fledde away because her Father would haue married her himselfe. And when Oliue vnderstood Ide, shee was right sorrowfull, howbeit, shee comforted Ide, and sayd. My right swéete Louer, discomfort not your selfe, for you shall not be ac∣cused by me neither to no man nor woman liuing, we are wed∣ded together, and I will be good and true to you, since you haue kept your selfe so truely, with you I will vse my time, & passe my destiny since it is thus, for I sée well that it is the pleasure of our Lord God. Thus as Oliue and Ide were deuising together of their se∣crets, a Page being in a Chamber that ioyned close to their Chamber, heard well all their secret words and communicati∣on, what each of them had sayd to the other, then he in all hast went to the Emperour, and shewed him all that he had heard betwéene the two Louers. When the Emperour heard that, he was right sorrowful, and sayd. Fellow beware what thou sayest, looke that thy report bee true, for if I finde it contrarie, thou shalt die an ill death. Sir, if it bee not as I haue sayde, and that Ide be not a woman whom you take for a man, strike off my head. Then the Emperour made him to bee taken and kept, to the intent to prooue the troth, for he thought that mat∣ter strange to beleeue: then hee called to him the Lordes of his priuie Counsaile, and he shewed them the matter, whereof they had much maruaile, seeing the great vertue and hye Prowesse that was in Ide, and they greatly complained of the matter and were sorrowfull: then the Emperour (who was right pensiue)
sware and made promise, that if hee found the matter in that case, hee would cause both his Daughter and Ide to bee burnt, because of hyding of that strange case, and sayd. If Ide hadde discouered the matter to me betimes, my Daughter should ne∣uer haue married her, and the matter now kept close from me, I shall neuer haue ioye at my heart vntill I knowe the troth. Then hee commaunded a bath to bee made readie in his owne Chamber, wherein he would haue Ide to bée bathed, to the en∣tent that he might know the troth before she escaped away, for he sayd that he would not suffer no such falshood to bee vsed: the bathing was made readie, and Ide was sent for, who knewe nothing of that matter, then the Emperour said to her. Ide doe off your cloathes, for you shall bath you with mée. When Ide heard the Emperour, she was sore abashed, and sayd. Sir, I pray you to forbeare it for this time, because I haue not béene accustomed to be bathed: then the Emperour sayd. I wil not forbeare it, because I will sée you naked, for if I finde that true which hath béene shewed me, both you and my Daughter shall be burnt. When Ide heard that, she saw that she was betray∣ed and lost, then shee knéeled downe before the Emperour and cryed him mercie, and required him to haue pitie of her, and the Emperour in great hast sent for his Lordes, who were in the Hall talking together, and were sorrowfull for Ide whom they loued entirely, so they came to the Emperour, and found Ide before him on her knées sore weeping, in such sort, that for pity of her they wept all, then the Emperour shewed them all the déede: wherefore ye must needs sée iustice to bee done vpon Ide, who then by the Peeres and Lords of Roome was iudged to be burnt. Then it was commaunded, the fire to bee made readie to burne her, the which was done: and Ide before the Emperor abyding her iudgement, with her handes ioyned lifted vp to∣wards Heauen, making pitifull prayers to our Lord God, and to the holy Ghost, praying them to haue pitie of her soule, and to receiue it into the holy Paradice, for shee sawe well that the end of her life was come.
Chap. CLXX. ¶How our Lord God made great Miracles for Ide, for God made her to chaunge from the nature of a woman and to become a perfect man, whereof the Emperor and his Daughter Oliue had great ioy, and so Ide and Oliue lay together, and ingendred a faire Sonne named after Croissant. And of the death of the Emperour. THe same houre that Ide was in her prayers, there appeared sodenly in the Chamber a great cléere light, and therewith a maruailous swéet odour, that it séemed all the Chamber to bee full of essence & spices Aroma∣ticke: then presently after they heard an Angel-like voice sent from our Lord God, and sayd. Thou Emperour of Rome, our Lord God commaundeth thée by mée, that thou be not so hardy as to touch Ide, to doe her any hurt, for our Lord God hath gi∣uen her the grace for the goodnes that is in her, he doth consent and will by his diuine puissance, that she be changed in nature, and to become a perfect man, as all other be without any diffe∣rence: & also God commandeth, that the Page whom thou hast in prison, that thou settest him at libertie, for ye which he shew∣ed thée was of troth, this morning Ide was a woman, but now shée is a man. Also God commaundeth thée to make thy self readie, for thou shalt liue here in the world but Eight daies lon∣ger, therefore from hence foorth let Ide and Oliue thy Daughter haue the gouerning of thy Empire, who before this yéere bee passed shall haue betwéene them a Sonne, who shall be named Croissant, who shall doe maruailes when hee commeth to age, many aduentures and pouerties hee shall suffer in his youth, but afterward he shall haue ioy and wealth ynough: and with those words the Angell vanished away, and left the Emperour and his Lordes and all the people of Rome in great ioy, for the
euident Miracle that our Lord God had sent by the prayer of Ide, who with Oliue his Wife had great ioy, and thanked our Lord God. Then the Feast and triumph beganne againe at Rome, that day passed, and the night came, and Ide and Oliue went to bedde together, and tooke their sport in such wise, that the same night was gotten and ingendred the faire Croissant, whereby the ioy doubled in the City of Rome, and the next day Ide came to the Pallaice with other Lordes. And the Empe∣rour was in his Chamber making of his Testament, for he had not forgotten the wordes of the Angell, so he liued Eight daies longer, and on the Ninth day hee dyed, and hee was borne into the great Church of Saint Peter, where his obsequy was done solemnly, and layd in his Tombe the which was ordained for him as it appertained, his Sonne in lawe and his Daughter mourned, according to the custome then vsed, and then after Eight daies were passed, all the noble Lords of the Countrey came to the Court, and crowned Ide Emperour and Oliue his Wife Empresse, great ioy and feasting was made at their Co∣ronation. And when Oliue the Empresse approached her time, she was deliuered of a faire Sonne, and when hée was christe∣ned, he was named Croissant, that is to say growing, because the Moone the same time was increasing. Of the chéere that Ide and his Lordes made at the birth of his Child, néede not to bee rehearsed, for you may well thinke it was as great as euer was any before. Then the time came that the Empresse was churched, whereof great ioye was made, this Child was well nourished, and two notable Ladies had the kéeping of him vn∣till he was Seauen yéeres of age: then a noble Knight and an ancient was sette about him, and a wise, and a great Clarke to teach him cunning, for commonly it is sayd, that a King with∣out learning or cunning, is compared to an Asse crowned: Of∣ten times the Father and the Mother would visit their Child, he was kept to Schoole vntill he was Fiftéene yéeres of age, & he was so good a Clarke, that there was none in the Citie of Rome, but that hee could well dispute with him and assoile his questions: of his beautie, greatnesse, force, humilitie, & good vertues, wherewith he was indued, if I should describe them,
it would be ouer-long to rehearse, whereof Ide and his Mother Oliue had such ioy, that they wist not what to doe, but alonely to thanke God of his grace, for their Child grew so in bignes & strength, that euerie man was thereof abashed, in such wise, that at that time there could not be found in the Citie of Rome of his age none so great, nor so hye of stature, whereof his Fa∣ther, and his Mother, and all the noble Lordes, and Knightes were right ioyfull. Chap. CLXXI. ¶ How King Florence sent two Knights to Rome to the Emperour his Sonne, desiring him to come and see him, and leaue the Em∣pire of Rome to his Sonne Croissant, and to set noble men about him to guide him: And also to bringe with him the Empresse, the faire Oliue. THe Emperour and the Em∣presse séeing their Sonne to grow, and amend euerie day in all good workes, they thanked God, praying him to giue him the grace from better to better to perseuer: so it fell, that vp∣pon a Whitsunday the Emperour and the Empresse held estate Royall at their Pallaice, for the solemnitie of that day, & there was many Kinges, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Duchesses, and Ladies, and whiles they were in the middest of their dinners, there arriued Two notable ancient Knightes: and when they were entred into the Pallaice, they came before the Emperor, and kneeled downe, and sayd. God that created vs, saue and kéepe the noble King Florence of Aragon, and of Nauarre, and Duke of Bourdeaux: and the same God saue the right noble and excellent Emperour of Rome his déere Sonne, and his faire Daughter the Empresse Oliue. When the Emperor Ide heard speaking of his Father, hee was fearefull in his heart, because of the shamefull thing not faileable, the which hee would haue
done against him, right intentiuely he beheld the two Knights, and demaunded how the King his Father did, euer since he de∣parted from him? Then one of the Knightes answeared, and sayd. Right déere Sir, if the dolour, displeasure, and the great rage wherein your Father was for your departing, if I should shew it, too long it would be to rehearse: but shortly I shal shew you the substance of the matter. The same Morning after your departing, tidings was brought to the King your Father, how that the King of Nauarre your Vncle was come to sée him, then your Father went and met him, and brought him into the Ci∣ty of Courtoys with great ioy and mirth, and they alighted at the Pallaice, and there tidings was brought to the King your Fa∣ther, how you were fled away, whereby such sorrow, dolour, & displeasure tooke him at the heart, that there was none that durst looke him in the face, for he looked like a spirit, because of the foolish loue that he had on you, and he ran about in the Pal∣laice like a desperate man, so that for feare of him, there was neither Ladie nor Damsell that durst abide him, for the great furie & displeasure that he was in, so that by reason of his great yre, he fell into a gréeuous maladie, wherein hee thought that he should haue died, and so was confessed and made ready to re∣ceiue the holy Ghost. Then the King of Nauarre and Sorbar, and diuers other Princes came to visit him, and desired him to put the folly out of his mind, and to crie to God for mercie, ma∣ny notable Docttors were there, and they shewed him many good reasons and examples, and sayd, without he would leaue and forsake his folly, he should be condemned bodie and soule. When the King your Father sawe himselfe in that doubt, & knowing that hee had done ill to cause you to flye away, & that no tidings could be heard of you, such a contrition and repen∣taunce tooke him, that great aboundance of drops fell from his eyes, in such sort, that all his face was wet, and he had such do∣lour and gréefe in himselfe, that euerie man that saw him wept for pittie, and the King of Nauarre had so great pittie of him, that he was so sorrowfull, that a gréeuous sicknesse tooke him, so that the Fourth day he died, whereof the Kinge your Father was right sorrowfull. At last his sickenesse determined, & hee
was recouered, and in good health a certaine space, but by rea∣son of the dolour that he had for you, could not be ceased, but he fell againe sore sicke, and so he continueth, and hath no power to ayd and reléeue himselfe, but he eateth and drinketh inough. And after nowe of late it hath béene shewed him all your life, and how by the grace of God it is fallen to you, whereby such ioy is come to his heart, that there was neuer so much ioy in no mans heart, and yet he sayth, that hee shall neuer haue perfect ioy at his heart vntill hee may sée you: and therefore hee hath sent vs hether to you, and he desireth and commandeth, asmuch as the Father can commaund his Child, that both you and the Empresse your wife, should leaue this your countrey in the gui∣ding of your Sonne, and to leaue notable persons about him, to kéepe and conduct him, for it shall be to you more profitable and better, to vse your life in peace in the Realmes of Aragon and Nauarre, with the Duchy of Bourdeaux the which to you ap∣pertaineth by iust inheritance, and he hath giuen vs in charge not to depart from hence, vntill you haue shewed vs your will, to the intent, that we may bring him some good newes. Chap. CLXXII. ¶ Howe the Emperour Ide and the Empresse Oliue gaue good in∣structions to their Sonne, when they departed from Rome▪ and howe they arriued at Courtoys, and came to Florence, who with great ioy receiued them as his Children. WHen the Emperor Ide had heard this Knight report these newes of the King his Father, the water fell from his eies for pitie and ioy that he had, and answeared and sayd. Sirs, I will that yee know well, that of your comming and good newes, I am right ioyfull, but I am sorrie for the great sicknesse that my Father is in, wherefore to recomfort him and to make him
ioyfull, I will that you returne to him and say, howe that I humbly recommend me to his good grace, and that at Midsum∣mer next I and my Wife will bee with him: the Messengers hearing that answeare, were right ioyfull. Then after din∣ner they tooke their leaue of the Emperor and of the Empresse, who gaue them many rich guiftes, for the honour of King Flo∣rence their Father, and so the Messengers departed. When the Empresse Oliue vnderstood the will of her Lord, shee was right sorrowfull for to leaue her Countrey, whereas shée was borne and nourished, and especially to leaue her Son Croissant whom she loued: but since it was the pleasure of her Lord so to doe, she contented her selfe, for shée loued her Husband so well, that shée would in no wise say against his pleasure, nor let him to do his will. Right sorrowfull were the Princes and Lordes of that Countrey, and all the people of Roome: but in the best wise yt they could they comforted themselues, because of ye yong Prince Croissant, who should tarie and abide with them, and whom the Emperour deliuered vnto them to be kept. And then hee spake to his Sonne, and shewed him many no∣table examples and reasons, he commaunded him to bée gentle and courteous to his Lordes and people, and that he should not bée light of credence, and that in any wise hee should not listen with his eares to heare Flatterers, nor the filth that commeth from them that will lye and flatter to please him withall, to the intent to come to their intention, whereby many a Prince hath béene destroyed and brought to Hell, & whereby they and their Lordes also for beléeuing of them, haue béene damned perpetu∣ally. Sonne, looke thou be serued with Gentlemen, such as are come of them that haue béene of good renowme, loue the ho∣ly Church, giue almes to the poore for the loue of Iesus Christ, let thy Chests be open to thy good Knightes, beware thou bée no Nigard, and beware thou be not ouercome with wine, lead an honest life, haunt and kéepe companie with the ancient no∣ble men, and praise them if they be worthy, flye Flatterers and Mockers, and beware thereof thy selfe, for thou canst not doe worse, because it will abate thine honour. Thus the Empe∣rour Ide sayd to his Son Croissant, and shewed him many no∣table
sayings and faire instructions, then he called his Lordes, and sayd. Sirs, the most part of you know my will, the which is, that I and my Wife will goe into Aragon to the King my Father: therefore I desire you all and command you, that yée will haue my Sonne as recommended to you, I haue left him great treasure, to the intent that if any warre or any other bu∣sinesse fall to him, that he shall haue riches sufficient, to with∣stand them that would doe him or his Country any dammage, and also the Realme of Aragon is not so farre from hence, but that anone I may haue newes from him. When the Lords vnderstood the Emperour, and how he had taken on him this Voyage, they knewe well they could not let nor stop him of his pleasure. Then they all answeared in ge∣nerall, and sayd, that as néere as they could, they would accom∣plish his commandement, and to serue truely his Sonne Crois∣sant, and to aid, keepe, and defend his Countrey against all men that would annoy him. Sirs, (quoth the Emperor) I thanke you. Thus after the Emperour had spoken with his Sonne and with his Lordes, and shewed them his will and pleasure, hee made readie for his iourney, and tooke with him a certaine number of Knightes to accompanie him and the Empresse his Wife▪ and he fournished two great Shippes, and caused them to be charged with victuall and Artillerie, as it appertained for the defence of their bodies and liues, and tooke with him great riches, apparell, & iewels: then he tooke his leaue of the Pope, of all his Lordes, and of all them of the Citie, who made great sorrow for their departing. Then they entred into the Riuer of Tyber, accompanied with about fiue Hundred Knightes, at their departing they tooke leaue of their Sonne Croissant, and kissed him often times. When the Empresse saw her Sonne, whome shee must depart from, she began to wéepe, but the Em∣perour comforted her as much as he could. Then they tooke their Shippes and so departed, and so long sayled in the Riuer of Tyber, that they came into the hye Sea, whereas they sailed night and day with good winde, that without danger they ar∣riued at the Citie of Courtoys, whereas they were receiued with great ioy, and so they came to the Pallaice, whereas they found
King Florence lying on a Couch, who when hee was aduerti∣sed of their comming, he had great ioy. Then the Emperour and the Empresse entred into the Pallaice, and came whereas the Kinge lay, then they both knéeled downe before him: and when the King saw them, he had such ioy that hee could speake no word, but made a token that they should approach néere to him, and so they did, and hee embraced and kissed them often∣times, and when hee might speake, hee sayde. My right déere Children, of your comming I am right ioyfull, and of the grace that God hath sent to you, then againe oftentimes he kissed the Empresse Oliue, & sayd, how she was welcome into the Realme of Aragon: Of the great ioy, feasting, guifts, and presents that were giuen and done at their welcomming, if I should shew it at length, it would be ouer-long to rehearse: and therefore I passe it ouer. Nowe let vs leaue speaking of the King, and of the Emperor and the Empresse his Wife, who tooke such plea∣sure to abide with Kinge Florence, that neuer after they retur∣ned to Rome, but they raigned together all their liues in good peace and loue, and they hadde no Child but Croissant, whome they had left at Roome, and of whome wee shall speake nowe héereafter. Chap. CLXXIII. ¶ How Croissant was so bountifull and so liberall, that hee gaue a∣way all the Treasure that his Father had left him, so that at last he had no more to giue, and so was constrained to goe seeke his aduenture, he and a Varlet alonely. AFter that the Emperour Ide and the Empresse Oliue were departed from the Citie of Roome, Croissant their Sonne grewe & amended in all thinges, he delighted to take his pleasure in all sports, and he made to be proclai∣med Iusts and Tourneys, and gaue large guiftes to Ladies &
to Knightes, none went from him without some guift, he tooke great pleasure to giue guifts, so that hee was praised of euerie man: howbeit, diuers ancient and wise men sayd, if Croissant our yong Prince deale thus with the Treasure that his Father left him, it will be much wasted, and such as nowe follow him will forsake him, when they sée that he hath no more to giue, as they did indéed as yee shall heare, for he gaue to them that were poore, whereby they were made rich, who after would not giue him one morsell of bread: he was so liberall and so great a spen∣der, that all the Treasure that his Father had left him, he gaue it away, so that many complained greatly of his bountie and Larges, for he gaue away so much, that he was forced to dimi∣nish his estate, and was forsaken of all them that were woont to serue him, because he had no more to giue them, so that when they met him, they would turne to another way: and when he knewe that, he had so great shame, that he determined to depart priuily out of the Countrey, and to goe séeke his aduentures, for he sawe well that he had giuen away and lent so much, that he could not then find one man that would lend him one penny. Then with that which was left he bought two good horses, and mounted on the one, and vppon the other a Varlet and a Male behinde him, and therein a Gowne, and his shirts, hose, and shooes, and he had in his purse no more but one Hundred . for his expences, and in a Morning he departed from Roome, to the intent he should not be perceiued, and road so long by his iour∣neys, that hee was farre off from the Citie of Roome more then Foure dayes iourney. Now let vs leaue speaking of him, till time shall be to returne to him againe. Chap. CLXXIIII. ¶ How they of Roome sent to the King Guymart of Puylle, to the entent that he should come and gouerne that Countrey, and to be their Lord, because that Croissant was a Child, and had giuen and wasted all that he had: and how Guymart came thether, and was receiued as Lord.
AFter that the Barons and Se∣natours of Roome were aduertised, that their young Lord Croissant was departed from the Citie, and that he had wasted and spent al the Treasure that he had: then they assembled at the Capitoll, and there was one sayd. Cursed is that land whereof the Lorde is a Child, as yée may well perceiue by our young Lord Croissant, who hath spent all and giuen away the great treasure that his Father had left him, verie badly should he gouerne his Land and Countrey, when he cannot kéepe that which is closed fast in his Coffers: and therefore mine aduice is, that wee send to King Guymart of Puille, who is alreadie of the mind to come and besiege vs, because he knoweth well that we be without a Lord, and therefore mine aduice is, that wée send vnto him a noble Ambassage, desiring him to come to this Citie of Roome, and say that this Citie shall doe to him obey∣sance, it is better to send betimes then too late, to the intent that neither he, nor none of his doe any dammage to the Landes of Roome. All they that were there agréed to his saying, and so they sent to him, who receiued the Ambassadours right honou∣rably, and so he came to Roome, whereas he was receiued for their Lord peaceably. But before he entred into Roome, they went and mette him, and with great ioy brought him into the City, with Trumpets and Drummes blowing before him, vn∣till he came to the Church of Saint Peter, and there hée offered and kissed the Reliques, whereof he made his oath, such as Em∣perours are accustomed to make, he to defend and kéepe Roome & the Empire. Then hée went to the Pallaice, whereas hée was receiued of the noble men and of the people: then hee go∣uerned Roome in good peace and iustice. Nowe lette vs leaue speaking of him, and returne to Croissant.
Chap. CLXXV. ¶ Howe Croissant arriued at Nise in Prouaunce, and came to the Earle Remon, who was besieged by the Sarazins, and of the ho∣nour that the Earle Remon did to Croissant, and howe hee gaue him his banner to beare, and made him Knight: and of the great enuie that the Earles Sonne had at Croissant. AFter that Croissant was depar∣ted from Roome, and his Varlet with him, and had well séen that in all Rome they set nothing by him, because hee had no more guifts to giue them. Then hee road through Romania and Lombardie, and passed Piemont, and then came into Daulphe∣ney: and when hee came into the Towne of Grenoble, it was shewed him that in Prouaunce there was a noble Prince, na∣med Earle Remon of Saint Giles, who was besieged by land & by water in the Towne of Nise, by the King of Granado, & the King of Belmarin, who day and night made great assaults to the Citie, and they had sworne and made promise, that they would neuer depart from thence vntill they had wonne that Towne, and slaine the Earle Remon. When Croissant heard those good newes, the hardy prowesse wherewith hee was garnished and repleat, set him into so hye a will, that hee thought the Sara∣zins flew to the ayre, and that he would raise their siege before it be night, and for the burning desire that he had, hee thought to goe thether to prooue his vertue against the Paynims: so when he had rested his horse, he and his Squier mounted, and rested not vntill he came to Nise, in an Euening late hee there arriued, without perceiuing of them of the siege, for as then they were all in their Tents, because a little before there hadde béene at the gate a great Skirmish, wherefore the Sarazins were wearie of their trauaile, and also on that part that Crois∣sant arriued, there were no Sarazins lodged. Then hee came
to the gate, and prayed the Porter to let him enter: and when the Porter saw there were no more but two persons, and that hee was a Christian, hee suffered him to enter without any re∣fuse. And when Croissant sawe that hee was in without any danger, he was ioyfull, then he came to one of the best lodgings in the Towne, and there he alighted and supped with his host, because it was too late to goe that night to the Court: there he tarried all that night vntill the next morning, then hee went to the Pallace, whereas he found the Earle Remon, deuising with his Lordes and Knights of the déedes of warre, then Croissant saluted the Earle and all his Lordes▪ When the Earle saw the young man, he greatly beheld him, and thought that in all his life he had neuer séen so goodly a per∣son, and thought that hee was come of some noble Lineage. Then he tooke Croissant by the hand and demaunded what his name was? Sir, (quoth he) my name is Croissant. Croissant? (quoth the Earle) you are welcome, you are come wel at a point both for you and for mee, for I haue great néede to haue men with me to ayd mee, and mee thinkes by your personage, that you should atchieue great Enterprizes, for of your age I haue not séene in my daies, a young man more likely to bee feared of his enemies, and because I sée by your apparell that you are no Knight, I shall make you a Knight, to the intent that to morrow your Prowesse and hardines may be prooued, for you may sée héere without this Towne two Kings, enemies to our Christian faith, and by the grace of God, I intend to morrow to giue them battaile, I looke this night for my Brother the Duke of Callaber, who bringeth with him Thirtie Thou∣sand men of warre, and Twentie Thousand I haue alreadie within the Towne, and considering your hye courage to come hether to serue mee, I shall doe you more honour: after I haue made you Knight, I shall giue you my banner to beare, and if you doe as me thinkes you should doe, your paines shall not be lost. Sir, (quoth Croissant) God giue me the grace, that to mor∣row to him and to you I may doe such seruice, that it may bée wealth to all christendome, and that God may performe in me that which wanteth, for if you make me Knight, all the dayes
of my life after I shalbe yours. Then the Earle incontinent sent for a Son of his, who as then was no Knight, and diuers other whome he made Knightes with Croissant, then he said to Croissant. Fréend, I pray to our Lord God to giue you such for∣tune to Morrowe, that you may vanquish the Battaile. Sir, (quoth he) God giue me the grace to render to you thankes, for the honour that now you doe to me, for as for me, by the grace of God to morrow I shall so doe, that your enemies shall curse the houre that they came hether to assaile you. Whiles ye Croissant was thus made Knight with the Earles Sonne and others, the same time came thether the Duke of Callaber, and hee came to the Pallaice: of the chéere that he had made him by his Brother the Earle Remon, I will make no mention thereof, but he came at the same season that these new Knightes were made, and that a Quintaine was sette vp to prooue themselues. Then the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon his Brother went thether, verie desirous to sée who did best, then the Duke demanded of the Earle, what yong knight it was that road by his Nephew, for hée thought that he neuer saw so goodly a yong person, nor more puissant of his age: then the Earle sayd, how he was come thether to séeke for honour: but what hee was, nor of what Lineage he knew not. Thus they talked together of this young knight Croissant, and when they came to the place whereas the Quintaine was dressed vp, the Earles Sonne ranne and brake his Speare all to péeces, & then others assayed themselues, some brake their Speares, and some fell to the earth by force of their stroake, but there was none that could remooue the Quintaine. When Croissant saw that all had assaied themselues to ouerthrow the Quintaine, he had a great speare, and ran so fiercely, that hée strake the Quin∣taine, and ouerthrew it to the ground, whereof euerie man had great maruaile: the Duke sayd to the Earle, that he neuer saw so goodly a stroake, and sayd, how he is greatly to bee doubted that giue such stroakes, hée was greatly praised of the Ladies & Damsels that were there present, and especially of the Earles Daughter who was a faire Damsell. But whosoeuer was ioyfull, the Earles Sonne was displeased, hee tooke against
him a mortall hate and an ill enuie, so that if he durst, he wold haue run vpon Croissant to haue destroyed him, and concluded in his courage, that if he might liue long, he would make Crois∣sants life to depart from his bodie, and so hee had done, if God had not aided Croissant. When Croissant had runne his course, he road to the Earle, who sayd to him right swéetly. Croissant, God increase your honour, and God giue you grace to perseuer in your goodnes, and I pray you humbly to shew me the troth, what you be, and of what Lineage? for I am sure that you are of some hye Li∣neage. Sir, (quoth Croissant) since you would know it, I shall shew you the troth. Sir, knowe for troth, I am Sonne to the noble Emperour of Roome, and I am departed out of the coun∣trey, for certaine causes which I woulde not suffer, and there∣fore I went to search mine aduentures, such as God wold send me. When the Earle heard him speake, he was right ioyfull, and thanked God, and sayd. Faire Sonne, you are welcome, I am ioyfull of your comming, and for the goodnes that I sée in you apparant, I haue a Daughter right faire, whome I will giue you in marriage, & as much of my goods and of my Lands and Signiories, that you shall neuer bee poore. Sir, (quoth Croissant) your faire offer that you make mee I will not refuse, and I thanke you, but before I take a Wife, my will is to doe so much, that mine honour may bee exalted, and that renowne may run vpon me as it hath done of my Predecessors, and that I may conquer Lands and Signiories. Then the Earles son hearing his Father make Croissant such an offer, as to giue him his Sister in marriage, and a great part of his Land, hee was therewith so sore troubled in his heart, as he tooke against him a cordiall hate, and made promise within himselfe, that if hee might returne from the Battaile, hee would cause Croissant to die an ill death, thinking not to be disenherited by him. After those words, the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Re∣mon tooke betwéene them the young Knight Croissant, and led him by the hand to the Pallace, whereas he was receiued with great ioy, and after dinner they came into the Hall whereas all the Lords were. Then Croissant (who greatly delighted to be
in such a place, whereas hee might shewe his Prowesse) spake on hye, and sayde to the Earle Remon. Sir, you knowe well, that the enemies of our Lord God & yours, haue besieged you in your Towne, the which is a thing not to bee suffered so long, without doing of them any annoyance: and therefore Sir I counsel you, that before they knew much of your estate or puis∣sance, or what people you haue, it were best you went to assaile them, therefore without any longer tarying, ordaine your Bat∣tailes, and your Captaines to guide your people, to the intent that when you are yssued out of the Towne, euerie man may know what you are purposed to doe, and then send to your ene∣mies a Messenger, and giue your enemies knowledge of your comming, and wee shall follow so fast, that they shall haue no leasure to arme them. When the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon vnderstood the noble Croissant, they much praised his counsaile and aduise. Then they ordained their Battailes and their Captaines: and then they yssued out of the Towne with all their companie. Chap. CLXXVI. ¶ How Croissant did maruailes in the Battaile, by whome the Sa∣razins were discomfited and slaine, whereof the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber were right ioyfull. WHEN the Earle Remon was without the Towne, hee ordained Thrée Bat∣tailes. The first Croissant hadde the leading thereof, and the Earle sayd to him. Fréend, I pray you this day to shewe from whence you come, and how that you bee of the Lineage Emperiall, and of the good Line of the Duke of Bourdeaux, for I haue such trust in God and in the vertue of your armes, that me thinkes mine enemies doe now flye away before me. Sir, (quoth Croissant) I shall doe so much by the grace of God, that our enemies shall
haue no leasure to graunt vs the Victorie. The second Bat∣taile the Earle Remons Sonne led, and his Father sayd to him, that hee should that day shew foorth his vertue and Prowesse. The third Battaile the Earle Remon and the Duke of Callaber had the guiding thereof, and they set in euery Battaile Fiftéen Thousand men: then the Earle Remon went before euerie bat∣taile, stirring & moouing them to doe well: and then the Earle sent a Messenger to the Hoast of the Sarazins, to shewe them of the comming of the Christian men, & they were before their Tents in Fiue Battailes, they were in number about a Hun∣dred Thousand Sarazins, whereof there were two Kings and Foure Admirals. This Messenger did his Messuage, & when he had done, hée returned to the Earle Remon, and shewed him all that hee had heard and séene. Then Croissant sayd to the Earle: Sir, I pray you to shew mee what armes the two Sa∣razin Kinges doe beare? to the intent that I may know them, for the sooner the great men bee slaine, the sooner the other will flye, because that will abash them, and the sooner to be discom∣fited, for men without a Lord, are as shéepe without a shep∣heard. Then the Earle shewed him their armes and badges: Sir, (quoth Croissant) since I am hereof aduertised, I shall ne∣uer rest vntill I haue encountred them, if God will saue mine armes and good sword. Then the Paynims (who saw well the Christian men com∣ming) cast vp a great crie and so maruailous, that there was none so hardy, but was thereof abashed, for it séemed that all the world arriued there. When Croissant sawe the Sarazins approach, he aduaunced his Battaile, and when they ioyned, he couched his Speare, and strake therewith the King of Bel∣marins Sonne, so that the Speare-head passed through his bo∣die more then a foote, and so with drawing out of his Speare, the Sarazin fell downe dead among the horse féele, whereof the Paynims had great dolour. When Croissant hadde slaine the King of Belmarins Sonne, there came before him the Nephewe of the King of Granado, and Croissant bare him to the earth so rudely, that in the falling he brake his necke: then he ran at the Third & the Fourth and slew them, and as long as his Speare
held, he ceased not to slay and to beat downe the Sarazins, and when his Speare was broken, he tooke his Sword, wherewith hee claue the Sarazins to the braines, and cutte off armes and handes, hee made among them such slaughter, that there was not so hardie a Sarazin that durst abide his full stroake, but they fled before him as the shéepe doe before the Wolfe. Anon the tidings was brought to the King of Belmarin, how his Son was slaine by a young Knight, who did maruailes in the Bat∣taile: and when the King knew that his Sonne was slaine, he wept for sorrow, and made promise that he had rather die, then the death of his Sonne should be vnreuenged, and therewith he preassed into the Battaile, and met at his comming the Duke of Callabers Seneschall, and strake him with his Speare in such wise, that he ran him cleane through, and so he fell downe dead, then the Battaile began fiercely, and they of Prouaunce & Cal∣laber did valiantly. Then the Earle Remon came into the bat∣taile, and met with the Admirall of Cordes, and gaue him such a stroake with his sword on the helmet, that he claue his head to the braines, and so he fell downe dead. Then hee sawe the King of Granado, (who slewe many a Christian man) and the Earle Remon tooke a speare, and ran at the Kinge, and strake him so on the visor of his helmet, that hee fell to the earth with his féet vpward among his owne men, and had béen there slain if his men had not succoured him. In another place was Croissant, and hee saw before him the King of Belmarin, who road about séeking for Croissant, to be re∣uenged of him for the death of his Sonne: and when the King saw Croissant beating down horse and men, and that none could resist against him, he had great desire to be reuenged, and sayd to Croissant. Oh thou false Traytour that hath slaine my son, I ought greatly to laud and praise Mahomet, if I may bee re∣uenged vpon thée: then he couched his speare, and strake Crois∣sant in the middest of his shéeld, so that his speare flew all to pée∣ces, but for all the stroake Croissant remooued no more, then though he had striken a stone wall, and Croissant sore displeased that the king had giuen him such a stroake, let goe the bridle of his horse, and lifted vp his sword with both his hands, & strake
the king as he passed by on ye corner of his helmet in such wise, that he strake it cleane asunder, & if the stroake had not glaun∣ced, he had clouen his head to the guirdle, but the sword turned and alighted vppon the horse necke, so that he strake the necke cleane asunder, in such sort, that of force the king tumbled to the earth, sore astonied of the stroke that he had receiued, and if he had not béen quickly rescued, Croissant had striken off his head. Then the Sarazins remounted againe their King, and ran at Croissant, and cast darts at him and Iauelins to haue slain him, but they durst not approch néere him, so much they feared him, howbeit, they hurt him in diuers places, hee held his sword in his handes, wherewith hee strake no man with a full stroake, but that hee claue his head to the braines. Then hee sawe the great Admirall of Spaine, and he gaue him such a stroake, that his head was clouen to the chinne, and so hee fell downe dead. Great sorrowe made the Sarazins, and especially the King of Granado: and when Croissant saw him, he knewe him well by his armes, whereof hee was ioyfull, and Croissant approached to him, and gaue him such a stroke on the helmet, that his head was clouen to the braines, and so the Kinge fell downe dead: then Croissant ran at him that bare the Sarazins banner, wher∣on was painted the Image of Mahomet, hee strake him that bare it with a reuerse stroake, betwéene the necke and the shol∣ders, that the head with the helmet flewe in the field, and layd on so in the thicke preasse, that anone he made way, the Sara∣zins would faine haue raised vp againe their banner, but they could not. When the Sarazins saw their king dead, and their banner lying on the ground, their courage beganne to faile them: then they brayed and opened their array, and began to loose place, & Croissant (who tooke héed of nothing, but to slay the great Cap∣taines) at last sawe before him the kinge of Belmarin, who had slaine many a Christian man that day, Croissant gaue him such a stroake on the right shoulder, that his arme & shéeld fell to the earth, and by reason of the great dolour that the king felt, he fel in aswound among the horse féete, whereas he died miserably. The Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon, regarding the hye
déedes of armes done and atchieued by Croissant, hadde great maruell of his force and puissance, & they blessed the houre that hee was borne in, thanking God of his comming thether, they rested and beheld him how he made their enemies to fly away, for none was so hardy to abide him. Finally, if I shoulde re∣hearse the hye déedes that Croissant did that day, it would be o∣uer-long to declare, for by him and by his great Prowesse, the Paynims and Sarazins were vtterly discomfited, for he was happie that could saue himselfe. Thus they fled on all partes towards the Sea-side, and there were moe slaine in the flying, then were in the plaine Battaile, for from thence to the Sea-side, the wayes were couered with dead men, such as might saue themselues in the Ships were happie, but there were ve∣rie few that escaped. After the chace was done, they of Pro∣uaunce and Callaber came to the bootie, the which was excéeding great, and the Earle Remon distributed so liberally therof, that euery man was wel contented, for there was such riches in the Tents of the Sarazins, that it could not bee valued, whereby all such as were at the Battaile were rich euer after, both the and their Freends. Chap. CLXXVII. ¶ Of the great honour that the Earle Remon did to Croissant: and how he would haue giuen him his Daughter in mariage, where∣of the Earles Son was sore enuious, and thought the same night to haue murdered the noble Croissant in his bed, but he fayled, for the noble Croissant slew him, and afterward fled away as fast as he might. AFter that the Battaile was fi∣nished, and that the Sarazins were dead, the Earle Remon with great reuerence came vnto Croissant, and tooke him by the hand, and ledde him into the Towne betwéen the Duke of Cal∣laber
& himselfe, and they did him as great honor as they could deuise, and so entred into the Towne, and with great ioy and solemnitie they were receiued, and they came to the Pallaice & vnarmed them: and when they were refreshed, the Duke of Callaber and the Earle Remon came to Croissant, and the Earle sayd. Oh right noble Knight, repleat with all vertues and hie Prowesse, to whome no man is comparable, the strong arme, shéeld, and refuge of the Countrey of Prouaunce and Languedoc, by thy hye Prowesse this day thou hast saued one of the quar∣ters of Christendome, whereby the faith of Christ is exalted, the which (if thou est not béene) had béene abated & staun∣ched, it is not in mee to say nor recount the goodnesse that you haue done vs this day, nor it lyeth not in me to reward it, but if it were thy pleasure to abase thy selfe so lowe, as to take my Daughter in marriage, the which I would gladly sée, & I will giue thée the one halfe of all that euer I haue, for a fairer iewell nor a richer I cannot giue, then my déere Daughter whome I loue entirely: shée is the most faire, swéete, and the humblest Damsell that is now liuing. When Croissant had well vnder∣stood the Earle Remon, hee sayd. Sir, of your courtesie & rich guiftes that you offer mee, I will not refuse it, but thanke you hartely thereof, & as for your daughter whom you offer to giue me, I trust that I shall doe her that honour, that vpon her head I shall set a Crowne of gold, and make her Empresse of Rome, whereas she shall be serued and honoured as Ladie ouer all the Countrey. When the Earle heard the answeare of Croissant, he was ve∣rie ioyfull, but his Sonne (who was there present) was néere hand in a rage with the displeasure that he had, and sayd inra∣gedly to him. By God Croissant, since thus by you I shall bée disenherited, and that my Father will giue you that which of right appertaineth to me, before I grant thereto, I shal make you to die of an ill death, though I doe it by treason, nor thou shalt neuer haue my sister in marriage: thus thought ye Earles Sonne to worke against Croissant, who knew nothing thereof: and thus (without God helps him) he was likely to haue béene slaine pitiously. Then there began great ioy in the Pallaice,
the Earle Remon went to sée his Daughter, and sayd to her. My déere Daughter, know for troth, I haue giuen you in ma∣riage to the most faire & hardyest Knight that euer was guirt with a sword, that is Croissant who you sée héere, by whom we were all deliuered, and brought out of seruice into fréedome, for we had béen all lost if his hye prowesse had not béene, by whom all the Paynims are discomfited. When the Damsell heard her Father, she was right ioyfull, and thanked God, and said. Sir, since it is your pleasure to giue me to this noble Knight, I shall not refuse him, but I am content to fulfill your pleasure: whereof Croissant was ioyfull, for shee was so faire that euerie man had maruaile thereof. Then the Damsell saluted Crois∣sant, and sayd. Sir, of your comming and succours we ought to be ioyfull, for by you wée are restored to ioy, the which was lost. Ladie, (quoth Croissant) so goeth the works of our Lord God, for men make Battailes, and God giueth the Victorie. Thus deuising, they entred into the Chamber, whereas the boards were readie spread: but Izacars the Earles Son would not come there, but went into a secret place of the Towne, and thether hée sent for Ten of his affinitie, in whome hee had per∣fect affiance: then he shewed to them all his intention, and de∣termined that when Croissant was in bed and a sléepe, then they to murder him in his bedde, and his Squier also. When these Ten Traytours vnderstood their Master, they answeared and sayd, howe they were all readie to doe his commaundement, whatsoeuer came thereof. Thus they taried the houre to ac∣complish their vngracious Enterprize, & as they were in their communication, there was in a Chamber there beside a young Squier, who had well heard their Enterprize, and what they were determined to doe: then he sayd to himselfe, that surely he would aduertise Croissant of their malicious Enterprize, to the intent that he should not be surprized: then he departed as pri∣uily as he could, and so came to Croissant, and shewed him, how the Earles Sonne with Ten men were determined to murder him, the very same night in his bed sléeping, and how that each of them had a sharpe knife, and he sayd. Sir, be readie armed to defend your life, for they all haue sworne your death. When
Croissant vnderstood the Squier, he waxed as red as a burning coale, and sayd. I cannot beleeue that such a treason should be in the courage of a noble man, as to murder him that neuer did him trespasse. Sir, (quoth the Squier) you may doe as you please, but except you finde a remedie, you are but lost. When Croissant heard that, hee trembled for the displeasure that he was in, and he thought within himselfe, that he would not shew the matter to any person liuing, but he sware, that if any came to doe him displeasure, with his Sword hee woulde cléeue his head to the braines. Thus the matter rested vntill it was night, & so he went into the Hal among the other Lords, and there he found the Earle, who made him great chéere, and Supper was readie, then they satte downe: of their seruice I make no rehearsall. After they had supped diuers sports were shewed in the hall, and when the houre requisite came, euerie man went to bed, & the Earle Remon had prepared for Crois∣sant a faire Chamber, with a rich bed for him, and a Couch for his Squier. Then Croissant tooke leaue of the Earle and of the Damsel, with whom he was enamoured: & then he came to his Chamber well accompanied with Knights & Squiers, & with∣in a while they tooke leaue of him, & then he was alone sauing onely his Squier, whome he made to lye in the Couch, & shew∣ed him nothing of that he thought to doe. Then Croissant ar∣med him at all péeces, his helmet on his head, his sheeld about his necke, and his sword about him, and so layd him downe in his bed, and hid him with cloathes, that his armour should not be séen by them that would come thether, so there he lay as pri∣uily as he could: and then about midnight the Earles Son en∣tred into the chamber al vnarmed, with his sword in his hand, and his ten companions with him, each of them with a sharpe weapon in their hands, then they approached to Croissants bed, and the Earles Sonne lifted vp his Sword, and strke Crois∣sant such a stroake on the helmet, that the sword swarned in his hand, whereby he perceiued that hée was armed, and that hée had warning of their comming, whereof he was right sorrow∣full, then he recouered again another stroake, thinking to haue aine Croissant, but he could not his helmet was so good: then
the other Tenne strake at Croissant, but they could doe him no hurt, his armour was so good. Then Croissant rose vp quick∣ly (as a hardy Knight) with his sword in his hand. When the Earles Sonne saw that, he was neuer so afraid in all his life, and thought to haue fled away, but Croissant was before him, and gaue him such a stroake on the head with his sword, that he claue it to the chin, and so he fell downe dead, and the other had slaine Croissants Squier, whereof hee was sorrie, then hée ran at them like a man desperate, and did so much, that within a short space he had slaine Fiue of them, and the other fledde a∣way into another Chamber, and durst not speake one word. Chap. CLXXVIII. ¶ Howe Croissant depated from Nise with his sword in his hand: And howe the Earle Rmon was sorrowfull for the death of his Sonne, and chased after Croissant, but he could not bee found. WHen Croissant saw himselfe so enterprized, and that hée had slaine the Earles Sonne, he was in great feare, for hee knewe wel, that if he were taken, he should be in dan∣ger of his life, therefore hastely he departed out of the Pallaice: and when hee came to the Stable where his horse stood, he found a great yron chaine before the dore, to the  that the horse should not bee taken out in the night time, & when he saw that, he was sore discomforted, and sayd. Oh good Lord, now by thy grace ayd me, I ought well to be sorrie when I must leaue my horse. Alas, now I cannot tell how to  mine armour, certainely, except God succour mee, I sée no way how I can escape aliue: Alas, I thought to haue béene married to the Earles Daughter, but now I am farre from it,  I haue slaine her Brother▪ I was not minded to haue re∣turned into my Countrey so soone, vntill I had conquered some our and Landes, whereby I might haue béene receiued ho∣nourably
of them that did sette nothing by me: then hee began sore to wéepe, so he went through the towne as he might, for he coulde not trauaile long in his armour, but hee beheld a voide house in a corner of a streete, & hee went thether and vnarmed him of all his armour, except his sword, & so he was in a white Iacket, and then he rested not vntill hee came to the gate, and called the Porter, & desired him to open the gate, saying, that he had businesse to doe a little without the Towne, the Porter answeared stubbornely, and sayd, there rrquireth no hast, hée might well abide, for he sayd that hee would not open the gate vntill it was faire day. Fréend, (quoth Croissant) I pray thée shew me this courtesie: the Porter answered him fiercely, and sayd. Thou doest but loose thy labour, for the gate shall not be opened vntill the Sunne rise. When Croissant saw, that the Porter would not open the gate by faire meanes, hee sette his hand to his sword, and sayd. Thou false Traitour, except thou doest open ye gate incontinent, with my sword I shall slay thee. When the Porter saw that Croissant held a naked sword in his hand to strike him, he had great feare, and he came forth in hast with the keyes in his hande, and sayd. Sir, I shall open the gate with a good will, howbeit, he was so afraide, that all his bodie trembled for feare, then he came to the gate and opened the wicket: and then Croissant yssued out vnarmed, and hadde on but a Cloake ouer his Iacket and a sword about him, and a little purse at his guirdle, and therein Twentie Shillings in monney and no more. Thus as yée haue heard, Croissant yssued out of the Towne of Nise in Prouaunce, and tooke the way towards Roome, but before he had gone two Leagues, the Fiue Traytours that fled from him and were hidden in a Chamber, when they thought that Croissant was departed, for they thought he would not ta∣rie, because hee had slaine the Earles Sonne: then they went out of the Chamber, making great brute and noise, so that eue∣rie man rose in the Pallaice, and the Earle himselfe arose, and came into the Hall with his Sword in his hand, and there hée found the Fiue Traytours, who shewed him, that for certaine wordes betwéene Croissant and his Sonne, there was a Fray
betwéene them, whereby your Sonne is slaine by the hands of Croissant, the which hee did wilfully, to the entent to haue all your Landes after your decease, because you haue giuen him your Daughter in mariage, and before wée could come he was sled, but before he departed out of the Chamber, he slewe Fiue men besides your Sonne, for they were not armed, but Crois∣sant was armed & he seemed rather a spirit then a mortall man, and when we saw that wee could not approach to him, because he was armed, we slew his Squier. When the Earle heard them, it was no maruaile though he was sorrowful: and then he went into the Chamber whereas his Sonne lay dead, when he came there, for the great distresse that hee had at his heart, he fell downe vppon his Son in a swound: and when he came to himselfe, hee cried and sayde. Ah Croissant, your acquain∣tance is to me verie hard: then he commanded his men to arme them, and incontinent to goe after Croissant, who so pitiously had slaine his Sonne, and sayde: if I may take him, hee shall neuer escape my handes without death. Then in the Pallace and in the Towne euerie man armed them, & the Earle him∣selfe armed him & mounted on his Horse, and yssued out of the gate with many people, and then they road abroad in the Coū∣trey, searching and demaunding if any man met with Crois∣sant, but he could heare no certaine newes of him, except of one man, that sayd how he met him about fiue Leagues frō thence, and that he went a great pace. When the Earle heard that, hee saw well that it was but a labour lost to fellow any further: then he returned to the town right sorrowfull, and sore displeased for the death of his Sonne, and yet againe hee greatly complayned for Croissant in that ad∣uenture, and saide, that a more valiant Knight coulde not bee found, neither more courteous, nor more wise, I would to God that there were betwéene him and me good amitie, so that hee had my Daughter in marriage, and that after my decease hee might haue my Land: then diuers of his men sayd. Sir, lette him goe, hée séemeth to bée rather a Diuell then a man, hée is fierce and cruell, hee makes no more to slay a man, then some  to drinke good wine, lette him goe, hee was borne in an ill
houre: then the Earle entred into the Towne, right sorrow∣full and sore displeased for the death of his Sonne, and als for Croissants aduenture: and then he caused his Sonne to be bu∣ried as it appertained, & great sorrow was made by the Earle, and by the Duke of Callaber, & other Knights that were there, but they knew not the troth of the matter: whosoeuer made so∣row, the Earles Daughter was sorrowfull, both for her Bro∣ther, and also for the noble Croissant, whome shee had thought to marrie. Nowe let vs leaue speaking of them, and returne to Croissant. Chap. CLXXIX. ¶ How Croissant arriued in the Subburbs of a little Towne called Florencolle, and lodged among Ruffians and Villaynes, and how they fell at strife: and how Croissant slewe them and fledde, and was in great daunger. And howe hee came into the Cittie of Rome, whereas there was no man that would giue him one mor∣fell of bread: and how he went and lay in an old Pallaice vpon a burden of strawe. WHen Croissant saw that he was departed from the Towne of Nise, and that he was alone afooe, hee made his complaints to our Lord God, requiring him humbly to haue pitie of him: then hee went foorth, and so tra∣uailed Three daies and Thrée nights, without meat or drinke, but a little bread and water, he had such hunger and thirst, that he could scarce sustaine himselfe on his féet, so at last a little be∣fore the Sunne was set, hee came to a little Towne called Flo∣rencolle, whereof the gates were shutte before he came thether, then in the Subburbs hee saw a house like a Tauerne, and hée sware though he should be slaine, he would goe to that house to eate and drinke, and to pay well for his shot: it had béen better for him to haue passed by, for there he was in great perill of his
life as yée shall heare. Thus hee approached to the house, and heard how the Cookes were busie in the Kitchin, then he sawe a great fire in a Chamber, where there was the greatest Ruffi∣ans, and players at dice in all the Towne, and they had pre∣pared flesh and fish for their Supper. When Croissant saw the preparation that was made there for the Sixe Ruffians, he en∣tred into the house, and saluted the Host, and demaunded if he might be lodged there: the Host sayd yea, and how hee should be there well serued both of wine and of meat, such as he wold demaund. Then Croissant went in, & the Ruffians met him, and sayd, how hee was welcome, and each of them pinched o∣ther, and wincked with the one eye, and sayd softly to the ma∣ster of them: this great Trauailer is come well at a point, for before he depart, he shall pay for our shot and expences, and a∣non we will put the dice into his hands, whereby he shal leaue his Gowne, Cappe, and monney if he haue any. Croissant did not vnderstand them, because they spake whisperingly: then Croissant sayd. Sirs, if I eate with you paying my shot, shall it turne you to any displeasure? Fréend, (quoth the Maister of them) it pleaseth me well that you eate with vs: then they wa∣shed all together, and sate downe at the Table néere to the fier, & they were well serued of euery thing. When Croissant was set, hee began to féede well, (his hunger was so great) for in Thrée dayes before he had eaten nothing but bread and water: & therefore hee had the better appetite, and also hee found there good wine and fresh, and he dranke thereof at his pleasure. When they had well eaten and drunke, and were well cha∣fed by reason of the good wine, the Host rose vp & sayd. Sirs, it is time to make reckoning, & that euerie man pay his part, then the maister Ruffian sayde. Sir, make you the account, for you can doe it better then we, and shew vs what wee shall pay. Euerie man alike Sirs, (quoth the Host) as néere as I can reckon, yée must pay in all Twelue shillings, and looke e∣uerie man pay his part. Then the Master Ruffian began to sweare bloud and wounds, that they should play at the dice, to sée who should pay for all, then hee sayd to Croissant. Fréend, you must come play with vs, behold heere Thrée dice good and
square, wee must doe so, for one must pay the whole expences before we depart. Sirs, (quoth Croissant) we shall not néede to play at dice to know who shall pay for the shot, I will pay it all together without any strife: then they sayd▪ that they were well content therewith, and thanked him: then one of them, the falsest Villayne among them, wilfully cast downe a potte of wine vpon the Table, whereof his fellowes blamed him, then he answeared and sayd. Sirs, you néed not to be angry there∣with, for there is none of you will drinke thereof, it is better to haue a fresh pot of wine of a new Vessell: they sayd, well, that is true, so be it. Then their Host brought them a new pot full of wine, and sayd. Sirs, this potte of wine is not of the first reckoning, this is a potte of a newe account: then the Maister Ruffian sayd to Croissant. Sir, take and cast the dice, for the first cast shalbe yours. Croissant beheld them fiercely, and sayd: Nay Sirs, I will kéepe mée from that, for I neuer played at dice in all my life, be content with the twelue shillings that I shall pay for our shot, for by reason of the longe Voyage that I haue made, I am not well fournished of monney, for I haue but Thirtéen Shillings in my purse: then the Maister sayd. Thou art better arrayed then we, and thou must vse thy tongue otherwise, for thou shalt not thus scape, thou shalt leaue thy Gowne to pay for our shot to morrow in the morning: then another Ruffian sayd, and I will haue his hose and shooes to morrow, to buy fish for our din∣ner. When Croissant heard the Villaynes, he began to change colour, and was sore displeased, and sayd right fiercely. Sirs, leaue your clattering, yet I haue xiij. s̄. in my purse, the which I wil giue you, rather then you should be displeased, me thinks this ought to suffice you: and Sirs, I am a noble man, & late∣ly I was made Knight, for if I were once againe in my Coun∣trey, I would neuer come from thence to séeke for such aduen∣tures, you ought to beare my honour, since I shew you that I am a Knight: the Ruffians sayd, how his words nor his prea∣ching should not auaile him, but that he must leaue his gowne, Iacket, hose and shooes. Then Croissant repleat with yre, did off his surcot, the which was furred with armins, and cast it to
them, and sayd. Sirs, now you ought to be content with me, and I ought to be quit. When the Ruffians vnderstood him, they cried all at once, that he should put off his hose and shooes, and his guirdle, purse, and Gowne, and bad him quickely de∣liuer it to them, and then to auoid the house, for they sayd there was no lodging for him, and the Host to please the Villaynes, sayd, how they sayd troth. Then Croissant full of yre and dis∣pleasure, turned his visage to the bench where his good Sword ay, whereof hee was ioyfull that they had not taken it away, then he stept thether, and tooke it in his handes and drewe it out, and came to ye Villaynes, and they rose against him with their swords in their hands, & he strake the Maister Ruffian so maruailous a stroake, that he claue his head to the téeth, so hee fell downe dead before the Chimney, & from another hee strake his head, and then he slewe the Third and Fourth, & the other Two had so great feare that they fled away. Then the Host began to crie, a Théefe, a Murderer: but Croissant would doe him no hurt, and hee yssued out of the house with his sword in his hand, and ran as fast as he could vntill he was without the Subburbs, then he ranne in the field ouer hedges and diches, to the entent that none should follow him, and he hearkened to∣wards the Towne, where hee heard great crying, and noise of the Host of the house that he came from, whereby all his neigh∣bours, Taylours, Shoomakers, Drapers, and men of al crafts, came to the house, and there was such a noise made in the sub∣burbs, that the Towne gates were opened, and the Burgesses yssued out, and came to the house whereas the noise was: and when the Magistrates of the Towne came thether, and sawe the men lye dead, they demaunded of the Host who had done that murder. Sir, (quoth the Host) a Vagabond hath done it, who is bigge and mightie, for I neuer sawe with mine eyes a man better made nor fourmed, and he is fledde away with his sword in his hands on yonder hye way: but Sir, for God sake come not too néere him, for hee séemeth no man when hee is an∣grie, but hée is like a man out of his wittes without all feare and doubt. Then the Magistrates commaunded to follow him both on
horse-backe and afoote, and they all ranne to armour, though the Captaine were not greatly afraide, yet hee would not bee the first that should go foorth, he loued better that another shold take that aduantage. Thus on all sides on horse-backe and a∣foote, they followed Croissant, who kept not the high way, and it was far in the night: and also there were many that would not chafe themselues ouer much to séeke for him, for they wold make no preasse to receiue his offering: because they feared to finde him: and when they had sought a long space in the fields and in the high wayes, and could not finde him, they all retur∣ned to their Towne, and Croissant went euer from the Town∣ward, with his sword naked in his hand: and when hee sawe that he was two Leagues off, he entred into the high way, and praised God that hee was so escaped without daunger, but hee was sore displeased, in that he had neuer a penny in his purse, and nothing but his Sword, his Coat, and a rich purse at his guirdle, and also he sawe that it was Winter, frost and snow: also he felt the cold winde, the which did him much ill. Thus hee went foorth all night, and the next day, vntill it was néere night, then he arriued at a Village, and there he was faine to sell his sword, for lacke of monney to pay for his shot, he came to a Lodge, where he was serued of euerie thing that he would haue: then in the morning when he departed, he sold his purse for as much as hee could get, and hee trauailed so long that hee approached to Roome, and hee came to a Lodging without the gate, and there he lodged that night, and in the morning he de∣maunded of his Host, to whome that Towne appertained, and who was lord thereof, and what his name was that gouerned the Towne? The Host sayd: Fréend, hee that nowe is Lord héere, is named Guymart of Puille, but before hee came hether, we had a young Lord, the fairest young Gentleman that euer was séene, and he was Sonne to the noble Emperour Ide, you somewhat resemble him, but he was of so ill rule, and so full of follies, that all the riches and wealth that his Father had left him, hée spent and gaue away to euerie man that would craue any thing of him, so that in the end hee left himselfe nothing to liue by. And after I heard say, that he had in himselfe such
shame, that he departed priuily with a Squier, & went to séeke his aduentures: but no man knoweth where he is, nor whe∣ther he will euer come againe or not, and the Communaltie of the Cittie made little thereof, for after hee was departed, they sent for King Guymart of Puille, whome they haue made Em∣perour of this Empire. When Croissant vnderstood his Host, he complained right pi∣tiously to himselfe, and sayde. Alas poore Caitiffe that I am, what shall I do, that thus haue lost al mine Inheritance with∣out recouerie? and besides that I haue nothing to spend, nor I haue no trade to liue by, it must behooue me to die through hun∣ger and cold, I haue no more but fiue and Twentie shillings, for the which I sould my purse. Thus as well as he could, he continued till Lent, then the season began to be somewhat hot∣ter, and euerie day in the morning he would heare seruice, and euerie man that saw him, beheld him greatly for ye great beau∣tie that he was of, & there were diuers that knew him, but they would make no semblance thereof, to the intent that they wold giue him nothing: and when they sawe him, they would shun the way, because he should not know them, there were many of them that hee had done much good vnto, and giuen them in such wise, that they were become rich, and he poore, and there was none of them that would offer him one morsell of bread, whereof he was sorrowfull, for then he sawe well his monney was gone, so that he had neuer a penny left, then he thought to sell his Gowne, rather then to die for hunger, and so he did: he sould it for eight & Twentie shillings, and then he taried in his Lodging as long as his money endured, & hée continued there vntill Easter, & by that time all his monney was gone. Then he thought that he would goe into the stréetes, to sée if he might espie any Burgesses, to whome he had done in times past some good vnto, and to demaund of them some courtesie: & so he yssued out of his Lodging, and walked into the stréetes, & saw a rich Burgesse, who was leaning out at a window in his house: Croissant knew him well, for it was hee that made him rich, and before he was but poore: then he thought to acknow∣ledge himselfe to that Burgesse. Then Croissant went and sa∣luted
him right humbly, and sayd. Sir, haue remembrance of a poore Caitiffe, to whome fortune is contrarie, and who in time past did you much good when you serued him, if you bee a good man as I beléeue you are, of the goodnes haue you remem∣brance, and it may be so, if you doe so, you shall fare the better. When the Burgesse heard Croissant, he beheld him fiercely, & he knew him presently, and without making of any manner of answeare, he called his Page, and commaunded him to bring him a pan full of water to the windowe, and he did as his ma∣ster had commanded him: then the Burgesse tooke the pan full of water, and he beheld Croissant who stood vnder the window, and did cast the water vppon his head, so that his faire haire, coat, and shirt were all wet: Croissant without any word spea∣king made himselfe cleane, and afterward said to the Burges, that if he liued long, the offence that he had done him, he should déerely buy it, but the Burgesse (who was proud and disdain∣full) set but little by his words. Croissant (who was right sor∣rowfull) tooke his way towards the Pallaice, before ye which there was an old Pallaice, whereas no man had dwelled in of a long space, and he entred in at the gate, the which was great and stood open, and there he saw a great Piller, whereas there lay two burdens of strawe: then he layd him downe and slept, right sorrowfull & angrie with the Burgesse that had so wet him with water: the which Burges after he had cast this wa∣ter vppon Croissant, hee went to the Pallaice to the Emperour Guymart, to flatter and to please him, & he found the Emperor leaning in a window and saluted him, and sayd. Sir, I bring you certaine tidings of Croissant, Sonne to the Emperour Ide, who of right ought to be Inheritour of this Empire, whereof you are as now Emperour: he is come into the Towne in his doublet, without hose or shooes, he is arrayed like a Vagabond or a Ruffian, comming from the Tauerne, & he is so great and so well made in all his members, that hee séemeth more like a Champion readie to fight, then euer I saw man in all my life: if you will follow my counsaile, strike off his head, or cast him into a pit, that of him there may neuer be had any more memo∣rie. For if he liue long, he may doe you dammage, and put you
out of this Empire which you hould, the which should apper∣taine to him. When the Emperour Guymart vnderstoode the Burges, he beheld him fiercely and sayd: Speake no more to me of this matter, for thou doest like a Traytor, thou knowest well, that by him and his déeds thou and other bee made rich, & thou art like him that betrayed our Lord Iesus Christ: there∣fore I command thée from hencefoorth come not in my sight, for I wil haue no acquaintance nor conuersation with a Traitor: if it be so that Croissant be poore, it is pitie and lamentable, and great sin to doe him any ill, for I haue done him great ill, when I kéepe his Landes and Signiories wrongfully and without a cause, wherefore I thinke my selfe greatly culpable against the almighty God, for the sinne that I haue done him, in that I hold the honour and Signiorie, that of reason ought to apper∣taine to him, this day is Easter day, vpon the which day eue∣rie good Christian man ought to humble himselfe to God, cry∣ing him mercie and pardon for all their sinnes: it is reason that I make peace with God, and doe so that hee may bee content with me. Chap. CLXXX. ¶ How the Emperor Guymart spake & rebuked the Burgesse that spake ill of Croissant: and howe the Emperour bare meate and drinke to the place whereas Croissant slept. And of the mar∣uailous Treasure that hee found in a Chamber in the sayde ould Pallaice: and of that which was shewed him by two Knights whome he found there. WHen the Burgesse vnder∣stood the Emperour, hee was in great feare, and so departed right sore abashed, & thought he had béene too hasty to report such newes, & so right sorowful departed, and lft the Em∣perour alone in a windowe right pensiue, &
sayd to himselfe. Oh verie God, the pouertie that Croissant is in, is by my cause, for all that I haue ought to bee his, and I kéepe it from him perforce, if I kéepe it still, I may wel say that my soule shall neuer come into Paradice, but shall bee damned for euer. Thus the Emperour Guymart complained to him∣selfe, and so went downe into his Pallaice, and there walked vp and downe by himselfe before the olde Pallaice, the which was néere to his Pallaice, & he looked in at a gate, & saw a man lye sléeping on a burden of straw, and he thought incontinent that it should be Croissant by the report of the Burgesse. When the Emperour saw him, he had such great pitie of him that hée wept: and then he went into his Pallaice, and commaunded one to bring vnto him a Towell with bread and flesh, & a bot∣tell of wine, the which thing was done: then the Emperour tooke a Mantle furred with grise, and did it about himselfe, and tooke the wine and meat, and commaunded his men that none should follow him, then he went downe the gréeces, and came to the Pallaice whereas Croissant slept, and the Emperour set the meat and wine néere by Croissant, and awoake him not: then he couered him with the mantle, and then he departed, and as the Emperour was departing, he looked on his right hand, and sawe a dore open all of yron, & banded verie strongly with yron barres, and hee saw a cléerenesse within in such wise, as though there had béene a Hundred torches burning, & he went thether and entred into the Chamber, the which was great & large, and hee sawe all about the Chamber great Coffers, the which stood open and they were full of gould, and other Coffers full of iewels & rich stones, the which did shine with such light that the Emperor greatly maruailed: also he saw great péeces of plate and monney lying on the earth, and besides hee saw a great Vessell of Cups, and pots of gould and siluer, and great péeces of gould bordered with precious stones. Also hee sawe rich Gownes hanging on pearches, of cloth of gould and silke, in so great number, that the Emperour was sore abashed, and sayd: whosoeuer left this Treasure héere, might well be called a great Lord, for hee thought if all the gould in the world, and all the rich iewels were brought together, they might not bee
compared to the Treasure that he saw there, and sayd hee was happie to come thether. Then he passed foorth where he saw an Image of fine gold, and it was as bigge as a Child of two yéeres of age, and wher∣as the eyes should stand, there was two great Carbuckles, the which cast so great cléerenesse, that all the Chamber was light therewith. When the Emperour saw that Image, he thought to haue taken it, and to haue borne it into his Pallaice, but he had much adoe to lift it: then hee looked towardes a little dore, out of the which he saw comming two Knights, well armed at all péeces with their swords in their handes, and they came to the Emperour, and sayd. Beware Fréend, be not so hardy to beare any thing from hence, for the Treasure that is héere is not yours, nor it belongeth not to you to haue it: therefore set downe againe that Image, for without you doe it shortly, you shall déerely buy it. The Emperour séeing the Two Knightes threatning him, he was in great feare, and he sette downe the Image, and beheld the Knightes, and sayd. Sirs, you speake fiercely to me for the Treasure, the which you warne me that I shold not take any part thereof: by al right it ought to be mine and none others, since I haue found it: and therefore I coniure you by the puissance of God, & of his Angels and Archangels, and of all Saints, that you shew me the troth, to whome this Treasure doth belong, you ought to knowe it, since you haue the kéeping thereof: then the Two Knightes answeared, and sayd. Sir, this Treasure that you sée héere ought to appertain to Croissant, Sonne to the Emperour Ide, who alone lyeth on a burden of strawe héere by not farre from this Chamber, hee ly∣eth right poorely and naked, the which Treasure was iudged to him Fiue Hundred yeares passed, and neuer since that time hath there béene taken from it the value of one pennie, nor ne∣uer since it was layd here, there neuer entred any earthly man but alonely you. Croissant (who sléepeth without) is a valiant knight and full of troth: wherefore if you will know to whom this Treasure appertaineth, I shall shew you the manner how you may know it: behold yonder heape of gould, goe and take thereof thrée Besans, and put them into your purse, then re∣turne
into your Pallaice, and cause to be proclaimed through∣out Roome, that all poore men come to your Court, and that to each of them you will giue a Florent of gould. When Crois∣sant shall heare that, he will not be behind, but he will come a∣mong other to take that almes: and then the Thrée Besans that shall be in your purse, take and cast them on the earth, one in one place, and another in another place, whereas the people must passe to come to receiue your almes: then Croissant shall come the same way and finde the thrée Besans, the which by reason of his noblenesse and bounti, hee will come and bring to you againe, thereby you shall know that the Treasure that is heere before you, appertaineth to him, & ought to bee his. Then giue him your faire Daughter in marriage: and bringe him hether, and you shall sée that he may take of this Treasure at his pleasure, for it is all his, no man shall say the contrarie: and doing thus as wée haue sayd, you shall haue part of this Treasure. Chap. CLXXXI. ¶ How the two Knightes that kept this Treasure, spake with the Emperor Guymart, and shewed him the manner how he should know Croissant. And of the maruaile that Croissant had when he awoake, and saw the meat and drinke by him. WHen the Emperour had well heard the two Knightes, he went to the heape of gould, and tooke the thrée Besans and put them into his purse: and then he tooke his leaue of the twoo Knightes and departed, and when he was yssued out, he looked behinde him, and he saw the dore fast closed, whereof he had great maruaile, and found Croissant still sléeping, and so he passed by and would not awake him, and then he went to his Pallaice, and his Lords demanded of him where hee had béene that hée tarried so long, but hee would not
shew them any thing of the matter. Then the Emperor went to dinner, and was richly serued: and then Croissant (who lay and slept in the old Pallaice) suddainly awoake, and had great maruaile of the furred Mantle that he found vppon him, and he saw also lying by him a Napkin, and therein wrapped good white bread, Capon, rosted Fesant, & Partridge, and thereby he saw lying a great bottell full of wine: and when he saw this good chéere, he thanked God of that aduenture. Then hee did eate of the meat, and dranke of the wine at his pleasure: and when he had well eaten and drunke, he departed from thence, and left the rest behind him, and tooke nothing with him: and also hee left the furred Mantle, for hee durst not weare it, but sayd to himselfe, that he had no right thereto, because it was a thing that was none of his, and so he went downe through the stréets of the Towne. Chap. CLXXXII. ¶ The proofe that the Emperor Guymart made to know Croissant, vnto whome he gaue his faire Daughter in marriage, and deli∣uered him all his Signiorie and Inheritance, whereof great ioye was made at Rome. WHen the Emperor was risen from dinner, he called to him Foure of his ser∣uants, to whome he gaue in charge, that they should cause to be proclaimed in euerie Stréete of the Towne, that all poore men that would come to the Emperor, should haue in almes euerie man a Flo∣rent of gould, of the value of Ten Sons, the which crie was made in euerie stréete and Market-place in Roome, whereby euerie poore man drew towards the Pallaice. When this crie was made, Croissant heard it, whereof he was ioyfull and said. howe hee would goe thether among others, to haue the Empe∣rours almes, wherewith hee thought hee would pay his Host, and then in hast he went thether. The Emperour (who was
there readie) thought to sée & prooue whether the two Knights sayings were true or not: & so drew out of his purse the Three Besans of gould, the which he did cast in diuers places, in the way as the poore men should come to the Pallaice, but many poore men passed ouer them, and perceiued them not: & then Croissant came among others, and he saw among the mens féet one Besan of gould faire and bright, and he stouped downe, and tooke it vp, and then he went forth: & within a little while after, he found the second Besan, the which also he tooke vp: and a little further among the mens feete, hée espyed the Third Besan, the which also hee tooke vp: then hee thought within himselfe, and sayd. Alas, what a Caitiffe am I? if these had béene siluer, they had béen mine, but they are fine gould, where∣fore I am beguiled, for they appertaine to the Emperour Guy∣mart, who holdeth this Empire, I haue no right to kéepe them, because they belong not to mee: therefore I will render them to the Emperour, vnto whome they doe appertaine: then hee came to the Emperour, & sayd. Sir, I haue found by ye way as I came to your Pallaice thrée Besans of gould, the which here I deliuer to you, for of right and reason they appertaine vnto you, bicause of the right and title that you haue to the Empire, but if they hadde béene siluer, I might haue kept them as mine owne without blame. When the right noble Emperour vnderstood him, he beheld him, and sighing he sayd. Fréend, you are welcome, the boun∣tie, noblenesse, and wisedome that is in you, shall ayd you to come to the place wherof in reason you ought to be: for ye good∣nesse and troth that I haue séene in you, I will giue you my déere Daughter in Marriage, whome I loue entirely, and you shall take her to your Wife, and therewith I shal yéeld you the Crowne Emperiall of the noble Empire of Rome, the which of right appertaineth to you. When the noble Croissant had wel heard and vnderstood the Emperor, he was right ioyfull, and kneeled downe to the earth in the presence of all the Lords that were there present, thanking him of the honour that he offered him. The Emperour (who was a noble and a wise Prince) tooke him vp by the hand, and led him into a Chamber, wher∣in
hee caused a bathing to be prepared, in the which the noble Croissant was bathed: and then the Emperour brought him such apparell as was méete for him to haue. When Croissant was thus richly apparelled, a fairer nor a better fourmed man could not be found in Eightéene Realmes christened, whereof the Emperour Guymart had great ioy, and sayd, how that in all his life he neuer saw a more goodlyer Prince, for he was great among other men, and well fournished of all his members, he was bigge and large in the shoulders, and the skinne white mingled with red, his haire like golden wyre, and his face straight with a large forehead, his eyes gray, and his nose well made, long armes and bigge handes, his Legs faire and straight, and his féete well proportioned and made: the Em∣perour Guymart could not bee satisfied with the regarding of him: and then hee led him into the Pallaice where his Lordes were, who greatly lauded and praised him, and sayd each to other, how that they had neuer séene before so goodly a Prince, nor better made nor fourmed of his members. Then the Em∣perour sent for his Daughter by two great Lordes, and they went to her Chamber for her: then she came to the Pallaice to the Emperour her Father, richly accompanied with Ladies & Damsels. Of their apparell I will make no long rehearsall, for it was as rich as might be, and she was so faire, that God and nature could not amend her, nor no Painter in the world though he were neuer so skilfull, could not paint ye fashion nor proportion of her beautifull bodie, and all that were there pre∣sent, both young and old sayd, that they neuer sawe nor heard report of so faire a couple of Creatures, as the noble Croissant and this Ladie were, for euerie man thought that they were made for nothing else, but to cause men to behould them and their beautie.
Chap. CLXXXIII. ¶ Howe the Emperour Guymart promised Croissant, that within three dayes he should haue his Daughter in mariage: And how the Emperour Guymart led Croissant to the olde Pallaice, and shewed him the great Treasure that the two Knightes kept for him. WHen the Emperour Guymart sawe his Daughter come, hee tooke her by the hand, and sayd. My right déere Daughter, I haue found for you a Husband, to whome I haue giuen you, and you may well say, that a fairer man, nor a hardyer Knight you neuer sawe before, and that is the noble Croissant, vnto whom this Empire appertai∣neth by rightfull enheritance, and he is Son to the noble Em∣perour Ide, who hath giuen this Empire to his Son Croissant, but when he was of no great age, he departed from this Cittie with a small companie, and went to serue in strang countreys, and when the Lords of this countrey saw that they were with∣out a Lord, they sent for me into Puille, and so they made mee héere Emperour wrongfully and without reason: but nowe since that Croissant the rightfull Inheritour is returned: for to discharge my soule towards God, I shall put into his hands al his Empire, without kéeping from him any part thereof, for as for me, I am rich and puissant ynough: and therefore Croissant, if it be your pleasure, you shall haue my Daughter in mariage. Sir, (quoth Croissant) if it be her pleasure I will not refuse her, for I neuer sawe a fairer, nor none that I had rather to haue. When the faire Damsell vnderstood Croissant, shee was right ioyfull, and she beheld Croissant, who séemed to her so faire, that her loue was enflamed vpon him, for the more she beheld him, the more she loued him, and she thought it long vntill the mat∣ter was made perfect: then shee sayd to the Kinge her Father.
Sir, then it is your will and pleasure, that I shall haue Crois∣sant in marriage, you may commaund mee as it please you, it were a folly for mee to make refuse, and Sir, I require you to let vs be married shortly, for if I haue not him, I renounce all marriage for euer, for there is none other that euer shall set the King on my finger but onely Croissant. When the King vn∣derstoode his Daughter, hee laughed hartely and sayd. Déere Daughter, thinke not the contrarie, but that you shall haue him to your Husband: then the King sent for a Bishoppe, who assured them together, whereof the Damsell was so ioyful that shee wist not what to doe, and priuily shee thanked our Lorde God: and if she loued him well, Croissant loued her aswell, and both of them desired for the day that they might come together in wedlocke. When Thrée dayes were passed, and that the prouision was made readie for the Wedding, then King Guymart made them to sweare each to other, and especially he made Croissant to pro∣mise, that on the Third day hee should take his Daughter in marriage, the which Croissant promised and sware so to doe: then the King tooke Croissant by the hand, and ledde him to the old Pallaice, to prooue if the Treasure that was there might be had away by Croissant, as the Two Knightes had shewed him: and then they two alone came to the ould Pallaice, when they were come thether, the King sayd. Faire Sonne, I loue you well, and also you ought to beare me your loue, since you shall haue my Daughter in marriage, and because I haue great af∣fiance in you, I shall shew you what I thinke to say, and that which lyeth in my heart: it is of troth, that about foure dayes passed, as I came from seruice, I stoode and leaned out at a window of my Pallaice, and I beheld this same place where∣as we be now, and where I saw you lye a sléepe, repleat with famine and pouertie, I tooke of you great pitie, and I brought to you bread and drinke, and did sette it by you, and I couered you with a furred mantle, and so I let you lye still, for I would not awake you, and as I returned from you, I sawe a dore o∣pen of this Chamber, the which you sée now closed, out of the which I sawe a great light yssue: then I went thether and en∣tred
into the Chamber, and there I sawe so great Treasure, yt I neuer saw none such in all my life: there was a rich Image of gould, the which I thought to haue taken and borne with me, & as I had it in my handes, two Knights well armed came foorth, whereof I was afraide, then they sayd vnto me, that I should not be so hardy as to touch the Image, nor no part of the Treasure that I saw there, for they sayd, that it did not apper∣taine to me, and if I did the contrarie, I should repent it, and they sayd incontinent they would slay me: then I demaunded to whome that Treasure did belong. Then they sayd, that it did belong vnto Croissant, who lay héere without a sléepe, and they commaunded me to take thrée Besans of gould, to prooue thereby to whome the Treasure should appertaine, and then they aduised me to make a Dole to poore men, and that I shold cast down the Besans vppon the earth whereas the poore men should passe by, and hee that found them and brought them to me, this Treasure should appertaine to him: wherefore I pray you let vs go thether to know the troth. Sir, (quoth Croissant) I pray you let vs goe thether. When they came there, they found the dore closed: and then Croissant knocked thereat, and sayd. Yée Sirs that be within, I pray you in the name of God to open this dore, incontinent the dore opened, and there they found the two Knightes with their swords in their hands. Then Guymart and Croissant en∣tred into the Chamber, and the two Knightes came to Crois∣sant, & made him great chéere, and sayd. Croissant, your great Prowesse and Noblenes is greatly to be praised, we haue béen a longe time héere sette to kéepe for you this Treasure that you sée héere, for it is Fiue Hundred yeares since that we were set héere by King Oberon, to kéepe this Treasure for you, and hée shewed vs that it appertained to you, and neuer since it was touched by any man, but onely by King Guymart, whome (to the intent to ayd and succour you) wee bad him take thrée Be∣sans of gould, and shewed him that this Treasure appertai∣ned neither to King nor Emperour, but alonely to you, which is so great that no man liuing can estéeme it, you may take it & beare it away, or giue it whereas it shall please you, and what∣soeuer
you take from it, all your life it shall not diminish nor decrease. When Croissant vnderstood them, hee was ioyfull, and thanked the Knightes in that they hadde so longe kept his Treasures then they tooke leaue of Croissant, and embraced him and sayd. Sir, we require you to bee courteous and liberall, and pitifull to the poore, and loue well all noble and wise men, and giue to them largely, and be good and true to your Father in law King Guymart, for he is a noble and a wise Prince, you ought to thanke him, & to loue him aboue all other men liuing. When Croissant thanked them of their good aduertisement, and then they tooke their leaue, and so departed sodenly, that nei∣ther Croissant nor Guymart wist not where they were become, whereof they were abashed, and made on them the signe of the crosse: then they looked about the Chamber, and saw the Trea∣sure that was there, where of Croissant was so abashed, that he will not what to say, for there was a great light in the Cham∣ber, as though there had béen Thirtie Torches lighted, by rea∣son of the bright stones that were there: to speake of the Trea∣sure that was in that Chamber, I cannot shewe it, for there  so much that they were thereof abashed to behold it. When Croissant sawe this Treasure, it was no maruaile though he was ioyfull, and thought to himselfe, that he would not spae to giue to them that were worthy, & such as did serue him truely, and so hee did, for hee gaue so largely, that all the  praised him: and when they had beene there a certaine space, Croissant sayd to King Guymart. Sir, of this Treasure, I will that you haue the one halfe, & you shall haue the keys of that, and giue thereof at your pleasure. Faire Sonne, (quoth the King) I thanke you, all that I haue is yours, and all that you haue is mine, wée will part nothing betwéene vs as longe as wee liue. Then they departed from thence, and Croissant tooke certaine of the iewels to giue to his Spouse: and then they departed out of the Chamber, and locked the dore, & tooke the key with them, and so they returned to the Pallaice right ioyfull. Then Croissant gaue to his Lady the rich iewels, who right humbly thanked him therefore.
Chap. CLXXXIIII. ¶ Of the great Treasure that they had, and how Croissant wedded the noble Damsell, daughter to King Guymart: and of the Feast that was there made. AFter that King Guymart and Croissant were returned to the Pallace, the La∣die was readie apparelled: and then the Two Louers were wedded together in the Chappell of the Pallaice. The great ioy and mirth that was made in the Pallaice and in the Citie, I make no menti∣on thereof, they dyned: and of their seruice and rich apparell I make no rehearsall, for it were too longe to declare it. After dinner the young Knightes and Squiers Iusted in the Cittie: of the ioy and sport that was there made no man can expresse it at length. Then they went to supper, and if they were well serued at dinner, it was aswell at Supper. And after supper, and that the dauncing was done, Croissant and his Ladie went to bed together in a rich Chamber, where the same night they accomplished their desires: so faire a couple was neuer seene, as were Croissant and the Ladie Katherine his Wife: & when the night was passed, they arose and came into the Pallaice, whereas the feasting and ioy began againe the whih  Fiftéen dayes. Great was the triumph that was there made: after that euerie man departed from the Court, except all such as appertained to the Court. Of the good life that they led, all such as loued them reioyced thereat, and longe time they liued together, so that at last through age King Guymart ay sicke in his bed, and so the Fourth day he dyed: great sorow the Ladie Katherine his Daughter made, and so did Crossant who déerely loued him, and his body was borne to the Church of Saint P∣ter, and his obsequies done, and so layd in his Sepulture with sore wéepings, for in his time he was a good Prince and a true
Iusticer, hee was greatly complained for both with poore and with rich. Then after his death by the consent of all the Lords of the Empire, Croissant was crowned Emperour, and the La¦die Katherine Empresse, at whose Coronation was made great feasting and ioy, a godly life they led as longe as they liued. Croissant amended and encreased the Signiorie of Roome, and conquered diuers Realmes, as Ierusalem and al Surrey, as more plainely you may knowe by the Cronicle that is made of him and of his déedes, and now héere of him I make no more men∣tion: they that will know more, let them search the Bookes of Cronicles making mention of his déedes. Thus endeth the Ancient, Honourable, Famous, and delightfull Historie of Huon of Bourdeaux one of the Péeres of Fraunce, and Duke of Guyenne: and of diuers Princes liuing in his time. Transla∣ted out of French into English by Sir Iohn Bourchier Knight, Lord Berners, at the request of the Lord Hastings Earle of Huntington, in the yeare of our Lord God one Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Thréescore & Ten: And now newly reuised and corrected, this pre∣sent yeare 1601. FINIS.
