14460 99843392 8122
A MANVDV∣CTION, OR INTRO∣DVCTION VNTO DIVINITIE: CONTAINING A Confutation of Papists by Pa∣pists, throughout the important Articles of our Religion; their testimonies taken either out of the Indices Expurgatorii, or out of the Fathers, and ancient Records; But especially the Manuscripts. By THO. IAMES, Doctor of Diuinitie, late Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, and Sub-Deane of the Cathedrall Church of Welles. This marke † noteth the places that are taken out of the Indices Expur∣gatorij: And this ☞, a note of the places in the Parchments. Imprinted for Henry Cripps and Henry Curteyne at ord, 1625.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, John, Bishop of Lincolne, Lord Keeper of the Great Seale, and one of his Maiesties most Honou∣rable priuy Coun∣cell. Right Honourable, my very singular good Lord; BEing incouraged by your Lordships fauo∣rable acceptation of some small Labours of mine, heretofore presented vnto your Honour, I presume to offer vp these few, but important and chiefe Arti∣cles of our Religion vnto your Lordships farther consi∣deration, as they are maintained and explained by Primitiue Fathers, knowne Papists, and ancient Ma∣nuscripts, a threefold corde, which, in my coniecture, cannot easily be broken. As concerning the Manuscripts, they are ancient, but not many; innominable as yet, but not long so to
continue, if their names can bee redeemed by any▪ meanes; and y t they cannot well be excepted against by the common Aduersarie, being written long before Luther, Hus, VVicklife, or VValo, as the Character plainely sheweth. And if they were not old enough, it would be easie for me to euicl the true Antiquitie of our Religion, ut of that great Treasure of Bookes, amas∣sed together by that iudicious Knight, Sir Robert Cotton, the truest Philobiblos of our Age in his kind. For the Papists, whose words and workes are of∣ten cited by me, though the Papists would seeme to elude their testimonies, or expunge their Sentences in thr vnsufferable and vnwarrantable thrise-accur∣sed Indices Expurgatorij; yet they speake fully and home for the truth of ours, and the falshood and nouel∣lisme of their Religion: and doe the Papists what they can, as what hath not been done by their close Indices? Yet all the water in the maine Ocean will neuer be able to wish their testimonies out of our Bookes: Ours I call them, because though bred and brought vp in the bo∣some of their Romane Church, they are but seeming Papists, so called, as Montes are a non mouendo, or Pacae a non prcendo, being easily mooued to take part with vs, and if need were, to defend and subscribe vnto the Articles of our Religion, so vniformely, so Catholikely agreed vpon by the Prelates of our Religi∣on in the yeare 1562. Lastly, for the Fathers, whom they would faine make Partiaries, and defenders of their new and vpstart opinions; it is not to bee marueiled, when they haue squeazed out the iuyce of their Bookes, Text, or Glosse, pared them to their purposes, and purged them to their
minds, or fancies rather: For if they also chance to erre, or mis▪speake in their iudgements (as the best haue failed sometimes, and in some things) they haue a delantur for them also; they shall be no longer Fa∣thers, but Sonnes, and therefore subiect to their cen∣sures, and in plaine tearmes, purgeable, as Gretser the Iesuite hath long since from Ingolstad aduertised vs. But let them leaue the Fathers of the purer Ages, in puris naturalibus, without mixture or mutation of theirs, pure and sincere; and wee doubt not, but the truth of our Religion will as clearely appeare, as the Sunne shine at mid-day, which I shall beleeue, till I shall see a round and plenarie Refutation of the defence of ewels Apologie, which was threatned to be answe∣red in the late Councell of Trent, and our Countriman Master Harding, hath challenged it here and there of some mis-quotations, which the learned Bishop doth confesse most ingenuously, and retort the like, and grea∣ter escapes vpon the Challenger: but wilfull, or purpo∣sed corruptions, id{que} cum authoritate (such as theirs are) he cannot, he shall not find in him, nor any of his supposts. This small Worke of mine, Right Honourable, such as it is (and better it had been, if due encouragement, health, and meanes had not fayled me) I willingly sub∣mit vnto your iudicious Fatherhood and graue wis∣dome, hoping some small good may accrew thereby vn∣to my deere Mother, the Church of England, a sound member and obedient child whereof, I professe my selfe to be, farre from Poperie, and farther distant (if farther may be) from all itching, vpstart, Schismaticall humor, going the Kings High-way, and fighting as others haue
done before me contra Dextrarios & sinistrarios. I haue better learned my Religion out of Tertullian and others, that the first Religion is the best; and that the higher we steppe, the neerer we approach vnto the truth. And if this small attempt of mine, graced by your Ho∣nourable Patronage, shall but worke in my poore sedu∣ced Countrymen and Compatriots, a true loue of Anti∣quitie, and detestation of all Popish corruptions, in de∣facing and dsgracing of all manner of good Bookes; to God onely be the glorie, I haue my desire. Resteth no∣thing but to shew my willing readinesse, and ready wil∣lingnesse to be imployed by your Honourable Lordship, in any seruice that commeth within the compasse and sphere of my small knowledge, and poore abilitie, and so I rest, Lond. 26. April. 1625. Your Honourable Lordships in all dutie to command, Tho. Iames.
The points that are briefly handled in this Booke. OF the sufficiencie of holy Scripture for saluation, &c. 1 2. Of the iustification of Man. 14 3. Of good Workes. 19 4. Of Priests Marriage. 23 5. Of the authoritie of generall Councels. 27 7. Of the Ciuill Magistrate. 29 7. Of Purgatorie. 57 8. Of Indulgences. 61 8. Of Prayers for the Dead. 67 9. Of Reliques and Pilgrimages. 67 10. Of Funerals and Diriges. 72 11. Of Adoration of Images. 73 12. Of the Inuocation of Saints. 81 13. Of the Sacrament of Penance. 83 14. Of Auricular Confession. 85 15. Of Satisfaction and Contrition. 88 16. Of the authoritie of the Church. 90 17. Of the Lords Supper. 95 18. Of the certaintie of Saluation. 97 19. Of Rome. 98 20. Of Cardinals and Bishops. 101 21. Of Popish Priests. 103 22. Of Popish Monkes and Friars. 109 23. Of Miracles. 114
Errata. Pag 3. (b) milio, reade unilio p 4. (c) pretera, r preterea. ib. l. 2 collected▪ summed vp, r. collected and summed vp. ib. esta perfecta, r. esca perfecta. p 6. c. Iud, r. nd ib. () confugium, r. confugimus. p. 7. p poiend, r. ponenda. ib. (x) Val▪ r. Vat. p 8. (z) Luic in ex, r. Lincoln▪ in ep. ib. (b) scita decretas, r scia decretaque. ib. (c) disputandi▪ r disputanda ib. (f) curiosa, r. curiosae. ib (g Quaedam esca est praelator est perfect, r quaedam esca est praeatorum perfect p 8 Its common, r, Its commones. ib (i) qui nouit, r. quod nouit. ib. (k) coarctatuu r. coarctatus. p 9. Bonium, r. Boiorum. ib. (9) exorintur, r. exuruntur ib. (y) Laudec, r Pan dect. p. 10. (c) oculus tuuis, r. oculus tuus. p. 12 in the text, infest, r. infect. p. 13. (q) urent, r. curabant. p. 16 (u) confitentum, r. confitentium. p. 17 (y) languiudi, r∣lam guidi ib () Pardus r. Paradinu. p. 18 . 2. in the text, vs we, r. that we. ib. l 16. foe. r some. ib (s) Christus▪ r. Christi p. 20 siu-siu, r. sin-sin. ib. (i) que accepit ostendit, r. qae accepit ostendunt p 22. (g) & alma, r. la alma. p. 23. (b) Apostoli vxorem, r Apostoli vxorati. p. 24 (r) Syluan▪ r. Sylua p. 26. (x) In in miuoribus, r, In minoribus p. 27 l 15. Franciscanus,  Francischinus. ib. (b) hab at, r habean. p. 28. Wernriu, r. Wernerus. Ib (c) Padr. r Pndect. Ib (k) Cytizensi. p. 31. n. 16 serue, r deserue p 32. por eppo, r. por ello.  33. plru{que} r plerumque. p. 34. (g) Ie∣sue, r osue. p 36▪  26 Sherife r Sherife. p. 38. l. 33 proposinō, r. propositions. p. 4. l. 11. quaerit, r. quad p. 44 l  Teire, r. True p. 46  3. harend, r. azend. p 47 l. 2 if Iurie, r. it ur. . 51. () Argironae, r. Angyrae Ib Ngedon▪ r Hvgedon. p 58 3 Cacologus▪ r Cacolog Ib l. 20 Not of their Theologus, but of their Ca∣cologus, r Not of their Theologues b  of their Cacologues p▪ 59. (g) sentiat, r. sentiant. p. 62. Nutius, r. mtu p 67 (b) mniae, r. neniae. p 7▪ l 14. sharos, r. shooes. ib. l. 16 and allowing besides. r and all know besides ib. l 19. common uro, r common burra 77 sultaries, r surtaies p 86 (d) ciuis r. spe∣cialius▪ p. 99 Lvthros, r Lycanthropia ib (q) modo is muneret donega∣re. r. modo is m , de ga ib. (x) megab r negabit. p. 100 oemine, r. foe∣mineo p 102 (k) Snaed r. Cyndis ib () vneimu, r. venmus. p 104 exclaime  procla. . () Bulaeuis r▪  p 105. l. 4 stone,  stoues▪  . 12. sore∣ly▪ r. w li  ()  caution▪ r dedi caunem▪ b (s) . ▪ insaniae. ib. (t) as  asu p. 106. l. and that r and f that 107 l 9 v r y p 08▪ l. 4. can∣ audaces p 9. () smniaria, r s a▪ p  Monasteum, r. Monaste∣ri. p. 113. a ab otium, r. ob otium. p. 116. Thca, r. Thea.
The Sixt Article. Of the sufficiencie of the Holy Scripture for Saluation. HOLIE Scripture containeth all things necessary for saluation; so that whatsoeuer is not read there∣in, nor may be proued thereby, is not to bee required of any man, that it should bee beleeued as an Article of faith, or be thought re∣quisite or necessary to saluation. In the name of the holy Scrip∣ture, wee do vnderstand those Canonicall bookes of the olde and new Testament; of whose authority was neuer any doubt in the Church. Of the names and number of the Canonicall Bookes. GENESIS. EXODVS. LEVITICVS. NVMBERS. DEVTERONOMY. IOSVA. IVDGES. RVTH. 1. booke of SAMVEL. 2. booke of SAMVEL. The 1. booke of KINGS. The 2. booke of KINGS. 1. booke of CHRONICLES 2. booke of CHRONICLES
The 1. booke of ESDRAS. The 2. booke of ESDRAS. The booke of ESTHER. The booke of IOB. The PSALMES. The PROVERBES. ECCLESIASTES, or the Preacher. CANTICLES, or Song of SALOMON. 4. Prophets the greater. 12. Prophets the lesser. And the other bookes (as Hierom saith) the Church doth read for example of life, and instruction of manners: but yet doth it not apply themto stablish any Doctrine, such as are these following: The third booke of ESDRAS. The fourth booke of ESDRAS. The booke of TOBIAS. The booke of IVDITH. The rest of the booke of ESTHER. The booke of WISEDOME. IESV, the sonne of SYRACH. BARVCH the Prophet. The song of the three Children. The Storie of SVSANNA. Of BELL and the DRAGON. The prayer of MANASSES. The first booke of MACCHABEES. The second booke of MACCHABEES. All the Bookes of the New Testament, as they are com∣monly receiued, we do receiue and accompt them for Cauo∣nicall. This Sixt Article maintained and explained by the more mode∣rate and learneder sort of Papists, from whom I haue taken these Propositions following. 1 THat they make the same Canon with vs. 2 Exhort vs to the diligent study of this sacred Word. 3 Shew the manifold vse and profit that we may reape there∣by.
4 Its perspicuity. 5 Its necessity to saluation. 6 The vnprofitable and vnnecessary vse of all other bookes. 7 Its commonnesse to be read of all. 8 Lastly, its contempt and reformation. Whence by way of Corollarie, I will en∣treate briefely. 1 Of its translation into the vulgar. 2 Of the Latine Edition. 3 Of the Septuagint. 4 Of the Hebrew Canon, shewing that it ought to be the Ca∣non and rule of all other Translations. The First Proposition. That they make the same Canon with vs. FIrst, In Leoti Adcto Act. 2. Col. 96. . Bibl. . Ptrum p. 4. ex Cron. Rom. vbi legitur in textu. Hi sunt librita prisci quam re∣centes, quae in Ec∣clesia pro Cano∣nicis habentur, Adscribe in rg▪ Caute lege: Nam Tobiam, Iudith, Esther, Sapientia, Ecclesiasticum, & Macchabaes per∣peram omisit. Leonius, commonly called Aduocatus, is a sure Aduocate for vs in this point, making the same Canon al∣most with vs, and informing vs, That in his time, it was not onely his, but the Churches opinion. In Imilio de partibus div. legis l. . c. 3. Col. 3. C. M. Adiungunt plures—Esdrae 2. Iu∣dith 1. Hest. 1. Macchab. 2. D. Quare hi libri non inter Canonicas Scripturas currunt. MS quoniā apud Hebraeos, quo{que} super hac differentia recipiebatur, sicut Hieronymus cae∣teri{que} testatur. Irmilius, in his learned Dialogue, betweene the Master and the Scholler, proceeds further, and yeelds the same reason that we doe: because the Hebrewes difference them after the same sort, according vnto the testimony of S. Hierome and others. But there is a cautè lege, or Caueat put in against them both: Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit Textum. Scripturae libris non Canonici. Caute lege, nam perperam quosdam libros, à Canone ss. Scripturarum euel∣lit. Secondly, ☞ Boston of Burie in his Calogue of Manuscript books ouer all England in his time. ☞ Sunt praete∣r alii quidam libri vt Sapien∣tia Salomonis, libri Iesu filii Sy∣rach, quidicitur Ecclesiast. liber Iudith, Thobias, & libri Maccha∣baeorum qui le∣guntur quidem, sed non scribuntur in Canone. In Catal. MS. in praelat. Boston of Bury, the painefull, but vniudicious
Monke, treating of Apocrypha bookes, out of Isidore and Iuo, makes the selfe same Canon with vs, and that for the same rea∣son, and with the same limitation: Shewing besides who were the supposed Authors of those Apocrypha bookes. Lastly, the History of Bell and the Dragon, is challenged by our quick-sighted † Historia Belis Apocrypha 1. Eras. ex Annot. Dion in p. 5. Aug. & scholijs in p. 3. in Dper praesatn Dan∣olum. Erasmus for an Apocrypha story. The like censure † Quam historiam scio inter Apocrypha numerari. Spondanus passeth vpon the Booke of To∣bie, and Erasmus vpon Iudith, and the Macchabees.f †▪ Erasmus in ep▪ ad p. 86. h †▪ Erasmus in Iud Aug. ¶ The second Proposition. That they exhort vs to the diligent study of the sa∣cred Scriptures. BY the complaint of diuerse writers both old and new, the Scriptuees were too too much neglected, shall I say, or vtterly despised, generally of their Monkes, and Friars, Preachers, and others (as more opportunely shall be shewed in the handling of the eight proposition) and therefore the Spirit of God which bloweth where it listeth, and illumina∣teth whom it pleaseth, raised vp some in priuate, some in publike, to be notable instruments of his glory. I will onely touch and away. In the history of the Councell of Ms. in Coll. Ball. Oxon. ☞ Basie, there is a whole Sermon, to rouse their diligent attention to the hearing and heeding of Gods word. Vatablus, more powerfully and fee∣lingly, before his Bibles, with the double translation and Scholiaes, hath collected summed vp all the testimonies of the Bible, † Ad sacrarum lit. studim ex∣hortatur ex sacris literis. the rather to incite and prouoke men to the studie of the holy Bible, and not vnworthily; for there is †. Benedictio obedien tibus verbo Dei, maledictio non credentibus. In Cap. 11. Deut. Bibl. R, Vatabli in Marg. a blessing an∣nexed
to them that obey, and a curse vpon them that disobey, or discredite Gods word, † Vita in verbo Dei, Vatablus & Steph. in Lucae, C. 4. in Marg. wherein is contained life, yea ☞ Vita aeterna in S lit. tota con∣tinetur. Bacō Ms. inter opera mi∣nora, p. 41. life eternall, and therefore it is called ☞ Sermo Dei cibus est. Ms. 43. p. 28. foode, the ☞ Sacra scrip. dicitur esta per∣fecta, Ms * p. 22 foode of the soule, perfect foode, ☞ Mane eti∣am colligebant Manna in signum quod ab ineunte aetate insudand est, s. Scripturae quae per Manna exprimitur, Ms * p. 22. spirituall Manna, which must be gathered in the morning; to shew, that wee must begin betime to gather, that is, to study it as it were in the morning of our ages. ☞ Corpus Christi est ecclesia, cuius oculus est S. Scriptura vt dicit Psalmista, lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, D. Ms. 29. p. 324. The Church may fitly be tearmed Christs body, & this the eye whereby it seeth, according to that of the Psalmist, The word of God is a lanthern vnto my feete. The ☞ Recte Scriptura Sion, dicitur quia speculum est Dei, quod hic reperitur & videtur. Hist Basil, Ms. 2. p. 5. word of God is called Sion, Si∣on signifieth a looking glasse or mirrour, wherein God is both seene and found. To conclude, it is both a ☞ Gladius clypeus{que} Ms 43, 128. Sword to † Antichristus debellatur, per S. Christi Euangelium, Liniger, p. 1468. con∣quer Antichrist, and a Shield to protect vs from his fierie as∣saults, of a ☞ In s. scriptura auctoritas principalis ad diri∣gendam fidem Catholicā. Ms 21. p. 205. principall vertue to direct man to the right Catho∣lique faith. And to say no more, all the ☞ Omnes Scripturae referendae ad Christum cui seruire est regnare, Bacon Ms. p. 46. Scripture is referred o Christ, whom to serue is to raigne. ¶ The Third Proposition. The manifold vse and profit thereof. THis proposition, hath a necessarie coherence with the for∣mer, and a neere dependance on the fift, of the necessitie to saluation: and therefore being vertually contained in them, I will passe by it, with a light touch, ¶ The Fourth Proposition. Of its Perspicuitie. THe word of God being (as hath bene formerly shewed) the bread of life, the spirituall Manna, what auaileth it, if it be not broken; or if it be broken, if it bes not digested? If
the Arke be vnder its courings, how shall the glory of God be seene? Or if it be seene, if onely the High-Priest may en∣ter? The Scriptures are hard, and the difficulties are many; to assoyle this doubt, and resolue the question, the Scripture is plaine, Ms 2. p. 149 ad dandam homini viaetori notitiam veram sufficientem partim per plana, and for the rest, the obseruation is safe that is giuen vpon ☞ Q aperte dicta no sunt, cu∣riosis in dagari non debe t. Cyil adversus Anthro∣pom. c. 2. p. 709. Cyrill, that wee must not be too curious to hunt after that which God would haue vnknowne in the Scripture. ¶ The Fift Proposition. The Scripture containeth all things necessarie to saluation. Scripturae cre∣dulitas sufficiens ad salutem. Fe∣rus in c. 17. Io. pa. 508. BEliefe in the Scripture is sufficient to saluation, and that a man would thinke were sufficient to cause vs to medi∣tate in Gods word both day and night: but we ☞ Nihil valet meditari, nisi sequatur operari, Ms * p▪ 528. must ioyne Good-workes with our Faith. Meditation without operation is fruitlesse, it  In Id. Chs. Scripturas conti∣nere omnia. containeth all things: all things ☞ Necessari∣a ad salutem radit. Mhst. o. Bas. p. 643. necessary to sal∣uation: heerein is contained the wisedome of God,☞ Sapientia ei comprehen∣diturin lege Dei vtriusq. Testa∣menti. Sapientia Dei, &c. the wisedome of God is contained in his Law, that is, in both the Testaments, we need seeke no further, f † Et nihil in Ecclesia Dei debet plus confi∣derari, Bacon Ms. p. 47. this alone is able to saue vs. It † A de perfecta vt nihil ei adiiciendum. In Synopside vita A∣bopardi ad 4. is so sufficient, that nothing can he added to its sufficiency: this sure Ant de Dominis fidei regula certa. l. 1. pag. 5. rule of Faith will square all that is amisse, Ad eam tanquam ad Ancheram confugium Id. ib. this Anchor will hold all that is fleeting, ☞ Nec fallere, nec falli potest. Conc. Bas. Ms. p. 39. it neither doth deceiue others, or is deceiued it selfe. For a conclusion of this point, it is ☞ Infallibi is reg a & sufficientissima, Ibid. pag. 42. & Ant. de Dom. lib. 6. cap. 1. ss. 39. a most infallible rule, and super sufficient, or om∣nisufficient meanes of our Saluation, let this suffice: but that I must needs take away one obiection before I passe further. It may perhaps bee granted, that all things necessarie to Salua∣tion are grounded in the Scripture: but in what sense, literall or mysticall, apert, or hidden? I answere, ☞ Omnia necessaria ad salutem fundantur in sensu literali. Hist. Concil. Bas Ms. p. 42. out of the
Councell of Basil, All things needfull to Saluation, are founded in the literall sense of the Scripture. ¶ The Sixt Proposition The vnporfitdble and vnnecessarie vse of all other Books. THere was a time, when blind superstition did so farre pre∣uaile amongst vs, that † Claues caele∣stis Philosophiae Aristoteli accep∣tae, Io. Auent. An∣nal. Bonorum l. 2. p. 95. in Theolo∣gorum scholis cele brior Aristoteles quam Paulus. E∣rasmus. schol. in Hier. p. 17. there was no God amongst vs almost but Aristotle, no † Argumento∣rum riui ex Ari∣stotelis fontibus. Io. Auent. annal. l. 2. p. 146. † Mundana Philosophia dominatur, Germ ser. v. . p. 831. Diuixitie, but drawne out of the dregges of Philosophy; and as if these were not sufficient to blind our spirituall eyes, or puzzle our vnderstandings, a la∣bryinth of humane traditions were found out, to amaze and perplex vs: but thankes be to God, the night is passed, and the day is come; darkenesse is passed, and the glorious Sunne shine of the Gospell hath long since expelled these mists or fogges: Wee haue a certaine rule to guide vs; an Ariadnean clue to direct vs, † Non Diale∣cticorū tendicula nec Arist. spineta quaerend a sunt, ipsa Scriptura∣rum verba po∣niendi. Io. Langus in Chron. Cytiz. p. 833. Germ. ser▪ pag. 1. ipsa Scripturae verba ponenda: Catches and sophismes of Logicians, abstruse and hard questions of Aristotle will not serue the turne: Gods word alone is certaine, other profes vncertaine and false, if they dissent from it. Sine Scriptura nihil asserendum, in Ind▪ Chrysost. Without Scripture nothing is to be affirmed, and † Nihil vltra quam sacris literis pro∣ditum est definiendum, Ersm. annal. in Hisarium. beyond it nothing is to be conclu∣ded: t to know nothing but the Gospell, is to know all things. † Solum Dei verbum honoretur omnino: coe∣tera autem velut aduentitia & superflua, si non etiam noxia reiiciantur: Christus est omnia, verbum Dei omnia, caetera tanquam nihilum & inane. Iac. Faber in Marcum, pg. 285.  Lex Dei adeo perfecta vt nil ei adiiciendum, Insynopside vita Agobrai ad 4. The word of God, onely and alonely is to be honoured with all manner of reuerence; all other things are but adiectitious and superfluous, if not hurtfull and noxious: in comparison of Gods word, all other things are as nothing, or of no weight. † Ire ad▪ dexteram est addere verbo Dei, ire ad finistram detrahere, Val▪ in Ios▪ c. Ms 10. The Law of God is so perfect, that it admits of no addition: much lesseq † Solum Dei verbum certum: coetera falsa si dissentiant. Ferus in ep. ad Rom. c. 3. pag. 303. c † Extra Euangelium nihil scire est. omnia scire, Faber in pfat in 4. Euang.
may wee take ought therefrom: This † Adre p∣ de gravius peccatum quam velle s futura ,  in  Reg. 1 . were to turne to the right hand or to the left, and not to runne the way of righte∣ousnesse.  fun∣dament des, vel pro fundamenta∣libus, non funda∣mentales ponan∣tur ▪ Luic  Regentes Oxon, s. Addition to Gods word is as heinous a sinne, as the sinne of witch-craft. The stones that Dauid must carry in his sling, must be taken out of this Sanctuarie: my exhortation to all shalbe, briefly that of the famous Grosthead to his Regents of Oxford: Take heed that in stead of these Myst sen∣sunt  &  predi∣catorum cum ∣nusquisque de∣gat pr vult No marg. apud Thoat. in os. 6. q. 73. p. 98. ex edit. foundation stones, you bring not vnfundamentall or moultering ones; such as are the a dreames and fictions of Preachers, which by an Allegori∣call, or mysticall sence, make good what best comes into their brain-sicke heades, causing the † Scta decre∣tas Christi non seruare sed seruire, Io▪ Auent▪ annal. l. 5. p. 452. Scriptures which should saue them, to serue them. I conclude with the saying and beliefe of Erasmus: † Quae lego in sacris libris & in Symbolo Apostolorum summa fiducia credo, nec vltra credo, caetera permitto Theo∣logis disputan de Erasm. pag. 117. Whatsoeuer I read, either directly in the holy Scrip∣tures, or virtually to bee deduced out of them: as the Symbole of the Apostles, I beleeue with the greatest assurance that may bee▪ further I dare not goe; this faith contenteth mee: all other † Quidditates & esseitatas, p. 1. Grrman. ser. pag. 833. Quiddities, and Esseities, † Ngae inscholis, Eras. ex annot. v. p. 3. cap. 10. Fooleries, Gryphes, † Curiosas ne dicam, impiae quae∣stione Ersnnet in Hilarium. Curious, orra∣ther impious questions, I leaue to bee disputed, in their proper place, the Schooles. ¶ The seuenth Proposition. Its common to be read of all. THe holy Scripture, as it affordeth stronger meate for them that are or should bee ☞ Quaedam (elca) est Praelu∣tor est perfecto∣rum scilicet, s. Scriptura, M * pag. 22. perfect, that is, Clearkes and Praelates: so it hath milke for Babes, Lectio debet omnibus esse communis, In Ind Chrysost. must be read of all: ☞ Communis est ista pastura, qui nouit Apo∣stous cum dixit: Frater debitorsum omnibus Graecis, Latinis, & Barbaris, M * pag. 300. all haue pasturing vpon these commons. ☞ Progressus S▪ Scripturae, non est coarctatuu ad partem vniuersitatis, Ms 21. p. 149. The progresse, or profit thereof, is not restrayned to one part and not to an other: as if some may read it, and some may not. Why then doe they so
much † Quare indig∣nantur si propha∣nus legat Scriptu∣ras, Io. Auent. wnum, l 4. g. 382 & p. 6 scorne, that lay or prophane men (as they tearme them) should read the Scriptures: † N quis lo∣quatur de Chri∣sto aut de S literis nisi Theol Eras. p  as if no man were to take of Christ or Scripture but Diuines. What † Lectio populi non prohibenda quia aliqui abu∣tuntur, Auen in Io. though some a∣buse it? All will not; it is no such † Nefas esse scrip∣turam in populare linguam vertere. Erasv. 9 p 802. heynous matter, as you would make it, to translate the Scripture into the vulgar: and yet, some for translating the Bible, more for Nunc exoriuntur hom . Erasv. 9. p. 58. reading of it, haue bene consumed with fire and flames; when poore soules they † Doctore hic magis opus est quem tortore, Lip∣sius in polit. l. 4. c. 16 had more neede of instructers, then tormentors, and might haue beene † Docendo magi quam iubendo, monendo quam mirado, Lipsius polit. l. 4. c. 4. wonne to the truth of their religi∣on (supposing it to be so) by faire meanes, rather than by compulsion. Faith is free to bee perswaded, not commanded: with Erasmus I will leaue men that cannot be perswaded, to Gods mercy, the furthest that wee can doe, (vnlesse they bee troublers of States, and seditious Schismatickes) is to excom∣municate them. But as a wise Lawyer saith, non mouendum quod sine sanguine moueri nequit: as wee must saue blood and not spill it; so wee must saue soules, and not damne them, if it may be otherwise.t † Fides suadenda non imperanda. Io. v † Relinquendus animo donec resipiscat aut excom Eras. v. 9. p. 380. x Non errantes in religione sed turbantes punitum e in Lips ad Polit. Not. in c. z. l. 4. & p. 78. y H. Aaerod. Lauder. c. 21. p. 47. ¶ The eight Proposition. The contempt of Scripture, and a desire of Re∣formation. THe complaint was too true, that † Verbum Dei & Scriptura multo perus a Christia∣nis discrep um est, quam a Iudaeis vel Gentibus, Ferus in Io c. 5. 9. 0. Ferus once made; the word of God, was in worse case amongst Christi∣ans then amongst Iewes or Gentiles, it was so tossed and tum∣bled, rent and torne, no otherwise saith † urisperit de∣torquent Scriptu∣ras quo volunt, v Sutores sordidas pellet, Virg. de in∣uent. l 4. c. 9▪ p. 271. Polydor Ʋirgill, then Coblers vse their filthy leather. Hee speakes this of the Canonists and Lawyers, the false Prophets, whereby God doth † Deus opera Pseudo-propheta∣rum seducit eos qui verbum eius oderunt, Vatabl. in Rg. 3. c. 22. in marg. seduce men, when hee giues them ouer to a rapro∣bate minde, that hate his word, and refuse to be reformed by the same, ☞ Neglecta   propter bullat & instituta ho∣minum. M. 29 p. 383. neglecting it for I know not what Blles and tra∣ditions of men. Of these writeth an ancient writer, whose
name were well worth the knowing, and his obseruations note-worthy; and therefore I will take the paines to trans∣cribe it wholly, as much as maketh for our purpose. ☞ Isa specula∣tores eius caeci om∣nes, viden s vara, hoc est caeci in spi∣ritualibus; sed per∣spicces in tempo∣ralibus. Et in euan∣gelio dicitur, lucer∣na corporis tui est oculus tuuis. Corpus Christi est Ecclesia, cuius o∣culus est sacra scrip∣tura, vt dicit Psal∣mista. Lucerna pedibus meis ver∣bum tuum, &c. Sed hodie est am∣phora oculis eorum qui per saeculare sci∣entiam & lucrationē Ecclesiam quae est, corpus Christi diri∣guut, & secundum instituta hominum regū & gubernat. Talentum plumbi ponderosum scilicet peccatū significat, & nogotium saecula∣re quod exigit auari¦tia. Et quid hodie talentum plumbi nisi bullata Priuile∣gia, dispensationes, rescripta cauda et huiusm Duae mu¦lieres quae leuant amphoram, volup∣tatem significant, & inanem gloriam propter quae con∣gregant multi aua∣itiam malam Domui suae. Qua∣rum alae sunt vt milui, qui est Auis rapax, querula, cir∣cumvolans, aubu comesticis insidians & cadaueribus. Sic & intentum auari inter caelum & terram defertur quia captat inania: sed stabilitur in terra Sennaar, id est, in inferno vbi faetor & stridor dentium, M 29 p 324. I say, their watchmen are all blind, and yet as blind as they are they can see vaine and transitory things, thus we may interpret these words: they are blind in spirituall affaires, but quick-sigh∣ted enough in temporall matters. It is said in the Gospell, the light of thy body is thy eye. Christs body is his Church, his eye is the holy Scripture, according vnto the saying of the Psal∣mist: Thy word is a lanterne vnto my feete, &c. But in these present times, alacke for woe; there is an Amphora, a beame in their eyes, which by saecular and gainefull Scien∣ces, take vpon them the rule and gouernance of the Church (which is his body) by traditions and ordinances of men. The weightie and ponderous talent of Lead, signifieth sinne and sae∣cular affaires, procured by couetousnesse. And at this present time, what is this talent of Lead, but their Priuiledges, Dis∣pensations, and such like, sealed with Lead? The two wo∣men which lift this two eared pot betweene them, signifie plea∣sure and vaine-glory, whereby many gather euill riches into their houses. Their wings are like Kites: The Kite is a rauenous birde, houering vp and downe, to lye in waite for tame foule, or stinking carrion. So these couetous men, lye houering betweene heauen and earth, casting about how they may get into their hands, whether it be by right or wrong, this transitory pelfe of the world: but their being is in the land of Sennaar, that is to say, in hell, whereis nothing but loath∣some smelles, and gnashing of teeth. Out of these words wee inferre this, that many in those dayes sought after wealth, few after the Scripture, the light of their soules: few looked into this ☞ Sacra Scriptura speculum est Dei, quo videtur sacra hist. Conc Bsnu. 2 p. 5. mirrour, to see the deformitie and foulnesse of their soules, fewer that Paucissimi hodernis temporibus repeciuntur, qui eam vi∣site, aut frequentent, Ibid. tread in those steppes which lead vn∣to saluation.
The first Corollary. Of the Translation of the Scripture into the vulgar tongue. OF this we haue heard Erasmus iudgement, in the se∣uenth Proposition; if that suffice not, lagitat necessi∣tas huius aeui, vt sint conuersa Bib∣lia in linguas vni∣cuique nationi vernaculas. Geo. Wicelius meth, Conc. Cap. 2. Geo. Wicelius a moderate Papist, that wrote not many yeares after Luther, will be able to informe vs, that as the times are now, it can∣not bee otherwise, but the Bible must be translated faithfully out of the originals: He reckons vp the great vse, and souc∣reigne profit likely to flow therefrom: but chiefely (saith Porro praeter ali∣as commoditates, quas secum af∣fert interpretatio primariae linguae, magnum incita∣mentum ecclesi∣ast is erit, vt vel li∣terati vulgi metu, accuratiús caui∣usque Scripturae loca in Cathedris vsurpent. Geo. Wice∣lius. Ib. hee) it will make our Preachers more warie and carefull in their citations of Scripture, lest the lay hearer may parhaps take them tardie now and then. And hee further saith, in the same place, that Nec periculum est vt hinc haereses pullulent, si in sua quisque statione modo seterit. Ib. there is no feare of making them Here∣tikes, by reading Gods word, if the Pastors and Teachers doe their duty. The † Laicos non sub mouendos a lecti∣one: sed Biblia traducenda in vulgarem Galli▪ cam vel Britanni∣cam. Anon. in Io. Anonymus writer vpon Iohn, will not haue the people prohibited from reading the Bible: but that they ought to be translated into English, or French. † Ob articulos huiusmodi exuri∣untur homines. Io. Cspn. Aust. p. 602. Cuspi∣nian, saith, that the Scripture was read, by the same token, that some were burned for it. By the meanes of Cyrill and † Contra Pontif. sententiam obtin∣uit sacra patrio sermone, Zuingerus p. 4146. ex Ranulpho Higden l. 5. c. 32. Anton. Tit. 16. c.  Ant. de Dom. l. 7▪ e.  ss. 4. Methodius, the Sclauons inioyed their seruice in the vul∣gar tongue, full sore against the Pontificians will. m Ant de Dominis, vrges this point mainely: but what need haue wee of more testimonies? This point is ratified, by a voyce from heauen (if † Audita vox de coelo, omnis spiritus laudet Dominum, et omnis lingua concatur ei. A. Siluius referent Zuinger. 1. 4168. Aeneas Siluius report before hee was Pope do not faile me:) There was a voyce, whilest this busi∣nesse of hauing the seruice in the vulgar tongue was trea∣ted of, heard from heauen saying, Let euery spirit praise the Lord, and euery tongue confesse him.
The second Corollary. Of the vulgar Latine Edition. SOme make the vulgar Latine of equall authority with the originall Hebrew and Greeke, preferring Agar the hand-maid, before Sara the Mistresse, to verifie that ofGen▪ 16. 8. the Scripture: I haue seene many seruants ride, and theireeles , 1. masters goe on foote. It is also questioned amongst some of the lesse learned, whether it be Hieromes or no; but that opi∣nion, and that of theirs, who shame not to say, that he wrote as a Mariana aith otherwise, Inter∣pre non   dictan  reddi it. De g edit. c.  0. Prophet rather the as an Interpreter, is cryed downe by the  Non est a ipsa  Mariana . learneder sort of Papists; stiling it therefore (as commonly it is) by the name of the Vulgar Edition. The iudgement of the best in these ages, since the light of the Tongues hath sprung forth, is, that it is a  Mendosa Ioh. Mariana, b. faulty,  In ea confesi errores Tucc. Tucc.  12. corrupt,  Aug Steu∣chs  Deut 28 pag 16▪ deprued translation: How often is the Interpreter taken tripping by their best linguists? It is full fraught, with  p▪ 2. gross errours and mistakings, with I know  Sathat qs . not what riffe raffe. One hath noted vnto vs 8000. at the least, and these errours are rooted and inueterate; for Roger Bacon our learned Countryman, hath long since obserued, ☞  p▪ 53. that to he a spleasure of God, and infinite lsse to his Church, it re∣mained vncorrected in his time: or if it were amended, it was the ☞ Quilibe cor∣.  sua  l. . p▪ 54▪ worse for their corrections, few of them beeing willin, and fewer able to performe the same, as it ought to be done, ☞ Non nt  qui sunt  Arab. ibid 16▪ wanting both Greeke, Hebrew, and the Ara∣bck tongues and ee ends with a patheticall speech to the ☞ Clmor ad  & ad vo qui soli potst . 54▪ Pop▪ to app a remedy in time to this maladie, least it should happen to fester and infest the Church of God, as it hath done these many yeares after his death, and is to this present day (notwithstanding they haue beene often tam∣pering with it,) in no good state of conualescencie, the more to blame are the Dowists, that haue translated it into English, and obtruded to our simple Countrymen, as the very word of God▪
The third Corollary. ¶ Of the Septuagint. OMitting the curiositie and speculatiue knowledge of those hidden questions, whether the 2. Transla∣tors, were shut vp in 72. diuers Celles: or being all toge∣ther, did so vnanimously agree vpon one Translation: most certaine it is, that as it is, be it more or lesse, corrupted  Apostoli atque Euangelistae fre∣quentissimé cum proferunt Scriptu∣rarum testimonia minime curent ex∣actam illam He∣braicae veritatis explicationem: v nonnunquam di∣uersa, atque He∣braica habet, si ver∣ba caute contem∣plere, scripsisse vi∣deantur. Isid. Cla. in prefat in Biblia.  Nulla super dis∣crepantia veritatis Hebraicae quaestio erat. Simpliciter credebant Sermonem Hebraicum, in Graeas voces fuisse mutatum. Nec cuiquam tunc curae fuit discutere cum de vtat non dubitaretur. Sed nec Apostoli debuerunt isiusmodi rebus oc∣cupari qi necesse habebant opportunae et importunae predicationi Cestis gratiae et Gentium onuersioni insistere, t proudere bona non solum coram Deo sed etia coram hominibus.  in Chron. l. 2. 118. it was, and accordingly and frequently cited and vrged by the Apostles, who being to plant the primitiue faith in mens hearts, thought it not best to put such seruples of reading, and diuers lections into their heades, and it was no fit time then to mooue or dispute this question, whether the Hebrew originals, were to bee preferred before the Septuagint translation, the fountaine before riuelets: They were other∣wise occupied, about preaching the word, conuerting of Nati∣ons, there was a consta for the truth of that they taught: further then that which tended to edification, they sought not, but to prouide honest things for them before God and be∣fore men. The fourth Corollary. Of the Hebrew Canon, shewing that it ought to be the Canon and rule of all other Transla∣tions. IF the rule swarue or decline, it cannot direct; if the fountaine bee myrie and tainted, the water that issueth from it cannot bee stanch; that which directeth others, must bee infallible in, and of it selfe: so fareth it with the
Hebrew Bibles, (say our obiectors what they will)  Explatia He∣raca non  corrupta. . ab  paet▪ in . they are incorrupt, and not onely the vulgar, but all other transla∣tions must bee reduced vnto it, as riuers vnto their N{que} nostra ides intepretation ∣ cu onti∣ comparata. Io.  pag. 110. Col▪ 1. Foun∣taine. This hath beene hitherto the practise of the best learned of the Romish Church, Aug. Steuchus, Arias Montanus, Isidorus Clarius, Iac. Faber, we are able to pro∣duce cloudes of witnesses to manifest the clearnesse of this truth and therefore taking it as granted, we will with ☞ No sunt quaor qui sciunt Graecam, Hebrai∣cam, & Arabicam, R  in oper ▪ p▪ 16. Ro∣ger Bacon, † Exuinis fonti∣ pus quam ex qualibuunque rivul, Pras v 6. Annot in Novum Test in praea. ad Lect▪ and † Priores doctores linguas non calleban, Tuc. Tuccius in Cantica, p. 129. others, bemoane the want of men expert and learned in the tongues of former ages, and with thankfulnes to the Almighty reioyce, † Redeunte Euangelii iuce, quae sese tand mundo rurs ha tempestate insinuat—a temp Constantini non fuit maior linguarum cognitio, Iac. Fabe a. in uang. for the light of the Gospell, in this † Hac ae ate nostra quam ego hoc nomine auream appello, Isid. Clar. prae∣at▪ in . golden age, which hath brought with it so much knowledge of the tongues, and shineth so brightly amongst vs, that none but men † (Homines) oppleti tenebri. Io. Mariana de vulg p. 34. that sit in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death, will dare to oppose against this truth, and defend the con∣trary. The Eleuenth Article. Of the Iustification of Man. WEe are accounted righteous before God, ☞ N ex nostris  sed ex sua bnitate▪ Phil. Re∣▪ M. p. 296. onely for the merit of our Lord and Saui∣our Iesus   ids in Christam & nullis  nostris iu∣, . in c. 6  R.  Non debti sed gratiae, non iustitiae sed misericordiae, Frus in c. 5. Io p. 154. † Pii  sol. De misericordia confidunt Sngoud in arg. Psal. 57, p. 201. † Nllis mortalium vel viribus, vel cops , . in Ps 61▪ in Arg. p. 252. † Fidei nostrae bass, ras. v. . p. p▪ . † Totum Christi∣onorum  est, Stella in Lucam, p. 64. by faith, and not for our owne workes or deseruings: Wherefore that wee are iustified by faith onely, is a most whole∣some doctrine, and full of comfort.
This eleuenth Article explained and maintained by Papists. BEcause Iustification by sole faith, R. s. p. 100. is the soule, life, and definition, and all, in a Protestant; first deuised by R. s. p. 87. Lu∣ther, Fathers against Iustification by sole faith. inpugned by the Fathers, neuer R. s. p. 17▪ beleeued of the Wal∣denses, nor to be gathered out of their owne opinions, or out of the writings of Catholickes: no signes or tras of onely iusti∣fying faith, but onely such which doth R. s. 172▪ separate them farre from the Protestant cape, and lead them vnto loosenesse: wee will make bold to scan this Article more narrowly, and resoluing the whole into it's parts, wee will diligently inquire; 1. About the name, nature, parts, and effects of Iusti∣fication. 2. Affirmatiuely, that it is onely for the merits of Christ by faith. 3. Negatiuely, not for our owne workes, or deseruings. 4. Wee will endeauour to make good this proposition, which is as it were, an Eleophuga, or scar-crow to the Pa∣pists, that we are iustified by faith onely, is a most whole∣some doctrine, and very full of comfort, and all this accor∣ding to the doctrine of the most renowned and best learned Papists. The first Proposition. About the Name, Nature, Parts, and Effects of Iustification. IVstification, is when the faithfull and chosen seruants of God, which were preordained vnto saluation in Gods se∣cret wisedome, being sinners by nature in Adam, guilty of eternall damnation, are accounted righteous, and pronoun∣ced iust before God, by his imputed and free righteousnesse; and not onely for the merits of Christ, acquited from the guilt and punishment of hell fire: but made partakers of e∣ternall
life, to their assured comfort in this, and certaine fruition in that better life which is to come. Let vs take a better view of all the parts of this definiti∣on. Iustification appertaines onely to the faithfull Belee∣uers; and none but they are  In filio pre or∣dina sunt ad viram nempe qui in ipsum credant. Fe     144. preordained to life in Christ: these are a certaine number, not Non omne cre∣d sedso electi   17. Ioh.  . all chosen out of the masse, and elected to saluation: and yet for all this, they are called sinners, and are  omines infi, scii & pecaore▪ , p 70 & p 87 all sinners by nature.  Homo qunus  mper pec∣c    in   12. as we are men, there  Nu in nobis usta, ▪  ▪    marg. is no manner of righteousnesse remaining in vs▪ Male ta sunt on solum quae n gm sed & quae in nos aguntur▪ ma∣dicta est cordis no str cogiratio, ratio, , manus, pedes &   . . 1. p 14. all that we doe, or is done vpon vs, is accursed: accursed are the very thoughts of our hearts, vnderstandings, the members of our bodies hands mouthes, and feet, and the very contingent things of this world, whether of ioy or sorrow, are all accursed: so  Qqu agit stus,   p 7 that the best deeds of the best men, are no better then sinnes. In   os  m▪ amuis ex mise▪  De non mputetur   th 22. p. 180. our Good-workes there is some medley of euill, not imputed to vs thorough Gods free mercie: and Qntacun{que}  ,   mo∣▪ vel saltem plu∣  mala,  p  albeit we do neuer so much good, still we sinne, and summing vp our good deeds and bad, the bad will be the greater number, and the more ponderous. To conclude this point,  Om stra ee mra enebra & peceata at{que} hic primus gradus est ad iu▪ ficationem,  in . cap. 3. pag. 92. all that wee ca challenge to our selues is nothing but sinne, and a fre ac∣knowledgement, that of our selues we deserue to be thrown into vtter darkenesse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. In this deplored estate of ours, what remedy? What helpe is there for a distressed conscience? The selfe same that was last mentioned, let vs ascend by an humble and lowly confession of our sinnes, which is the first step to sal∣uation: then by degrees acknowledging our sinnes, let vs call vpon God for  Ad fontem miserd  N ad o misericordiae pro canto elicto misericordia conetur ei, ac Faer  Can. p. ad Cor. c 11  81▪ mercy in feruerous prayer, liuely  Andit eos qui vna fide illum inuocant. Stella in ucem, p. 10. v. 2. faith, and  S rta in Deum fidu credit Sgoudanu in arg Ps. 224. v. 503.  Portis fides te ad t. Id▪ in Psal. 129 . 511 assured confidence, and then lay sure hold vpon the throne of Grace, and the Mercy seat: thus appearing and appealing to Gods mercy from his iustice, though we bee sicke he will cure vs, though we  Mundari per fidem Fer.  c. 26. p 343. be foule he will cleanse vs, though  Christus cō∣ent & dentium tegi peccata per suam iustiam, F . p. . we be naked, e will couer vs with our elder Bro∣thers garment, and Iosephs  Agnost cunicam Io∣sephihoc est, iustiti, am et merita Christi Fer. in c. 18. Math p. 158. party-coloured ceate died red
with his passion shall bee acknowledged, yea, though we be † Langiudi ae∣groti, imó mortui. Ar. Montanus▪ l 4. de Gen. et Regen. Adam p. 202. dead in sinnes and trespasses, we know that our † Viuinus in fide. Vatabl. in ep. ad Gal. c. 2. † Iustorum vita in fide sua. Cl. Guilliau∣dus. in ep. ad Rom. c. 1. u 7. liues are hid in him, and that he is able to raise vs vp from the death of finne, to the life of righteousnesse: such seekers finde, so they seeke in Faith, such Debtois † Qui non habet Christum per fidem, non habet legem, non satisfecit legi. Fer. in Ioc 5. p. 157. are able to satisfie the Law by their suretie Christ, are made of Seruants Gods † Fides facit dis∣cipulum Christi, charitas ostendit et probat discipulum. Fr. in c. 13. Io. p. 427. Schollers; of Schollers, † Per fidem effi∣cimur filii dei. Fr. in p. Io. . c. 5. p. 670. Children, and of Children heyres † Filios facit, et deum patrem. Iac. aber. in c. 5. ad Gal. p. 159. vnto Eternall saluation: and this, not for † Non pr uiusquam meritis; sed pro mera largientis liberalitate. Iac. Faber prefat in Euang. any worth of ours, but of his free gift. So that to descend this Iacobs Ladder, as we before ascended it. The † Spiritus s. donum. Vat. summa tot. Scripturae. gift of Faith is infused into our hearts, this Faith bringeth vs vnto Christ, Christ vnto his Father, God seeing vs in Christ ac∣knowledgeth vs to be his, † Christi iustitia iustitia nostra, et in Christo essicur iusti. Isid. Clar. in ep Co accepts his righteousnesse for ours, and for his sake takes vs vnto mercy, takes off the debt and hand-writing that was against vs, and finally admits vs into his heauenly mansions. And all this proceedeth not of our † Regnum coelorum non est merces operum, sed gratia dei. In Herma . Pl. Col. 83. v. 5. ☞ Donum sine merito. M. 29. p. 233. merits: but of his mercy, as now cometh to be shewed in the next place. The Second Proposition. That Iustification is onely for the merits of Christ by Faith, in the affirmatiue. THis gift † Donum gratui∣tum  indebitum. 10. Ferus in Io. 5. p. 154. † Non debiti sed gratae, non iustitiae sed miser▪ cordiae. Ib. ☞ Gratiae dei onia adscribenda Tho de Brackley in sermonibus. Ms. 30. p 91. † Ex mera liberalitate largientis. Iac Faber prefa in E∣uang. of Grace is no debt, no righteousnesse of ours, but a fauour of Gods, to whom onely all must be abscribed, as proceeding from his meere liberalitie, by † Sola fide in Christum et nullis meritis nostris iustificamur Fer. in c. 16 ad Rom. p. 327. Faith alone, by Christ † Sperant salurem per eum et non per alium. Rayn. Snoyg. p. 67. in arg. ps 19. alone, in his † In Christi erito. Claud. Paradus Symb▪ heroici p 124. merit for his passion, all rests † In sola dei misericordia confidendum Snoygod in Arg. ps. 51. p. 201. in his
grace no Christ: Christus non reci∣pitur nisi fide Fer.  c. Ioh. 1 p. 19. without Faith, Fides sine operi∣bus non magis est dicenda fides, quam cadaner hominis meretur hominis vocabulum, Eras. To. 9 p 570. no Faith without Works, no workes of our as we dare stand vnto, or relie vpon, or † Iustus ne in o∣peribus confidat quantumcun{que} bo∣is▪  Ind. Chrysost. in∣terpose betweene God and vs, his iudgement and our sinnes: † Gratiam exclu∣di▪ si meritis salua∣ur, b. mercy excludes merit, grace is opposed to workes, to this † Ad fontem mi∣sericordiae recurren∣dum, Iac. Faber in Can. p ad Cor. c. 11.  81 fountaine of Grace we are to haue our recourse, and of this mercy † Recipere omni saluificam Christo fidem, Faber in c 10. ad Rom. u. 92. and all-sauing faith, to looke for saluation, and of no other. The Third Proposition. Not for our owne workesor deseruings, in the negatiue. WE looke for no saluation from our selues as of † Nll sala ubis † Virtute efficientia{que} sua be∣rari on poterunt. Arias Montanu d Gen. & Regenerat. Adam. l. 4. c.  p 202 our selues, who † Comparatus Iob iustitiae Dei ho∣minis nullam de∣clarat, Vaablus in Iob c. 9. Not rg. † Homo homini comparatus vnus altero iustior—si ad Dei potentiam aequaliter omnes infirmi, ins & peccalores. Fer. in c 3 Io p. 70. † Si cum deo confe∣rantur sunt impii Vat. in Io  15 nu 15 though we be neuer so iust before men: yet are sinfull in comparison of God. Nor from our owne righteousnesse, which † In bonis operibus nonnihil mali, Fer. in c. 12. Math. p. 180. is damnable, if it be examined in rigor; nor from our owne strength and vertue, which is but weaknesse, our best † De fide habitu credendi, & fide confidentia dicta: vide Stellam in Lucam. p. 64. † Certa in Deum siducia & forti fide, Snoygoud in Ps 124. p. 303. workes that are tainted, wanting foure graynes to make them currant in Gods scale, and therefore in the last place, it is a most wholesome doctrine, and full of comfort, that wee are iustified by Faith. It is a whole∣some doctrine, because it agreeth with the word of God, and teaching of their owne men: full of comfort because it doth not onely hope that we may be saued: but breeds y an assurance and confidence in our minds, that we imbrace Christ, and leaue the world trust to Faith and disclaime me∣rit: which doctrine is not so to bee vnderstood, as if Faith were barren without Good-workes, or that Good-workes were not to be followed of vs, if euer we meane to runne the way of saluation, which now come in the next Article to be examined.v † Quae iudicamus bona, recta intenti∣one & feru nti facta, non protinus bona sunt, si a nobis sunt, sed si a Deo, Faber in Math, p. 201.
Of the Twelfth Article. Of Goodworkes. ALbeit that Goodworkes, which are the fruites of Faith, and follow after iustificati∣on, cannot put away our sines and endure the seueritie of Gods iudgement: yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and doe spring out of a liuely Faith, in so much that by them a liuely Faith may be euidently knowne, as a Tree discerned by the fruit. This Twelfth Article explained and maintained by the Papists. THere is no Article thoroughout all our Doctrine so much seandalized as this of Goodworkes. Our Ad∣uersarie the Deuill hath raised vp our Aduersaries the Pa∣pists, to reproach the whole hoste of Israel, and the God of Hostes, as if we lead men to loosenesse, taught men to eschew Goodworkes, as sinnes, and neuer so much as stu∣died the point of Sanctification: but looke into their In∣dices expurgatorij, hearken vnto their vnpartiall and mo∣derate Papists, and the scandall will cease, and this Article be cleered from imputation of calumny. For taking away all opinion of merit, all confidence in Goodworkes, ma∣king them accessarie after, and not necessarie before Iustifi∣cation, embracing them as the fruit, and not as the root of a true and liuely Faith, and we will be as forward as they to aduance the doctrine of Goodworkes, as being inuol∣ued within the doctrine of Faith, and incorporated in the Articles of our Religion proouing these Propositions. 1. That Goodworkes are the fruite of Faith, and follow after Iustification.
2. That they cannot put away our sinnes, and endure the seuerity of Gods iudgement. 3. That springing out of a liuely Faith, they are pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and are to be knowne no otherwise, then the Tree is discerned by the fruit. The First Proposition. That Goodworkes are the fruits of Faith, and follow after Iustification. FErus a most learned and pious Writer of their owne, saith as much in other words. † Fides radix, et opera bona fructus. orn 3. . Io. p. 61. Fides radix, Faith whereby a man † Qua homo iu∣stificatur. Ib. is iustified, is the root, Good-workes the fruite of our Iustification. Now I suppose it will bee easily granted, that the root goeth before the fruit, both in order of time and of nature. Wherefore though it be most true, that † Iustificatio non ex operibus. Faber. in Lucam. p. 376. Good workes haue nothing to doe, or doe interuene in the very act of Iustification, which is vvrought by free mercy and faith † Hoc donum in hac vita obtinetur per fidem tantum. Ar. Montanus in Math c. 19. nu. 30. † Fides ex Dei gra∣tia. in ep. B. Petri nu 1. p 385. alone, and which hath the prime place in our Iusti∣fication, as being more operatiue in the meanes of our Saluati∣tion, Primas partes asserendae a Deo salutis sidei tribuo. Iac. Faber. in p. ad Rom c 4. p. 76. yet they doe conuene to, and follow after our Iusti∣fication; a true and liuely Faith is still † Operosa est. Vat in Baruch c. 1 . 21. working by † Non puede set fee sui limosau sui charidad Ioseph Luquian Erudicion Christiana. p. 331. discars. 14. cha∣rity † Fides charitate stipata. Nota Marg. in Lemnium de cculis natura miraculis. l. 1 c. 14. p. 92. which waiteth vpon Faith, attired † bonis siquidem deoque acceptis operibus fides solida nunquam destituta est sed ornata. Id. Ib. with the ornaments and habillements of Good-workes, and they are so necessary by† Fides ad iusti∣ficationem sum∣mum tenet Id. ad Galat. c. 2. p 154. way of † Bona opera non precedentia quae meruit, sed consequentia que accepit ostendat. Cl. Gailliau∣du in p. ad Rom. c. 4 p 22. consequencie, but not of precedencie, non causatiuè sed ostensiuè, shewing, but not causing our Iustification. That I¶ † In re salutis fi∣des plus operatur, per ipsam n. iustifi∣camur, non per o∣perosam charita∣tem Fer. in Eccl. c 9 p. 147. dare be bold to argue with † Qui bona opera non habet, testatur se fidem in Christum non ha∣bere. Vatablus in Is. 58. in Marg. Vatablus (as Saint Iames doth) a posteriori, that hee that hath not Good-workes, hath no true faith in Christ, no Christ, no benefit of his passion, and shall haue no part in his resurrection; hee hath denied the Faith, and is already become a reprobate, and Infidell:
but grant that hee hath Faith, it is but † Instigandi prae∣dicatores vt libere hypocrism bo∣norum operum re∣darguant. Vat. in Isc. 58. in Marg. hypocriticall, and without true faith his workes are abhominable and † Fides sine o∣peribus non magis est dicenda fides, quām cadauer ho∣minis meretur ho∣minis vocabulum Er. p. 9. p. 511. cada∣uerous and stinkng in the nostrils of God. This is our, this is the Papists doctrine concerning Goodworkes built vp∣on the rocke Faith, or Christ, against which the slande∣rous mouthes of Obiectors, nor the gates of hell shall euer be able to preuaile. The Second Proposition. That they cannot put away our sinnes, and endure the seueritie of Gods iudgement. IF we looke for our † Per Christum (fideles) sperant sa∣lutem et non per alium Suoygoud in arg. Ps 19. saluation from no other person but Christ, no other gift but from † Salus per Christum Geo. Ven. p. 4 sect. 3. Probl. 340. his Grace, no other † Christus mori∣ens pro omnibus mortuus est. Geo, Ven. Probl. p. 4. sect. 1. p. 19. action but his passion, that by his death hath made a ful † Christus solus pacificator et iusti∣ficator Vat. nota Marg. in c. 26. Isp. 33. attonement for vs, † Victoria nulla a Diabolo sine Christo Geo. Ven. p. 4. Sect. 3. Probl. 98. conquered the Diuel and his Angels, pacified and satisfied God and his iustice, paying the full ransome for our sinnes, and rather more than lesse than we were indeb∣ted for: so that Christ is now become our onely Sauiour, † Solus qui pro salute inuocandus. Vat. in 1 Reg. c. 2. nu. 8. Re∣deemer, & Iustificator, and all in all † Christus omnia in omnibus. Cl. Gulliaudus in ep. ad Gal. c, 5. p. 219. nu. 4. both in vs, and for vs: then it can neither truely nor safely be said, that good workes can put away our sinnes, and endure the seuerity of Gods iudgement. In the best of men (Christ Iesus only excepted) there is somewhat amisse, and in the best of our workes, ai∣ming at the best end, but proceeding not from a true cause, nor ascribed wholly to Gods mercy, there is much euill, no merit, either † Meritum nullum ex aequo vel condigno. Fer in Io. c. 3. p. 85. x Eras. p. 9. p. 85. de congruo, or de condigno; they are not satis∣factory,r † Satisfactio pro peccatis. H. Steph. in Ps. 69 in Marg. cannot turne away Gods wrath from vs.
¶ The Third Proposition. That Good Workes springing out of a liuely Faith, are pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and are to bee knowne no otherwise then the Tree is discerned by the Fruite. GOod workes † Opera bona ex fide, aliâs mortuâ, Ferus in . 1. ad Ioan. p. 669. owe their being to faith, without which it is impossible for any man to bee pleasing, or any worke to be acceptable to God in Christ. This faith, which is the basis of our religious workes, and the † Totum Chri∣stianorum bonum, Stella in Lucam, p. 64. all-good of a Christian, must not be an † Fides vana & oiosa, For in Io. c. 3 p. 102. idle, vaine, cadauerous, and † Vera fides & nō mortua, Stella in Lucam, v. p. 2. p 189. dead faith: Non entis nulla sunt qualitates, it must be a liuing, † Mira operatur agente spiritu Dei, Snoygoud in g. Ps. 27, p. 97. working, and operatiue faith; and thus euery faithfull soule being iustified by Sola Dei miseri∣cordia, Snoyg. arg. Ps 51 p 201. grace, and † Porque el agua y riego de la fee, con que riega & alma, corre por las canales y alcadu∣zadas de la chari∣dad. Ios. Luquian. Erudicion Christia∣na, Pag 331. Dstinct 14. watred with Gods holy spirit, bringeth forth fruite abundantly in his due season: and the argument holdeth both in the affirmatiue, such a one hath true faith, ergo he † Fides semper facit bona opera, Vatab in Cant. c. 4.  4. wil bring forth good workes; and nega∣tiuely it may be said, such a one hath no faith, or no liuely faith, ergo he hath no workes, or † Vbi defectus fi∣der, omnia opera in∣vtilia, Fer in ep. Rom. c. 3. p▪ 304. Math. 25, 34. Verse 35. no profite by his Workes. And last of all, in the last day of iudgement when the sheep shall be discerned from the goats, the faithfull from the re∣probate, the elect (as we know, and all confesse) shall bee iudged, although not propter opera, yet secundum opera; not for, but according to their workes: then Christ shall say vn∣to them, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdome prepared for you from the beginning of the world. For I vvas an hungred, and ye gaue me meat, I was thirstie and yee gaue me drinke, I was a stranger, and ye tooke me in, &c. And they shall answer againe in effect: These good works were thy gift, and these thy gifts thou doest crowne in vs: Not vnto vs, not vnto vs, vnto thy name bee the glory.
The 32. Article. BIshops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow the estate of single life, or to abstaine from marriage. Therefore it is lawfull also for them, as for all other Christi∣an men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall iudge the same to serue better for godlinesse. This Article explained and maintained by Papists. WE will by Gods grace handle this question, partly Historically, shewing that Priests haue bene mar∣ried; and partly Theologically, prouing that they haue a li∣berty to marry, as well as all other Christian men. Historically thus. FIrst, in the old Testament, all the † Chrysost. in Iudi. Prophetas omnes vxores habuisse. Prophets were mar∣ried, sans quaestion, and as little doubt is to bee made of the † Apostoli vxo∣rem in Ignatio. . 9. Bb Pp. v. 3. Col. 25. Nota Marg. † Apostoli duce∣bant secumv xores suas. Io. Neuiz. Syluanupt. l. 4. p. 256. nu. 1. Apostles in the new: of Peter, the case is manifest in the Scripture, and yet the place that sheweth it, is blotted out in a † Petrus et eae∣teri Apostoli se∣cuti sunt Christum praeterquam in vi∣a virg nitatis. Barin Frar▪ de Iesu Christ ar scn∣dito 43. late writer: of Paul, we haue a plaine constat out of Ignatius Epistle, that place is likewise corrupted in an old Ms. ☞ In a very old Ms in Ballil Col in Oxford but is or was extant in an other Ms of Igna∣tius in Magdalen Col. Platina apud. Zuing. p. 4136. Ignatius with vs, belike to iustifie Bellarmines bold assertion saying, that it is not found in the Manuscript copies: but who told him so? I haue not seene many, but those that I haue viewed, either haue, or had Paul named written at large. Of Lucas, e Platina saith expressely, vxorem habuit in Bythinia, Lucas had a wife with him in Bythinia: this place hath passed the censure of our Inquisitors, and the later Edition (if I be not mistaken) read vxorem non habens
in Bythinia, he had no wife with him in Bythinia. There was some such motion in the Primitiue times, that Priests should be remoued from their wiues: but this was † Contra ss. Patrū sententiam, Sige∣bert B. PP. v. 7. Col. 1495. against the will of the Fathers in generall, and good  Theodoretus l. 1. c. 7. Sozom. 1 c. 10. & 23. Apud Zuing p 4363 & Zuing p. 4. Paphnutius in speciall, by the testimony of Theodoretus, and Sozomen: but the witnesses now will acknowledge no such matter, if you may haue your will, for the storie is twise cancelled at the least in Zuingers great Theater.  Io. Langius An∣not in Nicephorum l 4. c 8. p. 182. Admonitus ne coe∣libatus ou tan∣quam necessarium fratribus imponat. Pynitus, one that li∣ued not long after, was admonished that he should not lay so heauy a burden vpon his weake brethren: a burden indeed, that neither they, nor their successours, were euer able for to beare.  Hdio in Chron Germ. apud Zuing. p 870. Iohn Byshop of Leodium, tooke a wife and left his Bishopricke. k Adolph Archbishop of Coleyn, was married and left his Archbishopricke: one ☞ Per exten∣sum aliquoe milli∣arus campum in∣ueor di ad miror eas Presbyteroū vxores esse à dactoremeo didici. Mr. Dunelm▪ in visi∣one Bosonts. p. 140. Boso an old grandsire, in our English stories, had a vision (for at that time it could not bee saide there was no vision nor Prophet in England) and in that vision, he saw a plaine field, I know not how many miles long; and yet there were none there but Priests wiues. He is but meanly versed amongst our English Chroniclers, that knoweth not that Priests were commonly married in England before Eades in vita Anselmi. Anselm. in ep. Anselmes time, and there was no gene∣rall prohibition of them in the West Church, till Sacerdotum con∣iugium interdictum gratissimum Scor∣tatoribus, Io. Auent. Annal. Biorum, l. 5, p 40. Grego∣ry the seuenth, and as facts are sometimes to bee measured by their euents, what followed this strict prohibition? But the abhominable sinne of ☞ Ranulph Hig∣den in Polychron. Ms 1. Sodomie in England, † Sub honesto castimoniae nomine stupra, incestus & adulteria, Auent. Annal▪ Boior. l. 5. pag 460. Adul∣teries, incests, rauishments of mens wiues and daughters, and what not, amongst their religious Friars, Clarkes, Monckes, Seculars, Priests, and others? In somuch, that it was enacted for a law among their Gratianus in Iure Canon.  Dan. Ve∣nat. reader it thus. Is qui non habet vxorem, at pro vx∣ore concubinā, &c. Analysi Iani. p 481. Canons, that hee that had not a wife, might in stead of her, haue a Concubine, and accor∣dingly, † Rustci Sacerdotem suum cogebant concubinam habere, Io. Neniz. l. 1. Syluan. Nupt. apud Zuing. p, 139. & apud Neviz p. 217. num. 9. they did compell their Parish Priests, to keepe a Con∣cubine, and vnlesse he had one at the least, they would not suf∣fer him to liue amongst them; was not here good stuffe? And yet neuerthelesse, ☞ Graeci habent eosdem ordines, quos Latini: et Fr. non tenen∣tur continere sed habent vxores su∣as Ms. o. p. 5. ☞ In Nicaena Sy∣nodo—occidentalis ecclesia contradix∣it, et noluit conti∣nere. Ms. o. p. 160. the East Church, neither then, nor now
to this present day, receiued this doctrine into their Church: but left them free to marrie at their owne discretions, as commeth now in the next place to be shewed. Theologically, thus. ALl proofes in diuinity, are either diuine, taken out of the word of God: or humane, as the Lawyers call them Semi-probationes, or halfe proofes, drawne from the testimonies of men, or traditions of the Church, which are not binding, but of a fallible nature. Againe, diuine proofes are either plaine, in the literall sence of the Scripture; or hidden and latent in the Allego∣ricall interpretation of the wordes, whereout no sound ar∣gumentTheologia allego∣rica non est argu∣mentatiua. can be deducted, as most Diuines know. To ac∣commodate and apply that which hath beene saide to our present Article. What more plaine, and in expresse words can there be alleaged in defence of Priests marriage, then that of the Apostle, t Propter fornicationem vitandam vxo∣rem habeat vnusquisque: To auoyd fornication, let euerySee Vatablus in 1. Cr. man haue his wife? But (if my obseruation faile me not) as you haue since diuorced men from their wiues; so your tor∣mentors of books haue diuorced this sentence of S. Pauls either out of the body, or the margent of your Bibles: Let me say vnto you, as Gamaliel did to the Jewes: If this pro∣hibition of yours be of God, it will doubtlesse preuaile, but if it be not from him, the contrary doctrine will take place, will you nill you. I know it is obiected by some, that in one of the ☞ Quomodo potuerunt Patres qui fuerunt in Ni∣cna Synodo dare nobis legem, qui neque interfuimus, neque consensi∣mus? Item quo∣modo potuit eorum institutio irritare matrimonium insti∣tutum a Deo et ab Apostolis inter legitimas personas. Sed ista disputare si iuolum est, quia oportet nos institutioni∣bu. S. Rom. Ecclesia. [stare.] Ms. o. p. 160, 161. Nicene Synods, there was a Canon published, enioy∣ning Cleargy men perpetuall chastity: but what saith the Auctour, an ancient Mannuscript, where this obiection is read, how can this Canon of the Church bee of force against vs, that were neither present in person, nor consenting by our voyces to the making thereof? Thus farre my olde Manu∣script, and further too: for in those dayes when hee wrote,
there was no question made, but those of the ☞ Dicit Canon quod si qui Cleci in miuoribus or∣dinibus constituti continere non pos¦sunt et contrahere inatrimonium vo∣luerint, debet ei assignari sustenta∣tio sua de benefic∣is suis, extra Ec∣clesiam, it a scilicet quòd de caetero non ministrent in Ec∣clesia in ordine suo, sed onsuram habe∣ant et libertate gaudeant Clerico∣rum. Ms. o. p 160. inferieur sort of the Cleargy, should (if they could not containe but needs would marry) be sustained, and maintained out of the profits of their benefice, and enioy the benefit of their priui∣ledges. ☞ Si Acolythus veniat ad discre∣tum Sacerdotem in priuata confessi∣one, et dicat se non posse continere: non multum peccat Sacerdos dando ei consilium, quòd occulté contrahat cum aliqua, et fallat oculos Episcopi sui: quia minus malum credimus esse retinere bene∣ficium cum occulto congio sine scan∣dalo, quàm habere concubinam con¦tra prohibitionem diuinam. Si autem postea cogatur ad sacros ordines á suo Praelato, credi∣musminus pecca∣tum esse vti vxore, quàm fornicari cum aliqua, si ex toto coutinere no∣luerit. Ms. o. p. 160. At that time also if an Acolythus came to a dis∣creete Priest, and told him by way of Confession, that hee had not (to say the truth) the gift of continency, it was but a ve∣niall sinne in the Confessour, to aduise his Confessee, to con∣tract himselfe with some one or other, in priuate sort, & so de∣ceiue his Diocesan: for of two euils, the lesse is to be chosen, and it is a lesse fault for a Priest to marry priuatly, and to keepe his wife without scandall together with his benefice, then to keepe a Concubine against the expresse commandement of God. And put the case, that this man after this be compelled by his Dio∣cesan, to ascend to holy orders, wee beleeue and assure our∣selues, that hee is in lesse fault that keepes the company of his owne wife, than he that haunts an Harlots company: this is spo∣ken of them that cannot containe. Answerable to this an∣cient Tenet, was that of Erasmus, and others.  Qui concubi∣nas ante congi∣um habere praesu∣mit, peius facit, quàm qui adulte∣rium committit. Ern Iod. Aug. Whoso∣euer hee bee that preferres the hauing of a Concubine, before the marriage of a wife, (to my seeming) is in as bad case or rather worse, than hee that doth commit adulterie. The more ashamed might our Papists bee, that tollerate Stewes, and maintaine harlots in, and by their Church poli∣cie; they shame not to write it, I am ashamed to repeate it, ne deterior libido vsum assumat: and, as if they would put chast marriage cleane out of countenance. I haue read of one Tho. dela Beare, a Welch Bishop, who more like a Beare then a Bishop, would not suffer the Clergy of his Diocesse to part with their concubines, (though they ear∣nestly desired it) because, forsooth, he should lose an annuall rent of fortie Markes, which was well and truly paid him: and no maruell, for Espencaeus, a later Writer, telleth vs, that in his time, their Archdeacons and Officials in their vi∣sitations respectiuely leuied the same of concubinary Priests, * ☞ Ad vitandam deteriorem libidinem sustinentur meretrices, et Scorta tores in Ecclesia. et ab Ecclesia. &c. Ms, 29. p. 55. a ☞ Gascoigne in Dictionari Theol∣gic Ms.
and sometimes of those that were continent. † Espene. digress. 2 in cap 1. d Tit. p 65. Turpissimm, quòd et hos cum concu∣binis, pellicibus, & meretriculis coha∣bitare liberósque procreare sinunt, ac∣cepto ab eis, atque adeò alicubi à con∣tinentibus censu. Habeat, aiuut, si ve∣lint. Habeant aiunt si volunt; They might haue had their whores if they would. † Officiales plus reddituum setiunt ex concubinis, Er. v 9. p 400. Erasmus wondreth not at this, because they made a sweete gaine, by this sweete sinne. To conclude, consideratis consi∣derandis, the premises duely considered, the † Magni laquei animarum quos vulgo dissimulat vulgus Sacerdo∣tum. Kran▪ t. l. 14 c. 31 p. 333. great snares wherewith their Priests and religious were intangled, the in∣tollerable fire of lust, wherewith they did burne; their Dal. 4 Melch. un. quest. Politic. part. 2. q 27. nu. 13. p 1. homi∣cides, incests, whoredomes, Sodomitic all sinnes, denaturaliza∣tions, sinnes against nature, all which shall bee reckoned vp in their proper place: Were it not safer for vs to conclude with Fulgosius l. 7. c. 2. apud Zuinger p. 869. Io. Neuisylu. script. l. 1 p 16 nu 134 & p 75. nu. 133. Pius 2. his golden saying; As there was great cause to remoue Priests wiues at the first, so there is greater cause to restore them againe now? Which hee spake belike, because this old Aeneas had a young Ascanius brought vnto him, which his Father Franciscanus was faine to keepe; or ra∣ther, because Priests and Monkes are lesse Io. Auent. l. 5. p. 446. chaste then mar∣ried men; that Marriage is at this day now in the Coniugium apud reformatos sancti∣us. Ant de Dominit l. 2. c, 10. sect. 45. Refor∣med Churches more holy, and more acceptable vnto God; and the † Caelibatus apud Christianos non praefertur nuptiis Pariarcharum. Er. in Ind. Aug. bed vndefiled farre to be preferred before single life, as Erasmus, † Laurent Schraderus in monumentis Ital. p. 24. Laurentius Schraderus, † Melchio Iunius quest. Polit. q 27. par. 2. n 13. p. 11. Melchior Iunius, † Dan. Venatorius Anal. tit. 3. p. 492. & p. 444. Dan, Venatorius, and † Lib. 14. de discipl. bene∣sta c. 5. Petrus Crinitus doe conclude on the behalf of married men. And so I end my Treatise of this Article, That marriage is not to be forbidden Clergie men, and Ecclesiastiques; but it is lawfull also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their owne discretion, as they shall iudge the same to serue better for godlinesse. Of the authoritie of Generall Councels. GEnerall Councels may not be gathered together with∣out the commandement and will of Princes: and when they be gathered together (for as much as they bee an assembly of men, whereof all be not gouerned with the
Spirit and Word of God) they may erre, and sometimes haue erred, euen in things pertaining vnto God: wherefore things ordained by them as necessary vnto saluation, haue neither strength nor authoritie, vnlesse it bee declared, that they be taken out of holy Scripture. This Article maintained by the Papists. MEdicines (say Physitians) must bee proportionable to the diseases: when the diseases of the Church grow Epidemicall and common (say wise men,) there is no remedie so apt as a † Concilium ge∣nerale remedium omnium malorum. E. v. 6 in Mat. 1 Generall Councell. But who shall as∣semble them together? Who, but Princes and Emperours? so the same † Er. in schol. v. 2. ad lib. 2. Apol. ad∣versus Rusticum. Erasmus, † P. Arodius Pds. c. 17 p. 45. P. Aerodius, † Fr. Duarenus de S. Ecclesiast. ministe∣rii, l. 1. c. 5. p. 443. Fr. Duarenus, † Aug. Thuanus l 5 p. 123. Aug Thuanus, Ant. de Dominis l. 7 c. 3. ss. 27. Ant. de Dominis, and others of the best note with them. But then this question againe may be de∣manded; Who shall preside and gouerne the Councell? The same Princes by whose commandement and will they are gathered; so † Io. Langius in dedic. operts p. 33. & l. 8. c. 17. Langius vpon Nicephorus, and the fore cited C. 11 p. 448. Fr. Duarenus. But in the meane time, what shall become of the Pope? Is not he the great Patriarch of the West, and Prime Prelate of the Church? Be it granted, we will for orders sake, allow his voyce in the first place, but consultiue at the most with, and not decisiue without the Councell: for else † Si Papa est Su∣perior, frustra co∣gitur Concilium. Ktz Metrop. it were in vaine to call them together; Nay, when the Pope doth not his dutie, see how farre hee is in danger of a Councell, hee may bee opposed and deposed by them. If the Fathers of Constance and Basil were silent,7. c. p . this might be otherwise prooued: but the truth is, the best Writers of your side, whose eyes are not dazled with the brightnesse of the See of Rome, nor their persons awed by the Popes greatnesse, doe confesse thus much in expresse tearmes totidem verbis, that Councels are aboue the Pope; as  Io. Langius in Chron. Cytizensis ad  1414. † Fas∣ciculus temporum Germ. Script. v 3. . 277. & vlt p. 5. Io. Langius, † Auctoritas Con∣cilii Pontificis au∣ctoritati praefertur, Krantz. Metrop. l 11. c. 36. p. 312. Albertus Krantzius, † Ant. de Dominis, l. 7. c. 3. ss 79. &c. 5. ss. 24. Wernerius Role∣winck, † Zuinger. theat. p. 1317. 1503. 1674 & p. 4097. Ant. de Dominis, and a whole legion of Writers in
Atud Zuinger. p. 756. Zuingers Theater. It is not then to bee maruelled, if the Pope in these latter times be so loth to call a Councell; if no man will tell vs the reason thereof,  Iouius in the life of Leo the tenth will blab it forth; Concilia terrori Pontificibus: Our Popes are too wise to hazzard their estates in a Gene∣rall Councell, if they may otherwise dispatch the businesse, and come fairely off. There remaine behind two scruples in this Article, whe∣ther, first, Generall Councels may erre? Secondly, Whether Scripture must be the Rule to guide them? Prudent Eras∣mus taketh them away both, by saying, that † Eras. v. 3. p. 76. Councels may be depraued, and then that no morall perswasion of Coun∣cels, but authoritie of Scripture must be insisted vpon. Of the 37. Article. Of the Ciuill Magistrate. THe Kings Maiestie hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, and other his Dominions, vnto whom the chiefe gouernment of all the Estates of this Realme, whether they be Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill, in all cau∣ses doth appertaine; and is not, nor ought to be subiect to any forraine iurisdiction. Where we attribute to the Kings Maiestie the chiefe Gouernment, by which title, we vnder∣stand the minds of some slanderous folkes to be offended: we giue not to our Prince the ministring either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments; the which thing the Iniuncti∣ons also set forth by Elizabeth our (late) Queene, do most plainely testifie. But that onely prerogatiue, which wee see to haue been giuen alwaies to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himselfe; that is, that they should rule all Estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiasticall or Temporall, and restraine with the Ciuill sword, the stubborne and euill doers.
This thirtie seuenth Article explained and maintai∣ned by the Papists in these subsequent Propositions. 1. THe Kings Maiestie hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, and other his Dominions. 2. Ouer all persons, in all Causes, whether they be Ec∣clesiasticall or Ciuill. 3. The King is not subiect to any forraine iurisdiction. 4. Hee may restraine with the Ciuill sword; the stub∣burne and euill doers. The first Proposition. The Kings Maiestie hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, and other his Dominions. I Must craue pardon of euery honest Reader, if I inlarge my papers in this point, and the propositions following, beyond my first proposall; for that I take it to bee a piece of my alleageance, for me and all of my coate, not onely to oppose those paper walles, but to interpose our deerest liues betweene the King and danger (if need require). Danger there is, and euer will be to Kingly power, as long as their bloody Inquisition-house shall stand at Rome: for if their transcendent and vniustifiable power be not limited, they will in time to come (if they may haue their willes, quod ab∣sit) first, thrust Kings out of their bookes, and then out of their Kingdomes. But the best is, nocumenta, documenta: his most excellent Maiestie being forewarned, is forearmed, not only to preueut the danger by their bookes, but by their mischieuous persons, with a iust deleantur both out of his Kingdome and State. Wee may see their euill intents in their thrice accursed Indices Expurgatorij. If a flower of
Regall authoritie do begin to bud forth, it is presently nip∣ped off with their vlcerous hands. For example; Place we the King according to our bounden duties, by the Lawes of God and men, in a Throne † Non enim ha∣bet in terris quic∣quam se excelsius. Bibl. PP. Col. p. 208. l. 2. Serm. Ant. Ab∣bati. higher than all other men, be∣cause he hath no Peere or Compeere vpon earth, that can equalize, much lesse ouertop † Agapet. Dia. Col. Bb. Pp. v. 2. Col. 795. Honore quolibet sublimiorem quum habeat dignitatem: this doctrine was taught vs long agoe by Agapetus the Deacon, and other ancient Writers, whose steppes the Papists pretend to follow, and who but they, that seeme to reuerence their graue sentences and gray haires? Neuerthelesse, you see a crosse in the Margent, and you shall find a Deleatur in their books, or a Caue, as if you had trod vpon a Serpent. I haue an ancient Manuscript in my keeping, that made an hard shift to come vnto mee, (for he almost lost his coate by the way): but ragged and torne as he is, he hath these words, which doe serue to bee written in letters of gold, because they speake the Supre∣macy in expresse tearmes, and accord with this our Article: ☞ Rex in Reg∣no suo nullum su∣pra se habebit.—vnde à Rege ferente sententiam appellari in Reg∣no suo non potest. nu. 29. p. 7. The King hath no liuing person aboue him in his Kingdome, who then dares appeale from him? Vnlesse it be some trai∣terous Becket, or other, that passing the Seas, raised such seas of trouble in this Kingdome, that he had welnigh ouer∣whelmed both King and State, if the prouidence of God had not the better preserued them, as may appeare in our English Stories. But leauing Becket to be fully displaied in all his colours, and prooued to bee (as he is) a notoriousBy Mast er Rich. Iames, B. of Diuini∣tie of C. C. C. in Oxford. Traytor, notwithstanding all their shifts that would apolo∣gize for him, I proceed, and further shew, that there is iust occasion giuen vs to feare, that if this old Manuscript had lighted into the Papists hands, either this leafe should haue bin purged or torne, or the whole booke made away, that it should neuer haue come in euidence against them. For Ma∣nuscripts as well as other books, whether Greeke or Latin, old or new, are the subiect, or obiectum adaequatum of their damnable, vnheard of, and Diabolicall censures. But to re∣sume my first Proposition againe, that the Kings Maiestie hath next vnder God the chiefe power in this Realme, is a
doctrine so harsh and distasteful in their mouthes, that there is a Deleatur wheresoeuer it is found, non habet in terris se quicquam excelsius, He hath no man greater vpon earth, is shamefully put forth, and cleane turned out of an ancient Writer in their Bibliotheque of ancient Fathers. This very sentence in other words, in † Cuius potestas Maiestásque secun∣dum Deum ma∣xima. Lud. Viues Epistle vnto King Henrie the eight, hath endured the like purgation, and is washed away cleane out of the booke. Now to grow to a conclusion: If the Papists doe so ill entreate Kings in their bookes, I leaue you to imagine what they would doe to their persons, if they could as easily come by them? But, nouerint vniuersi, I would haue all men know, that the more they corrupt, the lesse they gaine in the iudgement of any indifferent Papist not too much Romanized: and of fauour, let me aske them this question, and let them answere mee (if they can) vpon their consciences: doe these sentences that they haue caused to bee blotted and blurred, make against them, or not? If they doe not, they make themselues ridiculous, by taking so much labour in vaine, (the No se entiendor por eppo ser pro∣hibito el Thargum cum canto que al Principio della se pnga por Antido∣to, lo notado en el Expurgatorio deste Indice en la Palabra Thargum I Indice Sandoual p. 2. Thal∣mud of the Iewes, nor the great Theater of Zuinger amongst the Protestants, nor Tostatus, or Salmeron among your Pa∣pists, nor any booke in any Science, haue wearied your pa∣tiences, or terrified your Inquisitors from prying into their bookes, or corrupting their writings:) if they doe make against you and your doctrine, which cannot subsist with∣out these notorious shiftings and shufflings, wrenchings and wrincklings, the more dishonest men you, that while the controuersies are depending, and the questions are in disputing, doe shamefully either suborne Authors to beare false witnesses to testifie vntruths, or suppresse and subuert the testimonies that make against you. To close vp this first Proposition and your mouthes (if it be possible) this first Proposition standeth inuiolable: The Kings Maiesty hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, and other his Dominions.
The second Proposition. Ouer all persons in all causes, whether they be Ecclesiasticall, or Ciuill. HEarken then I pray you, to your own Writers. † Quod minus obs ruantes qui∣dam mota inter regnum & Sacer∣dotium controuer∣sia, mium quos quantsque turbas vtrinque dederint. Atqui tos post pa∣lum, tot ante hanc camerinam anno∣rum Centenariis & Chrysostomus vt nihil vnquam futu∣rum tale suspicans, simpliciter illud omnis anima enar∣rat, siue Apostolus sit, siue Euangeli∣sta, siue Propheta, siue Sacerdos, siue Monachus, illū se∣quuntur Theodo∣retus, Theophy∣lactus, Oecumeni∣us, & qui non Grae∣ci Et Gregorius 1. idem & Magnus ingenuè agnosceb Imperatori à Deo concessum non mi∣litibus solū sed Sa∣cerdotibus quo{que} Dominari▪ Regist. l. 2. Ep 64 Et vtro{que} tantò posterior Ber∣nardus ad Henricum Senonensem Archi episcopum Ep 42. sic colligit; Si omnis anima, & vestra▪ quis vos excipit ab vniuersitate? si quis tentat excipere tentat decipere, nolite acquiescere consiliis. p.) Claud. Esp in ep ad Tit c. 3. p 513. Clau∣dius Espencaeus, a man of singular note, trencheth vp∣on this troublesome question, and decideth it thus; Hauing spoken of Saint Pauls omnis anima; Let euery soule be sub∣iect to the higher powers, expounded by Chrysostome, whether he bee Apostle or Euangelist, Prophet, Priest or Monke, (which exposition is seconded by Theodoret, Theophylact, Oe∣cumenius, and what Greeke Writer dares oppose against it▪) he inferreth these words: [Yea, Gregorie the first, Gregorie the Great, doth ingenuously acknowledge the Emperours soue∣raigntie, aswell ouer the Priests (that fight Gods battels) as ouer the souldiers that warred vnder his conduct, Regist. lib. 2. Ep. 64. And after Gregorie and Chrysostome, Bernard, a late Writer, in his to Henrie Archbishop of Senes, Ep. 41. ar∣gueth after this manner out of the words, Euery soule: If eue∣ry soule, then yours: he that would haue you conceiue other∣wise of these words, doth but deceiue you, follow not their coun∣sels. Espenc. ep. ad Titum, cap. 3 pag. 513. And not long af∣ter; Si Principum nihil interest rerum sacrarum, cur de negotās Eccle∣siasticis in Codice 3▪ in Nouellis in Authenticis tot Augustae leges atque constitutiones, tot in nostris & omnium Christianorum Annalibus Edicta Regia, tot denique Senatus consulta 5 (Audio. Cum horrenda per vniuersam Galliam exercerentur viui-comburia, res erat sacra religio. Cum agitur, & ne∣cessario agitur de Clero Monachismoque reformando, de pastoribus ad caulas suas amandandis vt∣que verbo pascans compellendis: Rs est Synodica & Pontificia. Sic enim audiui & memini distin∣guere & quidem Episcopos. Quasi verò Principies tantum sint alieni zeli, pleruque idiscreti & sine scientia, ministri n dicam cru etatis carfics, non etiam vt Ecclesiae filii, sic omnium eius Sancti∣onum exteri custodes assertores et vindices. I. p. 526. If Princes haue nothing to do with Religion, and sacred businesses, what makes so many Imperiall lawes and constitu∣tions for Religion in the Code, Nouels, and Authentikes? And to what purpose doe wee reade of so many Royall Edicts and Parliaments in the Annals of all Christian Prin∣ces
for the settling and establishing of Religion? [As I heare, when those horrible fires were lighted throughout all the king∣dome of France, for the burning of men and women aliue: Oh, that was a matter of the Church, appertaining to Religion. But when there was speech of reforming the Clergie, confor∣ming Monkes to their primitiue orders, and sending Non∣residents home to their Cures to care for their flocks, that mat∣ter was not to be spoken of by the temporall Magistrate, it was to be treated of in a Councell, or before the Popes Holinesse: for so I haue heard, and doe well remember, that our Bishops were wont to distinguish after this manner; as if Princes were not to be zealous and carefull in point of Religion: but to commit the care thereof not only to men very indiscreet, but altogether ignorant, and so to become meere executioners of their cruell designes; as if they were not sonnes of our Mother the Church, and chiefe propugnators, propagators and defenders of the same. Wee haue heard what Espencaeus iudgement is of Princes, intermedling in Ecclesiasticall affaires: heare wee now a man nothing inferiour to him for learning, Si Sacerdotes, vel sacris legibus, vel vsu sancitum ap∣probatum{que} colen∣di Dei ritum, & sacra aut negligen∣ter, aut non rite conficiant, aut etiam violent; aut deni∣que improbis actio∣nibus Reip. statum conturbent laedant∣ue, non alienum à Profani Principis munere, ipsos sui officii admonere; atque etiam si opus sit, ab eo quod im∣probè faciunt, suo imperio refraenare, videtur Sacrrum literarum testimo∣nio atque exemplis confici posse. In I∣s cap. 3. p. 59. An∣dreas Masius, writing vpon Iosua; what saith he? If it should chance, that the Priests forgetting their duties, doe against the Lawes of God, Customes of the Church, or approo∣ued Ceremonies and Rites of Gods worship, and doe performe the seruices of God either negligently and disorderly, or do vio∣late and breake them; or by their lewd liues and wicked acti∣ons doe trouble and disquiet the settled state of the Common∣wealth; we may not say, that it belongeth not to the office of a Lay Prince to put them in mind of their duties, and to admo∣nish them; and if this will not serue, to bridle their audacious actions by his Princely authoritie: and this doctrine I take to be well warranted by the letter and examples of the Scripture. If out of the mouthes of these two witnesses, this doctrine be not sufficiently concluded, we will indeauour to euince the same out of the Pragmaticks of France, and Courts of Iustice here in England; and first of France. † Posse magistra∣rum animaduertere in vestales. P. Aero∣dius Pandct. . 9 p. 3. The Ʋestall Virgins are not free from the punishment of the Temporall Magistrate, and who more sacred? And (as learned Budaeus
saith) there was a French King, that made their Cardinals and Bishops quake; and who so great? But optima pri∣ma, his gouernment was too good to last long; he was soone sent packing with a figge in his mouth, or a † Angynarum py∣rum vorauit Bud. da Asse l. 5. p. 725. peare, or some such thing, as the Deuill would haue it. Boniface the eighth brought an error into the Church, which was great∣ly preiudiciall to the Pragmattick of France, one Tanque∣rel openly in Paris tooke vpon him to defend the same: but a good paire of legges were his owne best defence, he ran away, and one P. † Aug. Thuam. hist. l. 28. p. 41. Gustus in his steed, before fiftie Doctors of Diuinity, and Sorbonists in their Schoole, stood bare a pret∣tie while, and then shamefully acknowledged his errour, and not onely his, but Boniface the eighths; and forthwith their chiefe Diuines offered themselues prompt, and ready to take the Oath of Alleageance, or to giue any satisfaction to the King, or Courts of Iustice. But why dwell wee so long in France, when domesticis exemplis abundamus? England is sufficiently prouided to furnish vs with examples out of Westminster, or the Tower, as may appeare by the diligent hand of a most knowing Lawyer, who hath collected them together, sending them to a reuerend friend of mine, who coppied them out, and imparted the Transcript vnto mee; whence I gather, that it was a familiar matter in old time, when the State stood Popish, and the Iudges stood too much affected with that, which they now call the Romane Religion, to sue, fine, and imprison Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and Clergie men, for beating, wounding, burning houses, killing of men, cutting of lippes; and not so onely, but about Prohibitions in, & Prouisions out of the Realme; Appeales to, and Buls from Rome: and it would not serue a Bishops turne (so carefull were the Iudges of keeping and preseruing the ancient liberties and customes, and the King his Crowne and dignitie,) that though they reueren∣ced the Church according to their blind deuotion, yet a Bi∣shop comming before a Lay-Iudge, pleading that hee was an anoynted Bishop, Brother to the Pope, and an Ecclesia∣sticall person, that he was a Clerke; neither of both could
be heard, but in the Tower, Marshalsey, Kings-Bench, &c. or fined and ransomed: brought they Letters, Prohibitions and Buls from Rome, the very bringing whereof, was no lesse danger then a Praemunire. I know you expect proofes, and not words; Records, and no other proofes; and there∣fore I proceed, and shew out of the Records, that For Archbishops and Bishops, Anno 27. R. Henrici filij Inioris, there came a precept to the Iudges of the Kings-Bench, to proceed against Robert, Bishop of Worcester, and others, in a cause of Prohibition, as being against the Kings Crowne and Dignitie. The Bishop of Exeter lost his Temporals, for not admit∣ting the Kings Clerke to the Church of Southwell. The Bishop of Ely for being accessary to the burning of Blanch Wakes house, and murdering of Will▪ Holme (which was killed in a Wood by his seruants, and intertained by him after the fact was done) was put vpon his twelue God∣fathers. Walter, Bishop of Exceter, for appealing to the Court of Rome, to the Kings great preiudice, finds sureties to answer the matter before the King, Anno 6. Edw. 1. Semblably, Ralph, Bishop of Bath and Welles, was pro∣ceeded against, for summoning men to Rome. Anno 19. Edw 3. William, Bishop of Norwich, had his Temporals seazed on, for excommunicating one Richard that brought the Kings Prohibition, Anno 20. Edw. 3. Adam Hereford, for partaking with Roger Mortimer, is tainted in Parliament, notwithstanding the Archbishops challenge. Anno Edw 17 Rob. Archbishop of Canterburies body was to bee taken, for excommunicating the Sherifes when he came to serue the Kings Warrant. Anno 32. Edw. 1. And to see how small a matter would incense the King, and how sharpe his punishments would be against the Cler∣gie, there was a warrant sent downe to the Sherife of Wor∣cester, to serue vpon him for hunting only in Windsore Park.
Concerning Deanes of Churches, and Abbots, and Priors of Conuents. THe Priors of Kockford and Bingam, were sued for pro∣ceeding against some in the spirituall Court after pro∣hibition. R. Io. anno 15. The Deane of Doncaster for molesting diuers of the Kings liege people, was conuicted before the Iudges, and admitted to his fine. The Prior and Couent of Saint Patricks in Dublin, lost their Temporals, for electing an Archbishop without the Kings consent. Anno 6. Edw. 1. The Deane of Wooluer-hampton was cited to appeare before the Iudges for his contempt, for admitting one Otto∣bon to a Prebend in the same Church, by a Mandate from the Pope. Anno 31. Edw. 1. The Prior of Canterburie for appealing to the Court of Rome, was adiudged to bee imprisoned, and to reuoke his Appeale. Anno 23. Edw. 1. Io. Abbat of Walden attached for the same. Anno eo∣dem. Thus farre of Bishops, Deanes, Abbots and Priors; the recitall of the rest would fill the booke, and not much more satisfie the Reader, and therefore I forbeare to name them, and come now to shew how little the Pope of Rome, or his Buls were regarded of our English Iudges. There was an Act made against drawing causes to Rome, anno 27. Edw. 3. and a commandement giuen, anno 16. Edw. filij R. Edwardi, that no man should alienate, sell, or send any thing beyond the Seas; and how many were accordingly indited and committed: as Io. Ouerton to the Tower, Simon Mellercet to the Kings Bench, anno 28. Edw. 3. William Beuercot to the Marshalsey, anno Regis filij Edwardi 17. And for the Popes Buls, how little were they regarded, or rather how greatly were the getters or procurers, their fautors and abettors, & those that did but threaten to make vse of them
punished and censured? There was a proceeding with some seueritie against one, that threatned, he would get a Bull from the Pope, Anno 27. R. Henrici. There was likewise an Inquisition indented, taken for those that procured them, anno 20. Edw. 3. their Abettors, anno R. Edw. 4. and one that pleaded them was committed to prison. So then those that bought those Buls at Rome (giuing Gold for Lead) found them still Lead, and no better here in England, and neither Buls, Appeales Bishops, or liberties of the Church, could protect them against the King, his Crowne and dig∣nitie, Kings of England here, and (I trust euer shall be able) to maintaine their soueraigne iurisdiction within these Kingdomes, ouer all persons, and in all causes, against all forreine iurisdiction, which commeth next in order to bee handled. The Third Proposition. The King is not subiect to any forraigne iurisdiction. THe Pope pretends to be the Head of the Catholique Church, how rightly we shall see hereafter; I am sure the King of England holdeth it by as good right, as the Law of God, and the Law of this Kingdome can giue him. I know it will bee presently obiected, that King Henry the eighth being a violent King, tooke this title vpon him; they are certainely deceiued that either thinke or say it; and therefore to manifest this point the better, I will tell you my conceit how this matter was brought to passe, not without an especiall prouidence of God, out of very vnlikely meanes. For, when King Henry the eighth was sharpened against Luther, there wanted not some about him, that buzzed this into the Kings eares, that the doctrine of Mar∣tin Luther was nothing else but drawne from the hereti∣call proposition of Iohn Wicklife, which was condemned long since in, and by his Vniuersitie of Oxford. Whereupon
the King being tickled (because the full knowledge of this at that time serued well for his purpose) presently dispatch∣ed Edward Leighton, one of his Chaplaines, and Batchelor of Diuinitie, with those Letters to the Vniuersitie of Ox∣ford. By the King. TRusty and welbeloued, Wee greet you well. AndEx Registro Actorū in Archiuis Acad. Oxon. p. 109. &c. forasmuch as Wee at this instant time, for cer∣taine great and weighty considerations Vs moouing, touching as well the repressing of such erroneous opi∣nions and heresies; as be now a dayes spread abroad in sundry places; as also the consolation of Christs Church, and good Christian people, be desirous not only to be aduertised of the Articles whereupon Wicklife was condemned heretofore by that Our Vniuersitie of Oxford; but also of the confirmation of the Councell of Constance, concerning the condemnation of the said Articles: We therefore will, that yee with all celerity doe send vnto Vs, by Our trusty and welbeloued Chap∣laine, M. Edward Leighton, the bearer in writing, vnder the Seale of Our said Vniuersitie, in as lawfull and Authentique wise (as yee can deuise) as well all and singular the said Articles of condemnation of the said Wicklife, and also the confirmation thereupon of the said Councell of Constance, giuing vnto Our said Chaplaine firme credence in such things, as he shall shew vnto you in Our behalfe touching the premises. And in thus doing, you shall minister vnto Vs full ac∣ceptable pleasure. Yeuen vnder our signet at our Castle of Windesore, the last day of Iuly.
Vpon the receipt of these Letters, followed a Conuocati∣on; a Delegacie was appointed the sixth of this instant mo∣neth, (there wanted no celritie;) the Instrument is made, and both it and the answere to the Kings Letters sealed the ninth day of that very moneth. Amongst those Articles that were sent vp, there were diuers that did mainly trench vpon the Popes power, which (as Wickliefe said) were nei∣ther found, nor founded vpon Gods Word. What effects these Articles wrought in the Kings mind, I know not: but of one thing I am wel assured, that not long after, the King be∣ing at variance with the Pope, a Parliament was called with in two yeres, and a motion was made therein, that the King should be declared Head of the Church: but his Maiestie refused, till he had aduised with his Vniuersities vpon that point; and whilest the Parliament sate, God (in whose hands the hearts of Princes are, so disposing it), the King reflecting belike vpon Wickliefes former Articles, directing his Letters to the Vniuersitie of Oxford, about the election of the Bishop of Lincolne into the Chancellorship of the Vniuersitie of Oxford, in the roome of Archbishop War∣ham, lately deceased; After the accomplishment whereof (saith the King) Our pleasure and commandement is, that ye, as shall be beseeme men of vertue, and profound literature, di∣ligently intreating, examining, and discussing a certaine questi∣on, sent from Vs to you, concerning the power and primacie of the Bishop of Rome; send againe to Vs in writing vnder your common Seale with conuenient speed and celeritie your mind, sentence, and assertion of the quaestion, according to the meere and sincere truth of the same, willing you to giue credence to Our trusty and welbeloued, this bringer, your Commissarie;Ex Registro Act. in Archiuis Academia Oxn ad ann. Dom. 1534. p. 127. &c. aswell touching Our further pleasure in the premisses, as for other matters, &c. Yeuen vnder Our Signet at Our Man∣nor of Greenewich the eighteenth day of May. Vpon the receipt of these Letters, the Ʋniuersitie (at that time, for ought we know, consisting all of Papists) be∣ing assembled in Conuocation, decreed, as followeth: That for the examination, determination, and decision of this que∣stion,
sent vnto them to be discussed from the Kings Maiestie, viz Whether the Bishop of Rome had any greater Iurisdicti∣on collated vpon him from God in the holy Scripture, in this Kingdome of England, than any other forraine Bishop; that there should be deputed thirtie Diuines, Doctors and Bache∣lors of Diuinitie of that facultie, to whose sentence, assertion, or determination, or the greater part of them, the common Seale of the Vniuersitie in the name thereof should be affixed: prouided, that the question should bee first disputed, and then sent vp to his Maiestie. And the 27. of Iune, in the yeere of our Sauiour 1534. this Instrument following was made, and sent vp, sealed with the common Seale of the Vniuersi∣tie. The Instrument it selfe is in Latine, in English thus. TO all the sonnes of our Mother the Church, to whom these present Letters shall come, Iohn, by the grace of God, Chauncellor of the famous Vniuersi∣tie of Oxon, and the whole assembly of Doctors and Masters, Regents and not Regents, in the same gree∣ting. Whereas our most noble and mighty Prince and Lord, Henrie the eighth, by the grace of God, of Eng∣land and France, King, Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland; vpon the continuall requests and complaints of his Subiects exhibited vnto him in Par∣liament, against the intolerable exactions of forraine Iurisdictions, and vpon diuers controuersies had, and mooued about the Iurisdiction and power of the Bishop of Rome, and for other diuers & vrgent causes against the said Bishop then and there exponed and declared, was sent vnto, and humbly desired, that he would pro∣uide in time some fit remedie, and satisfie the com∣plaint of his deere Subiects. Hee, as a most prudent Salomon, minding the good of his Subiects, ouer whom God hath placed him; and deepely pondering
with himselfe how he might make good and wholesome Lawes for the gouernment of his Commonwealth; and aboue all things taking care, that nothing bee there re∣solued vpon against the holy Scripture (which hee is, and euer will bee ready to defend with hazard of his dearest blood) out of his deepe wisdome, and after great paines taken hereabouts, hath transmitted, and sent vnto his Vniuersitie of Oxon, a certaine question to be disputed, viz. Whether the Bishop of Rome hath any greater Iurisdiction granted to him from God in the holy Scripture, to be exercised and vsed in this King∣dome, then any other forraine Bishop; and hath com∣manded vs, that disputing the question after a diligent and mature deliberation and examination of the pre∣misses, we should certifie his Maiestie vnder the com∣mon Seale of our Vniuersitie, what is the true mea∣ning of the Scriptures in that behalfe, according to our Iudgements and apprehensions. Wee therefore the Chancellour, Doctors and Masters aboue recited, daily and often remembring, and altogether weighing with our selues, how good and godly a thing it is, and congru∣ous to our Profession, be fitting our submissions, obedi∣ences and charities, to foreshew the way of truth and righteousnesse to as many as desire to tread in her stepps, and with a good, sure and quiet conscience, to anchor themselues vpon Gods Word; we could not but endeauour our selues with all the possible care that wee could deuise, to satisfie so iust and reasonable a request, so great a Prince (who, next vnder God, is our most happy and supreame Moderatour and Gouernour.) Ta∣king therefore the said question into our considerati∣ons, with all humble deuotion, and due reuerence (as be∣commeth
vs) and assembling our Diuines together from all parts, taking time enough, and many dayes space to deliberate thereof diligently, religiously, and in the feare of God, with zealous and vpright minds, first, searching, and searching againe, the Booke of God, and the best Interpreters and Commenters thereup∣on, disputing the said questions solemnely and publike∣ly in our Schooles, haue in the end vnanimously, and with ioynt consent resolued vpon the Conclusion; that is to say, That the Bishop of Rome hath no greater Iu∣risdiction giuen vnto him in Scripture, then any o∣ther Bishop in this Kingdome of England. Which our assertion, sentence, or determination so vpon delibera∣tion, maturely and throughly discussed, and according to the tenour of the Statutes and Ordinances of this our Vniuersitie concluded vpon publikely in the name of the whole Vniuersitie, we doe pronounce and testifie, to be sure, certaine and consonant to the holy Scrip∣ture. In witnesse whereof we haue caused these our Letters to be written, sealed, and ratified by the Seale of our Vniuersitie. Yeuen in our Assembly-house the 27. of the moneth of Iune, in the yeere of Christ 1534. This Instrument being brought into the Parliament∣house, an Act passed, whereby the King was declared Su∣preame Head and Gouernour of the Church. What excep∣tion? was it taken or giuen? The Parliament motioned some such matter to the King; his Maiestie wisely referreth it to the Learned of his Ʋniuersitie; the Vniuersitie to thirty Delegats; the referrees returne their ioynt opinion to the King; that the Pope had no more to doe here in England, then any other forraine Bishop: this their opinion was grounded on the Scripture; the places of Scripture confir∣med by the exposition of the best interpreters: the Par∣liament
vpon full knowledge of this, banish all forraine Iu∣risdiction out of the Realme, to the comfort of Gods Church, and the reliefe of his distressed subiects, which had so long been inthralled and groaned vnder this Baby lonish captiuitie. What remaineth? If this be not satisfactorie, Ireferre you to the reading of three excellent pieces of this Argument, which I forbeare to insert into this booke; first,In my Cosen Richard Iames of C. C. C. of Beckets De-cano∣nonization, lib. 3. c 4 because of prolixitie; secondly, because ere long, you shall haue them all comprized in one volume. The first is taken out of Guicciardine, the second out of Machiauell, the third out of Stephen Pasquier, quarit Recerches. The place in Guicciardine is shamefully expunged; that of Ma∣chiauell with the whole booke, and all his Workes forbid∣den; onely Pasquier is improhibited and vnpurged. But no thankes to the Inquisitors, for feare lest our French men, which are accounted lost men at Rome, should bee vtterly lost from the Church of Rome, if the Inquisitors went about to infringe their Pragmaticall Constitutions. Of these three witnesses, two of them are without exception, Guicciardine and Pasquier: the third is branded for an Atheist, and (as I dare not make any Apologies for him, so many, and so great Schollers hauing fastned this imputation vpon him) so I cannot but say (it is onely my coniecture) that if Machia∣uell had not touched the Popes free-hold, but suffered him to haue been a God vpon earth, Machiauell had been no Atheist for this booke, but might haue hoped rather to haue been a Cardinall: but how deadly soeuer they hated him, and interdicted his Workes, at his death (as it seemeth) he left his Machiauelismes to bee disposed of by the Pope and his Cardinals, which haue made no small vse of his po∣litike ends. But to reuert, the tenour of these afore recited places being read and perused, and thought vpon, may breed such a vnitic in our Christian Princes, that both Church and Commonwealths may be much the better for it. If I faile in my coniecture, yet my hopes and prayers shall stand good. And thus hauing plainely shewed the Kings Supremacie, and made him Head of the Church, let
vs see, what can be said in defense of forraine Iurisdiction; or, which is all one, for the Popes Primacie. First, the Papists will pleade a deed of gift, or gift from Constantine the Great, a great gift, if it can bee prooued. It is registred in their Canon-Law, (though the Record where it is, be somewhat doubted of; yet it is confirmed out of Gesta Syluestri,) which is (if I durst belieue them) of an vndoubted truth. I answere; First, the Donation, or gift it selfe, (I will giue them this gift before hand) is not found at all in all our English Copies, nor in Gestis Sylue∣stri. There antiquitie knowes them not; they must bee contented to forbeare to vrge this donation any longer. And I am mooued the rather to thinke so, because by their own confessions, if this gift of all the Westerne Prouinces, &c. were made to the Church (as is suggested,) doubtlesse it was made by Syluesters Constantine, vpon his Baptisine. But what if this Story bee not true? Then it will follow very suantly, no Syluester, no Baptisme; no Baptisme, no such Constantine; no such Constantine, no Donation. And that this is not a bare coniecture of mine, but commeth appar∣elled vnto you with some likelihoods at the least. HearkenThe wner of this, Master Hen Party of C. C. C. Batchelor of Diuinitie hath giuen it to the Library I pray you, what an ancient Writer saith, the Copie where∣of is now in my hands, but shal hereafter (if I can perswade) bee placed in the publike Librarie, ad dicti fidem liberan∣dam, & ad perpetuam rei memoriam. † Secundum quosd am non fuit iste Constantinus Imperator qui à B. Syluestro Papa fuit baptizaus, & ad fi∣dem conuersu, si∣cut aliquae videntur innunere. Nu 24. p. 84. sed is fuit Constan∣tinus pateristius Constantini, sicut in aliquibus historiis inuenitur Ib. According to some Writers (saith he) this was not Con∣stantine the Emperour, which was baptized and conuerted by Pope Syluester (as some other Histories seeme to intimate, or insinuate), but it was Constantinus, the father of this Constan∣tine, as we find it recorded in other Histories. By this time we haue  a gift, and no gift; for farther proofe, put the matter to any indifferent Iurie of Papists, and if they cast not the Papists, if they dare ioyne issue with vs vpon this very point, wee will yeeld. But what if a full Iurie should not appeare vpon the summons, on the day of triall? Surely then I would say, there were some knauery abroad, and some such thing it is. I heare vpon good intelligence,
that some of them are comming on the way, that offer rea∣dily to depose of our side: but they are deposed already from comming, or so harend being come, that you cannot get a word from them: but speake they shall, and must. One of them (as I am informed) hath these words against your temporall and forraine Iurisdiction. The Citizens of † Io Paulus Lan∣gius in Conico Cy∣tii id annum Dm 1405. Germ. rerum script v. 1. p. 849. entio P. Romani ciues claues Ciuitatis cum Ramis palmarum oblerunt, et om∣ne Dominium vr∣bis Romae etiam temporale illi con∣cesserunt, sed minus rustè minusque laudabiliter, quo∣niam illa Tempo∣ralium affluentia officiat haud parum spiritualibus, Nec Petri successor ipse Paa eiusdi pe∣riculosum tempo∣tale dominium sum psse debuerat. Nusquam equidem legitur, prisis quod temporibu, etiam post donationem Constantini de qua cuncti Cano∣n stae magnum fa∣ciunt festū) quispi∣a summus Ponti∣s temporale do∣minium vrbis Ro∣mae gub rauerit. At nouis tem∣poribus nostraque memoria certi Pontifices, de illo  & dolores met inde cumulantes, se intromittere ausi fuere. Rome (quoth he) carrying boughes of Palme in their hands, came vnto Pope Innocent, and offered vp the Keyes of their Ci∣tie, and granted vnto him the temporall Dominion of the Ci∣tie of Rome, neither mooued with any iust ground, neither are they to bee commended for it; sith abundance of temporall things doth much hinder the progresse of spirituall affaires. Nor in truth ought the Pope himselfe (though hee bee Peters successour) take any such temporall Dominion, that might in∣tangle, or indanger his gouernment, into his hands. For it is not read in old time, since the time of Constantines Donation (wherewith all our Canonists, whom I must needs say, are too curious in this point, make themselues merry), that any chiefe Bishop did take vpon him the temporall Gouernment of the Citie of Rome. But of late dayes, and in the memory of man, some Popes procuring labour and trouble vpon themselues, haue been so bold, as to intermeddle therewith. This witnesse speaketh well, but not so fully to our purpose; let vs heare another, † Ex eo, inquit, Pontifex multarum vr∣bam dominus, & qui antè religionis Maiestate res tenebat, mox imperio & potentia metuendus fuit: etsi quidam historiarum ignari, & temporum nescii, ignorato rerum gestatum ordine, à Con∣stantino Syluestro Pontifici datum referant. Gunthorus pota Ligunius, pag. 383. Spigelius Script. Germ v. 2. Guntherus, or rather Spigelius: From this time forward, the Pope, Lord of many Cities, that awed men here∣tofore by the Maiestie and greatnesse of his Religion, is now feared for his greatnesse and power: and yet if all were knowne, it would not bee found so great (as it seemeth): for some vn∣skilfull Historians, ignorant of the course of times, and the or∣der of things, doe say, that Constantine gaue some such matter to Pope Syluester. How now? Are all they vnskilfull in Histories, ignorant of times, knowing not the order of things, that defend Constantines Donation? this censure
may pricke to the heart, and fetch blood. But the same Au∣thor hath not yet done with these Constantine-gift defen∣ders: Oh, † Sed neque tan∣ta fuit largitio De∣signat vulgatam il∣lam Constantini iam dicti Donatio∣nem, de qua apud nullos extat Aucto∣res, praeterquam in libro Decretorum, idque in antiquis voluminibus mini∣mè contineri auctor est Antoni∣nus in Chronicis. Quamquam Isido∣rus in Historia sua scribit eum vrbe Româ Pontifici cessise, ornamen∣tisque omnibus Im∣perialibus, Diade∣mate viz habitu∣que, & albo equo, quo vehebatur. Ba∣silicas item dicitur nonnullas in vrbe condidisse. Sed quid haec ad tam immen∣sum, vt aiunt, Pe∣tri Patrimonium, elephantia Con∣stantini, san guine puerorum, & Syl∣uestri baptismate partum? O beata nugas, quae tantum constituêre Imperi∣um. In Laurentium Vallam, virum propter veritatem odio habitum & persecutum, quòd probare conatus est eo libello, qui iam vulgò notissimus est, nullum ius siue munus Imperii Pontifici concessum, listichum iactatum legimus, &c. Spigeli∣ in Guntherum. p. 377. he meanes the Donation of Constantine (which is so commonly spoken of) and yet as common as it is, there is no Record of it, but in the Decrees, nor in the Decrees, neither in ancient Copies (iust as I told you before) so saith Antoninus in his Chronicle. Isidorus, I confesse, in his Historie writeth, that Constantine quitted the Citie of Rome, leauing it to the Pope, and with it, his Imperiall Robes, Diadem, and white Horse which he was wont to ride on, and bestowed many digni∣ties. What is all this to so great a Patrimony, as they say, of Peter, purchased by his leprosie, his cure thereof, by the blood of Infants, and his baptisme by Syluester? Oh happy tales! which erected so great and large an Empire. Wee reade a certaine distich against Laurentius Valla, a man hated and persecuted for the truth, labouring to prooue in a booke, now in the hands almost of euery one, that the Pope hath not any right or title granted to him of Empire, or temporall Go∣uernment, &c. So these honest men that are likely to bee impannelled vpon this Iurie, (and I will be bound to bring forth a full Iurie of these, if Iury Masters of the Inquisition doe not cut out their tongues, before they come to be pro∣duced either as witnesses or Iurors;) or if they doe, they may happen to rue it, by that time we haue inquired (as di∣ligent inquirie shall be made) either by writ, or by a dedi∣mus potestatem. Do you know the danger? It is Fellony by the Statute, and villany vnexpiable. But if all that hath bin said, cannot satisfie our Romane Catholikes about this their Donatiue, what if we be able to bring forth a plainer Sur∣render againe into the Emperours hands, of all that large Grant from Iustinian the Emperour, or Charles the Great, and why not from Constantine? It is to be read in a Leo P. 8. Othonem ipsum coronaut, & vniuersalem Augustum declara∣uit: omnem{que} eligendi Pontificis authoritatem à Clero populoque Romano abstulit: & Gratiano referente, in ipsum Othonem transtulit: vt habemus in Cau. 63. di. C. in Synodo: & non modo Impe∣riales titulos; verum etiam omnes Donationes per Iustinian Carolum{que} Imperatores Ecclesiae Rom. factas Leo hic Othoni & eius successoribus concessit; vt scilicet Italiam ab inuasoribus defensarent. Io. Stella in vita Leonis 8. Popish
Writer, and what reason haue Protestants not to belieue it? This, I say, as not belieuing it much, because (as I haue for∣merly shewed) their owne Authors doe diffide the Donati∣on as much, or rather more then wee: but in case the Do∣nation be prooued, and the witnesses and testimonies against vs bee disprooued, this shall serue to close vp their sto∣macks. But the Papists say, they haue a better Grant from Christ Jesus, the true Emperour of the whole World, on whose thigh is written this diuine Impresa, Rex regum & Dominus Dominantium: the proofes taken out of the Scripture (the Protestants Carde) in diuers places of the New Testament, and some out of the Old, as Matth. 16. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Peter will I build my Church. And againe: To thee (Peter) will I giue the Keyes, &c. and againe: Ecce duo gladij; two Swords at once, to signifie two Empires, either of them two-edged, as well to stablish the Empire in the person of Peter, as to cut off all opposites, and all knots and difficulties, that are incident vnto these controuer∣sies. Touching, Thou art Peter; and, Vpon this Peter, &c. vnlesse they get more by their Salt-peeter (as they are De∣uils in the Vault) then by their Peter, they are not likely to get much, for the Popes either temporall or spirituall pow∣er out of this place: you must make your Peter either the Rocke of Faith, or the Rocke of Christ; or else you dash against so many worthy and famous Writers of your own, as against so many rockes.  Fers,  Ferus in . 16. Math p 220. Ger∣man script. v. 2 p 375 Erasmus, and † Erasm. v 10 1. in prefat. Renani. h † Petra, verbum, clauis, fides 1 c Fa∣ber in Math c. 16. p 126. Fa∣ber, besides sundry others of your Worthies, interpret the words of the Rocke of Faith, or the Rocke, the Word; that is, Christ. You cannot better these Schollers, nor this expo∣sitions and furthermore, let me informe you, Peters Faith was not Super hoc fidei so∣do Is. Clarius in Math 16. personall, but common to him with the rest of the Apostles. For that which is vrged of the Keyes, much may be said ☞ Fides Petri on personalis. Bas. 2 p. 493. of that also out of your owne Writers, but nothing that will doe you good. Ferus and Faber in the places aboue
named, the one giueth these Keyes to the Church, the other vnto faith. Concerning that which is obiected out of the Gospell, Ecce duo gladij, I may very well say vnto them, as Christ did vnto Peter; Put vp your Swords, the controuer∣sie is ended: (for ought I know,) thus writeth the Com∣menter vpon Guntherus, by occasion of these words, † Sequitur com∣mentitiam Schola∣sticorum Theolo∣gorum sententiam; qui Christi verba de duobus gldiis, vt pleraque alia, quae propius ad philophiam caele∣stem pertine bant, subuertetunt: recla∣mantibus omnibus Christi praeceptis, reclamante tota ip∣sius vita, reclaman∣te doctrina Aposto∣lica refragantibus tot Martyrum mil∣libus, repugnanti∣bus vetustis Inter∣pretibus, paueis illis verbis, Ecce duo gladii hîc, mundi gladium Imperato∣ri & Ecclesiae, si Christo placet, as∣seruerunt; quamuis ipse affirmet reg∣num suum non esse de hoc mundo, & Apostolus; Arma nostra non sunt car∣nalia, sed potentia Dei. Sed quid at∣tine bat hinc trahere pullicam Magistra∣tuum functionem, quam neque Chri∣stus, neque Aposto li admerunt, quin eis etiam Idolola∣tris incolum esse voluerut, quòd iustitiae diuirae seruiret? Dumque Sacerdoti conatur iunger Regem hoc est dum superi oritatem (vt vocat dominan li, Sacerdo ibus plaè interdictam à Christo vsurpat Spigel. Germ. Script. to 2 p. 69. Gladijs quae rite duobus Nitiur: He seemeth (quoth hee) to follow the commentitious opinion of the Schoole-Diuines, who doe not so much interpret, as subuert the words of Christ of two Swords, as they doe all other that appertaine vnto this heauenly Phylosophy, against the example of his life, which is our best precept, against the doctrine of the blessed Apostles, and so many thousands of Martyrs, and the whole streame of ancient Interpreters commenting vpon this place. In these few words, Behold two Swords, (say they full wisely God wot) one for the Emperour, the other for the Church: and yet would they be pleased to hearken vnto Christ, he would informe them, that his Kingdome is not of this World: and the Apo∣stle semblably, Our weapons are not carnall, but power full vn∣to God, &c. Which latter words, aswell as the former, are obiected against Hildebrand by Conrade Bishop of Traict at a meeting of all the Bishops of Cermany and France at Gastng, reproching him very worthily, for going about † Gladio duplici ense ancipiti ad viuum reserare. Io. Auent. Annal. Bo, p. 462. with his double or two-edged sword, to riuet open and vnfold the obscure places of both Testaments. Thus you see plaine∣ly, that the edge of both your Swords are well abated. If you list to trie a venny or two at foynes (for at sharpe you cannot) † Papam non habere vrumque gladium ait. Sigebertus Trithmus apud Zuinger. p. 4126. Sigebertus and Trithemius, haue beaten these Swords about your eares, as one † En∣sem ancipitem, gladium duplicem Christianae Ciuati daum ad seruandum vificar dumque, non oc∣cidendum esse putabat: eundemque spiritualem appellabat, qui est sermo Dei, vita & ux homi∣num & mortuos ad vitam reuocat, ex hominibus Deus, ex mortalibus aeterno facit. Io. Auent. Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 446. Gerochus in Auentine, is bold to put you in mind, that this double or two-edged Sword, is giuen to saue and quicken vs, and not to kill, he vnderstan∣deth
this Sword spiritually of the Word of God, the life and light of men, that is able by its power to raise dead men to life, to make gods of men, and to conuert and turne mortalitie into immortalitie. Thus farre Io Auentine, so much, and so often commended by your Papists: though you haue taken away his iust commendations, quo iure, quáue iniu∣ria, I know not. But the best is, † Iam enim Pon∣tisices in eam vene∣rant Maiestatem (quam Principes Saeculares dicut pre∣sumptionem) vt Reges crearent, ci∣tantes verbum pri∣mi post Christum Pontificis, Ecce (in quit Petrus) duo gladij hic Contra quod Principes ipsi verbum aeterni Pontificis (Mitte gladium tuum in vaginam) de gladio carnali, humano & saeculari interpre∣tantur, quasi non li∣ceat summo Ponti∣fici in eo pugnare. Albert. Krantz. Wandal. l.  c. 2. p. 17. Albertus Krantzius, as good a Writer as hee, giues this censure of your two Swords: The Romane BB. were come now to take that state vpon them (which our Temporall Princes (saith he) call presumption) as to create Princes, citing for themselues Peters words, that was first Bishop after Christ, Behold, here are two Swords, against which, our Temporall Princes oppose the words of Christ, Put vp thy Sword into thy sheath; interpre∣ting it of the materiall, carnall, and temporall Sword; as if it were not lawfull for the Pope to vse that to his purpose. And thus hauing put vp your Swords, and shewed out of your owne best Writers, that these Keyes will not serue to open the way to any forraine Iurisdiction, we cleaue fast to the Rocke Christ, or faith; and doe certainely beleeue, that the Pope hath no temporall Iurisdiction, either in this Land, or any other Country, out of the New Testament: as little helpe is there out of the places of the old; for in this very question, you would be accounted like the good Houshol∣der in the Gospel, that haue both old & new in store for vs. The places cited by you, are two in number, and none in effect. The first is taken out of Deut. 17. He that shall refuse to obey the commandement of the Priest, by the decree of the Iudge shall die the death. This argument being taken out of a corrupt reading in your Bibles, ex for &, and wellIn a Treatise against Doctor Norrice, &c. amended in your Clement Bibles (as I haue shewed else∣where) let it stand by a while, while we examine that other of planting and displanting, planting Gods Word, and displan∣ting errors, and not Kingdomes, which I could prooue very sufficiently out of the ancient Manuscripts: but I content my selfe onely for the present, with that Exposition which the Councell of ☞ Con. Bas. MS p. 678. Basil giueth of these words, answerable
to my former words, and contrary to your vnwonted ex∣position. And thus hauing extinguished the Popes preten∣ced right, let vs take a full suruay of him, his doctrine, life, manners and actions towards God, and towards men. Some things seeme otherwise then they are; all is not Gold that glistereth; all are not † Budaeus de Asse. l. 5. p. 724. of the best that are called so; Popes may be sainted and canonized here vpon earth, whose soules frie in Hell fire. I know (as once † Ex opusculo de Herculis vita. p. 544. Me extemplo impi∣um, & cum facino∣rosis hominibus aqua & igni in∣terdicet. Lil. Greg. Gyraldus said) that it were better for me to hold my peace, and to commend their many abominations, and manifold abu∣ses vnto † De eius modi magis mutire pos∣sumus, quàm palam loqui, & idcirco sa∣tius ea fuerit Har∣pocrati, & Argi∣ronae consignare. Lil. Greg. Gyrald. Syntagm. 1. p. 14. Harpocrates, or the Lady Silence; for else I must looke to be cursed with Bell, Booke and Candle: but iacta est alea, I am resolued to goe on in my intended courses, to in∣treate first of their wicked and accursed liues, and then of their hereticall and damnable positions and doctrines, spea∣king no more then others haue done before mee of your owne side; some of them of great marke and eminencie. I trust I shall find fauour both with God and men, both Pa∣pists and Protestants; or if the worst come to the worst, I hope I shall haue a pardon of course. And first, For their liues and manners, what goodly Popes haue we? IT is no matter in what order I ranke them: as they liue in no order, so I will take them as they first come to my hand. And first, because there is a common saying amongst vs, As merry as Pope Ioane; Was there not a Woman Pope amongst them? † Zuing. p. 439 & p. 491 & Bb. Pp. v  col 1452. Sigebert & Bocace de claris mulieri∣bus, c. 99. † Germ. rerum Script.   p. 731. Iohannes Baptista, † Zuing. p. 1997. Egnatius, l. 3 c. 4. Chroni∣conb † Zuing. p. 950. excerptum de diuerfis Chronicis, Baptista Fulgosius, l. 7. c. 3. Calius 2. Curio l. 14. c. 1. Crantz l. 2. Metrop. † Zuing. p. 1201. Fr. Pe∣trarcha. † Pag. 39. Io. Mg∣nuntinus m. 1. Anselmus Rydd. And to helpe to make vp a full Iurie, Ms. in Coll. Ball. Ran. Nygedon, ad an 858. And lastly, a booke of the Ms. O. 4. 11. in the publike Library. Stations of the Church of Rome of great antiquitie, re∣maining in our publike Librarie at Oxford, there are ma∣ny more witnesses yet remaining behind: but because
they are many, and these onely not so much distinguished from the rest, as cleane extinguished in your bookes. I leaue them to be dressed for your daintie palats by one that is a very expert Cooke. Sergius the third begat † Zuing. p. 233. Iohn the twelfth, on the body of Marozzia, a common strumpet. Luitprandus, l. 3. c. 12. Here is a good succession of your Popes: you were best pleade this. † Zuing. ex Tri∣themio & Sgeb. p. 2289. Iohn the twelfth, like father, like sonne, kept his fathers Whore, and I know not, whole troopes and squadrons of Whores and Queanes; and for this very cause was turned out of his Popedome like a knaue as he was; and lastly, was † Zuing. ex Tri∣themio, Platina, Blndo, & uit∣prnd, p. 531. taken with another mans wife in the very act of adultery, and so slaine. Hildebrand was hatefull both to God and men (you may be sure not without good cause) being Antichristed, by so many good Writers, and free speakers of those times: but aboue all, commend me to Iohn Auentine, † Equidem nul∣lus obtrectator & adulator sum, sicut lex Historiae postu∣lat libero ore lo∣quor Io Auent. An∣nal. l. 5. p. 535. who was nei∣ther flatterer nor back-biter of any; but with a full mouth in∣uayed sharpely (as farre, and no otherwise, then the truth of the Historie required;) who hath set † Io. Auent. An∣nal. Boior. l. 5. p. 452. him forth in all his liuely colours, and who dares take vp the Pensill after Apel∣les? Anno Dom. 978. † Iste dicitur in Papatu magus & N romanticus, & Diabolum pro di∣tiis adorasse, &c. Cr. de dss, Coon▪ p. 732. Germ. Comm. Script.  2. Gerbert, alias, Syluester, Poped it; a great Pope, and as great a Magician and Necromancer, he worshipped the Deuill for riches sake, and was promised by him, that hee should not die, till hee came into Hierusa∣lem. Hereupon hee promised himselfe many yeares, and bade his soule take much ease; for as for that Hierusalem that was aboue, he meant neuer to goe to it; and for that on earth, it was beyond the Seas too farre for his Holinesse to goe: but (as secure as hee was of his life and happinesse) as the Deuill would, there was a Chappell called by that name, which for the very name of a Chappell, he had not of likelihoods visited often, where hee ended his vnhappie dayes; and after his death (see the Iudgement of God) † ussit seipsum amputati manibus sis, & pedibus, & as membris enor∣iter, & crudeliter utilar▪ Ib. p. 732. his priuie members, hands and feete, and all the rest, were piteou∣sly
torne and cut off by his owne appointment: and it is more then probable, that as his body went not to the graue in any decent or Christian sort; so his soule went not to Hea∣uen, notwithstanding he had the Keyes about him when hee died, as † Eis licet rectà in coelum migrare, quippe cum claues. gerant Er. to. 2. Cnt. 7 Adag 1. p. 774. Erasmus merrily once said. But leauing him vn∣to his Lord, to whom hee doth stand or fall, (because it shall not be said vnto me, Who art thou that iudgest another man?) I onely note this by the way, that it is no strange thing for a Pope to goe to Hell. † Cap 4. ep. 5. In Scholiis super illa verba, Benedictum Papam. Haec ea∣dem narrat d Be∣nedicto 8. & 9. Martinus Polonus in suis supputatio∣nibus: quod si con∣stat vt in vtriusque vita ait Platina, qui tamen Christianus erit, non hinc scan∣dalizabitur, sed aedi∣fibitur: verba quae in Textu habntur haec sunt. Episco∣pus qui tum (si rectè teneo) Capuae praeerat, vi it Maio∣rem Benedictum Papam qui am ob∣ierat, nigro quo quasi corporaliter insidentem▪ P Da∣mianus Bb. r. 10 3. col. 721. P. Damianus re∣ports of a Bishop of Capua, as farre as he remembreth, that saw Benedict the Pope riding on a blacke Horse in those infer∣nall Lakes. † Sixtus 4. bonis malisque Artibus instructus▪ Iouius in Leone 10. &  l. 6 Hist apud Zuing p 7 Sixtus 4. was brought vp in the better and the worser Arts. Pope † Stuprum Zosi∣m. Pontificis etiam pr Diabolum. Zuing. ex Marulo, l. 3 c. 2 1347. Zosimus was an Adulterer by confession of the De∣uill. † Zuing. p 1531. Benedict the ninth got the Popedome by Simonia∣call chaffering, and marchandizing, a small sinne, a pecca∣dillo. † Zuing. p 1627. () See a booke entituled, Loci duo ab Expurgatoribus dolo malo subrasi, 8. s. 39. Th. Alexander the sixths vices, or abominations rather, were recorded in Guicciardine: you haue practised to de∣face the foulenesse of his crimes from out the memory of man; but as you haue your Indices, so God and the truth haue their (:) Vindices. † Hic ia∣ceo in nomine Diaboli. Zuing. p. 1482. Iohn the 23. was an accursed blasphemer, when hee chanced to fall downe on the ground, Here I lye (quoth he) in the Deuils name. Iohn the 13. is called a † Monstrum vitiorum appellat. Platina Zuing. p. 1613. Monster of all vices. As Benedict the ninth got the Popedome by Simonie, so † Ioh. . Poptrâ scorti Theodorae adeptus Pontificatum. Luiprandus Zuing. p. 2314. Iohn the eleuenth got it by meanes of a lewd Harlot: it must needs thriue, that is so well and truly gotten. † Zuing. p. 2208. Leo the tenth his luxurie is knowne out of Iouius in his life. † Onuphrius apud Zuing p. 1208. Onuphrius hath described Iulius 2. his Houses and Gardens of pleasure, but speaketh nothing of his trauels and
paines in his Vicarship. I haue † Iouius in Leone 10. apud Zuing. p. 22. read of Hadrian the sixth his Peacocks, not kept without some Epicureisme, and lost with great blasphemie. Petrarches red Hat that was offe∣red him, if he would be but a Bawde to the † Squarziaf n vita Petrarchae. Zuing. p. 2272. Pope for his owne sister, might cause the Papists to blush at their baw∣dy Popes, if they had any grace in them. Boniface the 8. whose famous sentence it was, that if hee lead millions of soules into Hell, no man could taxe him for it, or say blacke to his eye; gaue good tokens of his repentance: for, vpon Ash∣wednesday, when after the vsuall ceremonies with great so∣lemnitie, his Holinesse was to throw ashes vpon their heads, he cast it into ones eyes, that was of the contrary faction, saying in mockerie, or blasphemy rather, in stead of these words; Remember man that thou art ashes, and to ashes thou shalt goe: Remember Sirra, that thou art one of the Gibel∣lines, and with the Gibellines thou shalt perish. Much more may be said out of Stella, that shineth like a bright Starre in. Stella de vitis 0. Pontificum. those darker Ages, and hath most liuely represented vnto vs the liues of their impure vnholy Fathers, the Popes. But as I began with Pope Ioane, so I end my discourse with Pope Eugenius the fourth, who, whether hee were man or woman, God or Deuill, I know not: but hee made ha∣uock of all things, neither fearing God, nor regarding † Diuina simul & humana contur∣at A Rdd. . 53. man, putting all things as it were into a combustion. But let their liues be as bad as may be (and worse they cannot be) yet as long as their doctrine is sound, and their teaching good, wee may and ought to adhere vnto them: it may bee they are impeccable and inerrable by the speciall prouidence of God, and assistance of his grace, possessing that Chaire that hath that promise: but because both Papa de haeresi  accusari. Nic. , part. 2. p 82. Nic-Eymericus, in his dayes a famous Inquisitor, and Franciscus Pegua his Commentatour, do determine this question, and resolue vs, that the Pope may be accused of heresie, and procee∣ded or informed against by an Inquisitor vel  alius pro∣cedere possit contra Papam deprehen∣sum in haerei. Illius Iudex vel Generale Conclium, vel Car∣dinalium Consi∣strium. Ib. part. 3. quest. 25. p. 359. Inquisitor, or any other ordi∣narie man: but his competent Iudges are none but a Generall Councell, or a Consistorie of Cardinals: (the selfe-same do∣ctrine that was preached in the Councell of Constance and
Basill) we will now see by their leaues, what Schismes and heresies haue been stirring amongst them; and as before their hearts were without any honesty, so here the Head of† Diu caput Eccle∣siae fuit sine cere∣bro. Krantz. the Church may be found to want wit or braine, to discerne betwixt truth and falshood, the right faith and false here∣sies. The Councell of ☞ Conc. Bas. MS. Basill hath made a muster of their secessions, Schismes and departures from the true faith, which thing I find carefully set downe in one or two choyce Manuscripts ☞ MS. . in Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. To come therefore to particulars. † Haeresi Aia∣nae subscripsi. Chron. excerptum de diuersis Chron. germ. script. v. 1. p. 716. † Erasmus in schol. p. ad Damsum. Liberius was an hereticke, his heresie was no lesse then the worst of all others, that of the Arrians. † Ib. Leo succee∣ded him both in his Papall Sea, and Arrian heresie. Who is so little versed in the Stories of the Church, but knoweth, that † Io. Villanus hist. sui temporis. Krantz. l. 5. Van∣li, c. 15. Iohn the 22. his error de visione faciali, was condem∣ned by the Sorbons, and blowne abroad by the sound of a Trumpet throughout all Paris? But I will dwell no lon∣ger vpon this incongruous and vnpleasant subiect of ba∣nishing all forraine Iurisdiction of Popes out of this King∣dome and territories. Wee say, that his Maiestie may re∣straine with the Ciuill Sword, the stubborne and euill do∣ers; which is my fourth and last proposition in this Arti∣cle, and commeth now to bee explained by the more tem∣perate and moderate sort of Papists. In the Chapter preceding, we haue forced the Tempo∣rall Sword out of the Popes hands; and that it may bee drawne forth against the stubborne and euill doers, none but the franticke Anabaptist, will dare to denie. With them and their fantasticall propositions and delirations, we will haue nothing to doe; at this present wee will inquire on∣ly, how farre forth this Sword is to bee drawne, according vnto the Papists Tenet, and the practise of these Kingdoms. They make two sorts of hereticks: some, that erre of † Qui pietatis studio, non autem mala malitia Andr. Masu in Ios. c 22. p. 318. malice, and † Non errantes in religione sed turbantes. Iust. Lips. ad Polit. Not. in c. 2. l. 4. Polit. p. 78. trouble the State: some, that † A maiorum sorum religione paululum deflectant. Ard▪ Mas. in Is. c 22 p. 318. erre the errors
of their Fathers, and stand stiffe in that Religion which hath been taught them, because they know no better: these are to be reclaimed and informed by † Euangelica mansuetudine & operatione Eras. to 3. p 5. good and gentle meanes, according to the example of the primitiue times, when the `Doctors and † Olim trucida∣hantur Christiani, nunc trucidant. to. 3 schol. in to 3. Hier. q 1 ad He∣thim. Pastors were readier to lay downe their liues, then to take them away from illiterate and simple men and wo∣men; they † Religionis causa non gladio sed ver∣ D transigenda Thuan lib. 27 p. 28. knew no other Sword then the Word; no other fire then the Spirit. Touching those that erre of malice, they are to be dealt withall in sharper sort, especially if their ma∣lice breake forth vnto the disturbance of the State, either Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill; and yet these are to be reclaimed also, and purged of their malice (if it may bee) as well as of their errors; or else preuented in time by the stroke of Iu∣stice, according to their demerits, without effusion of blood; but for blasphemous hereticks, that impugne the Trinitie, or wilfully trouble the vnitie and peace of this Kingdome, bee they Schismaticks or Hereticks (it now groweth to bee a matter of State rather, then Religion) I leaue them to those, that know well how to rule them, thinking no punishment too sharpe for them. But for your Ant. de Dominis,  c. 8.  24. sanguinarie punishments, and † Au Thuanus,  3 hist p 73. bloody Inquisitions, as our State vseth them not, nor our Religion doth warrant them; so your owne Writers doe, inueighing against them as ea∣gerly as we can, or do; supposing, that the Church of Rome hath † Saeuitiā ihil perfectum est Eras. to 2. Adag. 1. Cent. 3. p 6 13. profited little since it first vsed these vnwonted and vn∣warranted courses, Qui suadent vt omnia infumum & cinerem vertantur. Geo. Wicelius in ep. nuncupa. to turne all into fire and sword vpon small occasions, God he knoweth: for denying the Popes † Nunc in ignem pertrahuntur, qui dubitant an Rom. Pontifex ius habeat in Purgatorium. Er to 9. p. 861. power in deliuering soules out of Purgatory; for speaking a∣gainst the Canons of the Church, the opinions of their Schooles: sometimes for crossing their positions (though it bee but in † Haeresis si quis dixerit aut scripse∣t aliquid quod aliquo pacto, cum magistralibus Theologorum posituniculis vel in re Grammatica dissentiat. Er to. 2 Cent. 3. Adag 1 p 603. Grammar) notantur Articuli; parantur fascculi; away with them to the fire, they may no longer liue: one or two of their illiterate † Nunc interdum monachi vanum spargunt rumorem, mox veluti suspectum pertrahunt in carcerem, ibi notantur articuli, & parantur fasciculi. Er. to. 9. p. 861. Friars shall accuse them; some others shall beare witnesse; the spirituall Magistrate shall condemne
them; the Temporall shall execute the sentence, to the vtter destruction both of soule and body (as you are perswaded). If your men were as † Saeui potius quam eruditi. & ad damnandum quàm docendum instru∣ctiores. Er. Anno▪ in ep. 168. p. 492. ready to teach, as to burne; and dealt by † Non ferro & ig∣ne, sed colloquiis grassandum. Thuau l. 28. p. 222. Colloquies, and not by the Sword; by the Gospell, and not by Armes; we would thinke that your Religion had some shew of truth, and the Christian World some likelihood of Peace; to the which in Christ I commend the cause of Gods Church, and it a period to this long Article, much the longer, because it treateth of two the greatest powers vponq † Euangelium armis propagatum magis, quàm ver∣bis Krantz. l. 7. 6. 13. Earth; the one lawfully challenged by his Maiestie, the o∣ther vnlawfully pretended and vsurped by his Holinesse (such as it is,) as I haue shewed heretofore. Of the 22. Article. Of Purgatorie. THE Romish doctrine concerning Purga∣torie, Prayers, worshipping and adorati∣on, as well of Images, as of Reliques, and also inuocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainely inuented and grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repug∣nant to the Word of God. This 22. Article explained and maintai∣ned by Papists. HEre we are to runne through Purgatorie; or rather, through a Hell of deuilish inuentions; but I will con∣tract my selfe and it. The Church of England giues no defi∣nition of it in this Article, neither can it be defined, because non entis nullae sunt qualitates: but out of the writings of moderate Papists, it may be described briefly thus: Purgatory is a prety slight to picke mens purses.
Largely thus. PVrgatorie is an excellent inuention of fiction of some Cacologus, Schoolemen, or Legendaries, founded vpon dreames and reuelations, to certaine politick ends: partly vn∣knowne, partly knowne to picke mens purses, and fill the Popes cofers, to defeate men of their lands, and rob their soules of true comfort, leauing nothing in mens consciences but scruples and terrors, to thinke when it began, what it is, how long it shall continue, for yeares, dayes, moneths, or till the day of iudgement. This awing the people by it, more then by any thing, and causing them to reuerence their persons more then any men; that can by their Pray∣ers, mages, Inuocations, and Reliques of Saints, Indul∣gences, Funerals and Diriges (being well hired vnto the same,) quench this fire, deliuer these soules out of Purga∣tori, and free them a poena, and send them straight into Pa∣radise to their endlesse ioy and comfort (as they thinke, and are perswaded by their ignorant guides). To course ouer the parts of this description. It is a meere fiction, not of their Theologus but of their A Cacologis non Theologis excogi∣tatum Ant de Dom. l. 5 c 8  39. Luke 16 29 Cacologus, founded vpon dreames and The sto e Odilo. reuelations of men, that ☞ See Higden ad  67 especial∣ly about the story of the fellow at Long∣compton, that was tormented in his graue, till he had pay∣ed his ihes; and his senne by paying for , quieted his fa∣thers soule, and  profd his owne appeared to them from the dead. Habent Moysen & Prophetas, could not content them, pickes mens purses, and robs men of their lands to inrich the Pops Ditauit & indies magis ditat Ecclesim. t. e Dem.  5 c. 8 ss 75 cofers. What scruples it leaueth in the conscience, I leaue to your considerations, when you shall perfectly vnderstand, that either there was no men∣tion of it † De Purgatorio nulla mentio Inda  renaum. † Apud priscos nulla vel quam arissima fiebat mentio, sed & Graecis ad hunc vsue diem non est creditum esse. Episcopus Roffensis apud Polydenum Virgil. l. 8. c. 1 pag. 484. in the primitiue times, or very little; that the Graecians beleeue it not, neither are the learnedst of the Papists able to define the place, qualitie, duration, and extention of it vnto this present day. The Papists haue been euer Scepticks in defining and defending it; take them of what time and age you will, first, middle, or latter. For the
first age, you haue heard there was little or no mention of it; and for the middle age, ☞ Quaeritur quid tit ignis Pur∣gatorus & qui trnsiuri sunt per ilium. & qualiter. Quidam dicut, quòd est ignis materialis vltra ignis elemen∣tum non ignis cui sunt ligna materia & nutrimentii: sed ignis qui am exi∣stens sub luna. M S O p 403. one that wrote about some foure of fiue hundred yeares agoe (as may be coniectured by the hand) makes it a very disputable question what it is, where it is, who shall passe thorow it, and how long it shall continue. The first point hee resolues, but with a quidam dicunt, some say, that it is a materiall fire, beyond the Element of fire; no such fire as is to be maintained with wood, or nourished with any materials. ☞ A dicunt, quò▪ ignis ille nilul aliud est. quàm poe∣na, quae ideo dicitur ignis quia grauis est, & vrens ad mo∣dum ignis; & quia quaedam poena pu∣mns est & aeter∣na he de illa intel∣ligeretur, dictus est ignis purgatorius, id est non puniens, sed purgans per poenam temporali∣ter quis aeternali∣ter ne puniatur. Quicquid autem sit ignis ille▪ cre∣dendum est, quòd fideles etsi non om∣nes per eū transeum illi scilicet qui per∣fectam poenitenti∣am in hac vita non egerunt Sed alii plus sentiat, alii mi∣nus & ali cituis liberantur ab eo, alii tardius Nam quidam vsque in diem iudicii in eo puniuntur quidā ci∣tò liberantur & hoc secundum quantita∣tem peccati & poe∣nitentiae, & secun∣num modum confi∣tend, vt praedictum est. Nu O p 403. Alii dicunt, others say, that it is nothing but a kind of pu∣nishment, likened to, or called fire, because fire is the greatest of punishments, and this burnes like fire: and to distinguish it from Hell fire, that is lasting; because this fire doth not so much punish, as purge men by temporall paines, it is called a Purgatorie fire, or Purgatorie. Who shall goe thorow it? Whatsoeuer the fire is, (here is no certaine resolution of the question,) beleeued it must bee, that although all the faithfull children of God passe not thorow it, but these onely which perfected their penance in this life; yet with this distinction, that some soules shall be punish∣ed more, some lesse. Some soules shall bee deliuered from thence quickly in an instant. Some soules shall bee kept there prisoners till the last day of Iudgement, according as they doe penance, or sinne; more or lesse, and according to the manner of contrition. If this be their doctrine (as then it was in those darker Ages of the World) what comfort out of all these doubtings? May not a man say vnto their Schoole men, as Iob 6 2 h Animarum loca certa assignare impossibile Ant. de Dominis, l . c. 8 ss 122. Iob said vnto his friends, Miserable com∣forters are yee? But to come neerer our owne times: How is this point tossed and tumbled, and yet the Doue-like soule cannot find any place to rest herselfe on? to † Ignis remorsus conscientiae. Er. to. 9 p 685. name any set places or receptacles of the soules after this life, is impossible. No mortall man can riddle me this riddle, and tell me what this fire is. Some vnderstand by this fire, thes fire of con∣science,
or of † Purgantur ani∣mae post mortem ign charitatis. Eas 9. charitie. Some make it an † Torquentur igni qui suh sensum non cadit. Victor Antiochenus, cap. 5. Eb Pp. col. 1004. insensible fire; other∣some doubt of it, as † De Purgatorio dubitant viri docti & pii. Er. to. 9. p. 685 Erasmus, and other learned men; and in speciall, Iames Faber, intreating of the rich Glutton in the Gospell; and if there be any such place as Purgatory, it is as it † Vt Deo placi∣tum est & cogni∣tum. Iac. Faber ibi. c 16 aln. pleaseth God. Saint Augustine sometimes doubteth of it; sometimes it is past doubt, saith the same Saint † Dubitat de eo Aug. Er. in indice Aug. Augustine, (if the booke be his) that there are † Tertius locus penitus Ignoratus. Aug. in lib. Hypog∣nost. p. 597. but two places, Heauen and Hell: he is altogether ignorant of a third place. Vbinunc est Purgatorium? What then will become of Purgatory? And (to my seeming) this was the ancient tenet of the Church: For although † De statu post mortem, aut exig∣ua, aut prorsus nulla mentio ante Cbri∣stum. Cyprianus Men. Cisterciensis in c. 7. Iob, p. 147. there bee little or nothing knowne, what will become of our soules before Christ; yet since the time of Christs birth and Passion, I am † Animae be ato∣rum statim in coe∣lum vadt. Iul. Tole∣anus. l. 2. c. 8. col. 939. to. 9 Bb. Tp. taught by the Primitiue Fa∣thers, that the soules of the godly goe immediatly to Heauen; that they are † Anima soluta à corpore absoluitur ab omni macula peccati Ger. Ven. Probl. 57. to. 2. sect. 4. absouled from all blots and spots of sinne; that † Puniti pios post moretm impossibi∣le. In Ind. Chrys. it is impossible that the punishment of fire should come neere them; that it is a † Mirabile so∣phisma ex theolo∣giae myster iis quod condonata culpa manet obli∣gatio poenarum & infirmitatis. Er. . 9. p 6. 15. meera sophisme in Diuinitie, to thinke that part, that is the fault, is pardoned; and part, that is the punish∣ment, remaineth behind to be satisfied; there is no such mat∣ter. † Deus simpliciter ipsam & culpam, & poenam condonauit Iac. Faber  Luc. c. 16. he that remitteth the fault, will neuer exact the punish∣ment: or rather let vs say (as an ancient ☞ Sum∣mae crudelitatis & incredulitatis est, ab eo qui summe bonus est, dimidiā sperare veniam. MS. * p. 24. Non fas est dimidiam de eo soerare veniam, qui caput est & sons veniae, qui cum vnum mortale re∣mittit omnia remittit MS p. 71. Writer doth) It were vnfitting, or vnlawfull, nay, a sinne that hath a mixture of some cruelty and incredulitie, to hope for halfe pardons at his hands, that is so good and mercifull; the fountaine of all goodnesse and mercy; either he remitteth all, or none. And therefore laying all that hathbeen formerly spoken, and a great deale more that may bee alleaged to this purpose, before our eyes, let vs safely conclude, that it is an vnsafe way to make Purgatory (as it were) an Article of our Creed, as our Vide formulam iuramenti. Trent Masters doe: at the least, let vs take heed of Temerarium de rebus abdi∣tissimit quae in alia vita fiunt ex se proprioque cerebro quidquam promere. prying into those hidden mysteries, which God would haue hidden, and dare rather to inuent, or hammer out somewhat out of our owne braines, then to be ignorant of any thing: let
vs not be too Temperent sibi Theologi ab im∣modica asseueratio∣ne & qualitatum descriptione. Geo. Wicel. Met. Con. c. 18. confident in describing the place and qualitie of its punishment. A modest ignorance of these things will best become vs, till wee haue better warrant for the same out of Gods reuealed Word. Of Indulgences. PVrgatory should seeme to haue been in great request heretofore, it hath such a great traine following after of Indulgences, Prayers for the dead, Reliques, Pilgrimages, Diriges, Funerals, Images, and inuocations of Saints. Though the fall of Purgatory may be the ouerthrow of them all, yet we will (by God grace) intreate of them seuerally in their order: and first of Indulgences, and Popish Pardons, be∣cause they haue so neere † Quamdiu nulla fuerat de Purgato∣rio cura nemo quae∣siuit indulgentias: nam ex illo pendet omnis Indulgentia∣rum existimatio. Polyd. Virgil. l. 8. c 1 p. 484. affinitie with Purgatory, that if it be prooued, that there is no Purgatory, it will be easie to proue, that there are no Indulgences; and then the Popes † Si tollatur Pur∣gatorium quorsum Indulgentiis opus erit? Ib. market is marred, his Pardoners may goe shake their eares. First, for the originall of them, we subscribe to the Coun∣cell of P. 822. Hist. Conc. Trid. Trent: It is certaine, and cannot be concealed, that in no Christian Nation of the Easterne Church, either in ancient or moderne time, there euer was any vse of Indulgences of any kind whatsoeuer. And in the West, if by ancient custome they meane that which was obserued before Ʋrban the second, in the yeare 1095, no proofe can be brought of the vse of Indul∣gences. If from that time, vntill the yeare 1300. it will ap∣peare, that the vse of them hath been sparing, and onely to free men from punishments, imposed by the Confessour. Af∣terwards, from the Councell of Ʋienna, the abuses began, which did increase very much, vntill the time of Leo the tenth. Hitherto the Councell, and yet no Counsell neither; they say no more then all the World besides; I meane, a world of Papists, which I haue catalogued vp according to the times where in they liued descendendo; I hope they are all fit and proper.
Indulgences came in Anno Christi 1095. and were opposed Ann. dom.     Ann. dom.     1240   Vincentius Belluacensis.     Geo. Wicelius. 1260   Bonauenture.     Alph. de Castro. 1360   Durand.     Polyd. Ʋirgill. 1444   Petrarch.     Onus Ecclesiae. 1   A Dialogue published de insolentijs Curiae Ro∣manae.     Conc. Tridentinum.           Chronicum Belgicum.           Io. Langius. 1410   Io. Gerson.     Huldericus Nutius. 1430   Fortalitium fidei.     Franc. Polygranus. 1453   Io. de Vesalia.     Valer. Anselmus Rydd. 1453 By Vincent. Ferrarius.   By Syluester Prierius. 1458   Regin. Peacock.     Contra Lutherum Con∣clusiones. 1460   Tho. Gascoigne.       1478   Dominicus de Domini∣cis.     Laur. Valla.           Car. Militzius. 1480   Gabr. Bieli.     Fr. Guicciardinus. 1480   Hier. Sauanarola.     Io. Roffensis. 1494   Wern. de Rollowinck.     Nigellus Wirocher. 1511   Nic. Kus.     Anon. Vetus scripter. 1511   Io. Keyserberg.     Conr. a Liechtenawo. 1514   Friar Flechen.     Io. Auentinus. 1518   Caietanns.     Henricus Henriquez.     Cassander.       In this Catalogue, I haue mentioned none but such as were esteemed at the least of their Church, and complained of the sundry abuses of it. I haue purposely omitted these that follow: P. Valdus, Io. Wickleph, Walter Brute, Guil. Swinderby, Ric. Turmyn, Io. Cleydon, Io. Puruey, Henr. To∣ken, Nic. Russe, Ric. Hume: These were all Waldenses, Wickleuists, or Hussies; you will neuer accept of their testi∣monies when they are brought against you, and I am very
well prouided without them, to make good these two Pro∣positions. 1. That there is no such treasure of the Church; wee haue but carbones pro the sauro. 2. If there be, or put case there be; yet they are ill distri∣buted, and as they are bought and sold, cannot bee de∣fended. These two Propositions are maintained and explained by the Papists, to whose writings I haue confined my selfe, when I might (as you perceiue by that which hath been written) haue made vse of a great many more testimonies, both pregnant and pertinent to my purpose: but these and a few Parchments shall suffice. The first Proposition. That there is no such Treasure of the Chureh. WHatsoeuer Pontanus the Iesuite, out of that of Vir∣gil,Symbolarum l 1 40 6. Aeneides In il∣sud, ergo exercentur poenis, vide de poe∣nis expiatoriis, p. 1509. Infectū eluitur scelus aut exoritur ignis, proues Purgatory; yet you haue heard that Polydore Ʋirgill could neither fetch Purgatory, nor Purgatory Pardons so farre, because the Well was deepe, and his bucket would not reach so farre. Fr. Polygranus in his Catholike Assertions knoweth no other Pardons (nor I,) then such as by the † De Iure diuinc quilibet Sacerdos dare possit Fr. Po∣lygranus assert, quo∣rundam Ecclesiae dog∣matum. p. 68. Law of God, any ordinary Priest might giue vnto a true penitent; that is, to ☞ Sacerdos absoluit id est o∣stendit absolutum † ab obligatione fori poenitenualis. MS O p. 93 or, ☞ Ostendit peceatum esse dimissum vel retentum, & haec est potestas quam dedi Deus ligandi at que soluendi. idest. ostendendi ligates. vel solutos in Confessione, cum iam soluta sint apud Deum per cordis Confessionem MS. O p. 410. pronounce him absolued before God. Hee doth this but declaratiue, or ministerially; it is God alone that doth truly forgiue sinnes, and acquit vs both a paena & a cul∣pa. ☞ Ego solus deleo iniquitatem popu∣li. Item Ambrosius: Ille solus peccata dimit tit qui solus pro peccatis mortuus est. Et Aug. Nemo tollit peccata, nisi solus Christus, qui est agnui tollens peccata mundi tollit autem & dimittendo qua facta sunt, & adiuuando ne fiant perducendo ad vitam vbi omnino fieri non possunt. MS. O. p. 410. I alone (saith he) by the Prophet Isay, doe put away,
or put out the sinnes of my people. Also Ambrose; Hee, and none but he, forgiueth sinnes, that died for thee. And Saint Augustine most elegantly concludes the Chorus in these words; No man can take away our sinnes but Christ alone, which is the immaculate Lambe that taketh away the sinnes of the World; hee taketh them away, both by pardoning them that are already committed, and by keeping vs from commit∣ting any more, and by bringing vs to heauen, where it is impos∣sible to sinne any more. More then this, what can be said to take away the Keyes from the Pope, and giue them to the true owner, Christ? To point vs out with the finger, or to direct vs to the true Treasure of the Church, the Merits of our Sauiour, the true Purgatorie of Christs blood: and thus much briefly of the first Proposition. The second Proposition. That Indulgences, if they had been good at their first institution (which can neuer be prooued) being abu∣sed as they are, and euer will be, are not to bee tolerated any more in the Church of Christ. THe Pope, whom Polygranus in the place before cited (which I had forgotten to tell you) maketh the sole Steward and distributer of this † Propter varios abusus restrictae ad Papam Ib. p. 68. Treasure, for that they were abused, when they were in the hands of euery ordinary Priest to be disposed and distributed, as liked them best, pretendeth the good of the Church by his † Sub praetextu Turcorum infini∣tam collegerunt (quatuor ad diuer∣sas mundi partes le∣gati missi) pecuni am, cum summis & plenissimis misit Indulgentiis, vt col∣lectam pecuniam ali astu tandem copiose inter Cardinales nouas creaturas suas distribuere posset. Praeterea ex cunctis fidelium regio∣nibus, praesertim Germaniae, mediantibus Indulgentiarum Commissariis, sub specie fabricae Basilic S Petri pecuniam omnimodis aggregare feruentissime ausus est, tametsi ad dictae fabricae, &c. In Chron Cytinsi ad ann Domini 1513. German rerum script. 0. 1. Croisadoes, and building of Saint Peters Fabrique. But he intendeth nothing lesse, then the aduancement of the true Crosse, and the publishing of Saint Peters doctrine; but the diuiding and sharing of so many millions amongst his new made Cardinals, which hee had
† Creauit denique & eodem tempore alios 30 Cardinales, à quibus ex pacto quingent ma au∣reotum sucepit. Ib. fleeced but a little before; taking for the making of thirtie Cardinals, not passing fiue hundred thousand Crownes † Quando adhuo illud Sruatris praeceptum inuio∣latum per manebit, Gratis accestis gatis date? Ibid. Alack, when shall our Sauiours precept come in date, gratis accepistis, gratis date? that they would bestow that freely, which freely they haue receiued? But it may bee said, or fea∣red at the least, that some of their Popes come not so freely by their Chaire, and therefore make a common Matte of these Pardons. As Pope Boniface being both a couetoush † Erat et pecuniae auidus, ad quam colligendam plures legaos▪ per diuersas mundi partes ad negotianum cum Inulgents misit. Fuit denique maxi∣mu Simoniacus, & Smonia: cultores multis dignitatibus sublimauit, &c In Chron. Cytiz. ad ann. Dom 1555. wretch, and a Simoniack sent not his Disciples as Christ did to preach, but his Brokers to trade for Pardons, ffering his plenarie Pardons so Petentibus con∣tra ius fasque conecssit quaestus gratia. Indulgenti verò plenariae ita passim vendebantur vt iam frequenti vsu vilesceret cla∣uum & literarum Apostolicarum au∣toritas. In Chron. Cytizensi p. 1389. cheape, that many began to loath them, and waxe wearie of them: for there was no sinne so hatefull, no crime so enormous, but it was bought out for ready money. This was the second foule abuse of Pardons. But if wee cast our eyes vpon the History of the Councell of Trent, we shal see many horrible abuses of Pardons, that could not Hist. Conc. Trid. p 169. be related without teares; as first, that Leo 10. should giue the be∣nefit of his Indulgēces to his sister Magdalen, wife vnto Fran∣ceschetto Cybo, Innoc. 8. his bastard. Secondly, the Pardoners in Tauernes, and elsewhere in Games, and other things not fit to be named spent them. The Trent-Masters durst not name all the abuses, either for shame or modestie belike: but one Tho. Gascoigne, that was sometime Chancellor of this Vniuersitie, and might haue been Bishop of this Realme, hauing ☞ Gascoigne in Dictnario Theol. MS publikely read against the abuses of Indulgences in his Lectures at Oxon, and shewed that they were cause of much wickednesse, afterwards he relateth these particulars: That they ☞ Ib. in Calathi. were carried vp and downe the Country in Bas∣kets, and either sold for sixe pence, foure pence, or two pence, or giuen for a game at Tennis for a cup of Ale, and worse mat∣ters, that is in plaine English, Pro actu mere∣tricio. for lying with awench. He himselfe is much against the Popes changing penance into money: and farther sheweth, that there was a Doctor (Eng∣lish belike) at the Councel of Basil, disprouing Indulgences; out of a Paper-booke of the Councels in Durham Colledge. The booke of Councels which the Doctor vsed, is now faire∣ly bound, and charily preserued in Balliol Colledge, and the
authoritie that is cited out of that booke against Indulgen∣ces, is to this ☞ Non est pu∣tandun quod (Pa∣pa) vt pecunias re∣cipiae det indulgen∣tias, & si faceret peccaret grauiter: nec teerent▪ quia nec esset charitas in recipiente nec pie∣ta in causa Bas. MS. p 09. effect; to proue, that the Pope cannot sell his Pardons, and if he did, they would be of no force, arguing nei∣ther charitie in the one, nor piety in the other. This I speak on∣ly vpon my own coniecture, grounded vpon these two rea∣sons: first, because there be foure books of Sermons, Acts, and other passages in that Councell; and secondly, because he doth treate of this point somewhat largely, and with an English freedome. But esteeme of its authoritie as you will. To draw this point to some conclusion. I know your eares by this time begun to glowgh, to heare of so much baggage stuffe, seeing the doctrine of Indulgences, take it at the best, is Hist. Conc. id. p. 21. rather disputable, then decided; take it at the worst, that it bringeth with it many abuses, more then I haue mentioned, noted by I. p. 58. Iohn Gerson, and Nic. Clemangis, and Io. Collet of England: knowne by the detestable gaine by Indulgences, the Ib p. 9. people especially of Germany en∣thralled and robbed of their mony, had not Martin Luther of Wittemberge, and Friderick, Duke of Saxony iust cause to re∣claime, and declaime against the sundry abuses of them, be∣ing † Quomam eius∣mo  Indulgentiani quaestus iam in odi∣um hominum cum Procuratoribus in∣currerunt Polyd. Vg de uen. re∣, l. 8. c. 4. p. 498. now growne into the generall hatred of all men, and to banish them out of all Germany, and we here in England not to admit them, vntill they bee better warranted vnto vs. Things that are good (as the brazen Serpent) out of your owne Gascoigne, may be taken away: and so much of Indul∣gences and Pardons. Pardon mee if I haue insisted the lon∣ger on this point occasioned through plenty of matter. I will contract my selfe in all the rest, leauing you to ima∣gine, what large volumes may bee written of controuersies out of their owne Indices, if either I had all of them, or all were written out of them: but I may with thankefulnesse to the Almighty, say vnto them that meane to spend houres well in this kind, Principium dedi vobis. I onely intend and propose vnto my self an Introduction vnto the Contro∣uersies in this first Edition.
Of Prayers for the Dead. OF prayers for the dead, what shall I say? Seeing that in our prayers whether † In publicis precibus nihil quod non de∣promptum ex sa∣cris es E to 6. in c.  Mat. p 54. publike or priuate, there must bee no † Mu rculae meniae sacris ad mixae Ib. † Du precati∣on nugae assurae. Ib. assuments, or additaments of men or women, but all must be taken out of the holy Scriptures; although I cannot deny, but the Purga rm negaur à Graecis & amen orant pro de func is Ant de Domnas,  7 § 118. Graecians, which to this day doe deny Purga∣torie, doe grant the vse of prayers for the dead: yet because I am taught, that in the next life there is present † Eras in Indice Aug. condemnati∣on, or remunertation, and, † Eras to 9. p 683 that they will profit vs little or no∣thing; and that we are to be accountable at the last day of Iudgement, for euery idle word, they were better forborne, then vsed, and that I may conclude all in the marginall note vpon Greg. Neocaesariensis word, verè sentiunt qui sublat as volunt preces pro defunctis: they thinke aright, which wouldf † In Greg Ncae∣sar in Metaphrasi in Eccleslasten, c. 9. col. 97 lib. 3 Legitur in Textu. Praemia por∣ro poenasque nullas post expletum vitae cursum proponi. Et in margine † Sic verè sentiunt qui sub∣aar volunt precespro defunctis. haue prayers for the dead abolished, according to the plaine doctrine of the Church of England. Of Reliques and Pilgrimages. FIrst, of Reliques, seeing they † Auaritia & tur∣p quaestus multo errores induxit in Ecclesiam tum cir∣ca doctrinas quae ad quaestum plus faci∣unt, quàm in pieta∣tem O quot scrup conscientiae timi∣dis & infir∣mis mentibus in∣geruntur, qui per vnum Christi san∣guinem possunt s∣se oae? Iac Fabor in p d Tit. c. 1. p. 20. sprung both from one roote, couetousnesse and gaine, which is the roote of all euill. We will inquire, whether there be any true Reliques, or no; proceeding in right method, first, to proue the , and then to talke of the  afterwards. Let it be first agreed vpon of all hands, that if Reliques be to be worshipped of any, then much more of Christ, the blessed Virgins, and his Apostles; but all these are either vncertaine, or vnknowne; of Christ what haue wee remai∣ning, but some few cart loades of his Crosse, or Nailes wherewith he was fastened to the Crosse? which hee that will beleeue, must haue faith more then a graine of Mu∣stardseed, so incredible are they (if the relation bee true
which I find recorded in an ancient Parchment booke. The historie is somewhat long, but withall strange, and therfore we will heare it, and it be but for its noueltie to you, and in∣credibiliti both to you and me. I reade (saith my Author)b ☞ In quadam Chronica Authenti∣ca legitur, &c. MS. 29. p. 84. that Helena was the daughter of Choel, King of the Brit∣taines, whom Constantine at his comming into Brittaine mar∣ried, being the onely daughter of her father. After whose death, the whole Iland deuolued, vnto him. So much we∣may reade in the Brittish Stories: but some there bee that fetch her pedigree and descent as farre as Treuers. Thus much a man may beleeue, although that he haue but some few graines or scruples of faith: But that which follow∣eth, can hardly be beleeued, without some scruple of con∣science, though hee had whole mountaines of faith, or as much faith as would remooue Mountaines into the Sea; yet, I say, it will hardly be belieued. The said Helena being desirous to find out Christs Crosse, and nayles (a most excel∣lent inuention, whosoeuer put it into her head) sent for allSI de hoc Regina quae sierit, vide ne hoc sibi aliquate∣nus confitearis. the Iewes: the I was supposing it was for some such businesse, feared and resolued, that they would neuer confesse where it was One Iudas (mistake him not for Iudas Iscariot) yet it was one almost as ancient as he: perhaps, some men will wonder how this should come to passe, when it is knowne, that Helena called this assembly of Iewes, more then 270. yeares after Christ? I answere out of the same Author, that perhaps men liued longer ☞ Nisi forte dice es, quod tunc homines plus quam modo viu∣bant MS 24  83 Iusst os omnes igne creari. Hic, Domina Iusti & prophetae filius optime nouit lgë, & tibi omnia quae quaelieris ab eo in∣icabit. then, then they doe now. Zachaeus was his Grandfather, and Saint Stephen that was stoned to death, was this Iudas brother: this Iudas (I say) when Queene Helena threatned to burne them all aliue, if they would not tell her; for all their solemne vow, was discouered to her to be the onely man, that knew where the Crosse was hidden: so she set them aside, and tooke Iudas along with her, and told him in plaine termes, that if he would not tell her where Gol∣gotha was, that the Crosse might be found, eft soones she would throw him into a pit, and there he should lie (as sure as Christ died for her) till hee were famished to death: which was in∣stantly done, and there hee lay poore soule sixe dayes and sixe
nights: but on the seuenth day he made signes to come foorth, and made show that he would tell them where the pretious Re∣lique of the Crosse was. As soone as hee came forth, downe falleth he to his prayers, (which that it might bee the more auaileable was ioyned with much fasting) straight wayes whilest he prayed, the ground shooke, and yeelded forth a sent of most pleasant smelles. Whereat Iudas lift vp both his hands, and said; Now doe I know of a truth, that Christ is the Saui∣our of the world. Now in that place (as we reade in the Eccle∣siasticall Historie (for this is not a Legend-storie) there was whilome a Temple of Venus, the Goddesse of lust, built by A∣drian the Emperour, wherein whosoeuer prayed, might bee thought to pray to her Deitie, & therfore it was vnfrequented, and ready to fall: but Queene Helena razed it to the ground, and plowed it vp. After this Iudas begins to settle himself to his busines, and hauing digged not passing 20. yards in the ground, he found three Crosses, which with great ioy hee carried vnto Queene Helena. But loe, here a doubt, that did much per∣plex them all, it could not be known, which was Christs Crosse, from the thiefes; nor of the two thieues Crosses, which was the good thiefes, & which was the bads: but that mattered not. But as God would haue it, there was a young man carri∣ed forth to be buried; Iudas staied the Beare with his band, and layed the first crosse vpon the body, and it stirred not; and then he layed the second crosse vpon it, and it stirred not; but when he touched the body with the third Crosse, the young man started vp; and if this bee not true, the Sea burnes. Would you know what became of this wonder-working Iudas? He was baptized not long after by the name of Quir∣iacus, and in time, anno nullo, regnante nemine, (the time cer∣tainely cannot be assigned) was made Bishop of Ierusalem, and was put to death by Iulian the Emperour, after most ex∣quisite torments. This Quiriacus vpon intreatie of the same Empresse, was so happy as to find out the Nayles, where∣with our Sauiour was crucified, glistering in the ground as it were any gold. How Helena disposed of them, I leaue to Gregorius Turonensis, and other Fablers to informe you:
for my part, I beleeue neither part, nor parcell of this Story, as it is here related: though I doe not denie, but such Nailes might be found, and, perhaps, stucke in Constantines Helmet; and one of them was throwne into the Hadriatique Sea, which hath been the quieter euer since, neuer a whit: yet all this will not make me beleeue, that the Feast of the Inuention of the Crosse, commonly called Holy-roode day, tooke its originall from this Iudas Helena. That which I inferre out of all this long and tedious legendarie Storie, (let the Papists ecclesiasticate, and magnifie it neuer so much) is, that there is no certaintie, either of the one, or of the other. Next, touching the parts and parcels of the Virgin Maries Sepulchre, I will not say, that these are as certaine as her assumption, or her houses transumption (both which are written in the backside of my Creed:) but I will say confidently and peremptorily, that the Councel of † Reliquiae dm∣natae in Concilio Trdentio quae contra Eccleae Rom doctrinam populo obrudtur & de particul Se∣puleri R. Virginis, & B Michaelis cra∣io. Aug. Thuanus, l. 3 p 463. Trent hath long since condemned these fopperies and vanities; and it will be now high time for vs to leaue them. But, perhaps, there may bee a good constat for the Apostles Reliques. Nay, nay, they may goe with the rest, the Disciples are not aboue their Master Christ, or their Mistrisse, the Lady Ma∣rie, Queene of Heauen, and Empresse of the whole World. But of these, Poldore Ʋirgil said long agoe (I doe not beleeue his words for Gospell, you know how he is iustly censured both by Protestants and Papists, that said, Tam certo scio, &c.) but I beleeue it coniecturally, that there are † Pauci sciunt vbi ipsa Apostolorum ossa iacent Polyd. Virg de Iuent e∣rum, l. 4. c. 11. p. 282. very few that can tell vs, where the very bones of the Apostles lye, vn∣lesse they lie themselues. It would make a Horse breake his bridle, to runne ouer two or three lists of Reliques, that I find registred in a Masse-booke from Exeter, the Antiqui∣ties of Glaston, and the third of the Reliques of Saint Cuth∣bert in Durham: and did we but peruse all the Reliquiaries in the World, how much more of these sleights and couse∣nages in ordine ad Deum would come to light? How ma∣ny heads, hands and toes should we find, that each of them had, as if they had been Monsters in Nature, bicipites, or tricipites; two-headed, or three-headed; and more fingered
then some mightie men in the Bible. But I know you will2 Chron. 20 6. obiect, that though all the World may bee deceiued in dis∣cerning the Apostles bones, yet the Apostolicall Church of Rome cannot deceiue, nor be deceiued. I pray say not so: for this were to take from God, and giue vnto your Ro∣maine Church, bringing Romaine in steed of Catholike into the Creed. I haue read in a good Historian, that our Ro∣mans were deceiued, in carrying another mans bones, insteadc † Ossa alterius pro Di Bat holomai Roman translata. Crantz 3 Motrop. c 35. apud Zuinger. p 437. of Saint Bartholmewes bones to Rome: the Author is Crant∣zius, his Religion Popish. Thus haue you been deceiued in worshipping Saint Michaels skull; and these cousening Knaues, that made not righteousnesse great gaine, † Isti nebulones quaestum pietatem, religionem prae∣dam putant I A∣uent l 4 p. 438. but a gaine of righteousnesse, and a prey of Religion, shewed you this and that for † E o 6. in cap. 23. pag. 92. filthy lucres sake; some butcher or harlotry fellowes shares, instead of Beckets, whom yee haue sainted long since, and I know who hath dis sainted him very lately, and you know and allowing besides, when he was first declared to be a † Non D. Tho∣mae sed Lanionis alicuius aut Leno∣nis. Er. to. 9 in Pe∣regrinatione. traytor, and his bones publikely burned by the Hang∣man. Yea, you haue worshipped some mens bones that weref † Hist. Conc. Trid p 87. hanged by the common Bureno; and sometimes the bones of Asses and brute beastes, instead of men: your blind deuo∣tiong † Cum sint ossa patbulo affixo∣rum Geo. Ven Probl. ro. 6 sect. 4 Probl. 134. hath reached not onely to the worshipping of ashes and bones; but of smockes, and shirts, and breeches, and shoes, and I know not what; yea, the very excrements (I meane, the hayres of the head) which hath been so highly accounted of you, that you haue made ☞ Maius fit festum de ossiculo vel panniculo mi∣mini sancti quam de toto corpore Regis maximi. MS. 9. p 362. Tu per Thomae sanguinem, qui no redemit, fac nos Christe scandere quo Thomas as∣cen. more reckoning of one little sinew or ragge of some blind Saint, then of the whole body of the greatest Soueraigne in the World. Yea (I feare to say it, but you feare not both to speake it, and beleeue it) most blas∣phemously you confide as much in the blood of some Saints, as you doe in the blood of our Sauiour. Time would, and my promise bindeth mee, to make good my : but since the Papists cannot shew me any true cer∣taine Reliques, but such as must be maintained either sola fide, onely by faith, (which is the Protestantes Cape,) or by tradition onely, which is the errour of the Iewes, and most Papists, and the very sinew that knits the scattered parts of
their religion together to the Church, and the Church to the Pope; and that is a very Gordian knot, which as strong as itContra veneratio∣nem Reliquiarum. Ant. de Dum l. 7 c. 12 ss. 29. is, Ant de Dominis, (that Caiaphas, or high Priest with vs for a yeare or two) hath cut a sunder, and giuen (full sore against his will) such a blow to our fantasticks and Rome∣gadders,Contra onipetas & reliquia. Ant▪ de Dom. l. 5 c. 1. ss. 29. or Relique-worshippers, that they will hardly be in any state of health, to go to this present Iubilee: but if needs they will bee trudging, let them well consider into what dangers they run, that thus run their Countries, with  Cum vitae & morum discrimine. o.  . ad Paulinum & to. 9. In Dialogo de vi∣ndo loca sancta. Ib. ha∣zard of liues, wiues, losse of goods, and good manners; and last of all, of God, and true comfort in Christ: and because in changing their places, they change not their faces, nor alter their natures, but are as impudent in the one, as they are ob∣stinate and peeuish in the other, I would wish them to stay at Rome, when they are once there: if they returne, let it be at their owne perill, praedictum est caue: if the Praemonere take not place, I am sure the Praemunire will; and here I leaue them. Of Funerals and Diriiges. OF these Funerals and Diriges I haue little to say, be∣cause  as vita Aug. &  to 6 in c. 13. &  Dial qui dicitur nus. Erasmus, † Annot. in lib, de Corona militi, pag 3. Rhenanus, I cap. de nere. Wicelius, and others before me of their owne side, haue scored vp their abuses in cousening men with a tale of Robin Hood, or of some hood or other of Dominick or Francis, which is able to send them streight to Heauen, so that they shall neuer need to goe by the way of Purgatorie; prouided, perhaps, that they bee truly contrite, for mis-giuing their lands from their wiues and children, vpon these Gorbellies and Lasie-bones: no, there is no such matter, prouided that they giue liberally to their Couents and Monasteries; No penny, no Pater no∣ster; and it were tolerable, if they would stay till it were giuen; but they will haue it many times out of mens throats, as it were, and bury them aliue, rather then faile, sending them quicke vnto the graue. There is a pretty Storie to this purpose in . Itan.  4 Amatus Lusitanus worth the rehearsing: one
Armellius, a rich man, fell sicke, but his sicknesse was not to death: the Friars of Saint Dominick and Francis wisht him (as their manner is) to commend his soule vnto God, and a good part of his goods vnto them, that they might pray for his soules health, after hee was departed this world: but their meaning was, to prey vpon his body being aliue, for they would haue buried his body quicke, that his body might haue taken possession of his graue, and they of his goods: but as God would haue it, in comes the Physitian, who wondring at his sudden departure, maketh triall, and findes there was life in him, recouers him of his sicknesse; the man liued many yeares after, and reuoked his Legacy, to the no small griefe of these greedy Shauelings, who had lost such a booty. And therefore it was not without cause, that † Quod assrere erroneum est & impium. Er. in Dia∣logo qui Ens. Erasmus was ac∣counted an Hereticke before he died, for writing so sharpely against their foolish Obites and Mortuaries, that were bought and sold for other mens prayers, that would doe the de∣ceased no good: for (as the same Erasmus saith out of Au∣gustine, and hath been formerly shewed) † Exequiarum pompa magis vi∣uorum quam mor∣tuorum solatia Er. in Indice Aug. funerall pompes, and such like solemnities, may yeeld some comfort to the liuing; but the dead are neuer a whit the better for them. And there∣fore they are but meere Wood-cocks that will bee caught with such Springes. These Springes were Confession, where∣by, by the confession of Gul. de S. Amore, ☞ Per confes∣siones quibus (Mo∣nachi) se ingerunt immensa sibi legata relingui, procurant. Contra Gyrr▪ MS. our Friars and Monkes, especially Mendicants, get no small Legacies vnto their hands; and therefore seeing prayers for the dead (as hath been prooued) are nothing, and funerall pompes are nothing but comforts to the liuing, and not the dead; wise and vnderstanding men among the Papists may spare † Er. l. 5. Apo∣thgm. apud Zuing. p. 24 18. this charge, and bestow it vpon their poore Kinsfolke, Wiues and Children, for ought I can see. Against adoration of Images. BEfore wee enter into the maine controuersie about Adoration of Images, let vs enter some Creekes there∣of, and then lauch forth into the deepe; and as he that goeth
about to fell a Tree, that is compassed with Thornes and Bushes at the bottome, must first cut or grub vp the bushes, that hee may come at the tree: so wee will cut off certaine nice and thorny distinctions, that wee may the more freely come to throw downe this great tree of Images, which like Alex. Oke, is growne now to adoration, and speciall wor∣ship. The distinctions are three, betweene simulachrum and imago, a similitude or likenesse of a thing; an Idoll, an Image; and latria and doulia. The Papists as much as wee, condemne the worshipping of Idols and simulachra, and all god-worship, or latria to Images of men; but not the wor∣ship, or adoration of Images in a meaner sort, called doulia, or in a greater, called latria, of the Images of God, either alone, or in the Trinitie, or of the Crosse, or of our blessed Sauiour that died vpon the Crosse, both God and Man. But God willing, we will first auoide these niceties, and fooleries of distinctions, out of their owne Writers, and then erect and establish certaine propositions, whereunto the Papists must stand, vnlesse they will thwart and with∣stand some of the chiefest of their owne Writers. A simulachre and an image are all one, saith learned † Simulachrum hic est imago Va∣blus in Deut. c▪ 4.  24. Va∣tablus. With him agreeth † Imagines simu∣lachra vocata Co∣us apud Zuing. p. 1403▪ Geo. Cedren, or rather the Tran∣slator of him out of the Greeke. An Idol and an Image are all one. If doubt be made, we appeale vnto an Herald, that shall proclaime so much vnto the whole World, euen Desi∣derius Heraldus, in his learned Annotations vpon † Annot, in Ar∣nobium, p. 359. . 44. & p. 364. Arno∣bius. For the third distinction of Latria and Doulia, let the Christians call them what they will, and distinguish the one from the other; the Gentiles put no difference betweene them, as testifieth † Ex ist. de d Gent. Stagm. p. 5. Lil Greg. Gyraldus. Thus hauing cleared the passages, we purpose to make good these following Propositions. 1. That Images were not vsed in the Primitiue Church. 2. When they began to come into vse, and crept into Churches, they were onely Lay-mens Remembrancers, not their Idols, or worshipped of them.
3. That when they began to be worshipped (as Ido∣latrie commeth in step by step) Images of the Trinitie or of God the Father, were neuer generally receiued, but most∣ly misliked of the Church. 4. Adoration of Images crosseth Scripture. 5. Repugneth to reason. 6. And is very much impugned by the Papists them∣selues of the better sort. The First Proposition. Images were not vsed in the Primitiue Church. IF Agobardus Works, and especially his de Picturis, with Papyrius Massenius notes, and Desiderius Heraldus anno∣tations vpon Arnobius, bee not satisfying in this point, we shal be constrained to haue recourse to the Writings of the Fathers, and the Histories of the Church: out of both which, it will appeare as cleare, as the Sunne-shine at Noone-day, that the Prime-Christians could say confidently, that they had no Altars, no Images nor Statuaes: making Images the badge or cognizance to know the Christian from the Gentill; and who knoweth not that memorable History of Epiphanius, recorded by Saint Hierome? Which Epistle you haue laboured what you can to discredit, and when you could not doe that, you fell foule vpon some few Notes of † Notati ab Epi∣phanio propter Imagines▪ Eras. in seh. Apol. aduers Rusticum, p. 251. . 5. Erasmus, that declared the same. A poore reuenge: but that Epistle and the truth thereof doth stand, and your doctrine of Images must needs fall, vnlesse it haue better proppes to maintaine it, then I see in this first Proposi∣tion.
The Second Proposition. When Images came into the Church, they were placed in their Temples for rememoration, and not for adoration. THe Proposition is so notorious and famous out of Gregories Epistle to Serenus of Masseils, that you were best blot out that Epistle, and coyne a doctrine cleane con∣trary to this, and clap it to some Epistle or other. And doubtlesse (as you are cunning gamesters, that can helpe your selues at a need) yee haue played your parts very cun∣ningly on both sides. Saint Gregorie in his ninth booke and ninth Epistle to Serenus, Bishop of Marseils, blameth him for being so inconsiderate, as to breake certaine Images that were offensiue, by reason of the peoples worshipping them. Hee saith; Antiquitie knew of the painting of Saints Stories in places where men did worship God; although they did not worship pictures as gods, or as men. I reuerence S. Gregorie as much as any man, hauing perused his workes as much as some others haue done, and compared him with the Ma∣nuscript Copies which (vnder correction) I take to bee the best reading of him, or any other Greeke or Latine Author. But these words, quia in locis venerabilibus Sanctorum de∣pingi Historias non sine ratione admisit vetust as; hee saith but admisit, permitted them to bee painted; and yet I can scarsely beleeue them, because Epiphanius that liued some hundreds of yeares before Saint Gregorie, rent the Vayle in the Church: Was he inconsiderato zelo succensus, when he did it? Who dares say it? And both Tho. Bradwardine, our profound Doctor, and the Councell of Basil, haue taught me how to distinguish betweene auctorities and auctorities, the former and the latter: and whereas it may be obiected for proofe hereof, that the Picture of our Sauiour was mira∣culously depaynted in the Lateran Church, as saith † Imago Saluato∣ria miraculose de∣picta in pariete La∣teranensis Ecclesiae si rectè sentiunt qui haec scribunt. Geo. Ven. to. 2. Probl. sect. 6 Problem▪ 272. Geo. Ve∣netus,
take that which followeth; Sirectè sentiunt qui haec scribunt; if that be true which is written of it. But to reuer to my purpose: How doth this doctrine of Gregories, that Images may bee, but may not bee worshipped, agree with that which went before in the seuenth booke of Greg. Register. Indict. 2. ep. 54. to Secundinus? The words come not in by way of a Postscript, Sic esse oportet; but they come in, or rather are thrust in the perclose of that long Epistle by head and eares. The Images (saith this false Gregorie) which you sent for vnto me by Dulcidius the Deacon, I haue taken care to be conueyed vnto you. And it was no small pleasure vnto me, to see by this your liuely and earnest affection to contem∣plate him, whose Image you desired to haue before your bodily eyes, that seeing his picture, you might the better imprint him in your imagination. And verily it is not amisse done of vs, then to demonstrate inuisible things by visible. Iust so a man that loueth and longeth to see his friend, or a man that truly loues his wife, maketh all the haste he can, to see, the husband his wife, the man his friend, comming from the Church or the Bath, and doth both meet them some part of the way, and reioyce with exceeding great ioy. I perceiue by this, that you are much inflamed with the loue of your Sauiour, because you haue such a longing after his Image. And yet I would not haue you to conceiue, that wee are so grosse, as to worship the Image as a god: no, no; we worship God by the Image, who was crucified, dead and buried, and now sitteth at the right hand of God, as we are well taught in the Creed. For whilest the outward picture, or Scripture, representeth the Image to our bodily eyes, the eyes of our minds take great comfort in his glorious Resurrection and blessed Passion. In considerati∣on whereof, we haue caused to be sent vnto you two sultaries or tables, wherein are painted the Images of God the Sauiour, and of the blessed Ʋirgin, the Mother of God, and of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, by our foresaid sonne and Deacon. You shall likewise receiue a Crosse and a Key, that hath been hallowed vpon the body of S. Peter, the chiefe of the Apostles, that being thus crossed, and thus keyed, you may bee
sufficiently defended from all euill. Now let vs rest a while, and be thinke our selues; first, for the time: It was written a yeare or two before the other to Serenus; and if this bet∣ter had been true, Gregorie had good cause indeed to find fault with his inconsiderate rashnesse, that would offer to touch, much more to betrample and breake such precious Reliques▪ but Gregory distinguisheth adoration from re∣memoration; and at the most, he maketh Images but Lay∣mens bookes: but this Secundinus, to whom he writeth is a seruant of God, an Incluse, or Recluse: and last of all, I must be bold to tell you this, that this Epistle is not found in any of our ancient Manuscripts, saue ☞ Out of a a∣nust booke of E∣pistles in All-Soules College. one, that citeth it not out of Gregorie, but as ☞ Sententia Gregorii Pexcerp∣a de Decretis Ca∣nonum. Gregories sentence, or Grego∣ries opinion taken out of the Decrees of Canons. So then, if Dominicus Basa, or the Cardinals deputed for the reuising and printing of the Fathers out of the Ʋatican Print, were so bold as to mend Gregory out of Gratian, or the De∣crees; I say vnder correction, they were more bold then wise, and wee are like to haue the Fathers Workes well amended, that are reuised after this manner. Againe, it must be duly considered, that Gregory in the Manuscripts, wrote fourteene bookes of Epistles, distributed and ranked accor∣ding to the yeares that he sate Pope: but you haue confoun∣ded the Epistles, and made but twelue books (wherin not∣withstanding, there is hysteron proteron I know not how often) so that the story of things is much obscured there∣by. Howsoeuer, either Gregory doth contradict that in the ninth booke, and ninth Epistle, which he had formerly said in his seuenth booke, touching the vse and adoration of Images: but the truth is, this is a patched Epistle, and it appeareth out of the Gospell, that a new piece put to an old garment, will make the rent worse. I conclude this Propo∣sition out of learned Papists words: To vse Images for adoration and worship, were to abuse † Contra vetustam Ecclesiae discpli∣nam non ad dora∣tionem, sed ad me∣moriam & recor∣dationem Tucc. Tucc. in Cant. p 342. them, crosse to the disci∣pline of the ancient Church: for a memoriall or remembrance of the Saints by them, we may lawfully vse them: or if wee needs must fall to adoration of Saints, let vs either † Op imè colunt diuos qui vitam il∣lorum studen ini∣ar Er. to. 9. p. 366. imitate
their vertues, which is the best kind of worshipping them: as for reuerence to mute Images, the true Church † Non muta si∣mulachra sed viuae Dei imagines. Aug. Thuan. l. 28. pag. 77. asknow∣ledgeth none, but the liuely Images of God: And so an end of this Proposition. The third Proposition. It is not lawfull to paint the Images of the Trinitie, or of God the Father, &c. I Say, it is not onely vnlawfull, but also impossible; cui me assimilastus? yet you (as if you had better eyes then other men, or had been snatched vp with Saint Paul, into the vpper Heauen, and taken full view of the glorious Maiestie of God) haue taken vpon you to paint God with three fa∣ces, as noteth a good † Alb. Krantz. Wandal. l. 4 c 23. p 93 Historian. I know, there bee some quaint and Polite Missals extant in the publike ☞ In the Achtues. Library, that haue shaped them otherwise. Pictoribus atque Poet is quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. And your owne deere Polydore yeelds the selfe same reason; † Cum Deum v perhibet Ioannes, vidisset nemo vn∣quam, quam ei for∣mam dabimus? Polyd▪ Virg. lib. de Inn um 6. c. 13. pag. 424. If no man euer saw God, how shall we be able to make any representation of him? Therefore we may safely conclude this third Pro∣position; Painting of God the Father, or of the Trinitie, was neuer generally receiued of the Church of God. The fourth Proposition. Adoration of Images crosseth the Scripture. LEt Polydore Virgil speake for all the rest: God Almigh∣tie gaue certaine Lawes and Precepts to bee kept of the Iewes: our blessed Sauiour confirmeth them in the new Testa∣ment. If thou wilt come vnto euerlasting life, keepe the Com∣mandements, the chiefe whereof is, Worship only one God, that is, [† Nullius animalis effigem co▪ Polyd. Virg. l. 5. c. 9. pag. 348. worship not the similitude or likenes of any created crea∣ture.] What can be spoken more plaine, or to the purpose?
The fifth Proposition. It is repugnant to Reason. YF ☞ Si fabrum adoare erubescis, quod faber fecit non erubescis▪ MS. 28 p. 7. wee bee ashamed to worship the Carpenter that made these images, should we not in reason bee ashamed to wor∣ship the images that are made by them? Againe, is it not vn∣reasonable, that beeing forwarned by Salomons † De Idolis à Sa∣lomona constructis quo auerterunt cor cius. Val. in Reg. 3. c. 11.  6. example, whose heart was turned aside to Idolatry by worshipping of Idols or images; Wee Christians should incurre the same crime, and endure the like censure? Worshipping of ima∣ges, hath beene occasion of † Multa mala attulit. E. in Indice Augustin. much mischiefe in the Christian Churches, and therefore to bee left. Doe not you your selfe thinke, there is much knauerie in some, to † Quibus im∣postores oleum aut alium liquorem (perforatis institue∣bant vt statuae la∣chrymas aut sudo∣rem mitture vide∣rentur. Thuanus hist. 175. p. 461. make the images to weepe or swette? What a iest is it to beleeue, or to make the simple people beleeue, that the diuell cannot † Simulabat dae∣mon se D. Michae∣li maginem venera∣ri. Zuingerus p. 366. abide the image of Saint Michael, In the Gildea La∣gand in the life of S. Christopher, &c. or the signe of the Crosse? I am halfe ashamed to see the indeuotion and superstition of your vulgar people, how they post vnto your images, and happy is hee that can come soonest, to † Nummos perfo∣rant, ileque pen∣deute in colio aut manibus ipsarum imaginum suspen∣dunt, denaria in lo∣cit conspicuis egte∣gie collocant. Po∣lyd Virg de ant. l. 6 c. 13 p. 429. hang some piece of gold, or siluer, about the images necke; or to cloth it with some rich garment or other; or leaue it in some place of the Church where it may be seene. What say you to apparrell of cloth of siluer, or of gold? The images haue no sence in them, and is † Vestes igitur, ge & caetera qu habentur in praetlo, si quis pu∣tat Deo chara, is planè quis sit Deus escit. Id. . God delighted with gold or precious stones, Dia∣mond, Saphirs, or Smaragds? Thus doe the rich giue, and ouer-giue, and study or vie who shall giue most, when the tradesman offers but a † Imagines erectae, & candelae ad probationem sectarum. Thuan. l. 23. p. 641. candle; or the country peazant but an egge or two: and if it be to shew that he is no Hu∣gaenot, or Lutheran. What say the Papists to the wor∣shipping of bawdie and beastly images, or prodigious and vgly ones? Wicelius Geor. Wilius cap. de Imaginibs. complanineth of the one, and † Ex hist, de dii . Syagmato 1. p. 14. Imagines parum honestae & sanctae confictae. Gre∣gorius Gyraldus of the other; I now come to the last Propo∣sition of all.
The sixth Proposition. It is very much impugned by the Papists themselues of the better sort. PApists of the better sort are against the adoration of Images: I will reckon them vp ordine regrado rero∣grado, as they come promiscuously. First, Ant. de Do. . c. 12 ss. 6. & 8. Ant. de Do∣minis: Secondly, † Lib. 6 de Inc. c. 13. p. 424. & p. 409. Polyd. Virgil: Thirdly, † In Deut. c. 4. Ʋatablus, and Rob. Stephanus: Fourthly, † Desid. Heraldus in Arnob. p. 359. nu. 244. Desid. Heraldus: Fifthly, † Papyrius Mas∣sonius in praef. Agobardi. Papyrius Massonius, and sundry others, if I list either to be tedious, or vaine-glorious: but I conclude with Saint Iohns exhortation; My little children, beware of Idols. Against the Inuocation of Saints. THis controuersie of the Inuocation of Saints, to goe at large, may be reduced vnto two propositions, wher∣unto the best of the Papists haue willingly subscribed. The Propositions are these: First, God alone is to be worshipped, adored & inuocated. Secondly, The Saints neither may, can, nor will be inuo∣cated of vs, but with impietie, and no profit. The first Proposition. God alone is, and ought to be worshipped, adored, and called vpon. GOd † Erasin Indice Aug. Solus Deus adorandus. alone is to bee worshipped, † Solus Deus in∣uocandus. In Ind. Chrys. inuocated, † Deo soli fidendum. Val. in Isc. 43. nota marg. trusted vnto, Fides in Deo habenda, omnis spes in eo col∣locanda. Io. Auent. Annal. Boior. l. 4. p. 321. hoped in; all our trust and confidence must bee placed in him; we must † Debemus ipsum solum orare. Ferrar. de Iesu Christo abscondito, l▪ 1 p. 10. pray vnto none but to him, † Seruiendum soli Deo. In marg▪ Vat. in Reg. 1 c. 2. n 7. serue
none but him; no † Eam creaturam solummodo quae in∣creata dicitur cole∣re & venerati didici∣mus. Greg. Nyss. apud Ant. Magnum in Meliss. Serm. 1. col. 116 Bb. Pp▪ to 1 de∣leatur dictio solum▪ mode. creature is venerable, but the increated nature; † Si ab alio pen∣dcam quam a so∣lo Deo? Henr. Steph. in Ps. p. 49. nu 9. What dependance vpon any other? What Deus solus potest hominet iuare. H Steph in Ps. p. 47. profit? I conclude therefore with Erasmus: It is the safest course for † Opti∣mum est in omni necessitate recta ad Deum confugee. Er. to. 9. in Nausragie. all men, vpon all their incident occasions, to go streight vnto him: others, perhaps, would, but cannot; God is both able and willing. And thus this first Proposition standeth like a Rocke, immoueable against all the assaults and batteries of our Aduersaries. The second Proposition. Saints neither will, nor can be inuo∣cated of vs. FIrst, it may bee doubted, who are Saints: not † Multi Sancti quos nunquam in Diuorum eume∣rum retulit Rom sedes. Er. to. 9. all that are called, or catalogued, or ☞ Guil. de s. Ae. canonized for Diui cognomi∣tur qui omnino sune homines. Er. c. 2. Cent. 7 p. 768. Saints, ma∣ny whose seules frie in Hell: there is no certaintie of their Canonizationes intertae. Anton de Dom. l. 7. c. 5 §. 63. cononizations. But imagine there be some true Saints, and true Miracles, whereby they are discouered to bee true Saints; yet sith Almighty God is the † Sit ipse princi∣pun, & sons, & illa quaeda edia, ne eum velis esse nimium p sis in Christū, & in San∣ctos supersh o ipius. Nam & sancti & Ange∣li clamant De∣um adora Iac. Fa∣er in Numb. p. 317. beginning and foun∣taine of good, and Saints at the most, but a kind of conduits or pipes to conueigh the same vnto vs; Oh, let vs not be so pious to Men or Angels, that we prooue impious towards God: wor∣ship the Lord, and him onely serue, is the common voyce both of Men and Angels. † Quid facitis vobis patronos, & non confiditis Domino demus siue patrono, magis patrono quam Domino Domus confidentes. Iac. Faber in ep. ad Heb. c. 3. p. 234. Will a man that is wise, beg and sue to the seruant, when he may haue free accesse to the Master of the house? Such preposterous Praeposterus diuorum cultus. Lemni. de occultis Naturae miraculis, l. 3.  8. p. 358. worshipping of Saints; such confiding and trusting † Deriuatitia sanctitas nondum sufficit aperire coelum. Iac. Faber in . ad Cor. c. 7. p. 116. to any deriuatitious sanctitie, is not able to open vnto vs, when we knocke at Heauen gates. The wisest and sobrest amongst the Papists, leaue it as one of Gods secrets († De talibus secundum suum secretum disposuit Deus . either our knowledge of the Saints, or the
Saints knowledge of vs,) and expectnothing more, then the pious imitation of their vertuous deeds, which all of them commend vnto vs, † Imitatio eorum lis gratissima Laeu. Lemn de occultis Naturae mirac. l. 3 c. 8. p. 358. as the most acceptable seruice, both vnto them, and to God: they would not haue vs to confide, or re∣pose our † In humanitate Christi, in B. Virgi∣ne, atque Sanctis, non est caliocanda fiducia sub Deo. E to. 9. ad declarat. Dialegi qui dicitum naufragium. trusts either in Christs Humanitie, or his Mothers Virginitie, nor in any hee or shee-Saint in Heauen. It was a hard constitution, that was † Vt in Sanctia quam plurimum poamus fiduciae. Er. to. 9. obtruded vnto them by the Church, against a plaine Text of Scripture. † Maledictus qui confidit in homine. Er. to. 9. in Naufgio. Cursed bee he that putteth his trust in Man; and the † Nihilo peius ageretur cum religione Christians,  paulò minus ribueretur inuocationi Diuorum quam tribuitur à nonnullis. Er. to 9. Ib. Christian Religion had thriued farre better amongst vs, if wee had not giuen so much vnto inuocation of Saints, and so little vnto the seruice of God. The 25. Article. Penance is no Sacrament. PEnance is one of the seuen Sacraments, say the Pa∣pists; it is no Sacrament, saith the Church of England. Facilius est dicecre quid non sit, qua quid sit. Ci. de na∣tura deo. It is easier to say what it is not, then what it is. But I will not greatly stand with them for a Sacrament, vpon hope of better agreement in other matters of greater consequence: take it strictly, it is no Sacrament, (they haue better eyes then I, if they can see more Sacraments then two in the Gospell;) take it largely, it may passe well enough for a Sacrament, such a one as it is: and to gratifie the Papists, if the number of seuen be so gratefull vnto them, I will helpe them vnto se∣uen times seuen Sacraments, vpon reasonable conditions, out of Saint Austen. It is called † Er to. 6. annos. in c. 3. Math. metanoea, or resipiscentia in Latin, and as I take it, repentance in English: but this word, repentance, or resipiscentia, is so dreadfull a word to the Church of Rome, that there is Hue and Cry made after it; and hauing appre∣hended
it, they haue condemned it to perpetuall silence; it must neuer be mentioned againe, they haue purged it out of their See † Ferus in Io. c. 3. p. 92. † Rayn. Snoygoudanut, p. 16. in arg. Ps. 6. † Eras. in c. 3 Math. to. 6. † Vatab▪ in 1. Reg. c. 2 † Ic. Faber in Euan c. 3. p. 21. bookes, I would to God they were as well pur∣ged out of this Kingdome. I will quote a few Authors and places, that you may measure the rest by these few quota∣tions. They diuide it into † Laur Valla▪ deni∣eth the diuision, as not agreeable with Saint Pauls doctrine. In Ep. 1 ad Cor. c 7. pag. 272. three parts, into Confession, Contrition, and Satisfaction; how wisely, we shall see here∣after. Their penance consisteth in outward affliction of the body, and maceration of the flesh: our Interna paeniten∣tia sufficit Ant. de Dom. l. 5. c. 7. repentance is in∣ward, and spirituall in the † Non paenitentia nos saluat sed fides, sed gratia & benefi∣cium eius. grace, and faith of Christ. Wee know but one Name that can saue vs: their penances may be commuted, Ant. de Dom. l. 5. c. 8. §. 17. or redeemed with money; ours onely by the blood of Christ. To conclude; it † Non consistit in paena & afflictione corporis vel animae sed in reuersione ad Deum Go. Venet to. 4 § 3 Probl 122 consisteth not in pay∣ning the body, or afflicting the soule. A man may weare † Ficta paeniten∣tia in cilicio & af∣flictione corporis. Iac. Faber ad Heb. c. 6. p. 339. haire-cloth, and be neuer a whit the more either † Dia Seri. del Purgatorie, c. 18. p. 209. † Geo Ven. to. 4. §. 3. Prob. 122. attrite, or contrite (for I haue learned to make no diuision of these two termes; your Schooles doe.) This affected and feig∣ned penance may make others beleeue, that we are truly sor∣rowful, when there is no such thing We do herein but imi∣tate the old Heretikes, against whom † Lib. 7 de Iuent. c. 6. p. 467▪ Polydor Virgil, and ☞ In Balliol Collan Oxford, MS. Aegidius de Faeno, haue sharpened their pennes against them: our foolish Papists on Good-friday, either in Rome or Spaine, come not much behind them, and (if they belye them not that haue reported it,) some of them haue died vn∣der the displing Rod. But true repentance entereth not into the body with the Rod; but into the mind by true sor∣row, the feare whereof is so continually obuersant before their eyes, that they will not † Id quod malè perpetratum est etiamsi moriendum esset nunquam per∣petrare tur. Faber in Luc. 1. 17. p. 440. commit the like sinnes, and it were to loose a hundred liues; they doe cleane put off the old man, and all the † Vera poenitentia non est amplius eisdem affectibus obno∣xium deprehendi. Serm. 17. Ant. Magni, Bb. Pp. to. 1. col. 139. affections of a sinfull soule, with mind neuer to resume them againe. And this I take to belong vnto true repentance.
Against Auricular confession. IF auricular, or secret confession be not abused, the Church of England doth willingly admit of, and subscribe to it: the neglect of it hath been inquired of my knowledge, in some Visitations; and the reuealing of it, is forbidden vn∣der an high paine: but this must not be imposed of neces∣sitie, but arbitrarie and voluntarie. The sicke Penitent may say vnto the Confessour, I haue need of the Physitian; and the Confessour may reioyne vnto the Penitent, Non habeo praeceptum sed consilium do: I vrge it not vpon you as a pre∣cept, but I aduise you as a friend, and as your spirituall Pa∣stor; and if you be truly contrite (God seeth your heart, I see but your face) you may receiue comfort at Gods hands, and I will ioyne my heartiest prayers with yours, for the obtaining of the same. Man is sinnefull, but God is merci∣full. To consider Confession a little better, it is a most force∣able weapon, to amaze and amate the conscience, to picke the purse, and steale into a mans priuiest thoughts, intru∣ding here vpon Gods office; it maketh the Confessour (e∣specially if he be a young man) a knaue, women whores, and their husbands Cuckolds: Subiects rebell against their Princes, worketh Stratagems in States: to bee short, it serueth (to my seeming) but to Politick ends, and in spe∣ciall, it tyeth the Laytie fast by the eares to the Cleargie, and the Cleargie to the Pope, which thereby is become, Rex Regum, et Dominus Dominantium. Touching the first part of this description, how is the pore conscience racked and torne, vexed and perplexed a∣mongst them? They require an exact Catalogue and enu∣meration of all sinnes, and all circumstances. I thinke it to be ☞ Impossibile esse omnia peccata confiteri. * p. 3. an endlesse worke, for who can say, how often hee offen∣deth? It is Con. Trid. ist. p. 359. vnpossible so strictly to take the Confession of an ordinary man for one yeere, much more of a great sinner for many yeeres: But admit it to bee possible; yet where is the
Ib. p. 318. ballance to make difference of euery graine, to weigh euery circumstance; is not this a trouble and vexation of the spirit? Nay a very hell and torment of the conscience. Sure, † Non disquisitio criminum exacta: tantum credat sibi per Christum re∣missa esse peccata et si non confitea∣tur eadem specia∣ius▪ Cone▪ Colons ease in Tr. de sacraum. Consess. §. Quod si p. 148. there needes no such matter: may it not suffice to be∣leeue assuredly, that my sinnes are forgiuen in Christ, though I confesse them not to a sinfull Priest, it may bee as bad, perhaps worse than my selfe? I beleeue it will be found in good writers, that before the † Priusquam Confessio ad os venit, Deus pecca∣ta dimitt . Er. in Ind. Aug. mouth openeth, the heart speaketh, and sigheth and cryeth vnto God for mercy, and great is the cry thereof in Gods eares; of force (if I may so say) beeing tendred to God in Christ Iesus name, to pull downe a full remission of all our sinnes. Secondly, it is saide to bee a Pick-pocket, as well as Purgatorie, because of the infinite summes of money, that accrew to the ☞ u. de S. A∣mor. MS. Monkes Couents by way of Legacies, and to the Popes Coffers by way of Indulgeuces. I may call it in this respect the Popes Indies, aswell as † Confessio illis aurifodinae. Krantz. metrop. l. 8. c. 42. p. 195, Krantzius tear∣meth it the Popes golden mines. I trow the Pope getteth as much by it, as the King of Spaine by both his Indies. Thirdly, it solliciteth and tempteth Priests to much lewd∣nesse, and therefore it was thought good by some of their best learned Papists, that young Priests should not inter∣medle † uenibus qui∣buslibet committi∣tur, praefecti adole∣scentes inepti et stulti, plerumque mali et petulantes. Rhn▪ in Tull. in Confessions: and yet who but they that were vsed in Confessions, ignorant and foolish, lewde and lasci∣uious as they were? It is not I, but good Rhenanus, that complaineth of this grieuous abuse. And therefore our learned Countryman, long before this complaint, gaue this wholesome aduise, That neither young nor old, ☞ Cauendum vel in Confessione vel ob aliam causa loqui cum mulieri∣bus, cum omnes homines quantum cunque sanctos spe∣cies fortes pluri∣mum turbam. Rog Bacon MS. in ope mino. p. 28. familiar themselues, or talke with women; because there is no man, but might be intangled with these snares, if he looked not the bet∣ter, or more warily to his steppes. And therefore there was great neede of some such aduise. For (as Poggius▪ saith in his merry tales) there was an Eremite at Padua, † Quot mulieres Eremita Paduae Ar∣sininus nomine per Confessionis speciem ad concu∣bitum pellexit. Pogg. in factiis. apud Zuing. p. 2283. one Arsi∣ninus by name, that had sosticited I know not how many wo∣men to lewdnesse, vnder pretence of Auricular Confession. If you list to heare any more Stories of this nature, you shall haue them as freely as I haue them from Zuinger, and Zuin∣ger
from Egnatius and others: as out of the same Poggius, you may read of a Monke called Albertus, Pogg. apud. Zuing p. 1941. out of Egnatius l. 1. c. 3. that came in Confession to a graue matron of Ʋenice, and had the vse of her body, telling her when shee began to make somewhat dainty of the matter, that he had a reuelation from Saint Michael the Archangell, which commanded him to come to her, of else God forbid, that wee should thinke that a poore minorite would haue attempted any such matter, before hee had his warrant. There is a third storie, of an other minorite, that lay with an other matron-like woman, which left his breaches behinde him, beeing like to be surprized; and her husband † Zuing. ex Pogg. p. 1990. espying the breeches on the bed, asked how they came there, she said they were sent her by God, and good Saint Francis: the poore Cuck old rested contented, and durst not for his eares, for a long time make this story knowne. Now ho∣nest Papist, is Confession a Sacrament or no? Take Sacra∣ment for a signe, and it appeareth that it is a signe, or ra∣there cause of much villany; and this was the cause why it was abolished in the Primitiue Church, vpon a like fact by Nectarius. What shall I speake of other Confessions? As the Confessions in a † Er. to 9. Monkes Cowle, which was of So∣uereigne vertue to cure all sicknesses of the soule: Monkes Cowles belike haue a speciall vertue. If they had said they were good to cure Matrons of the disease of the mother, or Maides of the greene sicknesse, I would easilier haue beleeued them. I am afraide, I haue rested too long vpon their Monkes Cowles: but it is no matter, † Non arbitror periclitari fidem si quis quid iocetur in cuullum alicu∣ius Dominicani. Er. To. 9. ad Decla∣rat. 48. Erasmus shall make my excuse for this once; the best is, it is not a matter of faith, nor much against good manners, vnlesse it be of their side. In this . Tome, and elsewhere, hee hath giuen them such a cooling carde for their Cowles (let them be Cowles of S. Francis, or S. Dominicke) that the Papists will haue no great cause to bragge of their Souereigne vertues here∣after. To hold you no longer about Confession, seeing † Lib. 6. c. 1. p. 373. Confession is not of any diuine institution, but an ordinance of the Church (as both Polydore Ʋirgil, and † Er. To. 9. p. 106. Erasmus, doe proue it; but instituted by the Fathers vpon iust occasion, and
abrogated † Er. To. 2. p. 865. againe by the same vpon as good an occasion: Thes † Er. in Dialog∣qus inscriitur pictas puerilis. Rhen in Tertull Chrysost. in Indice. surest way for vs is, to make our humble and secret Con∣fession to God, who is best able to forgiue the same, and to free vs both à paena, et à culpa: yet † Seruandam esse ob auctoritatem Ecclesiae Er Ib. for the auctoritie of the Church of England, that perswadeth is leauing it Arbitrarie, and for sundry good reasons that inforce it (to my seeming) if thou canst be so happy, as to finde a wise, learned, and discreet Minister, feare not to make known thy sinnes vnto him; there is no ragge of poperie in this, if thou bee true to the Minister, and the Minister vnto thee: But if no such Mi∣nister bee to bee found, or not at hand, men may confesse † Proximo faci∣enda est si non ad sit Sacerdos Er. in Ind Chrys. ☞ et MS. * p. 220. † Laicus admitti∣tur ad Confessio∣nem in defectu Sacerdotis . Ne∣izanus in Sylui. nupe. p. 236. themselues one to another, one neighbour to another, with∣out any scruple of conscience: the Papists will giue thee leaue, and so doe I, and heere I end my discourse of Auricular Confession. Of Satisfaction and Contrition. A Word or two of Satisfaction and Contrition, the o∣ther two parts of Popish Penance, that I may giue some satisfaction to my pore seduced Countrymen, if God shall moue their hearts, and that they hate not to be refor∣med: otherwise, whole bookes of this argument will bee bootlesse, non persuadebo etiam perswasero: I may plant, and others may water, but it is God onely that giueth the in∣crease. First, of Satisfaction: if the Papists meane publike Satis∣faction to the Church, for some publike scandall giuen; or priuate Satisfaction, for some priuate wrongs done, or scandall taken; God speed them, I question them not: it is a Canon of the Church of Rome, in force and practise in the Church of England; that he that offends ☞ Dicit Canon, qui publice peccat publice paeniteat. MS. o. p. 96. publikely, and by his offence doth scandalize the whole Church, should make a publike acknowledgement thereof; and for priuate wrongs, or persons, the holy Scripture, which is regula sufficienis∣fima, willeth vs in expresse tearmes, to go and reconcile our selues vnto our neighbour, and then come and offer: this is a
kinde of Excommunication, ipso facto, if we do it not: But if they meane Popish Satisfactions, whereby they thinke they do promerite, or postmerite God: with such satisfacti∣ons or sacrifices God is not pleased: Proue the lawfulnesse of them out of Scripture, and Traditions of the Church, and we will vse them; till when, we leaue them. In the meane time, there is a kinde of Satisfaction, which I will make bold to commend vnto you, out of Antonius Magnus, † Vitae emenda∣tio vera. Ant. Magnus. Bb. Pp. To. 1. Serm. 16. Col. 123. in the Bibliotheque of holy Fathers; and that is, the amendment of your wicked liues. Touching Contrition, seeing that the Papists acknow∣ledge, that the heart ☞ Tanta potest esse cordis Contri∣tio licet non ege∣rit paenitentiam in∣iunctam, quod im∣munis erit ab igne Purgatorio. MS. 51 p 96. ☞ Quod et culpa deletur per grati∣am et paena tolli∣tur per modicam paenitentiam. MS. o. p. 396. may be so contrite, that the body may be saued in the day of iudgement, both àpaena, et à culpa, without doing any penance at all, or very little; Sola delet Pecca∣ta nostra. Ant. de Dom. l. 5. c. 7. §. 20. grace being sufficient of it selfe, to do away all our sinnes (as is largely shewed by Ant. de Dominis, who hath also taken great paines, to score vp the Errours of Popish Contrition) the chiefe where∣of is filthy gaine, the bane of the soule, and indiuiduall companion of Purgatory and Penance: bee ruled by mee this once; if your Confessour seeke you, and not yours, hee will perswade you truly to repent, and sorrow, and satis∣fie God if you will, by your surety Christ: if they speak of any other sorrow, or any other satisfaction, take heede of Wolues, that destroy the flocke, ☞ MS. 51. p. 68. ne potius pecuniam quàm a∣nimarum salutem quaerere videantur, they rob you of your money, and giue no satisfaction to your hunger-starued soules.
The 20. Article. Of the Authority of the Church. THe Church hath power to decree rites or Cere∣monies, and authority in Controuersies of faith: And yet it is not lawfull for the Church, to or∣daine any thing that is contrary to Gods word; neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it bee repugnant to another. Wherefore, though the Church bee a witnesse and a keeper of holy writ; yet it ought not to de∣cree any thing against the same: so besides the same it ought not to enforce any thing to bee beleeued, for necessity of saluation. This 20. Article explained and maintained by the Papists. IT is a true saying, of good vse in opening of Controuer∣sies, that qui bene distinguit, bene docet. I will therefore for the better vnderstanding of this point. First, distin∣guish of Rites, Ceremonies, and Traditions. Secondly, propose certaine Theses. Thirdly, confirme them accor∣ding to the method which I haue confined my selfe vnto; either out of Papists, or out of old Manuscripts. Of Traditions, Rites, and Ceremonies, as I take it from the Papists, some are diuine, appertaining to pietie, perpe∣tuall and immutable. Some are humane, of the Tradition of the Church, for the better gouernment and policy of the same, which are variable and mutable, both in regard of time and of place. Thirdly, there are some infrugiferous, carnall, hypocriti∣call, or Pharisaicall, and these are neuer to be admitted, or being once admitted by conniuence of gouernours, or the industrie of the Deuill (that will if hee may, sowe Tares a∣mongst Wheat) must be speedily rooted out and abrogated.
My Propositions are these. 1. DIuine Rites or Ceremonies, must bee taken out of the word of God, or the continuall succession of the Church. 2. All Apostolicall Rites are not perpetuall. 3. Humane Rites and Ceremonies, may bee made by the Church according to the Scripture; are of like obser∣uation, euen in things indifferent, if they be once ratified, till the Church doe abrogate them. 4. They must be thus conditioned. First, not meerely offensiue for their multitude. Secondly, mysterious for their signification. Thirdly, decent for the ornament of the Church. Fourthly, tending to piety, and not supersti∣tion. Fiftly, putting no affiance or confidence in them. Sixtly, not lasting, but Arbitrary, according vnto the times Countries and seasons. 5. The Primitiue Churches had but a few. 6. All Iewish Ceremonies are abolished. 7. Diuine Constitutions, are to bee preferred before humane inuentions, pure, and without mixture. 8. Humane Rites, must as neere as may bee, consist in inward, and not externall matters, aswell for the end, as for the thing. 9. If Ceremonies do offend, or otherwise be to bee ab∣rogated, it is not for any priuate man to demolish them: but they must fairely and orderly be vnmade by the Au∣thority of the Church, that first made them. 10. As they are to be seuerely punished, that contemne the setled orders of the Church; so if there bee no con∣tempt, we are not rashly to censure them. The first Proposition. SVch Traditions † Quod immuea∣bile aut de Scrip∣turis traditu. as are mentioned in the Scriptures, and haue beene obserued in all ages by a continuall succession; aut extraditione Apostolorum percontinuas success▪ ad nos deductum. Er. To. 9
as the Creed and Symbole of the Apostles, are of perpetuall obseruation for the most part: yet some things † Non omnia quae ab Apostolis in perpetuam obli∣gant. Fr. To. 9. comman∣ded by the Apostles, as vnction by S. Iames, doe not oblige vs for euer: which is my second Proposition. The Third Proposition. HVmane Rites and Ceremonies may bee made by the Church, according to the Scripture, to bee obserued alikely, euen in things indifferent, if they bee once ratified, till the Church do abrogate them. I call them humane Rites and Ceremonies, because they are instituted by men, for the good of men; but other∣wise they are to bee obserued with care and reuerence, though they be not directly contained, yet they are virtual∣ly to bee deducted out of the Scriptures; and it is not † Non cuivis permittatur vt e∣iusmodi constituti∣ones violet: sed si graues existerent mutand causae per Ecclesiam tolleren∣tur Er. To 9. for any priuate man to quarell or impugne them, vntill the Prince by his authority, or Cleargie in Councell doe meete and abrogate them. The fourth Proposition. The conditions of Rites and Ceremonies in the Church. 1. THey must not be many, as in the Church of Rome, which † Er. To 6. in c. 11. Math. Iugum meum fuaue. complaine of the intollerable burden of them; they had † Sylua Iudaica∣rum caeremonia∣rum agrum Domi∣ni occupat. Plyd. Virg. l 4. p. 226. woodes, † Constitutionum umananm exa∣a Er. To. 6. in M. 11. swarmes, † Oceanica caeremon. multitudo. Engelliertu Abbas de ortis et fine Rom. imperii in prefat ad Lec∣torem. Oceans and † Caeremoniarum inundationem damnat. Er. To 9. p 325. inundati∣ons of those † Premuntur pluribus quam Iudaei Er. To. 3. Schol in Her. † Plus habent Iudaismi quam Christianismi. Er. To. 3. p 6. Iewish Ceremonies, by which they kept men in † Popu∣lum in seruitutem redigunt. Auent. Anmol. Boierum. l. 2. p. 204. miserable seruitude and bondage.l † Si recte instituantur debent esso▪ significaae. Ant. de Dom. l. 5. c. 5. §. 48. 2. Mysterious for their signification. 3. Decent for the ornament of the Church, as the Sur∣plice, Vestiments of the Church, Communion Cup, &c. 4. Tending to pietie, and not to superstition. They
must † Quae condu∣cunt ad pietatem. Er to. 6. in c. 24. Math. conduce vnto pietie, Christ is † Christus non in externis quaeren∣dus. Er. to. 6. in c. 24. Math. not to be sought in these outward things, as † Non solum in cibo & potu, & in∣dumento exterio∣ribus sed multo ma∣gis in interioribus. Iic. Faber in Math. p. 54. meate, drinke and rayment, these things † Externa seruanda, at non tanti aestimanda vt in his existiment sitam pietatem. Er to 9. Declarat. 40. 41 &c. must be obserued, if the Church command them; but we must take heed we place no superstition in them: we must seeke after those things rather which are inward. 5. † Damno superstitiosam fiduciam. Eras to. 6. in c. 24. Math. † In his non collocanda fiducia pietatis, sed in Christo & animi puritate Er. to. 9. Putting no affiance, or confidence in them. 6 Not † Ar∣bitrariae esse debent non obligatoriae. Er. to. 9. Declarat. 40. &c. † Quae protempore pertinebant ad decorem Ecclesiae pro more regionum & temporum mutantur. Er. to. 9. p 877. ☞ Immobiles & variabiles secundum varietatem temporum variantur. MS. Bas. p. 215. lasting, but arbitrarie, according vnto the times, Countries, and seasons. The fifth Proposition. † De simplicitate primaeuae Ecclesiae vide. Er. to. 6. in Math. 11. The Primitiue Church had but few. The sixth Proposition. † Abolitae. not a Marg. in Annot. Er. in Har. lib. 1 de Trin. p 6 † Mortuae. Chr Mass, in Chron. All Iewish Ceremonies are abolished. The seuenth Proposition. DIuine † Adeò stulta sunt hominum iu∣dicia vt haec diu, longè praeferant. Et haud scio an tem∣pora nostra hac la∣be careant. Faciat Iesu benignitas, vt citò purgentur, & omnes coelestem ambrosiam, vinum semper nouum, vi∣num Eangelicum bibant. Iac. Faber in Luc. p 362. Constitutions are to be preferred before Hu∣mane: they must be pure without mixture. The neglect hereof was complained of by diuers * u † Si quis consti∣tutiones humanas non doceret, quas aequè si non etiam arctius custodiri vellent ad mandarunt atque diuinas. Iac. Faber. in Mat. c. 15. p. 114. Learned men; the Constitutions of men were punished more, then the breakers and violaters of Gods Lawes; so that small † Minora peccata puniuntur neglectis grauioribus vt Sacerd. bibentis in Lupanari Er to 9 faults (as the neglect of their Feastes, or omissions of their Fasts) were punished with Scorpions; but greater sinnes, as their Priests ippling and whoring it in the Stewes, were let passe with a gentle correction. ☞ See the Councell of Basil. MS. p. 240. They must not haue any mixture of hu∣mane inuentions; there must be no addition of † Humana diuinis non addenda Iac. Faber in Lucan. p. 465. mens tradi∣tions to Gods Precepts.
The eighth Proposition. HVmane Rites and Constitutions must, as neere as may be, consist in inward, and not outward and externall matters, aswell in regard of the end, as the matter. Hier. ad Sunium & Fretellam. Ad offensionem populerum vitandam; For feare of offending any of these little ones, as Hierome sometimes spake vpon the like occasion, Who † Traditionum bona pars à vulgi errore. Krantz Wandal. l. 6 c. 37 p. 148. knowes not how the vulgar people doe dote vpon these showes, rather then substances of Religion, nay rather runne gadding † In his regioni∣bus in quibus ego versatus sum ad in∣saniam vsque deli∣rat superstitio vul∣gi. Erto. 9. p. 205. and madding after these toyes and fop∣peries, as Erasmus knew by wofull experience in the Coun∣tries where he liued? The ninth Proposition. THough Ceremonies bee to bee misliked, and prooue distastefull to the Church; yet it is for no priuate man to disturbe the settled peace and quiet order of the same, but to expect the Kings prohibition either by himselfe or his Cleargie. I am thus opinioned of Ceremonies, that they may be corrupted with the † Veteris fermen∣ti. Faber in Lucam. p. 362. Leauen of the Pharisees, Mutandae quae per imperitiam vel negligentiam, vel ambitionem, & auaritiam parantur. Cass. p 62 & 59. infected with auarice, negligence, or ambition, or adored as the golden Calfe, making a † Apud gregari∣os mstat, supersti∣tio commentaque & crassae ceremo∣niae speciem pieta∣tis prae se ferentes, efficaciores sunt, quam iusta religio. o. Auent. Annal. Bi. l. 4. p. 300. great shew of pietie, and preuai∣ling more then any thing else with the vulgar people, and that they are to be abolished, or changed; but who shall doe it? No priuate person I warrant you, they must beare and for∣beare with a † Faciat Iesu be∣nignitas vt cito purgentur Iac. Faber in Luc. p. 362. Faciat Iesus vt cito purgentur, God send wee may be well rid of them, making prayers, and no stirres, tu∣mults or commotions; when † Non cuiuis permittitur vt eiusmodi constitutiones vio∣let, sed si graues existerent mutandi causae, per Ecclesiam tollerentur, Erasmus, tom. 9. Decla∣rat. 40 &c. all is done, the Churches cen∣sure, or the Princes commandement; or rather the Chur∣ches censure by command of the Prince, is to be attended: no phlegmaticall schismatick is to haue a hand in this busi∣nesse, though it be to pull downe Images out of Churches,
or Pictures out of windowes; for this were to open a win∣dow to priuate mens fancies, rather then zeale; and com∣meth neere to the error of the Eiconoclasts, which in this case may be iustly censured: Leaue we this to Leo Isaurus, and other Emperours. The tenth Proposition. AS they are to be seuerely punished, that contemne the setled orders of the Church; so if there bee no con∣tempt of publike Gouernment, wee are not rashly to cen∣sure them. † In Dialogo qui dicitur pie∣tas Puerilis. Graue non est transgredi (as one writeth) constitutiones Ecclesiae, nisi accedat contemptus malitiosus; A man may transgresse the orders of the Church happly out of error, it may be of ignorance: but disobedience and contempt is as the sinne of Witchcraft, a most heynous sinne, as all those take it, that haue not their shooes made at Geneua: otherwise if there be weakenesse in them, let there be charitie in vs, and there will be † Non cemerè alii iudicandi prop∣ter transgressiones. Fer. in c. 15. Math. p. 207. no rash Iudges left in the Land. And thus farre of Rites and Ceremonies; and if I bee in the right, I shall be glad; if otherwise, blame the Papists, and not mee, and let the perclose of this Discourse be my sufficient Apo∣logie. The 28. Article. Of the Lords Supper. I Will take out of this Article as much as is in controuersie betweene vs and the Papists. Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot bee prooued by Holy Writ, but is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture; ouerthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath giuen
occasion to many superstitions. The body of Christ is gi∣uen, taken, and eaten, in the holy Scripture, onely after an heauenly manner; and the meane whereby the body of Christ is receiued, and eaten in the Supper, is Faith, &c. The 28. Article maintained, and explained by the Papists. THe Papists in the Councel of Trent make it a Sacrifice both for the liuing and the dead. Admit it be a sacrifice (which cannot bee well denied, being well vnderstood;) yet † Sacrifiium non expatorium aut sa∣tisfactorium sed re∣memoratiuum. Iac. Schopprun Conc. 23. de Ms. is it neither satisfactorie, nor expiatorie, but rememora∣tiue; so Schoepperus: that is, † Eucharistia non est sacrificium: sed sacrificii memo∣ria. Er. in Ind. Aug, not properly a Sacrifice, but a memoriall of a sacrifice, so Erasmus. Arias Montanus giueth the reason of both: † Neque enim nos illud Sacrifici∣um offrimu, sed illud referimus in∣cruento (vt dicitur) modo epetimus id, quod Christus cru∣entum obtulit. Ar. Mont in Isaiam, cap. 1. p. 43. For we do not offer that Sacrifice againe; but proffer, and represent it to the memorie after an vnbloody maner, which was offered vp once in blood; a Sacrifice, without Materiae expers sacrificium. Cyril Bb. Pp. 10. 1. p. 147. the matter of a sacrifice, to speak in Cyrils termes. Neither wil it auaile the Papists, to say, that † Mlchisedec qui primus sacrificauit, & Abraliam, Isaac & Iacob, qui sec∣dum eum tidem fecerunt. Se illos quadam naturali petate, non sacer∣dotali auctoritate rem diuinam fecisse constat Polyd. Virgild: Iuentrerum, l. 4 c. 5. p. 253. Melchisedec sacrificed, (for he was a Priest of the Highest,) for hee sacrificed no otherwise then Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, which herein imi∣tated him: [For of them wee haue a plaine constat, that they did not sacrifice by any Priestly authoritie, but mooued with a naturall deuotion] as writeth Polydor Virgil. And † Mel∣hisdec cibat Abraham. Vat-in c. 14 in Gen. nu. 1 Vata∣blus affirmeth of Melchisedec in speciall, that he releeued, or reeshed Abrahams men, and so sacrificed not at all. Christ our blessed Sauiour, when he gaue the Bread, † Corporis sui signum dedit Christus. Er. in A. gaue a signe of his Body, or type of his † Typus corporis & sanguinis domini. I Anaphora Basli, ol. 36. Bb. Pp.  6. Body and Blood, or an † Ima∣go & similitudo corporis & sanguinis Christi in actione mysteriorum celebrantur. Gelas. col. 561. Bb. Pp. to. 4. Image and similitude thereof, or a k representation of Christs sacrifice. Thus say the Fathers with one consent: and therefore (as an ancient l Writer saith) trust not to your bodily eyes, that is most of all seene, which is least of all seene; or we must not be † Ignorante illud Aug. crede & manducasti. Zuing. p. 1512. ignorant of the saying of blessed Saint Augustine: The
words of Christ must bee † Christi  non cor∣poralis hosti. In don s. 88. . Pp. to 6. spiritually, figuratiuely and mysti∣cally vnderstood, the lesh of Christ is spirituall, not corporall; spirituall Meate, a † Cbus spiritua∣lis coena ▪ Chrys. spirituall Rocke, all † Omnes eande escn spiritualen. . V. in. ▪ Co. 10. 4. must be † Quae de  ua nduc  Chri∣stus praecepit, spir∣tualiter intelligen sunt Er. in Ind. Aug. spiritu∣ally vnderstood: For what else was it but a † Mystica partici∣patio Christi. E▪ Oympiodorus in ∣eles. c. 9. col. 61, ▪ Pp. to. . mysticall body? So the † Mysticum cibum coporis Christum possiet Ecclesia▪ Nota Mag. ex Phil. pa∣thio in Cant. Bb Pp. . 1. col. 720. Church doth expound it; or † Panis mysticus. E. to. 9 p. 390. mysticall bread, to bee masticated & eaten † De fide comede∣dus E. in Ind. Aug. with the teeth of faith. † Betrami sententia contra eam. Trithemus apud Zuing. p. 4. 112. Bertram wrote plainely against Transubstantiation: And it is a foolish conceit, that the Accidents can be there without the sub∣iect, and plainely coinced, idque Apodicticè, demonstra∣tiuely: For King Alphonsus had a consecrated Hoste tur∣ned into a Maggot, or some such thing, as † E.  Com. in Panorm. apud Zuing. p. 1536. Aeneas Sylus reporteth in Zuinger. To conclude this point; if some † Hoc votum meum si valeret, non mundus iam olim uisiet agitatus ot quaestionibus, neque modò agitaretur de Eucharistia E. to 9 p. 390. might haue had their wishes, the World should not haue been vexed either now, or heretofore, about so many questions about the Eucharist. Of the certaintie of saluation. THis † Ferus in Eccles. Certa & constans iduci. c. 9 p. 131. certaintie and confidence of our saluation, is called † Pagnu in Th∣saur p. 120.  † Non fides ed vera & firm per∣suasio. Ferus in . . Io. p. 187. , fidelitas, firmitas, or certitudo, veritas: faith, sidelitie, firmenesse, certaintie, faith: not a bare faith, but a * certaine and firme perswasion, that by faith in † Fiduciam ha∣benti in Domi misericordia Do∣mini auxilio  & uebitur cum. V▪  Ps 32. nu. 27. Christ, the faithfull man shall be protected from all danger by Gods espe∣ciall grace, whereof the holy Spirit is a sure † Siitus S. Aha∣bo est & pignus. Va in Summ Scriptura. pledge and to∣ken, that hee may come with confidence † Cum fiducia accedentes ad thronum gratiae. Vaab. Ib. vnto the Throne of Grace, † Nihil  de certissima salute. Snoygandanus in Ps. 75. nothing doubting of his saluation, and being secure † A morte securus. e. in c 16. Ma. p. 229. from death, † Certit. de remissione pectorum. Fr. in cap. 20. . p. 598. certaine of remission of his sinnes. This is the dignitie and chiefe † Christiani dignitas stay of a Christian, † Fi∣ducia principale principium. . 9. commended of Christ. And yet the Papists dispraise it, teaching vs to doubtl † Fiducia laudata à Christo. Sll in  pag. 250.
of our saluation; when they haue not only our Writers, but their owne against them, mooued by the force of the truth, and the euidence of the Spirit, doe testifie the same both to vs and the World, vnasked, vnsent vnto. Of Rome. BEcause Rome is the chiefe Citie of the World, and so Io. Cusp. in  Ph∣a. p. 230. declared since Phocas time, and that this next yeere of Iubilee is like to draw multitudes vnto her, and some perhaps of our foolish countrimen are like enough to be as forward in going thither as any other: that they may not be misconceiued of that Citie, I will, if not topo∣graphically describe it, yet I will endeauour to paint her forth in all her colours, the predominant whereof is gueles, which may well become the Scarlet Whore, as shee is pro∣ued to be in the Councell ☞ Veè me∣retrix Babylon. Conc. Bas. MS. p. 54. of Basil, either in respect of her temporall, o spirituall fornications. Her spirituall fornica∣tions, that is, her sinnes are many, you may reade them in grosse in † Espenc. in Titum. c. 2. p. 76. Espencaeus, Amongst the † Tb. p. 3. German Writers, in † L. . Nic. Clenards Epistle to Honorius, Fr. Petrarch, † F. Ptrarcha p. 174. &c. in his Sonnets, and diuers others. If you please to haue the par∣ticular abuses of that Citie recited vnto you, note wee first her Simonie, Coutousnesse and Briberies. You may not come thither, vnlesse you bring † Pecunam om∣nia posse. Did. Stel∣l in Lucam 10▪ p. 32 money store. Money is all in all, and doth all at Rome; all things are bought and sold there, † Esp. in Titum  p. 65. omnia venalia: yea (as one told the Germans in the Councell of Trent) for money they might buy what Re∣ligion they would. † Officiarii Ro∣ae venales. De In∣. rerum l. 4. c. 11. p. 281. Polydor Virgil maketh a pitifull com∣plaint of their broage of Offices. I except not our holy Fa∣thers the Cardinals, their † Cardinalium Collegia venalia. Ib. l. 8. c. 2 p. 487. Colledges were set to open sale. This † Nummara pe∣is regna Romae. .  in Chron. i. ad . 1404. G. . . plague of money is so rife at Rome, that I doubt whe∣ther there be any safe going thither this yeare. Many men are strangled there with this disease, but especially Clergy men. They haue strange meanes of † Aritia & im∣posturae ad corradendum nummum. Germ. script. o. 2: p 377. hooking and hedging in money. They are not † Genus expiscandae pecuniae à vet∣rum Cnonibus & maiorum iustitutis valde alienu. Fr. Duarenus de S. Ecclsia ministeriis, l. 7. c. 6 p. 509 Fishers of men, but of money, which
which was neuer knowne in ancient time. They haue their factors and cursitors, that pste † Captores be∣neficiorum Romam certatim cursitant. Ib. l 6. c. 4. p. 518. vp and downe euery Coun∣try to bring in the Fish to the net, that is, the monied Par∣sons, and wealthy Prelates: for if you come to Rome, and bring no money (as I said before) with you, you may goe backe againe as wise as you came; † Io. Nniz p. 390. in Slua iux. nu. 149 Curia Romana non vult ouem sie lana; They like not these poore, ragged, shorne sheepe: and you come well fleeced thither, you shall be sure to be well fleeced before you goe thence: and yet it were well for all this, or tollerably well, if the best Schollers al∣waies might haue the best liuings for their money; this were some comfort: but there the Prouerb holdeth, † Quamlibet in∣digno nebuloni modo it muneret donegare consue∣uit. Fr. Dua.  S. Eccl. ministerii l. 6. c. 4 p. 518. The verier Knaue, the better lucke. † Non merenti∣us, sed magis affe∣rentibus Sacerdoti∣bus data. o. Langius in Act 15. 13. Not he that deserueth most, but hee that giueth most, is preferred: ☞ Non respici∣unt ad personarum mrita: sed tanum ad quantum pcuni concessit. MS. C. in Cll. Magd. they regard not the merit of the man, but the quantitie of the money that is gi∣en. Leaue we now their Simonie and Auarice, and come we to speake of the crueltie of these Roman † Pnorm. de ro∣bu gstis Alphons. l. 3. c. 8. Apud Zuing p. 283. Harpies (as King Alphousus calleth them; or Romane † Vulturii Ro∣manenses . Annal l. 5. p. 535. Vultures, as Auen ie stileth them;) What a slaughter of men was made in † Carnificina sub Alex Germ. sr. . 1. p. 189. Pope Alexanders time? The Pope taketh vpon him the Seale of the Fisherman, sub anulo piscatoris: but hee might more properly signe his Bulles and writings, that rore so fiercely, and disquiet the whole World, sub annulo Lani∣onis, vnder the seale of the Butcher. It was a good obserua∣tiony ☞ Lupi effica∣cim non megabit, quisquis genus Romanord lupino lacte non ambig educatum, vnde plrunque quod dulcius est upinum saporem retinet, primique fidem eorum quam à matre lupa didice∣runt, sibi inuicē se∣naurunt, eadem{que} quadam lege natu∣rae manauit ad po∣steros. Inde naum est prouerbium; Quicquid in Roma∣nis est lacteum, to∣tum est Lupuum. nu. 7. p 5. of an ancient y Writer, that Romes Sire was rsed by a Wolfe; for to this day Rome hath not left her wooluish na∣ture, so that now it is growne into a common Prouerbe, or by∣word; Quicquid in Romanis est lacteum, totum est lupinum; The Romanes haue no other milke to feed their young ones, but Wolues milke. Doubtlesse they haue the disease, which the Physitians call Lycanhropies, or worse; for that turnes men onely into Wolues by conceit and imagination, but these are Men-woolues really metamorphozed and tran∣slated into their wooluish natures and ferity. Not to speake of another metamorphosis of theirs, whereby the Church of Rome is turned altogether inside outside, into meere showes and outwards, and is altogether become meerely
hypocriticall (as noteth Lib. 5. c. 9 §. . Ant▪ de Dominis against Suarez) Let vs come now and see in the last place, whether we can find any honestie, or goodnesse in that famous and renow∣ned Citie. Certainely, if I may beleeue reports of your owne Historian; from the top to the te, there † In Romana cu∣ria nihil recti▪ nihil ani Thuan l. 28. p. 58. is no one sound part in that Court. Non licet esse pum; A man cannot bee pous there and if he would; † Romae non licet benesacre. I. Neuiz. in Sylua N, l 4 p 393. . 152. he cannot liue honestly, and doe as he ought: and I doe in part beleeue it, that there is no roome for it in Rome: no holinesse there, where his Holi∣nesse dwelles: to find an honest man, or an honest woman there amongst your Brothel-houses and Stewes that are publikely tollerated, † Roma ipsa supa∣nar reddita, foemi∣ne, Petri domus ∣lita fluxu. Ad Sy∣gos oet vsque la∣res, incestat olym∣pum Ndore ho, facta est toto exe∣erabs orbe Es∣pene.  e ad Tium, p. . to the high offence of God and men, were to † Continentia coru arior albo  Saeculares. Krantz Met op. . 9. c. 34. p. 2. see a white Crow amongst your Secular men, or Se∣cular Priests; take it in what sense you will. Now my Ma∣sters, if you like Rome vpon these conditions, packe and be gone▪ the sooner, the better (if his Maiestie will giue▪ you leaue,) it were a faire riddance (as we say) without a Sessi∣ons. But I must leaue to hold you any longer; I know you stand vpon thornes, and long to be gone to your holy Father the Pope: I haue done with their vices, and I would they had done with them too; and so farewell. Of the Clergie of Rome. HAuing described the Citie of Rome, and shewed our Romanists what wonderfull things are spoken of her; I will (if needs they will goe to Rome)▪ giue them this counsell, to goe their Stations as soone as they come thither, and as they passe by, to view the state of their Clergie and Church in generall, and then of their Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Monkes in particular: the knowledge hereof may be profitable vnto you; and yet not puffe you vp ne∣uer a whit the more.
First then of the Clergie in generall. HEre I must bee bold to borrow a pen or two from their owne Espencaeus vpon Titus, or from some one or other in the Councell of ☞ B MS. p. 334. Basil: as for inke (if any bee blacke enough to register the seuerall enormities and foulenesse of their facts,) I will borrow that from † Thuan. hist. l. 27. p 29. Thua∣nus Historie; there will neuer be wanting Inke as blacke, and as bitter as Gaule amongst Popish Writers, to supply our wants; and therefore vpon full trust and confidence hereof, as we shall see when we come to handle the particu∣lars, I come in this second place to speake of their Cardi∣nall sinnes, or the sinnes of their Cardinals; although I am not ignorant of Ant. de Dominis saying, that a man were as good touch the apple of the Popes eye, as point out, or point at their Popish or Romish errors: but that care is ca∣red for, and so I proceed. Of the Cardinals and Bishops. SOme call them Carpinales, in scossing manner, as † Carpinales voca∣ti à. Conrade Mogunt. apud Zuing. p. 28▪ 4. Con∣rade of Mentz: some on the contrary, prayse them beyond the skies, and say, that † Curiales Cardi∣nales & Praelai ad∣miu in Pra∣diso abs{que} examine. I N. l 4 p 336. . 155. when they die, they shall be sure to goe to Heauen, and neuer goe by the Examiners of∣fice. Be it so▪ yet by their leaues we will make bold to ex∣amine their liues, while they liue here vpon earth. First, for their originall, it cannot be precisely learned when they be∣gan. Wicelius saith, they were anciently instituted by the pri∣mitiue Popes, (if the word Pope be so ancient) to be aiding and assisting to his Holinesse in visiting the sicke, and bury∣ing the dead. But I doubt they will not fall out to be of that antiquitie; for in Saint † Cardinalis no∣men Hier atate vix ntum. Zuing. p. 13 15. Hieromes time, the name of a Car∣dinall was hardly in request; and yet their Writers or Pain∣ters, seeing Saint Hierome so poore in his Cell, of † Rubus petas D. Hieronymo im∣pertitus à Pictori∣bus. Plyd Virg. l 4. de Inuen rerum. p. 274. meere pitie and liberalitie, haue bestowed a red Hat vpon him; which, if he had liued in these latter times, perchance might
haue cost him † Ferd. Ponztta 60 aureorum mil∣libus Cardinaliti∣um pileum emit. Garrenbert. l. 6 devi∣tis Pontif Zuing. p 2490. threescore thousand, or a † Fr. Armellinus Rom. Mercator emit Cardinalum à Lone 10. 150. aureorum millibus. Il. 2511. hundred and fifty thousand Crownes. Whatsoeuer their originall is, they are now raised to a great state, not much inferiour to that of † Iud. Palatinus multo reges ae∣quauit. Flgos. l. 6. c 10. Zuing. p. 951. Kings and Princes, and they haue wherewithall to main∣taine † See Erasmus cap. 2. Gent. 3. Adag. 1. p 603. that estate; they must haue their † Lud. Patauinus Cardinalis primus canes equosque aluit. Volate. l. 22. Anthropomorph. Zuing. p. 954 Horses, and their Hounds, their Mistresses, or † De Cardinali∣bus Scortatoribus Synaedis & eorum spurcitiis vide Ant. de Dominis contra Suarem. c 1 §. rather their Whores and Queanes, their Bawdes and Ganimedes; and then it is not to be wondered at, if they be so ☞ Cardinales more solito cupidi. MS. Cn Coll. Magd. p. 117. couetous: it was, is, and euer will be their guise, to get fuell to maintaine this fire of lust. I should here admonish them of their duties; but the Coun∣cell of ☞ Bas. Conc. MS. p. 363. Basil hath preuented my paines, in learning them their seuerall duties, and representing before their eyes their red Scarlet, which should teach them to be Martyrs for, and not persecuters of the Christian Faith. A word or two of Bishops, and so an end. The word ☞ Nomen ope∣ris & non honoris. Conc. Bas MS. 2. p 455. Bishop is a name of paiues, and not of honour; he is a Superintendant ouer the flocke; let not the Precisi∣ans appropriate this word vnto themselues, or pare it, as they doe all things else to their purpose: but alas, now adayes, men are made Bishops (I speake of our Popish Clergie) for couetousnesse, and not for righteousnesse sake: they inquire not how many Parishes belong to their Diocessees; but how many Lordships, or rich Mannors belong to their Bishop∣ricks: and so what Multi Episcopa∣tum desiderant ex∣plendae auaritiae, & libidinis suae causa, non quod commu∣ni vtilitari vt eorum exposcit officium & nomen, consulan. Quaeritur enim quantum in redditibus habeat Episcopatus, non quot oues pascuae in eo sunt. Platina apud Wolf. to. 1.  p. 185. for fulfilling their lusts, and filling full their purses, and other by-respects, men affect, or rather infect the Bishopricke, as a good Writer noteth. And therefore we may very iustly complaine with Erasmus, that † Nulli minus Episcopi, quam qui inter Episcopos primas tenent. Eras. to. 2. Adag. 1. Cnt. 3 p, 603. those which haue the best Bishopricks, are not alwaies the best men. Mostly Bishops now adayes (I speake thus much out of the mouthes, and from the complaints of two famous Writers in those impurer times, † Ple∣rique sunt nostri temporis à religione & sacris quam quiuis Satrapae & prophani Principes longè ali∣eniores Fr. Duarenus lib. 1 c. 4. p. 440. Fr. Duarenus, and † (Vneimus) ad hae empora, quibus nihil minus no∣runt quam eas partes quae illis à Paulo assignantur. Isid. in 1. Tim 3. Isidorùs Cla∣rius) are more ignorant of true Religion, and sacred busines∣ses,
then Lay-Princes and Potentates; and doe know any thing, saue that which they should know, that is, their duties out of Saint Pauls doctrine contained in his Epistles to Timo∣thie and Titus. I conclude this point; Let him that hath a Bishopricke attend his office, attend his function, attend his name; he is called a Bishop, an Ouer-looker, or a Super∣intendant. (I know no harme by this word, as I told you before,) his office is not † Episcopi nomen officium, non Simo∣nia. Viues in Eras. l. 19. c. 19. Simonie, but to visite his Diocesse, to preach to his flocke. If you cannot, nor will not learne so much of me, yet learne it of your owne deere It was the office of Bishops to preach. Hist Conc. Trid. p. 188. Councell of Trent; or at the least, of the ☞ Officium E∣piscoporum praed∣care. Bas. MS. p. 53. Councell of Basil. And so much for Bishops and Cardinals, their sinnes and failings, their office and duties. Of Popish Priests. I Haue touched the Popes free-hold, layed open the faults of their Cardinals and Bishops; What remaineth? Non∣dum completae sunt iniquitates Amorrhaeorum; but that in like manner, and that without any great order (which their vices will not beare) we proceed to speake of the intollera∣ble abuses, and innumerable sinnes of the Antichristian Ro∣mane Clergie, that we may haue a complete mysterie of iniquitie. Of the Priests. HEre for breuities sake, let me intreat thee gentle Rea∣der, whosoeuer thou art, to name me any sinne, where∣in the Priest hath not bin Superlatiue. They are Priests with a witnesse: before all other men, verum est, in sinning. Will you haue ordinarie sinnes, or extraordinary; prophane vi∣ces, or Clergie-faults? For me, it is all one, and it were well with them, if one were all: but I may number them vnto you almost by the dozens. 1. They are notable Theeues, some of them; reade † Sacerdos fur insigni Lib. 13. Wandal. c. 24. Albertus Krantzius History of Wandalia. 2. Couetous beyond measure: so † Inexplebilis auaritiae. Fer. in c. 2, Io. p. 60. Ferus, † In Is. c. 3 in margine. Vatablus,
and the ☞  116 267 346 422  .  3  Pinguis panis Councel of Basil in I know not how many pages, in one onely Volume. The bread  Poly  de  275 . Zuing 4. 29. 62. of the Lord is sweate bread, and this their † Auaritia & sacri∣egnum sb pretex∣ pretatis Germ. set. to. 2. p. 376. auarice ioyned with much sacriledge, and both shadowed with some pretences of pietie, which im∣prooue the sinne, and make it be the greater in deed, the lesser it is in seeming: this siane, which (as † Auaritia in con∣versione lud eorua (cum vt magis effe rent s P Cieza erum Indicarum, to. 2. c. 33. ad   411. one writeth) doth much binder the conuersion of the poore Indians, hard∣ning them in their owne sinnes, to see the Christians embrace and fellow riches so greedily, is either not inquired after, or being inquired after, is not censured, or punished. 3. They are incredible Leachers, noted with this vice more then any; they carry the very markes about them. They are ▪ Cierici non quiruntur an sint auari I g MS.  473 lib Pp. to. 3. Souldiers, but serue not the God of Hoasts, but sight vnder Pluto, Bacchus, and Venus colours. Clergie men and Ecclesiasticall persons ▪ l siasti miirant Plutoni, accho & eeri. . : tia dplici, p. 117 vncleannesse and pollutions are notorious and open to all the World, and a by-word in euery mans mouth: they cannot † Communia ma∣tain Prou. thium vlgò venerunt. Io. uent Annal. Boio∣rum, p. 647. content themselues with one kind, but they exercise all kinds of lewdnesse and libidinousnesse: one † Omne genus libi∣dinum atque ne∣quitiae exercent. woman will not satisfie their vnruly appetites, they must haue many Sweet-hearts, a great many of Lemans and Concubines, (if Neuizanus report be true:) yea, they are ready to take m mens wiues from them, they glory in their shame, in their Tauernes, how many n Wenches they haue lyen withall; how many Ʋirgins they haue deflowred: they haue no other song but this prophane one; o Let vs make our selues merry with wine, and then there shall bee no Meadow, but wee will sport our selues in one kind or other. But perhaps it may be said; Flesh is fraile, and men may offend: but if they doe, secd † Non solam, imo¦plures vxores su amasias, io & quandoqae concu∣binas habent eodem tempore I▪ Neuiz. sylut pt p 68. . 128. d † Alinas repere vxores Io. Ant. Annal. l. 4 p. 382. e † Gloriantur in tabernis vinarus de puellis stupratis Id. Ib. l. 5. p. 386. f ☞ Inebriemus nos in vino, non sit pra∣tum quod non pertansea luxuria nostra. Vigel in Clericis, MS. 9. p. 304. g † Hodie non pu∣untur aduiteria. I Neuizanut in syl Nutiali, p. 55. nu. 89. how we will punish them, whether they bee adulterers or fornicators. There was Cinitus de honesta disitlina. s. 9. c. 10. one, that durst exclaime it, that in his time there was no punishment of Adulterie, and therefore lesse hope was there of censuring lighter sinnes, if greater sinnes escape without your punishment; What reason haue we to thinke, that you should punish the lesser? And in
truth, as one of your owne side hath told me (as great a † Erasmus to. 9. p. 306 Si omnes adulterae lapidaren∣tur, to us mons Ol∣lariae non suffi∣ceret. Scholler, and as wise a man, as any the Church of Rome sent forth these many dayes,) the greatest Hill of Ollaria (which I suppose to be a great one) would not yeeld vs sto∣ries enough, if the Leuiticall Law should take hold of all your secret and open, knowne and vnknowne Adulteries. But that the World may know how seuere censors you are of this fault, hearken to a Storie or two in this kind, and I will end this Discourse. ☞ Quidam Ar∣chiepiscopus Cleri∣cum saum tam in∣corrigibiliter in sa∣nientem cum adul∣tera inclusit in cel∣la, & omnia per multos dies cautè fecit ministrari, sed nec die, nec nocte eos oxre permisit, nec ab invicem se∣perari. Cumgitur per multos dies enim cautionem, Iuratoram se nun∣quam in amplexus illius mulieris re∣uersurum, & ita quodam modo Sa∣thana Sathanam ex∣pellente ab insania sua curatus est. MS O. p. 165. There was a good fellow in the world (a Priest I meane) that had a woman in a cellar with him, which he loued full sorely; his Prelate hearing of this, commeth vpon them on the sudden, lockes the dores, and shuts them in many dayes, and many nights, causing them to bee watched, and supplied with all manner of necessaries, and in the end the poore Priest had so ouer-laboured and spent himselfe, that he was taken with a giddinesse in his head, so that he neuer after durst come in her company any more. Beleeue it who list: If they had said, he had neuer been well after this, and no more, I would haue beleeued them. I haue two Stories behind, which I will shut vp in ones ☞ Curand um est tale vitium non solum per castiga∣tionem & increpa∣tionem & commu∣nicationem, sed per medicinalem caute∣lam Vnde quidam Episcopus cum ha∣bere quendam Clericum insano amore incorrigibi∣liter laborantem, suscitauit ci litem de  nesicio suo, & tam du, cum li∣bus & sumptibus cum fatigi fecit, c tous insan∣us morū obliuisce∣▪ MS. O. p. 164. word; they both loued Wenches well; the one was sent purposely to the Court of Rome, the s other sued here in ☞ Alter Epis∣copus in consimili casan impetrabat â Principe vt Clericum suum ita amantem in at o & periculo∣so negotio mitteret ad Curiam Romanam. In quo got ot sustinuit advtsitates & labores, quod cum rediret insani amoris non recordabatur MS. O. p. 164. England, both of set purpose, to make them forget their old loues: now could my Author haue shewed mee that there had bin no Stewes in Rome at that time, nor Brothel∣houses in London, I would haue in part beleeued his re∣port of both: but transeat cum caeteris erroribus; I proceed from the Daughter to the Mother; from the caue, to the effect: you know, and Neuizanus hath told vs, that Ʋen∣ter & genitalia are neere of kind, I will not English this for shame. 4. They are very riotous in fare, meere Belly-god, and Epicures. If either you had patience, or I had leasure,
could insist vpon this point as long, as vpon the former: it shall suffice therefore to shew you, that he that serues God Bacchus, is no great enemie to the Lady Venus; and hee that is † Potatores st∣pratores Io. Auent. Anal.  5 p 440. ptator, a drunkard, may be scortator, a whoremaster, before he be aware; they are termes almost conuertible, per luxam & otium ventri viuunt; I say no more. 5. They are Prodigals and spendthrifts; and that they spent were their owne, or not mispet vpon wicked purposes, and lewd luswiues, the fault might be lessened, though not cleane taken away: but † Miseremini  opr m co uptas oblati∣ones. Patri om Christ, co smtar c . Liur. Schri monumentis Italia, p 235. misereremini mei, (ay the Church say;) Pittie, pittie, my goods are mispent, spent vpon Har∣lots and Queanes; thus saith your great Antiquary Laur. Schraderus in his books of Monuments, especially of Italy. 6. Ambitious, no men more; neither sought they their Benefices to doe good with them, Viues in to 5. Aug. l 7 c. 5. but propter quae∣stum, to make a gaine of them, or a adder for their ambiti∣ous thoughts to mount vp; and this adder, because it should carry them vp higher, hath many rounds; their de∣sire was ☞ Quaerunt vt praesint non vt pro∣sint. MS. Bal. p. 345. not so much to profit their inferiours, as to sit amongst their superiours in high place and dignitie, in great honour and worship: and this was the true cause, why Be∣nefices were so chopt and changed, bought and sold, as if the Church were an † Sacerdotia quasi caballi empta. Io. Auent. Annal. Beior. l. 4 p. 382. Horse-faire. 7. They are egregious Simoniasts: but of this no∣thing, hauing launced this soare before in the Chapter of Rome, and, I doubt, it is not healed yet. 8. They are as proud as Lucifer. This vice is com∣mon to them with their † Pontificum E∣piscoporum Pres∣byterourm Sacer∣dotum superbissi∣ma tecta aulae, equi, non dicam scorta & vilissima mancipia. Andt. Mas in Iosue  7. p 128. Bishops and Prelates; also they must haue their stately Houses, magnificent Halles, gallant Horses, to speake nothing of their Queanes and Concubines: but it may bee, their Prelates will challenge this as proper vnto themselues. 9. They are braue Courtiers. This vice is noted in them by diuers good and approoued Writers, as ☞ Pag. 5. Guil. de S. Amore, diuers MS. * p 130. & MS 29. p. 216. Manuscripts, and others, branding them with the name of ☞ Clrici cutia∣les stellae erraticae. MS. 29. pag. wandring Planets, † Plunt mancipia Principum & Aulae. Er. to. 2. Adag▪ . Cent. 3. p 603. Court-slaues; they
pronounce a heauy doome against them, ☞ Frequen∣tantes Aulas Re∣gum peru▪ ire de∣bent ad ignomini∣am Gehennalem.  S Amore MS. p 156. that shame will be their end, and a worse punishment, if they take not the better heed. Mistake them not; they meane not Kings and Princes Chaplaines, that necessarily must attend vpon them nor such as repaire vnto the Court vpon good occasion, but frequen∣tantes Curiam, such as are neuerwell, but when they are there, or any where, so they may be from their charges. 10. They are stout Souldiers: I meane, not onely in their feild beddes, and in the Lady Venus payre (as I haue largely demonstrated vnto you before) but Souldiers in their ☞ Contra Cle∣ricos vt Mtes in∣cedentes MS 29. p 271. habit; or (as another hath it) ☞ Quastu Cle∣tie & habitu mili∣tes MS 59 127. for their greedinesse they may be called Clergimen; but for their habits, Souldi∣ers. Doubtlesse Saint Bernard was the Author of this complaint they forget themselues, rma milittae nostrae sunt spiritualis; Our weapons are spirituall. And as a merry fel∣low told an † Fr Duarenus de sacs ecclesiae , l 10. 4 p. 440. Archbishop, that was both a Duke and an Archbishop, and stood in defence of his temporall Domi∣nion, more then was fitting; It may bee (quoth he) the Archbishop may goe to Heauen, but I feare much, the Duke will neuer goe thither: So giue me leaue to say to these Clergie-Souldiers, that are, as Ant. de Dom. l. 6. c. 8. § 30. Ant. de Dominis com∣plaineth (though they put not on Saint Pauls compleate ar∣mour) yet are both galeat & lorati, harnessea from top to toe: if they be not commanded to the Waires by the State, as who knoweth not, but our profound Bradwardine ser∣ued as a Chaplaine in the Came? but run idly from their Cures, that well they may goe to Heauen as they are Cler∣gie-men (which I oe not easily beleeue,) but as Souldi∣ers they will neuer come thither. This vice was touched to the quicke by Desid Erasmus, but hee was neuer a whit thought of the better of the Church of Rome. Hee was wholly for the maintaining of the Canons of the Church, and nothing for these Powder-Canons, and Field-pieces. Thus much bee spoken of their fighting: Ministers must not be fighters. 11. They are cunning Merchants: They trade not with the Word, in this spirituall merchandize of soules;
but with money, like temporall ☞ Contra Mercatores. MS. p. 139. Merchants and Trades∣men, neglectis studijs. 12. They are for the most part ignorant Dolts, ignari, stulti, stipites, † Pecudes igna∣uae, stulti sti e caudaces asiri Io. Auent. l. 5. p. 45. candaces, idle sluggards, fooles, stockes and stones, that haue (as one said in the Councell of ☞ Conc. Bas. MS. p 365. Basil) nec scientiam, nec conscientiam, nec entiam; nor science, nor conscience, nor any entitie of goodnesse in them: so that a man may well conclude of them, as Io. Neuizanus did long before I was borne, peraduenture, de Clerico ad asinum valet argumentum, vnlesse you would haue me tell you out of Polydor Virgil, that their Masse-Priests were so ignorant, as not to know whether Cle in Paracletus were long or short. But for auoiding this difficultie, and helping their ignorant Shauelings, you haue lately found out an excel∣lent deuice, to accent all the Trissyllables, or longer words in your Missals: and yet I doe not remember, that Io. de Lapide, as very a stone as euer wrote, hath this amongst his centum dubia occurrentia circa missam, printed and reprin∣ted with shame enough. Thus endeth their first dozen of faults of their Priests, vnlesse you will haue a Bakers dozen. I will bee loath for (for so was mine Author Gyraldus) to touch vpon this soare: it was not Syluester Gyraldus, and yet he was a plaine downe right Author; it is Lilius Greg. Cyraldus, the fault was this, (which I doe not score vp, because I giue it you to boote) That diuers men in his time, or of his knowledge, were chosen Priests † Sacerdotia Hi∣strionica Arte comparata Lil. Greg. Gyrald. to. 2 ex hist. Poet. Dial. 6. p. 236. p. 328. for some excellent qualitie, belike, because they were excellent Stage-players: and yet when I bethinke my selfe the better, this may fall out to be no fault, or a small one, when wee consider, that it is the manner in Spaine and some Countries, to haue long Pulpits, and the first worke the Priest doth when he ascends the Pulpet, is to set vp his Crucifixe, and then to play his parts, so as neuer an Actor of them all shall goe beyond him. But I haue done.
Of Popish Monkes and Friars. I Purpose in this last place, to insist a while vpon their Monkes and Friars, not † Ordo in mul∣tas sectas diuisus. Polyd. Virg. de In∣uent l 7. c 1 p. 440. & l 8 c 4 p. 493. diuiding them into their seuerall Orders, Sects, or Sodalities, wherewith the whole World did, and yet doth † Nunc mundus plenus est So∣dalitatibus. Er. to. 4. p. 224. swarme: they are commended vnto vs vnder the † Religionis ti∣tulo commendabi∣les Er. to 4 p 24. title of Religion, † Ahorum nomi∣nibus religiosi. Iac. Faber in 1. Cor. 1. c. 1 p 106. vsurping religious mens names and titles: but are not † Non reli sed sacrilegium. Guil. de S. Ame, c 14. truly religious, but very sacrilegious per∣sons, ☞ Contra fal∣ monachos. MS O. p. 115. false Monkes, against whom Saint † Erasin decla∣rat. ad Confessionem militis. Hierome, and others, haue iustly and sharpely inueighed. Some deriue their originals from the † Qui etiam iacti∣tant illud Aposto∣lorum fuisse institu∣tum. Pol. Virg. l. 7. c. 3 p. 451. 163. Apostles, and make them † Religio D. Fran∣cisci de iure diuino. Em Rodericu quaest. regular. & Canon. p. 18. de Iure diui∣no: but that cannot be prooued; (yet are they ancient) com∣pare the old Monkes with the new, and † See Polyd. l 7. c. 1 p. 440. † Eras. i vita Hier. p 5. † Er. Duar . de Eccministrir, c. 24 p. 458. † Er. to▪ 9. there is great diffe∣rence and disparitie. Those were Schooles of † Apud eos lite∣rarum exercitia publica Io. Auent. Annal. Boiorum. Scholae & Sonniaria. At de Dom. l . c. 12 §. 63. Learning, ra∣ther then Colleges of Monkes, or rather Cages of vncleane birds the heate of persecution made them retire into holes and vales, caues and dennes, where they studied † Mona∣chi professio priscae liberaeque vtae meditatio. Er in vita Hier. p. 5. amend∣ment of life; and when they came forth out of their Cel, and Monasteries, being found by the like persecution, they brought others vnto the studie of godlinesse by their ex∣emplarie liues: they † Nullum yotorum vincu∣lum. Polyd. Virg. de Inuent. l. 7 c 1 p. 440. knew no Vowes; were not ☞ Vncinis pomorum puerulos ad religionem vestrum adtrahitis. Ital. Acad & Ant. de Dom. l. 2. c. 12. § 46. intised by flatterie, or forced by vndue meanes, to take vpon them that state of life; all was arbitrarie, they sought God with their hearts, and † Omnibus impositum, vt sudore vultus acquirant necessaria. V at in Prouerbia c. 16 nu. 17. their liuings with their hands; were not distin∣guished with set Antiqui non distincti cultu aut vestibus. Eras. Sol in p ad Rusticum. p. 5. formes of apparrell; they were not luxuri∣ous in their liues, riotous in their fare, couetous in their see∣ming pouertie, leauing the World, to take it vp againe with aduantage, false Hypocrites, wandring Planets, ignorant Asses, proud Cockscomes, sloathfull Bellies, Court-slaues, Man-quellers, King-killers, greedy Worldlings, vnnatu∣rall to Parents: they followed Christ, and the people fol∣lowed
them; but our later Monkes of yesterdayes breeding, in comparison of Antiquitie, that † Orti fungorum more. Pol. Virg. l. 7 c. 3 p 453. sprang vp like Toade∣stooles or Mushrumps, are cleane contrary to these. I will not write their sinnes in generall, as some of your owne Writers haue done reasonably well, I must needs say, in this kind, as † Polid. Virg. lib de uent. p 443. ☞ Manuscript. Polydor Virgil, and especially one Hugo de Polio, that hath written a whole Treatise de 12. Abusioni∣bus Claustri; we intend not whole bookes of declamati∣ons against their filthy crying sinnes: but we will as briefe∣ly as we may, deliuer them vnto you, as we haue receiued them of your owne good Writers, that were compelled by the euidence of truth, or rather by the prouidence of God, to lay open their abominations, though you haue cast a cloake or garment vpon them (such as it is,) but it will not serue neither your, nor their turnes, there are that haue blabbed them abroad, and these they are: 1. The first accusation brought against them, is their † Monac Sacer∣dotibus Eliae  Idololariam co∣paran S Pagninus p 1157. Idolatrie, being nothing inferiour herein to the idolatrous Priests in Elias time. 2. Their Regicides, or killing of Kings: Was it not a † Henricus sep∣timus nephando Dominicani ca∣lice sublatus. Ansel. Rid p. 54. † Hen 7.  Monacho potio∣natus Io. Struiu apud Zuing. p. 145. Dominican that porsoned Henrie the seuenth at the Eucha∣rist? What can bee added to this Villanie? To make the fact seeme more ougly, the murderer was a Religious per∣son, specie tenus, or vere tenus: the murdered, a sacred person, an Emperour; the pretence, pietie; and the act seeming most religious of all others; the place holy, the Temple; the Chalice holy, for it was consecrated. Won∣der it is, that hee is not consecrated and registred amongst your Saints, aswell as Garnet, and others, that they may be put downe in the Calendars and Martyrologies in rea let∣ters, that their faces may be died red with shame and con∣fusion, and their bloody facts recorded to posteritie, and read of all men. 3. Their Hypocrisie. Their Religion consisteth chiefely † Caluitie & ha∣bitu duntaxat Reli∣gion in prae se fe∣rentes. o. Auentinus Annal. Boior. l 2. p. 156. in their shauen Crownes, and diuersitie of habits; they † Solo titulo fere Monachi sunt. Er. . 2. Cent. 3. Adag. . p. 830. are
onely titular Monkes, they professe ☞ Specie tenus derunt saeculum. Phil. Repington. MS p. 475. Religion in shew, and with Demas, imbrace the World: they † Pharisaeorum genus.  Auent. annal. Boior. l. 4. p. 312. are a kind of Pha∣rises; yea, the † Ad eos Phari∣saei collati simplices vieri queant Er. . 6 p. 92. Pharises being compared to them, are nothing, they are † Ficta Monastica Institutio. Polyd. Virg. de Inuent. l. 7 c. 2 p 446. fained institutions, and † Monasterium hypocriseos domi∣cilium. Clenard. in ep p. 165. houses of hypocrisie. 4. Their Luxurie and incontinencie. What should I speake of † Deuorantes domus & impudi∣citiae Eras.  6 in Math. c. 23. Ant de Dm. l. 5. c. 11 § 45. their sundry lusts in sundry kinds? They promise and vow Continentiam Monachi ipsi quam profitentur seruare non seruant. Iul Cae∣sar Scaliger in lib. de causis plantarum. Theophrasti l. 1. c. 5. p. 12. continencie, but there be that vow the contrary. I will not reckon vp their lothsome and filthy diseases which they get, out of † Amat. Lusita∣nus Curatione 69. p. 382 † Corrupti morbo gallico Ib. in schol. p. 384. Amatus Lusitanus, or any other, for very shame; let this suffice for the present. 5. Their Riots and excesse in fare. You may reade of their Epicureisme and delicacie in fare, in Hugo de ☞ Tot diuersia & tam delicatis ci∣bis vtuntur, qui in sua domo sobrii, in Monasterium gulo∣si. Hugo de Fo∣lio MS. Folio, he hath a set Chapter for it, of their † Splendida con∣uinia Er.  2 Cent. 3. Adag. 1. p 830. stately and sumptuous banquets in Erasmus; and therefore we may iudge whether men had not reason to ca them † Franciscani pori. Ambros Cale∣pinus in verbo Leuchephantus. Hogges, fat † Vt porci in latibulis ventri & peni seruiunt. Io. suspin. in Hen.  2 p. 409. Hogges, as it were out of the stie, that swinishly cared for nothing, but for their bellies and their tailes; with reuerence of the Reader be this spoken. 6. Their Sloth and Idlenesse. They leade a pretty kind of † Est oii genus quoddam. Er  4 p. 463. idle life, that slept, or † Sacrifici ac Moniales oio som∣noque dediti. Lau. Lemnius, l. 2. de occultis, c. 51 p. 277 idled out their times; it was no maruell, that so many men and women went thick and three∣fold to their Monasteries and Nunneries. Lib 1 de los dominos Manuscript. 1 § 2. Io. de Puente, he that lately intituled the King of Spaine his Master to the Seigneurie of the whole world, thinkes no man worthy to write a lying Storie (such as his is) vnlesse he come out of a Monasterie, or a Cell. True: for if they onely should write, which are the only, or especiall liers of the world, should we not haue goodly Stories out of their Forge? But some are of the contrary mind, that they, and only they, † Eorum ignauia historiae intercidunt Naturae miraculis. Io. Auent. Annal. Boir. l 4 p. 312. haue been the cause that we haue lost so many good pieces of Anti∣quitie, so many famous Histories, by their meere negligence and indiligence. 7. Their Discord and dissentions. They are called Fratres, that is, Friars: but Fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
they agree like Cat and Dogge, either amongst themselues, or towards others. I would to  Vinam non et verssmum nullum adhuc repe∣i quod non esset intestinis, odus ac impis insectum. Eto. 4▪ p. 488. God this were not too true, and that there were any Monasterie free from this infection. Peace (as † Non v▪ habi∣te pui fuor qu▪ in iseruto Lud Ario∣ Cant. 14 p 67. Ariosto saith) may be written and painted in their Cloysters and Walles: but doubtlesse it is not practized in their liues and conuersations. 8. Their Pride is somewhat † Non potest su∣perba eorum ope∣rati quam cum su∣perba a Luciferi qui voluit fieri alh∣mus Bti. (ssan. a. glor undi 4 te considerat. 2. § Sedeum sint Minores. Lucifer-like; it cannot well goe higher: they are called Minorites some of them; but they may be all called Maiorites. 9. Their Wandring vp and downe. They can neither truly containe (for as I shewed you, their † Claustia Mona∣chorum prostibuia meretricum Laur. Shiaderus in Mo∣num. Ital. p 235. Cloysters are but so many baudy houses) nor are their Cloysters able to containe them; they must be running vp and downe with little Pictures or Tablets of the † Ad haec Sancto rum reliqu as vel Apostolicas Tabel∣las, offerentibus os∣culandas porrigunt, &c Polyd Virgil. l. 7. c. 7. Apostles, which the simple people are made to kisse, and giue them money. Polydor Ʋirgil in the place quoted in the Margent, hath so liuely represented this fault vnto our considerations, that I am in a manner constrained to referre you to his learned Writings, that de∣sire to be better informed hereabouts. 10. Their begging. They † Poseunt stipem quam decet magis dare. Viues in Aug. l. 3. c. 26. begge, that are fitter to giue; and liue idly, that † Monachi de∣bent operari Nota Marg. in Bibl. Pp. col 7 27. are fitter to be set aworke. Doth any man deny this? It shall be prooued, Monkes: aswell as other men, must liue by the sweat of their † Omnibus im∣positum vt sudore vultus acquirant necessaria. Vatab. in Prouerb. c. 16. nu. 17. browes, and † In eos qui non laborant manibus. I nota Marg. in c. 3. ad Thessal. la∣bour of their hands. Monachus qui non operatur latroni par iudicandus est. Ant. de Dam. l. 9. c. 5. p. 64. Not to worke, if a man can, and haue an able body, is to steale. But you will say, perhaps, this pre∣cept is not generall, it concernes not Monkes. Yes; Monkes, aswell as other men. ☞ Monachi debent viuere labore manuum suarum. Guide Amore. Guil. de S. Amore hath inferred this doctrine throughout all his booke, against the begging Friers: but his booke against beggers, must be enforced it Being all transcribed and fittea for the Presse. selfe to begge, or else it is neuer like to see light, for ought that I know. I reade of many Monkes that were Fishers, and relieued themselues and others by that honest Trade: and I can tell you also of one that was a ☞ Monachus fabrilem artem exercens. MS. Dunelm. Smith, and exer∣cised the Trade in his Monasterie: belike it was hee that
made the Tongs that Saint Dunstane vsed, when he tooke the Deuill by the nose: the Storie is worth the reading in our old Chronicles, if a man haue so much faith as to be∣leeue it. But to returne to our begging Friers, which take the habite of † Ingrediuntur Monasterium ab o∣tium & ope I Cuspin in Austria p. 602 poore Monkes vpon them for riches sake; and so (as one notes very well) by † Profitentur paupertatem vt ef∣fugiant paiperlae. Eras. in Nou. est. to. 6 p 10. professing themselues poore, they make themselues rich: they haue stately houses, and are called beggers: Vtinam hoc esset mendicare; He that should begge with them, should not loose by them: but of this enough. 11. Their pride in Apparrell is one of the twelue abu∣ses, noted by Hugo de Folio, and he setteth it downe in Fo∣lio: yee may beleeue him, for he knew it too well. 12. Their Courting is noted by the same Author, who hath taken much paines to reforme them (if it were possi∣ble) and to reduce them to their prime-order. It was wont to be said, A Monke out of his Cell, was like a Fish out of the water. But in his time, and in all times, a man may find some of these Frogges; not only at Pharaohs Court, that is, in the Palaces of Kings and Princes; but in the Court of Rome, trading with his Holinesse about making and mar∣ring of Marriages; about vnlawfull Diuorces and Dispensa∣tions, and I know not what. I will not speake of their vn∣naturalnesse to Parents which they practise, if they doe not teach; nor of their children which they doe steale: I haueThe beginning of the Statute MS. Vnci∣nis pomorum pue∣rulos ad religionem vestram attrahitis. c † Monachi in tri∣bus Deo similes vbique; 1. aliquan∣do in lupanari; 2. omnia sciunt va∣gando; 3 non pec∣cando P. Rebuffus tr. Concordatorum, p. 214. shewed you an expresse Statute of our Vniuersitie of Ox∣ford against it: these bee supernumerarious faults; but to conclude, there is no sinne but they haue a tincture of it, and yet like counterfeits, they would be like God; without sinne as he is, know all things as he doth, are in all places; they are P. Rebuffus words, some of them too sharpe to be English∣ed, and ioyned with a little prophanenesse, to my seeming, which may well become a Popish Writer.
Of Miracles. I Had here thought to haue concluded: but that a fit and iust occasion is giuen me, by a late accident that fell out here in Oxford, to speake somewhat, although not much of this point, of Miracles: the patration of them is made a spe∣ciall note of their Church in diuers bookes, that were lately scattered in the night about our Colledges and Halles, and in the Cities and fields (bookes that we haue heard of long since, whereof some of them are throughly refuted) because I say, the euill one that hath sowed these Tares amongst our good Wheate, while the good Householder slept (as his manner is) confides belikes in his cause, and triumphs vpon this point more then any other. I will therefore take so much paines, as to insist vpon this point a little. I will not take vpon mee to answer all, it needeth not; let one or two serue for all the rest. The Author of my Lord of Londons supposed Legacie, makes this his sixth mo∣tiue: That true Miracles haue been wrought for proofe of the Catholike religion; but not any for Protestancy; and hee reckons vp diuers most stupendious Miracles in the primitiue Age, and later times; in this World and the New, I meane, both the Indies: and he concludeth with this Epiphonema; O misery and feeblenes of Nouelisme in doctrine, which is for∣cedPag. 75. (through it owne pouertie) to sustentate and support it selfe for the time, by maintaining assertions, repugnant to the pro∣uidence and charitie of God towards Man, and to all light of naturall reason. So that we must (as my Lord of London did, if they could tell the time when) beleeue that doctrine which is accompanied with so many true and celebrious Mi∣racles wrought by God alone, without any secondary humane meanes whatsoeuer. Master Io. Brereley hath likewise in his of S. Aug. religion spent his 18. Chapter, and all his Secti∣ons vpon this matter: so that now the matter is made cock∣sure. Against all which, is brought by him and his fellow Musket, whosoeuer shall oppose his owne bare vnwarranted
deniall, we leaue (saith hee) that man as much more worthy of contempt, then farther reply. But stay, now you Master Musket haue spent all your powder; or if you did shoote bullets, you haue wounded or killed none but your owne men (as may appeare.) Not to speake of the Auctour vpon the vnperfect worke vpon Mathew, very ancient (although† In illud Mathei, Tunc qui sent in Iudaea fugiant in montes. not Chrysostomes) whose words are so plaine for vs, both in the affirmatiue, that there is no note, note-worthy, or proofe of the true Church, nisi tantummodo per Scripturas: spoken more then once, or twice in the same place; and inSee my booke of Corruptions. the negatiue, that miracles may proue a false Church, and be done by Heretickes, which your Inquisitors haue pur∣ged out of the Auctour: That miracles, stupendious mira∣cles,† Io Bodinus methe do hist. p. 96. Talibus nugis re∣ferti suut Antoni. Aidonis. &c.—ac veterum Annalium libri—portentis ac miraculis referti. † Facta) et infecta narrant, Krantzius Wandaliae. l. 14. c. 17. † Miracula fictitia et reuelationes. Io. Auent. l. 5. p 438. Miracula Cacodae∣monum. Io. Iac. Wickerus de secretis. l. 1 c. 5 p. 36. ☞ De miraculis Sanctorum Arte magica Bac. MS. p. 13. † Pseudo-Prophe∣ta miraculis abdu∣cens—miraculis tentat fidem no∣stram Deus. Vat. in Deut c. 13 † Contra Henr. 4. pro Greg. 7 apud Zuing. p. 1542 Quatuor monachorum hist. stigmata Christi simulantium. vide apud Wietum de prastigi daemonum. Zuing. p. 1446. † Virginis Mariae tabula de caelo delapsa. Blondus Decade 1. l. 6: in Chron. apud Zuing. p. 4167. † Ad Mariam formosam Reginoburgi concursus ob miracula. Seb. Franeus in Zuin. p. 4163. Miracula in Transubstantiatione, non sunt ab omni dolo malo vel praestigiis libera. Ant de Dom. l. 5. c. 6. p. 265. ☞ Infinita miracula tempore Antichristi. Bacon MS p. 218. MS. 9. p. 101. Bas. MS. p. 515. such as your Historians doe swarme with, namely, Antoninus, Aido, Saxo Grammaticus, Sigebertus, Phrecul∣phus, Nauclerus, Marianus, Vrspergensis, Ammonus, Turpi∣nus, Guaguinus, and all your old Annalists: aske your owne Bodin, and he will tell you so much: they were done and not done, made or rather feined by helpe of Deuils, or of the black Art, by your false Prophets, to draw men to superstition, from the reading of Gods word: Such were those that Gregory the seuenth vsed against Henry the fourth: Foure Monkes that at Berke would needes counterfeite the fiue wounds of Christ; your Tablets of the virgin Mary that fell from heauen: or of gallant virgin Mary, either at Reginoburg, or Lisbon, or of Oeting, of your miracles of old of Transubstantiation: or of late within these one hundred yeeres, wherewith you haue blinded the simple people, and cast a mist before there eies, they are infinite in number, that haue beene wrought by Xauier and his fellow cheaters, and so shall those bee that Antichrist shall bring to passe in the latter end of the world, to the seducing of the very elect of God (if it were possible)
and therefore I cannot be perswaded, that there are any true miracles wrought amongst you: they were needefull in the infancy, but not in the groweth of the Church and aske not mee but S. Austine a reason, why miracles doe now cease in these times of the Gospell; or rather your owne Quare miracula non fiant. Geo. Ven. Probl. To 4 § 3. Probl. 164 ☞ Miracula simu∣lant campanas pulsant Praedica∣tio nibus extollunt fiunt à malis pre∣sertim in Aduentu Antichristi. Gu. de S. Amor. ☞ Alii alis nar∣rant. Dunelm MS. p. 110. † Miracula non prosunt fine fide.  2.  p. 55. Geo: Ʋenetus (to come neerer home) and they will bee able well to ensorme you in this point: and therefore ring your belles, preach your miracles, and make no small gaine of them before them simple people or poore Indians. Let your men vrge them, and presse them, and make their station in them, taking them vp of trust one from the other, as Bede from S. Gregory, and S. Gregory from others. I am fully resolued by your owne men, that miracles without faith can neuer be effectuall: but true faith without miracles, may bee acceptable both to God and men, as I haue formerly shewed. As concerning Master Brerelies fond obiection, be∣cause I perceiue by the casting away of his bookes, that hee is weary, or ashamed of them; and is now casting about, how he may frame a conuenient answer (though it bee but in shew) to him that wrote against him, I will not trouble his patience at this time, but stay till hee reioyne, and then I doe binde my selfe by promise, to ioyne issue with him, and to answer whatsoeuer hee shall obiect; either about mi∣racles, or any thing else, that shall concerne the substance of our religion. Whilst hee vrgeth Protestants and Papists, I will assure him that I will vrge none but Papists, and espe∣cially those that are marked with a black Theca in their In∣dices expurgatorij. And for a conclusion to all: seeing they vrge vs so farre vpon the point of miracles, I will commend these few mi∣racles that follow to their most Christian consideration. If they proue not miracles, yet I beleeue, they will proue miraculous and stupendious actions, and such as doe note forth vnto vs the great prouidence of God, in preseruing his little flocke, his true Church, amidst the furie, and fierie assaults of his and their great enemies, beyond the degree of admirations.
First, when the deluge of superstition had wel-nigh o∣uer whelmed the arke of the Church, when that abominati∣on of desolation, foretold by Daniel, and forespoken by S. Paul, began to sit in the Church, and to exalt himselfe against God, or all that is called God: God had his Waldo in France, and Wickleph here in England, and Hus a little after in Be∣hemia, that did preserue the truth of religion intire and vn∣corrupted, and themselues (except Iohn Hus) vntoucht and vnhurt: being but a handfull of men, against so many and potent Aduersaries. Secondly, how their followers beeing persecuted with bell, booke, and candle, with fire, and sword, multiplied whilst they groaned, like the Children of Israel vnder Pha∣raoh into thousands, and stood out against the Pope and his Croisadoes, and some of them to this present day, in the Con∣ualles remaine, that neuer yet bowed the knees to Baal, nor receiued the marke of the Beast in their fore-heads. Thirdly, that blinde Ziska, and his poore Thaborits, should conquer three hosts of the Pontificians, that wereCochlaeus. thought to be iuincible, and to haue beene an armie suffi∣cient, to haue encountred the great Turke, and to haue beaten him out of all Natolia. Fourthly, that the slaughtering and murdering of men and women in their bloody vnholy Inquifition, hath bene a speciall cause of the encrease of the Church, and the con∣uersion of diuers Sauls into Pauls, which of bloody Inqui∣sitors, became afterwards patient Martyrs, to the astonish∣ment of most men, who wondered not a little; that so ma∣ny of both sexes, especially of the simpler sort, should lay down their liues so readily, for the testimony of the Gospel: it made them (as I say) wonder, what that religion should bee. Fistly, their Inquisition of bookes aswell as of men, the especiall Ramme found out in the Councell of Trent, by the instigation of the Diuell, as the chiefe meanes to establish their new and vnheard of religion; partly by prohibiting of whole bookes, partly by purging of some Tracts in some
bookes, hath proued (beeing discouered vnto vs by the finger of God) the chiefest instrument of Gods glory, whereby so many witnesses of the truth are knowne now vnto vs; to speake wholly, and often, and earnestly, for the reformation which was made by Luther in these parts, (though it were before knowne in other parts of the world) especially in Bohemia, that Luther himselfe wished both for doctrine and discipline, his might bee the same per omnia: I say in all this, men purposed, but God dispo∣sed of all, for the singular good of his Church. Sixtly and lastly, what shall I speake of the more then miraculous preseruation of the late Queene, and our late King, and of both King, Queene, Prince, and State, from infinite and eminent dangers, both from fire and water? in the Spanish inuasion from water, in the Gunpowder trea∣son from fire: God make vs euer more and more thank∣full, for these our more then miraculous deliuerances, and so I end both the whole booke, and my answer to Musket and his companions about miracles. Deo soli sit gloria. The Conclusion of the whole Booke, with certaine needfull Aduertise∣ments to the Christian Reader, for the better vnderstanding of the same. CHristian Reader, whether Protestant or Papist, it mattreth not, and whether you reade & approue it, or reade and refuse it, it is all one: there be∣longs subscription to the one, and a full demon∣stration of mine errours to the other: and then as I haue ready thankes for the one; so I haue as ready my peccaui for the other. In the meane time, now I haue put a full period to my booke, and eased both my selfe, and thee, of much fastidiousnesse in reading, I thinke it fit to say some∣thing,
and not much, for the clearing of my intentions, and your vnderstandings. First, for the testimonies cited, and recited in this booke, they are taken partly out of bookes printed, partly out of bookes vnprinted. Secondly, the bookes printed are part∣ly (and for the greatest part) of bookes purged; partly out of bookes vnpurged, whereof there be but very few: and whether purged, or vnpurged, the Authors all of them are putatiue, and supposed Papists, bred and brought vp in the bosome of the Catholique Romane Church: though they belong vnto the Catholique Church, as shall bee farther shewed in my Alphabet of Authors, and Prints in the lat∣ter end of the booke. Of these Authors that are vnpurged, I haue been very sparing, when I could haue brought whole squadrons of Popish Writers that doe warre on our side, and fight vnder our colours. I haue singled out but three amongst the rest: the first is Geo. Wicelius: the se∣cond, the Author of the Councell of Trent; the third and lastPietro Seaue. is, Ant, de Dominis, all which I alleage the more willingly, because all these three were either peace-makers, or refor∣mers of those Additaments, or superadditaments, that time or ignorance, or that euill one hath brought in step by step into the Church of Rome: which was vnquestionably the Church of God, and its faith praised throughout all Nati∣ons, and is at this present time, a kind of putrid member of the same. The first of these is Geo. Wicelius, a famous prea∣cher in his time of Mentz, who was a true peace-maker: the first after Martin Luther, whose Motto was, Beati Pa∣cifici: and yet a sore enemie to him, and all Sectaries, ha∣bemus confitentem reum. If Luther had not, hee and his ac∣complices would haue reformed the Church in a peaceable anner, and in a lawfull Councell; and not otherwise in most things differenced, or controuerted betweene vs and the Papists. He first banisheth the Schoolemen, and their nicities, and foole-questions, thinking them to be the only troublers of the State, and quiet of the Church. 2. Secondly, in place of them, hee bringeth in the
Scripture, which he placeth in her Throne, as the Queene and Mistresse of all other subordinate testimonies, giuing her the precedencie both in, and out of Councell, and ma∣king her, and her onely the supreme Iudge of all Contro∣uersies. 3. He admits of no Traditions doctrinall, but such as are well warranted by the Word of God: Ceremonials he alloweth vpon the selfe-same conditions that wee doe; if they be not too gaudy, or too many, significatiue and my∣sterious, and well expounded to the people; for the orna∣ment, not of the essence of the Church, without putting any trust or confidence in them, a fault too common in those dayes, and noted by Cassander his Scholler many dayes and yeares after, and as yet vnreformed in their Romane Church. 4. He is peremptorie for the Translation of the Bible into the vulgar Languages of each Country, for singing of Psalmes and Hymmes in a knowne tongue, and for Cate∣chizing of the people. 5. He inuayeth against their numberlesse Feasts, abu∣sed Vigils, and imposed Fasts; the rigour of the one, and the number of the others, he thought fit to be abated, and in stead thereof, that Sermons should be brought into the Church (if need were) two a day. 6. For their Sermons, he would not haue them to be of a tale of a tub, or out of lying Legends, the principall fault of those times, but out of the pure Word of God. 7. He flatly contradicteth their adoration of Ima∣ges. 8. Their inuocation of Saints. 9. He speaketh against their confidence of Purgato∣rie, their questuarie ostentation of Reliques, gainefull Fu∣nerals, and Diges; and wisheth, that the largenesse of the Popes Indulgences were contracted, and the Treasure of the Church better imployed. 10. Farther, he saith, tha their holy Masse is both of∣ten, and many wayes abused, that it hath de decorosos abusus,
is shamefully abused by their priuate Altars, and priuate Masses; too much by themselues vpon hope of gaine, too little with the people administred. Hee inueyeth against their murmurings and whisperings in their Liturgies, and wisheth their halfe-Communions had either not been taken away; or being taken away, were restored againe in a Councell by publike authoritie, and not otherwise. 11. He would haue a Councell called for reforma∣tion of the Church, in it Head and members: but his request is the same with the Lutherans in the Councell of Trent, that the Emperour should assemble it, the Word of God preside in it, and that it should be called in Idonea Ciuitate in a fit place, and the Pope to haue notice of it. 12. Priests Marriage, though he like not well (as pre∣ferring single life of Priests before it:) yet he knoweth no Canon of the Church, or tye of Vowes, to restraine them from marriage, warrantable enough by the Word of God, and practise of some Churches: but howsoeuer, he vtterly disauoweth their Concubinarie Priests, their notorious Adulteries, Incests, and Fornications, especially of the younger sent: yea, hee is of the mind, that Priests Wiues and Children, should haue some competencie of meanes allowed them for their liuelood and maintenance. 13. What shall I say of their lergie? is not hee zealous for a Reformation, that spent his spirits almost and time wholly in vrging it, both in Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and Monkes, offendors more or lesse, in what kind, and of what sort soeuer? The number of idle Monkes he would haue abated and reduced to their primitiue orders, the Priests not tue at so high a rate, the Bishops and Cardinals to their office and functions, to assist the Pope in doing good and preaching the Gospell or visiting the sick, or suruaying their Diocesses. Lastly,  Pope (to whom he, poore Wicelius, deceiued by a counterfcite Epistle of Anacltus, erring the errour of the Pontifician, by misinter∣preting the words of our uiour, Thou art Peter, giueth a kind of Supremacie, but not in that latitude that now it is
taken) hee summoneth to appeare before the Tribunall Seate of God, if he did not his best, to reforme the corrup∣tions of the Clergy in generall, not exempting his Holines, as some flatterers and pick-thankes did, and the foule abu∣ses of the Court of Rome, which were spread abroad throughout all the World in bookes printed, to the shame of that See, and iust reproofe of his Holinesse; and hee did verily thinke in his conscience, that if they did not the soo∣ner begin to reforme the Sectaries, by Colloquies, or Coun∣cels, not by fire and sword; ere long be they would loose all Germanie, that began then to dance after Martins Lu∣thers Pipe, and greedily to imbrace his doctrine, for the ve∣ry filthinesse and abominable, or innominable sinnes of their Clergie. 14. Lastly, what shall I speake of their Holy water, qua nihil immundius, that was vnholy, their Thurification, that was to be reiected, because the sent thereof was not pleasing in Gods nostrils, abuse of Confession, Baptisme, Excommunication, which were too too much abused? You see our Wicelius was a true reformer of the Church, a mo∣derate Papist at the least, and no dissembler of the faults of his age, & of the Church: doubtles in time he might (if he had not bin too much awed by their great ones, to whom as be∣came a peaceable man he shewed all manner of outward o∣bedience,) I say, he might haue prooued an other Martin Luther, though moued with a cleane cōtrary spirit, so pow∣erful is the Spirit of God, to change our purposes, and alter our nature when, and as it pleaseth the Diuine prouidence. Concerning, Ant. de Dom I know not well what to say: but to cry out Digitus Dei; God had a finger in disposing of his comming ouer, and suffering him to fall, that other might rise, and to write so directly against the Church of Rome (as to my seeming for the most points, no man hath done better,) though himselfe were neuer in the right, ha∣uing a good head, but a corrupt and equluocating heart from the beginning, which well became him that was tuto∣red by, and brought vp vnder the Iesuites. Now, albeit his
conuersion were most fained, and his Apostacie most cer∣taine and true, whatsoeuer he proposed to himselfe (the heart is a Closet, wherein none may enter but God,) God so disposed of both for his glorie, that his person should re∣lapse from our Religion, and himselfe returne with the Dog to his old vomit, and his elegant and substantiall bookes (though they be mute) should speake and proclaime to all the World, the vnauoideable truth of our Religion, now publikely professed and established in the Church of Eng∣land. Thus doth the diuine prouidence bring light out of darknesse, and make good effects spring from the roote of euill causes; as better shall appeare when we come to giue you my obseruations about the bookes that are purged. I will onely touch vpon the Author of the Historie of the Councell of Trent, whom (because Ant. de Dominis, whom I cannot call Ant. de Dommo, because hee serued more Masters, called Pietro Soare) I will also call him by that name, doth so farre shew to euery one-eyed Reader, that the Councell of Trent, though it were called against, and condemned Martin Luther, and his Religion; yet if the Councell had been free, and their voyces decisiue with∣out the Pope (though the Italian Bishops were three to one in number) and there had been no foule play in calcula∣ting the voyces, still I say, leauing the Clokebag behind, the Councell of Trent might haue turned Lutheran, and sate at Witenberge, aswell as there, for their propositions and reasons, which (as D. Stapleton saith) may be fallible and deceitfull; but the conclusion is that which they did, and we must look after, if we will suffer our selues to be hood∣winckt,See l, Examen Pa∣cifique. Que le Concile of est pas legitime. Chap. 4. and as very fooles as they; I am not ignorant, that there be some in the world moderate Papists, that haue ta∣ken as iust, and as great exception, as we doe, or can, vnto the Councell of Trent; and I would not haue the Christian Reader ignorant of this, that I haue intreated of this large∣ly in another set Treatise, which, if it shall be thought wor∣thy by the Church of England (to whom I doe yeeld, and owe all submission) may haue the happinesse with some
other Treatises of mine to see the light. Of the bookes printed vnpurged, so much by way of caueat: for the prin∣ted purge ▪ Copies, take gentle Reader, these few notes in∣to thy Christian consideration. 1. That I propose not to my selfe any exact handling of the Controuersies questioned betweene vs and the Pa∣pists, per viam Thomae (as they say) by way of opposition, or obiections and answeres out of Scripture, Councels, Fa∣thers, midled aged, first aged, and all aged Writers before Martin Luther: my weake and wearied legges at this time will not suffer me to expatiate so farre; (yet my studies I confesse, and naturall disposition to rip vp, and vnfold the controuersies, and vnriuit them out of the secrets of true Antiquitie, driue that way) my purpose is (if God will) to giue you a taste onely of that fruit, which may be expected out of their sundry Indices Expurgatorij, if they be well and narrowly sought after, and looked into. I haue but seuen or eight of them; some that fell into my hands by casualty, at the surprizall of the Towne of Cadiz; others, by the prouidence of God, and great care and industrie of the Founder of our great Librarie, Sir Thom. Bodley, the Po∣lomey of our ges, and wonderfull preseruer of bookes. I haue by my selfe and my friends, amassed and shouelled to∣gether some thirtie Quire of Paper of Catholike restituti∣ons, and restored some one or two hundred seuerall Au∣thors, and out of them I haue gathered this small Introdu∣ction, or Manuduction vnto Diuinitie, sorted according vn∣to the especiall Articles of Religion, controuerted at this day betweene vs and the Papists▪ deliuered in as plaine and familiar manner, as I could possibly deuise, for the capacitie of the vulgar Protestant or Papist. 2. I haue not taken all that may be taken, or gathered out of the Articles, that the booke might not rise to too great a bulke. I haue neither collected all that is contained in the seuerall Indices, but a third or fourth part only; nor all that is contained in my said collections, but the most pertinent and proper places.
3. Neither is it to be vnderstood▪ that all that are re∣corded by them for Papists, are indeed Papists, but suppo∣sed ones, as Laeuinus, Lemnius, Io. Spondanus, &c. whose te∣stimonies are sparingly miscited by mee, in following the common errour of the Pontificians, which reckon them in the second Classis of Authors prohibited, which is the note of Papists bookes forbidden: but whether they be, or bee not, the question is prooued without their testimonies, which you may take, or follow at pleasure. 4. By those Authors that are vnquestionably theirs,P de Alliaco Ca∣meracensis de re∣formatione Eccle∣siae, MS▪ two Copies and printed. Bas. 155. Gentiani Heruei oratio de reparanda Ecclesiasticorum disciplina. Brixi 1563. De Squaloribus Ec∣clesiae sine nomine Authoris Bas. 1551. and others. Picus Mirandulae Oration to Leo the enth, and sundry others in fasciculo rerum expetenda∣rum. If we might haue been so happy as to haue seene their book in written hand, be∣fore they came to the Inquisitors hands, and were printed, what innumerable testimonies should we h ad? by them expunged, by me vsed, it appeareth euidently, that the Church of Rome in point of Doctrine, had need of re∣formation, when they did so often, and so many of them call for it, before Martin Luther, pressing and expressing it in their learned Writings, which were printed at Rome, Ve∣nice, Madrill, Paris, and other Popish places. 5. That their bookes were many of them examined, before they came vnto the Presse, and accordingly cor∣rected in many places, and afterwards printed permisses su∣periorum, with these very notes which wee present vnto you. 6. These Aduersaries of ours, and Writers of theirs, who write and speake many things in our behalfe, forced by truth, not inuited by charitie, though their authoritie of it selfe were of small account; yet they are to be esteemed, and good recko∣ning is to be made of them, when they speake in fauour of vs, because their owne consciences freely, and vncoactdly, induce them in such matters of weight, to depose against themselues, and against the oath of their owne confederacie, and so rest con∣demned by their owne Records, and guiltie of errour in them∣selues, and iniquitie against God. I. N. in his Preface to his learned Workes, could any man if he had been hired, haue spoken more properly, and pertinently to our purpose? I commend his iudgement, and shall like it the better whilest I know him: knowne him I haue, and ere long we shall be better acquainted. 7. The testimonie of these Writers by mee alleaged▪
which vncoacted, and forced by truth, doe pleade for our Religion, are pertinent and to the purpose: for else what need had you to raze the Records, and as it were, to em∣bezell their Writings? 8. To say (as some doe) that our Mother the Church may correct her disobedient children, and reduce them in∣to the right way of truth, when they reclaime, or swarue from the truth, may, perhaps, be true, prouided, that it bee knowne which is the true Church: secondly, that it haue a certaine infallible and inerrable rule, whereby all doctrine must be squared: and lastly, that the Author bee sent for by himselfe, or his friends, his errour shewed, and reasons conuicted. But for the first, you haue no Church; if you haue, lay the Pope aside, whom you would faine make your inerrable Dictator, and tell me where it is, and who it is, and wee shall haue some hope of agreement in this point. Secondly, as you haue no Church, so you haue no certaine Rule to proceed by, your doctrine is yet to seek, & your Re∣ligion to be made, except transubstantiation, your doctrine against Priests Marriage, & some few points more, that are in some sort, in some Councels concluded; shew all points of your doctrine, your additaments, determined before the Councel of Trent, & you shal haue them for me. As for theSee the Examen. Pacifique, alias, the Catholike Moderator Chap. 1. Que les Ca∣tholique & Hugu∣nots s' accordent tellement en do∣ctrine, qu' ils sont de mesme foy & Religion▪ & Cap. 6. Councell of Trents determination, it neither maketh our religion schismatical, or heretical; nor yours truly Catholike and Orthodoxe. Lastly, that which you practise vpon your owne Writers by way of expurgatiō, is not done with their priritie, but altogether against their wils and consents. 9. It will not auaile the Papists to say, that they purge not the words of the Text in any Romish-Catholike Au∣thor, but some scattred Annotations in the Margent or In∣dices of some Writers. I reply, that the Indices and Mar∣gents speake nothing different from the text, and whether the Text be not thorowly expunged, and some whole sen∣tences, pages, yea, sixtie in follio together blotted out; I re∣ferre my selfe to any indifferent Popish Arbiter▪ to arbitrate and sentence this controuersie betweene vs: for being re∣duced
vnto a Controuersie of fact, euery Lay Gentleman, ifThey are evident to the most ignorant and vnlearned per∣sons. R S. in his Pre∣face to the Reader, and are decided with more facilitie, Ib. his eyes be matches, becommeth a fit Iudge of these Contro∣uersies; your owne Smith truly saith it, and I beleeue it. But you cry out still, Shew vs the bookes printed accor∣dingly, as Auentinus, Cranzius, Ferus, Espencaeus, or Stel∣la? Let me see whether the sentences you speake of, or those that you haue produced in this very booke, be omit∣ted or no? I answere: This obiection hath a good varnish or glasse set vpon it; but glasse is brittle, and varnish will not long hold: to say the truth, your men speak they know not what in defence of their Indices; you haue their toungs, and they haue your eares to pawne, and which is more, your soules and consciences. What you heare your spiri∣tuall Gouernours say, you beleeue assuredly: what so you beleeue, you are ready to depose (if need be) against your consciences. For example: If one of your spirituall fathers should tell you, that the house at the Blacke-Friers fell vp∣on a Puritane Preacher and his Psalming Auditorie, toThe house was said  be in S. Andrewes; the Preacher, a Puri∣tane: this I speake from our Master Rainsden of Lin∣colne Colledge, who heard it from the Honourable, Sir Isaac Wake, Embassadour for his Maiestie in Venice, who had a booke presented him in France of this argument. bring Gods Iudgements vpon them, would you not be∣leeue him? Doubtlesse he is a Iesuite, ergo, impeccable, or a Father of the Societie, and therfore to be beleeued, chiefe∣ly in ordine ad Deum. Or what if another of the same So∣cietie should bring you a booke of my Lord of Londons Legacy, (a Legacy without a Will; or a Will, but neuer prooued) how gladly would you reade and receiue, hugge and embrace it, as the words of a dying Saul, so lately, so miraculously conuerted to the Romane Faith? Yet Preston, that is said to be his conuerter, denieth it, & saith plainly in Peters word, but with more truth, I know not the man: his el∣dest son that was with him, & his Chaplains & seruants that were about him▪ know no such things. Let other mē coniec∣ture what they will of this rumour, if I might freely deliuer vnto you my conceite, this false report was hatched first in the Spanish Embassadours house, by him is was rumoured abroad beyond the Seas, and by him and his it was bruted here in England: I haue my reasons to thinke it and thinke it againe; for that about the same time, there was a booke
either going to the presse, or newly printed; wherein itThe bokes were sold right ouer against  lodgings. was auouched, that his most sacred and pious Maiestic, was deposed by the Puritantes: But I do but lightly passe ouer this, as beeing a matter of State, wherein it is not fit for Ministers to enterdeale, I willingly forbeare: But this story that followeth I cannot choose but relate it; it lyeth aspersions on the late King, scandalizeth the State, pardon my iust indignation, and true zeale, that prickes me for∣ward, and maketh me for the good of the Kingdome and State, to venture a chiding Thus then it is, there is one D. B.Vhndo y loy del Ry Iacobo contra la se Cathelica y aduer∣tentias al lector para laa veri guaciom e in∣telligenciad ste cas para el mism Ry y para todo Comuration dela Poluora Ay graues indicios. yes opini∣on may recebda un entre Prote∣stantes, que tam∣bien los auctores y trac, adores dest a Conturation, sucron delos, que entreui∣nieron en esto van∣dos, D. B. Cleremond . 4. Cleremond, that hath made bold, more bold then wise, to make a most lewde, and spightfull Commentarie vpon his Maiesties Lawes, and Proclamations against Recusants, vpon occasion of that about the powder raitours▪ hee is bold, not to deny the fact (for then he must haue renounced his eyes, or discredited the generall report that marched vn∣controuled through out all the world:) but hee doth as ba or rather worse, he saith he hath heard it from credible men, of good iudgement, as well Protestants as Papists, that this was but a trick of State, to lay it vpon the Romane Catholiques, when they that had a hand in the penning of the Proclamation, were the chiefe Auctours and contriuers of this Conspiracie, y que siue de sus acostumbrados ardides de estado para fundar (con color de iustitia) la persecution que querian reuouar: and that it was one of their old trickes of State, to lay a foundation of a persecution of the Ro∣mane Catholiques, that was intended shortly to follow after, and to shadow it vnder pretences of seeming iustice. Was the like spightfull man euer heard, to vomite and belch our these wordes, against our late King, & State, so dangerously vntrue, so deuilishly inuented, and vented abroad in diuers languages? And these wordes fell not from his penne by misaduenture; for in an other place of this infernall booke, being occasioned againe to speake of the powder Treason, though he grant that there were eight or six Knights, moreHuo les anns passados vua con vracion de seys o ocho caualleros mosos poco mas o menos los quales in duzidos como es fama por man∣nanade Algnos de los mismos Prote∣stantes quisierō co vno reindio vio∣lento del fuego material ataiar el incendio del fuego infernal, que tan∣tos annōs ha a∣brasada su patria. Pero sea como qui eren sus contrarios, y aun que la bo publica, y muchas y grauissimas affir∣man, que todo fue eniedo einuenei∣on de estado (como esta dicho) digamos que los mismos ex∣ecutores fueron los Auctores dela coniuration, D. B. Cleremon d. p. 63. or lesse, very boyes or youthes, that had a finger in the Powder Treason, being drawne into this hellish plot, by the cunning
perswasions of the Protestants themselues as the report geeth, this is the most that con be saide against them. But admit it be so as our Aduer saries would haue it: although (as I haue saide before) it is voyced publiquely by many, and those most graue and substantall persons to the contrary, that all was but apolitique inuention of the State, and a snare to intrap them silly sonles, whereby it may appeare, that those which should haue put this treason in execution, were the Authors and plot∣ters of it. Here are the same words twice repeated: note them well, and call to minde that if this Treason, which God did miraculously preuent and confound, had (quod ab sit) taken effect, it should haue beene bruted and rumored abroad, that this had bene the fact of the Puritants, to set the Puritants and the Protestants together by the eares, and whilst they had beene sheathing their swordes one in ano∣thers bowels, the Spaniards might haue come in and cut all their throates. Heere hence I draw a double obseruaaion, one of the wily Spaniard, who knowing that his Maiestie, and the State, was iustly incensed against the Puritants, cast all the enuie they can vpon them: the fall of the House in the black Friars, was vpon Puritants; the King was, or should haue bene deposed by the Puritants; the powder Treason should haue bene wrought and brought to passe by Protestant Puritants. The other obseruation is this, that there is no report so hellish, diuellish, or incredible; but a Romanist, or Hispaniolized Papist, will soone beleeue it if it bee told him in ordine ad Deum, or to make the King of Spaine their Master, Master of the Land, in whose pay as itBrittanniae populos quos Pater, s Re optums nequi∣uit summis opibus, et ingenti saepius instructa classe, Ca∣tholicae Reipublicae Imperiopotestati∣que subiicere: Tu sapientiae vnius pre sidio, Deoque ad∣iutore fretus demulces ac mitigas, Ep. praesixa. To. 2. Tu das diligentce operam—(ne Catholica si∣des in Belgio ac Britannia concidat) vt si qua pars est vspiam religionis verae prolapsa, testita et sic vbi forte iam dui iacuerat excitetur. Ib. were the most of them are already, as Villalpandus saith, congratulating the King of Spaine, for getting more ground of the English by a Treatie of peace, then his Father could doe by an open warre. But to draw this relation to an end, is there any true hearted Papist in this land, that hath but any sence of religion, or any droppe of English blood in his
body, or any thing of a man in him; that can indure these enormous, diuelish, and hellish opprobries and calumnies, that are cast vpon the King, State, and Religion? And in your vnpartiall iudgements, doth not the Auctour, the late reporter of the powder Treason, deserue to bee beaten all to powder, that neither searing God, nor men, dares report such insamous lies, that in a superlatiue degree of infamie, touch this State, and then cause the booke thus published, to bee translated into diuers languages. I know you canTraduzidos de La∣tin en varias Len∣guas por el D. B. de Cleremond not but thinke, that your vncatholike religion, doth suffer for these false reports: To come neerer to my purpose, you were best denie that there be any Indices expurgatorij, that searse medle with the marginall notes, muchlesse with the Text of your owne men? Or if it bee, it is but in praecept only, it is not in practise: but for purging and expurging the Fathers, God forbid that any thing should bee spoken of your Indices, it cannot be shewed, it cannot be proued: so say your ghostly Fathers, and so say you. But I say thatMadriti par Fr. Quiroga 158. 4. Index expurgatorius iussu Bern de Sando∣ual et Roias Arch. Tolet Madr. ct 1612. Index lib. expur∣gand. To. 1. per l. Mariam S Palatii. magistrum Romae 2601. Index lib Prohibi∣torum in regno Portugalliae man∣dato Geo. Dalmaad. Oly. 1581. Greg. Capuccini. Eu∣chiridion Ecclesiasti∣cum. Van. 1588. 8 c. 26. Blotheca SS. Pa∣trum. To. 1. Par. 1575. To. 8. et Par. 1589. To 9. Eadam ex prae∣scripto Indicis Ex∣purgatorii Roma ulgati To. 8. Par. 1609 et Col. Agr. 1618. et 1622. Eman. sa Aphrismi. Confssariorum. Col. 1609. et Par. 1600. each part and member of this accusation, shall bee iustified to your faces, to your shame. First, for your Indices, cease off for very shame to deny it, wee haue these many knowne. I haue seene the first of Antwerpe, that Iunius reprinted, three of Spaine, one of Portugal, another of Naples, and the first Tome of that which is the Master Index of all other of Rome. Margi∣nall notes and Annotations, you doe in a manner acknow∣ledge to be deseruedly put forth, and words in the text are shamefully corrupted by sundry Additions, subtractions, and wilfull commutations; sometimes in the reprinting of new bookes, but mostly by the penne. You haue no great care or appetite, to reprint any of those Auctours workes, that come vnder your diuelish censures: but if they be re∣printed, iuxta mandatum Inquisiciouis Hispanicae, or Ro∣manae, then make no doubt but they will keepe touch with you, vnlesse it be in France, where this kinde of Inqui∣sition was neuer yet fully receiued. See the later Editions of the probable Fathers, in I know not how many Tomes, Polydor Virgill of Rome print, Eman. Sa. and sundry other;
but if they faile in reprinting them, (they haue no greatNecessario che quelli a chié com∣messa tal curas' opponghino per zelo del signore par mantenimen della santa fed et de buoni costumi, et opportunamente vegghino a i disor∣dini che dela let∣tura diessi libri al sicuto nascarebbo∣no Fr. Maria Ind. Expug. Roma. To. 1. 1604. Per tanto si com∣mette espressa∣meute, à tutti i Li∣bran di Roma et ad ogni altro diche conditione esser so voglia, che ha∣uendo nelle loro Boteghe è fludio alcuno de' sudetti libri, debba subito consegnarli al no∣stro officio, auuer∣ten doli, che oltre lagrauissmia offesa∣che saranno à Dio contra facendo, et oltre le censure ec∣clesiastiche, nello queh incorrerano s auuerà anco he venghino à notitia nostra si castige∣ranno seueramente▪ conforme alle pe∣ne' miraceiate nei sacri Canoni. nelle regole dell Indice. et ne i nostri Editti altre volte publi cati in mater a de libri. Fr. Io. maria B. asichellens. S. Palatii Apestotici Mag. manu propria. a Di∣dat. Stella in Evang. Lucam. To 1. esta corregido y emendad conforme al Expurgatorio dela santa Inquisiti∣on della Compania de Iesu de Cadiz. Melchiur do Gadea is purged and hath som sheets pasted. b G. Budae 1. operum. To. 2. lib de Asse et partilus eius. Bas. 1557 is throughly purged and remaineth in the publique view of all men in the Publique Librari, with some whole sheetes pasted together Vi este libro por mandado de los sennores Inquisidores de Seuill—conforme al Catalogo Expurga∣torio general, y ansi se. puede teuer y leer. Sept. 1585 Fray. Chrisioual Debuero. c Master Med∣kirch our Professur of Hebrew hath Car. Molinaeus . Commerciorum  suararum in his hands that possed the censure of Ia. Pamelius. subscribed thus, Expurgauit ad prescriprum libri Expurgatorii. Iac. Pali. anno. 1555. Par. Inter caetera subit malam fortunam Bibliotheca non vulgaris, quae mihi inpretio, et deliciis: cum illa siunl lucubrationes et vigiliae longi temporis, quas dum solicitus conor pecunia redmere, nusquam repertus raptor incertum incendione an easu aliquo perierint, mihi non dubi∣um periisse Ferd. Martin Mascaehas te de anxili diu gratia Lud. 1605. stomake to it as I haue told you) yet they faile not with the penne, to blot out all the places, that are to bee expunged; and let me see the proudest Scholler amongst you all, that dares keepe a booke vnpurged by them, it is a kinde of Praemunire, losse of bookes, and finable, if it amount not to perpetuall imprisonment. This is plainly manifested both out of the paine contained in the Indices, and out of the bookes themselues that come vnto vs by diuine proui∣dence; especially from the Colledge of Cadiz. After this manner Did. Stella, Io. Ferus, Guil. Budaeus, remaine to this day in the publique Library, some whole leaues pasted to∣gether, the sentences blotted, and the bookes tormented in a pittifull manner, that it would grieue any mans heart to see them; and this was done by publique Authority, according to the prescript forme of your Expurgatorie Indices, the Inquisitors name is either fore scribed, or subscribed, to euery booke. It were a world to see Krantzius, and Auen∣tine, as they come out of their hands. There are some a priuate persons in Oxford, that haue bookes in like sort expunged and sigued with the Inquisitors hands. What might the number bee of all those thinke wee, that came out of that Colledge? It is no maruell then if Massarena the Bishop, or any other, offered such large summes, for to haue had the bookes againe; they feared belike, that their knauery would come forth, and the mystery bee vnfolded of this worke of darkenesse, which since that time hath lyen
no more secret in corners; but is now knowne, to the body of all Christendome, and herehence by sight of your bookes thus scored or printed: occasion is giuen to theA. C. In his proface answering a Treatise intituted, Tho Fi∣sher caught in his owne net. wiser sort of Papists, to thinke it must needes bee a weake and bad cause, that needeth to be supported by weake and bad shifts. But the last obiection of all is, that the Fathers are not purged, no text of the Fathers in any Index, is purged or expunged: say ye so, what say ye to Saint Cyrill, Eucherius Intextu deleatur: the like may bee said of Greg. Nyssene.Cyrill. Par 1573. p. 172. iu fine. lib. 1. c. .  sextu dleetu fidei aut gratiam .  Echer Bs 1531. lib. 1.  Gen . 8  10 Iuilis, In T vbi logitur imago dei anima peccatrix esse de sinit Legendum es Anima peccatrix esse non desinit. In lib. Aut Nyssens e∣am vero solūmodo naturam, quae in∣creata est colere et venerari didicimus Bb. Pp. Par. 1575 Ise. 1. S. 1. Chrys. Serm 16. euis∣dem Ib. Col. 103. Saint Iohn Chrysostome, Agapetus, and diuers others, either in their owne workes, or in other mens workes, of great Antiquitie purged, and repurged, and expurged againe. What your purpose is, I know not, I do easyly imagine that it is to no great good of our religion, that you haue fiue times at the least printed seuerall Editions of the Bibliothe∣ca Sanctorum Patrum: first printed by Bigne, and lately at Coleyne with additions of I know not how many volumes, with Iesuiticall notes and Annotations, in Greeke and La∣tine; and so much for this ninth obseruation, which I haue the rather insisted vpon so long, because it containeth the marrow and pith of all the rest. 10. These men that beare witnesse for vs, are no meane Fellowes, abiect Writers, or contemptible persons; but the glory of those dayes, the honour of those times, the great Lampes and Ornaments of their Romish Church, some of them Inquisitors, but grone now vnder the Inqui∣sition themselues; quis enim custodiat ipsos custodes: but as I haue elsewhere (and may hereafter more fully) shewed, there is no more certaintie in their censures, then there is as∣surednesse in their religion, which is iust none at all. But briefely and orderly, that you may know of what great ac∣count they were, at the latter end of this booke, you shall perhaps haue an Alphabeticall Table, that out of their own censures, shall demonstrate this point to the full. Lastly, you see by these Indices, if flesh and blood might haue preuailed, by the secret operation of the Deuill, how
the Pontificians would haue taken from vs, and the World, so many testimonies of Fathers, middle aged Writers, and of all sorts, all at one time, and as it were, blowne them vp like Faxes in the Vaught: but that God is mightier then men, the truth then lyes; by this one act of theirs, and that a diuelish one. But God hath blowne, as it were, the Pow∣der into their owne faces, filling them with shame and confusion, laying their nakednesse open to the eye of the World, insomuch, that all wel-minded men doe either hisse, or laugh at it; seeing our Religion reasonably well confirmed and established by their owne men. What pit∣tie had it been, that so many Noble Writers, and worthy Authors should haue perished from vs and them. And thereby any man of the meanest capacitie may thence draw forth this conclusion, that God had his Church in the middest of Poperie, and speciall men, that in euery age did reclaime and declaime against their foule abuses, both in doctrine and life. These are the knees that neuer bowed to Baal, the men that truly serued God (though it were in secret) which if they had been free to speake their minds, and their minds had been fully knowne to vs, they would most willingly haue imbraced our Religion, and made a greater reformation, then that of Luthers, and that of the Princes of Germanie, which was by the secret IudgementHildegardis. of God, to be performed in ore gladij cruentati, as was long prophecied before. I close vp all with this admonition, that all the materiall places by me cited, and by them expunged or expurged, carry this note † of the Crosse before them, to shew, that the Authors endured the Crosse for Christ, and were persecuted for righteousnesse sake. Concerning the Manuscript Copies by me cited, they are after proofes, and not many, hauing the figure of a hand ☞ to direct you. Rome was not built vpon a day. I haue cited but a few, and those for the most part neglected and trod vnder foote: they are all of them almost innomi∣nable bookes, but not feigned by me, but written and vr∣ged many yeares agoe, the character and letter will best
shew the time, and some circumstances may hereafter bet∣ter discouer vnto vs the Authors: but be they who they will, in many points of doctrine, they are wholly ours. By that time we haue gone ouer all the vnprinted Manuscript Copies in both Vniuersities, the famous Librarie of Sir Ro∣bert Cotton, and other priuate Libraries, is there not great hope of much good to bee done for the publike benefit of the Church? If I had but halfe a dozen of such as I know, that are both willing and able: for pittie let not the Iesuite vpbraide vs any longer with his Nemo eos conduxit, forPoss. in Appar. to. 1. want of due incouragement and imployment in this sacred and weightie businesse. Some such matter hath been mo∣tioned in Conuocation: Oh, let it not be said, as it was once spoken of of our Conuocations and Congregations here in Oxford, that they were cause of much euill, because they were inutiles sine fructu, I complaine not for my selfe, IQuin igitur accedis quod tot Angli summa um laude faciunt. Possenius Ib. thanke God, I haue somewhat to liue on, and to pay euery man his owne: but there is somewhat else to be done, vn∣lesse I would bee an Infidell, and deny the Faith of the Church of England, notwithstanding all their flatteries and false promises. I haue gotten those small Benefices, that the late Lord Bishop of Canterbury, and this present, with my Lord of Bath and Wels, euer to be remembred by me with all thankefulnesse, freely, and without sute or seeking with∣out gift or reward, without cure of soules, or charge of men. Let any Priest or Iesuite beyond the Sea, shew mee, that their Abbots and Bishops haue done the like, so free∣ly, so vnasked, and I will resigne these vp vnto them, which I am not minded yet to doe as my Predecessor did, shew∣ingDoctor Ascanius my Predecesour in Mon∣geham in Kent. Thus haue they an∣swered my Bellum Papale, and Ecloga; but omitted to say any thing of my book of Corruptions, Wicklifes confor∣mitie, downefall of the Iesuite. one Italian tricke for our learning. And thus taking my leaue, I rest yours in the Lord, wishing the Aduersaries to answere this booke (if they haue a mind to it)  not by snatches and catches, as some haue done, but punctu∣ally and throughly auoyding personall calumniations, and truly quoting their authorities in the beginning or end of their bookes.
HERE FOLLOWETH A PROFESSION OF THE Catholike Faith, set out accor∣ding to the Decree of the Councell of Trent. I.N. doth with a steadfast faith beleeue and professe all andPrinted at the end of Lawes de Grena∣does spirituall Do∣ctrine, translated by Rich. Gibbon, Lon. 1599. p. 393. euery point, contained in the Symbole of the Faith, that the holy Romane Church doth vse; to wit, to beleeue in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heauen and Earth; of all things visible and inuisible: And in one Lord Iesus Christ, the onelyThis booke I got into my hands as a speciall Secret of theirs, not without much adoe; and if this, had bin administred onely to Graduates, it might in some sort haue been indured: but to administer the same to Lay and vnlettered Pa∣pists being so dan∣gerous, and leane contrary to the Kings Supremacy, I know not how it can be defended. Againe, of the points pressed in the Oath, some are crved downe by all, as Indulgences, some denied by al∣most all, as adorati∣on of Images: some doubted of by their best learned, as Purgatorie: some held with a distinction, as that of the seuen Sacraments: and yet the simple Papists must sweare to them all, and that no man can be saued without holding them all. begotten Sonne of God, and borne of the Father before all Worlds; God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God; begotten, not made, of the same substance with the Father, by whom all things were made; who, for vs Men, and for our saluation, came downe from Heauen, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Ʋirgin Marie, and was made Man: was crucified for vs vnder Pontius Pilate; suffered, and was buri∣ed; and rose againe the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended vp into Heauen; sitteth at the right hand of the Father; and he shall come againe with glory, to iudge both the Liue and the Dead; of whose Kingdome there shall bee no end. And in the holy Ghost, our Lord and giuer of life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne; who with the Fa∣ther and the Sonne, is together adored and conglorified, who spake by the Prophets: And one holy Catholique and Apo∣stolike Church. I confesse one Baptisme for the remission of
sinnes; and I expect the resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come. Amen. I doe most stedfastly admit and embrace the Traditions of the Apostles, and of the Church, and all other obseruances and Constitutions of the same Church. I doe likewise admit the holy Scripture, according to that sense, which our holy Mo∣ther the Catholike Church hath holden, and doth hold, vnto whom it doth appertaine to iudge of the true sense, and inter∣pretation of the holy Scriptures; neither will I euer vnder∣stand, nor interpret the same otherwise, then according to the vniforme consent of the Fathers. I doe also professe, that there be truly and properly seuen Sacraments of the new Law, instituted by Iesus Christ our Lord, and necessarie for the saluation of Mankind (although they be not necessarie for all men,) to wit, Baptisme, Confir∣mation, Euchariste, Penance, Extreme Ʋnction, Order, and Matrimony; and that these Sacraments doe giue Grece; and that of them, Baptisme, Confirmation, and Order, cannot bee reiterated without Sacriledge. I doe also receiue, and admit all the receiued and approoued Ceremonies of the Catholike Church, in the solemne administration of all the aforesaid Sa∣craments. I doe embrace and receiue all, and euery of those things, which in the holy Councell of Trent haue been defined, and declared, touching Originall sinne and Iustification. I doe professe also, that in the Masse is offered vnto God, a true, pro∣per, and propitiatorie Sacrifice for the Liue and Dead; and that in the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, there is truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood, together with the Soule and Diuinitie of our Lord Iesus Christ; and that there is made a Conuersion of the whole substance of Wine into the Blood; which Conuersion, the Catholique Church doth call Transubstantiation. I doe also confesse, that vnder either kind onely, is receiued Christ, whole, intire, and the true Sacra∣ment. I doe constantly hold, that there is Purgatorie; and that the soules which be there detained, are holpen by their Prayers of the faithfull. Also, that the Saints, who reigne together
with Christ, are to bee worshipped, and called vpon, and that they offer vp prayers to God for vs, and that their Reliques are to be worshipped. I doe most stedfastly affirme, that the Images of Christ, of the Mother of God alwaies Virgin, and of other Saints, are to bee had and receiued, and that due ho∣nour and reuerence is to be giuen to them. I doe affirme, that the authority of Indulgences, was left by Christ in the Church, and that the vse of them is very behoofefull for Christian peo∣ple. I doe acknowledge the holy Catholique and Apostolique Romane Church, to be the Mother and Mistresse of all Chur∣ches, and doe promise and sweare true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, who is the Successour of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, and the Ʋicar of Iesus Christ. All other things de∣fined and declared by the holy Canons and Oecumenical Coun∣cels, and chiefly by the holy Councell of Trent, I do vndoubt∣edly receiue and professe. And also all contrary things, and whatsoeuer heresies condemned, reiected, and accursed by the Church, I likewise doe condemne, reiect and accurse. This true Catholique Faith, without which no man can be saued, which now I doe willingly professe and hold, I the same I. N. doe promise, vow, and sweare to hold, and confesse most constantly, by Gods helpe, intire, and vncorrupted, euen to the last end of my life; and to procure, as much as shall lye in me, that my subiects, or those of whom I shall haue care in my office, shall accordingly teach, and preach the same: So God me helpe, and these holy Gospels of God.
A Table of the Manuscript bookes vrged in this Booke. BOston of Burie, his Alphabeticall Catalogue of Manuscript bookes, gathered out of 195. seue∣rall places, lent me by the most Reuerend, my Lord of Armagh. MS. Basil, the first Volume of the Acts and Sermons of the Councell of Basil, now in Ballioll Colledge in Pa∣per. MS. Bas. 2. The second Volume also in Paper, that were sometimes bookes belonging to Durham Colledge in Gascoignes time. MS. Bacon. Rogeri Bacon operis minoris pars tertia. MS. in the Archiues of the publike Librarie, A. 68. Lincoln. MS. Epistolae Rob. Grostheadi, Lincoln. Episcopi. MS. G. 8. 8. Phil. Repingdon, MS. Sermones eiusdem. MS. in Biblio∣theca Coll. Lincoln. Tho. de Bracley Sermones MS. 30. MS. *. MS. 43. MS. 21. MS. 0. MS. 29. MS. 9. MS. 38. MS. 51. MS. 7. All these fore-recited bookes were lent me very cour∣teously by Master Hen. Parry, Batchelor of Diuinitie of C. C. C. in Oxford; they were in sight and shew very neg∣lected bookes, rusty, dusty, and sometimes vncouered and torne: but they yeeld many good obseruations, as you may find in the booke it selfe: they are namelesse almost all of them, but not worthlesse, and vnpossible to be coun∣terfeited by vs, being written many hundred of yeares be∣fore our times, as the writing shewes, and are all giuen to the Publike Librarie, and are there to be read of all men. MS. Ignatius, a Manuscript Ignatius in Latine of great Antiquitie in Ballioll Colledge in Oxford.
MS. Dunelm. de visione Bosonis, extant in Master Heggs hands, Master of Arts of C. C. C. Tho. Gascoigne Dictionarium Theologicum in two Vo∣lumes Manuscript in Lincolne Colledge in Oxford. Extracts out of the Tower, fairely and largely transcri∣bed by the industrie and care of Master Noye of Lincolnes Inne, a great Antiquarie of the Law. MS. Registrum MS. A Register of Acts and Epistles in the hands of Master Thomas French, Register to the Vniuersi∣tie. MS. A. A Manuscript in Magdalen Colledge in Ox∣ford, wherein are contained diuers peeces of Antiquity: the booke came from the Monasterie of S. Marie-ouereis, to Master Iohn Fox, the Writer of the Booke of Martyrs, and by his sonne was giuen, with diuers other good Manu∣scripts, to the same Colledge. MS. C. Another Manuscript Chronicle in Magdalen Colledge. Ran. Higden Polychronicon Manuscript in Ballioll Col∣ledge, the largest and fairest Copy that I haue seene amongst many. Guide S. Amore contrafratres mendicantes, otiosos, curio∣sos, & Gyrovagos. Manuscript in the Publike Librarie. Gregorij M. Epistolae. Manuscript in All-soules Librarie. Two Missals Manuscripts in the Archiues of excellent workmanship. Aegidius de Faeno MS. a small Treatise, contrafratres flagellantes, in Balliol Colledge. A Statute booke of the Vniuersitie. MS. Hugo de Folio de 12. abusionibus Claustri, Manuscript in the Publike Li∣brarie.
An Alphabeticall note of the Prin∣ted Bookes, with their seuerall Editi∣ons, as they are here cited. A PAErodij Pandectae. Par. 1589. Agapetus Diaconus. Bb. Pp. to. 2. Anonynus in Io. Bas. 1522. Ludouico Ariosto. Orlando furioso. Ven. 1443. & Ven. 1555. Io. Auentini Annales Boiorum. Bas. 1580. S. Aug. religion by Iohn Brerely. 1620. B BIbliotheca Sanctorum Eccl. Patrum per Marg. de la Bi∣gne. Par. 1589. Henr. Broulaeus de militia politica duplici. Bas. 1545. C AMbros. Calepini dictionarium. Ludg. 1562. Georg. Cedreni Annales apud Zuingerum. Index in Chrysostomum. Bas. 1558. Chronicon de diuersis Chronicis Germ. Script. to. 1. Chronicon Cytizense. Ib. P. Cieza rerum Indicarum apud Zuingerum. Isid. Clarij Biblia. Ven. 1564. Nic. Cleonardi Epistolae. Ant. 1566. Concilium Coloniense, vel Enchiridion Christianae instituti∣onis in Concilio Coloniensi. Veronae. 1541. P. Crinitus de honesta disciplina. Lugd. 1543. Ioachimus Curaeus apud. Zuingerum. Io. Cuspiniani Austra. Bas. 1553. It. Imperatorum & Caesarum vitae. 1540.
Cyprianus Monachus Cisterciensis in Iob. Compluti. 1582. Cyrilli Alexandrini opera cum notis. Par. 1605. & Par. 1573. D PEtrus Damianus Bb. Pp. to. 3. Ant. de Dominis libri de Republica Ecclesiastici & contra Suarem. Fr. Duarenus de Sacris Ecclesiae Ministerij. Lugd. 1579. E. EAdmerus in vita Anselmi. Bapt. Egnatius apud Zuingerum. Engelbertus Abbas Admontensis, de ortu & fine Romani Imperij. Osserib. 1610. Erasmi opera. Bas. 1540. Claud. Espencaeu Commentarij in Titum. Bar. 1569. Nic. Eymerici Directorium Inquisitorum cum Com. Fr. Pegnae Romae. 1578. F. IAc. Faber in lib. Numerorum. It. in Euangelia. Neldis. 1522. It. in Epistolas Pauli. Par. 1531. Io. Ferus in Mathaeum. Mog. 1559. Io. Ferus in Ioannem. I on. 1559. Bapt. Fulgosius apud Zuingerum. G. GElasius, to. 4. Bibliot. Pp. Germanicarum rerum Scriptorum, to 1. secundus & tertius. Gregorius in apud Zuingerum. Gratianus in Iure Canonico. Claud. Guilliaudus in Epistolas. Lugd. 1543. Guntherus seu potius Iac. Spiegelius in Guntherum erm. Script. to. 2.
Lilij Gregorij Gyraldi opera, Bas. 1580. Loci duo à Fr. Guicciardino dolo malo subracti 8. S. 39. H. HEdionis Chronicon apud Zuingerum. Desiderii Heraldi Annot. in Arnobium. Par. 1605. Erasmi scholia in Hieronymum. Bas. 1526. Hilarius cum Annotationibus Erasmi. Ba. 1535. I. IGnatius Bibliotheca Patrum, to. 3. Paulus Iouius apud Zuingerum. Iulius Toletanus, Bb. Pp. to. 9. Iuuilius de Partibus diuinae legis. Bb. Pp. K. ALberti Krantzij Metropolis. Fr. 1590. It. Saxonia. Fr. 1580. It. Wandalia. lb. It. Regionum Aquilonarium Chron. Fr. 1573. It. Dania. Fr. 1575. L. IO. Langij Scholia in Nicephorum. Bas. 1560. Laeuinus Lemnius de occultis naturae oraculis. Gand. 1571. Leontius Aduocatus. Bb. Pp. to. 4. Iusti Lipsij Politicorum libri. 1604. Luithprandus apud Zuingerum. Iosepho Luquian Erudicion Christiana. Carag. 1594. My Lord of Londons supposed Legacy, permissu superio∣rum. 1624. Amati Lusitani centuriae medicinales. Bas. 1556. M. ANt. Magni melissae. Bb. Pp. to. 1. Io. Marianae Tractatus septem. Col. Agrip. 1609.
Andr. Masius in Iosue. Ant. 1609. Geo. Marulus apud Zuingerum. Christ. Massaei Chronicon. Ant. 1540. Papyrius Massonius in Abogardum. Par. 1605. Arias Montanus de Generatione & Regeneratione Adam. Ant. 1593. It. in Mathaeum & Lucam. Ant. 1575. It. in Epistolas F. Petri. Ant. 1588. N. IO. Neuizani Sylua Nuptialis. Lugd. 1545. Greg. Nyssenus. Bb. Pp. to. 1. O. ODo. Bb. Pp. to. 6. Hier. ab Oleastro Com. in Pentateuchū. Olyssip. 1556. P. SAntis Pagnini Thesaurus linguae sanctae. Lugd. 1577. Panormitanus, de Gestis Alphonsi Regis apud Zuing. Claudij Paradini Symbola Heroica. Ant. 1568. Fr. Petrarchae le cose volgare. 1571. B. Platina apud Zuingerum. Io. Poggius apud Zuingerum. Fr. Polygrani assertiones quorundam Ecclesiae dogniatum. Col. 1571. R. PEtri Rebuffi Tr. Concordatorum. Lugd. 1576. B. Rhenanus in Tertullianum. Com. 1608. Em. Rodorici quaestiones Regulares & Canonicae. Sal. 1604. Val. Anselmi Rydd. Catalogus Annorum & Principum Bernae 1540. S. IVl. Caesar Scaliger in Theophrastum, 1598. Iac. Schoepperi Conciones. Par. 1556. Dimas Serpi Fr. del Purgatorio. Barc. 1604. Laur. Schraderi Monum. Italiae. Helmst. 1592.
Sigebertus Bb. Pp. to. 7. Ric: Smiths booke of the visibilitie of the Church. Rayn. Snoygoudanus in Psalterium, Par. 1549. Io. Spondanus in Homerum. Aur. 1606. Squarzialufus apud Zuingerum. Did. Stella in Lucam. Sal. 1575. Io. Stellae vitae 230. Pontificum. Bas. 10. Henr. Stephanus in Psalmos. Lat. 154. Aug. Steuchi Cosmopoeia. Par. 1578. T. THeodoretus apud Zuingerum. Thostati Abulensis opera ex Editione perantiqua. Aug. Thuani Hist. Par. 1606. The Historie of the Councell of Trent by P. Soaue, Trithenius apud Zuingerum. Tuccius Tuccius in Cant. Canticorum. Lugd. 1606. V. LAur. Valla in Ep. ad Corinthios. Bas. 1595. Fr. Ʋatabli Biblia cum duplici Translatione & scho∣lijs. Lut. 1545. Dan. Venatorij Analysis Iuris methodica. Mg. 1579. Georgij Veneti Problemata. Ven. 1574. Victor▪ Antiochenus. Bb. Pp. Polyd. Ʋirg. de Inuentione rerum. Bas. 1545. P. Virgilij opera cum Com. Pontani. Hug. 1600. Lud. Viues in Aug. de Ciuitate. Dei inter opera Erasmi. Bas. 1529. Hier. Pradi & Io. Baptistae Villalandi in Ezech. to. 3. Ro∣mae. W. 1604. Geo. Wicelij Quadrag fimales Conciones, Par. 1565. It. Methodus Ecclesia icae Concordiae apud Nic-Wolrab. cum gratia & Priuilegio. 1533. Z. Io, Zuingeri Theatrum vitae humanae. 4. Vol. FINIS.
