17353 99845461 10363
THE ENGLISH HOVSE-VVIFE. CONTAINING The inward and outward Vertues which ought to be in a compleate Woman. As her skill in Physicke, Surgery, Cookery, Extraction of Oyles, Banqueting stuffe, Ordering of great Feasts, Preseruing of all sorts of Wines, Concei∣ted Secrets, Distillations, Perfumes, ordering of Wooll, Hempe, Flax, making Cloth, and Dying, the know∣ledge of Dayries, office of Malting, of Oates, their excellent vses in a Family, of Brew∣ing, Baking, and all other things belonging to an Houshold. A Worke generally approued, and now the fourth time much augmented, purged and made most profitable and necessary for all men, and the generall good of this Kingdome. By G. M. LONDON. Printed by Nicholas Okes for IOHN HARISON, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the golden Vnicorne in Pater-noster-row. 1631.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND MOST EXCELLENT Ladie, FRANCES. Countesse Dowager of Exceter. HOwsoeuer (Right Honourable and most vertuous Ladie) this Booke may come to your Noble Goodnesse clo∣thed in an old Name or Garment, yet doubtlesse (excellent Madam) it is full of many new vertues which will euer admire & serue you; and though it can adde nothing to your owne rare and vnaparalleld knowledge, yet may it to those Noble good ones (which will endeauour any small sparke of your imita∣tion) bring such a light, as may make them shine with a great deale of charity. I doe not assume to my selfe (though I am not altogether ignorant in abilitie to iudge of these things) the full inuention and scope of this whole worke: for it is true (great Ladie) that much of it was a Manuscript which many yeeres agon belonged to an Honourable Countesse, one of the greatest Glo∣ries of our Kingdome, and were the opinions of the
greatest Physitions which then liued; which being now approued by one not inferiour to any of that Profession I was the rather imboldned to send it to your blessed, hand, knowing you to be a Mistresse so full of honorable piety and goodnes, that although this imperfit offer may come vnto you weake and disable, yet your Noble ver∣tue will support it, and make it so strong in the world, that I doubt not but it shall doe seruice to all those which will serue you, whilest my selfe and my poore prayers shall to my last gaspe labour to attend you. The true admirer of your Noble Vertues, GERVASE MARKHAM.
The Table. CHAP. 1. THe inward vertues of the House-wife. pag. 2 Her garments. pag. 4 Her dyet and generall ver∣tues. pag. 4 Feauers and their kindes. pag. 5.51.6. To make one sweae. pag. 8.11 A preseruatiue against the plague. pag▪ 9 A Cordiall against infecti∣on. pag. 11 To draw a plague-botch to a¦ny place. pag. 11 For the head-ache. pag. 11.16.17 For the Frenzie. pag. 12 For the lethargie. pag. 12 To prouoke Sleepe pag. 12.37 For the swimming of the head. pag. 12 For the Palsey. pag. 13 For all colds and coughes. pag. 12.22 For the Falling-sicknes. p. 14 To helpe hearing. p. 14.17 Xor the Rhume. pag. 14.21 15.19 For stinking breath. pag. 14. For the tooth-ake. pag. 14.1 For all sore eyes. p. 16 .1 For a Canker. p 16.19.0 For swellng in the mouth. pag. 16 For the Qsey or Sqna∣cie. pag 17.18 For drunkennesse. pag. 17 To quicken wit. pag▪ 17 For the Kings-euill. pag. 17 To staunch bloud. pag. 27.28.52.26 27 To draw out bones. pag. 18 For the falling of the moud of the head. pag. 18 To make teeth white, &c. pag. 18 For any venome in the eare. pag 19 For stinking nostrills. p 19 To make haire growe. p 21.41 For a Saucie face. pag. 21 For hoarsnes in the throate pag. 22 For the Tyssicke. pag. 22 For griefe in the Stomacke. pag. 22
For spitting blood. pag. 23 For vomiting. pag. 23 For the Illica. passio. p. 23.24 ☞ Aditions to the diseases of the stomacke. pag. 24 For paine in the brest. p. 24 For the mother. pag. 24 Obstructions in the liuer. pag. 24.25 For the Plurisie. pag▪ 25 For a stitch. pag. 25.28 For any Consumption. p. 25 ☞ For the Iaundise. pag. 26, 27 Edtions to the diseases of the liuer. pag. 27 For a ring-worme. pag. 27 For the dropsie. pag. 28 For the spleene. pag. 28.29 For pane in the side. pag. 28 For fatnesse & short breath. ☞ pag. 28 Aditions to the diseases of the spleena. pag. 29 Eor the diseases of the heart. pag. 29 For the wind hollicke. pag. 29..32 34 For a laske. 30.32.56 For the bloody-slixe. pap. 30 31.32.56 For Costiuenesse. pag. 31.32 ☞ For wormes. pag. 31 Aditions to the diseases in the belly. pag. 32 Hardnesse of the belly. p. 32 For the stopping of the wombe. pag. 32 For the rupture. pag. 33.36 For the stone. pag. 33.35 To helpe vrine. pag. 36.37 For the strangullion. pag. 36 Aditions to the diseases of the reines. ☜ pag. 37 For the gonorda. pag. 37 For weakenes in the back. 37 For the hemoroids. pag. 37 For the falling of the fun∣dament. pag. 38 Aditions to the diseases of the priuie parts. ☜ pag. 38 For the greene sicknes. p. 38 To increase womans milke. pag. 39.40 To dry vp milke. pag. 39 For ease in child-bearing. 39 For the dead child. pag. 40 For aptnes to conceiue. p. 40 Aditions to womans infir∣mities. ☜ pag. 40 For the flowers. pag. 40 For the matrixe. pag. 40 For sore breasts. pag. 39.41 For woemen in child-bed. pag. 40.41 For the Mopphew. p. 41 For the Goute. pag. 41
For the Ctattica. pag. 42 For the stinging of veno∣mous beasts. pag. 42.49 For swelld leggs. pag. 42 For old and new sores. pag. 43.45.47.48.51.52 For scabs and itch. pag. 43.49 50 For the Leprosie. pag. 44 For pimples. pag. 44 Prime parts burnt. pag. 44 For any burning. p. 44.46.47 For scalding. pag. 44 To eate away dead flesh. pag. 45.47 For sinewes cut or shrunke· 45.52 To breake an impostume. pag. 46.49 For a ring-worme. pag. 49 To take away Scarres of the Small-poxe. pag. 50 For the French-poxe. pag. 50.51 ☞ Additions to greene wounds. pag. 51.52.53 For pricking with a thorne. pag. 53 ☞Additions for atch and swelllings. pag. 53.54 For paine in ioynts. pag. 54 ☞Additions to griefe in the bones. pag. 44.55 A bath to cleare the skin. 55 The oyle of swallowes. pag. 57 Oyle of Camomile. pag. 57 Oyle of Lauendar. pag. 58 To make smooth hands. p. 58 To make Dr. STEVENS wa∣ter. pag. 58 To make rosasolis. pag. 59 ☞Aditions to oyles. pag. 60 To make oyle of Roses or Violets. pag 60 Oyle of Nutmegs. pag. 60 Oyle of Spike. pag. 61 Oyle of Masticke. pag. 61 CHAP. 2. THe outward and actiue knowledge of the hous∣wife. pag. 62 Knowledge of hearbs. pag. 62 Skill in gardens. pag. 63 Skill in cookerie. pag. 65 Of sallets simple & cmpoun pag. 65.66.67.68.69 Of fraises of all kinds. pag· 69.70.71.72.73 Of Quelquichoses. pag. 73 ☞ Additions to Cookery. p. 74 Puddings of all kinds. pag. 74.75.79.77
Boyld meates of all kinds. pag. 78.79.80.81.82 83.84.85 The Ooleopothrigo. p. 81 ☞Additions to boyld-meats. pag. 05.86.87 Roast-meates of all kindes. pag. 88.90.91.92.93.94.95.96 Obseruations in Roast-meats. pag. 88 Spitting of meats. pag. 88 Temperature of fire. p. 88 Complexion of meats. p. 89 Basting of meats. pag. 89 To know when meats are e∣nough. pag. 89 Ordering of meats to be roa¦sted. pag. 95 Sauces of all kinds. p. 96.97 68.99 ☞ Additions to Sauces. p. 99.100 Of Carbonados. p. 100.101 ☞Additions to Carbonados. pag. 102 Dressing of fish. p. 102.103.104 Of the pasterie and bakt-meats. p. 104.106.107.108.109 Mixture of pastes. pag. 105 Of puffe-paste. p. 105 ☞ Additions to the pastery. p. 109.110.111.112.113.114.115.121 To recouer Venison taynted. pag. 113 To preserue Quinces to bake. pag. 115 Of Tarts. pag. 116.117.118.119, 120.121 Of white-pott. pag. 122 Of Banqueting stuffe of all kinds. p. 122.123.124.125.126 127.128.129.130.131 Of diuers waters. p. 127.128 To make any Conserue. p. 131 To make waffers. pag. 131 ☞ Additions to Banque∣ting-stuffe. p. 132.123.124.135 To make Ipocras. pag. 133 To Candy any thing. p. 136 Ordering of banquets. p. 136 Ordering of great Feasts. pag. 137 CHAP. 3. OF distillations & their vertues, from p. 140. to 147 The vertues of seuerall wa∣ters. 147.148.149 Of perfuming. pag. 149.150
151.154. To make Pomanders. p. 151 To make vinegar. pag. 151.152.154 To make vhuyce. p. 152 ☞ Additions to conceited secrets. pag. 152 153 To perfume Gloues. pag. 154 CHAP. 4. The ordering, preseruing, and helping of all sorts of Wines. p. 155.156.157. &c. to 162.165 166 Of Gaging. p. 162.163.164. To chuse Wines. pag. 164. CHAP. 5. Of Wooll, Hempe, Flaxe, Cloth and dying of all Colours from pag. 167 190 CHAP. 6. OF dairies, butter, cheese, &c. from pag. 190. to 206 CHAP. 7. THe office of the Maltster, the secrets and know∣ledge thereof, from p. 207 to 236 CHAP. 8. THe excellency of Oates, the vertues and vses thereof. from pag. 236. to 243
CHAP. 9. The office of the Brew-house and the Bake-house, and their vses, from p. 243. to the end. To make Perry and Cider. pag. 238
The approoued Booke, Called the English Hous-wife. Contayning all the Vertuous knowledges and actions both of minde and body, which ought to be in any compleate Houswife, of what degree or calling soeuer. Booke 2. CHAP. 1. Of the inward vertues of the minde, which ought to be in euery House-wife. And first of her general Knowledges both in Phisicke and Surgery, with plaine appro∣ued medicines for health of the House-hold, also the extraction of excellent Oyles fit for those purposes. HAuing already in a summary briefnesse passed through those outward parts of Husbandrye which belong vnto the perfect Husbandman, who is the Father and Maister of the Family, and whose office and imployments are euer for the most part abrod, or remoued from the house, as in the field or yard: It is now meete that we descend in as orderly a Method as we can, to the office of our Eng∣lish
Hous-wife, who is the mother and Mistris of the fa∣mily, and hath her most generall imployments within the house; where from the genrall example of her ver∣tues, and the most approued skill of her knowledges, those of her family may both learne to serue God and sustaine man in that godly and profitable sort which is required of euery true Christian. First then to speake of the inward vertues of her mind; she ought, aboue all things, to be of an vpright and sin∣cere religion,A Hous-wife must be religi∣ous. and in the same both zealous and constant; giuing by her example, an incitement and spure vnto al her family to persue the same steppes, and to vtter forth by the instruction of her life, those vertuous fruits of good liuing, which shall be pleasing both to God and his creatures; I doe not meane that herein she should vtter forth that violence of spirit which many of our (vainely accounted pure) women doe, drawing a con∣tempt vpon the ordinary Ministery, & thinking nothing lawfull but the fantazies of their owne inuentions, vsur∣ping to themselues a power of preaching & interpreting the holy word, to which only they ought to be but hea∣rers and beleeuers, or at the most but modest perswa∣ders, this is not the office either of good Hous-wife or good woman. But let our English Hus-wife be a godly, constant, and religious woman, learning from the wor∣thy Preacher and her husband, those good examples which she shall with all carefull diligence see exercised amongst her seruants. In which practise of hers, what particular rules are to be obserued, I leaue her to learne of them who are professed Diuines and haue purposely written of this ar∣gument; onely thus much will I say, which each ones experience will teach him to be true, that the more care∣full
the master and mistris are to bring vp their seruants in the dayly exercises of Religion toward God, the more faithfull they shall find them in all their businesses towards men, and procure Gods fauour te more plen∣tifully on all the household: and therefore a small time morning and euening bestowed in prayers, and other exercises of religion, will proue no lost time at the weekes end. Next vnto this sanctity and holinesse of life, it is meet that our English Hous-wife be a woman of great mo∣desty and temperance as well inwardly as outwardly;Shee must be temperate. inwardly, as in her behauiour and cariage towards her husband, wherein she shall shunne all violence of rage, passion and humour, coueting lesse to direct then to be directed, appearing euer vnto him pleasant, amiable, & delightfull and though occasion, mishaps, or the misgo∣uernement of his will may induce her to contrary thoughts, yet vertuously to suppresse them, and with a mild sufferance rather to call him home from his error, then with the strength of anger to abate the least sparke of his euill, calling in her mind that euill and vncomely language is deformed though vttered euen to seruants, but most monstrous and vgly when it appeares before the presence of a husband: outwardly, as in her appar∣rell and diet, both which she shall proportion according to the competency of her husbads estate and caling, making her circle rather strait then large, for it is a rule if we extend to the vttermost, we take away increase, if we goe a hayre breadth beyond, we enter into consump∣tion: but if we preserue any part, we build strong forts against the aduersaries of fortune, prouided that such preseruation be honest and conscionabe: for as laush prodigality is brutish, so miserable couetuousnese is
hellish.Other Gar∣ments. Let therefore the Huswifes garments be com∣ly and strong, made aswel to preserue the health, as a∣dorne the person, altogether without toyish garnishes, or the glosse of light colours, and as far from the vanity of new and fantastick fashions, as neere to the comly imi∣tations of modest Matrons: Let her dyet be wholsome and cleanly, prepared at due houres, and Cookt with care and diligence, let it be rather to satisfie nature then our affections,O her Dyet. and aper to kil hunger then reuue new appetites, let it proceede more from the prouision of her owne yard, then the furniture of the Markets; and let it be rather esteemed for the familiar acquaintance she hath with it, then for the strangenesse and rarity it bringeth from other Countries. To conclude, our English Hus-wife must be of chast thought,Her generall vertues. stout courage, patient, vntyred, watchful, diligent, witty, pleasant, constant in friendship, full of good Neighbour-hood, wise in Discourse, but not frequent therein, sharpe and quicke of speech, but not bitter or talkatiue, secret in her affaires, comfortable in her counsels, and generally skilful in the worthy know∣ledges which doe belong to her Vocation, of all, or most whereof I now in the ensuing discourse, intend to speake more largely. To begin then with one of the most principal vertues which doth belong to our English Hous-wife;OF Her vertues in Physicke. you shal vnderstand, that sith the preseruation and care of the family touching their health and soundnesse of body consisteth most in the diligence: it is meet that she haue a physicall kind of knowledge, how to administer many wholesome receits or medicines for the good of their healths, as wel to preuent the first occasion of sicknesse, as to take away the effects and euill of the same, when
it hath made seasure on the body. Indeed we must con∣fesse that the depth and secrets of this most excellent Art of Physicke, is farre beyond the capacity of the most skilfull woman, as lodging onely in the brest of learned Professors, yet that our House-wife may from them receiue some ordinary rules and medicines which may auaile for the benefit of her Family, is (in our common experience) no derogation at all to that wor∣thy Art. Neither doe I intend here to lead her minde with al the Symptomes, accidents, and effects which go before or after euery sicknesse, as though I would haue her to assume the name of a Practitioner, but only relate vnto her some approoued medicines, and old doctrines which haue beene gathered together, by two excellent and famous Phisitions,Dr. Burket. Dr. Bomelius. and in a Manuscript giuen to a great worthy Countesse of this Land, (for farre bee it from me, to attribute this goodnesse vnto mine owne knowledge) and deliuered by common and ordinary experience, for the curing of those ordinary sicke∣nesses which daily perturbe the health of men and Wo∣men. Of Feuers in Generall. First then to speake of Feuers or Agues, the Hus-wife shall know those kinds thereof, which are most fa∣millar and ordinary, as the Quotidian or daily ague, the Tertian or euery other day ague, the Quartan or euery third dayes ague, the Pestilent, which keepeth no other in his fits, but is more dangerous and mortall: And lastly the accidental Feuer which proceedeth from the receite of some wound or other, painefull pertur∣bation of the spirits. There bee sundry other Feuers which comming from Consumptions, and other long continued sicknesses, doe altogether surpasse our Hus-wiues capacity.
Of he quoti∣dian. First then for the quotidian feuer, (whose fits alwaies last aboue twelue houres) you shall take a new laid egge, and opening the crowne you shall put out the white, then fill vp the shell with very good Aquauitae, and stirre it and the yolke very well together, and then as soone as you feele your cold fit begin to come vpon you, sup vp the egge, and either labour till you sweare, or else laying great store of cloathes vpon you, put your selfe in a sweat in your bed, and thus do whilst your fits con∣tinue, and for your drinke let it be onely posset ale. Of the single Tertian▪ For a single Tertian feuer, or each other dayes ague; take a quart of posset ale, the curde being well drained from the same, and put thereinto a good handful of Dandilion, and then setting it vpon the fire, boyle it till a fourth part be consumed, then as soone as your cold fit beginneth, drinke a good draught thereof, and then either labour till you sweat, or else force your sefe to swea in your bed, but labour is much the better, proui∣ded that you take not cold after it, and thus do whilst your fits continue, and in all your sicknesse let your drinke bee posset Ale thus boyled with the sae hearbe. Of the acciden∣tall Feuer. For the accidentall Feuer which commeth by meanes of some dangerous wound receiued, although for the most part it is an ill signe if it be strong and continuing, yet many times it abateth, and the party recouereth when the wound is well tended and comforted with such soueraigne balmes and hot oyles as are most fit to be applied to the member so grieued or iniured: there∣fore in this Feuer you must respect the wound from whence the accident doth proceed, and as it recouereth, so you shall see the feuer wast and diminish. Of the Feuer hetticke. For the Hettique feuer, which is also a very dangerous
sicknesse, you shall take the oyle of Violets, and mixe it with a good quantity of the powder of white Poppy seed finely searst, and therewith annoint the small and raines of the parties backe, euening and morning, and it will not onely giue ease to the Feuer, hut also purge and cleanse away the dry scalings which is ingendred either by this or any other feuer whatsoeuer. For the quar∣tan or for any Feuer. For any feuer whatsoeuer, whose fit beginneth with a cold. Take a spoonefull and a halfe of Dragon water, a spoonefull of Rosewater, a spoonefull of running water, a spoonefull of Aquavite, and a spoonefull of Vinegar, halfe a spoonefull of Methridate or lesse, and beate all these well together, and let the party drinke it before his fit beginne. Of thirst in Fe∣uers. It is to be vnderstood that all feuers of what kind soe∣uer they be, and these infectious diseases, as the Pesti∣lence, Plague, and such like, are thought the inflamma∣tion of the bloud, infinitely much subiect to drought; so that, should the party drinke so much as he desired, nei¦ther could his body containe it, nor could the great a∣bundance of drinke do other then weaken his stomacke, and bring his body to a certaine destruction. Wherefore, when any man is so ouerpressed with de∣sire of drinke, you shall giue him at conuenient times either posset ale made with cold herbes; as sorrell, purs∣len, Violet leaues, Lettice, Spinage, and such like, o else a Iulip made as hereafter in the pestilent feuer, of some Almond-milke: and betwixt those times, because the vse of these drinkes wil grow wearisome and loathsome to the patient, you shall suffer him to gargil in his mouth good wholesome beare or ale, which the patient best liketh, and hauing gargled it in his mouth, to spit it out againe, and then to take more, and thus to do as oft as
and then to take more, and thus to doe as oft as he plea∣seth, till his mouth be cooled: prouided that by no meanes he suffer any of the drinke to goe downe, and this will much better asswage the heat of his thirst then if he did drinke; and when appetite desireth drinke to goe downe, then let him take either his Iulip, or his al∣mond milke. For any ague sore. To make a pultis to cure any ague-sore, take elder leaues and seeth them in milke, till they be soft then take them vp and straine them; and then boyle it againe till it be thicke, and so vse it to the sore as occasion shall serue. For the quar∣taine Feuer. For the Quartaine Eeuer or third day ague, which is which is of all feuers the longest lasting, & many times dangerous consumptions, blacke iaundies and such like mortall sicknesses follow it: you shall take Methridate and spread it vpon a lymon slice, cut of a reasonable thicknes, and so as the lymon be couered with the Me∣thridate; then bind it to the pulse of the sicke mans wrist of his arme about an houre before his fit doth be∣ginne, and then let him goe to his bed made warme, and with hot cloathes laid vpon him, let him try if he can force himselfe to sweat which if he doe, then halfe an houre after he hath sweate he shall take hot posset ale brewed with a little Methridate, and drinke a good draught thereof, and rest till his fit be passed o∣uer: but if he bee hd to sweate, then with the sayd posset Ale also you shall mixe a few bruised An∣ny-seeds,To make one sweate. and that will bring sweate vppon him: and thus you shall doe euery fit till they beginne to cease, or that sweate come naturally of it owne accorde, which is a true and manifest signe that the sicknesse de∣creaseth.
Of the pesti∣lent Feuer. For the pestilent Feuer, which is a continuall sick∣nesse full of infection, and mortality, you shall cause the party first to bee let blood, if his strength will beare it: then you shall giue him coole Iulyps made of Endife or Succorie water, the sirrop of Violets, con∣serue of Barberries, and the iuyce of Lymons, well mixed and simboliz'd together. Also you shall giue him to drink Almond milke made with the decoction of coole hearbes, as violet leaues, strawberry leaues, french mallowes, pusline, and such like; and if the parties mouth shall through the heate of his stomacke, or liuer Inflame o grow sore, you shall wash it with the sirrop of mulberies; and that will not onely heale it, but also strengthen his stomacke. (If as it is most common in this sicknesse) the party shall grow costiue, you shall giue him a suppositary made of hony, boyld to the height of hardnesse, which you shall know by cooling a drop thereof, and so if you find it hard, you shall then know that the hony is boyled suffi∣ciently; then put salt to it, and so put it in water, and worke it into a roule in the manner of a suppositary, & administer it, and it most assuredly bringeth no hurt, but ease to the party, of what age or strength soeuer he be: during his sicknesse, you shall keepe him from all man∣ner of strong drinkes, or hot spices, and then there is no doubt of his recouery. A preseratiue against the plague. To preserue your body from the infection of the plague, you shal take a quart of old ale, & after it hath ri∣sen vpon the fire and hath been scummed, you shall put therinto of Aristolochia longa, of Angelica & of Cellan∣dine of each halfe an handfull, & boile them wel therin; then strain the drink through a cleane cloath, & dissolue therein a dramme of the best Methridate, as much Iuory
finely powdred and searst, and sixe spoonful of Dragon water, then put it vp in a closse glasse; and euery mor∣nig fasting take fiue spoonful thereof, and after bite and chaw in your mouth the dried root of Angelica, or smel on a nose-gay made of the tasseld end of a shippe rope, and they wil surely preserue you from infection. Fr infection of the plagu. But if you be infected with the plague, and feele the assured signes thereof, as paine in the head, drought, bur∣ning, weaknesse of stomacke and such like: Then you shal take a dram of the best Methridate, and dissolue it in three or foure spooneful of dragon water, and imme∣diately drink it off, and then with hot cloathes or bricks made extreame hot, and layd to the soales of your feet, after you haue beene wrapt in woollen cloathes, compel your selfe to sweat, which if you do, keep yourselfe moderately therein till the sore begin to rise; then to the same apply a liue Pidgeon cut in two parts, or else a plaister made of the yolke of an Egge, Hony, hearbe of grace chopt exceeding small, and wheate flower, which in very shot space will not onely ripen, but also breake the same without any other incision; then after it hath runne a day or two, you shall apply a plaister of Melilot vnto it vntil it be whoe. For the Pesti∣le. Take Fetherfew, Malselon, Scabious, and Mugwort, of each a like, bruise them and mixe them with old ale, and let the sicke drinke thereof sixe spooneful, and it wil expel the corruption. Another. Take Yarow, Tansie, Fetherfew, of each a handful, and bruise them wel together, then let the sicke party make water into the hearbs, then straine them, and giue it the sicke to drinke. A preseruation g first the e∣ce. Take of Sage, Rue, Brie leaues, or Elderleaues, of each an handful, stampe them and straine them with a quart
of white wine, and put thereto a little Ginger, and a good spooneful of the best Treackle, and drinke thereof morning and euening. How to draw a plague botch to any place you will. Take Smalledge, Mallowes, Wormewood, and Rue, stamp them wel together, and fry them in oyle Oliue, til they be thicke, plaisterwise apply it to the place where you would haue it rise, and let it lye vntil it breake, then to heale it vp, take the iuyce of Smallage, Wheateflower, & milke, and boile them to a pultis, and apply i morning and euening til it be whole. A Cordiall for any infection at the heart. ☜ Take of Burrage, Langdebeefe, and Callamint, of each a good handful of Hartstongue, Red mnt, Violets, and Marigolds, of each halfe a handful, boyle them in white wine, or faire running water, then adde a penny woorth of the best Saffron, and as much Sugar, and boyle them ouer againe wel, then straine it into an earthen pot, and drinke thereof morning and euening, to the quantity of seauen spoonfuls. Against too vi∣olnt sweating. Take Linseed, and Lettice, and bruise it wel, then apply it to the stomacke, and remooue it once in foure houres. For the Head-ache. ☜ For the Head-ach, you shal take of rosewater, of the iuyce of Cammomil, of womans milke, of strong wine ve∣negar, of each two spooneful, mixe them together wel vpon a chafing-dish of coales: then take of a peece of a dry rose cake and steepe it therein, and as soone as it hath danke vp the lyquor and is throughly hot, take a couple of sound Nutmegs grated to powder, and strew them vppon the rose cake; then breaking it into two parts, binde it on each side vppon the temples of the head, so let the party lye downe to rest, and the paine wil in a short space be taken from him. For th Frenzy. For Frenzie or inflamation of the calles of the braine, you shal cause the iuyce of Beets to be with a Serrindge
squirted vp into the patients nostrils, which will purge and cleanse his head exceedingly; and then giue him to drinke posset ale, in which Violet leaues and Lettice hath been boyled, and it will sodainely bring him to a very temperate mildnesse, and make the passion of Frenzie forsake him. F the lethar∣gy. For the Lethargie or extreame drowsines, you shall-by all violent meanes either by noyse or other disturban∣ces, force perforce keepe the party from sleeping; and whensoeuer he calleth for drink, you shal giue him white wine and Isop water of each a little quantity mixt toge∣ther, and not suffer him to sleepe aboue foure houres in foure & twenty, till he come to his former wakefulnes, which as soone as he haue recouered, you shall then forthwith purge his head with the iuyce of Beets squir∣ted vp into his nostrils as is before shewed. To prouoke sleepe. But if any of the family be troubled with too much watchfulnesse, so that they cannot by any meanes take rest, then to prouoke the party to sleepe, you shall take of Saffron a dramme dryed, and beaten to pouder, and as much Lettice seed also dryed, and beaten to pouder, and twice as much white Poppy seed beaten also to pou∣der, and mixe these with womans milke till it be a thick salue, and then binde it to the temples of the head, and it will soone cause the party to sleepe; and let it lye on not aboue foure houres. For the swim∣ming of the head. For the swimming or dizzing in the head, you shall take of Agnus casus, of Broome wort, and of Camomile dryed, of each two drammes mixt with the iuyce of I∣ue, oyle of Roses, and white wine, of each like quan∣tity, til it come to a thicke salue, and then binde it to the temples of the head, and it will in short space take away the griefe.
For the palsie. For the Apoplexie or palsie, the strong sent or smell of a Foxe is exceeding soueraigne, or to drinke euery morning halfe a pint of the decoction of Lauendar, and to rub the head euery morning and euening exceeding hard with a very cleane course cloath, whereby the hu∣mours may be dissolued and disperst into the outward parts of the body: by all meanes for this infirmity keepe your feet safe from cold or wet, and also the nape of your necke, for from those parts it first getteth the strength of euill and vnauoidable paynes. For a new cough. For a cough or cold but lately taken, you shall take a spoonfull of Sugar finely beaten and searst, and drop in∣to it of the best Aquauitae, vntill all the sugar be wet to through, and can receiue no more moysture: Then be∣ing ready to lye downe to rest, take and swallow the spoonefull of sugar downe; and so couer you warme in your bed, and it will soone breake and dissolue the cold. For an old cough. But if the cough be more old & inueterate, & more in∣wardly fixt to the lungs, take of the pouder of Bettonie, of the pouder of Carraway seeds, of the pouder of Sher∣uit dryed, of the pouder of Hounds tongue, and of Pep∣per, finely beaten, of each two drams, and mingling them well with clarified hony make an electuary therof and drink it morning & euening for nine daies together: then take of Sugar candy coursly beaten, an ounce of Li∣coras finely peared & trimmed, and cut into very little small slices, as much of Anniseeds and Coriander seeds halfe an ounce; mixe all these together and keepe them in a paper in your pocket and euer in the day time when the cough offendeth you, take as much of this dredge, as you can hold betweene your thumbe and fingers & eate it, and it will giue ease to your griefe: And in the night when the cough taketh you, take of the iuice of Licoras
as two good Barly cornes, and let it melt in your mouth and it wil giue you ease. For the falling sicknesse. Although the falling sicknes be seldome or neuer to be cured, yet if the party which is troubled with the same, wil but morning and euening, during the wane of the moone, or when she is in the signe Virgo, eate the berries of the hearbe Asterion, or beare the hearbs a∣bout him next to his bare skin, it is likely he shall finde much ease and fal very seldome, though this medicine be somewhat doubtful. For the falling euill. For the falling euill take if it be a man, a female mole, if a woman a male mole▪ and take them in March, or else April, when they go to the Bucke: Then dry it in an ouen, and make powder of it whole as you take it out of the earth: then giue the sick person of the powder to drink euening & morning for nine or ten daies together. OF An Oyle to helpe hearing. To take away deafnes, take a gray Eele with a white belly and put her into a sweet earthen pot quick, & stop the pot very close with an earthen couer, or some such hard substance: then digge a deep hole in a horse dung∣hill, and set it therein, and couer it with the dung, and so let it remaine a fortnight, and then take it out and cleare out the oile which will come of it, and drop it in∣to the imperfect eare, or both, if both be imperfect. For the Rhum. To stay the flux of the Rhume, take Sage and dry it before the fire, and rub it to powder: Then take bay salt and dry it and beare it to powder, and take a Nut∣meg and grate it, and mixe them all together, and put them in a long linnen bag, then heate it vpon a tile stone, and lay it to the nape of the necke. For a stinking breath. For a stinking breath, take Oake buds when they are new budded ou, and distil them, then let the party grie∣ued nine mornings, and nine euenings, drinke of it,
then forbeare a while, and after take it againe. A vomit for an ill breath. To make a vomit for a strong stinking breath, you must take of Antimonium the waight of three Barley cornes, and beate it very small, and mixe it with con∣serue of Roses, and giue the Patient to eate in the mor∣ning, then let him take nine dayes together the iuyce of Mints and Sage, then giue him a gentle purgation, and let him vse the iuce of Mint and Sage longer. This me∣dicine must be giuen in the spring of the yeare, but if the infirmity come for want of digestion in the stomacke, then take Mints, Maiora nd Worme-wood, and chop them small and boile the  Malmsie till it be thicke, and make a pister of it, and it to the stomacke. For the Tooth∣ache. For the Tooth ach, take a handful of Dasie rootes, and wa them very cleane, and drie them with a cloath, and then stamp them: and when you haue stamped them a good while, take the quantity of halfe a nutshel full of Bay-salt, and strew it amongst the roots, and then when they are very wel beaten, straine them through a cleane cloath: then grate some Cattham Aromaticus, & mixe it good and sffie with the iuyce of the roots, and when you haue done so, put it into a quil and snuffe it vp into your nose, and you shall find ease. Another. Another for the Tooth-ake, take smal Sage, Rue, Smal∣lage, Fetherfew, Wormewood, and Mints, of each of them halfe a handful, then stampe them wel all together put∣ting thereto foure drams of vinegar, and one dram of Bay salt, with a penny-worth of good Aquavitae: stir them well together, then put it betweene two linnen clouts of the bignesse of your cheeke, temples, and iawe, and quilt it in manner of a course imbrodery: then set it vpon a chafing-dish of coales, and as hot as you may a∣bide it, lay it ouer that side where the paine is, and lay
you downe vpon that side, and as it cooles warme it a∣gaine, or else haue another ready warme to lay on. A drie for a le in the eye. To make a drinke to destroy any pearle or filme in the eye: take a good handfull of Marigold plants, & a hand∣full of Fennell, as much of May-weed beate them toge∣ther, then straine them with a pint of beere, then put it into a pot & stop it close that the strength may not goe out; then let the offended party drinke thereof when he is in bed, & lie of that side on which the pearle is, & like∣wise drinke of it in the morning next his heart when he is risen. Fr pe in . For payne in the eies, take Milke when it comes new from the Cowe, and hauing syled it into a cleane vessell, couer it with a pewter dish, and the next morning take off the dish and you shall see a dew vpon the same, and with that dew wash the pained eies, & it will ease them. For dimme eyes: take Wormewood, beaten with the gall of a Bull, and then strane it and annoynt the eyes therewith, and it will cleare them exceedingly. Fo sore eyes. For sore eyes, or blood shotten eyes: take the white of an egge beaten to oyle, as much Rosewater, & as much of the iuyce of House-leeke, mixe them well together, then dippe flat pleageants therein, and lay them vppon the sore eyes, and as they drye, so renew them againe, and wet them, and thus doe till the eyes be well. For waterie eyes. For watery eyes, take the iuice of Affodill▪ Mirrhe, and Saffron, of each a little, and mixe it with twice so much white wine, then boyle it ouer the fire, then straine it and wash the eyes therewith, and it is a present helpe. For a . For a Canker or any sore mouth: take Choruile and beate it to a salue with old ale and Allum water, and annoynt the sore therewith, and it will cure it. A swelled mouth. For any swelling in the mouth: take the iuice of worm∣wood,
Cammomill, and Shirwitt, and mixe them with hony, and bath the swelling therewith, & it will cure it. For the Quin∣sie. For the Quinsie, or Quinacy, giue the party to drinke the hearbe Mouseare steept in ale or beere, and looke where you see a swine rub himselfe, and there vpon the same place rubbe a sleight stone, and then with it sleight all the swelling, and it will cure it. Against drun∣kennes. If you would not be drunke, take the pouder of Beta∣ny and Coleworts mixt together; and eate it euery mor∣ning fasting as much as will lie vpon a sixpence, and it will preserue a man from drunkennesse. To quicken the wit. To quicken a mans wits, spirit and memory; let him take Langdebeefe, which is gathered in Iune or Iuly, and beating it in a cleane morter; Let him drinke the iuyce thereof with warme water, and he shall finde the be∣nefit. For the Kings euill. If a man be troubled with the Kings euill, let him take the red docke and seeth it in wine till it be very ten∣der, then straine it, and so drinke a good draught there∣of, and he shall finde great ease from the same: especi∣ally if he doe continue the vse thereof. Addition to the particular sicknesses and first of the head and the parts thereof & the lungs. Take Frankinsence, Doues-dung, and Wheate-flower, of each an ounce, and mixe them well with the white of an egge, then plasterwise apply it where the paine is. The oyle of Lyllyes if the head be annointed there∣with, is good for any payne therein. Another. Take Rowe, and steepe it in Vinegar a day and a night, the Rowe being first well bruised, then with the same annoynt the head twice or thrice a day. For the head ke and to slay bleeding at the nose. Take the white of an egge and beate it to oyle, then put to it Rosewater, and the pouder Alablaster, then take flaxe and dippe it therein, and lay it to the temples, and renwe it two or three times a day.
To draw out bones broken in the head. Take Agrymone and bruise it, and plasterwise apply it to the wound, and let the party drinke the iuyce of Bet∣tanie, and it will expell the bones and heale the wound. For the falling of the mould of the head. Take the leaues of Agrymonie, and boile them in ho∣ny, till it be thicke like a plaister, and then apply it to the wound of the head warme. For the Squy∣nancy. Take a table napkin or any linnen cloath, and wet it in cold water, and when you goe to bed apply it to the swelling and lie vpright, thus doe three or of foure times in a night till the swelling waste. For the tooth¦ake. Take two or three dock roots, & as many daysy roots, and boyle them in water till they be soft, then take them out of the water, and boyle them well ouer againe in oyl Oliue, then straine them through a cleane cloath, and anoynt the pained tooth therewith, and keepe your mouh close, and it will not onely take away the payne, but also ease any megrem or griefe in the head. To make teeth white. Take a sawcer of strong vinegar, and two spoonefulls of the pouder of Roch allom, a spooneful of white salt, and a spoonefull of hony, seeth all these till it be as thinne as water, then put it into a close viol and keepe it, and when occasion serues wash your teeth therewith, with a rough cloath, and rub them soundly, but not to bleed. To draw teeth wi t yro. Take some of the greene of the elder tree, or the apples of oake trees, and with either of these rub the teeth and gummes and it will loosen them so as you may take them out. For teeth tht are yellow. Take Sage and salt, of each a like, and stampe them well together, then bake it till it be hard, and make a fine pouder thereof, then therewith rub the teeth euening and morning and it will take away all yel∣lownesse.
For teeth that are loose. First let them bloud, then take Harts horne or Iuo∣rie and red Pympernell, and bruise them well together, then put it into a linnen cloath and lay it to the teeth, & it will fasten them. For any venom in the eare. Take the iuyce of Louage and drop it into the eare, and it will cure any venome, and kill any worme, eare∣wigge or other vermine. For a stinking breath which commeth from the stomacke. Take two ounces of comine and beate in a morter to fine pouder, then boile it in wine from a pottell to a quart, then drinke therof morning and euening as hot as you can suffer it, or otherwise take an ounce of wild time, and being cleane washed cut it small and then pouder it, then put to it halfe an ounce of peper in fine pouder, and as much comyne, mixe them all well toge∣ther, and boile them in a pottell of white wine, till halfe be consumed, and after meate (but not before) vse to drinke thereof hot, also once in the afternoone and at your going to bed, and it will purge the breath. for stinking . Take red nettles and burne them to a pouder, then adde as much of the pouder of pepper, and mixe them well together, and snuffe thereof vp into the nose, and thus do diuers times a day. For a canker in the nose. Take old ale, and hauing boyld it on the fire, & clens'd it, adde thereto a pretty quantity of lyfe hony and as much allom, then with a setrindge or such like wash the sores therewith very warme. A red water for any canker. Take a gallond of running water, and boile it to a pot∣tell, then put to it a handfull of red sage, a handfull of Cellandine, a handful of Honysuckles, a handful of woodbine leaues & flowers, then take a penniworth of graynes made into fine pouder, and boile all very well together, then put to it a quart of the best life hony of a yeare old, and a pound of Roch allom, let al boyle
together till it come to a pottell, then straine it and put it into a close vessell, and therewith dresse and annoint the sores as occasion serues, it will heale any canker or vlcer, and cleanse any wound; It is best to be made at Midsomer. To cleare the eyes. Take the flowers and rootes of Primrose cleane washt in running water, then boile them in faire running water the space of an houre, then put thereto a pretty quantity of white copperas, and then straine all through a linnen cloath and so let it stand a while, and there will an Oyle appeare vpon the water, with that oyle an∣noynt the lids and the browes of your eies, and the tem∣ples of your head, and with the water wash your eyes, and it is most soueraigne. Another for the sight. Take Ffteene seeds of Gyneper, and as many Gromell seeds, fine branches of Fenell, beate them all together, then boyle them in a pint of old ale till three parts be wasted; then straine it into a glasse, and drop thereof three drops into each eye at night, and wash your eyes euery morning for the space of fifteene daies with your owne water, and it will cleare any decayed sight what∣soeuer. For sore eyes. Take red Snayles, and seeth them in faire water, and then gather the oyle that ariseth thereof, and therewith annoint your eyes morning and euening. For sicke eyes. Take a gallond or two of the dregges of strong ale & put thereto a handfull or two of Comyne, and as much salt, and then distill it in a Lymbecke, and the water is most pretious to wash eyes with. Fr  eyes. Take Cellandine, Rue, Chervile, Plantaine, and anyse, of each alike, and as much fenell, as of all the rest, stamp them all well together, then let it stand two daies and two nights, then straine it very well and annoynt
your eyes morning and euening therewith. For the pin and webb in the eye. Take an egge, and rost extreame hard, then take the white being very hot and lapp in it as much white cop∣peras as a pease and then violently straine it through a fine cloath, then put a good drop thereof into the eye, and it is most soueraigne. A poudr for the pin and webb in the eye. Take two drams of prepard Tussia, of Sandragon one dram, of Sugar a dram, bray them all very well together till they be exceeding small, then take of the pouder & blow a little thereof into the eye, and it is soueraigne. A pretious water for the eyes. Take of Red rose leaues, of Smalladge, of Maiden haire, Eusaace, endiue, succory, red fenell, hill-wort, and cellandine, of each halfe a quarter of a pound, wash them cleane and lay them in steepe in white wine a whole day, then still them in an ordinary still, & the first water will be like gold, the second like siluer, and the third like balme, any of these is most pretious for sore eyes, and hath recouered sight lost for the space of Ten yeares, hauing been vsed but foure dayes. To make haire to grow Take the leaues of willow, and boile them well in oyle and therwith annoint the place where you would haue any haire to grow, whether vpon head or beard. Another. Take Treakle water and hony, boyle them together, and wet a cloath therein, and lay it where you would haue haire to grow, and it will come speedily. For a pimpled or red saucy face. Take nine or ten egges and rost them very hard, then put away the yolkes, & bray the whites very small with three or foure ounces of white Copporas till it be come to perfect oyntment, then with it annoint the face mor∣ing and euening for the space of a weeke and more. For the rhume Take the rynde of Issop, and boile it or burne it and let the fume or smoke goe into the mouth and it it will stay any rhume falling from the head.
For hoarsenes in the throate. Take a pint of running water, and three spoonefulls of hony and boile them together and skime off the filth, then put thereto on ounce of small Raysons, and straine it well through a cloath, and so drinke it morning and euening. For a dange∣rous cough. Take Aquauitae and salt, and mixe it with strong old ale and then heate it on the fire, and therewith wash the soules of the feete when you goe to bed. For the dry cough. Take of cleane Wheate and of cleane Barly of each a like quantity, and put them into a gallond and a halfe of faire water, and boyle them till they burst, then straine it into a cleane vessell, and adde thereto a quar∣terne of fine Lycoras pouder, and two penyworth of gumme-Arabecke, then boyle it ouer againe and straine it, and keepe it in a sweete vessell, and drinke thereof morning and euening. For the tisicke. Take the best wort and let it stand till it be yellow, then boyle it and after let it coole, then put to it a little quantity of barme and saffron, and so drinke of it euery morning and euening while it lasteth, otherwise take hore-hound, violet leaues, and Isop, of each a good hand∣full, seeth them in water, and put thereto a little Saffron, Lycoras, and Sugar-candy, after they haue boiled a good while, then straine it into an earthen vessell, and let the sicke drinke thereof sixe spoonefull at a time morning and euening; or lastly, take the lunges of a Fox, and lay it in rose-water, or boyle it in rose-water, then take it out and dry it in some hot place without the sunne, then then beate it to pouder with Sugar-candy, and eate of this pouder morning and euening. For griefes in the stomacke. To ease paine in the stomacke, take Endiue, Mints, of each a like quantity, and steepe them in white Wine a dayes space, then straining it and adding thereunto a
little Cinamon and Pepper, giue it to the sicke person to drinke, and if you adde thereto a little of the pouder of Horse-mint and Calamint, it will comfort the stomacke exceedingly, and occasion swift and good digestion. For spitting of blood. For spitting of blood, whether it proceede of inward bruises, ouerstraining or such like, you shall take some pitch, and a little Sperma Caeti, and mixe it with old ale and drinke it, and it will stay the the flux of blood: but if by meanes of the bruise any outward griefe remayne, then you shall take the hearbe Brockellhempe, and frying it with sheepes tallow lay it hot to the grieued place, and it will take away the anguish. For vomiting: To stay the fluxe of vomiting take Worme-wood, and sowre bread toasted of each like quantity, & beat them well in a morter, then ad to them as much of the iuyce of mints, and the iuyce of Plantaine as well bring it to a thick salue: then fry them all together in a fryingpan, & when it is hot lay it plaister wise to the mouth of the stomacke, then let the party drinke a little white wine and cheruile water mixt together, and then steepe sower toasted bread in very strong Vinegar, wrapt it in a fine cloath and let the sicke party smell thereto, and it will stay the excesse of vomiting, and both comfort and strengthen the stomacke. To force one to vomite. If you would compell one to vomit, take halfe a spoonefull of Stonecrop, and mixe it with three spoone∣full of white wine and giue it to the party to drinke, and it will make him vomit presently, but do this seldome and to strong bodyes, for otherwise it is dangerous. For the Iliaca passio. For the Iliaca passio, take of Polipody an ounce, and stampe it, then boyle it with prunes & violets in sennell-water or Anni-seeds-water, take thereof a good quan∣tity, then strayne it and let the partie euery morning
and euening drinke a good draught thereof. Additions, to the diseases of the stomack. For the sto∣macke. If the stomacke be troubled with winde or other paine, take Commine and beate it to pouder, and mixe with it red wine, and drinke it at night when you goe to bed, diuers nights together. For the Illica passio. Take Brokelime roots and leaues & wash them cleane and dry them in the Sunne, so dry that you may make pouder thereof, then take of the pouder a good quanti∣ty, and the like of Treakle, and put them in a cup with a pretty quantity of strong od ale and stirre them well together, and drinke thereof first and last morning and euening for the space of three or foure dayes, and if need doe require, vse the same in the brothes you doe eate, for it is very soueraigne. For paine in the breast. Take Hartshorne or Iuory beaten to fine pouder, and as much Cynamon in pouder, mixe them with Vinegar, and drinke thereof to the quantity of seauen or eight spoonefuls. For the Mo∣ther. Take the water of Mouseare, and drinke thereof the quantity of an ounce and a halfe or two ounces, twice or thrice a day, or otherwise take a little Nutmeg, a lit∣tle Cinamond, a little Cloues, a little Mace, and a very little Ginger, and the flowers of Lauender, beate all vn∣to a fine powder, and when the passion of the mother commeth, take a chaffingdish of good hot coales, and bend the Patient forward, and cast of the pouder into the Chaffingdish, so as she may receiue the smoake both in at her nose and mouth, and it is a present cure. Obstructions of the liuer. Against obstructions in the Liuer, take Aniseeds, A∣meos, Burnet, Camomile, and the greater Centuary, and boyle them in white wine with a little hony, and drinke it euery morning and it wil cure the obstructions, and cleanse the Liuer from all imperfection.
Against the heat of the Liuer. Agaynst the heate and inflammation of the Liuer, take Endiue dryed to pouder, and the meale of Lupin seedes, and mixe it with hony and the iuyce of Worme-wood, make a cake thereof and eate it, and it wil asswage the great heate and inflammation of the Liuer, and take away the pimples and rednesse of the face which pro∣ceedeth from the same. For the Plurisy. To preuent a Plurisie a good while before it come, there is no better way then to vse much the exercise of ring∣ing, or to stretch your armes vpward▪ so as they may beare the weight of your body, and so to swing your body vp and downe a good space: but hauing caught a Plurisie and feeling the gripes, stitches, and pangs there∣of, you shal presently cause the party to be let blood, & then take the hearb Althea or Hollyhocke, and boyle it with vinegar and Linseede til it be thicke plaister-wise, and then spread it vpon a peece of Allom Leather, and lay it to the side that is grieued, and it wil helpe it. A playster for a stitch. To help a stitch in the side or else where, take Doues dung, red Rose leaues and put them into a bag, and quilt it: then throughly heat it vpon a Chaffingdish of coales with vinegar in a platter: then lay it vnto the pained place as hot as may be suffered, and when it cooleth heat it againe. Heate in the Liuer. For any extraordinary heate or inflammation in the Liuer, take Barbaries and boyle them in clarified whay, and drinke them, and they wil cure it. For the Con∣sumption. If you wil make a Cordial for a Consumption or any other weaknes: take a quart of running water, a peece of Mutton and a peece of Veale, and put them with the wa∣ter into a pot, then take of Sorrel, violet leaues, Spi∣nage, Endiue, Succory, Sage, Hissop, of each a good quan∣tity; then take prunes and raisins, and put them all to
the broth, and seeth them from a quart to a pint, then straine the yolke of an egge and a little Saffron therein∣to, putting in Sugar, whole Mace and a little white wine, so seeth them a while together, and let the party drinke it as warme as may be. To staunch bod. To staunch blood, take the hearb Shepheards-purse, (if it may be gotten) distilled at the Apothecaries, and drinke an ounce thereof at a time morning and euening, and it wil stay any fluxe of blood natural or vnnatural, but if you cannot get the distilled water, then boyle a handful of the hearb with Cinamon, and a little Sugar, in Claret wine, and boyle it from a quart to a pint, and drinke it as oft as you please: also if you but rubbe the hearbe betweene your hands, you shal see it wil soone make the blood returne. For the yellow iundis. For the Yellow Iaundisse, take two peny worth of the best English Saffron, drye it, and grind it to an excee∣ding fine pouder, then mixe it with the pap of a rosted apple, and giue it the diseased party to swallow down, in the manner of a Pill, and doe thus diuers mornings together, and without doubt, it is the most present cure that can be for the same, as hath been often times prooued. For the yellow . For the Yellow Iaundisse take Pimpernell and Chicke∣weed, stampe them and straine them into posset ale, and let the party drink thereof morning and euening. For a desperate yelow iaunisse For the Yellow Iaundisse which is desperate and almost past cure: Take sheepes dung new made, and put it into a cup of Beare or Ale, and close the cup fast, and let it stand so al night, and in the morning take a draught of the clearest of the drinke, and giue it vnto the sicke party. For the blacke Iaundisse. For the blacke Iaundisse take the hearbe called Peny∣ryall,
and eyther boyle it in white Wine, or drinke the iuyce thereof simply by it selfe to the quantity of three or foure spooneful at a time, and it wil cure the blacke Iaundisse. Additions, To the dieases of the liuer For wasting of the Liuer. Take of Hyssop, Parsley, and Harts-tongue, of each a like quantity, and seeth them in wort til they be soft, then let it stand til it be cold, and then drinke thereof first and last, morning and euening. A restoratiue for the Liuer. Take Fenel roots, and Parsley roots, of each a like, wash them cleane, and pil off the vpper barke, and cast away the pith within, then mince them smal, then put them to three pints of water, and set them ouer the fire, then take figges and shred them smal, Lyeoras and breake it smal, and put them to the hearbs, and let al boile very wel, then take Sorrel and stamp it and put it to the rest, and let it boile til some part be wasted, then take a good quantity of honey and put to it and boile a while, then take it from the fire and clarifie it through a strayner in∣to a glasse vessel, and stop it very close, then giue the sick to drinke thereof morning and euening. To heale a ring worme cōming of the heate from the liuer. Take the stalke of Saint Mary Garcicke, and burne it, or lay it vpon a hot tyle stone vntil it be very drye, and then beate it into pouder, and rub the sore therewith til it be whole. To staunch blood. Take Wooll in the Walkmil that commeth from the cloath and flyeth about like Doune, and beate it into pouder, then take thereof and mixe it with the white of an egge and wheate flower, and stampe them together, then lay it on a linnen cloath or Lint and apply it to the bleeding place, and it wil stanch it. For geat dan∣ger in bleeding If a man bleed and haue no present helpe, if the wound be on the foot, bind him about the ankle, if in the legges bind him about the knee, if it be on the hand,
bind him about the wrist; if it be on the arme bind him about the brawne of the arme, with a good list, and the blood wil presently staunch. For a stitch. Take good store of Cynamon grated, and put it into posset Ale very hot and drink it, and it is a present cure. A bath for the Dropsie. Take a gallond of running water, and put to it as much salt as wil make the water salt as the Sea water, then boyle it a good while, and bath the Legs therein as hot as may be suffered. For the dropsy. For the Dropsie, take Agnus castus, Fennel, Affodill, darke Wal-wort, Lupins and Wormwood, of each a hand∣ful, and boyle them in a gallon of white Wine, vntil a fourth part be consumed:☞ then strayne it, and drinke it morning and euening halfe a pinte thereof, and it wil cure the Dropsie; but you must be careful that you take not Daffodil for Affodil. Paine in the Spleene. For paine in the Spleene, take Agnus castus, Agrimo∣ny, Aniseeds, Centuary the great, and Wormwood, of each a handful, & boile them in a gallon of white wine, then straine it and let the patient drinke diuers mornings to∣gether halfe a pint thereof; and at his vsual meales let him neyther drinke Ale, Beere, nor Wine, but such as hath had the hearbe Tamoriske steeped in the same, or for want of the hearbe, let him drink out of a cup made of Tamoriske wood, and he shal surely find remedy. For paine in the side. For any pain in the side, take Mugwort and red Sage, & dry them betweene two tile stones, and then put it in a bag, and lay it to your side as hot as can be indured. For fatnes and short breath To helpe him that is exceeding fat, pursie, and short breathed: take hony clarified, and bread vnleauened & make toasts of it, and dippe the toasts into the clarified hony, and eate this diuers times with your meate. Additions, To the diseases of the Spleene. Take a lump of yron or steele, and heat it red hot, and
quench it in Wine, then giue the wine to the sicke party to drinke. For the Spleen, For the stopping of the Spleene. Take Fenel seeds and the roots, boile them in water, and after it is cleansed put to it hony and giue it the par∣ty to drinke, then seeth the hearbe in oyle and wine to∣gether, and playster wise apply it to the side. For the hardne of the Spleene. Make a playster of Worme-wood boyled in oyle, or make an oyntment of the iuyce of Worme wood, of Vi∣negar, Armoniacke, Waxe, and Oyle, mixt and melted together, and annoynt the side therewith, eyther in the Sunne, or before the fire. Diseases of the heart. Take the pouder of Galingal, and mixe it with the iuyce of Burrage, and let the offended party drinke it with sweet wine. For the passion of the heart.  heart sicke∣nesse. Take Rosemary and Sage, of each an handful, and seeth them in white wine or strong Ale, and then let the patient drinke it lukewarme. For fatnes a about the hart. Take the iuice of Fenell mixt with hony, and seeth them together til it be hard, and then eate it Euening and Morning, and it wil consume away the fatnesse. For the wind Collicke. For the wind Collicke, which is a disease both general and cruel, there be a world of remedies, yet none more approued then this which I wil repeate: you shal take a Nutmeg sound and large, and diuide it equally into foure quarters: the first morning as soone as you rise eate a quarter thereof; the second morning eate two quarters, and the third eate three quarters, and the fourth mor∣ning eate a whole Nutmegge, and so hauing made your stomacke and tast familiar therewith, eate euery mor∣ning whilst the Collicke offendeth you a whole Nutmeg dry without any composition, and fast euer an houre at least after it, and you shal find a most vnspeakable profit which wil arise from the same.
The Wind Col∣licke For the winde Collick, take a good handful of cleane wheat meale as it commeth from the Mil, and two egs, and a little wine-vinegar, and a little Aquauitae, and mingle them altogether cold, and make a cake of it, and bake it on a gridyron with a soft fire, and turne it often and tend it with basting of Aquavitae with a feather; then lay it somewhat higher then the paine is, rather then lower. For the Laske. For the Laske or extreame scouring of the belly, take the seeds of the Wood-rose, or Bryer-rose, beate it to pouded, and mixe a dramme thereof with an ounce of the conserue of Sloes and eate it, and it will in a short space bind and make the belly hard. For the bloody fluxe. For the bloody-fluxe, take a quart of Red-wine, and boile therein a handful of Shepheards purse til the hearb be very soft: then straine it, and adde thereto a quar∣ter of an ounce of Cynamon, and as much of dryed Tanners barke taken from the ouze, and both beaten to fine pouder, then giue the party halfe a pint thereof to drinke morning and euening, it being made very warm, and it will cure him. To stay a laske. To stay a sore Laske, take Plantaine water and Cy∣namon finely beaten, and the flowers of Pomgranats, and boile them wel together, then take Sugar, and the yolke of an egge, and make a candle of it, and giue it the grieued party. For the Fluxe. For the Flixe take a Stags pizzel dryed and grated and giue it in any drinke, either in Beere, Ale, or Wine, and it is most soueraigne for any Flixe whatsoeuer: So is the iawe bones of a Pike, the teeth and all dried and beaten to pouder, and so giuen the party diseased in any drinke whatsoeuer. For the worst Fluxe. To cure the worst bloody Flix that may be, take a
quart of red-wine, and a spooneful of Commin-seede, boile them together vntil halfe be consumed, then take Knot-grasse and Shepheards purse, and Plantaine, and stampe them seueral, and then straine them and take of the iuyce of each of them a good spoonful, and put them to the wine, and so seeth them againe a little: then drinke it luke-warme, halfe ouer-night, and halfe the next morning: and if i fal out to be in Winter, so that you cannot get the hearbs, then take the water of them hearbs distil'd, of each 3 spoonfuls, and vse it as before. For costiuents. For extreame costiuenesse, or binding in the body, so as a man cannot auoid his excrements, take Anniseedes, Fennicreet, nseeds, and the powder of Pyonie: of each halfe an ounce, and boile them in a quart of white wine, and drinke a good draught thereof, and it wil make a man goe to the stoole orderly, and at great ease. For wormes. For wormes in the belly, either of child or man, take Aloes Cikatrine, as much as halfe a hazel Nut, and wrap it in the pap of a roasted apple, and so let the offended party swallow it in manner of a pil fasting in the mor∣ning, or else mixe it with three or foure spoonful of Mus∣kadine, and so let the party drinke it, and it is a present cure: But if the child be either so young, or the man so weake with sicknesse, that you dare not administer any thing inwardly, then you shal dissolue your Alces in the oyle of Sauine, making it salue-like thick, then plai∣ster-wise spread it vpon Sheepes Leather, and lay it vp∣on the nauil and mouth of the stomacke of the grieued party, and it wil giue him ease; so wil also vnset Leekes chopt smal and fryde with sweet butter, and then in a linnen bag apply it hot to the nauil of the grieued party. Additions,  the diseases Take a quart of red wne, and put to it three yolkes of egges, and a peny worth of long pepper and graines, and
boyle it wel and drinke it as hot as can be suffered, or o∣therwise take an ounce of the inner barke of an Oake, and a peny-woorth of long Pepper, and boile them in  pint and better of new Milke, and drinke it hot first and last, morning and euening. Take an egge and make a little hole in the top, and put out the white, the fit vp againe with Aquavitae, stir∣ring the egge and Aquavitae til it be hard, then let the party eate the egge and it wil cure him, or otherwise take a pint of red wine and nine yolkes of egges, and twenty pepper cornes smal beaten, let them seeth vntil they be thicke, then take it off and giue the diseased par∣ty to eate nine spoonful morning and euening. asie . Take of Rue and Beets a like quantity, bruise them & take the iuyce, mixe it with clarified hony, and boyle it in red wine, and drinke it warme first and last morning and euening. two . Take Mercury, Sinkefoile, and Mallowes, and when you make pottage or broth with other hearbes, let these hearbs before named, haue most strength in the pot∣tage, and eating thereon it wil giue you two stooles and no more. Take two spooneful of the iuyce of Iuye Leaues, and drinke it three times a day, and it wil dissolue the hardnesse. Against . Take the barkes of the rootes of the Elder tree, and stampe it, and mixe it with old Ale, and drinke thereof a good harty draught. the winde . Take the crummes of white bread, and steepe it in Milke, with Allom, and adde Sugar vnto it and eate it,  it wil open the belly. For the . Take the kirnels of three Peach stones, and bruise them, seauen cornes of case pepper, and of sliced gin∣ger
a greater quantity then of the pepper, pound all to∣gether grosly and put it into a spoonfull of (Sacke which is the best) or else white wine or strong ale, and drinke it off in a great spoone, then fast two houres after and walke vp and downe if you can, if otherwise, keepe your selfe warme, and beware of melancholy. It may be an enemy at all times. For the Rup∣ture. Take of Dasies, comfrey, Polpodi, of the oake and A∣uens of each halfe a handful, two roots of Osmund▪ boile them in strong Ale and hony▪ and drinke thereof mor∣ning, noone, and night, and it will heale any reasonable rupture. Or otherwise take of Smallage, Comfrey, set∣well, polypody that growes on the ground like fearne, dai∣sies, and mores, of each a like, stampe them very smal, & boyle them well in Barme, vntill it be thick like a pultis, and so keepe it in a close vessell, & when you haue occa∣sion to vse it, make it as hot as the party can suffer it, and lay it to the place grieued, then with a trusse, trusse him vp close, & let him be carefull for straining of himselfe, and in a few dayes it will knit, during which cure giue him to drinke a draught of red wine, and put therein a good quantity of the flower of fetches finely boulted stirring it well together, and then fast an houre after. For the stone. For the violent paine of the stone, make a posset of milke and sacke, then take off the curd, and put a hand∣full of Camomll flowers into the drinke, then put it in∣to a pewter pot and let it stand vpon hot imbers, so that it may dissolue: and then drinke it as occasion shall serue:Another. Other for this griefe take the stone of an Oxe gall, and dry it in an ouen, then beate it to pouder, and take of it the quantity of a hasill-nut with a draught of good old ale or white wine. The collicke and stone. For the Collicke and stone, take hawthorne berries,
the berries of sweete briars, and ashen keyes, and dry them euery one seuerally vntil you make them into pou∣der, then put a little quantity of euery one of them to∣gether, then if you thinke good put to it the pouder of Licoras and Annseeds, to the intent that the party may the better take it, then put in a quantity of this pouder in a draught of white wine, and drinke it fasting.Another. Other∣wise you may take Smallage-seede, Parsey, Luage, Sax∣ifrage, and broome seede, of each one of them a little quantity, beate them into a pouder, and when you feele a sit of eiher of the diseases, eate of this pouder a spoon∣full at a time either in pottage, or else in the broth of a chicken, and so fast two or three houres after. A pouder for the collicke and stone. To make a pouder for the collicke and stone, take fe∣nell, parsley-seede anseed, and carraway seede, of each the waight of sixe pence, of gromel seede sax-frage seede, the roots of Filapendula, and licoras, of each the waight of twelue-pence, of gallingall▪ spikenard, and Cinamon, of each the waight of eight pence, of Seena the waight of 17. shillings, good waight, beae them al to pouder and searce it, which will waigh in all 25. shillings & 6 pence: This pouder is to be giuen in white wine and sugar in the morning fasting, & so to continue fasting two houres after; and to take of it at one time the waight of tenne pnce or twelue pence. Another. Other Physitians for the stone take a quart of renish or white wine, and two limons, and pare the vpper rinde thinne, and slice them into the wine, and as much white sope as the waight of a groate, and boyle them to a pint, and put thereto sugar according to your discretion; and so drinke it keeping your selfe warme in your bed, and lying vpon your backe. For the stone in the reynes. For the stone in the rynes, take Ameos, Camomill,
Maiden-haire, Sparrow-tongue, and Filapendula, of each a like quantity, dry it in an ouen, and then beate it to pouder, and euery morning drinke halfe a spoonefull thereof with a good draught of white wine, and it will helpe. For the stone in the bladder. For the stone in the bladder, take a Radish-roote and slit it crosse twice, then put it into a pint of white wine, and stoppe the vessell exceeding close: then let it stand all one night, and the next morning drinke it off fasting, and thus doe diuers mornings together, & it will helpe. A pouder fo the stone in the bladder. For the stone in the bladder take the kernells of slos and dry them on a tile-stone, then beate them to pou∣der, then take the rootes of Alexanders, parsly, pellitory, and holhocke, of euery of their roots a like quantity, and seeth them all in white wine, or else in the broath of a young chicken: then straine them into a cleane vessell, and when you drinke of it, put into it halfe a spoonefull of the pouder of slow kernels. Also if you take the oyle of Scorpion, it is very good to annoint the members, & and the tender part of the belly against the bladder. A bath for the stone. To make a bath for the stone, take mallowes, holihocke, and lilly roots, and linseed, pellitory of the wall, and seeth them in the broth of a sheepes head, and bath the reynes of the backe therewith oftentimes, for it will o∣pen the straightnes of the water conduits, that the stone may haue issue, and asswage the paine, and bring out the grauell with the vrine: but yet in more effect, when a plaister is made and laid vnto the reines and belly im∣mediately after the bathing. A water for the stone. To make a water for the stone, take a gallond of new milke of a red Cow, and put therein a handfull or Pelli∣tory of the wall, and a handfull of wild time, and a hand∣full of Saxifrage & a handfull of Parsly, & two or three
radish roots sliced and a quantity of Philipendula roots, let them lie in the milke a night, and in the morning put the milke with the hearbs into a still, and distill them with a moderate fire of char cole or such like: then when you are to vse the water, take a draught of renish wine or white wine, and put into it fiue spoonefull of the distilled water, and a little sugar and nutmeg sli∣ced, and then drinke of it, the next day meddle not with it, but the third day doe as you did the first day, and so euery other day for a weekes space. Difficulty of Vrine. For the difficulty of vrin, or hardnesse to make wa∣ter, take Smallage, Dill, Any-seeds and Burnet, of each a like quantity, and dry them and beate them to fine pou∣der, and drinke halfe a spooefull thereof with a good draught of white wine. For hot vrine. If the Vrine be hot and burning, the party shall vse euery morning to drinke a good draught of new milke and sugar mixt together, and by all meanes to abstaine from beere that is old, hard, and tart, & from all meates and sawces which are sowre and sharpe. For the stran∣gullion. For the strangullion, take Saxifrage, Polipody, of the Oake, the roots of beanes, and a quantity of Raysins, of euery one three handfull or more, and then two gal∣londs of good wine, or else wine lees, and put it into a slerpentary and make thereof a good quantity, & giue the sicke to drinke morning and euening a spoonefull at once. For pissing in bed. For them that cannot hold their water in the night time, take Kidds hoofe and dry it and beate it into pou∣der, and giue it to the patient to drinke, either in bee or ale foure or fiue times. For the rup∣ture. For the rupture or bursnesse in men, take Comphry and Frnosmund, and beate them together with
yellow waxe and Deares suet vntil it come vnto a salue, and then apply it vnto the broken place, and it wil knit it: also it shal good for the party to take Comphry roots, and rost them in hot imbers as you rost Wardens, and let the party eate them, for they are very soueraine for the rupture, especially beeing eaten in a morning fa∣sting, and by al meanes let him weare a strong trusse til he be whole. Additions, To the diseases of the reines & bladder. Take Goates clawes and burne them in a new earthen pot to pouder, then put of the pouder into broth or pot∣tage and eate it therein, or otherwise take Rue, Parsley, and gromel, and stampe them together and mixe it with wine and drinke it. For he that can not hold his water. Take Agnus castus and Castoreum and seeth them to∣gether in wine and drinke thereof, also seeth them in vinegar and hot lap it about the priuy parts, and it wil helpe. For the Gono∣rea or seding of seed. Take Malmsey and Butter, and warme it and wash the reines of the backe, whereupon you find paine, then take oyle of mace and annoynt the backe therewith. For weakenesse in the backe. First wash the reines of the backe with warme white wine, then annoynt al the backe with the ointment cal∣led Perstuaneto. For heat in the Rines. For comforting and strength∣ning of the backe. Take a leg of Beefe, a handful of Fenel roots, a hand∣ful of parsley roots, two roots of comphry, one pound of raisins of the Sunne, a pound of damaske prunes, and a quarter of a pound of dates, put al these together, and boile them very soft with sixe leaues of np, sixe leaues of clary, twelue leaues of bittany of the wood, and a lit∣tle harts tongue, when they are sod very soft, take them into the same broth againe with a quart of sacke, and a penny-worth of large mace, and of this drinke at your pleasure.
For the Heme∣roides. For the Hemeroides, which is a troublesome and a sore griefe, take of Dll, Dogge-fennell, and Pellitory of Spaine, of each halfe a handfull, and beae it in a morter with sheepes suet and blacke sope till it come to a salue, and then lay it plasterwise to the sore, and it will giue the griefe ease. For the piles or Hemeroids. For the piles or Hemerods, take halfe a pinte of ale, and a good quantity or pepper, and as much allome as a walnut: boyle all this together till it be as thicke as birdlime or thicker, this done take the iuyce of white violets, and the iuyce of housleeke, and when it is almost cold, put in the iuice and straine them all together, and with this oyntment annoynt the sore place twice a day. Otherwise for this griefe take lead and grate it small, and lay it vpon the sores: or else take muskles dried and beate to pouder, and lay it on the sores. For the falling of the funda∣ment▪ If a mans fundament fall downe through some cold taken or other cause, let it be forthwith put vp againe: then take the pounder of Towne cresses dried, and strew it gently vpon the fundament, and annoynt the reines of the backe with hony,Additions, to the diseases of the pe part. and then about it strew the pou∣der of Cummin and Calasine mixt together, and ease will come thereby. For the Heme∣roids. Take a great handfull of orpyns, and bruise them be∣tweene your hands till they be like a salue, and then lay them vpon a cloth & bind them fast to the fundament. For the greene sicknesse. To helpe the greene sicknesse, take a pottle of white wine and a handfull of Rosemary, a handfull of worme∣wood, an ounce of cardus benedictus seed, a dramme of Cles: all these must be put into the white wine in a iugge, and couered very close, and let it steepe a day and a night before the party drinke of it, then let her drinke of it euery morning and two houres before supper:
and to take it for a fortnight, and let her stirre as much as she can, the more the better, and as earely as she can: Otherwise for this sicknesse take Isop, Fennell, and Pe∣ny-royall, of these three one good handfull, take two ounces of Currants, seeth these in a pint of faire water to the halfe, then straine the hearbs from the liquor, and put thereto two ounces of fine sugar, & two spoone∣fulls of white wine vinegar, let the party drinke eue∣ry morning foure spoonefulls thereof and walke vp∣pon it. To increase a womans milke. To increase a womans milke, you shall boyle in strong posset-ale good store of Colworts, and cause her to drink euery meale of the same, also if she vse to eate boyled Colworts with her meate, it will wonderfully increase her milke also. To dry vp milke. To dry vp womans milke, take red sage, and hauing stampt it and strayned the iuyce from the same, adde thereunto as much wine vinegar, and stirre them well together, then warming it on a flat dish ouer a few coales steepe therein a sheete of browne paper, then making a hole in the midst thereof for the nipple of the breast to goe through, couer all the breast ouer with the paper, and remoue it as occasion shall serue, but be very carefull it be laid very hot to. Some are of opinion, that for a woman to milke to her breasts vpon the earth will cause her milke to dry, but I referre it to triall. A pultus for sore breasts in women. To helpe womens sore breasts, when they are swel∣led or else inflamed: Take violet leaues and cut them small, and seeth them in milke or running water with wheate bran, or wheate bread crummes: then lay it to the sore as hot as the party can indure it. For ease in child bearing. If a woman haue a strong and hard labour: Take foure spoonefull of another womans milke, and giue
it the woman to drinke in her Labour, and she shal be deliuered presently. Child dead in the wobe. If a woman by mischance haue her child dead within her, she shal take vitander, Felwort, and Penyroyall, and stampe them, and take of each a spoonful of the iuyce, and mixe it with old wine and giue it her to drinke, and she shal soone be deliuered without danger. Apursle to conceie. To make a woman to conceiue, let her either drinke Mugwort steeped in wine, or else the pouder thereof mix with wine, as shall best please her tast. Additions, To . Take the pouder of Corrall finely ground and eate it in a ear egge and it will sty the flux. To  wo∣men owers. Against the flowers. Against womens Tmes make a pessary of the iuyce of Mugwort, o the water that it is dden in and ap∣ply it▪ but if it be for the flux of the fowers, take the iuyce of plantaine and drinke i ed wine. For the matrix. Take a Fomentation made of the water wherein the Leaues and flowers of Tuson is sodden to drinke vp the superfltes of the Matrixe, it cleanseth the entrance, but this hearbe would be gathered in haruest; if a wo∣man haue paine in the Matrixe, set on the fire water that Amomum hath bin sodden in, and of the decoction make a pessary and it wil giue ease. A generaling for a  in . Take two or three egges, and they must be neyther rst nor aw but betweene both, and then take butter that salt  came in, and put it into the egges and sup them off, and eate a peece of browne bread to them and drinke a draught of smal Ale. To dluer the ded . Take the root of Arstoochia rotunda and boyle it in wine and oie; make a fomentation thereof and it helps. To increase milke. Take the buds and tender crops of Briony, and boile them in broth or pottage, and let the woman eat there∣of, it is soueraine.
For a woman that is n brought in bed, and oundeth much. Take Mugwort, motherwort, and mints, the quaintity of a handful in al, seeth them together in a pint of malm∣sey, and giue her to drinke thereof two or three spoone∣ful at a time, and it wil appeaseth her swounding. To prouoke sleepe. Take Hebane stamped and mixt with vinegar and ap∣ply it plaister wise ouer al the forehead, and it wil cause sleepe. For sre brests. Take Sage, Smallage, mallowes, and Plantaine, of each an handful beat them al wel in a morter, then put vnto them oatemeale and milke, and spread it on a fine linnen cloath an inch thicke, and lay it to the brest or brests, or otherwise take white bread Leauen and straine it with Creame, and put thereto two or three yolkes of egges, Salt, oyle, or oyle of Roses, and put it vpon a soft fire til it be warme, and so apply it to the brest For Morphew of both kinds. For Morphew, whether it be white or blacke, take of the Lethargy of gold a dram, of vnwrought Brimstone two drams, beate them into fine pouder, then take of the oyle of Roses, and Swines grease, of each a like quantity, and grind them al together with halfe a dram of cam∣phire and a little venegar, and annoynt the same there∣with morning and euening. To breed haire. To breed haire, take Southern-wood and burne it to ashes, and mixe it wel with common oyle, then annoynt the bald place therewith morning and euening, and it wi breed haire exceedingly. For the Gout. For the gout, take Aristolochia rotunda, Althea Bet∣tony, and the rootes of wild Neepe, and the rootes of the wild docke cut in peeces after the vpper Rind is taken a∣way, of each a like quantity, boyle then al in running water til they be soft and thicke: then stampe them in a morter as smal as may, and put thereto a little quan∣tity of chimney soot, and a pint or beter of new milke
of a Cow which is all of one entire colour, and as much of the vrine of a man that is fasting, and hauing stirred them all wel together, boyle them once againe on the fire, then as hot as the party can suffer it, apply it to the grieued place, and it wil giue him ease. For the Ciatica For the Cyatica, take of Mustard seed a good hand∣full, and as much in weight of Hony, and as much in weight of figges, and crummes of white bread halfe so much, then with strong vinegar beate it in a morter till it come vnto a salue, then apply it vnto the grieued place, and it will giue the grieued party ease, so wil al∣so a plaister of Oxicrotium, if it be continually warme vpon the same. For any payne o swelling, or the stinging of Venemous beasts. To helpe all manner of swellings or aches, in what part of the body soeuer it be, or the stinging of any venemous beast, as Adder, Snake, or such like: take Horehound, Smallage▪ Porrets, small mallowes, and wild tansey, of each a like quantity, and bruise them or cut them small: then seeth them altogether in a pan with Milke, oatemeale, and as much Sheepes suet, or Deares suet as an Hens egge, and let it boyle till it be a thicke playster, then lay it vpon a blew woollen cloath, and lay it to the griefe as hot as one can suffer it. For swellings in the leg or feete. For any swelling in the legges or feete, take a good handful of water Cresses and shread them small▪ and put them in an earthen pot, and put thereto thicke Wine Lees, and wheat bran, and Sheeps suet, of each of them alike quantity, and let them boile together vntill they be thicke, then take a linnen cloth bind it about the sore and swelling as hot as the party grieued can indure it, & let it remayne on a whole night, and a day without any remouing, and when you take it away lay to it a fresh plaiser, hot, as before, and it wil take away both the
paine and the swelling. Other Surgions for this griefe take hony and beere and heat them together, and there∣with bath the swelling both morning and euening. A water to wash a sore with. To wash any sore or Vlcer, take running water and Bolcarmoniacke and Camphire, and boyle them together and dip in a cloath, and lay it to the sore as hot as may be indured, also Plantaine Water is good to kill the heate of any sore: or if you take Woodbine leaues and bruise them smal, it wil heale a sore; or if you wash a sore with Veriuyce, that hath beene burnt or scalded, it is a present remedy. A pultis for a sore. There be diuers others which for this griefe, take the greene of Goose dung and boyle it in fresh butter, then strayne it very cleane and vse it. Also Sallet oyle and Snow water beaten together, will cure any scald or burning. For any olde sore. To cure any old sore how grieuous soeuer it be, take of new milke three quarts, a good handful of Plantain and let it boile til a pint be consumed: then adde three ounces of Allom made in powder, and one ounce and a halfe of white Sugar candy powdered. Also then let it boile a little til it haue hard Curd, then straine it, with this warme wash the Vlcer, and all the member about it: then dry it, and lay vpon the vlcer, vnguentum Basi∣licon spread on lint, and your diminium plaister ouer it, for this strengthneth and killeth the itch: but if you find this is not sharpe enough, then take of milke a quart, Al∣lom in pouder two ounces, vinegar a spoonful, when the milke doth seeth, put in the Allom and vinegar: then take off the curd, and vse the rest as was before said, and it wil cure it. For any scabs or itch. For scabs or itch take vnguentum populion, and there∣with annoint the party and it wil helpe, but if it be more
strong and ranke, take an ounce of Nerue oyle, and three penyworth of Quicksiluer, and beate and worke them together, vntil you see that assuredly the Quicksiluer is Kild, then let the party annoynte therewith the palmes of his hands, the boughs at his elbowes, his arme pits and hams, and it wil cure al his body. For the Lepro∣sie. To cure the Leprosie, take the iuyce of colworts, and mixe it with Allom and strong Ale, and annoint the Lea∣per therewith morning and euening, and it wil cleanse him wonderfully, especially if he be purged first, and haue some part of his corrupt blood taken away. To take away pimples. To take away either pimples from the face, or any o∣ther part of the body, take Virgin wax, and Sperma caeti, of each a like quantity, and boyle them together, and dip in a fine Linnen cloth, and as it cooles dippe it wel of both sides, then lay it vppon another faire cloath vp∣on a table, and then fold vp a cloath in your hands, and al to slight it with the cloath, then take as much as wil couer the grieued place. Priuy parts burnt. If any man haue his priuy parts burnt, take the ashes of a fine Linnen cloath in good quantity, and put it into the former oyle of egges, and annoynt the sore member therewith, and it wil cure it. For any bur∣ning. For any burning, take sixe new layd egges and roast them very hard, and take out the yolkes thereof, & put them into an earthen pot, and set it ouer the fire on hote imbes, and then whilst the egges looke blacke, stirre them with a slice til they come to an oyle, which oyle take and clarifie and put into a glasse by it selfe, & there∣with annoynt any burning, and it wil cure it. For any scal∣ding. For any scalding with hot water, oile or otherwise; take good creame, & set it on the fire, and put into it the greene which growes on a stone wal, take also yarrow,
the grene of elder barke and fire grasse, and chop them small, then put them into the creame, and stirre it well till it come to a oyle salue, then straine it and annoynt the sore with it. A pultis to dry a sore. To drye vp any sore, take Smallage, Groundsill, wild mallowes and violet leaues: chop them small and boyle them in milke with bruised Oatemeale and sheepes suet, and so apply it to the sore. To eate away dead flesh. To eate away dead flesh, take Stubble-wort, and fold it vp in a red docke leafe, or red wortleafe, and so rost it in the hot imbers and lay it hot to any sore, and it will fret away all the dead flesh, or otherwise, if you strew vpon the sore a little Precipitate it will eate away the dead flesh. A water to heale wounds. To make a water to heale all manner of wounds, you shall take Iuph-wort flowers, leaues and roots, and in March or Aprill when the flowers are at the best, distill it, then with that water bath the wound, and lay a linnen cloth well therewith in the wound, and it will heale it. To heale any wound. To heale any wound or cut in any flesh or part of the body: First if it be fit to be stitcht stich it vp, and then take Vnguentum aurum, and lay it vpon a pleagant of lint as bigge as the wound, and then ouer it lay a dimi∣nium plaister made of Sallet oyle and red lead, and so dresse it at least once in foure and twenty houres, but if it be a hollow wound, as some thrust in the body or other members, then you shall take Balsamum cepha∣lcum, and warming it on a Chafing dish and coales, p the tent therein and so put it into the wound, then lay your plaister of dmmum ouer it, and do thus at least once a day till it be whole. For sinewes▪ cut or shrunke. If a mans sinewes be cut or shrunke, he shall goe to to the roote of the wild neepe which is like woodbine▪
and make a hole in the midst of the roote, then couer it wel againe that no ayre goe out not in, nor raine, nor other moysture: thus let it abide a day and a night, then go and open it, and you shall finde therein a cer∣tayne lyquor: then take out the lyquor and put it into a cleare glasse, and doe thus euery day whilst you finde any moysture in the hole; and this must onely bee done in the moneths of April and May: then annoynte the sore threwith against the fire, then wet a linnen cloath in the same lyquor, and lap it about the sore, and the verue wil soone be perceiued. To breake any . To breake any Impostume, and to ripe it only, take the greene Melt plaister, and lay it thereunto, and it is sufficient. Additions, ☞ To generall  of Sur¦gey, . For buning, or , with . Take Plantaine water, or Sallet oyle and running wa∣ter bearen together, and therewith annoynte the sore with a feather, till the fire be taken out, then take the white of egges, and beate them to oyle, which done, take a Hare skinne and clip the haire into the oyle, and make it as thicke as you may spread it vpon a fine linnen cloath, and so lay it vpon the sore, and remooue it not, vntill it be whole, and if any rise vp of it selfe, clip it away with your sheares, and if it bee not perfectly whole, then take a little of the oyntment and lay it vn∣to the same place againe: otherwise take halfe a bushell of Glouers shreads of all sorts, and so much of run∣ning water as shal be thought conuenient to seeth them, and put thereto a good quarter of a pound of Barrowes grease, and then take halfe a bushell of the doune of Cats tailes, and boyle them altogether, continually stiring them, vntill they be sodden that they may be strayned into an earthen pot or glasse, and with it an∣noynt the sore.
Or else take of Caprefollij, Mouseare, ground-Iuy, and Hens dung of the reddest or of the yellowest, and frie them with May-butter altogether vntil it be brown, thkn straine it through a cleane cloath, and annoynt the sore therewith. For burnings o scaldings on the ce. Take the middle rind of the Elme tree, and lay it two or three houres in faire running water till it waxe opye like glew, and then annoynt the sore therewith: Or o∣therwise, take sheepes tallow and sheepes dung, and mixe them together till they come to a salue, and then apply it to the sore. An oyntment for burning. Take Plantaine leaues, daisie leaues, the greene bark of Elders, and greene Germaunders, stampe them alto¦gether with fresh butter or with oyle, then straine it through a linnen cloath, and with a feather annointe the sore till it be whole. Take of oyle Oliue a pint, Turpentine a pound, vn∣wrought wax halfe a pound, Rsen a quarter of a pound, sheeps Suet two pound, then take of Orpents, Smallage, Ragwort, Plantaine, and Sickle-wort, of each a good handful, chop all the hearbs very smal, and boile them in a pan altogether vpon a soaking fire, and stirre them exceeding much till they be wel incorporate together, then take it from the fire and straine al through a strong canuasse cloth into cleane pots or glasses, and vse it as your occasion shal serue, eyther to annoint, taint, or plai∣ster. Vlcers & Sores. A salue for any old sore Otherwise take Poplar buds, and Elder buds, stampe and straine them, then put thereto a little Venice-tur∣pentine, Waxe, and Rosin, and so boile them toge∣ther, and therewith dresse the sore, or else ake two handful of plantaine leaues, bray them smal, and straine out the iuyce, then put to it as much womans milke, a
spoonefull of hony, a yolke of an egge, and as much wheate flower as you thinke will bring it to a salue, then make a plaister thereof and lay it vnto the sore, renewing it once in foure and twenty houres. To take away dead flesh. Take an ounce of Vnguentum apostolorum, and an ounce of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, and put them to∣gether in a pott being first well wrought together in a bladder, and if the flesh be weake, put to it a little fine white sugar, and therewith dresse the sore, or otherwise take onely Precypitate in fine pouder, and strew it on the sore. A water for a . Take a gallon of Smithes sleacke water, two hand∣fulls of sage, a pint of hony, a quart of ale, two ounces of Allom, and a little white copporas, seeth them all toge∣ther till halfe be consumed, then straine it, and put it in∣to a cleane vessell, and therewith wash the sore. Or o∣therwise take cleane running water and put therein roch allom and madder, and let them boyle till the allom and the madder be consumed, then take the clearest of the water and therewith wash the sore. Or else take Sage, Fenell, aad sinquefoyle, of each a good handfull, boyle them in a gallond of running wa∣tr til they be tender, then straine the liquor from the hearbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of roch allom, and let it seeth againe a little till the allom be melted, then take it from the fire and vse it, thus, dip lint in it warme and lay it to the sore, and if it be hollow apply more lint, then make a little bolster of linnen cloth, and wett it well in the water, then wring out the water, and so bind on the bolster close. A blacke plai¦ste to heale old sres and kil inflamati∣on. Take a pint of sallet oyle and put int it sixe ounces of red lead, and a little ceruse or white lead, then set it ouer a gentle fire, and let it boyle a long season stirring
it wel til it be stiffe, which you shal trye in this order; let it drop from your sticke or slice vppon the bottome of a saucer, and so stand vntil it be cold, and then if it be wel boyled, it wil bee stiffe and very blacke, then take it off, and let it stand a little, and after straine it through a cloath into a Bason, but first annoynt the Ba∣son with Sallet oyle, and also your fingers, and so make it vp into roules plaisterwise, and spread it and apply it as occasion shal serue. An oyntment to . Take mallowes and beetes, and seeth them in Water, then drye away the Water from them, and beate the hearbs wel with old Boares grease, and so apply it vnto the Appostume hot. For the sting∣ing o any ∣der or vene∣mous thing. Take a handful of rue and stampe it with rusty Bacon til it come to a perfect salue, and therewith dresse the sore til it be whole. For any veno∣ming. If the party be outwardly venomed, take Sage and bruise it wel and apply it vnto the sore, renewing it at least twice a day, but if it be inwardly, then let the par∣ty drinke the iuyce of Sage eyther in Wine or ale mor∣ning and euening. For a ring∣worme. Take Selladine early in the morning, and bruise it wel, and then apply it to the sore, and renewing it twice or thrice a day. For the itch. Take of campheire one dramme, of Quicksiluer foure penny-worth killed wel with Vinegar, then mixe it with two penny-worth of oyle de Bay, and therwith annoynt the body. Or otherwise take red onions and seeth them in running water a good while, then bruise the onions smal, and with the Water they were sodden in, straine them in, then wash the infected place with the same. For the dryed Sabbe. Take a great quantity of the hearbe Bennet, and as
much of red nettles, pound them well and straine them, and with the iuyce wash the patient naked before the fire, and so let it drinke in and wash him againe, and doe so diuers dayes till he be whole. To kill the Itch . Take a penyworth of white copperas, and as much greene copperas, a quarter of an ounce of white Mercu∣ry, a hafe peny-worth of Allom and burne it, and set all ouer the fire with a pint of faire water, and a quarter of a pint of wine Vinegar, boyle all these together till they come to halfe a pint, & then annoint the ore therewith. To take away the  of the mal Poxe. Take Barrowes grease a pretty quantity, and take an apple & pare it and take the chore cleane out, then chop your apple and your Barrowes grease together, and set it ouer the fire that it may melt but not boyle, then take it from the fire, and put thereto a pretty quantity of rose water and stirre all together till it be cold, and keepe it in a cleane vessell, and then annoynt the face there∣with. For the French or Spanish pox. Take quicksiluer and kill it with fasting spittle, then take verdigrease, Arabecke, Turpentine, Oyle oliue, and Populion, and mixe them together to one entire oynt∣ment, and anoynt the Sores therewith, & keepe the par∣ty exceeding warme. Or otherwise, take of Allom bur∣ned, of Rossin, Frankensence, Populion, oyle of Roses, Oyle de bay, Oyle olyue, greene Copperas, verdigrease, White lead, Mercury sublmate of each a pretty quantity but of Allome most, then beate to pouder the symples that are hard, and melt your oyles, and cast in your pouders and stirre al wel together, then strayne them through a cloth, and apply it warme to the sores; or else take of Cpons grease that hath toucht no water, the iuice of Rue and the fine pouder of Pepper, and mixe them together to an oyntment, and apply it round about the sores,
but let it not come into the sores, and it will dry them vp. To put out the French or Spa∣nish Poxe. Take of Treakle halfe pennyworth, of long Pepper as much, and of graynes as much, a little ginger, and a little quantity of Licoras, warme them with strong ale, and let the party drinke it off, and lie downe in his bed and take a good sweate: and then when the sores arise, vse some of the oyntment before re∣hearsed. To make the scabs of the French Pox to fall away. Take the iuyce of red Fennell, and the iuyce of Sen greene and Stone hony, and mixe them very well toge∣ther till it be thicke, and with it annoynt the party, but before you doe annoynt him you shall make this water. Take Sage & seeth it in very faire water from a gallond to a pottle, and put therein a quantity of hony and some allom, and let them boyle a little together; when you haue strained the hearbs from the water,Additions, to greene wound. then put in your hony and your allom, and therewith wash the poxe first, and let it dry in well, and then lay on the a∣foresayd oyntment. A deffensitiue for a greene wound. Take the oyle of the white of an egge, wheate-flow∣er, a little hony and venice Turpentine, take and stirre all these together, and so vse it about the wound but not within, & if the wound do bleed, then adde to this salue a little quantity of Bolearmonyak. A salue for a greene wound. Take Apoponax and Galbanum, of each an ounce, Am∣monianum, and Belynd of each two ounces, of Lethar∣gy of gold one pound and a halfe, new waxe halfe a pound, Lapis Calamniars one ounce, Turpentine foure ounces, Myrrh two ounces, Oyle de bay one ounce, Thusse one ounce, Aristolochia-roots two ounces, oyle of Roses two ounces, saet oyle two pound, all the hard sym∣ples must bee beaten to fine powder and seased,
take also three pints of right Wine vinegar, and put your foure gummes into the vinegar a whole day before, till the gummes be dissolued, then set it ouer the fire and let it boile very softly vntil your vinegar bee as good as boiled away, then take an Earthen pot with a wide mouth, and put your oyle in and your waxe, but your Waxe must be scraped before you put it in, then by a little at oce put in your Lethargy and stir it exceeding∣ly, then put in all your gummes and all the rest, but let your Turpentine be last, and so let it boile till you see it grow to be thicke, then poure it into a Bason of water▪ and worke it with oyle of roses for sticking vnto your hands, and make it vp in oules plaisterwise, and here is to be noted, tat your oyle of roses must not be boy∣led with the rest, but after it is taken from the fire a little before the Turpentine. A water to heal an greene wound, cut, or ore. Take three good handfull of Sage, and as much of Honi-suckle leaues and the flowers cleane picked, then take one pound of Roch Allome, and a quarter of a pound of right English Honey clarified, halfe a penny-woorth of graines, and two gallonds of running Wa∣ter, then put all the sayd things into the water, and let them seeth til halfe be consumed, then take it from the fire til it be almost cold, and strayne it through a cleane cloath, and put it vp in a glasse, and then eyther on taint or pleagant vse it as you haue occasion. T staunch bd, & draw  toge∣ther Take a quart of Rie flower and temper it with running water, and make dough thereof, then according to the bignesse of the wound lay it in with the deffensitiue plai∣ster, before rehearsed, ouer it, and euery dressing make it lesse and lesse till the wound be closed. A  oyle for shinking of sinewes. Take a quart of Neates foot oyle, a quart of Oxegals, a quart of Aquauitae, and a quart of rose water, a hand∣full
of rosemary strypt, and boyle all these together till halfe be consumed, then presse and strayne it, and vse it according as you find occasion. For a wound in the gus. Take hony, pitch and butter, and seeth them toge∣ther, and annoynt the hurt against the fire, and tent the sore with the same. For pricking with a thorn. Take grounsell and stampe it, and seeth it with sweet milke till it be thicke, then temper it with blacke sope and lay it to the sore. To gather flesh in wounds. Take Rosin a quarter of a pound, of waxe three oun∣ces, of oyle of Roses one ounce and a halfe, seeth all them together in a pint of white wine till it come to skimming, then take it from the fire and put thereto two ounces of Venice Turpentine, & apply it two the wound or sore. Additions, for ach or swel∣lings. For the Cyaty∣ca. Take mustard made with strong vinegar, the crums of browne bread, with a quantity of hony and sixe figgs minxt, temper all together well and lay it vpon a cloth plaisterwise, put a thinne cloath betweene the plaister and the flesh and lay it to the place grieued as oft as need requires. A yellow  cloth for a paine or sl∣ling. Take a pound of fine Rozin, of oyle de bay two oun∣ces, of Populion as much, of Frankensence halfe a pound, of oyle of Spyke two ounces, of oyle Camomile two oun∣ces, of oyle of Roses two ounces, of Waxe halfe a pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a pound, melt them and stirre them well together and then dip linnen clothes therein, and apply the seare cloath as you shall haue occasion, & note the more oyle you vse, the more supler the feare cloath s, and the lesse oyle the stiffer it will be. For bruises swelled. Take a little blacke sope, salt and hony, and beate them well together, and spread it on a browne paper and apply it to the bruise.
For swelled leg. Take mallowes and seeth them in the dregges of good Ale or milke, and make a plaister thereof, and apply it to the place swelled. For any ache. Take in the moneth of may, Henbane, and bruise it wel and put it into an earthen po and put thereto a pint of Sallet oyle and set it in the Sunne til it be all one sub∣stance, then annoynt the ache therewith. ☞ A playster for any paine in the ioynts. Take halfe a pound of vnwrought wax, as much Ro∣sin, one ounce of galbanum, a quarter of a pound of Le∣thargy of gold, three quarters of white Leade, beaten to pouder and earst, then take a pint of Neates foot oile, and set it on the fire in a smal vessel which may containe the rest, and when it is all moulten, then put in the pouders and stirre it fast with a flice, and trye it vppon the bottome of a saucer, when it beginneth to be some∣what hard, then take it from the fire, and annoynt a faire boord with Neates foote oyle, and as you may handle it for heate, worke it vp in roules, and it wil keepe fiue or sixe yeares, being wrapped vp close in papers, and when you wil vse it, spread of it thin vpon new lockram or lea∣ther somewhat bigger then the griefe, and so if the griefe remooue follow it, renewing it morning and eue∣ning, and let it be somewhat warme when it is layd on, and beware of taking cold, and drinking hot wines. Additions, To  in the Bones. For bones out o ioynt, or sin∣newes sprung or strained. Take foure or fiue yolkes of egges, hard sodden or rosted, and take the branches of great morrel, and the berries in Summer, and in Winter the rootes, and bray all wel together in a morter with sheeps milke, and then fye it vntil it bee very thicke, and so make a plaister thereof, and lay it about the sore, and it wil take away both paine and swelling. A bath for bro∣ken ioynts. Take a gallond of standing lye, put to it of Plantain and knot-grasse, of each two handful, of worme-wood, and
comfrey, of each a handful, and boile all these together in the lye a good while, and when it is luke warme bath the broken member therewith, and take the buds of Elder gathered in March, and stripped downeward and a little boyle them in water, then eate them in oyle and very little wine Vinegar, a good quantity at a time in the morning euer before meat, or an houre before the Patient go to dinner, and it much auailes to the knitting of bones. ☜ A general bath for clearing the skin, and com∣forting the bo∣dy. Take rosemary, fetherfew, orgaine, Pellitory of the wall, fennell, mallowes, violet leaues, and Nettles, boyle all these together, and when it is wel sodden put to it two or three gallonds of milke, then let the party stand or sit in it an houre or two, the bath reaching vp to the stomacke, and when they come out they must go to bed and sweat, beware taking of cold. A soueraine help for broken bone. Make a plaister of wheat flower and the whits of egges and spread it on a double linnen cloth, and lay the plai∣ster on an euen board, and lay the broken limbe thereon, and set it euen according to nature, and lap the plaister about it and splint it, and giue him to drinke Knitwort the iuyce thereof twice and no more, for the third time it wil vnknit, but giue him to drinke nine dayes each day twice the iuyce of comfrey, daisies and osmund in stale Ale and it shal knit it, and let the fore-said play∣ster lye to, ten dayes at the least, and when you take it away do thus, take hore-hound, red fennel, Hounds tong, Wal-wort, and Pelitory, and seeth them, then vnroule the member and take away the splints and then bath the linnen and the plaister about the member in this bath, vntil it haue soat so long that it come gently away of it efe, then take the afore sayd plaister and lay thereto fiue or sixe daies very hot, and let each plaister lye a day
and a night and alwayes splint it wel, and after cherish it with the oyntments before Rehearsed, for broken bones, and keep the party from vnwholsome meats and drinks til he be whoe, and if the hurt be on his arme let him beare a bal of greene hearbs in his hand to preuent the shrinking of the hand and sinewes. For any Feuer. Take Sage, Ragwort, Yarrow, vnset Lekes of each a like quantity, stamp them with Bay salt and appy them to the wrests of the hands. To expel heate in a Feuer. Blanch Almonds in the cold water, and make milke of them (but it must not seeth) then put to it sugar, and in the extremity of heat, see that you drinke thereof. The royall me∣dicine for Fe∣uers. Take three spooneful of Ale and a little Saffron, and bruise and straine it thereto, then adde a quarter of a spoonful of fine Treacle and mixt altogether, and drinke it when the fit comes. Another. Take two roots of Crow-foot that growes in a marsh ground, which haue no little rootes about them, to the number of twenty or more, and a little of the Earth that is about them, and do not wash them, and adde a little quantity of Salt, and mixe all wel together, and lay it on linnen cloathes, and bind it about your thumbs betwixt the first and the neather ioynt, and let it lie nine daies vnremooued, and it wil expel the Feuer. An approoued Medicine for the greatest Laske or Flixe. ☞ Take a right Pomwater the greatest you can get, or else two little ones, roast them very tender to pap, then take away the skinne and the core and vse only the pap, and the like quantity of Chalke finely scraped, mix them both together vppon a Trencher before the fire, and
worke them wel to a plaister, then spread it vppon a lin∣nen cloth warmed very hot as may be suffered, and so bind it vnto the nauill for twenty foure houres, vse this medicine twice or thrice or more, vntil the Laske bee stayed. OF Oyle of Swal∣lowes. To make the oyle of Swallowes, take Lauendar cot∣ton, Spke, Knot grasse, Rbwort, Balme, Valerian, Rose∣mary tops, Woodbine tops, Vine strings, French mallows, the tops of Alecost, Strawberry strings, Tusan, Plantain, Walnut tree leaues, the tops of young Baies, Isop, violet leaues, Sage of vertue, fine Roman Wormwood, of each of them a handful, Cammomile and Red roses, of each two handful, twenty quicke Swallowes, and beate them altogether in a great morter, and put to them a quart of Neats foot oile, or May butter, and grind them all well together with two ounces of Cloues wel beaten, then put them altogether in an earthen pot, and stop it very close that no ayre come into it, and set it nine dayes in a Seller or cold place, then open your pot and put into it halfe a pound of white or yellow waxe cut very smal, & a pint of oyle or butter, then set your pot close stopped into a pan of water, and let it boile sixe or eight houres, and then straine it: this oyle is exceeding soueraine for any broken bones, bones out of ioynt, or any paine or griefe eyther in the bones or sinewes. To make oyle of Camomile. To make oyle of Camomile, take a quart of Sallet oyle and put it into a glasse, then take a handful of Camomile and bruise it, and put it into the oyle, and let them stand in the same twelue daies, onely you must shift it euery three dayes, that is to straine it from the old Camomile, and put in as much of new, and that oile is very soueraine for any griefe proceeding from cold causes.
To make oyle of Lauender. To make oyle of Lauender, take a pint of Sallet oyle and put it into a glasse, then put to it a handfull of La∣uender, and let it stand in the same twelue dayes, and vse it in all respects as you did your oyle of cammomile. To make smooth hands. To make an oyle which shall make the skinne of the hands very smooth, take Almonds and beate them to oyle, then take whole cloues and put them both toge∣ther into a glasse, & set it in the Sunne fiue or sixe dayes, then strayne it, and with the same annoynt your hands euery night when you goe to bed, otherwise as you haue conuenient leasure. To make Dr. Steuens water. To make that soueraigne water which was first inuen∣ted by Doctor Steuens, in the same forme as he deliue∣red the Receite to the Arch-bishop of Canturbury, a lit∣tle before the death of the sayd Doctor. Take a gallond of good Gascoyne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, ci∣namon, Nutmegs, Graines, cloues, bruised, Fennell-seeds carraway-seeds, Origanum; of euery of them a like quan∣tity, that is to say a dramme: Then take Sage, wild Mar∣ioram, Pny-royall, Mints, red roses, Time, Pellitory, rose∣mary, wild time, commomill, Lauender, of each of them a handfull, then bray the spices smal, & bruise the hearbs & put all into the wine, and let it stand so twelue houres, only stirre it diuers times, then distill it by a Lymbecke, and keepe the first water by it selfe for that is the best, then keepe the second water for that is good, & for the last neglect it not, for it is very wholesome though the worst of the three. Now for the vertue of this water it is this, it comforteth the spirits & vitall parts, & helpeth all inward diseases that commeth of cod, it is good a∣gainst the shaking of the palsie, & cureth the contraction of sinews, & helpeth the conception of women that be barraine, it killeth the wormes in the body, it cureth the
cold Cough, it helpeth the tooth-ach, it comforteth the stomack, and cureth the old dropsy, it helpeth the stone in the bladder and in the reines, it helpeth a stinking breath: And whosoeuer vseth this water moderately & not too often, preserueth him in good liking, and will make him seeme young in old age. With this water Docter Steuens preserued his owne life vntill such ex∣treame age, that he could neither goe nor ride, & he con∣tinued his life being bed rid fiue yeeres, when other Physitions did iudge he could not liue one yeere, when he did confesse a little before his death; saying: that if he were sicke at any time, he neuer vsed any thing but this water only; And also the Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry vsed it, and found such goodnes in it that he liued till he was not able to drinke of a cup, but sucked his drinke through a hollow pipe of siluer. This water will bee much the better if it be set in the Sunne. A restoratiue of Rosasolis. To make a cordial rosasolis, take rosasolis, & in any wise touch not the leaues thereof in the gathering, nor wash it; take thereof foure good handfuls, then take two good pints of Aquauitae, and put them both in a glasse or pewter pot of three or foure pints, and then stop the same hard and iust, and so let it stand three dayes and three nights, and the third day straine it through a clean cloth into another glasse or pewter pot, and put thereto halfe a pound of Sugar beaten small, foure ounces of fine Licoras beaten into powder, halfe a pound of sound Dates the stones being taken out, and cut them & make them cleane, and then mince them small, and mixe all these together and stop the glasse or pot close & iust, and after distill it through a lymbecke, then drink of it at night to bedward halfe a spoonefull with ale or beere,
but Ale is the better, as much in the morning fasting for there is not the weakest body in the world that wanteth nature or strength, or that is in a consumption, but it will restore him againe, and cause him to be strong & lusty, and to haue maruailous hungry stomacke, prouided al∣waies that this rosasolis be gathered (as you possibly you can) at the full of the Moone when the Sun shineth be∣fore noone, and let the roots of them be cut away. Additions, to the Oyles. To make oyle of Roes or Vi∣olts. Take the flowers of roses or violets and breake them small and put them into sallet oyle, and let them stand in the same tenne or twelue daies, and then presse it. Or otherwise take a quart of oyle Olyue, and put thereto Sixe spoonefuls of cleane water, and stirre it well with a slice, till it waxe as white as milke, then take two pound of red rose leaues and cut the white of the ends of the leaues away, and put the roses into the oyle, and then put it into a double glasse and set it in the Sunne all the summer time, and it is soueraine for any scalding or burning with water or oyle. Or els take red roses new plucked a pound or two, and ct the white ends of the leaues away, then take May Butter and melt it ouer the fire with two pound of oyle olyue, and when it is clarified put in your roses and put it all in a vessell of glasse or of earth, and stop it well a∣out that no ayre enter in nor out, and set it in another vessell with water and let it boyle halfe a day or more, and then take it forth and straine or presse it through a cloth, and put it into glasse bottells, this is, good for all manner of vnkind heates. To make oyle of Nutmegges. Take two or three pound of Nutmegs and cut them small and bruise them well, then put them into a pan and beate them and stirre them about, which done, put them into a canuasse o strong linnen bagge, and close
them in a presse and presse them, and get out al the Ly∣quor of them which wil be like manna, then scrape it from the canuas bagge as much as you can with a knife, then put it into some vessel of glasse and stoppe it wel, but set it not in the Sun for it wil waxe cleane of it selfe within ten or fifteene dayes, and it is woorth thrice so much as the Nutmegges themselues, and the oyle hath very great vertue in comforting the stomack and inward parts, and asswaging the paine of the mother & Cyatica. To make per¦fect oyle of Spike. Take the flowers of Spike, and wash them only in oile oliue, and then stamp them wel, then put them in a Can∣uasse bagge, and presse them in a presse as hard as you can, and take that which commeth out carefully, and put it into a strong vessel of glasse, and set it not in the Sun, for it wil cleare of it selfe, and waxe faire and bright, and wil haue a very sharpe odor of the Spike; and thus you may make oyle of other hearbs of like nature, as Lauen∣der, camomile and such like. To make oyle of Masticke. Take an ounce of Mastick, and an ounce of Olibanum pounded as smal as is possible, and boyle them in oyle Oliue (a quart) to a third part, then presse it and put it into a glasse, and after ten or twelue dayes it wil be per∣fect: it is exceeding good for any cold griefe. Thus hauing in a summary manner passed ouer al the most Physical and Chyrurgical notes which burtheneth the mind of our English House-wife, being as much as is needful for the preseruation of the health of her family: and hauing in this Chapter shewed al the inward ver∣tues wherewith she should be adorned. I wil now re∣turne vnto her more outward and actiue Knowledges, wherein albeit the mind be as much occupied as before: yet is the body a great deale more in vse: neyther can the worke be wel affected by Rule or direction.
The English Houswifes Skill in Cookery. CHAP. 2. Of the outward and actiue Knowledge of the Housewife; and of her skill in Cookery; as Sallets of all sorts, with Flesh, Fish, Sauces, Pastry, Banquetting-stuffe and ordering of great feasts. TO speake then of the outward and actiue Know∣ledges which belong vnto our English Hous-wife, I hold the first and most principal to be a perfect skill and Knowledge in Cookery, together with al the secrets belonging to the same, because it is a duty rare∣ly belonging to a woman; and she that is vtterly igno∣rant therein, may not by the Lawes of strict Iustice challenge the freedome of Marriage, because indeede she can then but performe halfe her vow; for shee may loue and obey, but she cannot cherish, serue, and keepe him with that true duty which is euer expected. She must know all Hearbes. To proceede then to this knowledg of Cookery, you shal vnderstand, that the first steppe thereunto is, to haue Knowledge of all sorts of hearbes belonging vnto the Kitchin, whether they be for the Pot, for Sallets, for Sauces, for Seruings, or for any other Seasoning, or adorning: which skill of Knowledge of the Hearbes, shee must get by her owne true labour and experience,
and not by my relation, would be much too tedious, & for the vse of them, he shall see it in the composition of dishes & meates here after following She shal also know the time of the yeere, Moneth and Moone, in which all Hearbs are to be sowne; and when they are in their best flourishing, that gathering all Hearbs in their height of goodnesse, shee may haue the prime vse of the same. And because I will inable, and not burden her memory, I will here giue her a short Epitomie of all that knowledge. Her skill in the Garden. First then, let our English Hous-wife know, that she may at al times of the Moneth and Moone, generally sow Asparagus, Colworts, Spinage, Lettice, Parsnips, Ra∣dish, and Chiues. In February, in the new of the Moone, she may sow Spyke, Garlicke, Borage, Buglose, Cheruyle, Coriander, Gourds, Cresses, Marioam, Falma Christi, Flower gen∣tle, white Poppy, Purslan, Radish, Rocket, Rosemary, Sorrell, Double Marigolds and Time. The Moone full shee may sow Annisseeds musked, Violets, Bleets, Skirrits, White Succory, Fennell, and Parsly. The Moone old, sow Holy Thystell, Cole Cabadge, white Cole, greene Cole, Cucum∣bers, Harts-Horne, Diers Graine, Cabadge, Lettice, Mel∣lons, Onions, Parsnips, Larkes Heele, Burnat and Leekes. In March the Moone new, sow Garicke, Borrage, Bug∣losse, Cheruile, Coriander, Gourds, Marioram, white Pop∣py, Purslan, Radish, Sorrel, Double Marigolds, Time, vio∣lets. At the full Moone; Aniseeds, Bleets, Skirrets, Suc∣cory, Fennell, Apples of Loue, and Marueilous Apples. At the wane; artichocks, Bassil, Blessed Thistle, Cole cabadg, white cole, Greene cole, citrons, cucumbers, Harts-Horne, Samphire, Spinage, Gilliflowers, Isop, cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Mugrets, Onions, Flower Gentil, Burnet, Leeks,
and Sauory. In May, the Moone old, sow blessed Thi∣stle. In Iune, the Moone new, sow gourds and radishes. The Moone old, sow cucumbers, mellons, parsnips. In Iuly, the Moone at ful, sow white Succory; and the Moone old, sow cabadge, lettice. Lastly, in August, the Moone at the ful, sow white Succory. Tranplanting of Hearbes. Also she must know, that Hearbs growing of Seeds, may be transplanted at al times, except cheruile, Arage, Spinage, and Pseley, which are not good being once transplanted, obseruing euer to transplant in moyste and rainy weather. Choise of seeds Also she must know, that the choice of seeds are two∣fold, of which some grow best, being nw, as cucumbers and leekes, and some being old as coriander, parsley, sa∣uory, beets, origan, cresses, spinage and poppy, you must keep cold lettice, artichokes, basil, holy thistle, cabadge, cole, Dyers graine, and mellons, fifteene dayes after they put foorth of the earth. Prosperity of . Also Seedes prosper better being sowne in temperate weather, then in hot, cold, or dry dayes. In the moneth of April, the moone being new, sow marioram flowers-gentle, time, violets: in the ful of the moone, apples of loue, and maruailous apples: and in the wane, artichokes, holy thistle, cabadge, cole, citrons, harts-horne, Samphire, gilliflowers, and parsnips. Gathering of Seeds must be gathered in faire weather, at the wane of the moone, and kept some in Boxes of Wood, some in bagges of Leather, and some in vessels of earth, and after to be wel cleansed and dryed in the Sunne or sha∣dow: Othersome, as Onions, chibls, and Leekes, must be kept in then huskes. Lastly, she must know, that it is best to plant in the last quarter of the moone; to ga∣ther grafts in the last but one, and to graft two dayes
after the change, and thus much for her knowledge briefly of Hearbs, and how he shall haue them continu∣ally for her vse in the Kitchin. OF Cookery and the prts thereof. It resteth now that I proceede vnto Cookerie it selfe, which is the dressing and ordering of meate, in good and wholesome manner, to which, when our Houswife shall addresse her selfe, she shall well vn∣derstand, that these qualities must euer accompany it: First, shee must bee cleanly both in body and garments, shee must haue a quicke eye, a curious nose, a perfect taste, and ready eate (shee must not be butter-fin∣gred, sweete-toothed, not faint-hearted;) for, the first will let euery thing fall, the second will consume what it should increase, and the last will loose time with too much nicenesse. Now for the substance of the Art it selfe, I will diuide it into fiue parts, the first, Sallats and Fricases; the second, boyled Meates and Broaths; the third, Roast meates, and Carbonados, the fourth, Bak't meates and Pies; and the fith, Bnqueting and made dishes, with other conceites and se∣crets. Of Sallats. Simple Sallats. First then to speake of Sallats, there be some sim∣ple, and some compounded; some onely to furnish out the table, and some both for vse and adornation: your simple Sallats are Chibols pilled, washe cleane, and halfe of the greene tops cut cleane away, so ser∣ued on a Fruit dish, o Chines, Sealions, Radish-roots, boyled Carrets, Skiets, and Tuneps, with such like serued vp simply: also, all young Lettice, Cab∣age-letuce, Posian, and diuers other hearbs which may be serued simply without any thing, but a lit∣tle Vinegar, Sallet-Oyle, and Sugar: Onions boyled, and stript from their rind, and serued vp with Vinegar,
oyle & Pepper is a good simple Sallat, so is Samphire, Beane cods, Sparagus, and Cucumbers, serued in like∣wise with Oyle, Vinegar and Pepper, with a world of others, too tedious to nominate. Of compound Sallts. Your compound Sallats, are first the young Buds and Knots of all manner of wholesome hearbs at their first springing; as Red-sage, Mints, Lettice, Violets, Ma∣rigolds, Spinage, and many other mixed together, and then serued vp to the table with Vinegar, Sallet Oyle and Sugar. ☞ An the com∣pound Sallet. To compound an excellent Sallat, and which indeed is vsuall at great feasts, and vppon Princes tables: Take a good quantity of blancht Almonds, and with your shredding Knife cut them grossely; then take as many Raisins of the Sunne cleane washt, and the stones pickt out, as many Figsthred like the Almonds, as many Ca∣pers, twice so many Olyues, and as many Currants as of all the rest cleane washt: a good handfull of the small tender leaues of Red Sage and Spinage: mixe all these well together with good store of Sugar, and lay them in the bottome of a great dish; then put vn∣to them Vinegar and Oyle, and scrape more Sugar o∣uer all: then take Orenges and Lemons, and paring away the outward piles, cut them into thinne sli¦ces, then with those slices couer the Sallet all ouer; which done, take the fine thinne leafe of the red Cole∣flower, and with them couer the Orenges and Lemons all ouer; then ouer chose red leaues lay another course of old Oues, and the slices of wel pickled Cucumbers, together with the very inward heart of your Cabbage letee cut into slces; then adone the sides of the dish, and the top of the Sallet with mo slices of Lemons and Orenges, and so serue it vp.
An excellent boiled Sallet. To make an excellent compound boild Sallat: take of Spinage well washt, two or three handfulls, and put it into faire water, and boile it till it be exceeding soft, & tender as pap; then put it into a Cullander and draine the water from it, which done, with the backside of your Chopping-knife chop it, and bruise it as small as may be: then put into a Pipkin with a good lumpe of sweete butter, and boile it ouer againe; then take a good handfull of Currants cleane washt, and put to it, & stirre them well together; then put to as much Vinegar as will make it reasonable tart, and then with Sugar season it according to the taste of the Master of the house, and so serue it vppon sippets. Of preseruing of Sallets. Your preserued Sallats are of two kinds, either pick∣led, as are Cucumbers, Samphire, Purslan, Broome, and such like, or preserued with Vinegar; as Violets, Prim∣rose, Cowslops, Gillyflowers of all kindes, Broome∣flowers, and for the most part any wholesome flower whatsoeuer. Now for the picking of Sallats, they are only boiled, and then drained from the water, spread vpon a table, and good store of Salt throwne ouer them, then when they are thorow cold, make a Pickle with Water, Salt, and a little Vinegar, and with the same pot them vp in close earthen pots, and serue them forth as occasion shall serue. ☜Now for preseruing Sallats, you shall take any of the Flowers before-sayd after they haue beene pickt cleane from their stalkes, and the white ends (of them which haue any) cleane cut way, and washt and dryed, and taking a gasse-pot like a Gally-pot, or for want thereof a Gally-pot it selfe; and first strew a little Sugar in the bottome, then lay a layer of the Flowers,
then couer that layer ouer with Sugar, then lay another layer of the Flowers, and another of Sugar; and thus do one aboue another till the pot be filled, euer and a∣non pressing them hard downe with your hand: this done, you shall take of the best and arpest Vinegar you can get (& if the vinegar e distilled vinegar, the Flow∣ers will keepe their colours the better) and with it fill vp your pot till the Vinegar swim aloft, and no more can be receiued; then stop vp the pot close, & set them in a dry temperate place, and vse them at pleasure, for they will last all the yeere. he making of ange Sallats Now for the compounding of Sallats of these pick∣led and preserued thinges, though they may be serued vp simply of themselues, and are both good and dain∣tie; yet for better curiosity, and the finer adorning of the table, you shall thus vse them: First, if you would set forth any red Flower that you know or haue seene, you shall take your pots of preserued Gilliflowers, and suting the colours answerable to the Flower you shall proportion it forth, and lay the shape of the Flower in a Fruit-dish; then with your Pursln leaues make the greene Cossin of the Flower, and with the Purslan stalkes, make the stalke of the Flower, and the diuisions of the leaues and branches; then with the thinne slices of Cucumbers make their leaues in true proportions, agged or otherwise: and thus you may set forth some full blowne, some halfe blowne, and some in the bud, which will be pretty and curious And if you will set forth yellow flowers, take the pots of Primroses and Cowslops, if blew flowers, then the pots of Violets, or Baglosse Flowers, and these Sallats are both for shew and vse; for they are more excellent for taste then for to looke on.
Sallats for shew onely. Now for Sallets for shew only, and the adorning and setting out of a table with numbers of dishes, they be those which are made of Carret rootes of sundrye co∣lours well boiled, and cut out into many shapes and pro∣portions, as some into knots, some in the manner of Scutchions and Armes, some like Birds, nnd some like wild Beasts, according to the Art and cunning of the Workman; and these for the most part are seasoned with Vinegar, Oyle, and a little Pepper. A world of o∣ther Sallets there are, which time and experience may bring to our Hous wfes eye, but the composition of them, and the seruing of them differeth nothing from these already rehearsed. OF Fricase, and Quelque ch∣ses. Now to proceed to your Fricases, or Quelque cho∣ses, which are dishes of many compositions, and ingre∣dients; as Flesh, Fish, Egges, Hearbs, and many other thinges, all being prepared and made ready in a fry∣ing pan, they are likewise of two sorts, simple and com∣pound. Of simple Fri∣cases. Your simple Fricases are Egges and Collops fried, whether the Collops be of Bacon, Ling, Beefe, or young Porke, the frying whereof is so ordinary, that it needeth not any relation, or the frying of any Flesh or Fish sim∣ple of it selfe with Butter or sweete Oyle. Best Collops and Egges. To haue the best Collops and Egges, you shall take the whitest and youngest Bacon, and cutting away the sward, cut the Collops into thin slices, lay them in a dish, and put hot water vnto them, and so let them stand an houre or two, for that will take away the ex∣treame saltnesse▪ then draine away the water cleane, and put them into a drie pewter dish, and lay them one by one, and set them before the heate of the fire, so as they may toaste and turne them so,
as they may toast sufficiently thorow and thorow: which done, take your Egges and breake them into a dish, and put a spooneful of vinegar vnto them: then set on a cleane Skillet with faire water on the fire, and as soone as the water boyleth put in the Egges, and let them take a boile or two, then with a spoone trie if they bee hard enough, and then take them vp, and trim them, and dry them; and then dishing vp the Collops, lay the Egges vpon them, and so serue them vp: and in this sort you may potch Egges when you please, for it is the best and most wholsome. Of the com∣pound ricases. Now the compound Fricases are those which consist of many things, as Tanss, Fritters, Pancakes, and any Quelque chose whatsoeuer, beeing things of great re∣quest and estimation in France, Spaine, and Italy, and the most curious Nations. To make the best Tansey. ☞First then for making the best Tansey, you shal take a certain number of egges, according to the bignesse of your Frying-pan, and breake them into a dish, aba∣ting euer the white of euery third egge; then with a Spoone you shal cleanse away the little white Chickin-knots which sticke vnto the yolkes; then with a little Creame beate them exceedingly together; then take of greene Wheat blades, Vioet leaues, Straw-berry leaues, Spnage, and Succory, of each a like quantity, and a few Walnut tree buds; choppe and beate all these very wel, and then straine out the iuice, and mixing it with a little more Cream, put it to the egges, and stirre all wel together, then put in a few crummes of Bread, fine grated Bread, Cynamon, Nutmegge, and Salt, then put some sweete Butter into the Frying-panne, and so soone as it is dissolued or melted, put in the Tansey, and frie it browne without burning, and with a dish
turne it in the Panne as occasion shal serue; then serue it vp, hauing strewed good store of Suger vppon it, for to put in Suger before wil make it heauy: Some vse to put of the hearbe Tansey into it, but the Walnut tree buds do giue the better taste or rellish; and therefore when you please for to vse the one, doe not vse the o∣ther. The best Frit∣ters. To make the best Fritters, take a pint of Creame and warme it: then take eight egges, onely abate foure of the whites, and beate them wel in a Dish, and so mixe them with the Creame, then put in a little Cloues, Mace Nutmegge and Saftron, and stirre them wel together: then put in two spoonful of the best Ale-bame, and a little Salt, and stirre it againe: then make it thicke ac∣cording vnto your pleasure with wheate flower: which done, set it within the aire of the fire, that it may rise and swel, which when it doth, you shall beate it in once or twice, then put into it a penny pot of Sacke: al this being done, you shal take a pound or two of very sweet seame, and put it into a panne, and set it ouer the fire, and when it is moulten and beginnes to bubble, you shal take the Fritter-batter, and setting it by you, put thick slices of wel-pared Apples into the Batter; and then ta∣king the Apples and Batter out together with a spoone, put it into the boiling Seame, and boile your Fritters crispe and browne: And when you finde the strength of your seame consume or decay, you shall renew it with more seame, and of all sorts of seame, that which is made of the Beefe-sut is the best and strongest: when your Fritters are made, strow good store of Suger and Cinamon vpon them, being faire disht, and so serue them vp. The best Pan∣cakes. To make the best Pancake, take two or three egges,
and breake them into a dish, and beate them well: then adde vnto them a pretty quantity of fair running water, and beate all well together: then put in Cloues Mace, Cinamon, and Nutmeg, and season it with Salt: which done, make it thicke as you thinke good with fine Wheate-flower: then file the cakes as thinne as may be with sweete Butter, or sweete Seame, and make them browne, and so serue them vp with Sugar strowed vpon them. There be some which mixe Pancakes with new Milke or Creame, but that makes them tough, cloy∣ing, and not crispe, pleasant and sauory as running water. Veale toasts. To make the best Veale tosts; take the kidney fat, & all of a loyne of veale tosted, and shred as small as is possible; then take a couple of Egges and beate them very well; which done, take Spinage, Succory, Violet-leaues, and Marigold-leaues, and beate them, and straine out the iuyce, and mixe it with the Egges: then put it to your Veale, and stirre it exceedingly well in a dish; then put to good store of Currance cleane washt and pickt, Cloues, Mace, Sinamon, Nutmegge, Sugar and Salt, and mixe them all perfectly well together: then take a Manchet and cut it into tosts, and tost them well before the fire; then with a spoone lay vpon the tost in a good thicknesse the Veale, prepared as before∣sayd: which done, put into your frying pan good store of sweete Butter, and when it is well melted and very hot, put your tostes into the same with the bread side vpward, and the flesh side downeward: and assoone as you see they are fryed browne, lay vpon the vpper-side of the tostes which are bare more of the flesh meate, and then turne them, and frie that side browne also: then take them out of the pan and dish them vp,
and strow Sugar vpon them, and so serue them forth. There be some Cookes which will do this but vpon one side of the tostes, but to do it on both is much bet∣ter; if you adde Creame it is not amisse. To make the best panperdy. To make the best Panperdy, take a dozen Egges, & breake them, and beate them very well, then put vnto them Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, Nutmeg, and good store of Sugar, with as much Salt as shall season it: then take a Manchet, and cut it into thicke slices like tostes; which done, take your frying pan, and put into it good store of sweete Butter, and being melted lay in your sli∣ces of bread, then powre vpon them one halfe of your Egges▪ then when that is fryed, with a dish turne your slices of bread vpward, and then powre on them the o∣ther halfe of your Egges, & so turne them till both sides be browne, then dish i vp, and serue it with Sugar strowed vpon it. To make any quelquechose. To make a Quelquechose, which is a mixture of ma∣ny things together; take the Egges and breake them, & do away the one halfe of the Whites, and after they are beaten put them to a good quantity of sweete Creame, Currants, Cinamon, Cloues, Mace, Salt, & a little Gin∣ger, Spinage, Endiue, and Marigold flowers grossely chopt, and beate them all very well together; then take Piggs Petitoes slic't, and grossely chopt, and mixe them with the egges, and with your hand stirre them excee∣ding well together; then put sweete butter in your fry∣ing pan, and being melted, put in all the rest, and fry it browne without burning, euer and anon turning it till it be fryed enough; then dish it vp vpon a flat Plate, and so serue it forth. Onely herein is to be obserued, that your Pettitoes must be very well boyled before you put them into the Frycase.
Additions, To the House-wifes Cookery. And in this manner as you make this Quelquechoise, so you may make any other, whether it be of flesh, smal Birds, sweet roots, oysters, muskles, cockles, giblets, le∣mons, Orenges, or any fruit, pulse, or other Sallet hearb whatsoeuer, of which to speake seuerally were a labour infinite, because they vary with mens opinions On∣ly the composition and worke is no other then this be∣fore prescribed; and who can do these, need no further instruction for the rest. And thus much for Sallets and Fricases. To make Frit∣ters. To make Fritters another way, take Flower, milke, Barme, grated Bread, smal Raisins, Cinamon, Suger, Cloues, Mace, Pepper, Saffron, and Salt; stirre all these together very wel with a strong spoone, or smal Ladle; then let it stand more then a quarter of an houre that it may rise, then beate it in againe, and thus let it rise & be beate in, twice or thrice at least▪ then take it and bake them in sweete and strong seame, as hath beene before shewed, and when they are serued vp to the table, see you strow vpon them good store of Suger, Cynamon, and Ginger. To make the best white Pud∣dings. ☞ Take a pint of the best, thickest and sweetest creame, and boile it, then whilest it is hot, put thereunto a good quantity of faire great Oate-meale Grotes very sweete, and cleane pickt, and formerly steept in Milke twelue houres at least, and let it soake in this Creame another night; then put thereto at least eight yolkes of Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues Mace, Saffron, Currants, Dates, Suger, Salt, and great store of Swines suet, or for want thereof, great store of Beefe suet, and then fill it vp in the Farmes according vnto the order of good House-wifery, and then boile them on a soft and gen∣tle fire, and as they swel, pricke them with a great pin,
or smal Awle, to keepe them that they burst not; and when you serue them to the Table (which must be not vntil they be a day old,) first, boile them a little, then take them out and toast them browne before the fire, & so serue them, trimming the edge of the dish eyther with salt or Suger. Puddings of a Hogs Liuer. Take the Liuer of a fat Hogge, and parboile it, then shred it smal, and after beate it in a morter very fine; then mixe it with the thickest and sweetest Creame, and strayne it very wel through an ordinary strainer, then put thereto six yolkes of egges, and two whites, and the grated crummes of neere-hand a penny white loafe, with good store of Currants, Dates, Cloues, Mace, Su∣gar, Saffron, Salt, and the best Swine suet, or Beefe suet, but Beefe suet is the more wholsome, and lesse loosning; then after it hath stood a while▪ fil it into the Farmes, & boile them, as before shewed: and when you serue them vnto the table, first, boile them a little, then lay them on a Gridyron ouer the coales, and broie them gent∣ly, but scorch them not, nor in any wise breake their skinnes, which is to be preuented by oft turning and tossing them on the Gridyron, and keeping a slow fire. To make bread puding▪ Take the yolkes and Whites of a dozen or fourteene egges, and hauing beate them very wel, put vnto them the fine pouder of Cloues, Mace, Nutmegges, Sugar, Cynamon, Saffron and Salt; then take the quantity of two loaues of white grated Bread, Dates (very smal shred) and great store of Currants, with good plenty eyther of Sheepes, Hogges, or Beefe suet beaten and cut smal: then when all is mixt and stirred wel together, & hath stood a while to settle, then fil it into the Farmes as hath been before shewed, and in like manner boyle
them, cooke them, and serue them to the Table. Rice Puddings Take halfe a pound of Rice, and steepe it in new Milke a whole night, and in the morning draine it, and let the Milke drop away: then take a quart of the best, sweetest and thickest Creame, and put the Rice into it, and boyle it a little; then set it to coole an houre or two, and after put in the Yolke, of halfe a dozen Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Currants, Dates, Sugar and Salt; and hauing mixt them well together, put in great store of Beefe Suet well beaten, and small shred, and so put it into the farmes, and boyle them as before shewed, and serue them after a day old. Aher of Lie. Take the best Hogges Liuer you can get, and boyle it extreamely till it bee as hard as a stone; then lay it to coole, and being cold, vpon a bread-grater grate it all to powder; then sift it through a fine meale fine, and put to it the crummes of (at least) two penny loaues of white bread, and boyle all in the thickest and sweetest Creame you haue till it be very thick; then let it coole, and put it to the yolkes of halfe a dozen Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Currants, Dates small shred, Cinamon, Ginger, a little Nutmeg, good store of Su∣gar, a little Saffron, Salt, and of Beefe and Swines suet great plenty, then fill it into the Farmes, & boyle them as before shewed. Puddings of a Ces Mug∣get. Take a Calues Mugget, cleane and sweete drest, and boyle it wel; then shred it as small as is possible, then take of Strawberry leaues, of Endiue, Spinage, Succory, and Sanell of each a pretty quantity, and chop them as small as is possible, and then mixe them with the Mugget; then take the Yolkes of halfe a do∣zen Egges, and three Whites, and beate them into
also; and if you find it is too stiffe, then make it thin∣er with a little Creame warmed on the fire, then put n a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger, Su∣gar, Currants, Dates and Salt, and worke all together, with casting in little peyres of sweet Butter one after an¦other, till it haue receiued good store of Butter, then put it vp into the Calues bagge, Sheepes bagge, or Hogs bagge, and then boyle it well, and so serue it vp. A Blood Pud∣ding. Take the Blood of an Hogge whilest it is warme, and steepe it in a quarte, or more, of great Oate meale∣groes, and at the ende of three dayes with your hands take the Groats out of the bloud, and draine them cleane; then put to those Grotes more then a quart of the best creame warmd on the fire: then take mother of Time, Parsley, Spinnage, Succory, Ediue, Sorrell and Strawberry leaues, of each a few chopt exceeding small, and mixe them with the Grotes; and also a little Fennell seede finely beaten: then adde a little Pep∣per, Cloues and Mace, Salt and great store of suet finely shred, and well beaten: then therewith fill your Farmes, and boyle them, as hath beene before descri∣bed. Linkes. Take the largest of your chines of Porke, and that which is called a Liste, and first with your knife cut the leane thereof into thinne slices, and then shred small those slices, and then spread it ouer the bottome of a dish or wodden platter: then take the fatte of the chine and the Liste, and cut it in the very selfe same manner, and spread it vpon the leane, and then cut more leane, and spread it vppon the fatte, and thus doe one leane vpon another, till ll the Porke be shred, obseruing to beginne and ende with the leane: then with your sharpe knife scotch it
through and through diuers wayes, and mixe it all well together: then take good store of Sage, and shred it ex∣ceeding small, and mixe it with the flesh, then giue it a good season of Pepper and Salt; then take the farmes made as long as is possible, and not cut in pieces as for Puddings, and first blow them well to make the meate slip, and then fill them: which done, with threads de∣uide them into seuerall linkes as you please, then hang them vp in the corner of some Chimney cleane kept, where they may take ayre of the fire, and let them drie there at least foure dayes before any bee eaten; and when they are serued vp, let them bee either fried or broyled on the Gridyron, or else roasted about a Capon. OF Boyl meates ordinary. It resteth now that we speake of boild meates and broths, which for asmuch as our Hous-wife is intended to be generall, one that can as well feed the poore as the rich, we will first begin with those ordinary wholesom boyld meates, which are of vse in euery good mans house: therefore to make the best ordinary Pottage, you shall take a racke of Mutton cut into pieces▪ or a leg of Mutton cut into pieces; for this meate and these ioynts are the best, although any other ioynt, or any fresh Beefe will likewise make good Pottage: and ha∣uing washt your meate well, put it into a cleane pot with are water, & set it on the fire; then take Violet leaues, Succory, Strawberry leaues, Spinage, Langdebeefe, Magola flowers, Scallions, and a little Parsly, and chop them very small together, then take halfe so much oat-meale well beaten as there is Hearbs, and mixe it with the Hearbs, and chop all very well together: then when the pot is ready to boyle, sum it very well, and then put in your hearbs, and so let it boyle with a quicke
fire, stirring the meate oft in the pot, till the meate be boyld enough, and that the hearbs and water are mixt together without any separation, which will be after the consumption of more then a third part: Then sea∣son them with Salt, and serue them vp with the meate either with Sippets or without. Pottage with∣out sight of hearbs. Some desire to haue their Pottage geene, yet no hearbs to be seen in this case: you must take your herbs and Oat-meale, and after it is chopt, put it into a stone Morter, or Bowle, and with a wooden pestell beate it exceedingly; then with some of the warme liquor in the pot strayne it as hard as may be, and so put it in and boyle it. Pottage with∣out hearbs. Others desire to haue Pottage without any hearbs at all, and then you must only take Oat-meale beaten, and good store of Onions, and put them in, and boyle them together; and thus doing you must take a greater quan∣tity of Oat-meale then before. Pottage with∣whole hearbs. If you will make Pottage of the best and daintiest kind, you shall take Mutton, Veale or Kidde, & hauing broke the bones, but not cut the flesh in pieces, and wash it, put it into a pot with faire water, after it is ready to boyle, and is throughly skumd, you shall put in a good handfull or two of small Ota meale: and then take whole lettice of the best and most inward leaues, whole spinage, endiue, succory, and whole leaues of colflow∣er, or the inward putes of white cabage, with two or three slic't Onions▪ and put all into the pot and boyle them well together til the meate bee enough, and the hearbes so soft as may bee, and stirre them oft well togeter; and then season it with salt and as much veriuyce as will onely turne the tast of the pottage; and so serue them vp, couering the meate with the
whole hearbes, and adorning the dish with sippets. T make ordi∣nary stewd brh. To make ordinary stewd broth, you shall take a necke of veale, or a leg, or mary-bones of beee, or a pullet, o mutton, and after the meate is washt, put it into a pot with faire water, and being ready to boyl skumme it well: then you shall take a couple of mches, an paring away the crust, cut it into thicke slices, and l them in a dish, and couer hem with hot broth out of the pot: when they are sleept, put them and some of the bth into a strainer, and straine it, and then put it into the pot▪ then take halfe a pound of Prunes, halfe a pud of Raisins, and a quarter of a pound of Cur∣rants cleane pickt and washt, with a little whole Mace, and two or three bruised cloues, and put them into the pot, and stirre all well together, and so let them boye till the meate be enough, then if you will alter the colour of the broth, put in a little Turnesole, or red Saunders, and so serue it vpon sippits, and the fruite vp∣permost. boyld . ☞ To make an excellent boyled meate: take foure pee∣ces of a acke of mutton, and wash them cleane, and put them into a pot well scowred with faire water: then take a good quantity of Wire and Veriuyce and put in∣to it: then slice a handfull of Onions and put them i also, and so let them boyle a good while, then take  peece of sweete butter with ginger and salt and put it  also, and then make the broth thicke with grated bread, and so serue it vp with sippets. To boyle a Malad. To boyle a Mallard curiosly, take the Mallard when it is faire dressed, washed and trust, and put it on a spt and rest it till you can get the grauy out of it: then take it from the spit and boyle it, then take the best of the broth into a Pipin, and the grauy which
you saued, with a peece of sweete butter and Currants, Vinegar, Sugar, Pepper and grated bread: Thus boyle all these together, and when the Mallard is boyled suffi∣ciently, lay, it on a dish with sippets, and the broth vpon it, and so serue it foorth. To make an excellent Ole∣potrige. To make an excellent Olepotrige, which is the onely principall dish of boild meate which is esteemed in all Spalne, you shall take a very large vessell, pot or kettell, and filling it with water, you shall set it on the fire, and first put in good thicke gobbets of well fed Beefe, and being ready to boyle, skumme your pot; when the Beefe is halfe boyled, you shall put in Potato-rootes, Turneps, and Skirrets: also like gobbers of the best Mutton, and the best Porke; after they haue boy∣led a while, you shall put in the like gobbets of Ve∣nison, red, and Fallow, if you haue them; then the like gobbets, of Veale, Kidde, and Lambe; a little space after these, the foreparts of a fat Pigge, and a crambd Puller; then put in Spinage, Endiue, Succory, Mari∣gold leaues and flowers, Lettice, Violet leaues, Straw∣berry leaues, Buglosse and Scallions, all whole and vnchopt; then when they haue boyled a while, put in a Partridge and a Chicken chopt in peeces, with Quailes, Railes, Blackbirds, Larkes, Sparrowes and o∣ther small birds, all being well and tenderly boiled, sea∣son vp the broth with good store of Sugar, Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, Ginger and Nutmegge mixt toge∣ther in a good quantity of Veriuyce and salt, and so stire vp the pot well from the bottome, then dish it v vp∣on great Chargers, or long Spanish dishes made in the fashion of our English wooden trayes, with good store of sippets in the bottome; then couer the meate all ouer with Punes, Raisins, Currants, and blaunch't
Almonds, boyled in a thing by themselues; then co∣uer the fruit and the whole boiled hearbs and the herbs with slices of Orenges and Lemmons, and lay the rootes round about the sides of the dish, and strew good store of Sugar ouer all, and so serue it foorth To mak the be white both. To make the best white broth, whether it be with Veale, Capon, Chickins, or any other Fowle or Fish: First boile the flesh or fish by it selfe, then take the va∣lue of a quart of strong mutton broth, or fat Kidde broth, and put it into a pipkin by it selfe, and put into it a bunch of Time, Morierome, Spinage and Endiue bound together; then when it seeths put in a pretty quantity of Beefe marrow, and the marrow of Mutton, with some whole Mace and a few bruised Cloues; then put in a pint of White-wine with a few whole slices of Ginger; after these haue boyled a whie to∣gether, take blaunch't Almonds, and hauing bea∣ten them together in a moter with some of the broth, straine them and put it in also; then in another pip∣kin boie Currants, Punes, Raisins, and whole Ci∣namon in veriuice and Sugar, with a few sliced Dates; and boile them till the veriuice bee most part consu∣med▪ or at least come to a syrrup; then draine the fruit from the sirrup, and if you see it be igh colou∣red; make it white with sweete creame warmed, and so mixe it with your wine broth; then take out the Capon or the other Flesh or Fish, and dish it vp drie in a dish; then powre the broth vpon it, and lay the fruite on the top of the meate, and adorne the side or the dish with very dainty sippets; first Orenges, Lemmons, and Sugar, and so serue it foorth to the table.
To boile any wilde Fowle. To boile any wild Fowle, as Mallard, Teale, Widge∣on, or such like: First boile the Fowle by it selfe, then take a quart of strong Mutton-broth, and put it into a pipkin, and boile it; then put into it good store of sli∣ced Onions, a bunch of sweete pot-hearbs, and a lump of sweete butter; after it hath boiled well, season it with veriuice, salt and sugar, and a little whole Pepper, which done, take vp your Fowle and beke it vp ac∣cording to the fashion of caruing, and stick a few Cloues about it; then put it into the broth with Onions, and there let it take a boyle or two, and so serue it and the broth foorth vpon sippets, some vse to thicken it with toasts of bread steept and strained, but that is as please the Cooke. To boile a lgg of Mutton. To boile a legge of Mutten, or any other ioynt of meate whatsoeuer; first after you haue washt it cleane, parboie it a little, then spit it and giue it halfe a dozen turnes before the fire, then draw it when it beginnes to drop, and presse it betweene two dish∣es, and saue the grauy; then slash it with your knife, and giue it halfe a dozen turnes more, and then presse it againe, and thus doe as often as you can force any moisture to come from it, then mixing Mutton-broth, White-wine, and Veriuice together, boyle the Mutton therein till it bee tender, and that most part of the liquor is cleane consumed; then hauing all that while kept the grauy you tooke from the Mut∣ton, stewing gently vppon a Chaffing dish and coales, you shall adde vnto it good store of salt; sugar, cinamon and ginger, with some Lemmon slices, and a little of an Oringe pill, with a few fine white-bread crums: then taking vp the Mutton, put the remainder of the broth in, and put in, likewise the grauie,
and then serue it vp with sippets, laying the Lemmon slices vppermost, and trimming the dish about with Sugar. An excellent way to boyle Chickens. If you will boile Chickens, young Turkies, Pea-hens, or any house fowle daintily, you shall after you haue trimmed them, drawne them, trust them, and washt them, fill their bellies as full of Parsly as they can hold; then boyle them with salt and water onely till they bee enough: then take a dish and put into it ver∣iuice, and Butter, and Salt, and when the Butter is melted, take the Parsly out of the Chickens bellies, and mince it very small, and put it to the veriuice and But∣ter, and stirre it well together; then lay in the Chic∣kens, and trimme the dish with sippets, and so serue it foorth. A broth for any fresh Fish. If you will make broth for any fresh fish whatsoe∣uer, whether it be Pike, Breame, Carpe, Eele, Barbell or such like: you shall boile water, veriuice and Salt together with a handfull of sliced Onions, then you shal thicken it with two or three spoonefull of Ale∣barme; then put in a good quantity of whole Barberies, both branches and other, as also pretty store of Cur∣rants: then when it is boild enough, dish vp your Fish, and powre your broth vnto it, laying the fruite and O∣nions vppermost. Some to this broth, will put Prunes, and Dates slic't, but it is according to the fancy of the Cooke, or the will of the House-holder. Thus I haue from these few presidents shewed you the true Art and making of all sorts of boild-meates, and broths; and though men may coine strange names, and faine strange Art, yet be assured she that can doe these, may make any other whatsoeuer; altering the taste by the alteration of the compounds as shee shall see
occasion: And when a broth is too sweete, to sharpen it with veriuyce, when too tart, to sweeten it with su∣gar: when flat and wallowish, to quicken it with Oren∣ges and Lemmons; and when too bitter, to make it pleasant with hearbes and spices. Additions, To boyle meates. A Mallard s ar, or a Hae, or olde Cony. ☜ Take a Mallard when it is cleane dressed, washed and trust, and parboyle it in water till it be sknd and puri∣fied: then take it vp, and put it into a Pipkin with the nocke downeward, and the tayle vpward, standing as it were vpright: then fill the Pipkin halfe full with that water, in which the Mallard was parboyld, and fill vp the other halfe with White Wine: then pill and slice thin a good quantite of Onyons, and put them in with whole fine hearbes, according to the time of the yeare, as Lettice, Strawberry-leaues, Violet-leaues, Vine-leaues, Spinage, Endiue, Succory, and such like, which haue no bitter or hard taste, and a pretty quantity of Currants and Dates sliced: then couer it close, and set it on a gentle fire, and let it stew, and smoare till the Hearbs and Onyons be soft, and the Mallard inough: then take out the Mallard, and carue it as it were to goe to the Table; then to the Broth put a good lumpe of Butter, Sugar, Cinamon, and if it be in summer, so ma∣ny Goose-berries as will giue it a sharpe taste, but in the winter as much wine Vinegar, then heate it on the fire, and stirre all well together: then lay the Mallard in a dish with sippets, and powre all this broth vpon it, then trim the edge of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp. And in this manner you may also smoate the hinder parts of a Hare, or a whole olde Cony, being trust vp close together. To stew a pike. After your Pike is drest and opened in the backe, and layd flat, as if it were to fry, then lay it in a large dish
for the purpose, able to receiue it; then put as much White Wine to it as will couer it all ouer; then set it on a chaffin-dish and coales to boyle very gently, and if any skum arise, take it away; then put to it Currants, Sugar, Cynamon, Barbery-berries, and as many Prunes as will serue to garnish the dish; then couer it close with another dish, and let it stew till the fruit be soft, and the Pike enough; then put to it a good lumpe of sweet But∣ter; then with a fine skummer take vp the fish and lay it in a cleane dish with Sippets, then take a couple of yolks of egges, the filme taken away, and beate them well to∣gether with a spoonefull or two of Creame, and assoone as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stirre it exceedingly to keepe it from curding; then powre the broth vpon the Pike, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, and Barberies, slices of Orenges or Lemmons, and so serue it vp. And thus may you also stew Rochets, Gurnets, or almost any sea-fish, or fresh-fish. To stew a Lambeshed & Purtenance. Take a Lambs-head and Purtenance cleane washt & pickt and put it into a Pipkin with faire water, and let it boile and skumme it cleane; then put in Currants and a few sliced Dates, and a bunch of the best fercing hearbs tyed vp together, and so let it boyle well till the meate be enough: then take vp the Lambes head and purte∣nance, and put it into a cleane dish with Sippets; then put in a good lumpe of Butter, and beate the yolkes of two Egges with a little Creame, and put it to the broth with Sugar, Cynamon, and a spoonefull or two of Verdiuyce, and whole Mace, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish, which should be put in when it is but halfe boyld, and so powre it vpon the Lambes-head and Purtenance, and adorne the sides of the
dish with Sugar, Prunes, Barberries, Orenges, and Le∣mons, and in no case forget not to season well with Salt, and so serue it vp. A Brest of Mutton stewd. Take a very good breast of Mutton chopt into sun∣dry large pieces, and when it is cleane washt, put it into a pipkin with faire water, and set it on the fire to boyle; then skum it very well, then put in of the finest Parsneps cut into large pieces as long as ones hand, and cleane washt and scrapt; then good store of the best onions, & all manner of sweet pleasant Pot-hearbs and lettice, all grossely chopt, and good store of peper & salt, and then couer it, and let it stew till the Mutton be enough; then takt vp the Mutton, and lay it in a cleane dish with Sip∣pets, and to the broath put a little Wine-vinegar, and so powre it on the Mutton with the Parsneps whole, and adorne the sides of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp: and as you doe with the Brest, so you may doe with any other Ioynt of Mutton. To stew a Neates foote▪ Take a Neates foot that is very well boyld (for the tenderer it is, the better it is) & cleaue it in two, and with a cleane cloth dry it well from the Sous-drinke; then lay it in a deepe earthen platter, and couer it with Verd∣iuyce; then set it on a chaffing-dish and coales, and put to it a few Currants, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish; then couer it, and let it boile well, many times stirring it vp with your knife, for feare it sticke to the bottome of the dish; then when it is sufficiently stewed, which will appeare by the tendernesse of the meate and softnesse of the fruite; then put in a good lumpe of But∣ter, great store of Sugar and Sinamon, and let it boile a little after: then put it altogether into a cleane dish with Sippets, and adorne the sides of the dish with Sugar and Prunes, and so serue it vp.
OF Roast-meates. To proceede then to roast meates, it is to be vnder∣stood, that in the generall knowledge thereof are to be obserued these few rules. First, the cleanely keeping & scowring of the spits and cobirons; next, the neate picking and washing of meate before it be spitted, then the spitting and broaching of meate which must bee done so strongly and firmely,Obseruations in roast meats. that the meate may by no meanes either shrinke from the spit, or else turne a∣bout the spit: and yet euer to obserue, that the spit doe not goe through any principall part of the meate, but such as is of least account and estimation:Spitting of roast-meates. and if it be birds or fowle which you spit, then to let the spit goe through the hollow of the body of the Fowle and so fasten it with prickes or skewers vnder the wings about the thighes of the Fowle, and at the feete or rumpe, according to your manner of trussing and dressing them. Temperature of fire. Then to know the temperatures of fires for euery meate, and which must haue a slow fire, yet a good one, taking leasure in roasting, as Chines of Beefe, Swannes, Turkies, Peacocks, Bustards, and generally any great large Fowle, or any other ioynts of Mutton, Veale, Porke, Kidde, Lambe, or such like: whether it be Ve∣nison red, or Fallow, which indeed would lie long at the fire and soake well in the roasting, and which would haue a quick and sharpe fire without scorching; as Pigs, Pullets, Pheasants, Partridge, Quaile, and all sorts of middle sized or lesser fowle, and all small birds, or com∣pound roast-meates, as Oliues, of Veale, Haslets; a pound of butter roasted; or puddings simple of them∣selues, and many other such like, which indeed would be suddenly and quickely dispatcht, because it is inten∣ded in Cookery, that one of these dishes must be made
ready whilst the other is in eating. Then to knowe the complexions of meates,The complexi∣ons of meate, as which must bee pale and white roastd (yet thoroughly roasted) as Mutton, Veale, Lambe, Kid, Capon, Pullet, Pheasant, Partridge, Quale, and all sorts of middle and small land, or water fowle, and all small birds, and which must be browne roasted, as Beefe, venison, Porke, Swanne, Geese, Pigges, Crane, Bustards, and any large fowle, or other thing whose flesh is blacke. The best ba∣sings of meats. Then to know the best bastings for meate, which is sweete butter, sweete oyle, barreld butter, or fine ren∣dred vp seame with Cinamon, Cloues, and Mace. There be some that will bast onely with water, and salt, and nothing else; yet it is but opinion, and that must be the worlds Master alwaies. The best dred∣ging· Then the best dredging, which is either fine white-bread crums, well grated, or els a little very fine white meale, and the crummes very well mixt together. To know when meate is e∣nough. Lastly to know when meate is roasted enough; for as too much rawnes is vnholsome, so too much drinesse is not nourishing. Therefore to know when it is in the perfect height, and is neither too moist nor too dry, you shall obserue these signes first in your large ioynts of meate, when the stemme or smoake of the meate ascen∣deth, either vpright or els goeth from the fire, when it beginneth a little to shrinke from the spit, or when the grauy which droppeth from it is cleare without bloodinesse then is the meate enough. If it be a Pigge when the eyes are fallen out, and the body leaueth piping: for the first is when it is halfe ro∣sted, and would be singed to make the coat rise and crackle, and the latter when it is fully enough and would bee drawne: or if it bee any kinde of Fowle
you tost, when the thighes are tender, or the hinder parts of the pinions at the setting on of the wings, are without blood: then bee sure that your meate is fully enough roasted; yet for a better and more certaine as∣surednesse, you may thrust your knife into the thickest parts of the meate, and draw it out againe, and if it bring out white grauy without any blooddinesse, then assuredly it is enough, and may bee drawne with all speed conuenient, after it hath beene well basted with butter not formerly melted, then dredged as aforesaid, then basted ouer the dredging, and so suffered to take two or three turnes, to make crispe the dredging: Then dish it in a faire dish with salt sprinckled ouer it, and so serue it forth. Thus you see the generall forme of roasting all kind of meate: Therefore now I will re∣turne to some particular dishes, together with their se∣uerall sawces. Roasting Mut∣ton with Oy∣sters. If you will roast Mutton with Oysters, take a shoul∣der alone, or a legge, and after it is washt, barboyle it a little: then take the greatest Oysters, and hauing ope∣ned them into a dish, draine the grauy cleane from them twice or thrice, then parboyle them a little: Then take Spinage, Endiue, Succory, Strawberry leaues, Violet leaues, and a little Parsley, with some Scallions: chop these very small together: Then take your Oy∣sters very dry, drain'd, and mixe them with an halfe part of these hearbes: Then take your meate, and with these Oysters and hearbes farce or stop it, leauing no place empty, then spit it and roast it, and whilst it is in roastng, take good store of Veriuice and Butter, and a little salt, and set it in a dish on a chaffing-dish and coales: and when it beginnes to boyle, put in the re∣mainder of your hearbes without Oysters, and a good
quantity of Currants, with Cinamon, and the yelke of a couple of egges: And after they are well boyled and stirred together, season it vp according to taste with sugar: then put in a few Lemmon slices, the meate being inough, draw it, and lay it vpon this sawce re∣moued into a cleane dish, the edge thereof being trim∣med about with sugar, and so serue it forth. To roast a legg of Mutton o∣therwise. To roast a legge of Mutton after an out-landish fashi∣on, you shall take it after it is washt, and cut off all the flesh from the bone, leauing onely the outmost skinne entirely whole and fast to the bone; then take thicke creame and the Yelkes of Egges, and beate them exceedingly well together; then put to Cinamon, Mace, and a little Nutmegge, with Salt, then take bread∣crummes finely grated and searst with good store of Currants, and as you mixe them with the Creame, put in sugar, and so make it into a good stiffnes: Now if you would haue it looke greene, put in the iuyce of sweete hearbs, as Spinage, violet leaues, Endiue, &c. If you would haue it yellow, then put in a little Safforn stray∣ned, and with this fill vp the skin of your legge of Mut∣ton in the same shape and forme that it was before, and sticke the out side of the skin thicke with Cloues, and so roast it thorowly and baste it very well, then af∣ter it is dredg'd serue it vp as a legge of Mutton with this pudding, for indeede it is no other: you may stop any other ioynt of meate, as breast or loine, or the bel∣ly of any Fowle boiled or roast, or rabbet, or any meate else which hath skinne or emptinesse. If into this pud∣ding also you beate the inward pith of an Oxes backe, it is both good in taste, and excellent soueraigne for any disease, ach or fluxe in the raynes whatsoe∣uer.
To roast a Gigget of mut∣n. To roast a Gigget of Mutton, which is the legge splatted, and halfe part of the loine together; you shall after it is washt, stop it with Cloues, so spit it, and lay it to the fire, and tend it well with basting: Then you shall take vinegar, butter and currants, and set them on the fire in a dish o pipkin; then when it boyles, you shall put in sweete hearbes finely chopt, with the yelke of a couple of egges, and so let them boyle together: then the meate being halfe roasted, you shall pare off some part of the leanest and brownest, then shred it ve∣ry small and put it into the pipkin also: then season it vp with Sugar, Cynamon, Ginger, and Salt, and so put it into a cleane dish: Then drawe the Gigget of Mutton and lay it on the sauce, and throw salt on the top, and so serue it vp. o ost Oliues of Veale. You shall take a Legge of Veale, and cut the flesh from the bones, and cut it out into thin long slices; then take sweete hearbes, and the white parts of scal∣lions, and chop them well together with the yelkes of egges, then fowle it vp within the slices of veale, and so spit them, and roast them: then boyle veriuice, but∣ter, sugar, cynamon, currants and sweete hearbes toge∣ther, and being seasoned with a little salt, serue the O∣liues vp vpon that sauce with salt, cast ouer them. To rost a pig. To roast a Pigge curiously, you shall not scald it, but draw it with the haire on, then hauing washt it, spit it and lay it to the fire so as it may not scorch, then being a quarter roasted, and the skinne blistered from the flesh, with your hand pull away the haire and skin, and leaue all the fat and flesh perfectly br: then with your knife scotch all the flesh downe to the bones, then baste it exceedingly with sweete butter and creame, being no more but warme: then dredge it with
fine bread-crummes, currants, sugar and salt mixt toge∣ther, and thus apply dredging, vpon basting, and ba∣sting vpon dredging, till you haue couered all the flesh a full inch deepe: Then the meate being fully roasted, draw it, and serue it vp whole. To roast a pound of ut∣ter wll ☜ To roast a pound of Butter curiously and well, you shall take a pound of sweete Butter and beate it stiffe with Sugar, and the yolkes of egges, then clap it round∣wise about a spit, and lay it before a soft fire, and pre∣sently dredge it with the dredging before appoin∣ted for the Pigge: then as it warmeth or melteth, so apply it with dredging till the butter be ouercomed and no more will melt to fall from it, then roast it browne, and so draw it, and serue it out, the dish being as neatly trim'd with sugar as may be. To roast a pud∣ding on a spit. To roast a pudding vpon a spit, you shall mixe the pudding before spoken of in the legge of Mutton, nei∣ther omitting hearbes, nor saffron, and put to a little sweete butter and mixe it very stiffe: then fold it about the spit, and haue ready in another dish some of the same mixture well seasoned, but a great deale thinner, and no butter at all in it, and when the pudding doth beginne to roast, and that the butter appeares, then with a spoone couer it all ouer with the thinner mixture, and so let it roast: then if you see no more butter appeare, then baste it as you did the Pigge, and lay more of the mixture on, and so continue till all be spent: And then roast it browne, and so serue it vp. T roast a chine of If you will roast a chine of Beefe, a loyne of Mutton, a Capon, and a Larke, all at one instant, and at one fire, and haue all ready together and none burnt: you shall first take you chine of Beefe and parboyle it more then halfe through: Then first take your Capon, beeing
large and fat, and spit it next the hand of the turner, with the legges from the fire, then spit the chine of Beefe, then the Larke, and lastly the loyne of Mutton, and place the Larke so as it may be couered ouer with the Beefe, and the fat part of the loyne of Mutton, without any part disclosed: Then baste your Capon, and your loyne of Mutton with cold water and salt, the chine of Beefe with boyling Larde: Then when you see the beefe is almost enough, which you shall hasten by schotching and opening of it: then with a cleane cloth you shall wipe the Mutton and Capon all ouer, and then baste it with sweete butter till all be en∣ough roasted: then with your knife lay the Larke open which by this time will be stewed betweene the Beefe and Mutton, and basting it also with dredge all toge∣ther, draw them and serue them vp. To roast Veni∣son. If you will roast any Venison, after you haue washt it, and cleansed all the blood from it, you shall sticke it with cloues all ouer on the out side; and if it be leane, you shall larde it either with mutton-larde, or porke-larde, but mutton is the best: then spit it and roast it by a soaking fire, then take Vinegar, bread-crummes, and some of the grauy, which comes from the venison, and boyle them well in a dish: then season it with sugar, ci∣namon, ginger and salt, and serue the venison foorth vpon the sauce when it is roasted enough. How  rost fresh Surgeon If you will roast a peece of fresh Sturgeon, which is a dainty dish, you shall stop it with cloues, then spit it, and let it roast at great leasure, plying it continu∣ally with basting, which will take away the hard∣nesse: then when it is enough, you shall draw it, and serue it vpon venison sauce with salt onely throwne vp∣pon it.
Ordering of meates to be roasted. The roasting of all sorts of meates, differeth nothing but in the fires, speede and leasure as is aforesayd, ex∣cept these compound dishes, of which I haue giuen you sufficint presidents, and by them you may performe any worke whatsoeuer: but for the ordering, prepa∣ring and ussing your meates for the spit or table, in that there is much dfference: for in all ioynts of meate except a shoulder of Mutton, you shall crush and breake the bones well, from Pigges and Rabbets you shall cut off the feete before you spit them, and the heads when you serue them to the table, and the Pigge you shall chine, and diuide into two parts: Capons, Pheasants, Chickens and Turkies you shall roast with the Pinions foulded vp, and the legges extended; Hennes, Stock-doues and House-doues, you shall roast with the pini∣ons foulded vp, and the legges cut off by the knees, and thrust into the bodies: Quailes, Partridges, and all sorts of small birds shall haue their pinions cut a∣way, and the legges extended: all sorts of Water-fowle shall haue their pinions cut away, and their legges turned backward: Wood-cockes, Snipes and Stints shall be roasted with their heads and neckes on, and their legges thust into their bodies, and Sho∣uelers and Bitterns shall haue no neckes but their heads onely. To roast a Cowes Vdder. Take a Cowes vdder, and first boyle it well: then sticke it thicke all ouer with Coues: then when it is cold, spit it, and lay it to the fire, and apply i very well with basting of sweete Butter, and when it is sufficient∣ly roasted, and browne, then dredge it, and draw it from the fire, take vinegar and butter, and put it on a Chaffing-dish and coales, and boyle it with White-bread crummes, till it be thick, then put to it good store
of Sugar and Cynamon, and putting it in a cleane dish▪ lay the Cowes Vdder therein, and trimme the sides of the dish with sugar, and so serue it vp. To ast a  of Veale. Take an excellent good legge of Veale, and cut the thicke part thereof a handfull and more from the Knuc∣kle: then take the thicke part (which is the fillet) and fierce it in euery part all ouer with Strawberry-leaues, Violet-leaues, Sorell, Spinage, Endiue and Succorie grossely chopt together, and good store of Onyons: then lay it to the fire and roast it very sufficiently and browne, casting good store of salt vpon it, and basting it well with sweete Butter: then take of the former hearbes much finer chopt then they were for fiercing, and put them into a Pipkin with Vinegar, and cleane washt Currants, and boyle them well together: then when the hearbes are sufficiently boyld and soft, take the yelkes of some very hard boyld Egges, and shred them very small, and put them into the Pipkin also with Sugar and Cynamon, and some of the grauie which drops from the veale, and boyle it ouer againe, and then put it into a cleane dish, and the Fillet beeing dredgd and drawne, lay vpon it, and trimme the side of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp. OF , and . To make an excellent sauce for a rost Capon, you shall take Onyons, and hauing sliced and pilled them, boyle them in faire water with pepper, salt, and a few bread-crummes: then put vnto it a spoonfull or two of Claret wine, the iuyce of an Orenge, and three or foure slices of a Lemmon pill; all these shred together, and so powre it vpon the Capon being broake vp. Sauce for a hen . ☞ To make sauce for an old Hen or Pullet, take a good quantity of beere and salt, and mixe them well toge∣ther with a few fine bread-crummes, and boyle them
on a chaffing dish and coales, then take the yelkes of three or foure hard Egges, and being shred small, put it to the Beere, and boyle it also: then the Hen being al∣most enough, take three or foure spoonefull of the gra∣uy which comes from her and put it in also, and boyle all together to an indifferent thicknesse: which done, suffer it to boyle no more, but onely keepe it warme on the fire, and put into it the iuyce of two or three oren∣ges, and the slices of Lemmon pils shred small, and the slices of orenges also hauing the vpper rine taken away: then the Henne beeing broken vp, take the brawnes thereof, and shredding them small, put it into the sauce also, and stirring all well together, put it hot into a cleane warme dish, and lay the Henne (broke vp) in the same. Suce for Chickins. The sauce for Chickins is diuers, according to mens tastes: for some will onely haue butter, Veriuice, and a little Parsley rolled in their bellies mixt together; o∣thers will haue Butter, veriuice and Sugar boild together with toasts of bread: and others will haue thick sippets with the iuyce of Sorrell and Sugar mixt together. Sauce for a pheasant or partridge. The best sauce for a Phesant, is wrter and onions list▪ Pepper and a little Salt mixt together, and but stewed vpon the coales, and then powred vpon the Phesant or Partridge being broken vp, and some will put thereto the iuyce or slices of of an orenge or lemmon, or both: but it is according to taste, and indeed more proper for a Pheasant then a Ptridge. Sauce for a Quaile▪ Raile, or big bird. Sauce for a Quaile, Raile or any fat big bird, is Cla∣ret wine and Salt mixt together with the grauy of the Bird, and a few fine bread-crummes well boild toge∣ther, and either a Sage-leafe, or Bay-leafe crusht among it according to mens tasts.
Sauce for ∣geons. The best sauce for Pigeons, Stockdoue, or such like, is Vinegar and Butter melted together, and Parsley ro∣sted in ther bellies, or vine-leaues rosted and mixed well together. A generall sauce for wild Fowle. The most generall sauce for ordinary wild-fowle rosted, as Duckes, Mallard, Widgen, Teale, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plouers, Puets, Guls, and such like, is onely mustard and vinegar, or mustard and veriuice mixt toge∣ther, or else an onion, water and pepper, and some (especiall in the Court) vse only butter melted, and not with any thing else. Sauce for greene gse. The best sauce for greene Geese is the iuyce of sorrell and sugar mixt together with a few scalded Feberries, and serued vpon sippets, or else the belly of the greene Goose fild with Feberries, and so rosted, and then the same mixt with veriuyce, butter, sugar and cynamon, and so serued vpon sippets. Sauce for a stuble goose. The sauce for a stuble Goose is diuerse, according to mens minds for some will take the pap of rosted apples, and mixing it with vinegar, boyle them together on the fire with some of the grauy of the Goose, and a few Barberies and bread crummes, and when it is boyld to a good thicknesse, season it with sugar and a little cina∣mon, and so serue it vp: some will adde a little mustard and onions vnto it, and some will not rost the apples, but pa them and slice them, and that is the neerer way, but not the better. Others will fill the bely of the Goose full of Onions shred, and oate-meae groats, and being rosted enough, mixe it with the grauy of the Goose, and sweete hearbs well boild together, ad sea∣soned with a little veriuyce. A Gallatine, or Sauce for a Swan, Bitter, To make a Gallantine, or sauce for a Swan, Bitter, Sho∣ueler, Horne, Crane, or any large foule, take the blood of
the same fowle, and being stird well, boile it on the fire, then when it comes to be thecke,Shoueler, or large Fowle. put vnto it vinegar a good quantity, with a few fine bread-crummes, and so boile it ouer againe: then being come to good thicknes, season it with Sugar & Cinamon, so as it may taste pret∣ty and sharpe vpon the Cinamon, and then serue it vp in saucers as you do Mustard: for this is called a chauder or gallantine, & is a sauce almost for any foule whatsoeuer. Sauce for a pig. To make sauce for a Pigge, some take Sage and roast it in the belly of the Pigge, then boiling veruice, But∣ter and currants together, take & chop the Sage small, and mixing the braines of the Pig with it, put all toge∣ther, and so serue it vp. Sauce for Veale. To make a sauce for a Ioynt of Veale, take all kind of sweete Pot hearbs, and chopping them very small with the yelkes of two or three Egges, boyle them in vine∣gar and Butter, with a few bread crummes, and good store of Currants; then season it with Sugar and Sina∣mon, and a cloue or two crusht, and so powre it vppon the Veale, with the slices of Orenges and Lemons a∣bout the dish. Additions, vnto Saucs Sops for Chic∣kens. Take Orenges and slice them thin, and put vnto them White wine and Rose water, the pouder of Mace, Ginger and Sugar, and set the same vpon a chaffing dish and coales, & when it is halfe boiled, put to it a good lump of Butter, and then lay good store of sippets of fine white bread therein, and so serue your Chickens vpon them, and trimme the sides of the dish with Sugar. Sauce for a Turkie. Take faire water and set it ouer the fire, then slice good store of Onions and put into it, and also Pepper and Salt, and good store of the grauy that comes from the Tur∣kie, and boyle them very well together: then put to it a few fine crummes of grated bread to thicken it;
a very little Sugar and some vinegar, and so serue it vp with the Turkey: or otherwise, take grated white bread and boile it in White wine till it be thicke as a Gallan∣tine, and in the boyling put in good store of Sugar and Cinamon, and then with a little Turnesole make it of a high Murrey colour, and so serue it in Saucers with the Turkey in the manner of a Gallantine. The best Gal∣lntine. Take the blood of a Swan, or any other great Fowle, and put it into a dish; then take stewed Prunes and put them into a strainer, and straine them into the bloud; then set it on a chaffing-dish and coales, and let boyle, euer stirring it till it come to be thicke, and sea∣son it very well with Sugar and Cynamon, and so serue it in saucers with the Fowle, but this sauce must be ser∣ued cold. Sauce for a Malad. Take good store of Onions, pill them, and slice them, and put them into vinegar, and boyle them very well till they be tender: then put into it a good lumpe of sweete butter, and season it well with Sugar and Ci∣namon, and so serue it vp with the Fowle. OF Carbonados. Charbonados, or Carbonados, which is meate broi∣led vpon the coales (and the inuention thereof first brought out of France, as appeares by the name) are of diuers kinds according to mens pleasures: for there is no meate either boiled or roasted whatsoeuer, but may af∣terwards be broiled, if the Maister thereof be disposed; yet the generall dishes for the most part which are v∣sed to be Carbonadoed, are a Breast of Mutton halfe boyled, a shoulder of Mutton halfe roasted, the Leggs, Winges, and Carkases of Capon, Tey, Goose, or a∣ny other Fowle whatsoeuer, especially Land-Fowle. What is to be Carbonadoed. And lastly, the vttermost thicke skinne which couereth the ribbes of Beefe, and is called (beeing
broyled) the Inns of Court-Goose, and is indeed a dish vsed most for wantonnesse, sometimes to please appe∣tite: to which may also be added the broyling of Pigs heads, or the braines of any Fowle whatsoeuer after it is roasted and drest. The manner of Carbonadoi Now for the manner of Carbonadoing, it is in this sort; you shall first take the meate you must Carbona∣doe, and scorch it both aboue and below, then sprinkle good store of Salt vpon it, and baste it all ouer with sweete Butter melted, which done, take your broiling-iron, I doe not meane a Grid-iron (thouhg it be much vsed for this purpose) because the smoake of the coales, occasioned by the dropping of the meate, will ascend about it, and make it stinke; but a plate. Iron made with hookes and pricks, on which you may hang the meate, and set it close before the fire, and so the Plate heating the meate behind, as the fire doth before, it will both the sooner, and with more neatenesse bee readie: then hauing turned it, and basted it till it bee very browne, dredge it, and serue it vp with Vinegar and But∣ter. Of the toa∣sting of Mut∣ton. Touching the toasting of Mutton, Venison, or any other Ioynt of meate, which is the most excellentest of all Carbonadoes, you shall take the fattest and lar∣gest that can possibly be got (for leane meate is losse of labour, and little meate not worth your time,) and ha∣uing scorcht it, ane cast salt vpon it, you shall set it on a strong forke, with a dripping pan vnderneath it, before the face of a quicke fire, yet so farre off, that it may by no meanes scorch, but toast at leasure, then with that which falles from it, and with no other basting, see that you baste it continually, turning it euer and a∣non many times, and so oft, that it may soake and
browne at great leasure, and as oft as you baste it, so oft sprinkle Salt vpon it, and as you see it toast scotch it deeper and deeper, especially in the thickest and most fleshly parts where the blood most resteth: and when you see that no more blood droppeth from it, but the grauy is cleere and white; then shall you serue it vp ei∣ther with venison sauce, or with vinegar, pepper and su∣gar, cynamon, and the iuyce of an orenge mixt together and warmed with some of the grauy. Additions, ☞ Vnto Carbo∣nados. A rashr of mutton or lambe. Take mutton or Lambe that hath bene either rosted, or but paboyld, and with your knife scotch it many wayes; then lay it in a deepe dish, and put to it a pint of white Wine, and a little whole mace, a little slic't nutmeg, and some sugar, with a lumpe of sweete but∣ter, and stew it so till it it be very tender: then take it foorth, and browne it on the Grid-yron, and then lay∣ing sippets in the former broth serue it vp. How to carbo∣nado tongues. Take any tongue, whether of Beefe, Mutton, Calues, red Deere or Fallow, and being well boyld, pill them, cleaue them, and scotch them many wayes; then take three or foure Egges broken, some Sugar, Cynamon and Nutmeg, and hauing beaten it well together, put to it a Lemon cut in thin slices, and another cleane pild, and cut into little foure-square bits, and then take the tongue and lay it in: and then hauing melted good store of butter in a frying-pan, pu the tongue and the rest therein, and so fry it browne, and then dish it, and scrape sugar vpon it, and serue it vp. Additions ☞ For dressing of . How to sauce any fresh-fish. Take any Fresh-fish whatsoeuer (a Pike, Breame, Carpe, Barbel, Cheain, and such like, and draw it, but scale it not; then take out the Liuer and the refuse, and hauing opened it, wash it; then take a pottle of faire wa∣ter, a pretty quantity of white wine, good store of salt,
and some vinegar, with a little bunch of sweete hearbs, and set it on the fire, and as soone as it begins to boile, put in your fish, and hauing boild a little, take it vp into a faire vessell, then put into the liquor some grosse pepper and ginger, & when it is boild well together with more salt, set it by to coole, and then put your fish into it, and when you serue it vp, lay Fenell thereupon. How to byle small Fish. To boyle small fish, as Roches, Daes, Gudgeon or Flounders, boyle White-wine and water together with a bunch of choise hearbs, ad a little whole mace; when all is boyled well together, put in your fish, and skinn it well: then put in the soale of a manchet, a good quan∣tity of sweet butter, and season it with pepper and ver∣iuice, and so serue it in vpon sippets, and adorne the sides of the dish with sugar. To boyle a Guinet or Ro∣chet. First, draw your fish, and either split it open in the backe, or ioynt it in the backe, and trusse it round, then wash it cleane, and boyle it in water and salt, with a bunch of sweete hearbs: then take it vp into a large dish, and powre vnto it veriuice, Nutmeg, Butter and Pepper, and letting it stew a little, thicken it with the yelkes of Egges: then hot remoue it into another dish, and gar∣nish it with slices of Orenges and Lemons, Barberies, Prunes and Sugar, and so serue it vp. How to bake a Carpe. After you haue drawne, washt and scalded a faire large Carpe, season it with pepper, salt and Nutmeg, and then put it into a coffin with good store of sweete butter, and then cast on Raysins of the Sunne, the iuyce of Lemons, and some slices of orenge pils; and then sprinkling on a little vinegar, close vp and bake it. How to bake a Tench. First, let your Tench blood in the tayle, then scoure it, wash it, and scald it, then hauing dried it, take the fine crummes of bread, sweete Creame, the yelkes of
Egges, Currants cleane washt, a few sweete hearbes  small, season it with Nutmegs and Pepper, and make t into a stiff paste, and put it into the belly of the Tch: then season the fih on the outside with pepper, salt and Nutmeg, and so put it into a deepe coffin with sweete Butter, and so close vp the pye and bake it: then when it is enough, draw it, and open it, and put into it a good pece of preserued Orenge minst: then take Vinegar, Nutmeg, Butter, Sugar, and the yelke of a new-layd egge, and boyle it on a Chaffing-dish and coales, alwayes stirring it to keepe it from cur∣ding; then powre it into the pye, shake it well, and so serue it vp. How to stw a Trout. Take a large Trout, faire trimd, and wash it, and put it into a deepe pewter dish, then take halfe a pint of sweete wine, with a lumpe of butter, and a little whole mce, pasley, sauory and time, mince them all small, and put them into the Trouts belly, and so let it stew a quarter of an houre: then minse the yelke of an hard Egge, strow it on the Trout, and laying the hearbs about it; and scraping on sugar, serue it vp. How to bake Eeles. After you haue drawne your Eeles, chop them into small peeces of three or foure inches, and season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, and so put them into a coffin with a good lumpe of butter, great Raysins; Oni∣ons small chopt, and so close it, bake it, and serue it vp. OF The pastery and baked meaes Next to these already rehearsed, our Englsh House-wfe must be skilfull in pastery, and know how and in what manner to bake all sorts of meate, and what past is fit for euery meate, and how to handle and compound such pasts: As for example, red Deere venison, wilde Boare, Gammons of Bacon, Swans, Elkes, Porpus, and such like standing dishes, which must be kept long, wold
be bak't in a moyst, thicke, rough, course, & long lasting crust, and therefore of al other your Rye paste it best for that purpose: your Turkie, Capon, Pheasant, Par∣tidg, Veale, Peacocks, Lambe, and al sorts of water-fowe which are to come to the table more then once (yet not mny dayes, would be bak't in a good white crust, somewhat thick, therefore your Wheate is fit for them: your Chickens, Calues-feet, Oliues, Potatoes, Quinces, Fallow Deere and such like, which are most commonly eaten hot, would be in the finest, shortest and thinnest crust; therefore your fine wheat flower which is a little baked in the ouen before it be kneaded is the best for that purpose. Of the mix∣ture of pasts. To speake then of the mixture and kneading of pasts, you shall vnderstand that your rye paste would be knea∣ded onely with hot water and a little butter, or sweete seame and Rye flower very finely sifted, and it would be made tough & stiffe, that it may stand well in the rising, for the coffin therof must euer be very deep; your course wheat crust would be kneaded with hot water, o Mut∣ton broth, and good store of butter, and the paste made stiffe and tough, because that ffin must be deepe also; you fine wheat crust must be kneaded with as much butter as water▪ and the past made reasonable y the and gentle, into which you must put three or foure egges or more, according to the quantity you blend together, for they will giue it a sufficint sffening. Of puff past. Now for the making of puff past of the best kind, you shall take the finest wheat flowre after it hath bin a little back't in a pot in the oun▪ and blend it wel with egges whites and yelkes al together, and afer the paste is well kneaded, roul out a prt thereof as thinne as you please, and then spread cold sweete butter ouer the
same, then vpon the same butter role another leafe of the paste as before; and spread it with butter also; and thus role leafe vpon leafe with butter betweene till it be as thicke as you thinke good: and with it either couer a∣ny bakt meate, or make pastie for Venison, Florentine, Tart or what dish else you please and so bake it: there be some that to this paste vse sugar, but it is certaine it will hinder the rising thereof; and therefore when your puft paste is bak't, you shall dissolue sugar into Rose-wa∣ter, and drop it into the paste as much as it will by any meanes receiue, and then set it a little while in the ouen after and it will be sweete enough. baking Red Deere, o al∣low, or any thing to keepe . When you bake red Deere, you shall first parboile it and take out the bones, then you shall if it be leane larde it, if fat saue the charge, then put it into a presse to squese out the blood; then for a night lay it in a meare sauce made of Vinegar, small drinke and salt, and then taking it forth, season it well with Pepper finely beaten, and salt well mixt together, and see that you lay good store thereof, both vpon and in euery open and hollow place of the Venison; but by no meanes cut any slash∣es to put in the Pepper, for it will of it selfe sinke fast enough into the flesh, and be more pleasant in the ea∣ting: then hauing raised the coffin, lay in the bottome a thicke course of butter, then lay the flesh thereon and couer it all ouer with butter, and so bake it as much as if you did bake great browne bread; then when you draw it, melt more butter with three or foure spoonefull of Vinegar, and twice so much Claret wine, and at a vent hole on the toppe of the lidde powre in the same till it can receiue no more, and so let it stand and coole; and in this sort you may bake Fallow-Deere, or Swanne, or whatsoeuer else you
please to keepe cold, the meare sauce onely being left out which is onely proper to red Deere:To bake beefe or mutton for Venison. And if to your meare sauce you adde a little Turnesole, and therein steepe beefe, or Ramme-mutton: you may also in the same manner take the first for Red Deere Venison, and the latter for Fallow, and a very good iudgement shall not be able to say otherwise, then that it is of it selfe per∣fect Venison, both in taste, colour, and the manner of cuttting. ☜ To bake a u∣stard or Dow∣set. To bake an excellent Custard or Dowset: you shall take good store of egges, and putting away one quarter of the whites, beate them exceeding well in a bason, and then mixe with them the sweetest and thickest creame you can get, for if it be any thing thinne, the Custard will be wheyish: then season it with salt, sugar, cinamon, cloues, mace, and a little Nutmegge: which done raise your coffins of good tough wheate paste, be∣ing the second sort before spoke of, and if you please raise it in pretty workes, or angular formes, which you may doe by fixing the vpper part of the crust to the ne∣ther with the yelks of egges: then when the coffins are ready, strow the bottomes a good thicknesse ouer with Currants and Sugar, then set them into the Ouen, and fill them vp with the confection before blended, and so drawing them, adorne all the toppes with Carraway Cumfets, and the slices of Dates pickt right vp, and so serue them vp to the table. To preuent the wheyishnes of the Custard, dissolue into the first confection a little Issingglasse and all will be firme. To bake an Oliue-pye. To make an execellet Oliue-pie: take sweete hearbs as Violet leaues, Strawberry leaues, Spinage, Succory, Endine, Time and Sorrell, and chop them as small as may be, and if there be a Scallion or two amongst them
it will giue the better taste, then take the yelks of hard egges with Currants, Cinamon, Cloues and Mace, and and chop them amongst the hearbs also; then hauing cut out long oliues of a legge of Veale, roule vp more then three parts of the hearbs so mixed within the O∣liues, together with a good deale of sweet butter; then hauing raised your crust of the finest and best paste, strow in the bottome the remainder of the hearbs, with a few great Raisins hauing the stones pickt out: then put in the Oliues and couer them with great Raisins and a few Prunes: then ouer all lay good store of Butter and so bake them: then being sufficiently bak't, take Cla∣ret wine, Sugar, Cinamon, and two or three spoonefull of wine Vinegar and boile them together, and then drawing the pie, at a vent in the top of the lid put in the same, and then set it into the Ouen againe a little space, and so serue it forth. To make a Marow bne pye. To bake the best Marrow-bone-pye, after you haue mixt the crusts of the best sort of pastes, and raised the coffin in such manner as you please: you shall first in the bottome thereof lay a course of marrow of Beefe mixt with Currants: then vpon it a lay of the soales of Artichokes, after they haue beene boiled, and are diui∣ded from the thistle: then couer them ouer with mar∣row, Currants, and great Raisins, the stones pickt out: then lay a course of Potatoes cut in thicke slices, after they haue beene boiled soft, and are cleane pild: then couer them with marrow, Currants, great Raisins, Su∣gar and Cinamon: then lay a layer of candied Eringo-rootes mixt very thicke with the slices of Dates: then couer it with marrow, Currants, great Raisins, Sugar, Cinamon and Dates, with a few Damaske-prunes, and so bake it: and after it is bakt powre into it as long as
it will receiue it white-wine, rose-water, sugar, cinamon, and vinegar, mixt together, and candie all the couer with rose-water and sugar onely; and so set it into the ouen a little, and after serue it forth. To bake a chic∣ken-pie. To bake a chicken-pie, after you haue trust your chickens, broken their legges and breast-bones, and rai∣sed your crust of the best paste, you shall lay them in the coffin close together with their bodies full of but∣ter: then lay vpon them, and vnderneath them currants, great raisins, prunes, cinamon, sugar, whole mace and salt: then couer all with great store of butter, and so bake it; after powre into it the same liquor you did in your marrow-bone Pie with yelkes of two or three egs beaten amongst it; and so serue it forth. ☜ Additions to the Pastery▪ Venison of Hares. To make good Red-Deere Venison of Hares, take a Hare or two, or three, as you can or please, and picke all the flesh from the bones; then put it into a morter either of wood or stone, and with a wooden pestle let a strong person beate it exceedingly, and euer as it is beating, let one sprinkle in vinegar and some salt; then when it is sufficiently beaten, take it out of the morter, and put it into boiling water and parboile it: when it is parboild, take it and lay it on a table in a round lumpe, and lay a board ouer it, & with weights presse it as hard as may be: then the water being prest out of it, season it well with Pepper and Salt: then lard it with the fat of Bacon so thicke as may be: then bake it as you bake o∣ther Red-Deere, which is formerly declared. To bake a Hare pye. Take a Hare and pick off all the flesh from the bones, and only reserue the head, then parboile it well: which done, take it out and let it coole, assoone as it is cold, take at least a pound and halfe of Raisins of the Sunne, and take out the stones: then mixe them with a good
quantity of Mutton suet, and with a sharpe shredding knife shred it as small as you would doe for a Chewet: then put to it Currants and whole Raisins, Cloues and Mace, Cinamon and Salt: then hauing raised the coffin long wise to the proportion of a Hare, first lay in the head, and then the aforesaid meate, and lay the meate in the true portion of a Hare, with necke, shoulders, and legges, and then couer the coffin and bake it as other bak't meates of that nature. A Gammon of Bacon-pie. Take a Gammon of Bacon and onely wash it cleane, and then boile it on a soft gentle fire, til it be boiled as tender as is possible, euer and anon fleeting it cleane, that by all meanes it may boile white: then take off the swerd, and sare it very well with all manner of sweete and pleasant serssing hearbs: then strow store of Pepper ouer it, and pricke it thicke with Cloues: then lay it into a coffin made of the same proportion, and lay good store of Butter round about it, and vpon it, and strow Pepper vpon the Butter, that as it melts, the Pepper may fal vp∣pon the Bacon: then couer it, and make the proportion of a Pigges head in paste vpon it, and then bake it as you bake Red Deere, or things of the like nature, onely the Paste would be of Wheate-meale. A Herring-pie. ☞ Take white pickled Herrings of one nights watering and boyle them a little: then pill off the skinne and take onely the backs of them, and picke the fish cleane from the bones, then take good store of Raisins of the Sunne, and stone them, and put them to the fish: then take a Warden or two, and pare it, and slice it in small sli∣ces from the chore, and put it likewise to the fish: then with a very sharpe shredding knife shred all as small and fine as may be: then put o it good store of Currants, Sugar▪ Cinamon, slic't Dates, and so put
it into the coffin with good store of very sweet Butter, and so couer it, and leaue onely a round vent-hole on the top of the lid, and so bake it like pies of that nature: When it is sufficiently bak't, draw it out, and take Cla∣ret-wine and a little Veriuice, Sugar, Cinamon, and sweet Butter, and boile them together; then put it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie a little, and put it againe in∣to the Ouen for a little space, and so serue it vp, the lid being candied ouer with Sugar, and the sides of the dish trimmed with Sugar. A Ling pi. Take a Iole of the best Ling that is not much watred, and is well sodden and cold, but whilest it is hot take off the skin, and pare it cleane vnderneath, and pick out the bones cleane from the fish: then cut it into grosse bits and let it lie: then take the yelks of a dozen Egges boild exceeding hard, and put them to the fish, and shred all together as small as is possible: then take all manner of the best and finest pot-herbs, and chop them wonderfull small, and mixe them also with the fish; then season it with Pepper, Cloues, and Mace, and so lay it into a coffin with great store of sweete Butter, so as it may swimme therein, and then couer it, and leaue a vent hole open in the top when it is bak't, draw it, and take Vertuice, Su∣gar, Cinamon and Butter, and boile them together, and first with a feather annoynt all the lid ouer with that li∣quor, and then scrape good store of Sugar vpon it; then powre the rest of the liquor in at the vent hole, & then set it into the Ouen againe for a very little space, and then serue it vp as pies of the sme natue, and both these pies of fish before rehearsed, are especal Lenten dihes. ☞ A Noole ool. Take a pint of the sweetest and thickest Creame that can be gotten, and set it on the fire in a very cleane
scowred skillet, and put into it Sugar, Cinamon and a Nutmegge cut into foure quarters, and so boile it well: then take the yelkes of foure Egs, and take off the filmes, and beate them well with a little sweete Creame: then take the foure quarters of the Nutmegge out of the Creame, then put in the Egges, and stirre it exceedingly, till it be thicke: then take a fine Manchet, and cut it in∣to thin shiues, as much as will couer a dish-bottome, and holding it in your hand, powre halfe the Creame in∣to the dish: then lay your bread ouer it, then couer the bread with the rest of the Creame, and so let it stand till it be cold: then strow it ouer with Carraway Com∣fets, and pricke vp some Cinamon Comfets, and some slic't Dates; or for want thereof, scrape all ouer it some Sugar, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp. A Trifle. Take a pint of the best and thickest Creame, and set it on the fire in a cleane skillet, and put into it Sugar, Cinamon, and a Nutmegge cut into foure quarters, and so boile it well: then put it into the dish you intend to serue it in, and let it stand to coole till it be no more then luke-warme: then put in a spoonefull of the best earning, and stirre it well about, and so let it stand till it be cold, and then strow Sugar vpon it, and so serue it vp, and this you may serue either in dish, glasse, or o∣ther plate. A Calues f-pye. Take Calues feete well boild, and picke all the meate from the bones: then being cold  red it as small as you can, then season it with Cloues and Mace, and put in good store of Currants, Raisins, and Prunes: then put i into the coffin with good store of sweete Butter, then breake in whole stickes of Cinamon, and a Nutmegge slic't into foure quarters, and season it before with Salt:
then close vp the coffin, and onely leaue a vent-hole. When it is bak't, draw it, and at the vent-hole put in the same liquor you did in the Ling-pie, and trim the lid after the same manner, and so serue it vp. Oysterpye. Take of the greatest Oysters drawne from the shells, and parboile them in Veriuice: then put them into a cuslander, and let all the moysture run from them, till they be as dry as is possible: then raise vp the coffin of the pie, and lay them in: then put to them good store of Currants and fine powdred Sugar, with whole Mc, whole Cloues, whole Cinamon, and Nutmeg slc't, Dates cut, and good store of sweete butter: then couer it, and onely leaue a vent-hole: when it is bak't, then draw it, and take White wine, and White-wine vine∣gar, Sugar, Cinamon, and sweete buter, and melt it to∣gether; then first trim the lid therewith, and candie it with Sugar; then powre the rest in at the vent hole, and shake it well, and so set it into the ouen againe for a lit∣tle space, and so serue it vp, the dish edges trimd with Sugar. Now some vse to put to this pie Oins sliced and shred, but that is referred to discretion, and to the pleasure of the taste. To recouer Ve∣nisn ha is tainted. ☜ Take strong Ale, and put to it of Wine-vinegar as much as will make it sharpe: then set it on the fire, and boile it well, and skum it, and make of it a strong brine with Bay-salt, or other salt: then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, then put your Venison into it, and let it lie in it full twelue houres: then take it out from that mea , and presse it well; then parboyle it, and season it with Pepper and Salt, and bake it, as hath beene before shewed in this Chapter. A Cheet py Take the brawnes and the wings of Capons and Chic∣kens after they haue beene rosted, and pull away the
skin, then shred them with e Mutten suet very small, then season it with Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, Sugar and Salt▪ then put to Rasins of the Sunne & Currants, and slic't Dates, and Orenge pills, and being well mixt together, put it into small coffins made for the purpose, and strow on the top of them good store of Carraway-Comfets: then couer them, and bake them with a gen∣tle heate, and these Chewets you may also make of ro∣sted Veale, seasoned as before shewed, and of all parts the loyne is the best. A minc't pie. Take a Legge of Mutton, and cut the best of the flesh from the bone, and parboyle it well: then put to it three pound of the best Mutton suet, and shred it very small: then spread it abroad, and season it with Pepper and Salt, Cloues and Mace: then put in good store of Currants, great Raisins and Prunes cleane washt and pickt, a few Dates slic't, and some Orenge pills slc't: then being all well mixt together, put it into a coffin, or into diuers coffins, and so bake them: and when they are serued vp open the liddes, and strow store of Sugar on the top of the meate, and v∣pon the lid. And in this sort you may also bake Beefe or Veale; onely the Beefe would not bee parboyld, and the Veale will aske a double quantity of Su∣et. A Pippen pe. Take of the fairest and best Pippins, and pare there, and make a hole in the top of them; then pricke in each hole a Cloue or two, then put them into the coffin, then breake in whole stickes of Cinamon, and slices of Orenge pills and Dates, and on the top of euery Pippin a little peece of sweete butter: then fill the coffin, and couer the Pippins ouer with Sugar; then close vp the pie, and bake it, as you bake pies of the like nature,
and when it is bak't, annoint the lidde ouer with store of sweete butter, and then strow Sugar vpon it a good thicknesse, and set it into the ouen againe for a little space, as whilest the meate is in dishing vp, and then serue it. A Warden-pie, or quince-pie. ☜ Take of the fairest and best Wardens, and pare them, and take out the hard chores on the top, and cut the sharpe ends at the bottome flat; then boyle them in White-wine and Sugar, vntill the sirrup grow thicke: then take the Wardens, from the sirrup into a cleane dish, and let them coole; then set them into the coffin, and prick Cloues in the tops, with whole sticks of Cina∣mon, and great store of Sugar, as for Pippins, then co∣uer it, and onely reserue a vent-hole, so set it in the ouen and bake it: when it is bak't, draw it forth, and take the first sirrup in which the Wardens were boyld, and taste it, and if it be not sweet enough, then put in more Sugar and some Rose water, and boyle it againe a little, then powre it in at the vent-hole, & shake the pie well; then take sweet butter and Rose water melted, and with it an∣noint the pie-lid all ouer, and then strow vpon it store of Sugar, and so set it into the ouen againe a little space, and then serue it vp. And in this manner you may also bake Quinces. To preserue quinces to bake all the yeare. Take the best and sweetest worte, and put to it good store of Sugar; then pate and chore the Quinces cleane▪ and put them therein, and boyle them till they grow tender: then take out the Quinces and let them coole, & let the pickle in which they were boild, stand to coole also; then straine it through a raunge or siue, then put the Quinces into a sweete earthen pot, then powre the pcke or sirrup vnto them, so as all the Quinces may be quite couered all ouer; then stop vp the pot close,
and let it in a dry place, and once in sixe or seuen weeks looke vnto it; and if you see it shrinke, or doe begin to hoare or mould▪ then powre out the pickle or sirrup, and renewing it, boyle it ouer againe, and as before put it to the Quncs being cold and thus you may preserue them for the vse of baking, or otherwise all the yeere. A pippen Tart. Take Pppins of the fairest, and pre them, and then diuide them ust in the hlfes, and take out the chores cleane: then hauing old out the coffin flat, and raisd vp a small verdge of an inch, or more high, lay in the Pippins with the hollow side downeward, as close one to another as may be: then lay here and there a cloue, and here and there a whole sticke of Sinamon, and a lit∣tle bit of butter: then couer all cleane ouer with Sugar, and so couer the coffin, and bake it according to the manner of Tarts; and when it is bakt, then draw it out, and hauing boyled Butter and rose water together, anoynt all the lid ouer therewith, and then scrape or strow on it good store of Sugar, and so set it in the ouen againe, and after serue it vp. A codlin Tart. Take greene Apples from the tree, and codle them in scading water wihout breaking; then pill the thinne skin from them, and so diuide them in halfes, and cut out the chores, and so lay them into the coffin, and doe in euery thing as you did in the Pippin-tart; and before you couer it when the Sugar is cast in, see you sprinkle vpon a good store of Rose-water, then close it, and doe as before shewed. ☞ A codling pie· Take Codlins as before said, and pill them and di∣uide them in halfes, and chore them, and lay a leare thereof in the bottome of the pie: then scatter here and there a cloue, and here and there a peece of whole Sina∣mon; then couer them all ouer with Sugar, then lay
another leare of Codlins, and doe as beforesaid, and so another, till the coffin be all filled; then couer all with Sugar, and here and there a Cloue and a Cinamon-sticke, and if you will a slic't Orange pill and a Date; then couer it, and bake it as the pies of that nature: when it is bak't, draw it out of the ouen, and take of the thickest and best Creame with good store of Sugar, and giue it one boile or two on the fire: then open the pie, and put the Creame therein, and mash the Codlins all about; then couer it, and hauing trimd the lidde (as was before shewed in the like pies and tarts) set it into the ouen againe for halfe an houre, and so serue it forth. A Cherry Tart. Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and pick them cleane from leaues and stalkes: then spread out your coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and couer the bottome with Sugar: then couer the Sugar all ouer with Cher∣ries, then couer those Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinamon, and here and there a Cloue: then lay in more cherries, and so more Sugar, Cinamon and cloues, till the coffin be filled vp: then couer it, and bake it in all points as the codling and pipping tart, and so serue it: and in the same manner you may make Tarts of Gooseberries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Biberries, or any other Berrie whatsoeuer. A Rice Tart. Take Rice that is cleane picked, and boyle it in sweet Creame, till it be very soft: then let it stand and coole, and put into it good store of Cinamon and Sugar, and the yelkes of a couple of Egges and some Currants, stir and beate all well together▪ then hauing made the cof∣fin in the manner before said for other tarts, put the Rice therein, and spread it all ouer the coffin: then breake many little bits of sweet butter vpon it all ouer,
and scrape some sugar ouer it also, then couer the tart, and bake it, and trim it in all points, as hath bene before shewed, and so serue it vp. A Florentine. Take the Kidneys of veale after it hath bene well ro∣sted, and is cold: then shred it as fine as is possible; then take al sorts of sweete Pot hearbs, or fearsing hearbs, which haue no bitter or strong taste, and chop them as small as may be, and putting the veale into a large dish, put the hearbs vnto it, and good store of cleane washt Currants, Sugar, Cinamon, the yelkes of foure egges, a little sweete creame warmd, and the fine grated crummes of a halfe penny loafe and salt, and mixe all exceeding well together: then take a deepe pewter dish, and in it lay your paste very thin rowld out, which paste you must mingle thus: Take of the finest wheat-flower a quart, and a quarter so much sugar, and a little cinamon; then breake into it a couple of egges, then take sweet creame and butter melted on the fire, and with it kned the paste, and as was before sayd, hauing spread butter all about the dishes sides: then put in the veale, n breake peeces of sweete butter vpon it, and scrape sugar ouer it; then rowle out another paste reaso∣nable hicke, and with it couer the dish all ouer, clo∣sing the two pasts with the beaten whites of egges very fast together: then with your knife cut the lid into di∣uerse pretty workes according to your fancy: then let it in the Ouen and bake it with pies and tarts of like na∣ture: when it is back't, draw it, and trim the lid with sugar, as hath bene shewed in tarts, and so serue it vp in your second courses. A pruen tart. Take of the fairest damaske pruens you can get, and put them in a cleane pipkin with faire water, Sugar, vnbruised Cinamon, and a braunch or two of Rose∣mary,
and if you haue bread to bake, stew them in the ouen with your bread: if otherwise, stew them on the fire: when they are stewed, then bruise them all to mash in their sirrop, and strayne them into a cleane dish; then boyle it ouer againe with Sugar, Cinamon, and Rose water, till it be as thicke as Marmalad: then set it to coole, then make a reasonable tuffe paste with fine flower, Water, and a little butter, and rowle it out very thinne: then hauing patternes of paper cut into diuerse proportions, as Beastes, Birdes, armes, Knots, Flowers, and such like: Lay the patternes on the paste, and so cut them accordingly: then with your fingers pinch vpp the edges of the paste, and set the worke in good proportion: then pricke it well all ouer for rising, and set it on a cleane sheete of large paper, and so set it into the Ouen, and bake it hard; then drawe it, and set it by to coole: and thus you may doe by a whole Ouen full at one time, as your occa∣sion of expence is: then against the time of seruice comes, take off the confection of pruens before rehear∣sed, and with your Knife, or a spoone fill the coffin ac∣cording to the thicknesse of the verge; then strow it o∣uer all with Caraway comfets, and pricke long comfets vpright in it, and so taking the paper from the bottome, serue it on a plate in a dish or charger, according to the bignesse of the tart, and at the second course, and this tart carrieth the colour blacke. Aple-tart. Take apples and pare them, and slice them thin from the chore into a pipkin with White wine, good store of Sugar, Cinamon, a few Saunders and Rosewater, and boyle it till it be thicke; then coole it, and straine it, and beate it very well together with a spoone: then put it into the coffin as you did the Pruen tart, and
adorne it also in the same manner, and this tart you may fill thicker or thinner, as you please to raise the edge of the coffin, and it carrieth the colour red. A Spinage tart. Take good store of Spinage, and boyle it in a Pipkin with White-wine till it be very soft as pap: then take it and straine it well into a pewter dish, not leauing any part vnstrained: then put to it Rosewater, great store of sugar and cynamon, and boyle it till it be as thicke as Marmalad, then let it coole, and after fil your coffin, and adorne it, and serue it in all points as you did your pruen-tart, and this carrieth the colour greene. A yellow tart. Take the yelkes of egs, and breake away the filmes, and beate thm well with a little creame: then take of the sweetest ad thickest creame that can be got, and set it on the fire in a cleane skillet, and put into it sugar, ci∣namon and rose water, and then boyle it well: when it is boyd, and still boyling, stirre it well, and as you stirre it put in th egs, and so boyle it til it curdle; then take i fom the fire and put it into a strainer, and first let the thin whay runne away into a by dish, then straine the rest very well, and beate it well with a spooe, and so put it into the tart coffin, and adorne it as you did your pruen tart, and so serue it: this carrieth the colour yellow A white tart. Take the whites of egs and beate them with rose-wa∣ter, and a little sweet creame: then set on the fire good thicke sweete ceame, and put into it sugar, cynamon, rose-water, and boyle it well, and as it boyles stirre it exceedingly, and in the stirring put in the whites of egs; then bole i till it curle, and after doe in al things as you did to the yellow tart; and this carrieth the colour white, and it is a very pure white, and therefore would be adorned with red carraway comfets, and as this to
with blaunched almonds like white tarts and full as pure. Now you may (if you please) put all these seue∣rall colours, and seuerall stuffes into one tart, as thus: If the tart be in the proportion of a beast, the body may be of one colour, the eyes of another, the teeth of an other, and the tallents of another: and so of birds, the body of one colour, the eyes another, the legges of an o∣ther, and euery feather in the wings of a seuerall colour according to fancy: and so likewise in armes, the field of one colour, the charge of another, according to the forme of the Coat-armour; as for the mantles, trailes and deuices about armes, they may be set out with se∣uerall colours of preserues, conserues, marmalads, and goodinyakes, as you shall find occasion or inuenti∣on, and so likewise of knots, one trayle of one co∣lour, and another of another, and so of as many as you please. An hearb tart. Take sorrell, spinage, parsley, and boyle them in wa∣ter till they be very soft as pap, then take them vp, and presse the water cleane from them, then take good store of yelkes of egges boild very hard, and chopping them with the hearbes exceeding small, then put in good store of currants, sugar and cynamon, and stirre all well together; then put them into a deepe tart coffin with good store of sweete butter▪ and couer it; and bake it like a pippin tart, and adorne the lid after the baking in that manner also, and so serue it vp. To bake a pud¦ding pye. Take a quart of the best creame, and set it on the fire, and slice a loae of the lightest white bread into thinne slices, and pu into it, and let it stand on the fire till the milke begin to rise; then take it off, & put it into a bason, and let it stand till it be cold: then put in the yelkes of foure egges, and two whites, good store of currants,
Sugar, Cinamon, Cloues, Mace, and plenty of Sheepes suet finely shred, and a good season of Salt; then trim your pot very well round about with butter, and so put it your pudding, and bake it sufficiently, then when you serue it, strow Sugar vpon it. A White pot. Take the best and sweetest creame, and boile it with good store of Sugar, and Cinamon, and a little rose-wa∣ter, then take it from the fire and put into it cleane pickt ryce, but not so much as to make it thicke, & let it steepe therein till it be cold; then put in the yelks of sixe egs, & two whites, Currants, Sugar, Sinamon, and Rose-water, and Salt, then put it into a pan, or pot, as  it were a custard; and so bake it and serue it in the pot it is ba∣ked in, trimming the top with sugar or comfets. OF banqueting stuffe and con∣ceited dishes. There are a world of other Bak't meates and Pies, but for as much as whosoeuer can doe these may doe all the rest, because herein is contained all the Art of seaso∣nings, I will trouble you with no further repetitions▪ but proceede to the manner of making of Banqueting stuffe and conceited dishes, with other pretty and curi∣ous secrets, necessary for the vnderstanding of our Eng∣lish Hous-wife: for albeit they are not of generall vse, yet in their due times they are so needfull for adornati∣on, that whosoeuer is ignorant therein, is lame, and but the halfe part of a compleat Hous-wife. To make paste of Quinces. ☞ To make paste of Quinces: first boile your Quinces whole and when they are soft, pare them and cut the Quince from the core; then take the finest sugar you can get finely beaten and seased, and put in a little Rose-wa∣ter and boie it together til it be thicke; then pu in the cut Quinces and so boyle them together tll it be stffe enough to mold, and when it is cold, then role it and print it; a pound of Quinces will take a pound of sugar,
or neere thereabouts. To make thin quince cakes. To make thin Quince cakes, take your quince when it is boyled soft as before said, and dry it vpon a Pewter plate with soft heate, & be ouer stirring of it with a slice till it be hard; then take searced sugar quantity for quan∣tit & strow it into the quince, as you beate it in a wood∣den or stone morter: and so role them thin & print them. To preserue quinces. ☜ To preserue Quinces: first pare your Quinces and take out the cores and boile the cores and parings all to∣gether in faire water, and when they beginne to be soft, take them out and straine your liquor, and put the waight of your Quinces in sugar, and boile the Quinces in the sirrup till they be tender: then take them vp and boile your sirrup till it be thicke: If you will haue your Quinces red, couer them in the boiling, and if you will haue them white doe not couer them. To make Ipo∣cras. To make Ipocras, take a pottle of wine, two ounces of good Cinamon, halfe an ounce of ginger, nine cloues, & sixe pepper cornes, and a nutmeg, & bruise them and put them into the wine with some rosemary flowers, and so let them steepe all night, and then put in sugar a pound at least: & when it is well setled, let it run through a wool∣len bag made for that purpose: thus if your wine be cla∣ret, the Ipocras wil be red: if white then of that color also. To make ielly. To make the best Ielly, take calues feet and wash them and scald off the haire as cleane as you can get it: then split them and take out the fat and lay them in water, & shift them: then bile them in faire water vntill it will ielly, which you shall know by now and then cooling a spoonefull of the broth: when it will ielly then straine it, and when it is cold then put in a pint of Sacke and whole Cinamon and Ginger slic't, and Sugar and a little Rose-water, and boyle all well together againe:
Then beate the white of an egge an put it into it, and let it haue one boile more: then put in a branch of Rosemary into the bottome of your ielly bag, and let it runne through once or twice, and if you will haue it coloured, then put in a little Townefall. Also if you want calues feete you may make as good Ielly if you take the like quantity of Isingglasse, and so vse no calues feete at all. To make the best Lach, take Isingglasse and lay it two houres in water, and shift it and boyle it in faire water and let it coole: Then take Almonds and lay them in cold water till they will blaunch: And then stampe them and put to new milke, and strayne them and put in whole Mace and Ginger slic't, and boile them till it taste well of the spce: then put in your Isingglasse and sugar, and a little Rose-water: and then let them all runne through a strainer. Gin∣ger bread. Take Claret wine and colour it with Townefall, and put in sugar and set it to the fire: then take wheat bread finely grated and sifted, and Licoras, Aniseedes, Gin∣ger and Cinamon beaten very small and searsd: and put your bread and your spice all together, and put thm into the wine and boile it and stirre it till it be thicke: then mould it and print it at your pleasure▪ & let it stand neither too moist nor too warme. Marmalad of quinces red. To make red Marmelade of Quinces: take a pound of Quinces and cut them in halfes, and take out the coes and pare them: then take a pound of Sugar and a quart of faire water and put them all into a pan, and let them boile with a soft fire, and sometimes turne them and keepe them couered with a Pewter dish, so that the stmme or aire may cme a little out: the longer they are in boyling the better colour they will haue: and
when they be soft take a knife and cut them crosse vpon the top, it will make the sirrup goe through that they may be all of a like colour: then set a little of your sir∣rop to coole, and when it beginneth to be thicke then breake your quinces with a slice or a spoone so small as you can in the pan, and then strow a little fine sugar in your boxes bottome, and so put it vp. Marmalad wines. To make white Marmalade you must in all points vse your quinces as is before said; only you must take but a pint of water to a pound of quinces, and a pound of su∣gar, and boile them as fast as you can, and couer them not at all. To make Ium∣bals. To make the best Iumbals, take the whites of three egges and beate them well, and take off the froth; then take a little milke and a pound of fine wheate flower & sugar together finely sifted, and a few Aniseeds well rub'd and dried; and then worke all together as stiffe as you can worke it, and so make them in what formes you please, and bake them in a soft ouen vppon white Papers. To make Bis∣ket bread. To make Bisket-bread, take a pound of fine flower, & a pound of sugar finely beaten and searsed, and mixe them together; Then take eight egges and put foure yelks and beate them very well together; then stow in your flower and sugar as you are beating of it, by a little at once, it will take very neere an houes bam; then take halfe an ounce of Aniseedes and Coriandr-seeds and let them be dried and rubbed very cleane, and put them in; then rub your Bisket-pans with cod sweet butter as thin as you can, and so put it in and bake it in an ouen: But if you would haue thinne Cakes, then take fruit dishes and rub them in like sort with but∣ter, and so bake your Cakes on them, and whn
they are almost back't, turne them, and thrust them downe close with your hand. Some to this Bisket-bread will adde a little Creame, and it is not amisse, but ex∣cellent good also. To make fin Iumbals. To make Iumbals more fine and curious then the for∣mer, and neerer to the taste of the Macaroone: take a pound of sugar beate it fine, then take as much fine wheat flower and mixe them together, then take two whites and one yolke of an egge, halfe a quarter of a pound of blaunched Almonds; then beate them very fine altogether with halfe a dish of sweet butter, and a spoonefull of Rose water, and so worke it with a little Creame till it come to a very stiffe paste, then roue them forth as you please: And hereto you shall also, if you please, adde a few dried Aniseeds finely rubbed and strewed into the paste, and also Coriander seed. To make drye sugar leach To make drie sugar Leache, blaunch your Almonds and beate them with a little rose water and the white of one egge, and you must beate it with a great deale of su∣gar, and worke it as you would worke a peece of paste: then roule it and print it as you did other things, onely be sure to strew sugar in the print for feare of cleaning too. To make leach Lumbard. To make Leache Lumbard, take halfe a pound of blaunched Almonds, two ounces of Cinamon beaten and searsed, halfe a pound of sugar, then beate your Al∣monds, and strewe in your sugar and cynamon till it come to a paste, then roule it and print it, as afore∣sayd. To make fresh cheese. To make an excellet fresh cheese, take a ptle of Milke as it comes from the Cow, and a pint of creame: then take a spoonefull of runnet or earning, and put it vnto it, and let it stand two houres: then stirre it vp,
and put it into a fine cloth, and let the whay draine from it: then put it into a bowle, and take the yelke of an egge, a spoonefull of Rose-water, and bray them to∣gether with a very little salt, with Sugar and Nutmegs; and when all these are brayed together and searst, mxe it with the curd, and then put it into a cheese fat with a very fine cloth. How to make course Ginger bread. To make course Ginger bread, take a quart of Hony and set it on the coales and refine it: then take a penny-worth of Ginger, as much Pepper, as much Licoras, and a quarter of a pound of Aniseeds, and a peny worth of Saunders: All these must be beaten and searsed, and so put into the hony: then put in a quarter of a pint of Claret wine or old ale, then take three peny Manchets finely grated and strow it amongst the rest, and stirre it till it come to a stiffe paste, and then make it into cakes and dry them gently. How to make quince cakes ordinary. ☜ To make ordinary Quince cakes, take a good peece of a preserued Quince, and beate in a morter, and worke it vp into a very stiffe paste wih fine searst Sugar▪ then print it and drie them gently. How to make Cinamon stickes. ☜ To make most Artificiall Cinamon stickes, take an ounce of Cinamon and pound it, and halfe a pound of Sugar; then take some gumme Dragon and put it in steepe in Rosewater, then take thereof to the quantity of a hasell nut, and worke it out and print it, and roule it in forme of a Cinamon sticke. How to make Cinamon wa∣ter. To make Cinamon water take a pottle of the best Ale and a potte of sack-lees; a pound of Cinamon sliced fine, and put them together, and let them stand two daies; then distill them in a limbecke or glasse▪ Still. How to make Wrme-wood water. To make Wormewood water take two gallons of good Ale, a pound of Aniseedes, halfe a pound of
Licoras, and beate them very fine; And then take two good handfuls of the crops of wormewood, and put them into the Ale and let them stand all night, and then distill them in a limbeck with a moderate fire. To make swete water To make sweete water of the best kind, take a thou∣sand damaske roses, two good handfuls of Lauendar tops, a three peny waight of mace, two ounces of cloues bruised, a quart of running water: put a little water into the bottome of an earthen pot, and then put in your Ro∣ses and Lauender with the spices by little and little, and in the putting in alwaies knead them downe with your fist, and so continue it vntill you haue wrought vp all your Roses and Lauender, and in the working betweene put in alwaies a little of your water; then stop your pot close, and let it stand foure daies, in which time euery morning and euening put in your hand, and pull from the bottome of your pot the saide Roses, working it for a time: and then distill it, and hang in the glasse of water a graine or two of Muske wrapt in a pece of Sarcenet or fine cloath. Another way Others to make sweete water, take of Ireos two oun∣ces, of Calamus halfe an ounce, of Cipresse rootes halfe an ounce, of yellow Saunders nine drams, of Cloues bruised one ounce, of Beniamin one ounce, of Storax and Calamint one ounce▪ and of Muske twelfe graines, and infusing all these in Rose-water distill it. To make date Leach▪ To mke an excelent Date-Leach, take Dates, and take out the stone and the whte rinde, and beate them with Suga, Cinamon and Ginger very finely then work it as you would worke a peece of paste, and then print them as you please, To make su∣gar plate. To mke a ind of Sugar plate, take Gumme Dragon, and lay it in Rose-water wo daies▪ then take the pow∣der
of faire Hepps and Sugar, and the iuyce of an O∣reng; beate all these together in a Morter, then take it out and worke it with your hand: and print it at your pleasure. To make spice Cakes. To make excellent spice Cakes, take halfe a pecke of very fine Wheat-flower, take almost one pound of sweet butter, and some good milke and creame mixt together, set it on the fire, and put in your butter, and a good deale of sugar, and let it melt together: then straine Saffron into your milke a good quantity: then take seuen or eight spoonefulls of good Ale-bame, and eight egges with two yelkes and mixe them together, then put your milke to it when it is somewhat cold, and into your flower put salt, Aniseedes bruised, Cloues and Mace, and a good deale of Cinamon: then worke all together good and stiffe, that you need not worke in any flower after: then put in a little rosewater cold, then rub it well in the thing you knead it in, and worke it throughly: if it be not sweete enough, scrape in a little more sugar, and pull it all in peeces, and hurle in a good quantity of Currants, and so worke all together againe, and bake your Cake as you see cause in a gentle warme ouen. To make a Banbury Cake. ☜ To make a very good Banbury Cake, take foure pounds of Currants, & wash and pick them very cleane, and drie them in a cloth: then take three egges and put away one yelke, and beate them, and strayne them with harme, putting thereto Cloues, Mace, Cinamon and Nutmegges, then take a pint of Creame, and as much mornings milke and set it on the fire till the cold be ta∣ken away; then take flower and put in good store of cold butter and sugar, then put in your egges, bame and meale and worke them all together an houre or
more; then saue a part of the pste, & the rest breake in peces and worke in your Currants; which done, mold your Cake of what quantity you please; and then with that paste which hath not any Currants coue it very thinne both vnderneath and a lost. And so bake it ac∣cording to the the bignesse. ☞ To mke the best March-pane. To make the best March pane, take the best Iordan Almonds and blaunch them in warme water, then put them into a stone-morter, and with a wooden pestell beate them to pappe, then take of the finest refined su∣gar well searst, and with it Damaske Rose-water, beate it to a good stiffe paste, allowing almost to euery Iordan Amlond three spoonefull of sugar; then when it is brought thus to a paste, lay it vpon a faire table, and strowing searst sugar vnder it, mould it like leauen, then with a roling pin role it forth, and lay it vpon wafers washt with Rose-water; then pinch it about the sides, and put it into what forme you please; then strow searst sugar all ouer it; which done, wash it ouer with Rose-water and sugar mixt together, for that will make the Ice; then adorne it with Comfets, guilding, or whatso∣euer deuices you please, and so set it into a hot stoue, and there bake it crispie, and so serue it forth. Some vse to mixe with the paste Cinamon and Ginger finely searst, but I referre that to your particular taste. To make paste of Gen, o any other past To make paste of Genoa, you shall take Quinces after they haue beene boyled soft, and beate them in a mor∣ter with refined Sugar, Cinamon and Ginger finely searst, and Damaske rose water till it come to a stiffe paste; and role it forth and print it, and so bake it in a stoue; and in this sort you may make paste of Peares, Apples, Wardens, Plummes of all kinds, Cherries, Bar∣berries; or what other fruit you please.
To mke any Conserue. To make conserue of any fruit you please, you shall take the fruite you intend to make conserue of: and if it be stone-fruit you shall take out the stones: if other fruit take away the paring and chore, and then boyle them in faire running water to a resonable height: then draine them from thence, and put them into a fresh ves∣sell with Claret wine, or White wine, according to the colour of the fruit: and so boyle them to a thicke pappe all to mashing, breaking and stirring them toge∣ther: then to euery pound of pappe put to a pound of Sugar, and so stirre them all well together, and being very hot strayne them through faire strayners, and so pot it vp. To make Con∣serue of Flow∣ers. To make conserue of Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Gil∣ly flowers, and such like: you shall take the flowers from the stalkes, and with a paire of sheeres cut away the white ends at the roots thereof, and then put them in∣to a stone morter or wooden brake, and there crush or beate them till they be come to a soft substance: and then to euery pound thereof, take a pound of fine refi∣ned sugar well searst and beate it all together, till it come to one intire body, and then pot it vp, and vse it as occa∣sion shall serue. To make Wa∣fers. To make the best Wafers, take the finest wheat-flow∣er you can get, and mixe it with creame, the yelkes of egges, Rose-water, Sugar and Cinamon till it be a little thicker then Pan cake-batter; and then warming your wafer-irons on a char-coale-fire, annoint them first with sweete butter, and then lay on your batter and presse it, and bake it white or browne at your pleasure. ☜ To make Mar∣malae of Oranges. To make an excellent Marmalade of Oranges, take the Oranges, and with a knife pare off as thinn as is pos∣sible the vppermost rinde of the Orange: yet in such
sort, as by no meanes you alter the color of the Orange; then steere them in aire water, changing the water twice a dy, till you finde no bitternesse of taste therein; then take them forth, and first boile them in faire run∣ning water, and when they are soft, remoue them into rosewater, and boile them therein till they breake: then to euery pound of the pulpe put a pound of refined sugar, and so hauing masht and stirred them all well to∣gether, straine it through very faire strainers into boxes, and so vse it as you shall see occasion. Additions to banqutig stuff· To make fine Cakes. Take a pottle of fine flower, and a pound of Sugar, a little Mace, and good store of water to mingle the flow∣er into a stifle paste, and a good season of salt, and so knead it, and role out the cake thinne and bake them on papers. Fine bread. Take a quarter of a pound of fine sugar well beaten, and as much flower finely boulted, with a quantity of Aniseedes a little bruised, and mingle all together; then take two egges and beate them very well, whites and all; then put in the mingled stuffe aforesaid, and beate all together a good while, then put it into a mould, wi∣ping the bottome euer first with butter to make it come out easily, and in the baking turne it once or twice as you shall haue occasion, and so serue it whole, or in sli∣ces at your pleasure. To preseue Qunce . Take sweete Apples and stampe them as you doe for Cider, then presse them through a bagge as you doe ver∣iuyce; then put it into a ferkin wherein you will keepe your Quinces, and then gather your Quinces, and wipe them cleane, and neither chore them nor pare them, but onely take the blacks from the tops, and so put them into the ferkin of Cider, and therein you may keepe them all the yeere very faire, and take them not out
of the liquor, but as you are ready to vse them, whe∣ther it be for pies, ar any other purpose, and then pare them, and chore them as you thinke good. To make spo∣ca. Take a gallon of Claret or White-wine, and put therein foure ounces of Ginger, an ounce and a halfe of Nutmegs, of Cloues one quarter, of Sugar foure pound; let all this stand together in a pot at least twelue houres, then take it, and put it into a cleane bagge made for the purpose, so that the wine may come with good leasure from the spices. To preserue quinces. Take Quinces and wipe them very cleane, and then chore them, and as you chore them, put the chores straight into faire water, and let the chores and the wa∣ter boyle; when the water boyleth, put in the Quinces vnpared, and let them boyle till they be tender, and then take them out and pare them, and euer as you pare them, put them straight into sugar finely beaten: then take the water they were sodden in, & straine it through a faire cloth, and take as much of the same water as you thinke will make sirrup enough for the Quinces, and put in some of your sugar and let it boile a while, and then put in your Quinces, and let them boyle a while, and turne them, and cast a good deale of sugar vpon them; they must seeth a pace, and euer as you turne them, couer them still with sugar, till you haue bestow∣ed all your sugar; and when you thinke that your Quin∣ces are tender enough, take them forth, and if your sirrup be not stiffe enough, you may seeth it againe af∣ter the Quinces are forth. To euery pound of Quin∣ces you must take more then a pound of sugar: for the more sugar you take, the fairer your Quinces will bee, and the better and longer they will be pre∣crued.
Conserue of Quinces. Take two gallons of faire water, and set it on the fire, and when it is luke-warme, beate the whites of fiue or six egges, and put them into the water, and stirre it well, and then let the water seeth, and when it riseth vp all on a curd, then scumme it off: Take Quinces and pare them, and quarter them, and cut out the chores: then take as many pound of your Quinces as of your sugar, and put them into your liquor, and let it boyle till your liquor be as high coloured as French Wine, and when they be very tender, then take a faire new canuase cloth faire washt, and straine your Quinces through it with some of your liquor; (if they will not goe through ea∣sily,) then if you will make it very pleasant, take a little Muske, and lay it in Rose water, and put it thereto; then take and seeth it, vntill it bee of such substance, that when it is cold, it will cut with a knife; and then put it into a faire boxe, and if you please, lay leafe-gold thereon. ☞ To keepe Quinces all the yeere. Take all the parings of your Quinces that you make your Conserue withall, and three or foure o∣ther Quinces, and cut them in peeces, and boile the same parings, and the other peeces in two or three gallonds of water, and so let them boyle till all the strength bee sodden out of the sayd Quinces and parings, and if any skumme arise whilest it boyles, take it away: then let the sayd water runne thorough a strayner into a faire vessell, and set it on the fire againe, and take your Quinces that you will keepe, and wipe them cleane, and cut off the vttermost part of the said Quinces, and picke out the kernels and chores as cleane as you can, and put them into the said liquor, and so let them boile till they be a little soft, and then take them from the fire, and let them stand till they be cold▪
then take a little barrell, and put into the said bar∣rell, the water that your Quinces be sodden in; then take vp your Quinces with a sadle, and put them into your barrell, and stop your barrell close that no ayre come into them, till you haue fit occasion to vse them; and bee sure to take such Quinces as are neither brui∣sed nor rotten. Fine Ginger Cakes. Take of the best sugar, and when it is beaten searse it very fine, and of the best Ginger and Cinamon▪ then take a little Gum-dragon and lay it in rosewater all night, then poure the water from it, and put the same with a little White of an Egge well beaten into a brasse morter, the Sugar, Ginger, Cinamon and all together, and beate them together till you may worke it like past; then take it and driue it forth into Cakes, and print them, and lay them before the fire, or in a very warme Stoue to bake. Or otherwise, take Sugar and Ginger (as is before said) Cinamon and Gum-dragon excepted, in stead whereof, take onely the Whites of Eggs and so doe as was before shewed you. To make Suckets. Take Curds, the paring of Lemons, of Oranges or Pouncithrous, or indeede any halfe-ripe greene fruite, and boyle them till they be tender in sweete Worte; then make a sirrop in this sort: take three pound of Su∣gar, and the whites of foure Eggs, and a gallon of water, then swinge and beate the water and the Eggs together; and then put in your Sugar, and set it on the fire, and let it haue an easier fire, and so let it boyle sixe or seuen walmes, and then straine it thorow a cloth, and let it seeth againe till it fall from the spoone, and then put it into the rindes or fruits. Course Gin∣ger-bread. Take a quart of Hony clarified, and seeth it till it bee browne, and if it be thicke, put to it a dish of water:
then take fine crummes of white bread grated, and put to it, and stirre it well, and when it is almost cold, put to it the powder of Ginger, Cloues, Cinamon, and a little Licoras and Aniseedes: then knead it, and put it into moulds and print it: some vse to put to it also a little pepper, but that is according vnto taste and pleasure. To candy any roote, fruite or flower. Dissolue Sugar, or sugar candy in Rose-water, boile it to an height, put in your rootes, fruits or flowers, the sirrop being cold, then rest a little, after take them out and boyle the sirrop againe, then put in more roots, &c. then boile the sirrop the third time to an hardnesse, put∣ting in more sugar but not Rose-water, put in the roots, &c. the sirrop being cold and let them stand till they candie. Ordering of banquets. Thus hauing shewed you how to Preserue, Conserue, candy, and make pasts of all kinds, in which foure heads consists the whole art of banqueting dishes; I will now proceed to the ordering or setting foorth of a banquet, where in you shall obserue, that March-panes haue the first place, the middle place, and last place: your preser∣ued fruites shall be disht vp first, your pasts next, your wet suckets after them, then your dried suckets, then your Marmelades and Goodiniakes, then your comfets of all kinds; Next, your peares, apples, wardens back't, raw or roasted, and your Oranges and Leamons sliced; and lastly your Wafer-cakes. Thus you shall order them in the closet: but when they goe to the table, you shall first send foorth a dish made for shew onely, as Beast, Bird, Fish, Fowle, according to inuention: then your Marchpane, then preserued Fruite, then a Paste, then a wet sucket, then a dry sucket, Marmelade, com∣fets, apples, peares, wardens, oranges and lemmons sli∣ced; and then wafers, and another dish of preserued
fruites, and so consequently all the rest before: no two dishes of one kind going or standing together, and this will not onely appeare delicate to the eye, but inuite the appetite with the much variety thereof. Ordering of grea asts, and proporton o expence. Now we haue drawne our House-wife into these se∣uerall Knowledges of Cookery, in as much as in her is contained all the inward offices of houshold, we will proceede to declare the manner of seruing and setting forth of meate for a great Feast, and from it deriue mea∣ner, making a due proportion of all things: for what a∣uailes it our good House-wife to bee neuer so skilfull in the parts of cookery, if she want skill to marshall the di∣shes, and set euery one in his due place, giuing prece∣dency according to fashion and custome: It is like to a Fencer leading a band of men in rout, who knowes the vse of the weapon, but not how to put men in order. It is then to be vnderstood, that it is the office of the clerke of the Kitchin (whose place our House-wife must many times supply) to order the meate at the Dresser, and de∣liuer it vnto the Sewer, who is to deliuer it to the Gen∣tlemen and Yeomen-waiters to beare to the table. Now because wee allow no Offices but our House-wife, to whom we onely speake in this Booke, shee shall first marshall her sallets, deliuering the grand sallet first, which is euermore compound: then greene Sallets, then boyld sallets, then some smaller compound sallets. Next vnto sallets she shall deliuer foorth all her frica∣ses, the simple first, as collops, rashers, and such like: then compound fricases, after them all her boyld meats in their degree, as simple broths, stewd-broth, and the boylings of sundry fowles. Next them all sorts of rost-meates, of which the greatest first, as chine of Beefe, or surloyne, the gigget or Legges of Mutton, Goose, Swan,
Veale, Pig, Capon, and such like. Then bak't-meates, the hot first, as Fallow-deere in Pasty, Chicken, or Calues foote-pie and Douset. Then cold bak't meates, Pheasant, Partidges, Turkie, Goose, Woodcocke, and such like. Then lastly, Carbonados both simple and compound. And being thus marshald from the Dresser, the Sewer vpon the placing them on the table, shall not set them downe as he receiued them, but setting the Sal∣lets extrauagantly about the table, mixe the Fricases a∣bout them; then the boild meates amongst the Fricases, rost meates amongst the boild, bak't meates amongst the rost, and Carbonados amongst the bak't; so that be∣fore euery trencher may stand a Sallet, a Fricase, a Boild meate, a Rost meate, a Bak't meat, and a Carbonado, which will both giue a most comely beauty to the ta∣ble, and very great contentment to the Guesse. So like∣wise in the second course she shall first preferre the les∣ser wild-fowle, as Mallard, Tayle, Snipe, Plouer, Wood-cocke, and such like: then the lesser land-fowle; as Chicken, Pigeons, Partridge, Raile, Turky, Chickens, young Peahens, and such like. Then the greater wild-fowle; as Bitter, Hearne, Shoueler, Crane, Bustard, and such like. Then the grea∣ter land fowles; as Peacocks, Pheasant, Puets, Gulles, and such like. Then hot bak't-meates; as Marrybone-pie, Quince-pie, Florentine, and Tarts. Then cold bak't meates, as Red deere, Hare-pie, Gammon of Bacon-pie, wild Br, Roe-pie, and such like, and these also shall bee marshald at the Table, as the first course not one kind all together, but each se∣uerall sort mixt together, as a lesser wild-fowle and a lesser land-fowle; a great wild-fowle, and a great land-fowle; a hot bak't meate and a cold: and for made
dishes and Quelquechoses, which relie on the inuenti∣on of the Cooke, they are to bee thrust in into euery place that is emptie, and so sprinkled ouer all the table: and this is the best method for the extraordinary great feasts of Princes. But in case it be for much more hum∣ble meanes, then lesse care and fewer dishes may dis∣charge it: yet before I proceede to that lower rate, you shall vnderstand, that in these great Feasts of Princes, though I haue mentioned nothing but flesh, yet is not fifh to be exempted; for it is a beauty and an honour vnto euery Feast, and is to be placed amongst all the se∣uerall seruices, as thus; as amongst your Sallets all sorts of soused-fish that liues in the fresh water; amongst your Fricases all manner of fride-fish; amongst your boyld-meates, all fish in broaths; amongst your rost-meates, all fish serued hot, but drie; amongst the bak't meates, and sea-fish that is soust, as Sturgion and the like; and a∣mongst your Carbonados, fish that is broild. As for your second course, to it belongeth all manner of shell fish, either in the shell, or without; the hot to goe vp with the hot meate, and the cold with the cold. And thus shall the Feast bee royall, and the seruice worthy. Now for a more humble Feast, or an ordinary pro∣portion which any good man may keepe in his family for the entertainment of his true and worthy friends, it must hold limitation with his prouision, and the sea∣son of the yeere: for Summer affords what Winter wantes, & Winter is master of that which Summer can but with difficulty haue: it is good then for him that intends to feast, to set downe the full number of his full dishes, that is, dishes of meate that are of substance, and not emptie or for shew; and of these sixteene is a
good proportion for one course vnto one messe, as thus for example, First, a shield of Brawne with mustard: Secondly, a boyld capon; Thirdly, a boyld peece of Beefe: Fourthly, a chine of beefe rosted: Fiftly, a neates tongue rosted: Sixtly, a Pigge rosted: Seuenth∣ly, chewets back't; Eightly, a goose rosted: Ninethly, a swan rosted: Tenthly, a turkey rosted; the eleuenth, a haunch of venison rosted; the twelfth, a pasty of veni∣son; the thirteenth, a Kid with a pudding in the belly; the fourteenth, an oliue pye; the fifteenth, a couple of capons; the sixteenth, a custard or dousets. Now to these full dishes may be added in sallets, fricases, quel∣quechoses, and deuised paste, as many dishes more, which make the full seruice no lesse then two and thir∣ty dishes, which is as much as can conueniently stand on one table, and in one messe: and after this manner you may proportion both your second and third course, holding fulnesse in one halfe of the dishes, and shew in the other, which will be both frugall in the spendor, contentment to the guest, and much pleasure and de∣light to the beholders. And thus much touching the or∣dering of great feasts and ordinary contentments. CHAP. 3. Of Distillations, and their veriues, and of perfuming. WHen our English House-wife is exact in these rules before rehearsed, and that she is able to adorne and beautifie her table, with all the vertuous illustrations meet for her knowledge; she shall then sort her mind to the vnderstanding of other House-wifely secrets, right profitable and meete for her vse,
suh as the want thereof may trouble her when need, o time requires. OF The nature of waters. Therefore first I would haue her furnish her selfe of very good Stils, for the distulation of all kinds of Wa∣ters, which stils would either be of Tinne, or sweete Earth, and in them she shall distill all sorts of waters meete for the health of her Houshold, as sage water, which is good for all Rhumes and Collickes; Radish water, which is good for the stone, Angelica water good for infection, Celadine water for sore eyes, Vine water for itchings, Rose water, and Eye-bright water for dim sights, Rosemary water for Fistulos, Treacle water for mouth cankers, water of cloues for paine in the stomacke, Saxifrage water for grauell and hard v∣rine, Allum water for old Vlcers, and a world of others, any of which will last a full yeare at the least: Then she shall know that the best waters for the smoothing of the skinne, and keeping the face delicate and amiable, are those which are distilled from Beane-flowers, from Strawberries, from Vine leaues, from Goates-milke, from Asses milke, from the whites of Egges, from the flowers of Lillies, from Dragons, from calues feete, from bran, or from yelkes of Egges, any of which will last a yeare or better. Additions, to distillations. To distill waer of the colour of of the hearbe o flower you desire. First distill your water in a stillatory, then put it in a glasse of great strength, and fill it with those flowers a∣gaine (whose colour you desire) as full as you can, and stop it, and set it in the stillatory againe, and let it distill, and you shall haue the colour you distill. To make Aq∣vitae. ☜ Take of Rosemary flowers two handfuls, of Maria¦rome, Witer-sauory, Rosemary, Rew, vnset time, Ger∣mander, Rybworte, Harts tongue, Mouscare, White wormewood, Buglosse, red sage, Liuerworte, Hoare-hound,
fine Lauender, Issop-cropps, Penny royall, Red fennell, of each of these one handfull: of Elycompane rootes, cleane pared and sliced, two handfuls: Then take all these aforesayd and shred them, but not wash them, then tae foure gallons and more of strong Ale, and one gallon of sacke-lees, and put all these aforesayd hearbes shred into it, and then put into it one pound of Licoras bruised, halfe a pound of Anyseeds cleane sif∣ted and bruised, and of Mace and Nutmegs bruised of each one ounce: then put altogether into your stilling-pot close couered with Rye paste, and make a soft fire vnder your pot, and as the head of the Limbecke hea∣teth, draw out your hot water and put in cold, keeping the head of your Limbecke still with cold water, but see your fire be not too rash at the first, but let your water come at leasure; and take heed vnto your stilling that your water change not white: for it is not so strong as the first draught is; and when the water is distilled, take a gallon glasse with a wide mouth, and put therein a pottle of the best water and cleerest, and put into it a pottle of Rosa-solis, halfe a pound of Dates bruised, and one ounce of graines, halfe a pound of Sugar, halfe an ounce of seed-pearle beaten, three leaues of fine gold, stirre all these together well, then stop your glasse and set it in the sunne the space of one or two moneths, and then clarifie it and vse it at your discretion: for a spoon∣ful or two at a time is sufficient, and the vertues are in∣finite. ill a pot with red wine cleare and strong, and put therein the powders of Camomile, Gii-flowers, Gin∣ger, Pellitory, Nutmeg, Galengall, Spicknard, Que∣bits, graines of pure long pepper, blacke Pepper,
Commin, Fennell seede, Smalledge, Parsley, Sage, Rw, Mint, Calamint and Horshow, of each of them a like quantity, and beware they differ not the weight of a drmme vnder or aboue: then put all the pouders aboue sayd into the wine, and after put them into the distilling pot, and distill it with a soft fire, and looke that it be well luted about with Rye paste, so that no fume or breath goe foorth, and looke, that the fire be temperate: also receiue the water out of the Lym∣becke into a glasse vyall. This water is called the wa∣ter of Life, and it may be likened to Balme, for it hath all the vertues and properties which Balme hath: this water is cleere and lighter then Rose water, for it will fleet aboue all liquors, for if oyle be put aboue this wa∣ter, it sinketh to the bottome. This water keepeth flesh and fish both raw and sodden in his owne kind and state, it is good against aches in the bones, the poxe, and such like, neither can any thing kept in this water rot or putrifie, it doth draw out the sweetenesse, sauour, and vertues of all manner of spices, rootes and hearbes that are wet or layd therein, it giues sweetnesse to all manner of water that is mixt with it, it is good for all manner of cold sicknesses, and namely for the palsie or trembling ioynts, and stretching of the sinewes; it is good against the cold goute, and it maketh an old man seeme young, vsing to drinke it fasting, and lastly it fretteth away dead flesh in wounds, and killeth the canker. To make aqu comp. Take Rosemary, Time, Issop, Sage, Fennell, Nip, rootes of Elicompane, of each an handfull, of Marierum and Peny-royall of each halfe a handfull, eight slips of red Mint, halfe a pound of Licoras, halfe a pound of Aniseeds, and two gallons of the best Ale that can bee brewed, wash all these hearbes cleane, and put into
the Ale, Licoras, Aniseeds, and herbes into a cleane brasse pot, and set your limbecke thereon, and paste it round about that no ayre come out, then distill the wa∣ter with a gentle fire, and keepe the limbecke coole a∣boue, not suffering it to runne too fast; and take heede when your water changeth colour, to put another glasse vnder, and keepe the first water, for it is most precious, and the latter water keepe by it selfe, and put it into your next pot, and that shall make it much better. ☞ A very princi∣pall aq com∣. Take of balme, of Rosemary Flowers tops and all, of dried red Rose leaues, of penny-royall, of each of these a handfull, one roote of Ely compane the whitest that can be got, three quarters of a pound of Licoras, two ounces of Cinamon, two drams of great Mace, two drams of Gallendgall, three drams of Coliander seeds three drammes of Carraway seeds, two or three Nut∣megges cut in foure quarters, an ounce of Aniseeds, a handfull of Borage; you must chuse a faire Sunny day, to gather the hearbs in; you must not wash them, but cut them in sunder, and not too small; then lay all your hearbs in soule all night and a day, with the spices gros∣ly beaten or bruised, and then distill it in order afore∣said, this was made for a learned Phisitians owne drink∣ing. To make the emperiall wa∣ter. Take a gallond of Gascoine-wine, Ginger, Gallend∣gall, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloues, Aniseeds, Fennell seeds, Caaway seeds, of each one dramme, then take Sage, Mints, Red roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, Wild-time Camomile, and Lauender▪ of each a handfull, then bray the spices small, and the hearbs also, and put all to∣gether into the wine, and let it stand so twelue houres, stirring it diuers times, then distill it with a limbecke, and keepe the first water, for it is best: of a gallond of
wine you must not take aboue a quart of water; this wa∣ter comforteth the vitall spirits, and helpeth inward diseases that commeth of cold, as the palsey, the con∣traction of sinewes, also it killeth wormes, and com∣forts the stomacke; it cureth the cold dropsie, helpes the stone, the stinking breath, & maketh one seeme yong. To make Cina∣mon water. Take a pottell of the best Sack, and halfe a pint of Rose water, a quarter and halfe of a pound of good Cinamon well bruised, but not small beaten; distill all these toge∣ther in a glasse-still, but you must carefully looke to it, that it boyle not ouer hastily, and attend it with cold wet cloathes to coole the top of the still if the water should offer to boyle too hastily. This water is ve∣ry soueraigne for the stomacke, the head, and all the inward parts; it helps digestion, and comforteth the vi∣tall spirits. Sixe most pre∣tious waters, whch Hepocra∣tes made, and sent to a Queene some∣times liuing in England. 1 Take Fennell, Rew, Veruine, Endiue, Betony, Ger∣mander, Red rose, Capillus Veneris, of each an ounce; stampe them and keepe them in white wine a day and a night; and distill water of them, which water will di∣uide in three parts, the first water you shall put in a glasse by it selfe, for it is more pretious then gold, the second as siluer, and the third as Balme, and keepe these three parts in glasses: this water you shall giue the rich for gold, to meaner for siluer, to poore men for Balme: this water keepeth the sight in clearenesse, and purgeth all grosse humors. 2 Take Salgemma a pound, and lappe it in a greene docke leafe, and lay it in the fire till it be will rosted, and waxe white, and put it in a glasse against the ayre a night, and on the morrow it shall bee turned to a white water like vnto Christall: keepe this water well in a glasse, and put a drop into the eie, and it shall clense
and sharpe the sight: it is good for any euill at the heart, for the morphew, and the canker in the mouth, and for diuers other euills in the body. 3 Take the roots of Fennell, Parseley, Endiue, Beto∣ny of each an ounce, and first wash them well in luke∣warme water, and bray them well with white wine a day and a night, and then distill them into water: this water is more worthy then Balme; it preserueth the sight much, and clenseth it of all filth, it restrayneth teares, and comforteth the head, and auoideth the wa∣ter that commeth through the payne in the head. 4 Take the seed of Parsley, Achannes, Veruine, Ca∣rawaies, and Cenry, of each ten drams; beate all these together, and put it in warme water a day and a night, and put it in a vessell to distill: this water is a pre∣tious water for all sore eies, and very good for the health of man or womans body. 5 Take limmell of gold, siluer, lattin, copper, iron, steele, and lead; and take lethurgy of gold and siluer, take Calamint and Columbine, and steepe all together, the first day in the vrine of a man-child, that is between a day & a night, the second day in white wine, the third day in the iuice of fenell, the fourth day in the whites of egs, the fift day in the womans milke that nourisheth a man-child, the sixt day in red wine, the seuenth day in the whites of egges, and vpon the eight day bind all these together, and distill the water of them, and keepe this water in a vessell of gold or siluer: the vertues of this water are these, first it expelleth all rhumes, and doth away all manner of sicknesse from the eyes, and weares away the pearle, pin and webbe; it draweth a∣gaine into his owne kinde the eye-lidds that haue beene bleaed, it easeth the ache of the head, and if a man
drinke it, maketh him looke young euen in old age, be∣sides a world of other most excellent vertues. 6 Take the Gold-smiths stone, and put it into the fire, till it be red-hot, and quench it in a pint of white wine, and doe so nine times, and after grind it, and beate it small, and cleanse it as cleane as you may, and after set it in the Sunne with the water of Fennell distilled, and Veruine, Roses, Celladine and Rew, and a little Aqua∣uite, and when you haue sprinkled it in the water nine times, put it then in a vessell of glasse, and yet vpon a re∣uersion of the water distill it, till it passe ouer the touch foure or fiue inches; and when you will vse it then stirre it all together, and then take vp a drop with a feather, and put it on your naile, & if it abide, it is fine and good: then put it in the eye that runneth, or annoint the head with it if it ake, and the temples, and beleeue it, that of all waters this is the most pretious, and helpeth the sight, or any paine in the head. The water of Cheruyle is good for a sore mouth. The vertues of seuerall waters. The water of Callamint is good for the stomacke. The water of Planten is good for the fluxe, and the hot dropsie. Water of Fennell is good to make a fat body small, and also for the eyes. Water of Violts is good for a man that is sore with∣in his body and for the raynes and for the liuer. Water of Endiue is good for the dropsy, and for the iaundise, and the stomacke. Water of Borage is good for the stomacke, and for the Iliaca passio, and many other sicknesses in the body. Water of both Sages is good for the palsey. Water of Bettony, is good for old age and all inward sicknesses.
Water of Radish drunke twice a day, at each time an ounce, or an ounce and a halfe, doth multiply and prouoke lust, and also prouoketh the tearmes in wo∣men. Rosemary water (the face washed therein both mor∣ning and night▪) causeth a faire and cleere countenance: also the head washed therewith, and let dry of it selfe, preserueth the falling of the haire, and causeth more to grow; also two onunces of the same drunke, driueth venome out of the body in the same sort as Methri∣date doth; the same twice or thrice drunke at each time halfe an ounce, rectifieth the mother, and it causeth women to bee fruitfull: when one maketh a Bath of this decoction, it is called the Bath of life; the same drunke comforteth the heart, the brayne, and the whole body, and cleanseth away the spots of the face; it maketh a man looke young, and causeth wo∣men to conceiue quickely, and hath all the vertues of Balme. Water of Rew drunke in a morning foure or fiue daies together, at each time an ounce, purifieth the flow∣ers in women: the same water drunke in the morning fasting, is good against the gryping of the bowels, and drunke at morning and at night, at each time an ounce, it prouoketh the tearmes in women. The water of Sorrell drunke is good for all burning and pestilent feuers, and all other hot sicknesses: being mixt with beere, ale or wine, it slacketh the thirst: it is also good for the yellow Iaundise, being taken sixe or eight dayes together: it also expelleth from the liuer if it be drunke, and a cloth wet in the same and a little wrong out, and so applied to the right side ouer against the liuer, and when it is dry then wet another, and
apply it; and thus doe three or foure times together. Lastly the water of Angelica is good for the head, for inward infection, either of the plague or pestilence, it is very soueraigne for sore breasts; also the same wa∣ter being drunke of twelue or thirteene daies together, is good to vnlade the stomack of grosse humours and su∣perfluities, and it strengthneth and comforteth all the vniuersall parts of the body: and lastly, it is a most soue∣raigne medicine for the gout, by bathing the diseased members much therein. Now to conclude and knit vp this chapter, it is meere that our hous-wife know that from the eight of the Ka∣lends of the moneth of Aprill vnto the eight of the Ka∣lends of Iuly, all manner of hearbes and leaues are in that time most in strength and of the greatest vertue to be vsed and put in all manner of medicines, also from the eight of the Kalends of Iuly, vnto the eight of the Kalends of October the stalks, stems and hard bran∣ches of euery hearbe and plant is most in strength to be vsed in medicines; and from the eight of the Ka∣lends of October, vnto the eight of the Kalends of A∣prill, all manner of roots of hearbs and plants are the most of strength and vertue to be vsed in all manner of medicines. ☜ An excellent water for per∣fume. To make an excellent sweet water for perfume, you shall take of Basill, Mints, Marierum, Corne-slagge∣rootes, Isop, Sauory, Sage, Balme, Lauender & Rosema∣ry, of each one handfull, of Cloues, Cinamon and Nut∣megs of each halfe an ounce, then three or foure Pome∣citrons cut into slices, infuse all these into Damaske-rose water the space of three dayes, and then distill it with a gentle fire of Char-coale, then when you haue put it into a very cleane glasse, take of fat Muske, Ciuet,
and Ambergreece of each the quantity of a scruple, and put into a ragge of fie Lawne, and then hang it within the water: This being either burnt vpon a hot pan, or else boyled in perfuming pans with Cloues, Bay-leaues and Lemmon-pils, will make the most delicatest per∣fume that may be without any offence, and will last the longest of all other sweet perfumes, as hath been found by experience. To perfume Gloues. To perfume gloues excellently, take the oyle of sweet Almonds, oyle of Nutmegs, oyle of Beniamin, of each a dramme, of Ambergreece one graine, fat Muske two graines: mixe them all together and grind them vpon a painters stone, and then annoint the gloues therwih: yet before you annoint them let them be dampishly moistned with Damaske Rose-water. To perfume a Ierkin. To perfume a Ierkin well, take the oyle of Beniamin a penny-worth, oyle of Spike, and oyle of Oliues halfe penny-worths of each, and take two spunges and warme one of them against the fire and rub your Ierkin there∣with, and when the oyle is dried, take the other spunge and dip it in the oyle and rub your Ierkin therewith till it be dry, then lay on the perfume before prescribed for gloues. ☞ To mak wash∣ing Balls. To make very good washing bals, take Storax of both kindes, Beniamin, Calamus Aromaticus, Lab∣danum of each a like; and bray them to pouder with Cloues and Arras; then beate them all with a sufficient quantity of Sope till it bee stiffe, then with your hand you shall worke it like paste, and make round balls thereof. To make a mske Ball. To make Muske balls, take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloues, Saffron and Cinamon, of each the waight of two-pence, & beate it to fine pouder, of Masticke the waight
of two pence halfe penny, of Storax the waight of six-pence; of Labdanum the waight of tnne-pence; of Ambergreece the waight of six-pence; and of Muske fouregraines, dissolue and worke all these in hard sweete sope till it come to a stiffe paste, and then make balls thereof. ☜ A perfume to burne. To make a good perfume to burne, take Beniamin one ounce, Storaxe, Calamint two ounces, of Mastick, white Ambergreece, of each one ounce, Ireos, Cala∣mus Aromaticus, Cypresse-wood, of each halfe an ounce, of Camphire one scruple, Labdanum one ounce: beate all these to pouder, then take of Sallow Charcole sixe ounces, of liquid Storax two ounces, beate them all with Aquauita, and then shall you role them into long round rolles. To make Po∣manders. To make Pomanders, take to penny-worth of Lab∣danum two penny-worth of Storax liquid, one penny-worth of Calamus Aromaticus, as much Balme, halfe a quarter a pound of fine waxe, of Cloues and Mae two penny-worth, of liquid Aloes three penny-worth, of Nutmegs eight peny-worth, and of Muske foure grains; beate all these exceedingly together till they come to a perfect substance, then mould it in any fashion you please and dry it. To make Vine∣gar. To make excellent strong Vinegar, you shall brew the strongest Ale that may be, and hauing tunned it in a very strong vessell, you shall set it either in your gar∣den or some other safe place abroad, where it may haue the whole Summers day Sun to shine vpon it, and there let it lie till it be extreame sowre, then into a Hogshead of this Vinegar put the leaues of foure or fiue hundred Damaske Roses, and after they haue layen for the space of a moneth therein, house the Vi∣negar
and draw it as you neede it. To make dry vinegar. To make drie Vinegar which you may carry in your pocket, you shall take the blades of greene corne either Wheat or Rie, and beate it in a morter with the strong∣est Vinegar you can get till it come to a paste; then role it into little balls, and dry it in the Sunne till it be very hard, then when you haue any occasion to vse it, cut a little peece thereof and dissolue it in wine, and it will make a strong Vinegar. To make ver∣iuyce. To make Veiuyce, you shall gather your Crabbs as soone as the kernels turne blacke, and hauing layd them a whle in a heape to sweate together, take them and picke them from stalkes, blackes and rottennesse: then in long troughs with beetles for the purpose, crush and breake them all to mash: then make a bagge of course haire cloth as square as the presse, and fill it with the crusht Crabs, then put it into the presse, and presse it while any moysture will drop forth, hauing a cleane vessell vnderneath to receiue the liquor: this done,  it vp into sweet Hogsheads, and to euery Hogshead put halfe a dozen handfuls of Damaske Rose leaues, and then bung it vp, and spend it as you shall haue occa∣sion. Many other pretty secrets there are belonging vnto curious Hous-wiues, but none more necessary then these already rehearsed, except such as shall hereafter follow in their proper places. ☞ Additions to conceited secrets. To make sweet powder for baggs. Take of Arras sixe ounces, of Damaske Rose-leaues as much, of Marierom and sweete Basill, of each an ounce, of Cloues two ounces, yellow Saunders two ounces, of Citron pills seuen drammes, of Lignum-aloes one ounce, of Beniamin one ounce, of Storaxe one ounce, of Muske one dram: bruise all these, and put
them into a bagge of silke or linnen, but silke is the best. To make  bags. Take of Arras foure ounces, of Gallaminis one ounce, of Ciris halfe an ounce, of Rose leaues dried two hand∣fuls, of dryed Marierum one handfull, of Spike one handfull, Cloues one ounce, of Beniamin and Storax of each two ounces, of white Saunders and yellow of each one ounce: beate all these into a grosse pouder, then put to it Muske a dramme, of Ciuet halfe a dramme, and of Ambergreece halfe a dramme; then put them into a Taffata bagge and vse it. How to make sweet water. ☜ Take of bay-leaues one handfull, of Red Roses two handfuls, of Damaske Roses three handfull, of La∣uender foure handfuls, of basill one handfull, Mario∣rum two handfuls, of Camomile one handfull, the young tops of sweete briar two handfuls, of Mande∣lion-tansey two handfuls, of Orange pils sixe or seuen ounces, of Cloues and Mace a groats-worth put all these together in a pottle of new Ale in cornes for the space of three daies, shaking it euery day three or foure times, then distill it the fourth day in a still with a continuall soft fire, and after it is distilled, put into it a graine or two of muske. ☜ A very rare and plesan Da∣mask water. Take a quart of malmsey Lees, or a quart of malm∣sey simply, one handfull of margerome, of Basill as much, of Lauender foure handfuls, bay-leaues one good handfull, Damaske rose-Leaues foure handfuls, and as many of red, the pils of sixe Orenges, or for want of them one handful of the tender Leaues of walnut-trees, of Beniamine halfe an ounce, of Callamus Aramaticus as much, of Camphire foure drammes, of Cloues one ounce, of Baldamum halfe an ounce; then take a pottle of running water, and put in all these spices bruised into your water and malmsey together in a
close stopped pot, with a good handfull or Rosemary, and let them stand for the space of sixe dayes: then di∣still it with a soft fire: then set it in the Sunne sixteene dayes with foure graines of Muske bruised. This quan∣tity will make three quarts of water, Probatum est. T mke the . Take and brew very strong Ale, then take halfe a do∣zen gallons of the first running, and set it abroade to coole, and when it is cold, put yest vnto it, and head it very strongly: then put it vp in a ferkin, and distill it in the Sunne: then take foure or fiue handfull of Beanes, an ptch them in a pan till they burst: then put them in as hot as you can into the Ferkin, and stop it with a little clay about the bung-hole: then take a handfull of cleane Rye Leauen and put in the Ferkin; then take a quantity of Barberies, and bruise and straine them into the Ferkin, and a good handfull of Salt, and let them lie and worke in the Sunne from May till August: then ha∣uing the full strength, take Rose leaues and clip the white ends off, and let them dry in the Sunne; then take Elder-flowers and picke them, and dry them in the Sunne, and when they are dry, put them in bagges, and keepe them al the Winter: then take a pottle-pot, and drw forth a pottle out of the Ferkin into the bottle, and put a handfull of the red Rose-leaues, and another of the Elder-flowers, and put into the bottle, and hang i i the Sunne, where you may occupie the same, and when it is empty, take out all the leaues, and fill it againe as you did before. perfume Gloues. Take Angelica water and Rose-water, and put into them the powder of Cloues, Amber-greece, Muske and Lignum Aloes, Beniamine and Callamus Aramatte∣cus: boyle these till halfe be consumed: then straine it, and put your Gloues therein; then hang them in the
sunne to dry, and turne them often: and thus three times wet them, and dry them againe: Or otherwise, take Rose-water and wet your Gloues therein, then hng them vp till they be almost dry; then take halfe an ounce of Beniamine, and grind it with the oyle of Almonds, and rub it on the Gloues till it be almost dried in: then take twenty graines of Amber-greece, and twenty graines of Muske, and grind them together with oyle of Almonds, and so rub it on the Gloues, and then hang them vp to dry, or let them dry in your bosome, and so after vse them at your pleasure. CHAP. 4. The ordering, Preseruing and helping of all sorts of Wines, and first of the choyce of sweete Wines. ☜I Doe not assume to my selfe this knowledge of the Vintners secrets, but ingeniously confesse that one profest skillfull in the Trade, hauing rudely written, and more rudely disclosed this secret, & preferring it to the Stationer it came to me to be polished, which I haue done, knowing that it is necessary, &c. It is necessary that our English House-wife be skilfull in the election, preseruation and curing of all sorts of Wines, because they be vsuall charges vnder her hands, and by the least neglect must turne the Husband to much losse: therefore to speake first of the election of sweete Wines, she must be carefull that her Malmseys be full Wines, pleasant, well hewed and fine: that Ba∣stard be fat, and if it be tawny it skils not, for the tawny Bastards be alwayes the sweetest. Muskadine must bee great, pleasant and strong, with a sweet sent, and with Amber colour. Sacke if it be Sees (as it should bee)
you shall know it by the marke of a corke burned on one side of the bung, and they be euer full gadge, and so are no other sackes, and the longer they lye, the better they be. To make Mus¦kadine, and giue i a slauer. Take a pleasant But of Malmsey, and draw it out a quarter and more; then fill it vp with fat Basterd with∣in eight gallons, or thereabouts▪ and parill it with sixe egges, yelkes and all, one handfull of Bay-salt, and a pint of cunduit water to euery parill, and if the wine be hye of colour, put in three gallons of new milke, but skimm off the Creame first, and beate it well, or otherwise, if you haue a good butt of Malmsey, and a good pipe of bastard, you must take some empty butt or pipe; and draw thirty gallons of Malmsey, and as many of bastard; and beate them well together: and when you haue so done, take a quarter of a pound of Ginger and bruise it, and put it into your ves∣sell; then fill it vp with malmsey and bastard: Or other∣wise thus, if you haue a pleasant butt of malmsey, which is called Ralt-mow, you may draw out of it forty gallons, and if your bastard be very faint, then thirty gallons of it will serue to make it pleasant: then take foure gallons of new milke and beate it, and put it into it when it lacketh twelue gallons of full, and then make your slauer. How to luer Muskdine. Take one ounce of Collianders, of Bay-salt, of Cloues, of each as much, one handfull of Sauory: let all these bee blended and bruised together, and sow them close in a bagge, and take halfe a pint of Damasket water, and lay your slauer into it, and then put it into your butt, and if it fine, giue it a parill and fill it vp, and let it lie til it fine: or else thus, Take Coliander roots a peniworth, one pound of Aniseedes, one peniworth in
Ginger: bruise them together and put them into a bagge as before, and make your bagge long and small that it goe in and out at the bung-hole, and when you do put it in, fasten it with a thread at the bung: then take a pint of the strongest Damaske water, and warme it luke∣warme, then put into the But, and then stop it close for two or three dayes at least, and then if you please you may set it abroach. To aparell Muskadine when it comes new into be fi∣ned in twenty foure houres. Take seuen whites of new layd egges, two handfuls of Bay-salt, and beate them well together, and put therein a pint of Sacke or more, and beate them till they be as short as snow; then ouer-draw the But seauen or eight gallons, and beate the wine, and stirre the Lees, and then put in the parill and beate it, and so fill it vp, and stop it close, and draw it on the morrow. To make white Bastard. Draw out of a pipe of Bastard ten gallans, and put to it fiue gallans of new milke, and skim it as before, and all to beate it with a parill of eight whites of egges, and a handfull of Bay-salt, and a pint of conduit water, and it will be white and fine in the morning. But if you will make very fine Bastard, take a White-wine Hogs-head, and put out the Lees, and wash it cleane, and fill it halfe full and halfe a quarter, and put to it foure gallans of new milke, and beate it well with the Whites of sixe Egges, and fill it vp with White-wine and Sacke, and it will be white and fine. How to helpe Bastard being eager. Take two gallons of the best stoned honey, and two gallans of White-wine, and boyle them in a faire pan, skimme it cleane, and straine it through a faire cloth that there be no moats in it: then put to it one ounce of Collianders, and one ounce of Aniseeds, foure or fiue Orange pils dry and beaten to powder, let them lye three dayes: then draw your Bastard into a cleane pipe,
then put in your honey with the rest, and beate it well: then let it lye a weeke and touch it not, after draw it at pleasure. To make Ba∣stard white, and to away Lagges. If your Bastard be fat and good, draw out forty gal∣lons, then may you fill it vp with the lagges of any kind of White-wines or sackes, then take fiue gallons of new milke, and first take away the Creame, then straine it through a cleane cloth, and when your pipe is three quarters full, put in your milke: then beate it very well, and fill it so, that it may lacke fifteene gallons, then a∣parill it thus: take the Whites onely of ten egges, and beate them in a faire tray with Bay-salt and conduite water: then put it into the pipe and beate it well, and so fill it vp, and let it stand open all night: and if you will keepe it any while, you must on the morrow stop it close, and to make the same drinke like Ossey, giue it this slauer: Take a pound of Aniseeds, two pence in Colianders, two pence in Ginger, two pence in Cloues, two pence in graines, two pence in long Pepper, and two pence in Licoras: bruise all these together: then make two bagges of Linnen cloth, long and small, and put your spices into them, and put them into the pipe at the bung, making them fast there with a thread that it may sinke into the Wine, then stop it close, and in two dayes you may broch it. A remedy for Bastard if it picke. Take and draw him from his Lees if he haue any, and put the Wine into a Malmsey But to the Lees of Malm∣sey: then put to the Bastard that is in the Malmsey But, nigh three gallons of the best Worte of a fresh tap, and then fill him vp with bastard or malmsey, or cute if you will: then aparell it thus; First, parell him, and beate him with a staffe, and then take the whites of foure new layd egges, and beate them with a handfull
of Salt till it be short as mosse, and then put a pint of running water therein, and so fill the pipe vp full, and lay a tile stone on the bang, and set it abroach within foure and twenty houres if you will. To make Malmsey. If you haue a good But of Malmsey, and a butt or two of Sacke that will not be drunke: for the sacke pre∣pare some empty But or Pipe, and draw it more then halfe full of sacke, then fill it vp with Malmsey, and when your butt is full within a little, put into it three gallons of Spanish cute, the best that you can get, then beate it well, then take your taster and see that it bee deepe coloured: then fill it vp with sacke, and giue it a∣parell, and beate it well, the aparell is thus: Take the yelkes of tenne egges, and beate them in a cleane bason with a handfull of Bay-salt, and a quart of conduit wa∣ter, and beate them together with a little peece of birch, and beate it till it be as short as mosse, then draw fiue or sixe gallons out of your butt, then bate it againe, and then fill it vp, and the next day it will be ready to be drawne. This aparell will serue both for Muskadine, Bastard, and for Sacke. To shift Malm∣sey, and to rid away ill Wines. If you haue two principall butts of malmsey, you may make three good butts with your lagges of Cla∣ret and of Sacke, if you put two gallons of Red Wine in a butt, it will saue the more Cute: then put two or three gallons of Cute as you see cause; and if it be Spa∣nish Cute, two gallons will goe further then fiue gal∣lons of Candy Cute, but the Candy Cute is more natu∣rall for the malmsey: also one butt of good malmsey, & a butt of sacke that hath lost his colour, wil make two good buts of malmsey with the more Cute; and when you haue fild your butts within twelue gallons, then put in your Cute, and beate it halfe an houre and more:
then put in your parell and let it lye. If Sacke want his colu. First, parell him as you did the Bastard, and order him as shall be shewed you for the White-wine of Gas∣coyne with milke, and so set him abroach. For Sacke that is tawny. If you Sacke haue a strong ley or taste, take a good sweete But faire washed, and draw your sacke into it, and make vnto it a parell as you doe to the Bastard, and beate it very well, and so stop vp your But: and if it be tawny, take three gallons of newe milke and straine it cleane, and put it into your sacke, then beate it very well, and stop it close. For Sacke ha orn ape and is brone. Take a faire empty But with the Lees in it, and draw your sacke into the same from his Lees fine: then take a pound of Rice flower as fine as you can get, and foure graines of Camphire, and put it into the sacke: and if it will not fine, giue it a good parell, and beate it well: then stop it and let it lie. To color sack, or any White-wine. If any of your sackes or White-wines haue lost their colour, take three gallans of new milke, and take away the Creame: then ouer-draw your wine fiue or sixe gal∣lons, then put in your milke and beate it; then lay it a foretarke all night, and in the morning lay it vp, and the next day if you will you may set it abroach. If Alligant be growne hard. Draw him out into fresh Lees, and take three or foure gallons of stone-hony clarified, and beeing coole, put it in and parell it with the yelkes of foure Egges, whites and all, and beate it well, and fill it vp, and stop it close, and it will be pleasant and quicke as long as it is in drawing. For Aligant that i lower. Take three gallons of white Honey, and two gallons of Red wine, boyle them together in a faire pan, and simme it cleane, and let it stand till it be fine and cold, then put it into your Pipe: yet nothing but the finest;
then beate it well, and fill it vp, and stop it close, and if your Alligant be pleasant and great, it will doe much good, for the one Pipe will rid away diuers. How to order Renish wine. There are two sorts of Renish wines, that is to say, Elstertune and Barabant: the Estertune are best, you shal know it by the Fat, for it is double bard and double pinned; the Barabant is nothing so good, and there is not so much good to be done with them as with the o∣ther. If the Wines be good and pleasant, a man may rid away a Hogshead or two of White wine, and this is the most vantage a man can haue by them: and if it be slender and hard, then take three or foure gallons of stone-honey and clarifie it cleane; then put into the ho∣ney foure or fiue gallons of the same wine, and then let it seeth a great while, & put into it two pence in Cloues bruised, let them seeth together, for it will take away the sent of honey, and when it is sodden take it off, and set it by till it be thorow cold; then take foure gallons of milke and order it as before, and then put all into your wine and all to beate it; and (if you can) role it, for that is the best way; then stop it close and let it lie, and that will make it pleasant. Of what coun∣tries Wines are by their names. The Wines that be made in Burdeaux are called Gas∣coyne Wines, and you shall know them by their hazell hoopes, and the most be full gadge and sound Wines. The Wines of the hie countryes, and which is called Hie-country wine, are made some thirty or forty miles beyond Burdeaux, and they come not down so soone as the other; for if they doe, they are all forfeited, and you shall know them euer by their hazell hoopes, and the length gagelackes. Then haue you Wires that be called Gallaway both in Pipes and Hogsheads, and be long, and lackes
two Cesternes in gadge and a halfe, and the Wines themselues are high coloured. Then there are other Wines which is called white Wine of Angulle, very good Wine, and lackes little of gadge, and that is also in Pipes for the most part, and is quarter bound. Then there are Rochell Wines, which are also in Pipes long and slender: they are very small hedge-wines, sharpe in taste, and of a pallad complexions. Your best Sacke are of Seres in Spaine, your smaller of Galicia and Por∣tugall: your strong Sackes are of the Islands of the Ca∣naries, and of Malligo; and your Muskadine and Malm∣seys are of many parts of Italy, Greece, and some speciall Islands. Notes of pad∣ging of Wines, Oyles and Ly∣quors. Euery Terse is in depth the middle of the knot in the midst. The depth of euery Hogshead is the fourth pricke a∣boue the knot. The depth of euery Puncheon is the fourth pricke next to the Punchener. The depth of euery Sack but is the foure prickes next to the Puncheon. The depth of the halfe Hogshead is at the lowest notch, and accounted one. The depth of the halfe Terse is at the second notch, and is accounted two. The depth of the halfe Hogshead and halfe pipe, is at the third notch, and accounted three. The depth of the halfe Butt is at the fourth notch, and is accounted foure.
The markes of . 1. The full gage is marked thus. 2. The halfe Sesterne lacketh, thus 3. The whole Sesterne lacketh, thus 4. The Sesterne and halfe lag. 5. The two Sesternes, thus. 6. The two and a halfe Sesterns, thus
The Contents of all manner of Gascoyne wine, and o∣thers. A But of Malmsey if he be full gadge, is one hundred and twenty six gallons. And so the tun is two hundred and fifty two gallons. Euery Sesterne is three gallons. If you sell for twelue pence a gallon, the tun is twelue pound, twelue shillings. And Malmsey and Renish wine at ten pence the gal∣lon, is the tun tenne pound. Eight pence the gallon, is the tun eight pounds. Sixe pence the gallon, is the tun sixe pounds. Fiue pence the gallon, is the tun fiue pound. Foure pence the gallon, is the tun foure pound. Now for Gascoine wine there goeth foure hogs∣heads to a tun, and euery hogshead is sixty three gallons, the two hogsheads are one hundred twenty sixe gallons, and foure hogsheads are two hundred fifty two gallons; and if you sell for eight pence the gallon, you shall make of the tun eight pounds, and so foorth looke how many pence the gallons are, and so many pounds the tunne is. Now for Bastard it is at the same rate, but it lacketh of gadge two Sesternes and a halfe, or three at a pipe, and then you must abate sixe gallons of the price, and so in all other wines. To chuse Gas∣coyne wine. See that in your choice of Gascoine wines you ob∣serue, that your Clarret wines be faire coloured, and bright as a Rubie, not deepe as an Ametist; for though it may shew strength, yet it wants neatnesse: also let it be sweete as a Rose or a Violet, and in any case let it be short; for if it be long, then in no wise meddle with it. For your white wines, see they be sweete and plea∣sant at the nose, very short, cleere and bright and quick in the taste.
Lastly for your Red wine, prouide that they be deepe coloured and pleasant, long, and sweete, and if in them, or Clarret wines be any default of colour, there are re∣medies enow to amend and repaire them. To remedy Clarret wine that hath lost hs clu. If your Clarret wine be faint, and haue lost his co∣lor; then take a fresh hogshead with his fresh lees which was very good wine, and draw your wine into the same, then stop it close and tight, and lay it a foretake for two or three daies that the lees may run through it, then lay it vp till it be fine, and if the colour be not perfit, draw it into a red wine hogshead, that is new drawne with the lees, and that will colour of himselfe, and make him strong; or take a pound of Tournoll or two, and beate it with a galon or two of wine, and let it lie a day or two, then put it into your hogshead, draw your wine a∣gaine, and wash your cloths, then lay it a foretake all night, and roule it on the morrow; then lay it vp, and it will haue a perfit colour. A remedy for Gascoyne wine that ha lost his colour. And if your Clarret wine haue lost his colour, take a peny worth of Damsens, or els blacke Bullesses, as you see cause, and stew them with some red wine of the deepest colour, and make thereof a pound or more of sirrup, and put it into a cleane glasse, and after into the hogshead of Clarret wine; and the same you may like∣wise doe vnto red wine if you please. A remedy for white wine, that hah lost his colour. And if your white wine be faint, and haue lost his co∣lour, if the wine haue any strength in it; take to a hogs∣head so much as you intend to put in, out of the said thike, and a handfull of Rice beaten very wel, and a little salt, and lay him a foretake all night, and on the morning lay him vp againe, and set it abrach in any wise the next wine you spend▪ for it will not last long. For white wine that . Take three gallons of new ilke, and take away the
Creame off it; then draw fiue or sixe gallons of wine, and put your milke into the hogshead, and beate it ex∣ceeding well, then fill it vp, but before you fill it vp, if you can, roue it, and if it be long and small, take halfe a pound of Roche Alum finely beaten into pouder, and pu into the vessell, and let it lie. A remdy for  white wine that drink oule. Take and draw it into new lees of the one nature, and then take a dozen of new pippins, and pare them, & take away the chores, and then put them in, and if that will not serue, take a handfull of the Oake of Ierusalem, and stampe it, then put it into your wine, and beate it excee∣ding well, and it will not onely take away the foulnesse, but also make it haue a good sent at the nose. Fo red wine that dinks faint. If your Red wine drinke faint, then take a hogshead that Allegant hath been in with the lees also, and draw your wine into it, and that will refresh it well, and make the wine well coloured; or otherwise draw it close to fresh lees, & that wil recouer it againe, & put to it three or foure gallons of Allegant, and turne it on his lees. For red wine that ws co∣lour. If your Red wine lacke colour, then take out foure gallons, and put in foure gallons of Allegant, and turne him on his lees, and the bung vp, and his colour will re∣turne and be faie. To make Tyre. Take a good But of Malmsey, and ouerdraw it▪ quarter or more, and fill him vp with fat Bastard, and with Cute a gallon and more, then parrell him as you did your Malmsey. If Osey com∣pleae,  a∣proch ha lst thei coour. You shall in all points dresse him, as you did dresse your Sacke, or white wine in the like case and parrell him, and then set him abroach: And thus much tou∣ching wines of all sorts, and the true vse and ordering of them, so farre forth as belongeth to the knowledge; and profit of our English Hous-wife.
CHAP. 5. Of Wooll, Hempe, Flax and Cloth, and Dying of colours, of each seuerall substance, with all the know∣ledges belonging thereto. OVr English Hous wife after her know∣ledge of preseruing, and feeding her fa∣mily, must learne also how out of her owne endeauours, she ought to cloath them outwardly & inwardly for defence from the cold and comlinesse to the per∣son; and inwardly, for cleanlinesse and neatnesse of the skin, whereby it may be kept from the filth of sweat, or vermine; the first consisting of woollen cloh, the latter of linnen. Of making wollen cloth. To speake then first of the making of woollen cloth, it is the office of the Husbandman at the sheeing of his sheepe, to bestow vpon the Hous-wife such a competent proportion of wooll, as shall be conuenient for the clo∣thing of his family, which wooll as soone as she hath re∣ceiued it, she shall open, and with a paire of sheees (the fleece lying as it were whole before her) she shall cut away all the course locks pitch, brands, tarr'd locks, and other feltings, and lay them by themselues for course Couerlids, o the ike: then the rst so censed she shall breake into peeces, and tose it euery locke by locke,Of tosing oll. that is, with her hands open, and so diuide the wooll, as not any part thereof may be feled or close together, but all open and loose, then so much of the wooll as shee intends to spine white, shee shall put by it selfe, and the rest which shee intends to put it to colours shee shall waigh vp, and diuide it to seuerall quantities, accor∣dng
to the proportion of the web which she intends to make, and put euery one of them into particular bagges made of netting, with tals or little peeces of wood fixed vnto them, with priuy markes thereon both for the wght,The dying of Wooll. the colour, and the knowledge of the same wooll when the first colour is altred: this done she shall if she please send them vnto the Dyers, to be died after her owne fancy; yet for as much is I woud not haue our Englsh Hous wfe ignorant in any thing meete for her knowledge, I will shew her here before I proceede any further, how she shal dye her wooll her selfe into any colour meete for he vse. To dye woll blacke. First then to dye wooll blace, you shall take two pound of Gals, and bruse them, then take halfe so much of the best greene Coperas, and boyle them both together in two gallons of running water: then shall you put your wooll therein and boile it, so done, take it for hand dry it. To dye wooll of haire clr. If you will dye your wooll of a bright haire colour: first boyle your wooll in Allum and water; then take it foorth, and when it is cold, take chamber-lye and chimey-soote, and mixing them together well, boyle your wooll againe therein, and stirre it exceeding well about, then take it forth, and lay it where it may con∣ueniently dry. To dye wooll red. If you would dye your wooll into a perfect red co∣lour, set on a pn full of water, when it is hot put in a peke of Whate branne, and let it boyle a little, then put it into a tub, and put twice as much cold water vnto it, and let it stand vntill it be a weeke old: hauing done so, then shall you put to ten pounds of wooll, a pound of Allum, then heate your liquor againe, and put in your Allum, and so soone as it is melted, put in your wooll,
and let it boyle the space of an houre: Then take it againe, and then set on more branne and water: Then take a pound of Madder, and put in your Madder when the liquor is hot: when the Madder is broken, put in the wooll and open it, and when it commeth to be very hot, then stirre it with a staffe, and then take it out and wash it with faire water; then set on the panne againe with faire water, and then take a pound of Saradine bucke, and put it therein, and let it boyle the space of an egge seething; then put in the wooll, and stirre it three or foure times about, and open it well, after dry it. To dye wooll blew. To dye Wooll blew, take good store of old cham∣ber-lye, and set it on the fire, then take halfe a pound of blew Neale, Byse or Indico, and beate it small in a mor∣ter, and then put it into the Lye, and when it seethes put in your wooll. To dye a Puke. To dye Wooll of a puke colour, take Galles, and beate them very small in a morter, put them into faire seething water, and boyle your Wooll or your Cloth therein, and boyle them the space of halfe an howre: then take them vp, and put in your Copheras into the same liquor: then put in your wooll againe, and doing thus once or twice, it will bee suf∣ficient. To dye a sin∣der colour. And if you will dye your Wooll of a Sinder colour, which is a very good colour, you shall put your redde wooll into your puke liquor; and then it will failelesse be of a sinder colour. To dye greene or yellow. If you will dye your wooll either greene or yellow, then boyle your Woodward in faire water, then put in your Wooll or cloth, and the Wooll which
you put in white, will be yelow, and that wooll which you put in blew will be greene, and all this with one li∣quor: prouided that each be first boyled in Allom. wooll  dy∣ing. When you haue thus died your wooll into those se∣uerall colours meete for your purpose, and haue also dried it well; then you shall take it foorth▪ and toase it ouer againe as you did before: for the first roasing was to mke it receiue the colour or dye: this second is to  the oyle, and make it  for spinning▪ which  as you haue oe, you shall mix your colours to∣gether, whein you are to note that the best medly, is  compounded of two colou onely, as a  for to haue more is but confu∣ , but distraction to the sight:  the proportion or your mixtures, you shall  take two parts of the darker colour, and but a third  of the light. As for example, your Web containes  pound and the colours are red and greene: you  it  tke right pound of the greene wooll, and but  poud of the red, and so of any other colours whr thre is difference in brightnesse. But if it be so that you will needs haue your cloth of three colours, as of two darke and one light, or two light and o darke: As thus, you will haue Crimson, Yellow, and , you shall take of the Crimson and yellow of each two pound, and of the pue eight pound:  is two light colours to one darke; but if you , a greene and an orenge tawny which is , and one light, then you shall tae of the puke and greene, and the orenge tawny of each a like quanti∣ty: , of or her foure pounds, when you haue equally diuided yor portions, then you shall spread vp∣pn the ground a see, and vpon the same first lay a
thin layre or bed of your darker colour, all of one euen thickesse: then vpon the same layre, lay anther much thinner of the brighter quantity, being so  s you guesse it, hardy halfe so muh as the darker: th cour it ouer with aohr layre of the sad colour or colrs againe, then vpon it another of the bright again▪  thus lay layre vpon lare till all your wooll be ▪ then beginning at one end to rle vp round and  to∣gether the whole bed of wool; and then causing one to kneele hard vpon the roue, that  may not stire nor o∣pen, with your hands toase, and pul out all the wooll in small peeces: And then taking a paire of Stoe-cards sharpe and large, and bound fst to a forme  such like thing, and on the the same Combe, and Card ouer all the wooll, till you see it perfectly and vndi∣stinctly mixed together, and that indeed it is become one intire colour of diuerse without spots, or vndui∣ded lockes or knots; in which doing you shall be very carefull, and heedfull with your eye: and if you finde any hard knot, or other felter in the wooll, which will not open, though it be neuer so small, yet you shall picke it out and open it, or else being any other  cast it a∣way: for it is the greatest art in House wifery to mixe these wools aright, and to make the cloh without blemish. Of the dying of Wooll. Your wooll being thus mixed perfectly together, you shall then oyle it, or as the plaine House-wife termes it, grease it: In this manner being said in a round fla bd, you shall take of the best Rap oyle or for want there∣of either well rayd red goo grease, or swines grese, and hauing melted it with your hand sprinkle it all ouer your wooll, and worke it very well into the same: then turne your wooll about, and doe as much on the other
side, till you haue oyled all the wooll ouer, and that there is not a locke which is not moystened with the same. The quantiy of yle. Now for as much as if you shall put too much oyle vpon the Wooll, you may thereby do great hurt to the web, and make that the thread will not daw, but fall into many peeces; you shall therefore bee sure at the first to giue it little enough: and taking some thereof, proue it vpon the wheele: And if you see it drawes dry, and breaketh, then you may put more oyle vnto it; but if draw well, then to keepe it there without any al∣teration: but because you shall be a little more certaine in the ruth of your proportions, you shall know, that three pound of grease or oyle, will sufficiently onnoint o grease ten pounds of wooll: and so according to that proportion you may oyle what quantity you will. After your wooll is oyld and annointed thus, you shall then tumme it, which is, you shall pull it foorth as you did before, when you mixe it, and cade it ouer a∣gaine vpon your Stock-cardes: and then those cardings which you strike off, are called tummings, which you shall lay by, till it come to spinning. There be some Hous-wus which oyle it as they mixe it, and sprickle euery layre as they lay it, and worke the oyle well into it: and then rouling vp as before sayd, pul it out, and tumme it; so that then it goeth but once ouer the Stock-cards, which is not amise: yet the other is more cer∣taine, though somewhat painefull. Of spinnng Woll. After your Wooll is thus mixed, oyled and tum∣med, you shall then spinne it vpon great wooll-wheeles, according to the order of good House wifery: the action whereof must be got by practise, and not relation; only this you shall be carefull, to draw your thread accor∣ding
to the nature, and goodnes of your wooll, not ac∣cording to your particular desire: for if you draw a fie thread from a wooll which is of a course staple, it will want substance when it comes to the Walke Mill, and either there beate in peeces, or not being able to bed, and couer the threads well, be a cloth of a very short lasting. So likewise if you draw a course thread from a wooll of a fine staple, it will then so much ouer thicke, that you must either take away a great part of the sub∣stance of your wooll in flockes; or els let the cloth weare course, and high, to the disgrace of the good House-wifery, and losse of much cloth, which els might haue beene saued. The diuersiti in spinning Now for the diuersities of spinning, although our ordinary English House-wiues make none at all, but spin euery thread alike, yet the better experienst make two manner of spinnings, and two sorts of thread▪ the one they call warpe, the other weft, or else wooffe; the warpe is spunne close, round and hard twisted, being strong and well smoothed, because it runs thorough the sleies, and also indureth the fretting and beating of the beame, the weft is spunne open, loose, hollow, and but halfe twisted; neither smoothed with the hand, no made of an great strength, because it but only crosseth the warpe, without any violent straining, and by reason of the softnesse thereof beddeth closer, and couereth the warpe so well, that a very little beating in the Mill bringeth it to perfect cloth: and though some hold it lesse substantiall then the web, which is all of twisted yarne, yet experience findes they are deceiued, and that this open weft keepes the Cloth longer from fretting and wearing. After the spinning of your wooll, some Hous-wifes
vse to wind i from the broch into round clewes for more ease in the warping, but it is a about may vry wel be saued, and you may s well wae it from the broch as from the clew, as lon as you know the cer∣taine wight, for by that onely you are to be directed in all manner of cloth making. Now as touching the warping of cloth, which i both the skill and action of the Weauer, yet must not our English House-wife be ignorant therein, but though the oug of the thing be not proper vnto her, yet what is done must not be beyond her knowledge, both to bridle he falshood of vnconscionable workemen, and for her owne satisfaction, when shee is id of the doubt of a∣nothers euill doing. It is necessary then that shee first case by the waight of her wooll, to know how many yards of cloth the web will arise: for if the wooll be of a resonable good staple, and well spunne, it will run yard and pound, but if it be course, it will not runne so much. Now in your warping also, you must looke how ma∣ny pounds you lay in your warpe, and so many you must necessarily preserue for your weft; for Hous-wifes say the best cloth is made of euen and euen; for to driue it to greater aduantage is hurtfull to the cloth: there be other obseruations in the warping of cloth; as to number your pousles, and how many goes to a yard: to looke to the closenesse, and filling of the sleie, and and such like, which sometimes hold, and sometimes , according to the art of the workeman; and there∣fore I will not stand much vpon them; but referre the House-wife to the instruction of her owne expe∣rience. Of wauing cloth, wlkng and dressig it Now after your cloth is thus warped, and deliuered
vp into the hands of the Weauer; the Hous-wife hath finisht her labour: for in the weauing, walking, and dressing thereof shee can challenge no property more then to entreate them seuerally to discharge their du∣ties with a good conscience; that is say, that the Wea∣uer weaue close, strong, and true, that the Walker or Fuller, mill it carefully, and looke well to his scow∣ring-earth, for feare of beating holes into the cloth; and that the Clothworker, or Sheereman burle, and dresse it sufficiently, neither cutting the wooll too vn∣reasonable high, whereby the cloth may weae rough, nor too low, least it appeare thread-bare  it come out of the hands of the Taylor. These thinges fore∣warnd and performed, the cloth is then to be vsed at your pleasure. Of linnen cloth. The next thing to this, which our English House-wife must be skilfull is in the making of all sorts of linnen-cloth, whether it be of hempe or flxe, for from those two onely this is the most principall cloth deriued, and made both in this, and in other nations The ground b . And first touching the soile fittest to sow hempe vpon, it must be a rich mingle earth of clay and sand, or clay and grauell well tempered: and of these the best serueth best for the purpose, for the simple clay▪ or▪ the simple sand are nothing so good; for the first is too tough, too rich, and too heauy, bringeth forth all Bunne and no rinde, the other is too barren, too hot▪ and too light, and bringeth forth such slnder witheed increse that it is nothing neere worth the abou bfly the the best earth is the best mixt ground which Husband men  the d hazeil ground, being well or∣dered and  and of this earth a principall place to w , is in old stackeyards, or other
places kept in the winter time for the laire of sheepe or cattle, when your ground is either scarfe, or formerly not imployed to that purpose: but if it be where the ground is plenty, and onely vsed thereunto, as in Hol∣land, in Lincolne-sheire, the Isle of Axham, and such like places, then the custome of the Country will make you except enough therein: there be some that will pre∣serue the endes of their corne lands, which but vpon grasse for to sow hempe or flaxe thereon, and for that purpose will manure it well with eepe: for whereas corne which butteth on grasse hads, where cattle are teathered is commonly destroyed, and no profit issuing from a good part thereof; by this meanes, that which is sowen will be more lafe and plentifull, and that which was destroyed, will beare a commodity of better value. The tillage of the ground. Now for the tillage or ordering of the ground where you sow Hempe or flaxe, it would in all poynts be like vnto that where you sow Barley, or at the least as often broke vp, as you do when you sow fallow wheat, which is thrice at least, except it be some very mellow, and ripe mould, as stack yards, and vsuall hempe-lands be, and then twice breaking vp is sufficient: that is to say, about the latter end of February, and the latter ende of Aprill,Of owing of . at which time you shall sow it: and herein is to noted, that you must sow it reasonable thicke with good sound and perfect seed, of which the smoothest, roun∣dest, and brightest with least dust in is best: you must not lay it too deepe in the earth, but you must couer it close, light, and with so fine a mould as you can possible breake with your Harrowes, clotting-beetles, or sleigh∣ting then till you see it appeare aboue the earth, you must haue it exceedingly carefully tended, especially an
houre or two before Sunne rise, and as much bfore it set, from birds and other vermine, which wil other∣wise picke the seed out of the earth, and so deceiue you of your profit. Of weeding of Hempe and fax. Now for the weeding of hempe, you may saue the la∣bour, because it is naturally of it selfe swift of growth, rough, and venemous to any thing that growes vnder it, and will sooner of its owne accord destroy those vn∣wholesome weeds then by your labour: But for your Flaxe or line which is a great deale more tender, and of harder encrease, you shall as occasion serueth weede it, and rimme it, especially if the weeds ouergrow it, but not otherwise: for if it once get aboue the weeds, then it will fue it selfe. The pullng of hmpe or flax. Touching the pulling of Hempe or Flaxe, which is the manner of gathering of the same: you shall vnder∣stand that it must be pulled vp by the rooes, and not cut as Core is, either with sithe or hooke: and the best tima for the pulling of the same is, when you see the leaues fall downeward, or turne yellow at the tops, for that it is full ripe, and this for the most part will be in Iuly, and about Mary Maulins day. I speake now touching the puling of hempe for cloth: but if you in∣tend to saue any for seed, then you shal saue the principal unnes, and let them stand till it be the latter end of August, or sometimes till mid September following: and then seeing the seede turned browne and hard, you may gather it, for if it stand longer, it will ed sud∣denly: as for flaxe, which ripeneth a little after the hempe, you shall pull it as soone as you see the sed turne browne, and bend the head to the earthward, for it will afterward ripen of it selfe as the bunne drieth. The ripening of hempe and flaxe. Now for the ripening, and seasoning of Hempe or
Flaxe, you shall so soone as you haue pulled it, lay it all along flat, and thinne vpon the ground, for a night and a day at the most, and no more; and then as House-wiues call it, tye it vp in baites, and reare them vpright till you can conueniently carry it to the water, which would be done as speedily as may be. Now there be some which ripen their Hempe and Flaxe vpon the ground where it grew, by letting it lye thereon to re∣ceiue dewes and raine, and the moystnesse of the earth, till it be ripe: but this is a vile and naughty way of ripe∣ning, it making the hempe or flaxe blacke, rough, and often rotten: therefore I would wish none to vse it, but such as necessity compelleth thereunto, and then to be carefull to the often turning thereof, for it is the ground onely which rots it. The watering of hempe or flaxe. Now for the watring of the Hempe or Flaxe, the best water is the running streame, and the worst the standing pit, yet because Hempe is a poysonous thing, and infecteth the water, and destroyeth all kind of fish, it is more fit to employ such pits and ditches as are least subiect to annoyance, except you liue neere some great broad and swift streame, and then in the shallow parts thereof, you may water without danger: tou∣ching the manner of the watering thereof, you shall according to the quantity, knocke foure or sixe strong stakes into the bottome of the water, and let them square-wise, then lay your round baits or bundles of Hempe downe vnder the water, the thicke end of one bundle one way▪ and the thicke ends of another bundle another way; and so lay baite vpon baite, till you haue laid in all, and that the water couereth them all ouer; then you shall take ouer-lyers of wood, and bin∣ding them ouerthwart to the stakes, keepe the Hempe
downe close, and especially at the foure corners; then take great stones, grauell, and other heauy rubbish, and lay it betweene, and ouer the ouer-lyers, and so couer the Hempe close, that it may by no meanes stirre, and so let it continue in the water foure daies and nights, if it be in a running water,The time it shal lie in the water. but if it be in a standing water, then longer, and then take out one of the vppermost baites and wash it; and if in the washing you see the leafe come off, then you may be assured the Hempe is watred enough: as for Flaxe, lesse time will serue it, and it will shead the leafe in three nights. Of washing out of Hempe or Flax. When your Hempe or Flaxe is thus watered enough, you shall take off the grauell, stones, ouer-lyers of wood, and vnloosing it from the stakes, take and wash out eue∣ry baite or bundle seuerall by it selfe, and rub it excee∣ding cleane, leauing not a leafe vpon it, nor any filth within it; then set it vpon the dry earth vpright, that the water may drop from it, which done, load it vp, and car∣ry it home, and in some open Close or piece of ground reare it vpright either against hedges, pales, walls, back∣sides of houses, or such like, where it may haue the full strength, or reflection of the Sunne, and being throughly dried, then house it; yet there be some House wues which assoone as their Hempe comes from the water, will not reare it vpright, but lay it vpon the ground flat and thinne for the space of a fortnight, turning it at the end of euery two daies; first on the one side, then on the other, and then after reare it vpright, dry it, and so house it, and this House wifery is good and orderly. Speciall orde∣ng of Flaxe. Now although I haue hitherto ioyned Hempe and Flaxe together, yet yu shal vnderstand that there are some particular differences betweene them; for wheras your Hempe may within a night or two after the pul∣ling
be caed to the water, your flaxe may not, but must be reared vp, and dried and withered a weeke or more to ripen the seede, which done, you must take ripple combes, and ripple your flxe ouer, which is the beating, or breaking off from the stalkes the round belles or bobs, which containe the seede which you must preserue in some dry vessell or place, till the spring of the eare, and then beate it, or thrsh it for your vse, and when your flxe or line is ripled, then you must send it to the water as aforesayd. The brking for hemp flax. After your hempe or Flaxe hath bene watered, dried, and housed, you may then at your pleasure breake it, which is in a brake of wood (whose proportion is so ordinary, that euery one almost knowes them) breake and beate out the dy bune, or kexe of the Hempe or Flaxe from the rinde which couers it, and when you brake either, you shall doe it, as neere as you can, on a faire dry Sun shine day, obseruing to set foorth your hempe and flxe, and spead it thinne be∣fore the Sunne▪ that it may be as dry as tinder before it come to the brake; for if either in the lying close to∣gether it shall giu againe or sweate, or through the moystnesse of the ayre, or place where it lies receiues any dampishnesse, you must necessarily see it dried sufficiently againe,The drying of Hempe o Flaxe. or else it will neuer brae well, nor the bune breake and part from the nde in order as it should: therefore if the weather bee not seasonable, and your need much to vse your hempe or flxe, you shall then spread it vpon your ilne, and making a soft fire vnder it, dry it vpon the same, and then brake it: yet for as much as this is oft times dangerous, and much hurt hath beene receiued thereby through ca∣sualty of fie, I would wish you to stke foure stakes
in the earth at least fiue foote aboue ground, and laying ouer them small our layers of wood,When it is brk't enough. and open fleakes or hurdles vpon the same, spread your Hempe, and also reare some round about it all, but at one open side; then with straw, small shauings, or other ight dry wood make a soft fire vnder the same, and so dry it, and brake it, and this without all danger or mistrust of euill; and as you brake it, you shall open and looke into it, euer beginning to brake the roote ends first; and when you see the bun is sufficiently crusht, fallen away, or at the most hangeth but in very small shiuers within the Hempe or Flaxe, then you shall say it is brak't enough, and then tearming that which you called a baite or bundle before, now a strike, you shall lay them toge∣ther and so house them, keeping in your memorie ei∣ther by score or writing, how many strkes of Hempe, and how many strikes of flaxe you brake vp euery day. Dursity o baks. Now that your Hmpe or Flaxe may brake so much the better, you must haue for each seuerall sort two se∣uerall brakes, which is an open and wide toothed, or nickt brake, and a close and straight toothed brake: the first being to crush the bun, and the latter to beate it forth. Now for Flaxe you must take first that which is the straightest for the Hempe, and then after one of purpose, much straighter and sharper for the bune of it being more small, tough and thinne, must necessari∣ly be broken into much lesse peeces. Of swingling hempe nd flaxe. After your Hempe and Flaxe is brak't, you shall then swingle it▪ whch is vpon a swingle tree blocke made of an hafe inch boord about foure foote aboue ground, and set vpon a strong foote or stocke, that will not easi∣ly moue and stirre, as you may see in any House-wiues
house whatsoeuer better then my words can expresse: and with a peece of wood called the swingle tree dag∣ger, and made in the shape and proportion of an olde dagger with a reasonable blunt edge; you shall beate out all the loose buns and shiuers that hag in the hemp or flaxe, opening and turning it from one ende to the o∣ther, till you haue no bunne or shiuer to be perceiued therein, and then strike a twist, and fould in the midst, which is euer the thickest part of the strike, lay them by till you haue swingled all; the generall profit where of, is not onely the beaing out of the hard bunne, but also an opening, and sofing of the teare, whereby it is pre∣pared and made ready for the Market. Now after you haue swingled you Hempe and Flax ouer once, you shall take and sae vp the refuse stuffe, which you beate from the same seuerally, and not onely i, but the tops and knots, and halfe brack't buns which ll from the bake also, and drying them againe cause them to be very well thresht with flayles, and then mix∣ing them with the refuse which fll from the swingle tree, dresse them all well with threshing and shaking, till the bunnes be cleane  out of them; and then lay them in some safe drye place till occasion of vse: these are called swingle tree hurds, and that which comes from the hempe will make window cloth, and such  course stuffe, and that which comes from the flxe▪ beng a little towed againe in a paire of wooll∣cd, will make a course hading. The scond swinglig. But  proced forward in the making of cloth, after you  o flx hath beene swingled once ouer, whc is sffint for the market, o for oy l, you shl e for cloth swingle  ad as the first did beate away
the rind, so this shall breake and diuide, and prepare it fit for the heckle; and hurds which are this second time beaten off, you shall also saue: for that of the hempe (being toased in wooll cards) will make a good hempen harden) and that commeth from the slaxe (vsed in that manner) a flaxe harden better then the former. Of heating hm. After the second swingling of your Hempe, and that the hurds thereof haue bene layd by, you shall take the strikes, and diuiding them into dozens, o halfe dozens, make them vp into great thicke roles, and then as it were broaching them, or spitting them vpon long stickes, set them in the corner of some chemney, where they may receiue the heate of the fire, and there let them abide, till they be dried exceedingly, then take them, and laying them in a round trough made for the purpose, so many as may conueniently lye therein, and there with beetles beate them exceedingly, till they handle both without and within as soft and plyant as may be, without any hardnesse or roughnesse to be felt or perceiued; then take them from the trough, and o∣pen the roler, and diuide the strikes seuerally as at the first, and if any be insufficiently beaten, role them vp, and beate them ouer as before. O hekling hempe. When your Hempe hath bene twice swingled, dried, and beaten, you shall then bring it to the heckle, which instrument needeth no demonstration, because it is hard∣ly vnknowne to any woman whatsoeuer: and the first heckle shall be course, open and wide tothed because it is the first breaker or diuider of the sme, and the layer of the strikes euen and straight: and the huds which come of this heckling you shall mxe with hoe of the latter swingling, and it will make the cloh much better; then you shall heckle it the second time through
a good straight hekle made purposely for hempe, and be sure to breake it very well and sufficiently thereupon, and saue both the hurds by themselues, and the strikes by themselues in seuerall places. Now there bee some very pincipall good House-wiues, which vse onely but to heckle their hempe once ouer, affirming, that if it be sufficiently dried and beaten, that once going ouer through a straight heckle will serue without more losse of labour, hauing bene twice swingled before. Dressing of Hmpe moe fine, Now if you intend to haue an excellent peece of Hempen cloth, which shall equall a peece of very pure Linen, then after you haue beaten it, as beforesayd, and heked it once ouer, you shall then roule it vp a∣gaine, dry it as before, and beate it againe as much as at the first; then heckle it through a fine flaxen heckle, and the towe which falles from the heckle, will make a principall hemping, but the teare it selfe a cloth as pure, as fine House-wifes Linnen, the indurance and lasting whereof, is rare and wonderful: thus you see the vtter∣most art in dressing of hempe for each seuerall purpose in cloth making tll it come to the spinning. Of heckling Flaxe. Flaxe after it hath bene twce swingled needeth nei∣ther more drying nor beating as hempe doth, but may be brought to the heckle in the same manner as you did hempe; onely the heckle must be much finer and strai∣ter, and as you did before the first heckle being much courser then the latter, holding the strike stiffe in your hand, breake it very wel vpon that heckell: then the hurdes whch comes thereof, you shall saue to make fine hurden cloth of, and the strike it selfe you shall passe through a finer heckle; and the hurds which come from thence, you shall saue to make fine miden
cloth of, and the teare it selfe for the best linnen. The dressing of flaxe to  finest vs To dresse Flaxe for the finest vse that may be, as to make faire Holland cloth of great price, or thread for the most curious purpose, a secret hitherto almost con∣cealed from the best House-wifes with vs; you shall takee your Flaxe after it hath beene handled, as is before shewed, and laying three strikes together, plat them in a plat of three so hard and close together as it is possible, ioyning one to the end of another, till you haue platted so much as you thinke conuenient, and then begin ano∣ther plat, and thus platte as many seuerall plats as you thinke will make a roule, like vnto one of your Hempe roules before spoke of, and then wreathing them hard together, make vp the roule; and so many roules more or lesse, according to the purpose you dresse them for: this done, put the roules into a hempe-trough, and beate them soundly, rather more then lesse then the hempe: and then open and vnplat it and diuide euery strike from other very carefully; then heckle it through a fine hec∣kle then any formerly vsed: for of heckles there be e∣uer three sorts, and this must be the finest: and in this heckling you must be exceeding carefull to doe it gent∣ly, lightly, and with good deliberaion, least what you heckle from it should runne to knots, or other hardnes, as it is apt to doe: but being done artificially as it ought, you shall see it looke, and feee it handle like fine soft cotton, or Iersie wooll; and this which thus looketh and feeleth, and falleth from the heckle, will notwith∣standing make a pure linnen, and run at least two yards and a hafe in the pound; but the teare it selfe will make a perfect strong, and most fine holland, running at least fiue yards in the pound. Of the  the . After your teare is thus drest, you shall spinne it either
vpon wheele or rock, but the wheele is the swifter way, and the rocke maketh the finer thread; you shall draw your thread according to the nature of the teare, and as long as it is euen, it cannot be too small, but if it be vn∣euen it will neuer make a durable cloth. Now for as much as euery Houswife is not able to spinne her owne teare in her owne house, you shall make choyce of the best Spinners you can heareof, and to them put foorth your teare to spinne, wighing it before it goe, and waighing it after it is spun and dry, allowing waight for waight, os an ounce and a halfe for wast at the most: as for the prises for spinning, they are according to the natures of the countrie, the finenesse of the teare, and the dearenesse of prouisions: some spinning by the pound, some by the lay, and some by day, as the bargain shall be made. After your yarne is spunne vpon spindles, spooles, or such like; you shall then reele it vpon reeles, of which the reeles which are hardly two foot in length, and haue but onely two contrary crosse barres are the best, the most easie and least to be troubled with rauelling; and in the weauing of your fie yarne to keepe in the btter from rauelling, you shall as you reele it, with a Ley∣band of a bigge twist, diuide the slipping or eane into diuers Leyes, alowing to euery Ley 80. threads, and 20. Laies to euery slipping, the yarne being very fine, otherwise lesse of both kinds: but if you spin by the Ley, as at a pound a Ley or so, then the ancient custome hath beene to allow to the reele which was 8. yarde all aboue 16 . threads to euery Ley, and 25 Leyes, and sometimes 30 Leyes to a slpping, which will ordinari∣ly amount to a  or there aboues; and so by that you may proportion foorth the price for any manner of
spinnig whatsoeuer: for if the best thus, then the second so much bated; and so accordingly the worst. After thus yor yarne is spunne and yeeld, being in the slipping you shall scowre it: Therefore first to ftch out the spotts, you shall lay it in luke warme water, and let it lie so three or foure dayes, each day shifting it once, and wringing it out, and laying it in another wa∣ter of the same nature, then carry it to a well or brooke; and there rinse it, till you see that nothing commeth from it, but pure cleane water; for whilst there is any filth within it, there will neuer be white cloth; which done take a bucking tub, and couer the bottome there∣of with very fine Ashen-ashes: then opening your slip∣pings, and spreading them, lay them on those ashes;Bucking yarne. then couer those slippings with ashes againe, then lay in more slippings, and couer them with ashes as before▪ and thus lay one vpon another, till all your yarne be laid in; then couer the vppermost yarne with a bucking cloth, and lay therein a pecke or two (according to the bignesse of the tub) of ashes more: then poure into all through the vppermost cloth so much warme water, till the tub can receiue no more; and so let it stand all night: the next morning, you shal set a kettle of cleare water on the fire; and when it is warme, you shall pull out the spigget of the bucking tubbe, and let the water ter therein runne into another cleane vessell, and as the bucking tubbe wasteth, so you shall fill it vp againe with the warme water on the fire, and as the water on the fire wasteh, so you shall fil it vp againe with the li which commeth from the bucking tubbe, euer obseruinge  in  the li hotter and hotter till it seeth; and then when  seetheth, you shall as before apply it with , at least foure houres together; which is cal¦led,
the driuing of a Back of yarne: All which being done you shall take off the Buckling-cloth, and then putting the yarne with the lie ashes into large tubbes or boaes, with your hands as hot as you can suf∣fer it to posse, and labour the yarne, ashes, and lie a pretty while together; then carry it to a well, riuer, or other cleane scouring water, and there rinse it as cleane as may be from the ashes, then take it, and hang it vp vpon poales abroad in the ayre all day, and at night take the slippings downe, and lay them in water all night, then the next day hang them vp againe, and if any part of them drie, then cast water vpon them, obseruing e∣uer to turne that side outmost which whieth slowest, and thus doe at least seuen daies together, then put all the yarne againe into a bucking tubbe without ashes, and couer it as before with a bucking cloth, and lay thereupon good store of fresh ashes, and driue that buck as you did before, with very strong seething lies, the space of halfe a day or more, then take it foorh, posse it, rinse it, and hang it vp as you did before on the daies, and laying it in water on the nights another weeke, and then wash it ouer in faire water, and so dry it vp: other waies there are of scouring and whiting of yarne; as sleeping it in branne and warme water, and then boyling it with Ozier sticks, wheat straw water and ashes, and then possing, rinsing, and bleaching it vpon hedges, or bues; but it it is a foule and vncertaine waie, and I would not wish any good House-wife to vse it. Of widing yarne. After your yarne is scoured and whited, you shall then winde it vp into round balls of a reasonable big∣nesse, rather with bottoms then with any at all, because it may deceiue you in the waight, for accor∣ding
to the pounds will arise your yards and lengths of cloth. Of wpg and wg. After your yarne is wound and waighed, you shall carry it to the Weauers, and warpe it as was before shewed for woollen cloth, knowing this, that if your Weauer be honest and skilfull he will make you good and perfect cloth of euen and euen, that is iust the same waight in weft that then was in warp; as for the action of weauing it selfe, it is the worke-mans occupation, and therefore to him I referre it. The scowring and g of Clth. After your cloth is wouen, and the web or webs come home, you shall first lay it to steepe in all points as you did your yarne, to fetch out the soyling and o∣ther filth which is gathered from the Weauer; then rinse it also as you did your yarne, then bucke it aso in lie and ashes as before said, and rinse it, and then hauing loops fixt to the seluedge of the cloth spread it vpon the grasse, and stake it downe at the vttermost length and breadh, and as fast as it des water it againe, b take heed you wet t not too much, for feare you mildew or ot it, neither cast water vpon it till you see it in manner drie, and be sure weekely to turne it first on one side, and then on the other, and at the end of the first weeke you shall bucke it as before in Lie and Ashes: againe then rinse it, spread it, and water it as before; then if you see it whtes a pace, you need not to giue it any more bucks with the ashes and the cloth mixt together: but then a couple of cleane buckes as was before shewed in the yarne) the next fortnight following; and then being whitened enough, dry vp the cloth, and vse it as occasi∣on shall require; the best season for the same whitening being in Aprill and May. Now the course and worst hous-wifes scoure and white their cloath with water
and branne, and bucke it with lie and greene hemlocks: but as before I said, it is not good, neither would I haue it put in practise. And thus much for Wooll, Hempe, Flaxe, and Cloth of each seuerall substance. CHAP. 6. Of Dairies, Butter, Cheese, and the necessary things belonging to that Office. THere followeth now in this place after these knowledges already rehearsed, the orde∣ring and gouernment of Dairies, with the profits and commodities belonging to the same. And first touching the stocke where∣with to furnish Dairies, it is to be vnderstood that they must be Kine of the best choice & breed that our Eng∣lish House-wife can possibly attaine vnto,O Kine. as of big bone, faire shape, right bred, and deepe of milke, gentle, and kindely. ignesse of Kine. Touching the bignesse of bone, the larger that euery Cow is, the better shee is: for when either age, or mis∣chance shall disable her for the paile, being of large bone, shee may be fed▪ and made sit for the shambles, and so no losse, but profit, and any other to the paile as good and sufficient as herselfe. Shape of Kine. For her shape it must a little differ from the Butchers rules, for being chose for the Dairy, shee must haue all the signes of plenty of milke, as a crumpled horne, a thinne recke, a hairy dewlappe, and a very large vder, with foure teaes, long, thicke, and shape at the eds, for the most part either all white, of what colo soeuer the Cow be; or at least the fore part thereof▪ and if it be wel haue before and behinde, and smooth in the bot∣tome, it is a good signe also.
The breed of Kine. As touching the right breed of Kine through our na∣tion, it generally affoordeth very good ones, yet some countries doe farre exceed other countries; as Chsshire, Lancashire, Yorke-shire, and Darbie shire for blacke Kine; Clocester-shire, Somerset-shire, and some part of Wilt-shire for red Kine, and Lincolne-shire pide Kine: and from the breeds of these Countries generally doe proceede the breeds of all other, howsoeuer dispersed ouer the whole Kingdome. Now for our House-wifes direction, shee shall choose her Dairy from any of the best breeds before named, according as her opinion and delight shall gouerne her, onely obseruing not to mixe her breeds of diuers kinds, but to haue all of one intire choice without variation, because it is vnprofitable; nei∣ther must you by any meanes haue your Bull a forrener from your Kine, but absolutely either of one country, or of one shape & colour: againe in the choice of your kine, you must looke diligently to the goodnes & fertility of the soile wherein you liue, & by all meanes buy no Kine from a place that is more fruitfull then your owne, but rather harder; for the latter will prosper & come on, the other wil decay & fal into disease; as the pssing of blood and such like, for which disease & all other you may find assured cures in the former booke, called cheape & good. Depth of mlke in Kine. For the depth of milke in Kine (which is the giuing of most milke) being the maine of a House-wifes pro∣fit, shee shall be very carefull to haue that quallit in her beasts. Now those Kine are said to be deepest of milke, which are new bae; that is which haue but late∣ly calued, and haue thei milke deepe ging in their vdders, for at that time she giueth the most milke; and if the quantity then be not conuenient doubtlesse the Cow cannot be said to be of deepe mlch and for the
quantity of milke, for a Cow to giue two gallons at a meale,Qanity of . is rare, and extraordinary; to giue a gallon and a hafe is much, and conuenient, and to giue but a gallon certaine is not to be found fault with: againe those Kie are said to be deepe of milke, which though they giue not so exceeding much milke as ohers, yet they giue a reasonable quantity, and giue it long as all the yeere through, whereas oher Kine that giue more in quanti∣ty, will goe dry, being with calfe some three moneths, some two, and some one, but these will giue their vsual measure, euen the night before they calue; and therefore are said to bee Kine deepe of milke. Now for the re∣tained opinion, that the Cow which goeth not dry at all, or very little, bringeth not foorth so good a Calfe as the other, because it wanteth much of the nourish∣ment it should enioye, it is vaine and fiuolous; for should the substace from whence the milke procee∣deth conuert to the other intended nourishment, it would be so superabundant, that it woud conuert either to disease or putrifaction: but letting these secret rea∣sons asse, there e some kine which are so exceedingly full of milke, that they must be milkt at least thrice a day, at morning, noone, and euening, or else they will shed their milke, but it is a fault rather then a vertue, and proceedeth more from a laxatiuenesse or loosenesse of milke, then from any abundance; for I neuer saw those thee meales yet equal the two meales of a good Cow, and therefore they are not truly called deepe of milke. O the genl∣nesse  Kin. Touching the gentlenesse of kine, it is a vertue as fit to be expected as any other, for if she be not affable to the maide, gentle and willing to come to the ple, and patient to haue her duggs drawne without skittishnesse, striking or wildnesse, shee is vtterly vnfit for the dayry.
Of kindlinesse in ine. As a Cow must be gente to her milker, so shee must be kind in her owne nature; that is▪ apt to conceiue, and bring foorth, fruitfull to nourish, and louing to that which springs from her; for so she bringeth foorth a double profit; the one for the time present which is in the dairy; the other for the time to come; which is in the maintenance of the stocke, and vpholding of breed. The best time to calue in, for the dairy or breed. The best time for a Cow to caue in for the dairy, is in the latter end of March▪ and all Aprill; for then grasse beginning to sprng to its perfect goodnesse, will occasion the greatest increase of milke that may be: and one good early Cow will counteruaile two latter, yet the calues thus calued a not to be reared, but suffered to feed vpon their Dammes best milke, and then to be sold to the Butchers, and surely the profit will equall the charge; but those Calues which fall in October, No∣uember, or any time of the depth of winter may well be reared vp for breed, because the maine profit of the Dai∣ry is then spent, and such breed will hold vp any calues which are calued in the prime daies, for they generally are subiect to the disease of the Sturdy, which is dange∣rous and mortall. Roaring of Calues. The House-wife which onely hath respect to her Dai¦ry, and for whose knowledge this discourse is written (for we haue shewed the Grasier his office in the Eng∣lsh Husband-man) must reare her Calues vpon the sin∣ger with floten milke, and not suffer them to run with the dammes, the generall manner whereof, and the cure of all the diseases incident to them and all other cattell is fully declared in the booke called Cheape and good. The generall ve of dairies. To proceed then to the geneall vse of Dairies, it con∣sisteth first in the cattell (of which we haue spoken suf∣ficiently) then in the houres of milking, the odering
of the milke, and the profits arising from the fame. Th hwers of milkig. The best and most commended howers for milking, are Indeed but two in the day, that in the spring and summr time which is the best season for the dairy, is betwixt fiue and sixe in the morning, and sixe and se∣un a clocke in the euening: ad although nice and cu∣rious House-wues wil hue a third houe betwixt them, as betweene twelue and one in the after-noone, yet the better experienst doe not allow it, and say as I beleeue, that two good meales of milke are better euer then three bad ones; also in the miling of a Cow, the wo∣man must sit on the neere side of the Cow, she must gently at the first handle and stretch her dugges, and mosten them with milke that they may yeeld out the milke the better and with lesse paine:Mneer of Mkng. she shall not set∣tle her selfe to milke, nor fixe her paile fime to the ground till she see the cowe stand sure and firme, but be ready vpon any motion of the Cow to saue her paile from ouerturning; when she seeth all things answerable to her desire, she shall then milke the cow boldly, & not leaue streching and straining of her teats till not one drop of milke more will come from them, for he worst poynt of Hous-wfery that can be, is to leaue a Cowe halfe milt, for besides the losse of the milke, it is the onely way to mke a cowe dry and vttery vnprofitable for the Diy: the milke-mayd whilst she is in mlking, shall doe nothing rashly or suddeny about the cowe, which ay affight or amse her, but as she came gent∣ly, so with al gentlenesse she shall depart. The ordring of Milk. Touching th well ordering of milke after it is come home to the Day, the maine point belongeth there∣ is the House-wifes ceanlines in the sweet and neate keping of the Dairy-house; where not the least moate
of any filth may by any meanes appeare, but all things either to the eie or nose to void of sowernesse or slattish∣nesse▪ that a Princes bed chamber must not exceed it: to this must be added the sweete and delicate keeping of her milke vessels, whether they be of wood,Ordering of milke vessels. earth or lead, the best of which is yet disputable with the best House-wfes; onely this opinion is generally recei∣ued, that the woodden vessel which is round and shal∣low is best in cold vaults, the earthen vessels principall for long keeping, and the leaden vessell for yeeding of much Creame: but howsoeuer, any and all these must bee carefully scalded once a day, and set in the open ayre to sweeten, lest getting any taint of sowernesse into them, they corrupt the milke that shal be put therein. Sllng of Milke. But to proceede to my purpose, after your milke is come home, you shal as it were straine it from all vn∣cleane things, through a neate and sweete kept Syle∣dish, the forme whereof euery House-wife knowes, and the bottome of this Syle, through which the milke must passe, shall bee couered with a very cleane washt fine linnen cloth, such an one as will not suffer the least mote or haire to go through it; you shall into euery ves∣sell sye a pretty quantiy of mike, according to the pro∣portion of the vessell, the broader it is, and the shalower it is, the better it is, and yeeldeth euer the most creame, and keepeth the mike longest from sowring. Profis arising from milke. Now for the profit arsing from milke, they are three of especiall account, as Butter, Cheese, and Milke, to be eaten either simple or compounded: as for Curds, sowre Milke, or Wigge, they come from secondary meanes, and therefore may not bee numbred with these. Of Butter. For your Butter which onely proceedeth from the
Creame, which is the very heart and strength of Milke, it must be gathered very carefully, diligently, and paine∣fully. And though cleanlinesse be such an ornament to a Hous-wife, that if shee want any part thereof, shee loseth boh that and all good names else: yet in this action it must be more seriously imploied then in any other. Of fleting Creame. To beginne then with the fleeting or gathering of your Creame from the Milke, you shall doe it in this manner: the Milke which you doe milke in the morning you shall with a fine thinne shallow dish made for the purpose, take of the Creame about fiue of the clocke in the euening; and the Milke which you did milke in the euening, you shall fleete and take of the Creame aboute fiue of the clocke the next morning; and the creame so taken of, you shall put into a cleane sweete and well lea∣ded earthen pot close couered, and set in a coole place: And this creame so gathered you shall not keepe aboue two daies in the Summer,Of keeping Creame. and not aboue foure in the Winter, if you will haue the sweetest and best butter; and that your Dairy containe fiue Kine or more; but how many or few soeuer you keepe, you shal not by any meanes preserue your Creame aboue three daies in Summer, and not aboue sixe in the Winter. Of ourming Butter and the daies. Your Creame being neately and sweet kept, you shall chume or churne it on those vsuall daies which are fittest either for your vse in the house, or the mar∣kets adioyning neere vnto you, according to the purpose for which you keepe your Dairy. Now the daies most accustomable held amongst ordinary House-wiues, are Tuesday and Friday: Tuesday in the afternoone, to serue Wednesday morning market, and Friday morning to serue Saturday-market; for Wednesday and Satur∣day are the most generall market daies of this King∣dome,
and Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, the vsu∣all fasting dayes of the weeke; and so meetest for the vse of butter. Now for churming, take your creame and through a strong and cleane cloth straine it into the churme; and then couering the churme close, and set∣ting it in a place fit for the action in which you are im∣ploid (as in the Summer) in the coolest place of your dairy, and exceeding early in the morning▪ or very late in the euening, and in the Winter, in the warmest place of your dairy, and in the most temperate houres, as a∣bout noone, or a litte before or after, and so churne it, with swift strokes, marking the noise of the same which will be solid, heauy and intyre, vntill you heare it alter, and the sound is light, sharpe, and more spirity: and then you shall say that your butter breakes, which perceiued both by this sound, the lightnesse of the churne staffe, and the sparkes and drops, which will appeare yellow a∣bout the lippe of the churne, and clense with your hand both the lidde and inward sides of the churne, and ha∣uing put all together, you shall couer the churne againe, and then with easie strokes round, and not to the bot∣tome, gather the buter together into one intire lumpe and body, leauing no pieces thereof seuerall or vnioy∣ned. Helpes in churning. Now for as much as there be many mischiefes and inconueniences which may happen to butter in the churning, because it is a body of much tendernesse, and neither will endure much heate, not much cold: for if it be ouer-heated, it will looke white, crumble, and be bitter in taste, and if it be ouer-cold, it will not come at all, but make you waste much labour in vaine, which faults to helpe, if you chure your butter in the heate of Summer, it shall not be amisse, if during the time of your
chuning you place your churne in a paile of cold water as deepe as your Creame riseth in the churne; and in the churning thereof let your stroakes goe slow, and be sure that your churne be cod when you put in your Creame: but if you churne in the coldest time of win∣ter, you shall then put in your crame before the churne be cold, after it hath beene scalded; and you shall pce it within the aire of the fire, and churne it with as swift stroakes, and as fast as may be, for the much labouring thereof will keepe it in a continuall warmth, and thus you shall haue your butter good;The handling of butter. sweete, and according to your wish. After your butter is churnd, or churnd and gathered well together in your churne, you shall then open your churne, and with both your hands ga∣ther it well together, and take it from the butter-milke, and put it into a very cleane boule of wood, or panshion of earth sweetned for the purpose, and if you intend to spend the butter sweete and fresh, you shall haue your boule or panshion filled with very cleane water, and therein with your hand you shall worke the butter, tur∣ning and tossing it to and fro, till you haue by that la∣bour beaten & washt out all the butter-milke, & brought the butter to a firme substance of it selfe, without any o∣ther moisture:Clensing of butter. which done, you shall take the butter from the water, ad with the point of a knife scoch and slsh the butter ouer and ouer euery way so thicke as is possible, leauing no part through which your knife must not passe; for this will clense and fetch out the smallest haire or mote, or ragge of a strainer, and any other thing which by casuall meanes may happen to fall into it. Seasoning of butter. After this you shall spread the butter in a boule thin, and take so much salt as you shall thinke conuenient, which must by no meanes be much for sweete butter,
and sprinkle it thereupon, then with your hands worke the butter and the salt exceedingly well together, and then make it vp either into dishes, pounds, or halfe pounds at your pleasure. Of May butter. If during the moneth of May before you salt your butter you saue a lumpe thereof, and put it into a vessell, and so set it into the Sun the space of that moneth, you shall finde it exceeding soueraigne and medicinable for wounds, straines, aches, and such like grieuances. Of powdering vp o potting of butter. Touching the poudring vp or potting of butter, you shall by no meanes as in fresh butter wash the butter-milke out with water, but onely worke it cleere out with your hands: for water will make the butter rusty, or reesse; this done you shall weigh your butter, and know how many pounds there is thereof: for should you weigh it after it were salted, you would be decei∣ued in the weight: which done, you shall open the butter, and salt it very well and throughly, beating it in with your hand till it be generally disperst through the whole butter; then take cleane earthen pots, ex∣ceedingly well leaded least the brine should leake through the same, and cast salt into the bottome of it: then lay in your butter, and presse it downe hard within the same, and when your pot is filled, then couer the top thereof with salt so as no butter be seene: then closing vp the pot let it stand where it may be cold and safe: but if your Dairy be so little that you cannot at first fill vp the pot, you shall then when you haue potted vp so much as you haue, couer it all o∣uer with salt and pot the next quantity vpon it till the pot be full. Of great dai∣ries and their customes. Now there be Hous wiues whose Dairies being great, can by no meanes conueniently haue their butter con∣tained
in pots; as in Holland, Suffolke, Norfolke, and such like, and therefore are first to take barrels very close and well made, and after they hau salted it well, they fil their barrels therewith; then they take a small sticke, cleane and sweete, and therewith make diuers holes downe thorough the butter, eun to the bottome of the barrell: and then make a strong brine of water ad salt which will beare an egge, and after it is boyl'd, well skimm'd and cool'd; then powre it vpon the top of the butter till i swimme aboue the same, and so let it settle. Some vse to boyle in this brine a branch or two of Rosemary, and it is not amisse, but pleasant and wholesome. When to pot Butter. Now although you may at any time betwxt May and September pot vp butter, obseruing to doe it in the codest time of the morning: yet the most principall season of all is in the moneth of May onely▪ for then the aire is most temperate, and the butter will take salt the best and the east subiect to eesing. Vse of Butter milke. The best vse of buttermilke for the able House wife, is charitably to bestow it on the poore neighbours, whose wants doe dayly cry out for sustenance: and no doubt but she shall finde the profit thereof in a diuine place, as well as in her earthly businesse: But if her owne wants command her to vse it for her owne good, then she shall of her butter milke make curds,Of Butter milke Curds. in this mannr she shall take her butter-milke and put it into a cleane earthen vessell, which is much larger then to re∣ceiue the butter-milke onely; and looking vnto the quantity thereof, she shall take as it were a third part so much new mike, and set it on the fire, and when it is ready to rise, take it off and let it coole a little: then powre it into the buttermilk in the same manner as you
would make a posset, and hauing stirred it about, let it stand: then with a fine skummer, when you will vse the curds (for the longer it stands the better the curds will eate) take them vp into a cullander and let the whey drop well from it: and then eate them either wih Creame, Ale, Wine, or Beere: as for the whey, you may keepe it also in a sweete stone vessell: for it is that which is called Whigge,Of Whigge▪ and is an excellent coole drinke and a wholesome; and may very well be drunke a summer through in sted of any other drinke, and without doubt will slake the thirst of any labouring man as well, if not better. Of Cheese. The next maine profit which ariseth from the Dairy is cheese, of which there be diuerse kinds, as new milke, or morrow milke cheese, netle cheese, floaten milke cheese, and eddish, or after-math cheese, all which haue their seuerall orderings and compositions, as you shall perceiue by the discourse following: yet before I do be∣gin to speake of the making of the cheese, I will shew you how to order your Cheeselep-bag or Runnet▪ which is he most principall thing wherewith your cheese is compounded, and giueth the perfect tast vnto the same. Of the Chees∣le bagge or Runnet. The Cheeselep-bag or Runnet, whch is the stomacke bagge of a yong suckling calfe, which neuer tasted other food then milke, where the curd lieth vndisgested. Of these bagges you shall in the beginning of the yeare prouide your selfe good store, and first open the bag and powre out into a cleane vessell the curd and thcke substance thereof; but the rest which is not curdled you shall put away: then open the curd and picke out of it all manner of motes, chies of grasse, or other fith gotten into the same: Then wash the curd in so many cold waters, till it be as white and cleane from all
sorts of moates as is possible; then lay it on a cleane cloth that the water may draine from it, which done, ley it in another dry vessell, then take a handfull or two of salt and rubbe the curd therewith exceedingly: then take your bagge and wash it also in diuerse cold waters till it be very cleane, and then put the curd and the salt vp into the bag, the bagge being also well rub'd within with salt: and so put it vp, and salt the outside also all o∣uer: and then close vp the pot close, and so keepe them a full yeare before you vse them. For touching the han∣ging of them vp in chimney corners (as course House-wiues do) is sluttish, naught, and vnwholesome, and the spending of your runnet whilst it is new, makes your cheese heaue and proue hollow. Seasoning of the runnet. When your runnet or earning is fit to be vsed, you shall season it after this manner; you shall take the bag you intend to vse, and opening it, put the curd into a stone morter or a bowle, and with a wooden pestle or a roling pinne beate it exceedingly; then put to it the yelkes of two or three egges, and halfe a pint of the thickest and sweetest creame you can fleete from your milke, with a peny-worth of saffron finely dried and beaten to powder, together with a little Cloues and Mace, and stirre them all passing well together till they appeare but as one substance, and then put it vp in the bagge againe: then you shall make a very strong brine of water and salt, and in the same you shall boile a handfull or two of Saxifrage, and then when it is cold cleare it into a cleane earthen vessell; then take out of the bag halfe a dosen spoonfull of the former curd and mixe it with the brine, then closing the bagge vp againe close hang it within the brine, and in any case also steepe in your brine a few Wall-nut-tree leaues, and so keepe
your runnet a fortnight after before you vse it; and in this manner dresse all your bagges so, as you may euer haue one ready after another, and the youngest a fort∣night olde euer at the least, for that will make the ear∣ning quicke and sharpe, so that foure spoonefuls there∣of will suffice for the gathering and seasoning of at last twelue gallons of milke, and this is the choysest and best earning which can possible be made by any House-wife. To make a new Mike heese compound. To make a new milke or morning milke Cheese, which is the best cheese made ordinarily in our King∣dome; you shall take your milke early in the morning as it comes from the Cow, and syle it into a cleane tubbe, then take all the creame also from the milke you milkt the euening before, and straine it into your new mike: then take a pretty quantity of cleane water, and hauing made it scalding hot, poure it into the milke also to scald the creame and it together, then let it stand, and coole it with a dish til it be no more then lukewarme; then go to the pot where your earning bags hangs, and daw from thence so much of the earning without stirring of the bag, as will serue for your proportion of milke, & straine it therein very carefully; for if the least mote of the curd of the earning fal into the cheese, it will make the cheese rot and mould, when your earnings is put in you shall couer the milke, and so let it stand halfe an howre or thereabouts; for if the earning be good it will come in that space; but if you see it doth not, then you shall put in more: being come, you shall with a dish in your hand breake and mashe the curde together, possing and turning it about diuersly: which done, with the flat pames of your hands very gently presse the curde downe into the bottome of the tubbe, then with
a thinne dish take the whey from it as cleane as you can, and so hauing prepared your Cheese-fat answerable to the proportion of your curd with both your hands ioy∣ned together, put your curd therein and breake it and presse it down hard into the fat till you haue fild it; then lay vpon the top of the curd your flat Cheese boord, and a little small weight thereupon, that the whey may drop from it into the vnder vessell; when it hath done dropping, take a large Cheese cloth, and hauing wet it in the cold water, lay it on the Cheese-boord, and then turne the Cheese vpon it; then lay the cloth into the Cheese-fat: and so put the Cheese therein againe, and with a thin slice thrust the same downe close on euery side: then laying the cloth also ouer the top to lay on the Cheese boord, and so carry it to your great presse, and there presse it vnder a sufficient waight: after it hath beene there prest halfe an houre, you shall take i and turne it into a dry cloth, and put it into the presse againe, and thus you shall turne it into dry cloaths at least fiue or sixe times in the first day, and euer put it vner the presse againe, not taking it there from, till the next day in the euening at soonest, & the last time it is turned, you shall turne it into the dry fat without any cloth at all. When it is prest sufficiently and taken from the fat, you shall then lay it in a kimnell, and rub it first on the one side, and then on the other with salt, and so let it e all that night, then the next morning, you shall doe the like againe, and so turne it vpon the brine, which comes from the salt two or three dayes or more, according to the bignesse of the Cheese, and then lay it vpon a faire table or shefe to drie, forgetting not euery day once to rubbe it all ouer with a cleane cloth, and then to turne it, till such time that it be throughly drie, and fit to goe
into the Cheese hecke: ad in this manner of drying you must obserue to lay it first where it may dry hastily, and after where it may dry at more leysure: thus may you make the best and most principall cheese. A Cheese of two meales. Now if you will make Cheese of two meales, as your mornings new milke, and the euenings Creame, milke and all you shall doe but the same formerly rehearsed. And if you will make a simple morrow milke Cheese, which is all of newe milke and nothing else,Cheese of one meale. you shall then doe as is before declared, onely you shall put in your earning so soone as the milke is fild (if it haue any warmth int) and not scald it: but if the warmth be lost you shall put it into a kettle and giue it the ayre of the fire. Of Nettle Cheese. If you will haue a very dainty nettle Cheese, which is the finest summer cheese which can bee eaten; you shall doe in all things as was formerly taught in the new milke cheese compound; Onely you shall put the curde into a very thinne cheese-fat, not aboue halfe an inch or a little better deepe at the most, and then when you come to dry them assoone as it is drained from the brine, you shall lay it vpon fresh nettles and couer it all ouer with the same; and so lying where they may feele the ayre, let them ripen therein, ob∣seruing to renew your nettles once in two danes, and euery time you renewe them, to turne the cheese or cheeses, and to gather your Nettles as much without stalkes as may be, and to make the bed both vnder and a oft as smooth as may be, for the more euen and fewer wrinkles that your cheese hath, the more dainty is your House-wife accounted. Of floaten-milk Cheese. If you will make floaten milke cheese, which is the coursest of all cheses, you shall take some of the milke
and heate it vpon the fire to warme all the rest: but if it be so sowre that you dare not aduenture the warming of it for feare of breaking, then you shall heate water, and with it warme it; then put in your earning as before shewed, and gather it, presse it, salt it, and dry it as you did all other Cheeses. Of edd Cheese. Touching your eddish Cheese or winter Cheese, there is not any difference betwixt it and your summer Cheese touching the making thereof onely, because she season of the yeere denieth a kindly drying or hardning thereof, it dffeth much in taste, and will be soft al∣waies; and of these eddih Cheeses you may make as many kinds as of summer Cheeses, as of one meae, two meales, or of milke that is floaten. Of Whey and the profits. When you haue made your Cheese, you shall then haue care of the Whey, whose generall vse differeth not from that of butter milke, for either you shall preserue it to bestow on the poore, because it is a good drinke for the labouring mn, or keepe it to make curds out of it, or lastly to nourish and bring vp your swine. Of Whey curds. If you will make curds of your best Whey, you shall set it vpon the fire, and being ready to boyle, you shall put into it a pretty quantit of butter-milke, and then as you see the Curds arising vp to the top of the Whey, with a skummer skim them off, and put them into a Cullender, and then put in more butter milke, and thus doe whilest you can see any Curds arise; then the Whey being drained cleare from them, put them in∣to a cleane vessel, and so serue them forth as occasion shall serue.
CHAP. 7. The Office of the Malster, and the seuerall secrets, and knowledges belonging to the making of Malt. IT is most requisite and fit that our Hous-wife be experienced and well practised in the well making of Malt, both for the necessary and continuall vse there∣of, as also for the generall profit whlch accrueth and ariseth to the Husband, Hous wife, and the whole family: for as from it is made the drinke, by which the houshold is nourished and sus∣tained, so to the fruitfull husbandman (who is the ma∣ster of rich ground, and much tillage) it is an excellent merchandize, & a commodite of so great trade, that not alone especiall Townes and Counties are maintained thereby, but also the whole Kingdom, and diuers others of our neighboring Nations. This office or place of knowledge belongeth particularly to the Hous wife; and though we haue many excellent Men-malsters, yet it is properly the worke and care of the woman, for it is a house-worke, and done altogether within dores, where generally lieth her charge; the Man only ought to bring in, and to prouide the graine, and excuse her from por∣tage or too heauy but hens, but for the Art of making the Malt, & the seuerall labours appertaining to the same, euen from the Fat to th Kilne it is onely the worke of the Hous-wife and the Maid seruants to her appertai∣ning. Election of o Crne for Malt. To begin then with the first knowledge of our Mal∣ster, it consisteth in the election and choise of graine fit to make Mlton, of which there are indeed iuely but two kinds, that is to say, Baley, which is of all
other the most excellent for this purpose; and Oates, which when Barly is scant or wanting, maketh also a good and sufficient Malt: and though the drinke which is drawne from it be neither so much in the quantity, so strong in the substance, nor yet so pleasant in the taste, yet is the drinke very good and tolerable, and nourish∣ing enough for any reasonable creature. Now I doe not deny, but there may be made Malt of Wheate, Pease, Lupins, Fetches & such like, yet it is with vs of no retai∣ned custome, nor is the drinke simply drawne or exrac∣ted from those graines, either wholsome or pleasant, but strong and fulsome; therefore I thinke it not fit to spend any time in treating of the same. To speake then of the election of Barly, you shall vnderstand that there be di∣uers kinds thereof, according to the alteration of soyes, some being big, some little, some full, some empty, some white, some browne, and some yellow: but I will reduce all these into three kinds, that is, into the Clay Barly, the Sand-Barly, and the Barly which groweth on te mixt soyle. Now the best Barly to make Malt on, both for yeelding the greatest quantity of matter, and ma∣king the strongest, best and most wholesome drinke, is the Clay-Barly well drest, being cleane Corne of it selfe, without weede o Oates, white of colour, full in substance, and sweete in taste: that which groweth on the mixt grounds is the next; for though it be subiect to some Oates and some Weedes: yet being painefully and carefully drest, it is a faire and a bould come, great and full; and though somewhat browner then the for∣mer, yet it is of a faire and cleane complexion. The last and worst graine for this purpose is the Sand-Barly, for although it be seldome or neuer mixt with Oates, yet if the tilage be not painefully and cunningy handled,
it is much subiect to weedes of diuerse kinds, as tares, fetches, and such like, which drinke vp the liquor in the brewing, and make the yeeld or quantity thereof very little and vnprofitable: besides, the graine naturally of it selfe hath a yellow, withered, empty huske, thicke and vnfurnished of meale, so that the drinke drawne from it can neither be so much, so strong, so good, nor so pleasant; so that to conclude, the cleane Clay barley is best for profit in the sale drinke for strength and long lasting. The Barley in the mixt grounds will serue well for housholds and famlies: and the sandy barey for the poore, and in such places where better is not to be got∣ten. And these are to be knowne of euery Husband or House-wife: the first by his whitenesse, greatnesse and fulnesse: the second by his brownenesse, and the third by his yellownesse, with a darke browne nether ende, and the emptinesse and thicknesse of the huske (and in this eection of Barley) you shall note, that if you finde in it any wild oates, it is a signe of a rich clay-ground, but ill husbanded, yet the malt made thereof is not much amisse, for both the wilde oate and the perfit oate giue a pleasant sharpe rellish to the drinke, if the quan∣tity be not too much, which is euermore to be respe∣cted. And to conclude this matter of election, great care must be had of both Husband and House-wife▪ that the barey chosen for malt, be exceeding swete, both in smell and taste, and very cleane drest: for any cor∣ruption maketh the malt loathsome, and the foule dres∣sing affordeth much losse. Of th Malt-house, and the situation. After the skilfull election of graine for malt, the House-wife is to looke to the situation, goodnesse and apt accommodation of the Malt-house; for in that con∣sisteth
both much of the skill, and much of the profit: for the generall situation of the house, it would (as neere as can be) stand vpon firme dry ground, hauing pro∣spect euery way, with open windowes and lights to let in the Wind, Sunne, and Ayre, which way the Malster pleaseth, both to coole and comfort the graine at pleasure, and also close-shuts or draw-win∣dowes to neepe out the Frosts and Stormes, which are the onely lets and hinderances for making the malt good and perfect, for the modell or fome of these houses, some are made round, with a court in the middle, some long, and some square, but the round is the best, and the least laborious; for the Cesternes or Fats being placed (as it were) at the head, or beginning of the circkle, and the pumpe or well (but the pumpe is best) being close adioyning, or at least by conuey∣ance of troughes made as vsefull as if it were neere ad∣ioyning, the Corne being steept, may with one per∣sons labour and a shouell, be cast from the fat, or ce∣sterne to the flowre and there coucht; then when the couch is broken it may in the turning either with the hand or the shouell, be carried in such a circular house round about from one flowre to another, till it come to the kilne, which would also be placed next ouer against the pumpe and cesternes, and all contained vn∣der one rooffe; and thus you may empty steeping af∣ter steeping, and carrie them with one persons labour from flowre to flowre, till all the flowres be fild: in which circular motion you shall finde, that euer that which was first steept, shall first come to the Kilne, and so consequently one after another in such sort as they were steeped, and your worke may euermore be constant, and your flowres at no time empty but
at your owne pleasure, and all the labour done onely with the hand and shouell, without carrying or re∣carrying, or lifting heauie burthens, is both trouble∣some and offensiue, and not without much losse, be∣cause in such cases euer some graine scattereth. Now ouer against the Kilne-hole or Furnace (which is euermore intended to bee on the ground) should a conuenient place be made to pile the fuell for the Kilne, whether it bee Strawe, Bracken, Furres, Wood, Coale, or other fewell; but sweete Straw is of all other the best and nearest. Now it is intended that this mault-house may be made two Stories in height, but no higher: ouer your Cesternes shall be made the Garners wherein to keepe your Barley before it be stee∣ped: in the bottomes of these Garners, standing di∣rectly ouer the Cesternes, shall bee conuenient holes made to open and shut at pleasure, through which shall runne downe the Barley into the Cesterne. Ouer the bed of the Kilne can bee nothing but the place for the Haire cloth, and a spacious roofe open euery way, that the smoake may haue free passage, and with the least ayre bee carried from the Kilne, which maketh the malte sweete and pleasant. Ouer that place where the fewell is piled, and is next of all to the bed of the Kilne, would likewise bee other spacious Gar∣ners made, some to receiue the Malte assoone as it is dried with the Come and Kilne-dust, in which it may lye to mellow and ripen; and others to receiue the Malt after it is skreened and drest vp; for to let it bee too long in the Come, as aboue three moneths at lon∣gest, will make it both corrupt, and breede Weeuels and other Wormes, which are the greatest destroyers of malt that may be. And these garners should be so conue∣niently
plac't before the front of the Kilne-bed, that either with the shouell or a small scuttle you may cast, or carrie the malt once dryed into the Garners. For the other part of the flowers, they may be imployed as the ground flowers are for the receiuing of the malt when it comes from the cesterne: and in this manner, and with these accommodations you may fashion any malt-house either round, long, square, or of what proportion soeuer, as either your estate, or the conue∣nience of the ground you haue to build on shall admi∣inister. Of Malt-flowers. Next to the cite or proportion of the ground, you shall haue a principall care for the making of your malt-flowers, in which (all the custome, and the nature of the soile binds many times a man to sundry inconueniences, and that a man must necessarily build according to the matter he hath to build withal, from whence ariseth the many diuersities of malt flowers) yet you shall vnder∣stand, that the generall best malt-flowre, both for Sum∣mer and Winter, and all seasons, is the caue or vaulted arch which is hewed out of a drye and mayne greetie rocke, for it is both warme in Winter, coole in Summer, and generally comfortable in all seasons of the yeare whatsoeuer. For it is to be noted, that all be House wiues do giue ouer the making of malt in the extreame heate of Summer, it is not because the malt is worse that is made in Summer then that which is made in winter, but because the flowres are more vnseasonable, and that the Sunne getting a power into such open places maketh the graine which is steeped to sproue and com so swifly, that it cannot indure to tak tim on the flowre, and get the right seasning which belongeth to the same: wher∣as these kind of vaults being dry, and as it were coucht
vnder the ground, not onely keepeth out the Sunne in Summer, which maketh the Malt come much too fast, but also defendeth it from frosts and colde bit∣ter blastes in sharpe Winters, which will not suffer it to come, or sproute at all; or if parte doe come and sproute, as that which lyeth in the heart of the bed; yet the vpper partes and outside by meanes of extreame colde cannot sproute: but being againe dryed, hath his first hardnesse, and is one and the sme with rawe Barley; for euery House wife must knowe, that if malt do not come as it were altogether▪ and at an instant, and not one come more than another, the malt must needes be very much imperfect: The next flower to the Caue, or drye sandy Rocke, is the flower which is made of earth, or a stiffe strong binding Claye well watered, and mixt with Horse-dung, and Soape-ashes, beaten and wrought together, till it come to one sol∣lide firmenesse; this Flower is a very warme comfor∣table Flower in the Winter season, and will helpe the graine to come and sproute exceedingly, and with the helpe of windowes to let in the colde ayre, and to shut out the violent reflection of the Sunne, will serue ve∣ry conueniently for the making of malt, for nine mo∣nethes in the yeare, that is to say, from September till the ende of May, but for Iune, Iuly, and August, to imploye it to that purpose, will breede both losse, and ncumbrance: The next Flower to this of earth, is that which is made of plaster, or plaster of paris, be∣ing burnt in a seasonable time, and kept from wet, till the tme of shooting, and then smoothly layde, and well levelled; the imperfection of the plaster flower is onely the extreame coldnesse thereof, which in frosty and cold seasons, so bindeth in the heart of the graine,
that it cannot sproute, for which cause it behooueth euery Malster that is compelled to these Flowers, to looke well into the seasons of the yeere, and when hee findeth either the Frostes, Northerne blasts, or other ipping stormes to rage too violently, then to make his first couches or beds, when the graine commeth newly out of the Cesterne, much thicker and rounder then otherwise hee would doe; and as the colde aba∣teth, or the corne increaseth in sprouting, so to make couches or beds thinner and thinner, for the thicker and closer the graine is coucht and layde together, the warmer it lyeth; and so catching heate, the sooner it sprouteth, and the thinner it lyeth the cooler it is, and so much the flower in sprouting. This flowre, if the windowes be close, and guard of the Sunne suffici∣ently, will (if necessity compell) serue for the making of Malt ten moneths in the yeare, onely in Iuly and August which containe the Dogge-dayes, it would not be imployed, not in the time of any Frost, with∣out great care and circumpection. Againe, there is in this flowre another fault, which is a naturall casting out of dust, which much sullieth the graine, and being dried, makes it looke dun and foule, which is much disparagement to the Maltster; therefore she must haue great care that when the malt is taken away, to sweepe and keepe her flowers as cleane and neate as may be. The last and worst is the boarded flower, of what kind soeuer it be, by reason of the too much heate thereof, and yet of boarded flowers the Oken boarded is the coolest and longest lasting; the Eme or Beech is next; then the Ashe, and the worst (though it bee the fairest to the eye) is the Firre, for it hath in it selfe (by reason of the Frankensence and
Turpentine which it holdeth) a naturall heate, which mixed with the violence of the Sunne in the Summer∣time, forceth the graine not onely to sproute, but to grow in the couch, which is much losse, and a foule m∣putation. Now these boarded flowers can hardly be in vse for aboue fiue moneths at the most, that is to say, October, Nouember, December, Ianuary and February: for the rest, the Sunne hath too much strength, and these boarded flowers too much warmth and therefore in the coolest times it is good to obserue  make the couches thinne, whereby the ayre may passe thorough the corne, and so coole it, that it may sproue at leasure. Imperfect Flowers. Now for any other flower besides these alreadie named, there is not any good to malt vpon; for the common flowre which is of naturall earth, whether it be Claye, Sand or Grauell, if it haue no mixture at all with it more then it owne nature, by oft treading vpon it, groweth to gather the nature of saltnesse or Salt-peter into it, which not onely giueth an ill taste to the graine that is layde vpon the same, but also his moysture and moldinesse, which in the moyst tmes of the yeare arise from the ground, it often corrupteth and putrifieth the corne. The rough paued flowre by reason of the vneuennesse, is vnfit to malt on, because the graine getting into the crannis, doth there lye, and are not remoued or turned vp and downe as they shoud be with the hand, but many times is so fixed to the ground, it sprouteth and groweth vp into a greene blade, affoording much losse and hinderance to the owner. The smooth paued flowre, or any flowre of stone whatsoeuer, is full as ill; for euery one of them natu∣rally against much wet o chaunge of weather, will
sweate and distil forth such abundant moisture, that the Malt lying vpon the same, can neither dry kindly and expell the former moisture receiued in the csterne, but also by that ouer much moisture many times rot∣teh, and comes to altogether vselesse. Lastly, for the flower made of Lime and Haire, it is as ill as any former∣ly spoken of, both in respect of the nature of the Lime, whose heate and sharpnes is a maine enemy to Malt, or any moist corne, as also in respect of the weaknes and brittlenes of the substance thereof, being apt to molder and fall in pieces with the lightest treading on the same, and that lime and dust once mixing with the corne, it doth so poison and suffocate it, that it can neither sprout, nor turne seruiceable for any vse. Of the Kilne and th ul∣ding thereof. Next vnto the Malt flowers, our Malster shall haue a great care in the framing and fashioning of the Kilne, of which there are sundry sorts of moddles, as the anci∣ent forme which was in times past vsed of our fore-fa∣thers, being onely made in a square proportion at the top with small spnts or rafters, ioyned within foure inches one of another going from a maine beame cros∣sing the mid part of that great square: then is this great square from the top, with good and sufficient studds to be drawne slope wise narrower and narrower, till it come to the ground, so that the harth or low∣est part thereof may be not aboue a sixth part to the great square aboue, on which the Malt is laid to be dred, and this harth shall be made hollow and de∣scending, and not leuell nor ascending: and these Kilns doe not hold an certaine quantity in the vpper square, but may euer be accordig to the frame of the house, some being thirty foot each way, some twenty, and some eighteene. There be other Kilnes which are made afer
this manner open and slope, but they are round of pro∣portion; but both these kind of Kilnes haue one fault, which is danger of fire; for lying euery way open and apt for the blaze, if the Malster be any thing negligent either in the keeping of the blaze low and forward, or not sweeping euery part about the harth any thing that may take fire, or foreseeing that no strawes which doe belong to the bedding of the Kilne do hang downe, or are loose, whereby the fire may take hold of them, it is very possible that the Kilne may be set on fire, to the great losse and often vndoing of the owner. The perfect Kilne. Which to preuent, and that the Malster may haue better assurance and comfort in her labour, there is a Kilne now of generall vse in this Kingdome, which is called a French Kilne, being framed of a Bricke, Ash∣ler, or other fire-stone, according to the nature of the soyle in which Husbands and Hous wiues liue: and this French Kilne is euer safe and secure from fire, and whether the Malster wake or sleepe, without extreame wilfull negligence, there can no danger come to the Kilne; and in these Kilnes may be burnt any kind of fewell whatsoeuer, and neither shall the smoke offend or breed ill taste in the Malt, nor yet discolour it, as many times it doth in open Kilnes, where the Malt is as it were, couered all ouer, and euen paboyld in smoke: so that of all sorts of Kilnes whatsoeuer, this which is called the French Kilne, is to be preferred and onely embraced. Of the forme or mode whereof, I will not here stand to entreat, because they are now so ge∣nerally frequent amongst vs, that not a Mason or Carpenter in the whole Kingdome but can bud the sme; so that to vse more words thereof were tedious∣nesse to little purpose. Now there is anther kind of
Kilne which I haue seene (and but in the West-country onely) which for the profitable quaintnesse thereof, I tooke some especiall note of, and that was a Kilne made at the end of a Kitchin Raunge or Chimney, being in shape round, and made of Bricke, with a little hol∣lownesse narrowed by degrees▪ into which came from the bottome and midst of the Kitchin-chimney a hol∣low tunell or vault, like the tunnell of a Chimny, and  directly on the backe side, the hood or backe of the Kitchin chimney; then in the midst of the Chim∣ney, where the greateh strength of the fire was made, was a quare hole made of about a foote and a halfe e∣uey way, with an Iron thicke plate to draw to and fro, opening and closing the hole at pleasure; and this hole doth open onely into that tunnell which went to the Kilne, so that the Malt being once laid, and spread vpon the Kilne, draw away the Iron plate, and the or∣dinary fire with which you dresse your meate, and performe other necessary businesses, is suckt vp into this tunnell, and so conuaieth the heate to the Kilne, where it drieth the Malt with as great perfection, as a∣ny Kilne I saw in my life, and needeth neither atten∣dance or other ceremony more, then once in fiue or sixe houres to turne the Malt, and take it away when it is dried sufficiently: for it is here to be noted, that how great or violent soeuer the fire be which is in the Chimney, yet by reason of the passage, and the quan∣tity thereof, it carrieth no more but a moderate heate to the Kilne; and for the smoke, it is so carried away in other loope-holes which runne from the hollownesse betweene the tunnell and the Malt-bed, that no Malt in the world can possibly be sweeter, or more delicate∣ly coloured▪ onely the fault of these Kilns are, that they
are but little in compasse, and so cannot dry much at a time, as not aboue a quarter or ten strike at the most in one drying, and therefore are no more but for a mas owne particular vse, and for the furnishing of one set∣led family; but so applied, they exceede all the Kilnes that I haue seene whatsoeuer. When our Malster hath thus persited the Malt house and Kilne, then next looke to the well bedding of the Kilne, which is diuersly done according to mens diuers opinions; for some vse one thing, and some another, us the necessity of the place, or mens particular profits draw them. But first to shewe you what the bedding of a Kilne is, you shall vnderstand, that it is a thinne couering laid vpon the open rafters, which are next vnto the heate of the fire; being made either so thinne or so open, that the smallest heate may passe thorow it, and come to the corne: this bed must be laid so euen and le∣uell as may be, and not thicker in one place then ano∣ther, least the Malt drie too fast where it is thinnest, and too slowly where it is thicke, and so in the taste seeme to bee of two seuerall dryings: it must also be made of such stuffe, as hauing receiued heate, it will long continue the same, and be an assistant to the fire in drying the corne: it should also haue in it no moyst or dankish propertie, least at the first receiuing of the fire, it send out a stinking smoke, and so taint the malt: nor should it be of any rough or sharpe substance, be∣cause vpon this bed or bedding is laid the haire-cloth, and on the haire-cloth the malt, so that with the turning the malt, and treading vpon the cloth, should the bed be of any such roughnesse, it would soone weare out the haire-cloth, which would be both
losse and ill House-wifery, which is carefully to be es∣chewed. But now for the matter or substance whereof this bidding should be made, the best, nearest, and sweetest, is cleane long Rye straw, with the eares onely cut off, and the ends layd euen together, not one longer then another▪ and so spread vpon the rafter of the Kilne as euen and thinne as may be, and layd as it were straw by straw in a iust proportion, where skill and industry may make it thin or thicke at pleasure, as but the thick∣nesse of one straw, or of two, three, foure or fiue, as shall seeme to your iudgement most conuenient, and then this, there can be nothing more euen, more drye, sweete, or open to let in the heate at your pleasure: and although in the olde open Kines it be subiect to daun∣ger of fire, by reason of the quickenesse to receiue the flame, yet in the French Kilnes (before mentio∣ned) it is a most safe bedding, for not any fire can come neere vnto it. There bee others which bed the Kine with Mat; and it is not much to bee misliked, if the Mat be made of Rye straw sowed, and wouen together according to the manner of the Indian Mats, or those vsuall thinne Bent Mats, which you shall commonly see in the Summer time, standing in Hus∣bandmens Chimneyes, where one bent or straw is layde by another, and so wouen together with a good strong packe-thread: but these Ms according to the ode Prouerbe (More cost more Worshippe) for they are chargeable to be bought, and very trouble∣sme in the making, and in the wearing will not out∣last one of the former loose beddings; for foe thread or stitch breake, immediately most in that owe will followe: onely it is most certaine, that during the
time it lasteth it is both good, necessary and handsome. But if the matt be made either of Bulrushes, Flaggs, or any other thicke substance (as for the most part they are) then it is not so good a bedding, both be∣cause the thicknesse keepeth out the heate, and is long before it can be warmed; as also in that it euer be∣ing cold, naturally of it selfe draweth into it a cer∣taine moysture, which with the first heate being ex∣pelled in smoke, doth much offend and breed ill taste in the malt. There be others that bed the Kilne with a kinde of matt made of broad thinne splints of wood wrought checker-wise one into another, and it hath the same faults which the thicke matt hath; for it is long in catching the heate, and will euer smoke at the first warming, and that smoke will the malt smell on euer after; for the smoke of wood is euer more sharpe and piercing then any other smoke whatsoe∣uer. Besides this wooden matt, after it hath once bedded the Kilne, it can hardly afterward bee taken vp or remoued; for by continuall heate, being brought to such an extreame drienesse, if vpon any occasion either to mend the Kilne, or clense the Kilne, or doe other necessary labour vnderneath the bedding, you shall take vp the wooden matt, it would presently cracke and fall to pieces, and be no more seruiceable. There be others which bed the Kilne with a bedding made all of wickers, of small wands foulded one into another like a hurdle, or such like wand-worke; but it is made very open, euery wand at least two or three fingers one from another▪ and this kind of bedding is a very strong kind of bedding, and will last long, and catcheth the hat t the fist springing, onely the smoke is offensiue, and the ounesse without great care vsed,
will soone weare out your haire-cloth: yet in such pla∣ces where straw is not to be got or spared, and that you are compelled onely to vse wood for your fuell in dry∣ing your Malt, I allow this bedding before any other, for it is very good, strong and long-lasting: besides, it may be taken vp & set by at pleasure, so that you may sweepe and clense your Kilne as oft as occasion shall serue, and in the neate and fine keeping of the Kilne, doth consist much of the Hous-wiues Art; for to be choakt either with dust, durt, soote or ashes, as it shewes sluttishnesse and sloth, the onely great imputations hanging ouer a Hous-wife, so they likewise hinder the labou, and make the malt dry a greatdeale worse, and more vnkind∣ly. Of fuell for the drying of alt. Next the bedding of the Kilne, our Malster by all meanes must haue an especiall are with what fuell shee dryeth the Malt; for commonly according to that it euer receiueth and keepeth the taste, if by some es∣peciall Art in the Kilne that anoyance be not taken a∣way. To speake then of Fewels in generall, they are of diuers kinds according to the naures of soyles, and the accommodation of places in which men liue; yet the bed and most principall fewell for the Klnes (both for sweetnesse, gentle heate, and perfect drying) is ei∣ther good Wheate-straw, Rye-straw, Barley-straw, or Oaten-straw; and of these the Wheat-straw is the best, because it is most substantiall, longest lasting, makes the sharpest fire, and yeelds the least flame: the next is Rie-straw, then Oaten-straw, and last Barley-straw, which by reason it is shortest, lightest, least la∣sting, and giueth more blaze then heate, it is last of these white straws to be chosen; where any of these faile, or are scarce, you may take the stubble or after-crop
of them, when the vpper part is shorne away; which being well dried and housed, is as good as any of the rest already spoken of, and lesse chargeable, because it is not sit for any better purpose as to make fodder, meaure, or such like, of more then ordinary thatching, and so fittest for this purpose. Next to these white strawes, your long Fenne-ushes, being very exceedingly well withered and dried, and all the sappie moysture got∣ten out of them, and so either safely housed or stac∣ked, are the best fuell: for they make a very substan∣tiall fire, and much lasting, neither are apt to much blazing, nor the smoke so sharpe or violent but may ve∣ry well be endured: where all these are wanting, you may take the straw of Pease, Fetches, pis, or Tares, any of which will serue, yet the smoke is apt to taint, and the fire without preuention drieth too sud∣denly and swiftly. Next to these is cleane Beane-straw, or straw mixt of Beanes and Pease together; but this must be handled with great discretion, for the substance containeth so much heate, that it will rather burne then drie, if it be not moderated, and the smoke is also much offensiue. Next to this beane-straw is your urrs, Gorse, Whinnes, or small Brush-wood, which dif∣fereth not much from Beane-straw; onely the smoke is much sharper, and tainteth the Malt with a much stronger sauour. To these I may adde Braken or Braks, Ling, Heath, or Brome, all which may serue in time of necessity, but each one of them haue this fault, that they adde to the Malt an ill taste or sauour. After these I place Wood of all sorts, for each is alike noysome, and if the smoke which commeth from it touch the Malt, the infection cannot be recouered; from whence a∣mongst the best Husbands haue sprung this opinion,
that when at any time drinke is ill tasted, they say straight, it was made of Wood-dried Malt. And thus you see the generality of fuels, their vertues, faults, and how they are to be imployed. Now for Coale of all kinds, Turfe or Peate, they are not by any meanes to be vsed vnder Kilnes, except where the furnaces are so subtilly made, that the smoke is conuaied a quite contra∣ry way, and neuer commeth neere the Malt; in that case it skilleth not what fuell you vse, so it be durable and cheape it is fit for the purpose, onely great regard must be had to the gentlenesse of the fire; for as the old Prouerb is (Soft fire makes sweet Malt) so too rash and hasty a fire scorcheth and burneth it, which is cal∣led amongst Malsters Firefangd; and such Malt is good for little or no purpose: therefore to keepe a temperate and true fire, is the onely Art of a most skilfull Malt∣ste. When the Kilne is thus made and furnished of all ne∣cessaries duely belonging to the same, our malsters next care shall bee to the fashioning and making of the Garnets, Hutches, or Holds in which both the malt after it is dried, and the Barley before it be stee∣ped, is to be kept and preserued; and these Garners or Safes for Corne are made of diuers fashions, and diuers matters, as some of Boords, some of Brickes, some of Stone, some of Lime and Haire, and some of mud, Clay or Loame: but all of these haue their seuerall faults; for Wood of all kinds breedeth W¦uell and Wormes which destroy the Graine, and is indeed much too hot: for although malt would euer be kept passing drie, yet neuer so little ouer-plus of heate withers it, and takes away the vertue; for as moysture rots and corrupts it, so heate takes away and
decayeth the substance. Bricke, because it is layde with Lime, is altogether vnwholesome, for the Lime being apt at change of weather to sweate, moysteneth the graine, and so tainteth it, and in the driest seasons with the sharpe hot taste, doth fully as much offend it: those which are made of Stone are much more noy∣some, both in respect of the reasons before rehearsed, as also in that all Stone of it selfe will sweate, and so more and more corrupteth the graine which is harbou∣red in it. Lime and haire being of the same nature, car∣rieth the same offences, and is in the like sort to be es∣chewed. Now for mud, clay, or loame, in as much as they must necessarily be mixed with wood, because o∣therwise of themselues they cannot knit or binde toge∣ther, and besides, that the clay or loame must be mixt either with chopt hey, chopt straw, or chopt Litter, they are as great breeders of Wormes and vermine as wood is, nor are they defences against mice, but easie to be wrought through, and so very vnprofitable for any Husband or House-wife to vse. Besides, they are much too hot, and beeing either in a close house neere the kilne, or the backe or face of any other Chimney, they drye the corne too sore, and make it dwindle and wither, so that it neither filleth the bushell, nor inricheth the liquor, but turnes to losse euery way. The best Garner then that can bee made both for safety and profite, is to be made either of broken tile-shread, or broken brickes, cunningly and euen layd, & bound together with Plaster of Paris, or our ordinary English Plaster, or burnt Alablaster, and then couered all ouer both within and without, in the botome and on euery side, at least three fingers thicke with the same Plaster, so as no bricke or tyle-shread may by
any meanes bee seene, or come neere to touch the Corne; and these Garners you may make as bigge, or as little as you please, according to the frame of your house, or places of most conuenience for the purpose, which indeed would euer be as neere the Kilne as may be, that the ayre of the fire in the dayes of drying may come vnto the same, or else neere the backes or sides of Chemneyes, where the ayre thereof may correct the extreame coldnesse of the plaster, which of al things that are bred in the earth, is the coldest thing that may be, and yet most dry, and not apt to sweat, or take moysture but by some violent extremity, nei∣ther will any worme or vermine come neere it, because the great coldnesse thereof is a mortall enemy to their natures, and so the safest and longest these Garners of plaster keepe all kinde of Graine and Pulse in the best perfection. The making of Cesternes. After these Garners, Hutches, or large Keepes for Corne are perfitted and made, and fitly adioyned to the Kilne, the next thing that our Maultster hath to looke vnto, is the framing of the Fatts or Cesternes, in which the Corne is to be steeped, and they are of two sorts, that is, either of Coopers worke, being great Fatts of wood, or else of Masons worke, beeing Cesternes made of stone; but the Cesterne of stone is much the better, for besides that these great Fatts of Wood are very chargeable and costly (as a Fatte to containe foure quarters of graine, which is but two and thirty bushels, cannot be affoorded vnder twenty shillings) so likewise they are very casuall and apt to mischaunce and spilling; for and besides their ordina∣ry wearing, if in the heate of Summer they be neuer
so little neglected without water, and suffered to be ouer-drye, it is tenne to one but in the Winter they will bee ready to fall in peeces; and if they bee kept moyst, yet if the water bee not oft shifted and preser∣ued sweete, the Fatte will soone taynt, and beeing once growne faultie, it is not onely irrecouerable, but also whatsoeuer commeth to be steeped in it after, will be sure to haue the same sauour, besides the wea∣ring and breaking of Garthes and Plugges, the binding, clensing, sweetning, and a whole world of other trou∣bles and charges doe so dayly attend them, that the benefite is a great deale short of the incumbrance; whereas the Stone Cesterne is euer ready and vsefull, without any vexation at all, and being once well and sufficiently made, will not neede trouble or repara∣tion (more then ordinary washing) scarce in a hundred yeares. Now the best way of making these Mault-cesternes, is to make the bottomes and sides of good tyle-shreads, fixed together with the best Lime and Sand, and the bottome shall bee raised at least a foote and a halfe higher then the ground, and at one corner in the bot∣tome a fine artificiall round hole must be made, which being outwardly stopt, the maltster may through it drayne the Cesterne drye when shee pleaseth, and the bottome must bee so artificially leueld and contriued, that the water may haue a true descent to that hole, and not any remaine behind when it is opened. Now when the modell is thus made of tile-shread, which you may do great or little at your pleasure, then with Lime, Haire, and Beasts blood mixed together, you shall couer the bottome at least two inches thicke, laying it leuell and plaine, as is before shewed: which
done, you shall also couer all the sides and toppe, both within and without with the same mater, at least a good fingers thicknesse, and the maine Wall of the whole cesterne shall bee a full foote in thicknesse, as well for strength and dureablesse, as other priuate rea∣sons for the holding the graine and water, whose poyse and weight might otherwise indanger a weaker sub∣stance. And thus much concerning the Malt-house, and those seuerall accommodations which doe belong vnto the same. The manner how to make Malt. I wil now speake a little in generall as touching the Art, skill and knowledge of malt making, which I haue referred to the concsion of this Chapter, be∣cause whosoeuer is ignorant in any of the things before spoken of, cannot by any meanes euer attaine to the perfection of most true and most thrifty malt making: To beginne then with this Art of making, or (as some tearme it) making of malt, you shall first (hauing pro∣portioned the quantity you meane to steepe, which should euer be answerable to the continent of your Ce∣sterne, and your Cesterne to your flowres) let it ei∣ther runne downe from your vpper Garner into the Cesterne, or otherwise be carried into your Cesterne, as you shal please, or your occasions desire, and this Barley woud by all meanes be very cleane, and neatly drest; then when your Cesterne is filled, you shall from your Pumpe or Well conuey the water into the cesterne, till all the corne be drencht, and that the wa∣ter floate aboue it: if there be any corne that will not sinke, you shall with your hand stirre it about, and wet it, and so let it rest and couer the cesterne, and thus for the space of three nights you shall let the Corne steepe in the water. After the third night is expired,
the next morning you shall come to the Cesterne, and plucke out the plug or bung-sticke which stoppeth the hole in the bottome of the Cesterne, and so draine the water cleane from the Corne, and this water you shall by all meanes saue, for much light Corne and others will come foorth with this draine water, which is ve∣ry good Swines meate, and may not bee lost by any good House-wfe. Then hauing drained it, you shall let the cesterne drop all that day, and in the euening with your shouel you shall empty the corne from the cesterne vnto the malt flowre, and when all is out, and the cesterne cleansed, you shall lay all the wet corne on a great heape round or long, and flat on the toppe; and the thicknesse of this heape shall be answerable to the season of the yeare; for if the weaher be extreame cold, then he heape shall be made very thicke, as three or foure foote, or more, according to the quan∣tity of the graine: but if the weather be temperate and warme, then shall the heape be made thinner, as two foote, a foote and a halfe, or one foote, according to the quantity of the graine. And this heape is called of Malsters a Couch or Bed of raw Malt. In this couch you shall let the corne lye three nights more without stirring, and after the expiration of the three nights, you shall looke vpon it, and if you find that it beginneth but to sproute (which is called com∣ming of malt) though it be neuer so little, as but the very white ende of the sproute peeping out (so it bee in the outward part of the heape or couch) you shall then breake open the couch, and in the middest (where the Corne laye neerest) you shall finde the sproute or Come of a greater largenesse; then with your shouell you shall turne all the outward part of the couch in∣wrd,
and the inward outward, and make it at least three o foure times as bigge as it was at the first, and so let it lye all that day and night, and the next day you shall with your shouell turne the whole heape ouer againe, increasing the largenesse, and making it of one indiffe∣rent thicknesse ouer all the flowre; that is to say, not a∣boue a handfull thicke at the most, not failing afer for the space of foureteene dayes, which doth make vp full in all three weekes, to turne it al ouer twice or thrice a day according to the season of the weather, for if it be warme, the malt must be turned oftner; if coole, then it may lye looser-thicker and longer together; and when the three weekes is fuly accomplisht, then you shall (hauing bedded your Kilne, and spread a cleane hayre-cloth thereon) lay the malte as thinne as may be (as about three fingers thicknesse) vpon the haire-cloth,The drying of Mault. and so drye it with a gentle and soft fire, euer and anon turning the mault (as it drieth on the Kilne) ouer and ouer with your hand, till you finde it suffici∣ently well dryed, which you shall know both by the taste when you bite it in your mouth, and also by the falling off of the Come or sprout, when it is through∣ly dryed. Now assoone as you see the come beginne to shed▪ you shall in the turning of the mault rubbe it well betweene your hands, and scower it, to make the come fall away, then finding it all sufficiently dri∣ed, first pu out your fire, then let the malt coole vpon the Kilne for foure or fiue howres, and after raising vp the foure corners of the haire-cloth, and gathering the mault together on a heape, empty it with the come and all into your garners, and there let it lye (if you hau not present occasion to ve it) for a moneth or two or three to ripen, but no longer, for as the
come or dust of the Kilne, for such a space melloweth and ripeneth the malt, making it better both for sale or expence, so to lye too long in it doth ingender Wee∣uell, Wormes, and vermine which doe destroye the graine. The dressing of Malt. Now for the dressing and cleensing of malt at such time as it is either to be spent in the house, or solde in the market, you shall first winnow it with a good wind either from the ayre, or from the fan; and before the winnowing you shall rubbe it exceeding well betweene your hands to get the come or sproutings cleane away: for the beauty and goodnesse of malt is when it is most smug, cleane, bright, and likest to Barley in the viewe, for then there is least wast and greatest profit: for come and dust drinketh vp the liquor, and giues an ill taste to the drinke. After it is well rubd and winnowed, you shall then ee it ouer in a fine siue, and if any of the malt be vnclensed, then rub it agane in the siue till it be pure, and the rubbings will arise on the top of the siue, which you may cast off at pleasure, and both those rubbings from the siue and the chaffe and dust which commeth from the winnowings should be safe kept, for they are very good Swines meate, and feede well mixt either with whay or swillings: and thus after the malt is reed, you shall either sacke it vp for especiall vse, or put it into a well clensed Garne, where it may lye till there be oc∣casion for expence. Obseruations in the making of Malt. Now there bee certaine obseruations in the making of Malt, which I may by no meanes omit: for though diuerse opinions doe diuersly argue them, yet as neere as I can, I will reconcile them to that truth, which is most consonant to reason, and the rule of honesty and e∣qualitie.
First, there is a difference in mens opinions as touching the constant time for the mellowing and making of the Malt; that is, from the first steeping to the time of dry∣ing; for some will allow bth Fat and Flowre hardly a fortnight, some a fortnight and two or three dayes, and doe giue this reson; first, they say it makes the Corne looke whiter and brigher, and doth not get so much the suilg and foulnesse of the flower, as that whch lieth three weekes, which makes it a great deale more beautifull and so more sllable: next, it doth not come or shoote our so much sprout, as that which lieth a longer time, and so preserueth more hrt in the graine, makes it bould and fuller, and so consequently more full of ubstance, and able to make more of a ittle, then the other much of more; ad these reasons are good in shew, but not in sub∣stantiall truh: for (although I confesse that Corne which lieh least time of the flwre must be the whi∣test and brightest) yet that which wanteth any of the due time, can neither ripen, mellow, nor come to true perfection, and lesse then three weekes cannot ripen bar∣ley: for looke what time it hath to swell and sprout, it must haue full that tme to flourish, and as much time to decay: now in lesse then a weeke it cannot doe the first, and so in a weeke the second, and in another weeke the third; so that in lesse then three weekes a man can∣not make perfect Malt. Againe, I confesse, that Malt which hath the least Come, must haue the greatest ker∣nell, and so be most substantiall; yet the Malt which put∣teth not out his full sprout, but hath that moysture (with too much haste) driuen in which should be expel∣led, can neuer be Malt of any long lasting, or profitabe for indurance, because it hath so much moist substance
as doth make it both apt to corrupt and breed wormes in most great abundance: it is most true, that this hastie made Malt is fairest to the eie, and will soonest be vented in the Market; and being spent assoone as it is bought, little or no losse is to be perceiued, yet if it be kept three or foure moneths, or longer (vnlesse the place where it is kept be like a Hot house) it will so danke and giue againe, that it will be litte better then raw Malt, and so good for no seruice without a second dry∣ing: besides▪ Malt that is not suffred to sprout to the full kindly, but is stopt as soone as it begins to peepe, much of that Malt cannot come at all, for the moystest graines doe sprout first, and the hardest are longer in breaking the husk; now if you stop the graine on the first sprouts, and not giue all leasure to come one after another, you shall haue halfe Malt and halfe Barley, and that is good for nothing but Hens and Hogs trough. So that to con∣clude, lesse then three weekes you cannot haue to make good and perfect Malt. Next there is a difference in the turning of the malt, for some (and those be the most men Malsters whatso∣euer) turne all their malt with the shouell, and say it is most easie, most speedy, and dispatcheth more in an houre, then any other way doth in three; and it is very true, yet it scattereth much, leaueth much behind vn∣turn'd, and commonly that which was vndermost, it leaueth vndermost still, and so by some comming too much, and others not comming at all, the malt is oft much imperfect, and the old saying made good, that too much haste, maketh waste. Now there are others (and they are for the most part woemen Malsters) which turne ll with the and, and that is the best, safest, and most certaine way; for there is not a graine which the
hand doth not remoue and turne ouer and ouer and laies euery seuerall heape or row of such an euen and iust thicknesse, that the Malt both equally commeth, and e∣qually seasoneth together without defect or alteration: and though he that hath much Malt to make, will be willing to hearken to the swiftest course in making, yet he that wlll make the best Malt, must take such conue∣nient leasure, and imploy that labour which commeth neerest to perfection. Then there is another especiall care to be had in the coming or sprouting of Malt, which is, that as it must not come too little, so it must not by any meanes come too much, for that is the grossest abuse that may be: and that which we call comed or sprouted too much is, when either by negligence for want or looking to the couch, and not opening of it, or for want of turning when the malt is spread on the flowre it come or sprout at both ends, which Husbands ca Akeripyerd; such corne by reason the whole heart or substance is driuen out of it, can be good for no purpose but the Swine∣rough, and therefore you must haue an especiall care both to the well tending of the couch, and the turning the malt on the flowre, and be sure (as neere as you can by the ordering of the couch, and happing the har∣dest graine inward and warmest) to make it all Come very indifferently together. Now i it so fall out that you buy your Barley, and happen to light on mixt graine, some being old Corne, some new Corne, some of the heart of the stcke, and some of the stale, which is an ordinary dee with Husbandmen in the Market, then you my be wel sed, tha this graine can neuer Come o sprout equally together; for the new Corne will sprout before the old, and the stddle before that
in the heart of the stacke, by reason the one exceedeth the other in moystnesse: therefore in this case you shall marke well which commeth first, which will be still in the heart of the Couch, and with your hand gather it by it selfe into a seperate place, and then heape the o∣ther together againe; and thus as it cometh and sprou∣teth, so gather it from the heape with your hand, and spread it on the flowre, and keepe the other still in a thicke heape till all be sprouted. Now lastly obserue, that if your Malt be hard to sprout or Come, and that the fault consist more in the bitter coldnes of the season, then any defect of the corne, that then (besides the thicke and close making of the heape or couch) you faile not to couer it ouer with some thicke woollen clothes, as course Couerlids, or such like stuffe, the warmth whereof will make it Come presently: which once perceiued, then forthwith vncloth it, and order it as aforesaid in all points. And thus much for the Art, order, skill and cunning belonging to the Malt-making. Of O-Ma. Now as touching the making of Oates into Malt, which is a thing of generall vse in many parts of this Kingdome where Barley is scarse, as in Chesheire, Lan∣casheire, much of Darbisheire, Deuonsheire, Corn∣wall, and the like, the Art and skill is all one with that of Barley, nor is there any variation or change of worke, but one and the same order still to be obserued, onely by reason that Oates are more swift in sprouting, and apter to clutter, ball and hang together by the length of the sprout then Barley is, therefore you must not faile but turne them oftner then Barley, and in the tur∣ning be carefull to turne all, and not leaue any vnmo∣ued. Lastly, they wil need lesse of the slowe then Bar∣ley will, for in a full fortnight, or a fortnight and two or
three dayes you may make very good and perfect Oate-malt. But because I haue a great deale more to speake particularly of Oates in the next Chapter, I will here conclude this, and aduise euery skilfull House-wife to ioyne with mine obseruations her owne tryed experi∣ence, and no doubt but shee shall find both profit and satisfaction. CHAP. 6. Of the excellency of Oates, and the many singular ver∣tues and vses of them in a family. OAts although they are of all manner of graine the cheapest, because of their generality being a graine of that goodnesse and hardnesse, that it will grow in any soyle whatsoeuer, be it neuer so rich, or neuer so poore, as if Nature had made it the onely louing companion and true friend to mankind; yet is it a graine of that singularity for the multiplicity of vertues, and necessary vses for the sustenance and support of the Fa∣mily, that not any other graine is to be compared with it, for if any other haue equall vertue, yet it hath not e∣quall value, and if equall value, then it wants many de∣grees of equall vertue; so that ioyning vertue and va∣lue together, no Husband, House-wife, or House-kee∣per whatsoeuer, hath so true and worthy a friend, as his Oats are. To speake then first of the vertues of Oates, as they accrew to Cattell and creatures without doore, and first to begin with the Horse, there is not any food what∣soeuer that is so good, wholesome, and agreeable with the nature of a Horse, as Oates are, being a Pro∣uendar in which he taketh such delight, that with it he
feedeth, traualleth, and doth any violent labour what∣soeuer with more courage and comfort, then with a∣ny other food that can be inuented, as all men know, that haue either vse of it, or Horses: neither doth the Horse euer take surfeit of Oates, (if they be sweet and dry) for albe he may well be glutted or staled vpon them (with indiscreet feeding) and so refuse them for a little time, yet he neuer surfeiteth, or any pre∣sent sicknesse follow after; whereas no other graine but glut a Horse therewith, and instantly sicknesse will fol∣low, which shewes surfeit, and the danger is oft incu∣rable: for wee read in Italy, at the siege of Naples, of many hundred Horses that died on the surfeit of wheat; at Rome also dyed many hundred Horses of the plague, which by due proofe was found to proceed from a sur∣feit taken of peason and fetches; and so I could runne o∣uer all other graines, but it is needlesse, and farre from the purpose I haue to handle: suffice it, Oates for Hor∣ses are the best of all foods whatsoeuer, whether they be but onely cleane thresht from the straw, and so dry∣ed, o conuerted to Oatmeale, and so ground and made into Bread, Oates boiyl'd and giuen to a Horse whilst they are coole and sweete, are an excellent foode for any Horse in the time of disease, pouerty, or sick∣nesse, for they scower and sat exceedingly. In the same nature that Oates are for Horses, so are they for the Asse, Mule, Camell, or any other Beast of burthen. If you will feede either Oxe, Bull, Cow, or any Neate, whatsoeuer to an extraordinary height of fatnesse, there is no foode doth it so soone as Oates doth, whether you giue them in the straw, or cleane thresht from the sheafe, and well winnowed; but the winnowed Oate
is the best, for by them I haue seen an Oxe fed to twenty pound, to twenty foure pound, and thirty pounds, which is a most vnreasanable reckoning for any beast, onely fame and the tallow hath beene precious. Sheepe or Goates may likewise be fed with Oates, to as great price and profit as with Pease, and Swine are fed with Oates, either in taw Malt, or otherwise, to as great thicknesse as with any graine whatsoeuer; onely they must haue a few Pease after the Oates to harden the fat, or else it will waste, and consume in boyling. Now for holding Swine, which are onely to be peser∣ued in good flesh, nothing is better then a thin mange made of ground Oates, whey, Butter-milke, or other ordinary washe, or swillings, which either the Dury, or Kitchin affoordeth; nor is there any more soueraigne or excellent meate for Swine in the time of sicknesse, then a mange made of ground Oates and sweet Whey, warmed luke-warme on the fire, and mixt with the powder of Raddle, or ted Oaker. Nay if you will goe to the matter of pleasure, there is not any meate so ex∣cellent for the feeding, and wholesome keeping of a Kenell of hounds, as the Mangge made of ground Oats and scalding water, or of beefe-broth, or any other broth, in which flesh hath beene sodden; if it be for the feeding, strengthning and comforting of Grey-hounds, Spaniels, or any other sort of tenderer Doggs, there is no meate better then sheepes-heads, haire and all, or other intralls of sheepe chopt and well sodden, with good store of Oate-meale. Now for all manner of Poultry, as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Chickens of great size, Turyes, Gese, Ducks, Swannes and such like, there is no food feedeth them better then Oates, and if it be the young breede of any
of those kinds, euen from the first hatching or disclo∣sing, till they be able to shift for them selues, there is no food better whatsoeuer then Oate-meale greets, or fine Oate-meale, either simple of it selfe, or else mixt with milke, drinke, or else new made Vrine. Vertue of Oates for man. Thus much touching the vertues and quality of Oates or Oate-meale, as they are seruiceable for the vse of Cattle and Poultry. Now for the most necessary vse thereof for man, and the geneall support of the fa∣mily, there is no graine in our knowledge answerable vnto it; first for the simple Oate it selfe (excepting some particular physicke helpes, as frying them with sweet butter, and putting them in a bag, and very hot appied to the belly or stomacke to auoyde collicke or windinesse, and such like experiments) the most espe∣ciall vse which is made of them is for Malt to make Beere or Ale of, which it doth exceeding well, and maintaineth many Townes and Countries; but the Oat-meale which is drawne from them, being the heart and kernell of the Oate, is a thing of much rarer price and estimation; for to speake troth, it is like Salt of such a generall vse, that without it hardly can any Family be maintained: therefore I thinke it not much amisse to speake a word or two touching the making of Oate-meale, you shall vnderstand then,Making of Oate-meale. that to make good and perfect Oat-meale, you shall first dry your Oates exceeding well, and then put them on the Mill, which may either be Water-mill, Wind-mill, or Horse-mill (but the hors-mill is best) and no more but crush or hull them; that is, to carry the stones so large, that they may no more but crush the husk from the Kernell: then you shall winnow the hulls from the kirnells either with the wind or a Fanne, and finding them of an indifferent
cleannesse (for it is impossible to hull them all cleane at the first) you shall then put them on againe, and ma∣king the Mill goe a little closer, runne them through the Mill againe, and then winnow them ouer againe, and such greetes or kirnels as are cleane huld and well cut you may lay by, and the rest you shall run through the mill againe the third time, and so winnow them a∣gaine, in which time all will bee perfit, and the greetes or full kirnels will separate from the smaller Oate-meale; for you shall vnderstand, that at this first making of Oate meale, you shall euer haue two sorts of Oate meales; that is, the full whole greete or kir∣nell, and the small dust Oate meale: as for the course hulles or chaffe that commeth from them, that also is worthy sauing, for it is an excellent good Horse-pro∣uender for any plow or labouring Horses, beeing mixt with either Beanes, Pease, or any other Pulse whatso∣euer. The vertues of Oate-meale. Now for the vse and vertues of these two seuerall kinds of Oate-meales in maintaining the Family, they are so many (according to the many customes of many Nations) that it is almost impossible to recken all; yet (as neere as I can) I will impart my Knowledge, and what I haue tane from relation: First, for the small dust or meale Oate-meale, it is that with which all pot∣tage is made and thickned, whether they be meate-pottage, milke-pottage, or any thicke or else thinne grewell whatsoeuer, of whose goodnesse and whole∣somenesse it is needlesse to speake, in that it is frequent with euery experience: also with this small meale oate-meale is made in diuerse Countries six seuerall kinds of very good and wholsome bread, euery one finer then o∣ther, s your Anacks, Ianacks, and such like. Also there
is made of it both thicke and thin Oaten-cakes, which are very pleasant in taste, and much esteemed: but if it be mixed with fine wheate-meale, then it maketh a most delicate and dainty oate-cake, either thicke or thin, such as no Prince in the world but may haue them serued to his table; also this small oat-meale mixed with blood, and the Liuer of either Sheepe, Calfe or Swine, maketh that pudding which is called the Haggas or Haggus, of whose goodnesse it is in vaine to boast, be∣cause there is hardly to be found a man that doth not affect them. And lastly, from this small oat-meale by oft steeping it in water and clensing it; and then boy∣ling it to a thicke and stiffe ielly, is made that excellent dish of meate, which is so esteemed of in the west parts of this Kingdome, which they call Wash brew, and in Chesheire and Lancasheire they call it Flamery or Flu∣mery, the wholesomnesse and rare goodnesse, nay, the very Physicke helpes thereof, being such and so many, that I my selfe haue heard a very reuerend and worthi∣ly renowned Physition speake more in the commenda∣tions of that meate, then of any other foode whatsoe∣uer: and certaine it is▪ that you shall not heare of any that euer did surfeite of this Wash-brew or Flammery; and yet I haue seene them of very dainety and sickely stomackes which haue eaten great quantities thereof, beyond the proportion of ordinary meates. Now for the manner of eating this meate, it is of diuerse di∣uersly vsed; for some eate it with hony, which is re∣puted the best sauce; some with Wine, either Sacke, Claret or White; some with strong Beere or strong Ale, and some with milke, as your ability, or the accom∣modations of the place will administer. Now there is deriued from this Wash-brew another courser meate,
which is as it were the dregges, or grosser substance of the Wash-brew, which is called Gird brew, which is a well illing and sufficient meate, fit for seruants and men of labour; of the commendations whereof, I will not much stand, in that it is a meate of harder disiestion, and fit indeed but for strong abe stomackes, and such whose toyle and much sweate both liberally spendeth euill humors, and also preserueth men from the offence of fulnesse and surfeits. Now for the bigger kind of Oate-meale, which is called Greets, o Corne Oate meale, it is of no lesse vse then the former, nor are there fewer meates com∣pounded thereof: for first, of these greets are made all sorts of puddings, or potts (as the West-countrey tearmes them) whether they be blacke, as those which ae made of the blood of Beasts, Swine, Sheepe, Geese, Red or Fallow Deere, or the lie, mixt with whole greetes, suet and wholesome hearbes: or else white, as when the greetes are mixt with good creame, egges, bread-crummes, suet, currants, and other wholesome spices. Also of these greets are made the good Friday pudding, which is mixt with egges, milke, suet, peni-royall, and boyld first in a linnen bagge, and then stript and buttered with sweet butter. Againe, if you rost a goose, and stop her belly with whoe greetes beaten to∣gether with egges▪ and after mixt with the grauy, there cannot be a better or more pleasanter suce: nay, if a man be at ea in any long trauell, he cannot eate a more wholesome and pleasant meate then thee whole greets boyld in water till they burst, and then mxt wih but∣ter, and so eaten with spoones; which although sea∣men call simply by the name of Lbolly, yet there is not any meate how significant soeuer the name be, that
is more toothsome or wholesome. And to conclude, there is no way or purpose whatsoeuer to which a man can vse or imploy Rice: but with the same seasoning and order you may imploy the whole greetes of Oate-meale, and haue full as good and wholesome meate, and as well tasted; so that I may well knit vp this chap∣ter with this approbation of Oate meale, that the little charge and great benefite consider▪ it is the very Crowne of the House wies gaand, and doth more grace her table and her knowledge, then all graines whatsoeuer; neither indeed can any Famiy o House∣hold be well and thriftily maintained, where this is ei∣ther scant or wanting. And thus much touching the na∣ture, woh, vertues, and great necessity of Oates and Oate-meale. CHAP. 8. Of the Office of the Brew-house, and the Bake house, and the necessary things belonging to the same. WHen our English House-wife knowes how to preserue health by wholesome Physicke, to nourish by good meate, and to cloath the body with warme garments, shee must not then by any meanes bee ignorant in the prouision of Bread and Drinke; shee must knowe both the proportions and compositions of the same. And for as much as drinke is in euery house more ge∣nerally spent then bread, being indeede (but how well I know not) made the very substance of all enter∣tainement; I will first beginne with it,Diuersities of Drinkes. and therefore you shall knowe that generally our Kingdome hath out two kindes of drinkes, that is to say, Beere and
Ale, but particularly foure▪ as Beere, Ale, Perry and Cider; and to these we may adde two more, Meede and Metheglin, two compound drinkes of hony and hearbs, which in the places where they are made, as in Wales and the march s, are reckoned for exceeding whole∣some and cordiall. Strong Beere. To speake then of Beere, although there be diuers kinds of tastes and strength thereof, according to the al∣lowance of Malt, Hoppes, and age giuen vnto the same; yet indeed there can be truly sayd to be but two kinds thereof; namely, ordinary beere and March beere, all other beeres being deriued from them. Of ordinary Beere. Touching ordinary Beere, which is that wherewith either Nobleman, Gentleman, Yeoman, or Husband∣man shall maintaine his family the whole yeere; it is meete first that our English Hous wife respect the pro∣portion or allowance of Malt due to the same, which amongst the best Husbands is thought most conuenient, and it is held, that to draw from one quarter of good Malt three Hogsheads of beere, is the best ordinary pro∣portion that can be alowed, and hauing age and good caske to lie in, it will be strong enough for any good mans drinking. Of brewing ordinary Beere. Now for the brewing of ordinary Beere, your Malt being well ground and put in your Mash-fat, and your liquor in your leade ready to boyle, you shall then by little and little with scoopes or pailes put the boling liquor to the Malt, and then stirre it euen to the bot∣tome exceedingly well together (which is called the mashing of the Malt) then the liquor swimming in the top couer all ouer with more Malt, and so let it stand an houre and more in the mash fat, during which space you may if you please heate more liquor
in your lead for your second or small drinke; this done, plucke vp your mashing stroame, and let the first liquor runne gently from the malt, either in a cleane trough or other vessells prepared for the purpose, and then stopping the mash fat againe, put the second liquor to the malt, and stirre it well together; then your leade being emptied put your first liquor or wort therein, and then to euery quarter of malt put a pound and a halfe of the best hopps you can get; and boyle them an houre together, till taking vp a dishfull thereof you see the hopps shrinke into the bottome of the dish; this done, put the wort through a straight siue which may draine the hopps from it into your cooler, which standing ouer the Guil-fat, you shall in the bottome thereof set a great bowle with your barme, and some of the first wort (be∣fore the hops come into it mixt together) that it may rise therein, and then let your wort drop or run gently into the dish with the barme which stands in the Guil-fat, & this you shall do the first day of your brewing, letting your cooler drop all the night following, and some part of the next morning, and as it droppeth if you finde that a blacke skumme or mother riseth vpon the barme, you shall with your hand take it off and cast it away, then no∣thing being left in the cooler, and the beere well risen, with your hand stirre it about & so let it stand an houre after, and then beating it and the barme exceeding well together, tunne it vp into the Hogsheads being cleane washt and scalded, and so let it purge: and herein you shall obserue not to tun your vessells too full, for feare thereby it purge too much of the barme away: when it hath purged a day and a night, you shall cose vp the bung holes with clay, and onely for a day or two after keepe a vent-hole in it, and after close it vp as close
as may be. Now for your second or small drinke which are left vpon the graine, you shall suffer it there to stay but an houre or a little better, and then draine it off also, which done put it into the lead with the former hops and boyle the other also▪ then cleere it from the hops and couer it very close till your first beere be tunn'd, and then as before put it also to barme and so tunne it vp al∣so in smaler vessels, and of this second beere you shall not draw aboue one Hogshead to three of the better. Now there be diuers other waies and obseruations for the brewing of ordinary Beere, but none so good, so ea∣sie, so ready and quickly performed as this before shew∣ed: neither will any beere last longer or ripen sooner, for it may be drunke at a fortnighs-age, and will last as long and liuely. Of brewing the bst March Beer. Now for the brewing of the best March-Beere, you shall allow to a Hogshead thereof a quarter of the best malt, well ground: then you shall take a pecke of pease, halfe a pecke of Wheate, and halfe a pecke of Oates and grind them al very well together, and then mixe them with your malt: which done, you shall in all points brew this beere as you did the former ordinary beere: onely you shall allow a pound and a halfe of hops to this one Hogshead: and where as before you drew but two sorts of beere: so now you shall draw three: that is a Hogshead of the best, and a Hogshead of the second, and halfe a Hogshead of small beere with∣out any augmentaion of hops or malt. This March Beere would be brewd in the moneths of March or Aprill, and should (if it haue right) haue a whole yeere to ripen in: it will last two, three and foure yeeres if it lie coole and close, & endure the draw∣ing to the last drop, though with neuer so much leasure.
Brewing of strong Ale. Now for the brewing of strong Ale, because it is drinke of no such long lasting as Beere is, therefore you shall brew lesse quantity at a time thereof, as two bu∣shels of Northerne measure (which is foure bushels or halfe a quarter in the South) at a brewing, and not a∣boue, which will make foureteene gallons of the best Ale. Now for the mashing and ordering of it in the mash-fat, it will not differ any thing from that of Beere; as for hops, although some vse not to put in any, yet the best Brewers thereof will allow to foureteene gal∣lons of Ale a good espen full of hops, and no more, yet before you put in your hops, as soone as you take it from the graines, you shall put it into a vessell and change it, or blinke it in this manner: put into the Wort a handfull of Oke-bowes and a pewter-dis, and let them lye therein till the wort looke a little paler then it did at the first, and then presently take out the dish and the leafe, and then boile it a full houre with the hops, as aforesayd, and then clense it, and set it in vessels to coole; when it is milke-warme, hauing set your Barme to rise with some sweete Wort: then put all into the guilfat, and as soone as it riseth, with a dish or bowle beate it in, and so keepe it with continuall beating a day and a night at least, and after tun it. From this Ale you may also draw halfe so much very good middle Ale, and a third part very good small ale. Brewing of Bottle-Ale. Touching the brewing of Bottle-ale, it differeth no∣thing at all from the brewing of strong Ale, onely it must be drawne in a larger proportion, as at least twenty gallons of halfe a quarter; and when it comes to bee changed, you shall blinke it (as was before shewed) more by much then was the strong Ale, for it must bee pretty and sharpe, which giueth the life and quick∣nesse
to the Ale: and when you tunne it, you shall put it into round bottles with narrow mouthes, and then stopping them close with corke, set them in a cold sellar vp to the wast in sand, and be sure that the corkes be fast tied in with strong packe-thrid, for feare of ri∣sing out, or taking vent, which is the vtter spoyle of the Ale. Now for the small drinke arising from this Bottle-ale, or any other beere or ale whatsoeuer, if you keepe it after t is blinckt and boyled in a close vessell, and then put it to barme euery morning as you haue occasion to vse it, the drinke will drinke a great deale the fresher▪ and be much more liuely in taste. Of making perry or cider. As for the making of Perry and Cider, which are drinkes much vsed in the West parts, and other Coun∣tries well stored with fruit in this Kingdome; you shall know that your perry is made of peares onely, and your Cider of Apples; and for the manner of making there∣of, it is done after one fashion, that is to say, after your Peares and Apples are well pickt from the stalkes, rottennesse, and all manner of other filth, you shall put them in the presse-mill which is made with a mil-stone running round in a circle, vnder which you shall crush your peares or apples, and then straining them through a bagge of haire-cloth, tunne vp the same (after it hath bene a little setled) into Hogs-heads, Barrels, and other close vessels. Now after you haue prest all, you shall saue that which is within the haire cloth bagge, and putting it in∣to seuerall vessels, put a pretty quantity of water there∣unto, and after it hath stood a day or two, and hath beene well stirred together, presse it ouer also againe, for this will make a small perry or cider, and must be
spent first. Now of your best sider that which you make of your summer or sweete fruit, you shall call summer or sweete cider or perty, and that you shall spend first also; and that which you make of the winter and hard fruit, you shall call winter and sowre cider, or perry; and that you may spend last, for it will indure the lon∣gest. Thus after our English House-wife is experienc't in the brewing of these seuerall drinkes,Of Baking. shee shall then looke into her Bake-house, and to the making of all sorts of bread, either for Maisters, seruants, or hinds, and to the ordering and compounding of the meale for each seuerall vse. Ordering of Meale. To speake then first of meales for bread, they are ei∣ther simple or compound, simple, as Wheate and Rye, or compound, as Rye and Wheate mixt together, or Rye, Wheate and Barley mixt together; and of these the oldest meale is euer the best, and yeeldeth most so it be sweet and vntainted, for the preseruation whereof, it is meet that you clense your meale well from the bran, and then keepe it in sweet vessels. Baking Man∣chets. Now for the baking of bread of your simple meales, your best and principall bread is manchet, which you shall bake in this maner: First your meale being ground vpon the blacke stones, if it be possible, which make the whitest flower, and boulted through the finest boul∣ting cloth, you shall put it into a cleane Kimnell, and opening the flower hollow in the midst, put into it of the best Ale-barme, the quantity of three pints to a bu∣shell of meale, with some salt to season it with: then put in your liquor reasonable warme and kneade it very well together with both your hands and through the brake, or for want thereof, fold it in a cloth, and with
your feete tread it a good space together, then letting it lie an houre or there abouts to swell, take it foorth and mold it into manchets, round, and flat, scotch them a∣bout the waste to giue it leaue to rise, and pricke it with your knife in the top, and so put it into the Ouen, and bake it with a gentle heate. Baking cheate Bread. To bake the best cheate bread, which is also sim∣ply of wheate onely, you shall after your meate is drest and boulted through a more course boulter then was vsed for your manchets, and put also ino a cleane tub, trough, or kimell, take a sowre leauen, that is, a piece of such like leauen saued from a fomer batch, and well fild with salt, and so laid vp to sower, and this sower leauen you shal breake into small pieces into warme water, and then straine it, which done, make a deepe hollow hole, as was before said in the midst of your flower, and therein powre your strained liquor; then with your hand mixe some part of the flower ther∣with, till the liquor be as thicke as pancake batter, then couer it all ouer with meale, and so let it lie all that night, the next morning stirre it, and all the rest of the meale wel together, and with a little more warme wa∣ter, barme, and salt to season it with, bring it to a per∣fect leauen, stiffe, & firme; then knead it, breake it, and read it, as was before said in the manchets, and so mold it vp in reasonable bigge loaues, and then bake it with an indifferent good heate: and thus according to these two examples before shewed, you may brake leauend or vnleauend whatsoeuer, whether it be simple corne, as Wheate or Rie of it selfe, or compound graine as Wheate and Rie, or Wheate and Barley, or Rie and Barley, or any othe mixt white corne; onely because Rie is a litttle stronger graine then Wheate, it shall be
good for you to put your water a little hotter then you did to your wheate. Baking of browne bread· For your browne bread, or bread for your hinde-seruants, which is the coursest bread for mans vse, you shall take of barley two bushels, of pease two pecks, of of Wheate or Rie a pecke, a pecke of malt; these you shall grind all together and dresse it through a meale siue, then putting it into a sower trough set liquor on the fire, and when it boyles let one put on the water, and another with a mash rudder stirre some of the flow∣er with it after it hath beene seasoned with salt, and so let it be till the next day, and then putting to the rest of the flower, worke it vp into stiffe leauen, then mould it and bake it into great loaues with a very strong heate: now if your trough be not sower enough to sower your leauen, then you shal either let it li longer in the trough, or else take the helpe of a sower leauen with our boy∣ling water: for you must vnderstand, that the hotter your liquor is, the lesse will the smll or anknesse of the pease be receiued. And thus much for the baking of any kind of bread, which our English House-wife shall haue occasion to vse for the maintenance of her family. Generall ob∣seruations in the brew-house and bake-huse. As for the generall obseruations to be respected in the Brew-house or Bake-house, they be these: first, that your Brew house be seated in so conuenient a part of the house, that the smoke may not annoy your other more priuate roomes; then that you furnace be made close and hollow for sauing fewell, and with a vent for the passge of smoake least it taint your lquor; then that you preferre a copper before a lead, next that your Msh-fat bee euer neerest to your leade, your cooler neerest your Mash-fat, and your Gul fat
vnder your cooler, and adioyning to them all seuerall cleane ubs to receiue your worts and liquors: then in your Bake-house you shall haue a faire boulting house with large pipes to boult meale in, faire troughes to lay leauen in, and sweet safes to receiue your bran: you shall haue boulters, searses, raunges and meale siues of all sorts both fine and course; you shall haue faire tables to mould on, large ouens to brake in the soales thereof rather of one or two intire stones then of many brickes, and the mouth made narrow, square and easie to be close couered: as for your peeles, cole-rakes, maukins, and such like, though they be necessary yet they are of such generall vse they neede no further relation. And thus much for a full satisfaction to all the Husbands and House-wiues of this Kingdome touching Brewing, Baking, and all whatsoeuer else appertai∣neth to either of their offices. The end of the English Hous-wife.
FINIS.
