17978.5 S1305 22108103 25086
THE MIRROVR OF COMPLEMENTS. To offer service to a King. SIR. IF words were able to expresse the duty in which I hold my selfe obliged to present you my most humble service, I were most ingratefull and un∣worthy of the light of heauen, for since you captivate the glory of the greatest Emperours upon earth, I should much forget my selfe, if I thought my vowes alone sufficient
to deserve the favour of your most princely grace; In which the greatest Monarchs of the world indeauour to continue. Pardon then that fervent zeale which compels your subiects to such acknowledgement as is due unto your Majestie. And let mee speake it with permissi∣on, that the greatest honour I can possibly at∣taine, is to dye worthily in some action of your service. SIR: HEaven hath his Iove, the Gods, the Sunne and the Stars, but your vertues are so uni∣versally adored of the people, that you fill the gods with jealousie and emulation, and so long as your Majestie shall continue in this world, the earth shall haue possession of that glory wherewith she may compare with heaven. I adde nothing to this truth, but the due pre∣sentment of my most humble service, nor would I wish for any thing, but a fit occasion to maintaine it with the perill of my life and bloud. SIR: I Haue beene a long time possest with this desire to prostrate my selfe at the feete of your sacred Majestie, to tender you my vowes,
and I shall account this the most fortunate oc∣casion that euer I could be blest with, hoping so much (also) in the affection which you beare to vertue, that you will daigne to accept the offers of my most humble service. And permit mee with due reverence to affirme it, that the heavens could not have done mee more inju∣stice, then in ordaining my nativity under a∣ny other influence then this of yours, which is the onely age that iustly can bee stiled happy, since the beginning of this Monarchie. SIR: IF the vertues of our ancestours were in your jurisdiction at this present, and that to ob∣taine the gracious favour of a Soveraigne, it were onely requisite to bee descended from a noble and a generous extraction, I should bee more confident to offer you that resolution and experience, which nature and my industrie have conferred upon me. For my Father be∣stowed his youth, and to his death continued (nor sought he for retirement) in the service of your predecessors; and the vertues of my ance∣stors are eminent in all those places where the Sunne imparts his lustre: notwithstanding I hope these offers of my most humble service shall not be unpleasing, seeing that I trace the
steps of my predecessours, and that I would not live but in the quality of your most faithfull humble subject. To offer service to the Queene. MADAM: VVIth permission from the King, and this of your Maiestie, I assume the boldnesse to present you with my humble duty, and to expresse my selfe, that there is nothing in the world which I desire with more vehemen∣cie then to be your most humble and most faith∣full seruant and subject. MADAM: THe honour which I received this day in kneeling before the King, would yet ap∣peare but lame, and not fully perfected, if I had not this happy occasion to present my vowes unto your Majestie, and to tender you my most humble and most affectionate services, which I shall esteeme in the highest degree of honour that I can possibly attaine.
To give due respect unto a Noble man. MY Lord, as I esteeme it a great favour to have the happinesse to salute you, and to doe my dutie to your honour; so shall I al∣waies account my selfe most happie, if it may please you to accept mee for your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant. My Lord, the place you hold amongst great Princes, and those noble vertues wherewith you are so perfectly adorned, oblige me to make offer of that little which is in mee; that in all occasions I may be able to render you most humble service. My Lord, it may please your excellence to permit this humble expression of my due re∣spects, hoping that heaven will blesse me with some favourable opportunitie wherein I may more effectually manifest how much my soule doth thirst to doe you service.
To salute a Gentlewoman with an in∣tention of marriage, and to offer her his service. ALEANDER. GEntlewoman, I doubt not but you will repute my addresses both too bold and too presumptuous, but I hope your heart is as full of bountie, as your eyes of beautie, and will not be unapt to pardon that resolution which (proceeding from my love) hath encouraged me to come and offer you my most humble and most affectionate seruice. CLARINDA. SIR, J am sorry that I have not had the ho∣nour to know you sooner, and I wonder that you offer service to a person that is so unworthy of it. Mistrisse, it is the excellencie of your dispo∣sition which makes you speake so. Excuse me Sir, for truth commands my tongue to use this phrase. Mistresse, I see so many noble and modest vertues expressed in your courtesie, as perswade
my affectionate hope, that my intentions shall be acceptable, and that in time I may attaine to some thing in your good favour. Sir, if I had any good favour in me, it should be wholly at your dispose, but having none, you cannot hope for any. Mistrisse, you have so many gracefull beau∣ties, that I should be most happy to possesse and to enjoy them. And I should be much preferred in my owne esteeme, if I had the favour to be affected by you, as much as I love and honour you. When I condiscend to your affection, it must be so well disposed, that it exceed not the termes of civill honestie. This it is which makes me honour you more deerely, and makes you still more lovely. And I beseech you to beleeve it, that my intentions have beene alwaies holy, and that I never ay∣med but at honest ends. What! did you thinke otherwise? and that I had pretended something that might be preiudiciall to your honour? no, I wish my heart may be deprived of life, before it shall give place to such a villanous designe: No, I intend for ever to continue your faithfull and most obedient servant, as mine indeavours shall expresse me in all occasions wherin I shall be employed by the honor of your commands.
Sir, my affection shall be the pledge of that gratitude wherewith I thanke you for this and all your other undeserved favours; I am your humble servant. Mistresse, it is I who am so much obliged to you, that I want all meanes to requite it, and therefore Mistresse I beseech you, and conjure you likewise, that I may obey you in all things where you shall thinke me capable to doe you service: in the interim after a thousand recom∣mends, I humbly take my leave of you, leaving with you my heart for a pledge of my fidelitie and assured constancie. Fare you well good Sir, I thanke you with all my heart for your kinde visit. I hope to see you againe, and that ere long, if I may with your permission. Sir, while your requests are civill, and your in∣tentions honest, you shal alwayes finde these dores open both to you and to your friends, who shall be ever welcome to the best entertainment that our poore abilities will permit, and therefore you may come at all times when please you. Mistresse, I assure you that in going hence I deprive my selfe of a most faire day, to bee imprisoned in such horrible darkenesse as I know not to expresse. For I protest, that without you, I have neither day nor light,
and therefore the time of this sad absence will be so grievous to mee, that each moment will seeme an houre, each houre a day, and every day an age, if I be not cherished with my hope to bee in your good graces; and therewith I shall resolve to be patient: These are excessive phrases, but I hope you are not so passionate as you pretend. Farewell Sir, we shall see you some other time. Mistresse, in this you both injure your own most excellent beautie, and my most faithfull affection; but I hope time shall give you a more perfect view both of mee and it, since necessitie doth now force mee to leave you: yet I shall never leave that affection which your faire eyes have cast upon my soule. Adieu sweet Mistresse till I see you againe, which shall be as soone as I can possibly.
At the Review. ALEANDER I Protest unto you my fairest Mistresse, I ne∣ver beleeved the torments of her absence whom a man affecteth to be so piercing and so cruell: for I sweare to your faire eyes, the true starres of my fortune, that I dyed of impatience to see you againe. CLARINDA. Is it possible? Sir, I cannot credit it. Mistresse, beleeve it I beseech you, if it please you, for I assure you that I could not any lon∣ger support the extremitie of that anguish which I suffered during my tedious exile from you the sweetest object of my indeat'd affecti∣ons, wherein my soule receiues such full con∣tentment. Sir, all this may be Sir, for your words seeme to import great passion. Mistresse, I protest unto you, I am not ca∣pable of any contentment in this world, saving that which pleaseth my affections, either in the visuall or intellectuall view of your most grace∣full beauties.
Sir, I know my selfe unworthy of these attri∣butes, and therefore though I take them as in jest, yet if you persist, I shall thinke you use them in derision. And why (sweet creature) have you that conceit? I assure you I speake it from my soule. And assure your selfe, my dearest Mistresse, that you now behold a man that is intirely yours, and one that desireth not to live, except onely for your service. But that which breeds my greatest difficultie is, that I must be some while absent from you to dispose some affaires of great importance. And I beseech you to be∣leeve, that wheresoever I shall goe, I shall al∣waies carry in my soule the lively image of your perfections, and that I shall not live, but by the Idea of your faire eyes, with a perfect resolution to obey you in all occasions: Adue sweet Mistresse till I see you againe, and I pray you excuse me that I can no longer wait of you. Sir, I give you infinite thankes, farewell till another time.
To offer service, thereby to give occa∣sion of a correspondent amity with some stranger. ALEANDER. SIR: ALthough I have not merited the honour which I have to see you, and to kisse your hands with a most cordiall and absolute affecti∣on; yet that earnest desire which I have to be accepted into your acquaintance, and admit∣ted to your friendship, hath given me the bold∣nesse to present my selfe before you, to receive the honour of your commandements, and to offer you the due indevours of my service. CLORIMAN. Sir, It is a great contentment to me, to see the good affection which you beare mee, and J am much obliged unto you for the paine which you have taken to come and see mee; assuring you, you can never goe to any place where you are
more truely welcome, or where you have more power. Sir, the desire I had to see you, and to be ac∣quainted with you, put mee in resolution to come hither, and offer you my most humble service, with this humble suit, that you will be pleased to accept it. Sir, you oblige mee infinitely, and I am very glad to see you, but more to understand your good affection to me. And though I am unwor∣thy of it, yet I beseech you to continue it, assu∣ring you of my part, you shall finde mee a most faithfull friend, and I hold my selfe much ho∣noured in your amity, which I accept with a most thankefull heart; and J am onely sorry for the trouble you have had in my occasion. That which you call a trouble, is to me, Sir, a great contentment; for I am alwayes best pleased when I have the happinesse to see men of your quality and merit, and most especial∣ly, when they honour mee with their friend∣ship. Sir, you doe me too much honour, and oblige mee to bee wholly yours; so that I shall alwayes endevour to manifest the effects of what I speak; and time shall let you see, that you have not a friend more assured, then I shall labour to ap∣prove my selfe.
To thanke a friend for some Courtesie. SIr, I thanke you a thousand times for the great paines you have taken for me, hoping that heaven will grant me some happy occasion whereby I may returne you some good service for a recompence. I shall ever be obliged unto you for this ample & actuall expression of your love in this urgent and pressing occasion, for which I am much indebted to you. Sir, This is the least that I could doe for you, it is not worthy your remembrance. I would doe more then this a thousand times for your con∣tentment; for this is nothing in respect of my de∣sires to serve you. Ahlas Sir! I have already had so many large expressions of your excessive courtesies, and you have so much obliged me unto you, that I want abilities to satisfie so great a debt. But in lieu of recompence, I beseech you to command me where you finde me capable to serve you. Sir, you shall ever finde mee a true observant of the rules of friendship, doe you onely continue your affection, and then assure your selfe you may command my service. For your good deeds doe very much exceed all that I have doue, that J do,
or can doe for you. But though I am not strong in power, yet I shall ever have a strong desire to doe you some good service. Sir, my good deeds towards you have beene such poore things, that I need not labour to an∣swer you upon so meane a subject, but if I can, I shall be alwaies glad to serve you. Sir, by this meanes still you increase my obli∣gations, and therefore howsoever, if I cannot have the opportunity to pay you, yet I beseech God to reward you for me. To goe to visit and salute a friend upon his new arrivall after some iourney. SIr, so soone as I knew of your much desired returne, I could not omit the office of a friend in comming to salute you, and to conti∣nue the offer of my humble service which is e∣ver at your dispose. Sir, I am very humbly yours; but I am infi∣nitely sorry that you have hindered me of the ho∣nour to come and see you first, for so I intended, as soone as J had refreshed my selfe a little, for I am but newly alighted.
Sir, I should have beene very sorry if you had troubled your selfe to come to mee; and I was therefore desirous to prevent you by be∣ing here as soone as I understood of your ar∣rivall. Sir, you oblige me abundantly to thanke you for the paines you have taken to come hither. But it belonged to me to render you that office. You should not use these termes to the poorest of your servants, and one that hath no∣thing to present you but the duties of his obe∣dience. O good Sir,  is for me to obey your comman∣dements, for you honour me a hundred thousand times beyond my merit. Let us leave this discourse, I beseech you Sir, for you know very well, that I am wholly yours. But tell me, I pray you, how have you had your health this long journey. The best in the world, thankes be to God Sir, onely at N. I was a little troubled with a fit of a feaver, but it was quickly gone. I beleeve you may well be weary; for your journey was both very long and toylesome. Excuse me, Sir, I am no whit weary, for my horse travelled very easily, ambled altogether. I am glad with all my heart of your pleasant voyage, and yet much gladder of your happy
returne; But if it please you I shall assume the boldnesse to demand some newes of you, how goe all things there, is there any newes? I can assure you there is none there but good, all is well there, onely they feare, and that with great likelihood, they shall have great warres this summer. How, doe they talke of warres say you? Yes, for the King of N. demands aid of his allies, but what the event will be, is yet uncer∣taine. I thinke that Countrie will never be in peace, there's nothing but warres there conti∣nually. Indeed Sir at this time it is so, but I shall tell you more another time when I have leisure, now onely I desire your favour that I may repose a little. To entertaine a friend that comes to visit us. YOu are very welcome, good Sir, you ho∣nour me a thousand times above my merit, especially from your particular.
Pardon me, Sir, it is J that have received the honour. It is the excesse of your good nature makes you use that phrase proceeding from that goodnesse which is native in you. Sir, my indevours shall be as witnesses to give a faithfull testimony of the love J beare you. Sir, you oblige me too much, I have not me∣rited these favours from you. Sir, this is but part of my respect, for I owe you much more in things of greater consequence. Sir, there is no need that you should use these termes to your obliged servants. Sir, it is so defective in that part, that I stand most obliged both to you and all my other friends. Sir, I wish to serue you in all that I am able, and I should more willingly expresse it in acti∣on then in speech. Sir, you have alreadie expressed it very am∣ply, and I were worthy to be thought ingratefull if ever I should faile to make acknowledgement that I am much beholding to you. You shall excuse me, Sir, if it please you, for I never gave you cause to say you are behol∣ding to me, nor was there ever any such occa∣sion; but it pleaseth you to speake this out of the bountie of your spirit. Sir, it is the debt it selfe which exacteth these
words, that I may confesse my selfe to be wholly yours. I see that you will conquer me with courte∣sle, but if it please you to sit, we shall discourse more at leasure. I thanke you Sir, it needs not; besides, it were undecent for mee to bee first in place, but if you please to sit, I shall keepe you company. Then I pray you sit you there. It shall be then to obey you. Sir I am your servant. Sir, it is I that am yours, and the most affecti∣onate of all your servants. Sir, shall it not bee offensive if I make bold to aske you what good winde brought you hi∣ther? Chiefly Sir to have the honour to see you, and to know the disposition of your health, and then to kisse your hands; lastly, to beseech you to im∣part what good newes you heare from Lon∣don. There is no newes there, onely the King is gone to Hampton Court.
When one meeteth a friend in the street by accident. GOod morrow to you Sir, this meeting makes me happy above my expectation: tell me how you doe? Ʋery well thankes be to God, and alwaies most humbly ready to doe you service. I am yours with all my heart. In good faith Sir it troubled mee extremely that I had not the honour to see you, and J know not what to thinke of it, nor vpon what occasion. Sir, I assure you I have bin at your lodging many times, and I know not if they told you or not, but I could never have the happinesse to finde you within. And that is strange, for I stirre abroad as lit∣tle as may be. But what newes heare you? any that's good? No truely Sir, I heare none at all, onely Mr. N. told me just now, that N. and N. were some∣what contentious yester night, and were like to have fought after some high words and in∣jurious speeches. Verily you have a good memory to retaine all these circumstances, but is it very certaine?
I have told you my Author, if he be a lyer, I shall discredit him. But it is a common phrase, that a lyer ought to have a good memory to keepe him from mista∣king, and inable him to defend both the right side and the left. You reckon me in the number then Sir, you have commended mine so much. Pardon me Sir, I thought it not, of the contrary I praise you therfore the more, for a good memory includeth not that vice, but it is rather a guilt of nature which she alloweth not to all, not to me e∣specially, for mine is very fraile. But J like better to have it so, then therewith to abuse the truth, in studying how to circumvent another. But Sir, he that alledgeth his Author, cannot be betrayed, if so be he prove not false to him. But he dares not, for there was good company with us when he spake it. Sir, not that I would attempt to injure either your life or honour, much lesse your reputation; But I am afraid lest you be made the Author of it, and that he may abuse you authorizing his fable upon the testimony of your speeches. That which you speak Sir, cānot but be good, for to medle with that which doth notconcern one, it is to be in danger to be mocked & expo∣sed to derision and reproach; hereafter I shall
be more secret and retentive, and I thanke you for your good advise; but as for me, I assure you it is not my invention. And if he did devise it, yet he ought not to make me his instrument to divulge it, albeit he may have told it to others that shall likewise tell you the same; And how∣soeuer though I am not well assured of the cer∣taintie, yet I am certaine that he told it me. An offer to accompany a Friend. SIr, I should willingly offer you my compa∣ny, if I thought it worthy your acceptance, and that I should not trouble you. It is so farre from that Sir, that it would be a great honour to mee, and a thousand times more then I deserve, for such company as yours, can∣not but be pleasant and delight full to all that love honour and vertue; but I feare lest in so doing, you will trouble your selfe. Sir, if my poore companie may pleasure you, I offer it with all my heart, but I feare to im∣portune you. Alas Sir, you will trouble your selfe too much, and for me I doe not deserve it, and there∣fore I should be unwilling to permit it.
Pardon mee Sir, this is no trouble, this! I would I had the happinesse to bee alwaies in in your companie, if it might be, I should ever account that time well bestowed, which were so imployed. Sir, you oblige mee too much, trouble not your selfe so, I beseech you, seeing you have other affaires that import you more then this; J kisse your hands with all my heart. Sir I have no affaires but such as (for my love to you, and to render you the respects Iowe you) I shall willingly dispense with: besides, your good affection to mee, doth oblige mee much more in a farre greater matter; and ther∣fore I assure you that I have nothing which can hinder meat this time. O good Sir, it is I that must be beholding and indebted to you whiles I live, but I should be sor∣ry to diuert you from your more serious affaires, which I feare cannot dispence with you so long as in your courtesie you speake of. Sir, I will not detaine you here any longer. Here you Boy, carrie those things thither, and in the meane time, Sir, with your permission, I will goe into the Coach. I will not refuse the honour, since it pleaseth you so to conferre it, and that you will goe, though I am very unwilling to trouble you, yet I will
attend you thither. These Gent. shall oblige mee so much as to keepe you companie while I dispatch that bu∣sinesse. To give a Present to a Friend. SIr, here is a Booke which I would present unto you, but I am ashamed to give you a thing of so small value, as is not worthy your acceptance. Alas Sir! you indeare mee too much, you need not entertaine such feares, nor put your selfe to so much trouble; but I may very well be sor∣ry, that I can never meet with a good occasion to returne your favours; I must intreat you ther∣fore to excuse my want of power, and to accept and use my service as a poore part of recompence and satisfaction. Sir, doe not (I beseech you) refuse it because it is little, for (with all my heart) I wish it of a greater value, that then it might bee more proper to your merit. Sir, every publique action that is done so freely, should bee answered with some expression of re∣spect to those that honour us; but I that am not
able at this present to returne you the like cour∣tesie, can onely thanke you for this booke, inten∣ding to reade it often for your sake. Sir, this is a trifle not worthy your remem∣bring, onely I beseech you to reckon me in the number of your friends, and of your humblest servants. Sir, I am yours most affectionately, and so I shall endevour to approve my selfe in all occasi∣ons where you shall please to try me. We need not make tryall of the thing wee doubt not, and for my part I never distrusted the integritie of your affection. That which I said Sir, was onely to assure you of the good will J beare you, and not that I think you have any suspition of me. Sir, I haue a long time knowne the sinceri∣tie of your intentions, and I beseech you to ex∣cuse me, that this present is not correspondent to your merit, and that you will not reflect up∣on the gift onely, but upon my good will and affection wherewith I offer it. Sir, I highly esteeme both the one and the o∣ther, and therefore I shall rest your debter.
To desire some Courtesie of a Friend. SIr, I have a suit to you, but the feare I have to be denied, makes me unwilling to move you in it. Sir, what is it you desire of me, Sir? I am ready to do any thing that may content you, so that it do not exceed my power. Sir, if it be not too troublesome, I shall de∣sire you to make my peace with M. N. for I know you are very powerfull with him. Sir, you cannot trouble me in any thing in the world, and for this businesse I promise you that I will use my best indeavours to give you all the best satisfaction in it that possibly I can. Sir, being I have never deserved this favour, you have a just cause to thinke me both bolde and troublesome: Onely necessitie is my war∣rant, which I hope your courtesie will accept for an excuse; for indeed, Sir, it imports mee much in a businesse of great consequence. Deare friend, my forces are farre short of my desire, notwithstanding I will doe what lieth in mee (by GODS assistance) to attaine your purpose.
Ah Sir, your forces are greater then this af∣faire requires, if it bee your pleasure so to use them; and therefore, I beseech you, and con∣jure you to make triall. Sir, to take away all doubt of my good inten∣tion, and to satisfie your request, I promise you to use all my power and credit, and to moove him in it when I see him next. They say that Opportunity hath all her haire upon her forehead, and that wee cannot hold her when she is past us, because she is bald be∣hinde, and in this occasion especially I feare the danger of delay. Doe you not know that there was one who by one onely demurre, rednced the common wealth of Rome into a quiet government. Yes very well Sir, but we neither live in that time nor place, nor is this businesse of that nature, and though he by his lingring did save his Countrey from that fearefull ruine which threatned it, yet there hath beene an in finite number who have lost whole kingdomes by negligent omitting of good opportunities. And this affaire being so different from that, both in it selfe, and in the qualitie of the persons, requi∣reth likewise another manner of proceeding. It is soone enough, if well enough, I will go a∣bout it immediatly, I meane, to speake with your
man, and beleeve it in a short time you shall see the effects. Farewell till I see you next, and be confident of me. To invite a Friend to Dinner. SIr, you shall oblige me very much if you will do me the honour to come and take a poore dinner with me. I thanke you with all my heart, I have not merited the favour of your courtesie, But I pray you excuse me for this time. Why Sir, you shall do me a great favour if it please you, and for a requitall I shall serve you in all things where it may please you to imploy me. Sir, you are too courteous and perswasive to be refused, and therefore I shall trouble you. You cannot Sir, but you will do me a grea∣ter honour in it then I know how to deserve. Sir, use me as your servant, I beseech you, for I do not affect ceremonies. Truly Sir, it is not because I have any thing to dinner, that is worth your tarrying: But there is no remedie, you must a little exercise your patience with me, as a testimonie of your ove.
If all that are injoyned to abstinence, were well assured of the like sufferings, their pennance would be verie sweet and pleasing. This is an excesse of favour which you do me, therefore I pray you pardon me if I prove troublesome. There needs no pardon where there is no offence, and I tell you that you cannot trouble your servants, and those that esteeme you e∣quall with their lives. But I must rather aske you pardon for having stayed you here to such poore entertainment. Neverthelesse you have it with a good heart. You have honoured me too much, but to re∣quite you I shall alwayes and in all occasions la∣bour to manifest (if my abilitie concurre with my good desires) that I will very freely both use mine owne endeavours and my friends to do you service. At sitting downe to the Table. THere then Sir, I beseech you sit. After you Sir, if it please you. No Sir, I pray you Sir. No I protest, Sir, if it please you, you shall shew me the way. Well Sir, it shall be then to obey you, since you will have it so.
Reason will have it so Sir, but here is a great deale of good meat more then needed, you know excesse is forbidden. Feare it not Sir, what we leave will not be lost, here are people enow in this house to take an order with it, and therefore you need not thinke of it, nor use so many Complements in a house that is wholly at your dispose. But let us drinke I pray you, for good wine warmes the bloud. I thanks you Sir, with your leave I will be bold to drink to your good health, and to drink a whole one. Sir, I thanke you heartily, and after that I will drinke a health to his Majestie, hoping you will do the like. Most willingly Sir, I pray GOD preserve him, and us also. Sir, to the good successe of your journey, and I beseech the divine bountie to blesse it, and to ha∣sten your returne, that we may quickly meet and be merrie together in perfect health, and so I drinke to you. Sir, I shall answer you with the like wea∣pons; to your good health.
Other Complements at sitting downe to the Table. To the Jnvited. ALEANDER. COme my Masters, please it you that wee wash our hands? The invited. After you Sir, if it please you. ALEANDER. Leave Ceremonies, for I cannot abide them. Let us wash, if it please you. The invited. Sir, they are not Ceremonies when a civill and a due respect commands them. You shall be first if it please you. ALEANDER Well, well, seeing you will not be ruled, let us wash together. The invited. Sir, it should not be so, but your desire hath all authoritie upon us. ALEANDER. And what, my masters, will you not please to sit?
The invited. It shall be after you Sir, if it please you, and seeing it appertaineth to you in right and equitie, these ceremonies are needlesse. Aleander. Well Gentlemen, to give you content, I wil sit here. The invited. Sir, you shall advance your selfe if it please you. Aleand. Master N. you shall sit there if you please, for that is your place appointed. N. You make me much ashamed Sir, of the exces∣sive honour which you doe me. Aleander. The cleane contrary way Sir, I doe not ren∣der it according to your merit, for one cannot attribute too much honour to men of your ranke and qualitie. The invited. Sir, J beleeve you mocke mee when you use these termes so farre above my desert, for you know Complements are frivolous among friends, as you and I have bin this many a day. Aleander. One cannot honour you enough againe I re∣peate it.
The invited. Jt is all to the contrarie by your favour, for you cannot doe so little as will not be too much. ALEANDER. Goe to, let us eat I pray you, what are wee here for? shall I carve to you? To entertaine a friend at the Table. SIr, I must desire your patience, that you are so sorrily entertained. Oh good Sir, it cannot be amisse with me in your company, but rather a thousand times bet∣ter then I deserue. I am sorrie we knew no sooner of your co∣ming, for then we had beene better prepared, and whereas now we have nothing but ordi∣narie, and all because you took us unprovided: but there is no remedie, I pray you take such as there is in as good part as if there were more and better. The good will and the deed are both apparant, but what would you more? for my part I would not wish to be better. How soever let us be merrie and cheerfull,
though we have not wherewithall. Sir, I know no cause you have to say so, for I have not seene a table better furnished, nor meat better ordered, what would you wish for more? as for me, I need no urging, I go well enough without a spurre. There is nothing here but what is common; so it hath pleased God that those things which are needfull are easie to bee had: And so like∣wise he hath provided that those things which are not easily gotten are not so necessary; please it you that I cut you some Capon; But let us drinke first. The Master of the feast his excuse to his friends after dinner or supper. Master. GEntlemen, now I crave pardon for ha∣ving stayed you here to such poore enter∣tainment; verily I should bee much ashamed of it, if I were not confident of your love and courtesie, wherein I hope you will excuse my
errour, and impute it to the great content∣ment which I receive in your good company. The invited. Sir, you have prevented us in discharging that account which more properly belonged to us, for wee ought to have taken hold of the first occasion to give you thanks for the good welcome and the good cheere you have made us. But the heart shall be ingaged for the tongue, and shall alwayes make you such actuall expressions of his remembrance by the effects, as he shall be permit∣ted or invited by a fit occasion. Master. My masters recreation is very good after meales, will it please you then to take a turne in the garden. The invited. The company likes well of any thing that shall please you Sir, but perhaps it will be a trouble to you. Master. It cannot trouble me, for at this time I have no such important businesse, besides I cannot have any trouble in this companie, but rather all pleasure and contentment; Let us go then Sirs, if it please you, for I use not to leade my friends out of doores, but rather into the house.
The invited. It shall be then to obey you Sir, since you will have it so. Master. And now Mr. N. what thinke you of this Garden, is it pleasant? The invited. It is a very large one, and well made, it wants nothing but water to keepe him fresh. Master. There is water yonder above, and when there is occasion wee let it runne downe; It comes from that adjoyning Rocke. The invited. See here a very fine convenience, which I per∣ceived not till now; But is this water also good to drinke? Master. Most excellent good, it's cold in Summer, and warme in Winter: and besides that, it is farre lighter then any that we have in all these parts. The invited. That is it which the Physitians commend so above all others, and according to the Pro∣verbe, Good corne is heavie, and good water light.
Master. The way to the Spring is somewhat slippe∣rie and ill-favoured; but one cannot have all commodities in one place. The invited. That is true Sir, and yet every one cannot have such as you have. God keepe you in good prosperitie; and so taking our leaves of you, we recommend our selves to your good grace. To take leave of ones friends at part∣ing from some place. SIr, now is the time that calls to my depar∣ture, and therefore by your favour, I come to take my leave of you. Sir, I thanke you very humbly, and I desire but one thing of you, that is to forget the grosse wel come you have had here. Sir, you shall pardon mee if it please you, for I shall never agree with you in that, For you have done me a thousand times more ho∣nour then ever I deserved of you. It is I Sir that am to thanke you for the pains you have taken to come and see me; But I hope ere long God will give me leave to requite it.
Sir, whensoever it shall please you to doe me that favour as to come to see me, you will oblige me very much, and I shall endeavour to make you welcome, not so well as you de∣serve but as well as my poore power can pos∣sibly attaine to. Well then Sir, I recommend my selfe to your good graces. And I mee to yours, which are much better, I will not bid you farewell, for I verily intend to come and see you one of these mornings, when you shall least dreame of it. I dare you to it, and assure you you, cannot come so soone as I desire, but I doubt me you will not oblige me so much. Sir, goe no further I beseech you. I will not leave you here. You are so too-ceremonious. Permit me to doe what belongs to me, am not I the Master of the house? Now then goe no further if you will oblige me. Well Sir, since you will have it so, I kisse your hands, and remaine your very humble ser∣vant. Footman, my friend, I pray thee commend me humbly to thy Ladie. Sir, J shall doe it my selfe.
Sir, it will be too great a trouble to you. Sir, this is the least part of the service that I owe you, and which I desire to doe for you. You oblige me too much Sir, and for part of recompence, I beseech you serve your selfe with me where you finde me capable. J am yours Sir, and so I take my leave of you without a farewell, because by Gods grace I hope to see you againe shortly.
To bid a friend farewell that is going a journey, or retiring to his Country. SIr, being constrained (by the necessity of my affaires) to leave you, I cannot but with much griefe, part from you, who have so much obliged mée with your noble favours, that I shall ever hold my selfe ingaged to render all the services I am able, both to you and yours. I know very well that I have often troubled you, and for the present, I cannot make you any other satisfaction, then to offer you all that I am, with protestation that I am wholly yours, and shall bee so while I live. Accept then if it please you, my most humble salutes, and doe me the favour to honour me with your commands. Sir, I am very sorry, and much troubled for the losse which J shall have of your good compa∣nie; howsoever since it is of necessitie, that this day I must sustaine this losse, J pray God your departure with us, may bee as profitable to you,
at I desire it, and that wee may (to comfort us in your absence) have this satisfaction, that you shall have more pleasure and contentment in the places more remote, then if you were nearer to us, and in discontent: for I must confesse we have not had the meanes to give you that respect, which is due unto your merits. Sir, I have had nothing here but all con∣tentment, and a thousand times more favours then ever I deserved from you, and your friends likewise, for which I most humbly thanke you. But to make short, Sir, doth it please you to command me any thing? Why Sir, are you ready to goe? Behold Sir, there is nothing stayes mee, but to receive the honour of your Command∣ments, and then you shall quickly see mee mounted. Sir, I shall take it as a great happinesse if you will vouchsafe to honour me with yours. Sir, I thanke you with all my heart, but I stay here, onely to render that respect which I owe unto your merits. Sir, J am utterly confounded at that exces∣sive honour which you doe me.
Alas Sir, this is the least part of my debt, it is I that have received the advantage. I thanke you Sir for the paines you have ta∣ken, if I may serve you in requitall, I shall doe it very gladly. This is no paines Sir, what is this, I could not doe lesse at my departure then take my leave, and give you thankes for all your fa∣vours. Sir, therein I am much obliged to you, but as for that, J will not give the ultimum vale, or the last adieu, for I hope yet wee shall have the happinesse to see you againe one day. That shall bee as it pleaseth God, to whose good graces I recommend you, and mee to yours. Sir, you shall goe no further if it please you. Good Sir let mee goe with you to the next turning, if no further. Sir, no further, I beseech you. But I am ve∣ry forgetfull, permit me (with your favour) to bid my Lady farewell.
An adieu to a Ladie. MAdam, your presence, and your faire vertues would retaine me here a longer time, did not the necessitie of my affaires compell me to this unhappie separation, which I must make, though most unwillingly, and against the proper course of all my strong de∣fires. But I will not leave to honour you, whilest I live, with this assurance from my oath (sweet Madam) that wheresoever I be∣come, in me you shall alwayes have a most af∣fectionate and faithfull humble servant. Sir, I assure you I am very sorrie for your sudden departure, which my eyes would witnesse with continuall weeping, were I not comforted by the hope I have of your safe and quicke re∣turne. Madam, my further stay could but procure your further trouble, and therefore you cannot have any cause to grieve at my departure. Sir, your behaviour and conversation is so pleasant, and your company so honest, that I can∣not but ressent the losse. These are yours Madam, which so insensibly
attract the verie soules of those that know them. But to omit this discourse, which though I should continue while I live, I should rather lessen then increase the glory of your merits; For the present I am to take my leave of you, beseeching God to protect you. Adieu sweet Madam, I recommend my selfe to your good prayers. Adieu good Sir, I pray God keepe you, and grant your journey a good successe, and that we may enjoy the benefit to see you returne speedily, merrily, and in good health.
A courteous Dispute about the first setting out. NOw Sir, I have dispatcht my businesse, it resteth onely that I kisse your hands, and take my leave of you, Adieu Sir. I have told you that I will not part with you here, let us go then if it please you. You shall go first then, I pray you for it be∣longs to you. I pray God deliver me from such an absurdi∣tie, I do not leade any man out of the house. Ha, let us go then and exclude ceremonies, I had rather erre in civilitie then be too trou∣blesome, it shall be to obey you. Sir, J am he that is your humble servant. Sir, Although my bodie may bee absent from you, my heart and my desire shall bee alwayes present with you; and I beseech you to beleeve my promise, which I give you as an assurance; and therewithall I kisse your hands and bid you farewell.
Farewell good Sir, God guide you, I pray you forget us not. To excuse himselfe to some one, and to demand pardon for some offence. SIr, I am verie sorrie for the fault wherein I have offended, and I beseech you that I may taste, as well the sweetnesse of your par∣don as the bitternesse of my repentance; I con∣fesse that I forgot my selfe very much, and I am amazed to thinke how I could do it, espe∣cially since it was so wholly opposite to my designe and purpose, which was never other∣wise then disposed to obey you in all occasi∣ons; but this happened I know not how, whereof I heartily repent me, and therefore I present my selfe before you, to render you what satisfaction it shall please you to re∣quire. But that is not sufficient to excuse such a rude fault as this, which in some sort hath given
a great wound to your owne credit; and I advise you hereafter, to exempt your selfe from such fol∣lies, lest you incurre some suspitious censure of disloyaltie, and of ingratitude towards your best friends. Sir, doe not (for all that I beseech you) ut∣terly exclude mee from your favour, lest you likewise injure the honour of your clemencie, and give some blemish to your courtesie; and which is more, lest you offend God very highly, who commands us to pardon the faults of others, as freely as we desire forgivenesse of our owne. Well, seeing you come in this manner to ac∣knowledge your errour, I will forget it for this time, upon condition that you doe not increase it by a relapse, for then your fault will admit no excuse nor pardon. Sir, I hoped for no lesse from the mildenesse of your good disposition; and I promise you I will keepe such a carefull guard upon all my ensuing actions, that you shall never more have cause to complaine of me. You shall bee welcome hither at all times, so long as you behave your selfe well and discreet∣ly, and therefore let us see you here more often then we have done of late.
Sir, the fault I had committed, was the cause of my long absence, not presuming to appeare before you, during your indignation; but I hope by Gods assistance to repaire my errour by a better life and conversation, as I desire and resolve with a firme and constant purpose. God give you the grace to doe it, and while you walke in that path, I will never leave you; I beseech him to guide you alwaies with his holy spirit, and so adieu to you, and remember to bee advised. Sir I pray God accomplish you with all feli∣cities, and that he wil blesse you with his bene∣fits, as you have obliged me with your libera∣lities; for I cannot requite them, onely this I assure you, I shall never forget them, and so I humbly take my leave of you, with a thousand recommends to your good graces.
Complements at a second appointed meeting. SIr, I have made you stay very long, but I pray you pardon mee, for I could not come any sooner. Sir, this is soone enough, I dranke a cup of wine this morning, to make the time passe mer∣rily while I stayed for you, and now you are wel∣come; and I beseech you to excuse my boldnesse in inviting you to so poore a dinner, which will not equall your ordinarie: but I have great confi∣dence, that in your good disposition, you know very well how to excuse this errour, seeing that amongst friends, we esteeme not so much the food for the body, as that contentment which the minde conceives in the amitie and familiar con∣versation which we have one with another, as for me, you see my custome. Sir, the qualitie you possesse, and the amitie which is betweene us, make me so dearely to esteeme you, that I can never refuse your com∣panie.
For there is nothing in the world which I desire so much as the frequent benefit of your pleasing conversation, as now you see I am so forward, that you neede not call mee twice. I wish Sir, in stead of my poore companie, it would please God to afford some occasion of im∣portance, wherein I might effectually expresse, that which I desire to doe for you. Sir, I never doubted your good will to mee, and therefore I give you many thankes, and I promise you that my intire affection shall ne∣ver faile you in any thing where I am capable to doe you service. Sir, let us leave this discourse I pray you, for I cannot doe any thing that may deserve that value, but I shall still remaine more obliged to you for your regard, having done me the honour to come to my poore house, and afford me the be∣nefit of your good companie. Sir, I see well by your accounts, that you are not a good Arithmetician, excuse me Sir, I pray you, for speaking in this manner, for it is I that have this honour, and I should desire to
enjoy it longer, were it not that my affaires call for my attendance in another place. Sir, being I cannot goe with you any further, by reason of these Gentlemen which expect my companie, I beseech you to excuse mee, and take it in good part that my Man wait of you to your lodging. Ho N. heare you, goe and wait of this Gentleman to his lodging, and doe not leave him till you see him there, and faile not to salute my Cosen his wife in my name, and tell her, I send her a good night, wishing humble recommends.
When one commends our good Horse. SIr you have a good Horse there. Excuse me Sir, this is a poore tit of little worth. Sir, you shall pardon me, he is well made, every limbe hath his just proportion. In that Sir, I shall agree with you, for J bought him for a good one, his head indeed is not amisse, and he carries it well enough, he hath a good foot, and a cleane legge, a good eye, a good haire, a good docke, and that well and long, and to exceed all this, he is well breathed: and such as he is Sir, he is at your dispose. Sir, you honour mee too much, I have not deserved it of you, But I am wholly yours, and that with all my heart: Neverthelesse I will not refuse to use him when I have occa∣sion without your trouble, seeing this offer proceeds from your good will. Sir, you know a friend is another selfe, and therefore we ought to have mutuall respects one to another. Sir, make triall of me when you please, and you shall alwayes finde a congruitie be∣tweene
my words and actions, howsoever I shall bee alwayes carefull to performe my promise. Sir, it is a thing J never doubted, and of my part J assure you of the like, for J may boldly sweare that there is not a man in the whole world hath so much power with me as your selfe. Sir I thanke you for it, I shall take the bold∣nesse to come and visit you very often, and to see how you do. Sir you will oblige me very much, and when you do so, J shall say you are my friend indeed. Sir I shall not faile, and so I take my leave of you, because I have a little businesse. Fare∣well Sir, I am wholly yours.
A Discourse of Exercises. SIr, I pray you tell mee what is your daily exercise, and I shall tell you mine. Sir, I want none, for from eight in the mor∣ning, till ten, I ride the great horse, and after dinner, I use to exercise my weapons. But how doe you bestow your time? I learne to danee, and to play upon the Lute, and I learne French also. Sir, I beleeve your exercises are much plea∣santer then mine, but in the meane time they are not so usefull nor so profitable, being they serve onely for a particular contentment, but mine are usefull both in publique and in private occasions in case of necessitie. You say right Sir, but men of peace doe not desire warre. Nay Sir, it is not that J preferre warre be∣fore
peace, but yet it is good to be provided with defensive weapons. That is true Sir, but in the meane time it is not fit for every man to take up armes, for some∣times it is better to suffer patiently, then to be too sudden in revenge. Sir, that you speake is very true, but who observes it: that tenet is now out of request, which commands us to turne our right cheeke when we are strooke upon the left. I beleeve it well, that for your part you cannot doe it, for you are too hastie, yet this is the holy Scripture, and I would wish you to consider, wee doe not want examples of it; yet wee must not relye upon examples onely, but chiefly upon Gods Commandements. Alas Sir, there are very few now a daies, that thinke of it, and if you should speake thus in some places, they would take you for a Di∣vine. That's true, but for all that, it is fit that armes should have their limits as well as other things. A Magistrate may use them to Gods honour,
and the King service: But private men being allowed to weare them, must not abuse them, nor you must not be offended with me. It is no part of my intention, for I know this proceeds of your good nature, which wisheth no hurt to any one, and what we speake, is but in the way of sport and merriment.
To comfort a friend after the death of some Kinsman. SIr, I desire not to renue your griefe, or a∣gaine to open those wounds which bleed inwardly alreadie in your heart, for this were an inhumane act, rather then the office of a friend, but the cause of my comming is to let you see the just ressentment that I have of Ma∣ster N. your Cousins death, and I sweare to you, that troubles me as much as if it were the nearest of mine owne alliance, for you know wee were alwaies very intimate and familiar friends. Sir, his bloud could not deny him, hee was the best of all my kindred, hee ever beheld mee with a friendly regard, and hee was a great com∣fort to me when hee found me afflicted and trou∣bled in minde, besides the other favours and as∣sistances which I received daily. This indeed I confesse Sir may justly in∣crease our sorrow, but yet wee have reason
to be glad and praise God in this respect, see∣ing hee dyed a good Christian, and after hee was well prepared for his last conflict, where∣in it often happens, that the most assured finde many difficulties. It is true Sir, yet in the meane time, you see his Wife hath a great charge of children, and but little meanes to maintaine them. Sir, what desire you more? God will bee their especiall protector, and hee never for∣gets his charge, and you likewise for your part will not abandon them, as I assure my selfe in that opinion which I have of your good nature. Sir, I know very well that I can expect nothing by it but charge and trouble, but that which grieves me, is his absence, and to finde my selfe deprived of his pleasant and fami∣liar conversation, doth incessantly afflict my minde.
Sir, I will agree with you that it is a matter of great difficultie, and almost impos∣sible suddenly to take away the impressions of such a just ressentment. Yet in the end wee must resolve with holy Iob to bee pa∣tient, saying, God hath given, and God hath taken away, his Name bee praised; and since one may doe thus, this is the best way, for all the teares in the world cannot prevaile with death. Sir, it is easie to give comfort to another, when wee our selves are not sensible of the evill, but when wee are to take it, then it is hard of digestion, especially in such accidents as this. Sir, it cannot bee prevented, and yet you know it is better to dye once for all, then to dye a thousand times by a living kinde of death: to lye a long time sicke in bed, languishing of some painefull and grie∣vous maladie, as wee see many that in the end are compelled to dye after suffering a thousand deaths.
But Sir, if it had pleased God to let him live but five or sixe yeeres longer, he had laid a good foundation to establish his house, and to provide for the preferment of his children, which are now exposed to the incertaine favours of those friends which shall take charge of them, and I feare that those who have most cause, will bee least carefull to provide for them. Sir, in such cases as this, where there is no remedy, wee may say as the great Patriarch Abraham said to his sonne Isaac, God will provide; briefly Sir, you are wise and dis∣creet enough to apprehend such comfort as you thinke most fit. And so I defire your fa∣vour to goe and take order for the dispatch of an important businesse. Sir, I give you many thankes for your paines, and for your friendly visite, whereby I have re∣ceived great comfort: please you to drinke?
Sir, I thanke you with all my heart, it needs not at this time, take comfort in God alone, and you shall see that he will dry up all teares, which might bee tollerable in a woman or a childe, but in a man of your qualitie, I can ne∣ver approve it; excuse mee Sir I pray you. Adieu. FINIS.
