18014 99837254 1569
The abridgement or Summarie of the Scots Chronicles, with a short de∣scription of their originall, from the comming of GATHELVS their first Progenitor out of Graecia into Egypt. And their comming into Portingall and Spaine, and of their Kings and Gouernours in Spaine, Ireland and Albion, now called Scotland, (howbeit the whole number are not extant) with a true Chronologie of all their KINGS. Their Reignes, Deaths and Burials, from FERGVSIVS the first King of Scotland, vntill his Royall MAIESTIE, now happily Raigning ouer all Great Brittaine and Ireland, and all the Isles to them apper∣taining. With a true description and diuision of the whole Realme of Scotland, and of the principall Cities, Townes, Abbies, Fortes, Castles, Towers and Riuers, and of the commodities in euery part thereof, and of the Isles in generall, with a memoriall of the most rare and wonderfull things in SCOTLAND. By IOHN MONIPENNIE. Printed at Brittaines Bursse by Iohn Budge. 1614.
To the most High and Mightie Monarch, IAMES by the grace of God, King of Great Britane, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. IT May be by many iustly (most graci∣ous Soueraigne) imputed to me for no small presumption, to present to your Royall Maiestie, a Prince of so great learning and excellent iudgement, these simple fruits of my vnskilfull endeuours taken in this short abridgement. In most humble and obedient man∣ner, I do preferre vnto your Highnesse these my weake and vnlearned labours, according to my ability, which how vnworthy they be of so great a princely fauour, as wel for the meannesse of me the writer, as for the plain∣nesse and rudenesse of the stile, yet if for the worthi∣nesse of the matter, and of your Maiesties great accusto∣med clemency, vouchsafe then your Highnesse fauou∣rable regard, they shall be as fortunate, as if they had beene composed by greater & more learned men, where∣in briefly ay be seene, the great and infinite mercy of God towards your royall person, that it hath pleased his superexcellent wisedome by his mighty power to pre∣serue your Highnesse ancient Kingdome of Scotland, vnconquered vnder the Empire and gouernment of
one hundreth and sixe Kings, your Maiesties roy∣all progenitors: and in speciall when almost the whole world was brought vnder the Romane Empire by the sword. Also to reduce in one peaceable Monarch, these ancient mighty landes & many Ilands, which haue bene diuided in many seuerall Kingdomes, one of Britons se∣uen of Saxons, one of Scots, one of Pictes, one of Orkenay, and sixe of Ireland,: also some of the valiant and il∣lustre noble actes of your Highnesse most royall and an∣cient progenitors, and of their raignes, liues, deathes, and burials. Accept them most mightie Monarch, I most humbly beseech your royall Maiesty, in your High∣nesse gracious protection, and according to my boun∣den dutie incessantly with all humility, I will pray the great God of all might and power (to his eternall glory) long to preserue your Royall Maiestie, and your graci∣ous Queene in blessed health and peace, to raigne ouer these your Highnesse great vnited Kingdomes, and to enlarge the same, and your Maiesties most royall and hopefull posterity to the worlds end. Your Maiesties most humble, and obedient Subiect, IOHN MONIPENNY.
THE ABRIDGMENT OR SVMMARY OF the Scots CHONICLE. WITH A SHORT DESCRIPTION of their originall from the comming of GATHE∣LVS, their Progenitour out of Graecia into Egypt, and of their Kings and Gouernours in Spaine, Ireland, and Al∣bion: (howbeit the whole number are not extant) with a true Chronologie of all their Kings, lineally descended from FERGVSIVS the first King of Scotland, vnto his sacred Maiestie, now happily reigning ouer all Great Britaine, Ireland, and all the Isles to them appertaining. GATHELVS son of CECROPS, King of ATHENS, by his inso∣lence made many inuasions, in Macedonia, and Achaia, in Grae∣cia. And because he could not suf∣fer correction, he with many vali∣ant Grecians came into Egypt, & followed Pharao in his warres a∣gainst the Aethiopians; who with great cruelty had wasted the most part of Egypt, vnto
Memphis the principall citie of that Realme; Pharao with support of Gathelus vanquished and ouercame the Aethi∣opians in a most dangerous battell. And Gathelus valiantly vanquished and wanne their principall citie called Meroe. After this great victory, he being a lusty person, strong of body, and of a great spirit, wan great fauour with the King and his familiars, that the Kings daughter SCOTA was giuen in marriage vnto Gathelus, with many lands. Shortly after Pharao died, and another Pharao succeeded; who opprest the Israelites with great seruitude and tyranny. Ga∣thelus abhorring such cruelty, conferring with MOYSES; also hauing respons of the Oracles of Egypt, was foreseene of the plagues to come vpon Egypt, made prouision for all things necessary for sayling, and tooke shipping with his wife Scota, his valiant Grecians, and many Egyptians from the riuer Nilus, the yeare of the world 2453. After long sayling and trauell he arriued at the land of Numidia, be∣ing stopped to land, he pulled vp sailes, and with dange∣rous and painfull passage through the Straites, he landed in one part of Spaine then called Lusinia, by his arriuall cal∣led Portgathel, now Portingall: at his landing the olde in∣habitants came against him with arrayed battell, whom he vanquished. He builded one Citie vpon the riuer Munda, then called Brachare, now called Barsolona. Then after he came into the North part of Spaine, now called Galia; where he builded a citie called Brigance, now Compostella, where he reigned with Princely dignity, and instituted lawes, and named his people Scottes, after his wife Scota: for she had born vnto him two sonnes twinnes, HIBER and HEMICVS. He brought with him from Egypt the marble fatall chaire, which was transported to Ireland, and to Albion, now called Scotland; wherein all their Kings were crowned, vntil the time of King Edward the first, who transported the whole ancient regall monuments of Scot∣land, with the marble fatall chaire to Westminster, where it remaineth to this day:
The Scots shall brooke that Realme, as natiue ground, (If words faile not) where euer this chaire is found: Gathelus sitting in his marble chaire within this citie of Brigance, gouerned his people with Princelydignity peace∣ably, and instituted lawes. And seeing his people encrease with such great multitude, and not willing to violate the bande, made with the old inhabitants, being informed by diuers expert explorators, that there was an Isle opposite to Spaine on the North, with a rude people inhabited, ha∣uing no lawes nor manners. Therefore he brought all the shippes he could get with expedition to the next Sea port, with sufficient prouision, with Hiber and Hemicus, accom∣panied with valiant warriours, and ordeyned Hiber to be Admirall to passe the said Isle, which they obeyed: & hoi∣sting sayles with fortunate windes, arriued the fift day after in the said Island. Immediately landing, their people then pitched their Tents on the next trenches. The rude inha∣bitants amazed at the arriuing and landing of such a mul∣titude of warriours, fledde with their cattell and goods in∣to their Cauernes. Hiber commaunding certaine of his warriours to passe forth; and if the inhabitants would bee willingly subdued, no slaughter to be committed vpon them. The inhabitants being brought as prisoners to the Admirall, and seeing him mercifull, rendred themselues and their goods: and he receiued them with such beneuolence, that he suffered the olde inhabitants to encrease with his people, vnder one name and lawe, and called the land Hi∣bernia, now Ireland. Hiber returning into Spaine, left his brother Himecus with a strong garrison of valiant warri∣ours, with wiues and children to inhabite the land, and to holde the same vnder obedience and subiection. At his returne into Spain his father being deceased, he succeeded King, and augmented his Empire, and conquered sundry lands from the Spaniards, hauing with him at all times a strong guard of valiant men. By his puissance and chal∣rie he subdued the people in such manner, that he was hol∣den
in great estimation and reuerence, that they were con∣strayned to seeke his peace; the land being named after Hiber, Hiberia: the Scots and olde inhabitants grew vn∣der one name and bloud with such tender and friendly be∣neuolence (not remembring of old iniuries) each one wil∣ling to defend his neighbour (as well in peace as warres) as his brother or father. Of Hiber descended by long pro∣gression, a great posterity lineally succeeding, amongst whom were many noble and famous Kings; howbeit the whole number of them are not extant. HIMECVS gouerned Ireland in great felicity iu∣stice, and tranquility, both the Scots and the olde inhabi∣tants during his life time. Immediatly after his decease, a∣rose an odious controuersie betweene the Scottes and the olde inhabitants for the gouernement, euery nation con∣tending to haue a gouernour of their owne blood, which contention enduring long time, at last they created two Gouernors, betweene whom was continuall battels and great slaughter on eyther side, through ambition and bur∣ning desire to be sole Gouernor of all Ireland. After long and dangerous battels, the two people broken with sundry displeasures, were constrained to take peace; howbeit the same endured but a short time, each one of them pursuing other with battell; and yet they dwelt many yeares toge∣ther, by enterchange of peace and warres, while at the last the Scots suffering many iniuries, sent their Embassador to METELLIVS, who was then King of the Scottes in Spaine, desiring to haue support against the old inhabitants of Ireland, declaring them to be a rude wilde people, impa∣tient to suffer any Empire aboue them; So that the Scots can haue no tranquility, vnlesse the said people were the more speedily tamed and subdued. This foresaid message was the more acceptable to the King Metellius: for it concerned the Common-wealth both of the Scots nation in Spaine and Ireland, descending (by long progression) of our lineage and blood, and willingly satisfying the afore∣said
Ambassadours request, trusting the same to be no lesse honour and glory to himselfe as profite to his friends. Therefore the King sent his three sonnes HERMONE∣VS, PTOLOMEVS, and HIBERT with a great Armie of valiant men into Ireland, where they with right dange∣rous battels vanquished the olde inhabitants, and brought them vnder subiection. Hermonens returning into Spaine, left his two brethren to gouerne the land, who gouerned the same long time after in great tranquility and iustice, insituting lawes, and instructed the Priests to make insence and sacrifice in the same manner as the Egyptians vsed: so both the people encreased many yeares in great felicity, peace and riches during the Gouernement of Ptolomeus and Hibert, and long after their decease. But too great pro∣sperity engendreth euill maners, and causeth men to worke often displeasures vpon themselues, finding no forraigne e∣nemies to inuade them at home. The people after long peace were diuided for the gouernement, contending for the same with great rigour and slaughter on both sides, vn∣till the one had almost vtterly destroyed the other, if they had not been reconciled by a noble man, named Thanaus, principall Ambassadour, sent by the King, then raigning o∣uer the Scots in Spaine (reioycing of the felicity succeeding to his friends) and to cause them by his prudent consulta∣tion, to encrease together vnder one minde. Thanaus be∣ing a prudent man, bearing nuturall affection to both the parties, perswading them at sundry conuentions to remoue all contention, and to elect one (whom they thought most expedient) to be their King, and to be obedient to him in all their gouernment. Through this perswasion the whole people had such feruent desire to haue one King, that all olde iniuries being forgotten, they appointed Thanaus to elect a King, whom he thought most expedient) and hee seeing their mindes willing to haue a nuturall King, decla∣ring to them that there is in Spaine a noble Prince of great seuerity and iustice, named SIMON BREK, well accusto∣med
with your lawes, and lineally descended from the an∣cient King Metellius, whom he thought most fittest to be their King. The whole people hearing the name of SI∣MON BREK, were well content to haue him their King, because that name was esteemed very fortunate in those dayes. Then after with consent of the whole people, Am∣bassadours were sent into Spaine, to request the said Simon to come into Ireland, to be their King. Hee knowing by graue aduisement the intent of the Ambassadours, proui∣dd a great Fleete of Ships with all things necessary, and finally by prosperous windes arriued in Ireland, where hee was solemnly receiued, and crowned in the chaire of Mar∣ble, which he brought out of Spaine, esteemed as a most rich jewel in those dayes; from the beginning of the world 3314. From the floud of Noah 1658. From the building of Rome 102. Before the birth of Christ 651. He reigned with great felicity peaceably forty yeares, being specially coun∣sailed by the aforesaid Thanaus, to whom he gaue sundry lands, lying in the South part of Ireland, beside the riuer Birsus, which lands are now called Dowdall, where hee dwelt with the people he brought with him out of the fa∣mous citie Brigance, now called Compostella. They were called Brigandes; of whom after by processe of time de∣scended many valiant and noble men, who came with Fer∣gusius the first King in Scotland, by whom al the lands now called Galloway, were then called Brigance, whose inhabi∣tants were euer full of manhood and strongest enemies a∣gainst Romanes, Britaines, and Pickes: Simon deceased, his sonne FANDVF succeeded King: after Fanduf succeeded ETHION: after Ethion succeeded GLAVCVS: after Glaucus succeeded NATHASIL: after Nathasil succee∣ded Rothesay. ROTHESAY was the first King that brought Scots with him into Albion. The first Isle that he inhabited he called after his owne name Rothesay, the remanent Isles were called Hebredes: after Hiber the eldest sonne of Ga∣thelus.
Rothesay hearing the death of his father Nathasil, returned into Ireland, and was there crowned King. The yeare that Scots were brought out of Ireland into Albion, was from the Empire of Simon Brek in Ireland 216. yeares: from the beginning of the world 3530. The Scots spread in sundry parts of Albion, lying farre North, and inhabi∣ted many Isles. The first part that they tooke possession of was named Ardgael, from Gathelus, which now is called Ardgile. They being diuided into sundry Tribes, elected certaine Captaines to euery Tribe, to gouerne them both in peace and warre, hauing the name of their Captaine in great reuerence, swearing by their names; which custome was long obserued in those Isles and the high lands. Then after about 150. yeares, a banished people named Pickes, came forth of Denmarke to search a dwelling place, and after they were inhibited to land in Fraunce, Britaine, and Ireland. They landed in Albion, first in Orknay, of olde called the olde Realme of the Pickes. The Seas betweene Orknay and Caithnes is called Pentland Firth, & the lands now called Loutheane (was of old called Pentland) after the name of the Pickes. Then after they came into Caithnes, Ros, Murray, Merms, Angus, Fiffe and Loutheaue, and ex∣pelled all the olde inhabitants. They were a Ciuill people right ingenuous andcrafty both in peace and warres. Af∣ter their planting in the aforesaid parts, they elected a King to gouerne them, and hold them in iustice, and made great policy in building of munitions, townes, and Castles. And because they knew all people, without issue to succeede, should perish, they sent their Ambassadours to the Scots, to haue their daughters in marriage, shewing (though they were of strange blood) they should not be so smally regar∣ded, seeing they with no lesse prudence then manhood haue sustained incredible dangers both by Sea and land. And now lately conquered (through the beneuolence of the Gods) right plenteous lands with such peace and tran∣quility, that no other people may claime them by reason:
Trusting surely (if the Gods support them) by their owne industry to be equall to any their neighbors, both in peace and warre. Further if the Scots condescended to their ho∣nourable desires, it might be they encreasing together (so strong vnder one bloud) that they might resist the fury of their enemies the better, when it hapned them to be inua∣ded. This Ambassage was not pleasant to the Scots at the first, thinking it vnworthy to haue any society or marriage with an vnknowne and banished people: but by graue ad∣uisement, and being profoundly resolued, and finding themselues as yet not able to resist the force of the Bri∣taines their olde enemies, they determined to giue their daughters to the Pickes in marriage, and to haue a band of peace with them, with conditions that euery one of them shall enioy the lands which perteyned vnto them before the marriage, and to concurre together with their whole puissance, as oft as they were inuaded by enemies. Any that did offence to any of them should be reputed as enemy to them both. And as often as the Crowne of the Pictes should come in question for lacke of an heire, the King to be elected of the neerest of the womans bloud. These con∣ditions accepted on all sides, the Scots gaue their daugh∣ters in marriage to the Pictes. The Britaines suspecting this marriage, and dreading the encreasing of this confede∣rate people vnder one bloud in short time, that neyther might the Britaines for the time present, nor their posterity resist the puissance of these two vnited people. Therfore be∣ing minded to destroy them both, and to inuade them with fraudulent sleights, rather then with any force of battell. And sending their Ambassadorus to the Pictes, allured the Pictes to violate their band with the Scots. By great per∣swasion & crafty dealing of the Britains, the band was dis∣solued; & mouing occasion of battel against the Scots, com∣māded by general edict, no Scots to be found in their boūds at a prefixed day, vnder paine of death. The day being ex∣pired, all Scots within their bounds were killed without
mercy, as breakers of their lawes. The Scots impatient to sustaie such iniuries, killed as many of the Pictes; so there followed continuall killing and murder on all sides, not re∣garding affinity, bloud, time, nor plce. In this manner the peace dissolued, the Pictes denounced battell to the Scots: then after followed continuall incursions and inuasions on eyther parties. The Scots assembling in Ardgiel, were suf∣ficiently resolued, that the battell that they were to holde, was not onely against the Pictes, but also against the Bri∣taines. Therefore it was agreed, to send their Ambassadors to their ancient progenitors and friends in Ireland, to haue their support and counsaile in this most dangerous matter, and for that plurality of Captaines (as often occurreth) rai∣seth sedition: the best is to elect one to haue Empire aboue the rest, by whose manhood and counsaile, they might de∣fend their liues and liberties, against a false and periured people, inuading them without any occasion. The Ambas∣sadours being directed to Ireland, complained of the wic∣ked offence done by the Pictes, and desired support. FERQVHARDVS (then being King of the Scots in Ireland) greatly moued for the displeasure done to his friends in Albion, sent his sonne. FERGVSIVS a wise and valiant Prince, with many valiant souldiers, and to giue them the more esperance, and assurance of permanent and good fortune, hee sent with them the fatall Marble chaire. Fergusius was the more pleasantly receiued by the Scots of Albion, because their Common-wealth approched to great danger, by a most perillous apparant battell. Then after a Councell was called in Ardgiel, where Fergusius made a large Oration, and acceptable Speech. Therefore by graue consultation, they condiscended to be gouerned by Empire of one King, as well in peace as in any trouble appearing against their enemies. Furthermore to remoue all suspition of hatred (because euery Tribe desired, a King of their owne linage) they elected Fergusius, both for his noble bloud, and other
his excellent vertues, to be their King: moreouer he was so approued in martiall deedes and iustice, that no Captaine of the Tribes might be any wayes compared vnto him. FERGVSIVS the first King of Scots (in Albion, now called Scotland) sonne to Ferquhard King of Ireland, was crowned in the fatall Marble Chaire, which hee brought with him (by respons of the Gods) to establish his reigne in Scotland. The yeare from the creation of the world 3641. Before the comming of Christ 330. In the first yeare of the 112. Olimpiade. In the 421. yeare after the building of Rome, about the beginning of the third Monarchy. When Alexander the great vanquished Darius the last Monarch of Persia, in the reigne of Chimarus King of Britaine, the King employed his whole minde to resist the iniury of this battell, moued by the Pictes; hee calling all the Cap∣tains, ordeyned them to be prepared with forty dayes pro∣uision. To passe with him, he made an greement and con∣cord amongst all his Nobles and Captaines, commanding his people to be obedient to their Captaines, hee making sacrifice to his Gods (as the custome was) praying the Gods to take vengeance of the partie that was the first occasion of battell against other, and to graunt him such felicity in his iust defence; that victory might succeed to him with∣out any great damage of his people. The Picts assembled an army, wich many Britaines concurring to their support, ap∣pear'd on eyther side a wicked & vnnatural battel between two confederate people, friends, fathers and sonnes. The Pictes came first io the Scots lands; against whom with no lesse courage then manhood, the King with his valiant Scots, with auncient armes displayed in forme of a Banner, in which was a dde Lion Rampant in a fielde of golde, whilst the Scots and Pictes were in array in each others fight: the armie of Britaines stood in array also, deuising what way they might destroy them both, with fme pur∣pose when the Scots and Pcties were vanquished, the one by the other, that the party victorious should vtterly bee
destroyed by their fresh army: and when both these peo∣ples were destroyed by this fleight, the Britaines might en∣ioy both their Realmes in Albion, without any impedi∣ment. This subtill sleight was discoured to King Fergu∣sius by a banished Britaine, through which both the armies moued no lesse by feare of enemies, then by their own pro∣per damage, prolonged the battell certaine dayes. King Fergusius desiring communication with the King of Picts, who willingly with some of his Nobles, had communicati∣on a long time together, after long conference, and delibe∣rate consultation with their Counsellors on both parties, and ruefull crying of the Pictes wiues, being the Scottes daughters, peace was finally concluded, betweene the two confederate people, vnder these conditions, redresse of all iniuries, being made on all parties. The Britaines (mouers of this battaile) shall be reputed enemies to them both; all other charges to be at the pleasure and will of the two Kings. And when any enemy occurred, that they and their people should conioine together, vnder one minde and or∣dinance. This peace being more strongly corroborate, the Kings returned home. King Fergusius in a most dange∣rous battell, assisted by the Pictes, vanquished the Britains, which time King Coyl or Chimarus (vnwatily kept by his Nobles) was killed in the land after his name then called Coyll, now Kyle in Scotland. After this victory the King called his whole Nobles and Subiects to a general conuen∣tion; and hee making a large and plausible Oration and speech, the Nobles and Subiects condiscended and agreed, that King Fergusius and his posterity should possesse the Crowne of Scotland; whereupon Charters and Euidences were graunted to him and his sucessors for euer. The Kingdome of Scotland being confirmed to King Fergusius, his heyres and successors, with deliberate coun∣sell of his Nobles, he diuided the whole lands then inhabi∣ted by the Scots amongst his Nobles and Captaines of the Tribes by lots or cauils. The first lot chanced or fell vnto
Cornath, Captaine and his Tribe; the land of Caithnes, ly∣ing ouer against Orkeney, betweene Dum misbye and the riuer of Thane: Secondly to Captaine Lutorke the landes betweene the water of Thane & Nesse, now called ROS. This Lutorke came with a band of valiantmen, out of Ire∣land with King Fergusius into Albion. This land of Ros lyeth in breadth from Cromarte to the water of Lochtie. In this countrey was the famous Castle of Vrquhart, of which the ruinous walles remaine in great admiration: Thirdly, to Captaine Warroth, the lands lying betweene Spey and Neffe, from the Almaine to the Irish Seas, the people inha∣bitants of this part (after their Captaine) were called Wars, being seditious, they were expelled, and the Murrayes pos∣sessed that land, and called the same land Murray land: Fourthly, to Captaine Thalis the lands of Boyne, Aynie, Bogewall, Gariot, Formartyn, and Bowquhan. These landes were then called vnder one name, Thalia by the name of their Captaine: Fiftly, to Captaine Martach, all the lands of Marre, Badzenoth and Loth Quhabar. The sixth to Captaine Nouance, the landes of Lorne and Kyntier, with the high places and mountaines thereof, lying from Marre to the Irish Seas. The seauenth to Atholus the lands of A∣thole, for he was descended of the Scots of Spain, and came out of Spaine into Ireland, and with Fergusius he came into Scotland. The eight to Creones and Epidithes, two Cap∣taines of the Tribes, the lands of Strabrawne and Braida∣wane, lying West from Dunkeld. The ninth to Captaine Argathelus, the lands of Ardgile, his people were named Argatheles from Gathelus their first progenitour; but now they are called men of Ardgile. The tenth to Captaine Lolgonas, the lands of Leuenox and Cliddisdale. The ele∣uenth to Captaine Silurch, the lands of Siluria, which Re∣gion is now diuided into Kyle, Carrike, and Cunningham; the inhabitants were right ingenuous and strong. The twelfth to the Brigandes, the lands of Brigance, now called Golloway.
King Fergusius after the diuiding of these lands, he insti∣tuted lawes to represse vice; he builded the Castle of Beri∣gone in Longhquhaber. He past the remanent of his dayes in good peace with the Britaines and Pictes. At the last he was elected as Iudge arbitrall to discerne vpon certaine high Controuersies, chancing amongst his friends in Ire∣land. He accompanied with certaine of his Nobles, past into Ireland and pacified them of all matters, returning home, by a very dangerous tempest perished with all his Nobles that were in his company, vpon a rocke in the Sea, called after his name Craigfergus, the fiue and twentieth yeare of his raigne. In his raigne was Morindus King of Britaines, and Cruthneus Camelon King of Pictes, who builded vpon the water of Carron the Citie of Camelon, the principall and strongest Citie of the Pictes, which resisted the Romanes and Britaines, vntill that Kenneth King of Scotland (who exiled the Pictes out of Albion) brought it vnto vtter subuersion. This Cruthneus Camelon builded also the towne and Castle of Edinburgh, sometime called the mayden Castle; for all the noble young women of the Pictes were nourished, and learned in all skilfull labour of their hands, vntill they were ready to marry. Fergusius departing this present life, as aforesaid a con∣uention was holden by the Nobles, for election of a King. After a long disputation and reasoning, it was concluded by plaine consent of Parliament, and enacted when it hap∣ned their King to decease, and hauing heyres gotten of his body, being children; the neerest of the Kings bloud, and fittest to doe iustice, shall possesse the Crowne for his time; after his death, the Kings sonne shall succeed to the crown without impediment, if he were able thereto: by the same acte it was prohibited children to be Kings. This custome endured long time, which raised much discord in this Realme of Scotland; for the fathers brother raigning in the minority of his Nephew, cast his chiefest busines to destroy him, and likewise the Nephew to the fathers brother for
ambition of the Crowne, through which occurreth conti∣nuall killing of Kings and Nobles, to the great damage of the Realme and Common wealth. 2 FEZITHARIS brother to Fergusius, by the a∣foresaid act, began his raigne the yeare of the world 3666. before the comming of Christ 305. yeares, from the begin∣ning of the raigne of Scotland 26. yeares: he was a good King and seuere Iusticer, and was willing to haue dischar∣ged himselfe of the Kingdome, in fauour of Ferlegus, eldest sonne to his brother Fergusius; which his Nobles would not condiscend vnto, because of the Statute and acte of Parliament lately made, which continued vntill the time of the raigne of King KENETVS the third almost 1205. years: he was killed by the aforesaid Ferlegus the fifteenth yeare of his raigne. Ferlegus the murtherer, and all other participant with him being banished, were fugitiues a∣mong the Pictes, and finding no security of his life, he past into Britaine, where he spent the rest of his dayes in great miserie. 3 MAINVS King Fergusius second sonne, succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 3680. before Christ 291. af∣ter the beginning of the raigne 41. He was a noble King, a good Iusticiar; for he exercised Iustice aires, for repressing of trespassors, and ratified the old league with Crinus King of Pictes, holding good peace with his confederates and Britaines. He died peaceably the nine and twentieth yeare of his raigne. 4 DORNADILLA succeeded his father Mainus in the yeare of the world 3709. before Christ 262. after the beginning of the raigne 70. Hee was a good King, and confirmed peace with the Pictes and Britaines, he deligh∣ting greatly in hunting, races and hounds, made certaine lawes profitable for hunting, which were obserued many yeares after: he died peaceably the eight and twentieth yeare of his raigne. 5. NOTHATVS succeeded his brother Dornadilla,
(whose sonne REVVTHER was a childe not able to go∣uerne by vertue of the aforesaid Statute) the yeare of the world 3738. before Christ 233. after the beginning of the raigne 98. He was an auaritious cruell Tyrant: hee was killed by Dowall one of his Nobles, Captaine of the Bri∣gandes, the twentieth yeare of his raigne. 6 REVTHERVS Dornadella his sonne succeeded the yeare of the world 3758. before Christ 213. after the raigne 118. He being young, (assisted by Dowall) raysed great contention by the perswasion of Ferquhart, Captaine of Kentire and Lorne (cousen to Nothatus the tyrant late killed) a man of subtill wit, and hauing great ambition to the Crowne. Betweene the aforesaid parties there was cruell warres: Ferquhart being fugitiue in Ireland returned being assisted with many Irish men, with the inhabitants of Kyntire, Lorne, Ardgile, Caithnes, Murray, and with a great armie. Dowall resing, came with a great power (accom∣panied with the young King and the King of Pictes) and many other his friends; there was a cruell battell and kil∣ling of Chiefetaines and Nobles on both parties. The King of Pictes with many of his Nobles pittifully killed Reuthe∣rus, the young King pursued and taken at the Castle of Ca∣lender. By this vnhappy battell was such terrible slaugh∣ter, that neither Scots nor Pictes were left liuing suffici∣ent to inhabite their Realmes, nor to withstand their ene∣mies. Afterwards the Scots and Pictes were most cruelly inuaded by the Britaines, and a great multitude killed, the rest exiled. King Reutherus and his people past into Ire∣land, and the Pictes past into Orkney. King Reutherus re∣turning from Ireland, and the Pictes with their King Ge∣thus returning from Orkney, they gaue battell to the King of Britaines, and obtayning victory by the high and soue∣raigne manhood, and valiantnesse of the foresaid King Reuthorus, the Britaines rendred all the forts, landes, and townes pertayning to the Scots and Pictes, with faithfull promise neuer to inuade them in time comming. This
peace being concluded, the Scots, Pictes and Britaines con∣tinued in great tranquility many yeares after: the King en∣during the rest of his dayes, had good peace, and died the sixe and twentieth yeare of his raigne. 7 RHEVDA succeeded his brother Reutherus in the yeare of the world 3784. before Christ 187. after the be∣ginning of the raigne 144. He was a good King, he caused sepultures to be made for noble & valiant men: he brought artificers into his Realme, and instituted sundry good lawes. In his time came certaine Orators, Philosophers from King Ptolomeus of Egypt, who were pleasantly recei∣ued and well entertained, because they were descended of the Egyptians his auncient forefathers. These Orators did write and consider the situation of the hilles, mountaines, vallies, riuers, lockes, frithes, Isles, townes, and forts within the Realme of Scotland, and the lands thereto pertayning, as also to the Pictes. He raigned peaceably sixteene yeares, and resigned the crowne to THEREVS, sonne to King Reutherus. 8 THEREVS Reutherus sonne succeeded in the yeare of the world 3799. before Christ 171. after the raign 158. He appeared in the first sixe monethes to be a vertu∣ous Prince; but after he became an vnwise cruell tyrant. Therefore being degraded of all honor, he was exiled. And Conan Captaine of the Brigandes elected to be gouernor, who gouerned the Realme peaceably during the exile of Thereus, who died in the Citie of Yorke in misery the twelfth yeare of his raigne. 9 IOSINA succeeded his brother Thereus the yeare of the world 3810. before Christ 161. after the raigne 170. He was a peaceable and good King, ratifying peace with his confederates the Pictes, and also with the Britaines: he was a good Medecinar and Herbestar. In his time were brought to his presence in Berigone. Two venerable Phi∣losophers, pleasant of visage almost naked, being Priests of Spaine, passing from Portingall to Athens, and by vnmer∣cifull
tempest, were Ship-broken at Ros, their shippe and company with Marriners all perished, they onely saued. Af∣ter refreshing and good entertainment, the King desired and demaunded of them, what they vnderstood by their science of the nature of the ground of Scotland, after good and deliberate aduisement (so farre as they might conie∣cture) there was more riches and profite to be gotten with∣in the veynes of the earth of Scotland then aboue; for it was giuen more to the winning of Mines and mettals then any production of corne. They knew this by the influence of the heauens. Also they learned the people to worship onely God the Creator, prohibiting them to make sacrifice (as their custome then was) to Isis and Apis, the Gods of the Egyptians, but only to make their sacrifice, prayers, and adoration in their Temples (without any imagery) to the eternall God, creator of heauen and earth, which the peo∣ple for the most part obserued long time. King Iosina be∣ing a vertuous Prince died in peace the foure and twenti∣eth yeare of his raigne, and buried at Berigone. 10 FINNANVS succeeded his father Iosina the yeare of the world 3834. before Christ 137. after the raigne 194. a wise and vertuous King, a good Iusticiar, with aduice of his Nobles, rewarding them honourably after their deser∣uings, winning the hearts of his people, ruled with great fe∣licity, encreasing in riches: hee did institute Prelates and Clerkes to be in the Isle of man, instructing Noble mens children in their youth. This vertuous King married his sonne Durstius with Agafia, daughter to the King of Bri∣taines: he wan great fauour among them; he visited the King of Pictes, who was vexed with a vehement feuer in Camelon: he died there the thirtieth yeare of his raigne, and was brought to Berigone, and there buried among the Sepultures of his progenitors. 12 DVRSTIVS succeeded his father Finnanus the yeare of the world 3864. before Christ 107. from the be∣ginning of the raigne 224. a cruell and traytercus tyrant,
killed in battell by his Nobles the ninth yeare of his raigne. 12 EVENVS primus succeeded his brother Durstius the yeare of the world 3873. before Christ 98. after the raigne 133. a wise, iust, and vertuous King. He was the first that caused his Nobles and subiects to giue their oath of fidelity; he executed iustice seuerely in all the partes of his Realme. At length there came Ambassadours from the Pictes, shewing that the Britaines were in armour, purpo∣sing to besiege their Citie Camelon: the King to assist his confederate friends, came with expedition against the Bri∣tains, Scots and Pictes, went forward with great courage: the Britaines with no lesse audacity on the other part, fol∣loweth a very dangerous battell, with vncertaine victory, vntill the night seuered them. The confederate Kings see∣ing their armie broken, retired in the night. The Britaines so broken, and dispayring of new support retired in the same manner as discomfited people; their Campe standing with their carriage. The confederate people aduertised hereof, returned and parted the spoyle by custom of armes. The King returned to Berigone, rewarded their friends that were slaine in the said battel, and others promoted to pub∣like offices, some with riches and goods: and the rest of his dayes he was a seuere Iusticiar, and died in peace the nineteenth yeare of his raigne; buried in Dunstaffage. 13 GILLVS bastard, sonne to Euenus, vsurped the crown, and trayterously killed two sonns of Durstius, con∣tending for the crowne in the yeare of the world 3892. be∣fore Christ 79. after the raigne 252. A crafty tyrant, killed in battell by Cadellus Captaine of the Brigandes; the second yeare of his raigne his head cut off, his body buried in Dunstaffage. 14 EVENVS secundus, Donallus sonne, King Finnans brother, succeeded in the yeare of the world 3894. before Christ 77. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 254. A good Iusticiar, ciuill, vertuous and peaceable King.
Cadallus after the killing of Gillus, returning out of Ire∣land with his victorious army, by rage of Tempest were al∣most all perished; Cadallus was truely rewarded with ma∣ny landes by the King, and comforted by him concerning his great losse of Nobles and friends. King Euenus marry∣ing Siora daughter of Gethus, King of Pictes, confirmed the olde band. After that hee vanquished Balus King of Orkney, who finding no way to escape, killed himselfe: hee builded Innerlothy and Innernes: hee resigned the crowne to Ederus, giuing him wise and good counsaile: he died in peace the seuenteenth yeare of his raign, buried in Dun∣staffage. 15 EDERVS Durstius sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 3911. before Christ 60. after the raigne 271. a wise, valiant, and good King. Bredus of the Isles (cousen to Gillus, killed as is before mentioned) made insurrection. Shortly after the King pursuing him and his associates, they were all taken captiues, and many with the said Bredus kil∣led. Cassibilian King of Britaines, sent his Ambassadours to the King of Scots, desiring support against Iulius Caesar the Romane Emperour, who was ready with most dread∣full Ordinance to come into Albion. The King and No∣bles receiuing the Ambassadours courteously, Androgeus speciall. Ambassadour, after a large and serious Oration, the King and Nobles being aduised, sent vnto London tenne thousand chosen men, vnder the conduct and gouernment of Cadallan and Dowall, Captaines of the Brigandes and Lorne. Also an army of Pictes came at the request of King Ederus. The Britaines were raised in great esperance of victory by the aide of Scots and Pictes; for they had no little confidence in their manhood and chiualry: King Cassibilian went forward with his whole power, against the Romanes there ensued a dangerous and doubtfull bat∣tell; at the last the Romanes were fugitiue, and being min∣ded to renew the battell, Iulius (hearing of the great de∣struction of his Ships) changed his minde, hoisted sayles in
the night, and returned into Fraunce, leauing behinde them a great prey of goods, when Iulius Caesar was forced to a∣uoide Albion. The Britaines, Scots and Pictes parted the spoyle gotten in his Campe by custome of armes, reioycing of this glorious victory. Cadallane and Dowall, richly re∣warded by Cassibilian, returned with the Scots army; at whose comming the King was greatly reioyced; then fol∣lowed such loue and kindenesse betweene the Britaines, Scots and Pictes, that it appeared them to liue in perpetu∣all peace. The King passing to Innernes, was certainly en∣formed by sundry Merchants strangers, that Iulius had pa∣cified Fraunce to his Empire, and making prouision for a new armie, to returne into Britaine, to reuenge the iniuries done vnto him the last yeare, he sends his Ambassadours to Cassibilian, promising (if he pleased) to send ten thousand chosen men vnto his aide and support. The Britaines (mo∣ued with vaine arrogancy) refused to haue any supply of Scots or Pictes: Iulius returning into Britaine, was three sundry times put backe, but at the last Cassibilian was van∣quished, and his whole valiant Captaines taken or killed, and his lands made to pay three thousand pound of siluer to the Romanes for tribute. Iulius sendeth his Ambassa∣dours to the Scots and Pictes, offering them conditions of peace two seuerall times. They were resolute to remaine free, not to be subiect, and refusing all conditions of peace, were willing to defend their liues and liberties. Iulius be∣ing minded to inuade the Scots and Pictes, was aduertised of a suddaine vprore in Fraunce; for which cause he passed into Fraunce: Murket Gildus nephew made insurrection against the King. Therefore he sent Cadallane with armed men, who hanged Murket with his complices. The King continued in good peace the rest of his dayes; hee died peaceably the forty eight yeare of his raigne: buried in Dunstaffage. 16 EVENVS tertius succeeded his father Ederus, the yeare of the world 3959. before Christ 12. after the raigne
319. He was a luxurious, auaritious tyrant, retayning a hun∣dred Concubines, and not being saciate with them, he was taken in a battell captiue, and imprisoned, and was killed by a yong childe the first night, the childe was executed on the morrow, the seuenth yeare of his raigne, buried at Dunstaffage. 17 METELIANVS Ederus brothers son, succeeded the yeare of the world 3966. before the comming of Christ 4. years; after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 326. A very modest, ciuill and good King, peace being vniuer∣sally at the birth of our Sauiour Christ. The Romane Em∣perour Augustus sent his Ambassadours into Britaine, re∣questing the Britains to continue peace, with whom the King sent manyrich jewels to August{us} to be offered in their Capitoll: he wan sure amity of them, which endured long. In this time were in Rome Vrgil, Horace, Od, Tullius, Marcus Varro, Straba, Titus, Liuius Salustius, with many other learned men: he died peaceably the nine and thirti∣eth yeare, of his raigne; buried in Dunstaffage. 18 CARATACVS Metellanus Sisters sonne suc∣ceeded in the yeare of the world 4005. in the yeare of Christ 35. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 365. He enioying the great treasure and riches, left by King Metellanus, exceeded all the Kings in Albion in riches, being wise and valiant, pacifying his Realme from all vp∣rore and rebellion, specially in the Isles, and executing se∣uere iustice. The Britaines at this time rebelling against the Romanes, sent their Ambassadors to Caratacus, desi∣ring support against the Romanes, he first reproching them for their wilfull refusall. The Scots offering them support, wisely counselling them to solicite the Normanes, Picards, Barteners and all them on the Sea coast, to rebell against them, and to kill the Souldiers, promising assistance of the Kings of Albion, with money and valiant warriours, both by Sea and land. The Romanes shortly inuading the Bri∣taines in a dangerous battell vanquished them, and killed
their King Claudius Emperour: and Vespasian comming into Britaine subdued them againe, and passing into Ork∣ney subdued the same, and brought Ganus King of Orkney his wife and children in his triumph to Rome. The Bri∣taines comming to Yorke, made new insurrection, assisted by Caratacus King of Scots, and Congestus King of Pictes, against whom Plancius Romane Gouernour, and Aruira∣gus then King of Britaines came with a great Armic. Cara∣tacus being elected Generall, there followed a cruell and dangerous battell, with vncertaine victory vntill the night separated them on either parties: Plancius on the morrow seeing his great losse, specially of his horsemen, returned to London, and Caratacus returned to Yorke: the next yeare Vespasian with many legions of Romanes were sent into Britaine. Aruiragus assisting with the rest of the Britains, conuened at Yorke threescore and fiue thousand chosen men. The consederate Kings came with threescore thou∣sand valiant warriours: there was a terrible and cruell bat∣tell. The Albions (notwithstanding their great valiant∣nesse, were discomfited by the prudent gouernement of Vespasian, the King of Pictes killed, the whole Britaines being killed except sixe hundred with their King. Carata∣cus returned with a few number to Brigance. Vespasian wintered in Yorke, and in the Spring besieged and wanne Camelon, wherein was found many rich monuments and jewels, with a precious crowne of gold, set about with ma∣ny precious stones of diuers colours, with a sword with hilts of golde, which Uespasian vsed in all his warres, hee remayning in Camelon. Caras assembled a new armie, against whom Plancius was sent with a great armie; a cru∣ell battell ensued. The victory at last succeeded to the Ro∣manes. The rest of the Scots (that escaped this sorrowfull battell) were fugitiue to the mountaines. King Caratacus sore wounded, was brought with great difficulty to Dun∣staffage. Vespasian sending his messengers to Caratacus, promising (if he would be obedient to the Romane Em∣pire)
that he should remaine in honours, and be reputed and holden as a friend to the Senate, and people of Rome; who answered that the Kingdome of Scotland was as free to him as the Kingdome of Romanes was to Caesar. Vespa∣sian returning to Rome Caratacus assembling a new army; the Romanes encountering him with a great multitude, there followed a cruel and terrible battel, long with vncer∣taine victory; at the last the Romanes obteyned victory. Caratacus returned to Dunstaffage. Plancius dying at Camelon, Ostorius Scapula was sent by the Emperor in his place, who after sundry rebellions of the Britaines conque∣red them, he came within the bounds of Scotland. Carata∣cus gathered a new armie of forty thousand valiant men; there ensued a dangerous and terrible battell, the victory succeding at last to the Romans. Caratacus wife, his daugh∣ter and brother were taken, himselfe returning to Carta∣munda his step-mother, Queene of Scots (in whom he tru∣sted) but vnworthily he was by her betrayed, and rendered to the Romanes. King Caratacus was sent with his wife, daughter and brother to Rome, where he was greatly ad∣mired, and honourably of the Emperour entertayned, and remitted freely with his Queene, daughter, and brother to returne home, restoring all his lands againe, he remayning the rest of his daies in good peace, died the twentieth yeare of his raigne, and buried in Dunstaffage. 19 CORBREDVS primus, succeeded his brother Ca∣ratacus in the yeare of the world 4025. in the yeare of Christ 55 after the raigne 385. a wife King and good Iusti∣ciar. He conuented his Nobles, and tooke counsaile of Venisius, the husband of Cartamunda his step-mother, Queene of Scots, who by erafty sleights had taken the a∣foresaid Venisius her husband, and sundry of his friends, and deteyned them prisoners, purposing to render them into the Romanes hands. The King impatient thereof, came and relieued them, commaunding her to be buried quicke: after a cruell battell betweene the Romanes and the Scots
and Pictes, peace was concluded. The Romanes shall pos∣sesse the lands of Britaine by them conquered, without in∣uading of Scots or Pictes, then after by commaund of Ne∣ro. Veraneus was sent into Britaine, who shortly died, Woada, sister to Corbredus Queene of Britaine, sent to her brother, complayning of her miserie & trouble, her daugh∣ters deflowred, her selfe shamefully beaten by vnmercifull Romanes. Corbredus moued herewith, renued the band with the Pictes, and they raysing a great armie, killed all the Romanes they might apprehend, and wanne in their iourney Barwicke, being then the most populous towne of that Region. In this time there came a people called Murrayes out of Almaine, with their Captain Rodrik, put forth and expelled out of their natiue land, being inhibi∣ted Originall of the most ancient sur∣name of Mur∣rayes. to land in France and Britain, arriued in Forth between Louthiane and Fiffe. They were sworne enemies to the Romanes, reioycing greatly that they might haue occasion to be reuenged vpon their enemies; requesting the confe∣derate Kings to suffer them to passe formost, in support of their people; and (if it chanced the Romanes to be van∣quished) to graunt them wiues that they might encrease vnder one bloud with the Scots. Their conditions were graunted to the Murrayes. The confederate King with the Murrayes went forwards, and ioyning with the vali∣ant Queene of Britaines Woada, who reioycing of her bro∣ther King Corbredus and the King of Picts comming, after an Oration and comfottable Speech made by her: prof∣fering her with fiue thousand Ladies, armed to passe in the front of the battell, against the vnmercifull and shamefull deflowrers of Virgins and Matrons, the cruell Romanes. The confederate Kings allowing her courage, past for∣wards, Cattus the Romane Gouernor with arrayed armes came to resist them: there followed a sharpe battell: the horsemen of the Romanes being vanquisht, the rest were fugitiue with Cattus, sore wounded escaped and returned into Fraunce. The Albions departed the spoyle and riches
of this field amongst them, and killed the Romanes in all parts where they might apprehend them: in this battell were killed threescore and ten thousand Romanes, and thir∣ty thousand Albions, had not Swetonius Romane Legate come hastily into Britaine, with two legions and ten thou∣sand warriours of sundry Nations, the Albions had beene perpetually deliuered of the Romanes: Woada the Queene hearing of the new armie of Romanes, assembled a new and great armie of Britaines, Scots and Pictes, and Mur∣rayes; there followed a bloudy and terrible battell. At last the Albions being vanquished, fourescore thousand killed: the Murrayes almost killed with their Captaine Roderik, Woada killed her selfe, to escape the iniury of the Romanes; her two daughters were taken and brought armed to Swe∣tonius. The eldest daughter was married vnto a noble Ro∣mane named Marius, who after was by command of Caesar made King of Britaines. Corbredus broken with this sor∣rowfull battell, returned with the rest of his armie into Scotland, and gaue to the rest of the Murrayes (that esca∣ped out of the field) all the lands betweene Spey and Inner∣nes, which lands were called after them Murray land: for the olde inhabitants being seditious and troublesome were partly expelled. The Murrayes were then marryed vnto Scottish Virgins, and remained vnder one bloud & friend∣ship. Corbredus the King continued the rest of his daies in peace, and died the eighteenth yeare of his raigne: buried in Dunstaffage. 20 DARDANVS nephew to Metellanus succeeded, being a lusty person, faire of visage and body: hee was welbeloued of the people, in the yeare of the world 4042. the yeare of Christ 72. after the raigne 402. He appeared in the beginning to be a good King; but being within three yeares degenerate, became an odious tyrant, and would haue trayterously caused to be slaine, the two sonnes of Corbredus remayning in the Isle of Man vnder discipline. This Tyrant at last was killed in battell, and beheaded by
his Nobles the fourth yeare of his raigne, without buriall. 21 CORBREDVS secundus, surnamed Galdus, Cor∣bredus primus son succeeded, an excellent person, endowed with sundry vertues and high prerogatiues, in the yeare of the world 4046. the yeare of Christ 76. after the beginning of the raigne 406. a valiant and couragious King. He re∣newed many battels against the Romanes, and was often victorious: at this time arriued in Forth a company of Al∣maines, named Vspians, banished out of their natiue land; for killing of a Romane Captaine and his band, they were pleasantly receiued, and ordayned certain lands to be inha∣bited by them, beside the Murrayes, for they were of one bloud. Agricola remayning in Britaine eight yeares with his Romanes, had sundry victories against the Scots and Picts. Domitian the Emperour, enuying Agricolaes pro∣sperous estate in Britaine, sent hastily letters for him; at whose comming to Rome he was poysoned by commaund of the said Domitian. GVENVS TABELLIVS was made Gouernor of Britaine, dissention engendred among the Romanes for the gouernement. King Corbredus sur∣named Galdus (being by his explorators) aduertised hereof, came with a new armie of Scots and Pictes against the Ro∣manes: and finally their Captain with many Romans were killed. The Scots with the Picts following the whole day; and killing them where they might apprehend them. The King assembling the Scottes and Pictes, parted the rich spoyle of their enemies amongst them as they had deser∣ued. Afterward the Scots and Pictes pursued cruelly in all parts the Romanes. The Romanes conuenting them, ele∣cted Chelius to be their Gouernour, there followed a most dangerous battell, at last the Romanes were vanquished and pursued with continuall killing vnto Calidon wood. The confederate Kings came with their armies into Bri∣gance: the Romanes assembled themselues in most feare∣full ordinance, a company of Britaines (sent by Marius their King, in support of the Romanes) came to the confe∣derate
Kings. There followed a terrible and bloudy bat∣tell, the Romanes being vanquished and compelled to re∣tire to their Tents with great killing of them, defended their Tents with great manhood, vntill the night appro∣ched. The Scots were vigilant all night, and attending that their enemies should not escape; others were making En∣gines to breake downe their Tents, and Trenches. The Romanes seeing so great preparation against them, and no way to escape the danger, sent their Orators to the confe∣derate Kings, most humbly entreating peace, on what con∣ditions pleased them. After long consultation, peace was graunted. The Romanes to passe and render all lands, forts and munitions pertayning to Scots and Pictes, with all the goods taken violently from them during the warres, and to remaine their friends at all times after. After this most valiant King Corbredus Galdus, came to Epiake the princi∣pall Citie then of Scotland. The rest of his dayes he conti∣nued in peace, exercising seuere Iustice: he died peaceably the fiue and thirtieth yeare of his raigne: buried in Dun∣staffage. 22 LVCTACVS succeeded his father Corbredus Galdus in the yeare of the world 4080. in the yeare of Christ 110. after the raigne 440. an odious and cruel tyrant, killed by his Nobles the third yeare of his raigne: buried in Dunstaffage. 23 MOGALDVS Corbredus secundus sisters sonne, succeeded the yeare of the world 4083. the yeare of Christ 113. after the raigne 443. a good King and victorious in the beginning of his raigne, gouerning his people with great iustice, and obtayned a great victory against Lucius and his Romanes, by the assistance of the Pictes in West∣merland and Camber; obteyning a rich spoyle of the Ro∣manes, which they parted by law of armes. Afterwards the King did degenerate into a cruell tyrant. In his time A∣drian the Emperour came into Britaine, and builded the wall of Adrian, deuiding the Britaines from the Scottes
and Pictes a great wall made of fewell, and earth, and turues, from the mouth of Tyne, ouer against the Almaine Seas, to the floud of Eske, at the Irish Seas fourescore miles in length: he was killed by his Nobles for his tyrannie and odious life the thirty sixt yeare of his raigne: buried at Dunstaffage. 24 CONARVS succeeded his father Mogaldus the yeare of the world 4119. the yeare of Christ 149. after the raigne 479. a cruell tyrant, degraded and imprisoned by his Nobles (and Ardgadus Captaine of Ardgile, made Gouernour, a good and seuere Iusticiar) he died in prison the foureteenth yeare of his raigne: buried in Dunsstaffage. 25 ETHODIVS primus Mogaldus sisters sonne, suc∣ceeded the yeare of the world 4133. the yeare of Christ 163. after the raigne 493. a good Iusticiar, who holding sundry battels against the Romane Captaines Victorine Trebellius and Pertinax, neere the wall of Adrian, & mini∣string good iustice, oppressing rebels, was trayterously kil∣led by an Harper (whom he trusted) the three and thirtieth yeare of his raigne; buried in Dunstaffage. This Harper was most cruelly executed. 26 SATRAEL Ethodius primus succeeded the yeare of the world 4165. the yeare of Christ 195. after the raigne 525. a cruell tyrant: he was slaine by one of his Courtiers the fourth yeare of his raigne: buried in Dunstaffage. 27 DONALDVS primus, firstChristian King of Scot∣land, succeeded his brother Satrael, in the yeare of the world 4169. in the yeare of Christ 199. from the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 529. a good and religious King (in his time Seuerus the Emperour came into Britaine) af∣ter many incursions made by the Scots and Pictes, in abo∣lishing the wall of Adrian. Anthonius Seuerus sonne go∣uerned Britaine, and builded and repaired the wall of A∣drian strongly with Towers Seuerus dying. Anthonius kil∣ling his brother Getus, was Emperour. He was the first that coined money of golde and siluer, and imbraced the
Christian faith: he died in peace the eighteenth yeare of his raigne; buried in Dunstaffage. 28 ETHODIVS secundus Ethodius 1. sonne, succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 4186. the yeare of Christ 216. after the raigne 546. anvnwise and base minded King: the Realme prudently gouerned by his Nobles, he was kil∣led by his guard the sixteenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage. 29 ATHIRCO succeeded his father Ethodius, the yeare of the world 4201. the yeare of Christ 231. after the raigne 561. a good Prince in his beginning; afterwards being degenerate, and pursued by his Nobles, for his viti∣ous life (killed himselfe) the twelfth yeare of his raigne. 30 NATHALOCVS succeeded in the yeare of the world 4212. the yeare of Christ 242. after the raigne 572. a cruell tyrant, killed by his Nobles (vsurped the crowne) the eleuenth yeare of his raigne. 31 FINDOCVS Athicroes sonne, succeeded the yeare of the world 4223. the yeare of Christ 253. after the raigne 583. a good and valiant King: hee was killed at a hunting, by instigation of his brother Carance, and Donald Lord of the Isles. The Traytors killers of him being tor∣mented to death, and Carance exiled the eleuenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage. 32 DONALDVS secundus, succeeded his brother Findocus the yeare of the world 4234. the yeare of Christ 264. after the raigne 594. a good King: he was wounded in battell; and being vanquished by the insurrection of Donald of the Isles, three thousand of his armie killed, and two thousand with their King taken, the third day with melancholy died, the first yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage. 33 DONALDVS tertius Lord of the Isles (vsurped the Crowne) the yeare of the world 4235. the yeare of Christ 265. after the raigne 595. a cruell tyrant, killed by Crathalinthus his successor (at which time there was vni∣uersall
persecution of the Christians vnder the Empire of Decius) the twelfth yeare of his raigne. 34 CRATHILINTHVS Findocus son, succeeded the year of the world 4247. the year of Christ 277. after the raigne 607. a valiant good Iusticiar, and godly King. Hee purged the land of superftition, planting the true Christian Religion. In this time chaunced in the hunting betweene Scots and Pictes discord, so hastily that there were many killed on both parties. Carance brother to Findocus or Carasus 77. Britaine King, exiled for suspition of his slaugh∣ter, was long in the Romanes warres, with Dioclesian Em∣perour, and vsing himselfe valiantly, returned into Albion with many valiant warriours and great riches, placed his people in Westmerland, being reconciled with the King, he at length agreed the two long confederate kings & people. Carance assisted by the twoconfederate Kings with a great army in three battels, comming to Yorke, was resisted by Quint{us} Bassianus, Captain of Britains, whom he killed, with many valiant Romans. After this battell victoriously won, against the Romans, & the rich spoyle, parted according to the law of arms, Carance with his victorious armie, past to London, where he was receiued with great reuerence, and possessed the crowne of Britaine, contrary to the Empire of the Romans; reteyning in his companytwo thousand Scots & Picts continually for a guard, he being assaulted in battel by the Romanes and Britaines, was alway victorious. The seuenth yeare of his raigne in Britaine hee was killed by Alectus Romane Captaine. King Crathalinthus ended the rest of his dayes in good peace, and died the foure and twentieth yeare of his raigne, buried at Dunstaffage. 35 FINCORMACVS Father, brother sonne to Crathilinthus, succeeded the yeare of the world 4271. the yeare of Christ 301. after the raigne 631. a godly valiant King: he was a worthy promoter of Christian Religion in Scotland; at which time Traherus Romane Captaine with many legions sent by Constantinus Emperour into Bri∣taine,
to represse Octauius then King of Britaines, being expelled, was fugitiue in Scotland. Traherus assembling a great Armie against the King of Scots, and Octauius King of Britaines (whom the foresaid King of Scots refused to render) being solicited friendly, and therefore sharpely and proudly manaced by the said Traherus, followed a cruell and dangerous battell; the Romanes finally vanquished, and sixteene thousand of the Romanes killed, and fifteene thousand Albions. Fincormacus and Octauius pursued vn∣till they came to Yorke, where the two Kings were plea∣santly receiued by the Nobles of Britaine. Octauius resto∣red to the Crowne Fincormacus for his assistance was per∣petually confirmed with an oath to him and his successors, the lands of Westmerland and Cumber (which Carance had graunted in his time to the Scots and Pictes for the assi∣stance of him by King Crathilinthus against the Romanes) King Fincormacus continued the rest of his dayes in peace with the Britaines and Pictes, and died the seuen and for∣tieth yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage. 36 ROMACHVS brother, sonne to Crathilinthus, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4318. in the yeare of Christ 348. after the raigne 678. a cruell tyrant, killed and beheaded by his Nobles: the third yeare of his raigne; in whose time Arrius beganne, and Ireland became Chri∣stians. 37 ANGVSIANVS Crathilinthus brother sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4321. in the yeare of Christ 351. after the raigne 681. a good and valiant King; Nectanus King of Picts, to reuenge the killing of Romanes, gathered an armie against the Scots, there followed a sharp battell. The Scots being victorious, and many of the No∣bles of the Pictes killed, and their King fugitiue vnto Ca∣melon their principall Citie. After that the Pictes renued battell, and came to the wood of Calidone, where the King of Scots with a great armie ioyned battell, with great cru∣elty, both the Kings were killed, and many of their No∣bles,
the third yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage without succession. 38 FETHEIMACHVS another brother, sonne to Crathilinthus succeeded in the yeare of the world 4324. in the yeare of Christ 354. after the raigne 684. Hee was a good and valiant King, and victorious against the Pictes, and killed their King in battell: he was trayterously mur∣thered in his owne chamber by two distembling Pictes and an Harper. The third yeare of his raigne, buried in Dunstaffage. The murtherers were apprehended and most cruelly tormented. At this time S. Andrewes Church was builded by the King of Pictes, at the request of Saint Re∣well. 39 EVGENIVS primus Fincormacus sonne, succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 4327. in the yeare of Christ 357. after the raigne 687. a vasiant, iust, and good King: he was killed in battell, his brother taken, and all his Nobles killed with fifty thousand of his armie by the cruelty of the Romanes, Britains, and deceitfull Pictes, and the whole na∣tion of Scottes, exiled a long time, the third yeare of his raigne. 40 FERGVSIVS secundus, Erthus sonne to Ethodi∣us Eugenius, the first brother, returning into Scotland by support of Danes, Gothes, and his owne countrey men ga∣thered vnto him out of all partes (where they were disper∣sed) conquered his Realme of Scotland, out of the Romans and Pictes hands, beginning his ragne in the yeare of the world 4374. in the year of Christ 404. from the beginning of the Realm of Scotland 734. He was a wise, valiant, good and godly King, being confederate with the Pictes: he was sundry times victorious against the Romanes: at the last he was killed in a battell by the Romanes the sixteenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolukill. 41 EVGENIVS secundus, Fergusius second sonne, succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 4390. in the yeare of Christ 420. from the beginning of the raigne of
Scotland 750. He was a valiant and good King; in sundry battels victorious against the Romanes and Britaines: at which time Maximian the Romane Gouernour of Bri∣taine made insurrection against the Romanes, and cruelly inuaded the land then called Armorica, and killed the most part of all the people there, that it should not be a prey to Frenchmen their neighbours; he brought out of Britaine a great multitude of people to inhabite the same, some authours write there came a hundred thousand men out of Britaine with Conanus, who was made King of that land, and called the same land Bartany, or litle Britaine, af∣ter the Britaines that came to inhabite there. Then after they sent into Britaine for women to bee their wiues: at whose request Vrsula (called S. Vrsula) with eleuen thou∣sand Virgins were imbarked to passe Bartany. They all by contrary and tempestuous windes were compelled to arriue in the low Countreyes, iourneying by land to Barta∣ny, were all lamentably murthered and killed, because they would not suffer deflowring of their bodies, but rather of∣fered themselues to be cruelly and vnmercifully murthered and killed, after this vnhappy and cruel murther, other wo∣men and Virgins were sent in great number into Bartany, who inhabite that land continually to this day. Britaine being desolate of Romane support, was occasion that the confederate Kings inuaded them after so hardly: for the valiant Graham, who was descended of an ancient house of Denmarke, and borne of a noble Lady of the same coun∣trey, married with a Scots noble man, that was exiled out of Scotland with Ethodius (brother to King Eugenius afore rehearsed, killed in battell by Romanes and Pictes. This Graham married a Virgin of the bloud royall of Denmark, to whom she bare a daughter of excellent beauty, who was married to Fergusius the second King of Scots: of him descended the auncient surname of Grahams: hee was a great enemy to the Romanes; for hee destroyed to the The originall of the noble sur∣name of the Grahams. ground the wall of Abircorne, called then after Grahams
Dykes, and past and all vtterly abolished the wall of Adri∣an ouer against the Irish Seas. The confederate Kings ac∣companied with valiant Graham, past with fire and sword through al the bounds betweene Tyne and Humber: there followed a most dangerous battell, in the which were kil∣led fifteene thousand Britains, with the most of the Princes and Nobles of Britaine, and foure thousand Scots, and the whole Romanes being exiled out of Britaine by the con∣federate Kings; and peace being concluded betweene the confederate Kings and the Britaines, all the lands lying be∣yond Humber shall remaine perpetually vnder the Empire of the confederate Kings, and presently to be paide three∣score thousand pound to their men of warre, and twentie thousand pound yearely to the confederate Kings: and for obseruing hereof, the Britaines deliuered one hundred pledges, being within age of thirty yeares, at the will of the confederate Kings. In the seuenth yeare of the raigne of Eugenius second King of Scottes, Britaine was deliuered from Romane tribute 496. years after that Iulius Caesar be∣gan the first tribute. Eugenius encreased in riches and po∣licy, his Realme with continuall peace. In the same time the Britaines falling at great diuersity, betweene the No∣bles and Commons there were many of both parties mise∣rably killed, he died in peace the one and thirtieth yeare of his raigne; buried in Icolmkill. 42 DONGARDVS succeeded his brother Eugeni∣us the yeare of the world 4421. the yeare of Christ 451. af∣ter the raigne 781 a godly, wise, and valiant King, in a dan∣gerous and cruell battell betweene Constantine, new ele∣cted King of Britaines, wherein were killed sixteene thou∣sand Britaines and foureteene thousand Scots and Pictes; the victory falling to the confederates, the King of Scottes valiantly fighting, was killed the fift yeare of his raigne; and buried in Icolmkil, which was the buriall for the Kings vntill King Malonus Camors dayes. 43 CONSTANTINVS primus, succeeded to his
brother Dongard{us} the year of the world 4427. in the year of Christ 457. from the beginning of the raign 787 a vitious & odious King killed by one of his nobles, whose daughter he had defloured the 22. yeare of his vnwort hy raigne. 44 CONGALLVS Dongardus sonne succeeded in the yeare of the world 4449. the yeare of Christ 479. after the raigne 809. a valiant King, he vanquished the Brittaines in a cruell and daungerous battaile, wherein were killed 20000 Brittaines with many nobles, with GVYTELL Prince of Wales, VORTIGERN vsur∣ping the Crowne of Brittaine, sent into Almaine to fee Warriours against the confederate Kings, at which time came into Brittaine Hengest and Horsus bretheren with 10000. Saxons, immediately the Brittaines and Saxons past The comming in of the Saxans in Brittaine. with arrayed battaile to Humber, before the confederate Kings were admonished of their comming, killing in all parts, without mercy where they came. The King of Picts assebled his army and ioyned battaile (without support of the King of Scots,) where he was vanquished by the Saxons and Brittaines. The Saxons proude of this victorie, and be∣ing resolued to conquer the Kingdome of Brittaine, past further. Against them came King Congalus with a great army, with the Picts there followed a cruell battaile, with vncertaine victorie, at last the Brittaines (that fought in the right wing, against the Scots) being fugitiue, there chaunced a mighty shower of haile with great dark∣nesse: Hengist by sounde of Trumpet gathered his people to his Standard. The Scottes and Pictes (hoping their enemies to be vanquished) followed on the Birtaines without array. Hengist the Brittaines van∣quisht and the confederate people without order killing and spoyling, he came with his Saxons in arrayed battaile, and killed all the confederates that might be ouertaken. This battaile was right sorrowfull to the confederate peo∣ple, and not pleasant to their enemies, for the most part of the army of Brittaines were killed, Hengist obteyning
new support out of Saxony, the next Summer came with Vortimer King Vortigerus sonne, with a great armie: there followed a cruell and long battell, valiantly debated on all parts, with sundry chances; for many Scots and Britaines being killed Congallus euill wounded, was brought out of the field. Long time then after Ambrosius (when he had vanquished Uortigern) and being crowned King of Bri∣taine, confederate with the Scots and Pictes, he assisted by them, and killed with his owne hands Hengist, and exiled the rest of the Saxons. King Congallus (holding good pcace with Britaines and Pictes, vexed with long infirmi∣ty) died peace ably the two and twentieth year of his raign, and buried in Icolmkill. 45 CORANVS succeeded his brother Congallus in the yeare of the world 4471. the yeare of Christ 501. after the raign 831. a good King and seuere Iusticiar. In this time arriued in Britaine Occa and Passentius, sonnes of Hengist, with a great multitude of valiant souldiers (assisted by the Princes of Almaine, against whom came King Ambrosius. There followed a doubtfull and dangerous battell; the vi∣ctory enclining to Ambrosius, yet very vnpleasant; for at the same time there were many Britaines killed. Neuer∣thelesse they parted the spoile of Saxons by right of armes. Occa being aduertised of the comming of the confederate Kings to assist Ambrosius, sent his brother Passentius to bring greater support out of Almaine, by contrary windes he arriued in Ireland, where he gathered a great number of hyred warriours, and returned into Britaine. Occa per∣swaded one Coppa a fained mediciner to poison King Am∣brosius; the confederate Kings comming with a strong ar∣mie to assist Ambrosius, were aduertised of his death: there∣fore they not knowing who was friend or foe; and being vncertaine how he died, they returned home: Arthurus being King of Britaines, assisted by the Scots and Pictes, obtayned sundry victories against the Saxons. The confe∣derate Nobles abode certaine dayes in London. And be∣ing
richly rewarded by King Arthurus, returned home. The Realme of Scotland was gouerned in great felicity and iustice by King Coranus. Then after certaine Traytors (assisted by Donald Captaine of Athole) murthered the King in his chamber the foure and thirtieth yeare of his raigne, in the sixteenth yeare of the raigne of King Arthu∣rus, and in the twentieth yeare of Iustinian Emperour, the yeare of Christ 535. He was buried at Icolmkil. 46 EVGENIVS tertius Congallus first sonne, succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 4505. in the yeare of Christ 535. after the raigne 865. a wise godly King, and good Iu∣sticiar: he continued in good peace all his dayes, and died the three and twentieth yeare of his raigne, and buried at Icolmkill. 47. CONGALLVS secundus, succeeded his brother Eugenius the yeare of the world 4528. the yeare of Christ 558. after the raigne 888. a good, iust, and godly Prince: he instituted many good lawes concerning Churches and Churchmen: hee died in peace the eleuenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill; in whose time was S. Colme and S. Mungo. 48 KINNATELLVS succeeded his brother Con∣gallus, the yeare of the world 4539. the yeare of Christ 569 after the raigne 899. a good and godly King: hee died in peace the first yeare of his raigne, and buried at Icolmkill. 49 AIDANVS Coranus sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4540. the yeare of Christ 570. after the begin∣ning of the raigne of Scotland 900. He was a valiant and good King, and seuere Iusticiar: he confederated with the Britaines against the Saxons and Pictes: there followed sundry battels; at last the Britaines and Scottes came into Northumberland against the Saxons, and Pictes; and van∣quished them in a dangerous battell; the tenth part of the spoyie obtained in the field was dedicated to the Churches of Scotland, and the Banners or Ensignes gotten at that time, sent to Icolmkill: he died in peace the fiue and thirti∣eth
yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 50 KENNETHVS primus, Congallus second sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4575. the yeare of Christ 605. after the raigne 935. a good and peaceable Prince. He died the first yeare of his raigne, and was buri∣ed in Icolmkill. 51 EVGENIVS quartus Aidanus sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4576. the yere of Christ 606. af∣ter the raigne 936. He was a godly and good Iusticiar, and instituted many godly and good lawes for the Common-wealth of his subiects: he raigned peaceably, and died in peace the fifteenth yeare of his raigne; buried in Icolm∣kill. 52 FERCHARDVS primus, succeeded his father Eugenius, the yeare of the world 4591. the yeare of Christ 621. after the raigne 951. a vitious Tyrant, degraded by his Nobles, and imprisoned: he killed himselfe in prison the e∣leuenth yeare of his raigne. 53 DONALDVS quartus succeeded his father Fer∣chardus the yeare of the world 4602. the yeare of Christ 632. after the raigne 962. a good and religious King. hol∣ding peace, with his neighbours, being at fishing with his seruants for pastime, he perished in Lothay the foure∣teenth yeare of his raign, his body being found, was buried in Icolmkill. 54 FERCHARDVS secundus succeeded his brother Donaldus, in the yeare of the world 4616. in the yeare of Christ 646. after the raigne 976. an auaritious and vitious tyrant, bitten by a Wolfe in hunting, whereof ensued a dangerous feuer, being penitent of his euill life. He died the eighteenth yeare of his raigne, buried at Icolmkill. 55 MALDVINVS Donaldus sonne, succeeded in the yeare of the world 4634. in the yeare of Christ 664. after the raigne 994. He was a godly and wise King, and a seuere Iusticiar, holding good peace with his neighbours. He was strangled by his wife in the night by suspition of Adultery
the twentie yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill, on the morrow his wife was taken with her Complices, and bur∣ned to death. 56 EVGENIVS quintus, Malduinus brother Sonne succeeded in the yeare of the world 4654 in the yeare of Christ 684 after the raigne 1014. he was a vali∣ant and good King, he obteyned a great victory against Edfreid King of Northumberland, being killed with 10000 Saxons, and Bredius King of Pictes fugitiue, he dyed the fourth yeare of his raigne, and buried in Icolmkill. 57 EVGENIVS sixtus Ferchardus secundus sonne, succeeded the yeare of the world 4658 the yeare of Christ 688 after the raigne 1018 a good religious and peaceable King, he died in peace the 9. yeare of his raigne. Buried in Icolmkill. 58 AMBERKELETHVS succeeded in the yeare of the world 4667. the yeare of Christ 697 after the raigne 1027 an auaritious euill King, killed by a shot of an Ar∣ro. The second yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 59 EVGENIVS septimus succeeded his brother Am∣berkelethus, in the yeare of the world 4669. in the yeare of Christ 699. after the raigne 1029 A good King, contrac∣ting peace with the King of Pictes then called Garnard, married his daughter Spontana, who being with childe, in the next yeare, was murthered in her bedde insteed of the King, by two brethren of Athole (who had conspired the Kings death.) The murtherers at length were apprehen∣ded, and cruelly put to death. He continued a religions and vertuous King, he endewed sundry Churches liberally, holding good peace with his neighbours, died in peace the 16 yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 60 MORDACVS sonne to Amberkelethus, succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 4685 in the yeare of Christ 715 after the raigne 1045 an humble and liberall Prince, he caused peace to be made in all Brittaine, amongst the Brittaines, Saxons, Scots and Pictes, he repaired many
decayed Churches, and builded Quhitthorne. In his time was Saint Beda, he died peaceably the 16. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 61 ETFINVS Eugenius seuenth Sonne succeeded in the yeare of the world 4700. in the yeare of Christ 730. after the raigne 1060. a Godly wise King, and seuere Iusti∣ciar, holding his Realme in good peace, his people encrea∣sing in riches and religion, he being aged elected foure Regents. The Thaues of Ardgiele, Athole, Galloway and Murray to doe Iustice to his subiects, which was not ob∣serued, he died in peace the 31. yeare of his raigne, buried at Icolmkill. 62 EVGENIVS Octauus Mordacus Sonne succee∣ded in the yeare of the world 4731. in the yeare of Christ 761. after the raigne 1091. a good King & seuere Iusticiar in the beginning, for he executed to death Donald the tyrant, Lord of the Isles, and the Earle of Galloway for assenting to his vices, then after he being degenerate vnto all abhominable vices, he was killed by his nobles, the third yeare of his raigne, and buried in Icolmkill, his fami∣liars and seruants asisting to his vicious life, were all hanged vppon Gibets, to the great contentment of his whole subiects. 63 FERGVSIVS tertius Etfinus sonne succeeded in the yeare of the world 4734. in the yeare of Christ 764. after the raigne 1094. he married Ethtolia daughter to the King of Pictes, he was a leacherous adulterer, and being admonished continued still in whoredome, at last he was murthered by his wife, and sundry of his familiar seruants, who being sharply therefore accused, his wife hearing thereof, came into iudgement and relieued those innocent men, confessing the fact, and imediately stabbing her selfe to the heart with a dagger, died in presence of the whole people. The King was buried in Icolmkill the third yeare of his raigne. 64 SOLVATHIVS Eugenius eight sonne, succee∣ded
in the yeare of the world 4737. in the yeare of Christ 767. after the raigne 1097. a noble valiant King, he mar∣ried the King of Brittaines daughter, she bare to him two sonnes and one daughter. He being troubled with the Gowe gouerned his people, by his Captaines and com∣maunders, seuerely executing iustice, and subduing sun∣dry Rebels, especially Banus Captaine of the Isle of Tyre, who assembled a great company of Rebels and calling himselfe King. He died peaceably of the Gowt, the 20. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 65 ACHAIVS Etfinus second sonne began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4757. in the yeare of Christ 787. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1117. a good Godly and peaceable King, he pacified insurrection both in Scotland, and Ireland, he contracted the band of amitie with Charles the great, King of Fraunce and Empe∣rour of Germanye, which band hath continued inuiolably The beginning of the League with Fraunce. obserued vnto this present time. He married the foresaid Charles the great his daughter, who bare to him three sonnes and one daughter. The amitie and confederation of Frenchmen and Scottes, to be made for euer both for the people present and their successours, and for corroborating of the said band. King Achaius sent his brother GVIILIAM with sundry nobles into Fraunce with 4000. valiant warriours to assist the foresaid Charles in his warres, in any part he pleased to passe against the enemies of the Christian faith, at which time the Armes of the Kings of Scotland, were the red Lyon Rampant in a field of gold, there was augmented a double treasour with con∣trary Lillies or flower-deluce including the Lyon on all parts: Guilliam, Achaius brother assisting Charles in his warres with his valiant Scots, purchased great honour, and being so beloued and holden in great estimation a∣mong the Princes of Fraunce, that he was called the Knight without reproach, and purchased great riches and lands, he prospered greatly in all his warres & vanquished
sundry nations, rebelling against the Emperour, he obteined great honours, the time that King Charles restored Pope Leo the third to his seate, after that he was put out of Rome by iniury of the Romaines, he conquered great honours, when Charles passing thorough Tuskany, restored the Cittie of Florence to their auncient honours, after it was destroyed by the Gothes, these and many other honourable acts were performed by Scottish Guilliam, howbeit they were done vnder the name of Charles Emperour, for he re∣mained not long in Italy, but left the charge to Guilliam, who did all things with such prouidence, that he augmen∣ted the dominion of Florence greatly. The Florentine in re∣compence of Guilliams humanitie towards them, ordeined solemne playes, to be made in their Cittie, in which a Lyon is crowned with sundry ceremonyes, they commaunded also quick Lyons to be yearely nourished vpon the com∣mon purse, because the Lyon was the armes of Scottish Guilliam. This is yet obserued in perpetuall memory. Guilliam after infinite trauailes taken with Charles the great, for the defence of Christian faith grew in age, and be∣cause he had no succession of his body (for he was all his daies giuen to chiualry) he made Christ his heire, and foun∣ded many Abbaies in Italy, Almayn, and Germanie, libe∣rally distributing vnto them rich rents and lands, and or∣deined that Scottishmen onely should be Abbots, to the same Abbeyes. In witnesse hereof are many Abbeys in Al∣maine and Germanie nothing changed from the first in∣stitution. At comming first of Scottish Guilliam there came two learned Clarks with him from Scotland, holden in great honour by the Emperour for their singular learning, they obteined a place in Paris which was giuen to them with certaine lands, to susteine their estate, and to instruct the noble mens children of Fraunce, in sundry sciences. To these men came such confluence of people out of all parts, desiring learning, that in short time by their exact dili∣gence in erudition of young children, the Cittie of Paris
was made a solemne Vniuersitie of resolute men in all sci∣ence. The Emperour Charles hauing great delectation that learning began to flourish in his realme, by the great industry of those two Scottish men, commaunded that Clement should remaine as principall regent of Paris: And Iohn his Colleague to passe to Pauy, a towne of Lumbardy for encreasing of learning there. This small beginning was the origenall of the famous Vniuesitie of Paris: King Achaius, continuing in good peace, the Romaine Empire was deuided, for Emperour Charles the first Emperour of Germanes was Emperour of the west and Constantiue Emperour of the East: Achaius married Fergusiane sister to Hungus King of Pictes who bare to him one sonne called Alpine, who after succeeded to be King of Scotland and right inheritour to the King of Pictes. King Achaius be∣ing aged died in peace, the 32. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 66 CONGALLVS Achaius cousen germane, began his raigne the yeare of the world 4789. in the yeare of Christ 819. after the raigne 1149. a good and peaceable King. He died in peace the fift yeare of his raigne, buried at Icolmkill. 67 DONGALLVS Saluathius sonne, beganne his raigne the yeare of the world 4794. the yeare of Christ 824. after the raigne 1154. a valiant and good King, sen∣ding his Ambassadours to the Pictes after the death of DORSTOLOGVS their King, killed by his brother E∣ganus, who marrying his brothers wife BRENNA, daugh∣ter to the King of Marches; who after murthered the said Eganus in his bedde (notwithstanding his armed Guard) to reuenge the murther of her first husband. The Scots Am∣bassadours at commaund and in the name of ALPINVS King Achaius sonne, begotten betwixt him and Fergusi∣an, sister to Hungus late King of Pictes. The two brethren aforesaid being murthered, without succession, the right and title of the Crowne of Pictes, succeeded by the law of
God and man to the aforesaid Alpinus. Therefore desi∣ring the Pictes to accept him as their naturall Prince, both of Scotland and Picts land: which they refusing, elected FEREDECH to be their King. The Scots Ambassadors denounced battell to the Pictes. King DONGALLVS preparing a great armie to passe against the Pictes, perish∣ed in a Boat passing ouer the water of Spey, the seuenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 68 ALPINVS Achaius sonne, began his raigne the yeare of the world 4801. the yeare of Christ 831. after the raigne 1161. a valiant and good King, being right heire to the Crowne of Pictes, in a dangerous and cruell battell, killed Feredech their King: then after the Pictes elected BRVDVS his sonne King, who was killed the first yeare by sedition among the Pictes. His brother KENNETH was made King, who comming with an Armie against the Scots, rent off his coate armour, and was fugitiue to the mountaines, where hee was shamefully killed by a Coun∣tryman (not knowne who he was). The Pictes immediatly elected a fierce and valiant Prince BRVDVS, to be their King; who directing Ambassadors to Alpinus, desiring peace, all matters to be redressed, and the olde band to bee renued. King Alpinus answered that he would make no peace vntill the crowne of Pictes were deliuered vnto him as righteous inheritor. Brudus raised a great armie, and came ouer the bridge of Dunkeld to Angusse. The night afore the battell he caused all the carriage men and women (that came with his armie) to stand in arrayed battell with linnen shirts aboue their clothes, with such weapons and armour as they might furnish for the time. This done, hee ordayned an hundred horsemen, to gouerne them, with∣out any noyse or din in the next woode; commaunding none of them to come in sight vntill the battels were ioyned. King Alpinus was at this time in a Castle, which was situate on a hill, not farre from Dundee, and beheld the Ar∣mie
of Pictes, marching forwards, incontinent he arrayed his Scots, then the battels ioyned with great slaughter on all parts. Immediatly the carriage men and women afore rehearsed, came mouing forwards vpon the backe of the Scots; who belieuing that a fresh armie of Pictes were to come against them (not looked for) at the last the Scottes were fugitiue: for this hidden sleight before rehearsed, was the discomfiture of the Scots armie. The Pictes followed with cruell killing of all they might ouertake. In this bat∣tell was King Alpinus taken and beheaded. The place where he was beheaded, is called Pasalpin, that is, the head of Alpin; his body was buried at Icolmkill, the third yeare of his raigne. After this great victory obtayned against the Scots, Bredus King of the Pictes returned to Came∣lon, and conuocated a Councell, making their oathes neuer to desist from battell, vntill they had vtterly destroyed the Scots, and made a Statute, what euer he was that laboured to haue peace with the Scots, hee should be beheaded. Some of the wise Pictes, not allowing their oathes and Statutes, counsailed to vse victory with measure (who were exiled) and came into Scotland. 69 KENNETHVS secundus (surnamed the great) succeeded his father Alpine the yeare of the world 4804. in the yeare of Christ 834. after the beginning of the Realme of Scotland 1164. a good and valiant King: he married the Lord of the Isles daughter, who bare to him three sonnes. The Pictes comming against the Scots, they contended a∣mongst themselues for a thing of nought: thus was their armie diuided, and many slaine (vntill night seuered them) King Brudus could not pacifie them; therefore hee with the rest of his armie past home; and hee shortly after died for displeasure. DONSKEN his brother was elected King, and redressed all iniuries that he might. Three yeares continued sundry incursions on both parts. King Kenneth setling his wits to defend his Realme, putting strong soul∣diers in all forts, adioyning to the borders of the Picts, and
commaunded his people to be daily exercised in chiualry, to be ready against euery trouble that might occurre. In the fourth yeare King Kenneth made a conuention of his Nobles, consulting how hee might reuenge his fathers slaughter, and obtayne the crowne of Pictes (rightfully ap∣pertayning vnto him). The season of the yeare being ex∣pedient to raise their armie, the Nobles not consenting thereunto for the great slaughter lately made on their King and Nobles; therefore the King conuenting all his Nobles, perswading them that hee had greater matters to propound. By solemne banquet within his Palace, he roy∣ally entertayning them, vntill darke night: after they were brought to seueral chambers within the Palace: and when they were in profound sleepe, the King caused sundry men to passe to euery seuerall bedde (where the Nobles did lie) cladde with fish skinnes, hauing in their handes a Clubbe of Muscane tree, which with the fish skinnes in the darke did shew a marueilous glaunce and light all at one time; each one holding in the other hands a bugle horne, and speaking through the horne (appearing to be no mortall mans voice) did shew they were Angels sent by God to the Princes and Nobles of Scotland, to cause them to obey the desires of the King; for his desire was so iust and right, that the Pictes for repulse thereof shall be brought to such ex∣termination, that no puisance nor wisedome of man can resist: their speeches ended, they obscured their clubbe and skinnes vnder their cloathes; their light vanishing at one time. The Nobles seeing this vncouth vision, were asto∣nisht, and tooke little rest that night: on the morrow at their conuention, each one declaring their visions, (all be∣ing at one time) concluded firmely the same to be no fan∣tasie, but an heauenly vision; assuring them of victory and felicity, reuealing the same to the King, who assured them that the same vision appeared to him the samehoure (how∣beit he would not first reueale it) least his Nobles should esteeme him glorious. By generall Statute all able persons
were commaunded sufficiently prepared to meet the King on an appointed day. In two battles the King being victo∣rious against the Pictes, to their vtter extermination, King Donsken and all his nobles being killed, his sword and coat armour, were sent to Icolmkill in perpetuall memory. The Citie of Camelon after long assault, was vtterly destroyed, and the Pictes, men, wiues and children killed, after they had raigned in Albion 1181. yeares. King Kenneth institu∣ted many good lawes, and brought the fatall chaire from Ardgiel to Scone, adding the Realme of Pictes to his Do∣minion. This victorious King died the twentieth yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 70 DONALDVS quintus, Kennethus brother began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4824. in the yeare of Christ 854. after the raigne 1184. a vitious & odious King; his people made effeminate by his vices and sensuall plea∣sures; his Nobles admonishing him to reforme his euill life; he continuing still without reformation. The Pictes that were fugitiue amongst the Englishmen, requesting Osbraed and Ella, two great Princes of England, to moue warres against the Scots: these two Princes, with English∣men, Britaines, and Pictes, came into the warres, where King Donaldus vanquished them in a great battell at Ied∣brugh. Donald right insolent after this victory, came to the water of Tweed with his Armie; and finding two ships laden with wines and victuals, which were taken and par∣ted amongst his warriours. King Donald was giuen to such voracity and lust of his wombe (the whole Campe vsing the same) and being ful of Tauernes, Brothels and whores, followed dicing and carding, with contention and killing one another. King Osbraed being aduertised hereof, pre∣paring a new armie, came suddenly on the Scots, and killed twenty thousand, being without armour, full of wine and sleepe. And King Donald was taken in manner aforesaid, and ledde through the countrey in derision to all people. At which time King Osbraed conquered great landes in
Scotland, assisted by Britaines; so that Striuiling bridge was made marches to Scots, Britaines, and Englishmen. King Osbred coined money in the Castle of Striuiling (by whom the Striuiling money had first beginning). King Donald being ransomed, returned into Scotland, continu∣ing in his vitious and abhominable life. He was taken by his Nobles, and imprisoned; where hee desperately killed himselfe the fift yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 71 CONSTANTINVS secundus Kennethus sonne, began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4829. the yeare of Christ 859. after the raigne 1189. a valiant King: hee married the Prince of Wales his daughter: she bare to him two sonnes and one daughter. Hee instituted sundry good lawes for Churchmen, and repressed all vitious vices engendred amongst his subiects by Donald the yrant, his predecessor; in whose time Hungar and Hubba with a great Fleete of Danes landing in Fiffe, vsed great cruelty; a great number of religious persons being fugitiue in the Isle of Maye, with Adrian their Bishop, were all cruelly tormented and killed by the vnmercifull Danes. Constan∣tine came with a great armie against Hubba, and vanqui∣shed him. The Scots being proude of this victory, and neglecting themselues, there followed a cruell and despe∣rate battell: at last the Scots were vanquished, and King Constantine with his Nobles, and ten thousand of his armie, killed in the fifteenth yeare of his raigne; buried in Icolm∣kill. 72 ETHVS surnamed the Swift, Constantinus secundus fonne, began his raigne the yeare of the world 4844. the yeare of Christ 874. after the raigne 1204. a luxurious Prince, taken by his Nobles and imprisoned; where he died the third day of melancholy the second yeare of his raigne and buried in Icolmkill. 73 GREGORIVS magnus, Dongallus sonne, began his raign in the yeare of the world 4846. the year of Christ 876. after the beginning of the raign of Scotland 1206. He
was but two moneths olde when his father perished in the water of Spey, a valiant and greatly renowned Prince in ll parts: he instituted good lawes for his subiects; and being very religious, ordeyned good lawes for Churches and Churchmen, and that all Kings his successors at their coro∣nation, should make their oath to defend the Christian Re∣ligion. He obtained great victory against Danes and Bri∣tains: and recouering all his lands lost in King Donalds time, enlarged his bounds with Northumberland, Cumber and Westmerland; and being confederate with Alurede King of England, the foresaid lands to remaine perpetually to be possessed by the Scots. Then after the King to represse Irishmen, that were come into Scotland, who had robbed the people, and made sundry incursions, he followed with a great armie; and lan∣ding in Ireland, vanquished Brennius and Cornelius, two Princes of Ireland with the whole Nobles of Ireland, and vanqushed sundry townes, and besieged Dublin with a strong siege, where their young Prince Duncane was, to whom the Crowne of Ireland appertained: at last the Towne was rendred (and the King made Protector during the Princes minority) with all the fortes, and threescore pledges. The King returning with his victorious armie, and the pledges of the Nobles of Ireland; and holding good peace the rest of his dayes, he died in peace the eigh∣teenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill: he builded thecitie of Aberdene. 74 DONALDVS sixtus sonne to Constantinus secun∣dus, began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4864. in the yeare of Christ 894. after the raigne 1234. a valiant Prince and godly: he punished with great seuerity the blasphe∣mers of the name of God: he married the King of Britains daughter; she bare to him one sonne and a daughter. At this time ROVVLAND King of Denmarke, gathered or conuened a great multitude of Danes out of England, Beginning of the Normanes. Norway, Swedicke, and Denmarke; and pastthrough
Fraunce, committing great cruelty vpon the people there. And because CHARLES the great then Emperour, was implicat with frequent warres in Italy, against the Sara∣zens. The Danes raged with such open cruelty, that great bonds of France appeared to come vnder their Dominion. Emperour Charles after his returne from Italy, came with a great armie to resist the Danes, and they (nothing affraid) went forward to meete him in their awfull manner. The Princes of Fraunce, knowing the great ferocity of the Danes, proued and exercised in all partes where they were assayled; and seeing them by frequent victory so insolent, that but by great slaughter they might not be vanquished, perswaded the Emperour Charles to make peace with the said Rowland, that their Realme should not be in ieopardy or put to extreme danger, through the wers both in Italy and Fraunce. Peace was corroborate and contracted with the Danes on this manner: The Emperour Charles his daughter shall be giuen in marriage to Rowland, and hee with all the Danes, shall receiue the Christian faith, and in the name of Dowry, shall haue all the landes which were named Newstria, lying betwixt Deip, Picardy, Paris, and Bartany. These landes were then after Rowland called Normandy. Rowland made King of Normandy by receipt of Baptisme, was named Robert, and ordayned to pay for the said lands one yearely tribute to the aforesaid Charles and his posterity, to signifie that the said landes were not conquered, but onely giuen from the Crowne of Fraunce in marriage. The yeare that the Normans began to raigne in Normandy, was from the Incarnation of Christ 886. yeares. The valiant deedes done by the Danes, in sundrie parts of the world was in great admiration to all people. Rowland called Robert begat on the Emperour Charles his daughter. WILLIAM who succeeded after his father. To William succeeded RICHARD the first, to him suc∣ceeded RICHARD the second, who had two Sonnes ROBERT and GVSTARD: Robert begat WILLI∣AM
the bastard, Duke of Normandy, who conquered Eng∣land, and vanquished both Englishmen and Danes, and possest the crowne thereof. And Gustard past into Italy, and made many and cruell inuasions in Cicill Calabre and Naples. In this time the Murrayes and Rosses inuading each other with cruell killing 2000. men were killed on either parties, the King came vppon them with a great ar∣my, and punished the principall mouers of this trouble to the death, he dyed in peace the 11. yeare of his raigne: and buried in Icolmkill. 75 CONSTANTINVS tertius Ethus sonne began to raigne the yeare of the world 4874. in the yeare of Christ 905. after the raigne 1245. a valiant prince, not for∣tunate in Warres, he married the Prince of Wales his daughter: she bare to him one sonne, being vexed with Warres in the time of King Edward and Athelstane his bastard sonne, he became a Chanon in Saint Andrewes and died the 40. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 76. MILCOLVMBVS primus Donaldus sonne be∣gan his raigne in the yeare of the world 4913. in the yeare of Christ 943. after the raigne 1283. a valiant Prince and good Iusticiar, he married the Lord of Twylths daughter: she bare to him two sonnes and one daughter. A confede∣racy was made betweene England and Scotland, that Cum∣ber and Westmerland shalbe perpetually annexed to the Prince of Scotland raigning for the time, to be holden in fee of the Kings of England. By vertue whereof Indulfus sonne to Constantine the third, (as Prince of Scotland,) tooke possession both of Cumber and Westmerland. The King passing the rest of his dayes in peace & seuere Iustice, which caused a conspiracy in Murrayland, where this noble King was traiterously killed, the 9. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. The murtherers and their assistants all apprehended, were cruelly tormented and put to death. 77. INDVLFVS Constantinus tertius sonne, began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4922. in the yeare of
Christ 952. after the raigne 1282. a noble valiant Prince. He vanquished in battaile Hagon Prince of Norwaye and Helricke Prince of Denmarke, and was killed by a Stratageme of Warre, the 9. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 78 DVFFVS Milcolumbus sonne began his raign the year of the world 4931. the yeare of Christ 91. after the ragin 1291. a good Prince & seuere Iusticiar. He was tray∣terously murthered by one Donalde Captaine of Forres in Murrayland, and his wife was buried secretly vnder a bridge at Kinlus. The murtherers being apprehended were seuerely executed and put to death the 5. yeare of his raigne, and buried in Icolmkill. 79 CVLENVS Indulfus sonne began his raigne the yeare of the world 4936. the yeare of Christ 966. after the raigne 1296. he was marryed to the King of Brittaines daughter, a vitious Prince killed by Rodardus a noble man at Mesfen, whose daughter he had defloured, the 4. yeare of his raigne, and buried in Icolmkill. 80 KENNETHVS tertius Duffus brother began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4940. in the yeare of Christ 970. after the raigne 1300. one valiant and wise Prince and seuere Iusticiar, for one time he caused 500. no∣table theeues to be hanged on gibbets, and inhibited their bodies to be taken downe, beside the Castell of Bertha to giue example to others. The Danes with a great Fleete of ships arriued in the mouth of Taye, and destroyed the towne of Mountrose, killing all the people & demolishing the wals, wasting the whole country comming thorough Angus, with great cruelty, and laying a strong siege to the Castle of Bertha. The King came with a great army, there followed a dangerous and cruell battaile, with vncertaine victorie, valiantly defended on both parties. At the last one Haye with his two sonnes, enforcing the Scots that were fugitiue, to returne, and by their valiant courage renew∣ing battaile, the Danes were vanquished and fugitiue, the
most part of them being slaine. The King enriched Haye and his sonnes, giuing them a great part of the spoile of the Danes, with as much land as a Falcon flew ouer, of one mans hand vntill she lighted, called the Falcons stone. So he obteined the whole lands betweene Tay and Arrole, sixe miles of length and foure of breadth. This was the be∣ginning of the noble and ancient surname of Hayes de∣corate Originall of the noble surname of Hayes. with great honours, riches, and lands, valiant de∣fendours of the realme of Scotland: This noble King, (so long decorate with Iustice,) the blinde and immoderate affection (that he had to his sonne) was occasion that he killed by poyson Malcolme Prince of Scotland, and Lord of Cumber and Westmerland. He abrogated the old lawes concerning the Kings, and instituted. The King being deceased, his eldest sonne or Nephew notwithstanding what age soeuer he were of, and though he were borne after his fathers death, shall succeed to the crowne. The Nephew borne on the Kings sonne shalbe preferred before the Nephew gotten on the Kings daughter, and the Nephew gotten by the Kings brother shalbe preferred before the Nephew gotten on his sister: These lawes to be obserued amongst all other nobles in succession of their heritage. When the King is young, one noble man of great pru∣dence and authoritie, shalbe chosen gouernour of the Realme vntill the King come to age of fourteene yeares, and then the King to gouerne his Realme by his owne authoritie. All other inheritours shall succeede to their fathers he∣ritage after the expiration of one and twentie yeares, and within that time they shalbe gouerned by curatours or guardians, and vntill those yeares be outrunne, they shall not be admitted to claime their heritage: He pro∣claimed his sonne Malcolme Prince of Scotland and Lord of Cumber and Westmerland. Once when the King was lying in his bed, he heard a voice saying, O Kenneth belieue
not, that the cursed killing of Prince Malcolme is hid from God (O thou vnhappy tyrant which for desire of the crowne) hast killed an innocent, inuading thy neighbour with treasonable murther, which thou wouldest haue punished with most rigour, if it had bin done by any o∣ther person then thy selfe. Therefore thou hast incurred such hatred of God, that thou and thy sonne shalbe sud∣dainly killed, for thy nobles are conspired against thee. The King was greatly affrayde of this voice, and being very penitent, confessing his offence to a Bishop, who comforting him, he did sundry good workes, appertai∣ning to a Christian Prince. At the last King Kenneth com∣ming to the Castell of FETHERCARN was (as ap∣peared) thankfully receiued by FENELLA Lady there∣of, where in the midle of the Castle most curiously wrought was an Image of brasse, the similitude of the King, with a golden apple in his hand. The King perceiuing the same (suspecting no treason) counselled by the said Lady be∣ing alone in the tower, the Castle being apparelled with rich Tapestries of golde & silke ouerlayed or thicked with copper. The King taking the apple with violence out of the hand of the Image, immediately the titups of the Cross∣bowes were throwne vp (being made with such engyne) one of them shot the King thorough the body. The Lady was fugitiue. There he died the 24. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 81 CONSTANTINVS quartus surnamed Caluus. Culenus sonne began to raigne (vsurping the crowne) in the yeare of the world 4964. in the yeare of Christ 994 after the raigne 1324. he was killed in battaile at the town of Crawmond in Louthaine, the second yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 82 GRIMVS Duffus sonne began his raigne in the yeare of the world 4966. in the yeare of Christ 996. after the raigne 1326. (a vitious vsurper of the crowne) killed in battaile by Malcolme his successour the eight yeare of
his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 83 MILCOLVMBVS secundus Kennethus third sonne beganne his raigne the yeare of the world 4974. in the yeare of Christ 1004. after the raigne 1334. a valiant and wise King, he was often victorious against the Danes. In his time beganne the auncient noble name of KEITH, whose house is decorated with great honours, being Mar∣shall Original of the noble surnames of Keith. of Scotland. The King repaired and enlarged the City of Aberdene then called Murthlacke, he was killed by conspiracy of some of his nobles in the Castle of Glam∣mess. The 30. yeare of his raigne he married the Duke of Normandies daughter, who bare to him three sonnes and two daughters, buried in Icolmkill. The murtherers fu∣gitiue in the night, chaunced into the Loch or Poole of Forfarr, being frozen ouer, couered with snowe, were all drowned therein, by the righteous iudgement of God. 84 DVNCANVS primus Malcolme second daugh∣ter Beatrix her sonne, began to raigne in the yeare of the world 5004. in the yeare of Christ 1034. after the raigne 1364. a good and modest Prince. In his time was THANE or Earle of Lochquhaber Banquho. Of whome are descen∣ded the auncient and royall name of STEVVARTS. He Original of the royall and aun∣cient name of Stewarts. was trayterously killed by Makbeth the 6. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 85 MACBETHVS (Dowoda Malcolme second daughters sonne) began to raigne in the yeare of the world 5010. in the yeare of Christ 1040. after the raigne 1370. in the beginning he was a valiant Prince, and seuere Iusti∣ciar instituting many good lawes, at last by illusion of Witches and Sorcerers, he became a cruell tyrant and op∣pressor, at last killed in a battaile, vanquished by his suc∣cessor King Malcolme Cammore, and killed by Makduff Thane or Earle of Fiffe the 17. yeare of his raigne, buried in Icolmkill. 86 MLCOLVMBVS surnamed Cammore, Duncane the first his sonne began to raign in the year of the world 5027
in the yeare of Christ 1057. after the raigne of Scotland 1387. he was a religious and valiant King, he rewarded his nobles with lands and offices, and commaunded that the lands and offices should be called after their names, he created many Earles, Lords, Barons, and Knights. They First Earles. that were called Thanes as Fiff, Menteith, Athole, Lenex, Murray, Caythnes, Ros, Angusse, were made Earles: many new surnames came in at this time as Calder, Lokart, Gordoun, Seytonne, Lawder, Wauane, Meldrome, Schaw, Originall of Sur∣names, the time of the conquest. Liermond Liberton Struchquhan, Cargill, Rettray Dondas, Cockurne, Mirtoun, Mees, Abercrummy, Listye, names of offices Steward, Duard, Bannerman. At this time William Duke of Normandy conquered England holding battaile with King Harold, and killed him in the yeare of Christ 1066. Edgar within age rightfull heire of England, seing the crowne conquerd, was desperate to succeed any way to the gouernement. To eschew all apparant dunger he tooke shipping with purpose to returne with his mother and sisters into Vngerland, by contrary winds he arriued in Forth in a part called the Queenes Ferrey. King Mal∣colme was at that time in Dunfermling, he came and ten∣derly receiued the said Edgar with his mother and sisters, and married Margaret eldest sister to the said Edgar, William the conquerour hearing of his marriage, exiled all the friends of the said Edgar, wherefore they came into Scotland, many people to King Malcolme whome he receiued and gaue them lands as their surnames, Lyndesay Vaus, Ramsay, Lowuell, Towers, Preston, Sandlandes, Bisart, Sowles, Wardlaw, Maxwell nd sundry surnames, came out of Vngerland to Queene Margaret as Creitchton Fotheringham, Giffard Melwill, Borthuike out of France came into Scotland Fraiseir, Scincler, Boswell, Moutray, Montgomery, Cambell▪ Boyes, Beton, Taylifer and Both∣well. In King Malcolmes time was the Recrosse erected, with the King of Englands Image on the one side, and the King of Sotlands on the other, this stone crosse (was
march betweene the two Realmes, standing in the middle of Stan-moore; Queene Margaret foresaid daughter to Edward, sirnamed the Outlaw, sonne to Edward Ironside, King of England, a very religious Queene, after called S. Margaret, who beare vnto King Malcolme sixe sonnes; Edward the Prince, Edmund, Etheldred, Edgar, Alexander and Dauid, and two daughters, Matilda or Mawde; sirnamed Bona, wife to Henry the fourth, sirnamed Beau∣clerke, King of England, of whose vertues are extant an Epigram. Prosperit ie reioyced her not, to her griefe was no paine, Prosperity affrayed her als, affliction was her gaine, Her beauty was no cause of fall, in Royall state nor pride, Humbly alone in dignitie, in beauty onely good. She founded the Church of Carliel. The other daughter was married to Eustatius Earle of Bolloigne: King Mal∣colme builded the Church of Durham and Dunfermling. Hee was killed at the siege of Anwike, by one Robert Mowbray, who vnarmed vpon a light horse, came out of the Castle of Anwike, with a Lance in his hand, the keyes of the Castle vpon the point of the Launce, King Mal∣colme looking earnestly thereunto, the aforesaid Robert Mowbray ran the King through the left eye, and ran hasti∣ly into the next wood. King William changed the name of this valiant Knight, calling him Percey, of whom are descended the Earles of Northumberland. King Malcolme Originall of the Perceyes. died the six and thirtieth yeare of his raigne, and his sonne Prince Edward, both buried in Dunfermling. 87 DONALDVS septimus, Malcolme Cammore his brother (vsurped the Crowne) sirnamed Bane, beganne to raigne in the yeare of the world 5063. in the yeare of Christ 1093. after the raigne 1423. Hee was expelled by Duncane, bastard to Malcolme, the first yeare of his raigne. 88 DVNCANVS secundas bastard aforesaid (vsur∣ped the Crowne) killed by Mak-pender Thane of Mernis,
by procurement of Donald the seuenth, who after was crowned. He gaue the North and West Isles to the King of Norway, to haue his assistance to recouer the crowne: he was taken captiue by his Nobles, and his eyes put out: he died miserably in prison the third yeare of his second raigne, buried in Dunfermling. 89 EDGARVS Malcolme Cammors sonne, began to raigne in the yeare of the world 5068. in the yeare of Christ 1098. after the raigne 1428. a good and religious King, the first annoynted King: he builded the Priory of Coldingham, and died peaceably the ninth yeare of his raigne, buried at Dunfermling without succession. 90 ALEXANDER the first, sirnamed Fierce, succee∣ded his brother the yeare of the world 5077. in the yeare of Christ 1107. after the raigne 1437. a good and valiant King: he builded the Abbeyes of Scone and Saintcolms Inch; he married Sibilla, daughter to William Duke of Normandy, the seuenteenth yeare of his raigne, he died in peace, buried in Dunfermling. 91 DAVID. primus, King Malcolms third youngest sonne, began his raigne the yeare of the world 5094. the yeare of Christ 1124. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1454. a good, valiant, and very religious King: he builded many Abbeyes, as Holy-rood-house, Kelso, Iedborugh, Melrose, Newbottell, Holmcultrane, Dundra∣nane, Cambuskenneth, Kinlosse, Dunfermling, Holme in Cumber, two Nunneries, one at Carliel, the other at north Berwick; he founded two Abbeyes, besides new Castle, the one of S. Benedicts order, the other of white Monkes: hee founded 4. Bishopricks, Ros, Breichin, Dunkeld & Dun∣blane; ordeyning them great lands, rents and possessions, al out of the patrimony of the crown. King Dauid of Scotlād in his time possessed Northumberland, Cumber, Hunting∣ton and Westmerland; he married the inheritrix of the a∣foresaid lands called Mawde, daughter to the Earle of Northumberland, and Iuditha daughters daughterto Wil∣liam
the Conquerer King of England. In the time of King Stephen of England he repaired the towne of Carliel with new wals: his sonne Prince Henry died with great lamentation of the whole Realme, hauing three sonnes and three daughters. King Dauid caused Malcolme, (el∣dest sonne vnto Prince Henry late deceased) to be decla∣red Prince of Scotland. After that he past into Northum∣berland, and made William his second Nephew Earle thereof; after he went to Carliel, where he made Henry (the Empresse her sonne Prince of England) Knight, ta∣king his oath hee should neuer take Northumberland, Cumber, Westmerland and Huntington from the Empire of Scotland: afterwards this victorious and religious King Dauid died in peace, being greatly honoured and beloued of his subiects and neighbors, the nine and twen∣tieth yeare of his raigne: he died in Carliel, and buried in Dunfermling. MILCOLVMBVS quartus (sirnamed the Mayden) nephew to King Dauid, began his raigne in the yeare of the world 5123. in the yeare of Christ 1153. after the raigne 1483. a good and milde Prince: he builded Cow∣per Abbey in Anguisse, and subdued sundry rebellions, di∣ed at Iedbourgh, buried at Dunfermling the twelfth yeare of his raigne. 93 GVILIELMVS (sirnamed the Lion) succee∣ded his brother Malcolme, in the yeare of the world 5135 in the yeare of Christ 1165. after the raigne 1495. (a good & valiant King vnfortunate) he married Emigerda, daugh∣ter to the Earle of Bewmont, who beare to him two sons and two daughters: he builded the Abbey of Abirbro∣thoke, she builded the Abbey of Bamerinoch, after that the Castle of Bertha was demolished by inundation of waters (King Guilliam narrowly escaping with his wife and children) his young sonne and nurse perished, and sundry others: he founded and builded the towne called Perth, and graunted sundry great priuiledges thereunto,
now called S. Iohns towne. The King continuing in peace died the nine and fortieth yeare of his raigne, buried in Abirbrothoke. 94 ALEXANDER 2. succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 5184. in the yeare of Christ 1214. after the raigne 1544. a valiant and good King, and seuere iusti∣ciar: hee pacified all rebellion in his Realme; he agreed with King Henry of England, and married his sister, retey∣ning Northumberland, Westmerland, Cumber and Hun∣tington, and King Alexanders two sisters were married vnto two great Princes of England. He past into France, and renued the auncient band: in the meane time Iane his Queene died without any succession. The next yeare he married at Roxbourgh Mary daughter to Ingelram, Earle of Coucey in Fraunce, of great beauty, who bare to him a sonne, Alexander who succeeded after him: he di∣ed in peace the fiue and thirtieth yeare of his raigne, buri∣ed in Melrosse. 95 ALEXANDER tertius, succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 5219. in the yeare of Christ 1249. after the raigne 1579. a good young Prince, being at his coronation nine yeares of age. After that the Kings of England and Scotland, with their Nobles conuened in Yorke, where king Henry the third of Englands daughter Margaret, was married to King Alexander of Scotland. Enduring his tender age the Realme of Scotland was wel gouerned by his Nobles; be comming to perfect age, willing to execute iustice, summoned the Earles of Men∣tieth, Athole and Buchquhane, and the Lord of Strabogy, which were all of the name of Comminges, and for non comperance denounced them rebels. They with their assistance being a great number, because there was of the same name (by the aforesaid Lords) thirty Knights and landed men. They imprisoned the King in Striueling a certaine space. King Acho of Norway came into the Isles with many Danes. King Alexander to resist him
came with a great armie; there followed a cruell and dan∣gerous battell, long with vncertaine victory, at last the Danes being vanquished, and foure and twenty thousand of them killed, Acho was fugitiue to his Ships: his whole Nauie by tempestuous storme being spoyled (returned with foure Ships left of his whole Fleete into Norway). Then after his sonne Magnus renouncing all title to the Isles, contracted his sonne Hanigo (to be married with King Alexanders daughter one yeare of age) at their both perfect age. At this time Alexander Earle of Carrike past to the holy land, hauing a daughter Martha, who succee∣ding in his heritage, who married a Nobleman Robert Bruce, sonne & heire to Robert Bruce Lorde of Anandale in Scotland, and Lord of Cleueland in England. This Martha aforesaid inheritrix of Carike, in the third yeare beare the Noble and inuincible Champion, Robert Bruce King of Scotland: Margaret sister to King Henry the third of England, beare to King Alexander two sonnes, Prince Alexander and Dauid, one daughter Margaret, married vnto Hanigo Magnus sonne, King of Norway, who beare to him Margaret called the Mayden of Norway. In this time died Dauid King Alexanders second sonne. Alexan∣der the Prince was married at Roxburge, vnto the Earle of Flanders daughter, whereat many of the Nobles of Scotland and England were present for thetime. The third yeare after Prince Alexander died at Lundors the twen∣tieth yeare of his age, to the great lamentation of the whole Realme; for in him failed the whole succession of King Alexander the third (except the Mayden of Nor∣way) who was begotten on his daughter Margaret be∣fore rehearsed. King Alexander by counsell of his No∣bles (after the death of his first Queene) married Ioleta the Earle of Drux daughter in Fraunce, by whom he had no succession. He builded the Crosse Church of Peblis. He died of a fal off his horse, ouer the west craig at Kingorne, the seuen and thirtieth year of his raigne, buried in Dun∣fermling.
The day before the Kings death, the Earle of March demaunded of one Thomas Rymour, what wether should be the morrow? Thomas answered, that on the morrow before noone there shal blow the greatest winde that euer was heard in Scotland: on the morrow being almost noone (the ayre appearing calme) the Earle sent for the said Thomas, and reprouing him, said, There was no appearance. Thomas answering, yet noone is not past, immediatly commeth a Post, and sheweth that the King was falne and killed. Then Thomas said to the Earle, that is the winde that shall blow, to the great calamity of all Scotland. After the death of King Alexander the third, the Realme was gouerned by sixe Regents; for the South side of Forth, Robert Archbishop of Glasgiue, Iohn Com∣ming, and Iohn the great Steward of Scotland. For the North side of Forth VVilliam Frester Archbishop of Saint Andrewes. Makduffe Earle of Fife, Iohn Comming Earle of Buchquhae: they gouerned the space of seuen yeares. During which time Edward the first King of England sent his Ambassadors into Scotland, for marriage of the May∣den of Norway aforesaid. The Nobles of Sland being agreed in all points, with the said King Edward (sirnamed Longshankes) the Ambassadors of Scotland directed to bring the mayden of Norway, the right inheritrix of Scot∣land with them: before their arriuing she was departed this present life, by meanes whereof great contention a∣rose betweene Robert Bruse and Iohn Balioll, the deciding of the said matter was by the Nobles of Scotland (vnwise∣ly) referred to King Edward. 96 IOHANNES BALLIOLVS was preferred before Robert Bruse, by King Edward, sirnamed Long∣shanke, who being elected Iudge in the foresaid contro∣uersie, admitting him King, with condition that the said Baliol should acknowledge him for his superiour: which condition (refused by Robrt Bruse) hee as an auaritious vnworthy man receiued, began to raigne in the yeare of
the world 5263. in the yeare of Christ 1293. after the raigne 1923. a vaine glorious man, little respecting the good of his country, in the fourth yeare he was expelled by the aforesaid King Edward into France, where he died long after in exile, Scotland being without King or gouernour the space of nine yeares: during which time King Edward cruelly oppressed the land, destroyed the whole auncient monuments, and shedde much innocent blood. About this time William Wallace, sonne to Sir Andrew Wallace of Cragy Knight, of huge stature and maruellous strength of body, with good knowledge and skill in Warlike enterprises; hereunto such hardinesse of stomacke, in attempting all maner of dangerous exploits, that his match was not any where lightly to be found: he bare inward hate against the English Nation, when the fame of his worthy actes were notified, many Nobles and Commons were ready to assist him: therefore hee was chosen Gouernor vnder the Baliol, to deliuer the Realme from bondage of England. At this time many Abbeyes and spirituall Benefices were in Englishmens hand, which he by commission of the Archbishop of S. Andrew, auoy∣ded and put forth of all partes, and receyuing the whole armie that was vnder the conduct of Iohn Cuning Earle of Bucquhan; he conquered many Castles, Fortes and strengths out of English mens hands, King Edward being in Fraunce, hearing hereof, sent his Lieutenant Hugh Crassingham with a great armie into Scotland, where VVilliam VVallace encountring him at Striueling bridge, killed the said Crassingham, with the most part of his armie, many being drowned, and few escaping away with life: great dearth being in Scotland, he gathered a mightie armie, and past into Northumberland, wasting and spoyling the countrey to Newcastle; for he with his armie remained in England, almost the whole Winter from the feast of All Saints, vntill Candlemas, liuing vp∣pon the spoyle of Englishmens goods. King Edward be∣ing
in Fraunce, hearing the deedes of VVallace, sent his Ambassadour, soe menacing him that had inuaded his Realme, which he durst not haue done, if he had beene at home. VVallace answered, that he had taken the aduan∣tage, as he had done in the wrongfull Conquest of Scot∣land (he being chosen by the Nobles as indifferent Iudge, and further sent word vnto King Edward, that (if God fortunate him to liue) he purposed to holde his Easter in England: and comming with an armie of thirty thousand valiant men into England at the appointed time, King Ed∣ward was readie with an army of threescore thousand vpon Staines Moore to giue them battell. Being ready to ioyne, the Englishmen drew backe, hauing at that time no lust to fight, as appeared: the Scots seeing them draw backe would haue followed, but VVallace fearing deceit, stayed them and returned (with infinit spoyle and booties gotten in that iourney) into Scotland. King Edward be∣ing aduertised that VVallace was greatly enuied by the Cunings, & Robert la Bruse, raised a great armie, and came to Falkirke, and VVallace not knowing of any deceit, rai∣sed a great armie to resist being in sight of Englishmen, there began a great contention for the leading of the Vantguard, and by their owne misgouernance, many No∣blemen were killed, Robert Bruse was against the Scot∣tishmen that day. Shortly then after VVallace came, and renounced in Perth the Gouernement, and also refused great and large offers of King Edward, to be his subiect, and true man: Iohn Cuning and Simon Froser being ad∣mitted Gouernours, King Edward sent a great armie to Perth, subduing the countrey. The aforesaid Gouernours raised an armie of eight thousand valiant men. King Ed∣ward sent with Ralph Comfray thirty thousand men, deui∣ding them in three armies, to passe in three sundry parts through the countrey and to meete at Rosling. The Go∣uernours aforesaid, encountring with the first ten thou∣sand defeated them, and so at three sundry times in one
day the Scots obtained the victory: King Edward impati∣ent hereof, gathered a mighty army of sundry nations, and subdued with great cruelty the most part of the Scottish nation. About this time was Willam Wallace traiterously betrayed by Sir Iohn Menteith at Glascoe, and deliuered King to Edward, and being brought to London, was cru∣elly executed in Smithfield. King Edward accusing Robert Bruse of a contract made betwixt him and Iohn Cumyng, and he straitly denying the same was aduertised by the Earle of Glocester, of the kings displeasure, causing a Smith to shoe his horses back∣ward in the Winter, the ground being couered with snow he came into Scotland, howbeit he was sharply pursued, and meeng with his brother and some friends, and being aduertised that the Cumyng was in the Friers at Dumfreis. After hard commoning, he suddenly killed him, where∣through hee purchased many enemies, both English men and Scottish men, and was hardly pursued (especi∣ally by the Cumyngs being then very potent and rich, and a great number of them. 97 ROBERTVS BRVSSVS (sonne to Isabell King VVilliams brothers daughter) began his raigne in the yeare of the world 5276. in the yeare of Christ 1306 after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1636. a va∣liant king, good and wise (in his beginning subiect to great affliction and persecution. At last being assisted by Iames Dowglasse) cosen to William Lambertō Archbishop of Saint Andrewes) tooke all his gold and horses, with sundrie young valiat men of his opinion, who remained with the said King Robert, both in warres and peace to the end of his life. Of this Iames Dowglasse descended the valiant and illuster surname of Dowglasse the sure target, and defence of Scotland, as in old verse sheweth. Originall of the ancient, noble, and valint sùrname of Dowglasse. So many good as of the Dowglasse hath beene, Of one surname was neuer in Scotland seene. King Robert hauing van quishet king Edward the second
of Carnaruen being of sundrie Nations to horse and foote three hundreth thousand warriours, and King Robert not aboue thirtie thousand olde, well exercised valiant men at the battell of Bannockburne, deliuered Scotland free from all seruitude of England: All Englishmen be∣ing expelled out of the land. Hee married first Isabel daughter to the Earle of Marre, who bare to him Mar∣gery, married to Walter the great Steward of Scotland, after her death he married the daughter of Haymerus de Burck Earle of Haltouia or Hulster in Ireland, who bare to him Dauid the Prince, Margaret Countesse of Sud∣derland, and Mawde that died young. Iohn Balioll transferred his right of the Crowne of Scotland vnto King Robert and his heires. In this time Hanton an En∣glishman) for the killing of one Spencer came into Scot∣land, and was courteously receiued by King Robert, and rewarded him with the lands of Cadyowe, whose posteri∣tie is spread in great number, now called Hamiltons en∣dowed with great honour and riches. King Robert died at Cardrose the 24. yere of his raign, buried in Dumfermling. After this time Sir Iames Dowglasse (as most worthy champion) was chosen by the Nobles to passe with king Roberts heart to Ierusalem, and there to cause to bury the same within the temple beside the Sepulchre of our Lord, conforme to the said kings direction, because he had a∣uouched or vowed, till he had past with a great armie in defence of the Christian faith against the Turkes and Sa∣racens (if he had not beene hindered or stayed by warres at home) and now preuented by death. Sir Iames Dowglasse willingly obeyed, as he that most faithfully had serued King Robert in his life time, and in∣closing the heart in a case of gold, enbalmed with sweet spices, and precious oyntments, accompanied with Sir William Sinclair, and Sir Robert Logane, with many other noble and valiant men, past and buried the said heart with great reuerence and solemnity at the place appointed. Therefore the Dowglas buries the bloudy heart in their armes or Coat.
There after Sir Iames Dowglasse with his noble and va∣liant men accompanied with other Christian Princes then present: Many times obtained great victorie against the Turkes and Sarazens. So that by his often victories he purchast great honours of the Christian name. Purpo∣sing to returne home, by tempestuous winds, was com∣pelled to land in Spaine vpon the borders of Granad, where he assisting the King of Aragon in his warres a∣gainst the Sarazens, obtaining great victories. At last (be∣ing negligent of himselfe) was inclosed with one am∣bushment purposely lead for him by the Sarazens, he and his most valiantly defending were vanquisht and killed with all his Nobles and valiant men. Thus ended the Noble and valiant Dowglasse, one of the most worthy and renowned knights that was in his daies. It is chronicled that he was victorious against the Turks and Sarazens, thirteene times, and against others his ene∣mies in battell fiftie seuen times in memory of the Dow∣glasse, in our time there was a port or gate in Danskin cal∣led the Dowglas port. Now reedified sumptuously (called the Hochindure) the high port, also there are sundrie Earls in the Easterne parts of that name, and specially one was called Graue or Earle Scotus, a great Nicromancer, his title was Ieronimus Scotus, Graue or Earle of Dowglasse, his brethren dwell in Italy. 98 DAVID BRVSSIVS succeeded his father the yeare of the world 5300. in the yeare of Christ 1330. after the raigne 1660. a good Prince subiect to much af∣fliction in his youth, being first after the death of Earle Thomas Ranulph his Regent, forced for his preseruation to passe into France, and returning home at the battell of Durham, was taken and detained prisoner in England twelue yeares, after he was at liberty, hee married the foresaid Iane, daughter to Edward the secōd, king of Eng∣land, after her death he married Margaret Logy daugh∣ter to Sir Iohn Logy Knight, and died at Edenbourgh
without succession, the fortieth yeare of his Raigne, buried in Hollyrood house. 99 EDVVARDVS BALLIOLVS, sonne to Iohn Balioll, assisted by King Edward the third, vsurped the Crowne the yeare of the world 5302. in the yeare of Christ 1332. after the raigne 1662. hee was expel∣led by King Dauids Regents, and King Dauid esta∣blished. 100 ROBERTVS STVARTVS, the first King of the Stewarts, sonne to VValter the great Steward, and Margery Bruce, king Robert Bruce his daughter, succeeded his mothers brother in the yeare of the world, 541. in the yeare of Christ 1371. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1701. a good, valiant, and victorious king, hee married Eufame, daughter to Hugh Earle of Rsse, who bare to him, Dauid Earle of Strai∣therne. VValer Earle of Athole, and Alexander Earle of Buchqham, Lord Badyenoch, after her death for the affection hee bare to his children begotten before his marriage, hee married Elizabeth Mure, daughter to Sir Adam Mure Knight; who had borne to him Iohn, after called Robert the third, Earle of Carricke, and Robert Earle of Fiffe, and Menteth and Eufame, wife to Iames Earle of Dowglasse, hee died at Dun∣donald, and buried at Scone the nineteenth yeare of his raigne. 101 ROBERTVS tertius (sirnamed Iohn Fernyar) succeded his father, in the yeare of the world 5360. in the yeare of Christ 1390. after the raigne 1720. He was a modest and peaceable Prince: hee married Annabill Drummond, daughter to the Knight of Stobhall, who bare to him Dauid the Prince, Duke of Rothsay, who di∣ed in prison in Falkland, by procurement of Robert Duke of Albany (who aspired to the Crowne) and Iames his se∣cond sonne, taken prisoner in his iourney into Fraunce, and deteyned by Englishmen the space of eighteene
yeares. King Robert died of displeasure (when he heard his one sonne deceased in Falkland, and the other sonne taken prisoner the sixteenth yeare of his raigne, buried in Paslay. Robert Duke of Albany, Earle of Fiffe and Mentieth, gouerned Scotland the yeare of the world 5376. in the yeare of Christ 1406. after the raigne 1736. Iames the first being captiue in England, a noble and valiant Prince: he died the fourteenth yeare of his gouernment, Duke Mur∣do Earle of Fiffe and Mentieth, was made Gouernour foure yeares, Iames the first returning home from captiui∣tie, caused the said Murdo and his sonne to be executed for oppression of his subiects. 102 IACOBVS primus began his raigne the yeare of the world 5394. in the yeare of Christ 1424. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1754. a godly, wise, learned and vertuous Prince, and a seuere iusticiar; hee married Iane daughter to the Duke of Somerset, Mar∣quesse Dorset, sonne to Iohn of Gaunt, third sonne to Ed∣ward the third, the victorious King of England; who did beare to him two sonnes twinnes, Alexander who died shortly, and Iames the second, who succeeded his father, and sixe daughters; Margaret wife to Lewes the eleuenth Dolphin, then after King of Fraunce, Elizabeth Duchesse of Britaine, Iane Countesse of Huntley, Elenor Duchesse of Austria, Mary wife to the Lord Camphier, and An∣nabella: he was killed at Perth trayterously, by Walter Earle of Athole. Robert Grahame and their complices, who were all apprehended and cruelly tormented to death the thirteenth yeare of his raigne, after his deliue∣rance out of England, and the one and thirtieth yeare af∣ter the death of his father, buried in the Charterhouse of Perth, which he founded. 103 IACOBVS secundus succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 5407. in the yeare of Christ 1437. af∣ter the raigne 1767. (a Prince subiect to great troubles in
his youth) hee married Margaret daughter to Arnold Duke of Gilder, sisters daughter to Charles, sirnamed Au∣dax, the last Duke of Burgundy, who bare to him Iames 3. Alexander Duke of Albany; hee married the Earle of Orkneyes daughter, and begat on her Alexander Bishop of Murray: hee parting with her, married in Fraunce the Countesse of Boloine, and begat on her Iohn Stewart Duke of Albany, who was many yeares gouernour of Scotland. The third sonne Iohn was Earle of Marre, died in the Canon-gate without succession: the first daughter married one Thomas Boyd Earle of Arran, after his death married the Lord Hammilton; and by that way the house of Hammilton is decorated by the Kings bloud. This King was killed at the siege of Roxebourgh the foure and twentieth yeare of his raigne, buried at Holy-rood-house. 104 IACOBVS tertius succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 5430. in the yeare of Christ 1460. af∣ter the raigne 1790. a good Prince (corrupted with wic∣ked Courtiers) hee married Margaret, daughter to the king of Denmarke (sirnamed Diues) and king of Norway, who in his fauour renounced all title that hee had any manner of way to Orkney, Schetland and the Isles for e∣uer, who bare to him Iames the fourth, Alexander Bi∣shop of S. Andrewes and Duke of Albany, and Iohn Earle of Marre. They died both without succession; he made peace with King Henry of England, who (like a liberall Prince) for the fauour he had receiued in Scotland, resto∣red the towne of Berwicke to the King. Thomas Co∣chrane and VVilliam Rogers (his peruerse Courtiers) were hanged at the bridge of Lawder. The King was killed at Bannockburne the nine and twentieth yeare of his raigne, buried at Cambuskenneth. 105 IACOBVS quartus succeeded his father in the yeare of the world 5459. in the yeare of Christ 1489. after the raigne 1819. a noble and couragious Prince, both
wise and godly: he made peace with England, and marri∣ed Margaret, eldest daughter to Henry the seuenth King of England, & Elizabeth, daughter to Edward the fourth, in whose persons the cruell warres betweene the houses of Lancaster and Yorke were pacified, the foresaid Mar∣garet bare to him Iames the fift: he was killed at Flowdon in battell the fiue and twentieth yeare of his raigne, buri∣ed at Holy-rood-house. 106 IACOBVS quintus succeded his father in the yeare of the world 5484. in the yeare of Christ 1514. af∣ter the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1844. a wise valiant Prince, and seuere Iusticiar: he married Magdalen daughter to the King of Fraunce, who died shortly after; he married Mary of Lorraine, Duchesse of Longeuile, daughter to Claude Duke of Guise, who bare to him two sonnes and one daughter Marie: hee died of displeasure at Falkland, the nine and twentieth yeare of his raigne, buried at Holy-rood-house. 107 MARIA succeeded her father in the yeare of the world 5513. in the yeare of Christ 1543. after the begin∣ning of the raigne of Scotland 1873. (a Princesse vertu∣ously enclined) she married Francis Dolphin, after King of France; after whose death she returned into Scotland, and married Henry Stewart Duke of Albany, &c. Lord Darley, a comely Prince, sonne to Mathew Earle of Len∣nox (pronepnoy to Henry the seuenth King of England) to whom she bare Charles: Iames the sixth now our most gratious soueraigne king, afterwards comming into Eng∣land, was receiued with greathumanity, and after she was captiue, at length put to death the eighth of February. 1586. 108 CAROLVS IACOBVS sixtus, succeeded to his mother in the yeare of the world 5537. in the yeare of Christ 1567. after the beginning of the raigne of Scotland 1897. a godly learned Prince, indued with singular know∣ledge, and a sincere professor of the Gospell: he married
Anna daughter to Fredericke the second, King of Den∣marke and Norway; and Sophia onely daughter to Ulri∣cus Duke of Meckleburgh, our most gratious Queene, who hath borne the royall and hopefull Prince, Henry Frederikc Prince of Wales, Duke of Rothsay and Corne∣wall, Earle Palatin of Chester, great Steward of Scotland, and Earle of Carect, the nineteenth of February, 1593. in the Castle of Striueling; Elizabeth the nineteenth of August 1596. Charles Duke of Yorke and Albany, Earle of Rosse, the nineteenth of Nouember 1600. His Maiesty is now King of great Britaine, France and Ireland, defen∣der of the faith. The Lord of his great mercy, for Christ his sake, encrease all royall vertues in his Highnesse, that he may remaine a comfort vnto Christs Church, within his Maiesties Dominions. To the Authour. THe Romane Tullie, Rose of all that race, Of facund Mercurs; boldly vnaffrayde In Milos fence, to Clodius deface This sacred sentence in the Senate sayd: Nought only for our selues we're borne to toyle, But for our friends, and for our natiue soyle. Thou wisely weighed hes these words I finde, Thou cairs to cleere thy countrey from obscure, To please thy friends, thou fram'st thy wit and minde, And by thy light thy countries light is pure: She brought thee forth to light, thou takes like paine, Who made thee see, to make her shine againe. W. T.
A TRVE DESCRIPTI∣ON AND DIVISION OF THE WHOLE REALME OF SCOTLAND, of the situation, distance, and commoditie in euery part thereof, and of the principall Ci∣ties, Townes, Abbeyes, Palaces, Forts, Castles, Towres, and Riuers. SCOTLAND is diuided from England by certaine Marches, from the East Sea, called the Scottish Sea, to the West Seas, called the Ireland Sea, from the mouth of Tweed, vp the same riuer, till it come be∣twixt Werke and Hadden, where the March leaues the riuer, and passing South-west by dearne wayes, knowne onely to the inhabitants of that countrey, till it come to Redden-Burne, or Water; and so vp the said Burne, while it come to the height of the Fellis of Cheuiot, and so west by the toppes of the Fellis, 'till a March ditch (called the Meir ditch) and so endlong in the Meir ditch, till it fall in the riuer of Carshope, and downe Carshope while it fall in Liddail, and downe Liddail while Eske and Liddail meete, and taking Aiffe at the north side of Eske, goeth endlong a ditch, while it come to the riuer of Sarke, and so downe Sarke while it fall in Sulwait, where the waters of Annan, and Nith, running se∣uerally in Sulway, all in one channell in the Irish Sea: ma∣keth
plentie of fishes: also by owing and ebbing of furi∣ous tides, made through many lands ends, and partly by inundation of the said waters, there is very dangerous quicke sands, called Sulway sands, that no man may passe safely ouer them without perill (except they haue one accustomed guide) because of sinking holes that are fre∣quent in them, being euery tyde ouerflowed with the Sea. The trauellers take their iourney through them at a low or ebbe water: if any man or horse fall in, his fellow trauellers casting their clokes or other clothes about that part where he sinkes in, and so running often about, the sand swels vp in a height, and so vomits out that which is fallen in the sinking hole. Vpon the banckes of Sulway in Iune and Iuly, the countrey people gather vp the sand within the flood-marke, bringing it to land, and laying it in great heapes. There after taking the salt spring water, and casting it vpon the sand (with a certaine deuice) cau∣sing the water to runne through the sand to a hollow pit, purposely made to receiue the water: which water being boiled in a little vessell of lead, there is made thereof good white salt, and sometimes gray salt, after the temperance of the weather. This part is called the salt oats. The reason of the variation of the foresaid Marches was, vpon diuers debates and controuersies, arising be∣twixt the borderers of both the Realmes; which being referred to the arbitrment of sundry Commissioners, of both the Nations, were set down according to the power of the parties. Thus the Marches being set forth particu∣larly, beginning at the Mers, wherein at the mouth of Tweede stands the auncient and martiall towne of Bar∣wicke, and strong Castle, well walled and strengthned: the chiefe town of the Mers, the Scottish Sea on the East. Next is the towne of Haymouth, with the Castles of Ay∣towne, Hutonhall, Manderown, Cockburne, Easter and Wester Nisbets, with Wedderlie, the towne and Abbey of Coldingham by the Sea. South-west from Barwicke
lies the towne of Duns, the towne of Langton with the Castle, the Abbeyes of Coldstreame and Ecklis demolish∣ed, the Castles of Craighame, the Earle of Homes princi∣pall Residence, and Wedderburne, the very strong Castle of Fastcastle. The riuers in the Mers are Ei, Whittitur, Blakitur, and Ednem water. This countrey is plenteous and abundant in all things necessary for the vse of man. West from the Mers lies Tewiotdail, Liddisdail, Ewis∣dail, Eskdail, Wauchopdail, and Annandail, taking their names from Tot, Liddil, Ews, Eske, Wauchope, and An∣nan, running seueraily through the said Dailes. In Tewi∣otdail lies the auncient strong Castle of Roxbourgh de∣molished. The Castle of Cesfurd, the Lord of Roxbourgh speciall Residence: the Castles of Little-deane, and Ma∣kerstowne, Tewiotdail. the auncient towne and Abbey of Kelso, with the Castle of Flures, the towne and Abbey of Iedbourgh, the Castles of Bown-iedburgh, Hunthill, Hudelie, Crai∣ling, and Edyarstowne, with many other stone strong houses, tedious to describe, the Towne and Abbey of Melrose, the Towne and Abbey of Driburgh, the Towne of Hawicke, the Castles of Kaiwers and Branxholme, the Lord of Balcleuchs special Residence. The Riuers in Tew∣iotdail are Tiot, Tweed, Kail, Auchnom, Ied, Rewl, Sli∣tricke, Borthuike and Eall. In Liddisdail is the auncient Castle of Harmetage: The Castles of Prickinhauch, Mangerstowne and Whit∣tow Liddisdail. In Eskdail is the Castle of Langhome. Eskdail. In Annundaile is the Castle of Lochmabane, inui∣roned with a number of Loches, replenished with diuers goodly fishes. The Lord Maxwels speciall residence. The townes of Annandaile are, the towne of Annan∣wich, a strong demolished Castle, the towne of Lochma∣bane, Annandail. the towne of Moffat, the Castles of Bonschaw, Newby Bred-kirk, Hoddon, Howmanis, and Hoddam∣stans, next standeth the watch tower of Repentance. The Castles of Loch-house, Loch-wood, Speldings, Ros,
and Kirk-Michael. The riuers in Annandaile are Annan, Sark, Kirtill milk, Ey, Kinnill, Ewan, and Moffat, a fertile countrie, and good for pastoring: West from Annandaile lies Niddisdaile, taking the name from the water of Nith, where stands the towne and Castle of Dumfreis with a pleasant bridge of large fine stones, the towne and castle of Sanquhar. The Lord Sanquhars speciall residence the town of Disdeare, the Colledge of Lincluden, the Ab∣bey of Haliwode. In Niddisdaile are diuers ancient hou∣ses, and Castles demolished: And yet standing, the strong Castle of Carlauerock, the ancient Castle of Drumlainrig, and Disdeir, the ancient Castle of Mortoun demolished, the Castles of Closburn, the Castle of Torthorrall, the Lord of Torthorrails, principall residence, the Castles of Muswell and Glencarne. North from Niddisdaile a little inclining to the East lies Cliddisdaile. Cliddisdaile taking the name from the riuer Clyde beginning at Crawfurd moore, wherein lies Crawfert-Iohn, Dowglasdale, Ewendaile; Carne-wath moore, Bod∣well moore, the townes of Cliddisdaile are Lanarke, Ha∣milton towne and Palice. The Marquesse of Hamiltons speciall residence with the Castle demolished, Boithwell with the Colledge. The Citie and Castle of Glasgow, the Archbishop seate, verie populous with a sumptuous Ca∣thedrall Church containing a lower and ouer Church, co∣uered with lead, also a flourishing Vniuersitie in liberall sciences and Theology: adiacient to this Citie is a large stone bridge ouer the riuer Clide, wherein falles diuers o∣ther the riuers as Ewen, Dowglasse, Lismehago, there is an Abbey of the same name, the water of Ewan, the wa∣ter of Cadder, the two Maidens, and Cutter water. In Cliddisdaile is the Castle of Crawfurde, the ancient Castle of Dowglasse, the Earle of Anguish principall residence. The Castles of Crawfurd-Iohn, Lamington, Couthley, the strong Castle of Draffan. This countrey is plentifull of all necessaries. In the ouer ward of Cliddisdaile, there is
a hill or mount where ou springs three riuers, Tweed run∣ning in the Scottish Sea, Annn in the Irish Sea, and Clide in the great Ocean, South-East from Cliddisdaile lyeth, Tweddaile, named so from Tweed, the speciall towne is Peblis with a religious house called the Crose Church, and the Castle of Drochellis, with the strong Castle of Neideth, the Lord Zsteris residence. The Castles of Traquhair, Grisum, Ormstoun, Horsburge, Dawicke, Dremmelger, Smithfield, Cringeltie, and Dearn-hall. The waters of Tweddaile are Tweede, Quair, Mamier, Hig∣ger, Tarffe, Lyne Peblis water, and Lithnops. This coun∣trey is good for pasturing. East from Tweddaile lieth Heriot moore, Galla water, and Lauderdaile, with the towne and Castle of Lauder, taking the name from the water of Lidder, there being pendicles of other Shieres, I omit particularly to de∣scribe them, South from Tweddaile lieth forrest Shyre, he speciall towne is Sel-kirk, three miles distant therefrom is the old Castle of Neuwark. There is two goodly Riuers, Zara, and Ethrik, both falling in Tweede, Zara cometh out of a great Loth called the Loth of the Lowis, wherein is abundāce of fishes, this country is also good for pasturing. Lothian, taking the name from Loth King of the Pis is deuided from the Mers, by one part called the Easter peece, & by Lammer-mure on the South from Tweddaile on the Southwest. In East Lothian are the Castles of Dun∣glasse, Innerwick, Broxmouth, and Spot, Stanypeth, Waig∣toun, Whittingham, Nunraw, Harmostoun, Saltoun, Kieto, Winttoun; Ormestoun, the townes in Lothian are Dum∣barre, with a stong Castle demolished the townes of Tu∣ningham, and North Barwicke with an Abbey, Dirltoun and Castle, Fentoun towne and Castle, Seitoun towne and Pallace. The Earle of Winton speciall residence, the strong hold and Castle of Tamtalloun, the towne of A∣ber-Lady. Haddingtun towne and Abbey, the Castle of Lethingtoun, the Lord Thirlstans speciall residence, the
the castle of Creichtoun, Sowtray Abbey, the towne of Prestoun with the castle, the towne of Prestoun pannes, the townes of Tranent, Mussilburgh, and Enneresk. The towne of Dalkenh with the castle, the Earle of Mortons speciall residence, the towne of New-botlie, with the Ab∣bey: The Earle Lothians residence, the towne of Letth a commodious hauen for ships, and the Sea port of Edin∣burgh right well shipped. Edinburgh, the speciall and headburgh in Scotland, chiefe Iustice seate of the Realme, strongelie builded with stone. The most part of the houses are fiue, sixe, or seuen Edinburgh. stories high, wherein is a goodly Vniuersity, florishing in all sciences, for instruction of the youth; fortified on the West, with a most strong Castle builded vpon a high rock, kept by the Kings Captains, which Castle commands the said burgh, called of old the Maiden Castle, founded by Cruthneus Camelon, the first King of Picts. Before the birth of our Sauiour 330 yeares: Circuite vpon the East, South and West with a stone wall, and vpon the North strength∣ned with a Loch. It is also decored with the kings Pallace, and Abbey of Holy Rood-house vpon the East part: within seuen miles to this burgh, vpon the East, South and West parts, and within two miles vpon the North part, there is of Noble and Gentlemens Pallaces, Castles and strong builded Towres and stone houses (not as yet nominated) aboue an hundreth. Also the towne of Cra∣mond, lying vpon Almond. The riuers in Lothiane, are Tene, Aske, the riuer of Leith, the water of Almond, Lothiane is very plenteous & right abundant in all things necessary for the vse and sustentation of man. Next East Lothian lies in West Lothian, the Shirifdome of Linlithgow, with the towne of Linlithgow, and the West-Lothian. most pleasant Kings Pallace, with a very commodious Parke and Loch vnder the Pallace wall. Not farre distant Linlithgow. is the strong Fortresse and Castle of Blacknesse, inuiro∣ned with the Sea. The ancient demolished Castle of A∣bercorne,
the towne of the Queenes ferry. The Castles of Dundas, Barnbugall, Cragiehall, Didestowne, Newli∣stowne, the towne of Kirklistown, the Castles of Neddrie, Cadder, Torphican, Kinneil, the towne of Bareston Nes. Auenne water, whereon there is a stone bridge, de∣uides Sterling shire from west Lothean at the South: the Firth or Forth at the East; which Firth piece and prede be∣commes narrow, till it grow to the quantity of a reaso∣nable Riuer, neerer vnto Striueling bridge. There is but one water worthy to make account of, that runnes tho∣row it, named Carron. There are two little earthen knols, builded as may appeare, by men, (being auncient monu∣ments) called Duini pacis, that is, the knols of peace. Two miles downward vpon the same water, there is a round building without lime, made of hard stone, in such sort that one part of the vppermost stones idenied with the stone that lies directly vnder it; so that the whole worke, by this coniunction mutuall, and burthen of the stones, vphold it selfe; growing narrow by little and lit∣tle from the ground to the head, where it is open like a Doue-coat. The common people call it Anthurs Ouen. Vpon Carson was situate the famous Citie of Camelon, chiefe citie of the Pictes, founded by Cruthneus Camelon, afore the birth of Christ three hundred and thirty yeares, destroyed and abolished by King Kenneth the great, a∣bout the yeare of Christ 846. In this country is the Abbey of Manwell; the Castles of Haning, Powerile, and Cum∣mernald, the Earle of Wigtowns Residence, with the woode, the ore wood, and tore wood side, the towne of Falkirk, the Castles of Kers, and Calender, the Earle of Linlithgow Residence. The Castles of Donipace, Harbert∣shire, west Quarter, Arth, Poffowles, Carnoke, Bruse Ca∣stle, the Palace of Elphigstowne, the Lord Elphingstones residence, the Castles and Towers of Easter and Wester Polmais, and Chattrishall. the auncient towne, with the most strong fortiesse and Castle, and sumptuous Palace of
Striueling, builded vpon a high rock, with a pleasant and commodious Parke vnder the Castle wall. In this shire is the Castles and Towres of Towch, Gargunnok, Broich, Lekke, Dundaffe, Kilsyith, Manners, and Powes. Beyond the bridge of Striueling lies the Abbey of Cambus, Kin∣neth, with the Castle, the Towne and Castle of Alloway, the Towne and Castle of Clackmannan, the Castles of Tulliallan & Sawchy, Blair, Valeyfeild, Kinnedder, Aikin∣hed, Menstre, the town and Abbey of Culrosh, with the new builded Palace. Next adiacent to Striueling shire lies Lennox, diuided from the Barony of Renfrew, by Clyde: from Glasgow, by the water of Heluin, at the foote of the hilles of Grangebean, Loch-lomond runnes downe a low valley foure and twenty miles of length, and eight of breadth, hauing more then twenty foure Islands within the same. This Lo besides abundance of other fishes, hath a kinde of fish of the owne, named Pollac, very pleasant to eate: the water of Leuin runneth out of Loch-lomond Southward, which water hath giuen the name to the country, running so strong, that no man (without danger) may passe the same. Lenin entreth into Clyde, neere to the most strong and inuincible fortresse and Castle of Dumbarton, standing vpon very high Rockes, with abun∣dance of fresh water springs, one spring being in Summer wholsome cold, and in winter sweete, warme: no rocke nor hill, being within more as a mile to the foresaid strength and Castle. Next adiacent is the towne of Dun∣barton, pleasantly situate vpon the Riuer of Leuin, the principall towne in the Duchie of Lennox; within the which there is many strong Castles, Towers and stone houses, as the Castles and Towers of Kirkmichael, Rosdo, Tarbat, Arnecaple, Kilmahow, Ardeth, Kilmarannoch, Buquhannane, Drummakeil, Cragiuarne, Ballindalloch, Kilcroch, Balglas, Fentrie, Duntreith, Craigbarnut, Clorct Woodhed, Cochnoch, Balquhannaran, Drumry, Dunglas
with sundry others tedious to declare. The Duke of Lennox is superior to the most part of the Gentlemen inhabitants in this countrey, and many in the Barony. Next lies the Barony of Renfrew, taking the name from the towne of Renfrew, wherein the Session of Iu∣stice is kept to the Countrey. It is diuided in the midst by two waters, both called Carth. The towne of Paislay plea∣santly situate vpon the riuer Carth, with the Abbey there∣of, the Earle of Abircornes speciall Residence, with most pleasant Orchards and Gardens. In this countrey lies the Castle of Sempil, the Lord Sempils special Residence, with the Castles and Towers of Crukstone, Marns, Cath∣cart, Hag, vpper Pollok and nether Polloke, Hakket, the Lord Ros residence. Cardonald the Lord of Blantyrs re∣sidence, Blackhall, Caldwel, Stanelie, Ellerslie, Ihonstown, Waterstowne, Ramfuley, Dochail, Raalstowne, Biltries, Craganis, Housloun, Barrrochane, Dargewell, Blackstoun, Selwiland, Walkinshaw, Inchchennā, Arskin, Bishoptoun Boghall, Funlastown, New werke, Grinoke, Ardgowan, Glengarnoch, Kilburne, & Lady-land, with many others, strong stone houses tedious to rehearse. These countries aforesaid are plenteous in cornes bestiall and fishings. Next lies Cuningham, deuided from Kyle, by the water of Vrwine: at the foote thereof is situate the towne of Vr∣wine, a goodly Marchant towne, with a strong stone bridge. The towne of Kilmarnocke, the towne and castle of Kilmaris, the Earle of Glencarnes residence, the town & castle of Newmils, the towne of Salt Coats, where great store of white Salt is made, the towne of Largs, the town and Abbey of Kilwinning, the Castle of Deane the Lord Boyds residēce, the Castle & Palace of Lowdon the Lord Lowdons speciall residence, the castles of Eglintowne, Ki∣relaw, Ardrossin, the Earle of Eglingtowns residence, Cu∣ningham-head, Blair, Robertland, Gyffin, Eastwood, Cal∣wel, Rowallen, Law, Fairly, Kelburne, Arneil, Knock, Skel∣murly. In the towne of Vrwine the Iudge Ordinary holdes
iustice. Kyle and Cuningham were called of olde Silua. Their countries are fertile in cornes and bestiall. Next lies Kyle, diuided from Carricke, by the water downe, which descends out of Loch-downe, wherin there is a strong to∣wer builded vpon an Isle. This water runnes West in the Firth of Clyde, in the midst of Kyle runnes the water of Air, which diuides Kyle in Kings Kyle, and Kyle Stewart, a part of the Princes principalitie. At the mouth of the water, on the South side is situate the auncient Marchant towne of Air, taking the name from the water, the prin∣cipall Bourgh of the whole Shire, pleasantly builded in a plaine field, hard on the Sea, very populous, and well ship∣ped, with faire stone houses, most couered with blew sklate, with a large stone bridge, passing to the new town of Air, with a castle and Palace. The towne and castle of Machling, the town and castle of Cumnoke, the towne of Preseike, the iustice seate of Kyle Stewart, the townes of Gastown and Ricardtown, the castles of Dundonald, Sun∣drum, the Lord of Cathearts residence. The Castles of Ochiltrie, with the towne, the Lord Ochiltres residence. The castles of Caprintown, Gaitgirth, Cragie, Entirkign, Gastown, Sesnocke, Carnal, Bar, Locoreis, Terringean Cars, Drongane, Sorne, Dregornie, Sornbeg, Monton, Af∣flecke and Barskymmyn, the Loch of Martuane, with a strong tower. Loch fergus, with an Isle, with ma∣ny growing trees, where great plenty of Herons resort, with the Loch of Feal: there is a decayed Monastry in it. The Riuers in Kyle are Air, Luggar, Feal and Sesnocke, Luggar and Feal runnes in the water of Air, and so in the Firth of Clyde. The water of Sesnocke runnes in the wa∣ter of Vruing, and so in Clyde. This countrey abounds in strong & valiant men, where was borne the most renow∣ned and valiant Champion William Wallace, in the Baro∣ny called Ricardtown, then his fathers Style, thereafter of Craigy and Ricardtowne. Fiue miles from Air is a place called Coels field, where the King of Britons called Coell
was killed, by the Scots and Pictes, vpon the water of Dewne. This countrey is plenteous of bestiall, reasonably corned with abundance of Cornes. Next Kyle lies Carrick, bordering with Galloway, vn∣der Lochrean, of old called Loch-calpin, declyning while it come to Clydis-firth: in Carricke are two goodly wa∣ters, plenteous of fishes, the water of Stinchar, at the foot thereof stands the towne of Ballintrea; where is great plentie of Herrings and other fishes, the castles of Arstin∣char, Craigneil, builded vpon a strong rocke with the ca∣stle of Knockdolean. Vpon the water of Girwane are the castles of Bargany, Blairquhan, Dalwharran, Cassils, Dun∣ure, the Earle of Cassilis residence. The castles of the Koe, Ardmillanx, Careltowne, Killoquhan, Baltessane, Keirs, Auchendrane, the abbey of Corsraguel. There was a goodly Merchant towne, of olde called Carrike, founded by Caratake King of Scots, whereof remaines nothing: the principall towne is now Mayeboll, where the Iudge ordinary holds iustice. Next adiacent with Carricke lies Galloway, of olde called Brigantia, bordering with Nid∣disdail, almost declyning to the South; the shire whereof inclosed, all the rest of that side of Scotland is more plen∣tifull store of bestiall Thane cornes. The waters of Gal∣loway are Vre, Dee, Terfe, Fleit, Kenne, Cree, and Losse; which runne all in the Ireland Sea. There is almost no great hils in Galloway, but it is full of craggie knols: the waters gathering together in the valleyes betwixt those knols, make almost innumerable Loches; from whence the first floud that comes before the autumnall Equino∣ctiall, causeth such abundance of waters to run, that there come forth of the said Loches incredible number of Eeles, and are taken by the countrimen in wand creeles, who salting them, obtaine no small gaine thereby. The farthest part of that side is the head, called Nouantum, vnder the which there is a hauen at the mouth of the water of Los∣sie named Rerigonins. In the other side of Galloway, o∣uer
against this hauen from Clyddis-forth, there enters a∣nother hauen named commonly Lochryen, or Vidogo∣ra: all that lieth betwixt those two hauens, the coun∣trey people call the Rynes, that is, the point of Gallo∣way: Also Nouantum, the Mle, that is, the Becke, In Galloway are the townes of Kirkcubright well situ∣ate for a merchant towne a good Harbery, with a Castle Whithorne is the Bishops seat there. Wigtoun a good∣ly Market town, the towne of Innermessane, Minigooff, and Saint Iohns Clachane. The Abbey of new Abbey Glenluse, Sall-Syde, Dundrenan, and Tongland, the Castles of the Treaue, Barcloy, Hillis, Orchartoun, Bom∣by in Lochfergus, Cumpstoun, Cardenes, Wreythis, Ken∣mure, Kirkgunze. The great strength and Castle of Crow∣giltoun, builded on a rocke hard on the Sea, the Ca∣stles of Garleis, Large, the greate Castle of Clare, the Castles of Dunskaye, Corsell, Lochnee, the Lo∣ches of Galloway are Ruhinfranco, Carlingwork, Myre∣toun which neuer freezes, for any frost that chances. The westmost of the hils of Grangebean make the bor∣der of Lennox, the hilles are cutted by a little bosome of the Sea named for the shortnesse thereof Gerloch at the entrie thereof standeth the Castle of Roseneth, beyond this Loch there is a greater Loch named from the water that runneth in it Lochlowng, this water is the March be∣tweene Lennox and Cowall, this Cowall, Argyle, and Knapdall altogether called Argyle are deuided in many parts by many narrow creekes that run out of the firth of Clyde into them. In Cowall is the Castle and towne of Dunnone, where is the Bishop of Argyle his seate, there is one most notable Loch called Loch fyne, which is in length threescore miles: vpon Lochfyne is situate the Ca∣stle Palace and towne of Inraray, the principall residence of the Earle of Argyle: Also doth the Sheriffe of Argyle keepe his Courts of Iustice, this Loch is most plentifull of Herings and all other fishes: On this Loch are situate di∣uers
Castles and Gentlemens places, as Castle Lauchlane, the Otter and Dunetrewne in Knapdall is Loghaw, and therein a little Ile where there is a strong Castle of the same name, there is also the Castle of Tarbat. In Argyle is the strong Castle of Carriek, builded vpon a rocke, within Loch goyle, there is also the Colledge of Kilmun, the water of Awe runneth out of Loch-how, and is the onely water of all that countrey that doe run in the Dewcalidon Sea. South and by VVest from Knapdall li∣eth Kantere: The head land of the countrey right ouer against Ireland, deuided by the sea, of the breath of sixteen miles onely. In Kantere is the Castles of Dunauerty, and Sadell, the towne and Castle of Kilkerraine, situate in the Loch of the same name Kantere is more long then broad, ioyning to Knapdal by so narrow a throat about one mile of breadth, which ground is sandy, and lieth so plaine and low that Marriners drawing along, their vessels as gallies and boats through it makes their iourney a great deale shorter then to passe about Kintire which is the common passage Lorne lies next, & Contaygne with Argyla on the backe thereof where standeth the most ancient Castle of Dunestaffage, in which were the Kinges of Scotland in old times crowned, where also the Marble fatall Chaire remained more then one thousand yeares. In Lorne are also the Castles of Carnacery, and that of Makdules built vpon a right rockie mountaine. The countrie of Argyle, Knapdall & Cowell do abound of bestiall, kye, sheepe and great store of venison, and abundant in fishes. Lorne mar∣cheth still with Argyle vntill it come to Haber, or rather Loch-haber: A plaine countrey not vnfruitfull. The coun∣trey where the hilles of Grangebean are, most easie to be trauelled, named broad Alben, that is to say, the highest part of Scotland. And the highest part of broad-Albin is called Drumalbin, that is the backe of Scotland so termed. For forth of the backe waters doe run in both the seas. Some to the North, and some South. Habre or rather
Lochaber marcheth with Badzenoch, which hath as it were a backe running out through the midst of it, which spouts forth waters in both the seas, Lochaber marching with Badzenoch, tending by little and little towards the Deucalidon sea, a country aboundant in cornes and great plenty of fishes, for besides the abundance of fresh wa∣ter fishes produced by a great number ot waters, the Sea runnes within the countrey, in a long channell, and being narrow at the mouth, the water kept in betwixt two high bankes, and spreading wide inward, makes the forme of a Stanke, or rather of a Loch, a place where ships may lie sure as in a hauen adiacent with Calkmananshire, lies Fyffe, beginning at the towne of Torre-burne, with the castles of Torre, Cromby, Pickfirran, Pictincreiff, the towne of Dumfermling and Abbey thereof, founded by King Dauid the first, the Kings of Scotland were buried there a long time, the Pallace therof now repaired by the Queenes Maiesties cōmand, & charges where the Earle of Dumfermling Chancellor of Scotland hath his residence. The towne of Lymkellis with the castle of Rossynh, the towne of the Queens ferry vpon the North. In the middle of Forth, vpon a rocke is the fortresse & decayed castle of Inchgaruy. By East lies in the same water Saint Colmis Inch, with a demolished Abbey, abundant with conies, and good pasturing for sheepe. Next in the mid Firth lies Inchkeith with a demolished Fortresse fertile of conies, and good for pasturing of sheepe. East from Inchkeith, within Forth lies a very high and big Rocke inuironed with the Sea; called the Basse, inuincible hauing vpon the top a fresh spring where the Solane geese repaires much, and are very profitable to the owner of the said strength. Next the Basse in the mouth of Forth lies the Ile of May a mile long, and three quarters of a mile in breadth, there was a religious house, with many fresh water springs, with a fresh Loch abundant with Eeles: This Ile is a goodly refuge for saylers in time of tempest. By East the
Ile of May twelue miles from all land in the German seas, lies a great hidden rocke called Inchcape, very dangerous for nauigators, because it is ouerflowed euery tide. It is reported in old times vpon the said rocke, there was a Bel fixed vpon a tree or timber, which rang continually, being moued by the Sea, giuing notice to the saylers of the dan∣ger. This Bell or Clocke was put there, and maintained by the Abbot of Aber-brothok, and being taken downe by a Sea Pirote, who a yeare thereafter perished vpon the same rocke with ship and goods in the righteous iudgement of God. Returning to the ancient towne of Innerkething, adioyning thereto is the most comfortable and safe refuge for saylers in time of storme, called Saint Margarets hope. The castles of Dunnybirsill, Dalgatie, and Fordell, the towne and castel of Aberdour, the Loch of Cowstoun, the castell of Orterstoun, the towne of Brunt-Iland, with the castle, the castels of Balmuto, Balwery, Hal-randes, and Raith. The towne and castell of Kingrne, the castles of Seyfield, and Abbots-hall: the towne of Kirkealdy, the castles of Bogy & Rauens-houch, the Lord Sinclairis speciall residence, towne of Dysart, the towne of VVe∣sterwemis and the castle, the castle of Easterwemis, the Lord Colweil chiefe residence, the townes of Buckhauen, and Lewynis mouth, so named from the riuer of Lewin out which comes of Loch-Lewin, the towne of Kenne∣way, the castles of Dury, Lundy and Largow, with the towne thereof, the castles of Rires, Bulchares, and Kin∣nochar, with the Loch thereof, the towne of Earles ferry, the castles of Kelly and Ardrosse, towne of Eliot. The towne and castles of Saint Monanes, Carnbie, and Bal∣kaskie, the towne and Abbey of Pictonweme, the Lord of Pictonwemes residence, the townes of Anstruther with the castle, the castles of Bofy, Pitterthy, the townes of Innergelly, and Siluer-dikes: the castles of Erdry, third part, West-Berns, the towne of Craile, with the Prouestry and demolished castle, the castles and towres of Balcomy,
Wormestoun, Randerstoun, Newhall, Camno, Kipper, Pitmille, Kinkell, Strawithy, Lamberletham, Lachochar. The Citie of Sanctandros, the Metropolitane and Arch∣bishops Seat, with a strong Castle and Abbey decored with three Vniuersities for learning in all sciences. In old time the Churches in this Citie most curionsly and sumptuously builded, and now decayed from this Citie West vpon the water of Eddin lies the Castles of Ny∣dy, Rumgary, Dairsey, Blebo. The towne of Cowper, the chiefe Iustice seate, the Castle of Corstoun, the Castle of Struther, the Lord Lendsayes principall residence, the Castles of Inglishtarwet, Craighall, Bruntoun, Balgony, the towne of Merkinsche, the towne of Falk∣land with the kings Palace, with a pleasant parke aboun∣dant, with Deares and other wilde beasts. The towne Stramiglo with the Castle, the Loch of Rossy, with the Tower thereof Hill-Carney and Nachtoun. The two promontories called the Loumonds, the towne of Leslie with the Castle, the Castles of Straith-Endrie, and Ar∣nat, the Loch of Inchgaw, with the Castle within, the Castles of Dowhill, Killerny, Ady, Cleisch, the Loch of Loch-lewin with a strong Castle, aboundant in all fresh fishes, with the New-house adiacent thereto, the Castle of Burley, the Lord Burleyes residence, the Castle of Balluaird, the towne of Newbrough, the Abbey of Lundors, the Lord of Lundors residence. The Castle of Bambreich, the Earle of Routhous speciall resi∣dence. The Abbey of Balmerinoch, The Castles of Collarny, Ferne, Perbroth, Mordocarny, Maquhany, Forret, Kynneir, the towne of Lucers, with the Castle, the Castles of Earleshall, Colluthy, the townes of East and West Ferreis, the riuers in Fyiff are Lewin, Eddin, Ore, Lochty, the two Quichis, the waters of Largo, Kendlie, and Stramiglo. This countrey is abundant in cornes, fruits bestiall, and all sort of fishes, with abundance of coale and salt: and all
the aforesaid Sea townes, very populous and wel shipped. Straitherne taking name from Erne, which runneth out of Locherne. The principal country of Perth-shire is diuided on the South from part of Fiffe, Kinroshire & Clakmanan∣shire by the Ochel hilles, the tops of the hils seruing for march: for as the water springs doe fall towards the North, they belong to Straithern, and as they fall towards the South they appertaine to Kinroshire, Culroshire, and Clakmananshire, by ambitiō diuided: in old times all their three shires were vnder the iurisdiction of Perth. The Stewartrie of Mentieth, liand in Perth shire, wherein lies the Abbey of Inch-mahomo with the castles and towers of Cardrose, Archopple, Balinton, Quolze, Burnbanke, Row, Keir, Knockhill, Calendar, Leny, Cambusmore, Torre and Lainricke, lying vpon Teith water, giuing the name to Montieth. The strong Fort and castle of Downe. Nowtowne, Argatie and Kirk-bryd, the Earle of Mon∣teiths residence. Next lies in Perthshire, the citie of Dum∣blane, the Bishop of Dumblans residence, the castles and towers of Kippinrose, Cromlix, Buttergasse and castle Campbell. Returning to the towne of Abirnethy, some∣time the Metropolitane citie of the Pictes, liand in Strai∣thern, marching with Fiffe, where the Earle of Angusse hath there Sepulchres. By Mugdrum and Balgony run∣neth the riuer of Erne in Tay, which is the greatest riuer in Scotland. At the foote of the Ochellis lies the castles & towers of Craigpotte, & Knight-potte, Fordel, Ardrose Balmanno, Exmagirdle and Forgon, where the water of Meth flowed from the Ochellis, giuing name to the castle of Innermeth, the Lord of Innermeths residence. The ca∣stles and Towers of Condie, Keltie, Garuoke, Duncrub, Newtowne, Glenaigles, the towne of Doning and Auch∣tirardour, the castle of Kincardin, the Earle of Montroze speciall residence, the castles of nether Gaske and Tulli∣bardin, the Earle of Tullibardin speciall residence, the ca∣stles and towers of Aurchtermachonie, Orchell, Pannels,
Ardoch, Braikoch and Craigrossie. The castle of Drym∣men, the Earle of Perths residence: the castles and towers of Balloch, Petkellany, and Boreland. Betwixt Erne and Tay lieth Easter and Wester Rindes: the castles and towers of Fingaske, Kinmonth, Elcho Ab∣bey and castle, Easter and Wester Montcreiffis, Malar, Pet∣thewles, Balhoussie: the ancient bourgh of Perth, pleasant∣ly situate vpon the riuer of Tay, betwixt two commodious greene fields or Inches, founded by King William, sirna∣med the Lion, after the abolishing of the castle of Bertha by inundation of waters, about the yeare of Christ 1210. the King giuing great and ample priuiledges to the said burgh, decored with a large and long stone bridge ouer Tay, of eleuen Arches, partly decayed, & now reedifying; hauing reasonable commodities for shipping, with good∣ly fishings, of olde decored with sundry Monasteries, and specially the Charterhouse now demolished. The strong castle of Dupplin, the Lord Oliphants speciall residence: the castles of Huntingtore (of olde called Ruthwen) the castles and towers of Methwen, Bachilton, Logyalmond, Cultmalindis, Tibbermure, Tibbermallow, Keillour, Gor∣thy, Trewn and Strowane, the town of Fowlis, the castles and towers of Cultoquhay. Abircarny, Inchbreky, Mony∣uard, Carriwechter, Fordee, Comrre, Williamstowne and Durndone, with the town of Creiffe, Octhirtyre and Mil∣nabe: the abbey of Incheffrey, the Lord of Incheffreyes residence, Innerpeffry, the Lord of Mathertyes speciall dwelling. Betwixt Almond and Tay lies the Stormond of Straitherne, wherein is the castles and towres of Stra∣thurd vpper Bāchels, Inchstrewy, Ochtirgewin, Arlywicht Tullibeltane, Innernytie, Inchstuthil, Murthlie, the aunci∣ent demolished castle of Kinclewin, where the water of Ila runneth in Tay. In their countries are the riuers of Farg, Meth, Erne, Vrdachy, Schiochy, and Lochtre, falling in Almond, where Lous werke made of stone, receiues a great channell of water, passing to Perth, whereon stands
many mils, and filling the ditches to Spey tower, the rest of Perth is compassed with a stone wal. The citie of Dunkeld the Bishops seat situate vpon Tay, with little Dunkeld, the water of Brane fals in Tay, giuing the name to Strait∣brane, wherein is the castle of Trocharry: adiacent to Dunkeld lies the castles and towers of Rotmell, Carny, Cluny, Loch and castle Gowrdy, Mekilhour, Lethandy, Glesclun, Drumlochy, Gormoke, Blair, Ardblair, Craig∣hall, Rettray and Forde. In Straithardell, named from the water of Ardell, lies the castles and towers of Morkley, Assintulle, and Inner∣throsky: in Athole liand in Perthshire, is the great and strong castle of Blair, the Earle of Atholes speciall resi∣dence; the castles and towers of Strowane, Ballachan, Balladmyn, the olde demolished castle of Muling, the old demolished castle of Logyrait, where the water of Tyn∣mell, flowers in Tay, the Castles of Garntully, the strong fortresse of Garth vpon a great rock, the Castles of Weme, Balloch, Finlarge, Glanurquhar, Lawers, and Miggerny in Glenlyon where the water of Lyon runneth in Tay. The water of Tay commeth forth of Lochtay, in Broad-Albin, which Loch is foure and twentie miles of length. There is other countries (as Rannoch, Balquhidder) lying betwixt Athole, Argyle, Lorne and Lochaber vn∣knowne to the Author. Returning to Gowry, and the rest of Perthshire lying betwix Tay and Angusse, where lies the Castles and Towers of Stobhall, Campsey, Byrs, Petcur, Ruthwens, Banff, Camno, Balgillo, Moncur, Inch∣stur, the ancient and renowned Abbey of Scone, where the kings of Scotland were crowned, from the extermi∣nion of the Picts, vnto the time of King Robert Bruse, at which time the fatall Marble chaire was transported to Westminster by Edward the first (surnamed Longshanks) King of England. This Abbey was sumptuously builded, now wholy decayed: a part whereof is reedified, and pleasantly repaired by the Lord of Scone, being his spe∣ciall
residence: The Castles and towres of Poknyll, Pit∣sindy, Balthiok, Rait, Kilspindie, Fingask, Kynnarde, Me∣ginshe, Murey, Hill, Petfour, the towne and Pallace of Arroll, the Earle of Arrols residence, Leyis, Inchmartine, Monorgund, Huntley and Innergowry. These countreyes (all in Perthshire) are right plen∣teous and abundant in all kind of cornes, bestiall, and all sort of fishes, and all other necessaries for the sustentation of man, and Athole abounds in all kind of wild beasts and fowles with wild horses. Next adiacent to Gowry lies Angusse, beginning at the bridge of Innergowry, with the Castle of Fowles, the Lord Grayes residence, the Castles of Balfour, Lundy, and Dinnun. The towne of Kethens, the towne and Ab∣bey of Copar, the Castle of Newtyle, the towne and Castle of Glammis, the Lord Glammis speciall residence. The towne of Killy-mure, the Castles and Towers of Lowry, Brigtoun, Thorntoun, Innerrichtie, Kilkaudrum and Quich, Clouoy, with parks and woods, Innerquha∣ritie, and Quich, Glen-Ilay, Wain, Dysart, Rossie, the Castle of Fyn-heauin, the Earle of Crawfurds speciall re∣sidence. The Castles and Towers of Melgund, Flemyng∣toun, Woodwre, Bannabreich, old Bar, with the Parke Carrestoun and Balhall, the Citie and Castle of Brechin the Bishops residence. The Castles and Towers of Dun, Craig, Edzell, Balzordy, and Newtoun. The towne or brugh of Dunde, strongly builded with stone houses, right populous, and industrious with good shipping, and a commodious hauen: a pleasant Church with a right high stone steeple, the castles of Duddope and Autherhouse, the Earle of Buquhans special residence. The Castles & towers of Strickmartin, Clawers, Mayns, wester Ogyll, Ballumby, and Claypottes, the strong fortresse & Castle of Bruchty, vpon a rocke inuironed with the Sea. The townes of north Ferrey, and Monyfuth, the Castles and townes of Auchin∣leck, Easter and Wester Powreis, Glen, Drumkilbo, and
Teling, The towne of Forfarre with a demolished Castle, with a Loch and an Ile therein with a Tower, Cassie, Lo∣gymegle, Barnzstaird, Innerkelour, the demolished Ab∣bey of Resenneth, with a Loch, and the Loch of Resko∣bow, the Castles and Towers of Woodend, Balmeshan∣noch, Hakerstoun; Balmady, with a Loch Balgayis de∣molished, the Castles and Towers of Turings, Carsegow∣ny, Guthrie, Garne, Fernell, and Boshane: The Lord Ogilbies speciall residence, the townes of Barre, and Pan∣bryde; the Castles of Duniken, Pammure; and Kelly, the towne and ancient Abbey of Abirtrothok; with the Castle, the Castle of Lethame, and Ethy; where a Fal∣con engendes yearely vpon a high rocke past memorie of man. The Castles and Towers of Enblackmond, Calli∣stoun, Bisack, Ardbeky, and the red Castle, the Castles and Towers of Dunnenald, Vsum, Craig, Bonytoun and Kinnarde. The ancient towne of Mont-Rosse, with a commodi∣ous harbery for shipping, and well shipped, this towne is all builded with stone, and populous, aboundant with all kinde of fishes: the towne and Castle of olde Mount-Rosse, and the Castle of Westerbracky. The riuers in An∣glusse are the water of Innergowery deuiding Gowry from Angusse: The riuers of Dichty, Carbat, Ila, Brothat Lunnen, North and South Askis. This countrey of An∣gusse is plentifull and abundant in all kinde of cornes great store of bestiall, with all sort of fishes withall other commodities necessary for man. Next adiacent to Angus is the Mernis, where are the townes Kincardin, Fordoun, & Beruy, Cowey and Stane∣hyue, Galguein, with the Castles of Halgrein and Low∣ristoun, the most strong Castle of Dunotter, with many pleasant buildings within the same, situate vpon a Rocke, inuironed with the Ocean sea, and well furnished with Ordinance and all warlike prouision for defence, the Earle Martiall his residence, with the Castle Fatteresso,
there is also the Castles of Glenberuy, Puttarrow, Ar∣buthnet, Thornntoun, Balbegenat, Hakertoun, Morphie, Benholme, Allardes and Maters. This countrey is plen∣tious of Beere, and wheat, abounding in bestiall and fishes: The Barrons and Gentlemen deteste contention in law, remitting and submitting alwaies their actions debatable, to amicable arbitrements among them∣selues. North from the Mernis is the mouth of the water of Dee, where is situate the ancient burgh and, merchant towne of Abirdene, wel builded & renowned for the Salmond∣fishing thereof, well shipped, it hath a florishing Vniuer∣uersitie for instruction of the youth, a pleasant bridge buil∣ded of stones, at the mouth of the riuer Done, is situate the old Citie of Aberdone, which is the Bishops seate, where also is a goodly Colledge for learning in sciences specially in Philosophy. Betweene Dee and Done beginneth the countrey of Mar, growing alwaies wider and wider till it be three∣score miles length and comes to Badezenoch. In Mar is the towne of Kinkardin of Neil, the Castles of Drum, Leyes, Skein, Monimusk, Halforrest, the towne of Kyn∣tor, the Castles of Abirgeldy, Lenturke, Corsse, Aslun, Kyndrymme, Innerbuchat, Cluny, Corsinda, Muchall, Cragywar, Torry and Cowgarth, Klenkindy, Buchholly, and New. Lochaber, Badzenoch and Mar, comprehends the breadth of Scotland betweene the two Seas. Next Mar vpon the North lies the Gareoch, wherein is the towne of Innerwry. The Castles of Balquhan, Fe∣thernere, Caskybane, Auchenhuiff, Meldrum, Pitcaple, Pittodrie, Harthill, not farre distant is the most high mountaine of Bannachy, the highest mountaine in the North for saylers, comming from the Easter seas, takes vp land first by this mountaine. The Castles of Lesly and Wardens, the ancient Castle of Dinnedure vpon a high mountaine called the Golden Mountaine, by reason of
the sheepe that pastures thereupon: Their teeth are so ex∣traordinary yealow, as if they were coloured with gold, there is also the Castle of Drumminor, the Lord Forbes residence. Next Gareoch vpon the North-East lies Buc∣quhan, wherein is situate the towne of Newburgh, v∣pon the water of Itham, aboundant in Salmond and o∣ther fishes, the townes of Peterhead and Frisselburgh, the Castles of Fophern, Asselmond, Arnage, Tochone, Kelly, Straloch, Vdney, & vpon the North-East side therof there is a rocke where are found sundry well coloured stones of diuers hewes, very pleasant, some quadrant pointed, and transparant, resembling much the orientall Diamond for they are proued to be better then eyther the Virginean or the Bohemian Diamond. The time of the comming of Hengistus in Britaine, there came with him one Noble The originall of the name of Wdny. Germane Prince called Woden, about the yeare of Christ 477. (as writeth Pomarius) who adioyning their forces with Vortiger, then King of the Britaine, against the Scots and Picts, continuing in their fury were called Vo∣denay, conforme to the old Saxon language (as writeth Olaus magnus, Beda and Vliterpius) of whom by long progression and abbreuiation of speech is descended the ancient name of Vdny. There are also the Castles of Pitmedden, Hadde, Gicht, Fywie, the ancient Castle of Slanes, watterton, Enderrugy, with the strong Castle of the Craig of Enderrugy, The Castles of Fillorth, Pitsligo, Feddreth, Towy, Balquhaly, Dalgatie, the tower of Torrey, and the Castle of Mures. This countrey stretches farthest in the Germane seas of all the countries of Scotland fertile in store, and cornes: And in it selfe sufficient in all other commodities necessary for the countrey, there is abundance of Salmon and other fishes taken in all the waters thereof, except the water of Rattry, whereunto this day there was neuer any Salmon seene. Next Buehquhan vpon the North lies Boyne, and Enze in Boyne. In Boyne is the towne of Bamst, and
Castle thereof, situate vpon the riuer of Diuern, there is also the Castles of Boyne, Findetar, and Bogygieht, with the towne of Culane, situate vpon the sea coast. Next lies the lands of Straithbogy, where is the Castle and Pallace of Straithbogy, the speciall residence of the Marquesse of Huntley, the Castles of Fendrough, Pitlurge, Carnbarrow, Rothemay, the Lord Saltouns chiefe residence, Kinnardi, Crombie, Achindore, Lesmore, Balwany, Blarsindy, Drym∣myn, Dusky, Ballindalloch, Balla Castle and Aikenway, these foresaid countries are plenteous in cornes, bestiall, and in fishings. Next vpon the North is the water Spey, abundant in Salmond and all new fishes, Endlong Spey lies Murrey-Land, wherein is situate the Citie of Elgyn vpon the wa∣ter of Lossy, the Bishop of Murreyes seat and speciall resi∣dence, with a Church most curiously and sumptuously builded, which now in part decayes. In Murrey are ma∣ny strong Castles & other strong houses, as the Castles of Blairy, Monynesse, the ancient strong Castle of Vrquhart, the Castles of Spynay with a pleasant Loch abounding in fishes, the Castles of Innes and Duffus, the Castle and towne of Forres, the great Castle of Tornuaye, the prin∣cipall residence of the Earle of Murrey: The Castles of Cadall and Kilrauicke with diuers Gentlemens strong stone houses adiacent about the towne of olde Erne. In Murrey are two famous Abbeyes, Pluscardy, and Kinlus, the Castle of Louat the Lord Louats residence. There is also the most ancient towne of Innernes, and the strong Castles thereof situate on the water of Naes, which des∣cends from a Loch, named Loch Naes thirtie foure miles in length: this water of Naes is alwaies warme, and ne∣uer freezeth, in such sort as in winter time, yee falling in∣to it is dissolued by the heat therof: West from Lochnes, there lies eight miles of continent ground: And that small peece is the onely impediment that the Seas ioyne not, and make the remanent of Scotland an Iland: for
all the land that lies betwixt the strait and the Deucalidon Sea, is cutte by creekes and Loches of salt water run∣ning into the land. From the mouth of Naesse, where it enters in the Ger∣mane Sea, North lies Rosse, shooting in the Sea in great Promontories or heads. The countrey of Rosse is of grea∣ter Rosse. length nor breadth, extending from the Germane to the Deucalidon Sea, where it riseth in craggy and wilde hils, and yet in the plaine fields thereof, there is as great fertilitie of corne as in any other part of Scotland. There is in Rosse pleasant dales with waters, & Loches full of fishes, specially Lochbroome: It is broad at the Deucalidon sea, and growes narrow by little and little turning Southward from the other shore, the Germane Sea (winning the selfe an entrie betwixt high clintes) runs within the land in a wide bosome, and makes an healthfull port and sure refuge against all tempests and stormes: the entrie of it is easie, and within it is a very sure hauen, against all iniu∣ries of Sea, and a hauen for great nauies of ships. Loch∣broome is abundant of Salmond and all other fishes. The townes in Rosse are the City of the Channory, the Bishops seat with a strong Castle, the towne of Rosemarky, the Castles of Read-castle, Dingwall, the Abbey of Bewly, the castles of Cromarty, Miltoun, Fowlis, Ballingoun, the town of Tane, the Castles of Catboll, Torbat, Loselun, & Kayne with many others, the waters in Rosse are Cromar∣ty, the water Tane, the water of Naes: Also Mountains of Allabaster and hils of white marble, there is many other parts in Rosse too longsome, to describe. Next Rosse lies Sutterland, the speciall towne is Dnorch with a strong Castle: the Castls of Skibow, Pulrossy, Skelbo, Clyne, Dun∣robene, the Earle of Sutherlands residence, with goodly Orchards, where growes good Saphron: the riuers are Sutherland. Ferryhuns, Brora Helmsdeaill, abundant in Salmond and other fishes, and good store of bestial, there is also hilles of white Marble, with salt and coale. Next Sutherland lies Stranauern.
Stranauern, the castle of Far, where the lord of Makky hath his speciall residence: The Castles of Tunge, this countrey & Stratleigh, with sundry Ilands, as Ship-Iland, Hyp-Iland Marten-Iland, Conne-Iland are vnknown to the Author. Next lies Caithnes, where it marches with Stranauerne is the furthest North countrey of all Scotland: and those two draw the breadth of Scotland in a narrow front. In thē are three Promontories or heads: the highest wherof is in Stranauern, called Orcas, or Taruidum, the other two not so high are in Caithnes, Veruedrum now named Hoya: and Brebrum now called Dunsby, at the foot of this hill there is a pretie hauen for them that trauell from Orknay by Sea, there is mountains called Ordhead, Ho∣burnhead, Madēs Pape, the Castle of Berydale, with a riuer abundant in Salmond & other fishes. The Castle of Dum∣beth with a goodly riuer, with the towns of Wcik & Thir∣so, with Ichone a riuer. The Castle of Gerniggo, the Earle of Caithnes special residence. The Castles of Akergile, Keis Pressik, old Weik, Ormly, Skrabstar, Dunray, Brawl, and May, Dunnethead isa hil of Marble, the riuers are the riuer of Berridale, Dunberth, Weik, Thirso Fors. This countrey is abundant in cornes, besall, Salmond, & all other fishes. Of the Iles of Scotland in generall. NOw refleth it to speake somewhat of the Iles, they are diuided (which as it were Crowne Scotland) in three classes or rankes, the West Iles, Orknay Iles, & Shet∣land Iles, the west Iles lye in the Deucalidon sea, from Ire∣land almost to Orkenay vpon the west side of Scotland, they are called Hebrides, and by some Aebudae: They are scattered into the Deucalidon sea, to the number of three hundreth and aboue: Of old the kings of Scotland kept these Iles in their possession, vntill the time of Donald brother to King Malcolme the third, who gaue them to the King of Norway, vpon condition that he should assist him, in vsurping of the Kingdome of Scotland, against law and reason. The Danes and Norway people kept pos∣session
of them for the space of 160. yeares: and then King Alexander the third, ouercomming the Danes and Nor∣way men in a great battell, thrust them out of the Iles: yet afterward they attempted to recouer their libertie, partly, trusting to their owne strength; and partly, mooued by se∣ditions in the maine land of this Countrey, creating Kings of themselues, as not long ago, Iohn (of the house of Clan∣donald) did vsurpe the name of King, as others had done before. In foode, raiment, and all things pertaining to their family, they vse the ancient frugalitie of the Scots. Their bankets are hunting and fishing. They seeth their flesh in the tripe, or else in the skinne of the beast, filling the same full of water. Now and then in hunting, they straine out the bloud, and eate the flesh raw. Their drinke is the broth of sodden flesh. They loue very well the drinke made of whey, and kept certaine yeeres, drink∣ing the same at feasts: It is named by them, Blandium. The most prt of them drinke water. Their custome is to ake their bread of Oates & Barly, (which are the onely kinds of graine that grow in those parts:) Experience (with time hath taught thē to mak it in such sort, that it is not vnplea sant to eat. They take a litle of it in the morning, & so pas∣sing to the hunting, or any other businesse, content them∣selues therewith, without any other kind of meat til euen. They delight in marled clothes, specially, that haue long stripes of sundry colours: They loue chiefly purple & blew. Their predecessors vsed short mantles or plaids of diuers colours, sundry wayes deuided: and amongst some, the same custome is obserued to this day: but for the most part now, they are browne, most neere to the colour of the Hadder: to the effect, when they lie amongst the Had∣der, the bright colour of their plaids shall not bewray them: with the which, rather coloured, then clad, they suffer the most cruell tempests that blow in the open field, in such sort, that vnder a wrythe of Snow, they sleepe sound. In their houses also, they lie vpon the ground, lay∣ing betwixt them and it, Brakens, or Hadder, the rootes
thereof downe, and the tops vp, so prettily laid together that they are as soft as feather-beds, & much more whole∣some: for the tops themselues are dry of nture, whereby it dries the weake humours, and restores againe the strength of the sinewes troubled before, and that so eu∣dently, that they, who at euening goe to rest sore and wea∣ry, rise in the morning whole and able. As none of these people care for feather-beds and bedding, so take they greatest pleasure in rudenesse and hardnesse. If for their owne commoditie, or vpon necessity, they trauell to any other Countrey, they reiect the feather-beds and bedding of their Host. They wrap themselues in their owne plaids, so taking their rest: carefull indeed, lest that barbarous de∣licacy of the maine Land (as they tearme it) corrupt their naturall and Countrey hardnesse. Their armour wherewith they couer their bodies in time of warre, is an Iron Bonnet, and an Habbergion, side almost euen to their heeles. Their weapons against their enemies, are bowes and arrowes. The arrowes are for the most part hooked, with a barble on either side, which once entered within the body, cannot be drawne forth againe, vnlesse the wound bee made wider. Some of them fight with broad swords and axes. In place of a drum they vse a bag-pipe. They delight much in musicke, but chiefly in Harpes and Clairschoes of their owne fashion. The strings of the Clairschoes are made of brasse-wire, and the strings of the Harpes, of sinewes: which strings, they strike either with their nailes, growing long; or else with an Instru∣ment appointed for that vse. They take great pleasure to decke their Harpes and Clairschoes with siluer and pre∣cious stones: and poore ones, that cannot attaine heere∣vnto, decke them with Cristall. They sing verses pretti∣ly compounded, containing (for the most part) prayses of valiant men. There is not almost any other argument, whereof their rimes entreat. They speake the auncient language, altered a little. FINIS.
A SHORT DESCRIP∣TION OF THE WES∣terne Iles of Scotland, lying in the Deucalidon Sea, being aboue 300. ALSO THE ILES IN ORKENAY, and Schetland or Heth∣land. THE first is the Ile of Man, of olde called Ile of Man, pertayn∣ing now to Eng∣land. Dubonia, there was a Towne in it named Sodor, the Bishop of the Iles seat. It lyes almost midway betwixt Ireland and Cumber in England, and Galloway in Scotland, 24. miles in length, and 18. in bredth. Next vnto Man is Ailsay, into the Firth of Clyde, with a Castell therein, an hard high Craig on all sides, except at one entrie, vnmanured. There comes a great number of Boates there to fish éeling. There are many Comes, and Solayne Géese in it. It lyes betwixt Ireland vpon the Northwest, Carrik vpon the North∣east, and Kyntire vpon the Southeast. 24. miles from Ail∣say, lyes Arrane, almost direct North, 24. miles of length, Arrane. and 16. of bredth. The whole Iland riseth in high and wild Mountaynes, manured onely vpon the Sea side, where the ground is lowest. The Sea runnes in, and makes a well large Créeke into it: the entryes whereof are closed by the Iland Molas: A very sure Hauen for Shippes: and in the waters, which are alwayes calme, is great abundance of Fish, that sundry times the countrey people taking more then may sustayne them for a day, they cast th  ne in the Sea, as it were in a Stake. Next
Ile Flada, fertill of Conyes. Further in it is situate the se of B within the Firth of Clyde, eyght miles in length, and foure in bredth, from Arrane eyght miles, South∣east, and from Argyill, Southwest, halfe a mile. Cwn∣nyngham lyes, by East of it,  mes. It is a low Coun∣trey, commodious for Corne and store, with a Towne of the same name, and the old Castle of Rosa; with another An an∣cient Castle Rosa. Castle in the middest of it, named Cames. The Ile Mr∣noca, a mile of length, and halfe a mile of brédth, lyes low, Southwestwards, well manured and fertill. With∣in the Firth of Clyde lyes little Cambra, fertill of Fallow Déere: And great Cambra fertill of Cornes. From the Mule of Kyntire, little more then a mile, is Porticosa A∣uona, getting that name from the Creeke of water, th kept the Danes Nauie there, at what e they had the Iles in their hands. Northwest from the Mule, ouer a∣gaynst the Coast of Ireland, lyes Rachuda. And from Kyn∣tire, foure miles, is the Ile Caraia: and not farre from thence Gigaia, sixe miles of length, and a mile and a halfe of bredth. Twelue miles from Gigaia lyes Iura, foure Iura. and twentie miles of length. The Shore side of Iura is well manured: and the inward part of the Countrey is led with Wood, full of Déere of sundry kinds. Two miles from Iura lyes Scarba, foure miles in length, and a mile in bredth. The tide of the Sea, betwixt this Ile and Iura, is so violent, that it is not possible to passe it, ether by sale or are, except at certayne times. At the bache of this Ile, is the Ile Ballach, Geistaria, Gearastilla, Lon∣gaia, The two Fidlais, The thrée Barbais, Culbremna, Dnum, Cop, Cuparia, , Vikerana, Vitulina, Lumga, Scila, Scana. These thrée last Ilands are fertill of Corne and store, pertayning to the Earles of Argyle. Next vnto them is Sklata: named from a Sklait quarry, that is in it. Then Naguigosa, and Eisdaa, and Skennia, and the Ile Thiania, Vderga, and the Kings Iland: then Duffa,
that is black: and the Iland of the Church,  Triara∣cha: and then the Iland Ardu, Humlis, Viridis, and Ericea. Item, Arboraria, Capraria, Cunicularia, and the Ile named, The Ile of Idle men: and Abridita, and Li∣mora, where sometimes was the Bishops seat of Argyle, eyght miles in length, and two in bredth. In this Ile are Mines of Mettals, with other good commodityes. Then Ouilia, the Iland Traiecte, the Iland Garna, the Iland of the Stane, Gressa, and the great Iland Ardiescara, Mu∣sdilla, and Bernera, sometime called, The holy Girth, notable by the Trée Taxus, that growes in it. Moochas∣gia, Taxus like the Fire tree, the fruit thereof is vene∣mous. Yla. Drinacha, full of Thornes and Bourtrée, ouercoue∣red with the ruines of old houses. Wrichtun, fertill of Wood. Item, Ransa, Kernera. The greatest Iland, next vnto Iura, Westward, is Yla, foure and twentie miles in length, and sixetéene of bredth, extended from the South to the North, abundant in store, Cornes, Déere, and Lead: there is a fresh water in it, called, Lai; and a Créeke of salt water; and therein are many Ilands. There is also a fresh water Loch, wherein stands the Iland, named, Falinga∣nia, sometime the chiefe seate of all the Iles Men. There the Gouernour of the Iles, vsurping the name of a King, was wont to dwell. Neere vnto this Iland, and some∣what lesse then it, is the round Iland, taking the name from Counsell: for therein was the Iustice seat, and fouretéene of the most worthy of the Countrey, did mi∣nister Iustice vnto all the rest, continually, and intrea∣ted of the waighty affayres of the Realme, in Counsell, whose great equitie and discretion kept peace both at home and abroad: and with peace, was the compani∣on of peace, abundance of all things. Betwixt Ila and Iura, lyes a little Iland, taking the name from a Cairne of stones. At the south of Ila, doel ye Colurna, Muluoris, Ossuna, Bri∣gidana, Corskera, The low Iland, mersga, Beathia, Texa, Ouicularia, Noasiga, Vinarda, Caua, Tarsheria, The great Iland Auchnarra, The Iland made like a Man, The Iland Iland like a Man.
of Iohn Sbadis. At the west corner of Il Iyes Ouersa, whereth Sea is most tempostuous, and at certayne houres gable. The Marchants Iland: and South westwards from it, Vsbrasta, Tanasta, and Nefa. The Weauers Iland. The wea∣uers Iland. 8. miles from Ila, somewhat North, lyes Ornansa. Next vn∣to it the Swines Iland. Halfe a mile from Ornansa, Colan∣sa. North from Colansa, lyes the Mule, 20. miles from Ila. The Mule. This Ile is 24. miles of length, and as much in bredth, fruit∣full of Cornes: there are many Woods in it, and many Heards of Déere, and a good Hauen for Ships: there are in it two waters well spred of Salmond Fishes, and some stripes not empty thereof. There are also two Loches in it, and in euery one an Iland, and in euery Iland a Tower. The Sea running in this Iland at 4. sundry parts, makes 4. salt water Loches therein, all 4. abounding in Herring. To the Northwest lyes Columbaria, or the Dowe Iland: to the Southeast, Era: both the one and the other profitable for Beaiall, Cor, and for fishings. From this Iland lyes the Iland of Sanctcolm, two miles of length, and more then a mile of bredth, fertill of all things, renowned by the anci∣ent Monuments of the Countrey. There were two Ab∣beyes in this Iland, and a Court or a Parish Church, with many Chappels, builded of the liberality of the Kings of Scotland, and Gouernours of the Iles. There is as yet re∣mayning amongst the old Ruines, a Buriall place, or Church∣yard, Buriall places of the Kings of Scot∣land. common to all the Noble Families of the West Iles, wherein there are thrée Tombes higher then the rest, distant one from another a little space, and thrée little Houses, situa∣ted to the East, builded seuerally vpon the thrée Tombes: vpon the West side are stones grauen, which stand in the middest, bearing this title, The Tombes of the Kings of Scotland. It is sayd, there were 48. Kings of Scotland buried there. The Tombe vpon the rightside hath this in∣scription: Kings of Ireland. The Tombes of the Kings of Ireland. It is recor∣ded, that there were foure Kings of Ireland buried there. Upon the left side it hath this inscription: The Tombes of the
Kings of Norway. The report is, that there were 8. Kings Kings of Norway. of that Nation uryed there. The notable houses of the Iles haue their Tnbes in the rest of the Church-yard, seue∣rally by themselues. About this Iland, and re vnto it, there are se Ilands, right fruitfull, giuen by the ancient Kings of Scotland, and Gouernours of the Iles, to the Ab∣bey of Sanctcolme. So is a very profitable ground for shéep, but the chiefe commodityes of it consist in Sea Fowles that build theret, specially of their Egges. Next vnto it is the Ile of Women: then Rudana. Néere vnto it Benira; and from that Skennia, halfe a mile distant from the Mule. The Sea sides of it abo in Ces. Fiue miles hence lyeth Fro. All their Iles are subiect to Sanctcolmes Abbey. Two miles from Fresa lyeth Vlua, fiue miles of length, fruitfull of Corne and shore, with a commodious Hauen for Gallies or ates. Upon the South side of it lyeth Toluansa, with a Wood of Nuts, reasable fruitfull. About thrée hundred pa∣ces from this Iland lyeth Gomatra, two miles long, and one mile brod, extending from the North to the South. From Go, foure miles Southward, lye two Saffae, both full of ing places. From thence, foure miles South∣east, lye the two Keburgae, the more and the lesse, enuio∣ned with such shoe, high, and furious fide, that by their owne naturall de (supported somewhat by the industrie of man) they are altogether inuincible. One mile from them lyes an Iland, the whole earth is blace, whereof the people make Peat for their . Next lyeth Longa, two miles of length, and Bcha halfe as much. From Bacha sixe miles lyes Tiria, eyght miles in length, and thrée in bredth, most fertill of all the Ihons, it  in store, Cornes, Fish∣ings, and Sea to wie. In this and, there is a fresh water Lorh, & therein an old Castle, with a good hauen for Boates. From this Iland two miles lies Sunna, and from Sunna as farre lieth Colla, 12. miles of length, and 2. miles of breadth: a fertill Iland. Not farre from it is Culsa, almost full of wood:
and then two Ilands, named Mekle Viridis, and Little Viri∣dis. Item, other two of the same names. Ouer-against the Mules head, and not farre from it lye two Ilands, named Glassae, and then Arden-Eider, that is, the high land of the Rider. Then Luparia, or the Woolfe Iland: and after it a great Ile, lying north from Colla, extending East and West. Then Ruma, 16. miles in length, and 6. in bredth: the Sea-Fowles lay there Eggs here and there in the ground: in the middest of Spring time when the Eggs are layd, any man may take of them. In the high Rocks the Solayne Géese are taken in aboundance. From this Iland, foure miles North-East-ward lyes the Horse Iland. From it halfe a mile, The Horse Iland. Swine Iland. Swine Iland, fruitfull enough in all things necessary: the Fal∣con builded in it, with a good Hauen. Not farre from it, lyes Canna and Egga, fertill enough. In Egga are Solayne Gese. Soabrittella profitable for hunting. From this Iland is the Ile of Skye, the greatest of all the Ilands that are about Scotland, lying North and South 40. miles in length, and 8. miles broad in some places, and in other places 12. miles, rising in Hills, in sundry places full of Woods and Pastorage: The ground thereof fertill in corne and store: and besides all other kinds of bestiall, fruitful of Mares, for bréeding of Horse: it hath fiue great Riuers rich in Salmond, and many little waters, plenty of Salmond and other Fishes. The Sea run∣ning in the land on all sides, make many Salt waters: Thrée principall, and 13. others: all rich in Herring. There is in it a fresh water Loch, and e Castles. About the Skye, lye little Ilands, scattered here and there. Oronsa, fertill in Corne and store. Cunicularia, full of Bushes and Connyes. next is Paba. 8. miles frō Paba Southwest, lyes Scalpa, which (besides sundry other commodities) hath woods full of troopes of Déere. Betwixt the mouth of Zochcarron and Raorsa, lies Crulinga, 7. miles of length, and two of bredth: there is a sure Hauen in it for ships: There are in it also woods full of Bucke and Déere. Halfe a mile from Crulinga is Rona, full of wood and had∣der,
with a good Hauen in the innermost Lorh thereof: in the mouth of the same Lorh, is an Iland of the same Name, called Ger-loch. From Rona sixe miles Northward, lyes Flada: Two miles from Flada, Euilmena. Upon the South side of Skye, lyes Oronsa, and a mile from it, Knya, Pabra, and great Bina: and then fiue little Ilands. Next vnto them is Isa, fertill in Cornes. Beside it is Ouia; then Askerma, and Lindell. 8. miles from Skye Southward, lyes Linga and Gigarmena, Benera, Megala, Pana, Flada, Scarpa, Ver∣uecum, Sandara, Vatersa, which by many other good com∣modityes, hath a Hauen commodious for a number of great Ships, whereinto Fishermen of all Countreys about, con∣uene certayne times of the yere ordinarily. These last nine Ilands are subiect to the Bishop of the Iles. Two miles from Vatersa is Barra, running from the Northwest, to the Southeast, seuen miles in length, fruitfull of cornes, and a∣boundant in Fish: there runneth in it a Lorh, with a narrow throat, growing round and wide within: in it there is an Inche, and therein a strong Castle. Upon the Northside of Barra, there riseth an Hill full of Hearbs, from the foote to the head, vpon the top whereof, is a fresh water Well: The spring that runneth from this Well, to the next Sea, caryes with it little things, like as they were quicke, but hauing the shape of no beast, which appeare (although obscurely) in some respect, to represent the fish that is commonly called, Cockles: The people that dwell there, call the part of the shore whereunto these things are carryed, The great Sands: because yt when the Sea ebbes, there appeares nothing but dry Sands, the space of a mile. Out of these Sands the people dig out great Cockles, which the Neighbours about iudge, ey∣ther to grow (as it were) of that séede that the springs doe bring from the well, or else (indéede) to grow in that Sea. Betwixt Barra and Wist lye these Ilands: Oronsa, Onia, Hakerseta, Garnlanga, Flada, great Buya, little Buya, Haya, Hell S, Gigaia, Lingaia, Foraia, Fudaia, Erisoaia. From these Ilands Vistus lyes Northward, 34. miles of length,
and 6. of bredth. The tide of the Sea, running in two pla∣ces of this Ile, causeth it to appeare thrée Ilands, but when the tide is out, it becommeth all one Iland. In it are ma∣ny fresh water Loches, specially one, thrée miles long. The Sea hath worne in vpon the Land, and made it selfe a pas∣sage to this Loch, and can neuer be holden out, albeit the In∣habitants haue made a wall of 60. foote broad, to that effect. The water entereth in amongst the stones, that are builded vp together, and leaues behind it, at the ebbe, many Sea Fi∣shes. There is a Fish in it like to the Salmond in all things, except, that with the white wombe, it hath a blacke backe, and wanteth scales. In this Iland are many fresh water Loches, sundry Caues, couered with Hadder. In it are fiue Churches. Eyght miles West from it lyes Helther Vetu∣larum, pertayning to the Nunnes of the Ile of Ione. A little further North riseth Haneskera: about this Iland, at cer∣tayne times of the yéere, are many Sealches, they are taken by the Countrey men. Southwest, almost 60. miles, lyes Hirta, fertill in Cornes and store, and specially in Shéepe, greater then any other Shéepe, in any other Ilands. About the 17. day of Iune, the Lord of this Iland sendeth his Chamberlayne to gather his dutyes, and with him a Mini∣ster, who baptizeth all the Children that are borne the yéere preceding: and if the Minister come not, euery man bapti∣zeth his owne Child. This Hirtha is the last and farthest Ile in Albion: so that betwixt the Ile of Man, being the first Ile in Albion, and this Ile, there is 377. miles. Returning to Wistus, from the north point thereof, is the Iland Velaia, two miles long, and one mile of bredth. Betwixt this point, and the Iland , lyes Soa, Stroma, Pabaia, Barneraia, Esaia, Keligira, little Saga, great Saga, Harmodra, Sca∣ria, Grialinga, Cillinsa, Hea, Hoia, little Soa, great Soa, Isa, great Seuna, little Seuna, Taransa, Slegana, Tuemon. All these Ilands are fruitfull of Cornes and store. Aboue Horea, is Scarpa. And halfe a mile towards the West Equinoctiall, from the Lewis, lys seuen little Ilands,
named Flananae, some holy place (in old times) of girth or re∣fuge, rising vp in hills full of Hearbs. Further, North, in the same ranke, lyes Garn-Ellan, that is, she hard Ile, Lam∣ba, Flada, Kellasa, little Bernera, great Bernera, Kirta, great Bina, little Bina, Vexaia, Pabaia, great Sigrama, Cunicula∣ria, plenty of Conyes, little Sigrama. The Iland of the Pig∣meis, Iland of Pigmeis. wherein there is a Church, in which the Pigmeis were buried, (as they that are neighbours to this Iland beléeue.) Sundry strangers, digging déepely in the ground, sometimes haue found, & yet to this day doe find very little round heads, and other little bones of mans body, which seemes to approue the truth and apparance of the common bruite. In the North∣east side of the Iland Leogus, there are 2. Loches, running foorth of the Sea, named, The North and South Loches, wherein at all times of the yéere, there is abundance of Fish, for all men that list to take them. From the same side of the Loch, somewhat more Southerly, lyes Fabilla, Adams Iland, The Lambe Iland. Item, Hulmetia, Viccoilla, Hana, Re∣ra, Laxa, Era, The Dowe Iland, Tora, Affurta, Scalpa, Fla∣da, Senta: at the East side thereof, there is a passage vnder the earth, vaulted aboue a flight shoote of length, into the which, little Boates may eyther sayle or row, for eschewing of the violent tide. Somewhat Eastwards lyes an Iland, named, Old Castle, a roome strong of nature, and plenty of Cornes, Fish, and Egges, of Sea Fowles, to nourish the In∣habitants. At that side where Lochbrien enters, is situate the Iland Ew. More Northerly lyes the Iland Grumorta: both these Ilands full of Wood. The Iland, named, The Priests Iland, lyes the same way, profitable for pastorage of Shéepe, and full of Sea Fowles. Next vnto it is Afulla, and great Habrera: then little Habrera: and néere vnto it, The Horse Ile; and then Marta Ika. These last mentioned Ilands lye all before the entrie of Lochbrie: and from them, North, lye Hary, and Lewis, 16. miles of length, and 16. of bredth: Lewis. These 3. make an Iland, which is not deuided by any Hauen  Port of the Sea, but by the seuerall Lordships of the he∣ritours
thereof. The South part is named, Haray: in it sometime was the Abbey Roadilla, builded by Maccleude Haris, a Countrey fertill inough in Cornes, and good Pa∣storage, with a high Hill, ouercouered with grasse, to the ve∣ry top: many Shéepe are séene féeding there masterlesse, per∣tayning peculiarly to no man; for there is neyther Woolfe, Foxe, or Serpent séene there: albeit, betwixt that and Lewis, there bee great Woods full of Déere. In that part of the Iland is a Water, well stored of Salmond, and other Fishes: Upon the North-side it is well manured: Upon the Sea side there are foure Churches, one Castle, 7. great running Waters, and 12. lesse: all plentifull of Salmond, and other Fishes. The Sea enters in the Land in diuers parts, making sundry salt water Loches, all plentifull of Herring, with abundance of Shéepe. In this Countrey is great abundance of Barley. In this Iland is such abundance of Whales taken (as aged men report) their tenth will extend to 27. Whales: also a great Caue, wherein the Sea at a low water abides two faddome high, and at a full Sea, foure faddome déepe. People of all sort and ages sit vpon the Rocks thereof, with hooke and line, taking great multitude of all kind of Fishes. Southeast from Lewis, almost 60. miles, there is a fertill Iland, low and playne, alled, Rona, well manured: Rona. the Lord of the ground limits certayne number of House∣holds to occupy it, appoynting for euery Household, few or many, Shéepe, according to his pleasure, whereon they may easily liue and pay his rent. In this Iland is a Chappell, dedicated to Saint Ronan, wherein (as aged men report) there is alwayes a Spade, wherewith, when any is dead, A mar∣uell. they find the place of his graue marked. Besides other Fishes in this Iland, is great plenty of Whales. Sixetéene miles from Rona, West, lyes Suilkeraia, a mile of length: but in it growes no kind of Hearbe, not so much as Hadder. Sea Fowles lay Egges there, and doe hatch. They of Leogus, next neighbours vnto it, get great profit thereby.
In that Iland is séene a rare kind of Fowle, vnknowne to other Countreyes, called, Colca, little lesse then a Colca,  fowle vn knowne. Goose: they come in the Spring time, & euery yéere hatch and nourish their Young ones. They cast their Feathers, which haue no stalke, like vnto downe. Now follow the Iles of Orknay, (of olde called, The Orknay. Realme of the Picts) lying scattered, partly in the Deucalidon Sea, partly in the Germane Seas. The common people to this day are very carefull to kéepe the ancient frugality of their Predecessors, and in that respect they continue in good health, for the most part, both in mind and body, so that few dye of sicknesse, but all for age. They haue Barley and Oates, whereof they make both bread and drinke. They haue sufficient ore of quicke goods, Neate, Shéepe, and Goates, great plenty of Milke, Chéese, and Butter. They haue innumerable Sea Fowles, whereof (and of Fish, for the most part) they make their common foode. There is no Uenemous Beast in Orknay. There is is no kind of Trée, except Hadder. They haue an old Cup, amongst them, called, Saint Saint Magnus Cup. Magnus Cup, the first man that brought the Christian Re∣ligion in that Countrey. There are about 33. Ilands in Orknay: whereof 13. are inhabited: the remnant are reserued for nourishing of Cattell. The greatest Ile is named, Pomona. The firme land, thirtie miles of length, sufficiently inhabited. It hath 12. Countrey Parish Churches, and one Towne, called Kirkwaa. Kirkwaa. In this Towne there are two Towers, builded not farre the one from the other. One of them appertaynes to the King, the other appertaynes to the Bishop.
Betwixt these 2. Towers stands one Church, very magni∣fique: betwixt the Church and the Towers, on eyther side, are sundry goodly buildings, which the Inhabitants name, The Kings Towne, and, The Bishops Towne. The whole Iland runnes out in Promontories or heads, the Sea running in, and makes sure Hauens for ships, and Harbours for Boates. In 6. sundry places of this Ile, there are Mynes of good Lead and Tinne, as is to be found in any part of Britayne. This Iland is distant from Caithnes about 24. miles, diuided by the Picts Sea. In this Sea are diuers Ilands, scattered here and there: of whom, Stroma, lying 4. miles from Caithnes, is one, very fruitfull: the Earles of Caithnes being Lords thereof. Northward lyes South Ranalsa, 5. miles long, with a commodious Hauen; with 2. little Ilands, or Holmes, good for Pastorage. Toward the North lyes Burra, Suna, Flata, Fara, Hoia, and VValles. In these Ilands are the highest Hilles, that are in all Orknay. Hoia, and Walles, are 10. miles of length, distant from Ranalsay, eyght miles, and more then twentie from Dunkirke in Caithnes. North is the Ile Granisa, and Cobesa. Siapinsa, turning somewhat East, lyes, two miles from Kirkwaa, euen oueragaynst it, sixe miles of length. Right West from Siapinsa are Garsa, and Eglisa, 4. miles of length. In this Iland, they say, Saint Magnus is buried. Next, and somewhat neerer the continent land, is Rusa, foure miles of length, and thrée miles of bredth, well peopled. Westward lyes the Iland Broca. Some Ilands lye to the North, as Stronza, next Linga, fiue miles of length, and two of bredth. Haa, fiue miles of length, and two of bredth. By East lyes Fara. And North from Fara, lyes Wastra, running out in the Sea, in Promontories or heads. Aboue Stronza, at the East end of Etha, lyes Sanda, Northward, 10. miles of length, and foure of bredth, most fertill of Cornes of all the Iles of Orknay; but it hath no kind of fire within it, ma∣king exchange of Cornes for Peats. Beyond Sanda, lyes,
North, Ranalsaa, 2. miles of length, and two of bredth. Upon the South sie of Pomona lyes Rusa, 6. miles of length: and from it Eastward Eglisa: South Veragersa: and not farre from it Westraa; from which, Hethland is distant 80. miles; and Papastronza lyes 80. miles from Hethland. In the midway betwixt lyes Fara, that is, the yre Iland, standing in the sight of Orknay, and Hethland both: it riseth in thrée Promontories or heads, and shore Craig round about, with∣out any kind of entrance, except at the Southeast, where it growes little lower; making a sure Harboro for small Boates. Next is the greatest Ile of all Hethland, named, Heth∣land. The Mayne-land, 16. miles of length: There are sundry Promontories or heads in it, specially two, one long and small, which runnes North: the other broader, in some part, 16. miles, runnes Northeast, inhabited vpon the Sea coast. There is good Fishing in all these parts; the peoples commo∣dity standing most by the Sea. Ten miles North lyes Ze∣all, 20. miles of length, and 8. miles of bredth: the Bremes Marchants doe bring all wares néedfull. Betwixt this Iland and the Mayne-land, lye Linga, Orna, Bigga, Sanctferri. Two miles Northward lyes Vnsta, more then 20. miles of length, and sixe miles of bredth, a pleasant Countrey and playne. Via and Vra, are betwixt Vnsta and Zeall. Sken∣na and Burna, lye Westward from Vnsta, Balta, Hunega, Forlora, seuen miles long: and seuen miles Eastward from Vnsta, Mecla, with the thrée Ilands of east Skennia, hualsa, Nostwad, Brasa, and Musa: vpon the West side lye West Scheniae, Rorira, little Papa, Veneda, great Papa, Valla, Trondar, Burra, great Haura, little Haura, and many other Holmes, lying scattered amongst them. The Hethlandish men vse the same kind of foode that the Orkney man vse, but that they are more scarce in house kéeping. In this Iland no kind of Shée Beast will liue 24. houres to∣gether, except Ky, Ewes, Conyes, and such like beasts, as may be eaten. The people are apparelled after the Almayne faion, and according to their substance, not vnséemely.
Their commodity consisteth in course Cloth, which they sell to Norway men, with Fish, Oyle, and Butter. They fish in little Cockboates, bought from Norway men that make them: they salt some of the Fish that they take, and some of them they dry in the wind. They sell thse Wares, and pay their Masters with the siluer thereof. ¶ Of the great plenty of Hares, Red Deere, and other wild Beasts in Scotland. Of the strange propertyes of sundry Scottish Dogges: And of the nature of Salmond. HAuing made this speciall description of the Realme of Scotland: Now touching some things concerning the same in generall. In ye Fields, and in al places of the Countrey, (except the parts where continuall habita∣tion of people makes impediment) there is great abundance of Hares, Red Déere, Fallow Déere, Roes, Wild Horses, Wolues, and Foxes, & specially in the High Countreys of Athole, Argyle, Lorne, Loch-aber, Marre, and Badzenoch, where is sundry times séene 1500. Red Déere, being hunted all together. These Wild Horses are not gotten but by great sleight & policy: for Wild Horses. in the Winter season the Inhabitants turne certayne tame Horses and Mares amongst them, wherewith in the end they grow so familiar, that they afterward go with them to & fro; and finally, home into their Masters Yards, where they bee taken, and soone broken to their hands, the Owners obtayn∣ing great profit thereby. The Wlues are most fierce and Wolues. noysome vnto the Heards, and Flockes, in all parts of Scotland. Foxes doe much mischiefe in all steads, chiefly in the Mountaynes, where they be hardly hunted: howbeit, Foxes.
Arte hath deuised a meane to preuent their malice, and to pre∣serue the Poultry in some part: and especially in Glenmoores euery house nourishes a young Foxe, & then killing the same, they mixe the flesh thereof amongst such meate as they giue vnto the Fowles, and other little bestiall: And by this meanes, so many Fowles or Cattel as eate hereof, are safely preserued from the danger of the Foxe, by the space of almost two moneths after, so that they may wander whither they will: for the Foxes smelling the flesh of their fellowes, yet in their crops, will in no wayes meddle with them, but es∣chew and know such a one, although it were among a hundred of other. In Scotland are Dogs of marueylous condition, aboue the nature of other Dogs. The first is, a Hound of Three sort of Dogs. great swiftnes, hardines, and strength, fierce and cruel vpon all wild beasts, and eger against Thieues, that offer their ma∣sters any violence. The second is a Rach or Hound, very ex∣quisite in following the foote (which is called drawing) whether it be of man or beast, yea he will pursue any maner of fowle, and find out whatsoeuer fish, haunting the land, or lurking a∣mongst the Rocks, specially the Otter, by that excellent sent Otter. of smelling, wherewith he is indewed. The third sort is no greater then the aforesayd Raches, in colour for the most part red, with blacke spots, or else blacke Sleuth∣hound. & full of red marks: These are so skilfull (being vsed by prac∣tize) that they will pursue a Thiefe, or thiefe-stollen Goods, in most precize maner, and finding the trespasser, with great au∣dacity they will make a race vpon him, or if he take the wa∣ter for his safegard, he shrinketh not to follow him: and en∣tering and issuing at the same places where the party went in and out, he neuer ceaseth to range, till he hath noysed his footing, and be come to the place, wherein the Thiefe is shrow∣ded or hid. These Dogs are called Sleuthhounds: There was a Law amongst the borderers of England and Scotland, that whosoeuer denyed entrance to such a Hound, in pursute mads after Fellons and stollen goods, should be holden as accessary vnto the theft, or taken for the selfe same Thiefe.
Of Fowles, such as (I meane) liue by prey, there are sun∣dry sorts in Scotland, as Eagles, Falcons, Gohawks, Spar∣hawks, Marlions, and such like: but of water Fowles there is so great store, that the report thereof may séeme to excéede all credit. There are other kinds of Fowles, the like are rare to be séene, as the Capercaily, greater in body then the Rauen, Caper∣caily. Moore Cocke. Blacke Cocke. liuing onely by the rindes & barks of trées. There are also ma∣ny Moore Cockes and Hennes, which abstayning from corne, doe éede onely vpon Hadder crops. These two are very de∣licate in eating: the third is reddish, blacke of colour, in quan∣tity comparable to the Pheasant, and no lesse delicious in taste and sauour at the table, called The blacke or wilde Cocks. Salmond is more plentifull in Scotland, then in any other Salmond Region of the world: in Haruest time they come from the Seas, vp in smal Riuers, where the waters are most shallow, and there the Male and Female, rubbing their bellies, or wombs, one agaynst the other, they shed their Spawne, which foorthwith they couer with sand and grauell, and so depart a∣way: from hencefoorth they are gaunt and lender, and in appearance so leane, appearing nought else but skin and bone: and therefore out of vse and season to be eaten. Some say, if they touch any their full fellowes, during the time of their leanenesse, the same side which they touched will likewise be∣come leane. The foresayd Spawne and milt, being hidden in the sand, (as you haue heard) in the next pring doth yéeld great num∣bers of little Fry, so nesh and tender for a long time, that till they come to be so great as a mans finger (if you catch any of them) they melt away, as it were gelly or a blob of water: from henceforth they go to the Sea, where within 20. dayes, they grow to a reasonable greatnesse, and then returning to the place of their generation, they shew a notable spectacle to be conidered. There are many Lines or poles, which be∣ing in some places among the Rockes, very shallow abou, and déepe beneath, with the fall of the water, and thereto the Salmond not able to pierce through the channell, eyther for
swiftnesse of the course, or depth of the discent, hee goeth so nre vnto the side of the Rocke or Damme as he may, and there aduenturing to leape ouer, and vp into the Linne, if he leape well at the first, he obtayneth his desire, if not, he assay∣eth esoones the second or third time, till he returne to his countrey. A great Fish, able to swimme agaynst the streame: such as assay often to leape, and cannot get ouer, doe bruise themselues, and become meazelled: others that happen to fall vpon dry land (a thing often séene) are taken by the peo∣ple (watching their time:) some in Cawdrons of hot water, with fire vnder them, sit vpon shallow or dry places, in hope to catch the fattest, by reason of their waight, that doe leape short. The taste of these are estéemed most delicate, and their prices commonly great. In Scotland it is straightly inhibi∣ted to take any Salmond from the 8. of September, vntill the 15. of Nouember. Finally, there is no man yt knoweth readily whereon this Fish liueth, for neuer was any thing yet found in their bellyes, other then a thicke symy humour. In the Deserts and wild places of Scotland, there groweth an Hearbe of it selfe, called, Hadder or Hather, very delicate for Hadde. all kind of Cattell to féede vpon; and also for diuers Fowles, but Bées especially: this Hearbe, in Iune, yéeldeth a purple flower, as swéete as hunny, whereof the Picts, in times past, did make a pleasant drinke, and very wholesome for the body: but since their time, the maner of the making hereof is perish∣ed in the subuersin of the Picts, neyther shewed they euer the learning hereof to any but to their owne Nation. There is no part of Scotland so vnprofitable (if it were skil∣fully searched) but it produceth either Iron or some other kind of Mettall, as may be proued through all the Iles of Scotland. A memoriall of the most rare and wonderfull things of Scotland. AMong many commodityes, that Scotland hath common with other Nations, it is beautified with some rare
gifts in it selfe, wonderfull to consider: as for example. In Orknay, the Ewes are of such fecundity, that at euery Lambing time, they produce, at least, two, and ordinary thrée. There bee neyther venemous nor rauenous Beasts bred there, nor do liue there, although they were trported thither. In Schetland, the Iles called, hulae, at the entring of the Sunne in Cancer, the space of 20. dayes, there appeares no night at all. Among the Rockes growes the delectable Lam∣bre, called, Succinum, with great resort of the Mertrik, for costly Furrings. In the West, and Northwest of Scotland, there is a great repayring of the Erne, of a maruelous nature; The Erne. the people are very curious to catch him, & punze his wings, that hee flie not: he is of a huge quantity, & a rauenous kind, as the Hawkes, and the same quality: they do giue him such sort of meat, in great quantity at once, that he liues contented there with 14. 16. or 20. dayes, and some of them a moneth: their Feathers are good for garnishing of Arrowes, for they receiue no rayne nor water, but remayne alwayes of a dura∣ble estate, and vncorruptible: the people doe vse them eyther when they be a hunting, or at warres. In the most of the Ri∣uers in Scotland, beside the maruelous plenty of Salmond, and other Fishes gotten there, is a Shell Fish, called, The Horse-mussell, of a great quantity; wherein are in∣gendred innumerable faire, beautifull, & dlectable Pearles, Pearles. conuenient for the pleasure of man, and profitable for the vse of Physicke: and some of them so fayre and polished, that they may be equall to any Orientall Pearles. And generally, by the prouidence of Almighty God, when dearth and scarcity of victuals are in the land, then the Fishes are most plentifully taken, for the support of the people. In Galloway, the one halfe of Loch Mirton, doth neuer fréese. By Innernes, the Loch∣mirton. Lochnes Loch; called, Lochnes, and the Riuer flowing from thence in∣to the Sea, doth neuer freese but on the contrary, in the cold∣est dayes of winter, the Loch and Riuer doe both smoke and réeke, signifying vnto vs, that there is a Myne of Brimstone vnder it, of a hote quality. In Carrik are Kyne and Oxen,
delicious to , but their esse is of a wonderfull tempe∣rature: all other estable Beasts fatnesse, with the cold ayre doth congeale: by the contrary, the fatnes of these Beasts is perpetually liquid, like Oyle. The Woo and Parke of Commernauld is replenished with Kyne and Oxen, and those, at all times, to this day, White Kyne & Oxen. haue béene wild, & of a wonderfull whitenes, that there was neuer among all yt huge number there, so much as the smal∣lest blacke spot found to be vpon one of their sainnes, hornes, or cle. In Kyle is a Rocke, of the height of 12. foote, and as much of bredth, called, The deafe Craig: for although a Deafe Craig. man should cryneuer so loude to his fellow, from the one side to the other, hee is not heard, although hee would make the noyse of a Gunne. In the Countrey of Stratherne, vpon the water of Farg, by Balard, there is a Stone, called, The Rock∣and Stone. Rock and Stone, of a reasonable bignesse, that if a man will push it with the least motion of his finger, it will mooue very lightly, but if he shall addresse his whole force, he profits no∣thing: which mooues many people to be wonderfull merry, when they consider such contrariety. In Lennox is a great Loch, called Loch-lowmond, 24. Loch∣lowmōd miles in length, & in bredth 8. miles, contayning the number of 30. Iles: In this Loch is obserued 3. wonderfull things: The one is Fishes, very delectable to eate, yt haue no fynnes to moue themselues withall, as other Fishes do. The second, tempestuous. Waues and Suges of the water, perpetually raging, without winds, & that in the time of greatest calmes, in the fayre pleasant time of Sūr, when the ayre is quiet. The third is, one of these Iles, that is not corroborat, nor v∣nited to the ground, but haue béene perpetually loose: and al∣though it be fertill of good grasse, and replenished with Neate, yet it moues by ye waues of the water; & is transported, some∣times towards one poynt, and other whiles towards another. In Argyle is a Stone found in diuers parts, the which laid vnder Straw or Stubble, doth consume them to fire, by the great heat that it collects there. In Buquhan, at the demolished Castle of Sl, is a Ca,
from the top whereof illes water, which in short time doth congeale to hard white stones: the Caue is alwayes emptied. In Louthian, 2. miles from Edinburgh, Southward, is a Well spring, called, Saint Katherins Well, flowing perpetu∣ally, S. Kathe∣rins well. with a kind of blacke famesse or Oyle, aboue the water, procéeding (as is thought) of the Parret Coale, being frequent in these parts: this fatnes is of a marueilous nature: for as the Coale, whereof it procéedes, is sudden to conceiue fire or flame, so is this Oyle of a sudden operation to heale all salt scabs and humours, that trouble the outward skinne of man: commonly the head & hands are quickly healed by this Oyle: it renders a maruelous swéet smell. At Abridene is a Well, The Well at Abride∣ne. of marnelous good quality to dissolue ye Stone, to expell Sand from ye Reyes & Bladder, & good for the Collick, being drunke in the moneth of Iuly, & a few dayes of August. Little inferi∣our to the renomed water of the Spaw in Almaine. In the North Seas of Scotland are great Clog of Timber sound, in the which are maruelously ingendred a sort of Géese, called, Clayk Geese, and doe hang by the beake, till they bee of per∣fection, Clayk Geese. oft times sound, & kept in admiration of their rare ge∣neration. At Dumbartan, directly vnder the Castle, at the mouth of the Riuer of Clyde, as it enters in ye Sea, there are a number of Clayk Geese, black of colour, which in the night Blacke Clayk Geese. time do gather great quantity of the crops of the grasse, grow∣ing vpon the land, and carry the same to the Sea: then assem∣bling in a round, and with a wondrous curiostly, do offer eue∣ry one his owne portion to the Sea floud, & there attend vpon the flowing of the tide, till the grasse be purified from ye fresh taste, and turned to the salt: and left any part thereof should escape, they labour to hold it in with their nebs: thereaster or∣derly euery Fowle eats his portion: and this custome they ob∣serue perpetually. They are very fat & delicious to be eaten. FINIS. Errata. Pag. . lin. . word, for wierds. p. 42. l. 35. Malonus, Malcolme. p. 66. l. 35. buries, beares. p. 77. l. 10. Higger, Bigger. Ibid. l. 5. peece, p. p. 7. l. . T, Ty p. 87. l. 17. hal-ds, halyards. Ibid. l. 31. & 32. Pictonweme. Pittinweme. Ibid, l. . bufy, bufy. p. 88. l. . Kipper, Kippo. p. 92. l. . Poyll, Poyll. p. 6. l. 1. new, other. . Pag. 5. . 2. Rocira,  Roia. Ibid. . 2. Trondar, for Trondra. Printed at London by Simon Safford.
