19182 99849219 14357
THE SECRETS OF PHYSICK and PHILOSOPHY, Divided into two Bookes: In the first is shewed the true and perfect order to distill, or draw forth the Oyles of all manner of Gummes, Spi∣ces, Seedes, Roots, and Hearbs, with their perfect taste, smell and vertues. In the second is shewed the true and perfect order to prepare, calcine, sublime, and dissolue all manner of Minerals, and how ye shall dravv forth their oyles and Salts, which are most wonderfull in their Ope∣rations, for the health of Mans Bodie. First written in the German Tongue by the most learned Theophrastus Paraselsus, and now published in the English Tongue, by IOHN HESTER, Practitioner in the Art of Distillation. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for William Lugger, and are bee sold at the Posterne Gate at Tower Hill. 1633.
TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, and his singular good Lord, Iohn Watson, by the grace of God, Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the right Honourable Order of the Garter, I. H. wish∣eth health and peace, and long life in IESVS CHRIST. PRettie and pi∣thie is the tale (my Good Lord) that Plato tells in his Protago∣ras,
and somewhat appli∣able to my present pur∣pose, and therefore not absurd for mee to set downe, to the better pre∣ferment of my pretence. Among other his excel∣lent Inventions (as hee is in all his things most like himselfe still verie divine) hee sheweth how Ioue looking down from heaven with a pitifull re∣gard upon the hard & un∣toward cōdition of men, seeing the sundry calami∣ties, and infinite miseries that they were subject un∣to, while yet they lived savage like beasts amōgst
beasts, every man leading his life after the levell of his owne lust, took order strait with his winged Messenger Mercurie, to descend downe with ex∣pedition, with travell to collect and gather toge∣ther the dispersed multi∣tude, that so united they might both bee stronger to defend themselues frō the bruit beasts their cō∣mon enemie: and linked as it were in a bodie po∣litique, each presented as well with the dayly view of his owne want, as the continuall shew of the like lacke in others,
might with ioynt assent and consent (as driuen by necessitie) endevour to driue necessitie frō them∣selues. For the speedier accomplishing whereof, he had in charge to esta∣blish a law, that if any a∣mongst them were found vnfurnished with iustice, and voyd of shamefast∣nesse: the same should be compted as an vnprofi∣table droane among la∣bouring bees, and should suffer punishment accor∣dingly. A worthy talke, and fit so worthy a Phi∣losopher. By the which hee highly delivered in
generall tearmes, that which wee dayly finde in particular proofe: to weet, no cōmon wealth, nor societie to continue long happy where the members and parts ther∣of either for loue of Iu∣stice, or feare of shame are not like affectioned each other. Now lest I should seeme to allow of this tale in speech, and to dislike it in practice, I haue presumed by this bare translation, to testi∣fie my forwardnesse in furthering her that fost∣ers mee. And yet is not my Translation so bare,
(my good Lord) but that it carryeth in it more plainnesse to the Reader, then perhaps they shall find in the first writer: For beside that I haue culled out their choise things, I haue from the same choise proined, and cut off their superfluitie, I haue supplied their de∣fects, I haue laid open their obscuritie, and I haue shadowed their de∣faults, neither yet arro∣gating to my selfe, not derogating from them, but as Dies diem docet, So; Experimentum experiendo confirmatur. What my
travel herein shal profit, I know not: but sure I am, my trouble in the triall of them hath been great, my expences large, my proofes painfull, and no∣thing at all heerein plea∣sant saue onely a little knowledge that I haue got, aboue the capacitie of the common sort, a thing sure that I value far aboue the price that it cost me. Which know∣ledge indeed such is my grossenesse, or such the subtlenesse of the matter if selfe that I can easilier by demonstration shew it, then by declaration
teach it: and therefore dare I not vnder-credite warrant perspicuitie to all men, but to those that are Filijartis, I promise more then I found, and yet found I more then they hauing would wil∣lingly loose: To the re∣sidue I may say, that as Hennes sit, but hatch not Chickens in one day: so men reade, but learne not Artes in one day. To you, my good Lord, whose Counte∣nance heerein I craue for protection, whose iudgement and skill I ap∣peale
to for favour, I must needs confesse they are not written) although loth to haue them mast∣erlesse like their master, I am over bold, to shroud them vnder your wings) to you I say they are not written, except overladē with the deepe and graue mysteries of higher and more heavenly Philoso∣phie, it may please you for delight, now & then to looke downe into the plentifull and pleasant store-house of Nature; a matter no doubt that all your whole life time, you haue beene singular∣ly
delighted with, as most plainely do declare the singularitie, that you haue happily attai∣ned vnto in all & every the parts of her, no lesse to your great content at home, then to your like commendation abroad: which because I can nei∣ther praise to your desert not in praising please your desire, I leaue to speake farther of: onely desiring your good Lord∣ship with your wonted clemencie, to accept of this small testimonie of my great good will, as∣suring your selfe, that
amongst the great num∣ber of your well wil∣lers, there is no one more dutifull then your poore Iohn Hester.
To the Reader. EXperience, the Daughter of Time, the mo∣ther of Wise∣dome, the Re∣ward of Travell, and the onely Iewell of a fewe the wiser, is commonly, good Reader, set out at so high a price, & valewed at so deare a pennyworth, that shee hath ever more Cheapners, then Chapmen, more lookers on her, then likers of her: and yet is shee bought of some, although one dramme of her cost them a whole pound of Repentance. To descend in∣to
particulars, were but to tye thee to a wearisome tale, and to leade thee along tho∣rowe a tedious Labyrinth, stuffed full of Examples of former ages: a matter al∣ready so open to the view of the whole world, that for me to stirre further therein, were but to set a lighted can∣dle in the bright Sunne. Onely for proofe, it may please thee (good Reader) to admit the Instance in my selfe. VVhen I began first to shake hands with the va∣rietie of delights, that un∣stayed Youth are commonly carryed away with: and looking backe, (as it were o∣ver
my shoulder) saw the vast Sea of sugered miseries that I had waded through, I then beganne to thinke it high time to set downe a su∣rer Compasse to direct the remnant of the course that I haue yet to runne. And although at that time I car∣ried in my purse sufficient wealth to support my cal∣ling, in my bodie sufficient health to maintaine my life; and those both so reasonable, as might haue satisfied a reasonable man, (were not Natura hominum novi∣tatis avida) yet found I nei∣ther such content in the one, nor the other, as might lon∣ger
content mee to continue in that state. But drawne on a while by this instinct, or infection (I know not whe∣ther to callit) I was driven at last by a greedy kinde of jealousie, to envie the store that I saw in others, in re∣spect of mine owne penurie: and therewithall I fell into consideration how I might become one of the smal num∣ber of those, whom the grea∣test number wondred at. To enter the straight path that many the learned had happi∣ly to their great commenda∣tion perfectly troden, I saw it almost unpossible, unlesse per∣adventure I should get mee
where the Muses dwell, to Oxford and Cambridge, and there putting my selfe Ap∣prentice seven yeares to the seven liberall Sciēces, might afterward become as long journeyman I cannot tell to whō: and in the end (as too many the learned doe) get I cannot tell what. This course yelded so course a liking, as I sooner passed over it, then in∣to it: and casting about a∣gaine with my selfe, I was combred with a hundred o∣ther odde crochets, all as farre beyond the compasse of my reach, as they were short of the condition of my like∣ing, till at lengh in the mid∣dest
of this muse, I met in my mind with two such mi∣nions, as in my conceit were the only Paragons of the rest: the one gallant and gorgeous garnished with gold and sil∣uer, bedect with jewels, sole Ladie and Governesse of all the rich Mines and Mine∣ralls that are in the bowels of the earth: the other sweet & odoriferous, adorn'd with flowers and hearbs, beautifi∣ed with delicate spices, sole Lady and Regent of all plea∣sant things that grow vpon the face of the earth. These I vowed to serue and to ho∣nour, euen to the lsse of life and limme: neyther haue I
greatly broken promise with them, though they haue not kept touch with me. Goodly and many golden mountains they promised me, Mary hi∣therto haue seantly perfor∣med any leaden mole-hills. But howsoever the bargaine∣stand between them and me, I am neither disposed to ac∣cuse them, nor excuse my selfe. Wee agreed vpon wa∣ges, and I weare their Li∣veries: their Cognusance, such as it is, I beare where I am not ashamed to shew it: divers and sundry their Af∣fayres haue they imployed mee in, in the which I haue saithfully, painfully, and
chargeably applied my selfe, and attained by their in∣structions, (to mine owne destruction allmost) many their hidden secretes aswell in Mettals and Mineralls, as in Hearbs and Spices: part wherof I haue diligently col∣lected together, and for non-payment of my board wages at their hands, am forced to set them with the residue of my skill to sale, with offer vnto thee (good Reader) of preferment to the best things I have: yet at a farre easier price then they cost me, being no lesse my Summa sum∣marum cast vp, and the foot of my account set down,
then the wasting out of my former health, and the wea∣ring of the little wealth I had. So that what experi∣ences soever I haue digged out of hard stones, blowne out from hot fire, raked out from foule ashes, with great cost, and greater travaile, that hast thou heere in my Booke to see, and in my shop to vse with great ease at thy commandement. Iohn Hester.
A TRVE AND perfect Order to make Oyles out of all maner of Gumms, Spice, Seeds, Roots and Hearbes Whereunto is added some of their vertues, gathered out of sundrie Authors. To make Oyle of Ma∣sticke. TAke the purest Masticke that may bee got, which is not mixed with Sandrake, or such like, and beate it to
powder, then put it into a glasse with a long neck, and put therein as much pure Aqua vitae, as will cover it three fingers high, and then slop it close that it take no ayre, then set it in warme horse-dung, or in a soft Bal∣neo, untill it bee dissolved: then poure it into a glasse, and put therin as much wine as you shall thinke good, and distil it with a head, and receiver in sand, with a smal fire, and you shall receiue both oyle and water toge∣ther, the which you shall se∣parate one from an other. Then increase your fire, and there will come fourth an∣other oyle, which smelleth somewhat of the fire, and i best to bee used outwardly.
Yee may rectifie it againe with a small fire, and so it will come sweet. The vertues of this oyle. It is excellent against all colde diseases of the Maw: it comforeteth the liver and the lights, and all other in∣ward parts of the body. Be∣ing drunken it helpes those that vomit or spit bloud: it consumeth and breaketh all inward sores. This oyle be∣ing annoynted on the belly, it stoppeth the flixe, it stop∣peth womens Termes, it is also good for the Mother that is fallen downe, if you annoynt it therewith, and the under part of the belly: It is good for young chil∣dren whose Arse-gut com∣meth forth, if you annoint
it therewith, and put it vp againe: It is also good for those that are Bursten, if you annoynt them there∣with, and let them weare a Trusse fit for that purpose: it helpeth fresh wounds ve∣ry quickly, if you annoynt them therewith, and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same. It fastneth the teeth if you annoynt the gummes therewith: it comforteth a weake stomack, and causeth good digestion, if you an∣noynt it therewith. This Oyle hath all the vertues of Masticke, but it is an hundred times more of force.
To make Oyle of Mirra. TAke pure Mirra that is new and fat, sixe ounces, and put it into a glasse with a long necke, and put there∣on twelue ounces of pure rectified Aqua vitae, then lute the glasse fast, and set it in horse-dung untill it bee dissolved. Then poure it into an Vrinall with a head and a receiver, and distill a∣way the Aqua vitae in Bal∣neo, with a soft fire, and the oyle will remaine in the bottome, the which straine through a fine cloath, and keep it in a glasse. His ver∣tues are these. This Oyle by his natu∣rall Vertue preserveth all
things frō putrifaction that is annoynted therewith: likewise the face and hands being annointed therewith, it presenteth thē in youth∣full state, a long time. It helpeth▪ all stinking sores and wounds quickly: it hel∣peth: paines of the eares, if it be put therein. It preser∣veth the sight of the Eyes, if your put one or two drops therein: Helpeth all paines of the Mother, if it be an∣nointed therewith: it stay∣eth the haire from falling: if any bee troubled with a Fever, let him annoint his whole-body therewith, and lay him downe to sweate. This Oyle drieth and consu∣meth all Accidents after birth. Being drunke, it ma∣keth
a sweete breath, and helpeth the Cough: it is good against short winde: it helpeth the stitch in the side; if you drinke thereof one dram: it stoppeth the flux of the bellys it maketh a cleane voyce. The Arme∣pits being annoynted there∣with, it taketh away the stinch from those parts: if yee mixe it with wine, and wash the mouth therwith, it will comfort the gumm; and fasten the teeth: it is also good for wounds in the head. If thou wilt use this oyle to preserue any part, you shall use it in this order; first, make a Bath with some sweet hearbs, and then hold that part the which you wil
preserue over the fume, that the poares may open, then drie it with a linnen cloath, then annoynt it with this Oyle, and chafe it in: that being done, if there re∣maine any yellownesse of the Oyle, ye may wash it a∣way with white wine. This Oyle would bee occupied when you are in the Stewe or hot-house. To make Oyle of Storax liquida. TAke the purest Storax that you can get, and put it in a glasse with a long necke, and set it in horse-dung for a moneth, then take it foorth, and distill it in an Vrinall that hath a
wide mouth, in sand, with a gentle fire, and you shall haue both Oyle and wa∣ter, the which you shall, separate, and keepe to your vse. Risius writeth in his great Booke of Distillations, that this Oyle hath the same Vertues that the Oyle of Mirra hath: but that it is a little more hot and pier∣cing. To make Oyle of Storax Calamite. THis oyle may be made divers wayes, of the which I will shew you the best. Take the purest Storax that you can finde, and beat it into Powder, then put it
into a long necked glasse, and put thereon pure recti∣fied Aqua vitae, and lute the glasse, then set it in warme dung, or in a soft Balneo a moneth. Then distill it in sand with a small fire, and thou shalt haue both Oyle and water, which you shall separate. You shall vnder∣stand, that towards the end of the distillation, there will ascend a certaine matter like Manna, the which is pleasant. The vertues of this oyle. Three or foure droppes be∣ing drunke, it comforts the Breast and Lungs, and all inward parts: it helpes the paines of the Mother if it bee drunke, and also annoint those parts therewith: it
stoppes the Rheume that falles to the breast and neck: this being drunke, it makes a man merry, and of light courage, but beware you take not too much. If you put two or three drops into the Eares, it takes away the singing in them. To make Oyle of Ben∣jamin. THis is made as you made the oyle of Sto∣rax Calamite, and is onely used in perfuming: some di∣stil this Benjamin with rose water, but I thinke it will not bee so perfect in smell, nor so easily done.
To make Oyle of Gal∣banum. TAke the purest Galba∣num thou canst get, & put it into a glasse close luted, then set it in Balneo Mariae untill it bee dissolved, then distill it with a soft fire, and then will come forth a faire yellow oyle, the which yee shall separate. This oyle being drunke, is good against an olde cough, and for such as are short winded, and can not easily draw their breath, but are alwayes panting & brea∣thing. It is also very good for such as are broken, and bruised within, and against Crampes, and shrinking of
sinewes. This oyle being drunke in Wine with oyle of Mirra, is good against all venome drunken, or shot into the bodie with vene∣mous darts or arrowes. Be∣ing taken in the same or∣der, it provoketh womens termes, and delivereth the dead childe. It hath the same vertue, if a persume thereof bee received in the secret parts This Perfume doeth also helpe women that are grieved with the rising, or strangling of the Mother, and them that haue the Falling sicknesse, and being layd to the Navell, it causeth the Matrix or Mo∣ther that is remooved from his naturall place, to set∣tle againe. This oyle doth
mollifie and soften, and draweth foorth thornes, splinters, or shivers, and cold humours, being mixed with any convenient vn∣guent. It is good to an∣noint the side against the stopping and hardnesse of the Milt. The perfume or sent of this Oyle driveth a∣way serpents from the place where it is burned: and no venemous beasts haue pow∣er to hurt such as be annoin∣ted with the Oile of Galba∣num, and if ye mixe this oile with the root of Angelica, or the seed or root of Spon∣dilium, and touch any Ser∣pent or venemous beast therewith, it causeth them to die.
To make Oyle of Sagapenum, a Gumme running out of the Herbe Ferula. TAke this Gumme, and dissolue it in strong Wine, in Balneo Mariae, and then distill it in the sand with a gentle fire. This oyle is good for the stitch in the side, It taketh away the Cough that hath continued long : It helpeth the swelling of the breast, whereby the breast is stop∣ped. It is very good against the Crampe: it warmeth the joynts, and helpeth the paines of the hippes, and all such like diseases cōming of cold. It is good for women that haue great pain in their-bed,
if you annoynt the nostrills therewith: For it driveth foorth both the quicke and the dead fruit quickly: being drunk with wine it helpeth against poi∣son, and is also good against the biting of an Adder: be∣ing put into the eye, it ta∣keth away spots: You shall note, that women with childe must take great heed of this Oyle. To make oile of Opoponax. THis is made as is afore∣sayd, and his vertues are these. If you drinke three or foure droppes with Wine, it helpeth the Cough, and all impediments of the Milt:
it helpeth also all Impedi∣ments of the Bladder, and cleanseth it of all scabs and fores: It helpeth the stitch in the side: it causeth spee∣die deliverie in Women with childe: it helpeth a∣gainst winde in the Matrix, and dissolveth the hardnesse of those parts, and causeth the paine to cease. To make Oyle of Eu∣phorbium. THis it made as is sayd a∣fore, and his vertues are these. Yee shall note, that this Oyle is not to bee occupy∣ed inwardly, by reason of his great heate, except it be mixed with some other
thing, as if it be mixed with honey, it purgeth the belly marveylously: it helpeth those that are troubled with obliviousnesse, if yee annoynt the parts there∣with: It draweth foorth thornes and such like out of the flesh: it helpeth the bi∣ting of an Adder: it is also good for stiffenesse of the joynts comming of cold, if ye annoynt the parts there∣with. To make Oyle of Ambre, or Succinum. TAke Ambre, and beat it to powder, and put it into a glasse with a Head and a Receiver, and distill it in sand with a gentle fire,
and there will come foorth both oyle and water, the which ye shall separate one from another. This Oyle being perfect∣ly distilled, is good against paines of the head, and reso∣lution of sinewes, and a∣gainst swimming in the head, and falling sicknesse. If yee drinke thereof three or foure drops in the morning with Pionie water, it pre∣serveth a man from all poy∣sons and pestiferous ayres, if yee annoynt the nostrilles therewith, or put it into some medicine fit for that purpose. It is excellent a∣gainst diseases of the Blader and Reines, and driveth foorth the Stone, and pro∣voketh Vrine, if yee drinke
it with Malmesie, or Parce∣lie water, or such like. It helpeth the Collicke. and choking of the Matrix; if you also annoynt the parts therewith, it driveth foorth the fruit, and causeth a wo∣man to be fairely delivered; if she drinke three or foure drops, it is good against all fluxes of the head. To make Oyle of Amo∣niacum. TAke this Gumme, and put it into a glasse close luted: and set it in warme dung, or in Balneo Mariae, vntill it bee dissolved; then distill it in sand with a head and a receiver, & thou shalt haue both Oyle and water,
the which yee shall separate one from another: ye shall understand, that there will come foorth more water then oyle, as I haue prooved many times. This Oyle helpeth the Cough comming of moy∣sture: it purgeth the breast, and helpeth Vlcers in that place, three or foure drops being taken in an Egge: it helpeth paines in the side, if yee annoynt it therewith: It dissolveth all hardnesse, and swellings, and taketh away the paynes of the Gowt. If ye mixe this oyle with as much oile of Galba∣num, and a very little oyle of Wormewood, and annoint the Milt, it taketh away all the paines: being mixed
with oile of Wormewood, and annoynted in the navill, it killeth wormes. To make Oyle of Sar∣cocolla. THis is an excellent Bal∣some against all wounds, and filleth them with flesh: it purgeth all olde sores, without paine and smart: it breaketh hard Impo∣stumes, it helpeth all run∣ning Eyes, if you vse it in a Collirie: it helpeth wheales in the eye-lids: Being drunk with Wine, it helpeth the Phewme that falleth to the teeth, and for that cause it is vsed of those that are troubled with aboundance of flegmatique humours:
You shall note, that this oile is specially vsed in fresh wounds, and old sores. This Oyle is made as you made the oyle of Serapynum. To make Oyle of Ca∣storeum. TAke the fattest that thou canst gett, and stampe it well; then put it into a glasse, and set it to putrifie in Balneo Mariae, fiue or sixe dayes, then di∣still it with a soft fire, and thou shalt haue an excellent Oyle. This is good against all cold Cramps, and Balsies, be∣ing mixed with Rew and Vineger, and put into the nostrills, it comforteth the
braine, and taketh away paines of the head. Beeing annoynted on the necke, and also drunke with Wine, it helpeth much those that are troubled with the Falling Sicknesse: It helpeth Con∣vulsions, and paines of the sinewes, if you annoynt them therewith: Being drunk with Pepper and Hi∣dromell, it provoketh wo∣mens termes, and also the fruit, it warmeth cold pla∣ces; it is also excellent a∣gainst Appoplexia it helpeth those that are deafe, it moo∣veth Venery. It cureth the Collicke, and the suffocation of the Matrix, and streng∣theneth the naturall parts.
To make Oyles of Fran∣kincense. TAke Frankincense, as much as you will, and put it into a Retort of glasse well luted, and put thereun∣to for every pound of stuffe, foure ounces of cleane sand, and then distill it with a gentle fire, vntill all the sub∣stance bee come foorth, and thou shalt haue both water and oyle, the which ye must separate. The water is good a∣gainst wind in the stomack, if it bee drunke: it is also good for choppes in the hands and feet, if yee wash them therewith, & annoynt them with the oyle against the fire, and strait wayes
put on a paire of gloues, and so doing three times they shall be whole. This Oile helpeth simple wounds in three or foure dayes, if yee annoynt them therewith, and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same, it preserveth all flesh from pu∣trifying and alteration, and taketh away the paine: It helpeth all aches and bruises if ye anoint them therwith. Ye shall note, that you must vse no tent where you occu∣pie this oyle, but wash the wound cleane, and joyne it, or stitch it close together, and then lay thereon a cloth wet in the same; for if yee fall a tenting, ye make work for the Surgeon.
To make Oyle of Tur∣pentine. TAke pure and cleane Turpentine as much as you will, and put it into a glasse, so that three parts be emptie, and put therein a certaine quantitie of Sand, as much as you shall thinke good; then distill it in sand with a soft fire, and there wil come foorth foure Li∣quors: The one is a cleare water, the other a cleare Oyle, the third a yellow Oyle, the fourth a red and stinking, the which a num∣ber of Potecaries doe fell in stead of Balme. Yee shall note, that the first Oyle is hot, the second hotter, the
third hottest of all, and not so good to occupie inward∣ly, as the first. Falopius in his booke of secrets writeth, that this oile will help fresh wounds in foure and twenty houres, if ye anoint them therwith, and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same. So is the oyle of Tile-stones, or the blessed oyle mixed with Grayes or Badgers grease. This oyle is made with powder of tyle-stones burnt redd hot, and quenched in the best oyle o∣liue, and then with a retort and strong fire purchased. It is good against contra∣ction or sinews comming of cold: It provoketh vrine, if yee drinke one dram of the first oyle in white wine: it
breaketh wind in the bodie, and dissolveth the Plurisie, and pestilent Fever: it pro∣voketh an appetite if ye an∣noynt the stomacke there∣with. It helpeth against cold diseases of the Maw, and helpeth a stinking breath, and the cough. To make Oyle of Wax. TAke new yellow Waxe as much as you shal think good, and melt it on the fire; then powre it into sweet Wine, and vvring it betweene your hands, then melt it againe, and powre it into Wine againe; and this you shall doe fiue or sixe times at the least, and everie time you must
haue fresh Wine, then at the last you shall put it into a Retort of glasse well luted with his Receiver, and di∣still it in Sand, and there will come forth a faire yel∣low oyle, the which will congeale like pap when it is cold. You shall understand, that for everie pound of Waxe, yee shall put there∣to foure ounces of the pow∣der of Brickes into the glasse. Raymonde Lullie greatly commendeth this Oyle, ap∣prooving it rather to bee a Celestiall or divine Medi∣cine, then humane: for be∣cause this in wounds wor∣keth most miraculously, which for his marveilous commoditie, is not so well
to bee vsed of the common Chirurgion: Because this precious Oyle healeth a vvound bee the same never so bigge or wide, being a∣fore wide stitched vp, in the space of eleven dayes, or twelue at the most: But those that are small, this Oyle healeth in three or foure dayes, by annoynting onely the wound therwith, and laying thereon a'cloath wet in the same. Also for inward diseases this Oyle worketh mira∣cles: For if you giue one dramme at a time to drinke with white wine, it stayeth the shedding of the hayre, either on the head or beard, by anoynting the place ther∣with. Moreover, it is excel∣lent
in provoking of Vrine which is stopped: it helpeth stitches and paines in the loines, if you drink the fore∣said quantitie with White Wine: It helpeth the cold Gowt or Sciatica, and all o∣ther griefes comming of cold. Yee shall understand, that if you rectifie this oile, it wil congeale no more, but then it will bee too hot to take inwardly, for it pier∣ceth marvellously, and is good to bee mixed with o∣ther medicines, to cause them to pierce the better. To make the Quintessence of Honey. YOu shall vnderstand that Honey is a liquor rather divine then humane, because
it falleth from heaven vpon the hearbs, & is such a sweet thing, that the like cannot bee found vpon the earth. And this Raymond Lullie calleth the Flower of Flo∣wers, because Bees gather it vpon the Flowers in the field. And truely it is a most strange thing if wee would consider well the qualitie of Honey and Waxe: and therefore the wise Baruch Arabico, in the Academie of Avicene, did write this sen∣tence: Mel dentro, & olio difuori, satisfying vs by this, that Honey and Oyle were the first two liquors in the world. And truly it is so if we consider well, as it may well bee prooved by holy Scripture.
The order to make this Quintessence, is thus: Take two pound of perfect pure Honey, and put it into a great glasse, that foure parts of fiue may remaine emp∣tie: Lute it well with a Head and Receiver, and giue it fire vntill there appeare certain white fumes, which you shall turne into water, with wetting of clothes in cold water, and laying them on the Receiver and Head, and they will turne into wa∣ter of a redd colour like blood. When it is all di∣stilled, keepe the glasse close shut, and let it stand till it bee cleare, and in the colour of a Rubine. Then distill it in Bale Mariae, at least sixe or seven times, and so
it will lose his red colour, and remaine in the colour of Golde, having a great smell, and so pleasant, that the like cannot bee found in the world. The juice of a Limmon doeth dissolue Leafe-golde in vvarme ashes, with the Quintessence of this honey, and maketh it potable in fortie eight houres. This Quintessence dissol∣veth gold, and maketh it potable, and likewise any sort of Iewell that is put therein. It is of such ver∣tue, that if any bee a dying, and drinke two or three drammes thereof, presently hee will recover, as the Quintessence of Wine will doe. If you wash any wound
therewith, or other sore, it will heale quickly. It is also good against the Cough, Catarre, and paines of the Milt, and many other disea∣ses which I will not speake of: for but few. and they very hardly, wil beleeue the great vertue and operation thereof. I gaue this six and fortie dayes vnto one that had the Palsie, and hee was holpen. It helpeth also the falling sicknesse, and preserveth the bodie from putrifaction, so that by these you may per∣ceiue that it is a celestiall medicine. If therefore anie vertuous man would take a little paine, in the experi∣ence heereof, hee shall doe wonderfull things, as ma∣ny
times I haue, so that the people deemed that I wrought by Inchantment, when as indeed I did it by vertue of this liquor, mini∣string the same so privily that they could not see it, which fell out to my great honour, and benefit of the sicke, as you shall reade in my Thesauro della vita hu∣mana. And therefore I would wish them that pro∣fesse Physicke and Chirur∣gerie, to vse such Expe∣rience, whereby commeth Honour and gaine to the Physician, and profite to the Patient.
To make Oyle of Lignum vitae, or Guaicum. TAke the freshest Wood that thou canst get, and make it in powder, then put it into a vessell of glasse well luted, and set it in hors-dung, or in Balneo, to di∣gest, then take it foorth, and distill it with a gentle fire, as thou wouldst distill Nut∣megs, and thou shalt haue both oyle and water, the which thou shalt separate by themselues: then take the feces and put it into a new earthen pot, and set it in a furnace of reverberati∣on, vntill it bee burnt: into ashes, then take that ashes and make therof a Lie with
Fumetarie water, and when thou seest that the ashes will make the water no more sharpe, cast them a∣way, and let the water set∣tle cleare, then vapour away the water with a soft fire, and in the bottome will re∣maine a Salt, the which you shall dissolue and congeale vntill it be cleare and faire, as Sal ron, or Eniallie, then keepe it to thy use: the water is to drinke with Wine. The Oyle is to annoynt the fores or aches, and the salt is to purge, and the or∣der to vse it is thus: Either in the Poxe, Gowt, or the Palsie. First, you shall purge the Patient wel with this: Take
of the salt halfe a scruple, Theriaca Alexandria, two drammes, mixe them, and giue them thereof halfe a scruple at a time: you shall giue this three or foure times, according to the infe∣ction of the disease; for in this Salt is vertue to purge all humours that causeth the Gowt, the Palsie, and the Poxe, and such like hath not been found, neither by vo∣miting or purging. Then when the patient is wel pur∣ged, if the patient haue any sores or holes, you shall mundifie them with this salt; and when they are mun∣dified, you shall dresse them twise a day with the Oyle, vntill they bee whole, but if the Patient haue no holes,
you shall annoynt those pla∣ces where hee feeleth ache or griefe: Also every mor∣ning early in his bed, and at night an houre after sup∣per, you shall giue him a good spoonefull of the wa∣ter with Rennish wine to drinke, and let him sweat thereon well; also hee shall vse this with his meat if he will. Yee shall vnderstand, that the cure lyeth not in meat nor drinke, but in the medicine, and therfore keep him not too hungry, but let him haue good meate, and well seasoned with salt, and let him drinke wine; and so vsing this order, thou shalt be able to helpe the Gowt, Pox, or Palsie.
To make Oyle of Butter. TAke newe fresh But∣ter, as much as you will, and put it in a Retort of glasse well luted, and there will come forth three liquors, the which thou must separate. This Oyle doeth pearce marvellously, and taketh away the paines of the Gowt, if you annoint them therewith: If you annoint the hands and face there∣with, it will preserue them faire: It is also good for those that are troubled with a Catarre, if you giue them thereof an ounce fasting; for presently it arriveth to the
stomacke, and mollifieth the Catarre, in such order as you shall spit it foorth at the mouth. To make Oyle of Egges. TAke Egges and seethe them hard; then take foorth the yelks, and stampe them in a morter, then put them in a frying-panne, and set them over the fire, and continually stirre them vn∣till you see them turne to oyle, then take them forth, and put them into a Canvas bagge, and presse it foorth. This Oyle helpes wounds with great speed: it makes the hayre of the head or beard black: It takes away the paines of the Emerodes;
it is excellent against bur∣ning with fire, or scalding with water: you shall un∣derstand this oyle may bee made very perfect by the art of Distillation without im∣pression, as I haue prooved divers times. ¶ Here beginneth the Order to make Oyles of all man∣ner of Spices and Seeds. To make Oyle of Si∣namon. TAke Sinamon as much as you will, and stampe it grossely; then put it into a glasse with pure
Aqua vitae, and so let it stand fiue or sixe dayes, then di∣still it with a small fire, and there will come forth both oyle and water, the which you shall separate one from another, for the Oyle will sinke to the bottome: some vse to distill this with wine, and some with Rose-wa∣ter. You shall vnderstand, that this Oyle is of a mar∣veilous nature, for it pier∣ceth through the flesh and bones, and is very hot and drie, and is good against all colde and moyst disea∣ses, and in speciall for the heart and head, in so much that if a man lay speech∣lesse, and could scant draw his winde, it would pre∣sently
recover him againe, so that his time bee not yet come: most miraculous to see: and to bee short, this Oyle is of such operation and vertue, that if a man drinke never so little, hee shall feele the working in his fingers and toes with great marvell: and therfore to be short, it pierceth tho∣row the whole body, and helpes all diseases that are come through cold & fleg∣matique matter. This oyle is hot and sharpe: it digest∣eth and makes thin, & driues downe womens termes: it helpes vvomen that haue great paines and smart in their travaile, and brings foorth their fruite, if you giue the Patient a little of
this Oyle, with oyle of Mir∣ra in Wine to drinke, and annoynt the parts there∣with. The face and hands being annoynted with this oyle, it driveth away the Measells and Spots. It war∣meth the breast, and helpes the colde Cough: It con∣sumes all cold Fluxes, that proceed from the braine, and head, and causeth quiet sleepe. This Oyle may bee occu∣pied in stead of the naturall Baulme for many Diseases: Yee shall note, that the wa∣ter of Sinamon is also good against the aforesayd Di∣seases, but yet nothing of so much force as the Oyle; for one drop of Oyle will doe more, then foure spoon∣fulls
of the vvater: there∣fore they would bee vsed together. To make Oyle of Cloues. THis Oyle is made in this order: Take the best Cloues thou canst get, and beat them grossely, then put them into pure wine in∣to a glasse with a long neck close luted; then set it in warme hors-dung the space of a moneth, then distill it in sand with a soft fire, and thou shalt haue a faire Oyle, which will sinke to the bot∣tome, the which you shall separate: and his vertues are these. It strengtheneth the braine, head, and heart, and
reviveth the spirits; it ser∣veth against al cold diseases, it consumeth all euil flegme: being outwardly applyed, it hath great vertue in healing, & may be occupied in steed of balme for wounds. One or two droppes taken in the morning with wine helps a stinking breath: it maks the heart merry, and cleanseth the filthinesse thereof, and openeth the liver that is stopped: being put into the eye it cleeres the sight, it comforts a cold stomacke, and causeth good digestion, it purgeth melancholy: this oyle may be made in manus Christi with sugar, and they will haue the aforesaid ver∣tue and strength.
To make Oile of Nut∣megs. THis Oyle is made as the Oyle of Cloues, and will swim vpon the wine: but if you distill this againe in Balneo, it will bee most pure and suttle, and may bee kept an hundred yeeres in his perfect strength and ver∣tue. This Oyle being drunke with Wine, driveth downe womens tearmes, and al∣so the quicke and the dead fruit: and therefore wo∣men with child shall not oc∣cupie this oyle, vntill such time as they bee in travell with childe, and then it cau∣seth them to be faire delive∣red
without paine and dan∣ger: Being drunke with wine, it takes away al paines of the head comming of cold: It comforts the maw, and opens the liver, milt, and kidneyes, and such like, it is excellent against beating of the heart, and faintnesse and swouning; if ye drinke thereof, and annoint the re∣gion of the heart therwith: it makes good blood, and expelleth flegmatique and melancholly humours, and makes a man merry: being vsed at night, it takes a∣way all fancies and dreames: if any had a vvound, or had broken a ribbe within him with a fall, let him drinke this Oyle with any slight wound-drinke, and it
will helpe him although he were almost dead: it is good in all filthy sores which are counted uncurable: it is also pretious for all cold diseases of the ioynts and sinews: it makes a sweet breath: if the splene doe swell, yee shall annoint therewith the left side: it helps all effects in the blather if it bee drunke. To make Oyle of Mace. THis oyle is made as aforesaid, and is hot in operation, it hath great ver∣tue against the chollicke, which commeth of cold causes, or of a rheume des∣cending from the head: it
comforts the heart, the sto∣macke, and the wombe, it is good in the strangurie, and all cold diseases: if yee drinke thereof three or foure drops fasting with a spoonfull of wine or broath, or eate two or three manus Christi made there with. To make Oyle of Pepper. THis oyle is distilled as is said afore, and is very cleare and light, and his ver∣tues are these. This oyle hath more ver∣tue then the Pepper hath in piercing, and specially in the cholicke, and other weake places filled with flegme, if you take thereof three or
foure droppes with one scruple of the juyce of a Quince, two houres afore the fit, after the bodie is well purged, and let blood; it stayeth also the shaking at the first time, or else at the second, it taketh away the fit. Yee shall vnderstand that this Oyle is onely the ayrie part, separated from the o∣ther Elements. I saw once this Oyle made by a Ger∣man, which had the perfect taste, savour, and smell, and was so hot on the tongue as oyle of Vitrioll.
To make Oyle of Saffron. TAke the best Saffron thou canst get, and put it into a glasse, and put thereon pure rectified Aqua vitae, then lute the glasse fast, and set it in warme horse-dung a moneth: then distill it in Balneo Maria with a soft fire, vntill all the Aqua vitae be come foorth: then take foorth the Saf∣fron, and presse it in a presse made for that pur∣pose, within a strong Can∣vasse bagge, and you shall haue both oyle and water, which you shall disgest fiue or sixe dayes, and then sepa∣rate them by art.
If this oyle bee drunken with Wine it makes a man merry, and to haue a faire colour: if yee annoint the temples of a man overcome with drinke it will helpe him. This oyle being an∣nointed on Saint Anthonies fire it quencheth it, and pre∣serues the place: this oyle being mixed with womens milke stoppeth the running of the eyes: being annoin∣ted on the heart it maketh it merry. The head being annoynted with this oyle it provokes sleepe, by reason whereof the ancient Doc∣tors heretofore did use it to such as were mad, annoyn∣ting the temples therewith, it cleanseth old sores.
To make Oyle of Anniseede. TAke as much Anniseed as thou wilt, and beate it grosly, then infuse it in strong wine foure or fiue dayes, and distill it in a gourd with a head and re∣ceiver, in sand, and there will come forth both oyle and water, which thou shalt separate. This oyle being drunke with wine in the morning fasting, maketh a man to haue a sweet breath, if ye put a little into the nostrils when you goe to bed, and annoynt the temples there∣with: it takes away all paines comming of colde,
and causeth the patient to sleepe quietly: it is good a∣gainst winde in the gutts and stomacke, and causeth the paine to cease, if yee drinke three or foure drops and annoynt the stomacke therewith: It breaketh al∣so Flegme, and causeth it to come foorth at the mouth: It provoketh ve∣nerous actes, and driveth foorth poyson by sweat: it is most excellent for those that are short winded, and cannot fetch their breath but with great paine: it comforteth the Breast and lungs: it breaketh the stone in the Reines and, Bladder: it is good against the Bloc∣dy flixe & piles. If any chest be annoynted therewith, it
will not suffer Moaths to breed therein. To make Oyle of Fen∣nell seed. THis is made as is afore∣sayd, and his vertues are these: It is most excel∣lent against all paines of the eyes, in so much that if a man were almost blinde, it would recover his sight a∣gaine, if he drinke thereof once a day, and dropp one drop into the eye morning and euening: It maketh a sweet breath, and comforts the head of cold humours: it comforteth the Maw, and opens the liver & Milt that is stopped: It helpeth the dropsie & yellow Iaundise,
of what cause soever it bee: in hot diseases ye must oc∣cupy it with cold waters, and in cold diseases with wine: Ex Philippo Her∣mano. This oyle as writeth E∣vonimus, breaketh the stone in the reines, and provoketh menstrue and vrine: it com∣forteth the stomacke and breaketh wind, this oyle may bee made in manus Christi, with sugar, and is very pleasant, and hath the selfe same vertue. To make Oyle of Cu∣min seed. THis oyle is made as is aforesaid, and is good a∣gainst wounds that pierce
the splene: it is also most excellent to scatter and breake all the windinesse of the stomacke, the belly, the bowels and matrixe; also it is singular against gryping torments, and gnawings or frettings of the belly, not onely to bee vsed inwardly, but to be put into glisters, or to bee layed to outwardly with barley meale. This oyle being drunke with wine, is good for those that are hurt with any venemous beasts: this oyle either eaten in Manus Christi, or drunke is very profitable for such as haue the cough and haue taken cold, and for those whose breasts are charged or stopped. This oyle being too much vsed, decayeth
the naturall complexion and liuely colour, causing one to looke wanne and pale. To make Oyle of Car∣raway seed. THis Oyle is made in the aforesaid order, and is very good and convenient for the Stomacke, and for the mouth: at helpeth dis∣gestion, and provoketh V∣rine: it swageth and dissol∣veth all kinde of windinesse and blastings of the inward parts. And to conclude, it is answerable to the Oyle of Annis seed, in vertue and o∣peration.
To make Oyle of Dill seed. THis Oyle is made in the aforesaid order: This oyle being eaten in Manus Christi, or drunk with wine, causeth vvomen to haue great plentie of Milke: it driveth away ventositie or windinesse, & swageth the blastings & griping torment of the belly: it stayeth vo∣miting and laskes, and pro∣voketh vrine: it is very profitable against the suffo∣cation or strangling of the matrix, if yee cause the wo∣man to sit over the fume of it in a close stoole, for that purpose this oyle being ea∣ten in Manus Christi, staieth the yexe or hiquet.
This oyle healeth hollow and moist ulcers, and espe∣cially in the share or pvivie parts, this oyle doth digest and resolue and swage paine, and ripeneth all raw and unripe humours. This oyle may not bee too much vsed inwardly, for it diminisheth the sight, and the seed of generation. To make Oyle of Parce∣ly seed. THis oyle is made in the aforesaid order, and his vertues is to open obstructi∣ons of the liver and kid∣nies: it provoketh men∣strue, if it bee drunke with convenient liquors: it cau∣seth a good appetite and
disgestion, and comforts the stomacke: it driueth forth the stone and gravell, & pro∣uoketh vrine, and is a reme∣dy against all poisons: it dri∣veth away all blastings and windinesse: it is also good against the Cough, if it bee made with medicines made for that purpose. To make Oyle of Rue, or Hearbgrace. THis oyle is made of the seed of Rue being putri∣fied in wine. Cardanus, writeth, that this Oyle being perfectly made, is of great vettue a∣gainst poyson being drunke with wine, for it causeth the patient to avoyd it by
vomit, at the first time hee taketh it: and at the second time it expelleth the other evill humours that are infe∣cted therewith: and at the third time it cureth the pati∣ent, and maketh him whole: and this is done in three or foure daies: it helpeth all diseases of the eyes, of what cause soever it be, so that the apple of the eye be not peri∣shed. The vse of this oile to the eye, is to annoint it ther∣with twice a day, or wash the eye with the water of Rue, and drop one or two drops into the eye. This oyle being drunke, suffereth no poyson to re∣maine in man that day: if a man drinke thereof fasting which is sore wounded, and
that the other cure bee had accordingly, hee shall easily escape. This oyle being drunke, taketh away the gowt and dropsie sprung of a cold cause: it restores all nummed members taken with the Palsie, if you an∣noynt them therewith. Cardanus also affirmeth in his second booke de Sub∣tilitate, that there are cer∣taine poysons which slay with their onely touching, against which poyson, saith he, the best remedy is, not to tarry in any place vntill thy hand waxe hot, but often bathe the parts with warme water, and annoynt them with oyle of Rue perfectly distilled.
To make Oyle of Ivie. THis Oyle is made as is aforesaid, and is good against these Diseases fol∣lowing. Against gripings or wind in the gutts: against Gono∣rheam, & paines in the neck comming of a Catarre: this oyle may bee compared to Balme, three or foure drops being drunke, it doeth pre∣vent the resolution of Si∣newes, the Falling sicknesse, and other Diseases of the braine: It preserveth the body from all poyson and pestilent ayres, it comforts a colde stomacke: It stayeth vomiting: it purgeth the reines: it breakes the stone,
it provoketh Vrine: it hel∣peth the Collick, and paines of the guttes: it helpeth paines in the Stomacke and Lungs: it is good against the Dropsie, and water be∣tweene the skinne and the flesh: it killeth wormes: to bee short, it helpeth all sicke members: by the ver∣tue of his piercing, being anoynted outwardIy, it stay∣eth Consumptions: it hel∣peth Scabbes, and olde evill Vlcers: it: helpeth paines of the hippes, the Gowt, and Collicke: It helpeth the choppes in the handes and feete. Philippus Harmanus wri∣teth, that if this Oyle bee rectified againe, it will bee an hundred times more pu∣rer,
and more piercing, for I haue seene those that could not make water in three or foure dayes: and after they haue drunke foure or fiue drops of this oyle, and an∣noynted therewith the Re∣gion of the bladder, present∣ly they haue made water without any tarying. This Oyle is so excel∣lent against the Pestilence, that if any drinke there∣of oftentimes, hee shall not bee infected: although he were in the house where the Pestilence is. But if a∣ny haue the Plague already, let him drink three or foure droppes in Wine, and lay him downe to sweat, and the next day he shall be wel againe.
This oyle is so excellent against poyson, that if a man vse it, there will no poy∣son remaine with him: It strengtheneth the Maw and all inward parts, and princi∣pally it warmeth the heart: it stoppeth the bloody flux: It is also good against all diseases of the Kidneys and Bladder: If yee drinke it with Wine, it stoppeth wo∣mens termes: this oyle be∣ing annoynted from the na∣vell of a woman to the pri∣vie parts and reines of the backe, it strengtheneth the Matrix, or Mother, and dri∣eth up the moysture there∣in, and prepareth it to con∣ception. This sayd Oyle of Ivie being made up with Sugar
in Manus Christi, hath the foresaid vertues. To make Oile of Rosemary Flowers. TAke Rosemary Flow∣ers, and stampe them, then put it into a glasse with strong Wine, and stop it close, then set it in the Sun fiue or fixe dayes, and then distill it with a soft fire, and thou shalt haue both water and oyle, the which you shal separate, and keepe close in a glasse, and his vertues are these. It helpeth against all paines in the head, although they haue continued seaven yeares: it comforteth the memorie, & also preserveth
the eyes, if you drinke thereof now and then a drop or two, and put ano∣ther into the eyes. It hel∣peth those that are deafe, if it be put into the eares, and also drunke with good wine: It openeth all stop∣pings of the liver and milt, and helpeth against the dropsie and yellow Iaun∣dize: it breaketh wind and helpeth the Cholicke, and rising of the mother: it is also excellent for those that haue drunke poison, or that are infected with the pesti∣lence, if you drinke thereof a little and lay you downe to sweat: It comforteth the heart and cleanseth the blood, and maketh a man merry, and causeth a
good colour, and this Oyle is most excellent for those that are full of Itch, and scabbes. And to bee short, it helpeth all the disease of the body, that come of cold and moyst humours, al∣though they were never so evill: It helpeth the Can∣ker and Fistulaes, and such like. To make Oyle of Wild Time. THis Oyle is made as is a∣foresaid. This Oylebeing eaten in Tablets of Sugar, or drunke in Wine, bringeth to wo∣men their fluxe naturall, and driveth out the front and gravell, and provoketh vo∣mite:
the same taken in like manner stoppeth the Laske, and cureth Gri∣pings or gnawings, and is excellent against Crampes, and the contraction of Si∣newes. This Oyle being taken in meats or broaths, is a so∣veraigne Medicine against all poisons, and against the bitings and stingings of ve∣nemous beasts and serpents. This being applied unto the forehead and temples with oyle of Roses and vineger, swageth headach, and is ve∣ry good against raving and frenzie: the fume of this Oyle driveth away vene∣mous beasts.
To make Oyle of Time. THis oyle is made as is aforesaid, and his ver∣tues are these. Three or foure drops be∣ing drunke with honied water, helpeth a painefull cough and shortnesse of breath: it provoketh vrine, and expelleth the secondine and dead fruit from the matrixe: it provoketh men∣strue, and dissolveth clotted and congeled blood in the body: being taken with oximell and a little salt, it purgeth tough and clammie flegme, and sharpe chole∣ricke humours, and all the corruption of the blood▪
being taken in the said man∣ner, it is good against the Sciatica, the paine in the side and the breast: it is also good against blastings and windinesse in the side and belly, and of the stones and genitors: it is good for those that are fearefull, me∣lancholy, and troubled in spirit and mind. This oyle being often v∣sed, helpeth bleered eyes and paines of the same: be∣ing drunke in wine, it is most profitable for those that are troubled with the Gowt, but if it chance that their paines be on them, yee shal giue them 5 or 6 drops with a dram of oximell: if ye use this oftentimes with honey, it will cleanse the
breast, and ripen flegme, and causeth it to bee spit foorth with ease: the smell of this Oyle is most comfortable for those that haue the Fal∣ling sicknesse. To make Oyle of sweet Margerom. THis Oyle is made as is a∣foresaid, and his vertues are these. Being drunke in White Wine, it is most whole∣some for those that beginne to fall into a dropsie, and for such as cannot pisse but drop after drop, and that with great difficultie. It is also good for those that are troubled with griping pains
and wringings of the belly: being taken in the said or∣der, it provoketh womens tearmes. If yee convey this Oyle with Oyle of bitten Al∣monds up into the nostrils, it will purge the head of moyst humors, and cause them to sneese. It is most excellent for those that have lost their smelling, & against all paines of the head, being vsed as is aforesaid: It is good against poyson, and the stining of Scorpions.
To make Oyle of Sage. This oyle is made in the aforesaid order: And helpeth congealed blood within the body, and cu∣reth inward wounds and bruses, either by a stripe or fall if it bee drunke with wine: it provoketh vrine and breaketh the stone: it comforteth the heart, and taketh away the head ache. It is also good for women with child, to use it now and then, for it closeth the matrixe and comforteth the fruite. This oyle being often drunke causeth women to bee fruitfull: If yee drinke
it with wine it helpeth the cough, and openeth the stoppings of the Liver, and swageth the paine in the side: if it be drunke with worme-wood wine, it stop∣peth the bloody flixe: It is also good against the biting of venemous beasts, for it cleanseth and helpeth them. To make Oyle of Pe∣neriall. THis oyle is made as is a∣foresaid, and his vertues are these. Being drunke in Wine, it mooveth monethly tearms, bringeth forth the secun∣dine, the dead fruite and
the vnnaturall birth: it pro∣voketh urine, and break∣eth the Stone, especially in the Kidneyes, being used with purified Honey: It cleanseth the Lungs and Breast from all grosse and thicke humours. This oyle being mixt with Honey and Aloes, purgeth the melan∣cholick humour, and prevai∣leth much against Crampes, and the contraction of Si∣newes. This oyle being drunke with water and Vineger, stayeth the inordinate de∣sire to vomite, and the gnawing paines of the sto∣macke; being drunke with Wine, it helpeth the bi∣ting of venemous beastes: it is also good against the
Falling Sicknesse: the tem∣ples and nostrills being an∣noynted with this oyle, it taketh away the swimming paines and giddinesse of the head. It is most excellent for those that haue cold and moyst braines: it taketh a∣way the paines of the Gowt, The fume or smoke of this Oyle being at the secret parts with a fonnell, is good against ventositie, windinesse, and blastings, and also against the hard∣nesse and stopping of the Mother.
To make Oyle of Mint. THis oyle is made as is aforesaid. This oyle being either eate or drunke, is most pro∣fitable for the stomacke, for it warmeth and strength∣neth the same, and drieth up all moist and superfluous humours gathered in the same, and taketh away all paines thereof, and causeth good digestion: it staieth also vomiting in those that haue a weake stomacke, being drunke with vineger, it stayeth those that vomite blood, and killeth the round wormes. This oyle being drunke
foure or fiue times with some convenient liquor, hel∣peth the griping paine and gnawing in the belly, with the Collicke, and stoppeth the inordinate courses of the menstruall issue, being drunke with wine, it ea∣seth women which are too much grieved with hard and perillous travel in child bearing: being dropped in∣to the eares it taketh away the paine: the smell of this oyle causeth a man to bee merry. This oyle is singular good against the gravell and stone in the Kidnies, and against the strangury, which is when one cannon pisse, but drop after drop, if yee use to drinke it in wine.
To make Oyle of Isope. THis oyle is made as is a∣foresaid of Camomill. If ye use to eate this oyle either mixed with honey, or made into Manus Chri∣sti with Sugar, it will helpe those that haue obstructions or stoppings of the breast, with shortnesse of breath, it is also good against an old difficult and hard cough: yee must use this morning and evening for a certaine space. This oyle being drunke with sirope of vineger, pur∣geth downe-ward tough and clammie flegme, and killeth and driveth forth
wormes: it hath the like vertue if yee eate the same with figges. To make Oyle of Ra∣dish seed. TAke the seed of Ra∣dish and stampe it small, then take for every pound of seed, two ounces of good Wine, then stampe it againe untill it be mixed, then put it into a vessell of Iron or Copper, and set it over the fire, and stirre it continually, untill it bee as hot as you may suffer your hand therein, and then put it into a canvas bagge, and presse it forth, and thou shalt haue both oyle and water,
the which you shall separate one from another. This oyle causeth good digestion, and provoketh vrine, the which is stopped through wind and ventosi∣tie: it dissolveth wind in the stomacke, and breaketh the gravell and stone in the bladder. To make Oyle of Mu∣stard seed. THis oyle is made by im∣pression as is said afore, and is excellent for those that haue the stone, and cau∣seth them to avoid gravell: it provoketh womens sick∣nesses, if you annoint the body and reines, and within the necke of the Matrixe,
and also take it inwardly, it dissolveth the paines of the side and mother, if you eate it with a little Sinamon and white Honey mixed toge∣ther. To make Oyle of Cole∣wort seed. THis oyle is made as is said afore, and of nature is hot and windy, and is v∣sed much of lecherous per∣sons, because it maketh ele∣vation of the yard, and cau∣seth them to bee lusty, being vsed in meates it causeth good digestion: it preserveth armour from rusting a long time it is good against inflamations
in all parts of the body, and is also good against wormes. To make Oyle of Linseed. THis oyle is made in the aforesaid order, and is good against the plurisie: if yee giue thereof foure ounces to drinke, for it dissolveth the impostume presently, and so preserveth life. It is good against Eme∣rods in the fundament. This oyle of Linseed being di∣stilled with Frankencense and waxe, is most excellent to dissolue all contusions. With this oyle they make vernish.
To make Oyle of Saint Iohns Woort or Seed. THis oyle is made of the seeds by impression, and is excellent to helpe woūds, because it defendeth them from alteration, and matura∣tion, and will not suffer hu∣mours to run thither. It is also excellent against poison, and the pestilent fever, and all evill dispositions of the stomacke: it is good against the fluxe of the body and Emerods, and for all manner of scabs. It helpeth the rupture newly done, if you annoynt it therewith, and weare a trusse fit for the purpose, and let him keepe
his bed, and walke as little as hee can for a certaine time: it helpeth against all manner of sores, as well old as new, and that it doth by his proper quality, for it is neither hot nor cold, but temperate. To make Oyle of Quin∣ces seed. TAke the seed of Quin∣ces and stampe them, then put them into a frying pan with a little wine, and stirre them well together, untill it bee so hot that you can scarce abide your hand therein, then put it into a canvas bag, and presse it out in a presse, and thou shalt haue both oyle and water,
the which thou shalt sepa∣rate. This oyle is excellent a∣gainst all paines in the sto∣macke, and helpeth the di∣gestion & dissolveth wind: It provoketh venerous acts. It is also good against E∣merods and Fistulaes that come in the lower parts. To make Oyle of Acornes. THis oyle is made as is a∣foresaid, and is very re∣strictiue and driving, and helpeth those that are trou∣bled with the fluxe, if yee drinke thereof a little and anoynt the belly therewith: you shall note that this oyle is not to bee occupied much inwardly: this oyle is excellent to make Vernish
In this manner yee make oyles out of all manner of feeds. To make Oyle of Tar∣tare by distilla∣tion. Take white Tartare bea∣ten in pouder, foure pound, and put it into a strong vessell of stone well luted, with a head and re∣ceiver, and giue it first a small fire, and then increase it according to art, and at the last giue it extreame fire un∣till all the moisture be come forth, then put the liquor into a glasse, and distill it in Balneo, and the oyle will remaine in the bottome: the which thou salt distill
or rectifie in sand, and then the oyle will haue the co∣lour of gold. It is most excellent to cure ulcers caused of the poxe: for it taketh away their malice in such order, that it can hurt no more: being drunke with wine, it breaketh the stone in the raines and bladder, it provo∣keth vrine, it purgeth ul∣cers. Another way to make Oyle of Tar∣tare. TAke Tartare and stamp it small, and then put it in a new earthen pot ungla∣ed, and set it in a potters furnace, or furnace of rever∣beration
untill it bee white, then lay it upon a smooth stone in a moist place, and it will turne into oyle: the which is corrosiue: but one part thereof mixed with ten parts of pure rectified Aqua vitae, healeth ulcers quickly, if yee touch them therewith: it maketh the face faire: if yee wash the haire therewith it maketh it yellow: it taketh out blacke spots in linnen cloth, and fixeth the medicines alchimicall, with divers o∣ther vertues, the which I will leaue untill another time.
To make Oyle of a Harts horne. YEe shall take a Harts horne in the moneth of August, and file it to pow∣der, then boyle it in water untill it be sufficient, then draw away the water in Balneo, and take that which remaineth in the bottome, and put it in a glasse with little pieces of tiles, and di∣still it, and thou shalt have a faire oyle, the which ser∣veth for sundry purposes.
To distill Oyle of a mans Excrements. TAke the doung of a young sanguine child or man, as much as you will, and distill it twice in a Lim∣becke of glasse. This hel∣peth the Canker, and molli∣fieth Fistulaes: comfor∣teth those that are troubled with Allopecia. To make Oyle of the Skull of a man. TAke the skull of a man that was never buried, and beate it into powder, then distill away the fleg with a gentle fire, and put it on againe, and distill it again,
and this you shall doe three times upon the feces, and at the last give it strong fire, untill the Oyle bee come foorth: the which yee shall separate by Balneo, and keep it close shut in a glasse. The dose is three graines, against the falling sickenesse. Yee shall understand, that there is also a salt to bee drawne forth of the feces, the which is of great vertue against the aforesaid diseases being drunke with wine, as is aforesaid. FINIS.
SECRETS OF PHISICKE AND PHILO∣SOPHIE. The second Booke, CONTAINING The ordering and prepa∣ring of all Mettalls, Mineralls, Allumes, Saltes, and such like, for medicines both inward∣ly and outvvardly, and for divers other uses. Printed at London by A. M. for Will. Lugger, and are to be sould at the Posterne gate at Tower-Hill. 1633.
To the Reader. IN this pre∣sent Booke (welbeloved Reader) I have taken upon mee to set foorth, the true and worthy cun∣ning of the distillation of Mineralles, that is, of those things which are found in the Mines, as all
manner of Salts, Allums, Vitrioll, Sulphur, Mercu∣ry, and such like Met∣talles, as Saturnus, Iupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna, Venus. And how you shall get the liquor or moisture out of them. And all that which appertaineth to the health of man. The which I meane by the grace of God to set foorth in this Booke, with a number of Alchy mistes preparations of the said things, the which worketh wonderfully in mans body: so that it seemeth to divers per∣sons myraculous.
Therfore (gentle Rea∣der) peruse this Booke with discretion, and then if thou seest it stand to thy minde, set thy hand to the plough and be di∣ligent in the worke, so that thou mayest know the proofe, and feele the ready commoditie there∣of, for yee shall under∣stand that there is no me∣dicine in the world that can be found of so quicke operation as the Mine∣ralls are, if they bee truely prepared and as I will shew you here∣after: but if they be not well prepared they
are very hurtfull, and not to bee allowed. Therefore looke that ye prepare them as I shall shew you, and then you shall wonder at their working. And although the wor∣thy science of Alchimie is come in such disdaine through lewd persons, that it seemeth lyes and fables, and no true sci∣ence: Yet that ought not to hinder or derogate a∣ny thing to our purpose, as long as our matter is against the abuse of it, as for example: The Alchymistes have
wrought in this worke, to the intent they might have of Lead and Cop∣per, Gold and Silver, or the meane to make them of all other simples or slight mettalles. But whether God hath given them that gift I know not: therefore I leave it to the Masters of that Arte. And albeit wee have seene many won∣derfull things in that Arte: yet will I not af∣firme that it is possible to be done, for it seemeth vnreasonable, that a man in so short time should doe that thing the which
nature doth in many yeares. And that men should presume to doe that which God doth only himselfe, and not any of his creatures. Wee therefore will not affirme it to bee true or possible, nor yet will wee deny it vtterly or condemne it as untrueth. But wee will leave the answer to those that take it to be done. But heere in this trea∣tise wee will set foorth that which we have seen and wrought, and proo∣ved, and are expert therein: And although it
bee sprung out of the Arte of Alchymie, yet it is not to that intent, for it serveth not to transmute Mettalles, but it serveth to helpe those diseased both inwardly and outwardly, who of the common sort of Chirurgions are counted uncurable, and also given over of the Physitians. Those Patients shall be holpen through the hid∣den mysteries & heaven∣ly secrets of this science. And forasmuch as it is unpossible to prepare these things without the Arte of Alchymie: ther∣fore
we must praise this art through our preparati∣ons above al other scien∣ces, that maketh for the health of man, for they preserue a man only tou∣ched and afflicted with slight wounds and griefes on his body, and that with much paine and much adoe. But this Arte giveth unto man his health againe in short time, and with smal paine unto the patient, be he ne∣ver so desperately sicke, and to mans thinking past cure: for I have seene myracles therein. And insomuch that it
is all prepared with fire: the meane man calleth it Alchymia. Howbeit the intent of the Alchymist is farre from our intent. But call it what you will, it maketh not much mat∣ter of the name. For I am sure there is nothing in all Physicke that mini∣streth eyther better or readier helpe to cure mans body, then this sci∣ence of preparing mettals with fire rightly. I say rightly prepared, not as the unskilfull Apoticaries have ordered them, or as the unlearned Physitians have occupied them, for
the Apoticary is no other then a servant in the kitchin (as I may terme him) and no master Cooke, so long as hee knoweth not these pre∣parations, which I will shew you. In like maner it is to be thought of the Physitian that hath no skill in these preparations. For wee have seene and prooved divers times, that the first vapour or smoake of any Herbe or Spice is the best that is therein, and yet our learned Phi∣sitians commaund it to be boyled untill halfe be
consumed, &c. Then note if the best flie away in boyling, what strength can the Medicine have. Therefore I say that the Physitian without this Arte of preparation is little or nothing worth, although they take the patients money. For he goeth to worke blindly with a blinde leader, which is the Apoticary. But the Physitian that is expert in this Science, and doeth prepare his Medicines truely, hee is to be praysed above all other. For a man cannot buy with any money
that which is got by long carefull travell. Therefore is the Arte of Alchymie worthy to be praised, and the Alchymist to bee praised also, al∣though they attaine not to their first intention, yet they have opened the way through the which this excellent cunning of preparation was knowne and found, and through the which there are a number of wonderfull secrets opened, the which without this Arte were all unknown, to the great hinderance of the sicke and diseased persons.
Therfore I wil not speak against it, but hold it in great estimation to our intention, that is the help of the sicke and diseased person, and to prepare the Mineralles where∣with you may doe that which cannot bee done with any other Hearbs, or simples, or spices And heerewith will we finish this preface, and write of the names of the simples, which are occupi∣ed in this Arte.
The names of the Mettals, Simples, or Medicines of this Science. HEre will I wel∣beloved Rea∣der, shew thee for good will that thing wch many have sought with their money and labour, and yet could never finde it: especially for that I will not have this worthy Science trod under feete. Therefore
wee will write first of the names of the Simples, and then of the names of the preparations, and what they are. Sal Armoniacke, that is a salt so called, the which yee shall finde at the Apoti∣caries. Sal Gemme, is stone salt, found in the Myne as cleere as the glasse. Sal Commune, is common salt that we eate. Vitriolum, is greene cope∣ras. Calcantum, is yellow Coperas, a matter like O∣ker. Alumen is Allum: but there are divers kinds. Sulfur Vive, is the stone whereout the other Sulfur
is melted, and is greene of colour. Antimonium is a certaine Minerall so called that yee shall finde at the Apotica∣ries. Carrabe that is yellow Ambre or Sucinum. Tartarum, that is Argil or wine leese. Saturnus that is lead. Iupiter that is tinne. Mars that is yron. Sol that is gold. Luna that is silver. Venus that is copper. Mercury that is quick-silver.
The names of the preparations. CAlcinatio that is to make any of these mettalles as it were lime, with great fire sometimes, and other sometime with small fire. Solutio that is to dissolve and make as it were liquid like unto water, the hard or tough substance of any thing. Sublimatio that is a dri∣ving up, or ascension of the mettall by force of heate into the toppe of the Lim∣becke, so that it may hange in the top of the vessell hard and dry. Distillatio that is to take
away the moysture by the heate of the fire. Digestio that is to set the matter in hot water or in horse dung. Fixatio that is to sub∣lime a matter, so long that it will sublime no more, but remaine fixt in the bot∣tome. There are a number of other preparations, but we will leave them because we have written sufficient for our purpose already.
To prepare Crocum martis and such like which are prepared through calcination. CRocum Martis, or Cro∣cum Ʋeneris shall bee made in this manner: Take the limmall of yron, as much as you will, and wash it with faire water so long untill that the water run as cleare as it was put out, then put it in a glasse, and put thereon strong Vineger untill it bee covered, and let it stand so two or three dayes close shut: then poure off the Vineger and dry the lim∣mall well, then put it into a new earthen pot with a co∣ver, and lute it very well
round about with lime and haire mixt together: then set it in a furnace of calcina∣tion eight dayes and eight nights, so that it may con∣tinually stand red hot, then take it foorth and grinde it on a stone, and if it grinde very smooth without any hard matter that yee can ei∣ther see or feele, then it is calcined enough: but if yee feele any hard matter, put it into the furnace againe two or three dayes, and then grinde it againe, and this or∣der ye shall use untill it bee fine as can be possible. This Crocum Martis be∣ing so prepared, amongst all other medicines in the world, it is the most excel∣lent that can bee found
against the bloody flixe, gi∣ving it in this order. Take conserue of roses one ounce, crocum Martis one scruple, mixe them together, and let the Patient eate it in the morning, and fast thereon two houres, and it will helpe him although he had had it never so long, or ne∣ver so sore. It is also gi∣ven aboue all other medi∣cines in the later end of a dropsie, and also against the fluxe of menstrue, and a∣gainst bleeding at the nose, and all other fluxes. It hel∣peth those that spit blood: it is excellent to stop the fluxe in wounds, and to helpe them and dry them, if yee strew the powder thereon, &c. Yee shall
make Crocum Veneris in the selfe same order aforesaid: but where yee tooke lim∣mall, yee shall take the scales of copper: and yee shall note, that this Crocum Veneris is not to bee vsed in∣wardly, but onely outward∣ly. Of the preparation of Alumes and Salts TAke sal Gemme, or com∣mon salt, and set it in a calcining furnace with a small fire, untill it be red hot the space of halfe an houre, and that it crake no more, then let it waxe cold and beate it to powder and let it melt, and let it stand till it be cleare; then powre it in a pot well nealed, and set it on the fire, and let it boyle
till it be dry, and ye shall find the salt on the ground as white as snow, the which yee shall neale once more in the fire, and then it is prepa¦red. The preparation of Allum. TAke Allum and calcine it in an open vessell till all his moysture bee gone, then make it red hot, and after a while put it into an other pot with strong vine∣ger, and set it on the fire and let it seeth dry, then set it on the fire againe till it bee red hot, and as white as snow, then keepe it to thy vse.
This is very excellent to dry up old sores if it bee mix with hony, and taketh away dead flesh without payne, &c. To calcine Vitrioll. TAke Vitrioll and beate it to powder, and put it into a new earthen pot that is unneiled, and set it in an oven somewhat warme till it be dry, then cover the pot close and lute it well, that no aire may come forth: then set it in a calci∣ning furnace the space of two houres, so that it may alwaies bee as red as the coles, and then it will bee as red as blood, then grind it on a stone, and keep it to thy use.
There is no Corosiue the which worketh like this vitrioll calcinated, for if yee mixe it with any Vnguent, and lay it on a ill Vlcer, it maketh an Asker the which in all corosiues must be loo∣sed with fat or butter: but this corosiue needeth not, for yee must still lay more therein, and leaue the Asker in the sore, for the vertue of this Vitrioll is so great, that it causeth the flesh to grow under the Asker, and when the flesh is enough the As∣ker will fall off, and then yee shall need nothing but to skin it, the which is not commonly seene of other corosiues: therefore I praise this for the best of all coro∣siues.
To calcine Quicksilver. TAke Aqua fortis ʒ. ii. Mercury ʒ. i. and put them in a glasse, and set it on the fire in a scarvell with sand or ashes, till the Mer∣cury be dissolved, then put it into an earthen pot well glased, and set it on the fire to boyle till it bee dry, and stirre it alwayes with a sticke that it may dry the better, and when as it is wel dryed, put it in an other pot with a kever that is ve∣ry well glased within, then lute it very wel that no aire may come forth: but ye must note that the pot must be top full, then set it in a calcining Furnace with a good fire
foure dayes & foure nights, then grind it to small pow∣der on a stone, and keepe it to thy use. For thou hast Mercurie calcinated, of the which wee have spoken much in our pearle of Chi∣rurgerie. This is excellent in all olde sores, although they be never so evill, for it clean∣seth without paine and healeth them, that is, it clen∣seth as long as it is needfull, and then it healeth, which is most strange to see: this eateth away all dead flesh, and preserveth that which is good and sound, and cau∣seth the ulceration to heale in short space. Yee shall note that when wee speake of Mercurie calcinated or
precipitate in any place, yee shall take this. To calcine Tartare. TAke good Tartare that is cleere and without filth, and stamp it to pow∣der, then put it in a scravell that never was occupied, and set it in the calcining furnace, so that it may stand but even red hot, and there let it remaine untill it be as white as snow throughout, then take it forth and keepe it in a glasse close shut, untill you reade more how that ye shall make this Oyle.
To calcine Tinne or Lead. TAke Tinne or Lead and melt it on the fire, and when it is molte set it very hot, then take an Iron Scummer and stirre it there∣with so long, till it come to ashes, then take that ashes and wash it so long till that the water runneth deare off as yee put it on, then dry it in a calcining Furnace till that it smoke no more, then put it into another new pot with a cover, that is unglased, and lute it very well, then set it in the cal∣cining Furnace againe one
whole day with a good fire, then take it forth and yee shall find a Calxe in manner white, but somewhat incli∣ning to yellow. The Tinne yee shall calcine in the selfe same manner as yee did the Lead, but when yee burne it to ashes yee must giue it great fire, but in calcining it shall not need greater fire then it was for thy Lead, and so keepe your fire untill it be as white as snow, and then it is prepared to make his Oyle as wee will shew you hereafter.
To Calcine Silver. TAke Silver and dissolve it in Aqua fortis, then cast a peece of Copper into the glasse where the water is with the silver, and strait∣waies powre theron a good quantity of raine water, and then the silver will fall to the bottom in a Calxe: then let it stand so one night, or as long as ye will, and then powre away the cleere wa∣ter, and dry the Calx on the fire, then wash that with warme water so long that it have no bitter taste of the Aqua fortis, and when ye have so done, ye shall take common salt prepared as I
have shewed you before, and lay it in a Crusible the thicknesse of a straw, and then lay thereon your Calx of Silver, and cover it with the same salt againe, then lute your Crusible with a cover that no ayre may come foorth, then set it in a calcining furnace with a rea∣sonable fire sixe houres long, then take it forth and put thereon faire water, and let it seeth two or three Pa∣ter Nosters, and then the salt will seeth away, and the Calx will remaine sweet, which ye may proove upon the tongue: but if it be not sweet, wash it againe till it be sweet, and then keepe it in a glasse, for it is prepared to make his Oyle.
To calcine Gold. TAke gold and Mercury, and make thereof amal∣gamie as the Goldsmithes doe use to gild their silver Plate: the which is made thus. Take twelue parts of Mercury, and one part of gold, the which yee shall beate into very thin plates, and then cut it in as small peeces as yee can, then take a Crusible and put therein the Mercury, and set it on the fire till it beginne to smoke, then put thereto the gold and take it from the fire, and stirre it together so long till that yee may see no more gold, then set
it on the fire againe, and stir it so long that the Mercury be flowne all away, and then yee shall find your gold in the Crusible like sand, then take that and put thereto as much prepared salt, and grind them together on a stone as small as is possible, then put it in a glasse, and wash it with warme water so long till that yee see the Calxe faire and yellow and sweet upon the tongue, so that it taste nothing of salt∣nesse, then it is prepared: and herewith will wee make an end of Calcination, and write of Sublimation.
To sublime Quick∣silver. TAke Mercury and wash it with Vineger and salt a pretty while, then put thereon very hot water and wash it therewith, till that the water runne as cleare off as ye will put it on, then dry it with a cloth and grinde it with vineger & salt againe, and wash it with warme water as ye did afore: this grinding and washing ye shall use till that the Mer∣cury be no more blacke, and that it be as cleare as a glasse, then take of that Mercury one pound, Salt prepared two pound, Sall Armoniack sublimed as I will shew
hereafter one pound, grinde these saltes together with the Mercury, so long till that the Mercury cannot be perceived: then put all the substance in a subliming ves∣sell with his cover, the which hath a hole in the top: as I will shew thee hereafter in the next booke, if God permit me life. Then set it in a calcining furnace, and give it first a small fire till that the moysture bee flowne out thorow the hole of the cover of the Sublima∣tory, the which yee shall know by this meanes: ye shall now and then holde a knife over the hole of the instrument, and then if the knife be wet there is moy∣sture in the vessell, but when
yee see that the knife is still dry, stop the hole with a stopple of paper, and en∣crease the fire a little big∣ger, and let it stand so foure houres long, then encrease the fire yet bigger, and let it stand foure houres: then make the fire so hot that the bottome may be all red, and that continue sixe houres, but let not your fire slake, then let it waxe cold and take that which is sub∣limed, and grind it on a stone with two pound of salt prepared, and sublime it againe as yee did afore in all points, then let it waxe cold, and grind it againe with Salt prepared, and sub∣lime it againe. This grin∣ding and subliming yee shal
use untill the Mercury bee as cleare as Christall, and as white as Snow and then it is prepared, then keepe it in a glasse till that I write more thereof. To sublime Sulphure. FIrst before that yee will sublime Sulphur, ye must prepare him thus. Take Sulphure vive and grind it to fine powder, then searce it finely, then put it in a pan with strong vineger, and set it on the fire, and let it seeth a whole day and a night, but yee must put thereto alwayes more vineger as it consu∣meth avvay, and still yee must skum off the skim or filth as fast as it riseth, and vvhen it hath sodden
so in Vineger, ye shall seeth it two daies in the Vrine of young children, and alwayes skum off the froth, and put thereto more Vrine alwaies as it consumeth. This seeth∣ing and skumming ye shall continue untill there rise no more froth, then put it in a glasse, and wash it with warme water till all the stinke of the pisse be gone, and that it remaine as white as any Snow: then dry it wel for it is well purged, then take of that purged Sulphur halfe a pound, Vitriall calci∣ned one pound grind these very fine together, so that the Sulfure cannot be seene, then put them in a subli∣ming vessell, and set it in the furnace, and give it first
a small fire till the moisture be gone, the which ye shall know with a knife as I shewed you afore: then stop the hole and increase the fire a little, and so keepe it sixe houres, then let it waxe cold and take that which is sub∣limed, and grind it vvith fresh Vitrioll and sublime it againe as ye did afore: this subliming and grinding vvith fresh Vitrioll, ye shall use till that the Sulfure be as vvhite as Snovv, & so cleere as a glasse, and then it is sub∣limed enough: therefore keepe it in a glasse close shut vvith Waxe, till that vve vvrite more thereof.
To sublime Sal Armoniacke. TAke Sal Armoniack l'i. and as much limall of Iron and grind them toge∣ther on a stone, then put them in a subliming vessell, and seeth it in the furnace first with a small fire, and then increase it so that the bottome of the pot may be red hot, and so let it stand halfe a Summers day, then let it waxe cold and take that which is sublimed and grinde it on a stone, with as much salt prepared and sub∣lime it againe: This grind∣ing with new salt and subli∣ming, ye shall use so long till that it bee sublimed as
white as Snow and then it is prepared: then keepe it to sublime thy Mercurie with. To sublime Copper, which is a great secret. FIrst yee must calcine it with Sulphur thus. Take plates of Copper beaten as thin as is possible, and cut them in little peeces as bigge as a peny or there∣about, then take a crusible and put therein Brimstone beaten a finger thicke, then lay thereon a bed of these plates and cover them with Sulphur, & then lay another bed and cover it with Sul∣phur againe, and this doe till
the Crusible bee full, then set it in the calcining Fur∣nace halfe a day long with a good fire, then let it waxe cold and grinde it upon a stone, and then put it into Aqua fortis & let it dissolue: and distill away the water and make the powder very dry, the which remaineth in the bottome of the glasse land grinde it on a stone with salt prepared: then put it in a subliming vessell, and set it in a Furnace, and giue first a small fire, and then giue it a very strong fire foure and twenty houres: and then let it waxe cold, and in the vessell yee shall find a greene powder light and subtile, but nothing like the Copper, the which yee
had to sublime. Then keepe that in a glasse close shut with waxe, for there is no better medicine in the world then this for the Canker, the Wolfe, Fistu∣laes, and all such like sores, for this doth helpe them quickly: and when yee will occupy it in such sores, yee must straw it thereon , and lay upon it a wound plaister: of the which I haue written a number in my pearle of Chirurgery, and it shall heale them how sore soe∣ver they be.
To sublime Lead and Tinne. THese two are sublimed with lesse labour then the Copper: neverthelesse when ye shall sublime them, goe to worke as thou didst with Copper, saving that ye may not calcine them with Sulfur, but as I haue shewed you afore. And when it is so calcined yee shall dissolue them in this strong water following: and when it is dissolved distill the water away till it remaine dry: then dissolue it againe, and distill the water away a∣gaine, so that it remaine scant dry: then take that, and put thereto twise so
much salt prepared and sub∣lime them together with a strong fire, and yee shall find a white powder subli∣med in the top, the which serveth to the same use that the copper serveth for: that is in all foule Vlcerations and filthy sores, &c. How to make the said Aqua fortis to dissolue Lead and Tinne. TAke salt Peter, Vitrioll Roman and Sal Armoni∣ack, of each one pound, beate them well together and put them in a glasse, the which is very well luted: then set on the head with a great receiver, and lute the
joynts well that no ayre may come forth, then giue it a very small fire twelue houres long, and then en∣crcase it according to Art: but take good heed that yee bee not rash with your fire at the first, lest that all the glasses fly in peeces: then keepe it to thy use, and when yee will dissolue your Lead, yee must take for every pound of Lead, two pound of water, and dissolue it cold, for otherwise it would blow the glasse in peeces.
To make Oyle of Sulphure, the which is a great secret. THis oyle is made in this manner. First yee shall haue a bell of earth, or a head of glasse like the com∣mon Stils of Tin, the which yee shall hang up by a string: then take a plate of Iron of a finger thicke, and two fingers broade, and make it red hot in the fire, then lay it under the bell or head, and cast thereon Brimstone, & let it burne, so that the fume may go with∣in the bell, and this yee shall continue, possible a whole day, afore that one drop wil fal: but when ye see it drop,
then continue till yee haue oyle enough, and then hast thou a great treasure, the which keepe in a glasse, for it will helpe the poxe and all outward sores and ulce∣rations. And also stincking and filthy sores, the which will not bee holpe. It is also excellent against the Rose, and against the pestilence, the which yee must use in this manner. Take water of Sorell, of Roses, of Cardus Benedictus of each ʒ. i. oyle of Sulfer ℈. i. mixe them to∣gether, and giue it the pati∣ent as soone as he feeleth himselfe sicke, and lay him downe to sweat one houre, and let him not stirre that he may sweate the better, then dry him well with
warme clothes, and let him rest two houres, and then if hee haue list to eate, let him haue a cullus made of a Hen in this order. Yee shall boyle the Henne or chicken so long, that the flesh fall from the bones, then stampe the bones and all, and straine it with the said broth, then put thereto a good deale of Sugar, and a little Wine, and let the patient eate it with a very little bread: and then two houres after, yee shall giue him the aforesaid receipt with Oyle, and let him sweat thereon two houres, as is said afore, and this yee shall doe the next day once, and by the Grace of God the Pestilence shall not hurt him. But when yee
will occupy it to the Poxe, or any other filthy sores, yee shall giue it with water of Hops, of Cicorie, of Germander, of eche ʒ. i. water of Fumetorie ʒ. ii. Oyle of Sulphure ℈.i. these yee shall mixe together, and let the Patient drinke it at seven a clock in the mor∣ning, and let him sweat thereon two houres: then dry him with warme clothes, and then at night yee shall giue him that por∣tion in manner as yee did before, and let him sweat thereon other two houres: and this order yee shall use till that they be whole, the which will be in very short time, so that it shall seeme miraculous, for his sores
will presently be healed, al∣though they were never so evill. Against the Rose ye shall take the water of Sorell, of Purselene, and put thereto ℈.i. of oyle of Brimstone, and let the Patient drinke it, and lye downe to sweat thereon, and in one day hee shall be holpe, although hee had it a long time. To make Oyle of Vi∣trioll. FIrst yee must haue an earthen pot, the which holdeth about a gallon, and must be about a foot, or four∣teen inches high, thē ye must haue a head of glasse, the
which commeth just over the pit, then take vitrioll and put it in the pot, and then set on the head, with a great receiver, and lute the joynts well, then giue it small fire, as I haue shewed you afore in the making of strong water, and when yee see that it will drop no more, then encrease the fire a little, and so keepe it till it drop no more, then take away the receiver, and poure out the water, and set it to againe, and lute it fast, then encrease thy fire by little and little, till that the fumes come forth: then keepe it bigger and bigger, so that the pot may stand as hot as the coales, and so keepe it untill that the head
and receiver waxe cleare a∣gaine, but in any wise slacke not thy fire: for I haue seene fire kept a whole day, after that the water was ta∣ken away, and never a drop fell into the receiver, but at the last it came apace, therefore leaue not till it be done. Then keepe this oyle very close in a glasse, that the spirits fly not away, for when it hath lost his spirits, it is good for nothing, but to corrode and eate away dead flesh. But when this oyle hath his spirits, there is no better medicine in the world, against the falling sickenesse and Apoplexia being vsed thus: Take A∣qua vitae perfectly rectified, without fleme one pint,
Oyle of Vitrioll one spoone∣full, mixe them and let the Patient drinke thereof eve∣ry morning one spoonefull, and he shall bee holpen, al∣though hee haue had it ten yeares, and fell every houre: and for Apoplexia yee shall giue it in the said order. But if hee cannot drinke it so, yee shall giue it as yee thinke good, so as he haue it in his body, and presently he shall mend, although he had it a long time, and were lame over all his body. It is also excellēt good against all hot fevers in the sum∣mer, for it helpes them in one day, as I haue proved divers times my selfe, and yee shall giue it in this or∣der. Take bourage water
as much as yee will, and put thereto so much of this oyle, till it bee sowre like veriuice, and thereof let the Patient drinke as much as he will, and then yee shall see the Patient holpe, and his thirst shall slake, and al∣so his heate. This oyle is also good against all foule & old sores, & to take away their stinke, if yee doe mixe it with water of Egremony, till it bee very sowre, and then wash the fore there∣with. If ye mixe more oyle with the said water, untill it be as sowre as vineger, it takes away warts if ye wash them therwith, and causeth them to fall out without paine. It helpes all scabs if ye wash them therewith, mixt
with Egremony water as is aforesaid. If yee mixe it with bourage water, bu∣glosse water, and mellise water, it helps the beating of the heart, which hath continued a long time. To make water of Mercury, which Paraselsus writeth of in his booke of Chirurgery. TAke Mercurie that is sub∣limed, as I haue shewed you afore, and put it in a glasse, and set it in a furnace, and giue such a temperate fire, as you may hold your hand over it Paster noster while, and that degree of
fire yee shall keepe, the space of sixe weekes, but looke that yee encrease not the fire, nor yet diminish it: then take that Mercury and grind it fine, and poure it into a bagge, like unto an Ipocrasse bagge, and hang it in a moist place, and set a glasse under it, and the Mer∣cury will turne into water, which keepe well: and when thou wilt occupy that water, thou shalt wet a linnen cloath therein, and lay it on such kind of sores, as will not bee holpe by no other kind of meanes: for it will take away their co∣rofiues, and cause them to heale, although they were never so ill. And moreo∣ver, because that thou shalt
know wherefore it serveth, yee shall note that it is good against all Cankers, Fistu∣laes, the wolfe, and such like, for it helpeth them al, though they were never so evill, as Paraselsus writes in his great Surgery in the chapter of the Canker, and such like. To make water of sal Armoniake. TAke Sal Armoniake that is sublimed seven times, and grinde it to pow∣der, then put it into a glasse, that hath a hole in the bot∣tome on the one side, and then set that glasse in ano∣ther,
and set them in a moist sellar, and then the Sal Ar∣moniacke will dissolue into water, and runne into the neather glasse, the which yee shall keepe close: in the aforesaid manner yee may make water of Allum, the which is excellent to dry up all filthy wounds, &c. The order to fixe all things that are flying. TO fixe any thing, is to be understood thus. Ye shall sublime it so often, as it will sublime no more, but it will lie in the fire, so as the fire cannot consume it, and
when ye will fixe any thing, as Sulphur, Quickesilver, or Arsnicke, or such like, yee shall doe it in this order: yee shall take Mercurie sub∣limed, or Sulphur sublimed, or Arsenicke, or such like, and put it into a subliming glasse, which I will shew you divers Paternes, in the next booke (God willing) and set it in a Furnace with a small fire, and then en∣crease it according to Art, the space of a whole day, and then at Evening yee shall turne the glasse and let it sublime up into the other end: and this order yee shall use with subliming, from one end unto another, till that it will sublime no more: the which yee shall
proue in this manner. Yee shall take a little thereof and lay it on a red hot coale, and look whether it smoke or no, for if it smoke it is not fixt, but if it smoke not it is fixt: but to know the very truth, yee shall take thereof and grinde it to powder, and then put it in∣to a Crusible, and giue it as great a fire as though yee would melt Copper, and then if yee see there com∣meth no smoake from it, it is fixt: but if it smoake away, yee shall put it into a new subliming glasse, and sublime it againe, then keep it to thy use, till I write more thereof: for when you haue your spirits fixt, yee haue a great treasure,
not to be bought with mo∣ney, and principally of Sul∣phure fixt, for therewith ye may doe what yee list, for there can no sicknesse come unto mans body, but it may bee holpe therewith. Also Mercury being fixt, is such an excellent medicine a∣gainst the poxe, that the like cannot bee found in the world. But yee shall note, that it must not be occupied alone, but with other things which I will shew you in an other place. The Arse∣nicke and the Sal Armoni∣acke may not bee occcupied in any wise inwardly, but onely outwardly, as yee shall heare hereafter, and especially of the salt of Ar∣senicke.
To make Oyle of An∣timonie. IF you will make this oyle, yee must looke di∣ligently to your fire, lest ye spoyle all: then take a re∣tort of glasse, and lute it very well, and put therein three pounds of Antimo∣nie, and three pounds of Sal gemme calcined, beaten together, then encrease your fire according to Art, three dayes and three nights, and lute thy receiver very well, which must bee of the quantity of fiue or sixe gallons, or more, the greater the better, and then thou shalt haue an oyle as red as blood, which is not
to bee sold or bought for money: for it helpeth the Canker, the Wolfe, Noli me tangere, and Fistulaes, if yee annoynt them there∣with: first the dead flesh will fall out without paine, and then it will heale, how sore soever it bee, although it were forty yeares old. In summa. It is a most excellent oyle against all sores and venemous Vlcers, for if yee annoynt them three times therewith, it helpes them, although they were so venemous as they did eate a hand broad in one night, as is divers times seene of the Wolfe, and such like ulcerations, that eate so, as it seemes a dogge had bitten out a great peece.
These and all other ulcera∣tions, which will not bee holpe by any meanes, yee shall helpe them with this oyle in short space, so as shall seeme marvellous to behold. How yee may draw forth Salt out of all mettalles and first out of Gold, which is called Sal sapien∣tium. FIrst if you will make sait of Gold, you shall take gold filed into powder, and dissolue it in the afore written strong water, and when it is dissolved, yee shall boyle away the water,
till it remaine dry, then thou shalt put thereon faire water, and let it seeth there∣with three or foure houres long, and then poure it a∣way, and put more thereon and let it seeth againe, and then poure it off againe: this pouring on and off yee shall use till the water haue no taste of the strong wa∣ter, but is sweet: and when it is so, giue it great fire that it may dry well, then put it in a glasse and set it in a cal∣cining Furnace, and there it shal calcine a whole moneth long, so that it remaine al∣wayes red hot and at one degree of fire, then take and grinde it on a stone, un∣till it be as fine as is possible: then poure thereon good
distilled vineger, and lay a cover over the glasse, and let it seeth in Balneo Mariae a whole day long, putting thereto alwayes fresh vine∣ger: then poure off that vineger into a glasse and put thereon more, and boyle it a whole day as ye did afore, and this yee shall doe three times: then take that vine∣ger that yee poured off and distill it by Balneo Mariae till it remaine dry, and in the bottome yee shall find a salt as white as snow, which yee shall take and put thereon more vineger, and set it in the Balneo Mariae that it may boyle the space of two houres, then let it settle a whole day, and then poure off that which is cleare, and
then if there remaine any thing in the bottome it is not enough prepared: then shall yee dissolue it in vine∣ger againe, and distill the vi∣neger againe as I haue shew∣ed you, and yee shall find a whiter salt in the bottome of the glasse, which ye shall put in vineger againe, and let that boyle in Balneo Mariae two houres, as I haue afore shewed you, and then let it stand and settle, and then poure off the clearer part, and distill it in Bailneo Mariae, and the salt will re∣maine in the bottome as white as snow. But if there remaine any in the other glasse yee shall not doe as I haue shewed you, till it bee all dissolved.
Then dissolue that salt in raine water three or foure times, and looke whether there remaine any salt in the bottome undissolved, and if there remaine none, it is well prepared, or else not, and it is called Sal philoso∣phorum, or sapientiae, and when it is dissolved into cleare water, that the salt may remaine very dry in the bottome, the which ye shall keepe in a glasse close there, for it is a mod excel∣lent medicine against all di∣seases of the body, for it will leaue nothing in a mans body that shall hurt him, but it doth driue it forth by sweat, and maketh the Pa∣tient as sound and whole as ever he was in all his life. It
helpeth all outward sores, as the Canker, the Wolfe, Fi∣stulaes, and such like. This being taken inward∣ly doth helpe those out∣ward diseases most won∣derfull: for it helpeth them in three or foure dayes, and when yee will occupy it a∣gainst such diseases, yee shall use it in this manner. Yee shall take a Viall full of wine, and put therein two or three graines of that salt, for it is sufficient for any sicke person, for any kind of diseases, then stop that Viall and set it in warme water, untill the salt be dissolved, then giue the sicke person thereof to drinke warme, and lay him downe to sweat, for it will
cause him to sweat wonder∣fully, therefore keepe him from the cold in any wise, for that sweat will bring him to health againe, al∣though he were a Leaper, so that it come not by nature of his mother, for if it come by kind, there is no helpe that I doe know, yet never∣thelesse this medicine can not hurt, nor yet it cannot helpe him. But other sick∣nesses, although they were never so evill or sore, it will helpe them. It helps the Pestilence miraculously in one day, and likewise the poxe in short time, giving it as is aforesaid in wine, and lay thereon and sweat, and
when thou wilt helpe any outward sore, thou shalt lay thereon a wound plaister, and let him drinke the said salt with wine morning and evening, as is said afore, and in short space they shall be holpen, The order to distill vineger to make the afore∣said salts. TAke good strong re∣nish wine vineger, and distill it in a Limbecke of glasse, and giue it first a small fire till halfe be distil∣led, then take it away, for it is nothing worth to our worke, then taste it on thy
tongue whether it be sharpe or no, if it bee not sharpe, it is not good: if not, keepe that small fire till the li∣quor come forth sowre: yee shall note that the worst of the vineger di∣stilleth first, then distill that which is last with a reaso∣nable fire till it bee almost distilled, but yee may not distill it all quite out, lest it should stinke of the fire, and waxe red, for then will it not serue our purpose. Moreover yee shall note that it may not drop faster, but that a man may say a Pater noster betweene.
To draw forth the salt of Arsnicke. THe salt of Arsenicke is a marvellous salt, but it is sharpe and corosiue, and the order to make it is thus. Take Arsnicke ʒ i. which is fixed, and dissolue it in Aqua fortis made of salt Peter and Allum, and when it is dissolved put thereon raine water, till it sincke to the bottome, and when it is suncke to the bottome let it stand to settle, then poure off that part which is clear, and put on more fresh wa∣ter, and let it seeth, and then
let it settle and poure off the water againe, and then poure on more: and this order yee shall use untill the water come off as sweet as yee put it on, then calcine it sixe dayes and sixe nights, then poure thereon distilled vineger and seeth it in Balneo Mariae to dissolue, and at night let it settle and waxe cleare: then poure off that which is cleare and put on more, and let it stand a day to dissolue as I said a∣fore, and then let it waxe cleare, and then poure off the cleare parts. This yee must doe three times as is said of gold, and then dry it very well, and put there∣on faire raine water till it be dissolved, and when it is
dissolved yee shall make no more fire under it, but let it waxe cold, and then poure the cleare parts off and di∣still it in Balneo Mariae un∣till it be dry: and then you shall find your salt in the ground as white as the snow: which is most ex∣cellent against the Canker, the Wolfe, and such like as commeth of wounds, &c. Yee shall helpe them thus. Take of this salt ℈. j. and put thereto ʒ. j. of Vnguen∣tum fuscum, and therewith dresse the sores, and they will heale in short time, though they were never so old: and therefore if thou wilt understand wherefore it serues: looke in my pearle of Chirurgery, and
also in the Chirurgery of Paraselsus. To make Oyle of Mettals, and first of Lead and Tinne. IF you will make oyle of these two Mettalles, yee must first calcine them, as I haue shewed you, and then dissolue them in the afore∣said strong water, and when they bee dissolved let them stand till it bee as cleare as a glasse, then distill away the water by a Limbecke till it remaine dry, and when it is dry, put thereon good di∣stilled vineger, and set it in Balneo Mariae to dissolua a
whole day, and let it boyle, and then let it waxe cold and settle, then poure off that part which is cleare and distill it in an other glasse, and when your mat∣ter is dry, put thereon other distilled vineger, and let it seeth so long untill it bee dissolved, then distill away the vineger, and then put on more vineger: this dis∣solving and distilling yee shall use so long untill the matter remaine in the bot∣tome like oyle, then put it forth whilest it is yet warme, for when it is cold it is so tough as yee cannot get it from the glasse: This oyle so made is most excel∣lent, for it helpes wounds and sores in very short
time: and moreover, there is no oyle amongst all the secrets of Phisicke or Sur∣gery that heales a wound sooner then this oyle doth, for it helpes them in foure and twenty houres, so as there bee no bones broke or cut, &c. There is an other manner of making of this oyle which is better, wher∣of wee will not write in this place. To make Oyle of Copper, and of Crocum Mar∣tis, or Iron. THese mettalles yee must first calcine, and then dissolue them in strong wa∣ter,
then put thereon raine water till the mettall sincke to the bottome, then put to so much raine water till it haue no taste of the strong water, then dry it well and put thereon distilled Vine∣ger, and set it in Balneo to dissolue, then distill away the Vineger till it remaine dry, then put thereon fresh Vineger, and distill that a∣way till that the matter re∣maine dry: and this order yee shall use till that the matter remaine moist in the bottome like oyle. This oyle is of like vertue as the other, and therefore we will write no more thereof in this place.
To make Oyle of Quick∣silver. IF thou wilt make this oyle, yee must haue Mer∣cury fixt or else it will not serue for our use: therefore take that which is fixt and put it in strong water, and set it in Balneo to dissolue, and set thereon a head, and when it is dissolved let it settle, and then poure off that part which is cleare, and distill it in Balneo Ma∣riae, and your Mercury will remaine in the bottome, then put thereon raine wa∣ter, and wash it so long that the water haue no taste of the strong water, but
remaine as sweet as yee put it on: then put thereon distilled vineger, and set it in Balneo Mariae a whole day till it be dissolved, then distill the vineger away, and put thereon fresh, and set it in Balneo Mariae a∣gaine to dissolue, and then distill it away againe: and this order yee shall use till that it remaine like an oyle in the bottome, then take it forth and keepe it in a glasse close shut, lest it should loose his strength. This oyle is of as great operation in fresh wounds as the o∣ther aforesaid are: it is a∣boue all other against the Poxe to be vsed outwardly, for it helpeth all sores that come of the Poxe, if yee
annoynt the sores there∣with and in the foresaid manner: Yee may make oyles of all Mettals, but they are not to be taken in∣wardly, and therefore I wil shew thee another order how you shall make oyles of all the Metals to use in∣wardly. To make Oyle of Gold, the which is distilled through the helme, and it is to be vsed both inward∣ly and outward∣ly. IF thou wilt make oyle of gold, yee shall take his salt of the which we haue
made mention afore, and put it into a glasse with a long neck, and mixe the glasse fast with hermes-sel, that is with a paire of glo∣ing tongs as I will shew you hereafter: then yee shall set the said glasse in a calcining Furnace, with a fire so temperate as though it stood in the sun, and there yee shall let it stand eight dayes, and then increase the fire other 8. dayes, till that ye see it begin to waxe yel∣low, and then keepe thy fire in that heate till that thou seest thy glasse all yellow, and then increase thy fire a little till that ye see it waxe a browner yellow: and when yee see that: yee shall keepe it in that heate eight
dayes, and then if yee see it change no colour, increase your fire a little more eight dayes, and then yee shall see it waxe red, and when it is indifferent red, yee shall in∣crease your fire againe eight dayes, till that yee see it a brown red, then ye may giue it a greater fire, for it is fixt, & no fire can consume it: and when ye haue kept it 8 daies in such a great heate, ye shall let it waxe cold, and if yee will make this oyle, yee shall grind it in fine pouder, & put it into a stone pot, and put theron distilled vineger, & set it in Balneo Mariae to dissolue 4. dayes long, then let it settle & poure off the cleare parts, and put theron more vineger & stop the pot
very close, and set it againe other foure dayes in Balneo Mariae to dissolue, and every day yee shall stirre it two or three times with a stick, then let it waxe cold and settle, and poure off the cleare parts, and then put thereon fresh vineger, and set it to dissolue againe, and let it stand and settle untill the fifth day in the mor∣ning, then let it waxe cold and settle, and then poure off the cleare parts, and if there remaine any thing in the pots bottome, cast it out, for it is not profitable for our worke, then wash the pot very cleane, and put therein the said Vineger, that yee boyled afore, and distill it per Balneo Mariae
untill it be dry, and yee shall find the powder fairer then it was afore, and then put thereon fresh Vineger, and set it to dissolue in Balneo Mariae, as is said afore. And when it hath stood foure dayes, yee shall poure it cleare off, and looke if there remaine any feces or powder in the bottome, and if there be any you shall poure it out, and make the pot cleane, and put therein the said Vineger which yee poured off, and distill it a∣way per Balneo Mariae, un∣till that it remaine dry: then put thereon fresh Vi∣neger, and dissolue it as I haue shewed you, and then poure off the Vineger and distill it againe, and this yee
shall use, untill you find no more sand in the bottome. But that it is all dissolved, and then it is prepared to make his oyle of, then di∣still that last vineger away per Balneo Mariae, untill that it be very dry, then put it into a glasse with a head and a great receiver, the which yee must lute together ve∣ry well that no aire may come forth, then giue it small fire foure houres long, and then encrease it a little stronger, and so keepe it o∣ther foure houres, and then yee shall see certaine yel∣low fumes rise up into the head, then keepe thy fire in that degree, untill that thou seest the head waxe red, then increase your fire a lit∣tle,
untill that the head be as red as blood, then keepe thy fire in that state, untill thou seest the colour begin to slake. Then make thy fire greater, untill that the bottome of the vessell bee red, and then keepe it in that stay one houre, and then the head will seeme to bee full of Snow. Then make the fire as great as thou canst, untill the head waxe cleare againe as it was at the first. Then let it waxe cold, and thou shalt find an oyle in the receiver, the which is not to bee bought for any money: For because it helpeth all diseases in mans body, both inwardly and outwardly: although they bee never so evill, as
the Pestilence, the Poxe, the Wolfe, the Canker, Con∣sumptions, the Dropsie, and the Leaper, if so bee that it came not by nature of the father and mother. And the order to take it is thus: Yee shall take a pot of wine and put therein ℈.j. of this oyle, and giue the sicke thereof to drinke in the morning, and let him lie in his bed and sleepe, and then thou shalt see his wonders. And if so bee that the Pati∣ent be full of evill humors, and that hee shall need pur∣ging, it will cause nature to cast forth either by sweat, or vrine, or by vomite, or downeward, as long as the Patient shall haue need, and then straight wayes amend
and waxe stronger, then if he had eate a whole Capon: and then if the Patient doe purge no more by any of the said meanes aforesaid, yee shall giue it him but three dayes. For if he doe purge more then one day, it is a token that hee is full of corruption, as of the Lea∣pry, and the Poxe, for those are so full of corruption, so that hee cannot bee holpe in one day by nature. There∣fore yee shall giue it more then three dayes, that is thus to bee understood, yee shall giue it him so long that nature purgeth no more, and that yee may see that the Patient waxeth ve∣ry strong, for this medi∣cine worketh with the
helpe of nature a long tim after, and therefore this me∣dicine is pretious, and of too quicke operation to giue to any sicke person, where no need is. But as for the wolfe and the Canker, and such like outward sores, ye shall understand, that there is neede of no other helpe then the aforesaid drinke as is said afore: and yee shall lay upon the sore a coole Leafe or Lint, and you shall fee great aboun-dance of foule and rotter blood and such like come forth: The which is scant to bee beleeved, and then those holes or sores will in∣carnat, and heale of them∣selues without fault. FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST Booke of the Secrets of Physicke and Philo∣sophy, wherein is shewed how. 1. TO make Oyle of Ma∣sticke. fol. 1. 2. To make Oyle of Mirra. fol. 5. 3. To make oyle of Storax Li∣quida. fol. 8.
4. To make oyle of Storax Ca∣lamite. fol. 9 5. To make oyle of Benjamin, fol. 11 6. To make oyle of Galbanum, fol. 12 7. To make oyle of Sagapenum, fol. 15 8. To make oyle of Opoponax, fol. 16 9. To make oyle of Euphorbium, fol. 17 10. To make oyle of Ambre or Succinum, fol. 18 11. To make oyle of Amonia∣cum,
fol. 20 12. To make oyle of Sorcocolla. fol. 22. 13. To make oyle of Castoreum fol. 23. 14. To make oyle of Frankin∣cense. fol. 25 15. To make oyle of Turpentine, fol. 27 16. To make oyle of Waxe, fol. 29 17. To make Quintessence of Honey, fol. 32. 18. To make oyle of Lignum Vi∣tae or Guaium. fol. 38
19. To make Oyle of Butter, fol. 42 20. To make Oyle of Egges. fol. 43 21. To make Oyle of Sinamon. fol. 44. 22. To make Oyle of Cloves. fol. 48 23. To make Oyle of Nutmegs. fol. 50 24. To make Oyle of Mace. fol. 52 25. To make oyle of Pepper. fol. 53 26. To make Oyle of Saf∣fron.
fol. 55 27. To make Oyle of Anniseed, fol. 57 28. To make Oyle of Fennell∣seed. fol. 59 29. To make Oyle of Cummin∣seed. fol. 60 30. To make Oyle of Carraway∣seed. fol. 62 31. To make Oyle of Dill seed. fol. 63 32. To make Oyle of Parcelie seed, fol. 64 33. To make Oyle of Rue or Hearbgrace. fol. 65
34. To make oyle of Ivy. fol. 68 35. To make oyle of Rosemary flowers. fol. 72 36. To make oyle of Wild Time. fol. 74 37. To make oyle of sweet Mar∣gerom. fol. 78 38. To make oyle of Sage. fol. 80. 39. To make oyle of Peneriall, fol. 81. 40. To make oyle of Mint. fol. 84. 41. To make oyle of Hyssop, fol. 86
42. To make oyle of Radish seed. fol. 87 43. To make oyle of Mustard seed. fol. 88 44. To make Oyle of Colewort seed. fol. 89 45. To make oyle of Linseed. fol. 90 46. To make oyle of Saint Iohns wort or seed. fol. 91 47. To make oyle of Quinces seed. fol. 92 48. To make oyle of Acornes. fol. 93 49. To make oyle of Tartare by
distillation. fol. 94 50. Another way to make Oyle of Tartare. fol. 95 51. To make Oyle of Harts-Horne. fol. 97 52. To distill Oyle of Mans Ex∣crements. fol. 98 53. To make Oyle of the skull of a man. fol. 98
The Table of the second Booke, shewing 1. The Names of the Me∣talls, Simples, or Me∣dicines spoken of therein. fol. 117 2. The names of the Preparati∣ons. fol. 120 3. How to prepare Crocum
Martis, and such like as are prepared through cal∣cination. fol. 122 4. To prepare Alumes and Salts. fol. 125 5. Toprepare Alume. fol. 126 6. To calcine Vitrioll. fol. 127 7. To calcine Quicksilver. fol. 129 8. To calcine Tartare. fol. 131 9. To calcine Tinne or Lead. fol. 132
10. To calcine Silver, fol. 134 11. To calcine Gold. fol. 136 12. To sublime Quicksilver. fol. 138 13. To sublime Sulphur fol. 141 14. To sublime Sal Armoniacke. fol. 144 15. To sublime Copper, which is a great secret. fol. 145 16. To sublime Lead and Tinne. fol. 148
17. How to make Aqua Fortis to dissolue Lead and Tin fol. 149 18. To make Oyle of Sulphure, the which is a great secret. fol. 151 19 To make Oyle of Vitrioll. fol. 155 20. To make water of Mercury, which Paraselsus writeth of in his booke of Chirur∣gery. fol. 160 21. To make water of Sal Ar∣moniacke. fol. 162 22. The order to fixe all things that are flying. fol. 163
23. To make oyle of Antimony. fol. 167 34. How you may draw forth Salts out of all metalles, and first out of Gold, which is called Sal Sapientium. fol. 169. 35. The order to distill Vineger to make the aforesaid Salts. fol. 176. 36. To draw forth the S of Arsnicke. fol▪ 8. 37. To make Oyle of Mettals, and first of Lead and Tinne. fol. 181. 38. To make Oyle of Copper,
and of Crocum Martis, or Iron. fol. 183. 29. To make Oyle of Quicksil∣ver. fol. 185. 30. To make Oyle of Gold, the which is distilled through the belme, and is to bee vsed both inwardly and outwardly fol. 187. FINIS
LONDON, Printed by. A. M. for William Lugger, and are to bee sold at the Posterne Gate at Tower Hill. 1633.
