19839 99854384 19802
The Coppy of a Let∣ter and Commission, of the King of Spaine, Phillip the third, sent vnto the Vice-roy of Portugall, dated the 20. day of Iune, In the yeare of our Lord God. 1602. Wherein the dealings and trade of Ships & Marchandize is forbidden, with the subiectes of Holland, Zealand and England, &c. with the said Lands and Countries of Spaine and Portugall. Whereby appeareth the inueterate, and continuall malice of the said Spaniards, against the Dominions of England, Holland and Zealand, &c. Truely translated out of the Spanish originall, into the Dutch tongue; and now translated againe out of the Dutch Copye, into English. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pauier, and are to be solde at his shop in Cornehill, at the signe of the Cat and Parets, neere the Royall Exchange, 1602.
To the curteous Reader. CVrteous Reader, after that Phillip the second of that name King of Spaine, had vexed these Countries of Holland and Zealand, with tedious and continual wars, and with many Imbargos or arrestes, made vpon their Ships and Merchandize, to the mighty hindrance of their Nauigation and Mariners, & to the great damage and ouerthrow of many honest Mar∣chants: And not therewith contented, vsed more∣ouer his great Tiranye against the Masters and Mariners, putting them into his Gallyes, and like vnto poore miserable slaues, with chaines and in∣tollerable trauailes and labours tormenting them, vntill such time as the Almighty God (by the wise dealings of the Honorable Lords the States) at last did send release and freedome vnto a great nūber, which then remained aliue. And after this, his sonne, Phillip the third, comming to the Crowne after the death of his Father, seeketh & practiseth to Imitate herein, the waies & foote-steps
of his Father, as it appeareth most plainly by this Letter, dated the 20. day of Iune 1602. sent vnto the Vice-roy of Portugall: Wherein hee declareth those of Holland and Zealand, for enemyes and rebels to God and his Maiesty: Notwithstand∣ing they were neuer bound by oath of dutye vn∣to him, nor euer were his subiects: meaning in this sort to rule and gouerne ouer them as his Fa∣ther hath done before him: which is nothing at al to be wondred at, seeing he hath bin nourished and brought vp vnder the wings of the holie fa∣thers of the Spanish Inquisition: wee haue in such sort fostred him, that they name him to be Hu∣mani generis desiderium, that by him they may fullie ef∣fect their rage and tyranie according to their owne wished desire, to the surpression of these lands and their priueledges, and also to the rooting out of Gods holye word, from which our mercifull God defend and keepe vs. Amen.
An Edict, set foorth & publish∣ed by the King of Spaine, against all Ships and their lading, comming out of England, Hol∣land, and Zealand: tearming them by the names of Rebels of God and of his Maiesty. The King. MArquesse of Castel Rodrigo, principall of my Secret Councell, my Viceroy and Captaine Generall in the Kingdome of Portugall. You haue vnderstood long since, yt causes which moou∣ed the K. my Lord (whome God hath taken vnto him) to prohibit the trade & dealings, which my rebels of Holland & Zea∣land vsed in these Countries & Kingdomes, wt the English, & other enemies of our Lord God, & of my kingdoms: as also ye reasons which haue hapned in my time cōcerning ye same
matter, & such as haue lately hapned, your selfe beeing present in Councell, when the same was resol∣ued vpon and determined. And seeing that at this present time, many reasons concurre, moouing vs to the execution of the said prohi∣bition, and to see that such orders as are there∣in prescribed, be seuerely helde and maintain∣ed: my selfe being by diuers enformed (that not∣withstanding the said orders) the aforesaid Englishmen, Rebels, and what enemies else so∣euer, haue in no other place elsewhere so com∣mon and frequent trade, as in the Hauens of these our dominions, dayly ariuing in our said Hauens, with their own Ships laden, & with false and cullored proofes and Pasports, as if they came from free Citties or Townes, or else with the Ships of the high Dutch, or other strange Ships: although that by the nature of the said lading it is presumed that the commo∣dities are of the Ilands, or English: the keep∣ing of the said ordenances (so made & publish∣ed vpon all these reasons) being of so great importance, that the reducing of the state of the same countries dependeth thereon. Whereof I haue resolued, that this contraction and com∣morce shal be wholy broken and prohibited, to the ende that therewith also the molestations (which vnder colour heerof) haue been accusto∣med to be vsed towards the ships of my friends and confederates, may cease, which haue been
esteemed for enemies, and that the one ceasing, the other shall be prohibited. To which ende I haue consented, that you onely, & such persons (as your selfe shall nominate) haue power and authoritie to take knowledge of all matters and occurrences appertaining to these arrestes. Likewise I giue vnto you power and authori∣tie by vertue of this present commission and fa∣cultie, to visit, and to giue order that all Ships of strangers which shall come into the Hauens of these our said kingdomes may bee visited, naming and appointing thereunto in euerye Hauen, some one person of such qualitie & cre∣dit, that your selfe may bee therein quiet and contented, which shall vse therein such faithful∣nes and integritie, as may be needefull and ne∣cessary, or at least wise in the most frequented Hauens of moste importaunce, with com∣mission that to this effect they may seaze on all, or at least wise on such as shal fall first into their hands: & such as shall be found to be of the Re∣bels, English, or other myne enemies, you shall arrest all the persons which shall come in the same Shippes: and shall also attache and lay handes on all the goods and Marchandize which they shall bring, to the ende that (the same being conuinced, and prooued to come frō the landes of enemies and Rebels, and the
ac∣tions being prosecuted according to forme of law) you condemne the same to be lost and con∣fiscated, as by me is ordained, applycating the same according to the accustomed manner, as more perticularly at large appeareth in the a∣foresaid ordinances, and others which I esteeme as inserted heereunto. And whatsoeuer you shall in this manner condemne and confiscate, you shall presently cause to be solde, without let or hindrance of any appeale whatsoeuer, which may in the Interim happen, and the same shall be done by Port sale or Out-cry, to the most benefit and profit you can. Vnto all which do∣ings, the sercher Generall Don Iuan de Londo∣na, shall repayre to be present, as soone as any such Shippes or any of them shall be taken or seazed: and that the same Shippes, and the goods therein laden, shall be Inuentared, if the same doe happen where hee shall be resident. And for other places thereabouts, such other as shall be appointed for this seruice in his name. And all such summes of money as shall pro∣ceede heereof, you shall giue order that the same shall be put into a Christ, with three keyes, ha∣uing different lockes, in the presence of the be∣forenamed sercher Generall: whereof you shal haue one, Don Iuan de Londona (aforesaid) the second, and the third shall be deliuered vnto the Paymaster, who shall receiue these moneyes. And my will and
pleasure is, that no man shal touch the same money, for any cause whatsoe∣uer, that shall happen for my seruice, how speci∣all or importunate the same may bee, without my perticular order before had. And in the Hauens betweene Duero and Mino where the like diligence is needfull, the same shall bee ac∣complished in the presence of such as shall serue there for sercher of the Martiall men in those quarters: who also shall haue one key of the Chist which shall there be appointed, and the second shall be giuen to him whome you shall thereunto nominate, and the third shall serue for the Paymaster generall, vsing such dili∣gence as is before specifyed. And to the ende that men may heerein proceed with such iustifi∣cation and vpright dealing, as is thereunto ne∣cessary or needfull: you are heereby aduertised, that all the appeales (which for Iustice sake may in these causes take place, made from the sentences pronounced by you, or by such persons as by your commission shall be thereunto ap∣pointed) shall bee made before my Councell at warres, and not before any others sitting in place of Iustice, or other Courts whatsoeuer. To all which, and to euery part therof, & what∣soeuer else shall thereto appertaine, depend ther∣on, or concerne the same: I giue and lend you so full power, commission & authority: & to such persons as you shal thereunto appoint or nomi∣nate, as therunto
shall be needfull and requisite. And I commaund that no man, of what quali∣ty, respect, or condition soeuer, shal heerein inter∣meddle or intrude himselfe, but you onely, and such persons as you shall thereunto nominate, and that such persons shall remit and send vnto you, & to such persons which shal execute this commission by your appointment, all such pro∣cesses and actions, which are or shall be brought into their Courts, touching questions and diffe∣rences vpon goods, comming out of Holland, Zealand, and England: and also I command that they seaze, forbeare, and forbid all farther proceedings therin, eyther dyrectly or vndirect∣ly, and al such notaries or other persons, which shall haue any manner of such inuentaries, or actions, concerning and belonging vnto any such arrestes or possessions, I commaund them to deliuer vnto you the originals, as soone as you shall demaund the same, on such penalty as you shall set thereon. Also, I commaund the Master of the Requestes, and the Gouernour of the Hauens, and the Corregidores, and all other Iudges, and Courts of my Kingdome of Por∣tugall, that they hinder you not in the execution of these matters before written: but that they shew vnto you all needfull fauour, helpe and as∣sistance: and to al others (as is aforesaid) which you shall nominate or appoint: and that they shall inuiolably follow and keepe, such orders which you shall eyther giue, or
send them, be∣cause the necessity of our seruice so requireth. Giuen at S. Lorenco the 20. day of Iune 1602. Vnder written, L. the King, by the commaun∣dement of our King. Esteuan de Ibarra. Don Iohn Christoual de Moura Marques of the Castel Rodrigo, great Com∣mander of Altcateo, one of the Priuie Councell of his Maiestie. Vice-roy and Captaine Generall in this Kingdome of Portugall. DOcter Michiel de la Plaha, the Ship S. Iacob, and o∣thers are in this Hauen ar∣rested and attached, be∣cause it is reported that they are of, or come from the Enemies Countries: and for asmuch as it is needefull that their causes bee determined withall such dilligence and forme as his Maiesty hath writ∣ten vnto me in his Kinglie letter the xx. of Iune this present yeare, wherof the Attenticke cop∣pie shall bee deliuered vnto you, heerewith I doe binde and nominate you, to the ende that you follow the contents thereof in such manner as if the same were directed vnto you, to deter∣mine the cause of the said Ships,
withal the in∣cidents, and dependants thereof, and to nomi∣nate, Notaries, Alguasyl, & other seruants and Officers which therunto are needefull: and to cause such salarye to be giuen vnto them as you shall appoint. To all which I giue you all, and the same power & authority as I my selfe haue from his Maiestie: And for as much as in the meane season, I haue not any thing to the con∣trarye to commaund you: you shall admit and imbrace all such denuntiations, and informati∣ons as shall be brought vnto you, concerning this matter: And shall determine the same ac∣cording to the contents of the said letter. Acted at Lisborne the 10. day of August. 1602. Don Christouall. At the com∣maundement of his Excelency.Iohn Basques de Camara. FJNIS.
