23995 99843015 7721
Soliloquium Animae. The sole-talke of the Soule. Or, A spirituall and heauenlie Dialogue betwixt the Soule of Man and GOD. Which, for the great affinitie it hath with other bookes of the Auctor published heeretofore in our natiue tongue, is now entituled The fourth booke of the Imitation of Christ. Translated and corrected by THOMAS ROGERS. Neuer before published. ¶At London Printed. And are to be solde in the Royall Exchange at the Shop of Andrew Maunsell. 1592.
To the Christian Reader. BEing much and earnest∣lie requested heere-vnto, I haue pub∣lished in our vulgar tongue another of Malleolus, aliàs Thom. de Kempis, or, Kem∣pisius workes: not that I con∣fesse, which of some well wee∣ning, though not so well dee∣ming persons was commen∣ded vnto mee, I meane, that in the old English translation, and in some Latine copies too, called, The fourth Booke of the Imitation of Christe,
which in deede is altogether De sacramento altaris, and so entitled: but the next to that in Kempisius workes, namelie, the Soliloquium a∣nimae. This I haue tearmed, for the great affinitie it hath with the bookes of Kempisius by mee heeretofore diuulged, The fourth booke of the I∣mitation of Christ. In the dooing whereof, I haue as little as might bee varied frō the auctors words and phrazes, and no where from the sense, but where himselfe hath varied from the truth of God, and, I doubt not, would haue redressed, had hee liued in these daies of light, as he did in the time of most palpable blindnes. And this haue I doon with
the greater alacritie, because I finde (and thou maist reade it also in the Auctors owne Preface) that hee not onlie doubted that hee might vtter some things both fonde and offensiue, but also wished to haue some godlie corrector of his faultes, and praied vnto almightie God gratiouslie to reueale, such thinges offen∣siue, either vnto himselfe, or vnto some other. Whose godlie praier, God hath heard, and discouered those things for thy benefit, and testification besides howe Kempisius, the Auctor, how∣soeuer liuing in a Popish time, was yet in hart no Papist, but would like well of that which is doon, as I trust thou wilt, whose aedifieng, and spirituall
comforting, I haue onlie ai∣med at. And reaping this comfort to thy soule, by the reading or hearing of this treatise, bee thankefull vnto thy God that giueth thee some taste of the caelestiall ioies in this mise∣rable and all-trooblesome world, to whose grati∣ous protection, I doo most humblie com∣mend thee and my selfe.
The Aucthors Preface. I Haue gathe∣red together in∣to a little booke for my comfort sake, certaine de∣uoute sentences, the better so to commit them to memorie; I haue also disposed them as into a plesant orchard, set out with all sorts of trees, and bew∣tified with al varieties of good∣lie flowres, where-into I might now and then enter both for to chuse and behold at my neede such matter as my hart desires for the refreshing of the minde, grieued at anie time, and ouer∣whelmed with pensiuenes. Now the more cleerlie, and readilie to finde vnder which arbor I might repose my selfe, or which floure were best to be culled out, I haue made the
heads of euery Chapter to glit∣ter (as it were) with red titles. I haue likewise with varietie of words, as nowe talking, nowe reasoning, praieng nowe, nowe conferring, now in mine owne, now in another mans person, bewreathed about the text with a sweete, and delightsome stile. Wherefore I entreate them whosoeuer shall reade it, first that they be not moued with indignation at that which the writer hath doon, for it was his minde wholie to talke (with his God.) Next, that theie wil par∣don the imperfectiō, and plain∣nes of the stile, considering that God is more delighted with words that be simple and pure, than with those that be artifi∣ciall. And if happelie the sense in anie place appeare either not sounde, or not cleere enough,
my desire is to haue a godlie corrector of the same, telling him withall, that what fonde matter soeuer he shall espie, it hath escaped from me not of purpose, but rather for that I was not heedie enough in mar∣king what I writ. Moreouer, forasmuch as man in that iudgement of his which is most probable, maie be de∣ceaued, vnto thee, ô God al∣mightie, and father of lightes, doo I thine humble disciple make recourse, and this Sole-talke (of mine) doo present be∣fore thy diuine Maiestie, to the ende that thou maist both ap∣proue the things well said, and disproue what is doon amisse, and insinuate also either into my selfe, or some other faith∣full seruaut of thine, more rightlie to obserue whatsoeuer things are offensiue.
My request is also, holie Fa∣ther, that I thy poore seruant may obtaine at thy hands both time and space to abide in the all plentifull pastures of the Scriptures, which be and shall be my chiefest comfort, vntill that daie of aeternitie appeere, and the shadowe of mortalitie doo decline awaie. And there∣fore withdrawe thou fro me all vnprofitable cares, worldlie de∣sires, hurtfull affections, and what else may hinder mee fro my desired leisure. For he must haue a free minde and a quiet, that would meditate of hidden and heauenlie matters. Where∣fore that I maie be worthie to attaine my sute, vouchsafe thou (my God) to endue and fill me with the grace of thine hea∣uenlie ioie, that I maie speake to thy glorie, and to some com∣fort of my owne soule.
The fourth Booke of the Imitation of Christ. CHAPTER. 1. 1. A longing of the soule after God. 2. The incomprehensible maiestie of the Lord. 3. An exhortation to the loue of God. SOVLE. AS for mee, it is good to drawe neere vnto GodPsal 73, verse 28.. O short, and ô sweete saieng, em∣bracing God, and abandoning the vniuersall world! What more can be said? And what more-ouer is to be desired? Would it not suffice if that were performed which now is spoken? And were o∣ther,
yea many other things vttered, should not all in the end be reduced vnto this one thing? Therefore, my soule, saie thou with the Prophet, As for mee, it is good to drawe neere vnto GodPsal. 73, 28. O my God, thou art mine onlie felicitie; thou alone art goodLuk. 18, 19, and sweet vnto mee. To speake of thee it delighteth the louer; to thinke of thee, it liketh the religious, whose hart is not fixed vpon the worldMath. 6, 21 Coloss. 3, 1. 2, but hidden with thee in the heauens, to the end that both thou alone maiest be his true peacePhil. 4, 7, and inmost ioie; and he not vexed dailie in this world, where false concupiscence doth prouoke vnto sin1. Iohn 2, 16. O my God, how is hee affected, which is inflamed with thy loueRom, 8, 35 36, &c.! How doth hee reioice, that hath no pleasure in anie vaine creature!1. Cor 13, 4 5, &c. Are not these the words of such a man in that Psalme, whereout the beginning of my speech was taken, euen these his words? Whome haue Iin heauen but theePsa. 73, 25? and I haue desired none in the earth with thee? MAN. O holie soule,MAN. ô zealous
soule, so longing after God! What is that I heare? what is that thou sai∣est? Are the things both in heauen and in earth but small things in thine eies? SOVLE. Surelie I take all things but for trifles.SOVLE. MAN. What then seekest thou?MAN. Whome would you haue without these? And where will you finde him if not in these things? Hath he either name, or place, or habitation to be sought by? Where is the place where his ho∣nor dwelleth? of which in a certaine psalme thou sangest, sayingPsal. 26, 8.: O Lord, I haue loued the habitation of thine house; and the place where thine honor dwelleth. Make answere, I praie thee. For, if thou canst, show mee him, I will go with thee, and wee will seeke him to∣gether, yea and he shall be thy God, and my God: and wee shall be full happie when wee haue found him, and hold him. SOVLE. What aske you this at mine hands?SOVLE. Or whie so curiouslie do you enquire of this matter of me? Thinke you I can, or am able to vtter such things? What though gladlie I
would, conceaue not yet, that what through the rarenes of the thing, and the deepnes of the mysterie, I am restrained back? What aske you mee? Aske them who haue both heard and seene, they are such as better can describe him whome you seeke. But rather aske him that knoweth all thingsPsal. 94, 8 9 10. For he it is, of whome we speake, that both best can tell you who himselfe is, yea and best declare the place of his owne aboade.Psal 119, 12 Euen he it is (and none other) which tea∣cheth man knowledgePsal. 94, 12, and giueth his grace also to the humbleIam. 4, 6. Make recourse vnto him which re∣uealeth himselfe when hee will, and to whome he willMat. 11. 25, neither is there anie beside him that can open. Hee alone can reueale to thee what the ioie is of such as loue him1. Cor. 2, 9, and that far more excellentlie than I can tell you. MAN. But why speake you on this wise, ô holie and humble Soule? Thinke not that I would know that of you, which neither ought to bee knowen, nor can bee vttered. Keep your secret to your selfe; let your doore still abide shut vpon you: let
the seale of faith remaine vncancel∣led, neither let the vale, for me, bee remoued from the sanctuarie. Eate you holie bread (by your selfe) in the chappell, go in into the tabernacle of your house, ascend in∣to the vpper parlor, enter into the cellar of the eternall king, or, which is more noble, and soundeth more sweetlie, euen into the bride-cham∣ber of your celestiall spouse. I know it is writtenMat. 15, 26, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to whelps. I know this, I saie, and haue read it: but marke againe what fol∣loweth, and take pittie vpon me, ac∣cording to the words of her that said Mat. 15, 27, The whelpes doo eate of the romms, which fall from their maisters table. And therefore hide not that fro mee which I demaund, but of the greatnes of your inward pleasures, poure-out euen a sparcle of the firie loue. Giue me one small drop of pre∣tious wine, send forth some little sa∣uour of the best ointment, whose chiefest part and louelie comort is well and vsuallie knowne to thee, that I also maie taste thereof. Whie linger you? Satisfie my de∣sire, and open the doore to a freend
now at this third knock. O beloued, speake of the welbelo∣ued; let not mee bee neglected. If you cannot describe him right∣lie as he is, yet speake of him so well as you can. For indeed as he is, who is able to describe him? Yea, who is able to conceaue the describer? Therefore, if not, as in himselfe he is: yet tell me what thou thinkest of him. If not what to himselfe: yet vt∣ter out how good hee hath bin to thee. For who euer shall search forth what he is in himselfe? Thou wilt neuer doo it, because thou hast plainlie confessed, and not denied, how speaking of himPsal. 139, 6. Thy knowledge is too wonderfull for me: it is so high, that I cannot attaine vnto it. Whether shall I goe from thy Spirit?7 If then thou art not able to knowe thine owne spirit, which the creator and quicknerAct. 17, 25 of all spirits hath madeGen. 2, 7, how at anie time wilt thou knowe him which is vncreated! Did not this make thee all amazed to saiePsal. 35, 10, O Lord, who is like vnto thee? Notwithstanding, of all frendship, by some similitude describe him, whose essence thou hast not yet at∣tained
vnto. Neither is it for you to denie to showe him in part, whome you thinke can not wholie bee re∣uealed. S. I must needs saie you are too curious, and importune vpon mee. Thou searchest all my priuities, and lettest in thine hand into the secrets of my chamber. I sent thee vnto him, and commest thou againe vnto mee? Seeke you mee or him? But I praie you, of what spirit art thou? Bee still, I beseech thee, and trouble mee not. For whome thou seekest, hee is aboue mee. M. But can hee that seeketh after God, so easelie giue ouer? Protract not to speake, for you maie comfort mee forth-with. How long will you keepe mee in suspense? What doo you saie and vnsaie? As I liue I will not giue ouer, ex∣cept you blesse mee▪ For I compt it a blessing, if thou showe mee my God. Now therefore if thou hast seene him, tell mee plainlie, and I will take him vpon my shoulders. S. I knowe thou hast a great de∣sire, and a loue vnto the creator.
But a great thing is it which you require at mine hands, and such a thing as I am in doubt whether it maie be done or no. Hee whome thou seekest, knoweth it right well: for it is not in mee to let thee know so much. Your demaund seemeth vnto mee to be like that of the Spouse which in the Songs did saieSal. S. 1, 6; Show mee, ô thou, whome my soule lo∣ueth, where thou feedest. Wilt thou then learne of me who this is, or what good hee hath done with mee? Doubtlesse it is not in mee to show you. But you are not content, neither his greatnes, who exceedeth the hea∣uens1. Kin. 8. 27, can deterre you; nor my weakenes, which in his eies am no∣thing, make you to desist. Whie hast thou laid this burden vpon mee? I am not able to tell thee, vntill I goe into the sanctuarie of GodPsa. 73, 17, and vnderstand the same. Whie are you so desirous to know that, which maie not be vttered? M. And will you not? Oh, how faine would I bee instructed! For those things wee are most earnest to know, which the most hardlie maie bee
reuealed. Notwithstanding, once againe I praie you be not so hard, as altoge∣ther to be silent. Thinke not that forthwith I will vtter what you shall saie vnto our enemies. I will keepe your saieng as a friend, yea, as a verie friend ought to doo. You maie boldlie tell mee your mind secretlie. Lo, wee two be heere alone; neither I with lightnes, nor you with arrogancie are delighted, but in him which hath giuen vs vn∣derstanding, euen of him will wee speake. And if happelie he come while we are talking, let vs giue place, and let him be betweene vs. If he vouchsafe to speake, let vs heare him gladlie, and bee silent till hee haue done. At which time you shall not be bound to satisfie my demaundes. For when he speaketh, all flesh must be still. S. This couenant I like well. On∣lie let him bee with vs, and bee wee carried vnto our secret places. Let him bee the guide of our speech, and conduct vs whether our delight is to goe. This beloued of whome you so
diligentlie enquire, is for his great∣nes vnspeakeablePsal. 139, 6, for his hight and glorie incomprehensibleIob. 9, 10 11; for his strength and magnificence infinitePsalm. 8, 1 2▪ Whatsoeuer is either spoken or writ∣ten of him, commeth far behinde his maiestie, because in glorie he excel∣leth all things. The heauens haue sayd, He hath ouerpassed, and ascended, and pre∣uailed ouer vs2. Chro. 6, verse 18.. The earth hath aunswered, If the heauens, and the heauens of hea∣uens doo not comprehend him, aske not me of himPsal. 139, 7 8, &c.. The stars haue soong; Wee are darkenes and not light, vnlesse hee inlighten vsGene. 1, 1. 2, &c.. The sea trembled, and sayd, Hee is not in mee,Psal. 139, 12▪ and the deepe knoweth him not. Heare you what they saie? M. I heard, and was sore troubled; at their voice my verie lips trembled. S. What then will become of thee if wee should aske him? Let vs speake vnto him. O Lord, art thou hee of whome the Prophets haue prophecied, and whose commandement all things in their seasons doo obeie?
Verelie I am that I amExo. 3. 14; andGOD. besides me there is none other GodDeut. 4, 35 Psalm. 18, 31 Isai. 45, 21.; I am the beginning and the endingReuel. 1, 8; I am the crea∣torIsai. 42, 5 Act. 17, 24., and the gouernorHebr. 1, 3 Iohn. 5, 17. of all things. I liue saith the Lorde, and I will raigne for euer and euer. Now little worme what saiest thou,SOVLE. being enuironed with such light? Lo, thy beloued, whome thou thoughtest was with mee, speaketh vnto thee. Hee was with mee when I saidPsa. 73, 28, For mee it is good to draw neere vnto God. Hee will bee with thee, if thou also wilt saie,Psal. 77, 2 My soule refuseth comfort: the daie of miserie I desire notIer. 17, 16, for thou art my King and my GodPsalm. 5, 2. Bee not like to raging louers, but loue God alone, seeke him alone, which admitteth no companion of the world into his fellowship. Talke thou onlie with him, and though he depart, leauing the roome void, beare all things patientlie. For his woont is, to goe and to come, to prooue his freend, and make him
perfect in louing. If thou desire his presence, beare his absence patientlie. Waite, and waite againe, hee will depart for a while, and after a while hee will a∣gaine returne. Loue maketh thee thus affected, which now heaueth thee on high, and straight-waie flingeth to the ground againe. His loue is than all floures swee∣ter; than lilies fairer; and brighter than the pretious stones. For no creature is to be preferred before the loue of GodMat. 10, 37, and there∣fore for that euerie thing is to bee despisedMat. 16, 26 Luke. 9, 25. So soone as I was touched inward∣lie with his loue, I forthwith began so to be inflamed in my minde, that bidding adue to all things in the world, I onlie wished for his most pure embracements, and, as it were bearing hote coales out of a burning ouen, I vttered these words, which but few doo vsePsal. 73, 25. Whome haue I in heauen but thee; and I haue desired none in the earth with thee.26 God is the strength of mine head, and my portion for euer. By these gather now of thy belo∣ued
what manner a one and what he is, which incomprehensiblie excee∣deth all the things which are, and haue being. And although he can neither by words be vttered, nor conceaued in minde, because he is infiniteIob. 23, 8 9: yet is he verie louelie, tractable, felowlie, and to be entreated, insomuch as though hee cannot be comprehen∣ded, yet after a strange manner hee maie be loued. For by loue hee is taken, yea by loue fast bounden: but by desire, he is sought; by praier, knocked at; and by hope attained. If as yet I haue not satisfied you, let him, whome you haue sought, satisfie you, and teach you, aboue all teachers, to finde himselfe.
CHAP. 2. 1. Of God his distinct iudgement at the end of this world. 2. The cursed state of the vngodlie. KNit mine heart vnto thee, O Lord, that I maie feare thy namePsal. 86, 11. O my God, thou art much to be loued, yea, and to be feared much thou artPsal. 96, 4. Hee that loueth, let him be glad; but hee that loueth not thee, let him quake and feare. But hee which neither doth feare thee, nor loue thee, is vtterlie foolish and frantike. For, it is a fearefull thing to fall into thine handsHeb. 10, 31. And, who knoweth the power of thy wrathPsal. 90, 11? Or, who maie abide the daie of thy comming vnto iudgementMala. 3, 2? For, thy roaring shall be like a LionIsai 5, 29; and thy glittering swoorde like a consuming fire. At the sound of thy voice all the dwellers in the world shall be mo∣ued; and when thou commest, all the foundations of the earth shall
shake2. Pet. 3, 7 Reuel. 6, 14. Who then but will feare? Or by what meanes can anie escape thine handsPsal. 139, 7 8, &c.? If a man will hide himselfe vpon the strong rockIsai. 2, 19 20, &c., thou wilt thunder there-vpon, and it shall rent asunder. And if e lurke in caues, or moun∣taines, he shall be plucked outHose. 10, 8 Luke. 23, 30, and be made to susteine thy displeasureReue. 6, 16 17, because hee cared not for thy fa∣uour.Reuel. 9. 6 Surelie there is no place which can hide man from thy presenceIob. 23, 10 Psal, 139, 7 8, &c.. For all things are naked and open in thine eiesHebr 4, 13; thou seest the heart and the reinesPsalm. 7, 9, and beholdest the most secret affections of the thought, so that no secret is hid from thine eiesEcclus 23 verse 19 20. O how terrible wilt thou bee to sinners, and to the harts that e har∣denedProu 1, 2 25, &c, which now doo glorie in ill dooing, and triumph in wicked∣nes, saying. The Lord seeth notPsal. 10, 11, hee will not regardPsal. 94, 7. They are so puffed vp with vaine words, as though thou wouldest ne∣uer come: yea, they turne awaie their eies, that they may not see the ende.
But in the houre that they thinke not, thou wilt comeMat. 24, 44, and they shall be taken in the snaresLuk. 21, 35 of their owne wickednes. And as theeues and rob∣bers being suddenlie taken are con∣founded: so shall they be put to con∣fusion at their due time. Then wilt thou haue them in de∣risionProu. 1, 26 27 28, &c., which now deride thy ser∣uants; and euill shall be rendred vn∣to such as haue abhorred thy righ∣teousnes. Now they stop their eares vnto thy voice; but the time shall come, when they shall crie, and not bee heard. Now they turne thy word into a fable: but themselues shall be turned then into a flame of fireMat. 25, 41. For thy word shall goe out with an horrible blaste; and it shall strike the wicked and vnbeleeuers without all mer∣cie. What will the proude person saie then, so puffed vp with knowledge, and swelling in power? What an∣swere will hee make, when the last trumpe shall sounde in his eares1. Cor. 15▪ verse 52? When thou Lord, our God, shalt appeere in Maiestie, together with thine angelsMat. 24, 31 and archangels1. Thess. 4, verse 16?
Then all the vngodlie deriders of thy word shall bee hush; and they which haue molested thy seruants, struken with an horrible feareWisd. 5. 2 3, &c.. Then shall they vtterlie bee con∣founded, which, laying a good con∣science and honestie aside, gaue themselues to vanitie and wanton∣nes. They shal suffer punishment then, which haue loosed the bridle vnto the flesh. Then shall they roare towardes heauen, which now are cunning in vaine musick and daunces: Then shall that bee turned into moorning, which hath bin contrac∣ted by inordinate pleasure: They shall be bound vp in bundles together to be burned thenMat. 13, 41 42 43, which haue bin companions together at dronkennes and bellie-cheere. And whome loue hath bound in wicked∣nes, the reuenging fire shall roule to∣gether in torments. O yee foolish, and wretched, ô yee frantike, and blinde louers of the world, what doo yee, what is your meaning? how will yee escape the vengeance of the Lord? Why for a little pleasure which
you doo loue, doo yee hasten vnto euerlasting torments? Whie feare yee not hell, which doo so feare a little penance? And, you which flie the death of the flesh, whie afore∣hand doo yee not take heed of the eternall death of the soule? Vnlesse therefore yee doo con∣uert, and repent, yee shall neuer es∣cape these horrible and firie tor∣ments of Gods displeasure. When I consider the daie and houre of the generall iudgement, my bones doo shake for feare, be∣cause entreatie then shall not turne awaie the wrath of God, but hee will be a righteous iudge to allAct. 10, 42 2. Tim. 4, 8 Hebr. 12, 23. O God most holie, mightie, and mercifull Sauiour, saue mee from that bitter death, and giue mee grace to repent, that I may vnfeinedlie bewaile my sinnes before I de∣parte our of this present world. (∴)
CHAP. 3. 1. An humble confession of sins; 2. with a Praier for grace to repent. MY sorowe is euer before meePsa. 38, 17. O my God, foulie haue I spotted my life with manifold sinnes: but, Lord, behold my teares which I shead before thee, because I haue so much offended thine holines. For I know that in mee, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thingRom. 7, 18; and that so long as I carrie about a mortall bodie, I am not free from wickednesWisd. 9, 15. I therefore doo sinne, and offend daie by daie; and, which is more la∣mentable, I suffer manie sinnes to passe awaie without sorow and due repentance. For being busie most commonlie, and encombred with affaires of the world and vane curiousnes, I am not able so speedelie to returne vnto wholesome teares. Whereof it is that the darkenes of sinne doth encrease
so mightelie against mee, the which both stop vp the fountaines of grace, & hinder the streames of heauenlie comfort from comming vnto mee. LORD. And is that a small of∣fence? SOVLE. No, my God, it is a great sinne, and so much the greater, as it passeth the sooner from the heart, and doth not prick mee with sor∣rowe. But, Lord, wilt thou not regard this my wicked dealing? How long shall I delude thee, and thus deceiue my selfe! Wilt thou alwaie be silent? where is thy rod? where is thy spur? where is thy wand? O Lorde, why doost thou with∣drawe thy iudgement, and the paines of hell fro mine eies? Were these things alwaies in my remembrance, could I bee so retch∣lesse? Thy silence and patience is for mine amendmentWis 11, 20 2. Pet. 3, 9; but if I still bee negligent, wilt thou not then punish mee seuerelieWis. 12, 0? Surelie thou wilt punish mee, if not in this world, yet in the world to come. For nothing shall passe awaie vn∣reuenged,
neither small, neither great offence. But much better heere in this world, where both weeping is profi∣table, the paine is short, the satisfa∣ction more accepted, and reconcile∣ment sooner had. And therefore spare not the rod; but with a sharpe water annoint mine eies, and reserue not my sinnes vntill the time to come, least then I bee deliuered vnto the tormenters vntill I haue paide the vtmost far∣thingMatt. 5, 26. Better is it nowe a little for my profit to be pricked, than hereafter to feele the bitter paines of hell fire.Purgatorij. Wherefore I am to mourne, and to conceaue a great sorowe for my sinnes. For manie things I haue to be∣waile, but no cause at all to laugh. The darkenesse of mine hart, the slipperines of my conscience; my proanesse vnto wickednes; my want of grace, doo wish mee, yea rather of necessitie doo enforce mee to weepe and to lament. Furthermore, the remembrance of manifold temptations, and of as∣saults
to sinne, should make me haue little lust to be merrie. Spare mee, ô Lord, spare mee. For though I weepe, beeing tou∣ched inwardlie with sorow, it is no maruell, because the time is now to weepe. O happie is the houre, when I conceaue sorow for my sinnes! Bles∣sed are the teares which doo flowe from the griefe of heart, at the consi∣deration of the foulenes of a guiltie conscience! And who is able to sound the bot∣tom of this depth, and to reprooue the hidden filthines without fee∣ling? O my God, the true lightIohn. 1, 9, thou canst lighten all the obscure places of mine heart; yea, and burne vp all the spots thereof, in the spirit of heate, and iudgement. It is in thee to giue a newe heart, to create a new spiritPsal. 51, 10, and there to prepare a secret habitation, that it may bee a place for thee to rest in, and a tabernacle of thy name, which art the louer of cleanes, and the ghest of the good conscience. But forsomuch as willinglie thou doost not visit a disordered house,
but commonlie leauest the same to bee illuded with beastlie affections, I am the more carefull least that be∣tide mee. But helpe mee, ô mercifull and gratious God, to repare the ruins of this mine house. Woe to him from whome thou departest awaie offended! But peace to him vnto whome thou des∣cendest, and with whome thou a∣bidest. I miserable wretch now placed in the middes of snares, and loaden with the shacles of wickednes, what counsell is best for mee, or what re∣medie to be vsed, but onelie to lift vp mine heauie eies vnto thee, that my crie may be heard in the hea∣uens? For a polluted conscience shall neuer finde or haue a better medi∣cine, than bitterlie to slaie it selfe in praier. And how can extreeme ten∣tation more profitablie bee cured that it preuaile not, than by pow∣ring continuall petitions vnto thee, and by humbling our selues? But who can giue mee these bles∣sings? I meane to praie and to weepe as I ought to doo. Where may I
attaine that humilitie, and abun∣dance of teares? Doubtlesse of thee Lord, with whome is merciePsa. 130, 7, and great redemption. O Lord, my God, the giuer of all graceIam. 1, 17, grant that I maie, as I am bound, bewaile mine offenses, seeme they neuer so small, and to amend all without vaine excuses, aswell those offences which are secret, as those that are well knowen. Let this mine hartie repentance get mee thy fauor againe, and prepare vnto well doing, and to that which tendeth vnto saluation.
CHAP. 4. 1. A lamentation of the soule for her weakenesse, and vnstaiednes in the race of virtue. THine eies did see mee, when I was without formePsa. 135, 16. O Lord my GOD, what in the ende will become of mee, seeing dailie I doo offend? When shall I amend my life as I ought to doo? When will it be bet∣ter with mee? When shall I waxe strong? And when shall I ouer∣come? I am cast head-long into the deep pit of filthines. Who can thinke there is yet hope left to arise againe, to amend, to goe forward, and to come vnto the ende? Surelie tou∣ching my selfe I am out of all hope; ah that mine hope were stronger in thee! I greatlie do despeire, because my weakenes encreaseth through long troubles; and I see no ende of my sorow, and sinne.
And though I saie, lo nowe I will begin to amend; lo it is nowe time, I will doo my best to reforme my selfe, straight-waie, alas, sinne stan∣deth before mee, the enimie lifteth vp himselfe against mee, and wicked custome keepeth mee back with might and maine, contrarie to my minde. O Lord, behold howe I am cast downe, and troden vnder foote: be∣hold the troubles which I doo en∣dure. Lift vp thy right hand, and deli∣uer mee fro my persecutors, for they are too strong for meePsal. 142, 6. My wisedome is perished, and my strength hath failed mee. Mine arme is broken, neither can my swoord saue meePsal. 44, 6. I see not vnto whome I may flie; and that will receaue and heale me, I knowe none. Thou alone continuest my refuge, but I dare not approch for shame, because I haue offended thee. I haue sinned, ô God, forgiue mee. I am sorie, yea hartelie sorie that e∣uer I did transgresse thy lawes. Giue mee that which seemeth right in thine eies, and bee merci∣full.
Thou didest iustlie in forsaking mee, and iustlie thou didest commit mee into the hands of mine aduer∣sarie. But Lord, remember that which thou hast made, amende that which is decaied, for of it selfe it can neuer stande. Marke my groaning, and my troubles: let the paine and griefe of mine heart at no time be out of thy remembrance. O mercifull Father, cast an eie vpon my thraldome and imprison∣ment, vpon the miserie and crueltie which I doo endure; and bring mee out that am bound, from the prison-house, and wretched bondage. Though a man should liue manie yeares, what will hee bee the better thereby? And who knoweth whe∣ther hee shall amend his wicked life, or be worse and worse? Man woteth not howe hee shall proceede, and ende; and his conti∣nuance is verie doubtfull, because of the manifold chances of euils, and dangerous tentations. Manie at their first conuersion from sinne are good and humble,
which afterward become froward and rebellious. At the first they were modest and deuoute, zelous and si∣lent, and in the ende prooued care∣lesse, and dissolute, bablers, and barbarous. And they which at the beginning did bridle their wicked affections, at the length had scarse anie care at all either what they said or did. And so by little and little wickednesse taketh roote and en∣creaseth while it is not preuented at the beginning. Who therefore but should feare, and be circumspect, seeing such vn∣luckie chances doo come vnto the good and modest? Againe, who thoroughlie doth knowe whether hee bee elected; or hath strength to beare all things? Wee are all to be triedAct. 14, 22, and who is sure that hee shall not be burned, seeing tentation is a fire1. Pet. 1, 7? So that all must feare, and hope alike of the better: but none is rash∣lie to presume, nor yet prowdlie to bee secure. In deed the gold which is triedProu. 17, 3, shall be preserued: but I aduise thee, ô man, to consider well of what me∣tall thou art.
The celestiall purger will purge, hee will fine the sonnes of LeuiMal. 3, 3, euen all that are his seruants2. Tim. 3, verse 12. It is not alwaies gold, which hath the color of gold; neither is it al∣waie stuble, or naughtie siluer, which endureth beating, and beareth the flaile. For God beholdeth the verie cogitations and the heartsPsalm. 7, 9, by them most commonlie working woonders, which in the opinion of manie are but castawaies. O Lord God, what ioie can I haue in this world, when I thinke vpon the vncertaintie2. Petr. 3, 7 Psal. 102, 25 26, and frailtie of all things vnder heauen? Notwithstanding, this am I sure of, that thou art good, and that thy mercie is from generation to gene∣ration on them that feare theeIuk. 1, 50. For thine infinite goodnes and mercie, is greater than all my sins. And this shall be my comfort, while thou giuest me space to amend my life.
CHAP. 5. 1. Of the shortnes and miserie of this present life. 2. A praier for grace to renounce the world, and the vanities of the same. LEt mee vnderstand the shortnes of my daies. So long as I am in this world, I am wic∣kedIob. 14, 4: and while I con∣tinue vpon the earth, I am poore, a stranger, and a pilgrimeHeb. 11, 13. I brought nothing into the world1. Tim. 6, 7, and certaine it is I can carrie no∣thing thereout: for naked came I out of my mothers wombeIob. 1, 21, and naked shall I returne thether a∣gaine. As a shadow which passeth awaie; and as a fether, which is tossed vp and downe with the winde; and as a ghest of one night, so suddenlie shall I passe awaie. All the time wee haue heere to liue, is but as the shortest night. Fewe and euill are my daiesGen. 47, 9, and after a little while they shall ende, and bee as though they had neuer
been. And when man is dead, what is in man but filthines? Who will haue anie care of a stinking carkas? Or who will enquire of the absent being dead, whereas beeing aliue hee was accounted of? A small while is man remembred either of his freends, or of strangers: but vndoubtedlie the righteous shall be had in euerlasting remem∣brancePsal. 112, 6, because hee shall be euer∣lastinglie linked to God, who is al∣waies the same, and shall neuer diePs. 102, 27. Therefore happie is hee which putteth no trust in man; nor yet re∣ioiceth in anie worldlie thing, but hath his hart fixed in heauenPsal. 2, 12, for what soeuer is in this world, is tran∣sitorie2. Petr. 3, 7 Psal. 102, 25 26 and vane. Call into thy minde those which haue liued since the world began vntill nowe, and tell, I praie thee,1. Cor. 7, 31 where they bee?1. Iohn 2, 17 And those whome you see and heare to liue now, how long thinkest thou will they en∣dure? Saie therefore of all, Euerie man that liueth, is but vanitiePsal. 39, 5. O miserable and wretched life!
ô fraile, and lamentable life, which good men doo suffer rather than de∣sire: and wicked men, albe they de∣sire it, yet can they not long enioie the same! Oah, vanitie of this world, when wilt thou haue an ende? when wilt thou cesse? Yet the time will come, when all the elect shall be set free from the bondage of corruptionRom. 8, 22 23, though now they doo lament, because they are estranged from the kingdome of ChristPsal. 1, 23. Would to God, the whole world would euen wither vp in mine hart; and my Lord God, euen mine im∣mortall spouse, seeme sweete vnto my soule! Vndoubtedlie, the fleeting ioie of this present life, is but a false and a most bitter potion. Let them drinke thereof that list, for afterward they shall feele a most bitter flixe. And the more one hath drunke thereof, the sharper shall his torments bee, because the whole pleasure of this world shall more speedelie passe a∣waie than the windeWisd. 5, 8 9, &c., and leaue to their louers paines and burningsLuk. 16, 25. Therefore out of my sight thou
deceiptfull glorie of the world, and all foolish pleasure of the flesh. Manie you doo drawe, and de∣ceiue: but in the ende you leaue and destroie them1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17. Woe to them which beleeue thee; woe to them which be there drow∣ned. But come, and come nigh mee, most holie humilitie; and the full renouncing of all worldlie pompes; and neuer doo thou leaue mee, ô thou sweete remembrance of my present pilgrimage. What am I but ashes, and earthEcclus. 10 verse 9? and whether tende I, but towardes earthGen. 3, 19? Oah, how wretched am I become! how iustlie maie I lament, when I thinke vpon my pilgrimageHeb. 11, 13, and how little I am priuie how I shall ende the same! If I liue well, and continue so, there is no cause whie I should feare an euill death. But who can glorie of a good life, and of a pure consci∣ence? Hee which knoweth himselfe to be such a one, let him reioice in the Lord1. Cor. 1, 31, and take compassion vpon mee a sinner. To liue I haue no desirePhil. 1, 23, because
miserie enuironeth mee on euerie side: to die an euill conscience is affraide, for to answeare God, it hath not one for a thousandIob. 9, 3. The Prophet was not so in a feare, which saidPsal. 10, 1▪, Mine heart is prepared, ô God, mine heart is prepared. O Lord, the God of my saluation, let my life come vnto a good ende; and prolong not the daies of my la∣mentation. With sorowe I came into this prison; and without griefe I shall not get out. S. Long doo I thinke this life; and the rather, because of the continuall miserie and troubles which I finde therein: but in truth it is not long, for it passeth awaie more swiftlie than a PosteIob. 9, 25. To a man that liueth in paine and miserie, all time is longEcclus. 41, 2, and hee compteth a daie for a yeere. This maketh my life tedious vnto mee, and so much the more it dooth trouble mee, as the more trulie I consider all the miseries of the same. But, if happelie anie consolations and ioie come betweene▪ it standeth mee vpon to looke about whether they bee of God, or no▪ If they be
of God, I accept them gladlie, but yet I knowe not how long they will continue: yet howe shorte soeuer they bee, they like and please mee well. But, would to God hee would powre them largelie vpon mee; and cause them to continue with mee a long while! But the ioies and pleasures which are not of God, are vile and vading, albe to the showe they appeare sweete and pleasant. Thus, euen thus passeth awaie this life, replenished continuallie both with good and euill things. Therefore so long as I liue in this world, I am a poore pilgrimeHeb. 11, 13. I cannot trulie saie I haue enough, because presentlie there is saietie of no good thingEccles. 1, 8: but the good thing which I looke for thou artPs. 119, 57, in whome I beleeue. So that, when thy glorie hath ap∣peared, and replenished mee, then, euen then I will acknowledge, that I haue enough. But in the meane while, because this word is hidden fro mee, much griefe and sorowe dooth enuiron my soule. And therefore beeing mindfull
of thine holie saieng, I repeate this often-timesMatth. 26, verse 38▪, My soule is verie hea∣uie, euen vnto the death. Well were it with mee, if this houre were come, and that nei∣ther griefe nor sorowe did possesse mee! But, Lord, I beseech thee, let thy goodnes conserue mee.
CHAP. 6. 1. An ardent desire of the soule to bee loosed from sinne, and from the troubles of this world. BRing my soule out of prisonPsal. 142, 7. The greatnes of my sorowe will not suffer mee to bee still. For whie doo I yet liue in this world? I knowe not what I can doo heere. Slowlie, God hee knoweth, I go forward in virtue; naie would to God I went not backward! O Lord, what a pleasure shouldest thou doo mee, if speedelie thou wouldest take mee out of this life, that a woorser thing come not vnto meeIohn. 5, 14! My life, alas, sigheth in paine, and in weldoing amendeth not. If thou looke for my conuersion, I repent not by the same, but doo a∣buse thy long sufering; if thou pu∣nish mee, I doo ardlie show pati∣ence, because thou pursuest drie
stubleIob. 13, 25. Whie then doost thou not quite take awaie thy seruant? Whie doo I liue vpon the earth? that is, whie doo I dwell among good people, and yet reforme not my life and man∣ners? Whie, so vnwoorthelie and dangerouslie keepe I the place of some better person, and yet walke so careleslie and so coldlie, in this life? Thus powre I out this wofull thing which I consider of, in the eares of my God. Yet, gratious Lord, crie not out in thine anger against me, Cut downe the treeLuk. 13, 7, and cast it into the fire. I accuse mine infirmitie before thee, that I maie finde grace in thy sight through my confession. It is my part to accuse; but it be∣longeth vnto thee to show mercieDan. 9, 9. It is my part to weepe and to sigh bitterlie; but it belongeth vnto thee Lord, mercifullie to comfort. Wherefore, my Lord and God, either giue mee more grace in this life, or take me speedelie out of this world, that the rent bee not woor∣ser. For to liue long, and not to cesse
from ill liuing, is but to augment the punishment of hell. Neither can I awaie with such a life as knoweth neither how to pro∣ceede in virtue, nor to bewaile wic∣kednes. For that partie which leadeth an holie and righteous life, is greeued at the heart whensoeuer hee offen∣deth; and that he maie in grace and virtue encrease more and more, it is alwaies his desire. What shall hee doo which kno∣weth himselfe dailie to offend; and that his flesh greeuouslie dooth rise against the spirit? who also beeing ouercome with tediousnes some∣time, and cooled with negligence and idlenesse, dooth giue ouer to re∣sist, or else laieng aside the spirituall weaponsEphes. 6, 11, dooth folow the swing of the flesh, whether his owne wil dooth drawe him? Alas, Lord and God, such a one alas draweth nigh vnto the gates of death, and liuing in the flesh, run∣neth into the death of the soule. Oah, how is euerie one to take heede, that hee bee not seduced and supplanted of the enimie1. Pet. 5, ! No man is su from temptationMatt. 6, 13,
no man is pure from sinneIob 14, 4 Psalm. 51, 5 7; but all the sort of vs are fraileIam. 3, 2. But, Lord, thou which art almigh∣tieIob. 13, 3, and knowest all thingsEcclus. 23 verse 19 Est. 13, 12, raise vp the broken in heart; and clense the vncleane from all filthines, re∣nue a new spirit within his bowels, that all faintnes and lazenes may leaue him, that spirituall zeale may returne, and that thy loue may con∣tinue vnmooueable within him vnto the ende. For he onlie wanteth thine assi∣stance, who is pesed downe with his owne waightWisd. 9, 15: neither is hee able to cast off the loade of sinne, vntill thou sende strength from heauen of power to loase the hard fetters of carnall affections. And this my request is to obteine; for without thy speciall grace, wee shall neither leade a good life in this world, nor liue eternalie in the life to comeRom. 6, 23. And whereas I now liue in the bo∣die, it is no ioie to mee; for better it were for mee to die, than to liuePhil. 1, 23: because through this life I am de∣barred the farder from eternall life, which cannot come, vnlesse that death doo destroie the life present,
yea and death also it selfe bee de∣stroied. Hence it is that my desire is to heauen-ward, and mine heart see∣king eternall rest, fetcheth deepe sighes, and crieth: It is now enough Lord, take awaie my soule, which thou hast redeemed with thy pretious blood1. Pet. 1, 18 19. Open to mee the gate of thy king∣dome, and let in a poore pilgrimeHeb. 11, 13 returning vnto thee from exile. Listen to mee, Lord, and loase me from the band of the bodiePhil. 1, 23. What should I longer doo heere? I am good neither to my selfe, nor to others. Whie then doo I liue? To my selfe I am burdensome, to others troble∣some. What shall become of mee? I wot not, Lord, whether thou hast fore∣seene anie better thing of me, where∣fore my longing should bee lin∣gred. I doo allow thine ordinance, be∣cause it is good: but in mee onlie I finde the euill, whie it greeueth and troobleth mee to liue in the world. For dailie I doo sinne; I heape sinne vpon sinne, and yet, as I ought,
I repent not. If therefore I were loased from this bodie of sinneRom. 6, 6, and coopled to thee in heauen, neither should I of∣fend anie more, nor thou bee offen∣ded, but be praised continuallie. Notwithstanding as yet thou bea∣rest with mee2. Pet. 3, 9, and showest all pa∣tience. I know my fault; because through my sinnes I maie not enter into thy kingdome. For none vncleane thing shall enter thereintoEphes. 5, 5 Reuel. 22, 15. But, when shall I be without sinne! When shall I throughlie be cleansed, that I maie not feare to bee prohi∣bited, but reioice rather to bee let in? If I goe not forward more zea∣louslie, nor bee more carefull than hetherto I haue bin, I am affraide, mine hope will be little enough. But Lord, thou which wilt that no man should perish1. Tim. 2, 4 1. Petr. 3, 9, but that all should bee saued, grant mee more grace to the amendment of my life; and to hope for celestiall blessings, giue mee the spirit of inward fat∣nes. Let not mine heart heere reioice after the flesh; but in fearing let it
expect for death. Let no care, or creature hold mee back; but let thy desired presence drawe and comfort mee. Blessed is the man which trusteth in thee, ô LordPsa. 37, 34 Psal. 27, 14: but more blessed is hee that is passed out of this wicked world, for he shall no more either feele, or feare anie troobleReue. 7, 17 Reue. 21, 4. (∵)
CHAP. 7. 1. A godlie desire for a good death. O Lord, thou art mine hope euen fro my youthPsal. 71, 5. In this hope I flie vnto thee, vntill the last houre and time of my resolution shall come. Oah that I were so well prepared, that I might euen now die vnder the hope of grace! Oah that I had ended this life with an happie departure; and laide off the loade of this bodieWisd. 9, 15; how manie dangers and feares had I then escaped! Happie is the man whome thou hast chosen, and taken vp, who is now gone out of this world vnto the fatherMat. 5, 48; from banishment, vnto a kingdomeMat. 25, 34; from the prison vnto the palacePhil. 1, 23.; from darkenes vnto lightReue. 22, 5; from death vnto lifeReue. 21, 4; vn∣to securitie from dangersReue. 7, 16 17; from labor vnto restReu. 14, 23; and from all man∣ner miseries vnto euerlasting feli∣citieReu. 22, 5! Happie is the soule that now en∣ioieth
her reward, triumphing in thee her Lord! But, alas that my contrie is so long kept fro meePsal. 120, 5! How gratiouslie and mercifullie shouldest thou deale with mee, if quicklie I were called awaie, and bidden to come vnto thee, that where thou art, I might be also! Oah that I had bin taken out of this world, before euer I had knowen the filthines of the same, and be∣fore I was affraide to offend euen in small things; how happie then had I bin! But now the longer heere I liue, the more I wander from thee, and doo sinne in too too manie things. Wo is mee, what haue I doone? Alas, I haue folowed the desires of the flesh, and haue drawen vanitie to my selfe with roapes, but godlines I haue abandoned, abhorred inno∣cencie, and added sinne vnto sinne, so that now to my griefe I finde that true which I haue sometime readIsai. 3, 11, Woe be to the wicked, it shall be euill with him. Too too late almost I haue retur∣ned vnto my God, yea verie late it was eare I began to amend, and then
too but slowlie went I on; I was not zealous enough in my proceeding, I did not encrease in zeale, but, which is woorser, I waxed cooler and coo∣ler. Hence it was that manie times I was verie loath to die, because my guiltie conscience still tolde mee I had not liued as I should haue doone. Notwithstanding, in considerati∣on of the dangerous temptations (wherevnto I am subiect) and that my sinnes might not encrease, manie a time haue I wished for death; and into these woordes haue I burst, say∣eng: Oah that now God in mercie would take mee out of this world, that I might sinne no more vpon earth! Oh that God speedelie would vouch∣safe to take mee awaie, and make an ende of my labors; in what an hap∣pie state should I then bee! But, Lord, all things must bee euen as thou wilt. If thou minde to doo that which I require, it shall forth-with bee accomplished: but if otherwise, thy will bee doon. I maie vtter out my desire, and the miserie which I endure, not as
to him which is ignorant thereof, but that thereby I may finde some comfort to my soule. I knowe I am not yet readie as I ought to bee, for my conscience is greatlie out of quiet. And what maruell though I, a sinner, doo stand in feare, seeing ma∣nie euen of the holie fathers were affraide, because thou iudgest not as man dooth1. Sam. 16, 7 Iohn. 8, 15 16. But how shall I prepare my selfe? It were good for mee to prepare my selfe against that time, which may come this daie before to morow for anie thing I knowe. Therefore I will more firmelie al∣ter my purpose; I will bewaile all my negligences passed; I will sacrifice my selfe to thee; and wholie and henceforth commend my selfe vnto thy mercie, ô Lord. O Lord, my God, all my works doo stand at thy mercieEphes. 1, 6 7; and without thy mercie I haue no merits. And this is mine hope, this is all my trust. But how fareth it with a good and pure conscience? What saith the chaste, and deuoute soule? Come, saith she, Lord IesusReu. 22, 20, ô come, and
tarie not; vntie my sinnes, loase my fetters, bring me out of prison, out of the lake of miserie, and mirie claiePsal. 40, 2 1. I haue waited patientlie for thee, ô Lord, incline to mee, and heare my crie. Leaue mee not anie longer in this wicked world. Let it content thee that hetherto I haue striuen, that so long I haue bin in exile; that I haue not deser∣ued to enioie thee, nor to see thee face to face1. Cor. 13, verse 12 Reuel. 21, 4. Grant mee to enioie the long de∣sired ioie, which no time shall ende, nor troubles ouershadowe. Show mee thy countenance, which the angels continuallie do beholdMat. 18, 10. Let thy voice bee heard in mine eares, which they without cessing doo heare. Come Lord Iesu, and take mee out of this forreine contrie; call mee wretch home vnto my contrieHeb. 11, 10 13, and restore mee a sinner vnto my former puritie. Come gratious RedeemerMatt. 1, 21, make mee partaker of thine eternall glo∣rie. It is hie time that I returne vnto thee; it is now time that I commend my bodie to the earth, whereout it
was takenGene. 2, 7.. The matter is not great where the bodie be laide, or how it be handled, if so be the soule be safe, and come vnto thee. Let my spirit doo well, which I commend into thine hands; and let my flesh rest in hope to be raised vp againe in the last daie1. Cor. 15, verse 51 52 53. For where∣soeuer it be buried, it can neuer bee far, or hid from thee. Remooue mee from the compa∣nie of men, and ioine mee to the so∣cietie of thy saincts. For this tempo∣rall life is irkesome to mee: but to thinke of the daie of eternall glorie, reioiceth mine heart. Oah, let not the olde serpentReue. 12, 9 withstand mee at my departure out of Aegypt; let not the enimie barke against mee in the gate: let neither Satan with his ouglie sight terrefie, nor the horror of death trooble mee: but let thine holie angels faithfullie assist, stoutlie aide, valiantlie pro∣tect, louinglie receiue, and ioiefullie bring mee vnto the euerlasting feli∣citie of thy celestiall paradise. And mercifull, louelie, and bles∣sed Iesu, doo thou gratiouslie, I be∣seech thee, behold mee; and cast
mee not out of the number of thy seruants: but remember, ô Sonne of God, how thou hast redeemed mee with thy pretious bloodEphes. 1, 3 7. Receaue mee into glorie, and that in thy mercie and goodnes:. Pet. 1, 18 19 because greatlie haue I wished to solemnize a passeouer with thee. Oah happie daie of my desired re∣ward! Come blessed houre of bles∣sed passage, which long I haue desi∣red, and kept before mine eies. What now haue the troobles and afflictions in the world hurt mee?Rom. 8, 18 What am I the woorsse for the con∣tempt, labor, and humiliation for thy name sake? Thou hast bin my life, and now death will be to me an aduantagePhil. 1, 24, and to be with thee in thy kingdome will be absolute felicitie. Now praise and glorie be to thee, who art the life, of such as liueIoh. 11, 25, the hope, of those which dieAct. 2, 26, the saluation and rest of all which trust in theePsal. 17, 7 Psalm. 34, 8 Prou. 16, 20.
CHAP. 8. A meditation of one dead vnto the world, yet aliue in Christ. TVrne awaie mine eies from regarding vani∣tiePsa. 119, 37. Oah Iesu, which art the true lifeIoh. 11, 5, which neuer shall haue an ende, geue mee grace that through loue of thee I may bee consumed, through loue wounded, through loue killed, that the flesh preuaile not ouer mee. I am not as yet thoroughlie dead to the world, but the old man yet liueth in meeRom. 7, 23, raising vp within me much contention, and desires of ma∣nifold euils, and making the nightes bitter, and the daies tedious vnto mee. Oah, when will it fall out, that boldlie I may saie, I thought my selfe as a dead man? For hee which dead is, doth waie neither the praises of men, nor the reproches of the ma∣lignant, because he is dead. Hee which touching the flesh is
dead, neither speaketh, nor smel∣leth, nor tasteth, nor exerciseth anie worke, yea he neither heareth also the vanitie of this world: againe he regardeth not curious and bewti∣full things enticing vnto the loue of some vile thing vpon earth. And hee which is dead to the world, is not in the world, but in God to whome hee liueth; euen as Paule to the beloued disciples doth saieCol. 3, 3., yee are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. This man doth so speake, so thinke, so behold things without, as though they were not. For the things which are seene, are temporall, and vane1. Ioh. 2, 17: but the things which are not seene, are eternall2. Cor. 4, 18. Hether doth hee cast his eie; he∣ther doth hee hasten; hether is his desire; for these things doth hee la∣bor, to attaine these things is all his studieCol. 3, 1 2. These things hee wisheth, these things hee loueth, these things hee seeketh, these things hee sauoreth, euen which are within, and secret, to wit, great good things, soueraigne, and eternall things, of which hee cannot thinke too often, because
theie are exceeding pretious, and sweete, and delectable, and more than vtterable1. Cor. 2, 9. This man is far estranged from present thingsGal. 6, 1, and breatheth al∣together after things eternallColos. 3, 2, ha∣uing the dominion ouer the sensuall appetite. For the flesh seeketh outward, de∣sireth pleasant, loueth present, loa∣theth absent, flieth all sharp and bit∣ter things, which notwithstanding are good for the souleRom. 8, 4 5. &c.. Whence it commeth that it will not suffer the spirit to be at rest, but laieth before it sundrie phantasies, which are scarse to be spoken, and in truth not to be accompted of. But hee which is endued with the grace of spirituall fortitude, maie with more ease subdue the insolent motions of the flesh, singing in the word of the diuine powerPsal. 118, 6, The Lord is with mee, therefore I will not feare what flesh can doo vnto mee. Therefore albeit this sensualitie doth moue battell, and the voice of the flesh doth secretlie murmurRom. 8, 23: yet doth not the spirituall man ease∣lie consent; for greater is the force of the diuine loue which inwardlie
doth comfort. This man now and then so sweet∣lie, so stronglie, and so earnestlie is drawen, rauished, and in loue with God, that scarselie hee doth see, and perceaue the things about him, and be heard in the world: because he is not there, but else-whereMatth. 6, 21; not be∣lowe, but aloft euen with God, and in God, which moueth the spirit within him, and erecteth, and as it were carrieth it awaie in a firie cha∣riot, that at the length it maie en∣ioie him in an happie, and holie, and long wished desire of his hart. This man is sildome found (idle) abroade, because his freende hath borne him awaie. There quietlie and alone hee heareth his speech, euen the speech of his beloued, and great∣lie doth reioice to heare the voice of his vnsuspected spouse. Neither straight-waie doth he cas his phiall vpon the ground to draw vp vanitie: but hideth the founde treasure, and shutteth it vnder loc and keie, that the foote of pride com not in, and so all virtue doo perish For thus he saith to himSal. S. 8, 6, Set mee a a seale on thine heart, and so forth as i followeth in that place.
It is good to seale the heart, and to keepe it, least the beloued goe back, and flie awaie: because hee seeketh and visiteth aboue all a pure and an humble heartMath. 5, 8 Math. 11, 29. These things hee thinketh with himselfe, and is astonished at that good thing which passeth all sense, and gifts. Yea still hee wandereth, and enquireth diligētlie, what thing is this? and exceedinglie reioiceth, for that Manna is come downe from heauen. And hee which ministreth true bread from heauenIohn. 6, 31 32, doth giue also a good vnderstanding to the taster, that hee maie knowe, how euerie good giuing, and euerie gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lightesIam. 1, 17. This word now, saith hee, is from GodIohn. 1, 3. Without him there is no∣thing, I haue all things from him. Furthermore (this spirituall man) hee woondereth, and lamenteth that hee so lightlie esteemeth so excel∣lent a good thing, by the which hee is not a little blessed; and whie also he dooth not oftener bend his heart to heare and to see that, than the which nothing is more sweete, and
blessed to be desired. And would to God hence-forth I might thus doo! For this excee∣dinglie dooth delight mee, and more will delight mee, the more I giue my selfe vnto these meditations. Oah that my beloued would come into mine heart, that I might taste the sweetnes of his apples! Oah that hee would decline vnto mee, and showe himselfe to mee, and mee to himselfe! Hee is my felicitie, and mine onlie delight. Now begin I to couet, and desire, and greatlie to loue this good thing, in whome all good things areAct. 17, 28; this ioie, in whome is all ioie; this one thing, in whome are all things, small and great, base and hie; yet nothing created, but without all conceipt of man, the beginning and the ende of all the good things which hee hath formedReuel. 1, 8 17. Hence it is that now and then I would thoroughlie bee replenished with this good thing, and filled with that so heauenlie ioie, and I couet after a sort euen to be swallowed vp and consumed vtterlie of him, that mine insatiable desire might once be satisfied, in such sort, that nothing in
mee might bee mine, but his onlie, whose the fire and heate of loue is, whose this woonderfull worke is also, that so I might the more greedilie be carried to himward, and be made one spirit together with him. Notwithstanding all this doth not puffe vp the godlie man, or make him to thinke himselfe some-what, or to despise others, or to iudge infe∣riors: for hee knoweth that whatso∣euer hee hath commeth not of him∣selfe, but it is the free gift of God1. Cor. 4, 7, that thereby hee is not to waxe proude, when hee perceaueth him∣selfe to be so comforted of the Lord. For hee seeketh not the praise of man, he careth not for foraine fauor, but hee seeketh the beloued, his praise and his fauor hee onlie desi∣reth, in whome hee hath all things, and shall finde more than all these things: because hee preferreth his loue, his sweetenes, and the ioiefull enioieng of him before all transitorie things; and his honor hee seeketh and sigheth for aboue all things else. And therefore he cannot be proude, nor boast of anie thing. (God) hee is his glorie, his praise, and his comfort2. Cor. 1, 31. (God euen) hee
is his true and perfect ioie, his soue∣raigne and sole happines, all his de∣sire and perfection. And which more is, hee would haue others also thus to reioice with him, and to enioie such felicitie without ende both in this world, and in heauen too. For this is his desire and praier, that God would reueale himselfe to all men, and that hee would vouch∣safe to conuert and drawe all vnto him, that he alone might be praised and glorified; for hee is both loue it selfe1. Ioh. 4, 8, and such a fountaine of loue, as neuer can be drawen drie. For hee dooth more loue all men, than all men (set together) can loue him. Notwithstanding it liketh him well if anie man haue a desire to loue him from the botome, although hee cannot sounde vnto the depth. For hee in louing deuou∣reth, vanquisheth, and surpasseth all.
CHAP. 9. A desire of the Soule, that no earthlie creature maie carrie her awaie vnto va∣nitie. BEhold, I would take my flight far off, and lodge in the mountainesPsal. 55, 7. Oah how profitable, how sweete, and how ioiefull a thing is it to sit solitarilie in silence, to talke with God, and to en∣ioie the onlie good thing, in which are all good thingsIam. 1, 17! Would to God I were so conioi∣ned to that all simple and onlie good thing, that I might be moued with none affections and distractions of transitorie things; nor curiouslie fa∣sten mine eies vpon anie creature, and visible thing! O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer from the bodie of this deathRom. 7, 24? Alas, how often dieth my soule for the creatures which she loueth! oah manie times she forgetteth her crea∣tor, and is carried awaie for their sakes!
Mine vnstable minde now willeth this thing, now that thing, now it is heere, now there, seeking but not finding rest in creatures: because there is no creature which can yeeld full satietie to be enioiedEcclus. 1, 8, though it hath some delectation for vse. The heart of man is vnsearchable, and who can knowe itHier. 17, 9? O Lord, thou knowest the thoughts of men, that they are vanePsal. 94, 11. O eternall God1. Tim. 1, verse 17, most hie and infinitePsa. 139, 7 8, &c., the creatorAct. 17, 24. and gouer∣nor of all thingsPsal. 97, 1, I am thy crea∣turePsal. 100, 3 Psal. 119, 73 which thou hast made by thy power. Thou hast made mee that I should loue thee, and gladlie would I loue thee, but I cannot as I would. For I am fettered with vane loue, and with clammie affections of tran∣sitorie things, from which, while I would rid my selfe, hardlie or not at all can I so doo without great paine. Oah how soone would theie flie and perish, if thou, Christ, wert sweet, and didest auor in my nostrels! Notwithstanding sometime through the sight of the minde I doo behold thine inuisible things by the crea∣tion of the worldRom. 1, 20, and thee also the
soueraigne felicitie, the true and e∣ternall God. And gladlie would I continue in these meditations, but forthwith I knowe not with what winde I am blowen awaie from them, and helde downeWisd. 9, 15 like a miser by the loue and waight of visible things. Behold, I firmelie doo purpose in mine hart, as it were making a coue∣nant betweene mee and thee, that for thy noble and pretious loue, I will neither loue nor looke vpon a∣nie creature, but will contemne all things, yea my selfe and all mineRom. 8, 35: but straight-waie worldlie, fleshlie, and familiar cogitations doo ascend into mine heart as though in them were a certaine felicitie, and as though, if I contemned them, I were to forgo some great good thing; and these beare a good countenance, but they hide the wofull ende; showing what is present, but hiding the inconuenience that will ensue, as though euerie-where and in all crea∣tures thou art to be sought, and that nothing were to be neglected or de∣spised, which hath bin made of my God: and thus they withdrawe mee oftentimes fro my purpose, and at
the length vtterlie seduce mee. Oah how vane, and deceiptfull, and almost nothing, are thinges which now stand and florish, proued to bee1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17, which flieng awaie after their sudden ioies, doo leaue mee a∣mong the thornes and briars of a guiltie conscience. But woe is mee, Lord, yea woe a∣gaine to mee, because so soone I haue beleeued and assented to vanitie, and so quicklie forsaken thee, which art the truthIohn. 14, 6. Oah, how greatlie haue I sinned euen in this, that I haue not sticken to thee alone, neglecting all things elseLuk. 18, 29 30! For I was made to loue and to en∣ioie thee, but by following after crea∣tures inordinatelie I haue lost thee, and found no rest for mine hart in them neitherEccles. 1, 8. But turne mee vnto thee, ô Lord, and leaue me not in earthlie things, thou which hast vouchsafed to promise celestiall things to such as folowe theeMat. 19, 28 Luke. 9, 23.
CHAP. 10. 1. A comparison betweene earthlie, and heauenlie ioies; 2. with a praier for grace to contemne this transitorie world. MY soule hath refu∣sed comfortPsal. 77, . Wander thou not af∣ter deceiptfull vanities & madnes, ô my soule, but turne vnto the Lord thy God, for hee is the fountaine of all com∣fort2. Cor. 1, 3. Whatsoeuer thou seekest either among men, or among creatures, thou shalt leese it, and shalt well perceaue it to perish. For though I graunt, theie maie yeeld some showe of comfort, yet sure I am nothing dooth continue1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17 1. Cor. 7, 1. Whie so vanelie wilt thou bee de∣ceaued? It is egregious follie to beg of a begger, when he that is rich will giue abundantlie. Euerie creature is but poore to minister comfort vnto vs; but God which is rich in mercieEphes. 2, 4 giueth to all men liberallieIam. 1, 5, and reprocheth no man, if thou for thy part diligentlie doo seekeMatth. 7, 7, and pa∣tientlie
expect his leisure. Returne, ô my Soule, returne downe vnto Noah in the arkeGen. 8, 9, euen vnto Christ in thine heart, because it is not good to abide long abroade. See thou refuse outward comfort, if inwardlie thou wilt be refreshed1. Ioh. 2, 15. Doo not thou with the crowe abide without the arkeGen. 8, 7, but with speede auoide the carcase. Returne thou an hungred, and Christ so will feede thee with the bread of lifeIohn. 6, 31 32 35. If vrgent necessitie, or weakenes hold thee abroade, take heed thou make no staie, but with speede get thee home, least thou be either o∣uerwhelmed with the flud of words, or comprehended in the snares of diuelish tentation. Manie traps are laid for the wan∣dering soule; and great safetie hath the quick returning dooue: which not finding where to set her foote, made haste to come back vnto Noah in the shipGen. 8, 9. Go thou therefore vnto thy secret place and abide there, yea let it bee a griefe for thee to bee else-where. Oah blessed is the soule, which hath a cleare conscience before God Math. 5, 8, and is not delighted with anie
vane thingLuk. 18, 29 30, which is neither pol∣luted with louing anie thing1. Ioh. 2, 15 16, nor wearied with extremelie hating a∣nie manMatt. 5, 22 23, &c.! Blessed is the soule that seeketh no comfort of creatures, but fixeth all her hope in the LordPsal. 40, 4! Blessed is the soule which refuseth all outward and temporall quietnes, and whatsoeuer belongeth vnto the welfare of the bodie; and which for the loue of Christ dooth willinglie embrace both paine and pouer∣tieMat. 19, 29! Blessed is the soule which com∣mendeth her selfe to God, that hee maie doo with her euen as hee thin∣keth good! Blessed is the soule which at no time seeketh her owne glorieIere. 9, 24 1. Cor. 1, 31, which desireth at no time to haue her owne will doon, but continuallie mindeth, loueth, and preferreth the glorie and will of God aboue all things! Blessed is the soule which dooth esange her selfe from whatsoeuer is temporall1. Ioh. 2, 15 16, and keepeth her selfe pure and vndefiled before God in all her dealingsPsal. 15, 1 2! O reioice and be thou much glad, thou which art such a soule, for thou
maist abide in secret and celestiall (cogitations,) and so magnifie the Lord daie and night! Blessed and blessed againe is the soule whose desires are to heauen-wardColos. 3, 1 2; whose hands and armes are out-stretched euen as the two wings of the CherubimsEze. 11, 22; whose eies are pure to behold GodMath. 5, 8; whose inward power and strength dooth goe alto∣gether, and ascend, and returneth not, vntill it haue him whome onlie she loueth before all things! And when she hath found him, she folo∣weth him whether soeuer hee will haue her! And when he speaketh, he reioi∣ceth to heare her make answere, sai∣eng; I am thine onlie beloued, of thee elected. I am thine exceeding great rewardGen. 15, 1 Bee thou neither proude in prosperitie, nor impatient in aduersitie. Consider how theie which loue mee, are comforted of mee. How sweetelie, thinkest thou, I will entreate them, when theie shall be receaued vnto the eternall rest, after that the troobles of the bodie and soule are laide aside! Oah that I enioied such pleasure, as dooth the holie soule, when the
senses beeing asleepe, shee is carried aloft, and eleuated aboue her selfe beloued, and coopled to God by the bonde of most hartie frendship! O my God, which art the treasure of mine heartMat. 6, 21, thou knowest right well how this would bee the onlie comfort of mine inward griefe. But thou art the geuer, and the pourer in of this ointment. Thou teachest2. Tim. 3, 16, thou exhortest, thou cherishest, thou comfortest, thou carriest, thou vpholdest, thou guidest out and bringest back, thou doost with the soule whome thou hast chosen, euen as thou wilt, and whatsoeuer thou doost and wilt, it is all good. But I who am as a sowre vessell, altogether vnworthie to receaue th'infusion of thy good spirit, doo humblie craue that plentifullie it maie so spout forth vpon mee, that I maie both taste the sweetenes of thine inward loue, and also perceaue those sacred pleasures, the which, I doubt not, the religious soule dooth feele by thy grace. I did smell the celestiall perfumes a far off, when I did meditate certaine inward cogitations of the minde
concerning the soule: but, Lord, thou knowest how sildome, how litle I doo thinke of eternall things, how often words doo wither, how rude the vnderstanding, how vnquiet the conscience, how my hart is troobled, darkened and irreligious, and onlie through mine owne default. Notwithstanding sometime see∣king a waie vnto spirituall matters, hauing taken my cogitations with mee in secret, I begin seriouslie to call into my remembrance the good things of the blessed soule, how great are the celestiall ioies, and spirituall delightes which are in her heart; what peace, what tranquilitie, what hope and reioicing in God her Sa∣uiour, whose words be sweete, and face bewtifull. And these cogita∣tions though short theie endure: yet when theie come blessed is the houre. And I thus thinking, and thou en∣lightening my darkenes, I doo finde iust complaints vpon my selfe, and by priuie holes of grace I perceaue how such and such is the soule in∣wardlie vnited vnto thee, and tha so and so thou hast spoken to her. She is still from all things sensible,
and thou in the spirit speakest to her of inuisible matters. She seemeth as it were to be for∣saken of all creatures, and after an vnspeakeable manner thou doost comfort her. So that I said againe in mine hart wo to the sinfull souleDeu 27, 26 Gala. 3, 10, to the grie∣ued conscienceProu. 3, 33 Pou. 24, 19, to the man which is neither hote nor coldeReue. 3, 15 16, destitute of the light of grace, and of spirituall comfort, seeking teares, and yet fin∣ding none. But peace be to him which vnfei∣nedlie dooth loue Christ, and neuer turneth aside the eies of his heart from his SauiourColoss. 3, 1: but continuallie seeketh the things which are plea∣sing in his eies. For hee shall walke in peace and equitie, and no stranger shall parti∣cipate of his pleasure. Hee shall well perceaue that his rest is good, and taste how sweete his Lord God is, in whome hee trustethPsal. 34, 8. Hee shall set him far from outward tumults, and with hartie desire expect his prospe∣rous comming. Lo, thus worketh the Lord in his elected vessels! Hee which commeth vnto him shall not returne emptie awaie: for
cheerefullie hee bestoweth vpon the thirstie drinke, and bread vpon the hungrieMat. 25, 35. O my God, when thou enterest in∣to the house of the soule which lo∣ueth thee, wilt thou not feede her with thy milke? yea and bring her sometime beside her selfe, through thine abundant sweetnes, to the ta∣king of thee without anie corporall similitude! O truth, truth, of what force and power is loue! Then wilt thou speake thy word to her all secretlie, and show the things that shall bee, and haue bin in most happie charitie, and fruition, where the words of man shall no more bee heard. From thenceforth thou wilt cause her no whit to doubt anie more of eternall rest, and of the felowship of sancts: but now by differring the token of speciall grace, thou makest her the more able to hope for the things she seeth notRom. 8, 24, and to despise present things which by sense shee comprehendeth. O mercifull God, bee mindfull of mee a poore begger euen of thy great mercie1. Cor. 1, 3; and send the true bread
from heauenIohn. 6, 31 32, &c., thy good word so full of comfort and grace. CHAP. 11. 1. That all comfort, and pleasures are in God. 2. A praier that all people may glorifie the Lord. 3. The bles∣sed state of good men. 4. That wee are to be readie against the comming of our Sauiour Christ. ALl my bones shall saie, Lord, who is like vn∣to theePsal. 35, 10! There is oneDeut. 6, 4, and like to him there is none1. Kin. 8, 23, euen my GOD it isIoh. 20, 17, to whome, whatsoeuer is compared, is nothingProu. 3, 15 Isai. 46, 9. My God is entirelie to be loued, and a most faithfull frend, which ne∣er forsaketh the soule that loueth imIohn. 13, 1, but continuallie abideth with er for companie. And if sometime e hide himselfe, and suffer her to be roobled, it is not doon of him to de∣troie, but to trie herIam. 1, 12, to purge her Wisd. 3, 5 6, and to instruct herPsa. 119, 71. So that euen hen he forsaketh not, but the more iselie instructeth, that euerie one
maie see what hee is of himselfe, and how far hee is come forward (in re∣ligion.) O my beloued, thou art all faire and louelie, but not to the flesh, but to the minde; not to the eie or sense, but to the faithfull soule, to him which hath a pure heartMat. 5, 8, to him which is altogether addicted vnto things inuisible and spirituall2. Cor. 4, 18. So that who so desireth to be vni∣ted to thee by a religious affection, he must of necessitie mortifie in him∣selfe all fleshlie motions, and aboue all reteine a pure conscience. For thou art much displeased then, when a man doth goe vnto fraile crreatures to seeke consolation. And therefore thou callest me in∣wardlie to loue theeLuk. 10, 27, and thou commandest that I wait for thee: for then I shall finde thee, when I doo humble my selfe, and wish that which thou wilt. And this shall be all my felicitie, euen freelie to serue thee, neither dreading anie losse, nor seeking anie gaine: because thou allowest that soule which pure lie dooth loueMat. 10, 37. Oah blessed is hee, which both in life and death sticketh onlie to thee▪
But as for mee I am far-awaie cast oftentimes from thy fauor by louing, and that both inordinatelie, and vn∣discreetelie, transitorie things. But that I maie not perish with them, I with all speede will returne, and be∣hold in them thy glorieRom. 1, 21, and direct all my cogitations to thee wrd. O my Lord, and God, which of no∣thing hast made all thingsGene. 1, 1 2, &c., giue mee grace for all things to praise thy name.Iohn. 1, 1 2 Act. 17, 24 For all powerReuel. 4, 8., wisedomeIam. 1, 17, good∣nes and mercie is thineMat. 19, 17; thine also is euerlasting glorie and maiestieReue. 7, 12. Thy kingdome is an euerlasting kingdomePsa. 145, 13; and thy dominion en∣dureth throughout all ages. Thou orderest all thingsWisd. 8, 1, both things aboue, and things in earth. Thou knowest all thingsEcclus. 23 verse 19, and possessest all thingsPsal. 95, 4 Eccles. 9, 1; nothing dooth resistDan. 4, 32, or trouble thee: but quietlie thou rulest the world, and makest the rebellious to stoup, and to serueWisd. 12, 3 4, &c. Daniel. 9, 3 12. Thou art priuie of all things which are doon in the worldEcclus. 23, 19▪; and before theie were doon thou knewest their endesIsai. 46, 10. Thou art the God both of heauen and earthEzra. 5, 11, the creator of things
visible and inuisiblePsal. 89, 11 Psal. 115, 15, the gouernor of the whole worldPsal. 47, 1 2 6, &c., and the dispo∣ser of the seasonsEcclus. 4, verse 5 6, &c.. O blesse thy seruants, I beseech thee, dispersed far and wide ouer the world, yet seruing thee most religi∣ouslie. Make them (constantlie) to sound forth thy praise, and in all pla∣ces with one voice to glorifie thy name. Stir vp their harts firmelie to loue thee; and grante that all their enter∣prises maie take a good ende. Oah, how gratious, and how good art thou to such as loue thee1. Cor 2, 9! how sweete art thou to them which taste theePsal. 34, 8! Theie which haue felt thy sweet∣nes, knowe thereby the better how both to thinke and speake. For thy sweetnes surpasseth all sweetnes; and thy pleasures doo sweeten all bitter∣nes. O Lord my God, holie men haue spoken, and Prophets haue talked of thee. All the godlie from the worlds beginning haue beleeued in thee, haue serued thee, haue glorified thee both with sacrifices and obla∣tions, theie haue praised and blessed
thine holie name: because theie haue both acknowledged thee to bee the creator and maker of the vniuersall world, and also trusted in thee aboue all thingsHebr. 11, 2 3, &c.. Theie haue knowen thee in their visions, for thou hast reuealed thy name to them; and beside thee they knewe no God. Theie obserued the lawe of thy commandements, which thou gauest them. Theie folowed not the foolish i∣maginations of false Gods: but they worshipped thee which liuest for e∣uer1. Tim. 1, verse 17, the creator of all thingsAct. 17, 24 Hebr. 1, 3. Theie lifted vp their voice to thee with thankesgeuing: because from on high thou soundest in their eares, saiengExod. 3, 14, I am that I am. Before mee there was no God formedIsa 43, 10, neither shall there bee after mee. I haue ordained the things which shall be, and I for∣get not whatsoeuer is past. This when theie heard and vn∣derstood, theie cast the eies of their faith a far off, beleeuing that God will saue vs; and that he which shall come, will come, and will not tarieHeb. 10, 37. Knowing these things afore hand theie were not a litle comforted, and
maruelouslie astonished, at the pre∣sence of the glorie to come, theie fainted. But afterward comming by litle and litle to themselues, and with ioie beholding the power of God ap∣proching, theie said, Hee is, euen hee is the Lord our God, and wee haue none other. Hee hath taken vs, and hee will saue vs. Hee cannot denie himselfe2. Tim. 2, 13, because hee is faithfull. As we haue heard, so we haue seene1. Ioh. 1, 1 3: as wee haue beleeued, so wee haue spoken, and borne witnesse to the truthIohn. 3, 11. Once the Lord did speake, and it was doonPsal. 33, 9. Hee saide, My counsaile shall standIsai. 46, 10: but yours shall come to naught, ô yee sonnes of menPsal. 33, 10. Wo vnto them which imagine euillMich. 2, 1, and afterward make a scoffe at the word of God! Wo vnto you which doo faigne a religion out of your owne braine, and are exalted in your owne po∣wer! Heare the word of the Lord, yee which serue the Lord: knowe yee that he hath a controuersie with the inhabitants of the earthHos. 4, 1. To turne awaie your selues, it is not good; stand yee therefore and
consider his waies. Returne you and come vnto him, so will he ioiefullie receaue you into fauor; for the Lord is gratious and mercifullExo. 34, 6 Ionas. 4, 2. He keepeth not his anger as man doothHos. 11, 9, but pardoneth all sinnes, yea and moreouer he restoreth the for∣mer grace with the later. Onlie returne you with all your harts: and dedicate your selues who∣lie and vnfeinedlie to his seruice. Thus doo the sancts speake in mine eares. That which musick is at a banquet, and sweete smelling frankincense in a censar: euen that is the word of God in a pure hart. And thy sancts, Lord, filled with thy spirit, haue thus sounded forth the memorie of thine abundant sweetenes; and haue lest their words vnto vs to be sounded abroade. But my speech often-time is stop∣ped, so that it hath no passage to as∣cend. But if that fire come from a∣boue, then shal my toong be hot: and if it once be enflamed, I shall forth-with be consumed. I shall not be able to stand in the presence thereof; for as the winde
driueth awaie chaffe, so shall sorow be expelled from the hart. And as the rust by the fire: so shal my sinnes be consumed. The fire of God which consumeth all things, shall sweep the floore of mans hart. Descende, and get vp; tuch me a little, and I shall flee. Things passed shall be as though theie had neuer been, and that to come shall not be accompted of: for all sinnes shall vtterlie be forgotten. Old things shall passe awaie, new shall come abundantlie; holie de∣sires shall encrease, and rise vp on all sides, wheresoeuer the good spirit shall blowe. Feare shall depart, loue shall pos∣sesse the harts of all; all affliction shall cesse: for this alteration is by the hand of God. Therefore that which I saie is not to mine owne, but to his praise. The pensiue hath comfort; the hungrie, bread; the thirstie, drinke; The sick is healed; the wauering, assisted; the weake, strengthened; the wearie, quieted; the hopelesse, comforted; the complainer, pittied; To the blinde, sight; to the wan∣dering, a readie waie; to the knocker,
the gate is opened. He which doubted, is now resol∣ued; hee which staggered, is nowe strengthened; hee that diligentlie enquired, is now entertained ioie∣fullie by mother charitie. The freend commeth more ioiefullie to meete, than is the soule desirous to speake with him. L. Lo now am I present, saith he, saie on, what new thing hath fallen out? What, haue you forgotten what you are to suffer and to doo for my sake? B. Yet this staied mee not being de∣sirous to go forward with him. So straight-waie I mounted aloft, and forgat all mine affliction. Hee would not by and by discom∣fort the partie so longing to abide with him: but with gentle words he said, that in due time it should bee performed. L. Thy desire is good, and request vnto mee dooth like mee well: not∣withstanding, it maie not presentlie be graunted. Go thy waie, and get home to thine owne house, and declare to thine acquintnce what the Lord hath doon for thee. Saie vnto them, Prepare your
harts euerie one of you; and laie downe the heauie burden of sinne; and bee yee warie, and strong to re∣sist the snares of SatanIam. 4, 7. Watch and praie, least yee fall into tentationMat. 26, 41 Mark. 14, 38. I will come shortlie, looke that I finde you readie. Lo, I haue warned you aforehand. CHAP. 12. 1. The desire of the soule after God. 2. The properties of God by the sondrie titles ascribed vnto him. 3. None commeth vnto God, vnlesse God draweth him. SAie vnto my soule I am thy saluationPsal. 35, 3. O, of what excel∣lencie art thou, my soule, what wonderfull virtue is hidden in thee, that thou canst neuer bee at rest, vntill thou haue attained perfect happines, and found the last end which thou so de∣sirest! which once being knowen and found out, the care is gone. Oah happines aboue all happi∣nes; ô end without end, when shall I
both without measure, and euerla∣stinglie enioie thee! I finde manie good things in this world. But theie continue not1 Cor. 7, 31 1. Iohn. 1, 15 16, nei∣ther doo theie satisfie my desireEcclus. 1, 8. But one thing is necessarieLuk. 10, 42▪ This one thing is that I seeke; this oe thing I desire. For one thing are all thingsIsai. 43, 7; and of one thing are all thingsGen. 1, 1 2, &c. Iohn. 1, 1 3. If I et this thing, I shall be coent: but if I enioie it not, I shall continuallie be tossed, because manie things cannot satisfie mee. What is this one thing? I am not able to saie what it is; sure I am I de∣sire that, than which, nothing either is, or mae be imagined either better or greaterIsai. 46, 5 6, &c. Iob. 41, 1 2, &c.. For this is not one thing among manie things; but one thing aboue all thingsEzra. 5, 11. And it is my God, to whome if I stick, I shall doo wellPsal. 73, 2. To him I saie, to him I , when I saie, Saie vnto my soule, I am thy salua∣tionPsal. 35, 3. O my soule, my longing soule, what more desirest thou? Is it not better for the to cleae vnto one thing, than vnto manie things? Of one thing are manie thingsAct. 17, 24, but
one thing is not of manie things. Cesse to seeke manie things, ioine thee to one, stick vnto one: for in one thing all things consist. Let others enquire after manifold and diuers outward things: but doo thou seeke one inward good thing, and it is sufficient. Lo, this man seeketh a farmeMat. 22, 5 Luke. 14, 18; that man traueleth about his mar∣chandise; another heapeth vp much gold and siluer; another hunteth af∣ter pleasures and preferment; ano∣ther visiteth his freends and kinred; another is merie with his acquain∣tance; another rideth vnto cities and castles; another doth long to see diuers contries of the world; a∣nother desireth wisedome, another preferment, another principalitie, a∣nother a kingdome: and thus one wisheth one thing, another man ano∣ther thing euen aswell among the spirituall sort, as among the secular. But fewe doo seeke one thing, and (other things) purelie and simplie for one thing. And therefore theie neither doo finde anie sure peace; nor yet sauor the inward grace of the spirit. For so manie as are (the seruants)
of Christ, doo couet not temporall, not earthlie thingsColos. 3, 1, as though they were then iolie and glorious felows, if theie abunded therewith. What then? wilt thou saie that the things which theie seeke for, doo touch thee, ô deuout soule? in truth thou canst not. For my part, I detest all these things: for my good thing is but one thing; I loue but one thing, I require but one thing; and this one thing is better to mee than all other things either in heauen or earth. If thou hast founde such a good thing, my counsell is, that you hold and keepe it, for whoe sake you haue contemned all things. For hauing that, it shall not grieue you to want other things; naie, you will iudge it reason for the getting thereof, that you doo both giuePhil. 3, 8, and suffer all thingsRom. 8, 35 38. Now therefore, ô my soule, seeke thou after so singular, and superex∣cellent a good thing. So long as you liue in the flesh, you are of necessitie to seeke: because that cannot too carefullie be sought for, which can at no time sufficientlie be comprehended1. Cor. 2, 9.
But then shall you cesse seeking, when the houre of enioieng is once come. For then shal he be all in all1. Cor. 15, verse 28, euen he which alone is all sufficient for all, and euerie man. And although there too hee must be sought, where he is continuallie sound: yet is hee not there sought with labor, as in this world, but with surpassing pleasure, and loue. Cor. 13, 13. What he is in this life to the god∣lie, it maie be declared by his mani∣fold titles: and such as haue experi∣ence (of his goodnes) knowe verie well how it maie be showen. Notwithstanding, consider what the names of God are, as I haue lear∣ned them in the schoole of experi∣ence: I will recite a few, but the grace (of his spirit) maie put you in minde of manie mo beside. Lo, hee is a spouseMat. 9, 15, to such as loue; but to such as still serue him in feare, a dreadfull LordDeut. 6, 13 Math 4, 10. Hee is a father, to good childrenMath. 6, 9; but to the obstinatelie wicked, a se∣ueare iudge2. Tim 4, 8 Hebr 12, 23. To the sick, he is a physitionMatt. 9, 12, and to the whole, wholesome foodeIohn. 6, 55 56. To the ignorant, a teacherIohn. 7, 16, and to the obedient, an euerlasting Sa∣uiourMath. 1, 21.
Hee is the waieIoh. 14, 6 for beginners, the truth, for proceeders, the lifeIohn. 11, 25, for the absolute performers of his holie will. Hee is the hopeCol. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1 of repenters, and a surpassing comforterIoh. 14, 26 of the righ∣teous. Hee is a crowneLuk. 2, 32 for the humble, and a punishmentRom. 9, 33 for the proude. In darkenes, hee is a lightIohn. 1, 8 9 Iohn. 3, 19; and in the night, a lanterneIohn. 8, 12 1. Iohn. 1, 5. Hee giueth medicine to the disea∣sed soules, and much wine of com∣fort, to the sorowfull. With such as stand to the battell, hee standeth; with such as proceede in their iornie, he walketh; with such as feruentlie make haste, hee run∣neth; with such as mount in diuine contemplation, he flieth. Doo you praie? hee is present with you. Doo you reade? hee is talking with you. Doo you meditate? hee is still with you. One and the same God worketh in all these things, showing himselfe to euerie one, euen as hee thinketh good: in his words there is no fault, and his works are past finding out. For great and vnsearchable are
his iudgementsRom. 11, 33, and no man is t saie vnto him, whie doost thou so or whie doost thou chuse this ma rather than that manIsai. 45, 9 10 11. It is follie for a man to reason against the almightie: and all the will of Adams children is vane,Rom. 9, 20 21, &c. an to no purpose. How like you these things, and how dooth God sauor vnto you? S. Hee seemeth sweete vnto mee; neither am I offended at his works. Hee is righteousPsalm. 119, verse 137, and who can rebuke him of ill dealingIoh. 8, 46? Hee that so dooth, dooth set him∣selfe against God, and shal be reproo∣ued of his irreprehensible light. M. But what thou hast heard, what is it in his presence? scarse vndoubted∣lie so much as a sparcle, without that which is hidden within. Aske you what that is? I must saie, I knowe it not, it is altogether aboue my capacitie, euen as a certaine cloude far off, whose beginning and ende are vnknowen. And therefore meditate rather, and thinke more often vpon the base humanitie of Iesus, and doo not mount vp too high, least of his glori∣ous maiestie you be confounded.
But, forsomuch as burning loue dooth now and then forget all reue∣rence and feare, you are (in that re∣spect) the more to be borne withall, if sometime, being extreemelie set on fire with the loue of Iesus, you doo consider not onlie how hee cried in the mangerLuke. 2, , and how hee hanged vpon the crosseMat. 27, 31 32▪ &c.: but also how hee raigneth nowe in heauen all glori∣ousliePhilip. 2, 9 10, and ruleth all things vnder heauen most wonderfullieReuel. 1, 5. S. O most louelie Iesu, gladlie doo I folow thee in earth: but more glad∣lie would I folow thee vnto heauen. Where my treasure is, there would mine hart be alsoMath. 6, 21. Oah thou art my treasure, thou which art at the right hand of the fa∣therRom. 8, 34 Hebr. 1, 3, art deerer to mee than anie creature. For my sake thou wast in∣carnate, for my sake thou wast ele∣uate. Thou diddest leaue thy selfe an example vpon earthIoh. 13, 15 1. Pet. 2, 2; thou keepest thy selfe for a reward in the heauens. Vpon thee therefore mine eies are fixed, and after thee doo my feete trace. To thee mine hart saith, my face seeketh thee ô Lord, I will conti∣nualie seeke thy facePsal. 27, .
O Lord, how long wilt thou hide the sight of thy glorie? Whie hi est thou thy faceIob. 13, 24, and takest mee for thine enemie? Thou knowest right well, my mind wil be distracted hether and thther, and be diuerslie beate, vntill it be fast ioined to thee her freende in the heauens. For the force of loue knoweth not how to be quietSal. S. 8, 6 7: but vncesantlie maketh enquirie of her louer, sen∣deth forth messengers, and dobleth praiers: neither doth it so giue ouer, because loue will altogether possesse that which it desireth. Therefore drawe meeSal. S. 1, 3, that I maie begin zelouslie to run after thee. I had neede to be drawen, and with great force to be drawen. For vnlesse thou drawe, none wil comeIohn. 6, 44, none will folow: because euerie one is naturallie inclined to himselfe-ward. But if thou once drawe, lo then I doo hasten, then I run, then I waxe hot. But if thou doo not drawe, I doo neither run, nor seeke, yea scarse haue I anie desire at all to folowe. If thou reach out thine hand, I doo run so much the more swiftlie, as
thou forceablie doost drawe. This is the voice of my louer dra∣wingIoh. 12, 32, And when I am ift vp from the earth, I will drawe all men vnto mee. O sweete Iesu, drawe mee after thee, and then not I onlie, but all shal run after thee by the sauor of thine ointmentsSal. S. 1, 2 3. First therefore drawe mee after thee, then let others folow, seeing an example of good life. But, that we maie not waxe proude, it is good that we marke this withall, howe that wee began to run, not through our owne strength, but by the sauor of thine ointments. This is the heauenlie drawing, without which no man can go for∣ward, no not so much as begin, as likewise thou didest saieIoh. 6, 44: No man can come vnto mee, except my father drawe him. So that whome the father dra∣weth, he foloweth thee, and forsa∣keth himselfe. He seemed to be well drawen that saidMat. 8, 19 Luke. 9, 57: Master, I will folow thee, whether soeuer thou goest. But euerie one hath not the gift to be so affected: neither is it a weake stomach that can so readelie folowe thee vnto all things.
M. What let hast hou, ô my soule, that thou doost not forsake all for Iesus sake? Whie so vnwillinglie doo you depart from vane and transito∣rie things? What good can these worldlie things doo you? Behold, while you passe by mor∣tall things, and visible creatures, willing to delight your self in them, you forget better things. While you so doo, you seuer your selfe from the soueraigne good thing, and turne your minde from the true, blessed, and eternall life. And therefore you shall continue miserable and wretched, full of griefe and vexationEccles. 2, 17. For turne your selfe on which side you will, and you shall finde matter of continuall sorow, and much tedi∣ousnes, vntill you turne againe vnto thy creator: because he is thy peaceIoh. 16, 33, and secure quietnes. But, if thou neither make staie in earthlie things, nor fasten thy foote in the mire, but rather beholde and worship in the glasse of worldlie creatures, not the figure which pas∣seth awaie1. Cor. 7, verse 3, but him whose image and superscription it is, blessed art thou, and shalt neuer dieReue. 21, 4.
For when thou seekest after these visible things not to enioie them, but beholdest them to the ende to glorifie the name of thy creatour, by making to thy selfe of his best and basest woorkes a kinde of lad∣der wherewithall thou maist ascend, thou shalt be deliuered so from the filthie bowels of this world, and thoroughlie bee coopled to thy desired ende, which is aboue all things the blessed God for euer and euer.
CHAP. 13. 1. How, and when the soule and God are vnited together. 2. The miserie where God is not present. MY Soule cleaueth vnto theePsal. 63, 8 O my God, the true comforter, thou kno∣west how thou likest me well, and how I take pleasure dai∣lie to be talking with thee secretlie alone. But where maie I seeke thee, if happelie I do misse thee for an hour? who shall bring mee vnto thee? Thou art God aboue all thingsIsai. 46, 9; and I beneath all things a miserable man. Thou art in heauenMatth. 6. 9, and I in the world. Thou art most high, but I am poore, and a begger. Who euer hath measured the di∣stance betweene heauen and earth? Far asunder be theie: but farder art thou fro mee, ô God. Who therefore shall vnite mee to thee? either thou must doo it, or none can.
But if thou wilt, it maie speedelie be doon. And thou knowest, how of my selfe I maie easelie fall: but that I doo stand, and go forward, it is of thy goodnes. So that my soule dependeth vpon the grace of thy spirit, and of the in∣fusion of thy speciall fauor. I thou command, it shall be lifted vp from earth: but if thou turne a∣waie thy face, it shall be greatlie troobled. But of thy woonted fauor and mercie receaue mee; and let thy right hand guide mee wonderfullie vnto thee. Heare this, all yee peoplePsal. 49, 1, giue eare all yee that dwell in the world; for it is an easie thing with God to bring it to passe, as it is written, that the rich and poore maie be all one. I am poore, and lack manie things; but this my God is rich, and wanteth nothingPsal. 50, 11 12. And although no great experi∣ence, yet I haue an vndoubted te∣stimonie to prooue that the soule through grace maie be vnited to God. My beloued is mine, saith heSal S. 2, 16, and I am his, he feedeth among the lilies.
This is the testimonie of the frende, and his dearling; of the bridegroome, and the spouse: and it is a verie fit, and a strong testimonie of the holie lawe. The next is like to thisIoh. 17, 21: I will that theie all maie be one, as thou, ô father, art in mee, and I in thee. Behold the notable testimonies of two bookes, whereby it plainelie appeareth, that the soule, through speciall grace from aboue, maie bee linked familiarlie vnto God. And although it rarelie come so to passe: yet is it deerelie to be ac∣compted of, and not altogether vn∣knowen to the louer. And againe, though verie hardlie: yet may it fall out. The soule therefore so conioined to God, let no man dare to separat, or to trooble. If thou doost woonder at this mar∣uelous vnion, woonder thou and maruell at the excellencie of his goodnes, and at the strange and sin∣gular vniting of the humane bodie (to his Godhead.) Hee maie doo what he will, which onlie dooth great woondersPsal. 136, 4. If thou lookest for merits, you
shall finde it is his good pleasure to haue it so. O sweete societie with Christ, and vnder the wings of Christ! O gratious coniunction, full of loue, and sweetenes of the holie Ghoste, the which is perceaued bet∣ter than vttered! These things belong vnto the soule that is estranged from all worldlie matters, and is not delighted with this present life: but is carried aloft in godlie meditation. The more the louer knoweth this, the more am I ignorant. Notwith∣standing, gladlie would I bee in pre∣sence when the deuout soule is in such an happie case. And then is she so, when the spouse and she is together at the noone daie. But then it fareth ill with her, and that verie ill too, if it happen that Iesus bee awaie; if the perfumes of grace run not from aboue; if no plea∣sure she take in the holie Bible; if it bee irksome for her to continue in praier and godlie meditation; if the cloudes of the hart be so thick, and hurtfull cogitations doo so preuaile, that theie cannot be restrained, but do labor to ouerwhelme in a manner
all the former good things. O Lord God, whie doost thou so? What plaie is this? O blessed Iesus, what meane you heereby? If it were not offensiue to thine honor, I could wish to haue farther communication betweene thee, and thy beloued. Forsomuch as she is so greatlie desirous of thy gratious presence, whereby she may be nourished with chaste delightes, I doo much muse whie sometime you suffer her to fit so desolate. Thou passest by, and go∣est thy waie, as though she had no desire vnto thee. But she is alone all pensiue. For thus she saith in effectIsai. 26, 9, With my soule haue I desired thee in the night. It is night with her, when thou, the true light, art not present. So that she praieth for thy presence, that the darkenes of sinne compre∣hend her not. For she feeleth mani∣fold discommodities when thy gra∣tious visitation is taken from her. For, had she not suffered somewhat, she had neuer so earnestlie cried vn∣to thee. Another also, which was before said, cried thusPsal. 63, 8, My soule cleaueth
vnto thee. But I thinke no trouble is or see∣meth so troublesome to her, as the want of thy presence. And no maruell, if through this want the waieward soule doo lan∣guish awaie in sorow. For thou art verie hardlie found at anie time, and being found, she reioiceth at thy re∣turne, hoping to spend the daie me∣relie with thee: but thinking little of thy departure, she suspecteth no aduersitie to come. But, handling another matter secretlie, thou often takest thy flight. For thou departest suddenlie out of her hands, when she cannot laie holde vpon thee. I doo praise thee, but in this how shall I praise thee? If thou hast anie praise and sweetenes, whie doo you seeme to forgoe it in this deed? If thou wert not, she might be of∣fended. But she can take none of∣fence at thee, who so mightelie doost loue her. If therefore anie good reason be signified vnder that lesson, ô God showe it mee. For gladlie would I vnderstand the same: neither do I thinke it vnneces∣sarie
to learne though it be but little. Because no man of himselfe can behold thy secret iudgements: but it is thy light which dooth both in∣lighten darke, and driue awaie hurt∣full things. What therefore may the cause be that sometime so secretlie you with∣drawe your selfe from the soule, she not witting thereof? Doo you loue her, or no? If you doo loue her, then whie do you leaue her, my beloued? If you loue her not, whie then haue you visited her be∣fore time? Againe, if you loue her not, whie doo you make returne, whie knock you at the doore, whie enter you in againe? What, is it of lightnes that you doo so both go and returne? God forbid. But so often change dooth not a little greeue her; yea much it dooth disquiet her. Yet the griefe would be the lesser, if thou wouldest saie plain∣lieIoh. 14, 28, I doo goe, and will come vnto you; your harts shall reioice, and your ioie no man shall take from youIoh. 16, 22. But now you cast out neuer a by∣word; onlie she thinketh vpon that speech, which she well perceaueth to be performed in her selfe, how Iesus
hid himselfe, and went out of the TempleIoh. 8, 59. A fewe things I haue against you, but my complaint dooth spring out of a good roote. I humblie request to be instructed, I loue not to contend. And therefore, when occasion ser∣ueth, make answere I beseech you. Also let the godlie soule saie for her selfe somewhat for her learning. Likewise make you answere bold∣lie when your part requireth. O my soule, answere thou thy be∣loued boldlie. For thy freend will pa∣tientlie heare, and meete thee with milde words, that you maie suffer none hinderance. For if hee bee not thy comforter, who will comfort thee? And who more fauorablie will beare thine in∣firmitie, than hee which beareth all things, and yet is not burdened? And to whome more safelie can you reueale your miserie, than to him which perfectlie knoweth all things? Ecclus. 23 verse 19 Or in whome maie you put more confidence, than in the truth which deceaueth notIohn. 6, 14? Now, if anie stranger, or one that is not a freend to the spouse, shall heare these things, let him be driuen
from the doores. But if hee loue the spouse, if he be faithfull, if deuoute and spirituall, let him haue free in∣gresse. If hee bee a keeper of a good con∣science, a louer of virtue and disci∣pline; if hee bee pure in hartMatth. 5, 3, and cleere in iudgement; if humble in himselfe, and good towards others; if he can neither wickedlie carpe at, vanelie extoll, rashlie reprooue, im∣pudentlie maintane, nor proudlie commend things; but contrariwise if he haue learned both, the things which hee conceaueth not, to reue∣rence, and also rightlie to interpret obscure and mysticall matters, let him haue entrance, and heare the communication. For the affection of the hart through the sound of words ought to be noted rather than the qualitie of voices. And therefore tell me, ô soule, how doost thou feele thy selfe wanting now the grace of thy beloued? I for my part doo see that hardlie I can take it well, if he keepe himselfe long awaie: and I conceiue the like of you. If you thinke good let vs sit heere together, and confer we heereof to our comfort.
CHAP. 14. 1. A lamentation of the soule for the want of grace. MIne hart breaketh for desirePsa. 119, 20. What is it thou saiest? Why saiest thou, Zion, the Lord hath forsaken mee? Feare not daughter, Zion, thou lo∣uing and religious soule, lo thy king, and welbeloued freend commeth to thee. Arise, stand vp, and beholde the ioie which commeth toward thee from thy God. S. I haue sought, saith the soule, and haue not foundSal. S. 3, 2, I haue called, and he hath not answered, and therefore I doo breake for thought. M. Then said I, this is the voice of the Turtle hauing lost her mate. It is not now with you as it was yesterdaie, and earewhile, when you sang the songs of mirth. S. The morning is past, night com∣meth, and the spouse resteth him∣selfe at noone tide: yet maie I not
come nigh him. M. Your woords are sorowfull, and your eies shed teares. O soule, thou art grieued, and hast neede of com∣fort. But speake, whence commeth your griefe? S. I am not troubled either for gold or siluer, or anie worldlie matter, neither for lucre, nor for hurt, nei∣ther for iniurie, nor for pouertie, for I am now dead, and crucified to the world. M. If I bee not deceaued, long since you renounced the world. But whe∣ther in all things perfectlie you haue denied the same, and art come euen into a verie hatred of your selfe, I would faine knowe. S. Verie fewe haue that gift, and it is especiallie looked for at your hands. M. Whie therefore are you so pen∣siue? What haue you forgon? If it be for your freend his sake, I must needs confesse you doo well to be sad: nei∣ther should you take delight in anie thing, vntill he returne, and visit you againe. But in the meane while, how doo you susteine your selfe vpon the be∣loued, ô sweete soule? And sure I am hee is not alwaie
present at a wish. Therefore while he is absent, what comfort haue you, wherein doo you take delight? Tell me your secrets, be theie ne∣uer so grieuous. That you beare the absence of Christ heauilie, no man doubteth, but he onlie that loueth not. Now you are sad, I take it, not for this world, but for the spouse Christ. And I knowe full well that when hee shall returne, you will be merrie a∣gaine: because hee will not alwaies forget you. For he hath saidIoh. 14, 18, I will not leaue you comfortlesse, but I will come to you. Therefore your wordes are not vane, being vttered with such griefe, but theie declare a louing hart, and strike the cold affection, which is not inflamed with the loue of Christ. For your voice, is the voice of a Turtle, not the crieng of a murmu∣rer. And therefore I trust you shall finde him, whose losse you so la∣ment. Notwithstanding I demaund, What saie you of him, whose absence you doo so bewaile? Is he good, or no? S. Doubtlesse hee is good, and singu∣larlie good tooMat. 19, 16, righteous, and
faithfull, in him there is no wicked∣nesIob. 34, 10, neither can be. M. Whie therefore lament you for the good in whome is no deceipt1. Pet. 2, 22? S. I weepe not for the good, in respect that hee is good: but I lament mine owne miserable condition, because I haue lost a good and a faithfull freend. I, euen I haue deserued this: but alas, alas that I kept not his fauor. By the lack, I haue now learned what I haue lost. And the absence of a freend showeth, what his presence did good. I was merrie and iocund with him: but I did no whit consider of his speedie departure. He came skipping vpon the moun∣taines, hee was ioiefull and iocund in the porches of mine house. And straight-waie I locked the doores of the flesh, and let in the beloued vnto mee. I did sit, and rested within vn∣der his shadowe from the haile and raine. And it did mee much good to haue his companie. Whie should I not reioice? Hee is my ioie, and the comfort of mine hart. Ah, what had I? And what then
did I possesse? I am not able to vtter, how well I prospered then; neither is it conue∣nient that I should. I could not de∣sire more then I had, he beeing pre∣sent whome alone I loued. Oah, how did I loue, when I de∣spised both my selfe, and all things beside! I had either little or no care at all of anie thing that might delight me; for I was rauished with loue of him, and whatsoeuer was not my beloued, I loathed as altogether vnsauerie. But he being taken awaie, I am in a manner cleane out of hart. For my soule depended vpon his grace, because I had none other com∣fort besides him, whose absence I doo thus lament. He did content me, and was sufficient to the making of true mirth in deed. As I would, so was he; and what∣soeuer he enioined mee, I tooke it in good part, and I consecrated my selfe wholie and franklie to his will. So that there was a good agreement, and great quietnes betweene vs. No man durst be so bold as to in∣terrupt our silence, when hee had commanded so through my mouth.
L. I charge you, ô daughters of Ie∣rusalemSal. S. 2, 7, by the roes, and by the hindes of the fielde, that yee stir not vp, nor waken my loue, vntill shee please. S. Now therefore note, if you be able to conceaue my woords, what great cause I haue to lament the absence of my freend, by whose presence I began to bee so rich with all good things. M. Heereunto I answered. I knowe well what you saie: by often experi∣ence I haue prooued so much as you speake. But let vs comfort our selues in this, that the dispensation of his will, is the encrease of our zeale, and de∣uotion. And now I haue receaued with thankefulnes that which you haue vttered: notwithstanding, I would more thoroughlie haue them beaten into mine head. For theie which be hard of conceiuing, are of∣ten to be told of a matter.
CHAP. 15. 1. Touching the fruite of freendship. 2. The benefits of Christ vpon man. 3. The true felicitie and ioie of the soule. 4. The affinitie be∣tweene Christ, and the soule of man. PRaised bee GOD which hath not put back my praier fro meePsal. 66, 20. Therefore I am now againe zelouslie to en∣quire, if your freend at anie time left you without inward comfort. What meane you? What muse you heere about? How also maie hee bee reconciled and reclamed? Of all freendship, I beseech you, ô deere and beloued soule to Christ, conceale none of these things which I am to demaund of you. You maie so doo me a pleasure, in opening to mee your godlie cogi∣tations. By your talke. I shall be able to measure the waight of my griefe, whether iustlie or without cause I was pensiue.
For I haue seene you sometime merie, and sometime sad, and by and by glad againe, and by you I did somewhat consider of my selfe. But I suppose the chiefest cause of this your alteration is that returning and departure of the beloued. The which hath made mee, perceauing how you haue run ouer manie mat∣ters, for mine instruction to resort vnto you. S. According to your desire, I will bend my selfe somewhat to vnfolde the things which I feele within mee, both when I am with my freend, and also when I am alone, looking for him whome I so doo loue. This first vnderstand, I reape not so much ioie and pleasure by his pre∣sence, but I finde as much sorow and bitternes through his absence. But whie it pleaseth him so to come and go, rather I had he should declare than I. But you shall heare it when I haue finished the words of my song, be∣cause in the ende we will bring him in vnto vs, and sitting among vs, hee shall teach vs his order, the which he vseth to show vnto such as desire his presence.
In the meane while giue attentiue eare vnto mee, and be not offended at mine homelie speech. For wee are now come together to stir vp our harts, and either to weep together, or through loue to reioice together. For wo vnto him that is aloneEccles. 4, verse 10, because when hee falleth into some sorow or tentation, there is not a se∣cond to lift him vp. And if to be to∣gether theie will comfort one the o∣ther, while one being sad, the other ministreth ioie; or if he refuse to be comforted, he shall be pittied forth∣with, and griefe will be taken for his griefe; and so it will fall out that ei∣ther theie will both be glad, or both sad together. And although some so∣rowe doo yet still continue for some aduersitie, or matter of sorowe: yet the more patientlie theie beare it, because their harts be so linked, that nothing can change or alter their mindes. Now, who seeing this faithfull con∣cord of mindes, but must needes breake into these woords, and saie, Psal. 133, Behold, how good, and how comelie a thing it is, brethren to dwell euen together. And therefore I can the more
boldlie tel you what I thinke, because I dread no deceipt, or subtiltie in you. Lo, this all sweete spouse, and best beloued frend, our Lord Iesus Christ, the louer of holie soulesWisd. 11, 23, euen of pure loue, not able otherwise to doo, allured mee vnto him; and when I was not, he gaue me lifeAct. 17, 22, wisedome, and power to behold this common light. Hee gaue mee grace to be borne anewe by Baptisme, and adorned mee with the roabe of his pretious merits. Ouer and besides, when afterward I had foulie bespotted my selfe with sinne, and was far vnfit to loue him, he cast not his eie vpon my filthines, but vpon the side of his mercies. For when as yet I wandered out of the waie, hee reclamed mee of his goodnesRom. 8, 30, not suffering mee to pe∣rish in this wicked world. Moreouer, he hath prouided mee a place to rest in so long as I liue in this mortall bodie. Notwithstanding, this dwelling vnder the shadow of the beloued is not the true rest, nor the rest which shall for euer continue: but that is
the true rest, which wee shall feele after the labors of this present lifeReue. 21, 4. Yet for the soule to perceaue her selfe to be vnburdened of worldlie cares, and there to rest where she maie the more fullie serue her belo∣ued, and attend vpon him in the se∣cret chamber of silence, it is a kinde of comfort. Furthermore, my freend hath not left, but assisted mee in my diuers troubles, and sorest tentations. Also, he hath both instructed mee oftentimes with profitable sermons, and confirmed mee in his word. And as yoong plants are woont to be watred with showers: so he hath watered me with inward comfort, that the virtue newlie implanted within me maie not wither. L. And he said to me, If thou hast a lust vnto me, and wilt harken vnto me, thou shalt enioie good things; if thou wilt doo, whatsoeuer I com∣mand you, thou art a frend of mineIoh. 15, 4. If thou wilt choose me, and loue me aboue all things, all things that you aske, my father will giue you: but if you forgoe me, then shalt thou come to destruction, for my wrath shall bee incensed against thee; if
thou seeke after another, he shal not please thee long, but thou wilt loath and abhor him. Because I am the sal∣uation, and the life of the souleIohn. 14, 6 Iohn. 11, 25. S. So I turned mee vnto him which had doon me good, and expelling my selfe from out the dust of earthlie af∣fections, I decreed in mine hart from thenceforth to serue him onlie: be∣cause I found nothing better than him, nor could imagine no couenant more profitable. Let others iet, and seeke what freendship theie will else-where, I am thoroughlie perswaded this is the true man of the soule, for whose sake me thinks I could gladlie forsake this world, to enioie his loue euer∣lastinglie. And therefore I stuck vnto him, for he liked me still; neither could I finde a better freend. For my soule alwaie hath excee∣dinglie desired such a one, as is the greatest, for power, the best for good∣nes, the woorthiest for dignitie, and the most happie for all good things. And because he is verie curteous, he gaue me comfortable woords, warelie fore-seeing that theie should neither terrefie, nor breake mee
through ouer-much roughnes, but rather enioine and teach mee that which should bee both light, and sweete to be borne, that so my yoong affection might the better be drawen on, and the more forceablie addicted to the freend beloued, and shrinke not back. M. She shall the better, said he, be in∣structed, and profit, if not by force, but through gentlenes she be prouo∣ked forward. She wil the more easilie receaue my yoake, rather by loue with rewards, than by feare with pu∣nishment. And if she neede impul∣sion, let it wiselie be vsed, that vio∣lence doo not ouerthrowe her. For he knew right well what was best for a yoong plant, and what pro∣fit this his kindnes would bring vnto mee, especiallie at the time of triall, when I should easelie call into my re∣membrance the good things which at the first he did vnto my soule, and thereby take courage to proceede in the battell. He would not straight-waie open vnto me, what and how much trooble I was to endure in his seruice; but sometime hee tempered aduersitie with prosperitie, well considering my
weakenes at the first, vntill through experience I had gotten strength to endure affliction. After all this he carried me about, enstructed, and boare me vpon his shoulders. Hee conducted me ouer the holie Scripture, and with the heate of his holie Spirit he armed me against the wicked tentations of Satan. Moreouer, he placed before mine eies examples of all the virtues, namelie, the holie Patriarches, and Prophets, besides the glorious lights of the new Testament. Euen as a Mother teacheth her litle childe, so hee instructed mee, breaking spirituall shales, and put∣ting the carnels into my iawes, be∣cause theie were sweete to be eaten. Search if you can what theie sig∣nifie, and where such maie be found. Open the apostolicall booke, reade aduisedlie, and see if you are able to comprehend so great mysteries. Peruse the Prophet Isaiah; looke into the Gospell, the light of all lights, and marke if theie doo not yeeld most plesant notes of them∣selues. In them whatsoeuer you finde
which is obscure, and hard to be vn∣derstood, that is a nut in a shel. But if you heare it expounded, and vnderstand that which afore you did not, then broken is the shel, and the sweetnes of the ut dooth sauor in the hart. And so are we to iudge of other darke sentences. Whereby you maie behold so manie nuts, as you see hidden sentences. And how, thinke you, did he beare me on his shoulders? That he did so often as he beheld mine infirmitie, and yet neither cast me off, nor de∣spised me, but patientlie and merci∣fullie did beare with me2. Pet. 3, 9. Againe, he did beare me on his shoulders, when he made other men to beare with mine infirmities, and whatsoeuer was blameworthie with∣in mee. Besides, yet more louinglie he did beare me on his shoulders when he bare his crosse vnto the place, called the place of dead mens sculsIoh. 19, 17 18, &c., where hee was crucified. For then was I a more heauie burden vnto him, than the crosse was. And my sins were more grieuous to his bones1. Pet. 2, 24, than this wood of the crosse to his back. Because for my sake that crosse was
carriedIsai. 53, 5 6, not for his owne sake. Oah, how is hee aboue all things to be loued, and to be worshipped, by whose grace and merits I am thus both found outLuke. 15, 4 5, &c., and redeemedGal. 3, 13. And therefore he shall be as deere to me, as the child is to his mother. But well I knowe, that I am far vn∣meete to loue him. Notwithstanding my boldnes commeth from his good∣nes. Neither could I doo otherwise but run vnto his most freendlie em∣bracements, when hee showed him∣selfe so kinde vnto mee. I doo well remember what the Pro∣phet Dauid in a certaine place doth saie1. Sam. 18, verse 18: What am I? and what is my life, or the familie of my father in Israel, that I should be sonne in lawe to the King? But our affinitie together is much more excellent, than this of Dauid and Saul. Because ours is a pure and syncere kinred, not with flesh and blood, but betweene God himselfe, betweene faith vnuiolated, and a good conscience. Of this, did that Disciple whome Iesus loued, speake on this wise1. Iohn. 4, 4: Greater is hee that is in you, than hee that is in the world.
For God is loue1. Ioh. 4, 16, and loue brin∣geth forth this kinred. Therefore sith Dauid thought himselfe far vnmeet to be sonne in lawe vnto an earthlie King: much more abashed ought I to be, to enter into alliance with the King of all Kings, that vouchsafeth to allure me, vile wretch, into his freendship. So that he hath delt with mee, not according to my deserts, but euen as it seemed good in his mercifull eies. Oah blessed, and happie art thou, soule, now thou art fast bound with the chaine of the heauenlie loue! Oah how noble, and free art thou, seeing thou art priuie euen to the sighings of so holie copulation! But seing I haue spent manie words about the beloued, and yet haue not answered fullie vnto your de∣maund, let vs now begin afresh, and God grant that our speech may bee both to our comfort, and profit.
CHAP. 16. 1. The more wee loue Christ, the more we maie. 2. Tentation and when. 3. Happines of the life to come. 4. How to beare af∣fliction. BEhold, as the eies of seruants looke vnto the hands of their masters; and as the eies of a maiden vnto the hand of her mi∣stresPsal. 12 3, 2: so mine eies are fixed conti∣nuallie vpon my freend. Since first I began to loue him, I haue had a great desire to continue with him. And this mine intent liked him well, and he allowed the same, saiengIohn. 15, 5: Hee that abideth in mee, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruite. But that the truth, the strength, and the puritie of my loue might ap∣peere, it was behoouefull that I should be tempted. And so I could not bee, vnlesse he both suffered the same, and hid himselfe. And, because tentation serueth both for the purging of the inner manPsa. 119, 73, and for the frutefull bringing
forth of virtue; and also for the bet∣ter perceauing the spirituall graces of God, I was tried, and exercised therewithall. How stronglie, and how often hee flang me this waie and that waie, my God and Lord, which knoweth all se∣cretsEcclus. 23, verse 19, and is a witnesse to euerie priuie cogitation of the hartAct. 15, 8, and still seeth mee, and perceaueth how I am nothing else but a fraile crea∣turePsa. 102, 11, euen he knoweth right well. If therefore hee had not assisted mee, when I was extreemelie af∣flicted, doubtles I had perishedPsa. 119, 92, be∣ing readie to fall into the pit of de∣speration. But hee, whose manner is to comfort the troobled in spiritPsal. 34, 18, tooke mercie vpon mee. For, if God helped and assisted not, who were able to beare so ma∣nifold tentations! And therefore it was of his great mercie that I stoode before the face of such trooblesome tempests: and also it is of the same his goodnes, that still I doo stand and fall not. But heereof I maie not vanelie oast so long as I liue in this mortall odie. For though I see the element is
now cleere, yet doo I not thinke that long it will continue quiet. For the winde sodeinlie will arise, and that happelie when wee thinke least thereof. So that by so much I perceaue I doo neede my freend his assistance, by how much I perceaue I doo lie open on all sides to troobles. We shall be quiet no where but in heauenReuel. 21, 4, where my freend doth feed his elect with ioie and exultation. But when there? What can I speake thereof? Scarse can I thinke anie thing thereof, and that not euident∣lie enough; and enter thereinto I maie not. Oah that he would come, and set mee in that all glorious, quiet, and fructfull pasture of his sancts, where neither Satan is, nor danger to be feared! As yet I toile in the sea, and whe∣ther I shall attaine vnto the port of saluation by reason of my troobles arising through so manie contrarie windes, I am vtterlie ignorant. So that I am altogether out of quiet. Notwithstanding, it is a shield and comfort vnto mee, that I stil doo behold the light of faith; that with
all submission I seeke the fauor of my beloued; that I beare toward him a constant hope; that I will not bee separated from his loueRom. 8, 35; and that I doo rest vpon his prouidence, and vnsearchable goodnes, more than vpon my selfe. And therefore, though too too often I doo stagger, yea and fall too some∣time into sinne: yet am I not to de∣speire, but rather continuallie to flie vnto him, and to crie: O Lord my God, haue mercie vpon mee, and suffer mee not to pe∣rish through my manifold tentati∣ons, but assist mee faithfullie, that valiantlie I maie resist, and ouer∣come. Reach out thy right hand vnto the worke of thine owne handsIob. 14, 15 Psalm. 95, 7, oah thou which triest mee by Satan, and settest mee oftentimes on thy left hand. And if anie such tentation shall come, as will staie mee from crieng vnto the Lord, then will I sigh from the bottom of mine hart. For hee knoweth euen the verie secrets of the hartPsal. 7, 9, and is priuie to the gro∣nings of the spiritRom. 8, 26 27. It is not his will that anie one euen of the least should
perishMat. 18, 14. Oah, how great was his goodnes to mee-ward, in that it pleased him to be present with me in my trooble, when I did not knowe, nor could marke so much! For often hee pre∣serued me from beeing vtterlie giuen ouer vnto my wicked affections. Through his secret iudgement it came to passe now and then, that I fell, and was foiled euen in trifles, that I might not waxe proudePsa. 119, 73, and be high minded for great things, but learne through humiliation, how I was nothing euen then when I see∣med to stand vpright, and to florish1. Cor. 4, 7. And therefore I wish you not o∣uer-rashlie, or quicklie to commend mee, though I seeme to prosper in your sight, but reserue all praise vn∣till the good daie of my death, yea rather praise the Lord, and not mee. Giue the glorie vnto God on highLuke. 2, 14, which assisted mee in all my tentations. For hee deliuered mee of his mer∣cie manie a time, when I was taken of mine enemies. Also, when theie came as a whirle∣winde to destroie mee, hee sent out his arrowes, and scattered themPsal. 18, 14,
and he encreased lightnings and ap∣paled them, so that theie left me for a time. Because he would not haue mee to be without that, which from time to time he hath acquainted his sancts withallAct. 14, 22 Psal. 34, 19. So that I had afterward a little quietnes, and peace by the meanes of my freend. Whereupon, I did betake mee not vnto bodelie, or worldlie, but vnto spirituall ease, beholding the earth a far off, and casting my thoughtes vpon the secrets of heauenColos. 3, 1 2. I gaue diligence to see what man∣ner of person I am, and how I might best please him, which had reuealed vnto me so manie tokens of loue, far beyond all deserts of mine. And so much as in mee laie, I wi∣shed continuallie for this ioiefull peace, the better to cleaue vnto him, and to serue him the more freelie. But manie times the soule hath not her desire. But sometime it is granted, sometime vpon good consi∣deration it is differred. For who would not wish still to rest vnder the shade of the beloued, if it might be granted him, and if time and place were conuenient?
But now my freend worketh with mee againe. I feele not affliction alwaie, nei∣ther yet doo I enioie continuall rest, but by an euening and morning a daie is made. For this mortall life is spent in comming and going both through prosperitie and aduersitieAct. 14, 22. This was in the mind of that sanct which saidIob. 7, 18: Thou doost visit him in the morning, and triest him euerie moment. Notwithstanding, it seemeth a kinde of rest, if the enimie doo nei∣ther too often, nor too importunate∣lie assaile. And therefore when it shall be granted mee euen a little to rest my selfe sweetelie in my beloued, I will take it in good part, and reioice. I will reioice I saie, yea and alwaie re∣ioice for that grace of God. Moreouer, it maketh mee bolde to praie vnto him in all my necessi∣ties, because he hath freelie preuen∣ted mee so oftentimes with his mer∣cifull visitation. For when he dooth but approch, minding to keepe holie daie with mee, euen then suddainlie there shi∣neth
a light ouer mine hart, which forthwith driueth out the cloudes of all wicked cogitations, whereby I doo enioie the long desired cleerenes of God his light. Because no vncleane, nor filthie thing can stand where he entereth inReuel. 21, verse 27, for hee loueth puritieMatth. 5, 8, and is the ingraffer of the same; so that of necessitie all satanicall illusion, toge∣ther with the pomps of this world, must be packing. Therefore my passions and tenta∣tions which I did endure being sup∣prised, I began both the more eui∣dentlie to knowe, and the more ear∣nestlie to loue, and the more hartelie to praise him, for vouchsafing at the length to beate back the damned crewe of the wicked from assailing mee. For theie doo disturbe my peace, and sin dooth so shut vp my mouth, that I am ashamed to speake vnto my welbeloued. But in vaine doo theie bend them∣selues against his power and wise∣dome, because euen in a moment he can slide downe into mine hart, and poure in secretlie good motions, that I maie both contemne, and vtterlie
neglect all their priuie whisperings. O my faithfull, and all happie freend, take mee so vnto thee, when∣soeuer thou shalt perceaue mine af∣fections to be either pressed downe at anie time with the waight of sin, or to be held with vnnecessarie busi∣nes, that I maie not wander far a∣straie from thee after the swarme of wicked cogitations, and so ouerha∣stelie be depriued of thy grace, with∣out which I shall not be able to en∣ioie thy freendship. For thou art my Lord, and my GodMatt. 4, 10, which by thy word doost both heale, and sanctifie; which holdest my soule in lifePsal. 66, 9, and sufferest not my feete to slip, but deliuerest mee from the euill daie, and from the snares of death. Oah, how manie haue bin cast off, and vtterlie perished, that haue bin much more innocent than I am! And therefore my soule, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within mee blesse his holie NamePsal. 103, 1 2. My soule, I saie, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. It is all too little, and far vnsuffici∣ent whatsoeuer thou shalt either thinke, or speake, or promise to his
praise. For hee exceedeth all praise, and is much sweeter than anie mu∣sick. Wherefore my soule cleaueth to thee alone, and loueth thee aboue all other gifts, notwithstanding it be exceedinglie beutifull and sweete which of meere good will thou hast sent vnto mee. For thou alone art the spouseMatt. 9, 15, as for all things else theie are gifts, and arguments of loue. In steed of thee I will not loue them; neither will I beleeue that anie thing, or all things in the world can suffice mee, if I haue not thee: for in so dooing, I maie perchance forgoe thee with them too. Thou giuest me leaue to vse manie things for thy sake; but I maie not enioie so much as one thing in thy steedExod. 20, 3. And therefore, ô Christ my sweete spouse, I haue preferred thee afore all other things, and my care hath bin aboue all things to loue thee. Wherefore, grant that blessedlie I maie enioie thee, and in that vnion euerlastinglie to triumph in happi∣nes together with thee. But how far am I come? I haue
lengthened my speech more than perhaps you would. But pardon me, good freend. For I haue bin carried aloft through the loue of mine espe∣ciall, and onlie freend; and would to God it would please him still to lift vp both mee and you too in contem∣plation! Let him prouide an heauenlie as∣cension, but let vs not keepe a base going downe. M. Aske you mee, whether I am for∣saken at anie time of my beloued? S. Yea, I saie so. M. But how doo you behaue your selfe in trooble? S. I take all things as patientlie as I can, expecting his comming. Naturalie I am grieued, but as tou∣ching my spirit, I haue inward pati∣ence; that my griefe prooue not in∣curable. For I forget not, how hee that loueth, liueth in paine. I liue by faithRom. 1, 17; I beleeue the ho∣lie Scriptures; I giue credit to the words of comfort. And although I endure affliction: yet I doubt not, neither in deede ought I to doubt, but that God (when it pleaseth him) can send mee ease. For true, and to be credited are
those woordes which are declared. Because the verie sancts themselues haue bin exercised in manie, and proued in like thingsHebr. 11, 4 5 6, &c.. Nature continuallie dooth wish for quietnes, and seeketh to be comfor∣ted in some thing: but the spirit not∣withstanding is readie to sustaine whatsoeuer the wil of God is I should endureMar. 14, 38. If therefore I shall be lesse zelous, and lesse willing to doo good, my pu∣nishment shall be the more greuous. Though he slaie me, saith the wisemanIob. 13, 15, yet will I trust in him. If I loue virtues, patience is a great virtue: therefore let patience euer∣more bee retained. For the more praise we purchase, the more paines we take in bringing things to passe. And that our virtue maie be pro∣ued, and made the more glorious, we are commonlie exercised by con∣trarie euents. Therefore whensoeuer anie such triall shal happen, be not out of hart, neither fall downe; but reteine thou patience, and extoll the righteous∣nes of God. The Lord is not so hard and pittilesse, that he can suffer you to abide long vncomforted.
Onlie haue a care, that you nei∣ther lament immoderatlie, nor yet murmur against the righteous and iust God, because you are forsaken1. Cor. 10, verse 10, least the wicked spirit doo send vnto you more greeuous tentations of your faith, whereby being ouerfeare∣full, you shall extreemelie bee af∣flicted. Wherefore beare a little, and sup∣presse your sorowe, although the griefe both of your hart and bodie be neuer so great. Abide constant in that good pur∣pose, which at the first you intended to keepe. For it is good, especiallie at such an extremitie, to cast all confi∣dence vpon the beloued. Looke thou patientlie for God his heauenlie comfort, so shall you spee∣delie perceaue a speciall fauor, and sight of God. Lo, you haue a faithfull witnesse, saiengPsal. 40, 1, I waited patientlie for the Lord, and hee inclined vnto mee, and heard my crie. And that in your neede you maie finde the like fauor, I doo wish you both earnestlie to praie your selfe, and desire others to praie for you also, and so commit your selfe wholie
and is priuie vnto the things to come? Euen I, the Lord, which haue doon all things in measure, number, and weightWis. 11, 17. I am the creator both of heauen and earthIsai. 42, 5; the ruler of this world 1. Tim. 1, verse 17; the knower of hidden thingsReuel. 3, 15 Ecclus. 42, verse 20; the reuealer of secretsMat. 10, 26; the posses∣sor of the whole worldPsal. 50, 12, and the be∣holder of the causes of all parti∣culars. I am God, and change notMal. 3, 6, who haue continuallie with me the causes of all changes in the world. I am God the almightieGen. 35, 11 Reuel. 4, 8 Reue. 11, 17, whose power is inuincibleRom. 9, 19; I am God the most highIsai. 14, 14, whose highnes can not bee attainedPsal. 139, 7 8, &c.; I am God, the most righteousMat. 19, 17, whose beeing can not be conceauedIob. 11, 7 8, &c.. I am for my presence euerie-where Psal. 139, 7 8 9, and yet no where to be seeneIob. 23, 8 9. I am the most spirituall, and far∣thest from the senses of manIohn. 1, 18. I beare all things, yet neuer bur∣denedHebr. 1, 3, and I fill and rule each place, and yet vnstretched. I behold both things past, and things to come alike, as though theie were presentWisd. 8, 8 Ecclus, 42, 15. I surpasse all creatures both spiri∣tuall,
and corporallPsal. 35, 10. I am diuerslie to be named: yet no thought is able to conceaue mee as I am. I shewe my selfe suddenlie, and forth-with when one would little thinke, I am gone againe. I am in deede the inuisible God1. Tim. 6, verse 16, which after a thousand waies de∣clare my presence to my freends. And thus I spake vnto the louing soule: I will hide my face for a little sea∣son, I will forsake her for a while, to see if her loue be pure, and vn∣fained. It is a great matter to loue vnfai∣nedlie. For that is to loue mee nei∣ther for her owne sake, nor for anie temporall commoditie, or spirituall comfort; but to loue mee, and mee onlieMat. 4, 10, and that for mine owne sake, and that to the end, and that in hope of nothing at mine hands. It is not in euerie one thus to loue mee; but this prerogatiue of pure louing, is properlie to the perfect soule. But she that is yet vnperfect, hath great neede often to be prooued, and exercised, that she maie know both
how much she loueth mee, and how greatlie she despiseth her selfe. For you said in your hart: Trulie I doo loue (Christ,) yea, and often you repeate the same thing, I loue him in deede. But I credit not woords, or thoughts onlie. For I will make due triall of that loue. When I am present, and speake faire; when I either put, or encrease good motions in the minde; when I grante prosperitie most commonlie or pleasure, then can you saie with all deuoutnes, O my beloued, I doo loue you. And you saie well. For I am great∣lie to be loued, and you are at no time either to thinke, or speake o∣therwise than freendlie, and hono∣rablie of mee. But for prosperitie, and good turnes onlie to loue, and to commend mee, what great thing is it? Because euen sinners doo the same. For when theie haue receiued what naughtelie theie craued, theie oftentimes blesse mee for the same. But praise is not seeme∣lie in the mouth of the sinnerEcclus. 15, verse . He therefore which either for some profit, or comfort receaued, dooth loue me, dooth no more than a co∣uetous
man dooth. But exceede him, I saie, exceede him, and proceede vnto greater righteousnes. Be ashamed still to be weake and tender; learne to eate mans meate, bee not still fed with the milke of children. Attaine thou to the companie of the stout Dauids, that can hold both speare, and swoord, and shield. Take vp the crosse, and folowe meeLuk. 9, 23. Make haste to be in the number of them, which haue learned to beare diuers afflictions, and much banishment for my name sake. You are too much giuen vnto ease. I purpose to trie you, and to turne vnto the other side, that you maie knowe what you can suffer, least you seeme ouer innocent and holie in your owne conceipt. Tribulation, and anger, and mine heauie displeasure, together with sore tentations of wicked spirits, shall come vpon you. Some vniustlie shall spoile you of your goodes; others shall take no compassion vpon you; others shall defame; others shall re∣siste; others shall ouercharge; o∣thers shall carrie you perforce whe∣ther
you would not goe; some out∣wardlie, others inwardlie, shall trooble you. Some shall be aduan∣ced vnto hie degree, and honor, but you shall be left vnto reproches, and endure seruile paines. In all these, yea and in greater things you shall be prooued, whether you are a va∣liant soldior of mine, or no. I will depart, and not giue ouer, vntill I haue made sufficient triall, whether you blesse mee to my face. Now if I finde, that from the hart vnfainedlie you doo loue mee, and continuallie doo praise my name, then is it meete that from thence∣forth I call you Spouse, and that you shall haue a secret chamber with mee. But if I perceiue that you cannot Beare my correction, but will iudge my punishment to be ouer-sharp, and still bewaile mine absence, wishing for mee with hartie and earnest de∣sire, I will sende you my staffe, that you maie arise thereby, and after∣ward my selfe will come, and restore you againe vnto my woonted fauor. For it is not my will that you should vtterlie faint; because him that lo∣ueth mee, I will loue to the endeIohn. 13, 1.
And although your loue be not so perfect as could be wished; yet I will not despise you, but prouide that you maie growe on in louing. For my care is that you doo well; and therefore mistrust mee not. I knowe what you can endure, which maketh mee to temper my course, that you be not tempted a∣boue your strength, and so faint. And if I staie, in your opinion, some-what too long, looke for mee vntill the daie of my visitation. For comming I will come, and performe my promise. Bee you still in praier, still medi∣tating vpon the holie scripture, and alwaie be patient, and suffer. I am not ignorant but your griefe will be much: but so quicklie to be ouerthrowen, and to bee out of all hope of my returne, I cannot like that. Where is your faith? A great faith you had neede of especiallie on this behalfe: for although you see not mee, yet are you seene of meeEcclus. 23 verse 19, into whose hands you are to com∣mend both your selfe, and all that you haue. For although you are not priuie
to my iudgements: yet hauing a strong faith, you must of necessitie saiePsalm. 119, verse 137, Righteous art thou, ô Lord, and iust are thy iudgements. So then be of good comfort, for this affliction is not to your destru∣ction, but for the glorie of God. I denied your petition, because I would haue due proofe of your faith and loue. For all this I did that you should well vnderstand both your owne weakenes, and my goodnesPsa. 119, 67 71. I knowe what you arePsalm. 7, 9 better than your selfe dooth. Yea, I haue knowen you thoroughlie, not of late, but from euerlastingWisd. 8, 8. Wherefore acknowledge the be∣nefit which you haue by mee; be∣hold how miserable you should bee, if once I forsake you. As yet you haue not profited suf∣ficientlie in the knowledge of your selfe. And because it is verie expe∣dient that you haue that knowledge, my will was that by experience you should attaine thereunto. It is verie good for you to be for∣saken, to be troobled, to be humbled sometime, that so the better you maie euen sensiblie perceaue your
owne weakenesPsal. 119, verse 71. I knowe right well this will make you a good disciple of mine. And what, I praie you, haue you lost, if heereby you prooue more wise and watchfull? Oftentimes you are too arrogant, and forgetfull of your selfe, thinking that goodnes to be within you which is not; selfe-loue doth deceaue you, and while you thinke not of the gi∣uer, you doo abuse the gift. I made you drunke; but you forgat how the grape did growe vpon mine owne vine. Trie your selfe a little, acknowledge your strength. If that which you had came of your selfe, whie did you not holde it? But if you could not hold it, confesse that you receaued it from aboue1. Cor. 4, 7 Iam. 1, 17. And therefore ascribe all the honor to the mercie of God, and openlie confesse, how without mee you can doo nothingIoh. 15, 5. Consider both in what steede I stand you, and how able also I am to confirme you in all goodnes. Where were you before I called you, but weltering in sin and wicked∣nes? And now how would you wan∣der, if I directed you not? Yea, and
when also went it well with you, if you had not my fauor? S. And I said, At no time, sweete Lord. Thou alone, art my singular good freend, in all things, and aboue all most faithfull. L. Whie then did you purpose so wickedlie with your selfe, to go after strange louer? What misliked you in mee; was it either my maiestie, or my bewtie? S. Ah Lord, there is none compa∣rable to thee either for bewtie, or for glorie, or for riches, or for aucto∣ritie; neither in heauen nor in earth is anie like vnto thee1. King. 8, verse 23. For thou on∣lie art most hie ouer all creatures. The heauens are thinePsal. 89, 11, the earth also is thine; thou hast laide the foundation of the world, and all that therein is. Much it is that thou hast imparted vpon thy creatures, by which, thy bewtie, wisedome, and goodnes doth appeereRom. 1, 20: but yet in comparison of thy blessed, and glorious presence, it is nothing. So that by experience I haue learned now, that I cannot lack thy companie one houre to∣gether, but with much griefe to my soule.
L. Returne therefore vnto mee; thou hast hetherto wandered enough about. Let not hence-forth to be more staied, and milde, and faithfull, yea and to trust in mee, not onlie in the daie of my gratious visitation, but much more in the night of tenta∣tion. I haue let you slip, that beeing wearied, you might returne vnto mee the more speedelie, and beeing frustrate of outward comfort, at length vnderstand how much you are bound vnto mee, that so often haue called vnto you. And therefore liften now at the last, for it is not without cause that sometime you are forsaken; that you are cold sometime in zeale; that it irketh you; that you are ouer-wea∣ried with tentations; that on all sides you are afflicted; that you can neither finde anie counsaile, nor feele comfort, but are enforced to endure anguish and miserie at all times, and in all places. I am absent, to the end you may knowe how needfull it is that I bee present with you, not onlie in one matter, or in a speciall cause, but in
euerie action, in all places and times, so well earlie as late, wheresoeuer you shall become, goe, or stand. For this will teach you to walke warelie with your freend; to absteine from vanities; and to take heede of offensesMich. 6, 8. I doo leaue you, that you maie well vnderstand how much you are bound to loue mee, that is, that you maie see a manner how to loue mee in deede. It is verie true you thought your selfe more stout, and happie, than in truth you were; but when I did once withdraw mine aide from you a litle, it then appeered to the world how you were verie poore, and mise∣rableReuel. 3, 17. How shall your loue be knowen, vnlesse you beare my yoake with pa∣tience? Sometime I see you to waxe slug∣gish, and therefore I doo hide my selfe for an houre, like a freend stan∣ding behinde the wallSal. S. 2, 9, that you maie be stirred vp the more zelouslie to seeke mee. I knowe for my part, and I see all thingsEcclus. 42, verse 19 20 but troublous trials (which are good for manie causes) doo make
you the more heedie and wise in all your actionsIsai. 28, 19. Moreouer, if you loue mee, you will not waxe the more sluggish in seeking mee for all this; if you like mee, you will seeke mee. What? Wot you not, how riches painfullie come by, are kept most carefullie? Who so wisheth rest, as the wearied man? Who loueth so kindlie, as hee which hath sighed most heauelie? And is not that iewell which was lost, and is found againe, much more esteemed than before it wasLuk. 15, 19? So, euen so is the ioie duble, and the mirth dubled, at the long wished presence of the beloued. And therefore it is much for your profit that I withdrawe my selfe: be∣cause I doo it, not for anie ill will to you-wards, but vpon verie good cause; so do I dallie with my freends. Let it suffice you at this time, that you haue bin in my fauor to heare so much at my mouth. Besides, when you haue neede, returne vnto mee, and feare not. For I neuer shut mine eares against that person which humblie and ear∣nestlie crieth for mine assistanceMath. 7, 7 8.
CHAP. 18. 1. The confidence of a true Christi∣an. 2. God iustifieth the vngodlie. 3. giueth whatsoeuer good is to man. 4. will haue no man to despeire, 5. but that all sinners should flie vnto his mer∣cie. MY Lord God will helpe mee, therefore shall I not be confoundedIsai. 50, 7. S. Let it grieue no bo∣die, though I loue much to speake with my Lord God, whose goodnes hath allured, and inflamed mee both to praie, and to meditate in such sort, that me thinks I should be too hard and vnkinde, if I made none answere vnto his woords. But happelie some one will saie against mee, Therefore neither doo you feare God, seeing you are a foule sinner, vnworthie euen to liue in this world. Whence is it, that you dare so pre∣sume in your hart? And, being the least, and vilest of all others, with
what face can you thrust forth your selfe so to talke with your Lord GodEcclus. 15, verse 9 Iohn. 9, 13? Whome doo you make your selfe? Oah, my louing Lord, doo thou answere on my behalfe. For the mouth of the wicked is opened vpon meePsal. 109, 2. If I would iustifie my selfe, mine owne mouth shall condemne meeIob. 9, 20. And though I were cleane, yet did not my soule knowe so much. Oah, Lord, thou knowest my fol∣lie, and my shamefastnes. Speake thou on my behalfe, and I full glad∣lie will keepe silence. L. Giue thou none heede to the woords of the wicked: but rather doo thou remember how I haue saide, I came not to call the righteous, but the sinners vnto repentanceMark. 2, 17. Am not I to doo what I willMat. 28, 17 Mark. 17, 2 Hebr. 2, 8 Who maie resist my pleasure? If I thinke it good to showe fauor to thee-ward, though little thou de∣serue the same at mine hands, who shall reprooue me thereforeRom. 8, 33 34? Hee that is without sin, let him throwe the first stone at theeIohn, 8, 7. But if theie, all the pack of them are sin∣ners, with what face can theie finde
fault with my fauor to thee-ward? You haue not chosen meeIoh. 15, 16, but my mercie did preuent you. Dareth anie yet murmure against you for comming vnto me? Comfort thy selfe, his murmure is not against thee, but flatlie against my person, because it is I that receaue1. Tim. 1, 15, and eate with sinnersMatt. 9, 11 12 13. And whie ought you not to cha∣enge mine acquaintance, the which reioice to offer rather than to with∣drawe from anie one? S. Oah gratious Lord, laie not this in to their charge, but to mee, and to my sins. I cannot denie, but deseruedlie heie conceaue ill of mee; yea I doo penlie acknowledge this withall, hat I am much more wicked than nie man dooth knowe. L. You doo well thus to humble your elfe. For in so dooing, you shall euer gaine, and more easelie obteine my auor. Notwithstanding, I will not there∣ore cast you awaie, because you are sinner, and faultie, albeit that should ake you both to thinke basee of our selfe, and alwaie to haue in mind what great sins you are polluted
withall. But that you perish not through desperation, consider howe manie righteous men I haue made of sin∣nersMark. 2, 17 Luke. 15, 1 2, &c., freendes of enimies, choo∣sing the humble, and refusing the proudeLuke 1, 51 52, &c. Luke. 18, 14 Iames. 4, 6. I haue no neede of anie gift of thinePsal. 50, 11 12: onlie this I require at your hands, namelie, that you loue mee with a pure hartMar. 12, 33, and I am satis∣fied. S. I am cleane dashed, for, alas, there is nought within mee to stir vp your loue thus to mee-ward. L. I doo neither respect, nor require the things that this world dooth of∣fer to get fauor withall; if you doo loue, and that your loue be feruent, and constant, it is all that I aske. But, I praie thee, whose are the things that doo, or maie adorne a man? Are not all things mine, what∣soeuer doo glitter either in the bodie, or mindeIam. 1, 17 1. Cor. 4, 7▪? As for that of the world, and which set out the bodie, theie ought litle to trooble your minde. But the things which belong to the beutifieng of virtue, it standeth you vpon to seeke, that you maie please the Lord in the
light of the liuing. Howbeit, you haue well doon in humbling, and accusing your selfe so well outwardlie as inwardlie before the face of my maiestie, by confessing vnfainedlie your great weakenes, and wickednes, and by fetching deep sighes, for that you are verie vnwor∣thie to chalenge the fauor of my fa∣miliaritie euen but one houre, bee∣ing, as I am a glasse pure without spotWisd. 7, 26 and you are a great sinner, and vncleane euen from your infancieGene. 8, 21. And therefore be euer mindfull both of your fraile condition, and of my glorious maiestie, and so with humble reuerence approch boldlie into my presence. For I am hee that putteth awaie thine iniquities, and will not remem∣ber thy sinsIsai. 43, 25; it is I that iustifie the vngodlieRom. 4, 5, and this I doo for mine holie name sake; yea and I am still readie to minister greater gifts of mercie vnto thee. Because I doo euer choose to showe fauor rather than displeasure, as one who had rather spare than punish. Yea, all this seemeth but little in mine eies, neither am I so content with the first grace that I will not add
a second, or a third rather, yea, in verie deede, as I can set none ende to my merciesPsa. 145, 9: so neither can the number of my gifts and benefits bee recitedPsa. 68, 19. Last of all, after that I for my part haue pardoned sins, and men for their partes by their goodnes haue testified to the world their vnfained repentance, then doo I restore for the most part the comfort of mine healthfull countenance, by powring in most plentifull manner the grace of mine holie Spirit. And although a sinner doo abide still in the flesh: yet doo I receaue him into my familiaritie, so that he is not to feare the vtter confusion for sins committed: but rather to thanke and praise God, that old things bee passed awaie, and that all things are become newe2. Cor. 5, 17. So gratious, and mercifull am I, that alwaies I am more readie to for∣giue, than thou art to beg forgiuenes at mine hands; more readie to giue, than thou art to aske. Therefore whie feare you? What dismaieth you to approch vnto the side of such fauor? And whie doo you estrange your selfe from so greate
kindenes offered vnto you so franck∣lie of mine owne accord? Doubtlesse, though you did cer∣tainlie vnderstand that I were pur∣posed to giue you the deniall: yet ought you not to desist from praier, nor yet to be out of all hope of being heard; but so much the more ear∣nestlie to be instant in crieng, vntill you were heard. For my mercies are infinite, and what I denie at one time, maie bee granted fauorablie at another. How knowe you whether I will turne my face vnto you, and grant you the desire of your hart? And what saith the Prophet con∣cerning mee? Approch vnto him, and be illightened, so shall not your faces be confounded. Wherefore accuse your slowe com∣ming vnto mee rather than your of∣ten approching; and rather your fearefull shamefastnes than your prompt presuming of forgiuenes. To hope well of my goodnes, is a verie token of true humilitie, and of a great faith. This doo I speake, that you maie not offend; and that when you doo offend, you despeire not, but rise
againe with speede. For yet you haue hope, and an aduocate with the Fa∣ther1. Iohn. 2, 1. What? Looke you to be all woor∣thie before you make accesse vnto mee? And of your selfe when will you be so? If onlie such as are good and wor∣thie, and great, and perfect, should approch vnto mee, to whome should sinners and publicans approch? So then, what saith the Gospell? There resorted vnto him publicans, and sinners to heare himLuke. 15, 1. Therefore let the vnwoorthie ap∣proch, that theie maie become woor∣thie; let the wicked approch, that theie maie be made good; let the weake and vnperfect approch, that theie maie prooue strong and per∣fect; yet let all and euerie one ap∣proch, that theie maie receaue from the abundant streames of the well of lifeIoh. 4, 14. I am the well of life, that can not be drawen drie. He which is a thirst, let him come vnto me, and drinkeIohn. 7, 37. And he which hath nothing, let him come and buie without siluer, and without monieIsai. 55; 1. Hee that is sick, let him come to be healedMath. 9, 12. Hee that is neither hot nor
cold, let him come to be inflamedMar. 9, 24. Hee that is fearefull, let him come to be encouraged; hee that is sorow∣full, let him come to be comforted. Hee that is withered, let him come to be fatted; hee that is wearied with cares, let him come to be refreshed with ioie. Lo, my delite is to be with the chil∣dren of menRom. 8, 31. Hee that desireth wisedome, let him come vnto my lessonsPsal. 119, 9 24. Hee that seeketh riches, let him come to receaue those which are e∣ternall, and vncorruptibleMath. 6, 19 20. Hee that hunteth for honor, let him come to get an euerlasting name in the inheritance of heauen; hee that wisheth for felicitie, let him come, and hee shall taste the soue∣raigne, eternall, and infinite happi∣nes1. Cor. 2, 9. I, euen I it is which giue all tem∣porall good thingsIam. 1, 17, yea and besides that, I giue eternall riches in the heauensRom. 6, 23. And what I promise I will performe, at such time as my commandements are dulie obserued. And hee then shall be crowned glo∣riouslie in heauen, that hath fough∣ten couragiouslie in this world2. Tim. 2, verse 11 12.
CHAP. 19. 1. The desire of a Christian Soule is neuer satisfied, till God bee enioied. 2. No comfort anie whit com∣parable to the spirituall ioie. LEt the meditation of mine hart bee accep∣table in thy sightPsal. 19, 14. What can bee more comfortable: What more ioiefull to the faithfull Soule, than still deuoutlie to meditate vpon her Lord God; that whome she can∣not as yet behold in a cleere, and blessed sight, at the least she maie, as it were, make him present by earnest calling him into minde? Therefore let her behold him as in a glasse darkelie1. Cor. 13, 12, whome she is not to see face vnto face. And albe she maie not haue a full sight of him in his maiestie: yet let her search for him by types in the Scriptures. Oah that the care to seeke the face of the Lord did neuer waxe cold within me, but dailie more and more encreased!
Howbeit, the soule that loueth God, hath a wonderfull desire to enioie the sight of God. For to see him is happines in deed, and the absolute felicitieReue. 22, 4. Wherefore she desireth this bles∣sednes, that, her whole appetite ha∣uing attained her ende, she maie be satisfied, and at quiet, for nothing in the world is able to content herEccles. 1, 8. For long experience hath taught her, that the more she estraieth from celestiall happines, the more vnhap∣pie and vnquiet she is, in asmuch as in this world nothing is permanent, or durable1. Cor. 7, 3 1 Iohn. 2, 15 16 17, that maie assuage the heate of her affection. So then let her make returne vnto him that made herGen. 1, 26 27 Wisd. 2, 23, and let her de∣sire to be blessed of him, who at the firste created her. For doubtlesse, he that made the soule, must satisfice the soule with good thingsPsal. 103, 5. Because, such a de∣sire hath he instilled into her, that hee beeing gon, nothing will con∣tent her; nor anie ioie comfort her greatlie. And therefore, soule of mine, stand not heere still, for this is no place of rest for thee: but mount aloft, as∣cende
vnto him that made thee. For he hath now sent his messengers, and biddeth thee to ascend. So manie desires of eternall life as he inspireth, so manie messengers he dooth sende. Which beeing entertai∣ned, prepare thy selfe to the iornie. Then goest thou on, when thou desirest to see him; when thou labo∣rest to please him; when thou re∣nouncest this world; when thou doost, whatsoeuer thou doost, euen of pure loue to him-ward. For had he not first sought thee, and powred holie cogitations into thy brest, thou couldest neuer seeke himIohn. 6, 44. For that soule dooth languish not for loue, but through wearines, which is not inlightened with the beames of the eternall SonneIohn. 1, 5. But, if through the sweete blastes of the Southren winde her frosen coldnes, and sorowe be once resol∣ued, then by reason of the light in∣spired, and incomprehensible diui∣nitie, she beginneth to sweat through the hotnes of loue. Oah infinite heate of the true Sonne, what boilings doost thou cause then within the hart of the
louer? Thou dissoluest the darkenes of a sorowfull minde, and bringest the laborsome toile vnto nothing. The long time and daies of pouertie thou doost comfort and that abun∣dantlie, with one simple beame of thy glorious light. O salue of the sorowfullMatt. 9, 12! ô shi∣ning light of such as wander and seeke! Shine thou continuallie vpon me; prepare thou a mansion place within me, euen till thine euerlasting light doo appeere. Oah how sweete, and how comfor∣table will thy presence bee, seeing euen of a little remembrance, so vn∣speakeable ioie dooth arise! Howe gladlie can I turne vnto thee; how frankelie doo I renounce euen this world, that I maie be com∣forted with thine heauenlie fauor! For it will be none hard matter for the soule which longeth for the sight of thy countenance, to bereaue her selfe of all outward pleasure, when she shall either feele nowe a greater in the minde, or verie short∣lie expect with a perfect faith for the same. Furthermore, none is to be so foo∣lish
as to thinke, that thou wilt leaue the deuout soule anie long while vn∣comforted; or that the gifts of thy fauor which she is to receaue for all her conquests ouer nature, shall be small; for no earthlie comfort, what∣soeuer it bee, or whence soeuer it a∣rise, is anie whit comparable either in the qualitie, or quantitie of sweet∣nes to the heauenlie ioie. And therefore labor thou, ô faith∣full soule, to showe thy selfe such to∣ward thine heauenlie spouse Christ, that hee maie continuallie be grati∣ous and fauorable vnto thee; for through him and in him you shall in most abundant manner finde that, which exceedinglie shall minister comfort vnto you in all extremities. The oftener you haue accesse vn∣to him, and the nigher you doo ap∣proch vnto his side, the sweeter hee will appeere, and the more amiable in your eies. But if you withdrawe your selfe, then the losse wil be your owne; and he abiding in his beautie, shall feele neither griefe nor trooble. You stand in neede of his, but he of no mans goodnes. So that you maie become blessed
through him, but so cannot hee by your proceeding. Hee alone sufficeth himselfe; hee alone can neither bee augmented, nor diminished. Through his goodnes all things are, whatsoeuer bee, whether theie haue life, sense, or vnderstandingAct. 17, 28. And therefore iust it is that all creatures euerlastinglie should blesse himPsa. 150, 6. Oah, how gladlie would I dis∣course and speake of him vnto thee, if I were able sufficientlie so to doo! But what? He neither is, nor maie be vttered. Againe, as he cannot be vttered by meanes, so can he not be conceaued in minde. Which being so, thinke notwith∣standing of thy Creator so well as man maie, taking the remembrance of his abundant sweetnes for a com∣fort, vntill such time as hee re∣uealeth the sight of his owne countenance vnto thee in the heauensReue. 22, 4.
CHAP. 20. 1. A complaint of the Soule for the want of her blessed state. 2. What weeping pleaseth God. 3. Who trulie blessed. 4. A descrip∣tion of God. I Said in mine hart I am cast out of thie sightPsal. 31, 22. Mine hart is woun∣ded within me, throgh the long differring of thy glorie. I will speake therefore, and reason with my grieued Soule. The great zeale of loue compelleth mee to speake, and suffereth nothing to be concealed from thee. What then shall I saie? Lo my God, in peace is my most bitter bit∣ternes. Hee that is ignorant, wotteth not the meaning heereof. But it is not so with mee. I knowe, and I vnderstand it, and therefore I am not ashamed to sing with the Prophet. I speake to thee my LordPsal. 38, 15, who knowest all thingsReue. 3, 15 Ecclus. 42, verse 20; and giuest both knowledge and vnderstanding ac∣cording to thy good pleasure, that
neither I maie glorie more than is meete I should, nor the foole ad∣uance mee, when in truth I am simple. I maie confesse then what I haue receaued from thee. And yet what neede haue I to tell you thereof, when as you are neither ignorant, nor can take anie pleasure of the same. Againe, what comfort can come vnto you, which art the comfort of the comfortlesse? So that the profit is mine, which doo lack the consolation of woords, thereby to stir vp mine affection to thee-ward, and to finde some ease for my desolate soule. For, seeing I maie not behold thy presence, I will bewaile thine ab∣sence; because euen this is a token of loue, and a great pleasure to the louing soule. Now then the sense of this sen∣tence appeareth. Because it is right∣lie said of the louing soule, how, the more feruentlie she loueth, and the more earnestlie she longeth after eternall things, the more trulie she feeleth the power thereof working within her.
Theie are not cold woords, but to the vnkinde soule; neither deafe or∣gans, but to the hardened hart. The louing and zelous soule kno∣weth this well; and is so often infla∣med in hart, as she is pricked with the desire of eternall peace. And therefore shee speaketh to thee her Lord God, not to men, of whome she would not be knowen. And although sometime she tal∣keth with men: yet that which theie heare is to the outward sense. But whatsoeuer she saith to thee, it is to the verie soule, and rather by sighing of the hart, than by sounding words. Lo (saith she) in peace is my most bitter bitternes. As if she said; Af∣ter that of thy goodnes I returned vnto the peace of minde, the transi∣torie state of the world began to be still more grieuous vnto mee. For I see in this peace, how far I am sepa∣rated from the soueraigne peace. And in deede beeing first busied with earthlie desires, and mooued with diuers passions, I was greatlie hindered from spirituall cogitati∣ons, and so from heauenlie contem∣plation, after which I should haue much longed: but that could I least
of all doo, because through sloth∣fulnes I did forgo all sense of inward sorowe. But nowe seeing the troobles of idle thoughts are taken awaie, I doo somewhat rest in the peace of con∣science, and am drawen vnto hea∣uenlie matters with mine whole hart, and I do more lament, that I do not enioie the good things of God, than erst I did moorne being vexed with the troobles of this world. So that it is bitternes to my soule euen to liue in this world; and to go vnder the heauie burden of sin. But it is bitterest of all, when somuch as I maie, all mine affections being gathered together, I doo enioie now the good things of the hart, and bend my selfe, euen with hartie zeale to∣ward the armes of eternall peace, and yet maie not attaine thereun∣to, because of the bonds of my mor∣tall state. And this makes mee euen with griefe of hart to crie vnto thee, and to saie: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the bodie of this deathRom. 7, 24? There is none so greuous a burden vnto me, as stil to wander frō thee by
liuing in the world; for laboring in loue, I wish for no comfort beside thee. For by good experience I haue long sithence learned, that my soule can neither be satisfied with the good things of this worldEcclus. 1, 8, nor yet be blessed vntill she be ioined vnto thee in the celestiall habitation. For as exceedinglie she doth loue, burne, and vse contemplation while she is in the bodie: so will her desire be insatiable vntill the bodie be laide off. And therefore her ende must be made perfect by attaining the soue∣reigne felicitie, and the light of thy countenanceReuel. 22, 4. O King of heauen1. Tim. 6, 16 Reuel. 1, 5 Reuel. 17, 14, so amiable in all respects; ô my all louelie belo∣ued, euen wholie to be desired, when wilt thou fill mee with the light of thy countenancePsal. 16, 11; when wilt thou satisfie my longing with the well of life? My soule hath much thirsted after theePsal. 42, 2; and greatlie will be troobled vntill she attaine thee. Liuing in the world, and not see∣ing thee, I can take no comfort of whatsoeuer I beholde; so greatelie
dooth zeale waxe hot, that not once, but often I breake into these words: When shall I come, and appeere before the face of my GodPsal. 42, 2? And this loue of mine cesseth not, but encreaseth more and more, in such sort, that I am driuen euen to weepe night and daie, while conti∣nuallie I doo thinke with my selfe, Where is now my God? For it is a comfort to the louing soule to weepe for thy sake, while she must want her desire; and still ex∣pect thy comming. And these teares doo more feede and refresh the louing soule, than if she enioied all the things of this world. For did she loue themMath. 6, 24, she would not weepe for thee. Oah how blessed, and pleasing to thee is the sheading of such teares! For theie doo both kill the desires of secular and temporall ioies; and also theie obteine the celestiall con∣solation. And therefore none doo shed such holie teares, but theie which are both singularlie in loue, and verie notablie religious. Far of another kinde be the teares of such as miserablie be troobled in
this world. For one man weepeth because he is sick; another for that he is op∣pressed; another because he is iniu∣red; another because his minde is contraried: but it is thou, religi∣ous soule onlie which powrest forth teares euen of pure loue to thy Sa∣uior-ward; as for temporall damage, and worldlie causes, theie trooble thee not, for thou submittest thy selfe to the righteous iudgement of GodPsal. 119, verse 137, and art thankefull. And for so dooing, let no worldlie creature iudge thee either foolish, or impatient: because thy teares doo not greeue, but comfort; theie doo not blur the face, but wash it; theie hurt not the eies, but theie purifie the sight of the minde. Howbeit, let others conceaue heereof as theie will, I cannot but thinke otherwise than well of you; for I doo wish to drinke deep of such teares. S. If you wish to weepe with mee, then maie you bee comforted with mee. Oah that your soule were as I am, you could neuer forget what I doo feele!
I knowe whome I credit; and sure I am it is a more easie thing to denie that there is anie heauen and earth, than that there is a God. And I knowe also hee is my full happines; and that I shall neuer bee blessed vntill I haue an absolute sight of his maiestieReue. 22, 4. Whose sight, because it is not yet granted me, nor alwaies assured me, doth make me to lamēt, inasmuch as I am depriued of happines, wrapped in the darknes of this life, and down∣peised with the waight of mine owne infirmitieWisd. 9, 15, that I am not of power to suffer that wonderfull light, and that whatsoeuer I do think cōcerning the glorie of heauen, is so litle, and ouer∣shadowed as it were with a cloude. Hence it is that I dooble my com∣plaint in steede of a song; and while theie still saie vnto mee, Where is thy GodPsal. 42, 10? my spirit is the more troobled. For thus I thinke then, Where is my felicitie? where is the full ioie of mine hart? where is my true peace and reste? Where be all the good things that are vnspeakeable, but onlie in my God? And when shall I enioie them, vnlesse I be ioined vnto him, hauing nothing betweene?
Yea, when shall I there bee? I knowe not, but I beleeue well; I doo hope well, but yet I haue not. Whie then, where is my God, whome I loue so, and yet I see him not? Through whose loue I am so often wounded; through whose ab∣sence I am so grieued; through whose gratious visitation so refre∣shed sometime? Where is my God, whome euen once to see, is to knowe all things? Where is my God, in whome both mine hart, and my flesh doo so ear∣nestlie desire to reioice? Where is my God, for whose loue I suffer such paine and sorowe? His verie remembrance is sweete, but his presence is more louelie, and expel∣leth all sadnes fro mine hart. Where is mine hope, and my crowne? Is it not in thee my God, and in thy blessed countenance1. Cor. 13, verse 12. Oah, showe mee once thy glorie, and thy face, so will I cesse to com∣plaine! If I contende a little with thee, ô blame mee not; extreeme zeale of good will hath manie woonderfull deuises. I am driuen to expect, and moued
still to long; and so this ioiefull combat dooth continue. CHAP. 21. 1. The delaieng of the happie is pa∣tientlie to be borne. 2. The felicitie of the life to come. 3. with a Praier for the same. O Lord, I haue loued the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine honor dwel∣lethPsal. 26, 8. How gladlie I would be with thee, thou knowest full well ô my God; and how entirelie I desire the same, I am not able sufficientlie to ex∣presse. I wish it, not onlie when I am euill at ease, but also what prosperitie soeuer I enioie, my desire is to bee with thee. But how shall my longing be sa∣tisfied? Heere it greeueth mee to conti∣nuePhil. 1, 23, and yet of necessitie I must, but my desire is to be with thee, and I maie not yet. And therefore I see no remedie,
but that I am with patience to en∣dure this delaie, and to refer my wi∣shing to thine holie will. For what? Is it meete I should mur∣mur, when it must be so? God forbid. Againe, I haue the examples of manie of Gods children, which haue vsed long patience in this lifeHebr 11, 13 14, &c., and yet their harts were in heauenColos. 3, 1 2. Therefore if thy will be to prolong my pilgrimage, I am willing to abide, and obeie your pleasure. Howbeit, that with lesse griefe I may beare my longing to be with thee, I will till that time still meditate with my selfe of that celestiall habitation. Yet I presume not to pierce into the least of those ioies which thou hast prepared for such as loue thee1. Cor. 2, 9: but of this and that I will meditate, to the end that mine affection being pressed downe and infected often∣times, it maie be stirred vp, and lifted into the hope of eternall blisse. O that that daie had once shined, whether then had the ioies of hea∣uen rauished mee! How merrie at the hart should I be then, and how happie should I thinke my selfe! How happie should I then bee,
enioieng a continuall peaceReue. 21, 4! From thencefoorth should I make none enquirie for anie thing, seeing no secret could be hid. But my life is spent in darkenes, and therefore no maruell, though my sight doo dazel betweene the cloudes of glorie. Notwithstanding I will lift vp mine eies, and though a far off, behold and salute that holie citie Ierusalem builded in the heauen euen of liuelie stonesReue. 21, 10 11, &c., namelie of holie angels and men, replenished continuallie with praise, & mirth, and magnifieng the Lord their God for euer and euer. Now therefore my soule, take vnto thee the wings of desire, and flie vp∣ward, flie I saie from all bodelie sen∣ses, ascend from the visible forme of this world, vnto the holie house of God, euen vnto the newe Ierusalem, builded substantiallie in aie lasting peace, crowned with glorie and ho∣nor, and blessed with the abundance of all good things. Lo, wonderfull and vnspeakeable are the things (of heauen) which no man either can, or maie vtter1. Cor. 2, . No sense is able to conceaue, nei∣ther can the vnderstanding of man
attaine to knowe, howe God is in his sanctes glorious, and woonderfull in his maiestie. Mount thou in cogitation euen vnto the hiest things, stretch thy de∣sire into the euerlasting eternitie, and saie with the ProphetPsal. 87, 3; Glori∣ous things are spoken of thee, ô citie of God. There whatsoeuer can be wished of man, is hadReuel. 21, 4; and what is once got, is kept without careReue. 7, 17. God there is beheld face to face cleerelie1. Cor. 13, 12, trulie, continuallie, and eternallie. There the blessed and all glorious Trinitie, in one vnseparable vnitie, which of all the blessed citizens of heauen is woorshipped, praised, and magnifiedReue 7, 12, is perfectlie knowen. There is mine onlie and right sin∣gularlie beloued freendSal. S. 1, 1 2, &c., which is more pretious (to mee) than all ri∣chesMat. 10, 37 38, and the treasure aboue all to bee desired,Math. 6, 19 20 21 euen my Lord Iesus ChristRom. 1, 3 7, &c., the immortall spouse of the ChurchEph. 5, 25 26, &c Reuel. 21, , in whome are hidMath. 11, 25 (but yet reuealed to the sanctes) from the beginning of the world, the whole treasure of wisedome and know∣ledgeColos. 2, 3.
O how iocund are the sanctes now before the face of the most holie, who is the cause and spring of their blessednes! For there hee speaketh vnto them not in parables, but plainlie of the FatherIoh. 16, 25. Hee is their booke, euen the woord which in the beginning was with GodIohn. 1, , teaching all things, and per∣forming all things, so that theie want nothing in glorie. O blessed, and euerlasting glorie, not of small remembrance, but all happie in God his presence! There is also the most glorious Mother of our Sauior, and constant virgine Mae, bewtieng the whole celestiall courte with her comlines and bewtie, compassed and accom∣panied with troupes of virgins, as with sweete roases, and lilies of the valies. There be the angels and archan∣gels placed in order, who moste cheerefullie sound forth the praises of God. There bee the Patriarches, and Prophets, euen theie which beeing filled long ago with the holie Ghost, did foretell of Christ his commingGen. 49, verse 10 Num. 24, 17 Dan. 9, 24 25 Isai. 7, 14 Iere. 31, 22 Psal. 132, 11 Hag. 2, 8 10 Mala. 3, 1,
whome nowe theie both knowe, and euermore confesse to be their Lord and Sauior, the King of kingsReu. 17, 14 Reuel. 19, 16, and perfect God. There theie behold eie to eie their Redeemer, whome long theie looked for, and for whose comming theie longed. There be the Lordes Apostles, and Disciples, those most reuerend and renowmed Fathers, which were filled with holines and grace, and laide a strong foundacion of the Ca∣tholique faith. There especiallie shineth that re∣uerend man Iohn, which baptized our Sauior ChristMath. 3, 13 14. &c. Marke 1, 9 10 Luke. 3, 21, and was a spe∣ciall freendIohn. 20, 2 Iohn. 21, 7 20 of my Spouse. There is Peter, and Paule, and Andrewe, and Philip, and Thomas, and Iames, and Iohn, and all the other Apostles and Euangelistes, pillers of the Church. To keepe the faith, and to follow the example of these men, is the rea∣die waie vnto euerlasting life. Moreouer, there be the valiant Martyrs enriched with their proper blood, and euerlastinglie blessed with Christ, whose bodies though theie were most cruellie flean: yet
could not their soules by anie tor∣ments be seuered from Christ. Also, there be the noble Confes∣sors, which contemned this present life, that theie might be in heauen. There be the great and glorious Doctors that were so carried aloft in contemplation, of which many haue left a liuelie image of holines in their wrightings. There be yong men and maidens, old men and children praising the name of the Lord continuallie, and ascribing the goodnes which theie had at anie time vnto his mercie. There theie are I saie, alwaie grate∣full, alwaie zelous, alwaie iocund, alwaie religious, neuer loathing, but euer louing the Lord. Oah, howe glorious is this king∣dome, where all the Sanctes doo raigne with Christ, araied with the firste roabeReue. 6, 11 Reuel. 7, 13, and be without care of the other! There theie folowe the Lambe wheresoeuer hee goethReu. 14, , for theie cannot part; but reioicing euerla∣stinglie, shall ioie in the Lord. O my Soule, muse thou vpon these things, and cast thy thoughts vpon heauenlie matters.
That place in deede is an holie place, and God is in the same. There is surpassing ioie and peaceReuel 21, 4; good things abound, and euils there be none. Oah, if thou couldest euen a little comprehend the vnspeakeable ioies of God his sanctes, then should you finde some comfort! For in mee you shall be sure to finde nothing but labor and sorowe, and tentations, with troobles of this world. Oah that the giuer of supernall lightIam. 1, 17 would vouchsafe to enspire some porcion of these ioies into you, and not send you back vnto my newe withering foode, but according to the riches of his superabundant mer∣cie, purifie and rid you of all materi∣all formes, and bring you yea by force into the deepe of his eternall brightnes! Would to God, you could carrie back from that heauenlie sanctuarie, a forme and example of true holi∣nes, which you might imitate. For better, and more true are the examples of celestiall, and strong things, than theie which are confir∣med by earthlie demonstrations.
Therefore grante Lord, that I maie sauor and knowe what the perfect felicitie of sanctes is, not so much by written bookes thereof, as by the ho∣lie Ghost, which teacheth of celesti∣all secrets in such sort, as no sense of man is able to reach thereunto. Grante also that from henceforth I maie lift vp my minde more fer∣uentlie vnto heauenlie things; and amiddes my grieuous troobles, va∣liantlie beare the garland of pati∣ence, till the debt of flesh being paid, I maie attaine through thy mercie vnto this fe∣licitie that I so desire.
CHAP. 22. 1. A godlie meditation, concerning the accesse vnto the holie of holies, euen Iesus Christ, the king of angels. 2. godlie petitions for the forgiuenes of sins. THou art my King, ô GodPsal. 44, 4. Arise now my soule, come, and enter into the wonderfull taber∣nacle euen into the house of God. For it is meete that omitting other things, thou with all reuerence doo proceede to salute our Lord Iesus ChristRom. 1, 3 7, &c., thy SauiorMat. 1, 21, and redee∣merGal. 3, 13, which is the head of all prin∣cipalitie and powerReu. 17, 14; the ioie and crowne of all sanctes; the assured trust and certaine hope of all the faithfullCol. 1, 27. He it is which hath madePsal. 100, 3 Psal. 119, 73, and redeemed thee1. Pet. 1, 18 19; he it is which hath for thy sake both laboredIsai. 53, 3 4, &c., stri∣ued1. Cor. 15, verse 55 56, &c., and ouercomeMatt. 4, 10 11 Iohn. 16, 33. He is thine aduocate1. Ioh. 2, 1 2, and the propitiation for thy sins. He is thy comforter, thy prouider, and thy LordReu. 19, 16.
He is thine onlie & singular freend that feedeth among the liliesSal. S. 2, 16, and loueth to reste him vpon thy breastesSal. S. 1, 12. Who euer hath doon the like for thee? who euer loued you so entirely? Come thou vnto him; offer your selfe to him; open your whole heart, and vnfold euen your hidden secrets vnto him. For no man will better either de∣clare, or else reueale how you should behaue your selfe in this world, in the which, things fall out so strangelie. Let your wishes and praiers be di∣rected vnto him; and in him let all your counsailes abide. Vaine is the hope of manPsal. 62, 9; but hee is the vpholder of peace. Through him wee haue open ac∣cesse vnto the FatherEphes. 2, 18; and from him wee receaue all goodnes, and virtue1. Cor. 1, 30 31. Whether you mourne, or whether you reioice, make continuall re∣course vnto him. Hee is the glasse of life; the rule of righteousnes; the light of the soule; the loue of shamefastnes; and the ioie of a good conscience. If thou louest him, it will be none
hard matter for thee to despise the vane pleasures of this world; if thou louest him, all soure things will seeme sweete; all heauie things will seeme light; and that which other∣wise you should mislike, you will like right well for his sakeRom. 8, 35. To be briefe, of him, and through him, and for him, are all thingsRom. 11, 36. The principall ende both of all our thoughts, and of all our actions, and of our speech, and of our rea∣ding, praieng, meditating, and specu∣lation, should be Iesus Christ. Through him you attaine saluati∣onGal. 3, 13, and euerlasting life. For his loue you will neither feare to dieRom. 8, 35 36, nor refuse to liuePhil. 1, 23; because you are to commit your selfe wholie to his trust, and to prefer nothing before his loue, and honor. Wherefore come neere, and giue thanks to thy Redeemer. S. O moste sweete Iesu, aboue all things to be loued, I salute thee most religiouslie, I commend thee most highlie, and I blesse thee now and euerlastinglie with all thy crea∣tures. O moste renowmed Iesu, howe can I praise thee as I ought? When
shall I thanke thee, as I am bound, in that thy mercies are so infinite to mee-ward? Againe, whatsoeuer I giue, it is thy gift, and I receaued it from thee1. Cor. 4, 7. But little, or nothing it is that I haue: and can I then sacrifice of no∣thing? Howbeit, accept I beseech thee, mine humble, base, and vile sacrifice; and let my gifts be ascribed to thy goodnes. Let the quires of heauenlie angels attending about thee, sound forth thine infinite praises on my behalfe: also let the soules of the righteous repeate the same. In the meane while what shall I doo in memorie, and praise of thy most sacred name? Much I ought to doo, and for ma∣nie things I am greatlie bound; yet am I not able to performe the least. And therefore I will reade of thee, ô my sweete Sauior, I will write of thee; I will sing of thee; I will thinke of thee, I will speake of thee, I will worke for thee, and for thee will I suffer. In thee will I reioice, thee will I
praise, thee will I magnifie, thee will I glorifie. As it is meete I will worship thee, because thou art my GodMath. 4, 10, in whom I beleeue, whome I doo loue, seeke, and haue alwaie desired. Giue mee some good signe, that mine eies maie behold thy goodlie countenance in the heauens. Humblie I doo throwe downe my selfe at thy feete in hart, earnestlie with teares desiring thy fauor, that thou wilt vouchsafe to be good vnto mee. Write my name in the booke of life; and let that neuer be out-blot∣ted, which thine holie hand hath written. I, wretch that I am, and far infe∣rior to anie of thy sanctes, yet tru∣sting boldlie vpon the more than excellent prerogatiue of thy mer∣cies, beseech thee, that at the least∣wise I maie be compted among the basest and woorst of thine elect. I confesse, my life and conuersati∣on is not such, that I dare presume anie thing of my selfe; and therefore all mine hope and comfort is, and resteth in the price of thy pretious blood, wherein I doo wholie repose
my selfe, and deeme it requisite that I should doo so, together with all which I haue doon, offended, deser∣ued, and omitted. And therefore behold, most gra∣tious Iesu, my basenes and humilitie, consider the affection of mine hart which I beare toward thee, not for my merits, but for thy mercie sake, which vouchsafest to be loued euen of the vnworthie. In respect of mine vnworthines I am greatlie ashamed to come in thy presence; but I am drawen-on and emboldened through your won∣derfull goodnes and humilitieMat. 11, 28 29, which hast in perfect good wilRom. 5, 7 yeel∣ded not onlie to become manIohn. 1, 14, but also to sufferIsai. 53, 3 4, &c., die, and to be buried for my sake: and therefore vnto thee doo I make recourse, for I finde no goodnes in my selfe. Supplie that for my sake, which of my selfe I cannot performe. Thou hast giuen mee a desirePhil. 1, 13 to praie vnto thee, to praise, & to blesse thee: because thou art mine hope, and my portiō in the land of the liuingPsal. 143, 5. Al my desire is to be with thee in the kingdom of heauen; but inasmuch as my time is not yet come, I will waite
vntill the night approch. In the meane while, this maie bee my comfort in the place of my pil∣grimage, that I am mindfull of thy name, and of thine exceeding great loue; and that I behold thee in this life by the eies of my faith. To liue in this world, and yet to repose no trust in thee, ô Lord, were a thing intollerable to my soule. I doo not consent to reioice with the worldLuke. 6, 25; and, that I maie not abide without ioie and comfort, I haue determined to place my ioie in thee1. Cor. 1, verse 31. Much and often should I goe a∣straie, greatlie should I be tossed in cogitations, did I not reteine thee fast in my minde, and thoughts. And for somuch as I am vnable to sound the depth of thy diuinitie, I thinke it best for mee to turne vnto the deedes and saiengs of thine hu∣manitie; because, being in these co∣gitations, I swarue not altogether from thy diuinitie. Thankes bee to thee, good Iesu, sweete and louelie Iesu, for vouch∣safing to become my brother, to take my flesh and bones vpon theeIoh. 1, 14 Math. 1, 23. Thankes I saie to thee for ente∣ring
into the wombe of good Marie thy Mother, of whose maidenlie flesh thou tookest the holie members of thy bodie, which thou didest vnite to thy diuine nature. CHAP. 23. A godlie Praier; and commen∣dation of our Sauior Christ. NOtwithstanding I am wicked, and guil∣tie of manifold sins: yet haue I great hope of saluation, because of thy suffering, and merits: whereof, as I haue a good minde to consider, so graunt, ô my Lord Christ, that I maie with good leaue so doo. For who am I to approch nigh vn∣to thee, vnlesse I haue licence? I knowe mine vnwoorthines to ap∣peare in his presence, whome the ve∣rie angels doo worship with great re∣uerence, saieng: Who is this that commeth out of the wildernes of this world, so abun∣ding in pleasure?
Therefore, ô moste blessed Saui∣our, I am far vnmeete to thinke of thy glorie and honor, of thy bewtie and magnificence; because I am earth and ashesEcclus. 10, verse 9, yea more base am I then earth and ashes, because I am sinfull, and proane vnto all wickednes. But thou beeing made hier than heauen, hast the whole world vnder thy feeteMat. 28, 18 Hebr. 2, 8, and art worthie to be praised and honored for euermore. Howbeit of thine vnspeakeable goodnes, which passeth all vnder∣standing, I am drawen in affection vnto thee; because thou art the com∣fort of the comfortlesse, and vsest most willinglie to helpe most mise∣rable sinners. I acknowledge how I am not onlie destitute of all comforrt, especiallie of thy fauor; but also verie vnable to doo good vnto my selfe. But, mercifull Iesus, wouldest thou vouchsafe to consider my base∣nes, then should I both be aided, and comforted most plentifullie in this my trooble. Therefore I see well, whensoeuer I am compassed about with affliction and tentation, I am straight-waie
and without feare to flie vnto thee: for where mercie is moste readie, there grace is in greatest plentie. And when I haue a good minde to consider of thy most glorious estate, and to commend thee in moste ho∣norable manner, I must come foorth with a much purer affection, and maie not goe forwarde with-out the conduction of Gods heauenlie light. Assuredlie, he shall haue no glo∣rie, but shame, that presumeth with∣out all reuerence to approch vnto thy gate. And he which commeth thereinto, must proceede with all reuerence and humilitie, ioined with good hope, that hee maie finde grace to be admitted. Wherefore both humblie, and re∣uerendlie and deuoutlie, and boldlie I goe to thee-ward. Let the godlie louer of thy name listen then what I saie. The heauen reioiceth, the earth woondereth, when by faith mine hart saith, Christ is my Sauior. Satan flieth, hell trembleth, when my conscience crieth, Christ is my Sauior.
The world waxeth vile, and the flesh humble, when as a Christian dooth saie, Christ is my Sauior. Sorowe departeth, newe comfort approacheth, when my minde pro∣nounceth, Christ is my Sauior. Slothfulnes vanisheth, mine hart through loue fainteth, when ze∣louslie I can saie, Christ is my Sa∣uior. Zeale encreaseth, compunction ariseth, hope groweth, comforte waxeth strong, when my soule soun∣deth, Christ is my Sauior. Mine harte is iocund, mine affe∣ction becommeth sounde, when in truth I do saie, Christ is my Sauior. For such is the force of these words vttered of a faithfull soule, that no man is able to expresse the same in wordes, but still it resteth more hie and excellent, than maie be reached vnto by the wit of man. Which maketh mee once againe most humblie to bowe my knees vn∣to thee, ô blessed Sauior, and still I saie, ô Christ my Sauior. O most gratious Iesu receaue my praier, and mee with it, that I maie finde some-what that maie like thee well, and embolden mee, and kindle
my zeale, and keepe mee euermore in continuall praising of thine holie Name. Oah that for the satisfieng my desire to praise, and to praie vnto thee from the verie bottome of mine hart, both all my members were forthwith conuerted into tongues, and those tongues into firie voices, that I might finde a waie to glorifie thee, my Sauiour, world without ende! Oah that for all my sins wherewith I haue deserued thine indignacion, offended greeuouslie thy Father, and dishonored thee with all the hoste of heauen, I might once so thoroughlie bewaile, and repent, that I might heereafter take a newe trade of life to thy glorie, and the comforte of my soule! Oah that thou woldest assist mee in well doing, seeing my life fraile and I all subiect to offending! Oah pardon and forgiue all my sins either wilfullie, or negligentlie committed, all my vaine thoughtes, my vngodlie speech, my abhomi∣nable deedes! O most gratious Iesu, I saie, doo thou both defend mee from doing
anie wickednes hereafter, and for∣giue, I praie thee, all my sins fore∣past: so shall I be both the more de∣uout, the more zelous, and the more carefull in saieng, thou Christ art my Sauior both in mine hart, and with my mouth, in companie, and in my chamber, and in the garden, and in the field, and in all places where∣soeuer I shall bee. And now, what more shall I aske of thee, ô Christ my Sauior? What is better, or more profi∣table, or more necessarie especiallie for mee a great sinner, than to finde fauor in thy sight, ô Christ my Sa∣uior? And therefore it is that I haue desired, and still do craue, euen that by thine intercession and meanes I maie haue the grace of God thy Fa∣ther, who, as both thy selfe hast said, and the Apostle doth witnesse, hast all power giuen thee both in heauen and earthMat. 28, 8. There is no praier more welcome to thee, than this is, nor anie thing more necessarie for mee, than the grace and fauor of God. If I haue the grace of God, what∣soeuer else I do wante, I am rich
enough. For what is all mine endeuoring if I lck that? Againe, what can I not doo, if I be assisted and holpen thereby? I see that manie and diuers are my wicked affections: but yet against all passions the grace of God is a most effectuall medicine; and if once it come, it will mitigate them all. I doo also stand in neede of spiri∣tuall wisedome and knowledge: but the grace of God is a most excellent teacher, and instructor of heauenlie knowledge, and is able euen sudden∣lie to instruct mee in whatsoeuer things are necessarie vnto saluacion. For to require more than is ne∣cessarie, or to desire to vnderstand more than is lawfull to be knowen, is against the will of God, whose pleasure is that wee should be hum∣bled vnder his hand, and contented with his grace. Wherefore obteine this grace for mee, ô Christ, which is so noble and pretious, that in deed I ought nei∣ther to desire or craue any other thing than grace for grace.
CHAP. 24. A Praier for comfort vnto Iesus Christ. GRace is poured in∣to thy lipsPsal. 45, 2. Oah my Lord, I be∣seeche thee, at the length now vouchsafe to speake vnto mee, ô Christ. Open thy mouth in thine owne name, who art full of all spirituall gracesIohn. 1, 16. L. I am the fountaine of mercie; full of loue and sweetnes. I am the ladder for sinners; the hope and pardon of the guiltie. I am the comfort of the sorowfull, and the speciall ioie of all sanctes. Come vnto mee so manie as loue mee, and fill your selues at the breasts of my comfort; because I am good and mercifull to all which crie vnto mee. Come vnto mee both righteous and sinners, I will sue vnto the Fa∣ther for you; I will entreate him to bee good vnto you, and to fill you with the holie Ghost.
I call euerie one, I looke for all, I desire to haue all to come vnto me; I despise no sinner, but with the an∣gels in heauen I reioice exceeding∣lie ouer that sinner which repen∣tethLuk. 15, 10, and so commeth into the fa∣uor of God: for no one drop of my blood which I shed for the world, is in vane. Therefore come vnto mee, yee sonnes of men, consider and behold my zeale for you vnto God my Fa∣ther. Lo, I haue taken his wrath vpon my selfe, I haue borne his disple∣sureIsai. 53, 1 2, &c., yea, and continuallie doo I make supplication for you vnto him1. Iohn. 2, 1 2 whome you knowe right well you haue greeuouslie offended. Turne then, and approch, repent, and of my woord you shall haue pardon. For lo, I stand betweene heauen and earth, betweene God and sin∣ners; and that this world perish not, I obteine through my praiers. Wherefore, abuse not my good∣nes, and mercie; but beware of of∣fending, least when you litle thinke thereofMat. 24, 44, indignation be powred vp∣on you, and intolerable vengeanceRom. 2, 8 9.
I doo forewarne you as children, I beseech you as freends, be you per∣fect as your heauenlie Father is per∣fectMat. 5, 48. Forget not mee, who haue bin, and am, and will be mindfull of you. For I do both pittie such as are in miserie, and I do entreate for those which crie vnto mee1. Ioh. 2, 1 2. S. O gratious speech, and full of all comforte! O heauenlie voice sweetelie drop∣ping frō heauen to the comforting of sinners, & reioicing of the righteous! O celestiall musick, howe sweete∣lie doost thou resounde in a despe∣rate conscience! Whence is it that the Sauior of mankinde will thus talke with mee? Blessed art thou, ô Christe, and blessed are the wordes of thy mouth. For honie is vnder thy tongue, and the sauor of thy speech excelleth all sweetenes. My soule was mollefied, so soone as thou spakest, ô Christ. Behold, no sooner did thy voice sounde in mine eares, but my soule within did spring for ioie. For my spirit reuiued within mee; and all mine entralls were filled
with newe comforte; because good and ioiefull thinges are tolde mee this daie by you. I was dolefull, but now I am iocund because of your wordes. For your voice is sweete in mine eares. I was grieued and desolate; but now I am reuiued, and made merrie. For thou hast sent thine hande from on hie, and touched mee, whereby of weake, I am become strong. Scarse could I speake, but now I haue a good minde to sing, and to praise thee highlie. I was loth to liue, and now I am willing to die, because I haue thee, Christ, for mine aduocate, with the Father, to whose mercie I commend my selfe, euen from this time for e∣uer and euer. For since first you began to speake vnto the harte of thy desolate or∣phane, I haue bin changed into a better state, and greatlie comforted in my minde. I was almost at the doore of despe∣ration, but thy comfort came, and lif∣ted mee vp with these woordes: L. What is the matter Sonne? and who are they which would hurt thee? Feare not, I will see vnto thee,
my sonne. I doo liue with God my FatherReuel. 1, 4, and I sit at his right hand, beeing a faithfull hie Priest, and an interces∣sor for thy sinns1. Iohn. 2, 1 2. In mee thou shouldest repose thy trust, because I doo both giue lifeIoh. 11, 25, and destroie death1. Cor. 15, verse 55. I was incarnate of a virgine in timeMath. 1, 18 19, &c., but of my Father begotten before all timesPsal. 2, 7 Hebr. 1, 5, and when the ful∣nes of time came, I suffered for mans saluationGal. 4, 4 5. Lo, I am the hope and comfort of the godlie, and by mee is faith and victorie attained1. Cor. 15, verse 57. And therefore let neither mee, nor these things be out of thy minde, and thou wilt not feare anie dartes of Satan. S. Oah happie houre! ô blessed state, that my Lord and Sauior will vouch∣safe to comfort on this wise my trub∣led hart! Oah that I might still heare thy so comfortable words, for greatlie doo theie inflame, and moue mee, and touch mee euen at the verie harte! O blessed Christ, thou neuer ces∣sest to send forth the sweete milke of
heauenlie consolation! For by reason of the abundance of thy grace, thou canst not denie fa∣uor to such as craue the same at thine hands; yet often thou showest much mercie euen to the verie sinnerMath. 5, 45. O Christ, thou excellest in pitti∣fulnes, in mercie, and in louing! O Sauior, to whome none is to be compared, thou art aboue all to be loued, and to be worshipped. O Sonne of God, by whome wee are also the sonnes of GodGal. 4, 6 7, and of whome we are called ChristiansAct. 11, 26, thou art of all good men to be serued most religiouslie, and aboue allMat. 4, 10. O freend of all freends1. Ioh. 3, 16, King of heauen and earthReuel. 1, 5 6, Lord of angelsHebr. 1, 6 7, &c. Mark. 1, 13, conqueror of diuelsMath. 4, 10 11 Mark. 5, 7 8 9, &c., drawe mee after thee, least I fall, and so rest vn∣der the heauie burden of sin. Poure out thy grace, send mee thy comfortable dewe from aboue, that trulie I maie perceaue, how thou art the procurer, and the open fountance of all mercie1. Pet. 3, 24 25. L. I am in deede the spring of holie loue, and of chaste and religious feare, of godlie conference, and of sweete consolation. Therefore when you doo heare
my name, reioice with your whole hart, and magnifie the goodnes of your God. In honoring mee, you honor the Father which is God as I amIohn. 1 1 2, &c.. For I am Iesus the Sonne of GodMath. 1, 18 20, and this name shal I haue while the world endureth1. Cor. 15, verse 28. But what is Iesus? euen the Sonne of the liuing GodMath. 16, verse 16; the Sauior of the worldMath. 1. 21 1. Pet. 1, 18 19; the King of heauen and earthReu 17, 14 Reuel. 19, 16; the Lord of AngelsDan. 7, 10 Hebr. 1, 6 7, &c.; the redeemer of the faithfullGal. 3, 13; and the iudge of quick and deadAct. 10, 42. And what is Iesus? the hope of the godlie; the comfort of the desolae; the peace of the meeke; the riches of the poore; the glorie of the humble; the strength of the weake; the waie of such as wander, the light of such as see not, the staff of such as walke not; the oile of such as feele not, the staie of the oppressed, the helpe of the troobled, and the singular refuge of all good menMat. 11, 28. Blesse the Sonne with the Father, and so God will blesse you. Giue honor also and glorie to the Father, whensoeuer you praise mee. His glorie, is my ioie; and my praise, is his worship.
Place mee and the Father as a seale vpon thine hart, and as a token vpon thine arme. Therefore sit you, or stand you, or praie, or reade, or wright, or worke you, let my name Iesus and God be often reuerendlie in your mouth, but continuallie in your harte. S. O grante it maie be so good Iesus; and let all people, tribes, and tonges serue thee; and let all creatures bowe at thy presence. Let heauen saie, Raigne thou Iesus; let the earth make answere, yea for euer and euer let him raigne. Yea, let all Sanctes confesse thy glorious Name, and all good people reioice before the Father, and thee his lambeIohn. 1, 29, and our Lord Iesus ChristRom. 1, 3 7, Amen.
CHAP. 25. That for God his benefits we are to thanke him. BLessed be the glo∣rious Name of the Lord for euermorePsal. 72, 19. O Lord my GodIoh. 20, 17, let all my dooings, all my reading, all my wrighting, my thoughtes, words, and vnderstan∣ding, tend vnto the aduancement of thine honor1. Cor. 10, verse 31. Yea, let mee both begin my busines in thy Name, and goe forward in thy feare, and finish it with thy blessing. That which thou hast giuen, that receaue againe; and from whence the streames doo flowe, thether let them returne. It neuer goeth better with mee, neither dooth it realish better to my soule, than when vnfeinedlie I doo ascribe all to thee, whatsoeuer I haue either doon, or thought as I should. My desire is to render thankes, which I then doo as I ought, when for that I haue receaued, and thou hast giuen, I ascribe all praise to thee,
and nothing to my selfe. For what can I, a wicked and vn∣profitable seruant, render vnto thee my God? Alas, all that I can doo, yea, if I should doo all which thou com∣mandest to be doon, it is to none ef∣fectLuk. 17, 10. So that I am brought vnto no∣thing, and rightlie humbled. And in deede it is verie well that I am so brought downePsal. 119, verse 71, that thou alone maist bee iustifiedPsal. 51, 4, and haue the praise of all, and that vile dustEcclus. 10, verse 9 maie at no time glorie in it selfe. Howbeit, I minde not to surcesse, but will extoll thee both with hart and mouth. For albe I discharge not my dutie therein as I ought: yet ought I to speake of thy goodnes, and not be silent. O my God, thou art my glorie; my praise shall alwaies be of theePsal. 71, 6. He that would but a little consider of thy glorie, and knowe what it is to glorie in the LordIere. 9, 24; how would he despise all outward glorie! He that would, euen but a little taste of thy sweetnes; how quicklie would he loath, as most bitter, the pleasure of this world! He which would receaue euen but
a small sparcle of loue into his breaste, howe would hee burne in affection! For full gladlie would hee contemne all thinges to haue thy freendship: and would count it all sweete, and easie to be borne, what∣soeuer he should doo, or suffer for thy loue sakeRom. 8, 35. Hee that would consider in his minde thy goodnes to man-ward; how would he reioice, and run after thee! Hee would seeke nothing so charelie, he would keepe nothing so warelie, he would pursue nothing so egerlie, as to serue thee. For in lo∣uing, he would feele no burdenSal. S. 8, 6 7, be∣cause loue would beare all burdens. So then theie which complaine of the burden, doo plainlie declare how theie haue litle true loue in them. To serue of loue, is of all others the greatest pleasure, and comfort in labor. True loue dooth neither respect commoditie, nor feare damage, but in all things seeketh that which may please thee. Oah Christ, how sweete is thy loue, how well dooth it sound, how sweetlie dooth it enter, how stronglie dooth it binde!
Oah that it would fast binde mee to thy continuall seruice! oah that it would wholie take me, and wholie subdue me, and wholie and altoge∣ther make me to be thine! For then, and not before am I free, when I am taken of thy loue, and vt∣terlie depriued from all that mine is. O my Lord, I am thy seruantPsa. 143, 12, yea thy seruant am I, because thou hast redeemed mee1. Cor. 6, 20 1. Cor. 7, 23 1. Pet. 1, 19. I am thy seruant with a verie good will, and am not ashamed to be pro∣perlie thine. I wish not to be mine owne man againe, and therefore, Lord, helpe mee, that I maie be freed from that which naturallie is mine. Oah blowe, and kindle, and in∣flame the fire of my zeale, so shall mine hart boile, and become pure, cleare, and pleasant: for thy loue ex∣pelleth vice, and consumeth sin. Laie thou fast hold vpon the band of loue, and I shall stand and conti∣nue in thy seruice. Full well I wot, no good can my seruice doo you, Lord; but all the benefit redoundeth to my selfe, if I doo that which I knowe is acceptable in thy sight.
Would I did, and hid not, that I reuealed, and concealed not thy workes, Lord! When shall I be able worthelie to consider the manifold benefits con∣ferred vpon mee of God! Mercifullie hast thou delt with thy seruant, ô Lord; but alack, I ne∣uer thanked thee for the same, as thou deseruedst. And therefore am I punished, and pinched at the verie harte, euen be∣cause I am vnable to answere thy be∣nefits so great, and so manifold. Oah that I could euen but once worthelie, and thoroughlie thanke thee for all these things! But what maie proceede from him, in whome nothing is? An emptie vessell, can minister no drinke. What then shall I doo? Something I must giue. For it is not lawfull to come before God with an emptie hand. Because the Lord abhorreth the vngratefull manLuke. 17, verse 17. Oah that I could finde something in this world to giue you that might be acceptable in your sight! Oah my Lord, whome in hart I loue, what would you that I should giue you?
As for anie good thing of mine you neede it notPsal. 50, 12. And whie then exact you a gift at mine hands? For riches none is comparable to you, and yet require you some-what of mee? L. That which I demaunde is euen your selfe wholie. For so it is expe∣dient if you would purchase my fa∣uour. I will giue grace to you, and you shall showe grace to mee; and so loue shall be continued betweene vs. Giue mee your selfe, and you haue giuen euen all. S. O good Iesus, the fountane of all goodnes, the fountane of life, the fountane of grace, the fountane of sweetenes, the verie fountane of aie lasting wisdome, powre vpon mee, euen at this instant, I beseech thee, the gift of thy celestiall grace, and teach mee to be gratefull, and to giue my selfe before all thinges wholie vnto you; for this is the deerest thing that I can render. This I doo knowe, and acknow∣ledge. Therefore receaue mee, lo, I am wholie thine, and all that mine is, is thine.
Onlie one thing there is which I cannot giue; and that is my sin, which is mine indeede properlie, and therefore not to be imputed vnto thee. Sinne mine is; and all defaultes within me are to be ascribed to me onlie; but glorie, and for all thy be∣nefits thankes be vnto thee. But nowe in calling thy benefits into minde, of manie I gather onlie a fewe, and those which doo most of all moue mee, and appeere in my mind. For neither wil the time suffer to recite, neither can my thoughtes comprehend them all1. Cor. 2, 9. Because for number theie are infi∣nite, for greatnes incomprehensible, and inestimable for goodnes. For bought theie cannot bee, because theie are freelie giuenMat. 10, 8 Iam. 1, 17. And there∣fore onlie thankes be required for them, otherwise all shall be taken awaie, as from that vngratefull oneMat. 25, 28. First therefore and afore all things, I thanke thee, ô Lord my GodMat. 4, 10, cre∣ator of all thingsIohn. 1, 1 2 3, for making mee a man, after thine image and simili∣tudeGen. 1, 27 Psal. 119, 73, and for placing mee ouer the workes of thine handsPsalm. 8, 6 7, &c.. This is the great, and first benefit
bestowed vpon mee, and that of thy meere goodnes. For I made not my selfe, but thine handes did fashion meePsal. 100, 3, theie brought me into this world through my parentsPsa. 139, 13 15, &c., whome thy will was, should serue thee herein. And lo, I am better than other creatures, exalted aboue the beastes of the fielde, and birdes of the aërGen. 1, 28 Wisd 9, 2; in that I am facioned after thine i∣mage1. Cor. 11, 7, endued with eternall wise∣dome, and naturallie participate of the light vncreate, and of the vn∣changeable truth. Wherefore for my beeing, liuing, and vnderstanding, I giue thee euer∣lasting praise, wishing and desiring herewithall that all creatures both in heauen and earth, maie euerla∣stinglie commend thy glorious and most excellent name. I blesse thee, ô Father, Lord of heauen and earthPsal. 97, 1 Psal. 99, 1, who of nothing through thy onlie begotten Sonne Iesus Christ in the holie Ghost, hast created all thingsIohn. 1, 1 2 3 Hebr. 1, 2. Yea al things thou hast made, not of necessirie compelled, but of pure and special loue moued therunto, therby to showe thy power vnto the sons of
menPsal. 145, 4; and by thine inuisible and coëternall wisedome with thee, thou hast most perfectlie disposed this vi∣sible worldWisd. 9, 1. Let all thy creatures subiect in all things to theeMat. 28, 18, and ordeined for the vse of manGen. 1, 28, blesse thee. For at thy commandement both raine falleth from heauen, and fructe springeth from the earth: The sunne shineth brightlie in the daie time, the starres giue light by course in the night: The fountanes spring, the riuers flowe, and fishes of diuers kindes doo swim: The birdes not onlie flie, but sing also; and the goates, the coltes, and hartes, doo spring vpon the moun∣taines: The sheep and other cattell dop ioie in good pasture, and diuers o∣ther liuing creatures doo run about the groaues: The ground waxeth greene, the fieldes prosper, and trees of the wood doo yeeld both bowes and fructe. O Lord, which onlie doost woon∣derous thingsPsal. 72, 18, euen all these are thy woorkes. Another benefit which thou hast
bestowed vpon mee, is the mysterie of incarnation1. Tim. 3, 16, the worke of my redemption, the price of our salua∣tion, euen the fructe of thy passion and death. O greate worke of mercie! Oah worke of moste excellent loueRom. 5, 8, moste abiect humilitiePhil. 2, 5 6, &c., of moste rare patience1. Pet. 2, 21 22, &c.! No man could merit, nor Angel procure this thing. The Prophets haue wondered at it; the Apostles haue seene & taught it; the faithfull haue embraced it; and the elect especiallie doo loue, and call it into minde. The due consideration of this be∣nefit stirreth vp good desires; infla∣meth the harte; nurisheth deuotion; inlighteneth the minde; purgeth the affection; draweth on to heauen∣ward; with-draweth from the world; driueth vnto God; and vniteth the soule with Christ. This benefit far excelleth the a∣boue mentioned: yet there is one which gaue each, and hath bestowed both of them vpon vs, euen our Lord Iesus Christ. For what the better had I bin for my life, if I had not bin redeemed
with the pretious blood of my Sa∣uior ChristGal. 3, 13? Therefore the grace, and mercie of God grewe vpon me, and plente∣ous redemption was madePsa. 130, 7: for the corrupted nature of man without the aide of God his maker, could neuer haue bin repared. O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort2. Cor. 1, 3, thou, to redeeme thy damned seruantEphes. 2, 3, hast giuen thine onlie Sonne to the deathRom. 8, 32. O wonderfull I kindnes of thine to vs ward, vnto which, neither the wit of man, nor the vnderstanding of Angels can attaine1. Tim. 3, 16! But alone, sweete Christe, who art the begin∣ning and the ende of our saluation, and alone couldst helpe the mise∣rable, and damned, thou alone art priuie to the same. For thou didest vouchsafe to ap∣peere vnto the world in the likenes of a most vile seruantPhil. 2, 5 6; and for mor∣tall wormesEcclus. 10, verse 9 euen of meere pittie receauedst with a willing minde the iudgement of a cruell deathGal. 3, 13. O good Iesus, thou which art the fountaine of mercie, the light of aie lasting glorie, the pure glasse with∣out spot of God his maiestieWisd. 7, 26, kindle
mine harte with the meditation of this vnspeakeable benefit, bestowed vpon mee, and vpon all mankindeRom. 5, 15 16, &c.. But this, as was the former, is gene∣rall, sufficient to saue all, but not effe∣ctual in all, by reason of the incredu∣litie, and malice of manie: howbeit it saueth, and is profitable to all the elect, for whose sake all things were created, and be, as I maie saie, created againe, through thee my Sauior. O good Iesus, how manifold are the benefits brought vnto vs by thine humanitie! Thou becamest our brother, and flesh of our fleshIohn. 1, 14, that we might be compted the children of GodGal. 4, 6 7, and haue accesse vnto the Father tho∣rough thee1. Iohn. 2, 1 2, the fire of whose disple∣sure none could quench, but thou alone of whome himselfe did saieMat. 3, 17 Math. 17, 5: This is my beloued Sonne, in whome I am well pleased. Happie is the soule, which earnest∣lie recordeth, and hartelie loueth, & worthelie extolleth the sacraments of our redemption; and for them thanketh thee; and finallie depen∣deth vpon thy counsaile, more than vpon her owne sense. For none is meete to search out, no
wisedome can reach into this myste∣rie, onlie it is the strength of beliefe, and the purenes of the hart lighte∣ned from aboueMatth. 5, 8, that beholdeth the same. Oah, blessed is hee that is worthie to receaue that by grace, which the wise of the world could not vnder∣stand by natureMat. 11, 25! O sweete Iesu, the wisedome of the Father, make mee in the light of faith to knowe this great and woon∣derfull mysterie of thine incarnati∣on1. Tim. 3, 16, for therein the sweetenes of our whole saluation lieth, and there∣by the rarest freendship that euer was seene appeereth1. Ioh. 3, 16 Rom. 5, 8 Rom. 8, 32, and through it the vnsearchable fulnes of thy wisedome glittereth moste glori∣ouslie. Oah let thy seruant growe on still in godlines, in the studie of well doo∣ing, and more and more in this me∣morable secreat of thine incarnati∣on, make mee acquainted with the mysterie of thine holie passion, and drawe mee wholie into the medita∣tion of thy workes! The declaration of this loue, and humilitie, is a woonderfull deep, and a certaine celestiall sea, which maie
not be swoom ouer, wherein doo swim too and fro the spirituall fishes both small and greate, which thou hast taken within the net of faith. Wherefore let this thy so greate loue and sweetenes, thine so greate humilitie and kindenes abide still in my remembrance; let it alwaie re∣maine in euerie sacrifice of praier that I am to make; and in all mine holie exercises let there bee some∣what, as plesant frankincense, and delightfull spices, for a sweete smel∣ling sauor to be offered vnto God the Father, concerning the mysterie of thine incarnation and passion. Let now then such as thou haste redeemed, I saie whome thou haste redeemed out of the hande of the enimieLuke 1, 74, sing out with mee the song of thine heauenlie praise, and of in∣warde ioie together with thankes∣geuing. Yea, let all the Angels standing a∣bout thy throne, fall vpon their fa∣ces, and worship the lambe of God, who hath taken awaie the sins of the worldIohn. 1, 29, saiengReue. 7, 12: Praise, and glorie, and wisedome, and thankes, and honor, and power, and might, bee vnto our Lord Iesus
Christ for euermore, Amen. A third benefit, not inferior to the former, is the grace of iustification, whereby of thy goodnes thou haste drawen mee vnto repentance, and amendement of life, forgiuing my sins, and giuing mee both hope of pardon, and willingnes to do well, and to serue thee euermore. This after Paul dulie had conside∣red, he adhorteth his disciples to be both thankefull for so great a benefit, and also mindefull of the heauenlie grace, and to studie to showe them∣selues worthie so spirituall a calling: Brethren, saith he1. Cor. 1, 6 27, you see your cal∣ling, howe that not manie wise men after the flesh, not manie mightie, not manie noble are called. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confounde the wise. These things I consider in my selfe, who notwithstanding I am contemp∣tible, and vnmeete for this world: yet by thine holie calling am I saued from the shipwrack of the same vnto thine holie seruice. And this I ascribe wholie not vnto anie goodnes of mine, but vnto thy prouidence. For the which, I extoll thy good∣nes, and blesse thee, euen I say, for cal∣ling
me gratiouslie, for giuing mee a desire to please thee, for pardoning all my sins; for putting me vnder thy sweete yoake, softening mine harte with the oile of thy spirit, whome the world neither knoweth, neither seeth, nor sauoreth. O mercifull Iesu, keepe me in this minde, I beseech thee, encrease thy giftes of grace within mee more and more, so long as I remaine in this visible light. I perceaue right well this calling of mine is a greate benefit, not giuen to all men, but onlie to such as God the Father hath ordained there∣vnto: because it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that showeth mercieRom. 9, 16, that euerie mouth maie be stoppedRom. 3, 19, and all the world culpable before God; and that no flesh should reioice in thy presence1. Cor. 1, 29, nor ascribe anie of their owne vertues, or good works, to themselues. For if thou shouldest deale with mee in iustice, alas, I were then dam∣ned with the curssed spirits in hell. But of thy goodnes, ô Lord, thou hast spared mee, and forgiuen my sins, whereby I am not as the childe
of perdition. And therefore am I bounde to ren∣der great thankes vnto thee for so excellent a benefit; and would to God, both in my speech, and in my life, all the daies of my life, I might answere my calling! But Lord, in steede of all thankes, receaue I beseech thee, my poore ser∣uice, whereby I desire, and in deede am bound to serue thee. Grante also that the debt of my seruice maie proceede from the hart, and finallie agree to thy will and ho∣nor; and that mine hart be neuer turned from thy loue, but that both my soule and bodie maie alike watch and perseueare daie and night in thine holie seruice, euen so long as life is within my bodie, and I haue my wits to remember thee; let thy praise be neuer out of my mouth, nor the remembrance of thy mani∣fold benefits slip out of mine hart. And if thy seruant shall yet liue manie yeeres, either an hundred, or howe manie soeuer, grante that I maie not prooue luke-warme, or abashed at thy seruice, but be euen so zelous and so willing to serue thee, as I was at the first houre and daie
when mine harte was admonished and confirmed of thee, euen with a pure and whole minde onlie to fol∣lowe thee my Lord. Neither let anie infirmitie or aduersitie hinder my purpose; but euen as now I meane, and purpose in the hearing of thee my God: so I beseech thee giue grace, that what nowe I haue promised, I maie per∣forme. And although through my in∣firmitie and faultes this my course shall be broken, as there is no man so righteous vpon earth but hee sin∣neth2 Chro. 6, verse 36; yet suffer me not to despeire, and to faint vtterlie, but put into my minde forthwith to bowe the knees of mine harte, and with much so∣rowe and teares to offer vnto thee my wofull and wounded conscience to be healed with the salue of thy mercie, and that my purpose maie be bound more surelie than euer it was. Let mee neuer repent mee of this couenant, but still giue thankes that I haue founde such fauor in thine eies, as to be accepted into thine ho∣lie warfare. Thou canst, ô almightieEze. 10, 5 2. Cor. 6, 18 and all
mercifull GodWisd. 12, verse 20 2. Cor. 1, 3, who hast of no∣thing created meeGen. 1, 26 Psal. 100, 3, and foreseest the fall, and infirmitie of man; thou art able, I saie, and that thou wilt I beseech thee, forgiue the sins which I haue committed; supplie what I haue omitted; restore what I haue lost; heale what is sick; cleanse what is vncleane; lighten what is darke; assuage that which swelleth; inflame what is quenched; repaire that is broken; recouer that is neglected; amende what is awrie; make plaine what is rouged; restraine what is cu∣rious; call home that which wan∣dereth; place what is out of order; yea, and alter the whole state of my minde, that nothing be wanting to my former purpose, and let all occasion of euill worke for the best vnto mee, I moste humblie desire thee. This change, is made by the right hand of God; this is God his visitation; this is the manifolde conference of the diuine good∣nes. In steede of all thankes, accept the deuoute seruice of thine holie Church where-so-euer, with the
sweete praises of the whole courte of heauen. And let all the sanctes from the beginning of the world, which tho∣rough thy grace haue bin enlighte∣ned and called; yea and all the faith∣full and Christian people which ei∣ther be in the world, or haue bin afore vs, or shall liue hereafter, let them I saie together celebrate and praise thy all sweete and glorious name, which is aboue all names to be blessedPhil. 2, 9 10. Let them repeate againe, and a∣gaine with greate ioie, repeate all praises dulie and deseruedlie to be saide of thy name, and that so ma∣nie times, as there be either in the heauen, stars; or in the sea, fishes; or in the earth, cornes; or in the Bible, letters. And all this being doon, yet must I saie, theie haue not praised thy name sufficientlie, the which I de∣sire to commende euen to the vt∣termost of my strength, and by all meanes to extoll, vntill I attaine vn∣to those praises, which now cannot be expressed by the voice of mortall men.
So that thou seest now my Soule, the greatenes and the excellencie of God thy creator and redeemer his benefits, the which no creature, nor all creatures may recompense, whome hee hath made vnto the praise and glorie of his eternall and blessed nameIsai. 43, 7, who needeth no glorie, but is alone all sufficient for himselfe; hee that is what he isExod. 3, 14, is his owne glorie. The number of his benefits was so greate, that I could not place them all before thine eies; and therefore of a greate manie I choase three pre∣tious giftes, euen as the Wisemen did, which were about to offer to the LordMath. 2, 11, wherein I thought good to comprehend the rest. For euerie benefit of God, if you marke well, is either of nature, or of grace, or of superexcellencie: and whatsoeuer else is, maie fullie bee referred vnto one of these three kindes. In the Creation, you haue the be∣nefit of nature; in the Redemption, the benefit of superexcellencie; in our Iustification, note the benefit of grace.
For all which, and for euerie of them, glorie be to thee, ô sacred Trinitie, one equall deitie, both before all worldes, nowe, and for euermoreReu. 17, 12. Amen. The ende of the fourth Booke.
A Table of the con∣tents of euery Chapter conteined in this Booke. ALonging of the Soule af∣ter God. The incompre∣hensible maiestie of the Lord. An exhortation to the loue of God. Chapter 1. Page 1 Of God his distinct iudgement at the ende of this world. The cursed state of the vngodlie. Chapter. 2. Page. 14 An humble confession of sinns; with a Praier for grace to repent. Chap. 3. Pag. 19 A lamentation of the Soule for her weakenesse, and vnstaiednes in the race of virtue. Chap. 4. Pag. 25 Of the shortnes and miserie of this present life. A praier for grace to renounce the world, and the va∣nities of the same. Chap. 5. Pag. 30 An ardent desire of the Soule to be loosed from , and from the trou  this world. Chapter. 6. . 37 A godlie desire for a good death. Chap. 7. Pag. 44 A meditation of one dead vnto
the world, yet aliue in Christ. Chap∣ter. 8. Pag. 51 A desire of the Soule, that no earthlie creature may carrie her a∣waie vnto vanitie. Chap 9. Pag. 59. A comparison betweene earthlie, and heauenlie ioies; with a praier for grace to contemne this transito∣rie world. Chap. 10. Pag 63 That all comfort, and pleasures are in God A praier that all people maie glorifie the Lord. The blessed state of good men. That we are to be readie against the comming of our Sauiour Christ. Chap. 11. Pag. 71 The desire of the Soule after God. The properties of God by the sun∣drie titles ascribed vnto him. None commeth vnto God, vnlesse God draweth him. Chap. 12. Pag 80 How, and when the Soule and God are vnited together. The miserie where God is not present. Chap. 13. Page 92 A lamentation of the Soule for the want of grace. Chapter. 14. Page 101 Touching the fruite of freendship. The benefits of Christ vpon man. The true felicitie and ioie of the Soule. The affinitie betweene Christ,
and the Soule of man. Chapter. 15. Page 107 The more wee loue Christ, the more we maie. Tentation and when. Happines of the life to come. How to beare affliction. Chapter. 16. Page 118 The maiestie, and omnipotencie of God. How, and whie the Lord af∣flicteth his children. Chapter. 17. Page 133 The confidence of a true Christian. God iustifieth the vngodlie. Giueth whatsoeuer good is to man. Will haue no man to despeire, but that all sinners should flie vnto his mercie. Chap. 18. Pag. 147 The desire of a Christian Soule, is neuer satisfied, till God bee enioied. No comfort anie whit comparable to the spirituall ioie. Chapter. 19. Page 156 A complaint of the Soule for the want of her blessed state. What wee∣ping pleaseth God. Who trulie bles∣sed. A description of God. Chap. 20. Page 162 The delaieng of the happie is pa∣tientlie to be borne. The felicitie of the life to come: with a praier for the same. Chap. 21. Pag. 171
A godlie meditation, concerning the accesse vnto the holie of holies, euen Iesus Christ, the king of angels. godlie petitions for the forgiuenes of sins. Chap. 22. Pag. 180 A godlie praier; and commendati∣on of our Sauior Christ. Chapter. 23. Page 187 A Praier for comfort vnto Iesus Christ. Chap. 24. Pag. 194 That for God his benefits we are to thanke him. Chap. 25. Pag. 202 FINIS. ❧AT LONDON, Printed by Richarde Yardley, and Peter Short, dwelling at the nether ende of Bredstreete, at the Signe of the Star. 1592
