25334A 99849190 14328
THE CENSVRE of a loyall Subiect: VPON CERTAINE noted Speach & behauiours of those fourteen notable Traitors, at the place of their executions, the xx. and xxi. of September, last past. As also, of the Scottish Queen, now (thankes be to God) cut off by iustice, as the principal Roote of al their treasons. On Wed∣nesday the 8. of Februarie 1586. Wherein is handled matter of necessarie instruction and comfort for al duetiful Subiectes: especially, the multitude of ignoraunt people. Feare GOD: be true to thy Prince: and obey the Lawes. At LONDON Printed by Richard Iones, dwelling at the signe of the Rose and the Crowne, neere Holborne bridge.
CVrteous Reader: my good friend M. G. W. at his departure into the Countrey, left this most honest worke to be censured by me: being right well assured, by the continuance of our true friendshippes that I would not deceiue him with a flattering iudgment, and (trust me) vpon a considerate reading, I found it a little book, containing a large testimony of his loyalty to his Prince and country, a sweet comfort, and most sound counsail for good subiectes: concludig by many fair examples of Trai∣tors oule endes, that the reward of treason is distruction, and after death, infamie. The matter agreeing with the condition of this trouble∣some time, I haue aduentured to possesse thee with the benefite thereof, before I made account vnto him of my liking: which is, that no good sub¦iect can mislike the same, and I made the more hast herein: because some wicked persons that will not be admonished, haue now by new conspiracy desired our publique sorrowe▪ and by their discouery haue brought an v∣niuersall ioy into the church of God. Giue God thankes▪ for his wonder∣full presentation of her Maiestie, and the confusion of her enemies, serue him, and read this booke, which trulie promiseth thee, that  miscreate persons shall neuer prosper in their deuices. No rote but feare God, and thou shalt fare well. Thy louing friend, T C.
To the right honorable, Sir William Cicill, Knight, Baron of Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England, and one of the Queenes Maiesties most honora∣able and prudent priuie counsell a long continuance of honour and prosperous estate. RIght honorable and prudent Lord, the vngratious Emperor Commodus, vp∣on the accusation of a guilty consciēce, caused fourteen or fifteen discreete Ro∣man Gentlemen, to be thrown into the riuer of Tyber, for no other offence, but because they soberly talked, of the the vertues of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, his father: alleadging that they could not praise his father without the reprouing of himselfe: and certainly, although Commodus did euil, he spake the trueth: for the cōmendation of vertue, is euermore a reproch to vice: which principall (right honorable) considered of the one part, by your manifold, seruices done vnto the Queenes most excellent maiestie, to her blessed realm, & generally to the true church of God: and of the other side, weyed by the most odious trea∣sons, conspired by many rotten subiectes, whereof iu∣stice lately hath cut off certaine of the principall, whose vile purpose reached to the life of her sacred Maiestie, the subuersion of their countrey, and generall callami∣ty in the church of God: no other conclusion can fol∣lowe, but that the reuerence of your publique seruice, will alwayes reuiue the hatred of their treasons, and that the reproch of their treasons, will neuer suffer the
reuerēce of your fidelitie to die. Therefore (most graue Lord) desirous to honour (withall duetifull affection) your godly vertues, as the comforte of all good men: and also to acknowledge some especiall fauours shew∣en vnto my selfe, vnder your sound protection, I pre∣sent (for the generall instruction of my countreymen, the subiects of England) my obseruances of certain no∣ted speach and behauiours, of those fourteene notable Traitors▪ which lately suffered for their treasons: tru∣sting that this censure, by the sentence of all good Sub∣iects, will merite the acceptance of my former bookes, which hetherto haue escaped the disgrace of publique reproofe. Protesting, in the behalfe of my writing, that my desire hath euermore bene, to instruct all men, and not to iniure the worst of the wicked. And now to con¦clude, that vertue may haue her sample by your Lord∣ship, and vice her shame by these traitors, in the name of experience, I aduise all men, whoe heades clime a∣boue the height of their present conditions, to make loyall and honest actions, the ladders of their aduance∣ment: which will commend them with a beloued life, or an honorable death: whē treason is the hatchet that seuereth life, and ioyneth infamie vnto death. The Lord be with your Lordshippe in all your affaires: for whose health and honorable prosperitie, the good sub∣iectes of England continually pray. Humbly at your Lordships commandement. G. W.
A Censure, in forme of a Dialogue, of certaine noted speach and beha∣uiours, of fourteene notable Traitors, at the place of their executions. &c, The speakers, Walker, a godlie deuine, VVeston, a discreet Gentleman. Wilcocks, a substantial Clothier West. NEighbour Wilkcocks, you are well welcome home. Wilk. I humbly thanke your wor∣shippe. VVest. What is the best newes at London? Wilk. The best newes, are, fourteene of those ranke traitors that sought to bereaue the Queenes most excellent Maiestie of her life, (which God long preserue) haue made their confessiō at the gallowee▪ for my eies saw their traiterous harts burned, and bodilesse heads aduanced to the view and comforte of manye thousands of people. Walk. You sawe a happie sight, for the quiet∣nesse and safetie of the Queenes most excellent ma∣iestie, and general comfort for al good subiects, and a fearefull example to al traitors: but for asmuch as they offended in the highest degree of treason, as traitors resolued to kil the Queens Ma. (whose life,
almighty God long preserue▪) to spoile he nauie, to cloy the ordinance, to kil some of her maiesties hono¦rable priuy counsel, to moue a generall rebelliō, and what in them lay, to procure a forraigne inuasion: all which, beeing treasons of such danger, as the least of them closed vp the doores of mercie: it see∣meth conueniente, that theire executions shoulde be with more seuerity then the common iudgemēt of Traitors. Wilk. Their iudgements and executions were alike, saue that the first seuen were executed with lesse fauour, then the latter seauen. VValk. What difference was there in theire executions? VVilk Their iudgements were to be drawn to the place of execution, there to be hanged vntil they were halfe dead, their bowels to be brente before their faces, &c. And truly the first seauen, as the most mallitious (if there be anye difference in treason) were executed somewhat neere the seuerity of their iudgement: the other seauen were so fauouraby v∣sed, as they hung vntill they were euen altogether dead, before y• rest of their iudgemēt was executed. VValk. Their treasons were so odious as Peril∣lus Bull or the extreamest crueltie that pollicy may inuent, wold be too milde to punish them: so that the least fauour that might be showen vnto them, was a token of exceeding mercye in her Maiesty, and mildenes in the iustice of England. West. There were neuer people gouerned with more mercie, then the people of England vnder the raigne of our moste gratious Queene Elizabeth,
(whose prosperitie the Lord long continue: and tru¦ly I heard many wise men say,Comparisons by her maie∣sties mercie. that the greatnesse of her maiesties mercie (applyed to an olde prouerb Ouer much pittie spoileth a Cittie) is verie daunge∣rous to the peace of England: and some haue taken example, by a fable of a frozen serpent, that a pitti∣ful husbandman found, which he reuiued at his sire: but as soone as the Serpent had gotten strength, it stong the husbandmans children: euen so these hol∣lowe subiects (I pray God I may not safelye name most Papists) which run into many dangers of the lawe: yet her Maiesties mercie so fauoureth them, as it is to be feared they liue, but to recouer strēgth to persecute her maiesties subiects. Walk. In very deede, mercie breedeth presump∣tion in the wicked: but no doubt almighty God (that for the crueltie, which raigned vpon the earth, drow∣ned all the world, saue onely Noah and his famelye) is so well pleased with mercie, as he seldome suf∣fereth it to be the cause of inconuenienre, especially, where temperate iustice is ioyned with mercy: and although the example of he pitifull husbandman and the frozen serpent, may be well applied vnto her Maiesties mercie, and the papists malice: yet when the serpent stong his children,The begin∣ning of pre∣sumption is mercie and the end is de∣struction. the husband∣man grieuouslye beate him: euen so, when these kinde of people, turne her Maiesties mercye to publique disturbance, Iustice will doe her office, so that they shal hardly escape the censure of her ma¦iesties lawes. West. God bring them to shame and confusion
but Neighbour Wilcocks, I pray you shewe vs thē names of the Traitors, and manner of theire exe∣cutions. Wilk. Upon the twentith day of September, being tuesday, Iohn Ballard a Priest, and first per∣swader of Babington to these odious treasons, was laide alone vpon a hurdell and six others, two, and two vpon a hurdell, were drawne from Tower hill,The place of their executi¦on was som∣time the me∣ting place to cōsult of ther treasons. through the cittie of London, vnto a fielde at the vpper end of Holborne, harde by the high way side to S. Giles: where was erected a scaffolde conueni∣ent for the execution, and there vpon a paire of gal∣lowes so high, and withal, the place was so rayled to keepe off horsmen, as the people might plainely see the execution. West, I am much deceiued if there were not a great multitude of people assembled to see the exe∣cution. Wilk. I cannot number the thousands, but by computation, there were able men enough, to giue battaile to a strong enemie: but one thing I especi∣allye regarded, that although the assemblye were wonderfull great,The multi∣tude shewed no motion of pittie at the execution of the Traitors. and the traitors all goodly perso∣nages, clothed in silkes: & euerie way furnished to moue pittie: & that the order of their execution, was a fearfull spectakle: yet y• odiousnes of their treasōs was so setled in euery mans heart, as there appea∣red no sadnesse or alteration among the people, at the mangling and quartering of their bodies: yea, the whole multitude, without any signe of lamen∣tation greedylye behelde the spectacle from the first to the last.
Walk. Truly, they that beare dutiful hearts towards the safetie of the Queenes Maiestie, & peace of their countrey, would not but greatlie reioyce in their destruction, which sought the ge∣neral subuersion of the estate, beside the kind af∣fectiō & motherly loue yt her Maiestie published by her gratious letters, vnto the L. Maior and state of London:Her Maie∣stis louing affection, to∣wards her good subiects. wherein her Maiestie prote∣steth (and sundrie of her gratious proceedinges fullie witnesseth,) that she desired no longer to liue, then while in the whole course of her Ma∣iesties gouernment she carried her selfe in such sort, as might not onely continue their loue and goodwill, but also encrease the same, are causes strong enough to commaunde the multitude to reioice in nothing more, then in the destruction of those that pretend any hurte vnto her Maie∣sties person. But good neighbour Wilcocks con∣tinue your purpose concerning their execution. Wilk. The first day the Traitors were all placed vpon the scaffolde,The order of the Traitors executions. that the one might be∣holde the rewarde of his fellowes treason. Ballard the Priest,Iohn Bal∣lard, the Priest, executed. who was the first broacher of this treason: was the first that was executed, & after that his bowels & traiterous heart were thrown into the fire, (his head seuered from his shoulders,) was set vpon the toppe of the Gal∣lowes. West. By the way I praye you what confes∣sion made this traiterons Priest, at the time of his death. Wilk. He denied not his treason, died an
obstinate papist, & in his protestation, he doubt∣fullie said, if he had offended y• Q. Maiestie, or a∣ny mā els he was sorie, & so cōditionally desired forgiuenes: & to declare (at full) his traiterous mind, he said, I am sory I haue bin so ādalous, but most sory I haue bin so remis in my delings Walk. The malicious affection of his heart to∣wards the Q. maiestie, appeared euē in the trē∣bling passage of death: yt whereas his treasons were so impious,Ballads so∣phisticall as∣king of the Q Maiestie forgiuenesse. odious, & dānable, as the most wicked, (I meane his confederates for the most part) confessed as the cōmon fame goeth, yt they exceeded the greatnesse of her Maiesties mercie which may not be measured, where there is any measure in offēding, & yet in his desire of remis∣sion at her Maiesties hands, he added this cōdi∣tiō, (if) as one that doubted if he had offēded her highnesse: wel, leaue we this dissembling traitor a pray to the crowes, & his soule to Gods iudge∣mēt: good neighbour on with your tale to y• next. Wilk. Next vnto this priest,Anthonie Babingtō, Esquire. executed. Anthony Babing∣ton was made ready to the Gallowes, and in euery point was handled like vnto Ballard. West. Little may be the mone, bad was the best: but what obserued you in his end? Wilk. A signe of his former pride, for where∣as the rest,A note of Babingtons pride. through the cogitation of death were exercised in praier vpon their knees, and bare headed, he whose tourne was next, stode on his feete with his hat on his head, as if he had bene but a beholder of the execution, concerning his religion he died a papist, his treasons were so odious, as the sting of consciēce perswaded him
to acknowledge himselfe to be a most grieuous trespasser against God & the Queenes maiesty. West. I wonder that men are so bewitched with the inticements of these Iesuits,Note this controuersie. as they holde it a holly matter to lay violent hands vp∣on the Lordes annointed: & at their death their owne consciences perswade thē, that the imma∣ginations of such wickednes is damnable. Wilk. Pride,Causes of rebellion. enuie, and ambition are the rootes of treason, the body of treason is murther and all that mischiefe may deuise, the fruites of treasons are ruines of kingdomes and common wealthes: the generall reward of treason is the destruction of traitors: and for that, shame and perpetual infamie lead thē to the Gallowes: to collor if it were possible their treason they make religion their ground of rebellion: and with this holly showe strengthen themselues, but when Iustice hath deliuered them to the Hangman, death sommōneth their wickednes before their consciences, and then the feare of Hell maketh thē openly to confesse the matter to be dānable, which they took to be a holly ground of rebelliō. West. I am well satisfied, now good neigh∣bour, forward with the rest. Wilk. Next vnto Babington,Iohn Sauadge, Gent. executed. Sauadge was made ready for the execution. west. This notable traitor (as ye same goeth, was y• mā yt cōferred wt D. Gifford at Paris, & by the cōfirmatiō of y• english fugitiues at Rhemes, was resolued to kil y• Queenes Maiestie, whose defence the God of hoastes euermore be.
It is likewise said that vpon the apprehension of Ballard the priest, Babington hastened this Sa∣uadge to dispatch his resolution: and that he on∣ly deferred the matter, but for making of a court like sute of apparell. Walk. God by sundrie examples,Gods proui∣dence in fru∣strating of Sauadge his resolution. preserueth the innocent from the violent handes of the wic∣ked, euen in the pride and greatest hope of their purposes. Hāmon erected a Gallowes for Mar∣docheus the Iewe, and he and his tenne sonnes suffered therupon, the false Iudges had got sen∣tence of death against chaste Susanna, but by de∣uine prouidēce the stones dashed out their owne braines:The odious∣nes of treson in Gods sight but where the practize tendeth to the murder of annointed Princes, the odiousnesse of the matter, so highly offendeth the Maiestie of God, as he miraculously hath defended notable Tyrants, from the murthering swordes of trai∣tors. Comodus was a wicked Emperor, and to kill him the traitor Quintianus waighted at the entring of the Amphiatre:Tirants mi∣raculouslye preserued frō Traitors handes. his daggar was redy drawne, his heart was resolute, and his hande was striking the stroke, the Traitor cried, This the Senate sendeth thee: by which fore-warning, Quintianus was staied, and the Emperor esca∣ped vnhurte. The day before Scevinius determi∣ned to kill the Archtyrant Nero he put an olde rustie Daggar to grinding, he made his testa∣ment, he franchised his bonde men, and got rowlets in a readines to wrappe woundes in: by which tokens Milcheu: his seruante, gathe∣red, he wente about some waightie purpose,
and so accused him to the Emperor: Sceuinnius straightwaies confessed that his entent was to haue slaine the Emperor. If God plucketh wit and prudence from Traitors, that purposed to kill such notable Tyrantes, it is constantlye to be beleeued, that with the shield of his strength he wil defend righteous princes: among whom our most gratious Elizabeth is crowned with the soueraigne renown of vertue, in which dig∣nitie the king of kings long continue her Maie∣stie. The murther of a prince is so odious, as na∣ture crieth out against it.Mute persons and yong babes cry out against the murther of Princes. King Craessus had a yong sonne that from his birth was mute, and yet when one of king Cyrus Souldiors taking him for a cōmon person, was redy to kil him: the infant cried out O kill him not, for he is the king my father.Peter Messire in his Cron. of memora∣ble things. Lib. 1, Cap.  Aiben Ragel in his Iudicials, repor∣teth a stranger matter of a kinges sonne of his Countrey, that brake foorth of his mothers in¦trals to giue his father warning of his enemies & presentlie after his birth cried out. I am born in an vnfortunate hower, to be the messenger of no better tidings, then that my father the king is in present danger, to loose both his life and Kingdome.Eccle. 10, Which notice signified, the infante presently died: we hereby perceiue howe the person of an anointed Prince, is so sacred as na∣ture maketh a passage for suckling babes and domb personnes to deliuer the same from dan∣ger, and withall the traito is o open to destru∣ction▪Num. 16. as the preacher faith to the traitor, a birde of the aire shall bewray ty voce, and with her
feathers she shall bewray thy wordes. Dathan, Corath, and Abiran, they and all that they had, went down quicke into hell because of their re∣belliō, which is a great witnes of the saying of S. Paule, who forbiddeth to resist against the Magistrate.Ro. 1. For he that resisteth receiueth vnto himselfe damnation. And certainely whosoeuer marketh the sequel of treason, shall find an hun∣dreth examples to one, to proueth end of Trai∣tors to be miserable. West. Upon Gods prouidence inrustrating the mischieuous purpose of Sauadge the Traitor, M. VValker you haue deliuered matter of ne∣cessarie instruction for all subiects, especially the common multitude to learne, whoe are manye times tempted to rebellion with allurementes of godly and honest apparance when it plainely appeareth that there is no warrāt (yea that de∣struction followeth) to rebell against tiranous Princes. Walk. The serpēt inticed Eue, and Eue Adam to disobey Gods commaundement, in eating the forbidden fruite: with this subtill perswasion, If you eat of this fruit, you shal not dy the death but your eies shall be open, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing both good & euill: euen so, with subtill perswasions,The Popes practises to moue rebel∣lion. are the simple multitude e∣uer more drawne vnto rebellion. When the no∣ble king Henrie the eight, banished the Popes imperiall authority out of England, the Popes instrumēt Cardinal Poole thought ciuil cōmotiō to be the rediest way to bring y• same in againe:
and to bring his purpose to the better effect, he perswaded the Northrē men, that no man shold eat any dainty meat in his house, neither should any one be married but he should pay a tribute for the same vnto the king. In king Edward the sixt his daies ther was almost a general rebel∣lion throughout England: the papists tempted the commons to rebellion, with perswasions to throw down inclosure, and for them selues foy∣sted in, to haue their olde religion, and acte of six articles restored, the banishment of straungers hath bene the cause of many cōmotions: but my counsail is that my louing brethren the subiects of england,Counsail against re∣bellion▪ opē not their eares to such pleasing perswasiōs, lest rebellion enter into their harts, and so vengance light vpon their whole bodies: vpon the holliest ground of rebellion, destructiō of traitors haue euermore growen. The Nor¦thren men had but a bad proofe of two rebelli∣ons, when they had the crosse and banner of fiue wounds borne before them. God placeth kinges in their kingdomes, and he alone wil haue the dissoluing of them: If Princes be good, let vs be thankfull to God for them, if they be tirannous, let vs looke into our sinnes for God sendeth Ty∣rants to punish the sinnes of the wicked,Tirantes are the scurges of Gods en∣gennce. whoe saith, I will doe vengeance on my enemies by my enemies. God (saith Iob) maketh the H∣pocrite to raigne for the sinnes of the people. In Osea (God speaketh thus.) I will giue thee a Kinge in my surye. And in Esaye.
Assur is the rod and staffe of my furie. Be Prin∣ces good or bad, let subiects be obedient, least (for their disobedience) God take away the good, and double the tyranny of the bad. West. I would this sound counsell were graf∣ted in all mens hearts: then no doubt the rotten branches of rebellion, woulde soone be cut off: now good neighbour on with your matter.Robert Barnwell, Gent. ex∣ecuted. VVilk. When Sauadge was executed, Barn∣well was made readie to die. VVest. And what of him? Wilk. He died an obstinate Papist and for his treason he made conscience his best excuse. VValk. He had had but a rotten conscience that was infected with the murther of a vertu∣ous Queene: and since his conscience was so bad, I hope but a fewe that heard him, but for∣bad their conscience to pitty him, other then cha∣ritably to be sorrowful for his error, which was damnable. Wilk. After Barnewel,Chediock Tichburn Esquire, executed. Tichburnes turne was next, he was a goodly yong Gentleman, and certainly his humilitie and moue, moued much compassion, he was not setled so much in papi∣strie as the other: but he was so much setled to the proud humor of Babington. as his head could no longer settle vpō his shoulders. In his mone (which I very well marked) he compared his state to Adam, who said hee was placed in Pa∣radice,Tichburnes lamentaion moued many o pittie. and ther inioyed all the pleasures of the earth, he was onely forbidden to eate of the fruite of one tree: but for his trasgression, he not
onely procured wretchednesse and miserie vpō his owne heade, but vpon the heades of all his posteritie. So ({quod} he) I that wanted nothing, but had helth, welth, and friends, and so might long haue liued, if I could haue forborn to haue bin vn¦true to my prince. But alas for my offēce I haue brought my self vnto this miserie, by which my good mother, my louing wife, my four brethren, and six sisters, yea our whole house, neuer be∣fore attainted, is infamed, and our posterity for euer like to be vndone. Walk. His lack of grace is to be lamented and by his ouerthrowe al men are warned to make choice of good company: for the olde prouerbe is beriied. Euill companie corrupt good manners. And truly the iniurie that he hath done vnto his wife,A good exā∣ple to forbid vs the felow∣ship of the wicked. his mother, and to so many brethren and sistirs: and to conclude to his whole posterity, is a fearefull example to feare men from treason, especially the Nobility and better sort of Gen∣tlemen: for they thereby not only lose their life, & liuing, but the honor of their house is corrupted: neither seemeth it an iniury against reason, that in punishment of treason, a number beare the burthen, and blot of one mans fault: when for the vertue, and dutifull seruice of one man, a nūber in his posterity receaue both honour, and many other temporall blessings: further in his confession, or comparing his offence to Adams, t concluded, he likened her Maiestie to the plea∣saunt and glorious fruite, so pretions in Gods eies, as he forbad Adam and all other to lay vi∣olent
handes vpon, & thus by the mouth of her enemies, God causeth her sacred excellencie to be blazed. West. You put me in remembraunce of a tale that a Gentleman, a traulor once told me, who being at Rome when Pope Gregorie ther liued, and finding at the English Colledge, ouer the armes of England, a Phenix drawn, which the Pope did appropiate vnto himselfe: the Gentle∣mā dutifully reuerensing her maiestie as his so∣ueraigne, and Phenix of the worlde: in scorne of the Pope wrote these verses. And reason good the Lion should, the Phoenix stand belowe: For though the leaues bewray the tree, the fruit the goodnesse showe. Applying in secreat zeale, the construction ther∣to, of this sēce. The armes of England to leaues as but the generall badge of her kingdome, and the Phenix he did propriat to the vertues of her maiestie, as her excellent beautie, and glorie of the world. And of the contrary parte, the matter was wel takē, I know not by what mistaking. Walk. It is like enough that the meaning was perceiued, for the pollicie of the Pope and his fauourers is to turne all to their honours, that in the market place blazeth not their disho∣nor: as for example: A pleasant Frier being ap∣pointed to preach before the Pope and his Car∣dinals, who marking, with what maiestie and pompe, they entred into S. Peters church▪ as one rauished wt their brightnes, he scoffingly cried
out:y of S. Peter,A pleasant sermō before the Pope. fy of S. Paule, sy, fy vpon their beggerlye Apostels: what reckoning is to bee made of their religion, whē the honor therof cōsi∣ted in casting forth of deuils, clensing of Lepors, raising the dead, in making the blinde to see, the deaf to hear, y• domb to speak, & the lame to go: the good they did was to beggers, & their liuing was as beggerly, bareleg, & barefoot, they wā∣dred from country to cuntry, their raiment was simple, their diet thin, & their deaths violēt. But honor & reuerence be to the Popes holines, the glory of his religion is visibly seene: he is able to make kings, & to dispose kindomes: his raimēt is of golde, & his victuals the plētie of the earth, he dwelleth & dieth in pallaces, & is buried like a God. &c. This sermon was so wel liked as the Frier was inuited to dine with the Pope, who to relish his good sermon, excused himselfe by y• weaknes of his braine, yt could endure no strong sauor: when his meaning was deaunded, hee aunswered, since Emperors & kinges kissed his holines feet, he thought his lot would be but to kisse the homeliest part of his holines, al which was wel taken: & yet perceiued to be vnhapelie mēt. For if ye Pope shold reuenge euery dry bloe, he & his Cardinals would soone set Rome in an vprore: but if you make no publique professiō of y• gospel, for al other offēces Rome wil beate wt you, & for a few peterpēce ye pope wil pardō you West. God blesse me from such pardons that bring many men to the gallowes. Wil. Tilney, one of y• Q, maiesties pensioners,Charles Tilney a pensioner executed.
next vnto Tichburne made worke for the Hang∣man. VVest. By statute lawe, it is pettie treason, for a seruāt to murther his maister or maistris, being but a subiect: how detestable a treasō is it then, for a sworne seruant to lay violent handes on his annointed Prince? The offence being in the extreamest degree of sinnes, the punishment ought to be according to the seuerest censure of Iustice. Walk. Euery mans houshold wel gouerned, resembleth a common wealth, wherein seruāts ought to liue in the awe and subiection of Sub∣iects:The antien serui∣ude of ser∣n. and among the Romans there was an an∣cient lawe, that aucthorised the maister to pu∣nish the offences of their seruants with death: but the wicked pollicy of men hath alwaies bin such, as where open power was to weak, am∣bition, enuie, and money allured the familliar seruants, and meaner persons to Emperours, Kings, & men of al estates, to lay violent hands of their maisters and to betraye them to death. Iudas one of the Apostels, betraied our sauiour Iesus into the handes of the Iewes. King Alex∣ander, was poisoned by his phisition Thessalus: the death of the Emperor Commodus was com¦passed by the practize of his sister Lucilla. Many haue had their banes by their wiues, as King Candaulus: some by their sonnes, as the greate Turke Baiazet the nienth. &c. but innumerable that haue ben destroyed, by the treason of their seruants.
West. I hope these odious attempts wil dis∣couer them: and for that they are crept into ser∣uices of accompt, by subtilty, it shal be the part of euery good subiect to certify their Lords (who are perhaps vnacquainted with their religion,) of such dangerous seruants. Wilk. The last of these seauen that suffered was Abingtō,Edward Abington Esquire, exxcuted. his father was an officer of good credite in her maiesties house, and for many ad∣uauncements was bound to say, God saue good Queene Elizabeth: but his sonne was a notable Papist, an Archtraitor, and at his death did all that in him lay to settle a feare in the heartes of the ignorant multitude,Abingtons threatnings. with a speach, that ther could not choose but be a great effution of blood in England very shortly. VValk. Gods prouidence maketh it apparāt that y• prophises of traitors proue not euermore scripture: Throgmorton the traitor said, before one yeare were expired the prosperitie & peace of England should be tourned into general cal∣lamitie,Examples of great cōfort to the godlie, and of no les terror to the wicked. but the date thereof is out, and I hope the destiny past. No doubt he knewe of a num∣ber of mallitious enemies vnto the state, and with the spirite of their wickednesse, he blunde∣red foorth his prognostication, but let all good subiects to their comfort, and Traitors to their confusion, knowe that the wicked diggeth a pit, and falleth therein himselfe, and who treadeth down the hedge a serpēt shal bite him,Prouerb. , ther is no wisedome, there is no vnderstāding, there is no counsell against the Lord, The horse is prepared
the day of battaile, but the Lord giueth the victory. The Iewes had S. Paule in prison; yea fortie of thē vowed that they wold nether eat; nor drink, vntil they had flaine him: but God (according to the Psalmist,) in a due time defended him, yea in that distresse, he came and stode by Paule, & thus comforted him, Be of good cheare Paule, for as thou hast testified of mee at Ierusalem, so muste thou beare witnesse also at Rome. The Angell of the Lorde led Peter foorth of prison, the Angell of the Lorde defended Sidrack, Miaack, and A∣bednago, in the burning fire: the Angell of the Lorde stopped the Lions mouthes that shoulde haue deuoured Daniell: the Angell of the Lorde with a drawne sword, tould Ioua, that he was the chiefe of the Lordes hande: A comfortable saying, and a true experiment: that this holie Angell of the Lord, with a drawne sworde (al∣though not visibly seen) stādeth between the god¦ly & their enemies and then though the wicked come armed,The digraces of the Pope, since K. Henrie the 8. first vnmas∣ked his ab∣homination. with horses, chariots, & an hoast of men, they shal be ouercome with their subtil de∣uices, & their twords shall go through their own harts. The lord wil haue the pide of y• vncleane Pope abased, & al the world striue in vain to set him vp again, if his friends look into his disgra∣ces, since victorious King Henrye the eight, first vnmasked his abhominatiō:Cardinall Poole mo∣ued the frēch K. against K. Henrie the 8. they shal finde no cōfort to take his part: he was thē in his strēgth & the greatest princes of christēdome, his friend, yea for the Popes cause they were K. Henries greatest enemies: the Pope sent Cardinal Poole ambassadors to moue the French K, against the
K. of England: the French made many braggs but bit little the mighty Emperor Charles the 5. prepared a great Nauie, at the Popes request,The pope stirred the Emeror Char, the 5. against K. Henry 8. to trouble the peace of england: the fauoring of whose inuasion cost the Marques of Exeers head but this attempt prospered not, but which had likelihood to do more hurt, then all the boast of forrain power: by the practize of Cardinal Poole 20000 rebels in Lincolne shire,Cōmotion in Lincolnshire, by Cardinals Poles meanes dismaid by the kings power. for religiōs sake had put themselus in armes, but when they vnderstood of the K. power cōming against thē they cried for pardon, & least their chieftaine D. Mackerel monk, called captain cobler, to the cen∣sure of iustice. In february following the Pope by his instrument, cōpassed a meer cōmotion in Yorkshire,Rebellion in the North by Gods pro∣uidence qui∣eted. of 40000. rebels, but by the prouidēce of God, the night before the armies should ioine they were seuered, by a mighty fal of water, in somuch as vpon a part by the captaines of both sides, the rebels were appeased; & departed wt∣out blodshed: in the 3. yere of K. Eward the 6. the Pope to set vp his authority in Eng.General re∣bellion in K. Ed. the sixt his daies pu∣nished and pacified. by his sedi∣tious instruments moued generall rebellions through Eng. but they were ended wt the destru∣ction of the kings rebellious subiects. Q, Marie though vnsound in religion, had the better hand against her rebels: whom no doubt; God therin fauoured, for her godly father K. Henry the 8. as he did the Idolater Abdias for his greate grand∣father Dauids sake: But the manifold disgraces which our soueraign lady Q. Elizabeth hath gi∣uen vnto this bloody pope, (out of whose tirany, euē frō her very cradle, the Angel of ye lord hath
miraculously deliuered her maiesty) open the in∣comparable strength of Gods prouidence, and offer cause of admiration to the whole worlde: when (for our sinnes) Queen Mary committed both the word and fworde, to the hipocrisie and tyranny of the Cleargie, good lady, her life was assayled with a thousand publique and priuate practises, but the Angel of the Lord, stil stode be∣tween her and her harmes, and from the fetters of aduersitie, loosed, and crowned her Maiestie, with the supreame dignitie of this Realme, and as a prognosticatiō of his ruine by her renown: the yeare that God placed her royall throne, he displaced these christian Princes,The Popes friends drop∣ped away, whē Queene Elizabeth was crowned. the Popes great friendes. The Emperor Charles the sift, the Queene of Hungarie, Queene Mary of Eng∣land, two kings of Dēmarke, Bona, Sferza Queen of Polonia,, Henrie the third, the French king, Ie∣rolme Pruoli Duke of Vennice, Hercules Daeste, Duke of Ferrara,A figure of the popes fall. and Paule the fourth, Pope of Rome, that these setled friēds of the Pope being remooued, other princes better affected, or at lest not so hurtful, to the passage of the gospel, might occupy their places, the Pope and all his fauo∣rers, while their strength yet lasted, shot to de∣priue her maiestie of her crowne and dignitie, God so strengthned her maiestie, as by her pow¦er the French were dishonorably driuen out of Scotland, and by her wisedome,Victorie a∣gainst the French. both Realmes were deliuered from forraine bondage, yea the King of Scottes is bound to confesse, that from God, and her Maiesties goodnesse, he and his
posterity possesse a kingdome: this peaceable victo∣rie against the french, discomforted the Pope a few yeares:Victorie a∣gainst the northren Rebel. in fine, Pius Quintus set D. Morton, an eng∣lish fugitiue, a worke, to raise a commotion in the north parts: the Earle of Northumberland, the Earl of Westmerland, and others entred into open rebelli∣lion: the very sound of her Maiesties power disma∣ed them, and happy was he, that could run fastest away: the principals fled, but escaped not the iustice due vnto traitors:The Earl of Northder∣land beheded the Earle of Northūberland was soone broughte vnder the censure of her maiesties lawes, and according to his deserte, was beheaded at Yorke:Misery of the Earl of west∣merland. the Earle of Westmerland, euer after for a bare allowance, was subiect to the proud controle∣ment, of euery raskal Spaniard: Felton, to drawe her Maiesties subiects from dutiful obedience, set vppe the Popes Bul vpon the Bishop of Londons gates,Felton ex∣cuted. but (God be praised) the hornes that shold haue go∣red the innocent, turned into a halter to hang mai∣ster Felton: the Pope expected no good successe by o∣pen force, and therefore he now armed his practises with Machiuels pollices.Madder and Barlowe executed. Madder and Barlowe were made instruments, to murther some principal Ma∣iestrates, but their confusion was speedy, & their purpose frustrate. This wily Pope, with an ambi∣cious humour,The Duke of Norfolke, beheaded. then infected the principal Pear and most popular subiecte of England: his treason was so dangerous, as the person of the Queens maiesty, and the peace of England, could not be in safetie vn∣till the Duke was set lower by the head: in whose confusion by Gods prouidence the peace of England was no waye troubled: the conspiracie of Throg∣morton,
Apleyard,Q. Elizabeths death practi∣sed by nigro∣. Brooke, and others, had no better successe, then in helping some of those wicked mem∣bers to the gallowes The Pope & his instruments seeing the pollicie of man, preuailed not against the Lords annointed, they set the deuill a worke to de∣stroy her sacred maiestie. The notable traitor Do∣ctor Storie (whom God woulde haue cutte off,D Storie ex∣ed. by the censure of her Maiesties lawes) confessed that cer∣taine persons (of whome there is yet, that liueth by vertue of her princely word & mercy) vndertooke to destroy her excellency by Nigromancie: but the de∣uil had no power, where the Angel of the Lord was the shielde of his annointed:Stukelevs treaton fru∣strate. by the solliciting of the Athiest Stukeley, the pope tooke hart of grace, by o∣pen force to alter the godly gouernment of England, and for his better strength, Stukeley thought to haue compassed the K. of Portingals armie, after an ende of his battail with Mulei Maluco, King of Feze, and Marocoes,Stukeley slaine. but Gods prouidence turned his hope, to an idle fancy, for in that battail, the K. of Portingale was slaine, his army was discomforted, and Stuke∣ley was cut off, from disturbing of the peace of Eng∣land. But yet of keepe the Popes purpose a foote, Iames fitz Morrice an Irish Traitor, tooke vpon him to be the Popes captaine: a man both for courage, iudgemente, and experience, better armed to doe mischiefe then Stukeley: and to make passage for forraigne power, he conuayed himselfe into Ireland, where he soone allured the Earle of Deasmonde, sir Iohn his brother, and others vnto rebellion: but such was Gods iustice (when the Traitor Fitzmor∣rice least thought to be surprised) hee was casuallie
slaine, before he saw any successe of his treason.The traitor Fitzmorrice slaine. D. Saunders supplied his place, and after him followed the Italian and Spanish forces:The Popes forces in Ire∣land put to sword. it was Gods good pleasure, to giue her maiesty sohonorable a victory, as not one man escaped to carrie newes, saue a ve∣ry few that were spared toreporte the mercie and power of her Maiestie:D. Saunders died of a frezie in the mountaines. Doctor Saunders wandred vp and down in the Mountaines like a rogue, and died of frensie: the Earle of Deasmonde was driuen to liue like a begger in the Mountaines, and to finish his miserable life,The Earle of Deasmond beheaded. after his accustomed and sauage maner, had by an Irish man his head strokē off in his Caben: sir Iohn his brother like a Wolfe in the wooddes wandring to seeke some pray,Sir Iohn of Deasmond beheaded. was taken and headed after his owne vsage: when the practize of the Pope concerning open rebellion was thus rent in peeces, necessitie droue him, by his va∣grant Iesuits in euery corner to sound sedicious Schi∣meons proclamation, which was to entertain mur∣theres, theeues, A thiests, & all maner of disconten∣ted persons, into the seruice of the pope, to the intēt that they should murther the Q. maiestie, and alter the state of this gouernmēt, both in matters of reli∣gion & pollicy: these Iesuits in disguised habits, some like ruffiās, some like seruingmē, & ye most like cour∣tiers transformed themselues at pleasure like vnto Protew,Campion and diuers seditious Ie∣suits execu∣ted. and made their night walks like owles, not wtstāding Gods prouidēce hath deliuered their Champion Campion, and diuers others of thē, into the hands of Iustice, & Iustice by orderly trial after ward condemned Campion, and some of the most malitious of the Iesuits to the Gallowes, whereof a
number of good subiectes wondred at their deformi∣ties, and plainely saw that the Lord of hoasts, hea∣ped the deuices of the wicked vpō their own heads, and shewed foorth the vncomely priuities of Bebi∣lon, according to promise. West. With your fauour sir,originall of the Iesuits. I the lesse maruel yt these Iesuits, sow their seditiōs in such disguised, warlike, & ruffianly order, and intice men to violent murther, without difference of persons, when their first founder Ignatius Layola was a spanish souldi∣er, who decreeped with woundes, to keepe himselfe frō begging in age, disguised himselfe with the ha∣bite of holinesse, and with counterfeit miracles be∣gan this holy order, not vnlike to the curtisanes of Rome, who when the sale of their bewtie is past, professe themselues Nunnes to get them a liuing by cloister brokadge in their age. Walk. in very trueth since the time that it plea∣sed God,Rebellion coulored by religon. to make the glorie of himselfe, and the passi∣on of his sonne Iesus to be knowne and reuerenced among the Gentiles: the godly embraced religion to nourish their soules: and the wicked dissembled religion, to pamper their carnall bodies, and when that experience discouered, that the multitude were like vnto a barrel that is ready to receaue euery li∣quor, and that with hasty running they followed e∣uery new doctrine, the ambitious Athiests straight deuised some new forme of deuinity, to rob God of his glorie, many men of their liues and liuelyhode, (but which is most to be lamented) huge milliōns, of their saluation: in the primitiue church there were such a huge sight of heretiques, as christendome re∣sembled
a mighty armie,Ambition and enuie is the cause of al¦heretiques. wher the souldiers vnder a number of seuerall Ensignes followed seuerall Captaines, for after euery heretique followed a multitude of people. The enuious Monke Sergius, through enuy that his heresie in Cōstantinople was put to silence, deuised the damnable secte of Maho∣met, and to strengthen his purpose, he picked foorth Mahomet, the most proud, arrogant, and insolent person of Arrabia to take vpō him to be a prophet, & by magick wroght such counterfeit miracles, as to this day a great part of the world are led  his er∣ror. One Ismael seeing what force followed the ban∣ner of new religion, deuised a religion different frō Mahomets, & by the strēgth of his followers, grew in fine to be the great Sophie of Persia, the vnnatural enemie to the great Turke. The number of orders of Friers, had their beginning for the most part from ambition, or enuie, and to this day there is a ma∣litious hatred among them, as whosoeuer wil read Erasmus dialogue, called Funus, shal well perceaue, & seing the knaueries of the old orders of the friers waxed so publique as the date of their credite wea∣red out: your reason is probable that the wounded souldier Layola deuised this newe order of Iesuits, vnder the habite of holinesse, to sustaine his age in the reputation of his youth, and at this day there is in Italy a newe order, called the fellow∣ship of the Trinitie, wherin are Tinkers, Tailers, Tilers; and al mecanicall crafts men: and questi∣onles, if some notable Nigromancer to worke some false miracles, would enter into their raternitye, the dignitie of their order, would soone out way the
redite of the Iesuits: but to our former pupose, if the Deuill and al his furies ioyned with the pope & his disciples, their pollices should take no effect against Gods prouidēce. The murthering Iesuits thought y• they had sped of their purpose, when they had ouer∣come the hairebraine Gentleman Sommeruile,Sommeruile hanged him∣selfe. to murther her Maiestie (whome the Lorde alwaies keepe out of the violent handes of traitors) indeede they had picked foorth a dangerous instrument, as a man so graceles, as he was fearles, to lay violent handes vpon him selfe: but in his confusion was seene the Prophesie of the Psalmist: His owne tongue made him to fall, and all that hearde him laughed him to scorne, he was first discouered by the suspition of his owne speach and by his ouer∣throwe it was perceaued, that God shotte at him with a swift arrowe which wounded him, he made such haste to his deserued death: as this Traitor hanged himselfe the night before the appoynted day of his execution.Arden executed, The close Traitor Arden, was by Sommeruils discouery brought to confusion.Throgmortō executed. The dangerous traitor Throgmorton as cunning∣ly as hee disguised his odious treasōs was intrap∣ped in the snares which he set for his Countries de∣struction: and worthelie died with the sword which he had whetted for the innocent. The odious Athi∣est Parie had the rewarde of his fellowe Trai∣tors: he had the place and opportunitie (which pru∣dence I hope will keepe al other suspitious persons from) and yet as graceles as he was the very ma∣iesty of her Maiesties countenance made him loose his resolution,Parry ezeeu∣ed. with the selfe same vertue that ap∣peared
in the faces of the two magnanimous Ro∣manes: Marius and Crassus, where of the one with the motion of his eies, and the other with the stout∣nesse of his speach, redeemed themselues from death: The prouidence of God in bereauing the traitors of so valiant a Captaine, as the Earle of Northumberland, euery good subiecte to his comfort perceaueth,Henry Percie Earl of Nor∣thumberland slew himselfe with a dag. who had so deeply entred into disloyal∣tie as his owne cōscience condemned him, and ther∣fore to saue the honor of his house, slew himselfe. If the popes instruments had iudgement to way, that no one that actually practised her Maiesties death, or depriuement, hetherto escaped the visible ven∣geance of God: if her Maiesties goodnes, and their duty could not moue them to loue, yet the assurance of punishmēt, and the continuance of shame, might feare them to be disloyall: but alas, those whose hearts are hardned, haue their iudgements blinde,When it ple∣seth God to harden the harts of the wicked, he likewise blin¦deth their iudgements. and their affections swift to run vpon destruction. Pharao was warned with diuers plagues: that hee should not hinder the departure of the children of Is∣rael forth of Egipt: yet he would needs follow them to his vtter destruction. The report of the Souldi∣ors concerning the glorie of Christs resurrection, suf∣fised to haue conuerted the Iewes,Visable war∣nins of God turned to strengthen the errors of wicked. but to their con∣demnation, the Deuill & money sealed this errour in their harts, that his disciples stole him away by night. Gods iustice strooke Mahomet with the fal∣ling licknesse to make him knowe, and repente his blasphemie, but to strengthen the peoples misbeleefe, the deuil taught him to say, that his pas∣sion proceeded of the cōference with an angel whose
deuine presence, his earthly shape could not endure vpon the principal day of the sauage murther in Paris, as a token that Gods word should florish in dispite of their crueltie:A dead tree bore greene leaues, when the sauage murther at Paris was in execution. a withered tree bare greene leues in the churchyard, that receiued many a mur∣thered carcasse, and yet the papistes on the contra∣ry part, applied this prophising example, to the se∣cond florishing of their Romish church: thus blinde they are, in the successe of their errours and wicked∣nesse, as euermore they turn the presage of their ru∣ines, to the apparance of their prosperitie, & with these vaine hopes, Babington, and his fellowe trai∣tors, were ledde vnto the follies and falles of the a∣boue named vnloyall subiects: and therefore how∣soeuer they perswade themselues, and threaten the multitude with a change of their prosperitie: so long as we feare God, and be true to her Maiestie, our peace wil vndoubtedly last, and the disturbers thereof, are like to taste their fortunes, that bought the horse Seian, whose maisters had euermore mise∣rable endes. VVest. You haue answered a matter which rai∣sed much feare, and a great deal of speach amongst the common people, so comfortably and truly, as cannot but be the cause of great ioy and contentmēt vnto the ignorant multitude, and no doubt a specta∣kle of great terror vnto Traitors, to punish whose offences, no torture can be to violent: This Abing∣ton, was the last of the first seauen that were execu∣ted: but forasmuch as the common brute was, that the other seauen condemned and iudged, should be executed the day following, I would gladly know
if you saw their executiōs? what speaches they vt∣tered, & what behauiour they vsed at their death? Wlk. I stayed to heare,Thomas Salsburie Esquier executed. and see the order of their deathes, and according to the generall expectation of the whole multitude, the daye following being the 21 of September, Salsburie was laid alone vpon a hurdel, and other six, two, and two vpon a hurdel, were drawne from Tower hill, through the cittie of London vnto the former place of execution.The latter traitors exe∣cuted with ezeeding fauour. Salsbu∣rie was the first man that suffered, and in all points was handled as the seauen that suffered the day be¦fore, saue that he and the latter sir, were executed with this fauour, that they were suffered to hang vntill they were fully dead, before the rest of their execution was performed. West. It seemeth by their sauourable handling that although the greatnes of their offences, egged the sworde, to take away their liues, yet the out∣ward signe of their repētance obtained some com∣passion at their deathes. Wlk. In very deede, albeit that Salsburie was blinded with the superstition of papistrie, euen at y• point of death, yet he mildly acknowledged his gree∣uous offence, towards the Queenes maiesty, and in his last commendation, charged all Catholiques, (for so he onely accompted the Papistes) that they should leaue to attempt to set vp their religion by violent hand: and by double and treble repeticion,Violence  bidden by Salsburie, he counselled them to pacience, and earnestly for∣bed them all maner of violence. Walk. This gentleman by his execution, shewed all traiterous papistes, the assured reward of trea∣son:
and by his profitable admonition, a more neces∣sarie doctrine for them to followe, then the seditious perswasions of al the Iesuits in the world: he was a Papist at point to die, so that it stādeth with reason, that through the onely working of his censcience, he published to the world, that the violent courses of Subiectes were odious, when we doubte nt but Ballard and other Iesuits, had once blowne into his eares, that the same was meritorious: all ma∣ner of violence by which the life of man is taken a∣way, is murther, except the execution by the sword of iustice, which belongeth to the Kinge, and his ministers, onelie where the gouernemente is Monarchia: excepte also the violence done in righteous warres, and other slaughters by cau∣sualtie. And whosoeuer looseth his life by any o∣ther violence, the same man is murthered: whose blood, GOD will seuerely punish. GOD pu∣nished the murther committed by Caine with a moste bytter curse: and yet, that there might bee no protection in murther,The odious∣nesse of mur∣ther. GOD saide himselfe, That whoesoeuer slewe the reprobate Caine, it shoulde be auenged seauen folde. GOD requireth the blood of innocents, at the handes of Kinges and annointed Princes. To punish the faulte of King Dauid in seeking the death of Vrias, GOD tooke a∣way the life of the childe which Dauid had by Vrias wife: furthermore, in the time of King Dauid, there was three yeares famine, and Dauid, demaunded the cause why? and the Lorde saide, it was for Saule, and the house of bloode, because he slewe
the Gybonites. According to the opynion of Eras∣mus, the consenter in murther is as guiltie as the dooer, Iudas that betraied Christ, and Pilate that adiudged him death onelye to please the Iewes, carried the burthen of murther in their consciences,Iudas and Pi∣late died by the rown vi∣olent hands. and by the horror thereof, wrought their owne de∣structions, that either mighte die by the violent hande of the moste wicked personne aliue. The heathen men at Milite, when they sawe the vi∣per to hange vpon Paules finger, euen from the verye hatred of nature, they murmured and saide: This man must needs be a murtherer, whome, though hee haue escaped the danger of the ea, yet vengeance suffereth not to liue. Nature taught the Infidels to beleeue that vengeance followeth murther. And then reason may perswade Christians to assure themselues, that the blood thristie are worse then Infidels, and cannot escape the sworde of ven∣geance: seeing then that Kinges, if they shead a∣nye bloode otherwise then by the sworde of iustice, and Iudges, if they adiudge death for hatred, feare, or gaine, by Gods righteousnesse are puni∣shed as murtheres: What may they expecte, that in corners laye violent handes of annointed Kinges, or without collour of authoritie, mur∣ther the innocente, If the eies of their vnder∣standing were not blinde, they mighte see a doubtefull successe in their purpose, and the open consution of themselues. I haue reade of a num∣ber both of good and adde Princes and also of other, which haue bene bereaued of their liues by
the violent handes of secreat traitors: but among a hundred, you shall hardly read of one murtherer, that hath escaped the torture of Gods vengeance. Brutus and his partakers, murthered Iulius Caesar, but not one of them escaped a violent death: yea, the common people so loued Caesar, as to be reuenged, they violently ran vpon all the friendes of Caesars e∣nemies, and by way of instruction the opinion is ge¦nerall, that if for our sinnes, it had pleased God, to haue suffered our most excellent queene to haue sal∣len into the violent handes of these vilde Traitors, her maiesties louing subiects being the most of the better sorte, and the whole sway of the commons, would without respecte of persons, haue violently intreated euery knowne Papist, as the Romane multitude did the friends of Caesars enemies: and to continue this terror to murthering Traitors, with latter examples: the Archbishop of Pisa, together with the kindred of the Saluiatij, the famely of Pazzie and other the ancient houses of Florence,Conspiracie of Florence murther pre∣tēded against the Medeci punished. enuying the popular fauour of Segnior Iulian and Lawrence de Medeces, who thē principally gouerned the state of Florence, conspired to murther the two Medeces. To preuent suspition, and to bereaue the brethren of publique succour, which in the streetes they were like to finde, the conspirators made choice of the church for their slaughter house: and vpon a Son∣day at mid mas, one of the conspirators slew Signi∣or Iulian, & Laurence de Medeces by Gods prouidēce escaped into the Saccristiary• suddain brute of this as∣sault, set al the cittie in an vprore, the conspirators cried, liberti: and the multitude life to the Medeci, &
vengeance vpon the conspirators: to be briefe, with in the space of three howers the Archbishop of Pisa was hāged, Ieames Saluiatij, Ieames de Pazzi, Antho¦ny de Volterro and diuers others of the cōspirators were slaine in the furie of the people: Barnard Ban∣dyn was led naked into the market place and there hanged: the rest of the conspirators, their seruants, and fauourers, were in this sort ouerthrowne, and which is moste grieuous: their posteritye haue euer since bene subiects to the Monarcall gouernmente of the house of Medeces. Galeas the sonne of Frauncis Forze, and Duke of Millen, for his odious vices and extreame tirranny, was generally hated of all the people of the cittie, he slew his mother, and by fear of force, abused the greatest part or the virgins and faire women of Millen, so that to redeeme the Citie from this seruitude, and tyrannie, three yong Gen∣tlemen of anchient howses in Millen, conspired the Dukes death, their names were Charles viscounte, Iohn Andrea, and Ierolme Olgiat: these gentlemen kept their resolucion, & as the Duke was atten∣tiuely hearing of mas, said by the Bishop of Coma, they so violently assailed Galeas,The murther of the tyrant Galeas Duke of Millen punshed. as they left him dead in the church, God suffered this vengeance to light vpon the tyrant, yet in his iustice would not suffer the cōspirators to escape vnpunished, Andrea and Viscounte were both slaine in the hurley burley of the people: Olgiat was afterward apprehended by the ministers of iustice, and albeit he redeemed the Cittie frō a great bondage, yet for that the good that they receiued, proceeded from an euil action in Olgiat, they executed him as a cōmon traitor. The
late King of Scottes,Murther of the late K of Scots puni∣shed. was villanously murthered: the greatest fauourers & (according to published re∣cords) the greatest procurers of the saide murther, were by common iustice drawne to commit, al∣most all the murtherers into the hands of the hang∣man, and such as escaped, or were not bounde vnto the censure of law, could by no meanes shift them∣selues from the vēgeance of God. Iohn Iarugo that first assailed the godly prince of Orrenge, had the cō∣mon reward of traitors, and the most odious Athi∣est Balthazar Serack that slew him: notwithstāding ye blessing of the pope,Murther of the godlie prince of O∣renge puni∣shed. the cōmēdation & threatning of the king of Spaine, exchanged the pistoll where with he slew the prince, for tortures to execute himselfe. I could aleadge infinite examples to disswade men from violent murther, which Gods prouidence ma∣ny waies preuenteth, whē his iustice neuer leaueth ye murtherer vnpunished. It is a special pollicy that the Iesuits vse, to draw yong gentlemen to these de∣sperat treasons: for if they had iudgmēts to obserue ye infortunes of such practisers, or experience to looke into the currants of time: they should see the attēpt as vaine a matter, as to throwe stones against the Starres, or with a knock of their head, to leauell a mountaine, that seek to displace a beloued Prince. West. I pray God the good counsel of this trai∣tor Salsburie may settle obedience in al mens harts, and the better to bridle the malitious affections of the disloyall, they assure thēselues by their outward apparance, that the multitude will entreate them, (and all their partakers) as the Romanes did the quellers of Caesar, or as the Florentines did the con∣spirators
against the Medeces. Wilk. After Salsburie was with al possible fauor executed, Dun was stripped into his shirt,Henry Dun gent executed. who see∣med very penitent for his grieuous offēce, & after yt with very earnest perswasion, he had likewise dis∣swaded the Romish catholikes frō attempting any matter of violence, was executed with exceeding much fauour. West. This Dun, as the report goeth, liued (rea∣sonably) wealthely: but it seemeth, the humour of the man, was not contented with a reasonable vo∣cation,Ambitious humour of Dun. as appeared by his vain imagination, who in Trinitie terme last, cōming into the kings bench office, among other pleasant speach to one of his fa¦miliars: you wil marueil ({quod} he) to see me within one quarter of a year to walke vp & down with twenty men after me: where vpon an acquaintance of his plesantly answered, ye he feared he shoulde first see him followed to the Gallows with a thousand mē. Walk. Dun shewed his desire,The roote of rebellion. and the other red his destiny, & in this obseruance, you haue showen the working cause of most treasons: for though to draw ye affections of the multitude, religion or some other publique benefite be the pretence:Admoniton for the ambi∣tious. Ambitiō, & desire of dignity is y• welspring of rebelliō: but these yt wil fly without wings, are like to fall before they be wise, he yt is born to be a seruāt ought in no wise to looke for double and treble attendants: dignitie is like a Phane on a high tower, which is subiect to the chaunce of Fortune, as the other to the chaunge of the winde: and whoe so will sitte therevpon sure, hee muste like the ,
get experience with slowe climing, least in taking a swifter course, like vnto a birde, he be remooued with the least stone that is throwne: I mean with the least disgrace of fortune: if mens mindes grow bigger, then their natural conditions, there are ma∣ny examples of vertue to imitate, which haue rai∣sed sundrie men from the carte to the hiest degree of honour, when in climing by treason, many millions of honorable estates, die dishonorably, and to their posteritie leaue no better inheritance then infamy, let the ende of this traitor be a warning example to all ambitious humored men, that destruction fol∣loweth presumption, and that the climing of pride will haue a falle. Wilk. When the execution of Dunne was fini∣shed,Edward Iones Esquire executed. the next that plaied his parte was Iones: this Traitor by that which was easie to be gathered of his behauiour at the Gallowes, was a close pa∣pist of a shrowd reach, and a very dangerous mem¦ber in this common wealth: for notwithstanding he protested, he disswaded Salsburie from this odi∣ous enterprise, his owne tale shewed that his coun∣saile proceeded of a fear that he had, that the proud humour of Babington threatned an ouerthrowe of their purpose, rather then of any dutieful zeale that he bare towards the safetie of the Queenes maie∣sty: for he neither would himselfe discouer his trea∣son of the highest degree of treasons, neither did hee councell his friende Salsburie to preuente his owne danger in discouering the conspiracie of his compa∣nions: yea, when the odiousnesse thereof broke out into publique knowledge, contrarie to the general
duetie of a good subiect, and in contempt of a special warrant derected vnto him, he not onely refused (as he himselfe confessed) to apprehēd Salsburie being in his house, but so far as he might, succored him, after that he was published to be of the most wicked con∣spiracie, one especial thing that, neuertheles, moued a number to pitty him aboue the rest: with behemēt wordes he protested, that though he was a Catho∣lique in religion, yet he so deepely weyed the liberty of his countrey, as that he would and euer was re∣dy to spend his life in withstanding any forraigneForraign i∣uasion repro∣ued by Iones. enemie: French, Italian, Spanish, or whatsoeuer. The tollerating of muasiō, by whose opinion was so far from nature, and christian duetie, as no excuse nor punishment might satisfie the crime. West. It is a wonder that papists, who holde it damnable to harken to the counsels of Protestants are not admonished by the censures, and warnings of papistes themselues, at the point to die: but con∣trary to the iudgemente of their fellowes conscien∣ces in that fearful passage, they follow the seditious perswasions of Iesuits, that they shal greatly work the libertie of their countrey, in deliuering the same into the handes of forraigne gouernors, otherwise, they would neuer haue giuen succour and aid, to the Italian forces in Ireland, or (as it is one especiall point of their treasons) in all their conspiracies to practize a forraine inuasion. Walk. Those whose hearts it pleaseth God to harden, haue neither eies to looke into their owne danger, nor iudgement to consider of their owne be¦nefit, and no doubt this traitor, hauing his consci∣ence
prepared to die, saw the odiousnes, and vnna∣turalnes of this kind of treason, which the corruptiō of his life litle respected, or rather fauoured, for as the case standeth with the Papists (God be praised for blessing her Maiestie and the Maiestrates with such prudent foresight) he that setteth his hearte to treason,Forraigne inuasion vn∣natural. inclineth his affection to forraign inuasion, as otherwise out of hope to see the wished successe of his desire: but since it pleased God to commend by this publique enemie, the natural liberty of a mans countrey: and by conclusion, to discommend his el∣lowe traitors who continually labour the bondage thereof. It shall not be amis for our instructions to enlarge our conference with the odiousnesse and and vnnaturallnesse, and the Papists owne daun∣gers contained in this Archtreason: we see that if two Mastiues egerly fight, neuertheles, at the sight of a Beare, they part themselues and flie vpon their natural enemie: forraigne seruitude is as vnnatu∣rall, and odious, to euery Nation, as the Beare to the Mastiue. To be ridde of which seruile yooke, atExample by the Iewes. such time as Titus Vespatian belieged Ierusalem: notwithstanding there were thousandes of the Ci∣tizens dailye slaine with ciuill traies, yet at euerie assault of the Romanes, the Iewes ioyned so assured∣ly together, as if the multitude had beene but one hand: we reade in Chronicles of a number of good men that haue ben ingratefully & vnkindly intrea∣ted of their own country: and of a very few so badde (vntil this wicked age) that preferred a stranger toExamples of louers of their country the gouernmēt of their natiue country: Themistocles the good Athenian, was vniustly banished Athens & for succour was driuen to go to K. Artaxexces, the A∣thenians
sworn enmy: Artaxerxes glad of this aduan¦tage, laboured to guide his army against Athens: & whē the Captain could no longer wtstand the kings importunitie, he drunke buls blood and died, rather then he would reuenge the ingratitude of his coun∣try with forraigne bondage: there was mortal ha∣tred betweene two worthye Captaines, Cretinus Magnetius, & one Hermias, so y• the whole countrey was occupied wt their discord, but whē the K Mithri¦dates assailed their countrey, Cretinus Magnetius vo∣lūtarily banished him selfe, that y• ielosie of their ha∣tred might not hinder y• publique seruice of his vali∣ant enemy Hermias: y• traitor that for his priuate ad∣uancement laboreth to betray his country, would if his countries danger so required be loth to follow y• exāple of K. Codrus, who vnderstāding that y• liber∣ty of his country stood vpō the losse of his life, he pre∣sently in the habite of a slaue entred the camp of the Peloponians, & Dorians, his enemies & there quarel∣led vntil he was slaine: to do their countrey seruice, Anerus, K Midas son, & Curtius, voluntarily leaped into a deuouring gulf of y• earth: Caius Graccus sacri¦fized his own daughter, & y• noble Roman Seuola ad¦uētured alone to kil Poisinus in his camp. In auciēt time mē bore this zeal toward their country y• a nū∣ber in deence thero, ran vpon violēt death. If these general traitors had but experiēce, to cōsider of ther own thradom, they could not be so redy to welcome y• forraign enemy wt one hand, as they woulde, bee forward to throwe him forth with al their force, the Popish Cleargie who with Cardinall Poole say, Roma mihi patri est, helpte the Spaniarde into
England, the king of Spaine and his counsellors, la∣boured for the Monarcal Diadem, and as the time then serued, they thought, and it is verye like, they had wrought diuers of the Nobilitie to fauour their purpose:The purpose of the King of Spaine in Queene Ma∣ries daies. it is easie to be iudged, the euill that they meant vnto their enemies, when they purposed to deale thus with their friends: they determined first by their help to cut short such of the nobility as they found contrary to their desire, and then they meant to make their friends safe with honorable dignities abroad whereof, they should take such sound posses∣sion, as they should neuer see England again: as who¦soeuer hath seene a letter in forme of an admonition written by the godly martyr M. Iohn Bradford to the nobilittie of England, may more largely perceiue: Bernardin de Mendoza, y• late ambassador for Spain, (who trained Throgmorton a principall traitor,A pollicie of Barnardin de Mendoza. and many others no doubt vndiscouered, to make a pas∣sage for a forraigne inuasion,) after his forced de∣parture out of England, diuers times hath said, that if he had continued stil in England he wod not haue left a Papists head of anye account standing vpon their shoulders: meaning, that before the comming of the Spanish power, to leaue no man of estate or reckoning, that might lawefullye looke to strike a stroke in their gouernment, for the Spaniard will be Domine, fac otum, wheresoeuer he ruleth: & where is then the reckoning of those traitors, that look for dignitie by this vnnaturall treason. West. You haue already red their fortunes, and I praye God both by the falles and follies of these traitors, that all English men may haue their harts
(to withstand the forraigne enemye) strengthened with the protestation of Iones his tongue, at the hower of his death. Amen. Wilk. After Iones had paide the price of his trea∣son with all possible fauour,Iohn Tra∣uis & Iohn Charnok Gent. executed. Charnock was excecu∣ted, and after him Trauis, both men as it seemed be∣witched with an ignorant deuotion, for that in their endes there was nothing to be obserued, but their praying to our Lady, calling vpon Saintes, ioyned with a number of ceremonies, crossings & blessings, so that it appeared,Their igno∣rant deuoti∣on dāgerous. that in their prayers they were bound to a forme more then vnto faith. Walk. The Pope can finde out no instrument so constant for his purpose, as the ignorant peron be∣wiched with his superstitious deuotion, for he reso∣lutely followeth whatsoeuer is giuē him in charge: such a one was hairbraine Sommeile, that inten∣ded to kil her maiestie, whose life (as the life of Eng∣lands happines) God long continue: and such an o∣ther was young Iarugo, that first wounded the god¦ly Prince of Orage, whoe was so simple, as hee perswaded himselfe that the Pope had the power, and would cause him to doe the deed inuisible, and therefore the Pope was wont to practise moste re∣bellions by the ignorant multitude, who so long as they were blinded with his errors, were euer con∣stant in the execution of his pollices, and certainlye although the simple ignorance & error of these two traitors, were to be bemoned, yet the dāger of their treasons considered, their executions were verye necessary both for example, & her maiesties safetie. West. You say very truly.
Wilk. When the Hangman had giuen these two sencelesse papists his heauy blessing,Robert Gage Gt. ex∣ecuted. Gage pre∣pared himselfe to dy: he began his protestation, that there was neuer a subiect more bound to a Prince, then his Father was to her Maiestie: and from that true acknowledgement of her maiesties gratious∣nes,Her Mgrati¦ousnes com∣mended by this traitor. ell to excuse himselfe of the odious trealons for which he died: but vpon so weake a ground, as the simplest indgement then present, founde by the order of his own confession, that he was a dange∣rous instrument for the Pope: he confessed that he accompanied Ballad the Seminarie Prieste into Yorkshire,Gages hipo∣crisie. and that he wrote a letter for the saide Prieste, to a French man or a Spaniard of accompte beyond the seas, and in al the course of his confession in indifferent iudgmēts he accused him selfe to be a hollow subiect and a sound Papist. West. This cunning traitor Gage, coulde neuer haue made a confession of more infamye vnto him∣selfe, then in acknowledging y• Queens most excel∣lent fauour, shewed vnto his father, which a dutiful sonne ought to esteeme a benefit vnto himselfe: & so to dauble reproch his treasons, he condemned him∣selfe of ingratitude: which vnnatural fault, Peran∣der, euermore sentenced wt death: but in my opinion, if y• Queen were les mercifull,her maiesties mercy renow¦  Rome the papists would be more faithful: for truly their punishment is so mide as by the faith o an honest man I heard in Rome, a Popish Prieste in the presence of other ugitiues, wish to be her maiesties psoner in the  rather then to enioy his liberty o concience in Rme. VVilk. It is verye likely, that the
Priest,The almes of Rome. was regarded in Rome as olde dogges are with their maisters, when the date of their hun∣ting is out, the sentence of their hanging is at hand, for I haue heard, how those marked people (that ho∣ly scripture wils vs to beware of) are welcome to Rome, and no lesse rewarded of the Pope, when those y• by their outward coūtenance promise not a rebellious spirite, are enterained neither with the one nor the other. West. You put me in remembrance of a special difference, that I obserued in Rome, which wel con∣firmeth your opinion, and is not impertinent to our conference: being in Rome, Anno dommini 1580, there was presented vnto the Pope a notale Eng∣lish shifter, who named himselfe Seamer, a one eyed person, and such a one as had abused sundry greate estates in Germanie: this man being in want, and withall vnlearned as he could hardly read English was a suter to the Pope to be entertained into the English Seminary,The disposi∣tion of the discribed by these exāples and ther to be instructed in the profession of the Iesuits, he soone obtained his pur∣pose, and with a blessing of crownes was short∣ly after commended to Rheames, and what there became of him I haue not heard: at the same time, there came to Rome an English Gentleman, won∣derfullye dronken with the zeale of the Romishe religion, he had sometimes a proper lyuing, and good store of mony lefte him by his father, which for the most parte he consumed in the fellowship of the Papists: in fine, he was enioyned by his confessor, (I thinke vpon pollicye because he hadde little lefte to maynetaine him) to resrayne from the
drinking of wine and from the eating of all manner of flesh: in the execution of which pennance, (for that in Italie there was smal store of fish, and no beere or Ale, he was for the moste parte, driuen to liue with bread and water: this Gentleman was so strickt in obeying pennance, and so deuout in the Popes ho∣linesse, as of a number of Papists he was derided: & of some other tickled, that he was a very Sainte vpon earth: but what woulde Rome and all the Seminaries of Italie doe for this ignorant and de∣uout Gentleman? Unto the shame of all Papists, I truly certifie, that with many a weary step, in the deepe of winter he arriued at Rome: he was (not without some repining) entertained wt eight daies allowance in the English Colledge: but one daies succour aboue, he could not compasse: he laboured to be admitted into the fellowshippe of the Iesuits, he was flatly denied, and in recompence of al his toile, charge, & zeale, he was constrained to leaue Rome with a bare purse, to seeke some new blinde aduen∣ture, his vsage made me to abhor the hipocrisie of Papists, and inwardly to lament the blindnesse of my poore countryman: we departed from Rome to∣gether, my selfe minding to go vnto Vennis, and he to Madona Deloreta. To showe all the follies of the man in our iorney were tedious,A blinde deuotion. and more ridicu∣lous: at euery two miles end, there was (lightlie) a Chappel, and where he found our Lady, or any o∣ther Saint fair painted, he would there kneel down and pray, but if the Images were in bad attire, he euermore past them ouer with the salutation of his cap: many a mile he stepped foorth of his way, to
reuerēce some old friers relick: at Loreto he turned their lewd lie of our ladyes house into English, & to purchase the Iesuits fauour,The Papistes faine our La∣dies house was by mira∣cle brought from Ierusalē into Italie. he did al the dueties of a Romish Catholique: but for all his sure, they woulde not admit him into their society: thus wandred he al the dead winter, from religious house, to religious house in Italy, & yet for al his pennance, and strait∣nes of life, the poore Gent. coulde not gette a resting place, the reason was as you haue saide, and I wel obserued, he shewed an apparance of an ignorant zeale, and no signe of a dissentious spirit. Walk. Wel, leaue we these dissembling Iesuits to the iustice of God, who visibly punisheth them with shame, & the most of their instruments with destru∣ction, and now neighbor Wilk. I pray you showe vs what obserued you in y• end of y• last of these traitors Wilk. The last that suffered, was one of the Bellamies,Ieremie Belamy Gent. executed. his countenance discouered him to be a setled papist: & as he could say little to saue his life, so at y• gallowes he said nothing to desēd his death. West. Although this traitor had but a dul spirit, yet it seemeth he had a mallitious heart: he and his friēds succoured Babington, & some of his coemates, when feare of the lawe, and shame of their odious treasons, made them to shrowde themselues like a Fox in the couert:One of the Bellamies hanged him∣selfe in the Tower. & it seemeth that they were as re∣solute to followe the treasons of Babington, as they were ready to relieue him from the daunger of the lawe: otherwise if this Bellamies brother had had an innocent conscience, he woulde neuer with violente handes haue hanged himselfe. Wilk. God be praised that these rotten branches
are thus cutte off: but if his prouidence preuent not the mischiefes, it is to be feared that of the root there wil grow many other, apt to bring foorth the fruite of publique disturbance. VValk. In very trueth, necessitie hath made the bloody deuices of the Scottish Q. so common, as no good subiect may iustly be forbidden, to deriue the cause, both of forraigne, and domestike conspiracies from her vnprincely heart: our sacred Q. Elizabeths mercy hath many yeares contēded with a number of fearful admonitions, to preserue both the life and honor of this most vnkinde queen: when the Scottes her own people pursued her life,Bookes writ∣ten against the Scottish Q. forbidden in England. and printed her de∣fame, the Queenes Maiesty entertained her, as Au¦gustus did his enemye Cinna: she gaue her her life, that many waies sought her own life: and was so carefull of her honour: that she forbad the bookes of her faults, to be conuersant among her english sub∣iects: which almost in euery other nation wer made vulgar: but Cinna after three times forgiuenes, be∣came (none so) faithful to Augustus: when this Scot∣tish Queen, being three times thrise forgiuen, remai∣neth (none more) bloodily infected to Queene Eliza∣beth: her own hand writings be witnesses. During the whole course of her abode in Eng. which may be properly called a protection, and no imprisonment: ther is nothing more manifest, then that her mallice thirsted the death of her own life. The currantes of her practises were so general: as euery good christi∣an prince know as much, and certified her Maiestie no lesse: in fine, seeing y• her pretēdings were not on¦ly against the person of her Maiestie, but that they
also reached to the change of christiā religion: some zealous members of the Church of God,A book long since written in french to sentence the bloody Pro∣ceedings of the Scottish Q with death in publi∣que writing did set downe, the daunger of her Ma∣iesties mercye: and in christian pollicy shewed by many waightie reasons, that God deliuered the Scottish Queen vnto the sword of her iustice, as he did many Idolatrous Princes, into the handes of the Kinges of Israell: but our most gratious queen notwithstanding these continual aduertismentes, with a magnanimous heart digested all this dan∣ger: yea, she was so farre from reuenge, as shee yeelded not to make her subiects partakers of thee forraine counsels▪ whom next vnder her, they prin∣cipally concerned: Lastly, when the continual im∣portunities of her louing Subiects, by all the E∣states of Parliament, tyred her Maiestie with pe∣titions to proceed to the sentence of her own lawes, her clemency found out delay, when Iustice would admit no excuse:The Scot∣tish Q. ex∣ecuted on wednes∣day, the 8. of Feb. 1586. but the delaye of execution proo∣ued so dangerous, as the safety of y• Queenes Ma∣iestie (was in iudgement of the wisest) held despe∣rate, so long as the Scottish Queen liued: & (ther∣fore) to the vnspeakable griefe of y• Queenes Ma∣iestie: though (otherwise) to the vniuersall ioy and desire of her subiectes, Iustice was executed vpon this vngodly Queene, vpon Wednesday, the 8. of Februarie 1586. The Lord be praised: who is the protector of our gratious Queen and al her good subiects, and who (hetherto) with his holy hand hath giuen her these peaceable victories, so wonderfully, as al y• world is occupied with the admiration therof, & that the
same God may blesse her highnesse, with a long & peaceable life. I beseech you accompany me to the Church, where with thankeful heartes, we may praise him for many receiued benefites, and with zealous spirites, humbly pray for the continuance of the same. West, With right good will we are ready to accompany you, and God for his sonnes sake ei∣ther turne the mindes of those that miswish her Maiestie▪ or speedely bring them to the shame and confusion of these Traitors before named, that haue worthely suffered for their most odious trea∣sons. Amen. FINIS.
