3509 S115506 99850725 15950
A CONSIDERATION OF CERTAINE POSITIONS Archiepiscopall. 1 Religion cannot stand without some Ceremonies, as kneeling &c. REligion is the feare of God to serue him precisely according to his word, and therefore it is called Godlines. Isa: 29.13. Act: 2.5. & 10; 2. & 26.5. 2: Tim: 3.5. Heb: 9.1. Iam. 1.27. As by Superstition his Majestie mea¦neth, when one restreignes himselfe to any other rule in the service of God, thā is warranted by the word. Bas. dor. pag 15. Which is therefore cal¦led Wilworship. Col: 2.21.23. Howsoever it be Religion, out of the feare and loue of God, to keepe his cōmandemēts as well of the second as first table, yet the conscionable ob∣serving of the commandements con¦teind in the first table is, by an ex∣cellencie, called Religion; And wheras
man cannot judge of such observing the first and third commandements therfore is he esteemed Religious, who maketh conscience of the 2 and 4: commandements; In sanctifiyng the Sabbath with such an outward man∣ner of worship, as is not after mans invention, but according to Gods word. So that by Religion, in this position is meant the outward (especially publi∣que) worship of God: Religion being put for worship, because the feare of God to serue him precisely accordīg to his word, is, of all the actions of men, especially to be manifested in worshipping God. Who will be sāc∣tified in all them that come nere him if they offer strange fire. Levit: 10.3. Religion (then) being put for Outward worship, the position is granted. For in deed the outward worship of God doth consist only of ceremonies, that is, outward demonstratiōs of inward
worship. But, how doth this follow, The outward worship of God cānot stand without some Ceremonies, er∣go. It cannot stand without the cere∣monies in question? As though Reli∣gion had no better ground than Dio∣cesan Bishops haue, according to this maxime: No Ceremony, no Bishop. But more clearely to perceiue the truth, it is to be considered that some ceremonies by nature, or generall cu∣stome demonstrate inward worshipp is not only signes thereof, but effects also. Other doe the same, as signes on¦ly by institutiō. By which instituted ceremonies God is not worshipped except they be by himselfe prescri∣bed; For as no fire could make any sa¦crifice a savor of rest to God, but that which came from God. Levit. 9.24. and 10.1.2: So no warrant can make outward worship, or any part thereof acceptable to God, but that which commeth from God. Math. 15.9.
Therfore it doth not follow, that be¦cause kneeling in prayer is lawful, ther¦fore the ceremonies in question (nāe∣ly the Surplice) be so to. For 1: Nature teacheth us to manifest inward reve∣rence by outward gestures. 2 Gene∣rall custome amongst us maketh knee∣ling the most solēne signe of the gra∣test reverence. 3 In true worshippers of God kneeling is not only a signe of inward worship, but an effect also. 4: It is warranted by the word. And 5 it is not appropriated to the outward worship of God: For men doe usual∣ly, & may lawfully, demonstrat their inward reverencing of men by knee∣ling. Wheras the ceremonies in que∣stion (namely the surplice) do not de¦monstrat inward worship by nature: For then all religious worshippers would (at least) haue a disposition to use the surplice at all times, and in all places. (2) None can affirme, that ge∣nerall custome maketh a Surplice a
signe of inward worship. Because the publicke use of it is most what omit∣ted or inforced, and there is no such matter as the private use thereof, and by privat persons. In both which con¦siderations it may be (3) denyed to be an effecte of inward worship, and the rather if it cānot be proved to be an effecte of the obedience of faith to some commandement of God, pre∣scribing the same. Which (4) cannot be; Seyng in all the new Testament there is nether precept, nor example; nor other matter of necessary conclu¦sion warranting the same. And yet (5 It is appropriated to the service of God, and therfore superstitious, and not religious, especially beyng urged as it is. 2 Ceremonies are lawfull, when their doc∣trine is lawfull. If by Doctrin of ceremonies be mēt their signification, then the Th sis is d¦nyed: For then other Popsh ceremo¦nies
may be restored. As setting up of Candles to signifie that the workes of all christians, Phil. 2.15. especially Mi∣nisters. Math: 5.14.16. should shine be∣fore men; and yet it is pronounced in the 3 Injunction to be devised by mans phantasie, besides scripture, and therfore Superstitious. And vnleavened bread in the Lords supper may signify Sinceri∣tie & truth. 1: Cor: 5.8. And yet by the Communion booke (Rub: after the Communion sect: 5.) it is reformed, To take away the superstition, which any person hath, or might haue: But many haue, and may haue Superstition in Ceremonies reteined. If the meaning of the positiō be this Ceremonyes are lawfull, when they are warranted by lawfull doctrine, it is to be graunted; but then the Hypothess must be denyed. For it is petitio prin∣cipii to affirme; that Ceremonies in question are so warranted. 3 The doctrine of Ceremonies is part of
the Gospell. This position is true, but onely accor¦ding to the distinctiō of the doctrine f ceremonies by institution. Which doctrine is either affirmatiue, shewing what Ceremonyes by institution are to be used, and those be only the two Sacraments, which are indeed Seal s, and not onely Ceremonyes. Or Ne∣gatiue, teaching what ceremonies are not to be vsed. viz: Neither Ceremo∣nyes of the Iewes, nor traditions of El∣ders. Iohn 4.20.21.23. Neither Carnall rites. Gal. 3.3. Heb. 9.10. Nor comman∣dements of men. Col. 2.22. Which negatiue doctrine of Cere∣monyes, is indeed according to the truth of the Gospell. Gal. 2.3.5.12.14 and that is contrary to the Ceremo∣niall law of Moses. Because that law stood in carnall rites. Heb. 9.10.11. That is, Ceremonies instituted to in∣struct & direct the outward man un∣to the inward service of God, & ther∣fore
was that law called a carnal com¦mandement. Heb: 7.16. and those Ce∣remonyes accounted Rudiments of the world. Gal 4.3. So that after faith (that is the Gospel) came, that law, and the Ceremonies therof gaue place, as be∣ing lesse perfect, a childish paedagogy & beggerly rudiments. 1 Cor: 13.10.11. Gal. 3 25▪ and 4.2.3.9. In respect of the more perfect word of Christ, Col: 3.16. 2 Cor: 3.13.17.18. Who is that Messias, who, when he cam, did tell us althinges concerning the outward worship of God. Iohn. 4.19.20.25.26. But Christ never told us the ceremo∣nyes in question. Therefore if the negatiue doctrine against Iewish Ceremonyes instituted by God to the purposes aforesaid, be part of the Gospell, or word of Christ, much more is the negatiue doctrine against ceremonyes instituted by mā to the same purposes, without war∣rant of the word, part of the Gospell.
Col. 2.20.22.23. Gal: 1.6.7.8.10. And e rather; because the word sayth, at they, who burthen the Church ith ordinances of the world, which e traditions after the commande∣ents and doctrines of men, doe not old Christ the head. Col. 2.19.20.22 & 3.1. and opposing such traditions o the commandements of God, and ith of Iesus, maketh them parte of e beastes marke. Revel. 14.9 12. Here nto accordeth that which is affir∣med in the booke of Cōmon prayer, in the preface of Ceremonyes, viz. Christ his Gospell is not a Ceremoniall law (as much of Moses was) but it is a religi∣ to serue God, not in bondage of the fi∣gure or shadow, but in the freedome of spirit. 4 Ministers refusing Conformitie are Schismatiques. This word Schisme according to thnow receaved use thereof in the Church, signifieth A voluntary ren∣ting
of the Church onely for matters of the outward goverment thereof. So that Schismatiques are by Doctor Bancroft, in his Notes before his Sermon at Pauls crosse, Anno 1588. defined as out of Augustine, to be such, as retei∣ning with us the true faith, seperat them¦selues from us for orders and Ceremonies. In which sence though Browist: (so called) may be deemed Schismatickes, yet not Ministers refusing onely to Conforme; be so accoumpted: Because, their deprivation or suspen∣sion notwithstanding, they doe not seperat themselues from the church, neither doe they (indeed) forsake the Ministery of the gospell, which they desire (before all worldly benefites whatsoever) to execure with a good conscience, but are thrust from it; and therefore, if men driven by excōmu∣nication out of the Church be not schismatiques, much lesse Ministers driven by deprivation or suspension
only from the execution of their Mi∣nistery. This word Schisme is sometimes ta∣en for any dissention in the church, herby the peace, but not the vnity, hereof is broken. 1. Cor: 11.18. In which sense they are to be called schis¦matickes, who are specially to be bla∣med for such dissention. But if all the Prelates cannot giue one Argument soundly concluded from the word, to proue, that the Ceremonies in que¦stiō may be prescribed by authority, and yeilded unto by the Ministery, without sinne, then are they Schis∣matickes, according to the judgment of the Apostle. Who beseecheth the brethren, to marke them diligently, who cause division & offences, besides the doc∣trine which they haue learned, and to a∣voyd them. For they that are such, serue not the Lord Iesus Christ but their owne bellies, and with faire speach and flatte∣ring, deceiue the heartes of the simple.
Rom. 16.17.18. By which answer Protestants doe sufficiently justifie their seperation from Papistes. Much more may Ministers justifie their re∣fusing to Conforme yet without se∣peration. But when any such Argu∣ment shall be given (which hath not yet been heard of) then are Mini∣sters refusing Conformity to be deemed Schismaticks. In meane while this Position is to be ta¦ken for Petitio principii.
A PROPOSITI∣ON. CONCERNING KNEELING in the very act of receiuing Howsoever. Published to satisfie professours, yet humb∣lie, Submitted to the iudgment of Prophets. Rom. 14.10.11.12. Why doest thou condemne thy brother, for it is written I liue (saith the Lord) and e∣uery Knee shall bow vnto me. So then, every one of vs shall giue accountes of himselfe vnto God. Cor. 10.14 22. Flee from Idolatry, Yee cannot be partakers of the Lords table, & of the table of Deuils. PRINTED. 1605.
To my Christian frend, N. grace & peace. Howsoeuer it greiueth mee to heare o much more to se the troubles wherewith Sathan (knowinge his time to be short) doth trouble the Church of God in all places about vnprofitable and Popish Cerimonies, yet (to tell you the whole troth) my greife is the lesse when I consider that both they them selues, who be most troublesome, and do most vrge those Reliques of Rome be ambi∣tious,Rom. 16.17, 18 Phil 3.2.19 Gal. 6.12. or Dumme Dogges or, non Resident, seruing their bellies, and minding Earthly thinges, euen like their Predecessors, who vr¦ged the Cerimonies of Mozes in the Primi∣tiue Churches, and their proceedinges (like them selues) be so exorbitant that they can∣not but proue odious to all men. VVhat a- matter is this, that after the Sacramentall Bread is ministred, the Cup should be denied because of not kneeling? If any of theis scru∣pulous Ministers had played such apart, thoughe it were with one, openly knowne to lie in sinne notorious without repentance, whom by the 26. canon no Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiuing of the holy Communion, how would that Precisian be trounced But in this Puritan Gouernement of the Church
there is no fault but non conformitie to super∣stitious vanities, A Bird of theit fether may Preach scores of Popish Doctrines, be scan∣dalous in life, and at his last cast at dice when he hath lost all, say, In the Spite of God let him do now what he can, and yet hould his owne well inough, An other mans owne and ill inough I mighte well say if the law might haue due course well, God amend all, and re∣straine the remnant of this Rage. In meane while I reioice to heare that it is giuen to any of Gods people not only to beleiue in Christ but also to suffer for his sake, hauing the same fight which they see or heare to be in their Ministers,Phil, 1, 27: as it becommeth the Ghospel of Christ, the sincerity wherof belongeth as well to the people as to the Ministers of Christ. for howsoeuer all are not to weare the where of Babilons Smocke, yet all are to make con∣sence of bowing the knee to Baal. To con∣firme your zeale against the superstition of Kneeling I haue longe sought (being often so∣licited so to do by you) and at length found a short but (in my poore iudgement at least to mee) a sufficient discourse which I haue printed, that I may comfort not onely you but many other also who are in doubt, with that comfort wherewith I my selfe am com∣forted of God. I say Comforted. For when
the iudgment is satisfied the heart is comfor∣ted▪ This onely I requyre of you that there be no inquiring after or gessing at the author or publisher. If that hurtfull curiosity were mortified learned men now fearinge that hu∣mor would be boulder to wright and pub∣lish their Godly iudgments, touching points in cōtrouersy among other I heare of a more larg & learned treatise of this point which no doubt the authour will publish in time or o∣ther for him if cursous heads itching eares, and wanton tongues do not hinder. In meane while let vs make as good vse of this, as wee can. And the Lord giue vs vnder∣standing in all thinges Farewell
KNEELING IN THE VERY acte of taking, eating and drinking the Sacramentall bread and wine, in the holy Communion cannot be without sinne. IT is to be vnder stood, that, howsoeuer Kneeling may (in it selfe considered) be esteemed a naturall gesture of the body, as standing, sitting, etc. yet in this case, it is by Institution of man. For neiher nature nor custome, doth teach vs ordinarily to knele when we eate & drinke neither doth the word require Kneeling in this case.  If it be by Institution, it must be either in respect of a more reuerēt receiuing, or Not. But if the most soleme signe of reuerence (vsed in theis partes of the world) be with out all respecte of reuerence, and that by Institution of authority, in so high a part of Gods seruice may not suche Kneeling be iudged, if not a grosse mocking of Christ, as was the souldiours their bowing of knes before him,Mh 27.29 Mal. 1.6 7. yet a taking of the name of god in vaine. Seing all significatiōs of honour, in Gods seruice, ought to be to the honour
of his name,T 4.2 2 King 5.18. and an othe not religiously intended (as in the nature therof it ought to be) to the honour of God, is the taking of Gods name in vaine. Did Naaman newly brought to the knowledge of God, attribut so much to bowing in the house of Rimmō when his master leaned on him, so that it was not his volūtary act? And shalwe, who haue had the Gospel long, kneeling by in∣stitution and determination, in a princi∣pall parte of Gods seruice, make no accoūpt whether wee honour god, or no, by such kneeling? If kneeling be Instituted for a more re∣uerent receuing, then it must be either in regard of God, or of bread and wine If in regard of god then must wee be well per∣swaded that such kneeling is an acceptable seruice vnto his Maiestie.Rom 12.1 & 1, 23. Isa 29 13. Mh 1.. And that this may be, we must consider, whether such kneeling be a wilworshipp or a seruice rea∣sonable, and according to Gods will. Least otherwise we finde our selues so far from honoring God, as that we provoke him. As
did Nadab and Abihu,Levit. 0.1.2 3 who offered in∣ense, but not with the very fire which God appoynted,1 Chro 13.10 & 15.12.13. and were therfore devou∣ed with fire. And as did King David, & the preists, who caried the Arke otherwise than it ought to haue been, and therefore Yzza died for it, with a sodaīe death. For God wilbe sanctified (if not By yet) In all them that come neere him. But kneeling is contrary to the example of Christ, and his Apostles,Luke 22.14. 1 Cor: 11.1. who ministred & receiued sitting, or in such a gesture, as in those countryes was most vsed at eating. From which example to differ, without warrant from Gods word cannot be with∣out fault. Seeing examples of holy men, much more of Christ, are to be followed, except there be some reasonable cause to the contrary. And the Apostle to reforme an abuse which crept (even in their times) into loue feastes, which were immediatly before, or after the Lords supper, did ba∣nish them thence, & reduced the manner of administring the Lords supper to the
first institution, saying:1 Cor. 11.22 23. shall I prayse you in this? I prayse you not. For I haue receiued of the Lord that which I haue also delivered vnto you etc. Wherby it is apparant, that that forme of administration, which differeth frō the first institution, is worthy no prayse and therfore no acceptable service to God. For if the Apostle would not tolerate an indifferent thing (as was a loue feast till then) to continue so nere the L. supper, whē it was abus d, how would they allow the chaunge of sitting into kneeling, especially in these two considerations? First, because the abuse of loue feasts (viz. superfluity) was never so great, and scan¦dalous, in the Apostles time, as the abuse of kneeling (viz. Idolatry) was and is in the sinagogue of Rome: And besides, Loue feastes wre either before, or after the L. suppr, whras kneeling is in the principal part of the holy Communion. Therfore if the Apostl banished Loue feasts from the I supper, because of the abuse, & brought the Church to the simplicitie of the first in , Is it not a tempting sinne to re∣taine
the Idolatrous kneeling of Papistes, and reiect the exemplary sitting of our M. Christ? And the rather, because it is in that sacrament, & in that part of the sa∣crament, which especially setteth forth our communion with Christ, & his Church, and is therfore called The communion.1 Cor: 10.16 17. In due consideration wherof, how can wee imagine, that Christ hath any honor by our kneeling? Seeing it swarneth, not only from his example, but also from the prac∣tise of all reformed Churches, except in England,Concertatio Ecclesiae Ca∣tholn argu. which the Papistes them selues call Puritan-papisticall, for retainyng this, and other popish corruptions, and, Se∣ing it may be an argument (especially to a papist not vnderstanding our tongue, that we haue communion with Antichrist, & & his sinagogue, at least in the Idolatry of bread worship. Which our failing, or care∣lesnes to avow our communiō with Christ and his church, and not abhorring all cō∣munion with Antichrist & his sinagogue cannot be without grevous sinne. Or els
Paul sinned,Gal 2.11, 12 1 Co 11.6 2  6.1 7. Dt. 12, 30, 3. when he rebuked Peter for not holding communion with the Gentils converted, and wrote without good war∣rant, where he saith: If any lust to be contenti∣ous, we haue no such custome, neither the Churches of God. & in another place: VVhat communion hath Christ with Beliall? Com out, and touch no vncleane thing. Doth not God streightly forbid vs to serue him, as Idolators doe their gods. These things cō∣sidered, Can kneeling wherwith Papistes doe honor their breadē God, be honorable to Christ, in his holy sacrament? Secondly, whereas the end of a sacrament is to informe the outward man, by sensible dmonstrations, it pleased our M. Christ to vse such a gesture, as, agreably with bread and wine, setteth out our communi∣on and spirituall familiaritie with him, and reioycyng in him. And therfore as he saith,enl. 3.20. ath, 8.11, If any heare my voyce, and open the dore, I will come in to him, and sup with him and he with me, so he saith, Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit with A∣braham etc. By which places it appeareth that as by supper, so by sitting, familiar re∣ioycing,
or rreioycing familiarity is expressed. In which respects the cōmunion s called the Lords supper & not A Sacri¦fice, & we are said to be pertakers of the L. table, & not of an alter.1 Cor. 11.20 & 10:21 And therfore not kneeling, and sitting is for receiving. Wee read not of any gesture of bodie pre∣scribed, or observed in Circumcision, and Baptisme as in the Passover & L. supper Because there needeth no materiall regard to be had of any certaine gesture in the 2.Exod 12.11 Numb. 9, 3.11.12. Math 5 17. & 26.20. former sacraments, so the foreskynne were cut of, and water be vsed: But in the o∣ther two, a gesture, answereable to the ac∣tion is requisit. And therfore God prescri∣bed to his people: when they were to flie out of Egeipt, the gesture of loynes gyrded, & staues in their hands, because the eating then of the passover was in hast. But that gesture being but for that time, as may ap¦peare by the omission therof, when the ob¦servation of the passover was established, our Master Christ, who came not to break but fulfill the law, and knew what was sit∣est
to be done, did not eate the passover sit∣ting, a gesture more answerable to eating in peace, than the former vsed in Egeipt. Wherby kneeling is convinced, as being a-gesture altogether vnanswerable to eating And the rather, because it darkeneth the counsell of God, and beyng a signe of the greatest Submission obscureth that Reioy∣cing familiaritie,Iob. 38.2. 1 Cor. 11.25 26. which the L. supper sig∣nifieth, and sealeth. Doe we not condemne the papists for ministring the communion in one kinde, because such an admini∣stration is against Christ his example, and doeth not liuely demonstrate the Lords death? Here a caveat is to be given, that none take occasion by this discourse, to iu∣stifie the childish paedagogy of signifiynge ceremonies devised by man, Seeing sitting was vsed by Christ, and the signification thereof is found in scripture. And therfore that childish paedagogy is not iustified by that worthy servant of Christ, M. Cart∣wright, his iudgment, viz. That sitting doth signifie our rest in Christ Iesus.
That kneeling may be more soundly con∣uinced as a wilworship, obiections are to be answered. Therfore where it is supposed that Christ and his Apostles ministred & receiued sitting but by occasion, and not of purpose: because they were sitting before in eating the passeover wheras if Christ had sitten down of purpos to administer the cō∣munion, then all that is said is graunted to be some purpose. The answer is short, yet full: Christ did sit of purpose, when he mi¦nistred his last supper. For after the passe∣over he rose, washed his disciples feet, and sat downe againe. If it be demaunded, why the Church is not bound to the time of evening, as well as to the gesture of sitting, sith Christ ob∣serued the one, as well as the other? It may be answered: Time being a common cir∣cumstaunce to every action (for nothing can be done,Ioh. 13.4.1 Gen. 2, 2 3. but in some time) the perticu∣lar time is not to be obserued, except Christ had sanctified it to the communion, as God sainctified the 7. day, on which he
rested,Math 26.31:5 Lek 22.53 or (at least) chosen it of purpose, a he did sitting. But wheras it was vpon spe¦ciall, and necessary occasion, for the passeo∣ver must eaten before the L. supper could be instituted insteed therof, and presently after supper the hower came, when Christ was to be betrayed, therefore if the Iewes transgressed not the institution of the pass∣over, by chaunging a gesture, at the first prescribed by God according to that their present occasion, in another sitter for a tīe of rest, much lesse doe christians transgrese the institution of the L. supper, by chaun∣ging the time taken by Christ vpon occasi∣on, but not prescribed, into some other fit∣ter (in discretion) for the ordinarie cele∣bration of the L. supper. As probably the Primitiue Churches did. For every first day of the weeke (viz. the L. day) the bre∣thren came togither to breake bread,Act 2:42. & 20.7: 1 Cor: 16, 2. Revel: 1.10: id est, to minister the communiō. So that either thy never met vpon the L. day, but in the evenning, or else they celebra∣ted the communion at some other times,
but for y alteration of the gestures of sitting, especially into kneeling there is not the least probabilitie. It is further obiected. That we may kneele in regard of prayers to be vsed, by prescrip¦tion of authority, at the deliueryng of the bread and wine. viz. The bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ which was giuē for thee, preseru thy bodie and soule into eternall life, and take and eate this. etc. Heere vnto these answers may be returned. Seing we reiect Christ his ex∣ample of sitting for kneeling, we must not stand vpon what we may doe, but humbly consider what we must doe. For if there be not a necessary, and a iustifiable cause both of those prayers, and of Kneeling in regard of them, doe we not presume vpon Christ his patience, in reiecting his exam∣ple? Now, what necessitie is there of those prayers, at that very time? Seeing prayers goe before, and follow after. Againe, must we needs kneele at every bitte of a prayer? Is their more necessity to obey a needlesse direction to kneele at those prayers, than to follow the example of Christ, In sitting
when we take eate and drinke, hings r¦quyred in the same sentences? And w must the people kneele, when they hea those prayers, rather than the minist who pronounceth them? But it is a quest¦on, Whither those prayers be iustifiable o no. For besides that, by reason of them, Kneeling, devised and abused by Anti¦christ, doth crosse the practise of Chri and his Apostles, and they may seeme a vayne repitition: Even the adding of th to the words of institution is contrary t the minde of Christ. For he did first bless or pray, and after gaue the Elements, in a sacramentall forme of words,Math. 6 7 & 26 26. c. . Mark 14.21 Luk: 22.19, etc: without any addition, saying, take, eate, etc. Which order of administration, and forme of words, Mathew, Marke, Luke, and Paul doe so constantly, precisly, and sincerely re∣late, that any may perceiue the meaning of the spirit to be. That the sacramentall forme of words ought precisely to be obser∣ued, without any addition. And the rather because Paul beginneth his relation thus,
aue receiued of the Lord,1 Cor. 11, 23 4, that which I aue also deliuered, etc. So that it may me to be against religion and reason, at to a sacramentall forme of speach, herin the minister should only supply the rson of Christ, there should be added a rayer, as in the name of the Church. This fusion is fitter for Babilon, than for on. Lastly, Why is not a short prayer, af∣r other going before, aswell ioyned to the cramentall forme of Baptisme: viz. N. aptise thee In the name of the Father, etc.  then this addition of prayer to the sa∣ramētall forme of words, be not of faith,Rom 14.5, 23 ow can we, with faith and a good consci∣ce, confirme, or allow the same with our neeling? Lastly for iustifiyng of Kneeling, it is ffirmed. That it is indifferent whither e sitt, stand, or knl: Seeing Christ did sit, when he did eate the passr. Wheras God commaunded the chdren of Israel n Egipt to eate the passover standing, and some reformed churches receiue stan∣ding,
for all that Christ did sit at his last supper: Therfore the King may appoynt Kneeling, as the most reverend gesture, and best beseeming so holy an action. For answer whervnto, howsoever that which is alreadie said, may suffice, Yet it may be further cosidered, That though it be ad∣mitted, that it is indifferent to sit, or to stand, yet it doth not follow, that Knee∣ling is indifferent, For sitting is the exam¦ple, and standing is a gesture sometimes vsed in ordinary eating, and (in the obiec∣tion) it is said to be prescribed at a sacra∣mentall feast. Againe, It doth not follow, That because Christ vsed a gesture fitter for eating in his time, insteed of a gesture prescribed vpon occasion, it is therfore law¦full to vse a gesture nothing answerable to eating, and that taken out of the Synago∣gue of Antichrist (as though the word of God came out of it,1 Cor. 14.36 or to it onely) instead of a gesture most answerable to eating, & of purpose vsed by Christ at the institutiō of the sacrament. So that, notwithstanding
all that is said for Kneling, His Maiestie (vpon whome the burthern as of this ge∣sture so of other ceremonies, is layde) may remember,2 Chro▪ 29 25, That Hezekiah appoynted Levites in the house of the Lord with Cī∣balls, etc. according to the commaunde∣ment of David, and Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for the cōmaun¦dement was by the hand of the Lord, and by the hand of his prophets. And withall consider, that if Kneeling were the most reverēt gesture, & best be seming the holy cōmuniō, our L. & Master would not haue sitten downe of purpose, at his last supper. And that Ahaz was deceiued In deeming the Alter at Damascus,2 K ng 16 10, 12:14 15 more honorable for Gods service, thā the alter of the Lord. Having said that which may be suffi∣cient to a man reasonable, and not con∣tentious, against the iustitution of knee∣ling for supposed reverence in regard of God, it remaineth that somewhat be said against the institution of Kneeling, for reverence in regard of bread and wine.
Which need not be much, For no sound protestant, of any knowledge, will affirme it, but rather presently consider, That if kneeling be instituted for reverence in re∣gard of bread and wine, It must be either because they represent the body & bloud of Christ, though remaining bread and wine touching there substaunce: And then for like reason, we may worship the cruci∣fixe, and image of God, as the papists doe: Or, because Christ is really, bodily, & local¦ly, though invisibly, present in thē, either by Transubstātiation, according to the herisy of the papists, or by consubstantia∣tion, according to the herisy of the Luthe¦rans. These things cannot but be conside∣red, And then it must needs follow, that if we abiure these herisyes of Papists, & Lu∣therans, we must also abhorre idolatrous, & superstitious kneeling, their daughter and Nurse, which was never hearde of be∣fore Transubstantiation was hatched in the sinagogue of Antichrist.Rqs of R. . So that imme¦diatly after Pope Innocent decreed Tran¦substantiation,
Pope Honorius decreed kneeling.Auns to  Iuels ch fol. 111 Therfore if Harding doth graūt that it is not well to kneele: but in regard of a reall, & bodily presence, a sound pro∣testant should infer, But I detest your reall presence, therfore I abhorre your Idola∣trous kneeling. We are to abhorre kneeling, not onely be∣cause we abhorre the herisyes of worship∣ping images, Transubstantiation, & Con∣substantiation, but also, Because it is the shew of the greatest evils that ever were, viz Idolatry in worshipping a God made of a peice of bread,1 Thess. 5 1 and of communiō with Antichrist, rather than, with Christ, and therfore the greatest scādall that ever was or can be, both in regard of those evils it doth occasionally teach, or confirme, As al∣so in regard of multituds (indeed the most part of people) either not sufficētly instruc∣ted in the right vnderstanding, & vse of the sacrament, and therfore caried with a blinde devotion learned by tradition, or corrupted (more or lesse) with the leaven
of poperie. Who all in regard of their weak¦nes, are indangered by this gesture, either grosly to commit the Idolatry of papists, or to haue a superstitious estimation of the cutward elements. And the rather, because by the 21 Canon it is provided: That no bead, and wine newly brought, shalbe vsed, but first the words of institution shall be re∣hearsed, when the said bread & wine be pre∣sent vpon the Communion table. As if the words were incantations, & the table like the aulter which sanctifieth the sacrifice. May not this prouiso seeme (at least to the simple) to make way at least to the Popish consration? How grevous a sinne it is to scandalize the make,Mah, 18.6. may appeare by the word of Christ viz. whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, it were better for him, that a milstone were hanged about his nee, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.Co 8.13. And of Paul: If meate offēd my brother. I will eae no flesh, while the world standeth, that I may not offend my brother. What an offence or scandall is, the Apsl shew th in the same chapter, viz. An occasion of fallyng to the weake.
The perticular offence he speaketh of is this: Notwithstāding the gospell was prea∣ched a convenient time, and that by the Apostles, yet many wanted knowledge, &,vers 7:10. even vnto that time, did eate as a thing sacrificed to an Idoll. Of whome if any should see a man indued with knowledge sit at table in the Idols temple, his weake conscience might occasionally be imbolde∣ued to eate those things which are sacrifi∣ced to Idols. If Paul would never eate flesh rather than he would offend in this case, because in so doeing he should sinne agaīst Christ, how dare a christian,ver. 12 hauing know¦ledge, kneele in the presence of any, who, for want of knowledge, receiue superstiti∣ously. Of which sort, seing there be so many even vntill this hower, and ever likly to be, that we know not when, and where to communicate without some such, either old, or young: it followeth, that as sitting at table in the Idols temple, could not be with out sinne, in the Apostles time, so kne∣ling cannot be without sin in these dayes,
when the number of faithfull teachers is much decreased, but of papists much in∣creased, & by our kneeling much confir∣med in their bread worshipe.Sum of the confe. pa. 74 Therfore If his Maiesties iudgment be sound, that the surplice is not to be worne, if Heathenish men were commorant among vs, who, ther∣by, might take occasion to be strengthened in their paganisme? shall we by our corrupt pra∣ctise of kneeling, strengthen the papists, who swarme among us, in their Idolatry? If the State doth well, in ordeining the sa∣crament to be administred in vsual bread to take away superstitiō,Rub. after the com, sect 5. wheras Christ did by occasion, minister in vnleavēed bread, shall not we doe ill, In teaching, or confir∣ming superstition by kneeling, whereas Christ did of purpose minister sitting?Hom. agaist peril of Idol part 3 a Set¦ting vp of images in churches onely to be lay mens bookes, is, by authoritie condem∣ned,Levit: 19.14 because they are as stumbling blockes in way of the blinde So that they haue been, are still, and will be hereafter worshipped by ig∣norant persons. Is not kneeling as scan∣dalous? How can it then be iustified?
But it is said, that the Kings cōmaūdemēt taketh away scandall, in things indifferēt. And it may be averred that this is a beg∣ging of the question, except it be proued by the word, that kneeling may be without sinne, and that notwithstanding it be an institution of man, contrary to the exam∣ple of Christ, a signe of communion rather with Antichrist and his sinagogue of Rōe, than with Christ and his Church, it haue no proportion with sacramentall eating, and haue beene, is, and will be bread wor∣shipe. But suppose that in it selfe it wereas indifferent as was eating of flesh sacrificed to an Idol, not in the Idols temple,1 Cor: 10.17 28. but at a priuate table where no weake ones were, in the Apostles time: yet how doth the Kings commaundement take away scandall from kneeling in publicke places? Doth it make all so sure, that none can be scandalized? Or, if that cannot be, doth it take away guiltines from the scandalizer, as if all the blame of scandalizing, were in the Kings commaundement? Surly it must be in the
former, or els the latter cannot be, For by scandalizing a weake brother perisheth.Cor 8.11. mb: 35 Of whose bloud, the scandalizer is guiltie, as Ioab was of Vriahs bloud,am, 11:15 , 17, notwithstan∣ding the Kings commaundement. Here his Maiestie knowne to be of a gentle dispo∣sition, & to haue learned, yea professed bet¦ter thinges in Scotland, is most humblie prayed, to take this word (King) as spoken in imitation, and vnderstood of Cantor: who knowne to be of a violent disposition, did cary matters in the Convocation, and published Canons not orderly, & fully con¦cluded, as some of his suffragane prelates report, But it is impossible, that the Kings commaundement should make all so sure, that none can be scandalized, the generall ignorance of the people, the disposition of the ignorant vnto superstition, the old lea∣ven of popery not purged, & the multipli∣yng of papists, all well considered. Nay ra∣ther, It is likely, that by the commaunde∣ment, the scandall will be the greater. Espe¦cially in regard of the 27 Canon, where
ministers are commaunded, vnder paine of suspension, Not wittingly to administer the sacrament to any, but such as kneele. May not simple, & superstitious persons take oc∣casion thus to argue? Why should kneeling be thus vrged by authoritie, if the sacra∣mentall signes of the bodie, and bloud of Christ, be no more to be reverenced, than water applyed in baptizing children? See∣ing that is also a sanctified signe of Christ his bloud, that wsheth away our sinnes, and iniquities. To conclud, If kneeling in the very acte of taking, eating & drinking the sacra∣mentall bread & wine, in the holy commu¦nion, be (1) an institution of man. (2) If it be the taking of Gods name in vaine, when it is without all respecte of reverence (3) If God be not honored thereby, except it be according to his will. (4) If it swarue from the example of Christ his sitting, & therfore deserueth no prayse. (5) If it be a provoking sinne to reiect the exemplary sitting of christ, wherby we shw our selues
to be in communion with Christ, & the re¦formed churches, and to rtaine kneeling, which for bread worship, ought to be ba∣nished, & wherby we seeme to be in cōmu∣nion with Antichrist, & his sinagogue. 6) If it obscureth that reioycing familiaritie in & with Christ which the L. supper sig∣nifieth (7) if the argument from Christ his example be made the stronger, in that he sat of purpose. 8) If the lawfulnes of cha¦sing a fitter time than the euening cannot iustify our reiecting Christ his exemplary sitting (9) if the bittes of prayer ioyned with the words of institutiō do make knel∣ing the more sinfull (10) If kneeling be not as indifferent, as standing, nor best besee∣ming the holy communion, and the King must appoynt nothing but by the hand of the Lord. (11) If we ought to abhor knee∣ling, as we abhorre the worshipping of I∣mages, Transubstantiation, & Consub∣stantiation (12) If to scandalize be gree∣vously to sinne, and kneeling e a shw of the greatest evils, and withall the greatst
candall. And (13) If it be a begging of be question to affirme, kneeling to be in∣different, & the Kings commaundement so called) doth rather increase, thā lesson candall by kneeling, It may be averred, that kneeling in the very acte of Taking, eating, and drinking the sacramentall bread & wine, in the holy communi∣on, cannot be without sinne. The Printer to the reader. The copy sent me wanted direction for the quotations▪ & I wanted an English corrector therfore haue I failed more hen I would: especially in placing them. ut pardon I pray, and take knowledge of these principals: Errata, Pag 2 put downe Rom, 16, 17, 18, phil, 3, 2. 19, gal, 6, 12 lines, 2 pag, 5, pu, d, mal. 1, 6, 7. l 2 pa 6, 2 king 5, 18 l 3, pa 7, 1 cor. 11, 1, l 5, pa 10, 1 cor, 11, 16 l 3 & 2 cor 6, 15, 17 l 4, & deut 12, 30, 31 l 5, math 8, 11 l 2, pa, 11 set vp 1 cor 11, 20 & 10, 21 l 2 & p, d, exo, 12 11 16, num, 3, 11, 12 math, 5, 17 & 26, 20 l 12. pa 12, l 1. put out not. & set vp Iob 38. 2 l 1, p, d, 1 cor, 11, 25, 26, l 6, pa 13 s, v: Iohn 13, 4, 12 l 10. p, d gen, 2, 2, 3, l 3. pa: 14 pu, d: Math 26: 31: 45: Luke 22:53: lin 4 read must be eaten lin 11. read into another. pa. 16. li: 2 read sentences prescribed & s: v: math 6. 7 l 5
