3708 99840426 4930
AA Wits Priuate VVealth. Stored with choise commodities to content the minde. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by Edw. Allde, for Iohn Tappe, and are to be solde at his shop at St. Magnus corner. 1612.
TO To the right worshipfull, my much and much worthy beloued friend Iohn Crooke Esquire, Sonne and heire to Sir Iohn Crooke Knight, all prosperi∣ty on earth, and the ioy of heauen. TO present you with a long discourse, might perhaps wea∣ry you in the reading; & to write obscurely, might be a trouble to your vnderstanding: To auoide therefore inconueniences, I have chosen this litle peece of labor to fit the patience of your idle leisure; hoping, that as in fore∣ages, men of great Titles, would patronize the writings of good Studies, not regarding the estate or quality of the person, so your true spirits that can rightly iudge of the natures of well deseruings, will not altogether shut my Booke (with my better seruice) out of your good fauour: the subiects are many, and of diuers natures, but (as many flowers in one Nose-gay) they are here put together in a little volume, which perusd with that good patience that may make profit of experience, I hope shall giue you some way contentment, and no way the contrarie: but least I make to great an entry to a little house, I will shut the dore to my further speech, and one∣ly rest in some better seruice. Your affectionately at commaund. N. BRITTON.
To the Reader. YOu that shall happen to light on this little peece of a booke, how you will or can iudge of what you read, I know not: if it be well I am glad you are pleased, if otherwise, it is past the print, and therefore too late to be mended: many things are comprehended in a little roome, and he that reades all and takes good by none at all, I am perswaded is either vncapable or careles: to be short, such as they be I send them to you, set downe with the dayes in the yeare: in halfe one day you may read them, and euer after thinke on them as you can conceiue, disgest, or re∣member them: some of them were written by wiser men then my selfe, and for the rest (like wares in a shop) the good must help away with the bad: To conclude, I commend them with my further loue and seruice, to the fauour of those spirits, that iudging the best, will not say the worst: among whome, hoping you are one to fill vp the number of honest men, I rest. Your friend as I may. N. B.
VVits priuate wealth. HEe that takes much and giues nothing, shall haue more wealth then loue. He that giues much and takes nothing, shall haue ma∣ny thankes and few friends. He that spends his youth in whoring and dycing, may curse the bones, and cry out vpon the flesh. He that buildes Castles in the ayre, in hope of a new world, may breake his necke, ere he come to halfe his age. He that meets an ilfauourd woman in the morning fa∣sting, tis ods he shal not see a worse sight before dinner. He that telleth a lye and bindes it with an Oath, is either weake in wit, or vile in conscience. He that braggeth much of a little worth, hath made his tongue an ouerthrow of his wit. He that marrieth a rich wife and abuseth his Matry∣mony, will either begge among Rogues, or hang for good company. He that cryes afore he is hurt, hath learned wit to a∣void paine, and he that cryeth after a hurt, must learne patience for ease. He that oweth money and cannot pay it, is an agent for sorrow but he that hath it and will not pay it, is a Steward for hell. He that scofeth at God, is already with the Deuill, and though he walke in the world, hee hath a hell in his cnscience.
He that selleth his cloathes to be drunke with the mo∣ney, will beg in age and starue for foode. He that riseth early and maketh light meales, keepes his body in health, and his stomacke in temper. He that makes Religion a cloake for villany, deuiseth with the Deuill to cosen his soule of her comfort. If you see a faire wench leere after you when you are past, lay your hand on your hart for feare of your purse. If a stranger scrape acquaintance with you in some priuate place, thinke his wit, his wealth, or his honestie out of tune. He that selleth his ware, and liues by the losse, must giue ouer his trade or die in poore case. A kinde hearted man is easily abused, and a high spi∣rited woman must be warily obserued. If you offend God, repentance will haue pardon, but if you offend the law, take heed of execution. If you marry a Whore, make much of the Horne, but if you marry a Scolde, fall to your prayers. If you haue a friend, and cannot vse him, you lacke wit, but if you abuse his loue, you want honesty. He that tyeth his loue to beauty, may bring his heart to trouble, and he that marrieth a foule woman dooth wrong to his eie-sight. He that will neuer lend is vnworthy to borrowe, but he that comes into suretiship is in the way of vndoing. If you see an offenders punishment, pray for amend∣ment: but if a horse-courser be hanged it is happy for Trauailers. To giue a woman her will may be hurt to her wit: & to bridle her nature, may moue passion beyond reason. To build a house without money, is but a dreame of
folly, and to trauell among theeues is danger of life. He that spends more then he gets, will hardly be rich, and he that speakes more then knowes will neuer be counted wise. He that least sinneth is the best man, and he that neuer repenteth is the worst. A prodigall spender will keepe coyne from cankering and a greedy Vsurer will gnaw out the heart of a purse. He that trauaileth a strange way had need of a guide, and if he want money he must fare hard. A Mouse in a Cupbord will marre a whole Cheese, & an ill tongued woman will trouble a whole Towne. He that is giuen to sleepe, is borne to much trouble, and to ouer-watch nature may be a hurt to wit. He that leaueth the learned to liue with the ignorant, may happē vpon some wealth but he shal neuer be wise. An vntrusty seruant may rob a man of his goods, but a dogged wife will vexe his heart. If you see a trull scarce giue her a nod, but follow her not least you proue a noddy. A courteous Phisitian will make much of his patient, and time pleasers are no true diuines. Strong beere hath two contrary vertues, it will quench a thirst, and warme the stomacke. He that offends God to please a creature, is like him that killeth himselfe to auoide hurt. She that loues to make faces may haue an Ape for her Schoole-master, and hee that feedes her humors, puts his wits to much trouble. He that loueth many can hardly please all, and he that loueth none, is either dogged or foolish. A Foole that is rich shall be followed with beggers,
but the vertuous and wise are truely honorable. He that feasteth the rich, makes a friendship with Mommon, but he that relieueth the poore, is blessed of God. A Whores teares are a Fooles poyson, and a Theeues watch is the Trauailers woe. The shot of a Cannon makes a terrible report, but he that starts at the noise of it, will hardly proue a Souldier. The sound of a Trumpet stirs vp the spirit of a Soul∣dier, but if his heart faile him, he will not fight. Womens Tyers are an idle commoditie, and t liue by panderisme is a roguish profession. Swearing & lying is much among wicked men, & yet being so little belieued, I wonder they do not leaue it. A proud spirit is hatefull to nature, and he that is vn∣thankfull for little, is worthy of nothing. the hope of the vertuous makes haruest in heauen, & the dispaire of the wicked brings their soules into hell. The Spiders webbe is a nette for a Flye, and a flatte∣ring tongue is a trap for a Foole. That sight of a sword will affright a Coward, while a seasond Souldier makes a flea-bite of a wound. A partiall iudge makes a pittifull lawe, and a dumbe Preacher a pittifull parish. A bloody Souldier makes a pittifull warre, and he that trusteth an enemie, may be betraid ere he be aware. The Souldiers honour is got with great trauaile, while the Vsurer tumbleth in the ease of his wealth. The true spirit regards no drosse, and he that makes a God of his golde will goe to the Deuill like a Beggar. He that leaues his spurres in his horses belly, may sit downe and sigh when he is weary with walking.
He that will passe quietly through a common wealth must auoid the foole, and take heed of the knaue. An Vsurper of a crowne will breede murmures in a kingdome, but a wise gouernour is worthy of his place. He that cloyeth his stomacke is an enemie to nature, and to ouercharge wit is an abuse of reason. Vanitie & pride, make the fooles paradice, while loue and beauty are the nurses of idlenes. Blessed Children are the Parents ioyes, while the bar∣ren wombe is the curse of nature. A wise Generall and a valiant leader, are requisite in a Campe, but tyranny in conquest disgraceth the soldier the Gloe-wormes belly is the candle of the earth, & the Phoenix nest is too high for the world. the longest day will haue a night at last, and age will withr the smoothest skinne in the world. the dearth of the Corne makes Farmers rich, but to starue the people is the shame of the state. No preaching in the world will make a Iew a Christi∣an, & a cut-purse will be his work when the theefe is at the Gallowes. He that hath lost his eies may bid his friendes good∣night, and he that is going to the graue, hath made an end with the world. A faire man is like Curds and Creame, and a foule woman the griefe of the eyes. A wittie wanton is a pleasing mistris, but an honnest huswife is the best to breede on. He that is giuen to drinking is subiect to the dropsie, and a licorous grocer will eate out his gaine. A Garden is pleasant if it be full of faie Flowers, so is a faire woman indued with good qualities.
A faire flower without scent, is like a faire woman without grace. Hearbes are wholesome, gathered in their time, and money well vsed is an excellent mettall. If Christmas lasted all the yeare, what would become of Lent? and if euery day were good fryday, the world would be weary of fasting. The griefe of the heart is a weakning to the bodye, but the worme of conscience eats into the very soule. A iest is neuer well broken, but when it hurteth not the hearers, and profiteth the speaker. Hope is comfortable in absence, but possession is the true pleasure. Words out of time are lost, and seruice vnrewarded is miserable. To follow fooles is the anoyance of wit, and to serue a Churle is a miserable slauery. Variety of acquaintance is good for obseruation, and to make vse of knowledge, proues the sence of vnder∣standing. Early rysing gaines the morning, and a darke night is the theeues watch. A fantasticall Trauailer, is the figure of an Ape, and a proud woman is a fooles Idoll. The eye is small yet is seeth much, and the heart but little, & yet it is the life of the body. The hope of profit makes labour easie, and the hand of bountie winnes the heart of vertue. A Candle giues a dimme light in the Sunne, & where Diana keepes her Court, Cupid is out of countenance. A man is as dead when he sleepeth, and darkenes is the sorrow of time.
There is no true rich man but the contented not tru∣ly poore but the couetous. A weake body is not for trauell, nor a sim ple witte for a Scepter. No man liueth that doth not sometime amisse, but he that delighteth in sinne is a deuill in carnate. They that loue their beds, are great flea-feeders, and he that spends his spirits, cannot haue a strong body. The rich mans goods makes him fearfull to dye, and the poore mans want makes him weary of his life. The fire of Anger burneth the Soule, and the cold of feare chilleth the heart. Snuffe a Candle and it will burne cleere, and cut off dead flesh, and the wound will heale the sooner. The heart-ache brings the body into sickenesse, but the Worme of Conscience breeds the soules torment. Times alters natures, and Honors manners; but a ver∣tuous heart will neuer yeeld to villany. Miseries are the tryall of patience, but loue is the ma∣ster of passions. Thought is a swift trauailer, and the Soule is in hea∣uen in an instant. A kinde nature winneth loue, but a stubborne spirit is a plague to reason. The disease of opinion doth beguile vs in the taste of happines, while the vanity of delights is but the super∣fluitie of desires. Patience at the point of death, sets a seale to the per∣fections of life. How vaine is the loue of riches, which may be lost or left in an instant? In the tryall of truth excuse will not helpe dishonesty.
Trie wits by their wisedome, and loue them for their vertue. Reioyce not in any mans misery, but be pittifull to thy very enemy, and comfort the afflicted in what is fit for charitie. Followe not the Amorous, for they are humerous, nor the humerous, for they are idle. Giue what thou doost francklye, and be Maister of thine own purse, least base seruilitie make abridgement of thy bountie. Be not iealous without iust cause, and doe no wrong for any cause. If thou doest ill, doe not excuse it: if well, doe not boast of it. Nature enclinde to euill, must by correction bee brought to good, for discretion by instruction findes the way to perfection. The key of wantonnesse openeth the doore vnto wickednesse. the cares of busines, and the variety of pleasures, are the soules hindrances to her higbest happines. Sinne comes with conception, but grace onely by in∣spiration. In the repentance of sinne sorrow bringeth comfort. Where pride is poyson to power, and will an enimy to patience, there enuy can endure no equality, til death put an end to desire. Greater is the griefe to loose then neuer to haue, and to see the fall of vertue then the death of nature, Irreuocable is the losse of time, and incomparable the griefe of ingratitude, but the abuse of loue is abhorred in nature.
When a Dogge howles, an Owle singes, a Wo∣man scoldes, and a Pig cries, whether for a penny is the best musicke. Full hearts cannot weepe, and swallowed sighes make swolne brests, while wisdome couereth woes, till death couer wretchednesse. Who laboureth for knowledge, makes a benefite of time, but he that loueth vertue lookes after eternitie. The instruction of truth makes the witte gracious, while the practise of Craft makes the heart impious. He that makes beautie a Starre, studies false Astro∣nomie, and he that is soundly in Loue, needes no other purgatorie. The depth of passion, tryeth the height of patience, where if witte bridle not the sences; nature will reueale her imperfection. The remembrance of vanities, is a reuiuing of mise∣ries, where the looking glasse of life becomes an houre∣glasse of death. The exercise of venery is the Cow-path to beggerie, and he that diminisheth his stock, may goe to the hedge for a stake. The Landlords prodigality makes the tenants pro∣fit, and a proud beggar is a dogged Rascall. A Cat may loose a Mouse and catch her againe, but he that looseth time can neuer recouer it. When rich men die, they are buried with pompe, but when good men die, they are buried with teares. Bloody actions makes fearefull visions, while the ioy of peace is the spirits Paradice. VVhen al vnder the Sunne is vanitie, where hath vertue her dwelling in the world, but only in the heart
of the elect, whose loue is onely in the heauens. An intemperate spirit spoiles the body, and a proud heart giues a wound to the soule. The shāme of wit is folly, and the shame of nature sin. Who trauaileth out of the world, to seeke the truth of heauens historie, if he be not assured of grace, will make but an vnhappy iourney. Comfortable is the graue where death is the end of grief, but ioyful is that faith, that finds the life of eternity A Knight that dares not fight, hath honor in iest, & a marchant without mony may aduenture for nothing. The pinching of the body, makes a stincking breath, and straight shooes fill the feet full of cornes. Women with childe long for many things, but all the world longs for mony. A great wit may haue a weake body, and a great head but a little wit. The Dolphin is held the swiftest fish in the Sea, but the thought of a man hath no comparison in the world. The Tyger is said to be the cruellest beast in the world, but an Vsurer vpon a bond will goe to the Deuill for mony. A Maiden blush is an excellent coulour, and a virtu∣ous wit makes a Virgin honorable. A constant Louer is an admirable Creature, but the man of wealth goes through the world. Offices are sweet in the nature of gaine, but the abuse of an oath is the burthen of conscience. A sore eye is euer running, and a Gossips tongue is e∣uer babling. Crosse pathes many times puts a man out of his way, and crosse fortunes many waies puts a man out of
his wits. Great windes are dangerous at Sea, so is a Iudges breath, to an offender. The Philosophers stone hath mockt a number of Students, and Loue hath troubled a world of Idle peo∣ple. Virginity is precious while it is purely reapt, but is it catch a cracke the beauty is gone. The eyes growe dimme when they come to specta∣cles, and it is colde in vallies when a snowe lyeth on the Mountaines. The sting of a Scorpion is onely healed with her bloud, and where beauty wounds, loue makes the cure. Emprisonment and death are the miseries of nature, and the Sergeants Mace is a hellish weapon. A Childe that feares not the rod will hardly proue gracious, and a man that feares not God, will bee in hell ere he be aware. Elixars are great restoratiues, but much Phisicke is offensiue to nature. A Penne without inke writes a very blancke Letter, and a Purse without money, makes many a colde heart. Stolne Venison is sweete, so the stealer can scape, but if he be catcht he will pay for his hunting. The Anglers sport is full of patience, and if he loose his hooke he makes a faire fishing. A showre of Raine doth well in a Drought, but when Dust turnes to Durt, the house is better then the high∣way. A little Salt seasons a great pot, & a little poyson kils a world of people.
Iewels are as they are esteemed, and there is nothing forced that is welcome. A little seed will sow a great ground, and a Snuffe of a Candle will set a whole house on fire. The want of necessaries breakes the heart of an ho∣nest man, and to be beholding to a Dog, is a death to a good minde. When the Rich pray on the poore, and the poore pray for the Rich, there is great differnce in praying. A scolde and a foole must be answered with silence, while wisedoms words are worth the writing in gold. Philosophie is a sweet study, and Historie are some∣time worth the reading, but the Bible in all excellence, puts downe all the Bookes in the world. Much reading makes a ready Scholler, but the guift of nature doth much in Arte. A Foole and a knaue cannot take thought, while an honest heart is full of sorrow. A far Trauailer seeeth much, but he that goes to hea∣uen makes a happy iourney. The Kings of the earth are rich in golde, but blessed are the soules that are rich in grace. The aire is often cleansed by lightning, but till the world change it will neuer be cleane from sinne. An escape from danger is comfortable, but to keepe out of it is wisdome. He that makes an Epicure of his mind, makes a Gull of his witte: for time is precious to the vnderstanding spirit. A Diamond may be little, and yet of great price but the grace of God is more worth then the whole world. Fancy and fashion trouble many idle people, but the
study of Diuinitie rauisheth the soules of the elect. Cockes of the game will by nature fight, and a heart of Oake will burst ere it bend. The sight of the Sea will a fray a faint heart, while the Sailers care but a little for the Land. The cryes of Fooles make a foule noyse, while the hearts of the honest bleede inwardly. May-games and iestes, fill the world full of mirth, but the feeling of grace fils the soule full of ioy. A Flie feedes a Swallow that will choake a man, and that which kils a Spider will comfort a man. Th Stone and the Gowte followe the rich, but death where he commeth makes a swoope with all per∣sons. A poore man in his cottage is merrier with his pit∣tance, then many a Lord in the midst of his Liuing. Great mindes and small meanes are the ouerthrowe of many good wits. A broken heart is Gods cure, whose oyle of grace is a salue for all sores. Hee that hath forsworne a beard, hath a strange face, and shee that hath no teeth, may learne to sucke. A friend is best tryed at a neede, and a fawning foe is not to be trusted. Beefe and Mutton are strong foode, and hunger is the best sauce to any meate in the world. Sicknesse is the bodies Curbe, and sorrow the mindes, but vnkindenesse in a friend is the breake-heart of a goodspirit. Necessitie will breake through stone walles, but to make an excercise of Beggerie, is the condition of a Rascall.
A painted sword is for a bragging Coward, but the Souldiers Iron makes way where he goes. The rarenes of a Toy, will set vp the price, but the goodnes of anything is best esteemed of the wise. A Bird without feathers will flie ilfauouredly, and a man without money is out of heart with all mirth. To bee deliuered of a Childe is a ioy to a Woman, and to be deliuered from prison is a comfort to a man, but to be deliuered from sinne, is the truest ioy of the Soule. A forward Childe is sildome long liued, and to beget a foole is a griefe to the Parents. He that cryeth without cause, is worthy of hurt, and he that feeles no hurt is full of dead flesh. Trauaile is good for stayed wits, and a strong bodie is best for labour. The rich man to fill the tother bag, will pare a poore man to the very bones, but the good man will relieue his poore neighbour at his neede. An vnskilfull ryder may soone be out of the saddle, and a poore horse can goe but softly. Some say Tobacco is good to purge the head, but he that followeth it well, will finde it a shrewd purge to his purse. No eye can see the brightnes of the Sunne: how glo∣rious then is that life from whence It hath light? Many are fortunate that are not wise, but there is no man happie vntill he come into heauen. Fire and Sword are the terror of a Camp, but Thun∣der and Lightning are the terror of the world. A faire house is a comfortable lodging, but the sweet Aire reuiueth the senses.
A faire horse is comely to looke on, but if he prooue heauy he is nought for trauell. The sires of afflictions refine the spirits of the faithful, and happy is the heart that endures to the end. many factions breede seditions, but vnitie and peace are the ioyes of a Kingdome. An Asses braie is an vnpleasant noyse, but the knell of a passing bell kils the heart of the wicked. A man will forbeare many things for feare of the law, but how few forbeare any sin for feare of Gods iudge∣ment? Delicate meates are no strong foode, but the spring water is cleare drinke. Great assemblies are markets for the Cut-purse, but a bare purse kils his heart. Enuy among great men, make miserie of poore men, and when women breed the quarrells, they are not ea∣sily ended. A discreete Iudge makes a blessed Law, and a peni∣tent offender is worthy of pardon. Great boast and small roast, makes a colde Kitchin, and shrugging of shoulders is no paying of debtes. He that may liue well and will not, is of a wicked na∣ture, but he that would liue well and cannot, hath his heart full of griefe. The Flyes and the Bees liue in swarmes, & the Antes and the wormes liue in heapes, but men can hardly make a company to liue quiet. Poysoned drinke may be in a siluer cup, and he that plucketh a Rose may pricke his hand in gathering of it. The Porposes in the Sea will play against a storme, & many make a banquet to make an end of the guests.
The marchant and the Trades-man are the vpholders of a common-wealth, but if they leaue out the Farmer, they may fast for their Supper. A discreete woman is worthy of honor, and a foolish man the disgrace of nature. Burnt Children dread the fire; while olde fooles will play with the Coales. A rauening Curre is not good for a house, and a Hawke that feedes fowle, will neuer be a high flier. He that remooues a Land-marke is a very bad neigh∣bour, & he that sets a trauailer out of his way is a wick∣ked villaine. A delaying hope is grieuous to the heart, but dispaire is the greatest torment of the soule. To lye in bed and not sleepe, to see meate and haue no stomacke, to serue long, and get no wages, are three great miseries in the life of man. No man knowes a griefe so well as he that hath it, and no man more ioyfull then he that is rid of it. It is a griefe to a man to lacke wit, but more greefe to some to lacke grace to gouerne it. An aged man is a Kalender of experience, and a spruce youh is like a picture. A deadly wound makes a quicke dispatch, but a ling∣ring hope breedes a long griefe. To meddle with state matters may be more trouble then profit, but to part man & wife is a wicked practise. At a little hole a man may see day, but if he shut his eies the light will do him little good. Horselieches will burst with sucking of blood and a swelling Toade is a venomous creature. A Tortois shell will hardly breake, but at the least
touch she will pull in her head. He that hath a wife hath a charge, and he that hath a good wife hath a blessing, but he that hath a bad wife, is in a pittifull taking. She that loues not her husband, lackes either honesty or wit, and shee that loueth not her selfe, will goe neere to be sluttish. The Winter nights is for the Gossips cup, and Sum∣mers heat makes the Brewers haruest. The Lambe and the Doue are two pretty creatures, but the Dog and the Hog are sullen beasts. A Fox by nature is ful of craft, while a foole wants rea∣son to make vse of wit. The smooth grasse will hide a Snake, and a fained smile a false heart. To goe to Church for fashion, is an abuse of religion, and to pray without deuotion, is breath to no purpose. Good Incke graceth a Letter, but if the paper bee nought, the penne will doe no good. A long dyet kills the stomacke, and a desperat purge may be a perrill of life. The Owle and the Swallowe brings in Winter and Sommer, but the Nightingale & the Cuccoe talke one∣ly of the merry time. Light gaines make heauy purses, but he that labours for nothing may giue ouer his worke. He that will holde out the yere must abide winter and summer, and he that will goe into heauen must endure the miseryes of the world. To feed a iester is but a iest of wit, but he that giues not care to a tale, it neuer troubles him. When a Lyon roares come not in his way, & when
a Foxe preacheth beware the Geese. A faithfull friend is a rich iewell, and a silent woman is a strange creature. Nature is subiect to imperfection, but an Atheist is a horrible creature. He that lighs in a whirle poole, is in danger of drow∣ning, and the losse of liberty is the sorrowe of nature. A rich Court is a goodly sight, but he that lookes vp to heauen will not care for the world. when olde men are wilfull, their wits are out of tem∣per, and when yong men are wise, they are in the way to honour. An olde sore tries the skill of a Phisition, and if he get a name, he will quickly be rich. The fish of the Riuer is not affraid of drowning, and if he play with a bate, it may cost him his life. An Asse hath long eares, and a Fox a long taile, but a tongue will be so long that it will ouer-reach out of measure. A neighing horse is not good for a theefe, nor a quest∣ing Spaniell will make a good setter. A Dogge will reioyce at the sight of his Maister, when perhaps his Mistresse will frowne at his commng home▪ The bones of the dead, breake the hearts of the liuing, when a poore Gamster looseth his money. The kindenes of the heart is tryed in aduersitie, and the dogg ednes of the minde in the hight of prosperity. When the Hare is in chase, feare makes her runne, but when the hounds are at a falt, she hath time to get a∣way. He that plaies the Rogue in the morning, may be a
villaine till night, but if he be sorry when he goes to bed he may rise an honest man. He that is wounded in the heart hath made an end of his daies, but he that hath a wound in the Soule knowes not when to end his sorrowe. A looking-glasse will make a foole proud of his beau∣tie, but an houre-glasse will make a wise man remem∣ber his end. The varietie of Flowers makes a Spring beautifull, but the faire haruest makes a fat barne. Tobacco smoake is very costly, but the ashes of it are good for a galde backe. A proud Mechanique will looke ouer a Marchant, and a rich Churle will looke like Bull beefe. The winde is weake, yet it beares downe great Oaks, and water is weake, yet it swallowes vp great ships. A worme-eaten nut is not worth the cracking, and a crackt iewell not worth the wearing. Mony-masters are the pride of the market, but if you part without a pot, you are no good fellow. A subtill Bowler will haue a shrewd ayme, but if hee misse his byace his bowle may deceiue him. A dropping nose had neede of a handkercher, and a splay footed woman is a beastle sight. Time is neuer idle, but not euer well imployd, when wit without gouernment fals to fast vpon folly. he that hath many wounds looseth much blood, and he that hath many quarrells will haue little quiet. Vnkindenes is a cut to an honest heart, but a Dogged wife is the hearts torture. He that saltes his meate will keepe it from stinking, & he that mortifies his flesh wil keepe it from much sin.
He that hath an ill face hath neede of good wit, but money couereth many imperfections. VVhen the windes are downe, the Sea will be calme, but quarrels begun are not easily ended. VVhere there is much Carrion there wil be store of Crowes, and at the buriall of a Rich man, there will be store of beggers. Threescore yeares and ten are a mans faire age, but after foure-score his strength is gone. To wrastle with a begger a man may get but a lowse, and to brabble with a Scolde will make but a foule noyse. Many hands makes quicke worke, but one is enough in a purse. Good hearbes makes wholesome broath, but a filthy weede among them may marre all. A VVinters Summer makes an vnkindly haruest, and a Summers VVinter is not healthfull for a man. A Cuckolde is the scorne of marriage, but a VVittoll is a beast in nature. A finicall fellow is like an Vsher of a Dauncing Schoole, and a demure Mistresse like the picture of hi∣pocrisie. Three chiefe things a Trauailer had neede to haue a care of: his Tongue, his Purse, and his middle finger. Three other chiefe things had all men neede to looke to: the soule, the body, and the state. To conuerse with Children, is got little experience: but to talke with fooles is the abuse of wit, Reuenge is the villanie of nature, and Tirannie the horror of reason.
What a iest is it in the nature of reuerence, when men must put off their hats while their Maisters are pissing. Vse makes perfection in many things, else could not the hang-man be so nimble at the halter. A skilfull Phisition knowes how to vse his Patient, and a cunning Lawyer to doe with his Clyent. He that hath a mint of money, and an idle Woman to spend it, let him feede all her humours, and he shall soone see an end of it. He that reckoneth his Chickins before they be hatcht, may misse of his broode when the Henne leaues the neast. When Geese flie together they are knowne by their cackling, & when Gossips doe meete they will be heard. All earthly things haue an end, but the torments of the wicked are endles. In great extremities is tryed the greatest friendship, but when mans helpe faileth, God is a sweet comforter. The miseries of the world are many, but Gods mer∣cies are infinite. Hollow windes are a signe of raine, and a long con∣sumption is incurable. The Gowte and the stone are two tickling diseases, but the pox is a slight cure. Hell Gates and a whores aporne are euer open for wicked guests. To the faithfull there is no damnation, and to the damned no saluation. A crafty knaue needs no broker, and a snarling Curre will bite behinde. Vnder simplicity is hidden much subtilty, and the
Crocodiles teares are the death of the trauailer. The camelion liueth onely in the aire, and the Sa∣lamander liues onely in the fire. To traficke with vanitie, is to runne into miserie, and had iwist is an idle speech. The world goes hard with pride, when a Ladie lies at a red Lattis. True Knights make Ladies, and counterfaites marre them. Neede makes a heauie shift, when a man pawnes his cloathes for his dinner. When Taylors beganne to meate Lordes landes by the yeard, then beganne gentilitie to goe downe the winde. When vanitie bringes toyes to idlenesse, let wit be∣ware of foolishnesse. When a Souldiours pay is most in prouant, he will hardly be led into a sharpe peece of seruice. He that makes holliday of euery day, makes an idle weekes worke, and he that labours on the Saboath will neuer haue his worke to prosper. A Schollers commons make a short dinner, and yet he may be in more health then an Epicure. An ill blast of winde will spoyle a young plant, and a bitter frost is bad for fruite. A poore man shuts his doore to keepe out the winde, but a rich man shuts his doore to keepe out beggers. A kindely Colyer is euer besmeered, and a Smith and a Glasse-maker are neuer out of the fire. A downe bed is soft to lye on, but yet it soakes the bo∣die more then a mattresse. Truth hath often much a doe to be beleeued, and a lie
runnes farre before it be staide. To be busie with a multitude, is to incurre trouble, & to feare sparrow-blasting is a pittifull folly. When wit brings youth to beauty, and vanity brings pride to beggery, then reason seeth natures misery. A sorry bargaine makes a heauy soule, when the heart akes and cannot be helpt. Euill words are the worst part of eloquence, and hee that breakes the peace must answere the law. Affabilitie breedes loue, but familiarity contempt. He that is careles of his state, may quickely prooue a begger, and hee that is feareles of God, will quickely prooue a Deuill. VVitches and Sorcerers doe much hurt in a Com∣mon wealth, but after the Gallowes they doe goe to the Deuill. A Parret well taught will talke strangely in a Cage, but the Nightingale sings most sweetely in a wood. An vnkinde Neighbour is ill to dwell by, and an vn∣wholsome body is ill to lye by. A poysoned sword is a pestilent weapon, and he that vseth it hath a murtherous heart. A trotting horse beates sore in hard, way but a restie Iade is a villanous beast. The wound of sorrow goes deepe into the heart, but a Bullet in the Braine is a medicine for all diseases. An ill weede growes fast, but a paire of sheeres will cut him downe. Iudas Treason was most abhominable, and Iobs pati∣ence most admirable. Sweete fresh water is comfortable in a Cittie, and the want of it is the plague of the people.
Studie is the exercise of the minde, but too much of it may be a spoyle of the braine. When the saddle pincheth, how can the horse tra∣uaile? and when the wise lacke money their, wits ara in a poore case. Howling Dogs betoken death, and a Scritch-Owle at a window brings no good tidings to a house. Babes will be stilled with lullabye, but an olde foole will neuer be quiet. The Sunne is the Labourers dyall, and the Cock the Huswiues watchman. Diogines Tub was a poore house, and yet Alexander would come thither to talke with him. Many a dogge is hanged for his skinne, and many a man killed for his purse. Hee that loues not a woman lackes a peece of a man, and hee that loues too many, may be weary of his wo∣ing. The sauour of the earth makes a Plough-man hungry and after a storme the Sailers drinke merrily. A wax-candle and a Watch are good for a studient, but if he want wit, he will be no great scholler. A priuate rebuke is a sweete correction, but an open punishment makes some shamelesse. When sheapheards fall to be Hunts-men, the Wolfe may bee with their Flockes: and when the Warrener is at the Ale-house his connies may be stolne. He that goeth softly commonly goeth safely: but if he haue haste of his way hee looseth much time. Tis soone enough that is well enough, and neuer to late that doth good at last. The desire of dooing well, is accepted before God, but
the neglect of dooing well deserueth his displeasure. Sweete are the deceits of loue, but bitter is the taste of repentance. VVho attendeth profit is not sorry for patience: and the faithfull with the patient are best Trauailers to hea∣uen. A faire hand is a vertuous ornament, but a vertuous spirit is a royall treasure. A sharpe wit hath a quicke inuention, but a iudicious spirit hath best vnderstanding. He that trusteth words prooueth hope, and hee that serueth a foole looseth time. VVithout valour men are shadowes: and without Loue women Torters. Delay is the griefe of hope, but good neuer comes to late. That is not to day, may be to morrow, but yesterday will neuer come againe. It is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of God, but it is a foule thing to shake hands with the Deuill. The greatest proofe of follye is wilfulnesse, and the greatest proofe of wit is patience. too much reading is ill for the eye-sight, and too lit∣tle reading is ill for the in-sight. Time slipped is vnhappy, time lost is grieuous, time well taken shewes care, but to imploy it wel is gracious. And so much for this time. Laus Deo. FINIS.
