4236 99853527 18912
THE SIGNES OR AN ESSAY CON∣cerning the assurance of Gods loue, and mans salua∣tion; gathered out of the holy Scriptures. By NICHOLAS BYFIELD, one of the Preachers for the Citty of CHESTER. 2 COR. 13. 5. Examine your selues whether yee be in the faith: proue your owne selues. Knowe ye not your owne selues, how that Je∣sus Christ is in you except ye be repro∣bates. LONDON, Printed by IOHN BEALE for IONAS MAN. 1614.
TO THE TRVELY RELI∣gious, and his most af∣fectionate frend, Mistris Iane Ratclife, wife to Mr. Iohn Ratclife, Esquier, Alderman and Iustice of peace, late Maior of the Citie of Chester, PEace be vn∣to you and loue, with faith from God the father, and the Lord Iesus Christ. The
impertunitie, of diuerse of my hearers, and the ex∣pectation of many of all sorts, together with my de¦sire to yeeld some account of my long vndelightfull leasure, haue inclined me to prepare some of my publike and priuate la∣bours, for the common view: hoping that the a∣bounding respect of my friends will couer the wants, and weakenesses which other men will soo∣ner espie. Howsoeuer I haue long meditated, a worke of greater labour, then this ensuing treatise yet in the meane time I
haue beene willing to tast the approbation of good men, and make my best aduauntage of the cen∣sures of the many minded multitude, by aduentu∣ring to send foorth these first fruites, as a handfull gathered out of the rest. Worthie Gentle∣woman, there are manie reasons induce me to pub∣lish these signes vnder your name, your singular loue and liking of my mi∣nisterie, together vvith your reuerent and willing entertainement, of faith∣full Ministers (receiuing them as the messengers of
the Churches, and the glo∣rie of Christ as partners and fellow helpers, walk∣ing in the same spirit) challengeth from vs some publike testimonie of our acknowledgemēt of Gods grace, and of the ioy, vvherewith vve reioyced for your sake; besides con∣stant indeauour to make vse of all opportunities for your resolution, and direction, in the seuerall conflicts, and cases of your conscience. I haue had occasion fully to know your order, and manner of life, your desires, pur∣poses, teares, & vpright∣nes,
your faith, your loue, your obedience: and ther∣fore being assured, that you are marked euen with euerie one of these signes; vvhy should I not say vnto you, as somtimes Iob said of himselfe.Iob 31. 35 Be∣hold your signes that the Almightie wil wit∣nesse for you. And I am vvell assured, that this treatise vvill finde good accesse vnto the hands and hearts of diuers in these parts, euen for the loue they beare to you, and for the good they novv heare you haue by ex∣perience reaped from
these. Neither had I beene easily drawne to publish these, but that hauing oc∣casion in conference with many to make vse of thē, I could hardly satisfie them vvith coppies. I spare to alleadge other reasons. Novv vvhat remains but that I should beseech you, and all those vvho finde by these signes the assurance of Gods eternal loue, euen to honour the Lord vvith the continu∣all sacrifices of praise, the fruite of your lips,Heb. 13 vvith confession to his name, oh loue the Lord vvith your
whole heart, and make his praise glorious, and a∣bound more and more, in the fruites of sincere life, and in all holy, and hum∣ble conuersation, liue by faith, and in nothing be carefull,Phil. 4, 6 but in all things, let your requests he made knowne to God, vvith thanksgiuing: and as you haue receiued mercy faint not, neither be descoraged vnder the sence of your infirmities and vvants,2, Cor, 4, 1 for they that vvaite vpon the Lord,Esa. 40, 31 shall renevv their strength, the Lord vvill power his spirit vp∣on your seede, &Isa, 44, 4 his bles∣sing
vpon your buds: the sunne of righteousnesse vvill arise, and there is healing vnder his wings. You haue a high Priest,Ma. 4, 2 that is touched vvith in∣firmities,Hob. 5. 15 16 and therefore you may goe boldly to the throne of grace, to seeke grace and mercy to helpe in time of neede: the pow∣er of God is made knowne in vveakenesse,2 Cor. 12 and his grace will be sufficient: the Lord keepeth the feete of his Saints,1. Sam. 2, 9 and vvill supplie all your vvants vvith his riches in glory.Psa. 66, 8, 9 Blessed be the Lord that holdeth our soules in life,
and suffereth not our feee to be moued. Gracious gentlewoman be confident in this,Psa. 1, 6 that God which hath begun his good worke will per∣forme it, till the day of Christ▪ for his foundation remaineth sure:2. Tim. 2, 19. and hee euer liueth that maketh intercession for you,Heb. 7, 25 and the mortall seede abideth,1. Ioh. 3, 9 and Christ will be,Reu. 21. 6 Ome∣ga as well as Alpha, the end as well as the begin∣ning: neither feare the reproach of men, for there is a hiding place with the Lord,Psa. 31, 20 from the strife of tongues; and he will put
to silence those lying lipps that speake such grieuous things,Psal, 31, 18 so proudly, so con∣temptuously: vvaite on the Lord, and keepe his waie; they shall assuredly make an account to the Iudge of quicke and dead,1. Pet▪ 4, 5 that speake euill of the in∣nocent, And the same God and father of mercie that hath directed, your heart vnto his loue, and refreshed your spirit with the vnspeakeable ioies of his presence, finish his owne worke in you: and as you haue professed, a good profession before many that will witnesse,
how vnblameably you haue behaued your selfe among them that beleeue; so stand fast in the Lord, be stil an example of faith and puritie, of loue and feruencie, of meekenesse, and humilitie, of tender∣nesse, and harmelesnesse, of shamefastnesse, and so∣brietie, of mercie and good workes, as becom∣meth a woman professing godlinesse, that they may bee ashamed which shall falsely accuse your good conuersation in Christ, keepe the Doctrine you haue receiued, seeing you haue learned Christ, as
the trth is in him. Striue to increase in loue and o∣bedience to your husband and care of your chril∣dren & familie, and shew all faithfulnesse, and dili∣gence in your particular calling. Prouoke your kin∣dred and acquaintance vnto repentance, faith, praier, loue, fellowship in the Gospell, and good workes, that thanksgi∣uing may be giuen by ma∣ny to God for you. Let the word of Christ bee still your guide: watch vnto praier, receiue them that feare God, and make much of such. Let pati∣ence
haue her perfect worke, and commit your waies to God, and trust in him. The Lord make you to abound in loue yet more and more, in know∣ledge, and in all iudge∣ment, that you may still approue things that are excellent, and be blame∣lesse in the middest of a crooked & peruerse peo∣ple: the Lord perfect in you whatsoeuer is vvan∣ting, and fulfill the good pleasure of his goodnesse, and the worke of your faith with power. The Lord increase in you that holy couetousnesse, to be
with the Lord, looking for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saui∣our Iesus Christ. Farewell. May. 1614. Yours according to the common faith. N. BYFIELD.
A SHORT Treatise concerning Assurance. COncerning the assu∣raunce of Gods fa∣uour, three things may be considered of. First the proofes. Secondly, the Lets. Thirdly, the signes. That a Christian in this life may be infalli∣bly assured of Gods fa∣uour
to himself in par∣ticular, and that hee ought to seeke this as∣surance, as a matter of singular necessity, these places of Scripture proue. The Apostle Paul chargeth the Co∣rinthians to Examine themselues,2. Cor. 13. 5. whether they be in the faith, and requi∣reth this prouing of them∣selues with such earnest∣nesse, that he saith, know yee not your owne selues, how that Christ Iesus is in you, except ye be repro∣bates? As if he would auouch it, that a man can neuer haue found
comfort of his election till he get this assured knowledge of Gods fa∣uour in Christ. And the Apostle Peter ex∣horts Christians to vse all diligence to make their calling and electi∣on sure whatsoeuer car∣nall persons speake a∣gainst it.2. Pet. 1. 10. Iob vehement∣ly desires there were a perpetual record of his words, when he speaks of his assurance, that no man might thinke he spake passionately, or vainegloriously;Iob. 19. 23. 25. 26. 27. He knew that his redeemer liued, and that at the last
day, his very flesh should be raised, & he should see God with ioy. By the spi∣rit of God a Christian knowes the things of God:1. Cor. 2. 10. 11. 12. yea to this end haue we receiued this Spirit which is of God, that wee might know the things which are freely giuen vs of God: yea it searcheth the deepe things of God.2. Cor. 5. 1 And in the second of the Corinthians Gods children are said to know their glorificati∣on: as certainely as by sence and experience, they know, that their bodies, which are their
earthlie tabernacles shall bee dissolued: so certainely are they as∣sured of the building of God, not made with hands,2. Cor. 5. 6. 8. eternall in the heauens: yea they are alwaies confident here∣in; and therefore Gods seruant are taught to pray for the spirit of wisdome and reuelati∣on, that the eyes of their vnderstanding may bee inlightned, that they might know the hope of their cal∣ling, and the riches of their inheritance,Eph. 1. 18. 19. and the exceeding greatnes
of Gods power to∣wards them, vpon this assurance. Paul knowes whom hee hath belee∣ued, and no afflictions should hinder him,2. Tim. 1. 12. but he will settle, vpon this perswasion, that God will keepe his soul, which he hath cō∣mitted to him against the day of Christ. The Apostle Iohn saith,1. Ioh. 3. 14 We know that we haue pas∣sed from death to life,1. Ioh. 5. 13 And again,1. Ioh. 5 19 ye may know that ye haue eternall life. And again we know that wee are of God. And the Apostle to the Ephesi∣ans
saith,Eph. 3. 11. that in Christ we haue boldnesse and ac∣cesse, with confidence by faith in him: yea the ve∣ry words of assurance are found in Scripture where it is shewed,1. Thos. 1. 5 that we may haue much as∣surance,Heb. 10. 22. yea full assu∣rance,Col. 2. 2. yea the riches of full assurance: and men are earnestly exhorted,Heb. 6. 11 to vse all diligence to get this full assurance to the end; and when it is once had, neither death, nor life, nor An∣gels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth,Rom. 8. 38. 39. nor anie other creature should be able to sepe∣rate them from▪ this loue of God in Iesus Christ. Lets, THe attainment of the sence, power, & com∣fort of this assurance is exceedingly hinde∣red in all sorts of peo∣ple. First, For many can neuer attaine it, bee∣cause they are forestal∣led with euill opinions about it, they thinke it
is impossible to be had, or it is needelesse, or it is presumption to seek it, or it would prooue a nurse to security if it were had. Secondly, in the most, common hope serues the turne and supplies presump∣tuously the roome of this sacred gift, Third∣ly, many heare & pro∣fesse, and goe farre in the opinion of others, and yet get not assu∣rance; because they take not a soūd course for the mortification of the body of sinnes that are passed, whereas it
is certain assurance can neuer be had, till there be some sound course taken, in the acknow∣ledgement, bewailing, and reformation of them. Fourthly, besides a barraen life is an vn∣comfortable and vn∣setled life,1. Cor. 15. 58. and contra∣riwise to abound in Gods worke, hath sted∣fastnesse, and a secret rest of heart, as an vn∣speakeable companion of it. Fifthly, Melancho∣ly also (that is terrors and griefes, of which a man can yeelde no true reason) is in diuers
a mighty let to the set∣led assurance they might haue. They are so eaten vp with those strong conceits that all the comfort is pro∣pounded most anend, prooues as water spilt vpon the ground: espe∣cially when this humor is nourished by some extraordinary distem∣per of the body; Phy∣sicke, not arguments of Scripture must here be vsed, or rather both of them. Sixthly, the loue of earthly things is an∣other great impedi∣ment: many professors
haue their thoughts and cares so eaten vp with worldlinesse, that they cannot seriously hold out to follow the directions requi∣site to the attainement of assurans. This grace requires a minde some way fitted for contem∣plation. It is a know∣ledge will neuer be had with looking downe∣ward. Seuenthly, fur∣ther, many are so passi∣onate and froward, they can get no rest in their heart, when as ful assurance would bee lodged in an humble
& quiet brest. Eighth∣ly, Others want assu∣rance,1. The. 1. 5 because they neglect the meanes of assurance,Eph. 1. 17 which are the word,Phi. 15, 6 praier, or fellowship in the Gos∣pell. Ninthly, In some there lodgeth some se∣cret sinne vnrepented of, and this either keepes out faith, or keepes it downe in the cradle, that it can get no strength. Lastly, as∣surance is the gift of God, and hee bestow∣eth it on whom hee will.
The signes ge∣nerally pro∣pounded. THere are six∣teene infallible signes of a child of God, as may ap∣peare by the testimo∣nie of most apparent Scripture. First,Mat. 5. 3. Pouerty of spirit; for the poore of spirit are blessed and theirs is the kingdome of heauen. Secondly,2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sor∣row, for it causeth re∣pentance, not to be re∣pented off, euen such a
repentance as is vnto saluation. Thirdly, the loue of the word, for this is a sure comfort in affliction,Pal. 119. 50. and may quicken a mans heart,2 Cor. 2. 15. this is a sa∣uour of life vnto life, in them that are saued. Fourthly, The loue of Gods children;1. Ioh. 3. 14. for here∣by we know wee are passed from death to life,1. Cor. 13. 1. 2. 3. because wee loue the brethren. Fifthly, Faith; for god so loued the world that hee gaue his one∣ly begotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth
in him, should not pe∣rish but haue euerla∣sting life. Sixthly, Vpright∣nesse of heart:Psal. 84. 13. 1. for God will giue grace and glo∣rie, and no good thing will hee with-hold from them that are vp∣right in heart.Psa. 97. 11 Seuenthly, The spi∣rit of Adoption.Rom. 8. 9. 14. 16. For it beareth witnes to our spirit that wee are the sonnes of God: and if anie man haue not the spirit of Christ, he is not his. Eighthly, Holy de∣sires. For euery one
that thirsteth,Reuel. 21. 6 shal haue of the water of life free∣ly: & if they will heare,Esay 55. 1, 2 3, 4. their soules shall liue, and enioy the sure mer∣cies of Dauid, they are blessed,Mat. 5, 6. and they shall be satisfied. Ninthly, The spirit of praier or supplicati∣on;Iol. 2, 22 for whosoeuer cal∣leth on the name of the Lord shall bee sa∣ued.Zach. 12. 10. 10 The obedience of Christ,Heb. 5. 9. for he is the au∣thor of eternall salua∣tion to them that obey him. 11 Sauing know∣ledge
For this is eter∣nall life, to know God, and whom hee hath sent Iesus Christ.Ioh. 17. 3. It is not onely a signe of e∣ternall life or saluati∣on, but the beginning and part of it. 12 The Sacraments in the right vse of them are infallible signes of our saluation, and to that end ordained,Mar. 16. 11 for he that belieueth and is baptised shall bee sa∣ued.1. Pet. 3. 21 Hence it is said, Baptisme saueth vs: they are sure seales of the righteousnesse of faith.Rom. 4. 11
13 The loue of God: for if a man loue Christ the Father will loue him,Ioh. 14. 23 and come vnto him and dwell with him. 14 The feare of God: for it is a fountaine of life,Pro. 14. 27 to depart from the snares of death. 15 Loue of our ene∣mies:Mat. 5 44. 48. for it is not one∣ly a signe of a Christi∣an, but of a perfect Christian. 16 Desire of death.2. Tim. 4. For a crowne of life is layed vp for all them that loue the appea∣ring of Christ.
The signes par∣ticularly expounded; and first of pouer∣tie of Spirit. SPirituall pouertie may bee tried ei∣ther by proper∣ties, or by effect. Gods poore haue eight properties. First, They are sensi∣ble, and that first of their owne wants and misery, by nature and daily sinne. Secondly, they know when they see Gods iudgements,Zach. 11. 11. that it was the word of
the Lord. Thirdly, they tremble at Gods word,Esay 66. 2. and feare his dis∣pleasure, while it yet hangs in the threat∣ning. Fourthly, they are sensible of that speci∣all goodnesse of Gods mercy;Psal. 109. 20. when a man is poore and needie, he can say with Dauid, mercie is good.Psal. 109. 21. Fifthly, they are sensible of their owne mortalitie: they haue feeling im∣pressions of their fa∣ding condition. Secondly, they are thankfull, and that for lesser mercies; a poore
man is glad of a pen∣nie, whereas a rich man cannot bee touched with so small a fauour, Gods poore will praise Gods name for the ve∣ry crums that fals from his table: and as anie are more poore and humble, they are more thankefull. Thirdlie, they are teachable, and willing to bee appointed and instructed; it is a great signe a mans heart is not humble, when he must haue so much to doe, before he can bee perswaded to anie
trueth, or disswaded from anie sinne: pride and ignorance is hard to learne. Fourthly, they are hungrie people, espe∣cially greedie after the food in Syon,Psal. 12. 26 & 132. 15 they loue it, they desire it, they esteeme it, they are satisfied with no∣thing better then with it, it is the reliefe of their hearts foreuer. And there are fiue ef∣fects of spirituall pro∣perties. THe first is praier: for Gods poore
liue by begging, if hee be poore, hee will crie vnto God. The second is Abne∣gation: for this poore man, renounceth his owne merits, hee seeth no good will be had by deseruing; for hee de∣serueth nothing but Gods curse in al things hee forsaketh also the world, both in the lusts of it, and in the compa∣nie of the wicked, and all earthly things, as not hauing the chiefe good in them. The third is dili∣gence in Gods worke;
yea Gods poore are willing to do the mea∣nest and hardest worke God will be pleased to set them to: so as they may finde fauour in his eies to be accepted with him, they would account no worke too base for them to doe, but they would bee glad to doe anie thing they could with their best desires and endea∣vours. Fourthly, Gods poore,Pal. 11. 14 commit them∣selues & all their waies to Gods care and mer∣cie; they will onely
trust in the name of the Lord,Zeph. 3. 12 and bee con∣tented to let God dis∣pose of them as plea∣seth him. Fifthly, The last is a feare to offend God in word or deede, by their good will they would doe none ini∣quitie,Zech. 3. 13 nor speake lies, a deceitfull tongue should not be found in their mouth, Gods poore and Gods Tur∣tle doues are all one;Psal. 74. 19 so in seperable are harme lesse innocencie and spirituall pouertie.
2. Godlie sorrow. WEE may know whet¦ther our sorrowes be Godly, if we consider. First, the causes. Secondly, the properties. Thirdly the concomitants. Fourth∣lie, the effects of them. For the first of them wee must consider what raiseth our sor∣rowes and what asswa∣geth them, for godlie sorrow, is chiefelie rai∣sed for sinne: and so
for the sinnes of the time, because others keepe not the law. For Ezechiel doubt not to mark them with Gods marke,Ezech. 9. 4 that mourne for the abhomination done in Ierusalem;Psa. 119. 36. but wee must vnderstand that this sorrow must bee simple, because God is dishonored. And further in sor∣row for our owne sins, we must mourne, for al sorts of sinnes, for les∣ser sines, as well as grea∣ter,Esay 6. 5. for sinnes of our calling, for secret sins as well as open, for sins
that presntlie trouble vs, as well as for sinnes past:Rom 7. for the sins fea∣red and the corrupt in∣clination of our na∣tures, for beeloued,Esay 1. 16 gainefull and pleasing sinnes, finally for the e∣uill of our good works as wel as for euil works. Now there are two notes of great vse, in triall of sorrow for our sinnes; the one is, that wee must sorrow for sinne as it is sinne; and the other is, that a man should not easily satis∣fie himselfe in the mea∣sure, till he can mourne
as much for sinne, as he was wont, or now would for losses. The Prophet Zacharias in∣stanceth,Zac. 12. 10. 11. when he saith; the spirit of God, shold cause them to mourne as in the familie, as one would mourne for the losse of their onely sonne, or as in the com∣mon wealth, the sub∣iects would doe, for the losse of a most wor∣thie Prince. He menti∣oneth their sorrow for Iosiah, yet wee must know that teares are not of necessitie, and specially in such na∣tures,
as are voide of teares, for anie other causes. Secondly, in asmuch as sorrow may be God∣ly euen for iudgements wee must vnderstand that herein our triall wil be,Psal. 4, 3. 2 137. if we can mourn rather for spirituall iudgements,Neh 1. 3 4 then for temporall: and among the rest, if we can feele, and bewaile hardnesse of heart,Esay 63. 17 mourning be∣cause we cānotmourne as we ought, and far∣ther if we can be grie∣ued as well for the of∣fence of God as for pu∣nishment.
Thirdly, a christian is principally stirred vp in true sorrow, by the sence of Gods good∣nesse; so as nothing doth more fire him to a desire to abase him∣selfe and to humble himselfe, euen in the verie dust, in the sence of his owne vilenesse, then to feele and finde the gracious goodnes and readinesse of God to shew mercie.Hos. 3. He fea∣reth the Lord and his goodnesse. And as godlie sor∣row is raised by spiri∣tuall
meanes and consi∣derations, so it is as∣swaged onely by spiri∣tuall meanes, those sor∣rowes that can be hea∣led by sports, merrie companie or the like, are much like the me∣decines vsed to helpe them; but in godlie sorrow,Ho. 6. 1. 3. the same God that wounded them must heale, and a chri∣stiā desires helpe from the same word that pierced him. Thus of the causes. THere are foure properties of god∣ly
sorrow which a∣mong the rest, we must labour after, and with∣out which we can hard∣lie haue true assistance, that our sorrowes are right. First, it is inquisi∣tiue, it is a hard thing to make sorrow silent, and hee that is truelie pricked in his heart,Ior. 50. 4. 5 cannot with content∣ment smother his doubts, hee will aske the way to Sion, and cannot rest till he haue knowne what to doe to be saued,Act. 2. 37. those that finde so little to aske,
and can be so silent in the presence of Gods seruaunts, by whom they might bee direct∣ed, may suspect their sorrowes. Secondlie, it must not rest in the begin∣nings, or probabilities, or hopes, or others good opinions, or the mending of manie things: but a Christian that is truelie humbled will repent stil,Ier. 31. 19 though he haue turned, that is, he is so fearefull of be∣ing deceiued, through the corruption of his owne heart, and the
wils of Sathan, that he will constantlie hold on to confesse and be∣waile his sinnes, till he may finde assured rest vnto his soule. Thirdlie, it will ad∣mit nothing against God, but it makes a man condemne him∣selfe, rather then God; when Dauid lay in that mournfull plight, that he could finde no com∣fort night nor daie,Psa. 77. 1. 2▪ 27▪ for a long season, and that the question, was to be debated whether God had forgotten to bee mercifull, &c. Hee re∣solues,
the fault was in himselfe that it was his infirmitie, and that his soule refused com∣fort. Fourthlie, it will not rest without cleane∣nesse, godlie sorrow is not water, but washing nor euery washing, but such as maketh cleane:Esay 1. 16▪ worldlie sorrow may haue much water, but cleanseth nothing, but godlie sorrow greatlie desireth and loueth puritie. Thus of the causes and properties concer∣ning the concomitants
there are diuerse things doe accompanie god∣lie sorrow, by which it is discerned; for, First it is ioyned with a secret trust in the ac∣acceptation of God, so as no miserie can beate them from the consi∣deration and inward affiance of hope of mercie, in the verie disquietnesse of the heart the desire of the soule is to the Lord,Psa. 38. 9. & before his presence though a childe of God, be neuer so much cast downe, yet hee waits vpon God, for
the helpe of his coun∣tenaunce,Psa. 42. 5. 11. and in some measure condemnes the vnbeliefe of his owne heart, and sup∣porteth himselfe with the hope of the neuer failing compassions of God:Tam 3. 21 thus it differs from the sorrowes of Caine and Iudas. Secondlie, it is ioi∣ned with a wonderfull loue of God for hea∣ring of praier, it is most deepelie affected with euerie mercie of God felt in praier; Dauid loues the Lord,Psa. 116. 13. because he hath heard his prai∣er
at that time when his sorrowes was as the paines of hell. Thirdlie,Psa. 119. 20. 82. 33. it is ioined with a longing after the word. Fourthlie, it is ioined with a constant desire to glorifie God by a fruitefull profession, e∣uerie one that truelie mourneth in Sion,Esay. 61. 2 3. is a tree of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord, that he may bee glorified. Fifthlie, it is ioined with a spirit of suppli∣cations, sorrow that is after God, will teach a
Christian to pray, that could neuer praie be∣fore; the spirit of com∣passion,Zac. 12. 10 is a spirit of supplication. Lastlie, our sorrowes must be tried by their effects, for godlie sor∣row. First, driues vs to a dailie and serious con∣fession of sinne in par∣ticular without hiding anie sinne.Psa. 38. 17 Secondlie, it breedes a tender sence of the burthen of sinne; ne∣uer doth a Christian feele the heauie loade of sinne as it is sinne,
till God hath softned his heart by his spirit.Psal. 38. 5. Thirdlie, It workes a mindefulnesse of God and his presence,Psal. 42. 6. and a deepe impression and thought of good things. Fourthlie,Psa. 51. 17 it causeth a man to sacrifice and deuote himselfe to God.Rom. 12. 1 Fifthlie, it breedes sensiblenesse & thank∣fulnesse for all sorts of mercie.Lam. 3. 22 23. Lastlie, the Apostle notes seuen effects of Godlie sorrow,2. Cor. 7. 11. care, a∣pologie, indignation,
feare, vehement desire, zeale and reueuge. 3. Loue to the word. IN so much as wick∣ed men; especiallie such as are indued with a temporary faith may haue some kinde of affections to the word, we must careful∣lie trie our selues, and examine our selues se∣riously. 1.Ps. 119. 20 Whether we de∣sire it as our appointed foode constantlie?Iob. 23. 12. 2. Whether wee loue them that loue
the word. 3.Psal. 119. 115. Whether the loue of the word sepe∣rates vs from the wick∣ed? 4. Whether we can mourn,Psal. 119 136. because others keepe not the word? 5. Whether wee loue it aboue all riches and could esteeme it as our heritage?Psa. 119. 14. 72. 111 6. Whether it bee our chiefe comfort in affliction.Psa. 119. 23 24. 50. 51. 54. 143 7. Whether in hea∣ring wee receiue it as the word of God,1. Thes. 2. 13. and not of men. 8. Whether we re∣ceiue
it in power and much assurance?1. The, 1. 5 9. Whether it workeIoh. 8. 33. effectually in vs there∣dressePsa. 119. 45. 9. 59. of our waies and freedome from the bondage of sinne.1. Thes. 2. 13. 10. Whether wee loue all the words of God, euen the law that with threatning shews vs our sinnes as well as the gospell;Psal. 1. 2 & 119. 11. desiring to hide the word in our hearts that wee might not sinne. 11. Whether it be our desire and delight to exercise our selues in it day and night.Psa. . 1
12. Whether wee can accompt and feele the famine of the word to bee a most bitter crosse.Psa. 42. 3. 13. Whether wee could bee contented constantlie to labour for it,Amos. 8. as men doe, for the foode that perish∣eth.12. Ioh. 6. 27. 14. Whether wee finde a constant sweete taste in it,Psa. 19. 10. especially in the powerfull preach∣ing of it. 15. Whether for the gospell sake we can bee content,Mar. 10. 2. 9. to denie our reasons,1. Cor. 3. 18. affections,
credits,1. Thes. 1. 5. 6. carnall friends pleasures and profits. 4. The loue of Gods children. OVr loue to the Saints may be tried. First, by the cause. Secondly, by the extent. Thirdly, the manner. Fourthly, by the effects. For the first, to loue Gods children,Psa. 16. 2. 3. because they are begotten of God,1. Ioh. 3. and for the grace of Gods spirit,14 & 5. 1. by which they resemble God (or rather for the
Lord himselfe desiring to expresse our affecti∣ons to them, because wee doe no good to God himselfe) is not found in anie repro∣bate, and so to loue them simplie for the truths sake, whereas to loue them for beautie, profit,2. Ioh. 1. 2. companie sake, or any naturall or car∣nall reasons or ends in no signe at all.3. Ioh. 1. Secondlie, hee that truely loues the bre∣thren, loues all the bre∣thren;Eph. 1. 15. hee that loues not all the Saints,Col. 1. 4. loues no Saint aright:Phile. 5. a true
Christian hath not the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons, he loues the poorest, if he haue true grace, as∣well as the richest, yea he loues the absent as∣well as the present, yea he loues for the truths sake those he neuer saw yet this hinders not the difference of de∣grees of loue, so as some may be more beloued then others, and that by reason of the grea∣ter measure of Gods gifts and graces, or els, by the speciall pro∣uidence of God when
the Lord linketh the affection of some Chri∣stians in some speciall eminencie of respects; and so it is not alwaie needefull, that the per∣sons most loued, bee most gracious; it doth not of necessitie follow that Iohn was the most gracious of al the Apostles, though hee were most beloued. Againe as our loue must bee extendent to all saints, so also must it be to all times, we must loue them aswell when they are in aduersity, disgrace, temptation,
sicknesse, or any misery; as when they abound in prosperitie or good estimation, &c. For the third, this loue is without dissimulation,1, Ioh. 3, 18, 19. it is in∣deede and trueth,Rom, 12, 9, 10. not in word or appearance onely. And besides, it is a most affectionate and brotherly loue. Lastlie, there are sixe effects of true chri∣stian loue, for it shewes it selfe. First, by honor, and this honoring of them that feare the Lord,Psa, 15, 4▪ hath in it▪
First, an estima∣tion of them, as the onely excellent people in the world.Psa. 16. 3 Secondly,Rom. 16 19. a free ac∣knoweledgement of their iust praises in all places,3. Ioh. 6. for their grace and obedience.1. Thes. 18. Thirdly,1. Thes. 1. 7. a willing proposing of them, as examples to imitate. Fourthly,1. Pet. 4. 8 a holy en∣deauour to couer their infirmities, taking things in the best part and sence, not recei∣uing disgracefull re∣ports of them;1. Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. suffe∣ring long, not vauting
themselues in compa∣rison of them, not easi∣ly prouoked, not enuy∣ing them, hoping all things, induring all things, and yet not re∣ioycing in their ini∣quity. Fiftly, Apology for them against the repro∣ches and scornes of the world. Sixthly by delight in their fellowship,Psal. 16. 3. and society in the Gospell,Phil. 1, 5. in which respect they can be equall to them of the lower sort.3. Ioh. 8. Such as finde no need of,Rom. 12, 16 nor delight in the compa∣ny
of Gods children, or are willing to sort with none, but their betters or equals, may see great cause to bee humbled, either for the want of this grace, or for the weakenesse of it. Thirdly, by simpa∣thy and fellow-feeling▪ for in some measure,Rom 12. 9. 16 a childe of God is like affectioned: He can in some measure weepe with them that weepe,3 Ioh. 3 and reioyce with them that reioyce, especially they reioyce, to heare, or know their soules
prosperity. Fourthly,Psal. 16, 3. by weldo∣ing, & mercy,Rom. 12 10, 13. this loue is bountifull,Phile. 7, 1. Pet. 3, 8. & 4, 8. pittifull, tender, hath bowels both of spirituall and outward mercy,1. Ioh. 3, 17. it glad∣ly receaueth the saints,3. Ioh 5 it communicates to their necessitie willing∣lie, and with a readie minde. Fiftly, by a desire to walke in offensiuely, he that loueth his bro∣ther,1. Ioh. . 10 there is no occa∣sion of stumbling, or scandall in him. Lastly, the true loue of Gods children, will
make a man grow vpEphe. 4, 15, 16. the faster into Iesus Christ,1. Thes. 3. 12, 13. in all grace and holinesse.1▪ Ioh. 5, 2. 5. Faith. INasmuch, as there are diuers kinds of faith, and experi∣ence shewes in many that giue no signes of repentance, that they will not bee beaten from a confident per∣swasion, that Christ di∣ed for them, euen for them in particular. It stands vs in hand to try our perswasion by the
true rules of scripture, and if it will abide the triall of the touch∣stone, we may lay it vp as hid treasure, and a wonderfull grace of God, and if otherwise we may repent of pre∣sumption, as a deceaue∣able sinne. Faith may be tried. 1. By the Cause. 2. By the Properties. 3. By the Concomitants. 4. By the effects. For the first, true faith commeth by the hearing of the word
preached: It is no na∣turall endowment, nor gotten by naturall helpes; But first is wrought by the holy∣ghost, in the preaching of the Gospell, as is plaine by the Apostle. How shal they beleeue in him of whom they haue not heard,Rom. 10, 14. and how shall they heare without a Preacher. Secondly, there are 6. properties of faith. First, it accounts all things most base, in Comparison of the knowledge of Christ,Phil. 3 9 and the loue of God in1. Pet. 2. 6.
him. Christ is more precious then all the world besides. Secondly, it will re∣ceaue the testimony of Gods faithfull Mini∣sters out of the world,2. Thes. 1, 10 against the world. Thirdly, it is such a perswasion as cannot abide hipocrisy, but purgeth the heart of it, as of a most hatefull sinne,2. Tim. 1. 5. and is therefore called vnfained. Fourthly, it will en∣dure triall; cast it into the fire of tribulation,1. Pt. 1. 7 and manifold afflicti∣ons and disgraces,2. Tim. 1, 12. and
temptations, yet it will not perish, nor be asha∣med; it is a plate for the breast, and a helmet for the head. 1. Thess. 5. 8 Eph. 6. Whereas the best faith that is not the faith of Gods elect, will proue but drosse, if it be cast into the fur∣nce of temptation; further then it is sup∣ported by carnall ends and helpes.Luke 8. 13 Fiftly, it will beleeue all things that it appre∣hendeth to be requi∣red, threatned, or pro∣mised in the word;Acts 24. 14. to belieue some things,
may be in other kindes of faith; especially such things as stand with reason, affecting com∣mon opinion, &c. Sixtly, in affliction it laieth hold on Gods promise or prouidence, so as it will rest with quietness,Esay 25. 16. trust and pa∣tience, and not make hast to the vse of e∣uill, and vnwarranted meanes, he that belee∣ueth maketh not hast. Thirdly, it may bee tried by the concomi∣tants of it. for; First, it is ealed by the holy spirit of pro∣mise;
for in euery be∣leeuer the promised spi∣rit doth print in his heart the sauing graces of Christ,Eph. 1. 13, 14. from the sight of which, as from so many markes, com∣pared with Gods pro∣mises in his word, ari∣seth by the effectuall working of the spirit, this assurance or per∣swasion of faith: for though grace and faith bee giuen toge∣ther, and grow vp toge∣ther, yet the assurance of faith discouers not it selfe, till it discerne those companions of it
with which it is daily incouraged, and confir∣med and setled, that faith that can be with∣out sanctification of the spirit,2. Thes. 2, 13. is not the faith of Gods elect. Secondly,1. Tim. 1, 19. 5. it is ioy∣ned with a good and pure conscience.1. Tim 3. 9 Hee that is truly perswaded of Gods loue in Christ,He. 10. 22. maketh conscience of all his wayes, to seeke or doe thee good God requires, and auoyde the euils God forbids. Thirdly,2. Tim 3. 15. it is ioyned with a spirit of discer∣ning, or wisdome in
matters of saluation, the minde being en∣lightened, to obserue in some comfortable measure, the meaning of the holy ghost, in all things needefull to saluation, in vse of the word,Psa. 119. 130. through the power of Gods ordi∣nances, so as the verie simple may and doe at∣taine to a holy kinde of insight,Pro. 1. 4, 8, & 5, 9. and sharpe∣nesse of iudgement. Fourthly,1, Ioh, 5: 10 The true beleeuer hath a wit∣nesse in himselfe, euen the witnesse of the spi∣rit of adoption,Rom, 8, 15 16. infalli∣ble
certifying himselfe of Gods loue and his adoption. Fifthly, faith may be discerned by certaine effects of it; for, 1. It breedeth ioy vnspeakeable and glo∣rious,1. Pet. 1, 8 and that either through the sence of Gods sauour and your presence,Rom. 5. 2 or in the hope of glorie to come. 2. It puts on and applies a righteous∣nesse, that is not by the worke of the same,Rom. 10. but in Christ onely. 3. It will make a man speake in the con∣fession,
profession and defence of the truth of God, I haue beleeued,2. Cor. 4 13. 14. therefore I spake. 4. It workes the longing desires of2. Cor. 5. 7. Gods presence of glo∣rie.Gal. 5. 5. 5. It workes an ef∣fectuall loue of God and Gods children,Gel. 5. 6. & sheweth it selfe by the fruites of loue. 6. It will main∣taine a Christian in some measure of suffi∣ciencie and content∣ment in all estates;Heb, 2. 5. the iust liues by faith,Rom. 1. 17 not by friends,Gal. 20. mony, earth∣ly
hopes, or helpes &c. for it will make a man to lay houlde vpon Gods promise, and workes an inward trust in Gods neuer failing prouidence, so as hee will leaue the successe of all his labours, or meanes to God. 7. It excludes, boa∣sting of our owne la∣bours, praises, gifts, or workes,Rom, 3. 17 and in the same measure workes humi∣litie,Gal. 3 22. that it maketh a∣ny other grace. 8. It ouercom∣meth the world,1. 1o. 5. 4. 5 so as profits, credit, pleasures
carnal friends or hopes doe not sway and rule the beleeuer, but hee willinglie and patient∣lie rests in the treasures and pleasures of a bet∣ter world, yeelding himselfe ouer to bee guided by Christ and his truth to the death.Psa. 48. 14 9. It purifieth the heart from ignorance, wicked imaginations, carnall desires,Acts 15. 9 sinfull perturbations, and all sorts of secret and in∣ward sinnes. And this it doth by causing a man, dailie to seeke pardon for them in
Christ, and by casting them out by confessi∣on and sorrow, in the same measure, desiring inward puritie, that it reioyeeth in Gods loue. 10. There is a spring of grace in the heart of euery beleeuer,Ioh. 7 38. whence followes daily the ex∣ercise of sundrie sauing graces, which can ne∣uer bee vtterly dried vp in the heart of a Christian; and that is it, our sauiour Christ meaneth when hee saith; out of his bellie shall flow
riuers, of liuing wa∣ter. 6. The spirit of Adoption. THe spirit of a∣doption in the hearts of Gods Children, may bee dis∣cerned. First, by the fire of zeale and holie affecti∣ons, with which it fils the harts of Gods chil∣dren;Mat, 3. 11, especially in the vse of Gods ordinan∣ces,Eph, 5, 19 to the information & reformation of their liues.
Secondly,1. The 1. 5 by the much assurance, which especially at somtimes worketh in the heart. Thirdly, by a daily holy strife, to preserue grace giuen vs,2. Tim. 1. 14 and to preuent falling away. Fourthly, by secret suggestion or direction, by which Gods ser∣uants are reclaimed when they goe out of the way,Esa 30. 1 either on the right hand, or on the left. Fifthly, by the assise it keepes in the heart of a christian,Esay. 4. as a spirit of iudgement by which
he is made, to watch, arrest, accuse, condemn and restraine himselfe, from euerie euill way, according to the rules of the word, & before Gods holy presence. Sixthly, by libertie from the power of raigning and presump∣tuous sinnes;2. Cor, 3, 17. where the spirit of God is,Rom. 8. 10 there is libertie. Seuenthly, by the groath and florishing of true grace.Esay 44, 3 4. Eighthly, by vn∣speakable ioies, felt in the presence of God, in the due vse of his ordi∣nance,
by which a chri∣stian is enflamed to the loue of God,Rom. 14, 17. and all holy duties,Ezec. 39 vl and abased to the dust in the sence of his owne vilenesse, called therefore the ioies of the holy ghost: For, as for carnall ioyes or illusions, either they are not felt in the vse of Gods ordinances, or els they breede pride, and conceited security. Ninthly, by requests and supplications,Rom, 8. 13 affe∣ctionable and withZac. 12, 10 confidence powered out vnto God as a fa∣ther.Eph. 3, 12
7. Vprightnesse of heart. IF thou wouldest make triall of the truth and vprigh∣nesse of thy heart, thou must seriously examine thy selfe: First,Psa. 32. 2, whether thy spirit be without guile,Ioh. 1. 4. more desirous to be good,Prou▪ 20, 6, 7. then to bee thought to be so, and seeking more the pow∣er of godlinesse, then the shew of it. Secondly, whether thou loue all good
things aswell as one, and hate all things as well as one. Thirdly, whether that thou canst loue and forgiue thy ene∣mies, that hate, and dis∣grace, and wrong thee aswell as thy friends, that either wrong thee not, or but by infirmi∣ty. Fourthly, whether thou canst bee content to receiue euil at Gods hands, as well as good, without murmuring or letting goe thy inte∣grity,Ioh 1, 1, & 2, 3. 10 being carefull to approue thy selfe to
God without respect of reward, yea though trouble did befall thee. Fiftly, whether thou dislike sinne in all,1. Kin. 15 12, 13, 14 euen in those that are most neere and deere vnto thee? Sixtly, whether thou finde in thy heart a re∣solution to turne from nothing that God com∣maundeth thee all the daies of thy life.1. Kin. 15 5, 9, 4. Seauenthly, whether thou be innocent from the great transgression.Psa. 1, 13 Eightly, whether thou finde an inward combate and striffe a∣gainst
secret sinnes, as∣well as open sinnes, be∣wailing the transgres∣sions against the in∣ward worship of God, aswell as against the ontward. Ninthly, whether thy heart bee humble,Heb. 2, 4 patient,Pro, 21, 29 teachable, and tractable in some holy measure,1, Chr, 28. 9. increasing herein by the vse of Gods ordniance? an vpright heart, is a wil∣ling heart. 10 Whether thy de∣sire bee to walke as in Gods presence.Gen, 17, 1 11 Whether thou
finde a desire to be rid of sinne, and to humble thy selfe for it, in pros∣peritie aswell as aduer∣sitie,Iob 8, 5, 6 and in the begin∣ning of afflictions, as∣well as in the extremi∣ties of them. 12 Whether in wrongs and disgraces,Psal 7, 10 11, 7. when thou art inno∣cent, thou canst (in the sence of thine owne vnworthinesse of Gods loue) make God thy defence, resting in his fauour and acceptance. 13 Whether thou dost endeauour to glo∣rifie God,Psal. 33, 1 119, 7. 140, 13. aswell by gi∣uing
thankes for bles∣sings and graces, as for praying for supplie of wants, or pardon of innes. 14 Whether thy heart be stedfast, and setled, without lying, flattering, or dissem∣bling; so seeking and praying for pardon, and deliuerance in ad∣uersite, that thou wouldest practise it af∣ter release, this was a signe the Israelites were not vpright,Psa. 78, 36 37. in that they would crie to God in their distresse, but care not for their
vowes and promises, so soone as they were deliuered. 15 Whether the word of God doe thee good aboue all things?Mich. 2▪ 7 16 Whether thy praise be of God,Rom. 2, 29 and not of men? 17 Whether thou dost serue God with thy whole heart: not hauing a heart and a heart,2. Chro. 6. 14. psa. 119▪ 34 either waiuering or deuided? for vnlesse the whole resolution of thy soule, with the vtmost of thy desires, bee to walke in Gods waies, thy heart is
not vpright. 18 Whether there be in thee a faithfull heart,2. Chr. 19. 8 9. to deale faithful∣lie in the charge and calling in which thou art, and to discharge it in the conscionable feare of God? 19 Whether there be any sinne thou coul∣dest not willinglie iudg thy selfe for it, without hiding it, so soone as thou knowest it to be a sinne: This is the ioy of a Christian,Psa. 32. 11 & 5. in the sense of his owne wants and weakenesses, that though he haue manie
sinnes, yet there is no sinne but hee willing lie acknowledgeth it vnto God. 20 Whether thou be good at home,Psal. 101, 2. as well as abroade. 21 Whether thou canst be contented to make the Law of God,Psa 119, 1 thy onelie direction in all things?Deut 18 12. 13 22 Whether thou canst bee as carefull to preseuere in grace, as once to be good? 23 Whether thou keepe thy selfe from thine owne iniquitie.Pro. 13 1. Whether thou dost
conscionablie endeuor to forsake thy particu∣lar,2. Sam. 22 24. formerly beloued and speciall sinnes? 24 Whether thou be free from the raigne of frowardnesse in thy way,Pro. 11, 20▪ & 19, 1. or peruersenesse of thy lips. 8. Holie desires. OVr desires may bee tried fiue waies. First by obiects of them. Se∣condly, by the qualli∣ties of them. Thirdlie,
by the concomitants or companions of them. Fourthly, by ef∣fects or consequents of them. Fifthly, by the causes or accidents of them. For the first, those de∣sires are meant in the promises,Psa, 73. 25 that are car∣ried after things aboue nature, as the fauour of God, the pardon of sinnes,Mat. 5. the righteous∣nesse of Christ,Heb. 11. 10 16. the pre∣sence of God, and the saints in the new Ieru∣salem, the comming of Christ to iudgement,Reuel. 22 17. 20. victorie ouer the dee∣rest
sinnes,Rom, 7 the remou∣ing of spirituall iudge∣ments,Esa 63, 17 the damnation of their owne soules,Rom, 9. 3 that Israel might be sa∣ued, and such like. There are three prin∣cipall quallities in the holie desires of Gods elect;Lu. 12. 49. for First, they are fierie that is, such as cause the heart of man, to burnewithn him, with some measure of zeale for Gods glorie, indig∣nation at sinne, and fer∣uent affection in Gods seruice, whereas the desires of the wicked,
at least are either dull and cold, or transpor∣ted by the wrongs, ends to the fauouring of sinne. Secondlie, they are constant: both because they are renued dailie, as the metaphors of hunger and thirst doe import; as also because they are alike carried to the eternall fruition of the things desired, as to the present enioying of them, Gods seruants desire the fauour of God, the abolishing of sinne, the possession of grace, not to serue a
turne for the present, but to be enioyed as their portion for euer; for looke how the man vnregenerate desires to commit sinne, so doth the regenerate desire to forsake: but the for∣mer in some sins doth commit them, with a desire euer to sinne and a secret discontentmēt to thinke that at anie time, he should not be able to sinne. Euen such a contrarie desire is there in Gods elect truely called, they so desire not to sinne, as it is their griefe to thinke
that at any time they should againe sinne, yea affliction, doth not quench them but ma∣nie times inflame them.Esa. 26, 9▪ Thirdlie, they are not idle, which may appeare three waies. First, because they are carried after themeanes of good aswell as good things themselues:Psa. 27. 4 1, and that in a great measure too.Pet, 2, 2 Secondly,Psa. 1, 63 1 . because they are attended with a resolution to doe any thing that their desires may bee accomplished:Acts 2, 37▪ they aske what should
they doe to be saued? as taking it for graun∣ted, that they must bee industrious in Gods worke. There is no la∣bour, but they would endeuour to doe it, so the Lord would bee mercifull vnto them to graunt them their de∣sire, yea when they haue done all, they still are humbled because they can doe no more, nor no better. Third∣lie, they cannot rest till in some happie mea∣sure they ouercome,Reue. 21, 6 the most maisterly cor∣ruption either of na∣ture
or life. Thirdlie, holy desires are accompanied: First, with a super∣naturall valuation of the worth of spirituall things accoūting them pearle of the best price not to deere bought if they buie them with the sale of al they haue;Mat. 13. 45. 46. and contrariwise ac∣counting themselues exceeding poore and distressed,Psa. 42. if they want them or the meanes of them,Psa. 63. 1. 3 esteeming Gods louing kindnoss bet∣ter then life. Secondly, with a∣voluntary
forsaking of the vnnecessarie plea∣sures and profit of the world,Heb 11. 13 thankfully re∣ceiuing the promises of a better life, and easily confessing that they are strangers and pil∣grimes on the earth. Thirdly, with a con∣stant and secret medita∣tion of heauenly things desired,Isay 26. 9 what one de∣sires feruently,Psa, 63, 1, 6. hee thinkes on almost con∣tinuallie. Fourthly, Holy de∣sires shewe themselues by diuers effects or consequents of them,
especially if they be sa∣tisfied. First,Pro. 11, 23 they chase out euill desires and raise vp a dailie combat a∣gainst the most secret corruptions of na∣ture.Roae, 7. 25 Secondlie,Lam, 2, 19 the excite a frequencie and fer∣uencie in praier to God in secret. Thirdlie they worke a resolution to walke in the way,Es. 35. 7. 8 that is cal∣led holie, yea so graci∣ous is the Lord, that the most simple, if their desires bee most true, attaine to some happie
measure of reforma∣tion. Fourthlie, if the Lord graunt their desires, there followes: First heauenlie kindePs 63, 5 of satisfaction and con∣tentation with singular delight in the soule.Ier. 31, 25, 26. Secondlie the vowes and wishes of infinite and eternall thankful∣nesse.Psa, 63. 4. Thirdlie a groweth and springing vp as a¦mong the grasse,Esa. 44, 3 or as willowes by the water courses.1. Pet. 2, 2 Lastlie, they arise from a broken & hum∣bled
spirit, and the more they are infla∣med,Mat. 5. 4. 5 6. the more hum∣bled they continue to be. 9. The spirit of praier. HE that calleth on the name of the Lord a∣right, discouereth the spirit of grace & praies in his heart, by these things. 1. He askes accor∣ding to Gods will.1. Ioh. 5. 2. Hee praies with perswasion that GodMar. 11, 14
will heare,Iam. 1. 6. 7▪ he beleeueth he shal haue it,Psa. 6. 9. he praies in faith and assurance of heart before God.1, Ioh. 3, 19 22. 3.Iob. 14, 13 He praies in the name of Christ in the sence of his owne vile∣nesse by reason of his wants and sinnes.Pa. 86. 1. 2 & 143, 4 4.Ioh. 17. He will praie at al times.Psa. 116. 2 5. He is effectuallie feruet,Iam. 5. 16 he hath the af∣fections of praier.Psa. 6. 8. 6. Praier makes him exceeding wearie of the world,Psa. 6. 8. 9, & 39. 12. and willing to forgoe societie with the workes of iniqui∣tie.
7. When he knowes not how to pray as he ought the spirit pre∣pares his heart, excites holie desires supplies with words and power of affection,Rom. 8; 26 27 or else worketh inward vnex∣pressable groanes. 8. He findes a holie rest and quienesse in his conscience & heart with spirituall boldnes and confidence of trust in God,Ps. 3, 4, 5, 6 if the Lord heare graciouslie.Ps. 116, 1, 7 9. He findes answers from God,Psa. 91, 15 17.  1 by the wit∣nesse of the spirit of a∣doption:Ier. 33, 3 in which the
Lord deales somtimes wonderfully with his people.Esy 31, 19 58. 9. 10. He loues God exceedinglie for hea∣ring his praier,Psa. 116. 1. Iude 20. and de∣sires to keepe himselfe in the loue of God. 11. His praiers pro∣ceede from a heart that loues no sinne:2. Tim 2, 19. 22. but wil∣lingly departeth from iiquitie,Iob. 8, 5, 6 and desireth to keepe his com∣maundements;1. Ioh. 3. 22 and to doe that which is plea∣sing to Gods sight. 12. He loues praier in others.2. Tim, 2, 2. 13. He is oftentimes
dissolued into much sorrow for his sinnes,Zc. 12, 10 while he stands before the face of God.Psa, 55, 1, 2 14 He feeleth the confidēce of assuranceGal. 4, 7 that God is his father.Rom. 8, 15 15. If the Lord be silent and answer not,Psa. 28, 1 & 88, 13, 14, 15, 143, 7 but hides his face, his spirit faileth, and hee is as one that goeth down to the pit,Ioh, 1, 23 24. it trou∣bleth him as a sore crosse, & contrariwise. 16. Praier is his chiefe refug, and he wil pray, though praier bee in neuer so much dis∣grace,Psa. 69, 10 13▪ & 142 2. 5. and power out
his complaint, & shew all his trouble. 17. Hee striues a∣gainst deadnesse of spi∣rit and distractions as a heauie burthen.Psa 86. 4. 3 10. The obedience of Christ. OVr obedience wil be approu∣ed and accep∣ted in Christ, if it be an obedience that will beare triall in the rules following. First, if it arise out of loe to God and good∣nesse. The obedience
of Gods elect is from the heart,Deut. 30. 20 not constrai∣ned but volūtary,Iosh. 22. 5▪ their hearts being inflamed with the sence of Gods goodnesse, and hum∣bled when they haue done their best,Mat. 4. 19 that they cannot bring more glory to God; it is a ready obedience without repining,Rom. 6, 17 ex∣cuse or delay. 2 If it bee in all things,Ex. 15. 26 with respect to all Gods commaunde∣ments,1. Kin. 9. 4 a wicked manIet. 11. 4 may obaie in manyIoh. 15. 14 things but there is som one commaundement
he would be dispensedAct 13. 22 withall as Herod.Deu. 30. 2 3 Hee can bee con∣tent to obey against profit,Iet. 35 pleasure credit,Heb. 11. 8 libertie,Ge. 22 12 ease or the li∣king of the world or carnall friends,Pro. 7. 2 prefer∣ring Gods cōmaunde∣mēts aboue all things;Acts 5. 29 yea life it selfe.Mat 16. 25 4 If it follow the conscionable practice of the duties of morti∣fication, of sinnes past or present,1. Pet. 1. 22. the reforma∣tion and profession of such people as did ne∣uer in secret humble their soules for sinne,
may bee much suspec∣ted, for our hearts must be purified to o∣bey the truth. 5 If it bee in ab∣sence as vvell as pre∣sence, in all companies as vvell as anie, be∣fore meane Christi∣ans, as before the best,Phil. 2. 12 at home as well as abroad.Gal. 5. 7 6 If it be alwaies,2. King 18 6. as well as for a fit.Psa. 106. 3 7 If we belieue and obey Gods Ministers, as the ouerseers of our soules and liues,Heb. 13 direc∣ting vs out of the Word,2, Thes. 3 as vvell as if
vvee were commaun∣ded immediatly from God. 8 If wee obey in the Cōmaundements of faith, as well as life, submitting our selues to God,Rō. 10 16 as well by be∣leeuing as by dooing,Rō. 16. 26 yeelding our seruice as well to the Gospell as to the Lawe.2. The. 1. 8 9 If wee obey in the least commaunde∣ment, as well as in the greatest, making con∣science of the smal∣lest things required,Mat. 5. 19 or forbidden in the Word.Gat. 5 7.
10 It is an obedi∣ence that followes the sanctification of the spirit. Holy dutyes without they flowe from holy graces with∣in;1. Pet, 1. 2 neither can the life bee holy before God, if the heart bee not made holy, by the grace of Iesus Christ. 11 It is ioyned with the raigne of no sinne; a Christian that truly obeyes God may haue many sinnes, but there is no sinne to which he yeelds himselfe whol∣ly ouer,Rom. 6 by secret vows and resolution as a ser∣uant
to obey it: hee may faile in his obedi∣ence, so as hee cannot do what God requires as he requires; but yet hee consents to obey,Esa. . 19 and his will is to hire himselfe to doe Gods worke aswell as he can. And to this end hee hearkneth to his voice, & seekes God with his whole heart, that hee may keepe his testimo∣nies,Psa: 119. 2 he consenteth to obey,Deut. 6. 2. and obserues to doe: he comes to the light that his deedes may bee made mani∣fest.Ioh. 3.
Lastly, our obedi∣ence is right & accep∣table, if GOD heare our prayers, for God heareth not sinners:Ioh. 9. 31 and Dauid sayth,Psa. 66: 18 if there were wickednes in his heart, GOD would not heare his prayers. 11 Sauing know∣ledge. SAuing knowledge may be tried: 1. By the obiects. 2. By the causes. 3. By the cōcomitants.
4. By the properties. 5. By the effects. For the first, by this knowledge the elect are inlightned by the spirit of reuelation. 1. To conceiue a∣right of the nature of God, in some measure propounding before the eye of their minds the Lord, as hee is re∣uealed in the word,Ier 9. 24 at least by way of negatiō casting out al likenesses of any created nature. 2. To vnderstand the true manner of Gods worship.Ioh. 4. 22
3 To knowe their owne iniquities & vile∣nesse, in respect of cor∣ruption of nature and life.Ier 3. 12 4 To know ChristPhi. 3. 9. as their Sauiour.1. 1. Cor. 2. 2▪ 5 To know God in Christ.Ioh. 17. 3 8. 19. 6 To know the for∣giuenes of their owne sinnes.Ier. 31. 34 7 To knowe the voice of Christ, discer∣ning it in some mea∣sure from the voice of a stranger.Ioh. 1. 4. 8 To knowe their owne conuersion,1. 10. 3. 14 and al needful holy things.Pro. 9. 10.
9 To knowe the things giuen them of God,2. Cor. 13. 5 & especially the inhabitation of the spi∣rit1. Cor. 2. 12. of Christ.Ioh. 14. 17. 20. 10 To knowe their owne saluation.Luke 1. 77 Secōdly, this know∣ledge may bee discer∣ned from other know∣ledge, by the causes: for, 1 Flesh and blood hath not reuealed it,Mat. 16. 17 it is a wisdom in a my∣stery, it is giuen of God in Christ by the anoin∣ting of the spirit.1. Cor. 1. 30 2 Affliction of1. Cor. 2. 7 conscience, breeds the1. Ioh. . 27. & 5. 2
and experience of it in many, who neuer came to sound knowledge, till they haue beene wounded by the fee∣ling of Gods wrath,Ho. 6. 1. 2. 3. or their owne sinnes, or the venomed tempta∣tions of Sathan. 3. It is quickned and nursed by the sweete refreshings and con∣tentments felt in Gods house.Ps 36. 8. 9. 10. 4 It is founded vpon the true fearePro. 1. 7. of GOD;Iob. 18. 28. the very first beginning of it, is excited by the feare of GOD,Col, 1, 9 and it grow∣eth
as holinesse,Ioh, 7, 17 grace, and good works grow in vs.2. Pe. 3. 18 Thirdly, it hath sixe companions of it among the rest, that in speciall attend it. 1 The loue of the Law.Psal. 119. 97. 98 2 A holy estima∣tion of it aboue all possessions,Phil. 3. 8 shewed,Pro. 3. 3. 4. 7. & 7. 4. & 8. 9. 10 in that a Christian a∣boue all, getting la∣bors to get this vnder∣standing, and reioy∣ceth in it as the fairest ornament. 3 Teachablenesse.Pro 8. 9. 17.Isa, 28, 9.
4 A sauour of spiri∣tuallRom. 8. 5▪ things.2. Cor. 2. 14 5. Sence, that is,Phil. 1. 9. in∣ward feelings of the power of the word & ordinances of God. 6 The loue of Gods childrē which aboun∣deth as this knovv∣ledge growes.Phi 1. 9. 10 Fourthly it hath six properties. 1 It is affectionate, it is not written in the head,Ier. 31. 34 but in the heart and bowels.Deu. 46 2 It tends to actionPs 111. 10 and practice.Isa, 33, 6Ioh, 8, 55 3 It is constant and1. Ioh, 2, 3 & 3, 24 indelible, it hath deepePhil. 1. 9 10
impressions and much assurance,Ier 31. 34 so as it is not easily vnsetled vvith the puffes of contrary doctrine,Pro. 4. 5, 16 nor can it be extinguished by trials or afflictions;Eph. 4. 13 therfore it is sayde to be writ∣ten vpon their hearts. 4 It is sincere, for first it inclineth to re∣ceiue all truth,Ioh. 16. 13 as well as any truth:1, Cor▪ 3, 1 second∣ly, it will receiue the truth, though it be a∣gainst reason,1. Cor, 2 7 common opinion, profit, or the like. Fifthlie, It brookes not the impotent ru∣diments
and beggerlie inuentions of men, in the things of the king∣dome of Iesus Christ. Sixthlie, it leades a man principally to vn∣derstand his own way;Pro. 14, 8 and by it a man teach∣eth and admonisheth himselfe.Col. 3, 16 Lastly, it beareth fruite better then gold ro. 8. 19. and by the fruites or effects it may be knowne. 1. It lasteth out con∣citednesse, diffidence, insensiblenesse of Gods mercies and iudge∣ments, and vnthankful∣nesse:
he that hath true knowledge,Pro. 3, 5, 6 will not leane to his owne na∣turall wisedome, hee will trust in the Lord, and acknowledge him in all his waies. 2. It makes a man humble and lowlie, in the same measure that one abounds in true knowledge, in the same measure hee is made more lowlie and meeke, and carefull in all his waies;Pro. 8, 13 14▪ no scorner can finde this wise∣dome. 3. It mortifieth boi∣sterous & vnrulie, hate∣full
& hurtfull affecti∣ons, it will make a lion become a lambe, and a beare,Isa. 11, 9 or a wolfe, or a cockatrice, to be wil∣lingly guided, euen by a little childe, &c. 4. It extinguisheth or greatly dulleth the sauor of earthly things and makes a man hea∣uenly minded.Rom. 8, 6 5. This and such like other affects are al∣together set downe by the Apostle Iames in his third Chapter,Iam, 3▪ 17 18. and the seuenteene and eighteene verses.
12. Loue of God. OVR loue to God, may bee knowen. First,Eph, 6,  4 by the sincere and incorrupt loue of the Lord Iesus, the sonne of his loue. Secondlie, by the loue of his image in al the saints of God,1, Ioh. 5, 1 that are begotten by him. Thirdly, by the base estimatiō of the world and the lusts thereof, for if anie man,1, Ioh, 2, 15 loue the world, the loue of
the father is not in him. Fourthly, by a deli∣berate inward infla∣med estimation of God aboue all things,Psa. 63. 2 1, 11. accounting his louing kindenesse better then life, and the signes of his fauour our greatest ioy. Fifthly, by our de∣light in his presence which is then approu∣ed. 1. If wee loue to speake often to God by praier,Ps. 34. 5 37, 4.  and heare him speake often to vs, in his other ordinances.
2. If we loue,2 Tim. 4, 8 and long for his appearing. 3. If we bewaile his absence as a bitter crosse.Cant. 3. 1 4. If we set the Lord daily be ore vs.Psa. 16, 8 5. If we loue his house.Psa. 26, 8 Sixthly, by our care to keepe his comman∣dements,Ioh. 14, 21 and to be as he is in holinesse,1. Ioh 4. 17 which may be further tried. 1. If we willinglie re∣ceiue his commaunde∣ments, for this is the loue of God, that wee keepe his commande∣ments,1. Ioh. 5 3 & his comman∣dements
are not grie∣uous. 2. If we serue him with all our hearts and all our soules.Deut. 10 12 3.Deu. 11. 2 If it be our care to walke in al his waies and not to offend in a∣ny thing.Ios. 22. 5. Seuenthly, by our sensiblenesse of his di∣shonor if we be more vexed for his disho∣nour, then our owne disgrace. Eightly, by remem∣bring his benefits andPsa, 63. 2. 3 4. 6, 8 107 2. magnifying his mer∣cies,Ioh. 36, 24▪ for what wee loue we easily praise.Deut, 6. 2.
Ninthlie,Exod. 15 2. by our care not onely to do his wil but to please him,1. Ch 28. 9 be∣ing more incouraged with his praise and ap∣probation,1, Co. 7, 23 then the praise of al men.Heb. 1. 28 10. By a willingnes to suffer anie thing for his sake.Ioh 22, 15 to 19. 11. By a detestation as of sinne,Psa. 97, 10 because God hates it,Psa. 139 21, 22. so of sin∣ners, because they hate God. 12. By our desire to stirre vp our affections after God, auoiding what might steale away our hearts from him,
and delighting in al the waies,Iosh. 23. 11 by which our hearts might be infla∣med towards him, and to this end taking heede to our selues. 13. By our run∣ning to him in all ad∣uersitie, making him our defence, our rocke, our refuge in all trouble, to them we first runne to make our mone,Psa 1. 1. 2 whom we most loue. 14. By our willing∣nesse, affectionatelie to doe the meanest office vnto God, or Christ, or for his sake this was a
signe that Marie lou∣ed much,Luk. 7. 44 4 5. 46, 47 because she was content to wash with her teares, and wi∣ped with her haire the very feete of Christ. 15 By our humility in the sence of Gods loue to vs, for ere the more a Christian dis∣couers Gods loue to him, the more his af∣fection to God, makes him seeme base &1. Cor. 8, 3 vile in his owne eies. 16 By our sorrow for our sinnes and willingnesse to forsake and cut off from vs, the most gainefull
gainefull and pleasing corruptions,Deu. 30, 6 this is ment by the circum∣cising of the heart, that we might loue God. 13. The sacraments. THe sacraments are sure seales and infallible pledges of Gods, loue and our saluation, to the worthie receiuer: and he receiues wor∣thelie. First, that desires to search his heart and ex∣amine his life,1. Cor. 11. before he receiue.
Secondly, that dis∣cernes the Lords body that meditates oft, and is in knowledge infalli∣bly perswaded of the inward & effectual pre∣sence of the Lord to he worthie receiuer. Thirdlie, that eates with sorore herbs,Exod. 12 that is, that comes with some measure of sence and feeling with th burthen of his sinnes, & desire to make them his greatest sorrow. Fourthlie, that resol∣ueth and purposeth and inwarldlie, coue∣naunteth in his soule,
to deuote himselfe to God,1. Cor, 5, 8 and godlinesse, and to striue against e∣uerie sinne that hee knowes may offend God. Fifthlie, that con∣stantlie desires to be∣leeue Gods mercie in Iesus Christ to his owne soule in particu∣lar;Mat. 16. 16 and comes with a perswasion,Col. 2, 12 in some measure of the opera∣tion of God, in the in∣ward grace of the sa∣crament. Sixthly, that feeles the ioies of Gods pre∣sence, and the work∣ing
of Gods spirit, in∣wardly sealing in his heart the perswasion of his interest in Gods promises,Eph. 1, 23 bearing wit∣nesse to his spirit,1. Cor, 1, 22 that God is graciously re∣conciled in Christ, and his sinnes are pardo∣ned, &c. Seuenthly, that loues all the brethren and desires to bee furthe∣red in all holie com∣munion with them, both in grace and glo∣rie;1▪ Cor. 10 being readie to witnesse before God and men his resolu∣tion to honour and
cleaue to them aboue all other professions & sorts of mē in the world Eightly, that desires to liue in peace and godlie vnitie,Ma. 5, 6, 4 and wil∣linglie forgiueth al that haue trespassed against him. 14. The feare of God. THe true feare of God may be discerned; first, by effects; secondly, by the properties of it. First, The true feare God, workes a care & endeuour to serue God
and keepe his com∣maundements,Deu, 6. 13 & 8, 6 and by the feare of God men depart from euill:Pro. 8, 13 16, 6 For it teacheth men to hate euill,Reui. 15, 4 as pride, arrogancie, the e∣uill way, and a fro∣ward mouth: the wise man saith; He that wal∣keth in vprightnesse fea∣reth the Lord,Pro 14, 2 and by that signe he may bee knowne euen by acon∣sionable care to walke vprightlie with God in holie life. Secondly, it casts out carnall feares, he is not in much feare of men,Ma. 10, 28
that can kill the bodie, that is truely touched with the feare of God,Ma. 10. 28 that can destroy both body and soule,Es. 8, 12, 13 hee feares not their feare, nor the feares of the wicked men, but in some measure sanctifies God in his heart. Thirdlie, It makes a man desirous and ca∣pable of sauing know∣ledge: for this feare of God,Pro. 1, 7 is the beginning of wisedome. Secondlie, there bee fiue properties of the true feare of God.
First, it is sincere, for he that truelie feares God. 1. Feares Gods of∣fence aswell as pnnish∣ment. 2. Hee will feare Gods presence being carefull to aoide such sinnes, as no eie sees but Gods. 3. He will feare God though he see no re∣ward in his hand. 4. He feares Gods word and is more trou∣bled and humbled by the threatning of it,Psa. 119 then by the threatning of anie mortall man,
and will obey the voice of Gods seruants, whatsoeuer comes of it. 5. He will obey a∣gainst reason, affection profit, or pleasure, for so saith the Lord to Abraham;Gē, 22, 12 now I know thou fearest God see∣ing thou hast not with∣held thy sonne, thy on∣ly sonne. Secondly, it is filiall, not seruile, which may appeare in fiue things, for first it is ioined with the loue of God,Deu. 10. 12. 20 and so is not the feare of reprobates; secondly
it is not compelled by feare or sence of iudgements, but exci∣ted by the sence of Gods goodnesse and mercie. For so the con∣uerts in Hosea,Isa, 29, 23 are said to feare God and his goodnesse.Hos. 3, 5. Thirdly, it guides the heart of man to runne to God, and not from God) to bee healed of the wounds made by sine and to bee protected,Ma, 4, 2 striuing euen before God, to discouer and get strength a∣gainst the sinnes that trouble them; fourthly
It makes a man trust in God, and ere the more it increaseth, the more it worketh af∣fiance and confidence in Gods mecry. 5.Psa. 31. 19 & 115. 11 & 147. 11 It causeth a man to loue and cleaue to such as are Gods Children, though they be in dis∣grace with the world.Psa. 11 9, 79 Thirdly, it is a spea∣king feare, it will speak to God by prayer, and to men by conference, it cannot be silent; but will speake in defence of Gods glory &Mal. 3, 16 truth and seekes to draw o∣thers from sinne.
4 It is a contenting feare, it finds treasures in godlinesse, and is sa∣tisfied with his portiō,Esa. 33. 6 and will abide satisfied whereas the feares of re∣probates are either full of inwarde horror of conscience,Pro. 19. 23 or pertur∣bation in the heart. 5 It is constant, it is not for a fit, but al∣waies, not in sicknesse or misery,Ecc. 8. 11 but in pro∣sperity, or all aboun∣dance,Deut. 6. 24 & contrariwise not in prosperity only, when men may feare God without daūger but in trouble also.
15. Loue of enemies. OVr loue to our enemies is sin∣cere.Mat. 5. 44 1 If we can pray for them. 2 If we can volun∣tarily mourne &Psa. 35, 13 14. hum∣ble our soules for them in their distresses. 3 If we truly desire their conuersion, and find that we could loue thē vnfainedly if they had repented. 4 If we can forgiue them their trespasses a∣gainst vs.Mat, 6. 14 15
5 If wee bee more grieued for their sinnes against God, then for their wrongs to vs. 6. If we can acknow∣ledge freely their iust praises. 7 If we can patient∣ly and meekely endure their reuilings,1, Pe, 3, 10 being willing to bee at peace without reuenge.Rō. 12. 14 8 If wee can for∣beare when wee could bring shame or misery on them.1. Sam. 24 18. 19. 9 If we can endea∣uor to ouercome their euill with goodnesse, and to relieue them in
misery,Rom. 12 or to doe any other good,Pro. 25. 21▪ 22 either for body or soule. 16. Desire of death. THE desire of death will bee our Testimo∣nie. 1. If it arise out of the sence of Gods loue.Luk. 2. 2, 30 2. If it bee concei∣ued in time of prospe∣rity. 3. Especially,Ps. 39. 1, 4 if it arise out of a weariness of our owne sins,Ioh. 6. 9. 10▪ andRom. 7, 24 the sinnes of others.Heb. 9. 28▪ 4▪ If it come from a
longing after Gods e∣ternalPhil. 1▪ presence.2. Cor. 5. 8 5 If it bee ioyned with a desire after the way how to be saued,2, Pet, 3, 1 12 and an indeauor afterPsa. 90. 12 holy conuersation and godlinesse.2. Cor. 5. 9 6. If it breed courage and patience vn∣der tribulation.2. Cor. 4. 16 & 5. 2 7 If it make feruent in prayer.2. Tim. 4. 7Rom. 5. 3Psa. 3. 9▪ 12Rom. 8. 22▪ 23. 26. 8 If it extinguish the eager desires afterHe. 11. 16. 13. 15. earthly things.Re 22, 20 9 If wee be glad at heart of his comming.
