4270 99850940 16182
A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE DRAYNING OF FENNES AND SVRROVNDED GROVNDS in the sixe Counteys of Norfolke, Suffolke, Cambridge with the Isle of Ely, Huntington, Northampton, and Lincolne. Printed at London, 1629.
The Printer to the Reader. GEntle Reader, This discourse came vnto my hands not long since from a well-willer to the businesse therein treated of; and I hearing that the Fennie-Countreys are at this time more then ordinarily ouerflowne, haue thought fit to publish the same, if haply it may perswade such as are interested, to set forward the worke of drayning which would be both hono∣rable and profitable to the Common-wealth, as I conceiue.
A Discourse concerning the drayning of the Fennes. COncerning the drayning of the Fennes in the sixe Counties of Norfolke, Suffolke, Cam∣bridge with the Isle of Ely, Huntington, Northampton, and Lincolne, as well on this side Boston as beyond, there arise three maine questions. The first, whether it would be honorable and profitable to the King, and Common-wealth in generall, and to those Countreys in particular, if it might be effe∣cted. The second, whether it be Feasable. The third, how a compitent reward may be apportioned for them that should vndertake so great a worke. For the first, the first argument shall be the counsell and care of the State in euerie age since this Kingdome began to be improued, appearing by the many Acts of Parliament concerning this businesse, as against Weares, Gorces, Stankes, &c. begun the 9. of H. 3. itterated the 25. of Ed. 1. augmented the 25. and 45. of Ed. 3. the 21. of Rich. 2. the 1. and 4. of H. 4. And at length more districtly the 12. of Ed. 4. But in all these times by reason of the turbulent condition of the State at home and abroad, the prosecution of this businesse was either altogether fore
flowed, or so snatchingly persued, that little fruit came thereof. But in the peaceable time of King Henry the 8. who was the first great Im∣prouer, and in whose time the mischiefe was growne to a great height, a setled course of Commission of Sewers was established, with a verie endlesse power, such as hath neither length nor bredth, against offendors, (it is the word of the Statute not onely against the fore-named incon∣ueniences, but now for the maintenance and increase of Walls, Ditches, Bankes, Gutters, Sewers, Goates, Caulcies, Bridges, Streames and other defences against inundations: by which verie names of things in the for∣mer Acts not mentioned it doth appeare how the mischiefe was growne almost past remedy before any sufficient prouision was publikely made for redresse. Yea, although the Lawes of Sewers were ordained like Acts of Parliament, not examinable by any other authoritie, as being the most absolute that passeth vnder the great Seale of England, (such was my Lord Pophams iudgement) yet so bootlesse seemed the labour vnto the Countries afflicted, that the wisdome of the whole Common-wealth thought fit to prouide an other Act two yeeres after to constraine the Gentlemen of the Countrey vnder paine and forfeiture to take the oath of a Commission of Sewers as they should be thereunto designed. In this time also that royall Lady Margaret, Countesse of Richmond, procu∣red an admeasurement and diuision of all the surrounded grounds on the North side of Spalding, which before that time lay promiscuously. This was a great worke, and of excellent vse, not for those times onely, but the fruit of it hath continued euer since, euen vnto these dayes, and will be a great guid in this drayning businesse whensoeuer it is vndertaken. Neither did that royall Lady rest in this, but she sat her selfe amongst the Commissioners of Sewers, yea, and set her hand to the verie worke of drayning, and indeed, hit vpon the right way: but in her worke there were some notable errors (the world not being then so skilfull) which being followed by the neglect of the Countrey, in time forfeited her gra∣tious intention. After her stood vp Iohn of Gaunt; Duke of Lancaster, and tooke great paines to perfect what she had begun: He went into the Countrey in person, and imployed all his authoritie in it; but because the Countrey should haue borne the charge, when he was once passed on to Yorke, nothing went forward that hee had proiected, notwithstanding his many Letters, and increpations. In the 3. of Ed. 6. the Commission of Sewers was made perpetuall, which by the former Statute of H. 8. was to endure but twentie yeeres, and in the 13. of Eliz. it was enacted that euerie particular Commission of Sewers should continue for ten
yeeres, which before was limitted to fiue; and that in the interim be∣tweene the determining of one Commission, and the Awarding of ano∣ther, the Iustices of the Peace might execute the Commission of Sewers for a whole yeere. After that by these prouisions and presidents mens wits were a little set on worke, in the 29. of El. some Gentlemen vnder∣tooke the recouerie of the Marishes of Erith, Lesnes and Plumstead, for whose encouragement a Statute was made, That they should haue the moye∣tie of all such gained Lands, and an eighth part of the other moyetie, and hold it of the Queene as of the Mannor of East-Greenwitch in Socage by Fealtie, paing a pennie an Acre yeerely, and no Tyth for seuen yeeres. This Act of Parliament incouraged many men to vndertake also in the Isle of Ely, and the Countreys confining, and that with approbation of the State, because (saith the Statute) such Approuement will be a great and inestimable benefit to her Maiestie, her Heires and Successors, disburthening her Highnesse of many chargeable Bankes, and workes of Sewers in those surrounded grounds, and in the increase of many able Subiects by habitations being there erected, and in like sort, profitable to many her Highnesse Subiects, both bodyes Politike, as Corporate, who haue estate of inheritance, and other interest within the same. The same also was the opinion of the State in the fourth of King Iames his raigne, when the Parliament passed an Act for the vndertaking of Francis Tindall, Henry Far, and Iohn Cooper in the Isle of Ely, which Act gaue them two parts of the Land so to be inned and drayned, and immu∣nitie of Tyth for seuen yeeres after those seuen yeeres which were allot∣ted to them to doe their worke in. To speake nothing of the improue∣ment of Marsh-Land, Waldersey, the Londoners proportion, and diuers others, which though they remaine chargeable to the owners, because the generall drayning is not effected, yet doe they yeeld so great an improuement, as well witnesseth how aboundant it would be if those charges by a generall drayning were preuented. But if any man beside this Argument taken from the consent of so ma∣ny ages, wise and politike Princes and assemblies of Parliament, doe de∣sire to be led into those particulars whereby it is probable they were moued, let him consider, First, the costly and troublesome meetings of the Commissioners of Sewers; Grieuous (though necessarie) Taxations, Hartburnings, Emulations, Controuersies, and insupportable charges, for cutting, clensing and repayring of Riuers, Draynes, Goates, Sluces, Bankes, and such like costly workes of Sewers, so much to be lamented, so impossible to be any other wayes preuented, then by a generall dray∣ning of the seuerall Leuels wherein those Lands respectiuely doe lye.
Next, it would be remembred, that in winter, when the Ice is stronge enough to hinder the passage of Boates, and yet not able to beare a man, the Inhabitants vpon the Hards, and the Bankes within the Fennes, can haue no helpe of Food, no comfort for Body or Soule, no Woman ayd in her Trauell, no meanes to baptize a Child or to administer the Communion, no supply of any necessitie, sauing what those poore desolate places can afford. Moreouer, it hath beene the policie of this State to demolish all places of defence, sauing those that be in the hand of the Soueraigne power; this onely remaineth, whether we know in the Barrons Warres, the Rebels, vpon the naturall strength of the place and aboundance of prouision there, resorted, as into a Fastnesse, and to which purpose it might serue againe, if God and the wisedome of our Gouernours were not watchfull at the Helme. What should I speake of the health of mens bodyes, where there is no Element good. The Aer Nebulous, grosse and full of rotten Harres; the Water putred and muddy, yea full of loathsome vermine; the Earth spuing, vnfast and boggie; the Fire noysome turfe and hassocks: such are the inconue∣niences of the Drownings. But if a man would attend the manifold and great profits of Drayning, it were not hard to muster a royall Army of them. Consider first the quantitie of the Pen-Leuels valued at 500000 Acres. Mr Camden ac∣counts it from the edge of Suffolke, to Waynflet in Lincolneshire, 68 Miles, and that is by the Stringe; but if you reckon the Bow of the Fenne which runneth vp on both sides Witham till you come within a Mile of Lincolne (as rotten a peece as any of the rest) we may well call it 80 Miles in length; in bredth it is much 30, more 20, seldome so little as 10 Miles: a goodly Garden of a Kingdome; yea, a little Kingdome it selfe: as much and as good ground, it is supposed, as the States of the Low-Countreys enioy in the Netherlands. For the riches of the soyle if it were gayned from the waters, much may be said. Compare it with high ground, who will not preferre a le∣uell Medow? Compare it with the grounds in the same tract which lye but a yard higher then it; ordinarily let for 20. shil. an Acre and vpward: not about Ely and other good Townes onely, but at Thorny-Abbey my Lord of Beaford lets betweene 3 and 400 Acres of rising ground vpon which the Abbey stands, for 300. li. per annum, whereas the rest of his Lordship of Thorny, containing 16 or 17000 Acres of drowned ground, is esteemed as it now lyeth, of little or no value: yet it appeareth by the Historie of William of Malmesburie (vouched by Mr Camden) who liued
about 1200 yeeres since, that in his time it represented a very Paradise, for that in pleasure and delight it resembleth Heauen it selfe; in the very Mari∣shes bearing Trees that for their straight talnesse, and the same without knots, striue to touch the Starres. A Playne there is as euen as the Sea, which with greene grasse allureth the eye: so smooth and leuell, that if any walke along the Fields, they shall find nothing to stumble at. There is not the least parcell of ground that lyes wast and void there, here you shall find the earth rising some∣where for Apple-trees, there shall you haue a Field set with Vines, which either creepe vpon the ground, or mount on high vpon poles to support them, &c. For in those dayes Vineyards were verie frequent in England. The like may be said of the Abbey of Crowland, of the great Lordship of Whittle∣sea, and of all the rest that consist of part dry and part drowned Land; yet those dry & drowned Lands are of the same nature, and where there is any difference, the drowned is the richer, as appeared in the two ex∣traordinarie dry yeeres 1619 and 1620, when the edges of the drowned Fenne being dry, yeelded twice as much grasse as the rising grounds did. I shall speake of a strange thing, yet was it related by a Gentleman intere∣sted in the place and of good credit: Borrough great Fenne containeth about 7000 Acres, this Fen is vsually so much surrounded, that the dry places and all, are not well able to beare the Inhabitants Cattell: in those two yeeres it was all dry and yeelded such aboundance of Foather, that they receiued for a great part of Summer 50. li. a day for the ioysting of Cattell, as they call it, out of the high Countreys. The like may be ima∣gined to be the condition of all the rest of the Fens, especially if the ground be smooth and free from Hassocks. I will giue you an instance. There is a banke in Thorny of a Mile long or more, cast vp out of two Draynes of the most mirie Fens, which lying somewhat high, as being a Horse-way from Thorny-Abbey to Peterborough, is growne into verie fine and feeding grasse. And here to proue the Richnesse of the Fen-soyle, let it be obserued, that where water stands all the Spring in barren Land, there will be no grasse at all; not so much as where for want of raine the Sunne burneth the soyle: and this is a certaine argument of Sterile or leane Earth. But where though the waters stand, the Earth notwithstanding bringeth forth Fruit, it is an argument of a fat and lustie soyle, and so much the fatter by how much the Fruit is courser and larger; for all grounds that will afford nourishment to Grasse, will not suffice sap enough for Sedge or Reed; but on the contrarie, that which will beare Reed or Sedge in any quantitie, is able to yeeld sap enough for aboundance of
Grasse. So great a quantitie therefore of rich Land being gayned, would meruailously increase & support the multitude of his Maiesties subiects, wherein consisteth the glorie and strength of a Kingdome. Adde hereto the augmentations of his Highnesse Reuenews (for there are in the Fen, if I remember a right, 16 Mannors belonging to the Crowne on the South-side of Boston, besides the great Honour of Bullingbrooke on the North, containing about it by estimation 60000 Acres of Fen-Land, which was lately let for 18. li. a yeere to Sr Vincent Skinner) besides his Customes, Subsidies, Prouisions, Casualties, &c. What should I re∣member the profits which would accrew to the Common-wealth? the aboundance of prouision for victuall, Flesh, Fish and whit-meats, the breed of Horses seruiceable both in Peace and for Warre, the rich and necessarie Merchandizes of Wooll, Hydes, Tallow, Hempe, Rape, and such like; the transportation of the commodities of the Countrey from place to place for the vse of the neighbour-parts; the ease of Trauellors, who now are faine to make compasse iournies to auoid the ouerflowings; the conuoy of his Maiesties Armies if occasion should require, are all publike profits, and of excellent consequence to the King and kingdome. Such also would be the restoring of the Nauigation vnto the Townes of Wisbich, Spalding and Waynflet, and from thence vp into the Countreys. These are publike benefits: and for priuate the drayning would encrease the reuenew of many Corparations, both Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill, and of many his Maiesties particular Subiects, as well Lay-men as Rectors and Vicars of many great Parishes which now afford the Incumbents verie small meanes. There is one other great commoditie which a drayning will produce worthy to be insisted vpon, and that is the secu∣ring of Sheepe and other Cattell from the rot. For it is a true thing, that when the Fens yeeld most pasturage, then they doe the most mis∣chiefe to men in their Sheepe and Cattell, thence is the common saying of the Countrey, From the Farme to the Fenne, from the Fenne to Ireland. The reason is, because the Fen is neuer so dry, but there are many watry plashes, and much rotting Spire-grasse in it, where-with the Sheepe are vsually tainted in the Summer-time, and whereof they dye in the Win∣ter, if men be not carefull to sell them to the Butcher before: if they be so prouident, then is the Countrey and Citie too, fed with vnholesome food. As for other Cattell, together with the wet Grasse they slap vp such an aboundance of small Stiklebacks, that when they dye of the rot, or be killed for vse, their Mawes will be found full of them. Contrarie∣wise, in the Marishes beyond Wainflet in Lincolneshire, and such like,
where the grounds be seuered and trenched, it is hard to find a poore man, though they sit at great rents, for their Cattell are alwayes sound and thriuing, and therefore euer merchandable: or if they come to a mischance, yet fit for food. And that this was the opinion of all the Commissioners of Sewers, appeareth by the Sessions at Peterborough the eighth of September, 1619, there being present the Lord Bishop of Peterborough, the Earle of Bedford, Sr Francis Fane, and 25 other Knights and Gentlemen Commissioners of Sewers, assisted by a multitude of the Countrey. They agreed and concluded, That by a drayning, an ap∣parent great profit would arise to the Countreys and Owners of Lands, & that it would be without preiudice publike or priuate. And thereupon did decree the designe should be proceeded in, and determined to giue all lawfull ayd & assistance thereto, according to the extent of the Commission of Sewers. Which also was confirmed the 23 of September following at Ely, and the 24 at St Iues. And the businesse was prosecuted at Cambridge the 15 of Oct. and at St Iues and Hunting. the 16 of Oct. where there was 20. shill. set vpon euerie Acre for the accomplishment of the worke. If men descend vnto particular obiections, then must seuerall answers be giuen them. First therefore it is obiected, that they find lesse burthen of Foather vpon the ground in dry yeeres then in wet. I answer, it must be confessed that ground which beareth Reed or Sedge will not be so fruitfull if it be dry, because such ranke trash re∣quireth a great deale of moisture, but when through want of such store of moisture it improueth into grasse (as in a yeere or two it will cer∣tainly doe) then a little moisture will suffice, as we see in ordinarie Meddows. It will be vrged that euen in Meddows ouerflowings will doe good. It is true, if so be the water remaine not long vpon the soyle: but to be surrounded, or to lye in the suds, as we say, three quarters or halfe a yeere more or lesse, doth mischiefe not helpe the ground. I appeale to the Countrey if there were not in the yeere 1619 many thousand loads of Foather gotten where scarce euer any was had in the memorie of man. Witnesse the great stacks which were then seene all along the wild Fennes, as thicke (to mens seeming that road aloofe) as shocks of Corne in a Corne-field, and that of reasonable good Grasse. For if the water be drayned, and the cold moisture re∣moued from the root of Reed-ground, that Reed will in one summer returne into Sedge, and that Sedge shortly into good Grasse, of which there hath beene aboundant experience throughout the Fens in the dry yeeres 1619, and 1620.
But the drayning some say will decay Fishing and Fowling. I answer, it is neither possible nor profitable to drayne Porsen in Crowland, or some Deepes in the East-Fen beyond Boston, or the Meares of Whittlesea, Ramsey, &c. which be the chiefe places for Fish and Fowle. For other Fens there are no Fish or Fowle taken in them, but onely in the Riuers or Draynes; and those will be both more in number and more enlarged after the drayning, and the Fish and Fowle better contained in them, and so more easily gotten: For now the water ouerflowing all, the Fowle are so dispersed, that men cannot come at them (for there is not, nor must there be any shooting in the Fen) and the Fry of the Fish is lost or de∣uoured in the Reed or Sedge, which in the deepe Riuers and Draynes would be secured. But all this is not considerable in respect of the great benefit that will be made of Grasse in so large proportions of excellent Land. It will againe be obiected, that although the drayning will be benefi∣tiall to the Lords and Owners, yet the poore Commoner shall be in danger to loose his Common by the incroaching Lords, or at lest when such Common-Fens are recouered and secured, the rich men will so ouer∣charge them with Cattell, that the poore man shall not be able to make any benefit, where now he getteth a poore liuing, partly by the Pasturage of a few Cowes, partly by his labour in Fishing and Fowling, which labour the rich man will not take. Now saith the poore Fen-man, we haue euerie yeere an Order brought from Northampton, which layeth a Law vpon the rich, that they oppresse not the Commons: he meaneth the confluence of waters which drowne all. This is a great obiection and of consequence, and hath two parts. To the first part concerning the Lords incroaching vpon the Commons, I know not what prouision the State will thinke fit to make: but there is already a good care taken for it in that verie Act of Parliament which was made for Approue∣ments in this kind, the 43. Eliz. Cap. 11. the words be these, Prouided alwayes, and be it enacted, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to the impairing, diminishing, letting, taking away, or extin∣guishing of the interest of the Commoners, or any of them, or of the Lords or Owners of the Soyle, in or to any part of the residue of the Wasts or Commons which is not, or shall not be set forth or assigned to the Vndertakers: Nor to any franchises or Liberties, or Waife, Stray, Leete, Law-day, nor other Liberties to be vsed or taken in the part so to the Vndertakers assigned: But that as well the Commoners, as Lords and Owners of that Soyle shall and may enioy their Commons in the residue thereof. To the second part of the obiection that
rich men will ouer-charge the Common when it is secured, and so op∣presse the poore; I confesse it is a common calamitie in all vnstinted Commons, and deserueth a great deale of wisedome and care in the State to preuent it, especially in such rich Soyles. Two helpes there are: One, that the Commoner who dwelleth vpon, or neere the Com∣mon will make good shift if the rich man dwell but a Mile off, as in the Fen it will often be. But if the Land which is set out for the recompence of the drayning be let, part to the poorer sort at reasonable rents, then the poore man hauing seuerall grounds (adioyning to the Common) wherein to succour his Cattell at need and whereupon to get Foather for them, he may shift with his rich Neighbour so much the better. Other helpe I know none but an apportionment; which in the Fen will be more difficult then in other vnstinted Commons, because in one Fen many Towne-ships haue interest of Common; and yet there will be enough for all if it be well ordered. It is farther obiected, that if the drayning should succeed there will be then as much want of water, as there hath beene formerly too much. I answer, that when the Riuers and Draynes are deepened (which is a thing must be performed) they will hold a world of water more then they now doe; and it will ordinarily be held vp also to a sufficient height by the Works for the drayning, except when a Flood is feared, which if it come, there will be water enough and two much; if it come not, yet within a few houres, if the Current of the water at the Workes be inhibited, the Countrey will be full enough: beside, the partitions of the Land assigned for recompence of the drayning, will in a short time make Ditches enowe to containe more water then the Cattell in those parts will vse: and by common intendment, all good Husbands will make Ditches for diuisions in their owne grounds, and Sluces to detaine or let goe the water at their pleasure. Finally, some will say they are many times drayned from Heauen and therefore need not mans helpe. True it is that God Almightie hath taught them by the experience of some dry yeeres, though rarely, the difference between a wildernesse of water & a goodly greene Meddow: to lead them by sence (who are hardly gouerned by reason) to discerne what may be best for themselues and their posteritie: of which great document if they make sinister vse, vainly fancying to themselues that which is to mans reason impossible, they must be content to be punished according to reason. That is to say, whereas such dry yeeres shall haue drunke vp the waters, if not of the Riuers, yet of many of the Draynes,
which thereupon are growne vp and pestered with weeds and rubbish, it followeth necessarily, that vpon the next confluence of waters into that Leuell, the Sewers which contained them being stifled, they haue bred a greater and more fearfull Inundation. Beside these there be certaine Tacite and silent obiections which some are either afraid, or ashamed to vtter, and yet are obstinately gouerned by them. I will name but two: The one is, the losse of their Land: The other is, meere enuie; or if you will giue it a gentler name, Priuate Emulation. The former I may more boldly auouch, because it pleased his late Maiestie to fasten vpon it when he gaue gratious audience to a hearing of this businesse in the yeere 1619. viz. The Lord or Owner had rather be said to be Lord or Owner of 1000 Acres though they be scarcely worth to him 1000. shill. in the yeere, then part with 500 to make the rest worth 500 Angels by the yeere: In like manner the Com∣moner. Reason for this if they could giue any, it is likely I also were able to render some, but in truth I cannot, nor any shaddow of reason, but as a sullen Bird that is taken when it is old will rather dye then feed, so such Fen-men; not considering that though the alotment for the reward of drayning should be in Land, yet the expence being necessarily to be in money, much of the Land must be sold for supply thereof, which they that are able and willing may purchase before any other, to keepe their inheritances entire, being exceedingly improued. For Emulation, it is so notorious, so diffusiue a vice amongst them, as a man may imagine it to be bread there, as Hydra was in the Fen of Lerna. I will put a case. Iohn a Stile hath 2000 Acres in the Fen worth him haply 50. li. a yeere, and no other Liue-load. Iohn a Nokes hath 200 Acres in the same Fen worth 50. li. a yeere, but besides he hath an Inheritance of 300. li. a yeere, and thinkes himselfe, and so is, a Gentleman of some reckoning, the other is but a poore man and liues hardly. When the question of the drayning of the Fens comes, Iohn a Stile is glad, and promoteth it all he may: But Iohn a Nokes his rich Neighbour (what saith he) shall Iohn a Stile be a better man then I, who hath beene alwayes glad to shroud himselfe vnder my wings, that I cannot, I must not endure: For if the Fen be drayned, his Land may be worth 500. li. a yeere, though he part with one halfe for the drayning: my improuement will be little worth, no drayning therefore by my consent. But enough in an vnpleasing Argument, it being against my disposition to haue but touched so harsh a string. Hauing thus long held the Candle to the Sunne, that is, proued what
no reasonable man can denie, that the drayning of the Fens in the sixe Counties will be both honourable and profitable to the King and King∣dome and many particular persons, and answered the obiections which some ignorant or wilfull people stand most vpon, giue me leaue to pro∣ceed to the second Question, that is, whether it be feazable or no. First, Let it be for the time admitted not granted, that this great worke cannot be accomplished; I aske what shall the Countrey loose? For they that vndertake it, must haue no benefit till the worke be done. If it be not done, they indeed loose both labour and cost, the Countrey looseth nothing, but on the contrarie must gaine much, For it cannot be indeauoured that all the Fens should be drayned, but at lest some must necessarily reape great benefit, all some, by such indeauour. But the wisedome of the Parliament thought the worke feazable, and that not long since to wit in the last Parliament of Queene Elizabeth, the words are these. Wherein it is apparant to such as haue trauailed in execution of the Commission of Sewers in the Isle of Ely and Counties adioyning, that the Wastes, Commons, Marishes, and Fenny-grounds there subiect to surrounding, may be recouered by skilfull and able vndertakers. And the Commissioners of Sewers at Peterborough the 8. of September, 1619, were resolued of the possibilitie of the same. But what are the reasons men thinke the Fens cannot be drayned? Forsooth because many and great men haue attempted it and fayled: as if all wisedome and insight were confer'd on great men. It may be their misses haue taught other men wisedome: there is no greater aduantage then to learne by other mens losses. Hence it is that we see many things performed euerie day which our fore-fa∣thers thought bootlesse to attempt: besides, the causes of mischiefes and so the remedies are often-times not perceiued till the mischiefe be per∣fected. But will you giue me leaue to render you also a reason why those many and great men failed in their enterprises? I hold it for a certaintie, that it is vtterly vnpossible to drayne, or fruitfully to recouer any notable part of the Fen vnlesse all that Leuell of Fen whereof it is a part, be ioyntly recouered. And this hath beene aboundantly proued by the miscariage of all particular workes, except Marshland, and that is gayned by imbanking, partly because it lyeth on the out-side of all the rest next the Sea and adioyneth vpon the excellent out-fall of Linne; partly also, because as much cost hath beene and is bestowed vpon it, as the verie Soyle is worth, for it now costs about 3000. li. a yeere to maintaine the Bankes, and so the medicine hath beene as ill as the disease. Some-thing might be said also for Holland-Ellow by South of
Spalding, which is bettered by the Bankes, but neither recouered nor secured, and likewise of Waldersey and such portions. But for the dray∣ning of all together, my Lord Popham of worthy memorie may be an example somewhat to stay mens minds from thinking it so vtterly im∣possible, who being a wise experienced Gentleman, and of better estate then that he should be contented wilfully to cast it away, yet was verie desirous to haue aduentured vpon the drayning of all Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely, and surely had put it to the hazzard, if he had liued but two yeeres longer. But if I may speake without disparagement to his wisedome, that course which he intended (for I haue seene his Card and the wayes he intended to worke) would rather haue bettered much, then wonne or secured any. After his time and not aboue 13 or 14 yeeres since, his Maiestie and the Lords were so afflicted with Petitioners out of those parts, all im∣ploring helpe against that common calamitie (whereof they are now againe made sensible) that it was thought fit by the State to send Sr Clement Edmonds to take view of the Countrey, being assisted by the Lords and other Commissioners of Sewers. In which his Perigrination (for it was an vncouth and wild way he went, and a long time he spent in searching into euerie nooke and corner) he obserued with all diligence whatsoeuer might inuite him to thinke the drayning feazible, or discou∣rage him from it. At length in the returne of his Report to the State, he resolueth that it may be done. Yet not probably by any consent of the Countrey, or such as are interested in the Land, but rather by others. His reasons I forbeare here to touch vpon. After that, the right noble Patriot, the Earle of Arundel, by direction from King Iames, and the aduice of the Lords of the Councell, made a iourney into those parts to promote the generall drayning, as a businesse of great honour to his Ma∣iestie, with whom ioyned the honourable and worthy Commissioners of Sewers, & by an vnanimous decree designed vnto his Maiestie 120000 Acres of the Fennes to inable him to accomplish so great a work. Which Decree his Maiestie ratified by his Royall assent and acceptation, and would certainly haue performed the worke Royally and Really, sauing that he was at that time and vnto his death, taken and kept off by his weightie and important affaires of State. Since whose decease, his Royall Maiestie that now is, hath greatly desired that the said worke might be proceeded in, and for that purpose, finding that he could not presently relieue the great distresse the Countrey is now in by reason of the Inundation, hath remitted vnto the said Commissioners the fore-na∣med
Decree to inable them to prouide some other more expedite way for the Countries reliefe. By all which it appeares that by the iudge∣ment of King Iames, of the Lords of the Counsell, and the Commissioners of Sewers, the worke is feazable and greatly desired. For the Soyle I doubt not it is well disposed to a drayning, both because it hath a suffici∣ent fall to the sea, and because the Sewers (though with some difficulty and greater charge which yet the profit will farre surmount) may be in a short time sufficiently eased. That the Fennes haue a Competent fall to the sea, it is argument enough because they at length empty themselues into the Sea, which the deepe Meares doe not. Whether that fall bee sufficient to emptie them sooner and with a stronger Current then now they haue, is the question. I leaue the particular fall of euery leuell how many foote it hath to the high water marke to farther examination; but it is euident that from the heads of the seuerall draynes vnto the low water marke there is fall sufficient. It is also euident that Deeping Fenne lyes lower then Thornie, Bur∣rough or Croyland Fennes (whence also saith Mr. Cambden it hath his name) yet hath the Earle of Exeter made a conueyance of the water from Deeping Fennes vnder Spalding riuer to the sea, and that to some good effect if the out fall at sea were kept open: whence it followeth, that there is a fall into the Sea out of the lowest Fennes, and a descent much lower then the bottome of Spalding riuer; and yet the Flood at Spalding is not one houre in ordinary Tides, and consequently the Ebbe there aboue 10. From which obseruation it may bee gathered, that a fall may bee had from Spalding to the low water marke of twenty foote, which fall being improued by skilfull workemen will produce a strange effect. The like may be said of Wisbich, Clowes Crosse, Salters Load, &c. But how that must be done, and how the incoueniences thereupon ensu∣ing are to be preuented is the very Elusinium sacrum the mystery of drayning, which belongeth not to this place. For the out fall at Linne, no man maketh question of it, onely the difficulty will be thought to be in the placing of the workes, which will indeede bee chargeable but of necessary and excellent vse. I would haue it also considered that within these few yeeres the Tide from Spalding did flow vp beyond Crowland and neere Thornie, where as now the Tides are seldome seene aboue Spal∣ding; an euident argument that the Fennes grow euery yeere worse then other. For the out fals of Wisbich and Spalding being daily more and more choaked with sands from the sea and mudd out of the draynes which cannot now passe to sea, and the riuers stifled with weedes for
want of a current; it comes to passe that the whole Fenne is now vnder water; though this present drought hath brought all other riuers of the Kingdome to a very low ebbe. Which mischiefe if it grow but a few yeeres more (as it will certainly doe if it bee not preuented) the whole Leuell will be drowned perpetually and become of no vse at all. Besides, those waters growing deepe in so large a leuell, and being increased by a Flood; a storme of winde will haue so much water to worke vpon, that it will rayse billowes as in a sea, the force whereof neither the bankes of Marsh land nor of other inned grounds, nor houses, nor bridges will bee able to resist. What then will become of the fishing and fowling (their principall comndities) when the game is dispersed so wide that it will not be worth the labour and charge to goe about to take them? What will become also of the multitude of poore people, who now liue (though very meanely) in those Fennes by taking Fish and Fowle, by gathering Hassocke, Reede, &c. and by transporting by their Boates passengers and commodities too and fro? Finally the Towneships and particuler men that liue now vpon the Hards, will be confined as into small Ilands in an open sea: and euen those Ilands will be daily lessened by the billowes which stormes will driue against them on all sides. Adde hereto that the Meares (and Whitlesea Meare saith Mr. Cambden is six miles long and three miles broade) which haue of late yeeres much enlarged them∣selues, being yet more deepned and their waues raysed by stormes and raging like the sea, will dayly swallow more and more of the light Fen∣ny soyle bordering vpon them, and so at length may grow to an immense both longitude and latitude, and make it truly Circumfusa Palus. But to insist a little more vpon the fall or descent of the Leuell of the Fennes into the sea; it appeareth that the riuer of Peterbrough, (whose naturall Current, as it is most plentifull, so his excesse is most inundant) which should fall out at Splading, or at Wisbich, or both, if it had vent, passeth now on to Whittlesea Meare, and so runnes through the whole Isle, and meeting the riuers of Ouse, Grant, Brandon and Stoke, ouerflowes all, and falleth out leasurely at Linne aboue threescore miles from his aberration; in which tract running vpon a leuell and in small and cloyed draynes, it makes the greatest deluge: beside, the windes hauing the aduantage of the waters when they are out, with greater violence then any banke made of loose earth can resist, carry them whether they list vpon the face of the whole Fenne, because they haue no such strength of Current as will violently lead them away: so that if the winde bee Northerly and stiffe, it beateth them toward Linne, and then the Fenne is sooner drie;
but if it blow out of the East or South, the whole masse of waters is car∣ried from Lin ward, & finding no other out-fall, continues vpon the face of the Fenne till those winds remit, and the waters fall backe to Linne, where they find no very free discharge because they are holden vp by the Tide 12 houres in 24. and thence it comes that if any Flood happen in Aprill or after, the Fennes are lost for that whole yeere. More concerning the possibility to drayne the Fennes need not bee said, this being no place fit to discouer the manner of the Workes or the places of Aduantage whereon to set them, or the old or new draynes that must leade vnto them. Onely thus much I thinke fit to intimate, that there is a great difference betweene these Fennes and the Leuels in the Low Countryes. For there the sea is higher then the Land, and there∣fore their onely way is by Banking to keepe out the sea, and then by mils and other deuices to heaue out the water: which worke of banking though it be exceeding chargeable and dangerous for breaches, yet they are constrayned to trust to it, because they haue no fall to the sea, and be∣side they are so scanted for Land that the value thereof doth counter∣uaile that excessiue charge: but with vs in the Fennes all is otherwise. For we haue a fall to the low water marke of more then twenty foote to empty the waters into the sea. Beside, we haue abundance of riuers and draynes to lead them vnto the seuerall out-fals which may and must bee deepned; but we haue no firme earth in place to make bankes, nor sound ground to place them vpon. Besides, the Land to be gained will not de∣fray that charge neither (if all the trust be vpon banks) can it be secure to incourage men to inhabit, build, plant and stocke the ground to bee gai∣ned, because we haue had experience that some few breaches in Marsh∣land and other banked grounds haue brought great deluges and destructi∣on of houses, Cattle, &c. many of which are not yet regained, others held good at an excessiue charge, and vnder desperate dangers. There is also an other danger in Banking procured by a small contemp∣tible Vermine, they be Water-rats, which make their holes in the banks close to the water when it is at the shallowest in infinite number, and fee∣ding vpon the frie of fish, doe multiply like fishes. These burrough deepe into the bankes, which being made of light earth, when the waters do rise and are beaten into them by the winde, many of those holes are worne into one, and so the whole banke is in no long time demolished; a mischiefe which it is impossible to remedy, & yet such as will render all Banking insufficient to keepe out the water, much more vnsafe for men to trust vnto if they should be desirous to inhabit neere them or vnder
their protection. Finally, the cure by Banking is impossible for our Fennes, vnlesse the water could be taken into those banked draynes be∣fore it fall into the leuell of the Fennes, that is to say, as the riuers descend from the high ground; otherwise the waters can neuer rise to make vse of the height of such bankes, but will rather returne and drowne Peter∣borrough, Deeping Huntington, &c. Therefore the way must bee to begin at the Out-fals and there to repulse the salt water and sands, and by ta∣king aduantage of the fall to low water marke, to conuey away the fresh and the sand and other silte which now choketh the riuers and draynes. Besides these arguments against trusting to Bankes in a case where in great aduentures of mens persons, habitations and estates are to be borne; there is another argument against entertaining of Strangers to performe this work, for this Banking is the conceite of Strangers who are accusto∣med only to banking at home. And this is an argument first of Honor, se∣condly of security, thirdly of profit. For the matter of Honour: Now, if e∣uer, we haue reason to insist vpon it, when the reputation of our Country is brought into competition with our neighbours, who were wont to haue their dependance vpon vs, and reliefe from vs. Is the old Actiuity and abilities of the English Nation (who in former times were esteemed the greatest vndertakers in the Westerne parts of the world) growne now so dull and insufficient that we must pray in ayde of our neighbours to improue our owne Demaynes? The Duke of Ʋenice is said to marry the sea, as if he had with it but diuisum Imperium; wee haue beene al∣wayes Lords of the sea, and our Common Law hath adiudged the sea to be part of our Kingdome, shall wee suffer that Regality to become ob∣noxious to Strangers, and not that onely, but the fresh waters within our Continent, as if our selues were not able to bring them into order? Surely our great plenty and abundance of fruitful Land hath beene hitherto one cause why this improuement hath beene neglected: but of late the bles∣sing of peace hath so multiplyed our people vnder our last two peacefull Princes, that we haue transplanted many Colonies into Ireland, Virginea, Bermuda, St. Christophers, New England, &c. and beside hath stirred vp men at home to gaine much rich Land from the seas, and in particular to attempt vpon this surrounded Leuel, wherin that they haue not hitherto preuailed, hath not beene want of skill, or will, nor yet of indeauour. For diuers worthy men haue appeared in the vndertaking, the last and wor∣thiest being our late Soueraigne Lord of blessed memory, who thought it no dishonour to declare himselfe an Vndertaker herein, but being translated hence, hath left
The Honour of this Worke to Crowne the Raigne, Of his deere Sonne our now dread Soueraigne. For matter of security; shall wee esteeme it of small moment to put into the hands of Strangers three or foure such Ports and Harbours as Linne, Wisbeach, Spalding and Boston will be when the out-fals shall bee opened to Low water marke, and permit the Countrey within and be∣tweene them to be peopled by ouerthwart neighbours whose strength and vndertakings begin to grow formidable; or if they quaile themselues must giue place to our most Auncient & dangerous enemies, who will be ready enough to take aduantage of so many faire Inlets into the bo∣some of our Land, lying so neere together, that an Army landing part in each of them, may easily meete and strongly intrench themselues with wals of water and drowne the Countrey about them at their pleasure? This very thing was obiected by a worthy Patriot in a late Parliament, wherein a bill was preferred for the admitting of Strangers to vnder∣take this Worke, and thereupon cast out. Finally, if nothing were considerable but the matter of profit, would it be thought fit to giue so great a portion of our Land as the third part of that Leuell to Strangers to empty themselues into, and leaue our owne Countreymen with so great trauell, charge and aduenture to seeke for seates abroad in remote parts, when we may comfort both them and our selues by placing them at home? Neither yet would I be vnderstood to be so enuious to Strangers, as that I had rather the water then they should possesse the Land; but the question being whither should be pre∣ferred to the Vndertaking of the worke, Strangers or men of our owne Countrey, I am out of doubt that no true English man will be scrupulous in the choyce. Yet I doe ingeniously acknowledge that the industrye of some of our neighbours, especially the Dutchmen, deserueth commenda∣tions and imitation for enlarging themselues into the sea, especially in, and about Amsterdam, and securing themselues from the sea by costly and in∣genious deuices; but such deuices are not proper for our busines, which is to be performed in a farre different manner, the error leading vs di∣rectly to the remedy which is meerely Naturall: for Nature hath giuen to all riuers and waters as well their courses, issues and out-fals into the sea as their heads and springs; and by the former hath as well prouided for the vse of man as by the latter. This guidance of Nature if wee fol∣low, and adde Art as a hand-mayd vnto it, wee shall by remouing the cause auoyd also the effect; and by consideration how the mischiefe hath growne, learne to preuent it in the future; wherein the sparing of cost is
no frugality. But if it be questioned, Whether those Englishmen that of∣fer to aduenture their estates and the reputation of their skill, be able to accomplish the businesse? the answer is, That beside that they can demon∣strate their abilities, What praejudice can it be to any man to be an idle spectator, whilest they expend their money and exercise their skill, they requiring no recompence till the Worke be performed? The third and last Question is, How a Competent Reward may be apportioned for them that should vndertake so great a Worke? This indeed hath beene the great and maine Impediment of the Drayning of the Fennes, for many yeeres; most men interessed, being vnable to dis∣burse Money, and also vnwilling to part with any of their Land, of how little value soeuer it hath beene vnto them, or how great soeuer the im∣prouement of the remainder might be: or if some were willing, yet the minds of the multitude haue not beene vnlike the Waters of the Fenne; which not being contained within due limits, but dispersed abroad ouer the surface of so great a Leuell, are easily interrupted in their course by the slender opposition of Flagges and Reedes: euen so, these mens minds not being restrained by Authoritie, nor guided by rule of Reason, doe stray into seuerall Opinions, and receiue Impediment from Opposi∣tions as slender as those Weedes: some of them being not ashamed to alleadge, that by gayning of Grasse, they should loose their Reedes and Sedge, not considering the difference of their values. But of late, recei∣uing information from the King and his Councel, and the Commissioners of Sewers taking into their consideration, that the Wisdome of seuerall Parliaments haue thought fit to giue a part of such Lands to those that should improue the whole, and pondering how great the benefit of such improuement would be to them and their posteritie, haue (not many yeeres since) fallen vpon an excellent course to encourage men of skill and abilitie to embarke themselues in that Designe. Whereupon, after a Tax layd vpon the Lands of that whole Countrey by the Acre, to enable the Commissioners of Sewers legally to conuey part thereof to beare the charge of aduancing the whole, King Iames of blessed memorie declaring himselfe to be the Vndertaker, a Decree of Sewers was enacted at Cam∣bridge the 20. day of February, in the yeeres of the Reigne of our late Soueraigne Lord King Iames, of England, France, and Ireland, the 19. and of Scotland, the 55. Whereby was designed to be granted to his Maiestie for the supportation of that vast Charge, 120000. Acres of the Fenne Lands, to be conueyed vnto his Maiestie, his Heires and Successors: that is to say, out of euery particular part, a proportion answerable to the
quantitie of the Land, and the benefit that should redound vnto the Ow∣ners thereof, so that in the whole it should accomplish the said number of 120000. Acres, as the Commissioners of Sewers, after a particular sur∣uey, should thinke fit to allot the same. Which Lands notwithstanding, the King was not to haue any interest in, or possession of, vntill eyther the whole Fennes, or some notable part, were effectually Drayned, and so ad∣judged by the Commissioners, or a competent number of them. The rea∣son why this Decree tooke no effect, was the many and important affaires of State, wherewith his Maiestie was exercised the whole time of his life, after the said Decree was enacted. Whereupon all the good inten∣tions and preparation, both on the part of his Maiestie, and the Commis∣sioners fell to the ground. Since which time, those Countries hauing beene grieuously afflicted with the continuance and encrease of Inundations, they are now by the hand of God not led onely, but constrained to seeke some effectuall meanes for speedie reliefe. Whereupon some of them (as men readie to perish by the Waters, are wont) haue reached out their hands, to take hold vpon such weake and defectiue helpes, as the examples of their predecessors haue left vnto them, that is to say, vpon particular Workes of Goates, Draynes, Bankes, &c. not duly weighing, how they haue formerly fayled those that haue layd hold vpon them: Witnesse the costly Draynes of Morton Bishop of Ely called The New Leame; Clowes Crosse, Popham Mea, The Londoners Loade and many others; and the many miles of Bankes about Deeping, Thornie Walter Sea, The Londoners Land, and infinite others: all which are now of little or no vse, though the charge of them hath beene so great, as if it had beene bestowed at once vpon the generall Worke, would haue gone farre to∣ward the accomplishment of a Reall Drayning, which long before this time had made a rich Improuement. Others there are, who finding the Disease of the Fen to be like the stopping of the Vrine neere the fall of the Kidneyes; from whence being returned, it first filleth vp all the veines of the body which before were neere full with bloud, and then drownes the Patient in his owne Water: of which Disease there is no possible Cure, but to remoue the Impediment neere the Kidneyes, so to regayne the naturall Out-fall. In like manner, the Waters that annoy the Fennes, doe first fill the Riuers and Draynes; at whose issues be∣ing returned backe by Impediment, they ouerflow and stifle the whole Body of the Fenne: of which Disease, there is no possible Cure, but the opening and securing of the Naturall Out-falls; at which, the whole Body of the Fenne will equally and speedily vnburthen it selfe,
and so returne to that pristine Condition, so much extolled in the Mo∣numents of Antiquitie. This then being the onely way for Cure of that grand Disease, vnder which many thousand Acres of Ground, and (which more is) many thousand People doe languish, those onely shall approue their Iudgements in this Cure, who themselues incline and la∣bour to incline others to further by Art that Naturall Remedie. Yet how Naturall soeuer this Remedy be, it cannot be imagined that so vast and enorme a quantity of Land as these Leuels do containe can be drayned without a huge expence; and the preuention of the same mis∣chiefe for time to come by apt Works will greatly increase if not double the charge, beside the necessary prouision to maintaine, nay to better the Nauigation by deepning the riuers, &c. Adde hereto the aduenture of so great summes as are necessary to be expended in these Workes; where∣of although such as shall vndertake the businesse, well knowing their owne wayes and meanes are (as behoueth them) secure, yet their assi∣stants (for without aduentureres no priuate mans abilitie is able to effect it) relying vpon their credit and skill, haue reason to require no Litige∣ous, but a Legall and pregnant assurance of a valuable recompence which being conformed to the decree for the 120000 Acres before recited will be indifferent both for the Aduenturers and the Owners, as it see∣meth was concluded by the Commissioners before they enacted that Decree. Here it may be obiected, that many Noblemen and Gentlemen in∣terested in those Leuels, will choose rather to disburse some summes of money for their parts to keepe their Inheritances entire, then part with any of their Lands. The answer whereunto is, that a booke may bee made according to the Custome of Aduentures, wherein euery man that listeth may write such a proportion for his aduenture as will intitle him to so many Acres as vpon the suruey shall be set out of his Land to make vp the number of 120000 Acres. Out of which also it must bee considered, that a good proportion must be set apart for the perpetuall securing of the workes to be effected, as the Commissioners of Sewers in the forenamed Decree haue juditiously prouided. Thus much being collected out of loose papers which had lien long by the wals, and tyed together with some Additions out of new obser∣uations, is presented by a friend to this incomparable designe; which if it be effected, will be egistred to all succeeding ages, and haply this may conduce somewhat thereto, with which if the Author be honoured hee is well aped, but if hee be remembred to haue cast in his Mite into the Treasury he will exult. H. C. FJNJS.
