580 S100159 99836011 252
THE TRIPLE CORD OR A TREATISE PROVING THE Truth of the Roman Religion, By Sacred Scriptures Taken in the Literall Sense. Expounded by Ancient Fathers. Interpreted by Protestant Writers. WITH A Discouery of sundry subtile Sleights vsed by Protestants, for euading the force of strongest Arguments, taken from cleerest Texts of the foresaid Scriptures. Si quispiam praeualuerit contra vnum, duo resistunt el: Funiculus triplex difficilè rumpitur. Eccles. 4.12. If a man preuayle agaynst one, two resist him: A triple Cord is hardly broken. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXXIIII.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO THE PROTESTANT NOBILITY OF GREAT BRITAINE. RIGHT HONOVRA∣BLE LORDS, The Conceites of Men are so various, & the Guifts of Nature so vnlike, vvith the qualities of Climats so different, as that vve may by our Vnderstandings obserue, as great
Variety in Wits and Manners, as vvith our Eies vve see in Faces, and Fauours. For some, as I may say, are so vnfortu∣natly borne, as hauing no reguard to true Honour and Nobility, vvhich is euer founded vpon true Vertue; they vvholly dedicate themselues and their daily endeauours, to the only gayning and enioying of such pleasures & pro∣fits, as may best please the Corporall Senses, or othervvise comply vvith the aduantage of Temporall Fortunes: no∣thing fearing any blemishes of Ho∣nour, vvhilest they may obtayne the foresayd Ends. Yet others rising vnder a more pros∣perous planet, are so greatly taken vvith the desire and loue of true Honour and Renovvne, as that for the gayning or increase therof, all corporall Contents and temporall Cōmodities vvith grea∣test scorne they trample & contemne; and their dearest Lyues they ioyfully
expose to greatest hazards. It is true Honour, and celebrity of Name vvhich these men seeke to pur∣chase; Honour by Wisdome, Learning Fortitude, Magnanimity, Magnifi∣cence, and other such like Heroicall Vertues, vvhich as so many Potent Princes, create men truly noble. These are They, that gaue splendour to your right Honourable Progenitours, from vvhome by direct lyne you dravv your Nobility: and these are they vvho giue to your Selues a plentifull increase of all Honour, through your ovvne most vvorthy, and memorable deserts. It vvere true Rusticity to say, that Children are not honorable in the Ho∣nour of their Parents. Do not theMat. 3.1. Luc. 3.23. Luc. 1.5. E∣uangelists describe at large the Genea∣logy of Christ our Lord and his B. Vir∣gin-Mother, as also of S. Iohn Baptist, thereby to proue that these greatest He∣röes, vvere truly noble in their Proge∣nitors?
Doth not from the same roote S. Hierome deriue the prayses of noble Paula, affirming that she vvas noble in byrth, as being the issue of the Gracchi, the ofspring of Scipions, & the heire of Paul? Doth not S. GregoryOrat. de S. Cypr. & orat. de S. Basil. Nazianzen for splendour of their Stemmes, highly ex∣toll S. Cyprian and S. Basil, though o∣thervvise most renovvned for their le∣arning and sanctity? Yea thoseSalust. fa∣mous Heathen Nobles P. Scipio & Qu. Fabius, vvhē they heard, or read the glo∣rious gests of their Ancestours, or be∣held their Statues, they vvere greatly in∣flamed vvith the loue of their Vertues. Iulius Caesar, but looking vpon the Image of Alexander the Great, vvas thereby excited to the vndertaking and performance of things truly great. And Alexander himselfe, remembring the Triumphes of his Father, they serued to him as the sharpest spurrs to pricke him forvvard to the gayning an Immortali∣ty
of his ovvne Name? Wherefore my Honourable Lords, make right ac∣count that saying of Plato to be most true, and truly Yours, The vertues of Fathers are the Treasures of Children, in vvhich you may truly glory, and desire to imitate. Yet must I humby make bould, to intimate this further vnto your Ho∣nours, that vvhē your Fathers vvorthes are increased and enriched vvith your ovvne Merits, then your Nobility is more complet, & more truly free from all maleuolous Exceptions. TheJo. 8.39. Ievves gloryed that their Father vvas Abraham, but Christ bad them if they be the Children of Abraham, to do the vvorkes of Abraham. Yea they raysed their Pedigree so high, as that they a∣uouched they had, but oneIo. 8.41. Father God himselfe; But Iesus therefore sayd to them, If God vvere your Father, verily you vvould loue me, for from God I pro∣ceeded
and came. So that to make your Nobility, Firme and Immortall, you must adioyne your ovvne vertues: for no more can it subsist vvithout These, then Man vvithout Reason. What did it auayle profane and sen∣suall Esau, that his Father vvas holy I∣saac? or rebellious Absalom, that he vvas Sonne to the most valourous King Da∣uid? Or foolish Roboam, that he had vvysest Salomon for his Father? nothing did this profit, but to augment their shamefull Infamy in this vvorld, and their Eternall misery and punishment in the next, by so fouly degenerating from so Noble Progenitours. But so povverfull is Vertue, for the Creation of Nobility, as that many borne in a grosse ayre, of obscure paren∣tage, through the Glory of their merits and vvorthiest Actes haue shined to the vvhole vvorld, as so many starres, lea∣uing Honour to their Posterity, vvhich
their Fathers vvanted. Tinne is extra∣cted from Siluer, yet is not Siluer; and Gold proceedeth from the base matter of Earth, and yet is not Earth, but pre∣cious Gold. It is much better, of an ig∣noble Race, through vertuous Actions to become Noble, then of a Noble Stocke, by base vices, to become con∣temptible. Thare, Abrahams Father vvas an Ido∣later, and yet the Sonne for his admi∣rable vvorth had the Honour to be sty∣led,Rom. 4.11. The Father of the Faithfull, and him, in vvhose Seed, all Nations should be blessed, the Messias of the vvorld be∣ing to rise from thence.Ex. 3.1. Moyses &1. Reg. 9. psal. 77.71. Dauid, vvere by condition Shep∣heards, but through their noble Actes became renovvned Princes. Profane Histories are plentifull in these Exam∣ples, but I hasten to that vvhich giueth life and lustre, yea the last perfection to all Nobility.
This is Christian Nobility (vvorthy Peeres) vvhich vvill make you to be men truly borne of God, to haue him for your Noblest Father; and through the Influences of his Grace, to imitate, & in some, though imperfect, sort, to expresse in your Selues, his Purity, San∣ctity, Innocency, Wisdome, Iustice, Mercy, & the like; by these no lesse re∣presenting his Diuine Image, then Son∣nes do the faces and conditions of their carnal Parents. These are those true No∣bles, vvhich the Princely Eagle S. IohnJo. 1.13 describeth to be borne of God; not of Bloud. These are they vvhome the SacredIo. 1.12 Rom. 8.14.17. 2. Pet. 1.4. 1. Pet. 2.9. Io. 10.34 Scriptures do honour, vvith those glorious titles of being the Sonnes of God, the friends of God, Hey∣res of God, and Coheires of Christ, parta∣kers of his diuine Nature, Kings, Gods. Novv to be linked vvith this kinred, and so to be exalted to the highest No∣bility, our heauenly Father requireth in
his Children that by sacred vertues they seeke to glorify, and magnify his holy Name, for so himselfe promised, vvhen he said,1. Reg. 2.30. Whosoeuer shall glorify me, I vvill glorify him: and they that con∣temne me, shallbe ignoble. The Vertues vvherby God is chiefly glorifyed, and vvhereby Men vpon Earth do deriue their Nobility from the King of hea∣uen, are according to the beloued A∣postle, diuine Faith: for1. Iohn 5.1.4. Whosoe∣uer belieueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God. And, All that is borne of God, ouercommeth the vvorld, and this is the victory vvhich ouercommeth the vvorld, our Faith. But besids Faith, is likevvise required Charity, for1. Iohn 4.7. Euery one that loueth is borne of God. As also Iustice, for1. Iohn 2.29. Euery one vvhich doth Iustice is borne of him. And lastly, filiall Obedience, and conformity to the vvill of our heauen∣ly father, vvhose eldest Sonne assureth
vs all, that,Mat. 12 50. vvhosoeuer shall do the vvill of my Father that is in heauen, he is my Brother, Sister, and Mother. O ad∣mirable Honour! O incredible povver of vertue! Hovv many good Mothers, Brothers, and Sisters, vvould haue thought themselues most highly ho∣noured, if they might haue beene lin∣ked vvith Christ in these degrees of car∣nall propinquity. And yet, as S. Chri∣sostome truly teacheth,Hom. 45. in Mat. They are neerer of kin to God, vvho do his vvill, then those vvho are ioyned vvith greatest allyance of Bloud. So that for a man to contract affini∣ty vvith God, and thereby to be made of the Bloud Royall, and to attayne to the highest degree of Nobility, he must of necessity haue his Soule adorned vvith those heauenly Graces of Faith, Charity, Iustice, Obedience, and the like. His Coūtry must be the supernall Hierusalem; his highest Honour the
preseruation of Gods Image, and con∣formity to his Patterne, vvhich by Rea∣son, and Vertue are onely caused, and vvhereof at Gods Tribunall he must giue account. If he shall vitiously de∣fyle that sacred Image of greatest No∣bility, cut by the hād of God himselfe, and thereby introduce another forme, to vvit, of the Serpent; then, must he ranke himselfe to his euerlasting disho∣nour, amongst the spurious & ignoble. Christian Nobility doth not accept Persons, and Conditions of men, but looketh into their Minds: From the manners she iudgeth a man to be ser∣uile or noble. The only freedome vvith God, is not to serue Sinne: & the grea∣test Nobility vvith him, is to be emi∣nent in vertues. Who amongst men in the sight of God vvas more noble then Peter, a poore Fisherman? And vvho amongst vvomen more illustious then blessed Mary the vvyfe of a Carpenter?
And yet to that Fisherman the keys of the kingdome of heauen vvere giuen: and to that poore vvife it vvas granted to be the Mother of him, vvho gaue the keyes. Wherefore Christian vertues are they that must rayse a man to the height of Honour. Novv, if he that is borne of a Regall Stocke, may iustly glory in Princely Nobility; much more he vvho truly de∣riueth himselfe from the King of Kings and Creatour of all things. With this dignity all the Iust vpon Earth are ho∣noured, being borne of God by a nevv Natiuity; and the Saintes in heauen do therby raigne, as puissant Princes in Eternall glory. It is not vnvvorthy your remem∣brance, Noble Lords, thatHier. in Quaest. He∣braic. in Gen. ad Cap. 22. & in ep. 27. ad Eustoch. Genebrard. in psal. 68. Mount Sion hauing tvvo topps or Heads, vpon one vvas built a Temple for the Seruice of God, and vpon the other a Pallace for the seruice of the King: thereby to
shevv, that these tvvo Honours must euer cohabitate, and not be separated, ech one giuing a peculiar Grace, and Splendour to the other. The Romans also, as S.De ciu. Dei l. 5. c. 12. Au∣stine recordeth, erected tvvo Temples neere adioyning togeather; the one they dedicated to Honour, the other to Ʋertue: therby signifying that in vvhat place there is splendour of Honour, in the same must be the exercise of Vertue. Wherfore vvhosoeuer desireth to shine vvith Christian Nobility, and to deriue his Pedigree from the King of Heauen & Earth, a Father Almighty, he must ground his Honour vpon diuine fayth, and rayse it to the Height, by the exer∣cise of Charity, and true Religion. But vvhen I mention Religion, it put∣teth me in mynd, that this King your Father espoused himselfe toEphes. 5.27. a glo∣rious Queene, one so beautifull, that she had neither spot, or vvrincle, or any such
thing, but vvas Holy, and Ʋnspotted: and this vvas his BelouedEph. 5.25. Church, vvhome he affected so dearely, that he deliuered himselfe for it, &Act. 20.28. purchased it vvith his ovvne Bloud. This then be∣ing the Spouse of God, the Children of God, must needs be the Children of the Church, and she their Holy, and Vn∣spotted Mother. A truth so certaine, that the glorious Martyr and Bishop S. Cyprian, doubted not to auouch, thatDe Ecl. vnitate c. 5. August. tom. de Symb. l. 4. cap. 10. He cannot haue God for his Father, that hath not the Church for his Mother. Novv, that this Mother-Church, is only the Catholike Roman Church, I shall proue at large in this subsequent Treatise: only be pleased in the meane to remember, vvhat a good old Bishop and Martyr said of this point:Lucius Ep. 1. ad E∣pisc. Hisp. & Cal. The Roman Church is Apostolicall, and the Mother of all Churches, vvhich is neuer proued to haue Erred from the path of A∣postolicall Tradition, nor depraued vvith
Hereticall Nouelties to haue fayled, ac∣cording to the promise of our Lord himselfe saying: I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith fayle not. This Mother-Church it vvas, and only this, that had all your Forfathers for her louing and dutifull Children. It vvas She, that brought them forth Christians by the Lauer of Baptisme, & aftervvards gaue them grouth, strength and increase by her other Sacramentes. In her bosome they sucked Sanctity during this life, and by her they vvere aduanced to the Court of Heauen, ray∣gning there, truly Noble in immortall Glory. Peruse your Genealogies, looke in∣to the Chestes of your Euidences, vievv the Records of all Courts, behould the ancient Monuments in your Churches, read all Chronicles and Histories, they vvill all depose vnto You, that your Noble Ancestours, all of them before
King Henry the eight his Raigne, and infamous Relapse, vvere all of them Catholikes truly Romane: The Sect of Protestancy, or the very Name thereof as then not being in Rerum Natura, & so neuer heard, or dreamed of by any of your Ancient Bloud. And not only this, but many most noble Lords and Ladies, your glorious Predecessours, duely considering the vanity of things transitory, the vncer∣tainty of this present Lyfe, the innu∣merable dangers that therein occurre, the dreadfull Iudgment they vvere to vndergoe, and the finall Sentence of Ioy, or Misery Eternall, vvhich they vvere to receiue: these importāt points, I say, they seriously and prudently pon∣dering, vvith brauest Resolutions a∣bandoned the present pleasures, pro∣fits, or Honours this vvorld could af∣foard them, and betooke themselues to the safest Port of Monasticall, and Re∣ligious
lyfe, therein to giue themselues to the Exercise of Pennance for expia∣tion of sinnes, to the Contemplation of their Heauenly Fathers infinite and vnspeakeable Perfections, for their i∣mitation of his vertues, & to the need∣full Preparation, and due Disposition for the gayning, and enioying Nobili∣ty and Honour, euer permanent & im∣mortall. But if it vvere not to abuse your Honours greatest Patience vvith longer Discourse, in a matter so euident, I should easily present vnto your vvor∣thy vievves, many Kings and Queenes of our ovvne Country, for their singu∣lar vertues admired and honoured by all posterity, vpon the former Conside∣rations, to haue cast by their Crovvnes, to haue dethroned themselues of all ciuill Gouernement and Command, to haue resigned their Scepters into the hands of others, and to haue giuen the
farevvell to all Earthly contents, and all this to retire themselues the better in Religious lyfe for the exercise of Vertue and the gayning of the Kingdome of Heauen. These, Noble Lords, are the bright Starres you must delight to behould; these are the choyce patterns you must endeauour to imitate: Your vvorthy Spirits may, vvith much honour, emu∣late, their rarest Vertues, and thereby propagate to your ovvne Posterity the name and Honour, vvhich Kings and Kinred haue bequeathed vnto you. In these glory as your most Noble Proge∣nitors; in your Selues reioyce, vvhen as liuely Images, you represent their Goodnes. To degenerate from these vvould be greatest dishonour. His fall is fouler vvho hath happily stood, and the same more dāgerous from the greater height it happeneth. What doth it auayle a
covvardly Sonne, that his Father vvas valiant? Or a vicious Child that his Pa∣rents were vertuous? Certainly no o∣ther, but more cleerely, to blaze his greater shame, and most hatefull Igno∣miny. Your Noble Harts vvould not brooke the least aspersion to be layd vpō the Honour of your most renovv∣ned Predecessours, by any man vvhat∣soeuer, but vvith your vvisedoms you vvould cleere, and vvith Valour you vvould punish all offendours in that kind, as iustely thinking the Disho∣nour vvould rebound vpon your ovvn persons, if you should suffer such Indi∣gnity to passe vvithout Controvvle. Much more vvill your Lordships be truly carefull and precise, that the least stayne, or blemish do not fall from your Selues, vvhereby your Ancients splendour should by any vvaies, be ob∣scured. O vvhat vnsufferable disgrace is it,
for men ignoble and illiterate, not on∣ly to appeach your Noble Progenitors of ignorance, blindnes, and stupidity; but further to brand them vvith those blacke markes of being men Superstiti∣ous, Idolatrous, Antichristian; and so vndoutedly for euer damned. And yet these are the ordinary detractiōs vvhich come from the fovvle mouthes, and pennes of ignorant, and impudent Mi∣nisters. But vvho, not a vvretched Atheist, can possibly endure to haue his Hea∣uenly Father most blasphemously cen∣sured, as a cruell Tyrant, imposing Lavves vpon his Children, and Sub∣iects, vvhich are impossible to be ob∣serued, and yet the keeping of them to be necessary to their Saluation? To de∣stiny and reprobate men from all Eter∣nity, before their Creation, vvithout all respect of their free vvorkes, to cer∣taine Damnation? To make the foun∣taine
of all Goodnes (all eares do ab∣horre to heare it) the Authour, Cause, Counsailour, Commaunder, & Com∣peller to all Sinne. To make the Sonne of God, Christ our Sauiour, to haue bene borne vvith ignorance, to haue dyed vvith despayre, & to haue suffered the very paines of the damned. And yet these are Tenets, holden for good by your learnedst Protestant Doctours. And vvhat Child legitimate can vvith Patience brooke, that his Mother most Honourable, Chast, & Faythfull to her Spouse, should be accused and iudged for an Infamous Adultresse? No very Minister so ignorant, but vvill ac∣knovvledge, that the Romane Church vvas the most chast & faythfull Spouse of Christ, vvhen S. Paul proclaymed thatRom. 1.8. her Fayth vvas renovvned in the vvhole vvorld: AndRom. 16.19. her obedi∣ence published into euery place: and the Romanes highly commended, for that
they hadRom. 6.17. obeyed from the hart, vnto that forme of doctrine vvhich had beene deliuered vnto them. And yet novv our viperous brood of Ministers, vvil needs haue her to be the very vvhore of Baby∣lon;Apoc. 17 a harlot &c. vvith vvhome the Kings of the Earth haue fornicated: An Apostata from Christ her Spouse; a pro∣faner of Gods vvord and Sacraments and in briefe, vvholy Antichristian. And I must not forbeare to put your Honours in mind, of the dishonoura∣ble disgraces that these nevv-borne Se∣ctaries, vvould put vpon your Selues, not onely as you are Nobles, but as you are Men, endovved vvith reasona∣ble Soules, vvhose principall Povvers are Vnderstanding, and Freevvill, the most Essentiall differences betvveene men and Beasts. Do not your Nevv Maisters generally teach, that God hath giuen to man only freevvill to sinne, but not to do good? When they do
good, they are necessitated therunto, for as vvithout Gods grace they cannot do it, so the same being offered, they cannot resist. O hovv dangerously doth this Ec∣clypse the shyning splendour of your ovvne, and your Ancestours most com∣mendable Acts! vvhat can be praisvvor∣thy, that includeth necessity? Or on the contrary blamable, that cannot be a∣uoyded? If it vvas not in the povver and vvill of your Selues, and your Forefa∣thers to do, or not to do those Heroicall Deeds, but vvhat you did, you vvere ne∣cessitated to do through the enforcing hand and Ordination of God; vvhat cause or colour can be imagined for the raysing of your Selues, vvithout all de∣sert, to such highest Honours, and to grace euen your Successours vvith such titles of Dignity? Be pleased to heare vvhat Malleus Haereticorum, the learnedst S. Austine
thinketh of this brutish Paradoxe:L. de duabus A∣nimabus c. 11. Neyther heer (sayth he, speaking of Fre∣vvill) am I to search obscure bookes, from vvhence to learne, that no man deserueth Dispraise, or Punishment, vvho eyther vvilleth that vvhich Iustice doth not pro∣hibite, or doth not that vvhich he can∣not do. Do not the Sheepheards sing these things in the Mountaynes, the Poets vpon the Stages, the vnlearned at their meetings, the learned in their Studies, Maisters in the Schooles, Bishops in Churches, and Mankind all ouer the vvorld? So that Shepheards, Poets, Ru∣stickes &c. do exhibite that Honour vnto you, vvhereof your ovvne Chap∣laynes vvould vvillingly depriue you. Neyther is Enuy thus satisfyed but vvith greatest malignity pursueth euen your most laudable vertues, affirming that your best Deeds done for the Ho∣nour of God, his Church, your Coun∣try, or your Selues, are of all them, in
themselues, & in the sight of God, Sin∣nes abhominable, mortall or deadly, vvhich depriue a man of Gods grace, & thereby of all Spirituall lyfe, vvhich de∣grade him of that chiefest Nobility to be the adopted Sonne of God, & heyre of Eternall Kingdome, & finally make him the very slaue of the Diuell, and a most vvretched Caytiffe, condemned to eternall Misery. To vvhat end should you expose your dearest liues in the seruice of your King and Country to imminent dan∣gers? To vvhat end should you make your daily prayers, and vse other Exer∣cises of Deuotion, to the Honour of your supreme King, and your ovvne Soules good? Or giue your Charitable Almes to the Reliefe of the needy, if these deeds, payers, and Almes be all of them stayned vvith Sinne, offensiue to the Maiesty of God, and exceeding preiudiciall, being all of them sinnefull
to your ovvne Soules? And yet these, and sundry other such nasty principles, the pretended reformed Protestancy doth proiect vnto you. Avvake then, Noble Lords, and let your eies of Truth send forth their clee∣rest Raies, vvherby to dispell those dar∣kest Clouds of Errour, vvhich so dange∣rously obscure the brightnes of your Names & Nobilities. If these vnfortu∣nate tymes do threaten, or obiect any danger of loosing some temporall Ho∣nour, your Lops. may rest assured, that as the loosing of your liues for Loialty and Fidelity to your King and Coun∣try, doth nothing diminish, but greatly augment your former Renovvnes: So the losse of all trāsitory Glory for your Loyalty to God, for Obedience to his Church, for profession of the Catholike Fayth, for the gayning of a Heauen, is not to loose the least title of Honour, but vvith plentifull increase to enrich
the same. To loose lands or goods in the same honourable quarrel, is a pious Vsury, only lending them for a tyme vpon securest Bands, of not receiuing ten for the hundred, but a hundred for ten. And I cannot thinke so vn∣vvorthily of so vvorthy Spirits, that vo∣luptuousnes, and freedome in sensuall delights, vvhich your nevv Diuines do so loudly teach, & liberally allovv, that these, I say, can any thing deterre you from the chast Embracements of pure Vertue, and Religion, these being the base baites, vvhervvith the vulgar and ignoble are only taken. Wherfore to conclude this my hum∣ble Suite vnto your Lops. be pleased somtimes to reflect, that as you are tru∣ly carefull, and therein most commen∣dable, to continue in your selues, & to propagate in your Children, the An∣ciēt Nobility vvhich your fathers haue left you, liuely representing their vvis∣dome,
Fortitude, Magnanimity, and other such most bright beames of true Nobility: so no lesse carefull that you be, in expressing their Noble Christiani∣ty, vvhich they, before many hundreds of yeares past, vvorthily purchased by profession of Catholicke fayth, by obe∣dience to Christes Church, by Commu∣nion vvith Gods Saints, by participati∣on of holy Sacraments, and by their o∣ther exercises of Religion and Charity. Whereas this last Century hath giuen the first, and ancientest Bloud vvhich Protestancy can challenge, or expect. And seeing that vvherein your chie∣fest cares must euer be incumbent, is the labouring the Eternall Weale of your ovvne Soules, vvhich men de∣uoyd of diuine fayth, and floting out of the Arke of the Catholicke Church, amongst the vncertaine vvaues of Er∣rour and Heresy, can neuer attaine; therefore it vvill most neerly concerne
you diligently to learne, vvherin that diuine Faith consisteth; hovv it is to be gayned; vvhat profession thereof neces∣sary; vvhich is that Church vvhich is the Arke of safety, the Spouse of Christ, the Mother of the Faithfull, the Pillar of Truth, and so infallible a Iudge of all Controuersies in Religion, as vvhosoe∣uer shall refuse to obey her Sentence, is to be reputed by all men, as a Heathen, and Publican. This is the busines that importeth; the neglect vvherof is not losse of tem∣porall liberty, and imprisonement for life, or of large Renevves, and mines of Gold, or the fauour and grace of Prin∣ces, & esteeme in Court, or of Strength, Health, Beauty, and other such guiftes of Nature; but it is the losse Eternall of all Heauenly ioyes, and the Soule and Bodies burning in vnquenchable fyre for all Eternity. O discusse vvith your Selues at lea∣sure,
that deep question proposed by a Prince,Luc. 18.18. Mar. 10.17. ƲƲhat shall I do, that I may receiue life euerlasting? or in the vvords of anotherAct. 16.31. VVhat must I do, that I may be saued? Seeke, Search, Study, Meditate, Conferre, Read, neuer rest vntill you fynd a true Resolution of this vveightiest Question. If you vvill take it from Christ our Sa∣uiour, he giueth it in these plaine vvordsMat. 19.17. If thou vvilt enter into lyfe, keep the Commandements. If you vvill haue it from your ovvne Doctour, the Doctor of the Gentils S. Paul, his ansvvere is,Act. 16.31. Belieue in our Lord Iesus, & thou shalt be saued. If you vvill haue then the full Resolution, giuen by those tvvo greatest Doctours, it is Fayth, and Kee∣ping of the Commandements, that vvill saue you. Whereupon the third & most renovvned Doctour S. Austine giueth the vvhole decision in these vvordes,De fide & operibus c. 15. I see not vvhy Christ should say, If
thou vvilt haue lyfe euerlasting, keep the Commandements; if vvithout obseruing of them, by only fayth, one might be saued. Ioyne then these tvvo for your obtay∣ning of Eternall happines: and haue e∣uer fresh in your memories that sacred sentence of the Sonne of God,Mar. 8.36. VVhat shall it profit a man if he gayne the vvhole vvorld, and suffer domage of his Soule? And vvith this, I humbly kisse all your Lops. hands, and euer desire to remayne, Your Honours faythfull, though vnworthy Seruant, N. N.
THE PREFACE TO THE Protestant Reader. SEEING it was euer houlden as a thing most worthy of greatest prayse, for a man to excell in all, or any of the liberal Scien∣ces, the knowledge therof being not on∣ly to himselfe, but also to others most vsefull and commodious; much more then is he to be honoured, who shall wholly, or chiefly imploy his paines and studies in the attaining of the Science of Sciences, sacred Diuinity, true Wisdome, whose Obiect is God, and whose supreme end is the Omnipotent glory, and mans Beatitude. This Science it is, for the teaching wherof the best Maister, Christ our Lord, came into this world, according to those his blessed wordes,Io. 18.37. For this was I borne, and for this I came in∣to the world, that I should giue testimony to the truth: Which truth heIo. 18.20. taught in the Synagogue, and the Tmple: AndMat. 9.35. went about all the Cityes and Townes teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Ghospell of the kingdome &c. And not content that this prea∣ching
of the Ghospell should only be vsed by his owne person, and for his owne time, he gaue also in chiefest charge to his Apostles, and their Successors, that they shouldMat. 28.19.20. Teach all Nations &c. Teaching them to obserue all thinges, whatsoeuer he had comman∣ded them. Now, for their encouragement, the better to performe this Charge imposed, he assureth them by his Apostle, that1. Tim. 4.16. Thus doing, they shall saue both themselues, and them that heare them. By which last words it also appeareth, that the knowledge of this Truth, this Ghospell, this Diuinity is requisite and necessary for mans Saluation. This truth and Ghospell we only learne aright by the vertue of Faith, through which we firmly as∣sent to all such Doctrines as the prime Verity, God himselfe, doth reueale, and his holy Church doth propose vnto vs. A blessing so great, as that without it,Heb. 11.6.1. It is impossible to please God, and attayne Salua∣tion, in being the foundation of all such thinges, as are to be hoped, or expected. This faith as it is only gained by the free Guift of God, so is it only loste by Infidelity and Heresy, these being the opposites which destroy faith, and with which possibly she cannot subsist. And if it be most true that euery Heresy is a certaine Infidelity, and a true deniall of all faith; what shall we thinke of the Heresy of this vnfortunate Age, by which the integrity of faith is not only violated in one or other Article, or those of lesse moment and necessity (which yet by no meanes were to be tolerated, but by all Christian hartes to be detested and accursed) but generally in all as it were by an vniuersall deluge of Apostacy, euen in the pointes of greatest waight
concerning God, Christ, the Church, her Sacrifice and Sacramentes, Mans Iustification, Grace, Free∣will, the Commandments, & many other such lyke; All which with singular impiety are so depraued and impugned by the Sectaries of these dayes, as that their Endeauours may seeme to ayme, and to be wholly imployed, insteed of an Heresy, to introduce with g eatest boldnes, Madnes, and Malice, a gene∣rall Apostacy or Atheisme from the faith of Christ. The serious Consideration, and feeling Commi∣seration of this so great a mischiefe, I must confesse (worthy Reader) was the mayne Motiue for my vndertaking and compyling this Treatise following: for whilest I remembred, that without entyre diuine Faith, and true worship and Religion towards God, no Saluation was to be expected: and withall saw such innumerable Soules (so dearly bought by the precious Bloud and death of Christ our Lord, Soules also most deare to me in sundry other most iust res∣pectes) so continually to perish through the Infe∣ction of Heresy; I could not forbeare, but after my humble Prayers, adde also my poore and vnworthy labours, which if through Gods blessing, they may proue so effectuall, as to reduce any seduced Soule to the state of Saluation, I shall thinke them all most happily vndertaken, and ioyfully sustayned, and my selfe plentifully rewarded at the holy Hand of God. Now, that my writings might proue more plea∣sing, and powerfull with the Prot. Reader, whose Saluation I thirst▪ I haue purposely restrayned my selfe to that sole kind of Argument, which himselfe doth affect, and euer vrge, which is the sacred Scri∣ptures, or Written Word of God, to which he pro∣fesseth
in all Disputes to appeale, and in all Do∣ctrines to subscribe; esteeming, and making it his sole Rule, and Square, wherby to be directed in all points of faith and Religion necessary to Sauation. To this also for the present I likewise appeale, ma∣king this the subiect of my whole Discourse no∣thing doubting, but to make it appeare, and that most cleerly, that the Written Word, is our Catho∣licke Word, speaking and teaching ourRom. 1.8. Roman faith, so anciently renowmed in the whole world. And that it may be rightly obserued how diffe∣rent are the proceedings of Catholickes and Prote∣stantes, in the religious and sincere handling and v∣sing of this sacred Word, I desire briefly to giue a iust account, of the Method, and order which I haue prescribed to my selfe, and is generally obserued, throughout this whole Treatise. First then, seeing the true staring of the Matter in dispute, doth of it selfe often discouer the weak∣nes and falshood of a bad Cause, and therfore all Heretickes do fraudulently set downe the state of the Question, changing and peruerting the true mea∣ning therof, therby the better to hyde their owne Errors, & to traduce their Aduersaries; I haue ther∣fore in preuention herof, in the first place euer sta∣ted the Controuersy aright, shewing what the Ca∣tholicke Church doth teach and belieue as matter of faith, and this from her sacred Councels & ap∣proued Doctors: and what she permitteth her Schoo∣lemen to dispute as pointes indifferent, not defy∣ned by her Decrees: for with these I fynd our mo∣derne SectariesD. Mor∣ton, White, Featley. greatly to delude their Vulgar Readers, vrging these Schoole differences, as though
they were Differences in Articles, and Conclusions of faith, which to affirme, is a Grand Imposture, much frequented by D. Morton, who for want of better matter, storeth and stuffeth his writinges with toyes in this kind But not content with this, it is ordinary with Protestantes in their Sermons and Writings, most fowly to bely our Catholicke Cause, ascribing vnto vs infinite grosse, and most absurd opinions, which we vtterly detest and deryde: they intending by ma∣licious vntruthes to disgrace that, which with sound Argumentes they are not able to confute. I giue plentifull Examples of this bad dealing throughout this whole Booke. Hauing thus cleered our Catholicke Doctrine, I next set downe what Prot. teach concerning the point in Controuersy. In which I fynd them often at deadly wars amongst themselues, and that not for Points disputable and indifferent, but for the Chie∣fest Articles, and Conclusions of Faith, the true be∣liefe wherof is necessary to Saluation. In these their differences, I ordinarily set downe for Prot. Doctri∣ne, that which is most commonly taught by the En∣glish Prot. Church; or by such others, as are most re∣nowned amongst their Brethren, for their supposed Wisdome, and Learning. But in thus searching what their opinions are, I still obserue, and accordingly proue, that wherin they disagree from the Catholicke faith, therin they do agree with some Ancient Hereticke, formerly confuted, and condemned by Councels and Fathers. And not only this, but I fynd further, that they runne themselues vpon fundry grosse Errors, which
were not euen dreamed on by any former Heretikes, and which once admitted, would ineuitably inferre a generall Apostacy from the Christian faith. This is the Course which I generally vse for the true expres∣sion of the point in Controuersy; which point thus cleered, I addresse my selfe in the nexte place to such proofes for the Catholicke cause, as the sacred Scri∣ptures do plentifully affoard: from whence yet I on∣ly produce such textes, as being taken in their na∣tiue, simple, and literall signification, do speake most plainly for the Catholicke Truth. But because no∣thing can be spoken in termes so playne, but what the wit and malice of the Deuill and his Ministers will in some sorte depraue, inuenting for that end some Euasion or other, therby to weaken the force of the wordes being taken in their proper significa∣tion; I do therfore also take notice of these poore shiftes, and do further shew, that they are mere fan∣cyes, faigned and taught without all ground or co∣lour of truth, wholly impertinent, often ridiculous, and euer such, as with the like liberty, any Heresy though neuer so forlorne may easily be defended, & any Article of our Christian faith, though neuer so necessary, be dangerously impugned. But neither is this detorting of the wordes of Scripture from their proper meaning, the greatest iniury now adayes offered to the word of God: For Sectaries further proceed, when all other meanes faile them, most accursedly to corrupt the sacred wordes and sentences of Gods diuine word, adding wordes of their owne stamping to the holy textes, omitting, or taking away some of the sacred-words themselues, mistranslating wordes, making them to
speake thinges most different, and repugnant from their owne proper signification. And if all this will not serue their turne, through the euidence & fulnes of Scripture condemning their Errors, then they betake themselues to that last most desperate & dam∣nable Refuge, of that Atheisticall denying, or ma∣king Apocryphall whole entyre Bookes of holy Writ: which impious freedome, if it might be ad∣mitted, would shortly discharge the whole Canon of Scripture from any Scripture at all. But because it is another vsuall shifte vsed by Protestantes, to fly from the wordes to the sense, that neither they, nor we, as partiall Iudges, should giue sentence therof; I do therfore appeale for the fyn∣ding out of the true sense of the Scriptures to the In∣terpretations, and Expositions made by the Ancient Fathers, who liuing in the purest tymes of the Church, neighbouring vpon the Apostles, flouri∣shing in learning, shining in sanctity, and ignorant of our present Contentions, may in all reason be thought, & accepted for Iudges most competent, vn∣corrupt, and impartiall. Neither do I produce these as barely affirming what themselues thought or pra∣ctised, or spake in heat of disputation against their Aduersaries, but what they dogmatically taught in their Commentaries, Expositions, and Interpreta∣tions of the sacred Scriptures: or what is acknow∣ledged, confessed, and disliked in them by Prot. as making vnanswerably for our Catholicke faith, and strongly confuting, and condemning the Prot. Er∣rours. Neither do I wholly rest in this manner of proofe, though superabundant for my Cause: But
I likewise in greatest surplussage adioyne herunto, the aboundant Interpretations of Scriptures made by Prot. writers, most agreable to the former made by Fathers, and wholly confirming our Catholicke faith, and therin impugning their other Brethren who oppose against it. Now, if the Textes of sacred Scriptures, taken in their proper and literall sense, and the answerable Expositions made by the holy Fathers, and sundry of the learnedst Prot. writers, do all of them conspire in making that sense of Scri∣pture, which wholly agreeth with the doctrine and practise of the Catholicke Roman Church; I do not see what more can be required by any indifferent, & vnderstanding man, for the making it to appeare cleere, as the sunne at Noone day, that the Written Word of God is that which teacheth vs our Catho∣licke faith, and confuteth and condemneth such Er∣rours and heresyes as aryse against it. Lastly seeing, all this notwithstanding, Prot. do not desiste to obiect some darker passages of Scri∣pture against others most plaine, and for such con∣fessed by Fathers & Prot; I do therfore not forbeare to take notice of them, but withall do plainly shew, that the said textes taken in their literall sense, do nothing make against vs, and so most impertinent∣ly vrged; and being explayned by other plainer pla∣ces, do strongly make against themselues who vrge them. And if not the wordes but the sense, must be regarded, then I frequently alleadge both Fathers and Prot. so expounding the same, as that their Ex∣positions are full answers to what is obiected by o∣ther Prot. So weakely, and not at all, is Heresy truly grounded vpon the word of God.
This, Christian Reader, is the course obserued by me through this whole worke, which whether I be iudged duly to performe or no, I most willingly leaue to the dispassionate Censure of the Iudicious: who will easily herby perceiue, that Prot. pretending to fly to the Scriptures, as their only refuge, do ther∣in make flight to their mortall Enemy, who cutteth their throates. That which for my poore paynes at the handes of the good Reader I shall only request, is, that all former preiudicate opinion against Ca∣tholicke Religion set apart, and all base and vnwor∣thy feare of temporall losses in Honours, Estates, or Liberties couragiously shaken off, that he firmly be∣lieue, and constantly professe that only Faith, and Religion which Gods diuine Word doth teach, the holy Fathers do confirme, and sundry of the learnedst Prot do acknowledge for true: which doing, he shall gayne that faith, without which, according to the Apostle,Hebr. 11.6. It is impossible to please God. Which ac∣cording to S. Ambrose,In Ps. 40. Is the firme foundation of all vertues. According to S. Chrysostome,Ser. de fide, spe, & charit. The ori∣gine of Iustice, the head of Sanctity, the beginning of De∣uotion, the ground-worke of Religion. And according to S. Austine,Ser. de Temp. 38. The beginning of mans saluation, without which no man can come to the fellowship of the Sonnes of God: because without it, neither in this world can any man obtayne the Grace of Iustification, nor in the world to come shall possesse lyfe Eternall A fearefull Sentence, & much to be pondered by Infidels, and Heretickes, who are certainly deuoyd of this diuine Faith.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of the Chapters, and Sections con∣tained in this Booke. The Preparatiue to the Triple Cord. WHerin is proued the dignity and infallibility of the writ∣ten word of God, or sacred Scriptures: as also the neces∣sity of fynding out the true Sense intended by the Holy Ghost: with certaine infallible Rules for the fynding out of the said sense. Section 1. The true state of the Question concerning the verity of the sacred Scriptures. Whether the Scriptures cōtained in the Bible be the word of God himselfe, truly diuine & infallible, in euery least parcell, or Text therof? And therfore for such are by all the faithfull to be receyued, be∣lieued, and obeyed. pag. 1. Section 2. That the sacred Scriptures are the true Word, diuine, and infallible, the Scriptures themselues do testify. p. 3. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do teach and belieue the sacred Scriptures to be the true word of God, of diuine and infallible authority. p. 5. Section 4. That sundry Prot. do acknowledge the sacred Scriptures to be the word of God, of diuine and infallible Authority. p. 6. Section 5. That it is impious to corrupt, or reiect any part of Canonicall Scri∣pture. p. 7.
Section 6. The necessity of fynding out the true sense of the Scriptures. p. 9. Section 7. That the sacred Scriptures do admit seuerall, true, and different Senses but not contrary; as well Literall as Mysticall: and of the force of such Argumentes as are taken from any of the forsaid senses. p. 12. Section 8. Certaine Rules prescribed for the discerning of the simple literall sense from the figuratiue: and for the fynding out of the true sense in∣tended by the Holy Ghost. p. 15. Section 9. An Examination of such Rules as Prot. ordinarily prescribe and ob∣serue for the fynding out the true sense of the sacred Scriptures. p. 19. Section 10. That the Certaine and Infallible Rule, for the fynding out of the true sense of the Scriptures, is the Church of Christ. p. 21. Section 11. An Explanation of what we meane by the Church, when we say, that the true vnderstanding of the Scriptures, and the finall Decision of all Controuersies in Religion, is to be taken from the Church. p. 23. CHAP. I. Section 1. THe true state of the Question in Controuersy betwene Catho∣lickes and Protestantes concerning the Iudge of Controuersies in Matter of Religion consisteth is this: Whether besides the sacred Scriptures, any other infallible Autho∣rity and Iudge is to be acknowledged, by which the diuine faith, and the true sense of Scriptures may be proposed to the faithful, as reuealed by God, and to be belieued: And whether the said Authority and power of Iudging, be to be as∣cribed to the Church, to Generall Councels, and to the Fathers of the Primitiue Church? Or only to the sacred Scriptures themselues, or the Spirit of euery particular Man. p. 33.
Section 2. The sacred Scriptures cleerly teach, that we are to repaire to the Church of Christ, for the fynall decyding of Controuersies in Reli∣gion. p. 40. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholiks, in proofe of the Church being the Iudge of Controuer∣sies. p. 50. Section 4. That Prot. expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catho∣lickes in proofe of the Church being the iudge of Controuersies; And that sundry Protestants do teach, & defend the same Doctrine. p. 53. CHAP. II. Section 1. THe true State of the Question concerning the Churches Infalli∣bility, or not Erring. Whether the vniuersall Church of Christ can erre in defyning mat∣ters of Faith, and Manners: Or rather, that such her Decrees are al∣waies most true and infallible, and for such are to be belieued and ob∣serued by the faithfull. p. 62. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that the vniuersall Church of Christ, can∣not erre in matters of Faith and Manners. p. 65. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe, that the Church of Christ cannot erre. p. 73. Section 4. Protestant Writers teach, that the Church of Christ cannot erre in matters of faith. p. 75. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture in proofe, that the Church may erre in matters of faith, answered. p. 77.
CHAP. III. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the difficulty in vnder∣standing the sacred Scriptures. Whether the sacred Scriptures be so easy and plaine to be vnder∣stood, as that without the Explication of the Church, they are suffi∣cient to decyde and end all Controuersies of Faith: or rather in many places are very obscure, and difficult, euen to the learned. p. 82. Section 2. That the Scriptures are obscure, and hard to be vnderstood, it is proued by the Scriptures themselues. p. 83. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholickes, in proofe of the Scriptures obscurity, and diffi∣culty. p. 87. Section 4. That Protestantes expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Ca∣tholickes in proofe of the Scriptures obscurity: And that sundry Prot. de teach and defend the same Doctrine. p. 89. Section 5. That the Scriptures are obscure, it is further proued by sundry Rea∣sons. p. 92. Section 6. That the conference of one place of Scripture with another, doth neither make the Scriptures to be our Iudge of all Controuersies, nor alwaies easy to be vnderstood. p. 94. Section 7. An Examination of such Obiections as are vsually vrged by Prot. against the Scriptures Obscurity. p. 101. CHAP. IV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Interpretation of Scriptures and deciding Controuersie by the Priuate spirit of euery particular Man. p. 105.
Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that the said Scriptures are not made ea∣sy to be vnderstood, or our Iudge of all Controuersies, by the spirit re∣uealing to euery Priuate Man, the true sense, and determination therof. p. 107. Section 3. It is proued by the Ancient Fathers that the Priuate spirit is not a Iudge sufficient for the deciding of Controuersies, and interpreting the Scriptures. p. 111. Section 4. It is proued by Prot. that the Priuate Spirit is not our Iudge of Con∣trouersies. p. 112. Section 5. It is proued by Reason, that the Priuat spirit is not our Iudge of Controuersies. p. 113. Section 6. Obiections from Scripture for the Priuate spirit, answered. p. 115. CHAP. V. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Bookes of Scripture Canonicall or Apocryphall. Whether the Bookes of Toby, Iudith, Wisdome, Ecclesiasticus, and the first and second of Machabees, be Scriptures truly Canonicall, or Apocryphall. p. 121. Section 2. It is proued by sundry Reasons and Authorities, that the forsaid Bookes are truly Canonicall. p. 126. Section 3. That the Primitiue Church of Christ, and the Councells therin celebrated, haue admitted, and approued for Canonicall, the for∣said Bookes of Ecclesiasticus, Wisdome, Toby, Iudith, Macha∣bees &c. p. 131. Section 4. That Protestantes themselues do defend the forsaid Bookes. p. 134.
Section 5. Sundry Octiections produced against the forsaid Bookes, ans∣wered. p. 135. CHAP. VI. Section 1: THe true state of the Question, concerning the Translations of the Bible. Whether the Translation of the sacred Scriptures, ordinarily called the Old Vulgar Latin Translation, be to be vsed and preferred before all Translations made by Protestantes. p. 141. Section 2. It is proued by sundry Argumentes, that the Vulgar Latin Transla∣tion of the Bible, is to be preferred before all Translations made by Protestantes. p. 144. Section 3. Obiections against the Vulgar Translation, answered. p. 150. CHAP. VII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Traditions. Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, or written word of God, there be not another word of God, not written, which is called Traditions: And whether their Authority be certaine and infallible, in deciding matters of Faith. p. 152. Section 2. It is proued by the sacred Scriptures, that besides themselues, or the written word, there are certaine Traditions of the Church, or word of God, not written, which we are bound likewise to belieue, and ob∣serue. p. 156. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures in proofe of vnwritten Traditions. p. 169.
Section 4. That the learnedst Protestantes are inforced to acknowledge and be∣lieue our Catholicke Doctrine of Traditions. p. 170. Section 5. Obiections against Traditions taken from Scriptures, answe∣red. p. 176. CHAP. VIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning S. Peters Primacy. Whether Christ our Sauiour ordained S. Peter supreme Head or Pastour, not only of the Apostles, but of the vniuersall Church. p. 181. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that S. Peter was appointed by Christ the Supreme head, not only of the Apostles, but of the vniuersall Church. p. 184. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Ca∣tholickes, in proofe of S. Peters Primacy. p. 198. Section 4. That Prot. also do agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of S. Pe∣ters Primacy. p. 204. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against S. Peters Primacy, answered. p. 207 CHAP. IX. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Bishop of Rome his Primacy in matters Ecclesiasticall. Whether the Primacy giuen by Christ to S. Peter, was giuen also to his successors: And whether the Bishops of Rome be the said succes∣sors. p. 210. Section 2. It is proued from Scriptures and Reason, that the Primacy giuen to S. Peter was giuen also to his Successors: and that the Bishops of Rome are the said successors. p. 215.
Section 3. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe of the Bishop of Rome his succeeding S. Peter in the Primacy of the whole Church. p. 218. Section 4. That sundry of the learnedst Prot. do acknowledge, and teach the Primacy of the Roman Bishop. p. 220. Section 5. Obiections taken from Scripture against the Popes Primacy, ans∣wered. p. 223. CHAP. X. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Antichrist. Whether Antichrist be yet come; and whether the Bishop of Rome, can be said to be Antichrist. p. 225. Section 2. It is proued by the Scriptures that Antichrist is not yet come: and that the Bishop of Rome, cannot be said to be Antichrist. p. 228. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catho∣lickes, in proofe that the Pope cannot be Antichrist. p. 236. Section 4. That Prot. agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of the Pope not being Antichrist. p. 239. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, that the Pope is Antichrist, answe∣red. p. 241. CHAP. XI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Euangelical Counsailes, and the state of Perfection. Whether there be Euangelicall Counsailes, or workes of superero∣gation,
which if they be obserued or done, they are good and commen∣dable; if omitted, not sinfull: or whether all thinges that are good be commanded by God, and the omission of them be sinfull. p. 244. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that there are Euangelicall Counsailes, or workes of supererogation, which if they be obserued or done, they are commendable and meritorious, if omitted, not sinfull. p. 247. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures answerably with Catholickes in proofe of Euangelicall Counsatles, and workes of Supererogation, and Perfection. p. 253. Section 4. That Prot. do agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of Euangeli∣call Counsailes, and workes of Supererogation. p. 257. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, against Euangelicall Counsailes, are answered. p. 260. CHAP. XII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Vowes proposed. Whether the Vowes of workes of Perfection, as Pouerty, Cha∣stity, and Obedience, be lawfull, and commendable now in the law of Grace. p. 263. Section 2. It is proued from the Scriptures, that the forsaid vowes of Perfection are lawfull and commendable. p. 266. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the forsaid Scriptures in proofe of the vowes of Pouerty, Chastity and the like. p. 271. Section 4. That Prot. defend with Catholickes the vowes of Pouerty Chastity, and the like: And that they confirme the same from the sacred Scri∣ptures. p. 275. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against the vowes of Pouerty, Chastity, and the like, answered. p. 277.
CHAP. XIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Marriage of Priestes. Whether the vow of Chastity be so annexed to holy Orders, that af∣ter Ordination they who are Consecrated, can neither marry, nor vse their wyues formerly marryed. p. 286. Section 2. It is gathered from the Scriptures, that the vow of Chastity is rightly annexed to holy Orders. p. 289. Section 3. The Fathers do gather from the Scriptures, that the vow of Cha∣stity is rightly annexed to holy Orders. p. 290. Section 4. That Prot. teach the vow of Chastity to be rightly annexed to holy Orders. p. 292. Section 5. Obiections from Scriptures against the vow of Chastity in Priests, answered. p. 293. CHAP. XIV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Christ his descending into Hell Whether Christ our Sauiour truly descended in Soule into Hell, and there redeemed those who were in Abrahams bosome, or Limbus: Or that by hell should only be vnderstood his Graue, or his suffering the paines of Hell. p. 299. Section 2. It is proued by Scripture, that Christ our Sauiour truly descended is soule into hell: And there redeemed those who were in Abrahams Bosome, or Limous. p. 303.
Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do agreably expound the Scriptures in proofe of Christes descending into hell, and his deliuering of the Iust in Captiuity. p. 306. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach the descending of Christ into Hell, and the deliuery from thence of the Iust that were in Captiuity. p. 309. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against Christes descending into Hell. answered. p. 311. CHAP. XV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. Whether besides heauen and hell after this lyfe there be a place of Purgatory wherin the soules of the faithfull are temporally punished for their sinnes committed in their lyfe tyme: and whether they may be relieued by the Sacrifices, prayers, and almes of their liuing friends: Or otherwise that instantly after death, euery soule either immediatly as∣cendeth into heauen, or descendeth into hell. p. 313. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that after this lyfe there is a place of Purgatory: and that therin the soules of the faithfull may be relieued by the Sacrifices, Prayers, and other spirituall helpes of their liuing friendes. p. 317. Section 3. The ancient Fathers expound the forsaid Scriptures agreably with Catholickes, in proofe of Purgatory, and Prayer for the read. p. 327. Section 4. Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead taught, and belieued by Prot. themselues. p. 331. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, against Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, answered. p. 333.
CHAP. XVI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Intercession, and Inuocation of Angels and Saintes. Whether the Angels and Saintes in Heauen, do pray for men vpon Earth. And whether we may lawfully pray to them as Intercissors to God for vs: or whether the said Angels, and Saintes do heare our Prayers or know thinges done vpon Earth, and their Intercession be not a derogaion from Christes Mediation. p. 338. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that the Angels and Saintes in heauen, do know our Prayers vpon Earth, and that they pray for vs, and we may lawfully pray vnto them, as Intercessors for vs. p. 343. Section 3. Scriptures expounded by most Ancient Fathers, in proofe of the In∣tercession of Angels and Saints, and that we may lawfully inuocate them. p. 355. Section 4. That Prot. do agreably teach with Catholickes, that the Angells and Saints in heauen do heare our prayers, do pray for vs in particular: and that we may lawfully pray to them. p. 359. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, against Inuocation of Angels & Saints, answered. p. 364. CHAP. XVII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the vse and reuerence to be exited o Images of Christ and his Saints. Whether it be lawfull to make the Images of Christ and his Saints, to place them in Churches and to exhte any honour or reuerence vnto them: or that all his is Superstition and Idolatry, contraty to the Com∣mandement of God. p. 372.
Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that it is lawfull to make the Images of Christ and his Saintes, to place them in Churches, and to exhibite ho∣nour, or reuerence vnto them. p. 375. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures for the lawfull vse of Images, and Religious Reuerence done vnto them, agreably with Catholickes, p. 387. Section 4. That Protestant writers do acknowledge and allow the vse of I∣mages in Churches: and that due honour may be exhibited vnto them. p. 390. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture vrged by Protestantes against the law∣full vse of Images, answered. p. 393. CHAP. XVIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Sacramentes of the New law conferring grace. Whether the Sacraments of the New law do truly conferre Grace to the worthy receiuer, as Gods Instrumentall Causes: or that they are only signes and remembrances of Grace receiued by faith. p. 396. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that the Sacramentes of the New law do truly conferre grace to the worthy receiuer. p. 403. Section 3. Reasons in proofe that the Sacramentes do conferre Grace. p. 405. Section 4. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholickes, in proofe of the Sacramentes conferring Grace. p. 408. Section 5. That the learnedst Prot. do agreably with Catholickes teach, that the Sacramentes of the New Law do conferre Grace to the worthy re∣ceiuer. p. 413.
Section 6. Obiections from Scripture, in proofe that the Sacramentes do not conferre Grace, answered. p. 416. CHAP. XIX. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the number of the Sa∣cramentes. Whether there be seauen Sacramentes Instituted by Christ our Sa∣uiour: to wit, Baptisme, Confirmation, Euchariste, Pennance, Ex∣treme Vnction, Order, and Matrimony: or only two, Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper. p. 418. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that there are seauen Sacramentes insti∣tuted by Christ our Sauiour. p. 424. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers agreably with Catholickes belieued and taught that there were seauen Sacramentes of the New law. p. 428. Section 4. Prot. Writers do teach, and confesse the number of seauen Sacra∣mentes agreably with Catholickes. p. 432. Section 5. Contayning certaine Reasons, or congruences establishing the num∣ber of seauen Sacramentes. p. 435. Section 6. Contayning certaine Obiections had from Scriptures against the number of seauen Sacramentes, with Answeres therto. p. 440. CHAP. XX. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the necessity of Bap∣tisme.
Whether the Sacrament of Baptisme, or the desire therof, be not absolutely necessary to Saluation, not only because it is commanded by Christ, but because it is a meanes necessary therto: so that Children dying without Baptisme, cannot be saued. p. 442. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that Baptisme is necessary to Salua∣tion. p. 447. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptures in proofe of the necessity of Baptisme. p. 452. Section 4. That Protestant Writers do teach and defend the Catholicke Do∣ctrine of the Necessity of Baptisme. p. 455. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, against the necessity of Baptisme, ans∣wered. p. 457. CHAP. XXI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the B. Sacrament of Christes Body and Bloud. Whether in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, vnder the formes of Bread and wine, there be truly and really, and not only in signe, figure, or representation, contayned the very Body and Bloud of Christ our Sauiour, which was borne of the B. Virgin Mary, and afterwards crucified. p. 462. Section 2. Wherin is inquired what Prot. vnderstand by receyuing spiritually, or by faith? p. 473. Section 3. The Reall Presence of Christes Body & Bloud in the Sacrament, is proued by testimonies of Scripture taken frō the Old Testament. p. 479 Section 4. That the Scriptures of the New Testament conuince our forsaid Ca∣tholicke
Reall Presence of Christes Body, and Bloud in the Eucha∣rist. p. 482. Section 5. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of our Catholicke Doctrine of the Reall Presence, and Transubstantia∣tion. p. 498. Section 6. That Prot. Writers do teach and belieue from Scriptures, the reall Presence of Christes Body, and Bloud in the Eucharist. p. 511. Section 7. Obiections taken from the Scriptures, in disproofe of the reall Presence, answered. p. 515. Section 8. Obiections against the possibility of the Reall Presence, answe∣red. p. 521. Section 9. Obiections against the reall Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Eucharist, in regard of certaine pretended indignities therupon ensuing, answered. p. 532. Section 10. The forsaid truth of the reall Presence of Christes Body, and Bloud in the B. Sacrament, is further proued by cleere and confessed miracles, wrought by God in testimonie therof. p. 534. CHAP. XXII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Communion of the Laity, vnder one, or both kindes. Whether vnder either kind of the Eucharist, the Body and Bloud of Christ our Sauiour are truly contayned, and the true Essence of the Sacrament preserued; and consequently whether it be lawfull to admi∣nister the Sacrament only vnder one kind to the Laity: or that Christ hath commanded both kindes to be administred vnto them. p. 537. Section 2. That vnder either kind is contayned whole Christ, to wit, Body,
Bloud, Soule and Diuinity: As also the true essence of the Sacra∣ment. p. 542. Section 3. That Christ our Sauiour gaue no commend of receyuing vnder both kindes, it is proued by the sacred Scriptures, and by his owne, and his blessed Apostles examples. p. 544. Section 4. That Communion vnder one, or both kindes being a thing indiffe∣rent the Church might lawfully determine the same: And of the reasons that moued the Church in limitation therof. p. 547. Section 5. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in confirma∣tion of the lawfulnes of the Administration of the B. Sacrament vnder one kind. p. 552. Section 6. That Prot. Writers do belieue and teach the lawfull vse of Admini∣string the Eucharist vnder one kind to the Laity. p. 553. Section 7. Obiections from Scripture, against Communion of the Eucharist vnder one kind by the Laity, answered. p. 554. CHAP. XXIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Sacrifice of the Masse. Wheher Christ our Sauiour did institute a true, proper, and exter∣nall Sacrifice of his Body and Bloud, to be offered vp in his Church, in Commemoration of his death and Passion. p. 562. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that our Sauiour instituted a true, proper, and externall Sacrifice of his Body and Bloud, to be offered vp in his Church to God in Commemoration of his death and Passion. p. 567. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Ca∣tholickes, in confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Masse. p. 579.
Section 4. That sundry Prot. do teach and allow a true and externall Sacrifice in the tyme of the New Testament, euen the Sacrifice of the Masse. pag 587. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against the Sacrifice of the Masse, ans∣wered. p. 590. CHAP. XXIV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the Power giuen by Christ to Priests for the forgiuenes of sinnes: and the necessity of Confession. Whether Christ our Sauiour gaue to his Apostles, and in them to Bishops, and Priests, true authority to forgiue and retayne Sinnes in the Sacrament of Pennance: or only to declare Sinnes to be forgiuen to those that do belieue: and whether Confession of Sinnes in the sayd Sacrament, be necessary. p. 595. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that Christ gaue to his Apostles and in them to Byshops and Priests, true authority to forgiue, and retayne Sinnes in the Sacrament of Pennance: And that Confession of sinnes is necessary. p. 601. Section 3. That the ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures for the autho∣rity of Priests to forgiue sinnes; and the necessity of Confession. And that Pennance is truly a Sacrament. p. 606. Sction 4. That Protestant writers do teach, that Priests haue authority to retayne or to forgiue Sinnes: and that Confession of Sinnes in parti∣cular, is to be made to Priests: And that Pennance is truly a Sacra∣ment. p. 610. Section 5. Obiections from Sripture agaynst the Power giuen by Christ to Priest, for the remitting of sinnes, answered. p. 614.
CHAP. XXV. Section 1. THe true State of the Question, concerning punishment to be suf∣fered after Remission of the fault. Whether the fault of Sinne being pardoned by the Sacrament of Pennance, the Punishment due to Sinne is also alwayes pardoned ther∣with: or whether the sayd punishment is not afterwards to be payd, or satisfyed by Prayer, fasting, and Almes, and the paynes in Purga∣tory. p. 616. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that temporall punishment often remay∣neth to be payd after the fault is remitted: and that the sayd punish∣ment may be taken away by the good workes of prayer, fasting, Almes, and the like. p. 620. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of Punishment remayning after the fault pardoned: And that the sayd Punishment is payd by workes of Pennace. p. 624. Section 4. That Protestants do agree with Catholickes in teaching that Pu∣nishment after remayneth to be payd for Sinne, the fault being remit∣ted: and that the same Punishment may be satisfyed by good workes. p. 626. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture to proue that the punishment is alwaies remitted with the fault, answered. p. 628.
CHAP. XXVI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning Indulgences. Whether the Church of Christ hath authority to grant Indul∣gences, or Pardons for the temporall punishment due to sinne, the fault being formerly pardoned by the Sacrament of Pennance. p. 630. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that the Church hath authority to grant Indulgences, or Pardons for the temporall Punishment due to sinne, af∣ter the fault is forgiuen. p. 635. Section 3. That the ancient Fathers do agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of Indulgences. p. 640. Section 4. Protestant writers teaching Indulgences. p. 641. Section 5. Obiections against Indulgences, answered. p. 642. CHAP. XXVII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning prescribed dayes for fa∣sting and Abstinence from certaine meates. Whether certaine daies prescribed by the Church for Fasting: As al∣so Abstinence at some tymes from certaine meates, be things lawfull, and to be obseued vnder sinne: or rather that they are to be lefte free according to euery mans Deuotion, and liking. p. 645. Section 2. It is proued by the Scriptures, that daies prescribed by the Church for fasting: As also Abstinence at some tymes from certaine meates be thinges lawfull, and to be obserued. p. 648.
Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of the lawful Abstinence from certaine meates, and the appointed daies for Fa∣sting. p. 650. Section 4. That sundry Prot. writers do teach our Catholicke Doctrine of Ab∣stinence from certaine meates vpon prescribed daies. p. 652. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against Abstinence from certaine meates, and Prescript fasting daies, answered. p. 635. CHAP. XXVIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Concupiscence. Whether Concupiscence, remayning after Baptisme, is truly and properly sinne, though not imputed to the faithfull: or only that it is an Effect of Originall sinne: and corruption of nature inclyning men to sinne. p. 657. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that Concupiscence remayning after Baptisme, is not truly and properly sinne. p. 659. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe that Concu∣piscence remayning after Baptisme is not properly sinne. p. 661. Section 4. That Prot. writers do teach that Concupiscence without consent is not properly sinne. p. 663. Section 5. Obiections taken from Scripture in proofe that Concupiscence it properly sinne, answered. p. 663.
CHAP. XXIX. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the distinction of sinne into Mortall and Veniall. Whether all sinnes be of their owne nature mortall and damnable; and only veniall in the Elect by Gods not imputation: or rather that there be some Mortall others Veniall, which of their owne nature do not deserue Eternall Punishment, euen in the wicked, and Repro∣bate. p. 666. Section 2. It is proued by Scripture, that all sinnes are not of their owne na∣ture Mortall, but some Mortall, some Veniall. p. 669. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of the diffe∣rence betwene Mortall and Veniall sinnes, p. 672. Section 4. That Protestantes teach the true difference of Mortall, and Veniall sinnes. p. 674. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against the difference of Mortall and Ve∣niall sinne, are answered. p. 676. CHAP. XXX. Section 1. THe true state of the Question concerning the Author and Cause of sinne. Whether God doth, will decree, predestinate counsaile, or compell men to sinne, & to be damned, or only permitteth the same; and that
man himselfe is Cause of his owne sinne and damnation: and whether Christ dyed for all men, or only for the Predestinate. p. 678. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that God doth not Predestinate, will, de∣cree, counsaile, or compell men to sinne or to be damned, but only per∣mitteth the same: And that Christ dyed not only for the Predestinate, but for all men whatsoeuer. p. 683. Section 3. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe, that God doth not will, or command sinne: And that Christ dyed for all. p. 687. Section 4. That Prot. writers do teach the same doctrine with Catholickes, against God being the Author of sinne, or damnation. p. 689. Section 5. Reasons to proue that God doth not will, command, or inforce men to sinne, or to be damned but that he only permitteth the same. p. 692. Section 6. Obiections from Scripture in proofe that God is the Author of sinne, and decreeth the sinne or damnation of man, answered. p. 696. CHAP. XXXI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Freewill. Whether man after Adams fall hath Freewill with Gods Grace, to do such things as belong to Saluation, and not to do them: or
whether the will concurreth only as a naturall Instrument of God, and not as a free Cause. p. 705. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that man after Adams fall, hath freewill with Gods Grace, to do good, and eschew euill. p. 709. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures agreably with Catho∣lickes, in proofe of Freewill. p. 714. Section 4. That sundry Prot. Writers do teach, and defend our Catholicke do∣ctrine of Freewill. p 717. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against Freewill, answered. p. 718. CHAP. XXXII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the possibility of kee∣ping Gods Commandements. Whether the Commandements of God, through his holy Grace, though not by the only power of freewill, are possible to be kept by iust men in this lyfe: or rather that they are so impossible, that in euery worke that men do, they transgrsse them. p. 721. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that the Commandements of God through his holy Grace are possible to be kept by man in this lyfe. p. 726.
Section 3. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe that the Comman∣dements are possible to be kept. p. 729. Section 4. Protestants teach, that the Commandementes of God are possible to be kept. p. 731. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture in proofe, that it is impossible to keep Gods Commandements, answered. p. 732. CHAP. XXXIII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the best workes of the Iust being Sinne. Whether all the workes of the Iust, euen the best, are in themselues and of their owne nature truly sinnes, and deseruing damnation: Or rather, that they are truly and properly iust and good. p. 733. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that all the workes of the Iust are not sinne, nor deseruing damnation. p. 735. Section 3. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe that the works of the iust are truly good, and not sinne. p. 737. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach that the workes of the iust are truly good, and not sinne. p. 738.
Section 5. Obiections from Scripture, in proofe that the workes of the iust are truly sinne, answered. p. 739. CHAP. XXXIV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the infallible know∣ledge of our Predestination and Saluation. Whether man in this world without speciall Reuelation from God, can haue Infallible knowledge of his present Iustification, Predestina∣tion, and Eternall Saluation: In so much, that euery one is bound as firmly to belieue his owne Saluation as he doth the Articles of his Creed: Or only that in this world a morall certainty can be had therof: And whether true Faith and Iustice once had, may be lost. p. 741. Section 2. It is proued by Scripture, that man in this world without special Reuelation from God cannot haue infallible knowledge of his present Iustification, Predestination, and eternall Saluation: And that true faith and iustice once had, may be lost. p. 745. Section 3. The sacred Scriptures expounded by the Fathers agreably with Ca∣tholicks in proofe of our vncertainty of our Predestination and Salua∣tion: as also in proofe that faith & iustice once had, may be lost. p. 751. Section 4. That sundry Prot. do teach from the sacred Scriptures the vncer∣tainty of our Predestination and Saluation: and that faith and iustice once had, may be lost. p. 753.
Section 5. Obiections from Scripture in proofe of our certainty of Predestina∣tion, and Saluation, and that faith and Iustice cannot be lost, answe∣red. p. 755. CHAP. XXXV. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning the formall Cause of Iustification. Whether the formall cause of Mans Iustification is any vertue or grace infused by God, and inherent in the soule. Or that it consisteth only in Christs not imputation of sinne; or in the only remission of sinne, without any infusion of grace. p. 762. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures that the formall cause of mans Iustifica∣tion is true vertue and Grace inherent: and that it doth not consist only in Christs not imputation of sinne, or in the only remission of sinne. p. 766. Section 3. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of inherent Iustice. p. 768. Section 4. That Prot. Writers do teach the doctrine of inherent Iustice. p. 769. Section 5. Obiections from Scripture against inherent Iustice, answered. p. 770.
CHAP. XXXVI. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Iustification by Faith and Workes. Whether man is truly iustifyed by faith only, or that Hope, Charity, and good workes, are likewise causes of Iustification. p. 772. Section 2. It is proued by the sacred Scriptures, that not only faith, but like∣wise Hope, Charity, and other good Works do truly iustify, and cause remission of sinne. p. 775. Section 3. The Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures in proofe of Iustifica∣tion not only by faith, but likewise by workes: As also that true faith may be without workes. p. 781. Section 4. That sundry Prot. do teach our doctrine of Iustification by workes, and not only by faith. p. 783. Section 5. Obiections taken from Scripture in proofe of Iustification by only faith, and not by workes, answered. p. 784.
CHAP. XXXVII. Section 1. THe true state of the Question, concerning Merit of Workes. Whether Workes proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory. p. 788. Section 2. It is proued by Scriptures, that workes proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory. p. 792. Section 3. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of merit of workes. p. 793. Section 4. That Protestant writers teach our Catholicke Doctrine of merit of workes. p. 797. Section 5. Obiections from Scriptures against merit of Workes, answered, p. 798.
A PREPARATIVE TO THE TRIPLE CORD. WHEREIN Is proued the Dignity & Infallibility of the written Word of God, or Sacred Scriptures: As also the necessity of finding out their true sense intended by the Holy Ghost: With certaine infallible Rules for the finding out of the sayd Sense. SECT. I. The true State of the Question, concerning the verity of the Sacred Scriptures. Whether the Scriptures contained in the Bible be the word of God him∣selfe truly Diuine and Infallible in euery least parcell or text ther∣of? And therefore for such are by all the faythfull to be receaued, belieued, and obeyed. Catholike Doctrine. SACRED Scripture being a princi∣pall ground of Christian fayth and Re∣ligion, the dignity and infallible truth thereof must necessarily be acknowled∣ged; and therfore the Catholike ChurchConc Trid sess. 4. Decret. de Canonicis Scripturis. Receaueth and honoureth with like affect ō of Piety and reuerence all the bookes as well of
the Old as New Testament, seeing one God is Authour of both &c. The Councell Senonense decreeth, thatDecret. 4. Great hath been & euer is to be the Authority of sacred Scripture, in which nothing can be false, nothing idle. Our Catholike Doctours teach, thatRhem. Test. in Gal. 6. The Scriptures which are indeed wholly of the holy Ghosts indyting, be∣ing put to the Churches tryall, are found proued, and testifyed vnto the world to be such, and not made true, altered, and amended by the same. Without which attestation of the Church, the holy Scriptures in themselues, were alwayes true before, but not so knowne to be to all Christians, nor they so bound to take them. Cardinall Bellarmine proueth seuerall wayes, that theDe verbo Dei l. 1. c. 2. Canonicall Bookes of Scripture are the word of God. So that according to Ca∣tholikes, there is not any one Sentence or text of Scripture which we are not bound to belieue for most true & diuine. Protestant Doctrine. Some Prot.Harm. of Confess. p. 1. belieue & confesse the Canonicall Scriptures of the holy Prophets, and Apostles of both Testaments, to be the very true word of God &c. And theyIbid. pag. 3 detest all the heresies of Artemon, the Manichees, Valentinians, of Cerdon, and the Marcionistes, who de∣nyed that the Scriptures proceeded from the holy Ghost, or els receaued not, or &c. corrupted some of them. Others of more sublimated spirits do so little esteeme of the written Word, that they affirme theSee heer∣after Chap. 1. Sect. 1. fig 53. Old Testament and the New to be contrary and to fight altogeather. Others vtterly reiectLuth. tom. 3. VVittemb. in Psalm. 45. f. 423. 422. & tom. 3. Ger. f. 40. 41. Moyses and his writings, as being (as they conceit) in the sight of God either Idolatry, or Hipocriticall wisdome. OthersSwingl. tom. 2. cont. Anabap. f. 10. charge the Anabaptistes with ignorance, for that they thinke the Commentaries of the Euangelists, and the Epistles of the Apostles, to haue bene then in Authority, when Paul did write these things, as though Paul did attribute so much to his Epistles, that whatsoeuer was contained in them was sacred &c. Which thing (sayth Swinglius) were to attribute immoderate arrogancy to the Apostle.VVhi∣tak. de Eccl. cont. Bel. Con∣trou. 2. q 4. pag. 213. Fulke ag. the Rhem. Test. in Gal. 2. f. 322. Others condemne S. Peter to haue erred in matters of fayth, euen after the Holy Ghostes descending vpon the Apostles. But these things once admitted, how then can we be secure that the Euange∣listes and Apotles were the Scribes of the holy Ghost, and erred not also in their writings?
And if it be true which D. Fulke sayth,In Confut. of Purgat. p. 214. Whosoeuer de∣nieth the authority of the holy Scriptures, therby bewraieth himselfe to be an hereticke; what is then to be thought of Luther, Whita∣ker, Swinglius, Fulke himselfe, and sundry other Prote∣stantes, who thus impudently detract from the authority of Moyses, the Euangelistes, the Apostles, and their writings. SECT. II. That the sacred Scriptures are the true word of God, diuine & infallible, the Scriptures themselues do testify. I Do not intend these proofes from Scriptures with any expectation that they should be approued by such as re∣iect their authority, relying only vpon their priuate Spi∣rits, but only in this regard, that the world may know, that we Catholikes do so highly esteeme them for diuine and infallible, as whatsoeuer is spoken, taught, or to be read ther∣in, we in all Disputes and Controuersies of Religion, do humbly submit our selues to the doctrine thereof. First then we belieue that the Author of the Scriptures, is only God himselfe, dictating them to his Prophets, Euan∣gelistes, and Apostles, as his Scribes; of whom S. Peter affir∣meth that,2. Pet. 1.21. The holy men of God spake, inspired with the Holy Ghost. And S. Paul affirmeth that,2. Tim. 3.16. All Scripture inspired by God is profitable to teach &c. Agreably to which the Prophets were said to be the mouth of our Lord:Isa. 1.20. The mouth of our Lord hath Spoken.Luc. 1.70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the beginning.Heb. 1.1. In tymes past God speaking to the Fathers in the Prophets, last of all in these dayes hath spoken to vs in his Son. This speach whether vttered by the Prophets, or by Christ himselfe, is here said to proceed from God, as the first Au∣thor. And so God is said to speake by the mouth of man, & the Prophets and other sacred writers by the mouth of God. And wheras Moises writeth thatExod. 9.16. God said to Pharao, S. Paul elating the same thing writeth that, TheRom. 9.17. Scripture sayth to harao: so mking Gods speaking and the Scriptures spea∣ing all one. And to the same purpose speaketh S. Paul of
himselfe,2. Cor. 13.3. Seeke you an experiment of him, that speaketh in me, Christ? Yea the selfe same vvritings are said to be written by God, & by Moises. So God said to Moises.Exod. 34.1. Deut. 10.1.2.4. Cut thee two ta∣bles of stone like vnto the former, and I will write vpon them the words which the tables had, which thou hast broken.Deut 10.4. And he wrote in the tables according as he had written before, the 10. wordes. And yetExod. 34.27.28. our Lord said to Moises, write thou these words &c. And he wrote in the Tables the words of the Couenant, ten. Now how could the Tables of the law be said to be written by God & by Moi∣ses, but that Moises as a schollar did hould the pen, and God as maister did direct, that so all that writing might be as∣cribed to Moises as the Instrument, and to God as the chiefe author. A further proofe heer of may be taken from the frequent practise of the holy men of God, who vsually confirmed their callings, as also the Doctrine which they wrote or preached by testimonies of the Scripture. So S. Iohn Bap∣tiste alleadged the Prophet I say as a witnesse of his Embas∣sage, for being asked who he was, he answered,Io. 1.23. Esa. 40.3. I am the voyce of one crying in the desert, make straight the way of our Lord, as I say the Prophet said. The Apostles Peter, Paul, Iohn, Iames, Iude, in all their Epistles do frequently alleadge the testi∣monies of the law and Prophets. Yea Christ himselfe first of all confirmed his owne Embassage by testimony of the Prophet Esay saying,Luc. 4.18. Esa. 61.1. The spirit of the Lord vpon me, for which he annointed me &c. He confuteth the Saduces out of the Scriptures, when he said,Mar. 12.24.26. Do you not therfore erre, not knowing the Scriptures? And a little after, As concerning the dead that they do ryse againe, haue you not read in the booke of Moises &c? Finally heMat. 22.43. Psal 109.1. confuteth the Pharisees by the testimony of Dauid, and directeth them thus,Io. 5.39. Search the Scriptures for you thinke in them to haue life Euerlasting, and the same are they that giue testimony of me. This alleadging of the Scriptures by the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himselfe in proofe of their Callings and Doctrine, doth cleerly suppose their di∣uine infallibility.
SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do teach and belieue the Scred Scriptures to be the true word of God, of diuine, and in∣fallible Authoritie. THE Ancient Fathers teach, that the sacred Scriptures are Letters, or Epistles sent from God to man. So S. Chriso∣stome,Hm. 2. in Gen. God from the beginning spoke with man by himself for so he came to Adam so he blamed Cain, so he spoke with Noë, so he lodged with Abrahā. But after all mankind had degenerated into great malice, nei∣ther then did the maker of all withdraw himselfe wholly from man∣kind but willing to renew his friendship with them, he sent letters as to men absent, to reconcile vnto him all men, and these Letters God gaue, but Moises brought them. S. Austine affirmeth that,In Ps. 90. Letters came to vs from that Citie (to wit Heauen) where we are Stran∣gers: they are the Scriptures, which do exhort vs to liue well. And a∣gaine,Ser. 16. ad frat. in Ere∣mo. The diuine Scriptures, are as Letters sent to vs from our Country. Because our King more pious and mercifull then can be thought or spoken, hath vouchsafed to send vnto vs by Patriarches and Prophetes the diuine inuiting Scriptures by which he would inuite vs to our eternall Country.L 4. E∣pist. Ep. 84. What is sacred Scripture (saith S. Gre∣gory) but a certaine Epistle of Almighty God to his Creature? S. Austine teacheth, that Christ God and manDe ciuit. Dei. l. 11. c 3. Spoke first by the Prophets, then by himselfe, after by the Apostles as much as he iudged sufficient: yea he made a writing (or Scripture) which is called Canonicall, of most eminent Authority which we belieue of these things, which it is not expedient to be ignorant of, nor are able of our selues to know. And writing to S. Hierome,Ep. 19. I acknowledge (saith he) to thy Charity that I haue learned to giue that feare and honour to those bookes onely of the Scriptures, which are now called Ca∣nonicall, that I most firmely belieue no Author of them to haue erred any thing in writing. And if I shall find any thing in those writings, which seemeth contrary to truth, I will nothing doubt, but that either the Book is corrupted, or that the Interpreter hath not conceiued what is spoken, or that my selfe doth not vnderstand it. So Religious a respect did S. Austine beare to the Scriptures. Yea he con∣stantly
auoucheth that,De doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 37. faith it selfe will stragger, if the autho∣rity of diuine Scriptures do not stand sure. In which respect pre∣fering it before all the writings of men, he further saith:De Bapt. Cont. Don. l. 2. c. 3. Who knoweth not, that the holy Canonicall Scripture as well of the old as new Testament is contained in its owne certaine Bounds, and that the same is so to be preferred before all the later writings of Bi∣shopes, that no doubt or disputation may be had thereof, whether it be true or right whatsoeuer shall appeare to be written therin. Thus S. Austine, and thus all Catholikes at this day. SECT. IV. That Sundry Protestants doe acknowledge the sacred Scrip∣tures to be the word of God, of diuine and infallible au∣thority. MAny Protestāts seeme to giue so much credit vnto the sacred Scriptures, as that they pretend to belieue no∣thing for certaine, but the holy Scriptures only. So M. Wil∣let teacheth that,Synop. p. 38 The Scripture is not one of the meanes, but the sole, whole, and only meanes to worke faith. And agreably our English Church hath decred that theArt. 6, Holy scripture cōtaineth all things necessary to Saluation: So that whatsoeuer is not read ther∣in, nor may be proued therby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be belieued as an Article of the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Saluation. The Heluetian reformed Church ordai∣neth that,In the Harm of Confess p. 4. In controuersies of Religion or matters of faith, we cannot admit any other Iudge then God himselfe, pronouncing by the holy Scriptures what is true, what is false, what is to be followed, or what to be auoyded. And againe,Ibid. p. 5. The Canonicall Scripture being she word of God, and deliuered by the holy Ghoste, and publi∣shed to the world by the Prophets and Apostles, being of all other the most perfect and ancient Philosophy, doth alone perfectly containe all Piety &c.In the Harm. pa. 6. The Bohemiā Ministers reach with one cōsent, cōcerning the holy Scriptures of the new & old Testament, which is cō∣monly called the Byble &c. that it is true, certaine, and worthy to be belieued &c It is inspired and taught of the holy Ghost, and vttered by the mouth of holy men, written by them, and confirmed by heauenly
and diuine testimonies &c.Ib. p. 7. Wherfore euery one ought very highly to esteeme of the diuine writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles re∣solutely to belieue them, and religiously to yield vnto them in all things. The French Protest. auouch,Harm. pa. 8. 9. That God reueiled himselfe &c. farre more plainly in his word: which word in the begining he reueiled to the fathers by certaine visions and Oracles, and then caused it to be written in these Bookes we call holy Scripture. All this holy Scripture is contayned in the Canonicall Bookes of the old and new Testament. And then making the Catalogue therof, they say, we acknow∣ledge these Bookes to be Canonicall, that is, we account them as the Rule and square of our faith &c. and we belieue that the Word con∣tained in these bookes, came from one God &c. The Prot. of Bel∣giaHarm pa. 10. confesse that, this word of God was not brought or deliuered by any will of man but that holy men of God inspired by Gods spirit spake it as S. Peter witnesseth &c. And theyIb p. 11. without any doubt belieue also those things, which are contained in them &c. As also that this holy Scripture doth most perfectly contayne the will of God, and that in it all things are abundantly taught, whatsoeuer is necessary to be belieued of man to attaine saluation. The Prot. of Wittemberge say,Ib. p. 13. This Scripture we belieue and confesse to be the Oracle of the Holy Ghost, so confirmed by heauenly Testimonies, that if an Angel from heauen preach any other thing, let him be accursed. The Prot. of Scotland decree thus:Harm. p. 19. As we belieue and confesse the Scrip∣tures of God sufficient to instruct, and make the man of God prefect; so doe we affirme and auow the authority of the same to be of God, and neither to depend on men or Angels. In regard of these premisses and sundry other such like acknowledgments, D Fulke in∣ferreth and concludeth as before, thatAgainst Purgat. pag. 214. whosoeuer denyeth the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, therby bewraieth himselfe to be an heretike. And in this truth all Catholikes doe accord with D. Fulke. SECT. V. That it is impious to corrupt, or reiect any part of Canonicall Scripture. ALL sides agree, that it is most impious to corrupt the wordes, or true sense of Scripture, by adding, or sub∣tracting,
mistranslating, or false interpreting; this being, as S. Paul saith,2. Cor. 4 2. to adulterate the word of God: and these Corrup∣ters according to Origen, are,In Rom. 2. Theeues and adulterers of the Scriptures. And S. Cyprian calleth them,De vnit. Eccl. nu. 7. false Interpreters, artficers. & craftsmaisters in corrupting the truth. The ancēt He∣retikes were obserued by theIren. l 1. c. 1. Fathers, to be often guilty of this haynous crime, but none more frequently & palpably then our moderne Prot. haue offended herin, as will cleerly appeare vpon sundry occasions in this Treatise following. But this they haue learned from their first Father Martin Lu∣ther, to whom Swinglius said,Swingl. tom 2. ad Luth l. de Sa∣cram. p. 412. 413. Thou dost corrupt the word of God, thou art seene to be a manifest and common corrupter and per∣uerter of the holy Seriptures: how much are we ashamed of thee, who haue hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, & now proue thee to be such a man. Wheras on the other side, for speciall reuerence & sincerity of dealing in those matters, the Fathers and Catho∣like expositors are those whom S. Paul styleth2. Tim. 2.15. Right hand∣lers of the word of truth: These making Conscience and estee∣ming it most sacrilegious to corrupt, alter, adde, or subtract the least word or sillable indited by the holy Ghost, & writ∣ten in the booke of God. It is no lesse criminall to deny or reiect the sacred Scrip∣tures when they seeme to make against them: which S. Hie∣rome obserueth to be the custome of ancient heretikes, who,In Proaem, Comment. in ep ad Tit. whatsoeuer they saw contrary to their opinion, they either scraped out, or reiected the whole. Or, as S. Austine saith of them.L. 18 cont. Faust. Man. c 7. That which doth not hinder their heresy, that they receiue: but tha which hindreth, that they reeeiue not. So the Manichees denyed all the old Testament, and many parts of the new, as S. AustineHaer. 46. & cont. Faust. l. 3. & 81. witnesseth; the Nicolaires and Gnostikes discarded cut of the Canon the Psalter, as PhilastriusL. de hae∣res c. 117. testifieth. The Ebi∣onites plainly reiected the Ghospell of S. Mathew, as S. E∣piphaniusHaer. 30. recordeth: AndL. 3. c. 21. according to Eusebius, they made smal account of the rest of the Ghospels. Marcion receiued only the Ghospell of S. Luke, as TertullianL de Praescrip. Iren. l 1. c. 29. and Irenaeus auouch: And the same maimed in aboue 20. places,Haer. 42. as S. Epiphanius proueth, and confuteth. The Alo∣gians contemned the Ghospell of S. Iohn, and the Apoca∣lyps,
witnesse Epiphanius.Haer 51. The Seuerians admitted not the Actes of the Apostles, as EusebiusL. 4. c. 27. declareth, & the same affirmeth S. AustineL. de vti∣lit. cred c. 2. of the Manichees. The Ebionites re∣iected all the Epistles of S. Paul, as witnesse S. IrenaeusL. 1. c. 26. Epiph. haer. 30. and S. Epiphanius. Now that our moderne Prot. doe no little of∣fend in this kind of reiecting the Scriptures, whē they seeme to make against them, I shall sundry wayes make cleere, in thisSee hereafter. subsequent Treatise. SECT. VI. The necessity of finding out the true Sense of the sacred Scriptures. SEeing all things naturally desire that which is good, and the mind cannot incline to any euill, which may with∣draw the vnderstanding or the will frō that which is right, vnles it be vnder the pretext and colour of that which is true & good; euen as the Deuill to deceyue men,2. Cor. 11. doth trans∣figure himselfe into an Angell of light: So in matter of faith, no∣thing being more true thē the sacred Scriptures, all heretikes vnder the specious title of the Scriptures, do deceiue others and are deceiued themselues. Now because falshood cannot receiue proofe from truth, and Scripture rightly vnderstood can produce or nourish no errour; therfore from Scriptures falsely vnderstood doe all Heretikes defend themselues and their cause. But against this fraud Christ himselfe forwarneth vs,Mat. 7.15. to take great heede of false Prophets, which come in the cloa∣thing of sheep, but inwardly are rauening wolues. This cloathing of sheep are the words of the Prophets and Apostles, pre∣tended by heretikes, but inwardly, that is, in the Sense of the words, they are reuening wolues and robbers of Soules. To which purpose saith most excellently the eloquent Vin∣cent,L. Cont. proph. haer. Nouitates. c. 36. what is the cloathing of sheep, but the sentences of Prophets and Apostles? Who are the rauening wolues, but the wild and rauenous senses of heretiks, who alwaies trouble the foulds of the Church, and teare in peaces the flocke of Christ by what meanes they can? But that they may more deceiptfully steale vpon the vnwary sheepe, the cruelty of wolues remayning, they cast of the shape of wolues, and wrappe
thēselues within the sentences of Gods law, as within certaine fleeces of sheep. In like sort wheras our Sauiour biddeth vs not to be∣lieue false Prophets who wil cry,Mat. 24.23. Lo heer is Christ, or there, old Origen expoundeth this of heretikes detorting the Scrip∣tures:In Mat. hom. 29 He that would deceiue vs saith, Behold heere is Christ, shew∣ing for example this place of the Gospell: but the Author of another error will say, Behold Christ is heere, offering for example another text. So that the text of Scripture is made to serue the turne of all he∣retiks, though neuer so opposite one to another: Euery one, as S. Peter saith,2. Pet. 3.16. deprauing the Scriptures to their owne perdi∣tion. Tract. 18. in Ioan.In this respect it is, that the sacred Scriptures are said to be the bookes of Hereticks. Heresies (saith S. Austine) and cer∣taine opinions insnaring the soules of the peruerse, and plunging them into the depth (of Errour) haue no other roote but when Scriptures are not well vnderstood, and what is not wel vnderstood in them, is al∣so rashly and audaciously defended. Yea,De Gen. & lit. l. 7. c. 9. They are Heretickes for no other cause, but because not rightly vnderstanding the Scriptu∣res, they obstinatly maintaine their false opinions, against the truth of them. And according to S. Hilary,L. 2. de Trinit. & l. de Synodis extremo. Heresy is (or aryseth) of the vnderstanding not of the Scripture (it selfe,) the fault is in the sense, not in the wordes. And then naming diuers Heretickes, he sayth, they all speake Scriptures without sense, they all pretend fayth, without faith: for the Scriptures are not in the reading, but in the vnderstanding. Agreably to which, Christ our Lord repro∣ued the Sadduces in these words:Mat. 22.29. You do erre, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Sadduces did read the texte of Scriptue, but therfore they are said to erre, because they did not know, that is, they did not vnderstand the Scri∣pture: teaching therby that the cause of Error, is the not right vnderstanding, although we haue the wordes vpon our fingers ends. S. IrenaeusL. 1. c. 1. disputing against heretickes auoucheth that their monstrous Doctrines and phantasies of opinion, are wholly framed of Scriptures not well ioyned together; As If a man should breake asunder the Kings Image made of precious stones, and changing the figure, should make ther∣of Foxes & Lions, and by reason of the identity of the mat∣ter,
should endeauour to persuade the simple, that this is the true Image of the king: such like monsters make Heretickes of the word of God it selfe. This is so certaine a truth, that D. Luther himselfe auoucheth that,In Postil. VVitt. in 2. con. 8. Dom. post Trinit. fol. 118. It is true that the sa∣cred Scripture is the booke of Heretickes, because Heretickes are ac∣customed to prouoke to that booke: neither did there aryse at any time any Heresy so pestiferous, and so foolish, which did not endeauour to hyde it selfe vnder the veile of Scripture. That then, which importeth for the final and Infallible deciding of Controuersies arysing from the Scripture, is to fynd out the true sense therof intended by the holy Ghost: to which all parties will professe without any tergiuersa∣tion to yield and subscribe. And so prescribed S. Hierome,In Com∣ment. ad Gal. 1. Let vs not thinke (sayth he) that the Ghospel is in the wordes of Scripture but in the sense, not in the superficies, but in the marrow, not in the leaues of words, but in the roote of reason. Againe,In c 1. ad Gal. Ep. ad Nepot. & in l. 3. reg. c. 1. Then the Scripture is profitable to the hearers, when it is not expoun∣ded without Christ (that is to say, not contrary to the Rule of faith de∣liuered by Christ to his Church &c.) otherwise the Diuel which allead∣geth Scriptures, and all heretickes (according to Ezechiel) of Scrip∣tures make Cushions which they may put vnder the elbow of men of all ages. Wherfore S. Austine aduiseth wel,Ep. 221. Loue exceedingly the vnderstanding, because the Scriptures themselues, except they be rightly vnderstood, cannot be profitable vnto thee. Tertullian telleth vs,De Eraescript. c. 17. That the sense of holy Scripture adulterated, doth impugne the truth, as much as the style corrupted. And answerably herun∣to Prot. themselues teach, thatRai∣nolds in his Confer. p. 68. It is not the shew, but the sense of words (of Scripture) that must decyde controuersies. Now how this true sense is to be found without all Error and de∣ceipt, these few Sections next following will cleerly dis∣couer.
SECT. VII. That the sacred Scriptures do admit seuerall true and dif∣ferent senses, but not contrary, as wel Literall as Mysti∣call: & of the force of such Arguments as are taken from any of the forsaid senses. SAint GregoryL. 21. mor. c. 1. teacheth that, It is a thing proper to the sacred Scriptures, hauing God for their Author, to be of that fecundity, as to affoard seueral true senses, in one & the same sentence, as the literall or historical, and the spi∣ritual or mystical. The literal is that which the words of themselues do immediatly beare: the spiritual relateth to some thing else, then that which the words do immediatly signify. The literal againe is twofold, the one simple or plaine, which consisteth in the propriety of wordes: the o∣ther figuratiue, wherby the wordes are transferred from their natiue signification to another: and of this there be so many kinds, as there are seueral kinds of figures. The spi∣ritual sense also is deuided into Allegoricall, Tropologi∣call, and Anagogical. Now of these senses, the literall is found to be in euery Text both of the Old and New Te∣stament: And though the Spiritual be often to be had in both Testaments, yet not in euery sentence of both. So those wordes, Thou shalt loue thy Lord thy God with all thy hart, haue but one sense, and that is Literal. These things supposed, that which may seeme somwhat questionable, is, whether one Text of Scripture may admit seuerall true & different Senses, either literal or spiritual? In which though I fyndFulk ag. Purg. pa. 151. Wil. in Sy∣nop. p. 26. D. Fulke and M. Willet to hold the Negatiue; yet S. AustineL. 12. Confess. c. 20. & 23. 27. 31. l. 3. de doct. Christ. c. 27. l. 11. de Ciu. Dei. c. 19. proueth by many examples, that in one sentence may often be found seueral true literall senses. And further sayth,L. 12. Confess. c. 31. When one shal say, Moyses meant that which I do, and another, nay that which I do; I thinke I speake more religiously, why not rather both, if both be true? Or if any third or fourth, or any other truth any man shall see in these wordes; why may not he be thought to haue seene all those truthes, by whom God, to those that see
true and diuerse things, hath tempered the Scriptures with many senses? In another place he affirmeth, that such is the Scri∣ptures obscurity, thatDe Ciu. Det. l. 11. c. 19. It bringeth forth diuers senses of truth &c. whiles one vnderstandeth it after this manner, another after that.L. 12. Conf. 1. & de Gn. ad lit. l. 1. c 21. de doct. Chr. l. 1. c. 36. de Ciu. Dei. l. 15 c. 16, de vtil. cred. c. 3. Yea one text of Scripture may wel haue so many vnder∣standings, as may stand with truth, and be not repugnant to lyfe and good māners. And the like he teacheth in sundry other places. And indeed it is the general Doctrine of the Anciēt Fathers. A truth so euident that sundry Prot. writers do teach the same. Zanchius auoucheth that,De Sacra Script. fol. 421. 424. 425. Besydes the literal Sense, the Allegorical sense is often needful: to which are reduced the Anago∣gical, and Tropological, or Moral sense; and that these are deliuered from the Holy Ghost:Orig. in Gen. ho 11. Greg. Mo. l. 20. c. 1. Chri∣sost. ho 21 in Gen. Fulg. l. 2. Cad Mo∣nim. c. 14. Lyra. in Da∣niel. c 8. and are sometymes collected as pertayning to fayth or to manners, and according to the mynd of the Holy Ghost. The Translatour of the Bible into English published Anno 1576. speaking of the diuersity of Translations, sayth,Ep. to the Bre∣thren of Engl. Scot. and Irel. &c. Seeing some Translations read after one sort, and some after another, wheras all may serue to good purpose and edification, we haue in the Margent noted that diuersity of speach or reading, which may also seeme agreable to the mynd of the Holy Ghost. Aretius thinketh,Loc. com. loc. 59. fol. 187. As concerning the variable Exposition of Scripture, it is light which they (the Anabaptistes) do obiect: for they ought to consider that the Guiftes in the Church be diuerse, namly in Interpretation, wherin whiles the Rule of fayth and sincerity be obserued, there is no cause why the diuersity of opinions should hurt. And somewhat be∣fore he sayth,Ibid. fol. 177. Concerning the variable interpretation (of the Scriptures) I affirme euery one to enioy their seueral Guift, and do somtymes profitably vary: And that so long as it is not erred from the scope of fayth, we ought not to be offended with the diuersity of Inter∣pretation. But to alleadge many witnesses in one, the Prot. of Geneua in their Principles of diuinity propounded and disputed by certaine Students there, vnder M. Theodore Beza, and M. Anthony Faius, and by them published, affirme and reach that,L. 52. fol. 149. The Scripture is so plentiful, that one and the selfesame place can admit d uers Interpretations, and yet all agreable with the Doctrine of fayth. So that both Scriptures, Fathers, and Prot. do all teach this Catholicke Doctrine, that the wordes and sentences of Scripture do contayne in them seuerall diffe∣rent
Expositions and vnderstandings, and yet all true, and intended by the Holy Ghost. The next thing to be examined, is, which of these Sen∣ses do affoard a forcible Argument for the establishing any truth in matter of fayth and Religion. And first it cannot be denyed, that a firme Argument may be taken from any sense, litterall or mysticall, so long as it appeareth that Sense to be true and intended by the holy Ghost: But because it is most difficult to know and discerne when these mysticall & spirituall senses are true, and so intended by the holy Ghost, therefore ordinarily speaking, arguments drawne from this Sense are weake, vncertayne, and not sufficient absolutely to determine a Point of fayth. And so it is generally taught by Diuines, that, Theologia Symbolica non est argumentatiua, symbolicall or mysticall Diuinity doth not yield a strong Argument: which truth they haue learned from S. Denis in his Epistle to Titus. And S. Austine demaundethEp. 43. who but mest im∣pudently will endeauour to interprete by himselfe any thing that is Al∣legoricall, vnles he haue most manifest testimonies by whose light ob∣scure things may be illustrated. And with him agreeth S. Hie∣rome teachingIn. c. 1. Mat. That neuer can Parables and doubtfull vnder∣standings of riddles (or hard questions) profit to the Authority of Decrees. And the reason of this is, because the mysticall and spirituall Senses are many; and although they may edify, when they are not agaynst fayth or good manners, yet it doth not alwayes appeare, that they were intended by the holy Ghost: whereforeEp. 48. ad Vincent. S. Austine deseruedly derideth the Donatistes, who from these words mystically interpre∣ted, Shew me where thou feedest, where thou lyest in the noone day? did gather that the Church of Christ did only remayne in Affrick. Seeing then a good Argument cannot ordinarily be framed from the mysticall or spirituall Sense; Let vs now see what authority beareth the Litterall: In which, it is our generall doctrine, that seeing it is certayne, that Sense which is immediatly gathered from the wordes to be Sense of the holy Ghost, that therfore from the literal sense are we to take Arguments that will be efficacious: And so accordingly
Chemnitius concludeth, from seueral sayings of S. IrenaeusL. 2. c. 47. thatExam. part. 1. fol. 74. 48. That is the sound sense, and which is without danger, which plainely and without ambiguity is set downe in the Scripture in the same words. That then which is necessary to be knowne, is, how infailibly to find out the true Literall Sense frō whēce Arguments of force may be taken, & truly to discerne when and wherein it differeth from the figuratiue. SECT. VIII. Certaine Rules prescribed for the discerning of the simple Literall Sense from the figuratiue. And for the finding out of the true sense intended by the Holy Ghost. VVE find by dayly experience that often doubtes do arise cōcerning the very literall sense of Scripture: And this sometimes through the ambiguity of words, as where it is said, Drinke ye all of this; heeresome think it vncer∣taine whether the word, All, signifieth all men without ex∣ception, or only all the faithfull, or only all the Apostles. Sometimes the doubtes arise through the propriety of words: for seeing the literall sense (as hath bene said) is som∣times simple, and sometimes figuratiue, it is doubtfull in many places whether the true sense be proper and simple, or figuratiue. All Catholikes vnderstand these words, This is my Body, simply and plainely, according to propriety of the words: Protestāts expound them figuratiuely. Through this difficulty some haue fallen into grieuous errors, as Origen, takingHier. ep. ad Pamah. the words of Scripture figuratiuely, when they should haue bene taken simply. And on the contrary, Pa∣pias,Hier. Praefat. l 18. in Isa. &. in c. 36. Ezech. Aug. l 20. de Ciu Dei. c. 7. Tertullian, and others, by taking the words proper∣ly, when they should haue bene taken figuratiuely. For the auoyding therfore of these extremes, S. Austine giueth vs this good Rule.L. 3 de Doct. Christ. c. 10. Whatsoeuer can neither be referred to the honesty of manners, nor the truth of faith, that is to be taken fi∣guratiuely and Metaphorically. Againe,b. c. 6. If any speach of Scrip∣ture be commanding as forbidding sinne, or commanding Beneficence, then it is to be taken properly: But if it should seeme to command
sinne, or forbid Beneficence, it is a figurative speach. The 2. Rule giuē by S. Austine is,De vnit. Eccl c. 16. & cont. lit Pet. c. 5. &c. 16. that obscure & doub∣full places may not be vrged against those which are more plaine, but are to be vnderstood & expounded by them. This is so reasonable, that Chemnitius accepteth of it for good, saying;Exam. part. 1. fol. 48. 74. et. part. 3. fol. 49. We affirme that obscure places of Scripture are not to be expounded against that opinion which is expressed in plaine and euident places of Scripture. And he alledgeth S. Hierome to teach, thatExam. part. 3. fol. 127. doctrine may not be gathered out of obscure, doubtfull, aenigmaticall, and allegoricall places of Scriptures. In regard where∣of, that figuratiue layings afford no certaine proofe or Argu∣ment in matters of faith, it is taught by most Protestants, asChem. Ex. part. 3. pag. 127. Aret. loc com loc. 51. p 162. & loc. 81. p. 261. Wil. in Syn. p. 27. Oecol. l. ep. Oecol. & Swingl. l. 1 p. 223. Lub. de Princip. p. 409. Down. of Antich. p. 169. Chemnitius, Aretius, M. Willet, Oecolampadius, Lub∣bertus, and M. Downham, who affirmeth it to be a Rule in Diuinity, that, Theologia Symbolica non est argumentatiua. A third Rule is, that the wordes of Scripture are euer to be taken in their playne, proper, and litterall sense, and not to be changed into figures, vnles that Sense be contra∣ry to other plainer places of Scripture, or make against some knowne Article of fayth, or be opposite to the common Ex∣plication of the whole Church, or inferre some absurdity. This is also acknowledged by Protestāts: for D. Bilson affir∣meth it toIn his true Differ. fol. 568. Be rightly sayd, that, in the Scriptures so long as the letter may possibly be true, and not agaynst fayth and good manners, we may not fly to figures. Chemnitius thinketh that,Era. part. 2. fol. 71. when the Holy Ghost would haue any sentence in the Scriptures to be vn∣derstood otherwise then as the wordes do simply and properly signify, he plainly expresseth and sheweth so much, eyther in the same or some o∣ther place. M. HookerEccl. Pol l. 5. Ser. 59. p. 130. holdeth it for a most infallible Rule in Exposition of Scripture, that where a Litterall construction will stand, the furthest from the Letter is commonly the worst. And the very same is taught byAgainst the Plea of the Inno∣cent. pa 194. D. Couell. And this with great reason, for if those textes of Scripture which being literally taken, are not directly against any other playner Scripture or Arti∣cle of faith, may be peruerted and turned into Tropes and figures, then as Melancthon well obserueth,L. Ep. Oe col. & Swingl. ep. ad Prider. Mi∣con p. 645. All things may be peruerted: Yea faith it selfe will perish, and all diuine Mysteries depend only vpon opinion, and so the way laid
open to infinite errours. A fourth Rule approued by Catholikes & Protestants is this: that, when the Scripture doth specially instruct vs in the Doctrine of the Holy Sacraments, in the institution or publishing of Gods peculiar Commandements, or in any principall Article of faith, then that sense is to be holden good, for proofe of which the words are most plaine and li∣terall. But for the right vnderstanding of this, it is to be ob∣serued, that although our Sauiour in his ordinary Exhorta∣tion or preaching to the people, which did imply a Cōman∣dement, did sometimes to stirre them vp to greater attētion, remember them in figuratiue words of some generall duty or Commandment, not then first prescribed, but formerly knowne and commanded; yet the first promulgation of euery peculiar Commandement is euer deliuered in words plaine, not figuratiue or obscure. And as touching doctrines, it is not meant hereby, that euery sentence or opinion con∣cerning God is euer to be vnderstood according to the literall words, but onely that such as comprehend in them a speciall difficulty or necessity for vs to beleiue, or practise; such as are the Articles of our faith, which are set downe and deli∣uered in plaine words, and so to be vnderstood. Wherefore such examples of God being a Consuming fire, of Christ being a stone, a lyon, a vyne, a doore, and the like, are of another na∣ture, not importing any principle or Article of faith or do∣ctrine. Againe, in the secluding of Tropes and figures, it is not intended that euery figuratiue locution should be secluded, but onely such as is obscure and darke, for there be some which are in themselues no lesse easie and manifest then the other: As for example to say, The Cup is shed, Euery one knoweth (as BezaIn Mat. 26.28. cōfesseth) that thereby is meāt not the Cup it selfe, but the thing contayned in the Cup. And this, and such like are sometimes vsuall, but yet their sense is knowne and manifest. This Rule thus vnderstood, is acknowledged by Prote∣stants to be good: so Vrsinus prescribeth that,Com∣ment. Catech. fol. 416. Articles of faith ought to be vnderstood properly, vnles some Article so taken proper∣ly,
do disagree with other places of Scripture. Whitaker teacheth that,De Sa∣cra Script. fol. 391 395. Although in the words (of Scriptures) many things be ob∣scure, and in many places, yet all Articles of faith are manifest. Chē∣nitius affirmeth that,Ex. part. 1. fol. 48. The Scripture when it deliuereth do∣ctrine or Commandements, to be certaine, & nothing obscure. Melan∣cton discoursing of this matter cōfesseth that,L. de ve∣rit. Corp. & sing Domi∣ni, and see L. Epist. Oecol. & Swingl. fol. 132. 140. And Confess. Aug. tract. de Euchar. Although the phrase of Scripture be full of figures in narratiō of things done, yet saith he, If in the Commandements or Doctrines which containe the nature or will of God, we goe about to doe the like, what shall f, ollow, learned men may easily iudge. Whereupon he concludeth that in Do∣ctrines of faith, the Scriptures ought to be taken properly, as the words do vsually signifie, vnles therby, An absurdity doe light vpon other plainer places of Scripture: Which if it doe, then, saith he, It is to be redressed by the benefite of figures: But if the Ab∣surdity light only vpon reason, and not vpon the Scripture, then, as he teacheth, must the word of God be preferred before the Iudgment of reason. And he further auoucheth that It is needfull that the meaning of those places be certaine, from whence Doctrine, or Articles (of faith) be taken: otherwise saith he, when the rite of Circum∣cision was instituted, it had bene lawfull for Abraham to haue ima∣gined some other thing then that which the words signifie: And, a sub∣tile man might haue disputed, a thing (seeming) so ridiculous, to be in no sort commanded of God: But (thereby only) to be signified, that lusts were to be restrained and bridled. Thus fully Philip Me∣lancthon. Lastly Carion thinketh it needfull,Chron. p. 237. that in the Articles of faith, in themorall law, and in the Promise of Grace, that we be restrayned with the natiue signification of the words. And as this Rule standeth good for the vnderstanding of such Scriptures as instruct vs in the Institution of Sacramen∣tes and Commandementes, and in the necessary Article of fayth: So also may it serue for the fynding out of the true sense of any other Text, in which the vsuall and Literal sense is euer true; if so the said sense make not against some other plainer places of Scripture, or be contrary to some Article of fayth, or opposite to the general vnderstanding of the Church, or therwith it inferre some grosse and plaine absurdity. These Rules prescribed and approued both by Catholickes and Prot. if they likewise be obserued in the
Exposition of the Scriptures, they wil certainly discouer the literal sense from the figuratiue, and therby preuent Prot. of their frequent flying to figures, when they are conuinced by the Letter. SECT. IX. An Examination of such Rules as Prot. ordinarily pre∣scribe, and obserue for fynding out of the true Sense of the sacred Scriptures. THe first Rule that I fynd to be vsed and taught by Mo∣derne Sectaries, for the fynding out of the true Sense & meaning of the Scriptures, is the Scripture it selfe.Harm. of Conf p. 5. The Interpretation wherof (say they) is to be taken only from herselfe, that herselfe may be the Interpreter of herselfe &c. And,Ib. p. 3. We ac∣knowledge that Interpretation of Scriptures for authentical and pro∣per, which being taken from the Scriptures themselues &c. accor∣deth with the Rule of faith & Charity. YeaIb. p. 14. the true meaning of the Scripture is to be sought in the Scripture it selfe, and among those, that being raysed vp by the Spirit of God, expound Scripture by Scri∣ture. This Rule to be most imperfect and false, I proue at largeSee hereafter. heerafter; for the present, M. Hooker shall confute it, a∣uouching that,Eccl. Pol, l. 2. pa. 116. The Scripture could not teach vs the things that are of God, vnles we did credit mē, who haue taught vs, that the words of Scripture doe signifie these things. And seeing, as D. Whitakers cōfessethDe sacra Script. pag. 521. the Scripture hath no liuely voyce which we may heare, but is a thing without all life: It is impossible to imagine that her selfe alone can make knowne to her Readers, the true vnderstanding of so many and so difficult passages as are contayned in her. Others perceyuing the insufficiency of this, doe giue for their Rule, not the Scripture it selfe sole, and alone, but asWhitak. de Eccles. Contr. 2 q. 4. p. 221. & de script. pag. 521. it is diligently read, conferred one place with another, the Circumstances weighed, and much prayer vsed. But these studies and Conferences are but humane endeauours, and such wherein euery man, without extraordinary Priui∣ledge from God, is subiect to error, ouersight, and mans in∣firmity,
all his prayer and possible diligence notwithstan∣ding: and therefore cannot make and infallible Rule, as shalbe further sundry waies euicted, in thisSee hereafter. Treatise following. Onely I will now obserue what D. Whita∣kers, who prescrybed the foresaid Rule, as the best meanes of Interpretation, thinketh of it himselfe.De Eccl. Controu. 2. q. 4 p. 221. Such as the meanes are (saith he) such of necessitie must be the Interpretation: but the meanes of interpreting darke places, are vncertaine, doubtfull, and am∣biguous, therefore it cannot be but that the Interpretation also must be vncertaine, but if vncertaine, then it may be false &c. So confes∣sedly false is the foresaid Rule. The last Rule then, which indeed they chiefly rely vpon, is the interpretation made by the Holy Ghost, and giuen as they imagine, to euery Priuate man. So D. Whitaker af∣firmeth euen of such as are ignorant in tongues, that,De sacra Script. p. 127. They acknowledge and allow the Doctrine, being instructed by the Holy Ghost. But Lubbertus saith more plainely that,De Prin∣cipijs &c. p. 573. God hath giuen to euery faithfull person, not only the Spirit of vnderstanding, but also of discerning false Dostrine from true. Yea say Brentius & D. Whyte,Brent. Prolog. Cont. Petr. Sot. Whit. in the way to the Church. pa. 6. 27. As the priuate man hath priuate Authority of Iudging and decyding Doctrine of Religion, so the Prince hath Publike. But though it be most true, that the Scriptures are to be vnder∣stood by the same spirit by which they were written, and giuen vnto vs, to wit, the Holy Ghost, and that by the Holy Ghost the Guift of Interpretation is sometimes giuen to particular men: yet that neither the said guift is giuen to euery one of the faithfull, nor they to whom it is giuē, with∣out speciall Reuelation, can infallibly be assured thereof; & much lesse can it giue any assurance to others of the right expounding of Scripture or decyding any Controuersie, as I shal at large declare herafterSee hereafter.. In the meane time, it is not vnworthy of obseruation, that Protestants appointing these Rules for the finding out of the true sense of Scripture, doe thereby intend no other, but to make themselues, euen e∣uery Priuate man, to be absolute Iudge and Interpreter of the sense of the Scripture: and so to exempt themselues from all other Interpretations, though made by Auncient Fathers, Generall Councels, and the vniuersall Church.
SECT. X. That the certaine and Infallible Rule, for the fynding out of the true Sense of the Scriptures, is the Church of Christ. ALthough Prot. ordinarily professe that theyHarm. of Confess. p. 3. Do not acknowledge that, which they call the meaning of the Church of Rome, for the true and natural Interpretation of the Scriptures: Yet the Church of Christ in General Councel hath Decreed that,Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. No man dare to Interprete the sacred Scripture contrary to that Sense, which the Holy Mother the Church hath and doth hold, to whom it belongeth to Iudge of the true Sense and Interpretation of holy Scriptures. And this with greatest reason, for if the Church hath power from Christ to discerne the word of God from the wordes of men as shalbe cleerly prouedSee hereafter. hereafter, doubtles she hath the like power of discerning in the words the sense and meaning of God, from the sense and vnderstanding of men, both these being committed to the Church, that the may faithfully preserue them, and giue them to others, to wit, the true Scriptures and true vnder∣standing therof. This God promised to his Church by the Prophet Esay in these wordes,Isa. 59.21. My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, sayth our Lord, from this present and for euer. Which is also confirmed by Christ our Sauiour promisingIo. 14.16.17. The spirit of truth, which should abyde for euer, and shouldIo. 16.13. teach all truth And indeed seeing the true Ghospel of God, doth not consist in the writings or words, but in the sense; if the Church had only the written word, and not the true sense therof, she had not the true Ghospel of God, and so neither faith in Christ which is had by the true Ghospel; Fayth ha∣uing relation not to the words but to the sense. Wherefore Hretickes and Deuils though they can alledge Scriptures, yet not hauing the true sense, they haue not a true, but a false & Diabolical Ghospel.
Besydes Christ openedLuc. 14.45. (the Apostles) vnderstanding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures, which certainly he did not for them alone, but much more for his Church: and so ac∣cordingly the Apostles deliuered to the Church the true sense of them: for if they had deliuered the wordes and not the sense, they had not preached the Ghospel, nor taught all Nations to keep all things that were cōmanded to them by Christ. What preaching or doctrine would that be, which were deliuered without the meaning? certainly no other then of Children, or Parrots who can giue the sound of wordes without the sense. Lastly, seeing the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth; and truth properly and truly is in the vnderstanding of the Scriptures, not in the writings or words, but improperly & as in a signe; it euidently followeth, that she hath a certaine knowledge of the truths which are contayned in the Scrip∣tures. This truth is so certaine, that S. Austine for the true vnderstanding of the Scriptures, directeth all men to the Church, saying,L. 1. Cont. Cres∣con. c. 33. The truth of Scriptures is holden by vs, when we doe that which now hath pleased the vniuersall Church, which the authority of the same Scriptures doth commend, that seeing the holy Scripture cannot deceyue, whosoeuer feareth to be deceiued by the ob∣scurity of this question, let him take Coūsaile therof from the Church, which without any ambiguity the holy Scripture doth demōstrate. But to omit sundry other Fathers very cleare for thh purpose, many of the learnedst Protestants teach the same Doctrine, as I shallSee hereafter. shew hereafter: onely for the present, heare what D. Whitaker saith to Dureus his Catholike Aduersary,Cont. Dur. l. 2. fol. 134. Thou dost affirme that to be the sense of the word, which the Ca∣tholike Church hath receiued frō the Holy Ghost; I confesse so much for the Church is taught the true sense of Scripture from the Holy Ghost: she is the keeper of faith, the ground and Pillar of truth. So confes∣sed and cleare it is that the true and vndoubted sense and In∣terpretation of Scriptures, is to be learned from the Catho∣like Church. Wherefore all Catholiks in their Disputes, Ser∣mons, and Comments vpon the Scripture, doe euer place this as a sure ground and vndeniable Principle, that the true
and sincere sense of the Scriptures, is to be taken from the Interpretation of the Catholike Church. SECT. XI. An explication of what we meane by the Church, when we say, that the true vnderstanding of the Scripture, and the finall Decision of all Controuersies in Religion, is to be taken from the Church. FIrst thenCanus loc. com. l. 12. c. 6. et. l. 5. c. 4. Bellar de Concil. l 2. c. 2. Et de verb. Dei. l. 3. c. 3. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 18. Catholikes do heere vnderstand by the Church, the supreme Pastour thereof with a Councell of other Bishops, Pastours and Doctours. In so much that whatsoeuer by these in matters of fayth and manners is de∣creed, and proposed to the whole Church to be belieued, that we all firmly belieue to be most true and infallible, & wholy agreeing with the true sense of Gods word inten∣ded by the Holy Ghost. Secondly, weVal. T. 3. Disp. 1. q. 1. Punct. 7. §. 44. Bellar. de verb. Dei l. 4. c. 3. &c. Ca∣nus loc. com. l. 12. ca. 6. vnderstand by the Doctrine of the Church, such Points of Faith also, as not being written in the Scriptures, haue bene deliuered by the Apostles by word of mouth, the Holy Ghost inspiring them, or Christ being the Author of them: And these we belieue to haue as infalli∣ble authority of truth, as if they had bene written in the Scriptures. ThirdlyStaplet. de Princip. l. 11. c. 4. we likewise teach, that the vniuersall & Ge∣nerall practise of the Catholike Church, is a sure and Infal∣lible Interpreter of the Scriptures. In so much that if any Question shall arise concerning any difficult place of Scri∣pture, the general obseruation and Practise of the Church concerning the matter treated in that place is to be inquired, and to be held and followed, as the best Interpretation, and a truth Infallible. Fourthly, ProtestantsIewel in his Sermon at Paules Crosse. Fulk in his Ans∣were to a Counter∣faite Catho. p. 27. 33. 36. Whitak. cont. Camp. Rat. themselues confesse, that the Church during the first 600. yeares after Christ, was pure, sincere, and truly Catholicke; to the holy Fathers then of those times we appeale, firmly belieuingStaplet. de Princip l. 7. c. 12. that what they with vnanimous cōsent did teach, or the greatest part of thē,
without contradiction of others, cōcerning pointes of faith, or what vnanimous Interpretation of Scripture they made concerning Articles of faith, that the same is by vs receiued and beleiued, as the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and mat∣ter of faith. Lastly, the Church of Christ hath florished and shyned in all Ages, with true and vndoubted Miracles, which being Truth, cannot giue Testimony to a falshood; these also are sure and infallible proofes of all such Doctrine, in Confir∣mation whereof they are done. These are the Principles and firme grounds vpon which the Catholike Church doth build her faith and Religion: which I doe not heare goe about to confirme, with many such Arguments as might be easily produced in proofe of them, because the same wilbe done at large vpon seuerall occasions in this Treatise following, to which therefore in this respect I referre the Reader.
THE TRVE STATE OF THE QVESTION IN CONTROVERSY, Betweene Catholikes and Protestants, con∣cerning the Iudge of Controuersies in matters of Religion, consi∣steth in this: Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, any other infalli∣ble Authority and Iudge is to be acknowledged, by which the Doctrine of Fayth, and the true sense of Scri∣ptures may be proposed to the faythfull, as reuealed by God, and to be belieued. And whether the sayd Authority and power of Judging, be to be ascribed to the Church, to Generall Councells, and to the Fa∣thers of the Primitive Church? Or onely to the sacred Scriptu∣res themselues, or the Priuate Spirit of euery particular Man? CHAP. I. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THIS Controuersy being the greatest, and that wherupon al others do depend, for the full & cleerest Decision thereof, the Councell of TrentConcil. Trid. Ses. 4. decret. de Edi. & vsu sacro∣rum librorū. decreeth for the repressing of proud wits, that no mā relying vpon his owne wisdome in matters of Fayth & manners &c. wresting the sacred Scriptures to
his owne sense, presume to interprete the holy Scriptures contrary to that sense which our holy Mother the Church hath, and doth hould; to whome it belongeth to Iudge of the true sense and interpretation of Holy Scriptures. Before this it was taught in the Coūcell of Sens, thatDecret. 4. Contentions being risen concerning Fayth, the Scripture often is in vaine consulted, vnles the certaine and infallible Authority of the Church doe end the strife, which discerneth the Canonicall Booke from he Apocryphall, the Catholike sense from the hereticall, the true from the adulterate. These Councels auouch the Church to be Iudge of the true sense of the Scriptures. Concerning the authority of Councels, in the said Councell of Sens, it was ordayned, that,Con il. Sen nense Decret. 3. It might seeme absurd, if God with so great care was present to the old Synagogue, that if any thing oc∣curred in the Law, difficult or doubtfull, which could not be ended without Controuersie by the Iudges and Lawiers, yet they should not want a designed assembly, by whose sentence all the matter should be ended; yet he should leaue his Church, much to be preferred before the Synagogue, without necessary helpes, that she should not haue wherupon safely to rely, when Question of Faith aryseth. Wherefore seeing she Rule of the Church is certaine and infallible &c. that au∣thority cannot be denyed to Generall Councels, which most neerely doe represent the vniuersall Church. In the eight Generall Councell it was thus decreed,Actione 10. cap. 1. to. 3. We professe to obserue & keepe the Decrees of the Catholike and Apostolike Church, receiued by Tradition, both from the Holy Apostles &c. as also from Orthodoxall, Generall, & Prouinciall Councels. So vndoubted are the Decrees of Coun∣cels in matters of faith. The authority of auncient Fathers in expounding the Scriptures, is such, as that in the Councell of Trent it is decreed, thatConc. Trid. Sess. 4. Decret. de Edit. & vsu Sacrorum li∣brorum. no man presume to interprete the sacred Scriptures &c. against the vnanimous consent of Fathers. And it was enacted by the Councell in Trullo, that,Synod. 6. Constan∣tin. 8. in Trullo can. 19. If any Controuersie concerning Scripture shalbe raysed, let them not otherwise interpret it, then as the Lights and Doctours of the Church haue expoū∣ded in their writings. In the eight Generall Councell it was determined, that,Synod. Constanti∣nop. 8. gene∣ralis Act. 8. If any man according to the custome of wic∣ked heretiks, by any meanes, either by word, tyme, or place, shall at∣tempt to remoue the bounds, which the holy Fathers of the Church, or
the S. Sacred and Generall Councels haue placed; or do rashly innent nouelties, and other expositions of faith &c. let him be condemned for euer. In the first Lateran Councell it is thus decreed, WeCont. La∣ter. sub Mar∣tino 1. Consul. 5. follow in all things the Fathers and Doctours of the Church, Athana∣sius, Hilarius, Basill, Gregory &c. and we receaue all things which are expounded by them, for the right Faith, and in condemnation of Heretiks. And we receyue also other holy and orthodoxall Fathers who haue euer preached in Gods holy Church, the true Faith without blame. The Bishops & Doctours in the Councell of Valence said,Conc. Va∣lent. sub Leo∣ne p. 4. cap. 1. We doe reuerently submit our hearing, and vnderstanding &c. to the clearest expositors of sacred Scripture, that is, to Cyprian, Hilary, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and the rest &c. And to our power we imbrace what they haue written for our saluation. So that by the seuerall Decrees of so many Councels it appeareth, that the true sense and interpretation of Scriptures, and thereby the deciding of all diffrences in Religion, are to be knowne and taken from the Catholike Church, from generall Councels, and the vnanimous consent of auncient Fathers. This is our Catholike doctrine. Protestants vntruthes. The Authority of the Church not being to be infringed by any true and solid argument, Protestants endeauour to weaken the same by falshoods and vntruthes: for wherasBellar. de Conil. au∣thorit. l. 2. cap. 12. all Catholicks teach, that the Scriptures are in sundry respects to be preferred before Councels; Caluin falsly accuseth vs in these words: ToInstit. l. 4. c. 9. § 14. subiect thus the Oracles of God to the Censure of men, that therfore they should be allowed because they pleased men, is a Blasphemy vnworthy to be remembred. Againe,Initio libr, seu In∣structionis cont. Ana∣bap. & in Luc. c. 4.16. we do not af∣ter the manner of Papists say, that the sacred Scriptures ought to be cast away, that we may rest vpon the authority of men, for this eua∣sion we iudge to be execrable blasphemy. Yf you will belieue Iohn White,Way to the Church. Ep. Dedic. n. 2. All their speech is of the Church, no mention of the Scriptures, or God their Father, but their Mother Church. And,Ibid. p. 12. They know and confesse the most and greatest points of their Religion, euen welnigh all wherin they dissent from vs, haue no foun∣dation on the Scriptures. Luther speaking of Councells, affir∣meth, thereIn Act. Apo. c. 15. was neuer any one pure, but either added some∣thing
to fayth, or subtracted. And he auoucheth, that the PopeDe con∣cil. & Eccl. propè extre∣mo. hath buried the sacred Scripture in durt and dust, and hath al∣most blotted out the whole Christian Doctrine. Maister Sparks af∣firmeth thatAnswere to Iohn de Albines. pag. 82 83. we preferre the authoritie of the Church the wife, before Christ the husband; that we make the written word of God in∣feriour in the Authority to the Church, and to haue his Canonicall credit from thence. But these and such like vntruthes sayned by Protestants, the Catholike Church disclaymeth, as meere impostures, inuented by men malignant, and barely affir∣med without proofe or probability. The greatest esteem we haue of sacred Scriptures, as belieuing them to be Gods word, all inspired by him, all CatholikeBellar de verbo Dei. l 1. c. 2. Authors do fully testify, and I hauePrepara∣tiue. sect. 1. 2. formerly proued. Protestant Doctrine. You must euer know that the body of Protestancy, is a Cerberus with many heads; for in this present Controuersy, some Protestants teach, that our only Iudge vpon earth in matters of faith and Religion, are the sacred Scriptures, or writtē word of God; so our English Church hath decreed, that theArticle 6. Scripture comprehended in the Canonical bookes of the old and new Testament, is the Rule of fayth so farre, that what∣soeuer is not read therin, or cannot be proued therby, is not to be acce∣pted as any point of faith, or needfull to be followed. This article is defended by D.Way to the Church. pag. 12. White. And D. Morton acknowled∣geth,Apolog. part. 2. l. 1. c. 1. Protestants will haue all matters of faith squared & tried according to the written Rule, that is the sacred Scripture, euen as by the Touchstone.Pag. 4. In the Harmony of Confessions it is de∣termined, that in Controuersies of Religion, or matters of faith, we cannot admit any other Iudge then God himselfe pronouncing by the holy Scriptures, what is true, what is false, what is to be followed, or what is to be auoyded.Ibid. p. 5. Yea the interpretation thereof is to be taken from herselfe, that her selfe may be the Interpreter of her selfe. And soEnglish Confession. ibid pag. 10. be the sure and infallible Rule &c. whereunto all Eccle∣siasticall doctrine ought to be called to account. Other Protestants make euery faithfull man, endowed with the spirit, to be Iudge of all Controuersies in Religion. So D. Bilson sty∣lethTrue difference &c. part. 2. pag. 353. The people discerners and Iudges of that which is taught.
Doctour Whitaker confesseth of such as are ignorant in tongues, thatDe sacra script p. 127. they acknowledge, and allow the Doctrine being instructed by the holy Ghost Lubbertus auoucheth, thatDe prin∣cipijs &c. pag. 573. God hath giuen to euery faithfull person, not onely the spirit of vnderstan∣ding, but also of discerning false Doctrine from true: And this in so full manner, that according to Brentius & Doctour White,Prole∣gom. cont. Petr Soto. White in the way to the Church. p. 6. 27. Betweene the Prince and the priuate man is this difference; that as the priuat man hath Priuat authority of iudging and deciding Do∣ctrine of Religion, so the Prince hath Publike. Maister Rogers tea∣cheth that,Def. of the Articles Art. 20. pag. 103. Authoritie is giuen to the Church, and to euery member of sound iudgment in the same, to iudge in Controuersies of faith &c. And this is not the priuat opinion of our Church, but &c. also the iudgment of our godly brethren in forraine nations: so that e∣uery priuate spirituall man is a supreme head of the Church, able to iudge all Controuersies. Thus according to Prote∣stāts, the Iudge in matters of faith are either the sacred Scrip∣tures, or euery faithfull man endowed with the Spirit. Protestants agree with auncient Heretiks. Protestants by their forsaid opinions do shew them∣selues of what race they are come. So whereas D. Whitaker affirmeth,Cont. Duraeum l. 7. pa. 478. it is sufficient for vs (Protestants) by comparing the Popish doctrine and Scriptures togeather, to know their difference and disagreeing: we leaue it free for Historiographers (saith he) to write what they lst. And whereas Beza saith,In Bar∣crofts Sur∣uey. pag 219. If any shall oppose against my exposition the Authoritie of certaine of the aūcient Fathers, I doe appeale to the word of God. This appealing from Fathers Historiographers and Church, onely to the written word, is condemned in Maximinus the Arian by S. Austine, who produceth him saying,L. 1 cont. Maximin. & cont. Faust. l. 32. c. 19. & ep. 222. If thou shalt bring any thing from the sacred Scripture which is common to all, it is needfull we heare you: But these words which are out of the Scripture, in no case are to be re∣ceiued of vs. But not onely Arians, butL. 1 de Trinit. c. 3. all Heretiks (saith S. Augustine) endeauour to defend their false and deceiptfull opinions out of the Scriptures.L 1. cont. Haer. c. 35. If one shall aske (saith Vincentius) any Heretike &c. from whence doe you proue, from whence doe you teach, that I ought to forsake the Vniuersall and Auncient Faith of the Catholike Church? Presently he answereth, For it is written: and
forthwith he prepareth a thousand testimonies, a thousand examples, a thousand authorities, from the Law, from the Apostles, from the Pro∣phets. In briefe, this appealing to onlie Scripture is condem∣ned in the Nestorians, asL. 7. c. 2. Socrates testifieth: In the Ma∣cedonians and Eunomians byDe spiri∣tu sanc c 15. & l. 1. cont. Eunom. S. Basil; and in seuerall other heretiks by sundryHilar. orat. cont. Constant. Tertul. l. de praescript. c. 15. Hieron. ep. ad Paulin. & tom 3. cont. Lucif. Am∣bros. in c. vlt. ad Tit. Orig. hom 7. in Ezech. auncient Fathers. To come nearer home amongst our neighbours, it is condemned in the Puritanes by D. BancrofteSuruey of pretended discip. c. 7.. In the Anabaptists by CaluinTract. Theo. pa. 57. & instruct. cont. Ana∣bap p. 478. and HookerEccl. Pol. praef. pa. 38.. In the Pro∣testant Arians byDe ae∣terno Dei fi∣lio l 1. c. 2. Simlerus; and the same is the doctrine and practise of the BrownistsIn their apolog. pa. 103 4 93. 99. 100. and see Ainsworth in his coun∣terpoyson, p 15 154.. And yet that all Prote∣stants when they are vrged by Catholicks, do vse the same shamfull flight to only Scripture, their owne Brethren shall accuse them. The Anti-trinitarians say to the Tigurine Pro∣testantsSimlerus de fil. Dei. in Bullingers praef. therto. fol. 4 & in Simlerus his preface. fol. 1.. You haue taught vs that nothing is to be receyued besi∣des the Scriptures; therfore we demand where it is written in the Scriptures? &c. Except you shew this according to your Rule, we re∣iect and condemne those things: therfore we haue learned of you to con∣temne the Fathers. In like sort sayth Socinus the Arian to Vo∣lanus the Protestant:i. de Christi nat. p. 21. To what purpose should I answere that which thou borrowest from the Papists &c. You are no lesse deceiued in vrging against vs the Churches perpetuall consent, then are the Papists in vrging therof both against you and vs &c.Ibid. pa. 222. Euen Volanus him∣selfe disputing against the Iesuits, is inforced to reiect the examples, sayings, and deeds of Athanasius, Hierome, Austine, Theodoret, and o∣ther Fathers, whose authoritie he now opposeth against vs, as sacred. Thus &c. Volanus may receiue answere from himselfe, when he so of∣ten inforceth against vs the authoritie of learned men, and consent of the Church. Luther himselfe auoucheth that,In postil. wit. in. 2. cn. 8. Dom. post Trinit. fol. 118. It is true that the sacred Scripture is the booke of Hereticks, because Hereticks are accustomed to prouoke to that Booke: neither did there aryse at any tyme any Heresy so pestiferous and so foolish which did not endeauour to hyde it selfe vnder the veile of Scripture. So cleere it is, that all sorts of Sectaries, whether Protestāts or Puritanes, do agree with the ancient hereticks in reiecting the authoritie of the Fathers and of the Church, and in appealing only to the sacred Scriptures, or the Priuat Spirit. Of which appealing by old hereticks to the Priuat Spirit, I shallSee neerafter chap. 4. shew here∣after.
Protestant Errors. It is worthy obseruation to see the grosse errors and absurdities into which Heresy doth plunge a man. Caluin acknowledgeth of the Protestant Libertines, that theyInstruc. aduers Li∣bert. c. 9. were accustomed to laugh, if any man alledged the Scriptures: neither to haue dissembled, but that they hould them for fables &c. If any place was obiected vnto them, they answered we are not subiect to the letter, but ought to follow the spirit that quickneth. SvvenckfeldiusSee Staphylus l. de concord. discip. Lu∣theri. also reiected the written word, as the letter that killed, conten∣ding himselfe only with the internall spirit. Luther tea∣cheth, thatConc. de Sacram. Alt. tom. 1. Ger. VVit. in Gal. 3. pag. 147 the right of interpreting Scripture is equally granted to the Laity, as the learned. Yea he trembleth not to say, Although the Papists do bring a great heap of Scriptures in which good works are commanded: Yet I nothing care for all the words of Scripture, al∣though more then those were yet produced. Thou Papist dost greatly contemne, and with the Scripture makest thy selfe corragious, which yet is inferiour to Christ as Lord. Therfore I am nothing moued ther∣with. Go too then, rely vpon the seruant as much as thou wilt, but I do rely vpon Christ the true Ma ster, Lord, and Emperour of Scripture. To him I do assent, and know that he will lye to me in nothing, nor will lead me into errour. I do rather make choice to honour and belieue him then that with all the sayings of Scripture, I will suffer my selfe to be remoued from my Opinion a nailes breadth. And in sundry places he auerreth, thatColloq. Isleb. de Christo fol. 96. Tom. 1. Ger. VVit. part. 1. fol. 190. Tom. 5. len. fol. 500. in Colloq de spir. Sanct. fo. 125. de tenta∣tion. fid. fol. 218. Tom 6. Ger. len fol. 86. Tom. 7. Ger. VVit. f. 482. the Apostles might erre and teach false doctrine; And that themselues dayly doubted of the truth of their Doctrine. See how an Enemy of the Church, becomes also a contemner of Scripture it selfe, when it speaketh against him. Reynolds auoucheth thatConclus. annex. to his Confer. pag. 686. S. Iohns Ghospell alone is suf∣ficient to Saluation. But if I should tell him that according to his Doctrine, all Controuersies are to be decided by Scri∣pture, and nothing is to be belieued but what is taught in Scripture; he would neuer be able to show that all this is performed only by S. Iohns Ghospell. Some Protestants affirme, that the Old and New Te∣stament, or the Law and the Ghospell, are contrary one to another: Illyricus teacheth thatIn Clauo script. part. 2 tract. 1. Col 10. there are two kinds of do∣ctrine, the Law▪ and the Ghospell, and those of themselues, and their
owne nature truly contrary.Ibid. Col. 11. This truly is the key of the whole Scripture and Diuinity, to know that therin is contayned a double kind of doctrine, and a double way of Saluation, which of themselues are plainly contrary one to another. TheIbid. Col. 39. Law and the Ghospell of them∣selues do fight altogether. These doctrines do fight but the inferior Law doth yield to the superior Ghospell, and so one Contradictory fayling, the other remaineth true. Caluin likewise affirmeth, thatInstit. l. 2. c. 9. §. 4. Paul maketh the iustice of the Law and the Ghospell contrary amongst themselues. This errour is so wicked, that the Protestant Pa∣reus auoucheth,In Gal. 3. loc. 40. If the doctrine of the Law, and the doctrine of the Ghospell be contrary, God in his word should be contrary to himselfe, which God forbid. Such grosse and execrable errors doe Protestants teach and defend, against the truth and authority of holy Scriptures, though at other times when they are pressed with the authoritie of the Church, of Generall Coū∣cels, and auncient Fathers, they seeme wholy to appeale to them. SECT. II. The sacred Scriptures clearely teach that we are to repaire to the Church of Christ, for the finall deciding of Con∣trouersies in Religion. I Must once for all, most earnestly intreat the Christian Reader, of what Profession soeuer he be; that he diligent∣ly obserue, whether the Texts of Scripture alledged, being taken in their natiue signification, and according to the li∣terall sense which the words of themselues doe import, doe not clearely make for that Catholike point of doctrine, for which they are produced: for that being graunted, I gayne the intent which is heere desired. In the booke of Exodus we read that, Moyses said to Ie∣thro,C. 18. 15. 16. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23 24. 25. 26. The people commeth to me seeking the sentence of God. And when any Controuersie chanceth amongst them, they come vnto me to Iudge between them, and to shew the Precepts of God, and his Laws. But Iethro said &c. Heare my words and counsailes &c. Be thou to the people in those things that pertayne to God &c. And to shew to the people the Ceremonies and rytes of worshiping, and the way wherein they
ought to walke, and the workes that they ought to doe. And prouide out of all the People, men that are wise, & doe feare God &c. which may iudge the people at all times: and what greater matter soeuer shall fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them iudge the lesse matters only &c. If thou dost this, thou shalt fulfill the Commandmēt of God &c. which things when Moyses heard, he did all things that he had suggested vnto him. And choosing substantial men &c. he appointed them Princes of the people &c. who iudged the people at all times; and whatsoeuer was of greater difficulty they referred to him, themselues iudging the easier causes only. Now that these might rightly per∣forme their charge, it is further said by God to Moyses,Num. 11.17. I will take of thy spirit, & will deliuer to thē &c. Many wordes in this Text plainly proue, that Moyses was the Supreme Iud∣ge ouer the Israelits euē in matters of Religion. Let vs now examine those poorest euasiōs, which Protestāts haue for the auoyding of this plainest Text. M. BridgesDefence &c. l. 2. fol. 237. answereth heerunto, that the charge giuen heerto Moyses, was only in regard of ciuill causes, but this is cleerly contrary to the for∣mer words of Scripture, Moises being to shew to the people, The precepts of God & his Lawes, the things that pertayne to God, & the very Ceremonies & rytes of worshipping. Other Protestāts yet further reply, that Moyses was not a Priest, but only a tem∣porall Prince. But this is likewise most vntrue, for the same Scriptures affirme, that Moyses exercised all functions of Priesthood, as teaching theExod. 18.15 People all Precepts of God & his Lawes,Exod. 21.1. consecrating Aaron, and other Priests, andIb. ver. 7.21. annoin∣ting them, and their garments; yea which is most proper vnto a Priest;Ibid. vers. 36.37. he offered sacrifice euery day continually. A truth so manifest, that the Prophet Dauid sayd,Ps. 98.6. Moyses and Aaron in his Priests. And wheras Hunnius auoucheth thatColloq. Ratisb. Sess. 1. Moy∣ses sacrificed as a Prophet of the Lord, not as a Priest, this is barely affirmed without all ground or proofe, and is cleerly con∣uinced of falshood, by what hath been sayd next before. As Moyses being a Priest, was thus ordayned by God the supreme Iudge euen in causes Ecclesiasticall: so were the people of Israel commanded to go to the high Priest for the finall decyding of their doubtes and dissentions.Deutr. 17.8.9.1.11. And see cap. 1.5. If thou perceyue (sayth Moyses) that the iudgement with thee be hard and
doubtfull betweene blood and blood, cause and cause &c and thou see that the words of the Iudges within thy gates do vary; aryse and go vp to the place which our Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shalt come to the Priests of the Leuiticall Stock, and to the Iudge that shall be at that time; & thou shalt aske of them, who shall shew thee the truth of the Iudgment. And thou shalt do whatsoeuer they that are Presidents of the place, which our Lord shall choose, shall say and teach thee, ac∣cording to his Law, and shou shalt follow their sentence: neither shalt thou decline to the right hand, nor to the left hand. But he that shalbe proud, refusing to obey the Commandement of the Priest, which at that tyme ministreth to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Iudge, that man shall dye. Here the people are commanded vnder paine of death, to submit themselues and their causes to the deci∣cision of the high Priest. But D. Whitaker heereDe sacra Script. con∣trou. 1. q. 5. p. 463. re∣plieth, that the people were but commanded to obey the Priest, if he taught them according to the Law; in which sense Protestants professe to obey the Church or Councels, if they decree according to the Scriptures: Yet this doth nothing auayle; for first D. Whitaker and other Protestants, appea∣ling euer to the Originall, as to the fountaine, and text most authenticall, and reiecting our vulgar translation as corrupt, these words, And teach thee according to his law, are only to be found in our vulgar, and not in the Hebrew. Secondly the forsaid words are not conditionall, but words of promise or assurance, that he shall teach the truth according to the Law, which appeareth as well, in that the people are comman∣ded vnder payne of death, to abyde the Priests absolute sen∣tence, as also in that, if the people were to iudge whether the Priest gaue sentence according to the Law, or no, then not the Priest, but the People were Iudges: And so wheras this Law was made for the Satisfaction of the People in their doubts, and finall ending of their controuersies, all things would be left no lesse doubtfull and disagreeing then before. WherforeIn Prole∣gom. cont. Petrum à Soto. Brentius further replieth, that the people are here referred not only to the Priest; but also to the ciuil Iudge, who therfore may heare and determine causes Eccle∣siasticall. But the answere is easy, for first by the word, Iudge,
we may wel vnderstand the chiefe or high Priest, for accor∣ding to the Hebrew it is said; Ascend to the Priests, and to the Iudge, as if it had been said, Ascend to the Councel of Priests, and their Prince the high Priest. Secondly though we vn∣derstand by the Iudge the ciuil Magistrate, yet this only ar∣gueth their Offices to be distinct, as the Priests Office to concerne matters Ecclesiasticall; the Magistrates, matters ci∣uil; the Priests, to giue definitiue sentence; the Magistrats to execute the same. This answere then not satisfying, other Protestants seeke to euade by affirming barely that the forsayd Law of Deutronomy concerned only matters ciuill, not spirituall or directly tending to God. But besids that the law was ge∣nerall, concerning all doubts arysing from the law, and the text sayth in generall, betweene cause and cause; seeing heer it is euident that the people are referred by God to the high Priest, for the determining of their difficulties; how absurd & distasting would it be to our politick State, if our English Clergy should affirme, that the decision of temporall and Ciuill suits were to be referred to the Priest or the Church? Yea how seuerely would Bishops and Ministers be puni∣shed, if they should but endeauour to assume any such pre∣tended authority? Others obseruing that none of the foresayd euasions do sa∣tisfy so plaine texts of Scripture, as not being able to deny the words to be most euident, do therefore, as acknowled∣ging the same, yet further answere; that many things esta∣blished in the old Law, are now abrogated by the new, and therefore, an argument drawne from the decrees & pra∣ctise thereof, to be now inualide, in regard of our tyme of grace. But this also is as insufficient as the former answers; for although many things vsed in the old Law, being Cere∣monial, be now abrogated; yet that maketh no more against the Ecclesiasticall Iudge now, then it doth against the Iudge in Ciuill causes, or the temporall Magistrats, which were appointed by God, and exercised their authority during the old Law: and therefore most things then prescribed, not being Ceremoniall, are still with vs Christians, though not
in euery circumtance, yet in substane obserued. And the rather ought this to be, seeing the occasions to haue Con∣trouersies ended, and the dangers of erring are now no lesse then they were during the tyme of the old Law. But all this is yet more fully explained and confirmed by holy King Iosaphat, who hauing appointed Priests in Hierusalem, sayd thus vnto them;2. Para∣lip. c. 19. 10. 11. Euery cause that shall come to you of your brethren &c. Whersoeuer there is question of the Law, of the Commandement, of Ceremonies, of iustifications; shew it them, that they sinne not against our Lord &c. And Amarias the Priest, and your Bishop shalbe Chiefe in these things, which pertaine to God: moreouer Zabadias &c. who is the Prince in the house of Iuda, shalbe ouer those works, which pertaine to the Kings Office. So dinstinct∣ly doth King Iosaphat allot to the Bishop the decision of questions of the Law, of the Commandement, and of all things which pertaine to God, leauing the care of such things as pertaine to the Kings Office, to Zabadias a temporall Prince. Now it will not suffice to awere, that Iosaphat made this distinction and Decree by his owne authority, & there∣fore that the power which the Priest had for iudgment, was but giuen him by the King, and depended of his pleasure; for we haue seene before to the contrary, that the Ordinance was by God himselfe, who gaue the same authority to Moyses, and afterward enacted a Law thereof in Deutero∣nomy, chap. 17. So that Iosaphat did onely command the execution of that which God had formerly prescribed. By the Prophet Ezechiell God saith of Priests,C. 44. 23. 24. They shall teach my people what is between a holy thing and polluted, & between cleane and vncleane they shall shew to thē; And when there shalbe a Controuersy, they shall stand in my Iudgments, & shall Iudge &c. By the Prophet Aggeus God directeth his people to askeC. 2. 12. the Priests the Law. And by Malachy he promiseth thatC. 2, 7. The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, & the Law they shall require of his mouth, because he is the Angell of the Lord of Hosts; that is, his messēger sent & appointed to declare the truth. These texts are cleare for the Priest being Iudge, and the peoples requiring the knowledge of the Law from him. This place of Malachy is so forcible, that Protestants
for want of better answere, insteed of, shall keepe knowledge, doe most corruptlyEngl. Bibl. of 1578. translate, should preserue knowledge, contrary to all Originals. Lastly of the practise of the old Testament, it is said, expressely, and this according to the Protestants translationEngl. Bibl. of An∣no 1578., thatEsd. 2.8.7.8.12.13. the Leuites caused the people to vnderstand the Law &c. and they read in the booke of the Law of God distinctly, and gaue the sense, and caused them to vnderstand the reading &c. Then all the people &c. made great ioy because they had vnderstood the words that they had taught them. And on the second day, the chiefe Fathers of all the people, the Priests, and the Leuits, were gathered vnto Esdras the Scribe, that he also might instruct them in the wordes of the Law. So plaine it is, that the people of the old Law, were instructed in their vnderstanding of the Law, and the Scri∣ptures, not by their owne reading and conferring of Scri∣ptures, or by any imagined and inuisible Ghost, but by the Priests & Leuits, who were then the Pastors of their Church. And agreably to this we shall see shortly, that the ApostleEph. 4.11. affirmeth, that now in the Church Christ hath placed not only Apostles, Prophets, and Euangelists, but also next after them Pastors and Doctors: The diuine Prouidence disposing, that we should haue not only the sacred writings of the Apo∣stles, Prophets, and Euangelists, but also the Commentaries, Interptetations, and Preachings of Pastors and Doctors, in explanation therof. Which Pastors and Doctors (as CaluinInstit. c. 5. de fide. gathereth vpon this place) haue an ordinary Charge in the Church, and the Church can neuer want them, but euermore, as he sayth, Doctores praesunt Scripturae interpretationi &c. Doctors haue authority to interpret the Scriptures, that sincere and wholsome do∣ctrine may be retayned among the faithfull. So false it is, that the externall Iudgment granted in the old Law, is now abro∣gated by the New. Now this course of deciding Controuersies by the Priests or the Church, being so generally prescribed and practised in the old Law, was in it selfe so good and profitable, that Christ at his comming approued and confirmed the same, saying,Mat. 23.2.3. Vpon the Chayre of Moyses haue sitten the Scribes, and the Pharisees. All things therefore whatsoeuer they shall say to you,
obserue yee, and do yee; but according to their workes do you not, for they say, and do not. Heer our Sauiour commandeth the peo∣ple to obserue and do, whatsoeuer the Scribes and Phari∣sees shall say, or prescribe vnto them; and that for this rea∣son, because vpon the Chayre of Moyses haue sitten the Scribes and the Pharisees: signifying thereby, the Supreme and infal∣lible authority, which I haue proued before, was giuen to Moyses by God, for the decyding of Ecclesiasticall Con∣trouersies: as also that his Successours in that Chayre, were to haue the same, though in their liues and conuersations they proued offensiue and scandalous. Where I cannot but note the speciall prouidence & care of God ouer his Church, who though he sometyme permit the Superiours and Pre∣lates thereof, to be of sinnefull & scandalous lyfe, yet he euer so preserued them from teaching false doctrine to the people, as that he commandeth these still to follow their teaching, though their workes be bad: which in his goodnes and wis∣dome he would not do, if in like sort he permitted them to erre in fayth and doctrine, as in lewdnes of lyfe; but rather to the contrary would giue them Counsayle, to take good heed both of their doctrine and lyfe. To conclude then, frō the ordinance and pactise of the old Law; If the cause to haue Controuersies ended be as vrgent now, as during the Old Testament, and the danger of errour as grieuous; then if the People were not referred to the written word, or the Priuate Spirit, for the decyding of their doubts, but e∣uen to a visible and knowne Iudge, to wit, the Priests; may Christians,Heb. 8 6. Whose Testament is established in better pro∣mises, expect lesse playne and certaine meanes for ending of their Controuersies? To affirme the contrary were indeed to prefer in this behalfe, Moyses before Iesus-Christ, & the Ecclesiasticall gouernment and policy of the old Law, be∣fore ours, which were no lesse absurd in it selfe, then other∣wise impious. And so I will passe to the Law of Grace. It is prescribed by Christ himselfe, thatMat. 18.15.16.17.18. If thy Bro∣ther shall offend agaynst thee, go and rebuke him beeweene thee and him alone. If he shall heare thee, thou shalt gayne thy brother. And if he will not heare thee, ioyne with thee besides, one or two &c. And
if he will not heare them tell the Church. And if he will not heare the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen and Publican. Amen I say to you, whatsoeuer you shall bynd vpon earth, shalbe bound also in hea∣uen, and whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon earth, shalbe loosed also in heauen. Our Sauiour heere referreth the finall deci∣ding of dissentions amongst Neighbours vnto the Church; therefore much more doth he the same in matters of Reli∣gion. If he command an Adulterer to be brought to the iudg∣ment of the Church, much more an Heretike. And if the Church haue authoritie to loose whatsoeuer (not onely whomsoeuer) vpon earth, then no question she hath autho∣rity to loose all difficulties arysing in Religion. And if they who disobey the Churches sentence are to be accompted as Heathens and Publicans, that is, damnable sinners, then it fol∣loweth euidently not onely the said sentence of the Church to be finall, not admitting any further appeale either to Scri∣ptures, or the Priuat spirit, but also that the not hearing or disobeying the Churches Iudgment, is sinfull & punishable. D. Whitaker would auoid this two waies, first by expoun∣ding it ofCon∣trou. 2. q 4. c. 2. 3. Ecclesiasticall Censures, not of doctrine. Secondly by affirming that the Church is to be heard, but in those things onely, in which she heareth and obeyeth Christ. But if she be to be heard & obeyed in her Ecclesiasticall Censures of Excommunication and the like, much more in condemnation of Heresies; if she be confessedly the supreme Iudge in correcting and puni∣shing vs, much more in directing & preseruing vs frō error. Neither doth Christ (as Whitaker pretendeth) restraine this Precept of obeying the Church to any particular matter, but indeed enlargeth it to all, saying,Mat. 18.18. Whatsoeuer you shall bind vpon earth &c. whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon earth &c.Ibid. v. 19. Concerning euery thing whatsoeuer they shall aske it shalbe done them.Luc. 10, 16. And he that heareth you heareth me. All (30) things whatsoeuer they shall say to you, obserue and doe yee. So cleare it is, that the forsaid place is not to be vnderstood only of Cēsures. In like sort to say the Church is to be heard,Mat. 23.3. but in those things on∣ly in which she heareth and obeyeth Christ, or teacheth ac∣cording to the Law, or Scriptures, is most idle, for so is any Child, and the Deuill himselfe to be heard. And so insteed
of ending Controuersies, it begetteth new ones, calling the Church it selfe into question, when it is to be heard, and when not, and thereby making the sense onely to be this; Heare the truth wheresoeuer the truth is taught according to the Law, which to say, is not infallible, and finally to di∣rect vs, but rather to leaue vs in our first and other new per∣plexities. This place is so conuincing for the authority of the Church, as that our English Protestants in their Bible of 1562. doe translate the foresaid words thus: If he heare not them, tell the Congregation. So fearefull they are of the word Church, and the power therto giuen. This directiō of Christ, his Blessed Apostles and our first Christians obserued most diligently, for when some hadAct. 15.1.2.4.6.7.8.9.10.11.13.19.22.28.29. taught that, vnles you be cir∣cumcised according to the manner of Moyses, you cannot be saued: No litle sedition therefore being risen to Paul and Barnabas against them, the Church of Antioch appointed, that Paul and Barnabas should go vp, and certaine others of the rest, to the Apostles and Priests vnto Hierusalem vpon this question. Which they accordingly doing, the Apostles and Ancients assembled to consider of this word. And when there was made a great diputation, Peter rysing vp decided the mat∣ter, whose speach Iames confirmed, and the whole Church of Hierusalem so assented thereunto, as that they agreed the forsaid decree to be sent to Antioch, saying, It hath seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to vs, to lay no further burthen vpon you, then these necessary things &c. Now when this decree was read at Antioch, they reioyced vpon the consolation. And when Paul and Timothy passed through the citties, they deliuered vnto them to keep the Decrees that were decreed of the Apostles and Ancients which were at Hierusalem; yea it is expresly said, that Paul walked through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches: Commanding them to keep the Precepts of the Apostles and the Ancients. Here the deciding of the forsaid Controuersy, was not referred to the conference of Scripture, or the Priuat spirit, but to the Iudg∣ment and determination of the Apostles, Priests, & Church of Hierusalem: which after consult had therof, they deter∣mined, and their Decree without al further apeale was re∣ceiued with ioy, and was holden as a Precept, and the ob∣seruation therof was cōmanded by S. Paul. The Scripures
further teach vs, that we are bound to heare and obey our spirituall Pastors: Christ said vnto his Apostles,Luc. 10.16. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me. S. Paul likewise,Heb. 13.17. Obey your Prelates, and be subiect to them: for they watch, as being to render account for your soules. Now if we be commanded to heare and obey them, as our Prelates,Eph. 4.11. Pastors, andMat. 28.19.20. Doctors, then may we safely rely vpon their Iudgment and determination: for if they could erre, and so we, in following and obeying them, then might we lay the fault vpon Christ and his Apostles, who commanded vs to obey them. And whereas some reply, that Pastours, Pre∣lates, and Doctours, being men, and according to Scrip∣ture,Psal. 115.11. Euery man is a lyar, that therefore we cannot be in∣fallibly a certained that their teaching is not erroneous: This doth not suffice, for though by nature they be men and sub∣iect to lyes and deceyptes, yet by Pastorall authority they are true Gouernours of the Church, and instruments of the holy Ghost, by whose assistance in their Generall as∣semblies, and publick decrees, they cannot erre in matters of faith. S. Paul speaking of the Ghospell which himselfe prea∣ched, and which he had from the holy Ghost, sayth,Gal. 2.1.2. I went vp againe to Hierusalem with Barnabas &c. And I went vp according to Reuelation, and conferred with them the Ghospell, which I preach among the Gentils, but apart with them that seemed to be something, least perhaps in vaine I should runne, or had runne. By this it is cleere, that though S. Paul was taught his Ghospell of God, and not of men, and had an Extraordinary calling by Christ himselfe; yet by Reuelation he was sent to Hierusalem, to confer the said Ghospell with his Elders, the Ordinary Apostles, which afterwards he nameth toVer. 9. be Peter, Iames, and Iohn: not that himselfe was doubtfull of the truth of his Gospell, but because other men could not, nor would ac∣knowledg so much, till he were allowed by such as were without all exceptiō knowne to be Apostles, and to haue the spirit of truth, to discerne whether the vocation, Spirit, and Ghospell of Paul, were of God: he knowing that otherwise without conference with them, he should loose his labour, both for the tyme past, and to come.
These texts of Scripture do plainly direct vs to the Church and Pastors therof, for the cleering of all doubts, and the determining of all controuersies and questions, which shall aryse in matters Ecclesiasticall. SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholicks in proofe of the Church being the Iudge of Controuersies. FOr the right vnderstanding of the true sense of the fore∣said Scriptures, let vs now see in what manner they were expounded by the ancient Fathers and Doctors. Wheras I proued before that Moyses was appointed by God the Supreme Iudge in matters Ecclesiasticall; and Prote∣stants answered therto, that Moyses was no Priest, and ther∣fore could not be a competent Iudge in those causes: S. Au∣stin expounding these words of the Psalme, Moyses and Aa∣ron in his Priests, saith,In Psal. 98. Aaron was brother to Moyses, whom he ordained Priest &c. But if Moyses was not a Priest, what was he? Could he be greater then a Priest? This Psalme expresseth that he was a Priest, Moyses and Aaron in his Priests. Therfore they were priests of our Lord. Yea els where he affirmeth, thatQuaest, 23. in Leuiti∣cum. This Psalme ma∣keth it vndoubted, that Moyses was a Priest. S. Hierome intending to proue that Samuel was not Priest or Bishop, (though some hould that he was Extraordinary,L. 1. cont. Iouin. writeth thus. In the psalmes he is not named among Priests, but amongst those who in∣uocate the name of our Lord: Moyses and Aaron in his Priests, and Sa∣muel amongst them who inuocate the name of our Lord. And S. Gre∣goryOrat. ad Greg. Nysse∣num. Nazianzen in proofe heerof, hauing produced the same psalme, calleth Moyses the Prince of Princes, and the Priest of Priests: so cleerly do the Fathers proue from Scriptures that Moyses was a Priest. Now that Moyses was not only a Priest, but that his Chaire or authority was to be reueren∣ced and obeyed, S. Austine confirmeth from the words of Christ himselfe; for hauing numbred in order of succession all the Bishops of Rome, from S. Peter to Anastasius, who
then was Pope, he auoucheth, that,Ep. 165. If any traytor in those tymes had stolne into that Order of Bishops &c. it would haue nothing preiudiced the Church and innocent Christians: for whom our Lord prouiding, said of euill Prelates: whatsoeuer they say, do ye, but what they do, do you not, for they say, and do not. And againe,Cont. lite∣ras Petil. l. 2. c. 51. why dost thou call the Apostolick Chaire, the Chaire of Pestilence? If for the men, why? did our Lord Iesus-Christ for the Pharisees any wrong to the Chaire wherin they sate? Did he not commend that Chaire of Moy∣ses, and preseruing the honour of the Chaire, reproue them? for he sayth they sit vpon the Chayre of Moyses, that which they say do ye. As alsoIbid. c. 1. And see Aug. ep. 166. neither for the Pharisees &c. did our Lord command the Chaire of Moyses to be forsaken, in which Chaire verily he figured his owne. For he warned the people to do that which they say, and not to do that which they do, and that the holines of the Chaire be in no case forsaken, nor the vnity of the flock deuided, for naughty Pastors. So fully doth S. Austine confirme the authority of Moyses and his Chaire, as also of the Church of Christ from the words of Christ. But S. Austine is so full herein, as that he referreth our cer∣taine knowledge of the Scriptures themselues, to the autho∣rity and determination of the Church, saying of himselfe,Cont ep. Fundamenti, c. 5. I would not belieue the Ghospell, vnles the authority of the Catho∣licke Church moued me therto. Neither did he speak this of the tyme past when he was a Manichee, as someSee Whitak. Duplicat. aduersus Sta∣pletonum. l. . c. 8. p. 387. pretend, for all the words and circumstances of the place contest the contrary, and accordingly are vnderstood of the ProtestantCnturiae tres Cent. 2. q. 3. p. 267. Brachmanus. Yea Swinglius so much disliketh them, as that he sayth;Tom 2. fol. 135. Here I intreat your indifferent iudgments, that you freely speake, whether this saying of Austine may not be thought more audacious then meet, or to haue been vttered imprudētly. But here without intreaty, euery man may see, how impru∣dent and impudent Swinglius is, in this his vnworthy cen∣sure of S. Austine. Iosephus witnesseth thatL. 2. cont. Apion. the Priests were appointed by Moyses to be ouerseers of all things, and Iudges of Controuersies. Concerning S. Pauls conferring his Ghospell with S. Peter, Iames, and Iohn, Tertullian argueth thus:L. 4. cont. Marc. 10. c. 2. If he from whome S. Luke receyued his light, desired to haue his faith and preaching authorized by his Predecessours, how much more rea∣son
haue I to desire the like for the Ghospell of S. Luke, seeing the same was so necessary for the Ghospell of his mayster. S. Austine al∣so sayth hereof,Tom. 6. cont F at. Mnich. l. 28. c 4. The Apostle S. Paul called from heauen, if he had not found the Apostles with whome by conferring his Ghospell, he might appeare to be of the same Society, the Churcb would not be∣lieue him at all. S. Hierome auoucheh thatEp. 89. c. 2 he had not had security of preaching the Gholpell, if it had not been approued by Pe∣ters Sentence, and the rest that were with him.In Mat. 28. S. Chrisosto∣me vpon these words, Tell the Church, vnderstandeth by the Church, the Prelates of the Church. Now as the auncient Fa∣thers haue thus expounded the former Scriptures in behalfe of the Church, being the Iudge of Controuersies in causes Ecclesiasticall; so was their owne practise answerable in all succeeding ages: for neuer did there heresy aryse in any age, but it was still condemned and extinguished by the supreme Pastour and other Bishops assembled who liued in the same age. Now to censure that for errour, which the vniuersall Church teacheth, S. AustinEp. 118. termeth most insolent madnes. This is proued particularly throughout all ages by Cardi∣nall Bellarmine,De verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 6. who reciteth the heresies, and the Po∣pes and Councels that condemned them; shewing withall, that they were euer reputed hereticks who did not obey them. Agreably to which, D. Bilson confesseth, that the Fa∣thersPerpet. gouern. pag. 374. In all ages, as well before as since the great Councell of Neece, haue approued and practised this (of Councels) as the surest meanes to decide doubts. By this it appeareth, that according to the Exposition made by the ancient Fathers, the Scriptures do teach vs, that not the Scriptures alone, but the Church of Christ expounding the same, is to be acknowledged and re∣ceiued for our Guide and Iudge in matters of Faith.
SECT. IIII. That Protestants expound the Scriptures agreably with Ca∣tholikes in proofe of the Church being the Iudge of Con∣trouersies; and that sundry Protestants do teach and de∣fend the same Doctrine. THe Text of Scripture is so cleare and conuincing for this our Catholike doctrine, as that sundry of our chie∣fest Protestnt Dctours, not only interprete the same ac∣cordingly, but withall do teach and defend the same truth. The very Puritanes acknowledge, concerning the Eccle∣siasticall Primacy in tyme of the old Law, that,English Puritanisme p. 16 And see Hook. Eccl. pol. l. 5. pag. 235. The high Priest of the Iewes, was Typically and in a figure the supreme head of the whole Catholike Church; which though (say they) it were vi∣sible only in the Prouince and Ntion of Iewry, yet those of other Na∣tions and Countries (as appeareth by the history of the Acts, euen though they were Aethiopians) were vnder this high Priest and acknowledged homage vnto him. So that he was not a Prouinciall Metropolitan, but in very deed an oecumenicall and vniuersall Bishop of the whole world. And thersore the Pope of Rome, who alone maketh clayme vnto, and is in possession of the like vniuersall Supremacy, hath more warrant in the word of God to the same, then any Metropolitan or Diocesan, not dependant vpon him, hath or can haue. So that by the word of God, ei∣ther there must be no Metropolitans, or Diocesans, or els there must be a Pope. In like sort teacheth M. Cartwright,In VVhi∣teg. Def. pag. 428. The high Priest was the head Priest ouer all the whole Church, which was during his tyme to our Sauiour Christ. So cleere it is that not only Moyses, but euen during the whole tyme of the old Law, there was one supreme head Ecclesiasticall, vnto whom all others were bound to obey. Now concerning the law of Deutro∣nomy, wherby, as I haue formerly proued, the authority & Primacy of the Church was established; Protestants in so euident a matter affirme, that the people were boundMarg. notes of the Engl Bib. of Anno 1585. in Deut. 17.11. to obey their sentence, that the controuersy might haue an end. D. Rai∣nolds confesseth that, (4) The law of Deutronomy was made to
establish a highest Court of Iudgment, in which all harder causes Ec∣clesiasticall and Ciuil, should be determined. And the selfe same is taught byDe sacra scrip. pa 466. Bilson per∣pet. Gouern. c. 4. p. 20. And see his true Diff. &c. part. 3 p. 36. 37. D. Whitaker, D. Bilson, and M. Hooker. Now that the sentence grounded vpon this Law was definitiue and final, it is acknowledged by D. Bilson saying,Perpet. Gouern. p. 20. Their sentence by Gods Law no man might refuse without punishment of death. Yea sayth D. Whitaker, in this CaseDe sacra scrip. pa. 466. of defyning Ec∣clesiasticall controuersies by the Minister, it was not lawfull to ap∣peale, for otherwise there would haue been no end of Contention. With whom accordeth Doctour Reinolds affirming,Confe∣rence, pa. 251. that in this highest Court of Iudgment, all harder causes Ecclesiasticall were to be determined without appeale further. And the like is taught by M. Hooker,Preface before Eccl. Pol. pag 26. 27. 28. who further alledging this Law of Deutro∣nomy, and the former example of the Apostles out of the Acts, telleth the Puritanes, that what successe God may giue to any Conference or Disputation, we cannot tell, but we are sure that nature, Scripture, and Experience, haue all taught the world to seek for the ending of Contentions by submitting it selfe vnto some iudiciall and definitiue sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth may vnder any Pretence refuse to stand. Yea it is a truth so certaine, that the Church of Christ is the Iudge of interpretation of Scripture, and of all other Controuersies, that Martin Lu∣ther confesseth, that,Luthe∣rus l. de po∣testate Papae. we are not certaine of any priuate man, whether he haue the Reuelation of the Father or no, but the Church it is, of whom it is not lawfull to doubt. And therupon he sayth,In Dis∣put. Lipsiaca. I submit my selfe to the Iudgment and determination of the holy Church. And in another place;Ep. ad marchionem Brandeburg. quae est tom. 2. Germ. fol. 243. It is a dangerous and horri∣ble thing to heare or belieue, any thing which is contrary to the vnani∣mous testimony of fayth, and the doctrine of the holy and Catholicke Church, which she hath agreably kept from the beginning, for aboue a thousand and fyue hundred yeares. Were it possible to thinke that any man should say thus much for the authority of the Church, and do the quite contrary if he were not a Luther. Caluin expresly teacheth, that,Inst. l. 4. c. 1 sec. 5. as (God) in tymes past was not content only with the Law, or only with the Scripture, but added Priests for interpreters, fromMal. 2.7. whose lippes the people should sek the true sense therof: So at this day he would not haue vs only to at∣tend to reading, but he also ordayned maisters, by whose labour we
may be holpen. And in his Commentary, vpon these words, It hath seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and vs, he sayth,In com∣ment in Act. 15. by this is confuted the obstinacy of those who with full mouthes boasting of faith, do no lesse impiously, then proudly contemne the ministery of the Church. For as it were a Sacrilegious diuision, if fayth but in one Ar∣ticle should depend of man a part; So they openly mock God, who pas∣sing by (or neglectng) his ministers by whom he speaketh, pretend to receiuo him their maister. Now who are these true Ministers, himselfe telleth vs to his owne shame, saying,Com∣ment. in Eze∣chiel. 13. we see at this day how the Papists do take vnto themselues the name of the Church, because perpetuall succession is pretended by them. And truly we are compelled to confesse, that they haue the Ordinary Ministery. So Catholikly Caluin. Chemnitius teacheth, that in respect ofExam. part. 1. fol. 63. many hard questions, God would haue to remaine in his Church (to auoyd all occasion of errour) the guift of Interpretation, which is not common to all, no more then is the guift of healing and miracles. And this gift God would not haue to be contemned or reiected, but re∣uerently vsed, as an Instrument and help to fynd out the true and sound sense of Scripture. According to the Confession of Wittemberg,Cap. de Eccles. the Church hath right to Iudge of all doctrines:Cap. de Concil. She hath an assured promise of Christs perpetuall presence, and is gouerned by the Holy Ghost. Yea sayth D. Whitaker,Controu. 1 q. 3. c 6 pa. 323. She hath the spirit of God, by whom being taught, she heareth the voyce of her spouse, and acknowledgeth his doctrine. And in answere to Duraeus,Cont. Duraeum. l. 2. f. 134. Thou dost affirme that to be the sense of the word, which the Catho∣licke Church hath receiued from the Holy Ghost: I confesse so much for the Church is taught the true Sense of Scripture from the Holy Ghost, she is the keeper of fayth, the ground and Pillar of truth. And a∣gaine,Ibid. fol. 142. 143. It seemeth to thee as though I should esteem that for a great offence, that when any hard question aryseth the Iudgment of the Church should be required; which thing I confesse neuer came into my mynd, for the Iudgment of the Church is greatly to be accounted of, and is euer greatly of force to interpret the Scriptures rightly, and to determine Controuersies. D. Reynolds after his long debating this point, doth in the end acknowledge, that not only,Confer. p. 99. Christ our Sa∣uiour is to be our Iudge, but also they, which vnder him haue it com∣mitted to them, euen the Church of Christ.
D. Bancroft preached publikely,Sermon preached the 8. of Fe∣bruary, An∣no 1588. pag. 42. 43. God hath bound himselfe vnto his Church of purpose, that men by her good direction might in matters of doubt be relieued; to whose godly determination in matters of question, her dutifull children ought to submit themselues, without any curious or willfull contradiction. A saying so Catho∣licke, that a Puritan writer repeating the sameA Trea∣tile entitu∣led a Briefe discourse of vntruthes &c. contai∣ned in a Sermon preached by D Bancroft. p. 34. sayth, If this be not to ioyne hands with the Papists, let the Reader be Iudge.Def. of the Art. art. 20. Prop. 3. p. 103. Rogers defendeth, that the Church hath authority to Iudge and determine in Controuersies of fayth. AndIb. Art. 20. p. 104. that to interpret the word of God is a peculiar blessing, giuen by God only to the Church, and company of the faythfull, though not to all and euery one of them. And whereas Generall Councels do truly represent the Church, the authority of them for the finall decyding of Controuersies, Protestants do confirme from the sacred Scriptures; in so much that Melancthons aduice is, thatConcil. Theol. part. 2. p. 1. 2. And see l. 1. epist. 211. They assemble generall or nationall Councels &c. because it is written, Tell the Church. This was the custome of the Church from the very be∣ginning &c. And Councells are the proper Iudgements of the Church: yea it is expedient, that there be Iudgements in the Church, for o∣ther Nations cannot but be scandalized, if they shall heare that we will not vndergoe the sentence of any Councell. D. Whitgift, D. Rai∣nolds, D. Bilson and others do gather from the former e∣xample of the Apostles in the Acts, the necessity ofWhit. Def. p. 661. And see Carth∣wright, ib. and p 678. Rain. Con∣fer. p 254. 255. Bils. in his Perpet. Gouern. c. 16. p. 373. Coun∣cels for the deciding of Controuersies. In regard heerof Caluin sayth,Inst. l. 4. c. 9. §. 8. We willingly imbrace and reuerence as sacred, for as much as concerneth decrees of fayth, those ancient Synods, as that of Neece, Constantinople, Ephesus the first, Chalcedon, and the like, which were assembled for the confuting of he∣resies; for they contayne nothing but pure and natiue Interpretation of Scripture, which holy Fathers applyed with spirituall wisdome, to the ouercoming of the enemies of Religion, who then appead. And in another place,L. 4. c. 9. §. 13. We truly do willingly grant, that if Disputa∣tion happen concerning any opinion, that there is no remedy either bet∣ter or more certaine, then if a Synod of true Bishops do assemble, where the doctrine controuerted may be discussed: for much more waight will such Definition haue to which the Pastors of Churches hauing inuoca∣ted the spirit of Christ, shall generally consent, then if any one alone at home, what he hath conceiued, shall deliuer to the people, or some few
men priuatly should make it. Syr Edwin Sandes confesseth thatRela∣tion &c. fol.. 82. The Papists haue the Pope as a common Father, ad∣uiser, and conductour, to reconcile their iarres, to decyde their differences, to draw their Religion by consent of Councells vn∣to vnity &c. whereas on the contrary syde, Protestants are as se∣uered, or rather scattered troopes, each drawing aduerse way, without any to pacify their quarrels, no Patriarch one or more, to haue a common superintendance or care of their Churches for cor∣respondency and vnity: no ordinary way to assemble a Generall Coun∣cell of their part, the only hope remayning euer to asswage their contentions. Now that these Councells cannot erre, D. Bil∣son acknowledgeth with them the presence & assistācePerpet. Gouern. pag. 372. 373. 374. of the holy Ghost.Ib. p. 371. And (43) that they are strengthned with the pro∣mise of our Sauiour. M. Ridley affirmethAct. Mon. pag. 1288. that, Councells do indeed represent the whole Church, and being so gathered togeather in the name of Christ, they haue a promise of the guift and guyding of his Spirit into all truth. From which ground of their freedome from errour, D. Bilson obseruing truly, that,Perpet. Gouern. pag. 372. To haue no Iudge for the ending of Ecclesiasticall contentions, were the vtter sub∣uersiō of all peace, doth therupon inferIbid. p. 370. Synods to be an exter∣nall iudiciall meanes to discerne errour. And further he affirmeth, that the Fathers inIbid. p. 374. all ages, aswell before as since the great Councell of Nice, haue approued and practised this, as the surest mea∣nes to decyde doubts. Luther was opinion that,Lib. cont. Swing. de ve∣ritate Corp. Christi in Euch. If the world shall continue longer, it wilbe necessary by reason of the different interpetations of Scriptures, which now are, for the preseruing of vni∣ty of fayth, that we receaue againe the Decrees of Councells, and fly vnto them. To whome D. Couell addeth that,Modest Examina∣tion. p. 110. If Sy∣nods want, the Church neyther at any tyme was, nor indeed can safty be without tempests. Yea such is the force of a Generall Coun∣cell, that Sir Edwin Sands (as before) thinketh itRela∣tion. f. 8. 2. The only hope remayning euer to asswage (Protestants) dissentions. And M. Hooker auoucheth that,Pref to Eccl. Pol. p. 28. The will of God is to haue vs do whatsoeuer the sentence of Iudiciall and finall decision shall de∣termine, yea though it seeme in our Priuate opinion to swarue vtterly from that which is right. Which sentence sayth he,Ibidem. Is ground sufficient for any reasonable mans Conscience to build vpon, whatsoeuer his opinion were as touching the matter before in question. And that,
Ibid. p. 26. As for other meanes without this, they seeldome preuayle: because that,Ibid. p. 28. without this, it is almost impossible that we should auoyd confusion, or euer hope to attaine peace. Of all which we may conclude, that seeing Protestants expounding the sacred Scriptures, are inforced from thence to confesse, that Coun∣cels do truly represent the Church, that they are guided by the holy Ghost into all truth, that the Fathers of all ages haue vsed them for the ending of Controuersies, that without them the Church can ne∣uer be without tempests, and that, they are the surest meanes to de∣cyde doubts, that therfore for the ending of Ecclesiasticall cō∣tentions, we are to appeale vnto them, as a most certayne and Supreme Iudge. And that our Protestants at home, do not rely only vpō Scripture, but vpon an external Iudgmēt or definitiue sen∣tence appointed for the ending of Controuersies, appeareth by their answerable practise thereof, in the high Court of Parlament, Anno 1. Eliz. cap. 1. Where hauing reserued the Iudgement of Heresy to a Generall Councell, but yet with limitatiō that the matter be declared Heresy by the Scripture: it next afterwards determineth that to be Heresy absolutly, & without any such or other limitation, whatsoeuer shalbe heerafter iudged to be Heresy by the high Court of Parlament of this Realme. And so accordingly, the Puritanes in their treatise intituled,Pag. 3. A Petition directed to her most excellent Ma∣iesty &c. do referre their matters in question to the Parla∣ment to iudge therof. But this flying of Protestants in causes Ecclesiasticall to Parlaments, consisting for the greatest part, of the Laity, strongly conuinceth their desperation to de∣cyde their dayly and deadly arysing dissentions, only by the Scriptures. But now, because the Councell of TrentSess. 4. hath further decreed, that, none presume to interpret the sacred Scriptu∣res contrary to the vnanimous consent of Fathers; let vs see how farre sundry of the learnedst Protestants, do agree with vs in the same Rule of interpretation by Fathers. D. Morton professeth, that,Prote∣stants Ap∣peale. pag. 354. It hath been the common and constant pro∣fession of Protestants to stand vnto the Iudgment of Antiquity, for the continuance of the first foure hundred yeares and more, in all
things. YeaIbid. p. 512. Protestants in the disquisition of truth, do not abso∣lutely bound the name of Antiquity, within the compasse of the first Century of yeares, but are content to allow it a longer extent, & ther∣fore in all doctrines which are truly Catholicke, &c. they refuse not to be tried by the testimonies of the Ancient Fathers in the first fiue hun∣dred yeares after Christ. This doctour maketh here a faire flo∣rish, as though all Protestants did stand, as in all reason they ought, to the Iudgment of the Fathers of the Primitiue Church: but how false this is, euery Section through this whole Treatise, which treateth of the Fathers interpreting Scriptures, will cleerly demonstrate.Exam. part. 1. p. 74. Chemnitius con∣ceiueth this tryall by the Primitiue Church, to be so good & iust, as that he thinketh, that no man doubteth, but that the Primi∣tiue Church receiued from the Apostles and Apostolick men, not only the text of Scripture, but also the right and natiue sense therof. Wherupon sayth he,Ibid. pag. 64. we are greatly confirmed in the true & sound sense of Scripture, by testimony of the Ancient Church. And accordingly other Protestants confesse, that theHarmo∣ny of Con∣fess. p. 400. Primitiue Church is the true and best Mistresse of Posterity, and going before leadeth vs the way. D. Sarauia confirmeth the authority of the Primitiue Church, from her speciall assistance by the holy Ghost, saying,De diuer∣sis Ministro∣rum gradi∣bus p. 8. The holy Ghost who gouerneth the Church is the best Interpreter of Scriptures, from him therfore is the true inter∣pretation to be sought, and seeing he cannot be contrary to himselfe who ruled the Primitiue Church, and gouerned it by Bishops, it is not agreable to truth now to cast them of. D. Whitaker renewing the most audacious challenge made by D. Iewel, writeth thus to the glorious Martyr Campian,Resp. ad Rat. Camp. p. 90. 9. Attend Campian, The speech of Iewel was most true and constant, when prouoking you to the Antiquity of the (first) Six hundred yeares, he offered, that if you could shew but any one cleere & playne saying, out of any one Father or Councell, he would grant you the victory: It is the offer of vs all, the same do we all promise, and we will all performe it. And the like is proclaimed byOf the Church l 5. in his Ap∣pendix therto. Part. 1. p. 33. Mort. Protestants Appeale p. 573. 574. D. Field, and D. Morton. So that if we may belieue these great Do∣ctours, all Protestants do appeale to the Councels and Fa∣thers of the Primitiue Church for the deciding of Contro∣uersies, and for the fynding out of the true sense and Inter∣pretation
of Scripture. Neither may we in reason thinke that this guift of interpretation of the sacred Scriptures, ceased with the Pastors of the Primitiue Church; but as Pa∣stors and Doctors are to continue, toEph. 4.11 12.13.14. the consummation of the Saints &c. vntil we meet all into the vnity of fayth, which is, ac∣cording to Protestants,Whi∣tak. ag. Rei∣nol. f. 76. Melanct. loc. com de Ecclesia. for euer, to the end that we be not Children wauering, and caryed about with euery wynd of doctrine. And who therfore not by any humane authority, but byAct. 20.28. the holy Ghost are placed &c. to rule the Church of God: that so like∣wise their infallible power and authority of interpeting Scripture, and declaring the true sense therof, is also to con∣tinue in the Church. In proofe wherof, Caluin gathereth from these words of the ApostleEph. 4.11.12. And he gaue some Apo∣stles, and some Prophets, and other some Euangelistes, and other some Pastors and Doctours &c. that,Instit. impress. Ge∣neuae. 1550. c. de fide f 234. these Pastours and Doctours haue an ordinary charge in the Church, & the Church can neuer want them, but euermore Doctors haue authority to interprete the Scriptu∣res, that sincere & wholsome doctrine may be retained among the faith∣full. D. Fulke confesseth that,Ans∣were to a Counterf. Cath. art. 14. f. 81. the Church neuer wanteth the guift of vnderstanding. And both he, and D. Whitaker teach that,Against Rhem. Test. f. 445. 6. Whitak. de sacra Scrip. contro. 1. q. 4. f. 406. The people are not sufficient to read the Scriptures without their Pastors to guide them in all matters and doubts. The transla∣tour of the Bible into English published Anno 1556. in his Epistle therto prescribeth, that euery one as he is placed in this bo∣dy which is the Church, ought to enquire of the Ministers concerning the will of the Lord, which is reuealed in his word; for they are, sayth Hieremie, the mouth of the Lord, yea he promiseth to be with their mouth, and that their lippes shall keep knowledge, and that the truth and the law shalbe in their mouth, for it is their Office chie∣fly to vnderstand the Scriptures, and teach them. So cleerly do Protestants attribute to the Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all ages the guift of interpretation, the true vn∣derstanding of Scriptures, and the Peoples duty in learning of them the will of God, and the decision of their doubts. And thus we see by the seuerall texts of the holy Scriptures, either taken in that literall & natiue sense which the words do afford, or according to their Exposition made by the An∣cient Fathers, and Protestant writers, that our Iudge of
Controuersies is not only the written word, but the Church of Christ in all ages, Generall approued Councels, and the vnanimous consent of Ancient Fathers. Such obiections from Scriptures as are vsually vrged against the Iudicature of the Church, are either taken from such texts, as giue great praises to the Scripture, or seeme to assure euery man of the assistance of the spirit, or which may be thought to detract from the Infallibility of the Church: of all which being to speake in the Chapters following, I re∣serue the answeres for their more proper places.
CHAP. II. The true State of the Question concerning the Churches Infallibility, or not erring. Whether the Vniuersall Church of Christ can erre in defy∣ning matters of fayth, and manners: or rather, that such her Decrees are alwayes most true and infallible, and for such are to be belieued, and obserued by the faythfull. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE Church being thus proued to be the Iudge of all Controuersies in Reli∣gion, it must needs follow that she is free from errour, and therfore as a truth most certaine in the Councell of Basil it was decreed, thatRespons. Synod. de Authorit. Concil. Ge∣ner. the Catholike Church is enri∣ched with so great Priuiledge by Christ our Sa∣uiour, who founded it with his blood, that we firmely belieue she cannot erre &c. in those things which are necessary to Saluation. The holy Ghost who cannot lye, hath promised that he will stay with her to the end of the world, and that she is to be taught by the Holy Ghost in all truth. And the same is taught by the Councell of Sens, saying,Decret. General. The vniuersall Church cannot erre, because she is gouerned with the Spirit of truth, abyding with her for euer, and with whome Christ abydeth vntill the end of the world. AndDecret. 1. He that shall not follow (her) authority in fayth and man∣ners,
as if he had denyed God &c. let him be holden worse then an In∣fidell. And so accordingly it is nowBellar. de Eccl. l. 3. cap. 14. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 18.8. generally taught, that the Catholicke Church of Christ cannot erre in matters of fayth and manners. Points not defyned. Some teachSee Bel∣lar. de Rom. Pont. l. 4. c, 4. that the particular Roman Church cannot erre in matters of fayth, in such sort that no true be∣lieuers should be found in the Roman Church. But others limit this, in case the Apostolicall Sea should be remoued from Rome, which whether it can be translated or no, is also disputable. But none of these are defyned by the Church as matters of Fayth, or otherwise condemned as doctrines hereticall. Protestants vntruthes. Luther blusheth not to say, thatLib. de Concilijs. those Sycophants who flatter the Pope (meaning Catholikes) are so besotted, that they defend most audaciously this Paradoxe, The Councels haue power to make new articles of faith, and to change the old. But this is an audaciouslye made by Luther. White affirmeth that,Way to the Chur. Pref. to the Reader. n. 12. For the Church, the Fathers, the Councels, the Pope, which is all they can pretend, are yielded by themselues to be subiect to Error. But Iohn white in lying followeth in this his Father Luther. Rogers auoucheth that,Def. of the Articles Art. 21. p. 113. Neuer yet had there been a Councell, either Generall or Nationall, or whatsoeuer &c. either begun or ended to the glory of God, but it hath been, I say, not called only, but confir∣med also by some Godly Emperour, King, or Queene. This in effect is granted by all reformed Churches. And,Ib. Art. 11. p. 116. by Councels, the Tradi∣tions and bookes of foolish men, haue been made of equall authority with the word of God; as by the Councell of Trent. This is only lowd lying, and therfore needeth no other Answere. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church hath decreed that,Article 19. the Church of Rome hath erred, not only in their liuing and māner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of fayth.Article 21. See Calu. Inst. l. 4. c 9. Generall Coun∣cels
&c. when they be gathered togeather, for as much as they be an assembly of men, wherof all be not gouerned with the spirit and word of God, they may erre, and sometyme haue erred, euen in things per∣tayning vnto God. Wherfore things ordayned by them as necessary to Saluation, haue neither strength nor authority, vnlesse it may be decla∣red that they be taken out of holy Scripture. Whitaker affirmeth that,Controu. 2. q. 4. c. 3. pa. 489. God hath not promised this to the Church that it should not erre &c. The vniuersall Church may erre. The Church militant may erre. All the Pastors and Bishops of Churches may erre. It isIbid. pa. 490. euident that the true Church euen in things necessary may erre for a tyme. YeaIbid. pag. 491. it is euident that the whole Church erred concerning the vocation of the Gentiles. And the ChurchIb. q. 5. c. 17. p. 541. also for a tyme may erre in some fundamentall points. The like is taught byDe notis Ecclesiae. vol. 3. p. 139. Da∣naeus Con∣trou. 4. l. 3. c. 17. p. 733. Beza and others. So that according to Protestants the vni∣uersall Church, the true Church, Generall Councels, all Pa∣stors and Bishops may erre in matters of fayth, in things ne∣cessary, and in points fundamentall. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. TheAlph. de Castro. ver. Concilium. Arians taught all Councells to be subiect to error, and particularly they reiected the Nicene Councell. The DonatistsAug. passim Cont. Donatistas. condemned the whole Church of error. And so did alsoSerm. 45. Wicliffe. And the same as you haue seene do our moderne Protestants defend, as true heirs of such vnworthy Progenitors. Protestant Errours. WeDe vera Eccles. refor. pa. 322. do not vrge without cause (sayth Caluin) the Church of God, for some ages to haue been so torne and broken in pee∣ces, that it hath been destitute ef true Pastours. Danaeus affirmeth that,Contro. 3. p. 426. the Church often hath no man for Pastour. AndControu. 4. p. 757. the true Church hath often wanted Prelats. And the same is taught byBeza de notis Eccles. vol 3. p. 147. Sadeel, resp. ad art. abiurat. p. 573. Lub l. 5. de Eccl. c. 5. other Protestants. Whitaker not fearing to charge the Apostles themselues with errours, saythControu. 2. q. 5. c. 17. p. 541., These were great errours, and yet we see these to haue been in the Apostles, euen after the holy Ghost had descended vpon them. Brentius affirmeth
that,In Apo. Confess. c. de Concil. p. 90. S. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas after the holy Ghost receaued, togeather with the Church of Hierusalem, er∣red. But if the Church can be without true Pastours, if the Apostles who haue deliuered vnto vs the new Testament of Gods sacred word; if S. Peter the head of the Church, be all of them subiect to errour, vpon what firme ground can any Christian build his fayth or certainty of Religion? SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures that the Vniuersall Church of Christ, cannot erre in matters of fayth and manners. I Must suppose what I haue formerly proued,See be∣fore c. 1. §. 1. See 3. Reg. 8. 14. Mat. 18.17. Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Act 15. sect. 5 Ridley Act. Mon. p. 1288. and which is acknowledged for true by sundry Protestants which is, that by the Church in this question is vnderstood, not only the whole company of the faithfull, comprehen∣ding therin both the Clergy and the Laity, but chiefly that which doth truly represent the whole Church, to wit, the head therof, and the Bishops lawfully assembled togeather in Generall Councell: Euen as the Parlament representeth the whole Common wealth, and hath the Authority ther∣of. And so S. AustinL. 1. de Bap. c. 18. &. l 7. c. 53. calleth the sentence of a Generall Coun∣cell, the consent of the whole Church. Now that the Church taken in this sense cannot erre, may first be proued by all such ar∣guments, as weSee be∣fore c. 1. vsed before in proofe that the Church of Christ, is the lawfull and finall Iudge of Controuersies in Religion, for it doth euidently follow therof, that she is not subiect to error. Or els it must be granted, that Christ hath made for vs in matters of Saluation, an erroneous Iudge, which were absurd and blasphemous. The same is confir∣med by such places as speake expresly of the Church it selfe,Mat. 16.18. Vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not preuayle against it.Mat. 18.17. If he will not heare the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and Publican. Now if the Sentence or decree of the Church may be false and erroneous, it were most iniurious to bynd euery one vnder so great punish∣ment to assent therunto.
Those textes litterally taken being most plaine in our behalfe, let vs see how Protestants would euade them. To this place Whitaker answereth:De script. l. 1. c. 12. sect. 1. pa 143. The sonne of God hath com∣mended the voice of the Church to be heard, but not vnles she show the Scriptures. Or as Herbrandus sayth,In Com∣pend. loc. de Ecclesia. pag. 492. As long as she soundeth heauenly and vncorrupt doctrine, but so long a Child may be be∣lieued. FieldOf the Church. l. 4 c 4 Hun∣nius in Col∣loq Ratis∣bon. sess. 6. Molineus in Scuto. p. 84. and others do limit this to contentions bet∣ween particular persons, not to Controuersies of Religion: but if the Church be to be heard in matters Ciuill, much more in Ecclesiasticall. Herbrandus also limiteth this to the Church of Christs tyme, saying, TheIn Com∣pend. loc. de Eccles. pag. 494. Commandement is not vniuersall of the Church of all tymes, but Christ speaketh of his little Church, according to the Condition of those tymes, which then wanted a pious politick Ma∣gistrat, and who should be a member of the Church. But this dero∣gateth from Christs perpetual Prouidence ouer his Church: neither are those tymes lesse needfull of an Infallible tea∣cher and Iudge, then the former. Christ also is calledEph. 1.22.23. The head of the Church, and the Church his body; &Eph. 4.4. one body, one spirit; Therfore if the Church should erre, the error ther∣of would be ascribed to Christ, he being the head therof, and to the holy Ghost, as the Soule or lyfe. And wheras Caluin answereth, that Christ and the holy Ghost do teach the Church all truth absolutely necessary, (which is contrary to his former brethren) but yet do alwayes leaue some ble∣mishes or smaller errours; which no more are to be ascribed to Christ, or the holy Ghost, then Ignorance, wherof doubt∣les there is some in the Church: I answer, as the husbād who is head of the wife, is not bound to remoue all Ignorance from her, and yet is bound to remoue all errour, wherof great hurt may aryse, although she may be excused by Igno∣rance: So Christ is bound to preserue the Church from all error, wherof great Euill may ensue, of which kind is all er∣ror concerning faith: seeing it is a most pernicious euill, that the Church should worship God with false faith, Gods true worship chiefly consisting in fayth, hope, and charity. A∣gayne, if the Church only cannot erre in matters necessary to saluation, then the most points of fayth may be called in
question, for many things are to be belieued, which are not absolutly necessary to saluation, as that there are Di∣uine Scriptures, without the fayth whereof, many haue been saued, as well before the Scriptures were written, as since theIrenaeus l. 3. c. 4. tyme of the new Testament, in remote Na∣tions. Now I presume that Caluin will not allow that doubt to be made of the Scriptures. Agayne those smaller errours are eyther such as do not preiudice the integrity of fayth and mans saluation; & then without iust cause did Luther & all Protestants reuolt from the Catholicke Church, with so much combustion and ef∣fusion of Christian bloud: Or if they do preiudice fayth & saluation, then they are not small, but waighty errours, & such, as therewith the Church cannot stand. For Whitaker confesseth, thatControu. 2. q. 5. c. 17. If any fundamentall point of doctrine be re∣moued, the Church presently falleth; but no man will deny that such things as preiudice fayth and saluation, are fundamen∣tall, vnlesse he will speake so absurdly and contradicto∣ry as Whitaker doth in the same place, affirming that, The Church may erre for a tyme in some foundations, and yet be sound. So that you must imagine a Church to be sound, and yet fayle in the foundation. Yea directly contrary to Whitaker, S. Paul calleth the Church,1. Tim. 3.15. The pillar and ground of truth. This text is so plaine in our behalfe, that Protestants labour extremely to auoyd the same.Calu. in Tim. VVhi∣tak. cont. Staplet. fol. 289. Vrfinus Comment. Catech. fol. 17. Rein. Confer. pa. 639. Caluin and others answere, that she is only so called, because she is a faythful keeper of the truth, preseruing the Scriptures. But this maketh for me, for if she be a faythfull keeper of the truth, how then doth she erre? for in erring she doth not keep the truth, but depart from it. And if it be only vnderstood that she kept the written word from perishing; then in that sense, Libraries, Satio∣ners shops, and Arkes, may be called Pillars and grounds of truth: neyther is heer any mention made of Scriptures, but absolutely the Church is called the Pillar and ground of truth: Besides the Church was a Pillar of Truth, when there were not any Scriptures to be preserued. Whitaker further answereth, thatControu. 2. q. 4. c. 2. p. 485. not simply euery
truth, but only necessary is vnderstood in this place, Answerably to which saith Vorstius,In An∣tibel. p. 143. The Apostle treateth not of euery truth in any respect belonging to Religion, but only of sauing truth, or neces∣sary to Saluation to be knowne; and this conditionally, to wit, so long as she perseuereth the true Church of Christ. Or (as Peter Martyr sayth)In loc. Clas. 4. c. 4. §. 21. I confesse she is truly the Pillar of Truth, but not al∣waies, but when she relyeth vpon the word of God. Or as others say,Confess Heluet. c. 17. She erreth not as long as she relyeth vpon Christ the Rocke, and the foundation of Prophets and Apostles. Or as Bullinger writeth,Decad. 4. serm. 5. fol. 229. the Church erreth not when she heareth the voyce of her spouse & Pastor. But all this is so impertinent, that with the same li∣mitations, I may truely affirme any Cobler or Tinker, any Hereticke or Deuill, to be the Pillar of truth: for none of these erre so long as they rely vpon Christ, and the word of God. And indeed it is all one as to say, She is the Pillar of truth, whilest she is the Pillar of truth. So idle is all this. Againe, Protestants must vnderstand here, either all Truth, or but some Truth: if they meane that some truth is euer in the Church only, and she in that respect the Pillar of Truth, that cannot be so, for some truth is euer also among hereticks, and yet is not their Congregation the pillar of Truth. And if they meane that all Truth is euer in the Church only, then we haue our intent, that the Church cannot erre, seeing euery error is a deniall of some truth. Lastly, Chem∣nitiusExam. part. 1. p. 10. Rein. Confer. p. 652. c. 9. and Reinolds answere, that the Apostle calling the Church the Pillar of Truth, meant only, that she ought to be the Pillar of Truth, and so though not alwayes indeed, yet alwayes in office and duty, she is the Pillar of Truth, euen when she erreth: Euen as in like manner the Priest is calledMal. 2.7. The Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, not for that he did alwayes the Lords message truly, but for that he alwaies had authority so to do. I ans∣were this shift is no better then any of the former, the Com∣parison being most vnlike, for though it were granted, that the Priest did not Gods message alwaies truly, yet was he al∣waies truly and indeed Gods Messenger, receiuing that name and office, not from the message done, but from the authority & charge, giuen him to do the same: for the word Messenger, is a word of Office, respecting only an authority
& charge of a thing not already done, or presently in doing, but herafter to be done, namely of the message to be execu∣ted, & so euen before the message done, the party is actually inuested in that office, in respect only of the authority and charge, which actually he enioyeth? As in like, Kings Embassadours are actually for the tyme Embassadours, be∣fore they do their Embassy, or although they do it vntruly. But these words which the Apostle referreth o the Church, are of another nature, being titles not of Office only, but of Priuiledge, respecting an action still present. And so the Church, is in this place also called the House of God, for that God still dwelleth in her; and in the next words, she is ter∣med The Pillar of Truth. Because (euen asConfer. p, 639. Reynolds himselfe sayth) it beareth vp the Truth and confirmeth it: for no man cā say of the Church, that she is the House of God, when God dwelleth not in her; or that she is actually the Pillar of Truth when she erreth, as on the other part it may be sayd in the example obiected of the Priest, that he is actually Gods Messenger, and may so be called euen before his message done, or though he erre therein: As also in like manner he is truly his Priest, though he should erre in the function ther∣of.Instit. impress. Ar∣gentor. c. 4. defide. p. 147. Caluin himselfe confesseth thus much, speaking of the Iewes Church when it had reuolted, in which not∣withstanding he then acknowledgeth peculiar prerogatiues of the Church, and yet in respect of the Reuolt and defe∣ction of those times, he sayth thereof, If those be Churches, then is the Church not the Pillar of Truth &c. not the Tabernacle of the liuing God: whereas if the foresayd answere were good, the Church reuolted, which he speaketh of, was euen the Pillar of Truth, because as then she ought to haue been such. To conclude, as the Church is euer actually, and indeed The house of God: So is she euer actually and indeed the Pillar of Truth: and vnto her, as Gods house the faithfull ought to re∣sort to be taught, as the Prophet foretelleth of Christs Church, saying,Isa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. Come let vs ascend to the House of the God of Iacob, and he shall teach vs his wayes. The same is proued by such places as argue that lawfull Councels cannot erre. If the first Councell said confidently,Act. 15.28. It hath seemed good to
the holy Ghost & to vs, so auouching the decrees therof to be the decrees of the holy Ghost, then the like may say other Councels, the holy Ghost no lesse assisting them for the good of the Church. Christ himselfe alsoMat. 18.20. promiseth his owne perpetuall and present assistance, saying, Where two or three are gathered togeather in my name, there am I in the middest of them. But for the better vnderstanding hereof, obserue, that our Sauiour speaking before of the incorrigible man, said, Tell the Church, and if he will not heare the Church &c. Now least any should thinke that the Church might be contemned or disobeyed, he annexeth immediatly, Whatsoeuer yee shall bynd vpon Earth &c. And least any should doubt of Gods assi∣stance, when the Pastors of the Church assembled do con∣demne or absolue any man, therfore it followeth, Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the middest of them. And concerning euerything whatsoeuer they shal aske it shalbe done to them of my Father &c. Now what request more iust & necessa∣ry, then to be able infallibly to discerne truth from falshood? Christ speaking of the cōming of the holy Ghost, sayth,Io. 16.23 & 14.26. when he is come which is the spirit of Truth, we will lead you into all truth: Whitaker would euade this, saying,Controu. 2. quaest. 4. c. 2. p. 486. 488. I ans∣were, Christ and the holy Ghost do teach the Church all truth, simply necessary, but often do leaue some error: And the same answere is giuen by ReinoldsThes. 2. Bucanus loc. 41. and others. But this is contrary to the text which sayth, that the holy Ghost will lead into all truth. Neither would this be sufficient direction for Chri∣stians, who are not able to discerne, what truth is simply ne∣cessary, and what not. Daneus therfore restrayneth this only to the Apostles, sayingControu. 4. p. 632. This promise of Christ belongeth pro∣perly and truly to those twelue whom he then spoke vnto: Therfore it is a personall benefit, which cannot be extended to others then those twelue Apostles. And the same answere is made by Molineus.In Scuto. p. 51. But S. CyprianCypr. l. 4. Epist. Ba∣sil. Constit. Monast. c. 23. and S. Basill apply this to their Successors. And Fulke confesseth, that,Fulk. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 10.16. It is all one to des∣pise the Minister of Christs Catholicke Church, and to despise Christ. And that this is not spoken only to the Apostles, but also to their Successors, is manifest, in that the said Spirit is promi∣sed to abyde with the ApostlesIo. 14.16. for euer, that is, with them
and their Successors. And so Christ himselfe sayth,Io. 14.16. I will aske the Father, & he will giue you another Cōforter, that he may abide with you for euer, the Spirit of truth, whichIo. 16.13. shal teach you all truth. And accordingly he prayeth after to his Father, not only for the Church of that age, but also for the Church in all ages following, in these words:Io. 17.20. And not for them only do I pray, but for those also that by their word shall belieue in me. So expresly is Christs Church sāctified for euer in the truth of this word. Now, the holy Ghost doth not teach all truth to euery par∣ticular man, or Bishops being apart, therfore when they are assembled togeather. Fulke further replyeth, that euery true Christian may erre, & yet is no true Christiā voyd of Christs Spirit; for as the Apostle teacheth,Rom. 8.9. He that hath not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. But this is but a deceipful euasiō, for the guift of Christs spirit is not alwais one; it is one in the whole Church, & another in euery true Christiā, we speake heer of that particular spirit which is theIo. 16.3. Spirit of truth, which doth teach al truth; the guifts of this Spirit (I say) be not alwaies one, but it distributeth as the Apostle affirmethRom 12.6. Differēt guiftes, & therfore though euery true Christian hath Christs Spirit to Satisfaction, yet hath he not thereby, his speciall guift of the Spirit of Truth, whereof we now speake, no more then he hath the guift of prophecying, and of miracles. Of Bishops & chiefe Pastours it is said,Luc. 10.10. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me:Heb. 13.17. Obey your Prelates and be subiect to them: they are called Pastors,Eph. 4.11. or Shepheards, andMat. 28.19. teachers.Eph. 4.11. And he gaue some Apostles▪ & some Prophets, & othersome Euangelists, and othersome Pastors & Do∣ctors, to the consūmation of the Saints, vnto the worke of the ministery vnto the edifiing of the body of Christ, vntill we meet all into the vnity of fayth &c. And now followeth the reason why Christ pro∣uideth these Pastors in his Church; That now we be not Children wauering & carried about with euery wynd of doctrine, in the wicked∣nes of men, in craftines to the Circūuention of Errour. So prouident∣ly doth God preserue his Church against euery wynd of false doctrine, and Circumuention of Error. Accordingly as the Pro∣phet foretould, calling the Church of ChristIsa. 35.8 a direct way, so that fooles cannot erre in it. Now, if we be commanded
by God to follow and heare them as our Prelates, Pastors, and Doctours; then either they cannot erre, or erring, and we fol∣lowing them therin, we may lay the fault vpon God, who commanded vs to follow them: And then seeing euery Bi∣shop apart, or seuerall from the rest may erre, it followeth, that many lawfully assembled in Councell togeather can∣not erre. The same is proued by all such texts as conuince, that the Head, or Chiefe Bishop of the Church cannot erre in defyning matters of faith,Luc. 22.31. Simon, Simon, Sathan hath de∣sired you, that he might winnow you as wheat, but I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fayle. Here Christ prayeth not for all the Church, but in particular for Peter, as all the words show, Simon, for thee, thy fayth, thy brethren: Also wheras our Sauiour began to speake in the Plurall number, Sathan hath desired that he might winnow you (vos) forthwith he changeth his manner of speaking, and sayth, but I haue prayed for thee: fur∣ther he prayeth for him to whom he sayth, and thou some∣times conuerted, which cannot agree to the whole Church, except we will say the whole Church to haue been first peruerted, which is many wayes vntrue. But now that which Christ prayed for, is expresly, that his faith should not faile, and then seeing this prayer for Peter, was for the good of the Church, the Deuill still desiring to winnow the faithfull, it therof followeth, that she neuer wanteth one, whose faith may not faile, by whom she may be confirmed. Againe, Peter is calledMat. 16.18. a Rocke, and foundation, both which argue firmenes; for a Rock is not broken with wynd or tem∣pest, and if the foundation fall, all the whole house falleth withall. Againe, if the Church could erre, then there were no meanes left to decyde controuersies, and preserue vnity: yea all former decrees of the Church, and many condemned he∣resies therby would be called in question. And we should euer remayne vncertaine of sundry parts of Scripture it selfe, the authority wherof was holden doubtfull, vntill they were approued as Canonicall by the Church and her Councels. And if the church can erre, how can Protestants
be assured that their Church doth not erre, in condemning the Roman Church of superstition? Or how can the vul∣gar be sure they are taught the truth, when their Teachers themselues confesse, that their Church, and all their Pastors may lye? And lastly, if the Church can erre, one of these absur∣dities must ensue, that either Christ may sometimes be with∣out a Church, an Espouse in Earth, (as he was all the while there were no Protestants, if their Church be the Spouse of Christ) or else, if the Catholicke Church only is, and hath been his wyfe and spouse, and the same haue such Errors as Hereticks falsly pretend; then his wyfe so deareEph. 5.26. and so praised, is notwithstanding a very whore: this so grosse ab∣surdity conuinceth, both that the Catholicke Church al∣waies is, and that it teacheth truth alwayes. In briefe,Io. 14.16. Mat. 16. mar. 28. Eph. 4. Io 17. Luc. 22. Ps. . Eph. 5. if the Church be the Pillar of Truth, if it hath the spirit of God to lead it into all truth till the worlds end; If it be builded vpon a Rock, and hell gates shall not preuayle against it; If Christ hath placed in it Apostles, Dostors, Pastors, and Rulers, to the Consummation, and full perfection of the whole body, that in the meane tyme we be not carryed away with euery blast of doctrine: If Christ haue prayed for it that the faith of the chiefe Go∣uernour therof do not fayle: If it be his house, his Spouse, his body, his lot, kingdome and Inheritance giuen him in this worlld: If he loueth it as his owne flesh, and it cannot be diuorced or separated from him: Lastly if the new Testament, Scriptures, Sacraments, and Sacrifice cannot be changed, being the euerlasting do∣wry of the Church, continued euer in this our Catholicke Church; then certainty it cannot erre. So plaine then are so many textes of Scripture in proofe that the Church cannot erre. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proofe that the Church of Christ cannot erre. SAint Cyprian (or rather as some thinke Ruffinus) spea∣king of the Church sayth,De symbo∣lo Apost. This is the holy Church not ha∣uing
blot or wrinkle &c. The Churches of Heretikes are not with∣out blot or wrinkle of vntruth,Eph 5. v. 27. and therefore the Prophet sayd of them,Ps. 25.5. I haue hated the Church of the malignant, but of this Church which keepeth the fayth of Christ whole, the holy Ghost sayth,Cant. 6.8. my Doue is one. S. Austine directeth vs to the Church for the fynding out of all truth, saying,L. 1. Cont. Creso. c. 33. The truth of Scriptures is houlden by v when we do that, which now hath pleased the vniuersall Church, which the authority of the same Scriptures doth commend, that seeing the holy Scripture cannot deceiue, whosoeuer feareth to be deceiued by the obscurity of this question, let him take Counsayle thereof from the Church, which without any ambiguity the holy Scripture doth de∣monstrate. S. Lucius Pope and martyrEp. 1. ad Episcopos Hisp. & Galliae. affirmeth that, The Roman Church is Apostolicall, and the Mother of all Churches, which is neuer proued to haue erred from the path of Apostolicall tradition; nor depraued with Hereticall Nouelties, to haue fayled according to the promise of our Lord himselfe saying, I haue prayed for thee that thy fayth fayle not. That the Fathers taught from Scripture, that Councells could not erre, appeareth by S. Cyril, who speaking of the Bihops of the Councell of Nice, who made the Creed, sayth,Cyr. Alex. in Expos. Symb. Nieni. Truly with them sate Christ himselfe, who sayd, where two or three shalbe gathered in my name, there I am in the middest of them: for how can it be doubted, that he did inuisibly rule that holy and great Synod? As also in that the sayd words of Christ are cyted and vrged in proofe that Generall Councells cannot erre, by the Councell ofEpi ad Leon. quae est post tertiam Act. eiusdem cont. Syn 6. Act. 17. Tol. 3. propè init. Innoc. disp. 20. can. de quibus. Celest. ep. ad Conc. Ephes. pri∣mum. Chalcedon, by the sixt Sy∣node, by the third Toletan Councell, by Innocentius & Celestinus. S. Austin in another place sayth,In Ps. cont part. Donat. Number the Priests euen frō the sea of Peter, obserue who in that ranck of fathers succeedeth one another, that is the Rock which the Proud gates of Hell do not ouercome. In proofe of the supreme Pastors free∣dome from erring, I may alledge that, Theodoret writeth to Pope Leo in these words, IfAd Leo∣nem Papans. Paul the preacher of truth, the trumpet of the Holy Ghost ranne to great Peter, that from him he might bring the answere (or resolution) to them who contended at Antiochia concerning the legall ordinances; much more we, who are abiect and little, do runne to your Apostolicall Sea, that we may re∣ceiue
from you, remedy for the wounds of the Churches. S. Bernard writeth thus to Pope Innocentius,Ep. 190. ad Innocen. It is meete that all dangers and scandals of the kingdome of God (or Church) be brought to your Apostleship, those especially which concerne faith. For I thinke it conuenient, that there chiefly the domages of Faith should be repayred, where faith cannot feele defect; for to what other Sea was it euer said, I haue prayed for thee that thy faith faile not. So eleer∣ly do the Fathers and Councels expound the Scriptures, in proof that the Church, Generall Councels, or the Supreme Pastor of the Church cannot erre in matters of faith. SECT. IV. Protestant writers teach, that the Church of Christ cannot erre in matters of fayth. THe place before cited out of the Prophet Isay, is so cleere for the Churches not erring, as that the Glossers vpon the English Protestant translation, confesse the truth therof in the marginall notes vpon that place: Caluin commen∣ting vpon the same place sayth,In Isa. c. 50. God promiseth that his Church shall neuer be spoyled of this inestimable good, but that it shalbe gouerned by the holy Ghost, and vnderpropped with heauenly doctrine &c. And a litle after, such is the promise that our Lord will so assist his Church, and will haue that protection and care of it, as he will neuer permit it to be depriued of his doctrine: what more cleere could be spoken by a Catholicke? But no man deliuereth his mynd more freely in this point then Luther, TheDe decem praeceptis. Church (sayth he) cannot erre, but euery man may erre in his deuotion &c. The Church is gouerned by the holy Ghost. AgaineTo 7. Ger. VVit. de vet. Eccl fol. 561. they are inforced to confesse the Church to be the Rocke against which the gates of hell cannot preuayle. Matt. 16. or as Paul expoundeth, the Pillar and groundworke of truth &c. Therfore the Church neyther will nor can suffer a lye & false doctrine. Yea,Tom. 7. de Antiqua Ecclesia f. 562. Germ. The Church neyther ought nor can lye, nor teach errours, not in the least things▪ seeing God is the mouth of the Church: & as God cannot lye, so also neyther the Church. AndResp. ad Dialog Silue∣stri Priorat. the vniuersall Church cannot erre, as the Cardinall Cameracensis proueth most learnedly,
vpon the first of the Sentences. Yea sayth heEpist. ad Marchion. Brandebur. Tom 2. Germ. fol. 324. It is dangerous & fearefull to heare or belieue any thing which is contrary to the vnani∣mous testimony of fayth, and the doctrine of the holy Catholike Church, which from the beginning she hath kept with one consent for 1500. yeares. And,In Prote∣statione. I protest (sayth Luther) first, that I will ney∣ther speake or hould any thing, but first that which is had, and may be had, in and from the sacred Scriptures; then from Ecclesiasticall Fathers receyued by the Roman Church, hitherto obserued; and from the Cannons and Decretals of the Pope. But if any thing cannot be proued or disproued from these, that will I only hould for disputation sake. If Luther had performed this his iust protestation, he had neuer bin condemned by the Church for an Heretike. Would any man thinke it credible that Fox and many of his canonized Saints, who so obstinately opposed and disobeyed the Church, should expressely teach, that the Church cannot erre; and yet I find that Fox himselfe saith,Act. mon, p 999 The true Church Christ neuer suffereth to erre in the whole.Ib. pag. 493. Rid∣leyIbid. 1362. I do acknowledge an vnspotted Church of Christ, in which no man can erre, without which no man can be saued. And,Ib. pag. 1186. the Ca∣tholicke Church is the Spouse of Christ, the Pillar and stay of truth, this Church I belieue according to the Creed. Philpot.Ibid. pag. 1401. I do not thinke that the Catholike Church can erre in doctrine. Bradford calleth the Church,Ib p. 1211. Christs wyse, the Chayre and seat of verity. Iames Bainhams opinion was, that, There be two Churches, the Church of Christ, and the Church of Antichrist; the Church of Antichrist doth and may erre, and the Church of Christ not. Bilney auoucheth thatIb. p. 464. the Catholicke Church can by no meanes erre in fayth. And the same truth of the Church not erring, is taught byIn his Serm. prea∣ched 8. Feb. 1588. Hun. Act Colloq. Ratisb. fol. 105. Keker. in System. Theol. Pow. of things in∣different. c. 2 p 7. D. Bancroft, Hunnius, Kekerma∣nus, and Powell. Bertrand de Loque sayth of this very que∣stion,Dis∣course of the Church. c. 11. p. 198. The Controuersy in my Iudgement is not of the Catho∣licke (or vniuersall) Church, for we all agree heerin, that she can∣not erre touching fayth &c. Wherefore this question is, touching (only) a particular Church: but that a particular Church may erre Ca∣tholikes do not deny. In this sense also is S. Paul expounded by Zanchius, saying,De Re∣lig Christ. c. 24 §. 20. p. 139. We belieue and acknowledge this Ca∣tholicke Church, which we haue aboue described, so to be gouerned by the spirit of Christ, that he will neuer suffer all the same at once
to erre &c. Whereto we doubt not to pertayne that which Paul sayd, The Church to be the Pillar and foundation of truth, because out of the Church there is no truth, but in it, it is perpetually kept, seeing all∣alwayes some company great or litle may be found, in which the word of truth soundeth. But of euery particular Church we haue learned the reason to be vnlike. In like sort sayth Rhegius,Discuss. Theol. p. 213. See Hun∣nius in Acta Colloq. Ra∣tisb. f. 105. We grant that although particular Churches may erre, yet the whole Church can∣not erre altogether, for the promises of God do withstand it. Husse also in this is very liberall saying,Serm de fidei suae elu∣cidatione. I admit all the doctrines of holy Doctours, declaring faythfully the law it selfe: I reuerence also all generall and particular Councells, Decrees, and Decretals, & all lawes, Cannons, and Constitutions. And concer∣ning Councells which do represent the Church, Luthers opinion was that,Cont. Swinglium & Ocolamp. If the world shall longer continue, it wilbe againe for the different interpretations of Scripture, which now are, to preserue vnity of fayth, that we receiue the Decrees of Councels, and fly to them. Againe,In De∣claratione Eucharistiae. I haue not said nor counsailed, neither is it my Intention, that one or some Bishops by proper authority beginne to giue to any one both kinds, vnles it should be so ordained and comman∣ded in a Generall Councell. So respectiue in this humour was Luther to a Generall Councell. D. Bilson acknowledgeth with Councels, the presence and assistancePerpet. Gouern. pag. 372. of the holy Ghost. And, that they are strengthned with the promise of our Sa∣uiour. Ridley affirmeth thatAct. mon. p. 1288. Councels do indeed represent the whole Church, and being so gathered togeather in the name of Christ, they haue a promise of the guift, and guiding of his spirit into all truth. Thus do many of the chiefest Protestants expound the Scriptures in behalfe of the Church not erring, and belieue and teach the same doctrine themselues. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture, in proofe that the Church may erre in matters of fayth, answered. SOme obiect that Aaron, and the whole multitude ado∣red the golden calfe. But the Answere is easy, for Aaron was not then inuested with the authority of high Priest, but that office was imparted long after vnto him, as appeareth
in Exodus c. 40. Neither did the Leuits consent to that Ido∣latrie, or Moyses in whom the supreme Priestly dignity still remayned; so many wayes impertinent is this Obie∣ction. Such places are also obiected, as seeme to argue all Pastors, Priests and Prophets, not only of euill life, but euen of ignorance or error. HisIsa. 56.10. Ierem. 6.13. watchmen all blynd haue been ignorant &c. The Pastours themselues haue byn ignorant of vn∣derstanding. Answere. It is frequent in ScripturesMat. 2.3. Luc 10 25. for the faults of some, all to be reprehended in generall, that so the reprehension may seeme more vehement: and this is obserued by S. Austine.De Ciu. Dei. l c. 12. Yea Iewell himselfe doth ac∣knowledge that, InDefence. p. 442. the holy Scriptures, this word, All, is often vsed insteed of many. Againe, these reprehensions concerne Priests as they are seuerall, not as they are assembled in any lawfull Councell togeather. Neither is it necessary that these things which are spoken against the Priests of the old Testament, should be applied also to these of the new, espe∣cially assembled in Councell, the Church hauing greater promises from God, then the Synagogue had, of which it was neuer said; Vpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuayle against it, with sundry such like. Some vrge those words of Christ,Luc. 18.8. But yet the sonne of man cōming shall he fynd, trow you, faith in the earth? as though at Christs coming all faith should be ceased, and so the Church to haue erred and perished. Answer. The Ancient hereticks Luciferians, and Donatists, as Protestants now do, vsed this place to excuse their fall from the Church; saying it was de∣cayed in faith, when they forsooke it: to whom S. HieromeHier. cont. Lucif. c. 6. Aug. de vnit. Eccle∣siae. c. 15. & de verb. Dom. Serm. 36. and S. Augustine answered; that Christ sayth not, that there should be no faith left in earth, but by this manner of speech insinuateth, that at the latter day in the great persecu∣tion of Antichrist, faith should be more rare, especially that perfect faith, containing deuotion and affection towards God. Rogers obiectethDef of the Art. art. 11. p. 116. that at the death of Christ, the chiefe Priest, with the rest of the Priests and the people erred in fayth, condemning our Sauiour as guilty of death, and denying him to be the Messias, accordingly as was fore∣tould by the Prophet,Ezech. 7.26. The law shall perish from the Priests &
Counsaile from the Elders: As also that at the same time the a∣postles lost their faith. Answer. 1. The Chiefe Priest and the rest were not assembled to expound the Law, or teach the people, but to pronounce sentence in a matter of fact; in which no man doubteth but that they might erre. 2. The Priuiledge of not erring was graunted to those Priests, but vntill the tyme of Christs comming; and of it the Prophet said, The law shall perish from the Priests: but the New Testa∣ment is to continue vnto the worlds end, and to it the pro∣mise was made forPs 88.29. Isa. 54. Ier. 31.31. euer, and that theMat. 17.18. gates of hel should not preuaile against it. 3. As for the rest or the people, to many of them these iniuries to Christ were most displeasing, as to Nicodemus, Ioseph of Arimathia, and others. And to many others in Iudea, and sundry other parts of the world they were altogeather vnknowne, who therfore remayned at the same tyme faithfull. And so accordingly Protestants tell vs ofHarm. of Confess. pag. 326. Zacharie, Symeon, Ioseph, Elizabeth, Marie, Anne, the teachers, and many others, who agreed in pure doctrine and did not heare the Pharisees and Saducees; many of whom being then li∣uing. neuer consented to Christs condemnation. Yea Cai∣phas himselfe did not erre in faith, when heIo. 11.49. said, that it was expedient that one man dye for the people, and the whole nation perish not. And this he said not of himselfe, but being the high Priest of that yeare, he prophecyed, that Iesus should dy for the Nation &c. And as for the Apostles they were not as then Bishops, but only designed. Neither is it probable, that they as then did erre in fayth; for though it be said that,Mar. 16.14. He reproued their incredu∣lity, yet this doth not signify that they lost their faith which they had, but only that they were slow to belieue that which they had not formerly belieued, to wit, our Sauiours resurrection, wherof when himselfe had said,Luc. 18.33.34. They will kill him but the third day he shall ryse againe; it is imediatly said, but they vnderstood none of these things. And S. Iohn giueth the reason hereof:Io. 20.. For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he should ryse againe from the dead. Besides the B. Virgin Mary, & S. Mary Magdalen and others, continued as then with great Charity, which necessarily presupposeth fayth. Againe, the state of Christs Church with obligation to enter therinto,
did but beginne at Pentecost, when the Apostles preached publickly the faith of Christ. Lastly Protestants acknow∣ledge, that the Church cannot erre in matters necessary to saluation, wherfore if they charge the whole Church with this damnable error, they therin impugne themselues no lesse then vs. For so sayth Willet,Willet. Synop. p. 51. The Church of God may erre in some points not necessary to Saluation, but (she) cannot fall in∣to any dānable error,Against Rhem. Test. p 122. 168. 169 336. 373. 372. Cal. Instit. Ar∣gent. pa. 369. & the like is taught by (37) Fulk & Caluin, so many waies doth appeare the weaknes of this Obiection. FulkeAns. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 89. vrged frō S. Paul,1. Cor. 13.9. That our knowledge is imperfect, our prophecying imperfect; therefore the doctrine of the Church may also be imperfect or erroneous. Answer. Fulke may as well cōclude that therfore S. Pauls doctrine & writings may be erroneous, for this his saying cōcerneth himselfe, as much as the Church; we must therefore vnderstand, that S. Paul in this place (as is affirmed by S. AustineCited by Bede v∣pon this place. and is other∣wise manifest by the1. Cor. 13.10.12. Circumstance of the text) onely insinuateth our knowledge in this life not to be so cleer & manifest, as it shalbe in the next life, saying to this end in the place cyted; we see now by a glasse in a darke sort, but then face to face: now I know in part, (for which Fulke translateth falsly, imperfectly) but then I shall know, as also I am knowne. Which knowledge of the Church, although in this sense and res∣pect, it be, and euer was but in part, yet it hath been, and still is so certaine in it selfe, that she may be bould to say in her determinations,Act. 15.28. It hath seemed good to the holy Ghost and vs. Rogers obiecteth thatDef. of the Art. art. 21. p. 115. Fulk. Ans. were to a Counter∣fet Cath. p. 86. Generall Councells con∣sisting of men, who may erre, and who are all lyars, God only being true, that therefore they are subiect to errour. Answer. Though men of themselues be all subiect to er∣rour, yet God being true, who hath promised in that case to be in the middest of them, the danger of errour is taken a∣way. 2. Though euery man be of himselfe a lyar, yet may some men notwithstanding by Gods speciall grace, be true and no lyars, as the Euangelists and Apostles of Christs, a∣gainst whose doctrine and writing this argument maketh as much, as against the Church, vnto which the direction of the holy Ghost is no lesse promised, then to the Apostles
and Euangelists. Whitaker and Reynolds argue thusContro. 2 q 4. c 3. Rem. in his 2. Concl. That which befalleth to one, may befall to the whole: but euery one in particular may erre, therefore the whole may erre. This is a poore sophisme, for in the lyke sort might I argue, Whitaker cannot remoue a milstone, nor Reynolds, nor any other Minister; therefore all the Ministers in the world togeather, cannot remoue a Milstone. So though par∣ticular Pastours of the Church may erre, yet not the whole Church, especially it being guarded by Gods promise, and the assistance of the holy Ghost. But Whitaker and Fulke re∣ply,Contr. 2. q. 4. c. 2. Fulk. in c. 16. Io, sec. 5. (23) That the holy Ghost is promised to euery one in particular, Christ prayed to sanctify euery one, and con∣firme him in verity, as he did for the whole, for the laity, aswell as for the Clergy. Answere. It is true that he promi∣sed to euery particular, and prayed for them, but in a diffe∣rent manner, to euery one according to their seuerall state and degree: he prayed for S. Peter, and the rest of the Apo∣stles, and Bishops their successours, and assured them the holy Ghost; as to parents, maisters, and sheepheards of his fold; to the Laity and euery particular man, as to Children, schollars, and sheep to be directed by them: they haue the holy Ghost to teach, preach, and gouerne; these to obey, learne, and belieue. Wherfore as the Pastours cannot erre in teaching, defyning, and condemning heresies; so ney∣ther any particular man in belieuing, obeying, and submit∣ting himselfe vnto them. Thus haue Prot. like vnshamefast Children, sought (though with small successe) to discouer the nakednes of their spirituall mother, Christs Spouse.
CHAP. III. The true State of the Question, concerning the diffi∣culty in vnderstanding the sacred Scriptures. Whether the Sacred Scriptures be so easy and plaine to be vnderstood, as that without the explication of the Church, they are sufficient to decyde, and end all con∣trouersies of fayth, or rather in many places are very obscure and difficult, euen to the learned. SECT. I. Catholicke Doctrine. AMONGST other reasons that con∣uince the sole Scripture, not to be our Iudge of Controuersies, is the extreme difficulty in fynding out the true Sense thereof. And therefore in the Councell of Basil we are taught, that,Concil. Basil. Orat. Ioan. de Ra∣gusio. Seeing the sacred Scriptures in many places are hard to be vnderstood, in the resoluing of such doubts as aryse concerning fayth, there doth often happen amongst learned men variety and mul∣tiplicity of Opinions, and as it were an endles difficulty. Wherefore in this difficulty of Scriptures, and variety of Opinions, it is necessary to haue recourse to some measure or square, by application whereof, truth is discerned from falshood, which truly can be nothing els in hu∣mane things, then the holy Catholike Church, which we suppose cannot erre.Bellar. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 1. Rh. Test. p. 232. 672. Val to. 3. d. 1 q. 1. de obiecto fidei p. 112. All Catholikes agreably teach, that the Scriptures in many places are so obscure, that they need the interpreta∣tion
of the Church. In which, their meaning is that this obscurity doth not arise through any default of the doctrine therein by God deliuered, but by reason of the Maiesty and depth of the wisedome and knowledge of God taught ther∣by, & through the weakenes of mans vnderstanding. Protestant Doctrine. In this question Luthers absolute decree is this:L. de seru Arb. fol. 440. I say of the whole Scripture, I will haue no part therof to be said to be obscure.Praef. Aspert. Ar∣tic à Leone 10. damnato∣rum. The sacred Scripture is of it selfe most certaine, most easy, most plaine, (and) the expounder of it selfe. D. Fulke is of o∣pinion that,Against Rhem. Test in 2. Pet. c. 3. Whatsoeuer is necessary to be knowne, is plainly set forth, and easy to be vnderstood of them that will read diligently, marke attentiuely, pray hartily, and Iudge humbly.Apol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 19. That which is questioned (sayth D. Morton) is, whether all such things as are necessary to saluation, are so very plaine, that the most vnlearned belie∣uers, by the reading therof, may be instructed to Piety; and Hereticks, though most learned, may cleerly inough be confuted by them. And herein M. Morton holdeth the affirmatiue part. The same is taught byControu. 1. q 4. c. 3. pa. 341. &c. 1. p. 135. Et Con∣trou. 2. q. 5. c. 7. p. 513. Per∣kins Tom. . Col. 128. Whitaker, and sundry other Protestants. So that according to these men, the Mysteries of the B. Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, of the holy Sacraments, of our Iustification &c. are so very plaine in the Scriptures, that the most vnlearned belieuers by the reading therof may be instructed to Piety, and Heretiks though most learned, may cleerly inough be confuted by them. But how false all this is, dayly and dolefull experiences do most cleerly con∣uince. SECT. II. That the Scriptures are obscure and hard to be vnderstood, it is proued by the Scriptures themselues. THe Prophet Dauid, who was a man most conuersant in such Scriptures as were written in his tyme, was skilfull in the Hebrew, and otherwise humble, not proud or vnbelieuing; yet he prayeth for the true vnderstanding of
the Law, or Scriptures, as for a speciall guift from God, say∣ing,Ps. 118.18. Reueile my eyes, and I shall consider the meruailous things of thy Law.Ib. ver. 26. Teach me thy Iustifications.Ib ver. 34. Giue me vnderstanding, and I will search thy law, and sundry such like.Praefat. Assert. Ar∣tic à Leone 10. damnato∣rum. Protestants ordinarily answering, that the Scripture of it selfe cleere, is made obscure to the proud and incredulous, through their owne blindnes & wicked affections, will nothing helpe them in this case; for Dauid was a man humble, and a true belieuer, and yet he prayeth for the true vnderstanding of the Law, or Scriptures. Neyther will it suffice to answere withProlog. Cont. Petr. à Soto. Brentius, that the Scriptures obscurity is somtymes by reason of the Hebrew and Greeke Phrases, yet the Sense is euer most cleer: for besides that this seemeth to be spoken contrary to it selfe, as the wordes to be obscure, but the Sense most cleer; Dauid doubtles well vnderstood the He∣brew Phrases, and therefore that could cause no difficulty to him. The Apostles likewise who had heard so many hea∣uenly lessons, giuen from the mouth of Christ, were yet so troubled with this difficulty of Scriptures, as that our Sa∣uiour accompanying the two disciples going to Emaus,Luc. 24.27.32. Beginning from Moyses and all the Prophets, he did interpret to them in all the Scriptures the things that were concerning him &c. And they sayd one to the other, Was not our heart burning in vs, whyles he spake in the way, and opened vnto vs the Scriptures? Yea immedi∣atly before his Ascension, all his Apostles being assembled togeather, he sayd to themLuc. 24.44.45. These are the words which I spake to you when I was yet with you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which are written in the Law of Moyses, and the Prophets, and the Psalmes of me. Then he opened their vnderstanding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures. Signifying therby that the Apostles themselues, could not rightly vnderstand the Scriptures, had not Christ specially opened or enlightned their vnderstan∣dings, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures. Heere I hope it will not be replyed, that the Apostles did not know the Hebrew Phrases, themselues being Hebrews borne: nor that they were proud and misbelieuers, being the chosen A∣postles of Christ our Sauiour.
In respect of the Scriptures difficulty, as also of the weaknes of vs to conceyue; the ApostleHeb. 5.13.14. maketh diffe∣rence not only of persons, but of doctrine, affirming some to be vnskilfull of the word of Iustice, and such as are to be fed with milke, or easy doctrine: others who by custome haue their senses exercised to the discerning of good and euill; and of these the Apostle sayth, strong meat is for the perfect. And so elswhere he sayth,1. Cor. 2. v. 7. we speake wisdome among the perfect, dis∣coursing oftentimes of doctrine hard to be vnderstood, such as the Apostle termethHeb 9.1. inexplicable. So cleere it is that some misteries and doctrines of faith, are so farre from being easy, that they are so hard that they are inexplicable. S. Philip hearing the Ethyopian EunuchAct. 8.30.31. reading Esay the Prophet, said, Trowest thou that thou vnderstandest the things which thou readest? who said, And how can I vnlesse some man shew me? And he desired Philip that he would come vp, and sit with him. And the place of the Scripture which he did read was this; As a sheep to slaughter was he led &c. And the Eunuch &c. said, I beseech thee of whom doth the Prophet speake this? of himselfe or of some other? And Philip opening his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, E∣uangelized vnto him Iesus. Here the Eunuch acknowledging his ignorance in the vnderstanding of the Scriptures, in∣treateth the Apostle to expound the same, which he accor∣dingly performed, not referring him backe againe to the Scriprures, or any conference therof. Now wheras some reply that this Eunuch, as also the Apostle at those tymes were carnall, & therfore no meruaile if the Scripture were to them as then obscure: I answere, that all hereticks and Infidels, to whom the Protestants prescribe the sacred Scri∣ptures for their only certaine Rule, direction, and Iudge in matters of fayth, are doubtles no lesse carnall; yea all igno∣rant persons are in like manner carnall, at least before their Conuersion, and yet in the meane tyme the foresaid Scri∣ptures must be their only stay; yea after their Conuersion, they are still, in regard of their capacity & vnderstanding, weak, and carnall, though otherwise spirituall in respect of their faith, humility, and obedience. But none more cleerly testifyeth the obscurity of Scri∣ptures
then Saint Peter, who expressely writeth thus:2 Pet. 3.15.16. As also our most deare Brother Paul acccording to the wisedome giuen him hath written to you. As also in all Epistles speaking in them of these things, in the which are certayne things hard to be vnder∣stood, which the vnlearned, and vnstable depraue, as also the rest of the Scriptures, to their owne perdition. This text is to conuin∣cing, that D. Fulke in his translation thereof, most directly contrary to the Greeke and Latin, doth thus fowly corrupt and falsify the same,Against the Rhem. Test. 2. Pet. 3.16. Yea almost in euery Epistle speaking of such things, among which are many things to be vnderstood, which they that are hard, vnlearned, and vnstable, peruert, as they do also the other Scriptures, vnto their owne destruction. This making of Hardnes to agree to the Readers, not to the Scriptures, is so grosse a corruption, as that other ProtestantSee Bi∣ble of Anno 159. Transla∣tours reiecting the same, do agree with our vulgar transla∣tion heerin. And though S. Peter doth not say, that S. Pauls Epistles are hard, but only that in them are certaine thinges hard to be vnderstood, which some pretend for an answere; yet all is one to say, such an Authour is hard to be vnder∣stood, or he writeth of matters hard to be vnderstood: And the rather heer, in that S. Peter alledgeth this hardnes, as a reason why S. Pauls Epistles are depraued by the vnlearned and vnstable. And it may iustly be further obserued, that seeing S. Peter affirmeth, those things of S. Paul, as also the other Scriptures to be depraued by vnlearned, and vnstable men, therby he sheweth the other Scriptures for the most part to be likewise obscure: for by reason of the difficulty, the other Scriptures also are depraued, euen as those things of Pauls Epistles. All this notwithstanding, Whitaker blusheth not to affirme, that Peter doth not say,Controu. 1. q. 4. c. 3. pa. 341. Pauls Epistles to be ob∣scure, no nor that in Pauls Epistles there are certayne things obscure: but this the very sense of Seeing will easily confute, by but reading the words themselues.
SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures a∣greably with Catholikes, in proofe of the Scriptures ob∣scurity, and difficulty. SAint Ambrose writing vpon the former words of King Dauid, Giue me vnderstanding, and I will search thy Law, saith,Serm 10. in Psal. 11. The Prophet who had receyued the Holy Ghost, after he was annointed King, annoynted a Prophet, writing the hun∣dred and eighteene Psalme, desireth vnderstanding to be giuen to him, that he may vnderstand the Commandements of God; and knoweth, that vnles he receyue grace from our Lord, he is not able to vnderstand his Commandements. S. Hierome alleaging the selfe same words inferreth thus,Ep. 13 ad Paulin. c. 4. If so great a Prophet confes∣seth the darknes of his Ignorance, with what a night of Ignorance doest thou thinke vs little ones and almost sucking babes to be compassed? But this veyle was not only put vpon the face of Moyses, but also vpon the Euangelists and the Apostles. S. Chrysostome expounding those words of Christ our Sauiour, SearchIo. 5.39. the Scriptures, saith,Hom. 40. in Ioan. Christ referred the Iewes not to the simple and naked reading of the Scriptures, but to a very diligent search; he said not, Read the Scri∣ptures, but Search, for diuine things do need greatest diligence. In a shadow to those Ancestors not without cause he spoke, he commanded therfore to dig more deep, that so we may fynd those things that lye bid in the bottome. For we do not dig for any thing that lyes in the Su∣perficies, and is apparant, but for that which as a treasure is hid in the bottome; for he that seeketh for such things as these, vnles he vse grea∣test diligence and labour, he shall neuer fynd the things sought for. S. Hierome instanceth this obscurity in diuers bookes of the Bible,Ep. 103. ad Paulinum. ca 7. Who is able (sayth he) to vnderstand or expound Esay, Hieremy, Ezechiel, and Daniel. Ezechiel hath a begining and ending inwrapped in so great obscurities, as that these parcels with the begin∣ning of Genesis, were not read by the Hebrues before they were thirty yeares old &c. Iames, Peter, Iohn, Iudas set forth seauen Epistles, as mysticall as succinct, & both short and long: short in words, but long
in Sentences: so that he is a rare man, who is not halfe blynd in the rea∣ding therof. The Apocalyps of Iohn hath as many mysteries as words. Againe,Praef. in Oseam. If in the expositions of all the Prophets we need the com∣ming of the holy Ghost, that by his reuelation they may be opened, by whose instinct they were written; And we read in Esay, that the booke was sealed, which the Scribes and Pharisees, who boasted they knew the letters of the Law, could not read, because it was sealed, and none could be found but the lyon of the Trybe of Iuda, whom God the Father si∣gned, who was able to open the mysteries therof: How much more in the explanation of the Prophet Osee is our Lord to be prayed vnto, & with Peter we are to say,Mat. 13. Expound vs this Parable; especially since he testifieth the obscurity of this volume in the end therof who writ it,Ose 14.10. Who is wyse and shall vnderstand these things? Vnderstanding, and shall know those things? which we are to vnderstand, not as impossi∣ble, but as difficult. In like sort concerning the Epistle to the Romanes, he auoucheth, thatEp 150. ad Hedibiam q. 10. All the Epistle to the Romanes needeth interpretation, and is wrapped in so great obscurities, as that to vnderstand the same, we need the help of the holy Ghost, who by the Apostle did speake these things. S. Hierome also alledging the former example of the Eunuch mentioned in the Acts, writeth thus,Ep. 103. ad Paulinum. That in the meane tyme I may speake of my selfe, I am neither more holy, nor more studious then this Eunuch, who came from AEthtopia, that is, from the vttermost Coasts of the world, to the Temple, left the Court, and became so great a louer of the Law and diuine knowledge, that euen in his Chariot he read the Scriptures: And yet hauing the Bible, thinking of the words of our Lord, with tongue and lippes speaking therof, yet he knew not him, whom vnknowne he worshipped in the Booke: Philip came and showed to him Iesus, who shut vp lay hid in the letter. O wonderfull vertue of the Teacher! The same houre the Eu∣nuch belieueth, is baptized, and is made faithfull and holy, and of a schollar becometh a Maister &c. these things I haue briefly touched &c. that thou shouldest vnderstand, that in the sacred Scriptures, thou art not able to enter the narrow path without a guide and a tea∣cher. And then shewing that neither Grammarians, Rhetori∣cians, Philosophers, Geometricians, Logicians, Musicians, Astrono∣mers, Astrologers, Phisitians, no nor Husband men, Carpenters, Smi∣thes &c. can come to be that which they desire, without a
teacher &c. he addeth, as also our tymes do plainly con∣firme, that it is only the Art of Scriptures, which all do challenge to themselues &c. This the chatling old wife, this the foolish old man, this the pratling Sophister, this all presume, teare, and teach, be∣fore they learne. S. Austine endeauouring to expound these wordes of S. Paul,Cor. 3 12. If any man build vpon this foundation, gould, siluer, precious stones &c. promiseth thatDe fide & operibus. c. 15. it is meet diligently to at∣tend how that sentence of Paul the Apostle is to be taken, being plainly difficult to be vnderstood. Yea he further teacheth, that this Sentence is to be accounted amongst those whereof Peter affirmeth, that in the writings (of Paul) there are certaine things hard to be vnderstood. And comming to set downe his owne opinion he saythIb. c. 16. Heer peraduenture it wilbe expected of me, what I thinke of this Sentence of Paul the Apostle, and how I thinke it is to be vnderstood? Heer I confesse I had rather heare others more vnder∣standing, and more learned &c. So cleerly doth S. Austine ac∣knowledge the difficulty of Scriptures, exemplifying the same particularly in S. Pauls writings, which he taketh to be of those which S. Peter meant, when he affirmed, that there were certaine things hard to be vnderstood in the E∣pistles of Paul. And thus we see that the auncient Fathers do cleerly expound the Scriptures agreably with Catho∣likes, in proofe of their obscurity and difficulty. SECT. IV. That Protestants expound the Sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholikes in proofe of the Scriptures obscurity: And that sundry Protestants do teach and defend the same Doctrine. CHemnitius producing the former example of the Eu∣nuch, teacheth that in respectExam. part. 1 f. 63. of many hard questions, God would haue to remayne in his Church, to auoyd all occasion of er∣rour, the guift of interpretatation, which is not common to all, no more then is the guift of healing▪ and miracles. And this guift God
would not haue contemned or reiected, but reuerently vsed as an In∣strument and help, to fynd out the true and sound sense of Scriptures, euen as the Eunuch said, How can I vnderstand without a Guide? The Translatours of the English Bible of Anno 1578. in their marginall notes, of the place before alleadged from S. Peter (2. Pet. 3.16.) do affirme that; As no man condemneth the brightnes of the sunne, because his eye is not able to sustayne the cleernes therof; So the hardnes which we cannot sometyme compasse, or perfe∣ctly vnderstand in the Scriptures, ought not to take from vs the vse of the Scriptures. Aretius affirmeth thatLoc. com. loc. 53 f. 164. Many thinges remayne obscure euen to the Godly &c. Who did euer sufficiently expresse the matter of the Trinity, of the Incarnation of the sonne of God &c. I passe ouer in si∣lence the different vnderstandings of the places of the Ghospell, wherin thou mayest fynd among the Interpreters, almost so many opinions, as there be Interpreters. And immediatly after, he alledgeth the foresaid saying of S. Peter, to proue the obscurity of S. Paules Epistles; affirming generally of the Scriptures, that they contayneIbid. fol. 106. obscurity, as well in the matter as in the phrase. And that the veyle (or darknes) of the letter, is taken away by fit Interpreters. And that those being wanting, the Church is brought in∣to darknes. The like wherof is also taught byDe sacra. Script. p. 46. D. Whita∣ker. D. Fulke not only produceth seuerall of the forealled∣ged textes agreably to this purpose, but also declareth his owne opinion to be the same, saying:Agaynst Rhem. Test. in 2. Pet. 3. p. 821. As concerning the Argument and matter of the Scriptures, we confesse that for the most and chiefest matters, it is not only hard, but impossible to be vnderstood of the naturall man &c. Againe, Hierome to Paulinus noteth cer∣taine difficult places in the Prophets; and who will mislike him that he desired to learne of Didimus? &c. And Dauid prayed for vnder∣standing. The Eunuch required an Interpreter. And we also af∣firme that prayer is necessary for all men, and an Interpreter requisite for the vnlearned, that will come to the right vnderstanding of the Scripture &c. Yea we deny not but the Scriptures are in some places very hard. AndIb. p. 810. we plainly protest, that whosoeuer despiseth the ordinary Ministery of the word, which God hath established in his Church, for the direction of vs in truth and loue, shall neuer attayne to true knowledge, no, though he were otherwise neuer so well learned,
much lesse if he be ignorant and vnlearned. Cartwright the Puritane auoucheth, thatIn Whi∣teg. Def. p. 784. Vnles the Lord worke miraculously and extraordinarily, the bare reading of the Scriptures without te preaching cannot deliuer so much as one poore sheep from destruction. But would any man thinke it credible, that so learned a man as D. Martin Luther, should so in∣genuously confesse his owne ignorance in the vnderstan∣ding of any one Booke of Scripture? obserue but his words: I wouldPref in Psalmos. not haue that to be presumed by any of me, which none yet of the most holy and most learned could performe, to wit, to vnder∣stand and teach the true sense of the Psalter, in all thinges. It is i∣nough to haue vnderstood some, and those in part, the holy Ghost hath reserued many things to himselfe, that he might alwayes haue vs his schollers. And I know it to be a point of most impudent rashnes of him that dare professe, that he vnderstandeth anyone booke of Scripture, in all parts.De Conci∣ij. p. 12. Aboue twenty yeares agoe I was compelled to contemne the Commentaries of the Fathers, when I was to read the Scriptures in the schooles, and with great sweat (or paines) to seeke the true and proper meaning. The Translatour of the English Bible of Anno 1600. auoucheth, that it is,Pre∣face. A very hard thing to vnderstand the holy Scriptures, and that diuers errors, sects, and heresies grow dayly, for lacke of the true knowledge therof. The Centurists doubt not to affirme that,Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 52. The very Apostles thought that the Scriptures cannot be vnderstood, without the holy Ghost, and an Interpreter. Cal∣uin speaking of the Scripture sayth,Instit. l 3. c. 2 §. 4. See l 4. c. 17. §. 10. Daily reading, we fall into many obscure places, which do argue vs of Ignorance. But with this bridle God keepeth vs in humility, assigning to euery one a mea∣sure of faith, that euen the best Doctour may be ready to learne. So cleerly do the learnedst Protestants expound the sacred Scri∣ptures, in proofe of the Scriptures obscurity, and conse∣quently agreably with Catholiks defend the same Doctrine.
SECT. V. That the Scriptures are obscure, it is further proued by sun∣dry reasons. IN Scriptures we may consider, either the things there spoken of, or the manner wherwith they are spoken, both which are obscure: for the matter therin contayned, it is concerning the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the Sacraments, the hidden working of God in the soule of man, sundry Prophecyes not to be accomplished so many hundred yeares after their first prediction, and other the like. All which being high Misteries, must of necessity be difficult. Now the manner wherwith they are set downe is no lesse obscure, for first many things seeme to be contrary,Exod. 20.5. as, I am the Lord thy God &c. visiting the iniquity of the Fathers vpon the Children. And theEzech. 18.20. Soule that shall sinne, the same shall dye: the sonne shall not beare the Iniquity of the Father. S. Matthew and S. Luke report,Mat. 10.10. Luc. 9.3. that our Sauiour sending his Apostles to preach, forbad them to take a Rod. But S. Marke recordeth that,Mark. 6.8. he commanded them that they should take nothing for the way, but a Rod only. S. Paul affirmeth that,Heb. 9.4. In the Arke of the Testament, there was a goulden pot hauing Manna, and the Rod of Aaron that had blossomed, and the Tables of the Testament. And yet in the third Booke of kings, and elswhere it is said,C. 8 9.2. Paralip. 5.10. In the Arke there was nothing but two Tables of stone. Againe in the Acts of the Apostles it is said,C. 9 7. The men that went in company with (Paul) stood amazed, hearing the voyce, but seeing no man. And yet in the same Actes, S. Paul sayth,C. 22.10. They that went with me, saw the light indeed, but the voice they heard not of him that spake with me. So likewise in S. Luke, Christ said to Peter,C. 22.34. The Cocke shall not crow to day till thou deny thrice that thou knowest me. And yet S. Marke relateth that,C. 14.68.72. After the first deniall the Cocke crew, and that after another deniall, immediatly the Cocke crew againe, all which, with manySee Mar. 15.25. & Io. 19.44. Also Luc. 3.35.36. & Gen. 11 12. See also Hook. l. 5. sec. 19. p. 30. other such like, are seeming Contrarieties. Which must needs argue greatest
difficulty for their right vnderstanding, seeing, that we are bound to belieue, that they are not truly contrary, but all true in themselues. In like sort there are many speaches so obscure & doubt∣full, as that the learnedst Interpreters do vary and are trou∣bled therwith. When the Iewes said,Io. 8.25. Who art thou? Iesus said to them: The beginning who also speake to you: here Beginning in Latin (Principium) is of the newter gender, and the Rela∣tiue which (qui) of the Masculine: And which is more, in Greeke , Beginning, is the Accusatiue case, both which according to our ordinary conceipt, would seeme a most manifest incongruity. There are also in the sacred Scriptures obscure figures and parables almost innumerable. And if we be to examine and determine Controuersies by the Originalls, we shall fynd the Ambiguity, of the Hebrew especially, most intri∣cate, one and the same word or Phrase being oftentymes indifferent to receiue diuers significations, whereof great incertainty groweth among the learned, and to the igno∣rant in tongues, a difficulty inuincible. And if (as Luther affirmeth)Praef. assert. Artic. à Leone dam∣natorum. the Scriptures be more cleer then the Commentaries of all the Fathers, and as other Prot. make so easy, that the vulgar people may vnderstand them by their owne reading, to what end then the Fathers not only heertofore, but euen Protestants now continually do write so many Commentaries in explanation thereof? But chiefly seeing Prot. decyde all Controuersies only by Scrip∣ture, how aryse so daily and deadly dissentions among them∣selues, concerning things taught and set downe in the Scri∣ptures, if the Scriptures be so easy as is pretended? To these demands two things are vsually answered; first, that though the Scripture be most cleer, yet it is darke to the proud and vnbelieuing, by reason of their blindnes, and wicked affection. Secondly, that though in some pla∣ces it be obscure, yet the selfesame thing is cleerly set down in other places. But by the first it followeth, that Luther himselfe (who giueth these reasons) is a Proud man and In∣fidel, it being euident, and for such euen by Prot. acknow∣ledged,
that he taught and maintayned sundry grosse errors, and in all for his defence pretending Scriptures. And by the like reason the same crymes of Pride and Infidelity incurre all Lutherans, by the iudgement of Caluinists, and all Cal∣uinists by the iudgement of Lutherans; & so the like may be affirmed of our Protestants and Purians, euery one of these condēning the other of false doctrine in sundry points, and yet all building their opinions vpon the Scriptures. And against the second I vrge first, that sundry obscure places, haue not coherence with any other place; as the greatest part of the Apocalyps, and the beginning and end of the Prophet Ezechiel. Secondly though it were true, yet a true conference of places amongst themselues, is a thing of it selfe very difficult; for that place which a Caluinist would thinke to be cleere, and therefore other places con∣cerning the same matter to be expounded thereby; a Luthe∣ran will auouch to be obscure, and other places to be more plaine. Besides this, it is also very difficult alwayes truly to discerne whether the places so conferred do speake of one and the same thing, seeing the same word, and almost the same phraze is vsed in Scriptures to signify diuers things, as the ScriptureBaptisme is someti∣mes vsed for the Sa∣crament of Baptisme, othertimes for Pen∣nance or Martyr∣dome. See Mar. 1.4.1. Cor. 15.29. & Mar. 10.38. Luc. 12.50. it selfe testifyeth, and S. AustineL. 2. de Doctr. Chri∣sti. c. 24 25. 26. ob∣serueth. But because this conference of Scripture is accoun∣ted by Protestants so auaylable for the making of Scriptures easie to be vnderstood, and to be our Iudge of Controuer∣sies; I will therfore treat therof more largely in this Section following. SECT. VI. That the Conference of one place of Scripture with ano∣ther, doth neither make the Scriptures to be our Iudge of all Controuersies, nor alwayes easy to be vnder∣stood. SEeing Protestants generally teach, thatReinolds in his Con∣ference. pa. 68. It is not the shew, but the sense of the words that must decyde Controuersies: And seeing as D. Whitaker auoucheth,De sacra Script. p. 521. The Scripture hath no
liuely voyce which we may heare we must vse certayne meanes wherby we may search out what is the true sense & meaning of the Scriptures. And these meanes, as theyRein in his Conf. p. 83 84. 9. 99 Whitak. de sacra Scrip. p. 511. 522 523. prescribe, are our reading of the Scriptures, our Conference of places, our waighing of the Circum∣stances of the text, our skill in the tongues, our diligence, our Prayer and such like. Of which meanes D. Reynolds doubted not to auerre, that,Confe∣rence. pa 99. They are still effectuall, if men pray as they should, and search as they ought in the spirit of fayth and modesty. And D. Fulke auoucheth that,Against Purgat. p. 434. Who so obserueth this search shall come to the knowledge of the truth most certainly. I will now make manifest the vanity and insufficiency of this pretended course of tryall, and that for sundry res∣pects: for first if in the obseruation of the foresayd meanes, they require such a conference and diligence as is but imagi∣nary, and cannot be performed; then they prescribe vainly and to no purpose: And if they intend but such a diligent obseruation as is possible and within our power; then I al∣ledge them the example (to omit others) of D. Martin Lu∣ther, whome Prot. acknowledge to be a manApolog. Anglic part. 4. c. 4. q. 2. sent of God to lighten the world,Act. Mon. p. 416. the Elias, Conductour, and Chariot of Israel, whose calling they thinkeAret. loc. com. loc. 63 p. 198. Daneus Isagog. part. 4 l. 2. p. 36. Lascius de Rus. Religio∣ne p. 93. extraordinary, and his comming and speaking speciallyAnti-Christus p. 12. 13. 80. Coradus Schlusselb. in Catol. haeret, p. 314. 316. foreshewed in the Scriptures, & since foretould byAct. Mon. p. 399. & see Fox in Apoe. p. 324. sundry Prophecyes (of later tymes) which went vpon the tyme of Martin Luther: yea they accompt him aSleidan. l 16. & after the Eng. Transl. fol. 222. Prophet, and that sundry of his Prophecies proued true: And him∣selfe vndertooke that he was so assured and certayne of the truth of his doctrine, as he feared not to say;Aduer∣sus falsò no∣nmatum Ecclesiasticum statum. I would haue you know, that heerafter I will not honour you so much, that I will eyther suffer you, or the Angells from heauen to iudge of my doctrine &c. Neyther will I haue my doctrine iudged by any, and therefore not of the very Angels: for seeing I am certaine thereof, I will thereby be Iudge both of you and the Angells. This is the pure spirit of a new Ghospeller. Now this so rare a man, being skillfullAct. Mon p. 403. in the Gerecke and Hebrew did not only conferre the Scriptures most diligently, euen with a desire (as himselfe confesseth) to alter his Iudgement agaynst the Real Presence,Ep. ad Argenti∣nens. And in the Treatise against the Defence of the Censure p. 99. 100. Be∣cause (sayth he) I did well perceyue that I might very greatly hurt
thereby the Papacy (so direct and holy was his intention:) and, If Carolostadius or any man els could haue persuaded (him) that there had been nothing in the Sacrament but Bread and Wyne, he should haue bound him to him by a great good turne. But also he had personallCoo∣pers Chro∣nicle fol. 290. Sley∣dan l. 6. f. 83. Communication therein with Oecolampadius and Swinglius,Act. Mon p. 403. he heard and obserued their conference and Collections from the Scriptures: and yet all this notwith∣standing still persisted in his former opinionSee Bridges in his defence of the Go∣uern. pag. 559. Perkins in his 4. Treatises Tract. How to apply Gods word. num. 10. of the Real Presence:Ep. ad Argenti∣nens. And in the Treatise against the Defence of the Censure p. 99. 100. the which he thought to be so cleere a truth, that mentioning his former desire to change his Iudgment ther∣in; he yet concludeth and sayth,Ep. ad Argenti∣nens. and the Treatise against the Defence of the Censure. p. 100. But I do see my selfe cap∣tiue, no way being left to escape; for the Text of the Ghospell is too playne &c. And not content with this, he proceedeth so farre, as toSleydan. l. 16. f. 215. after the Eng. Translat. set forth a booke against Swinglius, wherin he reciteth andDefens. verborum Coerae in the 7. Tome of Luthers workes. reiecteth the arguments and conferences of Scrip∣ture framed by Swinglius and Oecolampadius agaynst the Real Presence. Now vpon these premises I do inferre, that for so much as Luther obserued the foresayd prescribed meanes of con∣ferring the Scriptures, and that with all diligence he could, and yet the same notwithstanding, still belieued and taught (in other Protestants Iudgements) a doctrine most errone∣ous, as also the like did his followersExam. part. 2. 92 94. 100. Chemnitius, Ia∣cobusIn Confut. Disput. Grinaei de oena Domini. Andreas, andAct. disp. de 8 oena pubi∣cè in Academia Heidelberg. Anno 1584. and see Haffenreff loc. Theol. l. 3. loc. 7. de Sacram. p. 371. others of the learnedst Pro∣testants; that therefore the Conference of Scriptures, though obserued & vsed with all diligence we can, is yet neuerthe∣lesse vncertaine, and vnauoydable to resolue vs priuatly, much more to end and determine our publicke Controuer∣sies. Secondly, I argue from the nature of the thing it selfe, that seeing our foresayd skill in tongues, our conference of places, and other prescribed meanes, are but actions on our behalfe humane, and such wherein, as in our other humane
endeauours, euery man without extraordinary Priuiledge from God, is (all his prayer, learning, and possible diligence not withstanding) subiect to error, ouersight, and mans in∣firmity, as both reason and Experience teach, that therfore the same can be no certaine and infallible Course of Iudg∣ment, wherby to determine Controuersies. A truth so cer∣tayne, that Lubbertus speaking of their owne learnedst mi∣nisters and Interpreters sayth,De prin∣cipijs Chri∣stian. dogm. p. 563. As we haue showed that all these may erre in expounding, so also do we affirme, that they may erre in Iudging. Yea sayth Zanchius,De sacra Script. pag. 411. 412. with Iudgment let vs heare them, knowing that they are men, and that they could, and may erre. And as it were despairing to prescribe any Rule for meanes, he iumpeth from them to the point of Elections, so restrayning the vnderstanding of Scriptures, as an imme∣diate and speciall guift peculiar only to the Elect,Ib. pag. 375. chiefly by reason of this obscurity (sayth he) we can giue no rule for the vn∣derstanding of Scriptures, because it is in no mans power, that he be Elect. And, It is only graunted to the Elect, that they may vnderstand the sacred Scriptures truly, cleerly, properly, and soundly. D. Whitaker, who prescribed the foresaid meanes, is enforced yet to giue sentence against them, and therin a∣gainst himselfe, saying,De Ec∣clesia Con∣trou. 2. q. 4. p. 221. Such as the meanes are, such of ne∣cessity must the Interpretation be: but the meanes of Interpreting are obscure, vncertayne, doubtfull, and ambiguous, therfore it cannot be, but that the Interpretation also must be vncertaine; If vncertaine, then may it also be false &c. So that all diligence in Conferring is insufficient to assure vs infallibly of the true sense of the Scriptures. Thirdly such as are Ignorant in the tongues, wherin Scripture was first written, as also such as cannot read at all, cannot haue the foresaid. Conference for their Infallible Iudge, seeing whether the Translatours haue erred, either vpon Ignorance or malice, or both, they are not able to dis∣cerne; and consequently whether that which they read or heare, be altogeather true Scripture, or rather replenished with manifold errors, and so no certaine Iudge, they re∣maine most vncertaine. According to which D. Whitaker is enforced to confesse, that,De sacra Script. pag. 523. The Ignorance of the Hebrew
and Greeke tongues, hath brought forth many Errors: truly those that know them not, do erre often and vnauoydably. And therfore for the instruction of these he is enforced to fly to their immediate knowledge from the holy Ghost, saying,Ib. pag. 127. The Ignorant in tongues, although they cannot Iudge of all places whether they be truly translated, yet they acknowledge and allow the Doctrine being instructed by the holy Ghost. And as for those others,Ib. p. 588. Who know not letters, and cannot read, he granteth that, They retayne wholsome saith by the preaching of their Pastors. So that to all such as do not vnderstand the Hebrew, and the Greeke, or that cannot read at all, the foresaid Conference of Scripture can be no immediate and certaine course of Iudgment. Fourthly, this foresaid Conference is only a Coloura∣ble refuge of words, wherby to make, not the Scripture our Iudge, but ourselues Iudge of the Scripture: for to Conferre and apply the Scriptures, and therby to determine the right sense, is in vs an acte of our vnderstanding, euen as it is the like to confer our temporall lawes: wherfore if the Scrip∣ture only without our conference therof, do not determine to vs the true meaning of it selfe, then is it no more our Iudge in Matters of faith, then the law is in temporall causes: And then further, if euery one of vs be to vndertake this Conference for himselfe, without relying vpon the Confe∣rence▪ and Iudgment of any Interpreter, further then we our selues can discerne the same to be true by our Confe∣rence, (as many ProtestantsZan∣chius de sa∣cra Script. p. 412. Whi∣tak. de sacra Script. pag. 529 Carth∣wr. in Whi∣teg. def. pag. 511. & Whitguift 16. Bilson in his differēce &c. part 2. p. 353. Willet Synops. Controu. 1. q 2 p. 127. teach) it therof necessarily followeth, that euery man must iudge and determine the sense of the Scriptures for himselfe, which is all one as to make himselfe his owne iudge. A cleere Example hereof Protestants haue in their Lutheran and Puritane Brethren, of whom they must needs confesse, that concerning such Errors as they lay to their charge, they make themselues Iudges of the Scripture, and not the Scripture their Iudge. Neither doth it suffice to answere, that they defend not an erroneous, but a sincere Conference: for the right∣full conference maketh the Scripture no more Iudge, then doth the right conference of the lawes, make the Law to be our Iudge. And as for the different kinds of erroneous and
rightfull Conference, they do equally and alike admit our Iudgment and act of conferring, only the nature of this conference is seuerally altered, according to the sincerity or errour therof. So that as Protestants must needs confesse of their foresaid Brethren, that they in their said Erroneous conference make not the Scripture their Iudge, but themsel∣ues Iudges, though erroneous Iudges of the Scriptures mea∣ning: In like manner in their owne Conference, they make themselues (though in their opinion rightly Iudges, yet) Iudges and determiners therof. Wherupon it followeth, that Protestants whether learned or vnlearned, conferring the Scriptures either sincerely or erroneously, do neuertheles in the said Conferences make themselues Iudges of the Scri∣pture, and not the Scripture their Iudge. This sequele is so cleere, that sundry Prot. do in plaine termes acknowledge the same. Lubbertus teacheth,De Prin∣cip. Chri∣stian. dogm. l. 23. p. 563. All the faythfull are Iudges of interpretations and doctrines. AndIbid. p. 573. that God hath giuen to euery faythfull person, not only the Spirit of vn∣derstanding but also of discerning false doctrine from true. D. Bilson expressely defendeth, that,True difference &c. part. 2. p. 353. The people must be discerners & Iudges of that which is taught. Brentius auoucheth most fully that,In Pro∣logom. Cont. Sotum & in Confess Wit∣temberg c. de sacra Script. It appertayneth to euery priuat man to iudge of doctrine concerning Religion, and to discerne true doctrine from false. So that now any Cobler may be a competent Iudge of the true sense of the Scriptures, or of any doctrine preached by his Pastour. But what seriously doth ensue of all this, but that eue∣ry heretike and ignorant fellow, may at his pleasure, exēpt himselfe from all authority of Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, Pastours, and the Church it selfe, making his owne fancy and conceypt, the supremest Iudge of all. Whereby amōgst other absurdities, it euer happeneth, that as yet could ne∣uer be established any agreement in Religion amongst the Protestant faction: but rather to the contrary, the schisme and diuision so long continued between Lutherans, Swin∣glians, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Puritanes &c. heerby to be most strongly vphoulden and maintayned, & that which is most dangerous, without all hope and proba∣bility
of any future vnity and consent. Wherefore I may cō∣clude, that our Moderne Protestants creating for their Iudg their our Conference of Scripture, do thereby only endea∣uour, as S. Austine affirmeth of all heretickes, thatL 32. conc. Faust c. 19. Euery mans mind may be his owne guide, and, that he be not subiect to the au∣thority of Scriptures, but that, he may make subiect the authority of Scriptures to himselfe. Adde only heerunto what M. Hooker thinketh of this cyting & cōferring of Scriptures:Eccl pol. l. 2. Sect. 7. fol. 113. Such are readiest (sayth he) to cyte for one thing fyue hūdred sentences of holy Scripture what warrāt haue they, that any one of them doth meane the thing, for which it is alleadged? Is not their surest ground most commonly, either some probable cōiecture of their owne, or the Iudgmēt of others, taking those Scriptures as they do? which notwithstanding to meane otherwise then they take them, it is not still altogeather impossible. So that now and then they ground themselues on humane authority, euen when they most pretend diuine. So fallible still is this Conference of Scriptures. But I will conclude with D. Fields Iudgment in this Case.L. 4. c. 19. We confesse (sayth he) that neither conference of places, nor consideration of things precedent and subsequent, nor looking into the originall; are of any force, vnles we fynd the thing which we con∣ceiue to be vnderstood and meant, in the places interpreted, to be conso∣nant to the Rule of faith. And this Rule of faith (he teacheth) must be tryed,Ibid. eyther by the generall practise of the Church, the renowned of all ages, or the Pastors of an apostolicall Church. So vn∣able is this pretended Conference to make a competent Iudge. I must needs yet obserue how aduenturous Protestants are for the maintaining the honour of their supreme Iudge the Conference of Scriptures. For whereas it is sayd, that S. PaulAct. 9.20.21.22. Entring into the Synagogue, he preached Iesus &c. and all that heard, were astonyed &c. But Saul waxed mighty much more, and confounded the Iewes that dwelt at Damascus, affirming that this is Christ, Protestants translate those last words thus;See the English Church Bi¦ble of Anno 177. Saul confounded them, prouing (by conferring one Scripture with another) that this is very Christ. Here for affirming, they say, prouing, but this not satisfying inough, they add to the text it selfe these
words, By conferring one Scripture with another, which words are not to be found in any Originall. And though some o∣ther Bibles haue left out this impious addition in the Text, yet in their marginallThe Engl. great Bible of 1578. notes they are pleased to say, Prouing by the conference of the Scriptures: wheras in the place cited, there is not the least mention or intimation of any Scriptures; but directly otherwise it is said, that he preached in the Synagogues, and confounded the Iewes. If a Catholicke should add but one word to the text, presently all the woes threat∣ned in Scripture against such Adders, would be thundred against him. SECT. VII. An Examination of such Obiections as are vsually vrged by Protestants against the Scriptures obscurity. MOstBrentius in Prole∣gom. Cont. Petr. Sotum. Protestant writers obiect those words in Deutronomy,C. 30.11.12.14. This Commandement that I command thee this day, is not aboue thee, nor so far of, situated in heauen, that thou mayest say, which of vs is able to ascend vnto heauen to bring it to vs, that we may heare and fulfill it in the worke? &c. But the word is very neare thee in thy mouth and in thy heart to do it. Answer. 1. Wheras the question is, whether the Scriptures be easy to be vnderstood, here is not any mention made of the Scriptures at all. 2. The words obiected do only proue, and that dire∣ctly against Protestants, who teach that the Commande∣ments are impossible to be kept, that indeed the Comman∣dements may be easily performed. And in this sense, is this place vnderstood by AncientTertul. l. 4. cont. Marcion. Orig. Am∣bros. & Chrysost. in. c. 10. ad Rm. Aug. l. de Perfectione Iustitiae Resp. penult. Fathers. 3. It may be vn∣derstood withAbu∣lensis in hunc locum. others of the facility in knowing, not the Scriptures, which as then peraduenture were none, but the Precepts only of the Decalogue, which being naturall, are easily vnderstood, & especially by those Iewes, who had heard Moyses explicate the same: so that according to either sense, the Obiection is impertinent. Secondly are obiected these wordes of K. Dauid;Ps. 118.105. Thy word is a lampe to my feete; and a light to my pathes. And those
of S. Peter,2. Pet. 1.19. And we haue the propheticall word more sure: which you do well attending vnto, as to a candle shyning in a darkeplace &c. Answere. 1. Neyther of these places do speake of all the Scriptures, and therefore they cannot conclude that all the Scriptures are easy. Secōdly though they were spoken of all the Scriptures, yet the Scriptures may be well called a lampe, light, or Candle, not that they be all easy to be vnder∣stood, but because being once rightly vnderstood, they do illustrate the vnderstanding, and direct it in the working of good. And so K. Dauid in the place obiected, intended to shew, that greater was the knowledge which was gotten by the word of God reueiled, then by his Creatures, and therefore he compareth the word of God to a lampe, which more auayleth vs for expelling the darknes of the night, then the light of all the starres. Thirdly though the Scriptu∣res be as a lanterne of themselues, yet we must consider with∣all how they do, as the Propet sayth, enlighten our eyes: for what if a Candle be put vnder a Bushell? truly it will as then shyne and burne, but it will not giue light to the stan∣ders by, except the bushell be remoued. Euen so, if the light of holy Scripture, shalbe placed vpon the authority of Gods Church, it will illuminate the whole house, but if it be cō∣prehended within the limits of euery priuat mans wit & in∣dustry, as vnder a bushell, though it remayne in it selfe e∣uercleere, yet to the Readers it shalbe as extinguished. Thirdly, it is vrged, that in the Prophet Isay it is said, that,Isa. 29.11.12. The booke was sealed: And in the Apocalyps we read that,C. 5.8.9. The Lambe opened the booke, therfore though in the old Testament the booke of Scripture was sealed or obscute, yet now in the new, it is opened and easy. In signe wherof at the Death of Christ,Mat. 27.51. The veyle of the Temple was rent in two peeces. Answere. 1. The wordes of Isay are, The vision of all shalbe vnto you as the words of a booke sealed; which when they shall giue to him that knoweth letters, they shall say, Read this: & he shall answere, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the booke shallbe giuen to one that knoweth no letters &c. And he shall Answere, I know not letters. Heere the words do only import, that the vision should be obscure, as a book sealed, which neither the learned nor vn∣learned
could vnderstād: wheras the Scriptures of the old Te∣stamēt were vnderstood and expounded, by Moyses, Esdras, the Priests, & the Prophets. Secōdly the difference of the old Testament from the new, consisteth in this, that the myste∣ries of Christ were not then vnderstood, and therefore the Booke was sayd to be sealed, as well to the learned as vn∣learned, whereas now in the new, Christ hauing fulfilled the figures and Prophecies, though many do not vnderstād the Sentences of Scripture, yet yong Children and ignorant women, do know the mysteries of our Redemption. And that in regard of the Sentences of Scripture, the booke is still sealed, euen now during the tyme of the new Testament, learned Origen testifyeth in these words:Hom. 12. in Exod. Let vs see if not only when Moyses is read, but also when Paul is read, the veyle be put ouer our hearts. And it is cleer, that if we heare negligently, if we do not adde study to learning & vnderstanding; not only the Scri∣ptures of the Law and Prophets, but of the Apostles and Ghospells are couered to vs with a great veyle &c. From whence it appeareth that we are not only to study for the learning of the Sacred Scriptures, but we are also to pray to our Lord, and day and night to intreat, that the Lambe will come from the Tribe of Iuda, and taking the sealed booke, will vouchsafe to open it: for he it is who opening the Scriptures, in∣flameth the hearts of the Disciples, in so much that they say,24 32. Was not our heart burning within vs, when he opened vnto vs the Scrip∣tures? With Origen agreeth S. Hierome, teaching that,Ep. 13. ad Paulin. de iustitit. Mo∣nach. c.  This veyle is not only put vpon the face of Moyses (or the old Testa∣ment) but also vpon the Euangelists and Apostles. Our Sauiour spake to the people in Parables, and witnessing that it was mysticall which he spoke, he sayd, He that hath eares to heare, let him heare. Vnles all things which are written be opened by him, who hath the key of Dauid,Apoc. 3.7. who openeth, and no man shutteth, who shutteth, and no man openeth, they cannot be opened by any other: So cleer it is, that euen now during the tyme of the new Testament, the Scriptures remayne obscure, without some speciall light & help from Christ, and our owne paines, study and prayer. Fourthly, some obiect these words of S. Paul:2. Cor. 4.3.4. And if our Ghospell he also hid, in them that perish it is hid, in whome the God of this world hath blynded the mynds of the Infidels, that the il∣lumination
of the Ghospell of the Glory of Christ▪ &c. might not shine to them: Wherfore to the faithfull the Scriptures are ea∣sy. Answ. 1. The Apostle speaketh not here of the vnder∣standing of the Scriptures, neither is there any mention made of Scriptures, but of the knowledge and faith in Christ, which the Apostles preached. And so in the very next words following S. Paul sayth; For we preach not our selues, but Iesus-Christ our Lord: Now no man doubted, but that the Apostles preaching was easy to be vnderstood. Se∣condly in the former Chapter S. Paul declareth this to be the difference between the Old and New Testament, that in the Old (as I noted before) men did not see the misteries of Christ (which thing the2. Cor. 3.12. veile of Moyses, wherwith he couered his face when he spoke to the people, signifyed) wheras in the new, they are generally knowne. Now be∣cause some might say, If this be so, wherfore after the prea∣ching of the Ghospell, so many as yet do not belieue, nor see (especially the Iewes) any thing but shadowes & figures? Therfore the Apostle annexeth, the Ghospell to be hid to some, because the Deuill hath blinded their vnderstandings by wicked affections; to whom our Sauiour also saith,Io 5.44. How can you belieue that receiue glory one▪ of another? Thirdly this place is so insufficient to proue the Scriptures to be ea∣sy, as that the Protestant Aretius answereth the same and saith,Loc. Com. l. 53. f. 164. But many things remayne obscure, euen to the Godly &c. who did euer sufficiently expresse the matter of the Trinity &c. I passe ouer in silence the different vnderstandings of the places of the Ghos∣pell, wherin thou mayest fynd among the Interpreters, almost so many opinions as there be Interpreters. So confessed is it, that not only during the tyme of the old Testament, but euen now in the new, the Scriptures are difficult to be rightly vnder∣stood.
CHAP. IIII. The true State of the Question concerning the In∣terpretation of Scriptures, and decyding Con∣trouersies by the Priuate Spirit of euery particular Man. Whether the Sacred Scriptures are made easy to be vnder∣derstood, or our Iudge of all Controuersies, by the Spi∣rit reueyling to euery Priuate man the true sense and determination thereof. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. CONCERNING theOrat. Ioan▪ de Ragusio. certainty and security of things to be belieued, it is taught in the Councell of Basil, that the same is not had by priuat Inspiration, because seeing such Inspiration is hidden and supernaturall, it ought to be manifested by some supernaturall signes or miracles, euen at the Doctrine of the Apostles was confirmed by signes and miracles. If therefore the doctrine of our aduersaryes be had by inspiration, let them shew the signes and miracles, and we will be∣lieue them; which they will neuer do, seeing the chiefe Verity, to whome it belongeth to worke miracles, cannot giue testimony to a lye or fal∣shood. An the like is taught by the Councell of Sens in these wordes;Decret. 4. He that followeth the Iudgmēt of his owne Spirit, the steppes of the Orthodoxall Fathers contemned, as a Schismaticke,
and rayser & fauourer of all heresies let him be restrained from so great temerity. In the second Nicene Councell it is taught, that,Act. 6. Seeing some do endeauour to peruert true doctrines, according to that which seemeth to them, let no man meruaile if they vse the words of Scripture: for all Arch-hereticks do take occasion of their error from Scr pture diuinely inspired. What are truly taught by the holy Ghost, malignant men do adulterate with their owne senses: And this the chiefe trumpet of the Apostles foretould, to wit Peter, saying,2. Pet. 3. which the vnlearned and vnstable peruert according to their desires. For it is proper to heretickes according to their desires, to peruert the knowled∣ge of diuine and true doctrine. And the like insufficiency of the Priuat spirit, for the deciding of Controuersies, isBellar. de verbo Dei, l. l. 3. c. 3 Rhem. Test. p. 684. general∣ly taught by all Catholickes. Protestant Doctrine. I haueSee be∣fore. c. 1. sec. 1. formerly shewed that Protestants do finally make the Priuat spirit the Iudge of their Controuersies. So WhitakerDe sacra script. p 127. Lub. de Prin∣cip. p. 573. Brent. Prole∣gom. cont. Petrum Sot. Whit. the way to the Church. p. . 17. Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 10. p. 103. confessed, that the ignorant in tongues, acknow∣ledge and allow the Doctrine being instructed by the holy Ghost. And the like is to be seene in Lubbertus, Brentius, D. White, and M. Rogers. Protestants agree with ancient Heretickes. S. EpiphaniusHaer. 21. reporteth, that Simon Magus pre∣tended for his errors the assistance of the holy Ghost. Only this holy Ghost he belieued to be his Concubine Helena: euen as Protestants make their Priuat fancies to be their priuat spirit. S. Austine obserued that.Tract. 45. in Ioan. There are innume∣rable who do not only boast that they are videntes or Prophets, but will seeme to be illuminated, or enlightened by Christ, but are hereticks. AndEp. 222. all Heretickes who receaue the authority of the Scriptures, perswade themselues they follow them, wheras they rather follow their owne errors. Andug de Gen. ad lit. l. 1. c. 18. they contend not for the true meaning of Scri∣ptures, but for their owne opinions, making that which is the opinion of their owne, to be the meaning of Scripture. Yea, Heresies haue no other origene then this; that euery Hereticke prefers his owne opi∣nion,
drawne from his owne proper Spirit, before the Common opinion of the Church. Protestant Errours. The ProtestantSee be∣fore Chap. 1. sec. 1. Libertines and Swenckfeldians do reiect the written word, and rely wholly vpon the in∣ternall spirit: and they differ from other Protestants in this, that though both of them rely vpon the spirit, as the ground of their faith, yet these cast away Scripture, and rely only vpon the spirit: wheras ordinary Protestants admit Scri∣pture, but for the sense therof, they subiect it to their spirit, which is no lesse pernicious then the other. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that the sayd Scriptures are not made easy to be vnderstood, or our Iudge of all Con∣trouersies, by the Spirit reuealing to euery Priuate man, the true sense and determination thereof. AGaynst this illusion & Priuat fancy challenged by all Sectmaisters, Lutherans, Caluinists, Swinglians, A∣nabaptists, Puritanes &c. we are specially forewarned by the sacred Scriptures saying;Ezech. 23.2.3.4.6.9. Thou shalt say to them that pro∣phecy of their owne heart &c. Wo to the foolish Prophets, which fol∣low their owne Spirit, and see nothing &c. they see vayne things, & they diuine lyes, saying: Our Lord sayth, whereas our Lord sent them not.Hier. 23.16. Heare not the words of the Prophets that prophecy vnto you, and deceyue you, they speake the vision of their owne hart, not from the mouth of the Lord.Hier. 14.14. The Prophets prophecy falsly in my name: I sent them not, and I commanded them not, neyther haue I spoken vnto them: lying vision and deceyptfull diuination, guilefulnes and sedu∣ction of their owne hart, they prophecy vnto you. These places shew that it is vsuall with false Prophets, and lying teachers, vn∣der pretence of being sent, or instructed by the Spirit, to broach their owne Priuat conceypts, and foolish fancyes: for this Spirit is sayd to be the Spirit of their owne hart, the
effects whereof are blindnes, they see nothing; vanity, they see vayne things; lyes, they diuine lyes; fraud, as foxes in the desertes; and finally punishment, wo to the foolish Pro∣phets, which follow their owne Spirit &c. My hand shalbe vpon the Prophets &c. Let any man Iudge whether these things do not agree with our moderne Spiritualists. I will shew a liuely Patterne of this proud Spiritualist in Eliu the Busit, who opposed holy Iob, sayng,Iob. 32.6. &c. I am yonger in tyme and you more ancient, therefore &c. I was afrayd to shew you my sentence. For I hoped that longer age would speake, and that a multitude of yeares would teach wisdome. But as I see there is a Spirit in men, and the inspiration of the Omnipotent giueth wisedome. They of many yeares are not the wise men, neither do the ancients vnderstand Iudgment. Therfore will I speake; heare yee me. I also will shew you my wisdome &c. I am full of words, and the Spirit of my belly streineth me &c. and sundry such like. Here you see a Puritane in his liuely colours, who though he be but of a late birth, yet by the presumed inspiration of the omnipotent, he preferreth himselfe before the auncient, for wisdome and iudgment. And his reason is, because his very belly is ful of the Spirit: as this proud young fellow against iust Iob, doth not euery new Ghospeller speake the like a∣gainst the Church, Councels, and Fathers, and all vpon conceipt, that his braines and belly are full of the Spirit? S. Paul affirmeth that1. Cor. 12.8.10. To one by the spirit is giuen the word of wisdome; and to another the word of knowledge, and to another Prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another kinds of tongues; to another interpretation of languages. And all these things worketh one and the same spirit, deuiding to euery one according as he will. Heere it is expresly taught, that God giueth not to euery man the guift of knowledge, but to one that, and to others other gutftes; wherfore euery priuat man may not presume that he is endowed therwith. For which we must note that these guifts do not necessarily depend or follow iustifying Grace, and so common to all the faithfull and iust; but are speciall guiftes freely giuen, some vpon one, some vpon another, as the text sayth. S. Peter hauing compared2. Pet. 1.19.20.21. the Propheticall word, to a
Candle shyning in a darke place, immediatly addeth, vnderstan∣ding this first, that no Prophecy of Scripture is made by priuat Inter∣pretation, for not by mans will was Prophecy brought at any tyme, but the holy men of God spake, inspired with the holy Ghost. Here by Prophecy of Scripture, is vnderstood the sense thereof, for so they are calledEph. 4.11. Some Prophets, because they did foretell and expound hidden misteries of Scripture; which Prophecy or sense is not to be made by Priuat Interpretation, because not by mans will, or selfe seeming humane conceipt, was prophecy, or the true sense of Scripture brought, or made at any time; but the holy men of God, Prophets and Apostles, inspired by the holy Ghost, spake and expounded the same, not leauing it to the priuat interpretation of euery particu∣lar man. S. Iohns aduise is, that, we1. Iohn. 4.1.6. belieue not euery Spirit, but proue the Spirits if they be of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world &c. He that knoweth God, heareth vs, he that is not of God, heareth vs not. In this we know the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. Here we are admonished not to belieue e∣uery one that pretendeth the spirit, because many false tea∣chers will challenge the same, but we are to try them by this, that those which be of God, will heare and obey their Apostles and lawfull Pastors, succeeding the Apostles, and submit themselues to the Church of God, the other that be not of God, will not heare either Apostle, Pastor, or Church, but be their owne Iudges, pretending their Instruction by the spirit. S. Paul, as it were, for the first conceiuing of true faith, requireth these helps amongst others, of hearing and prea∣ching:Rom. 10.14. How shall they belieue him whom they haue not heard? And how shall they heare without a Preacher? But for the nourishing and preseruing thereof, he further exacteth obedience to Pastours, saying,Heb. 13.17. Obey your Prelates and be subiect to them, for they watch, as being to render account for your Soules: Yea he af∣firmeth that these Pastours were placed by Christ in the Church, to this end, that,Eph. 4.14. Now we be not Children▪ wauering and carryed about with euery wind of doctrine, in the wickednes of men, in craftines, to the circumuention of error. Now, if the holy Ghost by himselfe alone, did infallibly teach euery Priuat
man, inspiring into him the true sense of all the Scriptures, and consequently true knowledge, for the infallible deci∣ding of all doubts and controuersies, to what end is prea∣ching commanded? to what end are Pastors appointed in the Church of God, for the teaching and guiding of the people? But to these, who euery one so much glory of their owne spirit, I may iustly say, as Christ our Sauiour said vn∣to the Iewes,Io. 8.44. You are of your Father the Deuill, and the de∣sires of your Father you will do &c. He stood not in the verity, because verity is not in him; when he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his owne, because he is a lyar, and the Father therof. For so euery priuat Protestant expounding the Scriptures according to his owne spirit, speaketh of his owne, and consequently spea∣keth lyes. But some Protestants will reply, that all these Scriptu∣res alledged, are only meant against those, who in truth ha∣uing not the Spirit of God, do yet euer pretend and chal∣lenge the same; wheras all faithfull Protestants haue the true Spirit of vnderstanding and iudging: But besides that this is barely begged, not proued, I demand whether Luther, Swinglius, Caluin, or any other Prorestant now in rerum natura, be a faithfull Protestant, and consequently had, or hath the true spirit of God, euer infallibly directing him, in the true vnderstanding of the Scriptures? If they affirme, then not only all Catholickes, who haue equall Priuiledge of challenging the spirit, but euen others of the learnedst Protestants, will contest, that he erred, and that grieuously in sundry points of faith, and so was not infallibly directed by the spirit of God. If they say, that the faithfull Protestant is not at all times, and in all points of Religion so infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, but that sometimes he may erre; then it followeth euidently, that no Protestant pretending to be assisted in that sort, can be to himselfe or others an in∣fallible Iudge, in all the weightiest matters of faith and Re∣ligion.
SECT. III. It is proued by the Ancient Fathers, that the Priuat spirit is not a Iudge sufficient, for the deciding of Contro∣uersies, and interpreting the Scriptures. VVHeras we haue seen from S. Peter, that no Prophecy (or sense) of Scripture, is made by Priuat Interpretation: th is according to S Chrisostome,Hom. de Spir. Sancto adorando. not by the Spirit which many brag of, as the spirit of God, but falsly pretending it, do speake that which is their owne. According to S. Clement,L 10. Re∣cog. It is to be obsrued, when the Law of God is read, it ought not to be read or vn∣derstood, according to the meaning of euery mans owne wit; for there are many things in holy Scripture▪ which may be wrested to that mea∣ning, which euery one of his owne accord presumes to himselfe: but this cannot be. S. Hierome affirmeth that,Ad Pou∣lin Ep. 2. whatsoeuer hereticks speake they thinke it to be the Law (or word of God.) Neither do they vouchsafe to know what the Apostles, what the Prophets thought, but do apply incongruous testimonies to their owne meaning: as though it were not a great and most wicked manner of teaching, to depraue the Sentences, and to draw the contrary Scriptures to their owne will.In Ose c. 8.60. They haue turned the sacred words and senses into Idols, which they haue framed out of their owne heart.Ep. ad Ioan. Hieros. The testimonies which the Manichees, Marcion, Ebion, Gnostickes do take from the purest fountayne of Scriptures they do not so interprete as they are written, but they will haue (simplicitatem sermonis Ecclesiastici) the playnes of Gods word to signify that which themselues do thinke. S. Austine reprehendeth the Pelagians,De Nat. & Gra. c. 42. For that they read all the Scri∣ptures according to their priuat Senses. And he saith to the Ma∣nichees,Cont. Ma∣nich. You see that your worke is, that the authority of Scri∣ptures may be taken away, and that euery mans mynd may be author to himselfe, what he approueth or disaproueth in any Scripture, that is, not that he should be subiect to the authority of the Scriptures, but that he should subiect the Scriptures to himselfe. S. Bedes direction is, that,In 2. Pet. 1, The Prophets did write, deliuer, and preach, not their owne words, but the words of God: So also the reader of them must not vse
his owne proper Interpretation, least he decline from the sense of the truth. Therfore we affirme that no man presume to expound Scriptures according to his owne pleasure. SECT. IV. It is proued by Protestants that the Priuat Spirit is not our Iudge of Controuersies. THis point is so cleer and vndenyable, that sundry Pro∣testants do agree with vs heerin against their other Bre∣thren. D. Luther teacheth that,De Potest. Papae. we are not certayne of any Priuat man, whether he hath the Reuelation of the Father or no: but the Church it is whereof it is not lawfull to doubt.Ep. ad Antwerp. Tom. 2. Ger. Ienae. And, there is no Asse in this tyme so sottish and blockish, but will haue the dreames of his owne head, and his opinion accepted for the instinct of the holy Ghost, and himselfe esteemed as a Prophet: whereof ensueth, as himselfe complayneth a litle before, That there are as many Se∣ctes & Religions among vs, as there be men. Caluin calleth thē,In Ep. ad. Eph. 4.12. Fanaticall, who fayne to themselues secret Reuelations of the Spirit; and proud, who thinke the priuat reading of Scripture to suffice them, that they need not the Common Ministery of the Church.In. 1 Ioan. Many false Doctours belye (or counterfaite) the title of the Spirit: many mad-men start vp, who rashly boast themselues to be endowed with the Spirit of God &c. They speake in their owne Priuat name, go out in their owne name, vtter out of their owne sense. Yea writing a∣gaynst Swenckfeldius, who contemning the Scriptures, challenged only the Spirit for his Iudge, he disputeth thus,Instit. l. 1. c. 9. § 1. If that were a good Spirit, it were the same with the Spirit of the Apostles, and first belieuing Christians; but the Spirit of the Apostles, and first belieuing Christians did not make it selfe Iudge contemning the Scriptures: Ergo, it is not a good Spirit. Now in like manner may I argue agaynst Caluin, and our English Protestāts; If the Spirit which they make their Iudge, were a good Spirit, it were the same with the Spi∣rit of the Apostles, and the first Christians: But the Spirit of the Apostles, and the first Christians, did not make it self Iudge, but made recourse in their Controuersies to S. Pe∣ter,
and other Apostles, and Priests, sitting in Councell at Hierusalem, and obeyed their sentence. Ergo the Spirit of Protestants is not a good Spirit. Chemnitius hauing taught, that,Exam. part. 1 f. 63. The guift of Inter∣pretation is not common to all, no more then the guift of healing or mi∣racles, he addeth that, No man ought to stay vpon his owne wit, in the Interpretation of Scriptures, not (so much as) in playne pla∣ces, for it is written, that no Scripture is of Priuate Interpretation. 2. Pet. 1. D. Whitaker auoucheth that,Aduersus Staplet. l. 2. c. 6. p 370. 357. See Hook. Eccl. Pol. Sec. 8. p. 147. The testimony of the Spi∣rit being Priuat and Secret, is not fit to teach and refell others; And that as often therefore as controuersy of the Scriptures doth aryse, we must fly to common arguments taken from the Scriptures themselues and the perpetuall testimony of the Church. So inforced is he to ap∣peale from his Priuat Spirit, to the Scriptures themselues, and the Church. M. Hooker and others do auouch that,Eccl. pol. l. 1. sec. 14. l 2. sec. 8. l. 3. Sec. 3 l. 2. Sec. 7. Whitak. ad∣uers. Stapl. l. 2. c. 4. Zanchius in confess. c. 1. Bren. in Pro∣leg. The outward letter sealed with the inward witnes of the Spirit, it not a sufficient warrant for euery particular man to Iudge and approue the Scripture to be Canonicall, the Ghospell it selfe to be the Ghospell of Christ: but the authority of Gods Church (as he acknowledgeth) is necessarily required thereunto. So that Protestants themselues teach from the Scriptu∣res, that the Priuat Spirit is not a sufficient Iudge for the decyding of Controuersies, or interpreting the Scriptures. SECT. V. It is proued by reason, that the Priuat Spirit, is not our Iudge of Controuersies. IN Common Sense and reason we see, that in the tem∣porall Common wealth, men generally haue that natu∣rall light wherewith the Law was made, & which is suffi∣cient to expound the same, and yet the interpretation of the Law is not permitted to the Priuat Iudgement of euery man, though they pretend neuer so much skill, or speciall
assistance of any reuealing spirit: And if it were, the Com∣monwealth could not long continue in peace. How much lesse is the interpretation of Scripture, to be permitted to e∣uery man, seeing all haue not that supernaturall light, wher∣with the Scripture is to be vnderstood, as I proued before from S. Paul 1. Cor. 12.10. Agayne, the holy Ghost which directeth another, is neither seene nor heard of me; wheras a Iudge must both be seen & heard of the parties in strife, they being corporal men. A Iudge likewise must haue authority to compell both parties to stand to his sentence, otherwise his Iudgement or Sentence would be idle and vnprofitable. But this autho∣rity Priuat men (though neuer so much replenished with the Spirit) altogeather want. Againe, if this Priuat Spirit of euery man, might be ap∣proued for a competent Iudge, neuer could hereticke be cō∣uinced or conuerted, or any Controuersy euer ended, eue∣ry hereticke preferring his owne Spirit, before the Spirits of others, yea euery one demanding with Sedecias the false Prophet, agaynst the true Prophet Micheas,2. Paral. c. 18. 23. Which way passed the spirit of our Lord from me, that it should speake to thee. Lastly, seeing Prot. ground their saluation vpon only Fayth, which say they, doth only iustify; & Faith vpō only Scripture, which according to them, contaynes all things necessary to be belieued; and the Scripture and sense therof, only vpon the Priuat Spirit, by which (excluding Church, Coūcels, & Fathers) they expound the Scripture; it therof followeth that the Priuat Spirit is the principall, or sole ground to thē of their sense of Scripture, the Scripture sense the like ground of their fayth, and this their fayth the like ground of their saluation: wherfore no Protestant can haue greater certaynty of his fayth or saluation, then he hath of this Priuat spirit; whereof seeing he hath none, either from Scripture, Church, Councells, Fathers, common sense, or experience; it must needs follow, that his sole relying vpon the Priuat spirit, must perforce bring him into infinite & inextricable Errors. So many wayes is this Priuat Spirit altogether insufficient for the finall decyding of all Contro∣uersies.
SECT. VI. Obiections from the Scripture, for the Priuate Spirit, answered. SOme obiect such places of Scripture as seeme to affirme, that God himselfe will teacheth vs all thinges, if we aske it of him:Luc. 11.13. How much more will your Father from hea∣uen, giue the good Spirit to them that aske him?Iac. 1.5. If any of you lacke wisedome, let him aske of God, who giueth to all men aboundantly &c. And it shalbe giuen him. And sundry such like. Answer. 1. Heere is not the least mention made of the spirit of Interpreting the Scriptures, which is a guift gratis giuen, and wherof we only speake in this question; but of the spirit of Faith, Hope, Charity, and wisdome ne∣cessary to Saluation: for according to S. Augustine,Tract. 73. 81 & 103. in Ioan. Prayer doth not infallibly obtayne, but that which is necessary or profitable to the saluation of him that prayeth. Now the guift of Interpre∣ting as also the guifts of tongues, and miracles, and such like numbred togeather by S. Paul, are not alwaies profitable to him that hath them. Therfore as by prayer we cannot euer infallibly obtayne the spirit of tongues, miracles &c. Though it be said, he will giue the good Spirit to them, that aske him; so neither the spirit of Interpretation. Secondly, al∣though the places obiected, were to be vnderstood of the spirit or guift of Interpretation, yet no man that prayeth for it, can be certaine that he obtayneth it, because no man can be certaine that he prayeth as he ought,C. 4.3. You aske (saith S. Iames) and receyue not, because you aske amisse &c. And this we see verified in all hereticks, Lutherās, Caluinists, Swin∣glians, Anabaptistes, Puritanes &c. all whom pray for the spirit, and yet they are possessed with most different & con∣tradicting Spirits. Such places also may be vrged, as seeme to insinuate that God teacheth all truth to euery man,Hier. 31.33.34. I will giue my law in their bowels, and in their heart I will write it &c. and a man shall no more teach his Neighbour &c. saying: know our
Lord; for all shall know me, from the least of them euen to the grea∣test.Io. 6.45. It is written in the Prophets, And all shalbe docible of God. Euery one that hath heard of the Father, and hath learned, cometh to me.Io. 10.27. My sheep heare my voyce &c. and they follow me, and sun∣dry such like. Answer. 1. I answer in generall, that both is true, that we are taught by God, as the places obiected do insinuate, and yet ordinarily we are not taught immediatly by himselfe, but by mans ministery, for it is vsuall in the Scri∣ptures, that those things which God doth worke as the Principall Cause, are attributed to him as though he effe∣cted them without any instrumentall cause; and that for this cause also, because he giueth vertue and power to the Instruments, that they may worke: So S. Paul affirmeth that,1. Cor. 3 7. Neither he that planteth is any thing nor he that watereth, but he that giueth the increase, God. And Christ himselfe said to his Apostles,Mat. 10.20. It is not you that speake, but the spirit of your Fa∣ther that speaketh in you. And yet it is cleere, that men as Gods Instruments do plant, water, and speake; therfore though it be said, that God doth teach vs, yet this is vnderstood ordi∣narily to be by mans Ministery, by whose mouth he spea∣keth, and is heard, according to that of S. Zacharie,Luc. 1.70. he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets, that are from the beginning. And agreably hereunto Christ, not by himselfe alone, but by AnaniasAct. 9.7.10. &c. taught Paul, byAct. 8.26. &c. Philip the Eunuch, & by PeterAct. 10.6.22.34. Cornelius. Secondly, in particular I answer to the first place with S. Augustine, thatL. de spi∣ritu & lit. c. 24. by those words, I will giue my Law &c. is vnderstood the Grace of the New Testament, that is, Faith working by Charity, which God powreth into our hearts, not only that we may know him, but withall may fulfill his Commandements. And by these words, A man shall no more teach his Neighbour, is signified the reward of faith, to wit, Beatitude; in which all the Elect shall see God face to face. And though we should vnderstand these last words of this present tyme, yet they only speake of knowing of one God, which not only the Gentiles conuerted, but euen Iewes, Turkes, and hereticks do acknowledge. To the second text, And all shalbe docible of God, I may ei∣ther
answer with S. Cyril,Cyril. in hunc. loc. that this is meant of the do∣ctrine of the Ghospell, which Christ, not by Prophets, but by himselfe, taught & preached, according to that of S. Paul,Heb. 1.1.2. Diuersly and many wayes in tymes past God speaking to the Fa∣thers in the Prophets, last of all in these dayes hath spoken to vs in his Sonne: Or I may answer with S. Augustine,De gratia Christi c. 12. 13. 14. that this is vnderstood of the Grace of the holy Ghost, wherby a man is inwardly & sweetly moued by God to belieue and loue. To the third text, My sheepheare my voyce, I answer with S. Augustine,In hunc locum. that Christ here speaketh of the Predesti∣nate, who before their death heare Gods calling, and fol∣low him. Besides, God speaketh to his Sheepe, not only by the Scriptures, but also by internall inspirations, and by the mouthes of their Pastors, of whom he sayth expresly,Luc. 10.16. He that heareth you, heareth me. So not excluding by those words (My sheep heare my voyce) his Vicars and Pastors, but only enemies, as himselfe directly sayth,Ioan. 10.5. But a stranger they follow not, but flye from him, because they know not the voyce of strangers. In like sort it is vrged, that S. Iohn sayth,Io. 2.27. You haue no need that any man teach you; but as his vnction teacheth you of all things. Answer. 1. It is not here spoken absolutely of the knowledge of all heauenly things, in such sort, that those who haue receaued the holy Ghost, should not need a mai∣ster or teacher in any thing: for then to what end should S. Iohn haue written this Epistle, instructing them therby, whom the vnction of the holy Ghost did still instruct in all thinges? Or to what end should God haue placed in his Church Pastors and Doctors? It is therfore here only spoken of such Doctrine, as they had learned from the Apostles; wherin that they should persist, and not attend to teachers of the contrary, S. Iohn warneth them, as is manifest by the verses precedent,Ver. 21. I haue not written to you, as to them that know it.Ver. 24. That which you haue heard from the beginning, let it abyde in you.Ver. 62. These things haue I written to you concerning them that seduce you. Secondly this place is answered by S. Augustine, speaking thus to S. Iohn.Tract 3. in 1. Ep. Ioan. They had the vnction to whom thou didst speake: thou saidst (1. Io. 2.) Because his vnction
teacheth you all things: wherfore then dist thou write that Epistle? why didest thou teach them? why didest thou instruct them? why didest thou erect them? And now he answereth for S. Iohn, Brethren here you now see a great Mistery. The sound of our words beateth the eares; the maister is within. Do not thinke that any man doth learne any thing of man: we may admonish with the noyse of our voyce. If he be not within who teacheth, in vayne is our noyse &c. He hath his Chayre in heauen who teacheth the harts. The Prophet said, and he in the Ghospell, Mat. 23. Neither be ye called maisters, for one is your maister, Christ. So learnedly teaching, that the Doctrine of faith ought to be attributed to God, not that he alone with∣out mans ministery, doth ordinarily teach vs all things, but because he is the principall maister of this Doctrine. Others obiect those words of S. Paul,1. Cor. 2.15. The spirituall man iudgeth all things, and himself is iudged of no man. Ergo he is to iudge of the sense of the Scriptures. Answer. 1. Though there be some spirituall men, which do truly Interpret Scri∣ptures, as there be some who Prophecy, and who worke miracles, yet to them doth not pertaine the definitiue Sen∣tence of the true sense of Scriptures, or other Controuersies; because we neither haue certainty of faith, who these spiri∣tuall men be, as also it is most cleere, that the most spirituall are ignorant of some things. So Eliseus who had receiued the double spirit of Elias, acknowledged of himselfe,4. Reg. 4.17. Our Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not tould me. And sundry learned Fathers had excellently the guift of Interpretation, yet neither did they assume, or others attribute to any of them in particular, the infallible knowledge of the true sense of all Scripture; wherfore, wheras it is said, that the spirituall man Iudgeth all things; the meaning is, That he iud∣geth as well spirituall things as temporall, aswell heauenly as earthly; according to which S. Paul had said before,Ver. 14. The sensuall man perceiueth not those things that are of the spirit of God: But from hence it will not follow, that the spirituall man is able to iudge either all diuine and spirituall things, or all temporall and earthly matters. D.Against the Rhem. Test. in Act. 17.11. Whitak ad∣uersus Stap. l. 3 c. 7. p. 529. Fulke, D. Whitaker, and others do vrge, that it is written of the People of Beroea, that,Act. 17.11. They were
daily searching the Scriptures, if these things were so as Paul taught. Ergo, the people may iudge by the Scriptures, whether the Church teacheth truely or no. Answere. Though S. Paul was an Apostle, & could not preach false Doctrine, yet this was vnknowne to those of Beroea, and therefore they were not bound presently to belieue, except they had seen first some miracle, or other credible motiues of beliefe: when then S. Paul proued to thē Christ, by the predictions of the Prophets, deseruedly they searched the Scriptures for the same. But Christians, to whome it is cer∣tayne, that the Church cannot erre in matters of fayth, are bound to receyue her decrees, without all doubt thereof. And if (as some thinke) the Beroeans formerly belieued, thē their searching of the Scriptures, might be for their Comfort and Confirmation. But this Obiection is so weake, that D. Bilson answereth the same against M. Iacob saying,Suruey of Christes sufferinges. p. 84. Where you say the Beroeans are commended by the holy Ghost, for not belieuing that which Paul spoke of Religion, till they had examined by Scriptures, and seen whether the truth were so as he vttered, you speake not only vnwisely, and vntruly, but if you would haue Christi∣ans to follow that Course, you shew intollerable pride against the word of God: for the Beroeans were commended, (whereas yet they neyther belieued in Christ, nor acknowledged Pauls Apostleship) for their rea∣dines to heare, and care to search, whether Paul spoke true or no. This if you now assume to your selfe ouer Paules words or writings, you incurre the crime of flat impiety: Paules words to vs that belieue with∣out further search or other credit, are of equall authority with the rest of the Scriptures, and not to belieue him, till we examine and see the truth of his Doctrine, is meer infidelity; So confessedly imperti∣nent is this common obiection. Some obiect that the Church receyueth from God in∣spiring her the right sense of Scripture, and so first decydeth the Controuersy in her mynd, before she can exteriourly decyde what is to be belieued: therefore the Spirit speaking in her hart is the supreme Iudge, euen to Catholikes. An∣were. The motions of the Spirit inspiring the Pastours of the Church, are vnknowne to others, and to themselues are vncertaine, vntill they be outwardly decreed and sub∣scribed
by the head and members of the Church, and so are no Iudiciall sentences, or finall decisions, or rules infalli∣ble, eyther to themselues, or others. Sander. de visiō. Mon. l. 4. c. 3.4.Others vrge, that in the law of Nature there was no other Iudge but only the Spirit instructing. Answere. (23) Adam during his lyfe was the Chiefe head and directour of Gods people in points fayth: then Seth, Enos &c. And so in succeeding ages, the first borne by Prerogatiue of his Pri∣mogeniture, or some other by Gods speciall Election, dis∣charged that Office. Some obiect that the belieuing Gentiles were not sub∣ordinate to the high Priest of the Iewes, nor had any other appointed ouer them, and so were only guided by the spi∣rit. Answere. The faythfull Gentiles were not subiect to the high Priest of the Iewes; because they had no such positiue Precept imposed vpon them, but the necessary my∣steries of fayth were reuealed vnto them, eyther by God himselfe, or by an Angell, or by some other infallible Tradi∣tion. But all this being Extraordinary, can be no warrant for paricular men to challenge the lyke, nor preiudice the ordinary Course prescribed by Gods wisdome: especially now in the Law of Grace, when both Iew and Gentile are subiected to one head, according to that of Christ our Sa∣uiour,Io. 10.16. Other sheep I haue which are not of this fold; them also must I bring, and they shall heare my voyce, and there shalbe made one fold and one Pastour. This cannot be vnderstood of Christ, as inuisibly gouerning, for so there was alwayes one fold and one Pastour; but of his inuisible headship, and of his secon∣darie visible Pastour, who is his Vicar vpon Earth; and of whomeL. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. S. Cyprian interpreteth these very words.
CHAP. V. The true State of the Question concerning the boo∣kes of Scripture Canonicall, or Apocryphall. Whether the bookes of Tobie, Iudith, Wisedome, Eccle∣siasticus, and the first and second of Machabees, be Scriptures truly Canonicall, or Apocryphall. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE Catholike ChurchConcil. Trid. Sess 4. Decret. de Canonicis Scripturis. Setting al∣wayes this before her eyes, that errours being taken away, the very Purity of the Ghospell may be preserued in the Church; what was pro∣mised before by the Prophets in the holy Scrip∣tures, our Lord Iesus-Christ the sonne of God, first published by his owne mouth, and after∣wards commanded to be preached toMar. vlt. euery creature by his Apostles, as the fountaine of all wholsome truth▪ and of the discipline of man∣ners: And seeing that this truth and discipline is contayned in the writ∣ten bookes, and in the Traditions not written &c. following the exam∣ples of Orthodoxall Fathers, with like affection of Piety and reuerence, it receyueth and honoureth all the Bookes both of the Old and new Te∣stament, seeing one God is the Authour of both &c. It hath further ordained that the Table (or Catalogue) of the sacred boo∣kes,
should be adioyned to this decree, lest doubt might arise to any, which bookes they are, which are receyued by the Synod. They are these following ef the old Testament, fiue of Moyses▪ that is, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deutronomy; Iosue, Iudges, Ruth, foure of the Kings, Two of Paralipomenon, the first & second of Esdras, which is called Nehemias, Tobias, Iudith, Fsther, Iob, Dauids Psalter of 150. Psalmes, Prouerbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Wisdome, Ecclesiasticus, Isaias, Hieremias, with Baruch, Ezechiel, Daniel, twelue lesser Prophets, that is, Ose, Ioel, Amos, Abdias, Ionas, Michaeas, Naum, Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias, the first and second of the Machabees. Of the New Testament, foure Ghos∣pels according to Mathew, Marke, Luke, and Iohn: the Acts of the A∣postles written by Luke the Euangelist: fourteene Epistles of Paul the Apostle, to the Romanes, two to the Corinthians, to the Galathians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, two to the Thes∣salonians, two to Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrewes: two of Peter the Apostle, three of Iohn the Apostle, one of Iames the Apostle, one of Iude the Apostle, and the Apocalyps of Iohn the Apostle. But if any man shall not receiue for sacred and Canonicall, these whole bookes with all their parts, as they are accustomed to be read in the Catholicke Church, and as they are in the old Vulgar Latin Edition &c. let him be accursed. In the third Carthage Councell it is defined,Can. 47. that nothing be read in the Church vnder the name of diuine Scriptures, but Canonicall Scriptures. The Canonicall Scriptures are Genesis, Exodus &c. And so the said ancient Councell proceedeth, making particularly the same Catalogue of the Bookes of sacred Scripture, with the next before recited out of the Councell of Trent. And the same with these Councels doBellar de verb. Dei. l. 1. c. 4. &c. The Translators of the Old Test. in the Argum. of the Macab. and the o∣ther Bookes. And in the Prooemiall Annotations. Catholiks now belieue. Protestants vntruthes. Luther affirmeth, that the. de Con∣eil. & Eccle∣sia. Pope doth bury the sacred Scri∣pture in dirt and dust, and hath almost abolished the whole Christian doctrine.Exam. Sess. 4, Chemnitius auoucheth, that Catholiks are of opinion, that the Pope at his pleasure, without all testimo∣nies of Ancient writers, may of a Booke not Canonicall,
make it Canonicall, and of the Contrary. And that if the Pope would, the sacred Scripture would be of no more au∣thority, then Aesops Fables. Ochinus speaking of the Bookes of Machabees, sayth,Dialog. de Purgato∣rio, that they are Apocryphall, it is manifest by the Laodicene, and the Africane Councels, yea by all holy Doctours, who making a Catalogue of the Scriptures, make no mention of the Machabees. But the con∣trary is euident by the third Carthage Councell cited, and by sundryAug. l. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 8. & de Ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 36. Innocent. 1. Ep. ad Exsu∣perium. c. vlt. Isidor. l c. Etymol. c. 1. ancient writers. And though the Laodicene Councell doth not mention the Bookes of Machabees, as neither doth it mention the Apocalyps, yet doth it no where censure them for Apocryphall. So that all heere said by Protestants are mere impostures, and vtterly detested by the Catholike Church. Protestant Doctrine. The English Church hath decreed, that,Article 6. In the name of the holy Scripture, we do vnderstand those Canonicall Bookes of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was neuer any doubt in the Church: and then followeth, of the names and number of Canonicall bookes, Genesis, Exodus &c. For Apocryphall, they number these following: the 3. booke of Esdras, the 4. booke of Esdras, the booke of Tobias, the booke of Iudith, the rest of the booke of Esther, the booke of Wisdome, Iesus the sonne of Syrach, Baruch the Prophet, the song of the 3. Children, the story of Susanna, of Bell and the Dragon, the Prayer of Manasses, the first booke of Machabees, the second booke of Machabees. And these their Apo∣cryphall, they say, the Church doth read, for example of lyfe and Instruction of manners, but yet doth it not apply them to establish any doctrine. Of the bookes of the New Testament, they only say in generall, All the bookes of the New Testament, as they are commonly receiued, we do receiue and account them Canonicall. To this Rule of making such bookes Canonicall, of whose authority was neuer any doubt in the Church, D. Whitakers addeth 2. more, wherby he discardeth the Ma∣chabees, and sundry others:Ans∣were to Reinolds. p, 22. 23. They were written (sayth he) in Greeke, or some other forraine language, and not in Hebrew; nor
had for their knowne Authors, those whom God hath declared to be his Prophets. So that no bookes must be Canonicall with our English Church, but such as were neuer doubted of in the Church, such as were originally written in the Hebrew, & such as had their authors knowne to be Prophets. The Lutherans hence teach, thatIn En∣chirid. p. 63. & Exam. part. 1. p. 55. The 2. Epistle of Pe∣ter, the 2. & 3. of Iohn, the Epistle to the Hebrewes, the Epistle of Iames, the Epistle of Iude, and the Apocalips of Iohn are Apocryphall: asExam. part. 1. p. 56. not hauing sufficient testimony of their Authority. And therfore, thatIbid. p. 57. nothing in Controuersy may be proued out of these bookes. Protestants agree with Iewes, and Heretickes. S. HieromeIn Pro∣leg. Galeat. relateth, that the Hebrews reiected the bookes of Toby, Iudith, Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, and Macha∣bees. EusebiusHist. l. 3. c. 25. and S. HieromeL. de viris illustr. in Iaco∣bo, Iuda, Pa∣tro, Ioanne. report, that some before their times doubted of the Epistles of Iames, Iude, 2. of Peter, 2. & 3. of Iohn. The AnomeansEpiphan. haer. 76. Hie∣ron. in c. 5. Michae. & Praefat. in Ep. ad Philem. Aug. l. 2. cont. Ad∣uers. Leg. & Proph. c. 2. and other here∣ticks taught, that all things in S. Pauls Epistles, were not inspired by the holy Ghost, but some things written only by humane wisdome: the same and worse do Protestants teach here next hereafter. Protestants Errours. Wheras Moyses was the first that writ any part of Scripture, and he who writ the Law of God, or ten Commandement, Luther thus reiecteth him, and his ten Commandements.Tom. 3. Germ. f. 40, 41. & in Col∣loq. Mensal. Ger. fol. 152.153. We will neither heare nor see Moyses, for he was giuen only to the Iewes, neither doth he belong any thing to vs.In Colloq. Mensal. c. de lege & E∣uang. I will not receiue Moyses with his Law, for he is the Enemy of Christ.Ib. fol. 118. Moyses is the Maister of all hangmen.Serm. de Moyse. The 10. Commandements belong not to Christians.In Con∣uiual. Col∣loq. cited by Au fab. cap. de lege. Let the 10. Com∣mandements be altogeather reiected, and all heresies will presently cease, for the 10. Commandments are as it were the fountayne from whence all heresies spring. Islebius Luthers scholler taught,See O∣siand Cent. 16. p. 311. 312. 310. That the Decalogue was not to be taught in the Church. And from him
cameSleidan. hist. l. 12. fol. 162. the Sect of Antinomans, who publickly taught, that,See Con∣fessio Mans feildensium Ministro∣rum. Tit de Antinomis, f. 89. 90. The Law of God is not worthy to be called the word of God. If thou beest a whore, if a whoremonger, if an adulterer, or o∣therwise a sinner; belieue, and thou walkest in the way of saluation: when thou art drowned in sinne, euen to the bottome, if thou belieuest, thou art in the midst of happines. All that busy themselues about Moy∣ses, that is, the 10. Commandements, belong to the Deuill, to the Gal∣lowes with Moyses. LutherIn serm. Conuiual. Tit. de Patriarch. & Proph. doth not belieue all things to be so done as they are related in the booke of Iob: and with him it is,Tit. de libris Vet. & nou. Test. as it were the Argument of a fable. He sayth of Ecclesiastes,Petrus Rebeastock. l. 2. Colloq. Latin. Luthe∣ri. cap. de vet. Test. This bke is not perfect, many things are taken away, it wanteth bootes and spurres, that is, it hath no perfect sentence. CastalioSee Beza in vita Caluini. commanded the Canticles of Salomon to be thrust out of the Canon, as an impure and obscene song, reuiling with bitter reproaches such Ministers, as resisted him therin. CaluinInstit l. 2. c. 16. § 10. doubted whether the Apostles Creed, was made by the Apostles. He arguethIn Math. 27.9. S. Mathew of error, he reiectethHarm in Math. 20.16. these words, Many are called, but few are chosen. Clebitius opposeth the Euangelists one against ano∣ther,Victoria veritatis, & ruina, Papatus, Arg. 5. Marke and Mathew deliuer the contrary, therfore to Mat∣thew and Marke being two witnesses, more credit is to be giuen then to one Luke, who was not present at the last supper, as Mathew was. SwingliusTom. 2. Elenc. f. 10. Fotherby in his 4, Sermons ser. 2. p. 50. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. ca. 10. Col. 580. Gualter. in Act. 21. and other Protestants affirme, that all things in S. Paules Epistles are not sacred, and that in sundry things he erred. OtherCaluin. in omnes Pauli Ep. in Gal. 2. p. 510. 511. Goad in the Towers Disp. 2. dayes confer. Arg. 6. Whit. de Eccles. Contr. 2. q. 4. p. 223. Protestants charge S. Peter to haue erred in faith and manners, euen after the descending of the holy Ghost. Ro∣gers confesseth and nameth sundry of his Brethren Prote∣stants reiecting for ApocryphallDef. of the Articles, Art. 6. p 32. the Epistle vnto the He∣brewes, of S. Iames, the first and second of Iohn, of Iude, and the Apo∣calyps. I desire the indifferent Reader here to Iudge, whe∣ther any men liuing, but professed Atheistes, did euer like vnto our Protestants so reiect, deride, discarde, and censure the Scriptures themselues, so generally receiued.
SECT. II. It is proued by sundry reasons and authorities, that the foresaid Bookes are truly Canonicall. IN Confutation of the foresaid Rules giuen by Protestants for the discerning of Canonicall Scriptures from Apo∣cryphall, I will begin with such bookes as were reiected or doubted of by some Ancient Fathers. It is euident that the Booke of Hester was not admitted within theAthanas. in Synopsi. Greg Naz. in carmine quod scripfit de geminis Scripturis. Melito apud Euseb. l. 4. hist. c. 26. Canon by S. Athanasius, S. Gregory Nazianzene, & Melito Africanus. AndPraefat. in Hester. S. Hierome reiecteth the last 7. Chapters thereof. Baruch is not expressely named or placed by such Auncient Councels and Fathers, as did make a Catalogue of the seue∣rall Bookes of Canonicall Scripture. The auncient belie∣uing Iewes reiectedHier. Prae∣fat. in Daniel. the Hymne of the three Children, the hy∣story of Susanna, (which also was refused byApud Euseb. Hist. l. 6. c. 23. Iulius Afri∣canus) and the History of the Dragon, as also the bookes of Tobis, Iudith, Wisedome, Ecclesiasticus, and Machabees. Neyther do Melito, Amphilochius, Nazianzenus, or the Councell of Laodicea, number Tobie, Iudith, Ecclesiasticus, or the Macha∣bees, in the Catalogue of their Canon; of all which also S. Hie∣romePraef. in Iudith. & l. 10. ad Furiam. c. 6. in Prole∣go. Galeat. & Praef. in li∣bros Salomo∣nis. Praef. in Daniel. seemeth to doubt. Some ancient writers doubted also of theSee in S. Hier. Ep. ad Hedibiam. q. 3. last Chapter of S. Marks Ghospells; others of some partSee Hi∣lar. l. 10. de Trinit. & Hier. l. 2. cont. Pelagianos. of the 22. Chapter of S. Luke; others of theSee Eu∣seb. hist. l. 3. c. 39. beginning of the 8. Chapter of S. Iohn, others of theSee Eu∣seb. hist. l. 4. c. 3. Hier. l. de viris illust. in Paulo. Epistle to the He∣brews, others of theSee Eus. hist. l. 3. c. 25. Hier. l. de vi∣ris illust. in Iacobo, Iu¦da, Petro, & Ioanne. Epistles of Iames, Iude, the second of Pe∣ter, the 2 and 3. of Iohn, and theSee Eus. hist l. 3. c. 28. & l. 7 c. 23. Hier. Ep. ad Dardanum. Apocalyps. And it is so certayne that these bookes and parcells of Scripture were doubted of by some Doctors of the Ancient Church, as that M. Rogers who defendeth the foresayd ca∣nonizing of Scripture, by being neuer doubted of in the an∣cient Church, is enforced yet to say,In his defence of the 39 Arti∣cles, p. 31. Although some of the ancient Fathers and Doctours, accepted not all the Bookes contayned within the volume of the new Testament, for Canonicall: yet in the end, they were wholly taken and receyued by the common Consent of the Church of Christ in this world, for the very word of God &c. D.
Bilson auoucheth, that,Suruey of Christes sufferings p. 664. The Scriptures were not fully recei∣ued in all places, no not in Eusebius tyme: He sayth, the Epistles of Iames, Iude, the 2 of Peter, the 2. & 3. of Iohn, are contradicted as not written by the Apostles. The Epistle to the Hebrewes was for a while contradicted &c. The Churches of Syria did not receiue the 2. Epistle of Peter, nor the 2. & 3. of Iohn, nor the Epistle of Iude, nor the Apocalyps &c. The like might be said for the Churches of Ara∣bia: will you hence conclude (saith D. Bilson) that these parts of Scripture were not Apostolicke, or that we need not to receiue them now, because they were formerly doubted of? The Deanes of Paules and Windsor, in the Towers disputation had with the most illustrious Martyr Campian, in proofe of this point, do thus report of themselues.The 1. dayes Con∣ference. D. 1. For proofe herof, we alleadged the testimonies of Hierome in Catal. where he thus writeth, The E∣pistle of Iames is said to be published by some other vnder his name; and of the 2. of Peter he sayth, that it is denied by many to be his. We also alleaged Eusebius writing thus; Those bookes that be gainsaid, though they be knowne to many, be these; The Epistle attributed to Iames, the Epistle of Iude, the later of Peter, the 2. & 3. of Iohn. With these agreeth D. Walker, affirming in the same Dispu∣tation, that4. Dayes Conference f. 2. B. S. Hierome sayth; Concerning that (Epistle) which is written to the Hebrewes▪ many haue doubted of it: and also con∣cerning the 2. of Peter, he sayth, It was doubted of by many, and so with some were the 2. last Epistles of Iohn &c. By all which it is cleere, and for such confessed, that if nothing must be admit∣ted for Canonicall Scripture, wherof any doubt was made in the Primitiue Church, as Protestants formerly exacted; then must not only the Machabees, Tobie, Iudith, and other Bookes of the Old Testament be discarded out of the Ca∣non, but a farewell also must we giue to some parts of the Ghospels, written by S. Marke, S. Luke, and S. Iohn, the Epistle to the Hebrewes, and the other of S. Iames, S. Iude, S. Peter; S. Iohn and the Apocalyps; all which yet contrary to their former Rule, our English Pro. are content to accept for Canoni∣call. So that the foresayd Rule prescribed by Prot. must be accepted for good agaynst Tobie, Iudith &c. but it must be reiected for a most false Rule, in regard of the Epistles of S. Ia∣mes, Peter, Iohn &c. And what it is that maketh this incre∣dible
or rather impossible difference, in one and the same Rule? Certainly nothing else, but that some Bookes so doubted of, spake ouer plainly agaynst Prot. Doctrine; and others no lesse doubted of, they hoped they could euade with better colours, and lesse difficulty. But it is to be obserued yet further, that the foresayd Bookes were neuer so doubted of in the Primitiue Church, but hat some then there were, who could testify, that they were set forth by Prophets or Apostles: for the want wher∣of, the booke of Enoch was neuer receiued by the Church. And although some others doubted, and the Church then did not determine the truth; yet, that no more inferreth that the Church since cannot determine it, then that the Coun∣cell of Nice could not decree the booke of Iudith to be Cano∣nicall, being formerly doubted of. Adde lastly that although the Lutherans sayd,In Con∣fessione Wit∣temberg. We call sacred Scriptures those Canonicall Bookes, of the old and new Te∣stament, of whose authority it was neuer doubted in the Church: Yet the Diuines of Geneua adde to those words, thus, Although in the Catalogue of the new Testament some bookes may be found, wher∣of sometymes doubt hath been made by certaine Ancient Doctours of the Church: yet at length, by the consent of the whole Catholike Church, they also were accounted and receyued for Canonicall; ther∣fore vndeseruedly, for the doubts of some, are cast behind. So croo∣ked, imperfect and wanting is that Rule of making onely such bookes Canonicall, as were neuer doubted of, in the Primitiue Church. To come now to the 2. Rule wherby true Scriptures must be discerned frō false, which is the restrayning the Old Te∣stament to haue been written only in the Hebrew, so that whatsoeuer is not found in the Hebrew, must be reiected as Apocryphall: But besides that, it is no litle temerity to re∣strayne the holy Ghost, to one onely language in the wri∣ting of the Scriptures; the falshood and vanity heereof is cleerly discouered, by example of Daniel a good part, wher∣of,To wit, from Chap. 2. ver. 4. to the end of the 7. Chap∣ter. though not written in Hebrew, is et by ourSee all our English Protestant Bibles. Aduersaries themselues acknowledged for Canonicall. In like sort concerning the third Rule, it is most vn∣true,
that God would direct by his holy Spirit, no authors in their writings, but such as were knowne, and also fur∣ther declared by certaine testimony to be Prophets: for Pro∣testants themselues cannot yet tell, who were Anthours of the seuerall Bookes of Iudges, the 3. and 4. of Kings, the two of Paralippomenon, and the Bookes of Ruth, and Iob. In so much as D. Whitaker himselfe doth directly answere his owne obiection, saying,De sacra Script. p. 603. The authours of many Bookes are not knowne; as of Iosue, Ruth, Paralippomenon, Hesther &c. AndSynops. p. 4. we receyue (sayth D. Willet) many Bookes in the Old Testament, the Authours whereof are not perfectly knowne. Yea Cal∣uin, Beza, and theOf Anno 1584. and 1579. See Caluin. in Heb. 2.2. publishers of certaine of our English Bybles, in the Preface or Argument vpon the Epistle to the Hebrews, do all of them professe to rest doubtfull of the Authour thereof: Caluin and Beza there affirming, that it is not written by S. Paul. So that though some parcels of the Bible haue not their Authors or Penners knowne, much lesse knowne to be Prophets, yet by lyke examples of other approued Scriptures, it maketh nothing against their sacred and diuine Authority. Lastly, wheras Protestants make the written word of God, or the reuealing Spirit, their generall Rule wherby to square them in all doubts; it is fo manifest, that by neither of these meanes, the Canonicall Scriptures can be discerned from the Apocryphall, as that M. Hooker teacheth to the contrary, that,Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec. 14 pag. 86. Of thinges necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what bookes we are bound to esteeme holy, which point is con∣fessed impossible for the Scripture it selfe to teach: forIbid. l. 2. c. 4. p. 102. (sayth he) If any one Booke of Scripture did giue testimony to all, yet still that Scripture which giueth credit to the rest, would require another Scripture to giue credit vnto it. NeitherIbid. p. 103. could we euer come to any pause wheron to rest, vnles besides Scripture there were something else acknowledged. Herein M. Hooker writeth so Catholik∣ly, that he is therfore reproued by a PuritaneSee the Christian letter to that Reuerend man M. R. Hook. p. 9. Brother. In like sort D. Whitaker teacheth, that true Scriptures can∣not be discerned from counterfait, by theAduer∣sus Staplet. l. 2 c. 6. p. 370. & p. 357 and see Hook. in his Eccl. pol. sec. 8. p. 147. testimony of the Spirit: the which (saith he) being priuat and secret, is not fit to teach and refell others.
Wherfore the only meanes remaining, wherby infalli∣bly to discerne true Scriptures from false, is (as all Catho∣licks teach) the Church of Christ. A truth so cleere, as that forbearing all other proofes, I may well content my selfe with the manifold acknowledgments of Protestants them∣selues. To this purpose then D. Fulke auoucheth, that,Answer to a Coun∣terf. Cath. p 5. The Church of Christ hath Iudgment, to discerne true writinges from counterfait, and the word of God from the writings of men, and this Iudgment she hath of the holy Ghost. With him agreeth D. Iewel, affirming, that,Defence of the Apo∣logy. p. 201. The Church of God hath the spirit or wis∣dome, wherby to discerne true Scriptures from false. M. Hooker hauing before taught, that true Scriptures cannot be know∣ne, vnlesse besides Scripture there were some thing which might assure vs; this Something afterwards he acknowled∣gethEccl. Pol. p 146. & 116. And see Aret. his Examen. p. 24. Bach∣manus his Centuriae tres. p. 267. To be the authority of Gods Church, or (as D. Whita∣ker termeth it)Aduer∣sus Stap. p. 300. 298. 24. 25. and a∣gainst Rei∣nolds. p. 44. The Ecclesiasticall Tradition: An argument (sayth he) wherby may be argued and conuinced what Bookes be Ca∣nonicall and what not. With whom accordeth another Prote∣stant writerAuthor of the Script. and the Church. f. 71. 72. 74. 75. much commended by Bullinger,Ibid. in the Preface. affir∣ming that, The Church is indued with the spirit of God, and that the diligence and authority of the Church is to be acknowledged here∣in, which hath partly giuen forth her testimony of the assured writinges, and hath partly by her spirituall Iudgment refused the writinges which are vnworthy. Yea he further assureth vs, with S. AustineTom. 6. cont. ep. Fun∣dam. c. 5. Ter∣tul. l. 1. de Praescript. c. 6. and Tertullian, that, we couldScri∣pture and the Church. p. 72. 74. 75. And see Me∣lancton in Ep. ad Rom. c. 14. pa. 358. 359. not belieue the Ghospell, were it not that the Church taught vs, and witnessed that this Doctrine was deliuered by the Apostles. And the like might be showed by sun∣dry otherSee Pet. Mart. in his com. Pla. in English. part. 1. c. 6. Sec. 8. p. 42. Chemn. Exam. part. 1. p. 69. Lubb. de principijs Christ. dog. l. 1. c. 4. p. 18. Protestant writers. Wherfore to conclude, seeing the sacred Scriptures of God cannot be discerned from the Apocryphall writinges of men, either by that they haue been neuer doubted of, or because they were originally written in Hebrew, or had for their penners knowne Prophets, or by any Proofe from the Scriptures themselues, or the reuealing spirit, but only in that the true discerning thereof, is confessed by the senten∣ce and determination of the Church of Christ; it remaineth next to be examined, whether the foresaid bookes of Eccle∣siasticus, Wisdome, Toby, Iudith, Machabees &c. reiected
by Protestants as counterfait, and belieued and defended by Catholickes as Canonicall, were euer admitted, acknow∣ledged and approued by the Church of Christ, as sacred, di∣uine, and the true word of God. SECT. III. That the Primitiue Church of Christ, and the Councels therin celebrated, haue admitted and approued for Canonicall, the foresaid Bookes of Ecclesiasticus, Wisdome, Toby, Iudith, Machabees &c. HAuing elswhere proued from the ample Confessions of the learnedst Protestant Doctors, that the Primitiue Church continued the true Church of Christ, during the first 500. or 600. yeares; I will now only make manifest, that the said Church admitted and approued the foresaid Bookes, as truly sacred, diuine, and Canonicall. Which though I might conuince at large, by producing the particular say∣ings of Fathers, and Decrees of Councels, yet seeing the Case on our behalfe is so cleere, as that our Aduersaries themselues do confesse what I intend to proue, I will only set downe such graunts as they affoard in our behalfe. Whereas in the third Carthage Councell, whereat S. Austine and sundry other Fathers and Bishops were present and subscribed, it is expressely defyned, thatCan 47. Nothing be read in the Church, vnder the name of diuine Scriptures, besides Ca∣nonicall Scriptures. And, the Canonicall Scriptures are Genesis, E∣xodus &c. fiue bookes of Salomon &c. (whereof Ecclesiasticus and Wisdome are two) Tobie, Iudith, Esther &c. two bookes of Ma∣chabees &c. Wheras also the same Canon of Scripture is made and numbred particularly byDe doct. Christ. l. 2. ca. 8. Innocent. Ep. ad Exupe∣rium. c. 7. Gel. Tom. 1. conc. in Decret. cum 70. Epis. Isid. l. 2. Etymol. c. 1. Rabanus l. 2. Instit. cleric. Cassiodorus l. 2. diuinarum lectionum. S. Austine himselfe, as also by Innocentius, Gelasius and other Ancient writers; the truth heerof is so manifest, that the same is confessed by sundry Prot. writers, and the same Councell and Fathers (insteed of better Answere) are seuerely reprehended for the same. Mathaeus Hoe reproueth the Carthage Councell in these
words,Hist. Tri∣par. Theol. p. 46. The Councell of Carthage hath decreed for Canonicall, all the bookes of the old Testament, excepting the 3. and 4. of Esdras, the 3. of Machabees &c. I adde, that the Councell ought not to haue Canonized more bookes, because it had not authority. Poliander likewise saith,In his Refutation p. 44. To come now to the Error of some Councels, the Councels of Carthage, and Florence haue enrolled for Canonicall Bookes, and as diuinely inspired &c. the bookes of Toby, Iudith, Wisdome, Ecclesiasticus, and the Machabees &c. And the Popes Inno∣centius and Gelasius, haue reckoned these bookes among the Cano∣nicall. Hiperius auoucheth, thatMethod. Theol. l. 1. p. 64. In the third Carthage Coun∣cell there are added to the Canon &c. Sapientia & Ecclesiasticus, two bookes of Machabees, Toby, Iudith &c. All which bookes in the same order numbreth Austine, Innocentius, and Gelasius, for which he at large afterwards reiecteth their Iudgment. I graunt (saithDe princip. Christ. dogm. l 1. c. 4 p. 8. Lubbertus) certaine of these bookes to be admitted by the Carthaginians, but I deny that therfore they are the word of God, for no Councels haue that authority. So confessed it is that the foresaid Bookes were holden Canonicall by the Councels and Fathers of the Primitiue Church. Now, where our English Doctors in the DisputationThe first dayes Con∣ference. had in the Tower Anno 1581. with Fa. Ed. Campian Martyr, did publickly and seriously answere, that S. Austine numbring the foresaid Bookes▪ within the Canon, vsed the word, Canon, improperly, as not meaning therby that the bookes now in question were properly Canonicall, but on∣ly that they were in the Canon of manners, not of Do∣ctrine; first, this appeareth to be most vntrue, in that S. Au∣stine ranketh these bookes in the same order with Genesis, & the rest of vndoubted authority, & therfore by the same rea∣son according to S. Austin, these other bookes should not be properly Canonicall. Secondly S. Austine was one who subscribed to the foresaid Carthage Councell, and his mea∣ning with the said Councell and other Fathers, is so Ro∣man Catholike, as that they are therfore all of them re∣proued by sundry ProtestantReinolds in his Con∣clusions, an∣nexed to his Conference. p. 699. 700. Zanchius de sacra Script. p. 32. 33. Hos∣pi. hist. Sa∣cram. part. 1. p 160. Trel∣catius loc. com. p. 15. Hoe Tract. Tripart. Theol. p. 46. Parker ag. Symbol. part. 2. pa. 60. Field of the Church. p. 246. 247. writers, which had bene blamlesse, euen according to Protestants, if they had taken the word (Canonicall) only improperly.
But Brentius auoucheth more in generall, thatApol. Confess. Wittemb. And see Bu∣cers scripta Anglicana p. 713. There are some of the Ancient Fathers who receiue (sayth he) these Apocry∣phall bookes into the number of Canonicall Scriptures: and in like sort some Councels command them to be acknowledged as Canonicall. I am not ignorant what was done, but I demand whether it was rightly & Canonically done? D. Couell aryseth yet higher, not only con∣fessing S. Augustines like Iudgment had of the BookeAgainst Burges p. 76. 77. of Wisdome, but withall further affirmeth of all these Bookes, that. IfIbid. p. 87. Ruffinus be not deceiued, they were approued as parts of the Old Testament, by the Apostles. And if you desire to ascend yet higher, you shall findOf the Church. p. 245. 246. Hut. 2. part of his answere. p. 176. D. Field, and M. Hutton both of them to acknowledge, that some of the Ancient Iewes receyued the foresayd Bookes for truly Canonicall. But though all the Iewes had reiected the forsaid boo∣kes, yet we Christians are to be directed heerin (as is con∣fessedSee be∣fore Chap. 5. sec. 2. before) by the Church of Christ. And according to thisDe Ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 36. S. Austine sayth of the Bookes of Machabees, not the Iewes, but the Church accounteth (them) for Canonicall. Saint Hierome also maketh the like opposition, betweene the Iudgemēt of the Hebrews, & the Nicene Councell concer∣ning the booke of Iudith, saying,Praef. in Iudith. With the Hebrews the booke of Iudith is read among the Hagiographall &c. (which they receyued into their Canon) but because we read that the Nicene Councell accompted this in the number of holy Scriptures, I haue yiel∣ded. In like sort writeth S. Isidore,L. 6 Ety∣mol. c. 1. Though the Hebrewes do not receyue (the Machabees) into their Canon, yet the Church of Christ doth honour them among the diuine Bookes: So litle forceth it, what the Iewes thought, but what the Church determi∣neth concerning the Canonicall Scriptures: And so cleere it is, that the foresayd Bookes reproued by Prot. for Apo∣cryphall, were confessedly approued by the Fathers and Councells of the Primitiue Church for Canonicall.
SECT. IIII. That Protestants themselues do defend the foresayd Bookes. VVHereas many of the Ancient Iewes would not admit the foresayd Bookes into their Canon, the Protestant Bibliander censureth this to be, The rashnes of the Iewes; In which his Censure, he is approued by the Prote∣testāt Sceltco in his booke of the second comming of Christ, englished byfol. 6. M. Rogers, for the supposed worth therof. Concerning all the foresayd Bookes pretended now to be Apocryphal, the Caluinists of Geneua do teach that,Admoni∣tio ad lectorem ante Biblia Calu. Anno 1551. per Ioan. Tornesium in folio edita. We are not to stand to the Censure of the Iewes, in regard of this mayming of the Canon of the Scriptures: and in these bookes there are true Prophecyes, and hidden mysteryes, which could not be spoken but by the holy Ghost, who for preseruation of that Church which he gouerneth and assisteth, hath moued the mynd, and directed the hand of writers to write these things. D. Bancroft in the veryPag. 60. Conference before his Maiesty, reiecteth the obiections of the Iewes made agaynst these Bookes, calling them, The old Cauils of the Iewes, renewed by Hierome, who was the first that gaue them the name Apocrypha, which opinion vpon Ruffinus his Challenge, he after a sort disclaymed. Yea D. Bancroft so fully defendeth the foresayd Bookes, that o∣ther of his Brethren charge him to say that,The 2. part of the Ministers defence. pag. 108. The Apocrypha were giuen by inspiration from God: which is all one, as to affirme them to be truly diuine and Canonicall Scriptures. And as concerning the booke Ecclesiasticus, it is defended to be truly Canonicall by the Prot. writersEp. ad Vo∣lanum. Lascicius, and M. Parker: of which latter D. Willet sayth,Londoro∣mastix. p. 69. How audacious is this fellow, that contrary to the determination of this Church (of England) dare make Ecclesiasticus a booke of Canoni∣call Scripture.In Phycho∣pannichia pro∣pè initium. Caluin calleth the authour of this booke A Saint. And other Prot.Clypaeus Calu. fides dial. 2. cyte it, and ascribe it to Salomon. And also affirme,Admoni∣tio Minist. ante hunc librum edit. 1563. & 1570. that therein are contayned diuine, singular,
and ancient histories of men approued by God. D. Couell in answere to some that impugned these Bookes, saith thus,Answer to Burges p. 85. We could without violence haue affoarded them the reconcilement of other Scriptures, and vndoubtedly haue proued them to be most true. In like sort Conradus Pelican Pro∣fessour at Tigure, writing his Commentary vpon the fore∣sayd Bookes, sayth,Ep. De∣dic. I easily yielded &c. especially seeing those bookes were alwayes accompted so Ecclesiasticall and Biblicall, that euen from the Apostles tymes they were read in the Catholike Church, with much reuerence, although they were not produced in authority agaynst the Iewes as Canonicall, who receyued not these in∣to their sacred Canon: whereas they doe not only not contradict in any thing, the writings of the Law and the Prophets, but also &c. for the most part they cleerly carry the right style of the holy Ghost; certayne knots (or difficulties) being intermingled, which are found more easy to be loosed then some haue thought &c. Whereupon they were reuerenced and read by holy men, yea the sayings therof are found to be alleaged by the Apostles. So cleere it is that the forsaid Boo∣kes are truly Canonicall Scriptures, euen by the Confessions of Protestantes themselues. SECT. V. Sundry Obiections produced against the foresaid Bookes, answered. VVHere it is vsually obiected by many Protestants, that in the foresaid Bookes there are many repu∣gnancies or Contradictions, and Consequently that they are not inspired by the holy Ghost: To omit that in those Scriptures, which are belieued by all to be Canonicall, there are many hidden difficulties and seeming1. Reg. 8.9. 2. Paral. 5.10. & Heb. 9 4. Act. 9.7. & Act. 22.9. Mat. 10.10 & Mar. 6.8. Mat. 26 34. & Mar. 14.68. Mar. 15.25. & Io. 19.14. Luc. 3.35.36. & Gen. 11.12. And see Iewels Def. p. 36. repugnācyes, which yet notwithstanding, we are bound to acknow∣ledge the same Scriptures to be true and sacred; I will for breuity only alledge, what other Protestants thinke, and answere themselues, to the foresayd pretended Contradi∣ctions in the Bookes of Machabees, Tobie, &c. D. Couell
(as before) answereth thus,Answere to M. Burges pa. 85. We could without violence haue affoarded them the reconcilement of other Scriptures, and vndoubtedly haue proued them to be most true: And heIbid. p. 87. 88 89. 90. particularly answereth certaine of the pretended repugnancyes. Con∣radus Pellican confesseth, that in these booke,Ep. Dedic. certayne knots (or difficulties) are intermingled, which are found more easy to be loosed, then some haue thought &c. Whereupon they were euer reuerenced and read by holy men, yea the sayings thereof are found to to be alledged by the Apostles. And agreably heerunto M. Hut∣ton at large answereth and cleereth the common Obiecti∣on agaynst2. part. of the Answere p. 238. 239. Iudith, and the like in behalfe ofIbid pag. 247. Ecclesia∣sticus &Ibid. pag. 246. And see Bucers Scri∣pta Angli∣cana. Daniel. And where it is obiected that these bookes were reiected, omitted, or doubted of by S. Hierome, & some others of the Fathers of the Primitiue Church, as also that they were not first written in the Hebrew; these are at large cleered and answerdSee here∣tofore. sec. 2. p. 117. &c. heertofore by sundry Pro∣testant writers. But yet more in particular agaynst the Booke of Tobie, it is obiected, that in the third Chapter it is sayd, that Sara whome younger Tobie was to marry dwelled in Rages a Citty of the Medes, where also Gabel was, Tob. 4. and yet in the ninth Chapter it is sayd, that when Tobie came to the place where Sara was, he sent from thence the Angell to Gabel in Rages: therefore Sara's house was not in Rages, as it was sayd in the third Chapter. Answere. In the third Chapter, not the Citty it selfe of Rages is there so called, but some place there neere vnto it, as he is sayd to dwell in Lō∣don, who dwelleth in Westminster, or other place neere adioyning. Agaynst the Booke of Wisdome, CaluinInst. l 1. c. 12. §. 8. obiecteth, that it erreth in affirming that Idolatry begunne by supersti∣tiously honouring the Images of the dead, seeing Labans I∣dols and others more ancient, were before any Images of dead men were honoured. Answere. Caluin supposeth that which is false, to wit, that Labans Idol was not the Image of a man: for the Hebrew word Teraphim, so signifieth, and the English Bibles of 1552. and 1578. translate Images. But because they were Images of false Gods, and for that Laban
called them his Gods, the Bible of 1603. translateth it bet∣ter, Idolls, as the Latin and Greeke haue. It is also certaine, thatSee Eu∣sebius initio Chron. Cy∣ril. l. 3. in Iul. propè fin. Ninus king of the Assirians long before Laban, set vp the Image of his Father Belus (called Iupiter) to be pu∣blickly honoured by the people for a God: which though it be the first that is recounted, to be publickly set vp to be a∣dored, yet this doth not hinder, but that the first priuat Ido∣latry, was the Image of the Sonne dead, made by his Father, and by him priuatly honoured, as the booke of Wisdome mentioneth,Cypr. l. de Idol. vanit. init. Chrisost. ho. 87. in Mat. Egesip. apud Hier. l. de viris il∣lust. and seuerall good Authors teach. Sundry things are vrged against the Bookes of Macha∣bees, as first by D. Fulke, that,Against Purg pa. 208. the author commendeth one Razis for killing himselfe, which is contrary to the word of God. But S. Austine shall answere him, saying,l. 2. cont. Ep. Gaud. c. 23. & ep. 61 ad Dulcit. Touching this his death, the Scripture hath tould how it was done, (but) it hath not com∣mended it as shough it were to be done: for though the Author re∣porting the truth of the fact, say, that he ranne boldly, & threw downe himselfe manfully, yet doth he not commend it, as done vertuously. The Booke of IudgesC. 16.30. reporteth how Sam∣pson killed himselfe and others, saying, Let me dye with the Philistines; and the Apostle yet numbrethHeb. 15.32. him among the faithfull, and S. AustineDe Ciu. Dei. l. 1. c. 21. affirmeth that he was com∣manded hereto, by peculiar inspiration: therfore though Razis had been commended, yet had it hereby been suffi∣ciently answered and explained. FulkeAg Pur. pag. 209. and others further vrge, that the Author craueth pardon for his writing, a thing (thinke they) far from the Maiesty of Gods spirit. Also that his Booke is an Abridgement2. Mach. 2.24 27. of the fyue Bookes of Iason the Cyrenean, wheras the holy Ghost maketh (as Fulke thinketh) no abridgment of other mens writing. And that he sheweth, what labour and sweat it was to him, in making this Abridgment, which sauoureth not of that spirit, by which the Scriptures were written. Answ. He doth insinuate for pardon, not of errors, but elocution, if he hath not spoken so worthily. In which sense S. Paul said,2. Cor. 11.6.17. Though rude in speach, yet not in knowledge. And,Rom. 15.14.15. I speake not according to God, but as it were in foolishnes. And he affirmeth the Romanes to beRo. 15.13. Replenished with all knowledge, insinuating therfore his
owne excuse in writing to them, saying, I haue written to you more boldly in part, as it were putting you in remēbrance: he reque∣steth also the Corinthians,2. Cor. 11.1. to beare some little of his folly. D. Morton would further euade, by affirming, thatApol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 3. the Apostle speaketh vpon the aduersaries supposall, but this Author (of Machabees) , and vpon the knowledge of his owne weaknes: as also the holy Ghost neuer willeth what he cannot, neither doth he euer doubt that he cannot what he will. But it is vntrue, that the Apo∣stle speaketh in the forsaid places, only vpon his Aduersa∣ries supposall, for his words are much more absolute, then these other of the Author of the Machabees, If well, and as be∣fitteh the History, this is that which I would: but if lesse worthily, I am to be pardoned. Wheras S. Paul acknowledged, that he was rude in speach; that he spoke not according to God, but as it were in foolishnes, and requested the Corinthians to beare some little of (his) folly: neither can the pretended doutfulnes of the Au∣thor of the Machabees, be more imputed to the want of the holy Ghost directing, then the confessed rudenesse and folly of the Apostle; none of these arguing any want of truth in that which was written, but only want of Elocution in the writers. As to the second, the Booke of Kings signifyeth in diuers places, that it abridgeth stories, telling where they be writ∣ten more at large in other bookes not Canonicall. S. Marke is called theAug. de consensu E∣uang. l. 1. c. 23. Abridger of S. Mathew: and euery Sermon & Letter in the Actes of the Apostles, is but an Abridgment. To the third, S. Luke writ his Ghospell,Luc. 1.3. Hauing di∣ligently attained to all things from the beginning. And Whitaker ac∣knowledgeth most cleerly, that anAgainst Reinolds. p. 393 And see cont. Du∣raeum l. 4. p. 347. Endeauour to learne & write the certaine truth, (and) to enquire the truth with all diligence, detracteth nothing from the wisdome and maiesty of Gods spirit: And as for the labour taken in writing therof, it is nothing more preiudiciall to him, then to S. Paul, who in the inditing of his Epistles, did sometimesRom. 16.22. 2. Thess 3.15. for his ease, vse another mans handwriting. Others obiect a contrariety through ignorance of the story, as that in some places it is said, Antiochus did dye in
Babylon, and in others, that he dyed in Nanca, and yet a∣gaine, that he dyed by the way, so that This one man (as Wil∣letSynop. p. 11. vrgeth) dyed thrice. Answere. Thc Bookes of Macha∣bees make mention of sundry Princes, Enemyes to the Iewes, who bore the name of Antiochus, as Antiochus1. Ma∣chab. 1.11. & 8.9. the great, Antiochus1. Mach. 1.11. the noble, & Antiochus the sonne of Demetrius1. Mach. 15.1.. But though the before mentioned chāces should all of them concerne one & the same Antiochus, yet they may be wel taken to signify his one death in one place: For in the chāce at2. Mach. 1 13.14, 15. &c. Nanca, Antiochus and the Captaine there mētioned, were two seuerall persons, & the Captaine only is there said to be slaine. And as for the death of Antio∣chus mentioned (1. Mach. 6.16.) & his death elswhere (2. Mach. 9.5.28.) mentioned to be by the way in a strange Coun∣try, this last signifyeth one and the same death with that of 1. Mach. 6.13. where he likewise mentioneth that he must dye in a strange land, the presence of his friend Philip being alike also mentioned in1. Mach. 6.14. & 2. Mach. 9.29. both the sayd places. But to an∣swere in generall, whereas Perkins professeth toReform. Cath. p. 304. reue∣rence the Bookes of Machabes, and the rest of the Apocrypha, pre∣ferring them before any other bookes of men, if Protestants did but reuerence them as Salust, or Liuy, they would neuer think them to be so grosly repugnant, as their foresayd obiection pretendeth.See here∣tofore Cap. 3. sec. 5. And though some (25) examples of seeming in∣congruity (which we could not thus easily auoyd) should appeare in any of the Scriptures, yet ought we religiously to impute the difficulty to our owne ignorance, rather then to charge the Scriptures with vntruth. Others yet obiect, that those persons for whome Iudas Machabeus caused sacrifice to be offered, had2. Mach. 12.40. vnder their Coates &c. some of the Donaries of the Idols &c. from which the law forbiddeth the Iewes: and therefore Iudas might not lawfully pray for them. Answer. All may be prayed for, sauing such as are knowne to dye in finall impenitence, and therefore Iudas Machabeus (not knowing the contrary) might chari∣tably hope, that many of those that were slaine, did repent them of that offence before their death, according as the Pro∣phet sayth,Ps. 78.34. when he slew them, they sought him, and returned.
And that Iudas had this opinion of them, is most playnely signifyed by these words,2. Mach. 12.45. Because he considered, that they which had taken their sleepe with goodlines, had very good grace layd vp for them. So childish and weake are these obiecti∣ons, in regard of the greatest power and authority of the Church, decreeing the foresayd Bookes to be truly Cano∣nicall.
CHAP. VI. The true State of the Question, concerning the Translation of the Bible. Whether the Translation of the sacred Scriptures, ordina∣rily called the Old Vulgar Latin Translation, be to be vsed, & preferred before all Translations made by Pro∣testants. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE Catholike Church,Concil. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. de Editione & vsu sacrorum Librorum. considering that no litle profit might come to the Church of God, if it were made knowne amongst all the Latin Editions of the Scriptures which are pu∣blished, which were to be houlden for authen∣ticall; decreeth & declareth, that this Old and Vulgar Edition, which by the long vse of so many ages, is approued in the Church, in publicke Lectures, Disputa∣tions, Sermons and Expositions, should be houlden for authenticall, & that no man vnder any pretext dare, or presume to reiect the same. And in the Councell of Basil it was taught, thatOrat. de punitione peccat. pu∣blic. by the (Church) the Translation of Hierome, others omitted, is receyued. And agayne,Orat. Ioan. de Ragufio. many haue translated the Byble into Latin, whe∣ther
from the Hebrew or the Greeke, yet the Translation of our onely most glorious Hierome, by the authority of the Church, is preferred. And the same isBellar. de verbo Dei l. 2. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in the Preface. still the constant Doctrine of the Catho∣like Church. Points Disputable. SomeSee Mor∣ton Apolog. par. 2. l 1. c. 6. Iacobus E∣piscopus Constantinop. Praefat. in Psalmos. Ca∣nus de locis Theolog. l. 2. c. 13. Catholike writers teach, that the Iewes in ha∣tred of Christian Religion, did purposely corrupt and de∣praue many places of Scriptures. OthersDriedo l. 2. de Eccl. dogm. c. 1. Bel. de verb. Dei, l. 2. c. 2. §. His igitur. thinke that the Scriptures written in the Hebrew, were not gene∣rally corrupted by the meames and malice of the Iewes: neyther yet, that they are altogeather perfect and pure, but haue in them certayne errours, which haue crept in, partly by negligence, partly by ignorance of the Prin∣ters; which yet are not of such moment, but that in those things which belong to fayth and manners, the sacred Scriptures integrity, may not be thought to be wanting. And this is much more probable. SomeSee Mort. Apol. part. 2. l. 1. c. 6. deny the Greeke Coppies to be most pure fountaines: but others affirme that the Greeke Copy which now is extant in the Church, to be the selfe same, which the Greeke Church vsed in the tyme of S. Hierome, and long before euen vnto the tymes of the Apostles. SomeSee Mort. Apol. par. 2. l. 1. c. 8. teach that our vulgar Edition was S. Hieromes Translation, but others deny it. SomeIbid. l. 1. c. 11. (as D. Morton reporteth) thinke, that there are therein some errours, through the ig∣norance or negligence of the Translatour: but others thinke that there is not any errour of weight therein. Protestants vntruthes. CaluinAntidot. in Sess 4. Conc. Trid. auoucheth, that the Fathers of the Tri∣dentine Councell decreed, that such were not to be heard as produced liquor out of the fountayne it selfe. But no such thing is to be seene in the Councell. He also affirmeth,Ibid. that there are not 3. verses togeather in the Vulgar Edi∣tion, which are not stayned with some foule Corruption.
And yet himselfe vnder taking to discouer the Corruptions of the Psalter, doth not obserue so much as one in the first Psalme: so vnmindfull is this Lyar. Chemnitius forgeth,Exam. Conc. Trd. Sess. 4. that in the Index Librorum prohibitorum, published by Paul the fourth, all Editions of the Bible, euen of the Old Interpreter, are condemned: wheras only such are there condemned, as were eyther made by Heretickes, or suspected Printers. He also preten∣deth, that therfore the Vulgar Edition is made authenticall by the Councell, because it maketh wholly for Popish do∣ctrine. But in this, besides impudency, he sheweth Impru∣dence, for Prot.See here∣after in the 2. Section. do acknowledge the vulgar Edition to be most ancient, and most syncere: and so then conse∣quently are our Catholicke Doctrines most ancient and syncere. Protestant Doctrine. Although there be many Translations of the Bible made by Protestants, yet, we account (sayth D. WhitakerDe sacra Scrip. Contr. 1. q 2. pa. 128. Piscator volum. Tbe∣sium Theolo. p. 34. no Edition to be authenticall, but only the Hebrew in the Old, and the Greeke in the New Testament. And as for the Vulgar Latine Edition, it is, in Whitakers opinion,Whi∣tak in his Answere to Reinolds. Pref. p. 25. 26. an old rotten Edi∣tion &c. full of faults, errors, and Corruptions.De sacra Scrip. q. 5. c. 11. p. 543. then which nothing can be more faulty or disteyned: and, of allAnswere to Reinolds. p. 213 318. others most corrupt. YeaWay to the Church. p. 29. I thinke (saith White) the Sunne neuer saw any thing more defectiue and maymed, then the Vulgar Latine. But I shall shortly shew, that euen in the sunshyne of the Refor∣med Ghospell, there are many Protestants Translations pu∣blished, most defectiue, and maymed, and the vulgar Latine Translation for sincerity, confessedly to be preferred be∣fore them all. Protestant Errours. Swinglians,Praefat. igurinae Editionis Bil. Anabaptists, and Caluinists agree in this, that they will haue no Translation of the Bible to be authenticall: and they thinke it vniust, that the Church should be tyed to any one Translation.
SECT. II. It is proued by sundry Arguments, that the Vulgar La∣tin Translation of the Bible, is to be preferred before all Translations made by Protestants. TO make triall with M. Whitaker, and that by Iurors of his owne packe, whether our Vulgar Edition of the Bible, for purity and sincerity, be not much to be preferred before any Edition Protestant that euer was; first concer∣ning the Translation of the Bible made by Luther, Swin∣glius writing vnto him concerning the corruptions therof, sayth,Tom, 2, ad Luther. l. de Sacram. pag. 412. 413. Thou doest corrupt the word of God, thou art seene to be a manifest and common Corrupter, and peruerter of the holy Scriptu∣res: how much are we ashamed of thee, who haue hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, & now proue thee to be such a man. Kecke∣manus affirmeth likewise, thatSystem. 8. Theol. l. 1. pa. 188. Luthers Dutch Translation of the old Testament, especially of Iob, and the Prophets, hath its ble∣mishes, and those no small ones Some few of Luthers corrupti∣ons I will only touch, as where it is sayd,. Io. 5.7. There be three which giue Testimony in heauen, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost & these three be one: this being a most euident place in proofe of the B. Trinity, is wholy omitted, and left out by Luther in his Dutch Bible. In like manner where it is sayd,Rom. 3.28. We account a man to be iustifyed by Fayth, without the workes of the Law; Luther heer translateth iustified by Faith, a∣lone, so adding to the text in maintenance of his errour, the word, alone; yea being admonished of this so foule a Cor∣ruption, he persisted willfull, saying,Tom. 5. Germ fol. 141. 144. So I will, so I com∣mand, let my will be insteed of reason &c. Luther will haue it so. And concludeth lastly, the word (alone) must remayne in my new Testament, although all the Papists go mad they shall not take it from thence: I am sorry that I did not also adde these two wordes, omni∣bus & omnium, to wit sine omnibus operibus omnium legum, with∣out all workes of all lawes. Also where it is sayd,2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore Brethren, labour the more, that by good workes you may make sure
your vocation and Election; Luther here omitteth those words (by good workes) which yet are acknowledged to be parcell of the Text by the ProtestantRedem∣ption of Mankind. p. 382. Kinnedoncius, & by our English Translations. Luther in some requitall to Swinglius, reiecteth the Translations of the Swinglians, terming them in matter of Diuinity,See Swinglius Tom. 2. ad Luther. l. de Sacram. f. 388. 389. Fooles, Asses, Antichrists, deceiuers, and of a like vn∣derstanding: In so much, that when Froscheuerus the Swin∣glian Printer of Zurick sent him a Bible translated by the Diuines there, Luther would not receiue the same, but sen∣ding it back, reiected it, as witnesse HospinianHist Sa∣cram. part. alt. fol. 183. Lauath. hist. Sacram. f. 32. and La∣uatherus. The Tigurine Translation was in like manner so di∣stastfull to other Protestant Diuines, thatHospin. in Concord. Discord f. 238. The Elector of Saxony, in great anger reiected it &c. and placed Luthers Translation in roome therof, though you haue seene before how foule it was. The Translation set forth by Oecolampadius, and the Diuines of Basill, is reproued by Beza, who affirmeth that,In Res∣pons. ad De∣fens. & Res∣pons. Castal. The Basill Translation is in many places wicked, and altogea∣ther differing from the mynd of the holy Ghost The Translation of Castalio (which D. Humfrey af∣firmeth to beDe Rat. Interpret. l. 2. p. 62. 63. 189. throughly conferred, examined, and polished, and which, as GesnerusIn biblio∣th Seb. Castal. saith, doth far surpasse all the Translations of all men hitherto set forth, in like commenda∣tion wherof other ProtestantsSee Ca∣stal. Defence p. 236. & Hipperius & Melancton set before Castalios great Bible of 1573. do agree) is neuertheles condemned by Beza, as beingIn Test. 1556. in Praef. & in Annot. in Mat. 3. & in 1. Cor. 1. & Mat. 4. & Luc. 2. & in Act. 8. & 10. Sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. In so much as Castalio wrote a speciall Treatise in defence of his owne Translation, complaining there in his Preface, and saying, Some reiect our Latine and French Transla∣tions of the Bible, not only as vnlearned, but also as wicked, and disse∣ring in many places from the mynd of the holy Ghost. As Concerning Caluins Translation, that famous Pro∣testant Carolus Molinaeus affirmeth, thatIn sua Translat. Nou. Test. part. 12. fol. 110. Caluin in his Harmony, maketh the text of the Ghospell to leap vp and downe, he vseth violence to the letter of the Ghospell, & besides this, addeth to the Text. Touching Beza's Translation, the same Molinaeus
chargeth him, thatIn Te∣stam. part. 20. 30 40 64. 65. 66. 74. 99. & part. 8 13. 14. 21. 23. He actually changeth the Text, and gi∣ueth further sundry instances of his Corruptions. Castalio also, thatOsiand. cent. 16. p 753. learned Caluinist, and most skilfull in the tongues, reprehendeth Beza in a whole booke of this matter, and fur∣ther saith,In. def. Translat. p. 170. I will not note all his Errors (in Translation) for that would require a volume ouer great. All which but confir∣meth K. Iames his true and learned Censure inConfe∣rence before the K Ma∣iesty pa. 46 thinking the Geneua Translation to be worst of all: And his further affir∣ming, That in theIbid. p. 47. Marginall notes annexed to the Geneua Translation, some are very partiall, vntrue, seditious &c. Agreably to this also saith M Parkes to D. Willet,Apolo∣gy concer∣ning Christs descending into hel. at Ddd. As for the Geneua Bibles, it is to be wished, that either they may be purged from those manifold errors, which are both in the Text, and in the Margent, or els vtterly prohibited. Thus far of the confessed corruptions in the foraine Protestants Translations. But to come now to our English ones, the Puritanes complaine vnto his Maiesty, that,A Peti∣tion dire∣cted to his Maiesty. pa. 76. Our Translation of the Psalmes, comprised in our Booke of Common Prayer, doth in addi∣tion, subtraction, and alteration, differ from the truth of the Hebrew in 200. places at the least. In so much, as they rest doubtfull,Ib p. 75. whether a man with a safe Conscience may subscribe therto. Yea they haue written and published a speciall Treatise en∣tituled, A Defence of the Ministers reasons for refusall of subscri∣bing; the whole Argument and scope wherof, is only con∣cerning mistranslating, and the title vpon the frontispice of euery page throughout the Booke, is, concerning Translations: Yea wheras it containeth 26. Chapters, the Reader may see before the beginning of the Booke, the title of euery such Chapter pointing to the Mistranslatings there in particular handled. M. Carlile auoucheth, that the English Translatours haueThat Christ des∣cended into Hel p. 116. 117. 118. 121. 144. depraued the sense, obscured the truth, and deceiued the ig∣norant; that in many places they do detort the Scriptures from the right Sense, and that they shew themselues to loue darknes more then light, filshood more then truth; wherun to D. Whitaker hath no better answere then to say,Answer to Rainolds p. 255. what M. Carlile with some others hath writtē, against some places translated in our Bibles, maketh nothing to the purpose; I haue not said otherwise, but that some things may be
amended, which yet to this day, remaine not amended. Yea sundry Ministers haue not forborne in their great Zeale, to signify vnto his Maiesty, that the English Transla∣tion of the Bible, isThe Abridgment which the Ministers of Lincolne Diocesse de∣liuered to his Maiesty p. 12. A Translation that taketh away from the Text: thatIb. p 11. 12. addeth to the text, and that sometymes to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the holy Ghost: Calling it yet further.Ib p. 13. A Translation which is absurd and senselesse,Ib p. 13. 14. peruerting in many places the meaning of the holy Ghost. In regard of which peruerting the meaning of the holy Ghost, Protestants of tender Conscience make great scruple to subscribe vnto them: for so doth Burges excuse himselfe saying,Apology sec. 6. And in Couels Answere to Burges. p. 93. How shall I approue vnder my hand, a Translation which hath many omissions, many additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense, being sometimes senseles, sometimes contrary. Now, in preuention of so great an euill, and scandall following, Broughton, one of the chiefest of the Puritani∣call Linguists, wrote an Epistle to the Lords of the Coun∣cell, desiring them to procure speedily a new Translation: because that (quoth he) which is now in England, is full of Errors. And in his Aduertisements of Corruptions, he telleth the Protestant Bishops, that, their publicke Translation of Scriptures in∣to English is such, as that it peruerteth the text of the Old Testa∣ment in 848 places, and that it causeth millions of millions to reiect the New Testament, and to runne to eternall flames. A dreadfull saying for all Protestant Professors. Now these our Proestant English Translations, being thus confessedly corrupt, absurd, sensles, contrary, and peruerting the meaning of the holy Ghost had not his Maiesty iust cause to affirme, that heConf. before his Maiesty pa. 46. could neuer yet see a Bible well translated into English? From all which then it further ensueth, that our Protestant Bibles being thus falsely translated, they can be no certaine and infallible meanes, wherby to decyde Con∣trouersies in matters of Faith; Translations (according to D. Whitaker)Answere to Rein p. 235. being so far forth only the word of God, as they faythfully expresse the meaning of the authenticall text. Which none of them do, but the direct cōtrary is cleerly heere made ma∣nifest by no weaker proofes, then by their plaine Confes∣sions,
to their eternall shame, and like spirituall ruine to all that follow the said Translations. Who can now expect, but that Prot. inueighing thus bitterly agaynst all their owne Translations, which yet they, and their simple followers, do daily read and follow; but that they will make most serpentine Satyres against the Vulgar Latin, which all Catholikes approue? But haue a litle patience, and you shall see, that as they do thus agree to disagree in their owne Translations, mutually condem∣ning (as before) ech other: so also haue they vpon a second and more aduised Consideration, affoardedd honourable testimony euen of our Vulgar Latin Translation, had from Rome, andSee be∣fore. sec 1. approued since by Generall Councell: for so Beza confesseth that,Annot. in Luc. 1.1. The Old Interpreter seemeth to haue interpreted the holy Bookes with greatest Religion.In Praef. nou. Test. And, I do imbrace, sayth he, for the most part, the Vulgar Edition, and pre∣ferre it before all others. So that with Beza, all Protestants Translations, must come behind our Vulgar. D. Humfrey confesseth that,De ratio∣ne Interpret. l. 1. p. 74. The old Interpreter was much addicted to the propriety of words, and that ouer scrupulously, which yet, I interpret him to haue done vpon Religion (or Conscien∣ce) not vpon ignorance. Heer is he free from malice and igno∣rance in translating. In regard of which integrity and learning, Molinaeus signifyeth his like speciall liking thereof saying,In Nou. Test. part. 30. I can very hardly depart from the Vulgar and accustomed reading, which al∣so I am accustomed earnestly to defend:In Luc. 17. Yea I prefer the Vulgar Edition before Erasmus, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the Tigurine Translation, also before Iohn Caluin, and all others. What could be spoken more honourably for our Vulgar? And yet Conradus Pellican2. part. of the Def. of the Mi∣nisters. pag. 6. (A man much commended by Bucer, Swinglius, Melancthon, and all famous men about Ba∣sill, Tigure, Berne &c.) addeth a far higher Commendation, in these words,In Praef. in Psalter. Anno 1584 I fynd the Vulgar Edition of the Psalter, to agree for the sense, with such dexterity, learning, and fidelity of the Hebrew; that I doubt no but the Greeke and latin Interpreter, was a man most learned, most Godly, and of a Propheticall Spirit. Which certaynly are the best properties of a good Transla∣tour.
Now, in regard of these laudable premises, D. Doue giueth wholsome counsayle, saying,Persu∣sion to Re∣cusants. p. 16. We grant it fit, that for vniformity in quotations of places, in Schooles and Pulpits, one Latin Text should be vsed. And we can be contented for the antiquity there∣of to preferre that (to wit the Vulgar) before all other Latin bookes. And if the Antiquity therof may carry with it any good respect, D. Couell will tell you, thatAnsw. to Burges p. 94. It was vsed in the Church 1300. yeares agoe, and himselfe doubteth not toIbid. prefer that Translation before others: In so much that wheras the English Protestant Translations, be many and among themselues disagreeing; he concludeth, that of all those,Ibid pa. 91. The approued Translation authorized by the Church of England, is that which cometh neerest to the Vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible. Add lastly hereunto, that S. Hierome by the appoint∣ment of Pope Damasus, was author, or rather Reuiewer, of this our Common Edition: In so much, that in his Preface before the new Testament dedicated to Pope Damasus, he sayth thereof; You cause me to make a New Worke of an old, that I after so many Copies of the Scriptures, dispersed through the world, should sit, as a certayne Iudge, and determine which of them agree with the true Greeke.In Catal. fine See Heb. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c. 9. I haue restored the New Testament, to the truth of the Greeke, and haue translated the Old according to the Hebrew.Praef psalt. qua est ep. 134. & in Prologo ad lib Regum. Truly I will affirme it confidently, and will produce many witnesses of this worke, that I haue changed nothing from the truth of the Hebrew &c. aske any of the Hebricians, and you shall cleerly see it. But peraduenture S. Hierome with some Protestants, wilbe thought partiall in his owne case, let vs therefore see S. Austines worthy testimony of S. Hierome and this Trā∣slation.De ciu. Dei. l. 18. c. 43. & ep 80. ad Hieron. c. 3. See Greg. l 20. Mor. c. 23. Isidor. l 6. Etym c. 5. 7. & de di∣uin. officijs. l. 1. c. 12. Beda in Martyro∣log. Cashod. 11 Instit. ca. 1 l. 21 Crispi∣nus of te Estate of the Church. p. 137. Fulke. ag. Rhem. Iest. in 1. Cor. 14. sec. 14. pa. 548. There was not wanting (sayth S. Augustine) in these our dayes, Hierome the Priest, a man most learned, and skillfull in all the three tongues, who not from the Greeke, but from the He∣brew translated the same Scriptures into latin: whose learned labour the lewes yet confesse to be true; yea the truth and due respect heerof is such, that D. Whitaker (vpon a more sober and stayed iudgement) doth alter the former vehemency of his style saying.Answere to Reinolds p. 241. S. Hierome I reuerence, Damasus I commend,
and the worke I confesse to be godly & profitable to the Church. From all this I may conclude, that the sacred Scriptu∣res translated by Prot. cannot be to them any certaine Iudge in matters of fayth, seeing all the sayd Translations are con∣fessedly false, corrupt and impious: and further, that in all their Disputes, Pulpits, and Writings, they are bound to follow our Vulgar Edition, seeing themselues prefer it for truth and sincerity, before all others. SECT. III. Obiections agaynst the Vulgar Translation, answered. IT is obiected, that we we are rather to haue recourse to the fountaynes of the Hebrew and Greeke, which were written by Prophets and Apostles, who could not erre, wheras the latin Translations are of diuers interpreters, who may erre. Answere. The fountayns or originalls are to be preferred before Translations, when it is certayne that the fountaynes are pure, and not troubled or corrupt; but it is most certayne, that they are in some places corrupted. And it may truly be thought, that as the Latin Church was euer more constant in keeping true fayth, then the Greeke: so it was alwaies more carefull in preseruing the Scriptures from corruption. And though it be true, that an Interpreter may erre, yet in that which the Church hath approued, he hath not erred in any matter of fayth or manners, though some smaller errours of Printers I do not deny. Chemnitius obiecteth that these words (IpsaGen. 3. conteret caput tuum) are corrupted, that thereby we may proue the Intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary: And that insteed thereof, we should read, Ipsum conteret caput tuum, seeing it was spoken of the seed, which as Christ, as all auncient writers doe teach. Answ. 1. Some bookes of the Vulgar Edi∣tion haue Ipsa, and some others ipse. 2. Though many He∣brew bookes haue ipse, yet there hath not wanted some which haue ipsa, and the points being taken away, the He∣word may be translated ipsa.L. 2. de Gen. cont. Manich. c 18. & l. 51 de Genisi ad Li∣teram c. 36. Amb. l. de fuga saeculi. c. 7. Chrysost. hom. 17. in Gen. Greg. l. 1. Mor c 38. Beda & alij in hunc lo∣cum. And, ipsa, is read by S. Au∣stine,
S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostome, S. Gregory, Bede, and sundry others. And though the word, Conteret, in the He∣brew be of the Masculine gender, and so should relate to Semen, which also in Hebrew is of the Masculine gender; yet it is not rare in theRuth. 1.8. Ester. 1.20. Eccles. 12.5. Scriptures to haue Pronounes and verbes of the Masculine gender, to be ioyned with Nownes of the feminine. He likewise vrgeth, that in these wordes,Gen. 14. Melchisdech Rex salem proferens panem & vinum, erat enim Sa∣cerdos Dei altissimi, the word obtulit, and the Coniunction e∣nim, are not in the Hebrew, but so translated, in proofe of the Sacrifice of the Masse. Answ. The Vulgar Edition hath not obtulit, but protulit, and the Cōiunction is in the Hebrew equiualently. Lastly, he obiecteth, that in these wordesEccles. 16. Miseri∣cordia faciet locum vnicuique secundum meritum operum suorum, that the word merit, is not in the Greeke, but added to proue the merit of workes. Answ. , doth signify in Latin most properly, pro meritis operum, for the merit of their wor∣kes. Such poore stuffe do Hereticks fynd agaynst our Vul∣gar Translation.
CHAP. VII. The true State of the Question, concerning Traditions. Whether, besides the sacred Scriptures, or written word of God, there be not another word of God, not written, which is called Traditions. And whether their authority be certayne and infallible, in deciding matters of Fayth. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. HAVING hitherto proued, that ney∣ther the Scriptures of themselues, nor as conferred togeather, nor yet as expoun∣ded by the Priuat Spirit, can be our sole Rule of Fayth, or Iudge of all Contro∣uersies; It now next followeth, that I speake of the word not written, but de∣liuered from Christ or his Apostles, by word of mouth: In which the Catholike Church know∣ing, that the truth of the Ghospell, which was first taught by Christ, and afterwards by his Apostles,Concil. Trident. De∣cret. de Ca∣non. Scriptu∣ris. is contayned in the written Bookes, and Traditions not written, which being receyued
by the Apostles from the mouth of Christ, or from the Apostles themsel∣ues, the holy Ghost teaching them, as it were, from hand to hand de∣liuered, haue come vnto vs: The Church (I say) following the Examples of the Orthodoxall Fathers, receiueth and reuerenceth with like affection of piety, all the Bookes aswell of the Old Testament as the New seeing one God is the author of both; as also the Traditions belonging both to faith and manners, as taught from the mouth of Christ, or from the holy Ghost, and by continuall succession preserued in the Catholike Church. Here the Councell receiueth & reueren∣ceth, with like piety, the word written, and not written, to wit, Traditions. The second Councell of Nice decreeth thus,Act. 7. p. 686. Tom. 3. We confesse with one consent, that we will keep Ecclesiasticall Traditions, whether by writing or custome, being in force and decreed &c. Againe, These things being so going the Kings high way, and continuing in the Doctrine of the holy Fathers, and the Catholike Church, in which the holy Ghost dwelleth, obseruing Traditions we do defyne &c. who shall dare to thinke otherwise, or teach, or after the Custome of wicked He∣retikes to violate Ecclesiasticall Traditions &c. If they be Bishops or Clergy men, let them be deposed, if monkes or laye men, let them be excommunicate &c. If any shall not regard the Traditions of the Church being in force, whether by writing or Custome, let him be ac∣cursed. In the eight Generall Councell it is defyned, thatAct. 10. The great Apostle Paul doth cleerly admonish vs, To keep the Tradi∣tions which we haue receyued, whether by speach, or by the Epistle of holy men, who haue formerly shyned. In the Councell of Sens, it is taught that,Decret. 5. It is dan∣gerous to be in that Error, that nothing is to be thought to be admit∣ted which is not drawne from Scripture: for many things are deriued from Christ to posterity by the hands of the Apostles, from mouth to mouth &c. which though they seeme not to be expresly contayned in sa∣cred Scripture, yet they come to be houlden without all doubt. That sundry things are to be receiued, belieued, and obserued by Tradition, which are not expresly taught by the Scriptures, it is generally acknowledged by allBellar. de verbo Dei l. 4 c. 3. Rhem. Test p. 559. in 2. Thess. 2. Catholikes.
Protestants Vntruthes. Caluin affirmeth, thatInstit l. 4. c. 10. §. 19. The Romish maysters will vrge, that there is not any litle Ceremony with them, which is not to be iud∣ged Apostolicall: but Caluin cannot alledge any one of those maysters, so much as intimating any such thing. Chemni∣tius auoucheth vs to teach, thatExam. Sess. 4. p. 68. God appointed that the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles, should not be writ∣ten in bookes, but only deliuered by word of mouth: AndIbid. pag. 18. himselfe affirmeth, that the Apostles were commanded to write. But both these are vntrue, and the truth in the meane; for we do not teach that God prohibited the fore∣said writing, for then the Apostles and Euangelists should haue sinned in writing: neither can he proue, that God did command it, as shall appeare hereafter. Againe, speaking of some words in the Consecration of the Chalice, he sayth,Ibid. pa. 410. Popish writers haue noted by what Romane Bishops they were added. But this is most false, for though they haue noted, what o∣ther parts of the Canon of the Masse were added, and by whom, yet not any one is noted to haue added any thing to the words of Consecration. Yet further,Ibid. If any one shall but show himselfe to doubt, that all the Canon of the Masse is from Apostolicall Tradition, he is to be accursed. But this is grosse forge∣ry, for though we say, that the chiefest part of the Canon is from Apostolicall Tradition, yet we deny not, but that there is commemoration made of diuers Saintes, who liued a∣boue 200. yeares after Christ. And againe:L. Theol. Iesuit. &c. Reader, thou shalt obserue in this place, what difference Iesuites make betweene the Written Traditions of the Apostles, and those which themselues do inuent vnder the name of the Apostles; They say, those that are written, are arbitrary (or may be changed at pleasure) but those that are fayned, to bynd vnder perill of saluation. Who would thinke, that any man should runne the perill of Damnation, for the belying of Iesuits, not be∣ing able to show the least proofe therof. Iohn White very wisely thinketh, that TraditionsWay to the true Church. p. 3. being once admitted, euery Fryars dreame, and base Custome of the Ro∣mish
Church shalbe thrust vpon you for an Article of Religion necessary to Eternall life. It seemes the poore man thought that Catho∣likes are as simple as himselfe. Melancthon blushed not to say,L. Con∣cordiae. p. 188. In Apolog. Art. 15. Great bookes are extant, yea whole Libraries contayning not one syllable of Christ, of faith in Christ, of good workes for euery mans vocation, but only gathering Traditions. AndLib. Con∣cor. p. 263. in Apol. de Po∣test. Eccle∣siast. they require their Traditions to be obserued more exactly then the Ghospell. TheDef. of the Articles Art. 6. p. 29. Papists (sayth M. Rogers) more cruelly do punish the violators of their owne Traditions and Ordinances, then they do the breakers of Gods Commandements. But certainly Rogers, and his lying Brethren, wilbe cruelly punished for feygning such Impo∣stures, and broaching such incredible lyes. Protestant Doctrine. The English Church hath decreed, that theArt. 6. holy Scripture contayneth all things necessary to Saluation: So that what∣soeuer is not read therin, nor may be proued therby, is not to be requi∣red of any man, that it should be belieued as an Article of the fayth, or be thought requisite or necessary to Saluation. Heere it teacheth, that nothing is to be belieued or thought necessary to salua∣tion, which is not proued by Scripture. And now you shall heare what it thinketh of Traditions. Whitaker expresly sayth,Controu. 1. quaest. 3. c. 10. p. 327. We do not respect Traditions not written.Reform. Cath. contro. 20. c. 2. We do acknowledge (saith Perkins) only the writ∣ten word of God. According to Caluin,In gra∣tulat. ad Prae∣centorem. p. 377. Nothing is to be be∣lieued, which is not expressed in Scripture. Yea, sayth Beza,In Rom. 1.17. Christians do acknowledge no other obiect of that faith, then the written word of God. But I shewed a litle before how hard∣ly they treated their sole obiect of faith, the written word of God: And I shall shortly make it appeare, that they are enforced to acknowledge another obiect of fayth, euen vn∣written Traditions. Protestants agree with ancient Hereticks. The (21) Donatists in their Disputations,Aug l. de vnitate Eccl. c. 19 vrged only the Scriptures, and S. Austine obiected to them Traditions, &
the custome of the Church. For the same Error were the Arrians condemned by S. EpiphaniusHaer. 75. Aug. cont. Maximin. l. 1. c. . & vlt. and S. Austin: the Eunomians by S. Basil:L. de Spir. Sancto. c. 27. 29. the Nestorians, Eutichians, and others by the 7.Act. 1. Synod; and the Apostolicks byHom. 66. in Cantic. S. Bernard. From such infamous Ancestors are our moderne Sectaries descended, who deny all Traditions, and the word of God not written. SECT. II. It is proued by the Sacred Scriptures, that besides themsel∣ues, or the written word, there are certayne Tradi∣tions of the Church or word of God, not written, which we are bound likewise to belieue and obserue. IT is euident, that Moyses,Exod. 24.4. Who wrote all the words of our Lord, was (asPerk. Re∣form Cath. p. 133. Whitak. de sacra Scrip. p. 99. 583. 752. Zanch. de sa∣cra Scrip. p. 133. Perkins, Whitaker, and Zanchius confesse) the first pen-man of holy Scripture: And yet before his tyme the Church continued two thousand yeares, onely by Tradition without Scripture: wherby it is euident that du∣ring all that tyme before Moyses, the true belieuers were not instructed, nor their differences decyded by Scripture which was not then written, but otherwise by Tradition of the Church of those tymes. ButReform. Cath. p. 133. Whitak de sacra Scrip. p. 752. Perkins and Whitaker do answere heerunto, that, God during all that tyme, supplyed the want of Scri∣ptures by apparitions to the Patriarches. But this is only i∣magined, for in the written apparitions, no such thing doth appeare: for the Patriarches vnto whome he so appeared before Moyses tyme, wereGen. 14.6. Cain, at what tyme Abel was so religious, that heGen. 4.4. offered of the first begotten of his flocke &c. and our Lord had respect to Abel and to his guifts. Also Noe,Gen. 6.13. & 7.1. & 8.15. & 9.1. who being likewise faythfull,Gen. 8.20. built an Aultar to our Lord &c. & offred holocausts vpon the Aultar. Abraham,Gen. 12.1. & 13.14. & 15.1. & 17.1. & 18.13. at what tyme God made or repeated the promise to him, not then instru∣cting him in any point of faith which Abrahā had forgot∣ten, for Abraham then belieued, andGen. 12.7. builded an Aultar to
our Lord. Isaac,Gen. 26.2.24. to whom he also rehearsed the forsaid promise, Isaac being then so faithfull, as thatGen. 26.25. he builded an Aultar, and called vpon the name of our Lord. Lastly he appea∣red to Iacob,Gen. 28.13. to whom he renewed the same promise, Iacob being at that tyme so faithfull, as that God then said to him,Gen. 28.15. I wilbe thy keeper whither soeuer thou goest. The Ap∣paritions therfore of God vnto the Patriarches before Moy∣ses tyme, were not to supply the Scriptures want, by instru∣cting them in any Points of their Religion then formerly forgotten, for it appeareth fully by the Premises, that the Patriarches, to whom these Apparitions were made before Moyses tyme, were at the tyme of the said Apparitions, not forgetfull of Gods Law, but faithfull and Zealous therin: And therfore the Apparitions so made to them, were not to instruct them in Doctrine then forgotten, but to signify to them Gods other pleasure: which truth is yet more euident, in that aswell inExod. 3.4. & 4.1. & 6.1. Nu. 12.4. Moyses tyme, as also afterIos 1.2. & 4.1. & 7.10. Iudic. 6.39. & 7.2. & 10 10. & 20 23. & 1. Reg. 3 10.17. & 8 7. & 15.10. & 16.. & 23.4. & 2. Reg. 2.1. & 7.4. & 3. Re. 3.5. & 9.2. the same, when the Scriptures were extant, God vsed Appari∣tions, no lesse then before. After the law was written, it was yet for many yeares lost, during which tyme, yet the Iewes continued true be∣lieuers,4. Reg. 22.8. Helcias the high Priest, said to Saphan the scribe, I haue found the Booke of the law, in the howse of our Lord: Of which bookeMargi∣nall notes of the English Bible of 1578. in the 2. Reg. 22.8. And Sparks in his Answ. to Albin. pa. 56. Protestants thus say, This was the Copy which Moy∣ses left them, as appeareth 2. Chron. 34.14. which either by negli∣gence of the Priests, had been lost, or else by the wickednes of Idola∣trous kings, had bene abolished. It is likewise certaine, that after the Captiuity,4. Esdras 14.22. See Irenaeus l. 3. c. 25. Tertul. l de habit. mul. Es∣dras did either restore the Bookes of Scripture, as being be∣fore time lost for many yeares, or else (as some ancientChrisost. ep. ad Heb. hom. 8. Theo∣doret. Praef. in in Psalmos. Fathers thinke) did collect and gather the Scriptures, into certaine Volumes, as being then before dispersed, and disor∣dered, or (as D. CowperChro∣nicle fol. 50. thinketh) scattered and destroyed. And it is no lesse certayne, that sundry parts of Scri∣pture are yet to this day wanting, as the BookeNum. 21.14. of the wars of our Lord:Iosue 10.13. & 2. Reg. 1.18. The Booke of the Iust:2. Paral. 20.34. The booke of Iehu the sonne of Hanani;2. Paral 12.15. The Bookes of Semeias the Prophet, and of Addo:1. Reg. 10.25. The Booke which Samuel wrote:1. Paral. 9.29. & see 2. Par. 26.23. & 2. Par. 33.19. The words of Na∣than
the Prophet: the Bookes of Ahias the Silouite: the vision of Addo, besides many Parables and verses of Salomon, for he spake3. Reg. 4.32. three thousand Parables; and his songs were a thousand and fyue. It is also certayne, thatCol. 4.16. S. Paul writ an epistle to the Laodiceans, and peraduenture another1. Co. 5.9. to the Corinthians. Whereof Caluin vpon these words,1. Co. 5.9. I wrote to you in an Epistle, saithIn 1. Cor. 5.This Epistle is not extant at this day, and no doubt, but that ma∣ny others haue perished. But it suffieth, that there remayne to vs, those which the Lord foresaw to suffice And Luther vpon these words,Ose 10.14. As Salamana was destroyed by his house that tooke vengeance on Baal in the day of battell &c. teacheth that,In Ose. 10. This History is no where else extant in the Scriptures, and many such like things haue happened which are not written; as that which Iudas hath in his Epi∣stle of Michael contending with Sathan for Moyses his body. Mention also is made in the Epistle of Iude,Ver. 14. of Enoch his Prophecy, which yet is not to be read in any other part of the Scrip∣ture: as neither the names of Iannes & Mambres the Egyptian Magicians, but only in2. Tim. 3.8. S. Paul. This losse and want of these Scriptures, Is a thing so euident, that Zanchius confesseth that,De sacra Script. p. 117. There were other Bookes inspired by God &c. of which we haue most certayne Testi∣monies in the Scriptures, but they haue perished, especially at the burning of the Temple, and the destruction of the Citty, when the people were taken into Babilon: those that are wanting, are the Booke of the warres of our Lord, the Booke of the Iust, the Booke of Nathan the Prophet, the wordes of Ahias the Silonite, the visions of Addo, many Prouerbs and verses of Salomon. Agreably whereunto sayth Whitaker,De sacra Script. p. 593. we grant somethings now to be wanting, which long since were in the Canon of Scriptures. And according to Willet,Syno. 1. Controu. q. 4. . 21. 36. It is not to be doubted, but that some part of the Canonicall Scripture is lost. All this notwithstanding, such is the ignorant bouldnesse of D. Morton, that he denyethApol. pas 2. l. 1. e. 4. Any Canonicall Booke of the Old Testament, or that Epistle of the New Testament to the Laodiceans, to haue perished. But now from these cleere and confessed Premisses, I may strongly argue, that if the Church and true fayth haue for many yeares ben preserued, before any Scripure was written, and after when it was lost, and yet to this day we
haue nor the entyre and full Canon of the Bible, but still many bookes are wanting; then it euidently followeth, that by Tradition true fayth and Religion hath bene taught and preserued; and the written word, neyther is, or can be our sole and perfect Rule of fayth, seeing we haue not the whole Canon hereof. And I will suppose for the present, that none wilbe so absurd as to affirme, that any one Booke, the Apocalyps for Example, is a sufficient square or Rule of all our fayth. And if any one should be so mad, as to affirme it, then must I demaund, what part that is, and why that, rather then another? To which demaund the best answere wilbe his deepest silence; and so the whole Canon of the Scripture cannot be the sole and perfect Rule of fayth, see∣ing the whole Canon is not extant, neyther will any one parcell be assigned, which contayneth all matter of faith. Perkins and Hospinian perceiuing how conuincing this was in proofe of Traditions, thought it still better, though ouer bouldly, yet plainly to deny, that any Scripture was lost: I take it to be a truth (saythReform. Cath p. 145. Hospinian Hist Sacram. p. 463.464. Perkins) though some thinke otherwise, that no part of the Canon is lost &c. Agayne to hould that any Bookes of Scrpture should be lost, calls into question Gods proui∣dence: But this being directly contrary to the former Scrip∣tures, and to the Iudgement of other more learned Prote∣stants, I omit all further Confutation thereof. And will only adde, that so many bookes thus perished, being all of them diuine, and inspired by the holy Ghost, were not superfluous or lesse necessary, then these other par∣cells which we haue, and therefore though these which are extant, be very profitable, yet they are not absolutely ne∣cessary, no more then those that haue perished; wherefore it is the word which is placed in the mouthes of Bishops & Priests, which shall neuer perish.1. Pet. 1, 25. The word of our Lord remayneth for euer, and this is the word which is Euangelized among you. Agreable to this are the ancient Prophecies,Malach. 2.7. The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require of his mouth, because he is the Angell of our Lord.Isa. 59.21. And, this is my Co∣uenant with them▪ sayth our Lord: my Spirit that is in thee, and my words that I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, sayth our Lord, from this present and for euer; which certaynty of continuance, we no where find to be promised to the writ∣ten word. But to proceed yet further, though Moyses writ the Law, yet somethings did he deliuer by Tradition, where of not obscure mention is made in the fourth Booke of Esdras, where it is sayd in the person of God, touching Moyses,C. 14. 4. 6. 16. See O∣rig ho. 5. in Numeros. Hilar in Psalm 2. Eu¦seb. hist. l. 7. c. 28. & l. 4. c. 21. I brought him vpon Mount Sina, and held him with me many dayes, &c. And I commanded him saying, These words thou shalt publish a∣broad, and these thou shalt hyde. And to omit, that these truths following, were not found written in the Old Testamēt, but continued by Tradition, the miraculous Pond vpon Proba∣tica at Hierusalem, recorded by S. Iohn,C 5. 2. the prayer of Elias concerning rayne, whereofC. 5 17. S. Iames speaketh: The altercation betweene S. Michaell and the deuill about Moyses his body, whichVer. 9. S. Iude mentioneth: as also that Iannes & Mambres resisted Moyses, whereof2. Tim. 3.8. S. Paul writeth: But I say, to omit all these, we find it contayned in the Old Te∣stament, that in remedy of Originall sinne, Circumcision was ordained, only for the Male Children of the Iewes, and that not before the eight day, whereof it is sayd,Gen. 17.22.14. An In∣fant of eight dayes shalbe Circumcised among you, all malekind in your Generations &c. The male, whose flesh of his prepuce, shall not be cir∣cised, that soule shalbe destroyed out of his people, because he hath bro∣ken my Couenant: But what meanes or remedy God vsed her∣in, eyther with male Children dying before the eight day, with women, or with the Gentile belieuers, we fynd it not expressed in the Scriptures, and yet the knowledge heereof was necessary to Saluation. And whereas D. Whitaker would euade in behalfe of women, only by affirming that in respect of their remedy from Originall sinne, theDe sacra Scrip. q. 6 fol. 598. vnmarryed (women) did pertayne to their Parents, and the marryed to their husbands, being as it were circumcised in them; this is barely affirmed, not pro∣ued by any place of the Old Testament, and therefore in∣deed it impugneth D. Whitaker himselfe, and other Pro∣testants, who teach that all matters of Saluation are taught
in Scripture. Secondly, this nothing helpeth the Male Chil∣dren dying before the eight day, or the Gentile belieuers. And thirdly if the women vnmarryed had their remedy herein by their Circumcised Fathers, what need they fur∣ther remedy, when afterwards they were marryed by their husbands? So impertinent, wanting, and absurd is this Eua∣sion of D. Whitaker. From Moyses tyme vntill Christ, when the Scriptures were extant, they were yet reserued only with the Iewes, & yet neuerthelesse there were many true belieuers in otherSee Aug. de Ci, l. 18. c. 47. de peccat Orig. l. 2. c. 24. l. 1. de Praedest. Sunct. c. 9. Nations, as with Iob his friends, and others. Yea the Iewes themselues who had the Scriptures did notwithstanding de∣pend especially vpon the Tradition of their fore-Fathers, ac∣cordingly as is said:Deut. 32.7. Remember the old dayes, thinke vpon euery Generation: Aske thy Father and he will declare to thee: the El∣ders and they will tell thee:Iob. 8.8. Aske the old generation & search dili∣gently the memory of the Fathers, for we are as but yesterday &c. and they shall teach thee &c.Ecclesia∣stic. 8.11. Let not the narration of the Ancient es∣cape thee, for they learned of their Fathers: because of them thou shalt learne vnderstanding &c. So euident it is, that during the Old Testament, both Iewes and Gentiles belieued many things only by Tradition. To come now to the New Testament, we fynd that Christ our Sauiour intended to haue all things preachd, & therin gaue speciall Commandemēt to his Apostles, saying,Mat. 28.19. Teach yee all Nations, baptizing them and teaching them to ob∣serue all things whatsoeuer I haue commanded you. AndMar. 16.15. going into the whole world preach the Ghospell to all Creatures. But that he intended to haue all things written, we fynd not: for had his intention herein been the like, it would haue appeared in the Scriptures by his like Commandement, which it no where doth. Secondly had our Sauiour intended to haue all things written, & so, not the Church, but the Scriptures to be the only Rule of faith, then doubtles would he haue left certaine direction and knowledge which had bene the Scriptures, and not haue left it to the Tradition and Iudg∣ment of his Church, as shalbeSee hereafter sec. 4. proued hereafter. And though ChemnitiusExam. part. 2. f. 42. obiecteth against this, that
Christ commanded S. Iohn to write a Booke: Yet this is ans∣wered by these words in the same place,Apoc. 1.11. That which thou seest write in a booke, to wit, his Reuelations, which neyther do contayne all points of fayth, whereof the now Question is, as also are so obscure and mysticall, that according to Lu∣ther,Prolog. in Apoc. no man can vnderstand them. In like sort though the Apostles according to Christs cō∣mand preached all needfull points of fayth, yet they neuer intended to set downe in writing all such points; for wher∣as they preached the Ghospell without expectation of any occasion, they did not yet vndertake to write, but when they were prouoked thereto by some vrgent cause, accor∣dingly as M. Hooker affirmeth, that,Eccl. Pol. l. 1 sec. 15. p. 87. The seuerall Bookes of Scripture are written vpon some seuerall occasion, and particular purpose &c. So did S. Matthew at his departure from the He∣brewes, write his Ghospell to them,Hist. l. 3. c. 18. prouoked thereunto (as Eusebius sayth) by certayne necessity. So likewise did S. Marke write his Ghospell vrged thereto by the earnestEuseb. Hist. l 2. c. 14. request of the Romans. And whereas many (as may be gathered fromLuc. 1.1. Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 18. S. Luke and Eusebius) did presume to write of of our Sauiour, and his actions, not hauing perfect notice therof, vpon this occasion did S. Luke write his Ghospell, the which labour he did especiallyLuc. 1..4. vndertake for Theo∣philus. In like manner didEuseb. his. l. 3. c. 18. S. Iohn preach the Ghos∣pell till his last age without Scripture; & did (as S.De Scri∣ptoribus Ec∣clesiast. Hie∣rome affirmeth) take occasion to write, by reason of the Ebionites, whose heresy was then arysing. S. Paul also did write his Epistles vpon like speciall occasions, as that to the Romanes, and the other to the Galathians,See the Argument vpon the Epistle to the Gala∣thians in the Engl. Bible of 1576. agaynst such as thought Circumcision needfull (that opinion being then an errour of thoseAct. 15.1. beginning tymes.) The other E∣pistles of S. Peter, Iames, Iohn, and Iude, were written a∣gaynst certayne Heretickes, who misvnderstanding S. Paul (as S. Peter2. Pet. 3.16. noteth of some) did thereupon teach, that fayth only without workes sufficed to saluation: Of which very point S. Austine sayth,De fide & operibus. c. 14. Because this opinion was then began, other Apostolicall Epistles of Peter, Iohn, Iames, Iude, do chiefly di∣rect their intention agaynst it, that they might strongly confirme, Fayth
without workes to profit nothing. And a little before, he like∣wise writeth that, Euen in the Apostles tyme, certayne obscure say∣ings of Paul the Apostle not being vnderstood, some thought, that he af∣firmed the same. By all which it is euident, that the Apostles and Euangelistes, did write their bookes, not by any com∣mand from Christ, but vpon some or other accidentall oc∣casion vrging them thereto. We do not read that the Apostles were sent to write, but to preach, and so accordingly all of them preached, wher∣as the greater part of them writ nothing at all. And of those which did write, some testify, that their intent in writing, was not to set downe the Law,Rom. 15.14.15. 2. Pet. 1.13.15. 2. Pet. 3.1. but onely to exhort, comfort and admonish them, to whome they writ of such things, as they had formerly taught them. And S. Iohn ex∣pressely denyeth, that he hath comprehended in writing all such things, as were worthy wryting, and that he will de∣liuer the rest by word of mouth,2. Io. ver. 12.3. Io. ver. 13.14. Hauing more things to writ vnto you, I would not by paper and inke: for I hope that I shalbe with you, and speake mouth to mouth, that your ioy may be full. Now that these things which the Apostles did not write, but teach by word of mouth were matters also of waight and belon∣ging to fayth, S. Paul assureth vs in these words,1. Thess. 3.10. Night and day more abundantly praying, that we may see your face, and may accomplish those things that want of your fayth. So euident it is, that the Apostles besides their writings, did preach other things which were wanting to their fayth. This truth yet further appeareth by order of their wri∣tings, for the Euangelists did not purposely set downe in their Ghospels principles of fayth, but penned only histori∣cally, and by way of Narration, a briefe abstract of our Sa∣uiours Acts, especially those wherin were fulfilled the Pro∣phecies fortold of him. And so also did S. Luke according∣ly set downe in his Actes, the Ecclesiasticall history of those tymes. In like manner the Apostles in their Epistles, do but treat obiter of matters of fayth, discoursing thereof, as also of other matters nothing pertayning to fayth, casually and as occasion is ministred, which occasion is for the most part but particular, concerning only but sometymes a speciall
people, as the Romanes, Corinthians &c. sometimes but priuat persons, as Titus, Timothy &c. And (which is most worthy of obseruation) all their Epistles be written to such persons only as were then before conuerted to the fayth, which thing was done, as Swinglius acknowledgeth, not so much to instruct, as to confirme. His words are,Tom. 2. l. de Eccle∣siast. fol. 43. In the tymes of the Apostles, there was not any of the new Testament written, but the Apostles as yet taught by word of mouth: Epistles were sent to and fro, not so much to instruct, as to confirme, in the fayth before receiued. Now had the Apostles intentiō in writing beene such, & so full as it was in their preaching, then like as they preached generally to all, so likewise their writings would haue been written indifferently for all. Agayne, if the intention or occasion of the Apostles had beene to write all needfull points of faith, then doubtles like as our Sauiour did,Act. 13. after his passion appeare to them for fourty dayes speaking of the Kingdome of God, & as thenSee Clement. apud Euseb. l. 2. c. 1. & Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Col. 581. Fulke against Rhem. Test. in Apoc. c. 1. fol. 463. instructing them in all needfull points of fayth; so also they all, or some one of them, would in like manner haue imployed his la∣bour, to haue set downe the same specially in writing, and being assisted by the holy Ghost, would accordingly haue performed the same: Nay it followeth heerupon, that euery of them who did write (this being according to Protestants the occasion of his writing) should haue performed the same. And so by this reason S. Iudes Epistle, for example, onely should be sufficient. And wheras D. Whitaker answereth heerto, that the Apo∣stlesDe sacra Scrip. q. 6. p. 597. knew that God would so gouerne their wils and hands, that those whom it behoued should write, & should write so much as should suffice, and that in time they should do all things; & so, that they had a generall intētion or notice, that what was wanting in one mans writings, should be supplyed in another: this ney∣ther doth satisfy, for the Apostles being dispersed into sun∣dry Nations, did not for the most, especially at the tyme of their writing, so much as know one of others writings, much lesse then did or could they write, with intention to supply what was wanting in others writings: which appeareth yet more fully, in that one and the same wryter, as name∣ly
S. Paul, in sundry of his Epistles, doth handle for the most part, one and the same matter, as in his Epistle to the Ro∣manes, and the other to the Galathians: and also the E∣uangelists do in like manner, for the most part, discourse and make mention of sundry matters; which are in others of them fully set downe: which their doing were superflu∣ous, had their occasion of writing beene to supply what was wanting in others. Vpon all which premises I do conclude, that the holy Ghost did not intend or command, that the Apostles and Euangelists should write all needfull points of fayth, seeing none, or all of them did euer performe the same. But what more conuincing for Traditions, then those expresse words of S. Paul, Therfore2. Thss. 2. .15 Brethren stand, and hould the Traditions which you haue learned, whether it he by word, or our Epistle; so plainly affirming that some things be taught by word, others by writing. This place is so powerfull, that it enforceth Protestants to very desperate shifts. D. Reinolds answereth, that,Def. of the Posit. p. 335. by the word speach (or word) S. Paul comprehendeth other Scriptures, and so confoun∣deth and maketh all one, speaking and writing, which is to make S. Paul to speake most absurdly. But these not sa∣tisfying, D. ReinoldsConfe∣rence fol. 456. 689. answereth further, that though the Apostle heere mentioneth Traditions, deliuered to the Thessaloniās by word, yet those Traditions also were (though vnwritten to them yet) contayned elswhere in the Scri∣ptures: for it appeareth in theC. 17.3. Acts, where the history is written, and those Traditions set downe, that S. Paul preached to the Thessalonians, that, it behoued Christ to suffer, and to ryse againe, and that he is Iesus Christ whom the Apo∣stle preached. Now, this Doctrine being the Tradition, which he meant in the place obiected, and which he deli∣uered to them by word, is manifestly contayned, though not in his said Epistle to the Thessaloniās, yet in other Scri∣ptures. But the weaknes of this Answere appeareth many wayes, for first it is without colour, vnlesse it could be pro∣ued, that the Apostle by those Traditiōs deliuered by word, did vnderstand only that doctrine, which is here alleadged
out of the Actes, which D. Reinolds neither doth, nor could proue. Secondly the Doctrine alleadged out of the Actes, was before written by him to the Thessalonians themselues in his first Epistle, wherin he instructeth them touching out Sauiour, that he is1. Thes. 2.15.19. Iesus Christ, and that Iesus was killled, and raysed vp from the dead, and therfore the Apostle speaking in the place by me obiected of Traditiōs deliuered by word, cānot be thought to meane therby this only doctrine which he deliuered to the same persons before by writing; his words implying so plaine diuersity of Traditions, which be taught them either by word or writing. Thirdly the for∣said answere is without all probability, vnlesse it can be shewed that all the doctrine which S. Paul taught the Thes∣salonians, is wholly expressed in that place of the Actes; for if all be not there written, how then can it from thence be knowne, what those Traditions deliuered by word are, wherof the Apostle speaketh in his said Epistle to the Thes∣salonians. And that all such Doctrine as S. Paul did teach the Thessalonians, should be set downe in that place of the Actes, it cannot be shewed; yea the contrary is euident, for as he taught them by writing many things concerning An∣tichrist,2. Thess. 2.5. the IudgmentIb. ver. 2.3. day, and other mattersIb. .3.9. not mentioned in that said place of the Actes: so doubtlesse he did preach by word no lesse to them, then he did to his o∣ther hearers,Act. 20.27. all the Counsell of God, and concealed from themAct. 20.0. nothing that was profitable, but preached it to them; all which cannot be found expressed in that place of the Actes. Four∣thly the Apostle did by these Traditions of his, deliuered ei∣ther by word or writing, vnderstand his vniuersall do∣ctrine, concerning all needfull pointes of faith; but that all this was written in S. Pauls tyme, much lesse at the tyme of his writing this his Epistle to the Thessalonians, cannot be proued; but to the Contrary it is certaine, that many parts of the New Testament were written after this Epi∣stle: from whence it followeth, that the Apostle by the fore∣said words, did refer the Thessalonians to be instructed, not only by the Scriptures, because they were not all then ex∣tant, but also by the Tradition of Doctrine, which was then
vnwritten. This truth is so cleere, that it is confessed by D. Whitaker, saying;De sacra Script. q. 6. fol. 630. How is it like, if these things were so ful∣ly written, that the Apostle should make any mention of Traditions: but because he perceiued that these things, were not yet written, he there∣fore warneth the Thessalonians, that these Traditions were to be kept. And the same is acknowledged byReform. Cath. p. 142. M. Perkins: so many wayes, and so confessedly is this Euasion insufficient against so cleere a Text of Scripture. Wherfore D. Whitaker and M. Perkins, perceiuing the insufficiency of Reinolds replye, do further answere, that though these Traditions deliuered them by word, were at that tyme vnwritten, that yet they were afterwarde written, and are now to be found in the Scriptures: But this they barely say without all proofe; and yet admitting so much, it therby is granted, that S. Paul did referre the Thessalo∣nians, for that tyme, to Tradition, euen in things necessary, as D. WhitakerVbi su∣pra. and M. Perkins are forced to confesse. But if in things necessary, then idle is that other Euasion re∣lated by D. Whitaker, saying;Controu, 1. q. 6. c. 10. Others thinke Paul to speake of certaine externall things and Ceremonies, not of very great moment: But this neither can be proued, but is only nakedly affirmed. I may also add hereunto that of S. Iohn,Ep. 2. ver. 12. Hauing, more things to write vnto you, I would not impart them by paper and inke. Also of S. Paul.1. Cor. 11.34. The rest I will dispose when I come. And speaking of Christes Priesthood, he sayth,Heb. 5.12. Of whom I haue great speach, and inexplieable to viter. And to Timo∣thy, 1. Tim. c. 6.20. O Timothy keep the Depositum. To the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.2. I praise you Brethren, that in all things you be mindfull of me, and as I haue diliuered unto you, you keep my Precepts, or Traditions according to the Greeke. Yea he tearmeth the Corinthians. The Epistle of Christ written2. Cor. 3.2. not with inke, but with the Spirit, if the liuing God, not in Table of stone, but in tht tables Carnall of the hart. According to which, the Holy Ghost prophecieth of the New Testament by Hieremy, saying,Hier, 31, 33. I will put my law into their bowels, and in their harts will I write it. So ma∣nifest it is, that the Apostles deliuered many things by word and not by writing. Protestants perceiuing the former Scriptures to be so
playne, that none of the foresayd answers do any thing sa∣tisfy, they wage a new warre against the Scriptures them∣selues, tearing the same in peeces, by many and seuerall cor∣ruptions. As first Beza (a man in this kind most expert & audacious) in hisOf An∣no 1598. And see him in Whitaker. Controu 1. q 6 c. 10. Translation, changeth in S. Paules words, 2. Thess. 2.15. the disiunctiue particle, siue (Whether) into the Cōiunctiue, tum (both) in this manner; Hold the Tradi∣tions which you are taught, both by word, as also by our Epistle. And in anotherApud Tremelium. Edition he likewise trāslateth the Text thus, Hold the Doctrine deliuered which you are taught, & per sermonem, & per Epistolam, both by speach and Epistle. Where for Traditions, he putteth Doctrine deliuered, which word Doctrine, is his own addition, which he maketh also in the singular number, whereas the true word Traditions, is both in Greeke and La∣tin in the plurall: and he also changeth Whether, into and, whereas between those two wordes, there is no lesse dif∣ference then between Beza, and an honest man. But such is the hatred of other Prot. besides Beza against Traditions, that wheresoeuer the Scripture speaketh agaynst certayne Tradi∣tions of the Iewes, partly friuolous, partly repugnant to the Law of God; there all the English Translations follow the. Greeke exactly, neuer omitting this word Tradition: but where it speaketh in commendatiō of Traditions, to wit such as the Apostles deliuered to the Church; there none follow the Greeke, which is the selfesame word. For exam∣ple thus they translate,Mat. 15.2.3. . Why do thy Disciples transgresse the Traditions of the Elders? And agayne, why do you also trans∣gresse the Cōmandement of God by your Tradition? And againe, you haue made frustrate the Commandement of God, for your Traditions. Heeres stil the word Tradition. But now cōcerning good Tra∣ditions, the Apostle by the selfesame word, both in Greeke & Latine, sayth thus, Therfore2. Thess. 2.15. . Brethren stand and hold fast the Traditions which you haue learned, either by word, or by our E∣pistle. And againe, Withdraw2. Thess 3.6. your selues from euery Brother walking inordinatly, and not according to the Traditions which they haue receyued of vs. And againe according to the Greeke,1. Cor. 11.2. I praise you Brethren that in all things you are mindfull of me, and as I haue deliuered vnto you, you keep my Traditions,
. But in all these places insteed of Tradi∣tions they translate either, ordinances, instructions, preachings, in∣stitutions, or the like. And Beza as before,2. Thess. 2. & 3. traditam doctri∣nam, putting the Singular number for the Plurall, and ad∣ding, Doctrine, of his owne. Yea they vse the word Tradi∣tion, when it may tend to the discredit therof, it not being in the Greeke Text,Col. 2.20. . as, Why as though liuing in the world are yeeled with Traditions? Or as the Translation of Anno 1579. hath, Why, are yee burdened with Traditions? And yet a little before,Col. 2.14. & Epb. 2.15. they translate , ordinances, de∣crees: and therfore why not now , quid decer∣nitis, why do you ordayne or decree, or why are you led with decrees? their Translation cannot be iustifyed, either by Scriptures, Fathers, or Lexicon. But by this liberty any Heretike, though neuer so impious, may make the Scriptures speake what himselfe best pleaseth. SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scri∣ptures in Proofe of vnwritten Traditions. IN the eight Generall Councell, it is taught thatAct. 10. The great Apostle Paul doth cleerly admonish vs, to keepe the Traditions which we haue receaued, whether by speach, or by the Epistles of holy men, who haue formerly shyned. S. Chrisostome expounding the same words of S. Paul, affirmeth that,In 2. Thess. ho. 4. And see Ba∣sil de Spir. Sant. c. 29. Theophil. in 2. Thess. 2. Damasc. c. 17. de Imag. Sanctorum. Hereby it appeareth, that the Apostles did not deliuer all things by Epistle, but many things without writing, and these are worthy of faith; wherfore also let vs esteeme the Tradition of the Church to be belieued. It is a Tradition, seeke no further. And the same exposition is giuen by S. Basil, Theophilact, and Damascene, as also by S. Epiphanius,Haer. 61. We must vse Tradi∣tion (sayth he) for all things cannot be receaued from diuine Scri∣pture, wherfore the holy Apostles haue deliuered some things by Tradi∣tion: Euen as the holy Apostle sayth. As I haue deliuered to you, and elswhere, so I teach, and haue deliuered in Churches.
S. Austine labouring to proue that those who were baptized by heretikes should not be rebaptized, saith;De Bap. Conc. Dou. l. 5. c. 2. The Apostles commanded nothing hereof, but that Doctrine which was op∣posed herein against Cyprian, is to be belieued to proceed from their Tradition; as many things be which the Church houldeth, and are ther∣fore well belieued to be commanded of the Apostles, although they be not written. This saying is so cleere, that Cartwright spea∣king therof, sayth,In Whit∣gif. Def. p. 103. To allow S. Austines saying is to bring in Popery againe. AndIbid. And his 2. Reply ag. Whitg. part. 1. p 84. 85. 86. if S. Austines Iudgment, be a good Iudg∣ment, then there be some things commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures, and thereupon no sufficient doctrine contayned in the Scriptures. But the Fathers Expositions and beliefe, are so cleere for our Doctrine of Traditions, that Chemnitius reproueth for the sameExam. part. 1. p. 87. 89. 90. Clemens Alexandrinus, and Origen, also Epipha∣nius, Ambrose, Hierome, Basile, Maximus, Theophilus, Damascene. AndAgainst Purg. p. 362. 303. 397. Against Martial. p. 170. 178. A∣gainst Bri∣stow. p. 35. 36. D. Fulke reiecteth herein, Chrysostome, Tertullian, Cyprian, Austine, Hierome, and a great many more. And the like is acknowledged byDe sacra Script. p. 678. 68. 683. 685. 686. 690. 695. 696. 670. Whitaker of S. Chrysostome, Epi∣phanius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Austine, Innocentius, Leo, Basile, Eu∣sebius, and Damascene. By the premisses then it appeareth, that S. Austine and all the forenamed Fathers, did confessedly teach and belieue our Doctrine of Traditions. SECT. IV. That the learnedst Protestants are inforced to acknow∣ledge, and belieue our Catholike Doctrine of Tra∣ditions. I Proued before that in the tyme of Nature, and much also in the tyme of the Law, the faithfull were instructed by Traditions not written: And accordingly the Protestant D. Westphailing affirmeth that there was a tyme whenSerm. 5. fol. 56. & Ser. 6. fol. 60. Tra∣ditions not deliuered in writing, or taken out of Bookes, but deliuered from one to another by word of mouth, were Rules of faith and man∣ners:
And thus it was first in the tyme of nature, secondly in the tyme of the Law. And in those tymes Traditions might well be Rules of truth to such as knew they came from those, whom Gods spirit would not suffer to erre. So confessedly Traditions haue bene, and may be Rules of truth. Concerning our learning the true sense of the Scri∣ptures, the Protestant Author of Catholike Traditions pres∣cribeth thus;In the preface fol. B. 35. when the Scriptures haue not sufficient light, to make the truth apparantly perceyued, yet may a man now a dayes vse that meanes, which S. Irenaeus counsaileth vs, which is to &c. learne the Apostolicall Tradition. And this with greatest reason, for M. Powell teacheth that,Of things Indiffer. c. 2. p. 7. Ecclesiasticall Traditions are not meer∣ly humane, but also diuine, because the Church is directed and gouer∣ned by the spirit of Christ. Now, if this be the confessed Priui∣ledge of the Church, in things indifferent, and lesse concer∣ning vs, it is much the rather to be acknowledged in such greater pointes of faith, as do more importantly concerne, euen our faith and Saluation. But to giue particular instance of seuerall Traditions ac∣knowledged by Protestants, the knowledge wherof is ne∣cessary to faith and saluation: Concerning the question of discerning Canonicall Scriptures from Apocryphall, M. Hooker affirmeth that,Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec 14. p. 86. of things necessary the very chiefest is to know what bookes we are bound to esteeme holy, which point is con∣fessed impossible for the Scripture it selfe to teach: forIbid. l. 2. sec. 4. p. 102. sayth he very well) if any one booke of Scripture did giue testimony to all, yet still that Scripture which giueth credit to the rest, would require another Scripture to giue credit to it:Ibid. pa. 103. neither could we euer come to any pause wheron to rest, vnlesse besides Scripture there were some∣thing else acknowledged. Neither is this something the testimony of the spirit, which (as WhitakerAduersus Stap. l. 2. c. 6. p 370. 357. & Hook. Eccl. Pol. sec. 8. p. 147. acknowledgeth) being priuate and secret, is not fit to teach and refell others: but it is euen accor∣ding to him,Vbi supra. l. 2 c. 4. p. 300, 298. the Ecclesiasticall Tradition, an Argument (sayth he) wherby may be argued and conuinced, what Bookes be Canonicall, and what not. Which authority of the Churches Testimony in this behalfe, he further auoucheth and teacheth in fundryVbi supra. l. 1. c. 1. p. 14. & 25 And against Rei∣nolds. p. 44. other places. And with him agree many others of his brethren, for M. Hooker supposeth that,Eccl. Pol. l. 3. p. 146. We all know,
that the first outward motiue leading men so to esteeme of the Scri∣pture is the authority of Gods Church. Yea, saith another,Treatise of the Script. and the Church c. 15. 16 p 72. 74. We would not belieue the Ghospell, were it not that the Church taught vs, and witnessed that this Doctrine was deliuered by the Apo∣stles. Zanchius (so much renowmed amongst Protestants) in plaine termes confessethDe sacra Script p. 281. the vnwritten Tradition of the Canonicall and Apocryphall bookes: and thatIb. pa 61. the Ecclesia∣sticall Tradition is the first meane of our certaine knowledge herein. As also thatIb p 265. The Fathers thought that we haue this thing only by Tradition of the Apostles, and Apostolicall men. In which due respect sayth Chemnitius,Exam. part. 1. p. 69. We reuerently receaue this Tra∣dition, wherby the Bookes of holy Scripture are to vs deliuered. Luther like a dutifull Child ascribeth thus much to the Church his Mother, that,Tom. 2. de Captiu. Ba¦byl fol. 89. This truely hath the Church, that it can discerne the word of God, from the words of men, as Austine confessed himselfe to haue belieued the Ghospell, being moued by the authority of the Church. Melancthon,Resp ad Act. Ratisb. T. 3. p. 732. We acknowledge in the Church this Authority of testifying of Apostolicall Scriptures, or of discerning the writings of the Apostles from counterfaite. Caluin,De vera Eccles. Refor. p. 323. I do not deny but that it is the proper office of the Church, to dis∣cerne true Scriptures from fayned. Peter Martyr,In loc. class. 1 c. 6. We do ac∣knowledge it to be the function of the Church, that seeing it is indued with the holy Ghost, it may discerne sincere and true Bookes of diuine Scriptures from adulterate and Apocryphall. Perkins,Tom. 2. of the Ser∣mon of our Lord. col. 252. The Church hath the guift of iudging of things of greatest waight; she can iudge of the Bookes of Scripture, which are Canonicall, which not, of the Spirits of men, and their Doctrines, and therefore she can iudge which company of men are the true Church, and which not. What more for the authority of the Church and her Traditions, in this so important a question of discerning true Scriptures from false, could be sayd by any Catholike? D. Whitaker, a man so renowned in this Kingdome for his supposed greatest learning, acknowledgeth this same truth, no lesse plainly then the rest,Controu. 1. q. 3. c. 1. pag. 315. We do not deny (saith he) that it belongeth to the Church, that she approue, acknowledge, receyue, promulge, commend the Scriptures to all hers, and we say that this testimony is true, and ought to be receyued by all.Ib. c. 2. p. 316. It is
the office of the Church that she determine and discerne true, right, & proper Scriptures from false, counterfait, and Adulterate.Ib. c. 7. p. 324. We may truly be compelled by the authority of the Church, that we acknow∣ledge the Canonicall Scripture.Ib c. 9. p. 326. We confesse with Irenaeus, the authority of the Church to be firme, and a compendious demonstration of Canonicall doctrine àposteriori. Yea he affirmeth, that the te∣stimony of the Church concerning the Scriptures,De Script. l. 1. c 1 sect. 9. p. 19. Ought to be receaued, because it is true: and he that doth not receiue it, is guil∣ty of sacriledge. Wherefore all Protestants that deny this Ec∣clesiasticall Tradition, of the Churches discerning Canoni∣call bookes from Apocryphall, in D. Whitaters Iudgement are sacrilegious. If it were not to be thought tedious in so cleer a Case, I would shew the same to be taught byIn Zan∣chius de Ser. p 123 124. Brentius,De prin∣cipijs Christ. dog. l 1. c. 4 p. 18. Pet. Mar. com. plac. in Engl part.  1. 6. sec.  p. 42. Iew. in Def p. 201. Fulke in answere to a Counterf. Cath. p. 5. Lubbertus, Peter Martyr, Iewell, and Fulke, most of them, and others affirming, that the Church is directed in her for∣sayd Testimony, euen with the presence and assistance of the holyWhi∣tak. aduers. Stapl. l. 1 c. 5. p. 69. The Treatise of the Scripture and the Church. c. 15. p. 71. Iew. Fulke and Pet. Mart. vbi supra. Spirit. So cleer it is that this so necessary knowledge of true Scripture from false, we haue not from the Scripture it selfe, nor from the Priuate Spirit, but from the Tradition of the Church. And if the Tradition of the Church be so forcible, in this Chiefe question of discerning true Scriptu∣res, shall the same Scriptures make it of lesser Credit in other smaller questions? Rogers in the name of the Church of England, sayth,Def of the Art. art. 20. p 108. All of vs do grant, that the Church as a faythfull witnesse may, yea of necessity must testify to the world, what hath beene the doctrine of God his people, from tyme to tyme; and as a trusty Recorder, is to keep, and make known what the word of God, which it hath receyued is, which truly hath beene performed afore the word was written, by the Patriarches, and after the same was committed to writing, be∣fore Christ his incarnation, by the Iewes, Christ his lyfe tyme, in the Primitiue Church, from the Apostles tyme by the godly Christians throughout the world. Agayne,Ib. Art. 34. p. 196. The Church and euery mem∣ber thereof in his place, is bound to the obseruation of all Traditions & Ceremonies, which are allowed by lawfull authority, and are not re∣pugnant to the word of God; for he that violateth them, contemneth not man, but God, who hath giuen power to his Church, to establish
whatsoeuer things shall make vnto comlines, order, and Edification. Heer then confessedly we haue one mayne poynt of fayth necessary to saluation, made knowne vnto vs, not by the Scriptures, nor by the Priuat Spirit, but only by the Tradi∣tion of the Church. To alledge yet further another example, and that of great importance, which is concerning the abrogating of Saturday the Iewish Saboth, and the establishing of Sunday for our Saboth, First it is granted, that the now obseruation of Sunday, is not a thing arbitrary, & of indisserency, but necessary and vnchangeable: for thus expressely teacheth D. Whitguift,Defence p. 89. I do not thinke it now arbitrary, or to be chan∣ged: and surely there had been very litle Iudgment in me, if I had made it changeable. D. Fulke expresly teacheth, that this ob∣seruaion of SundayAgainst the Rhem. Test. in Re∣uel. 1. sec. 6. fol. 463. Is not a matter of indifferency but a ne∣cessary Prescription of Christ deliuered to vs by his Apostles. And that to change it, or keepe it on Munday, Twesday, or any other day the Church hath no Authority. And with him dohSynop. Controu. 9. q. 8 p. 382. M. Willet agree, expressing his like Iudgement almost in the same wordes. But none more fully confime this truth, then the Diuines of Geneua, who in their Principles of diuiniy dis∣puted in the Vniuersity of Geneua, and therePreface. discussed and determined euen byEpist. of the Transl. the whole consent of the lear∣ned in the Church of Geneua, and especially by M. Theo∣dore Beza, do conclude and teach that,C. 33 p. 80. sec. 12. 13. The Apostles by direction of the holy Ghost insteed of that seauenth day obserued vnder the Law, did appoint that day, which was first in Creation of the for∣mer world: and that the Obseruation therefore of this Lords day, is not to be accompted as an indifferent thing, but as an Apostolicall Tra∣dition to be perpetually obserued. This then being supposed, that the obseruation of our now Sunday, is a matter obligatory, and of necessity; we will next examine whether the same be taught vs by the written word, or only by Tradition: and to omit what already heerin is granted by D. Fulke, Willet, and the Di∣uines of Geneua; Bullinger auoucheth thatSerm. in Eng. Dec. 2. Serm. 4. p. 140. We do not in any part of the Apostles writings fynd any mention made that Sun∣day was to be kept holy. And, we belieue saythCom∣ment. Catech. in olog. p. 36. Vrsinus, this A∣postolicall
Tradition, and see it to be profitable. According to Whitguift,Defence. p. 88. The Scripture hath not appointed what day in the weeke, should be most meet for the Saboth. And he vrgeth Cart∣wright thus,Ib. p. 89. You should haue proued it to be appointed by the Scriptures, which no doubt you would haue done if you could, for that is it which I deny. And yet both he andIb. & p. 89. 10. Cartwright do cō∣fesse, that it was taught by the Apostles. And the same witnes∣seth Fulke, saying, forAg. Rhem. Test. in 1. Reuel. fol. 463. the Prescription of this day, the Apo∣stles had eyther the expresse Commandement of Christ before his Ascen∣sion, when he gaue them Precepts concerning the Kingdome of God. (Act. 1.2.) or else the certayne direction of his Spirit. So euident it is, and for such further confessed byDe Re∣lig Christia∣na. n. 12. pa. 7. & in Com∣pend. doct. Christ. pag. 645. 646. Zanchius, that the obseruation of Sunday is an Apostolicall and vnwritten Tradition. And the same is maintayned at large bySuruey of Popery. l. 3. part. 4 c. 5. Bell. But D. MortonMorton Apol. par. 2. l. 1 c. 41. obiecteth, that S. Iohn maketh mention of theApoc. 1.10. Lords day; that in the Actes mention is made of the first of theAct. 20.7. Saboth, when S. Paul and others were assembled to breake bread. And that S. Paul likewise commandeth the Corinthians to make Collections for the poore, vpon1. Cor. 16.2. the first of the Saboth. But all these are imper∣tinent, for S. Iohn calleth it the Lords day, not in regard that Saturday was then abrogated, or Sunday established (for neyther of these points doth he affirme) but only in res∣pect it was the day of our Lords Resurrection. And as for the first of the Saboth, Caluin & the Centurists doIn Cate∣na August. Marloreti. & Cent. 1. l. 2. Col 503. affir∣me, that thereby is not meant Sunday, but Saturday; and in∣deed the Greeke Text being the Originall, hath not, The first of the Saboth, but only. Act. 20, 7.1. Cor. 16 2. one of the Saboth dayes, and so doEngl. Bi∣ble of Anno 1566. Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. in Act. 20.7 & Cent. 1. l. 2. 495. 503. Protestants trāslate the same. But though the Text were that the Sacrament was vsually celebrated, and Collectiōs made for the Poore, vpon the first of the Saboth: yet this pro∣ueth not eyther that Saturday (whereof no mention in these places is made) should be abrogated, or that Sunday should be to vs, not onely as a Holy day, but also as our Saboth, and day of rest. This answere is so cleere, as that it is like∣wise made and allowed by sundry Protestāts, wherof sayth M. Bel,Suruey of Popery. No text of holy Scripture can be alleadged, which com∣mandeth to keep our Christian Sabboth vpon the first day, or any o∣ther
determinate day. M. Caluin denieth flatly that, , doth signify the first day, or Sunday. And that the Reuela∣tion proueth nothing, but that S. Iohn had his Reuelation vpon the day of our Lords Resurrection: but neither sayth, that Christians must ob∣serue that day for their Sabboth, nor that the Apostles kept the same, which thing both Peter Martyr, and Erasmus do willingly graunt. So generally is it acknowledged by Protestants that the A∣brogation of Saturday, and our Obseruation of Sunday, is no where prescribed or commanded in the written word, but only receiued by Tradition, and yet the same is a mat∣ter of necessity: And so tryfling is M. Mortons Obiection. D. Field acknowledgeth and summeth togeather ma∣ny Traditions, saying,L 4. c. 20. We admit first the Bookes of Scri∣pture Canonicall as deliuered by Tradition: Secondly the chiefe heads of Christian doctrine, contayned in the Creed: Thirdly the forme of Christian Doctrine, and distinct explication of many things, somewhat obscurely contayned in Scripture &c. Fourthly the continued practises of such things as are not expressed in Scripture: Fiftly such obserua∣tions as are not particularly commanded in Scripture: Amongst which, and the former he numbreth the Fast of Lent, the Bap∣tisme of Infants, and obseruation of our Lords day. And some few lynes after he confesseth that, Many other things there are, which the Apostles doubtles deliuered by Tradition. We haue it heer then acknowledged most plentifully by the learnedst Protestants, that sundry Pointes of faith ne∣cessary to saluation, are not made knowne to vs by the writ∣ten word, or any Priuate spirit, but only by the Tradition of the Catholike Church. SECT. V. Obiections against Traditions taken from Scriptures, an∣swered. IT is incredible, that men professing learning, should not be much ashamed to produce such poore and weake stuffe, against so cleere and confessed a Truth: for example, such
Texts are obiectedRogers Def. of the Art. art. 6. p. 27. by M. Rogers, as seeme to forbid all Addition to the written word, as that of Moyses,Deut. 4.2. You shall not add to the word that I speake to you, neither shall you take away from it: As also that of S. Iohn,Apoc. 21.18. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add vpon him the Plagues &c. I answere to the first, It concerneth not the written word only, but the word deliuered by mouth; which (sayth he) I spake to you, & is therfore impertinent, for it proueth not that all the spoken doctrine was written. Secondly though it did concerne the written word only, yet the speach of adding or taking a∣way, is (as Cartwright confesseth) to be referred only to the obseruing wholly of that which God commanded,In whit∣gift. Defence p. 124. that is, to do no more nor lesse then he hath commanded: which sense is yet made more playne with conference of the premisses, with this other like saying in the same Booke,Deut. 12.32. What I command thee, that only do to our Lord, neither add any thing nor di∣minish. Thirdly howsoeuer it be vnderstod, it can yet no more seclude the Apostles adding of their vnwritten Tra∣ditions to that which Moyses spake, then it doth seclude their adding therto of their written Ghospell, and the Pro∣phecies which were written after Moyses. Add further that S. Iohn (asExam. p. 202. Chemnitius confesseth) writ his Ghospell after the Apocalyps, and so addeth thereunto. But CaluinInstit. c. 14. replyeth, that the Doctrine of the Pro∣phets and of the new Testament, were not additions to the Law, but Explications therof (as being taught or contained in the Law, though not in particular, yet in generall.) But I suppose Caluinists will not deny, but that they belieue more then is written in the Law, and no otherwise doth the Law contayne them then in generall, and (as it were) virtually: but so likewise are Traditions conteyned therin, and so no Additions. M. Rogers alsoDef. of the Art. art. 6. p. 28. obiecteth these words of S. Iohn,Io. 20.30.31. Many other signes also did Iesus in the sight of his Disciples, which are not written in this Booke. And these are written that you may be∣lieue, that Iesus is Christ the sonne of God, and that belieuing, you may haue lyfe in his name, therfore all things are written that are necessary to faith. Answere. This so plainly concerneth
only Christs Miracles, and not the Doctrine which he taught, that D. Whitaker saith therof,De Scrip. q. 5. p. 619. It is euident that the Euangelist speaketh of the signes and Miracles of Christ, not of his doctrine. and so is altogeather impertinent. Secondly, though it should concerne doctrine, yet it concerned not the whole Scripture, but the only doctrine (as the Text sayth) written in this Booke, and is therfore also impertinent, vnlesse we will thence also inferre, that S. Iohns Ghospell only is sufficient to instruct vs to Saluation. Which sequele D. Reinolds well perceiuing, affirmeth therupon that,Conclu∣sions an∣nexed to his Conference. p. 686. There is con∣tayned in S. Iohns Ghospell, so much as is sufficient to fayth and sal∣uation; and that S. Iohns Ghospell alone is sufficient: wherof it fur∣ther followeth, that aswell the rest of the Scriptures, as also the institution of the Sacrament in formes of Bread and wyne, and all needfull doctrine concerning the same, which S. Iohns Ghospell doth not expresse, are not in his opinion necessary to Saluation: all which is most absurd & impious to affirme. It is further vrged, that the Scriptures do condemne Traditions, as, YouMat. 15.6. haue made frustrate the Commandement of God for your owne Tradition. And, BewareCol. 2.8. least any man deceiue you, by Philosophy & vayne fallacy, according to the Tradition of men. Answ. Such Traditions are not reprehended, as the Iewes receaued from Moyses, and the Prophets; but only such as they had receiued of later tymes, wherof some were Idle, others cōtrary to the Scriptures themselues, as WhyMat. 15.3. do you transgresse the Commandement of God, for your Tradition? And as here are condemned certaine Traditions, so before we haue heard others to be commended: which plainly ar∣gueth, that as some were forged, and contrary to Scripture, and so to be eschewed; so others were Apostolicall and to be obserued. ManyRogers Def. of the Art. art. 21. p. 118. much insist vpon those words of S. Paul,Gal. 1.9. If any preach to you besydes that which you haue receyued, be he accursed. Answ. Here by the word, besydes, is meant, against, or contrary, for so do both S. AmbroseAmbr. in hunc lo∣cum. Aug. l. 17. cont. Faust. c. 3. and S. Austine expound this place: Yea S. Austine sayth of this very text,In Ioan. ract. 98. He doth not say more then you haue receyued, but besides that
which you haue receyued: for if he should haue said so, he should haue wronged himselfe &c. And though D. Whitaker will not ac∣knowledge so much of this place, yetDe Scrip. p. 718. I confesse (sayth he) that  is sometymes fitly translated, Contra, against. And so doth the same word signify in the same Apostle,Rom. 16.17. in which place Erasmus, and Fulke in their Translation ther∣of, do translate it, Contra, against. Yea here the sense is so eui∣dent, that Piscator doth affirme the Apostle to meane, Do∣ctrinamIn Gal. 2.9. Euangelio aduersam, doctrine contrary to the Ghospell; which exposition these other words of the Text, Another Ghospell, do fully confirme. Secondly howsoeuer we vnder∣stand the same word, yet this place is meerly impertinent, as not concerning only the written word (which is the only thing wherof the question now is made) but such doctrine in general, as was preached. And that he did preach all need∣full thingsAct. 2.20.7. we stedfastly belieue, as a matter out of que∣stion: but that he, and other Scribes of holy Writ, did write all needfull things, is the very point in question, and that which we deny. Thirdly this maketh no more against Tra∣ditions, then it doth against sundry parts of the new Testa∣ment, which were written after this Epistle, which would make the Apostle himselfe & others, in danger of his owne Curse. LastlyRogers Def. of the Art. art. 6. p. 28. Morton Apol par. 2. l. 1. c 44. it is made their chiefe and common obie∣ction, that1. Tim. 3 16. All Scripture &c. is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in iustice, that the man of God may be perfect, in∣structed to euery good worke. And, From2. Tim. 3.15. thyne infancy thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures, which can instruct thee to Saluation. But the answere is easy and manifold, first, that wheras it is said, All Scripture &c. is profitable, the same prayse of being pro∣fitable, is attributed to euery part of the Scripture, as to the whole body therof, for by the Iudgment of all that vnder∣stand Latine, whatsoeuer is said of all Scripture, is vnder∣stood of euery Booke therof; and so indeed euery part of Scripture, and euery good Sermon, or spirituall Booke is profitable, but not sufficient to saluation. Secondly these places do not concerne the Scriptures of the New Testa∣ment, which were not then all written, but only the other of the Old Testament, which, sayth the Text, Timothy had
knowne from his infancy, for these and not the other were they, which Timothy had to study from his Childhood. A truth so cleere, that M. Henoch Clapham confesseth with vs, say∣ing,In the song of son∣ges, lecture 15. Nor was it other Scripture then the old Testament, which is commended to Timothy for able to make the man of God perfect vnto all good workes. And the same vnderstanding heere only of the old Testament, is made by Aretius,Loc. com. de Tra∣dit. loc. 82. p. 264. Swingl. Tom. 2. l. Ec∣clesiast. fol. 43. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 1. sec. 14. p. 88. Ochinus l. 2. Dial. p. 198. Treatise against the Def. of the Censure. pa. 325. Chem∣nit. Exam. part. 1 f. 38. Swinglius, M. Hooker and others: In so much as one of them percey∣uing therby, that this foresaid place is impertinent, vnlesse we will withall thence affirme, that the Old Testament only is sufficient, doubted not therfore to acknowledge that sense, and so accordingly to vrge the same, maintayning thereupon contrary to M. Hookers CollectionVbi su∣pra. vpon this place.In the Treatise a∣gainst the Def. of the Cens. p. 325. that the Old Testament is sufficient to Christian men, for their Saluation, without any other writ: to such Iewish absurdities do these impertinent Obiections dryue our Pro∣testants.
CHAP. VIII. The true State of the Question, concerning S. Peters Primacy. Whether Christ our Sauiour ordayned S. Peter Supreme Head or Pastour, not only of the Apostles, but of the Vniuersall Church. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. HAVING hitherto proued not the Scri∣pture alone, but the Church of Christ, to be our absolute Iudge of all Contro∣uersies in Religion, it seemeth necessary to find out the Head of the said Church, and to inquire somthing into his power & authority: concerning which in the first Nicene Councell it is sayd,Can. 39. Arabico. He who houldeth the Sea of Rome, is the head and chiefe of all the Patriar∣ches, seeing he is the first (or Chiefe) as Peter, to whome power is giuen ouer all Christian Princes, and all their people, as he who is the Vicar of Christ our Lord, ouer all people, and the Vniuersall Church of Christ: and whosoeuer shall contradict this, is excommuni∣cated by the Synode. The Fathers of the Councell of Ephesus auouch,Part. 2. Act, 3.
That no man doubteth yea it is knowne to all ages, that holy and most Blessed Peter, Prince and head of the Apostles, Pillar of Fayth, and foundation of the Catholike Church, receyued from our Lord Iesus-Christ &c. the keyes of the Kingdome; and that power of loosing and bynding sinnes was giuen him, who in his Successours liueth and exer∣ciseth iudgement to this very tyme, and alwayes. And agreably to this, weBellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 2. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in Io. 21.17. still teach, that S. Peter the Apostle was orday∣ned by Christ, to be in his place the Head and Prince not only of the Apostles, but of the whole Church, that so as Chiefe Pastour vpon Earth, he might gouerne the same in matters Ecclesiasticall. Points Disputable. It was a Point much disputed by S. Hierome and S. Austine, whether the thing, for which S. Paul reproued S. Peter, was truly any fault, though not in Doctrine, yet in conuersation or Gouernment. S. Hierome and others thinke it was no fault at all, nor any other thing, then what SaintAug. ep. 9. 11. 19. Paul did himselfe vpon the lyke occasion: But S. Au∣stine houldeth the contrary. Protestants Vntruthes. Act. 21.26.Tindall affirmeth, that,In Foxe Act. Mon. p. 1139. Paul by the testimony of Christ was greater then Peter. But it wilbe impossible to fynd out this Testimony of Christ. D. Whitaker auoucheth that,Controu. 3. q. c. 3. pag. 604. Wher∣soeuer mention is made of Peter, if we looke diligently into the place, we shall fynd nothing to be giuen to him, which doth not agree to other Apostles. But this in the Sections next following, we shall cleerly see to be most false. And againe,Controu. 4. q. 2. c. 2. p. 545. Peter is not a Rocke▪ because Christ doth not build his Church vpon Peter. A saying most direct against sundry playnest textes of the Scriptures themselues. Swinglius maketh our Sauiour to speake con∣trary to himselfe thus,De vera & fal. Relig. c. de clauibus. I will build my Church vpon this Rocke, not vpon thee, for thou art not a Rocke &c. Only Christ, not Peter, is the Rocke, vpon which the Church built, remayneth.
Protestant Doctrine. MostLuther in Assert. Art. 25. Calu Inst. l. 4. c. 6. §. 7. Magdeburg. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 7 fol 524. Protestants affirme, that S. Peter was only equall, and fellow with the other Apostles, nor superiour. And that the Gouerment of the whole Church was no more committed to him by Christ, then to the rest. For the tyme since the Apostles, Protestants greatly dif∣fer among themselues, forIllyricus Cent. 1. l 2. c. 7. some giue the supreme Go∣uerment of the Church to the Ministers and the Laity. Cal∣uinInstit l. 4. c. 11 §. 6. chiefly ascribeth it to the Congregation of Seniors or Ministers. BrentiusIn Pro∣legom. cont. Petrum à Soto. and sundry others, to secular Princes, men, women, or Children. Protestants agree with ancient Heretikes. The Councell of Constance condemned as hereticall this Article of Wiccliffe and Husse,Sess 15. Peter neyther was, nor is the Head of the Holy Catholike Church. And the same error was taught byApologia ad Ludoui∣cum Baua∣rum. Marsilius of Padua. Protestant Errors. Swinglius affirmeth that,In Ex∣planat. Art. 50. The Papists contend the Church to be built vpon Peter, which is playne Idolatry. Whitaker avoucheth thatControu. 2. q 2. c. 2. p. 455. The Church is not founded vpon Christ, as he was to be seene, but as he could not be seene. AndControu. 4. q 1. c. 2. p. 525. Christ was not a visible Monarch in the Church. Vallada affirmeth that,Apol. cont. Epis. Luzon. c. 5. p. 122. It is grosse ignorance to make Iesus-Christ the head of the Church, as he is man. Yea sayth Swin∣glius,Tom. 4. in Col. 1. It is impossible for a visible man to be head of the Church, seeing it is inuisible. So that now not only Peter and his Successours, were not head of the Church, but neither Christ himselfe, as he was man, and visible vpon earth. But if visibility and Man∣hood do hinder Christ from being head of the Church, It may seeme strange, that the same Causes should not hinder Princes and Ministers from the sayd Headship, which I thinke few Ministers, or other Prot. dare affirme.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that S. Peter was appointed by Christ the Supreme Head, not only of the Apostles, but of the vniuersall Church. THe oftenMat. 20.26. Mar. 9.34. Luc. 9.46. Contention had amongst the Apostles, who should be greatest, argueth that they had some notice, that some one of them was to haue Primacy. And though our Sauiour in sundry places doth forbid ambition in them, and amongst others, where he sayth,Luc. 22.26. Let the greatest amongst you, be as the least, and the chiefest, as he that ser∣ueth; yet euen here he secludeth not Primacy, but affirmeth rather that one is greatest and Chiefest, whom he instructeth to be humble. And this he illustrateth by the different Go∣uerment of the kings of the Gentils, who raigne ouer their Subiects, and of himselfe who wasLuc. 22.27. amongst them, as one that serued, and yet was their Superiour. Now, that this greatest and chiefest was S. Peter, it is playne by Christs directing his speach to him presently af∣ter, saying,Ib. ver. 13. Simon, Simon, behould Sathan hath desired you, to winnow you as wheat, but I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth fayle not, and thou sometymes conuerted, confirme thy Brethren. Here though the danger was common to all, yet Christ prayeth only and particularly for Peter, that his fayth should not fayle, preferring him likewise to be the confirmer of the rest. CaluinCalu. Inst. l. 4. c. 20. §. 7. replyeth that, Christ sayth,Mat. 20.25. Luc. 22.25. Mar. 10.42. but you not so, that is, you must not beare rule ouer the Church, which thing the Kings of the Gentiles do. But much more right∣ly may I conclude, if not so, that is, after the manner of the Gentiles, then some of them were to Rule, but after ano∣ther manner, to wit, that he that was greatest, should be as the least, and he that is the leader, as the wayter, to wit, by mild∣nesse, humility &c. he doth not say, none shalbe greater, none shall beare rule, none shalbe leader, but only that he that is such, let him be as lesser; yea he declareth this by e∣xample
of himselfe, saying,Mat. 20.28. Euen as the Sonne of Man is not come to be ministred vnto, but to minister.Luc. 22.27. And, I am in the middest of you, as he that ministreth. And yet he sayth of him∣selfe,Io. 23.13. You call me Maister and Lord, & you say well, for I am so. By which it appeareth, that nothing is heere said against Primacy in the Church, but only the best manner of vsing the same, is prescribed. This forme of Gouerment S. Peter himselfe after pres∣cribeth to Bishops,1. Pet. 5. Feed the flock, which is in you, prouiding for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucres sake, but voluntarily: not as though you were Lords in the Clergy, but that yee may be ensamples to the flocke. So cleere it is, that one amongst the Apostles was to be Chiefest and greatest, and this, S. Peter, and other Bishops succeeding him. And I verily persuade my selfe, that it is not vnwor∣thy of obseruation, that though we search into all Scriptu∣res, Councels, Fathers, and histories, we shall not find that any other of the Apostles but S. Peter, was thought or pre∣tended by any to be the chiefest ouer the rest, and ouer the whole Church. Another strong proofe of S. Peters Primacy, is taken from this promise of Christ made vnto him,Mat. 16.18.19. And I say also vnto thee, thou art Peter, and vpon this Rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynst it: And, I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt bind vpon Earth, shalbe bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on Earth, shal be loosed in heauen. Out of this place foure principall points may be proued; first, that Peter was that Rock or foundation vpon which Christ promised to build his Church. Secondly, that to be the foundation of the Church, is to be the Gouernour of the Church. Thirdly, that the sayd Peter it was, to whome Christ promised to giue the keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen. And lastly that by those keyes is vnderstood the full power of gouerning the Church. The first point is proued sundry wayes, as first by the pronowne (this) which demonstrateth some Rocke wherof Christ had spoken a little before: now, immediatly before
Christ had called Peter a Rocke, for he spake in Siriacke, in which language Peter signifieth a Rocke, according to that in S. Iohn,C. 1.42. Thou art Simon the sonne of Iona; thou shalt be called Cephas, which is interpreted Peter, or a Rocke, so that our Sauiour said, thou art a Rocke, and vpon this Rocke &c. Now the reason why the Latin Translatour saith, tu es Petrus, and not, tu es Petra, is because translating it out of Greeke, in which both , and , signity a Rocke, it was more con∣uenient to translate it by a word of the Masculine gender, as more agreable to a man. Secondly, as of the exchange of Abrams name to Abra∣ham, God expressed the cause to beGen. 17.5 for that a Father of many nations he had made him: so our Sauiour hauing changedIo. 1.42. Simons name to Peter, which signifyeth a Rock, giueth this reason therof, becauseMat. 16.18. vpon this Rock I will build my Church: and so to that end Simons name was changed to Peter, ther∣by to signify that Peter was the Rocke vpon which Christ promised to build his Church. ButRey∣nolds in his Conf. c. 2. diuis. 1. Bils. part. 1 pa. 63. D. Reinolds replyeth, that by Rocke is meant Christ himselfe, according to that of S. Paul,1. Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is layd, which is Iesus Christ. But this is insufficient, for though Christ be the first and principall foundation, yet in a secondary manner, both the Prophets & Apostles are called foundations by S. PaulEph. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14. and S. Iohn. And the same is also cleered and answered by S. Basil, who excellently teacheth, that,Concione de Poeniten∣tia. God imparteth his dignities, not depriuing himselfe of them, but en∣ioying he bestoweth them; he is the light, and yet he sayth, you are the light of the world; he is a Priest, and he annoynteth Priests: he is the Lambe, and he sayth, Behould I send you like lambes amongst the middest of wolues: he is a Rocke, and he maketh a Rock. So plainly doth he teach that there is another Rocke besids Christ. And immediatly before refuting this obiection, he telleth who this other Rock is, saying; Though Peter be a Rock, yet he is not a Rock as Christ is: for Christ is the true Rock, vnmoueable of him∣selfe, Peter vnmoueable by Christ the Rock. What more cleerly can be spoken to make Peter a Rock? And agreably D. Whit∣guiftDe∣fence. p. 300. teacheth that, names proper to God, are yet like in a se∣condary
sense, communicable to creatures. Agayn, the pronowne This, must relate to that which is nearer, which is Peter, not to the more remote, which is Christ: & what inconsequēce of speach would this be, Thou art Peter, or a Rock, & vpon my selfe will I build my Church? Lastly, the Church was already builded vpon Christ, and therefore if it had beene meant of himselfe, he would not haue sayd, I will build, which betokeneth a thing to come, but, I do build, himselfe being already a Rock. Luther and othersDe pote∣state Papae. & Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. Col. 175. yet reply, that by Rock is vnder∣stood Peters fayth, or Peters confession, not Peter himselfe: But for the true vnderstanding heereof, we must note, that this fayth or Confession may be considered two wayes, first with reference to Peters person, as if our Sauiour had sayd, vpon thee Peter confessing, and belieuing me to be Christ the son of the liuing God, will I build my Church; so that neither Peters person alone, nor faith & Confessiō alone, but both ioyned togeather do make the forsaid Rock. And this is but agreable with that Catholike Doctrine, which teacheth that Peters fayth in two regards is called the Rocke of the Church: first because for the merit therof, Peter obtained that he was to be the Rock of the Church. Secōdly, in that Peter is therefore chiefly the Rocke of the Church, that seeing his faith could not fayle, he was to strengthen and confirme all others in fayth, for so our Sauiour sayd to him,Luc. 22.32. I haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth fayle not, and thou sometymes conuer∣ted, confirme thy Brethren: Therefore, seeing that Peter by reason of this indefectible fayth, is a most strong Rock, sus∣tayning the whole Church, it is all one then to say, vpon Peter, and vpon his fayth, the Church to be builded, and in those respects, may we truly say, the Church to be builded vpon Peters Faith, or Confession. Now, the second way wherby Faith and Confession may be vnderstood, is barely of themselues without all refe∣rence to Peters person, and in this sense Protestants vrge it: but it is false, for then our Sauiour would not haue said, v∣pon this Rocke I will build, but, I do, and haue built my Church, for as then already many had belieued him to haue bene the
sonne of the liuing God, as the Old Prophets, the B. Virgin Mary, Simeon, Zacharias, his Apostles and Disciples. Se∣condly, Faith so taken is rightly said (according toSerm. 22. de verb. A∣post. S. Austine) to be the foundation of our Iustification, and all vertues, not of the Church; for the foundation and the rest of the building must be both of the same kind. Now the Church is a Congregatiō of men, as it were1. Pet. 2.5. of liuely stones, therfore the stone which must be the foundation, must be some man, not any vertue. Thirdly, all words of the Text do plainly argue, that some Priuiledge or peculiar authority was giuen to Peter for that his Confession; all which were taken away, if that only fayth of Christ (which was common as then to others with him) were only the Rocke of the Church. S. Peter then being the Rocke whereupon Christ pro∣mised to build his Church, the next thing to be declared is, that to be the Rocke or foundation of the Church, is to be the chiefe Pastor or Gouernour therof; that the foundation in a building, is as the head in a Body, a gouernour in a Citty, and a king in his kingdome. For the prouing herof we must note, that in holy Scriptures the Church or com∣pany of faithfull, is calledHeb. 3.6. the house of Christ, and1. Cor. 3.9. Gods building; now as the rest of the building in a materiall house, dependeth of the foundation, as vpon that which wholy vphouldeth it; so in that spirituall building of the Church (which Christ promised to found vpon a Rock, & which Rock we haue proued to be Peter) the same depen∣deth vpon that Rock wherupon it is founded. Now what other dependance can be imagined, betweene the rest of the Church, & Peter their foundation, then that vpon him, as a firme Rock, they should wholy rely in all matters of fayth and Religion, to be instructed, gouerned, and confirmed, & so euer vpholden and sustained in true fayth, against all the stormes of false Doctrines, and the Professours therof. But some reply, that as Peter here, is called the founda∣tion of the Church, so are likewise the Prophets & Apostles in otherEph. 2.20. Apoc. 21.14. places. Answ. They are called so indeed in three respects; first, in that they were the first, as well as Pe∣ter, that planted Churches, and conuerted Countryes to
Christ, in which sense they are so called in theApoc. 21.14. Apoca∣lyps. Secondly, in that the faith of the Church dependeth vpon the Reuelarion which the Prophets and Apostles re∣ceiued from God, and which they by their preaching and writing,, haue left to Posterity, and so they are called foun∣dations by S. Paul; and in these two respects all the Apo∣stles were equall. Thirdly in regard of Gouerment, for they were all Rectors and Pastors of the whole Church, but not in the same manner that S. Peter, he being as an Ordinary Pastor, from whom (as shalbe hereafterSee hereafter. proued) the or∣derly succession of true Pastors, was to continue vntill the end of the world, they only but as Apostles, or Legates for the tyme. And in this respect (which pertayneth only to the present Controuersy) as also in that Peter was the head or chiefe amongst the Apostles themselues, the Church is said to be built vpon Peter, & not vpon the rest of the Apostles. The third Principall point therfore remayning to be proued, is, That those words, To thee I will giue the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, are meant of Peter. And in truth so many words of the Text it selfe do so plainly show it, as a man would more admire, that any should deny it, then much trouble himselfe in seeking to proue it: for who rea∣ding, Blessed art thou Simon, the sonne of Ionas &c. And, I say al∣so vnto thee, thou art Peter &c. And, I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, would not say, that to Simon, who was afterwards called Peter, the said keyes were giuen? But some conceite, that whatsoeuer is here said to Peter belongeth to the whole Church, which he only at that tyme did represent. But for answere hereto, we must ob∣serue, that two wayes Peter may be said to beare the person of the Church; first historically, which is, when one hauing done a thing himselfe, doth also therin represent a thing to be done by another, as Abraham hauing indeed two sonnes, did therin also represent, that God was to haue two people, as S. PaulGal. 4.24. expoundeth. Secondly parabolically, when nothing truly done is proposed, but something alike is fey∣gned, to signify another thing, as in the Ghospell, he that sowed good seed, signified Christ preaching. And in the first
sense, it is true, that Peter as then represented the Church, in that to him were giuen the keyes, which after were to be Communicated to the Church: but this maketh not against, but with vs; vnlesse we will say, that Abraham had not two sonnes, because therein he represented God to haue two people. And that it is not to be vnderstood in the second sense, is plaine, aswell that euery circumstance doth (as it were) marke out the very particular person of Peter, as also in that to the same, it is said, To thee I will giue the keyes &c. to whom it is said immediatly after (verse 29.) Go after me Sa∣than, for the name Peter is alike in both places; and that by Sathan, is meant Peters person is playne, and for suchHilar. de Trinit. l. 6. & 10. & in Ps. 131. Aug. l. 2. cont. duas ep. Gaud. c. 23. acknowledged by the ancient Fathers, and all Protestants (in their knowne loue to Peter) do easily belieue it. Others obiect that Peter spake in the name of all the Disciples, when he said, Thou art Christ &c. And therfore he likewise heard in the name of all, To thee I will giue the keyes. Answer. Peter spake in the name of the rest, not as a Cryer, foreknowing what would be the answere of the rest, for neither had they giuen him that in charge, no norHilar. in hunc locum. & l. 6. de Trinit. Chry∣sost. hom. 55. in Math. Cy∣ril. l. 12. in Ioan. c. 64. Aug. Ser. 114. de Temp. Leo Ser. 11. de pass. Domini. & ser. 2. de SS. Petro & Paulo. con∣sulted with him therof, as many ancient Fathers do obserue; he alone knowing it by reuelation from God, according to that which Christ presently therfore said, Flesh and bloud hath not reueyled it vnto thee, but my Father which is in heauen: he is therfore said to speake in the name of the rest, because to that, which he as chiefe and head had vttered, they by their silence, gaue their assent, which thing maketh wholly for Peters Primacy. It is further replied, that as to AbrahamRom. 4.9 Fayth was imputed to iustice, so also it is imputed to all others that be∣lieue, therfore if Peter receiued the keyes because he con∣fessed Christ, then all such as confesse Christ, shall likewise receiue them. Answ. Abraham by fayth was not only iusti∣fied, but also madeRom. 4.17. a Father of many Nations, and yet all such as belieue are not made such Fathers. The answere therfore is, that faith of its owne nature doth lead and bring a man to Iustice, if other things necessary thereunto be not wanting, as Hope, Charity &c. But Confession of Christ
doth not of its owne nature lead a man to receiue the keys, for sundry other wayes might Christ haue rewarded Peter worthily for his Confession, if it had so pleased his heauen∣ly wisdome. Some demaund whether Peter dying, the keyes re∣mayned in the Church, or ceased with him? If the first, then they were giuen to the Church; if the second, then no man now hath authority to loose or bynd. Or thus, When the Pope is chosen, he eyther bringeth the keyes with him, or not; if the first, then he was Pope before he was made; if the second, from whence had he them? Did some Angell bring them from heauen, or rather did he not receyue them from the Church, to whome they were giuen in the begin∣ning? Answ. Peter, or the Pope dying, the keyes do not perish, neyther remayne formally in the Church but only as they are communicated to inferiour Pastours, but they re∣mayne in the hands of Christ: and when a new Pope is chosen, he doth not bring them with him, neyther are they giuen him by the Church, but by Christ, neyther by any new deliuery, but by his auncient Institution. Euen as a King when he doth place a Vice-roy ouer some Country, should withall make knowne, that it is his Royall pleasure, that the sayd Viceroy dying, the Country shall choose and nominate another, to whome he already giueth the same power and authority, as to the former. Lastly, it is obiected, that as heer to Peter are promi∣sed the keyes, so the same authority to be promised to theMat. 18.18. rest of the Apostles, Whatsoeuer you shall bynd vpon earth, shalbe bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer you shall loose &c. Answ. As before it is shewed in what sense they are truly called foundations, so heer likewise they are sayd to haue authority to bynd & loose, but that this was giuen to them, not as to ordinary Pastours, but only as to Legates for the tyme, and withall with certayne subordination to Peter, shalbe shewed heerafter. And I wish only, that it may be further obserued, that Christ speaking of one matter, to one person, in one and the same sentence, to whomesoeuer he made the first promise, to him he made the rest. Therefore
if he promised the keies to all the Apostles, vpon them all he promised to build his Church, and not vpon himselfe. Or if he promised to build his Church vpon himselfe, to himselfe he promised the keies of the kingdome of heauen, to him∣selfe he promised all power of bynding and loosing, which had bene as impertinent to our Sauiours discourse, as disso∣nant from truth: for Christ had all that power before giuen by his Father, when he was first sent. The last principall thing then to be proued, is, that by giuing the keies to Peter, is vnderstood the giuing of the chiefe authority ouer the whole Church vnto him; for by keyes, is vnderstoodIsa. 22.22. principality, as where the Institu∣tion of the high Priest Eliachim, being described, it is said, And I will giue the key of the howse of Dauid, vpon his shoulder, and he shall open, and there shalbe none to shut, and he shall shut, & there shalbe none to open: heere, by key is vnderstood Ecclesiasticall principality, whereunto pertayneth that,Isa. 9.6. And his prin∣cipality is vpon his shoulder; for therefore is Principality said to be vpon the shoulder, because the keyes (wherwith it is signified) were accustomed to be layd vpon the shoul∣der. Christs Principality also is plainly signified by keyes,Apoc. 3.7. These things sayth he that is holy and true, which hath the key of Dauid; which openeth, and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth. As also it is a common custome in politicke gouer∣ment, that when any Citty is yielded to any Prince, or Go∣uernour, the keyes therof are deliuered withall, in signe of their subiection. So our Sauiour to signify the ample power that he would giue to Peter ouer his Church, promised him the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. So many wayes it is proued cleerly, that by the foresaid words of our Sauiour vnto Peter, he therby promised to make him supreme head of his Church. To come therefore to the performance of the foresaid promise; S. Iohn telleth vs that,Io. 21.15. Iesus said to Simon Pe∣ter, Simon of Iona louest thou me more then these? he said vnto him; yea Lord thou knowest that I loue thee: he said vnto him, feed my Lambes. He said vnto him againe the second tyme, Symon of Iona louest thou me? he said vnto him yea Lord &c. he said vnto him, feed
my sheep &c. Here our Sauiours speach is so direct to Peter alone (as is manifest by all circumstances, especially by those words, Louest thou me more then these?) as all other speciall proofe therof is needlesse. Now, that by those words, Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep, the chiefe Ecclesiasticall power is gi∣uen to Peter, is proued first by the word Pasce, feed, which in Scriptures signifyeth to gouerne or beare rule; so where it is said, For out of thee shall come aMat. 2.6. Captaine, or as Prot.En∣glish, Bib. of Anno 1578. translate a Gouernour, which shall gouerne my people of Israel; in the Greeke it is , which signifyeth to feed: Now that there is vnderstood Christs Gouerment, & chiefe power ouer the people, is of it selfe manifest. As also it is saidMichaeas 5.2. from whence S. Mathew tooke that saying, Out of thee shall come forth vnto me, he that shalbe the Dominatour or Ruler in Israel; where the Hebrew word signifieth not, pascere, to feed, but dominari, to rule. In like sort it is said of our Sauiour,Apoc. 19.15. He shall rule them with a rod of Iron: in the Greeke it is , feed. So also Homer (l. 2. Iliad) calleth king Agamemnon , pastorem populorum, the Pastour of the people. Secondly, he is not properly said to feed another which in any respect helpeth another to meat, but he that proui∣deth and procureth meat for another, which is a thing pro∣per to a Maister, orLuc. 11.41. Gouernour, who is a faithfull steward and wise, whom the Maister shall make Ruler ouer his houshould to giue them in season their measure of wheat: So that it is his part to feed, who is appointed ouer the family for Steward and Ruler. Besides, it is not the part of a Pastour or Shepheard, only to giue meat to his flocke, but also to guide them, de∣fend them, gouerne them, and correct them when they go astray. Thirdly, no reason can be alleadged, why so seuerally it should be said, to Peter, To thee I will giue the keyes: and feed my sheepe, and that for his singular faith and Charity, if therby he had receyued nothing aboue the rest. Fourthly, by those words, My sheepe is vnderstood the whole Church of Christ, not any one or other part therof: for seeing without all restriction, the Pronowne, Myne, is
ioyned to the Nowne, Sheep, it manifestly followeth, all those sheep to be commended to Peter, to whom the Pro∣nowne Myne, extendeth: now, it is certaine that it exten∣deth to all, for there is not any in the Church, who will not glory himselfe to be Christs sheep. Besides when one dying saith, I leaue my goods to my Children, he excludeth none of his goods, nor any of his Children; further our Sauiour either commended hereby to Peter, all his sheepe, or none, or some determinate company, or some indeterminate: Now none will say, that he commended none, or some determi∣nately, for that is manifestly false; neither any indefinitely, for no wise Prouider doth leaue an vncertain care, when he may determinate the same, seing certaine confusion and per∣turbation ariseth thereby: yea to commend some, and not to determine which, is as much as to cōmend none; for which shall he feed, who knoweth not his flock? It remaineth therfore that Christ assigned to Peter euen all his flock to be fed, and consequently the rest of the Apostles themselues, seing they were part of Christs flock. D. Whitaker answereth hereto, that,Controu. 4 q 2. c. 4. p. 573. Christ com∣mended his sheep to Peter indefinitely, not to feed these or those sheepe, but sometimes these, sometimes those. Agreable to which sayth Beza,In hunc locum Is the word of God thus to be prophaned? Truly Christ did adde , not , (that is, all, not vniuersall) and the difference is knowne betwene indefinite, and vniuersall propositions. But all this is friuolous, for Prot. do limit propositions vni∣uersall, aswell as indefinite. And therfore Caluin himselfe shall answere this, telling them, thatIn 1. Ioan. 3.3. an indefinite speach importeth as much as an vniuersall. Wherfore if, as Whitaker con∣fesseth, Christ commended his sheepe to Peter indefinitly; he commended all, and euery one of his sheepe. Another proofe from Scripture for S. Peters Primacy, is taken from the manner of numbring the Apostles, which is commonly by beginning withMat. 10.12. Peter. Now the na∣mes of the twelue Apostles were these, the first Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his Brother, Iames &c.See also Luc. 22.8. Io. 21 2. Mat. 17.1. Mar 5.37. & 13.3. where∣as the order of the rest is often chāged.Mat. 10.2. Mar. 3.16. Luc. 6.14. Act. 1.13. Yea where two or three are but named, he is commonly the first,Mar. 5.37. Luc. 8.51. and
so in all other places, one onlyGal. 2.9. excepted, where it is sayd, Iames, Cephas, and Iohn. And yet it is not certayne whe∣ther S. Paul so said: for diuersAmbrose Aug & Hie∣ron. vpon this place, & in the text, & in their Commen∣taries. ancient Fathers both in the text and in their Commentaries read, Peter, Iames, and Iohn. But if we admit, that it should be so read, then, it may eyther be sayd, that it was so done, because Iames was Bishop of Hierusalē, where those three Apostles then were, or else that S. Paul did not obserue any order in this place: for that S. Paul knew that Peter was aboue Iames, may ap∣peare, in that in the same Epistle he sayth,C. 1.18. He went to Hierusalem to see Peter, not to see Iames, though he were in the same place, as also1. Cor. 1.12. he proceedeth ascending, and placing Peter next vnto Christ. Further, Peter is not only placed in the first place, but also is described as a Captayne or Prince of the rest; for as it is said,Apoc. 12.7. Michael and his Angels,Ib. vers. 9. The Diuell and his An∣gels; so it is sayd,Mar. 1.36. And Simon, and they that were with him, followed him;Luc. 8.45. Peter sayd, and they that were with him;Mar. 16.7. See also Luc. 9.32. Act. 2.14.5.29. 1. Cor. 9.5. Tell his Disciples and Peter. Neither can it be answered to these, that Peter is thus placed, either because he was first called by Christ, for that was not he, but his brotherIo. 1.39, 40. Andrew, or because he was the eldest in yeares, for Andrew was Elder, which thing ourCent. 2. l. 2. c. 10. Aduersaries acknowledge for proba∣ble, or else because of his excellent guifts; for eyther that is meant of those guifts which he had in regard of the Church, as that he receyued singularly the keyes, that he was made the foundation of the Church, and Pastour of all Christs sheep &c. or else it is meant of his personall guifts and ver∣tues: if the first, it maketh wholly for vs; not the second, for the Euangelists could not easily know, neyther durst iudge, which of the Apostles was most vertuous, for Iohn was called the Apostle whome Iesus loued, and Iames the lesse was of such sanctity as that he was called the Iust, and the Brother of our Lord. Lastly, it cannot be sayd to be ca∣suall, in that some one was to be put first in the Catalogue, aswell in that, as all the Euangelists euer put Peter first, so yet they keep no one certaine order in placing of the rest, ex∣cepting Iudas, who for vnworthines, they still place last,
as they do S. Peter for his preheminence, first; which argueth a speciall respect of Peters placing: as also in that S. MathewC. 10.2. calleth Peter, primus, the first, not reckoning the rest, one, the second, and another the third &c. but without all ob∣seruation of order: so that betwixt Peter and the rest he ob∣serueth order, because Peter was Superiour, and the rest In∣feriours; but amōgst the rest he obserueth none, because they were all equall amongst themselues: And of the word, Pri∣mus, cometh Primatus, euen as of Princeps, Principatus, of Con∣sul, Consulatus. This is so conuincing, that BezaIn his annotations vpon the New Test. of Anno 1556. in Mat. 10.2. for want of bet∣ter answere, barely suspecteth the word, first, to be thrust in∣to the Text by some fauourer of Peters Primacy. What if this word, Primus (sayth he) be added by some, who would establish Peters Primacy? And yet (sayth he) we fynd it so written in all Co∣pies. But if this might suffice for an answere, euery hereticke might euade all Scriprure, though neuer so cleere. But that you may better know this Beza, here he con∣fesseth that the word, first, is written in all Copies; and yet he will needs suspect, that it is thrust into the text by some friend of Peters. And yet Mar. 3.16. where it is only said; He gaue to Simon the name Peter, here himselfe thrusteth it into the Text, saying, And the first was Simon; and the same Addi∣tion is also made in some of ourOf Anno 1578. 1579. English Bibles. What a masse of Contrarieties may be found in this man? In the first place, where the word, first, is to be truly seene in all Co∣pies, there will he haue it to be added to the Text by some forger: here where it is not, he will haue it part of the true Text, and that because Matthew readeth so, and yet next before he suspecteth not Mathew, but some late Papist to haue read so. In the first place, there could not be, first Simon, because there is no consequence of second, third &c. here he saith, that is no impediment, because there be many exam∣ples of such speach, and namely in that place of Mathew. There it is not so, though all Greeke Copies haue it so: here it must needs be so, because Beza will haue it so, though it be only found in certaine odd Copies of Erasmus, which Erasmus himselfe, as Beza confesseth, allowed not.
If after Christ had giuen to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Apostolicall authority in common, saying, Whose sinnes you forgiue &c. Preach the Ghospell &c. he had neuerthe∣lesse said seuerally to Peter, Peter thou art not a Rocke, I will not giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, Thou shalt not feed my sheepe, Peter is not the first of the Apostles, and the like; what Protestant reading this, would doubt to affirme, but that the chiefe authority ouer the Church, were denied to Peter? Se∣ing then, in these Negatiue Propositions, they doubtles would affirme chiefe authority to be denied to Peter, they must like wise affirme by the contradictory affirmatiue pro∣positions expressed in Scripture, chiefe authority to be giuen to Peter. Lastly, it is not to be neglected, that diuers Priuiledges and honours were giuen to Peter, which were not giuen to the rest of the Apostles, at that he was the only man a∣mong the Disciples, thatMat. 1.29. walked vpon the waters with Christ: that he was the only man for whom ChristMat. 17.27. payed tri∣bute: In PetersLuc 5.2.3. ship, and not in the other did Christ teach: the Apostles in generall being asked by Christ, who he was, Peter was the only man thatMat. 16.16. answered: for him only Christ prayed,Luc. 22.31. that his faith should not fayle: To him on∣ly he said,Luc. 21.16. Feed my sheep: him only heMat. 16.13. calleth Peter, or a Rock and accordingly promiseth to build his Church vpon this Rock: Peter is the first that speaketh in the CouncellAct. 1.15. & 5.29. & 15.7. of the Apostles: he prescribeth ElectionAct. 1.22. to be made of one in Iudas place: he standingAct. 2.14. among the Eleuen, taketh vpon him to make the first Sermon to the people: When Ananias had fraudulently left a porion of his riches atAct. 5.2 3 5. the feet of the Apostles, Peter only rebuketh him, & inflicteth vpon him present death: Peter was the only man of all the Apo∣stlesGal. 10.18. whom to see, Paul went to Hierusalem: Lastly he is the only Apostle that hath the vsuall preheminence in the order of being first named, as is before shewed; In so much as when the Apostles are but spoken of in generall, yet of∣ten he only for honour sake is named. All which things be∣ing so peculiar only to Peter, from the other Apostles, could not be casuall to him rather then to the other, but purposely
obserued, and so set downe in regard of his knowne Pri∣macy. I will only add hereto, that seing the best Gouerment is acknowledged by all, to be Monarchicall, that therfore the Gouerment of the Church is to be by one supreme Pastour vpon Earth. And although CaluinInst. l. 4. c. 6. §. 9. replyeth, this not to follow, because Christ is the King and Monarch of the Church: yet this is insufficient; for though Christ be the true and proper Monarch of the Church, gouerning the same spiritually and inuisibly, yet the Church being corporall & visible, needeth some one visible Iudge, by whom Contro∣uersies in Religion arysing, may be composed, and who may keepe the other inferiour Prelates in vnity & due per∣formance of their offices. Yea this maketh no more against one supreme Pastour, then it doth against all other Bishops, Pastours, and Doctours, who by the same reason were needlesse, for Christ is1. Pet. 2.25. the Pastour and Bishop of our soule, he is our Maister whom we are commandedMat. 17.5. to heare; he it is, who baptizethIo. 1.33. in the holy Ghost. And therfore, as other Bishops and Pastors do that as Christes Ministers, which himselfe doth principally; so the like may be said of one supreme Pastor. Thus much of the plaine Texts of Scripture in proofe of S. Peters Primacy. SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholickes, in Proofe of S. Peters Primacy. NOw, that the ancient Fathers do expound the foresaid Scriptures agreably with vs Catholickes, in bhale of S. Peters Primacy, it shall sundry wayes appeare; as first con∣cerning the change of his name from Simon to Peter, which signifieth a Rock; S. Cvrill affirmeth, that,In Ioan. c. 11. Christ &c. fore∣tould that his name should not be mon, but Peter, aptly signifying by the very word, that vpon him as vpon Rock and firme stone, he was to build his Church. To the same purpose S. HilaryIn Math. Can. 16. saith most
eloquently, O happy foundation of the Church, in naming of the new name, and worthy Rock of that building, which should dissolue the infernall Lawes, and gates of Hell &c. O happy Porter of heauen, to whose arbitrement the keyes of Eternall entrance are deliuered &c. S. Ggory is so confident in this, as that he demaundeth,L. 6. Ep. 3. Who knoweth not that the holy Church is founded vpon the soli∣dity of the Prince of the Apostles seing the firmenes of his mynd he tooke in his name that of a Rock he should be called Peter? to whom by the voyce of Truth it is said: To thee I will giue the keyes of the king∣dome of heauen. These Faers show from the Scriptures, that therfore the name Simon was changed to Peter, which signifieth a Rock, because he was to be the Rock, vpon which Christ would build his Church. Now, that S. Peter was the Rock, vpon whom Christ would build his Church, it is taught by S. Chrisostome in these words,Ho, 55. in Mat. Our Lord sayth, Thou art Peter, and vpon thee I will build my Church: what more cleere then, Vpon thee? S. Hie∣rome auoucheth that,In. c. 16. Math. According to the Metaphore of a Rock, it is rightly said to him, I will build my Church vpon thee. S. Athana∣sius,Ep ad Felicem. As the diuine Scripture sayth truly, Thou art Peter, and vpon thy foundation the Pillars of the Church are strengthened. S. Ambrose,Ser. 68. & 47. & see S. Leo Ser. 1. de anniuersa∣rio assumptio∣nis suae ad Pontifiatum. If therfore Peter be the Rock vpon which the Church is built &c. These Fathers expresly teach from the Scriptures, that vpon Peter himselfe, as vpon a Rock, the Church was to be built. S. Austine maketh not only S. Peter, but euen his Sea after him to be the Rock, saying,n psal. cont. part. Donat. & de Bap. cont. Don l. 2. c. 1. Number the Priests from the very Sea of Peter, that is the Rock which the gates of Hell do not ouercome. And againe▪Ser 5. in fest. Pet & Pau & ser. 15. de sanctis. Ep. ad Quint. only (Peter) amongst the Apostles deser∣ued to heare, Amen, I say to thee, thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church; worthy truly who to the people, which were to be builded in the howse of God, might be a stone for their foundation, a pillar for their stay, a key to open the gates of the kingdome of hea∣uen. And eis where he sayth,In sal. 30. Con. 2. O Church, that is, O Peter, be∣cause vpon this Rock I will build my Church: kill and eate. S. Austines opinion in this was so cleere, that the Prot. Hamelmannus confesseth that,De Tra∣dit. Apost. part. 2. l. 3. Col. 622. Austine in his booke against the Epistle of Donatus, teacheth that the Church was founded vpon Peter, as vpon
the Rock, and he proueth this his opinion by the verses of Ambrose. S. Cyprian, no lesse plainly writeth:De vnit. Eccles. Our Lord saith to Peter, I say to thee that thou art Peter, and vpon that Rock I will build my Church &c. But to be briefe, the like is taught by the CouncellAct. 5. Orig. hom. 5. in Exod. Epiph. in Ancorato. Basil l. 2. in Eunom. Ter∣tul. l. de Praes∣cript. of Calcedon, Origen, Epiphanius, Ba∣sill, and Tertullian. Now that the Fathers thus expounding S. Peter to be the Rocke, did thereby vnderstand, that the supreme care of the whole Church was committed to him, it is euident by S. Chrysostome, who interpreting those words, Thou art Peter,Ho. 55. in Mat. affirmeth that Christ ordained him Pastour of the Church; And that, the Father placed Hieremy ouer one Nation, but Christ placed Peter ouer the whole world. S. Ambrose auoucheth that,Ser. 47. Peter is called a Rock, because as an immoueable stone he sustayneth the ioyning, and wayght of the whole Christian worke or building. S. Gregory teacheth that,L. 4. Ep. 32. It is cleer to all that know the Ghospell, that by our Lords mouth, the care of the whole Church is committed to holy Peter, the Prince of all the Apostles, for to him it is sayd,Io. 21.15, Peter louest thou me? feed my sheep. To him it is sayd,Luc. 22.31. Behould Sathan hath desired to winnow you as wheat, and I haue prayed for thee Peter, that thy fayth may not fayle, and thou sometymes conuerted, confirme thy Brethren. To whome it is said,Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuayle agaynst it, and to thee I will giue the keyes &c. Behould he taketh the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, power of bynding and loosing is giuen him, the care and principality of the whole Church is committed to him &c. These sayings are so pregnant, that if Bellarmine were liuing, he could not speake more fauourably for the Popes Primacy. In like sort whereas Christ sayd to Peter, Simon louest thou me, and Pe∣ter answered, Thou knowest Lord that I loue thee, and then Ie∣sus sayth to him, feed my sheep; S. Ambrose expounding these words, sayth,Ad cap. 24. Lucae. Therefore is he preferred before all, because a∣mongst them all, he alone professed his loue. But no man speaketh more expressely in this then S. Cy∣prian,De vnit. Eccl. (21) To Peter our Lord after his Resurrection sayd, feed my sheep, and builded his Church vpon him alone, and to him he giueth the charge of feeding his sheep; for although after his Resurrection, he
gaue his power alike to all, saying; As my father sent me, so I send you, take the holy Ghost, If you remit to any their sinnes, they shalbe remit∣ted &c. Yet to manifest vnity, he constituted one Chayre, and so dis∣posed by his authority, that vnity should haue origene of one: The rest of the Apostles were that Peter was in equall fellowship of honour & power, but the beginning cōmeth of vnity: the Primacy is giuen to Pe∣ter, that the Church of Christ may be shewed to be one, & one Chaire. Let vs heare S. Chrisostome,L. 2. de Sacerdoti. Why did our Lord sheed his bloud? truly (sayth he) to redeeme those sheepe, the care of which he committed both to Peter, and also to his Successors. And a little after, Christ would haue Peter endued with such authority, and to be farre aboue all his other Apostles; for he sayth, Peter dost thou loue me more then all these do? Whereupon our Maister might haue inferred, if thou loue me Peter, vse much fasting, sleepe on the hard floore, watch much, be Patron to the oppressed, Father to the Orphans, and husband to the widdowes: but omitting all these things, he saith, feed my sheep; for all the foresaid vertues may easily be done by many subiects, not only men, but also women: but when it commeth to the gouerment of the Church, & committing the Charge of so many soules all woman-kind must needs wholy giue place to the burden and greatnesse therof and a great number of men also. And wheras Christ said to S. Peter, feed my sheep.L. 2. de Consider. What sheep (sayth S. Bernard?) the people of this or that City? of this or that kingdome? My sheep (quoth he) to whom is it not manifest, he designed not some, but assigned all? no∣thing is excepted where nothing is distinguished. And the like is taught by S. Chrysostome, S. Austine, and S. Cyril, vpon this place, and by S. LeoEp. 89. ad Episcopos Viennensis Prouinciae. Max. ser. de S. Pet. & Pau. and Maximus. S. Austine speaking of our Sauiours paying Tribute for himselfe and Peter, interpreteth the words thus,Quaest. vet. & nou. Test. q. 75. They that receyued the didrachmes, say to Peter the Apostle: Your maister doth not pay the didrachmes &c. vpon which words they went to the maister, that he might pay for all his Disciples. But our Sauiour when he commandeth to pay for himselfe and Peter, seemeth to haue paid for all: because as in our Sauiour were all the Causes of Superiority, so after him all are contayned in Peter: for he ordayned him the head of them, that he might be the Pastour of our Lords flock. And a little after vpon those words.Luc. 22. I haue prayed for thee that thy fayth fayle not, he sayth further: It is euident that all are contayned
in Peter, for asking for Peter he is knowne to aske for all. Alwayes in the Superiour, the people is reproued, or commended. S. Hilary writing vpon these words, Goe after me Sa∣than, thou art a scandall to me, expoundeth them in this man∣ner,In Ps. 13. multo ante med. When he had spoken certaine things concerning his Passion to his Disciples, and Peter had detested this as vnworthy the sonne of God, Peter, to whom before he had giuen the keies of the kingdome of heauen, vpon whom he was to build his Church, against whom the gates of hell should nothing preuayle, who what he either loosed or bound v∣pon Earth, those should remayne eyther loosed or bound in heauen; This man detesting this Sacrament of his Passion, he receiued with this re∣proach, Go after me Sathan, thou art a scandall to me: for so great was his Religion (or care) to suffer for the saluation of mankind, as that with the reproach of Sathan he named Peter, the first Confessor of the sonne of God, the foundation of the Church, the Porter of the king∣dome of heauen, and for earthly Iudgment, the Iudge of heauen. Vpon these words of S. Paul,Gal. 1.18. After three yeares I came to Hierusalem to see Peter, S. Ambrose writeth,In Gal. 1. It was fitting that he should desire to see Peter, because he was the chiefe a∣mong the Apostles, to whom our Sauiour had committed the care of Churches. Yea according to S. Hierome,Ep. 89. ad Aug. c. 2. Peter was of so great authority, that Paul in his Epistle writeth, Then after three yeares I came to Hierusalem to see Peter &c. Shewing that he had not security of Preaching the Ghospell, vnles it were confirmed by the sen∣tence of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles that were with him. S. Chrysostome saith hereof,Ho. 87. in Ioan. 21. See also Oecumenius in Gal. 1. Peter was the mouth of the Apo∣stles, and the Prince and top of that Company, and therfore Paul went to see him aboue others. Lastly, wheras in the numbring of the Apostles it is said,Mat. 10.12. The first Simon, who is called Peter, S. Ambrose sayth hereof;In 2. Cor. 11. Andrew first followed our Sauiour before Peter, and yet the Primacy Andrew receiued not, but Peter. S. Bernard affirmeth, that,L 2. de Confid. c. 8. Peter walking vpon the waters, as Christ did, declared himselfe the only Vicar of Christ, which should be ruler not ouer one people, but ouer all, for many waters are many peoples. But the Fathers are so confessedly cleere in their expoun∣ding of the Scriptures for S. Peters Primacy ouer all the A∣postles, and the whole Church, that Danaeus for his best
answere vnto them, sayth,Resp. ad Bell. disp. part. 1. p. 277. They are not to be belieued, for the saying of Christ, Mat. 16. thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church, most badly they expound of the Person of Peter. A∣greably also confesseth CaluinInstit. l. 4. c. 6. Sec. 6. The Church to be built v∣pon Peter, because it is said, vpon this Rock &c. Some of the Fathers haue so expounded, but the whole Scripture gainsayeth. And if we will belieue D. Fulke,Confut. of the Pa∣pists Quar∣rels. p 4. Many of the Ancient Fathers &c. were deceiued to thinke something more of Peters Prerogatiue, & the Bishop of Romes dignity, then by the word of God was giuen to either of them. The Centuristes affirme that,Cnt. 5. Col. 1262. Leo very painfully goeth about to proue that singular preheminence was giuen to Peter, aboue the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacy of the Roman Church. But Protestants forbeare not to reproue, and charge with affected Primacy euen S. Peter himselfe, and the other next succeding to him Bishops of Rome, for thus write cer∣tayne Caluinists,Catalo∣gus testium veritatis. to. 1. p. 27. It may not be denyed, but that Peter was sometymes faulty in ambition and desire of power &c. By which infir∣mity of Peter, doubtles it was signified that those Bishops which bragged of Peters succession, were to be faulty of the like &c. Wherefore this so peruerse ambition of Peter, and ignorance of heauenly things, and ne∣gligence withall &c. did without doubt signify, that the Romane Bi∣shop, because he would be Chiefe, and heire of Peters priuiledges, was to be ignorant and a contemner of heauenly things &c. To the same purpose another Prot. sayth,Philip∣pus Nicolai in Comment. de regno Dei. p. 221. The affectation of Primacy, was a common Infirmity of the Apostles, as also of the first Bishops of the Citty of Rome. But that you may see that this clayme was not onely made by Popes, the Centurists confesse that,Cent. 3. Col. 84. Tertullian not without Errour (as they dreame) seemeth to thinke the keyes to be committed only to Peter, and the Church to be built vpon him.Cent. 3. Col. 84. Cyprian sayth euery where the Church to be founded vpon Peter,Cent. 3. Col. 85. Origen sayth Tract. 5. in Matth. Peter by promise deserued to be made the foundation of the Church: and Hom. 17. in Luc. he calleth Peter the Prince of the Apostles.Reten∣tiue p. 248. Fulke chargeth Opratus with ab∣surdity for saying of Peter, he deserued to be preferred before all the Apostles, and he alone receyued the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, to be communicated to the rest. So manifest it is, that all the Fa∣thers
of the Primitiue Church, belieued Peter to be the su∣preme Head of the Church. SECT. IV. That Protestants also do agree with Catholickes, in the Do∣ctrine of S. Peters Primacy. IOhn Husse proueth both by Scriptures and Fathers, that S. Peter was head of the Apostles & the whole Church.De Eccle∣sia. c. 9. The saying of B. Dionisius (sayth he) is true, that Peter is Chiefe among the Apostles, and was the foundation of Churches; And the say∣ing of Austine also is true, that he was first among the Apostles, accor∣ding to some Prerogatiue. And the saying of Marcellus is true, that Pe∣ter was the head of the whole Church &c. There were three vertues in which Peter excelled, fayth, humility, and Charity &c. from that fayth Peter receyued the burden of the Rule of the Church: And I say to thee, sayth the Rock, because thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I will build my Church &c. Peter was the first Vicar of Christ by him chosen, and deputed spiritually to the Church. Perzibranes Confession in this point is this,In pro∣fessione fidei. cap. 38. I con∣fesse that the keyes of loosing and bynding, of forgiuing and retaining sinnes, were giuen by Christ to the holy Church in B. Peter principally, and in other Apostles. D. Bilson alledging these words of Christ, He that is greater among you, let him be as the least, affirmeth that,Perpet. Gouern. c. 6. p. 53. In these words the Lord noteth a manifest distinction of some greater, some lesse, some chiefer, some lower. D. Sarauia saith of the forsaid doubt of the Apostles, and our Sauiours said answere,Diuers degrees of Ministers. l. 2. c. 21. p. 173. 174. Farre be it from me, that I should rashly condemne those good men of sacrilegious ambition, seing the Lord did not so much correct, as direct them in their demaund. And the like is taught by D.Def. pag. 70. Whit∣guift. Caluin speaking of the change of name from Simon to Cephas, or Peter, faith,In Ioan. 1. 42. The Euangelist reciteth as it were this Prophecy, that Simon should haue a new name giuen him. I call it a Prophecy, not only because Christ foresaw the Constancy of faith
which would be in Peter, but because he foresaw what he would giue him: therfore now he commendeth in words the grace which he resol∣ued afterwardes to bestow vpon him. He doth not therfore say that this is his name for the present, but differreth it to the tyme to come, Thou shalt be called Cephas, saith he, It is meet that all the Godly be Peters, who founded in Christ may be made fit to build the Temple of God: but this one is so called for his singular Excellency. D. Whitaker relating what himselfe and other Prot. thinke heerof, sayth,Controu. 4. q. 2. pag. 544. We do not deny Peter to be the founda∣tion of the Church, and the Gouernour, and we will grant, if they shall require, that to be promised him by Christ in these words. AndCon. Dur. l. 5. sect. 4. who doth not confesse Peter to be the Rocke and the foundation of Church? Reynolds acknowledgeth it to be true,Confer. Cap. 2. sec. 1. That the words of Christ to Peter do contayne this sense, vpon thee I will build my Church. Marcus Antonius de Dominis confesseth that,L 1. de Repub. c. 7. mum. 1. It is expressely sayd by Christ, speaking to Peter, I will giue to thee the keyes. Let them therefore be gone and depart, whosoeuer offering vio∣lence to this Text, do contend that the keyes are giuen or promised not to Peter immediatly, but Peters person excluded, eyther to the whole Church, or to another which is not Peter. Whitaker likewise saith,Controu. 4 q. 2. c. 4 p. 557. I grant, that to him (to wit Peter) the keys were truly pro∣mised, for that the place conuinceth, and I will neuer deny it. Who doubteth (sayth D.Resp. ad Apol. Bellar. c. 8. Andrews) that the keyes were giuen to him? So free from all doubt is S. Peters Primacy. D. Whiteguift alledgeth Caluin to say,Whiteg. Def. p. 373. The twelue Apostles had one among them to gouerne the rest; and he proueth it, in that there is,Ibid. p. p. 469. no Colledge without a Gouernour, no Society without a maister; & hereupon he further concludeth, saying, So should it not be any absurdity, if we should confesse, that the Apo∣stles gaue such preheminence to Peter. Affirming further himselfe, that,Ibid. Among the Apostles themselues, there was one chiefe &c. that had chiefe authority ouer the rest, that Schismes might be com∣pounded. Musculus auoucheth, that,In Whiteg. Def. p. 66. 68. Celestiall spirits are not e∣quall &c. The Apostles themselues were not equall, Peter is found in many places to haue bene Chiefe, which we deny not. But D. White∣gui is so full in this, as that he not only answerethIbid. p. 62. 63 65. 68. 70. 395. cer∣taine places of Scripture, obiected by some against Peters
Primacy, but also expoundethIbid. p. 70. 304. in behalfe of the same sundry of the said Scriptures before alleadged. And although he would euade something from our Catholicke Doctrine, by affirming that Peter was only as an Archbishop, ouer o∣ther Bishops in one Prouince, hauing Chiefe authority ouer the rest to this end especially, that Schismes and contentions might be com∣pounded: yet Cartwright heerto well replyeth, that by the same reason it necessarily followeth,In whi∣teg. Def. p. 380. that, for the keeping of the vniuersall Church in vnity, there is like necessity of one Bishop ouer all Christendome. Luther thinketh,In reso∣lutionibus. That Peter was first in order no man denieth &c. We confesse Peter to be the Prince of the Apostles, the first member of the Church, the head of the Colledge of the Apostles, and the rest which holy Fathers haue said of him. D. Field,Of the Church, l. 5. c. 32. We deny not but that B. Peter had a kind of Primacy and honour. D. Couell is so full herein, that he giueth the true reason of this Primacy, for hauing spoken ofAg. the Plea of the Innoc. c. 9. p. 106. one aboue the rest to suppresse the seedes of dissension, he sayth fur∣ther,Ib. p. 107. If this were the principall meanes to preuent Schismes and dissentions in the Primitiue Church, when the graces of God were far more aboundant and eminent then now they are: Nay if the twelue, were not like to agree, except there had beene one Chiefe among them; for saith Hierome, among the twelue one was therfore chosen, that a Chiefe being appointed, occcasion of dissention might be preuented &c. and then speaking of Puritanes, he vrgeth well, How can they thinke that equality would keep all the Pastors in the world in peace and vnity &c. For in all Societies, authority (which cannot be where all are equall) must procure vnity and obedience. Thus far in proofe that Protestants do teach from Scriptures, the Primacy of S. Peter.
SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture agaynst S. Peters Pri∣macy answered. SOme obiect those words of S. Paul,Gal. 2.11. When Cephas was was come to Antioch, I resisted him in face, because he was re∣prehensible. Ergo, Paul was not subiect to him. Answ. An In∣feriour may reprehend his Superiour, so that the matter re∣quire it, and due reuerence be obserued: and as for the fault heer reproued, Tertullian affirmeth that it was,De Praes∣cript. num. 7. Conuer∣sationis, non Praedicationis vitium, a default in Conuersation, lyfe, or regiment, not in doctrine. And S. Austine, and those that make most of it, thinke no otherwise of it. But S. Hierome and other Fathers deeme it no fault at all, nor any other thing then whatArt. 21.26. S. Paul himselfe did vpon the like occasion, & that this whole combat was a set thing agreed vpon bet∣weene them. It is a schoole point much debated betweene S. Hierome andAug. Ep. 9.11.19. S. Austine. Howsoeuer the Ancient Fa∣thers do answere this obiection. S. Cyprian sayth,Ep 71. ad Quint. For neyther Peter whome our Lord chose the first, and vpon whome be built the Church, when Paul disputed with him of Circumcision, challen∣ged insolently, or arrogantly tooke any thing to himselfe, saying, That he had the Primacy, and therefore the later Disciples ought rather to obey him. According to S. AustineEp. 19. c. 2. & l. 2. de Bap. c. 1.. That which was done of Paul profitably, by the liberty of Charity, the same Peter tooke in good part by holy and benigne godlines of humility, and so he gaue to posterity a more rare and holy Example, if at any tyme perhaps they did amisse, to be content to be directed by their Iuniors, then Paul to be bould and confident: Yea the inferiours to resist their betters for de∣fending the Truth of the Ghospell, brotherly Charity alwayes preser∣ued. And see the like answere inIn Gal. 2. S. Hierome andHo. 18. in Ezech. S. Gregory. Reynolds vrgeth that,Conf. c. 4. diuis. 3. the ApostlesAct. 8.14. Which were at Hierusalem, sent Peter and Iohn to the people of Samaria:Act. 31.35. The A∣postles and Brethren that were in Iury, called Peter to an account,
when he had preached to Cornelius, which seeme to argue, that he was not head of the rest. Answ. All mission doth not suppose superiority in the sender, for the holy GhostIo. 14.26. & 15.26. is sayd to be sent from the Father & the Sonne, and yet is in∣feriour to neyther: so also fellowes in Colledges, and part∣ners in Incorporations, do by Election, send some of their Company, equall in authority to the rest about their affai∣res. And others are sent by aduise and humble intreaty, as theIosue. 22. people of the Iewes sent Phinees the high Priest to the sonnes of Ruben and Gad. And thus the Councell may send the King to vndertake some enterprise for the good of the Common wealth. And thus was Peter by intreaty sent to the people of Samaria. And so also of curtesy, or charity ra∣ther, he gaue account why he preached to the Gentiles, by telling the vision he receiued of gods diuine pleasure therin, to instruct such of the Apostles, as doubted whether the ty∣me were yet expedient to admit the Gentils. Or it may be sayd, he gaue that account, to free himselfe from the calum∣niation of his Enemies, and scandall of the Iewes. It is further vrged, that the first Controuersy arysing in the Church, was not defyned by any one supreme Iudge, but by the Assembly of the Apostles and Seniors,Act. 15.6. The Apostles and Ancients assembled to consider of this word. Answ. S. Peter, who was the chiefe, was there present, who therfore, though S. Iames Bishop of that Diocesse being then present, did speake first in the Councell; which he durst not haue done, if he had not been the head thereof: neyther doth it impugne a Monarchicall Gouernement, that things be de∣fyned in a publicke assembly, with the common counsaile and consent of the Princes or chiefe Nobles. In like sort it is obiected, that S. Paul sayth to Bishops,Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selues, and to the whole flocke, wherin the ho∣ly Ghost hath placed you Bishops, to rule the Church of God &c. And the like sayth1. Pet. 5.1.2. S. Peter. Answ. It is not denyed, but that Bishops and Priests are to feed and rule the Church, e∣uery one being to take particular care & charge of the peo∣ple committed vnto him: but the question is, of the chiefe power ouer the whole Church, for which the forsaid places inforce nothing.
Others obiect that Christ alone is a head sufficient for the gouernment of the whole Church, and therefore no ne∣cessity that S. Peter, or any Pope should be esteemed as head of the vniuersall Church vpon Earth. Answ. Christ alone as our Supreme Lord and King, is sufficient to goerne all Empires, Kingdomes, Cittyes, armies, families, and flocks: and yet therefore we must not inferre, that Emperours are to be driuen out of their Empyres, Kings out of their king∣domes, Gouernours out of Cittyes, Commanders from their Armies, Maysters from their families, and shepheards from their flockes: wherefore in this as in sundry other things, we are to consider the sweet course of Gods Prouidēce, who vseth the concurrence of secondary causes in the productiō, administration, and preseruation of things. So that as he v∣seth the Sunne, the Ayre, the Raine, the Earth, as seconda∣ry causes and instruments for our corporall nourishment; so doth he vse man, as his Instrument, to instruct vs in fayth, to feed vs with his Sacraments, and to be our Gouernour and Commaunder in matters spirituall. And though it be most true, that Christ is the chiefe Head or Rocke of the Church, yet that S. Peter in a good sense might also be a head or Rocke, S. Basil doth teach vs saying,L. de Poenit. Though Peter be a Rocke, he is not a Rock as Christ is, for Christ is the true immo∣ueable Rocke of himselfe, Peter is vnmoueable by Christ the Rock: for Iesus doth communicate and impart his dignities, not voyding himself of them, but houlding them to himselfe, bestoweth them also vpon others:Mat. 5.14. He is the light, and yet you are the lights, he is the Priest, and yetLuc. 22.19. he maketh Priests, he is the Rocke, and he made a Rock. So weake are the Obiections which Prot. take from Scrip∣tures.
CHAP. IX. The true State of the Question, concerning the Bi∣shop of Rome his Primacy, in matters Ecclesiasticall. Whether the Primacy giuen by Christ to S. Peter was giuen also to his Successours: & whether the Bishops of Rome be the sayd Successours. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THAT the Primacy giuen to S. Peter, was to continue to his Successors the Bi∣shops of the Roman Sea, the Catholike Church doth constantly belieue. The Councell of Trent teacheth that,Sess. 14. c. 7. Po∣pes deseruedly in regard of the Chiefest autho∣rity giuen them in the whole Church, might re∣serue some more grieuous Criminall causes to their owne peculiar Iud∣gement. The Church in the Profession of our fayth directeth vs to say,Bulla Pij . uperforma Iuramenti Professionis fides. I acknowledge the holy Catholike, and Apostolike Ro∣mane Church, the mother and Mistres of all Churches, and &c. the Romane Bishop, the Successor of S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of esus Christ. The Decree of the Fathers of the Councell of Florence
was this,Sess. vlt. We defyne the holy Apostolicke Sea, and, the Bishop of Rome to haue Primacy ouer the whole world, and that the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of B. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the true Vicar of Christ, and the head of the whole Church, and the Father & teacher of all Christians, and that to him in S. Peter full power was giuen by our Lord Iesus Christ, of feeding and gouerning the vniuer∣sall Church, euen as it is contayned in the Actes of generall Councels, and in the sacred Canons. This decree was made by the con∣sent both of the Greeks and Latin Fathers present in that Councell. In the very Councell of Basill it was acknowledged, that,Respons. Synod. de au∣thorit. Conc. general. the Pope was head and Primate of the Church, the Vicar of Christ, and the Prelate and Pastour of Christians: from Christ, not from men or other Synods, to him are giuen by our Lord the keyes, & to one it is said, Thou art Peter; and he alone is called into the fulnes of power, others into part of the care &c. These thinges we plainly con∣fesse and belieue, and do intend to giue our diligence in this Councell, that all may belieue the same. In the first Nicene Councell it is said,Can. 39. Arab. He who houl∣deth the sea of Rome, is the head and Chiefe of all the Patriarches, seing he is the first (or chiefe) as Peter, to whom power is giuen ouer all Christian Princes, and all their people, as he who is the Vicar of Christ our Lord ouer all people, and the vniuersall Church of Christ, and whosoeuer shall contradict this, is excommunicated by the Synod. In the Councell of Ephesus, Pope Celestine is called S. PetersPart. 2. Act. 3. Successor, and he that houldeth his place. And in the Councell of Laterane it is taught, that,Conc. La∣ter. sub In∣noc. 3. c. 5. The Roman Church by our Lords Ordinance hath Principality of ordinary power aboue all others, as being the Mother and Mistres of all Christian Belieuers. In the second Councell of Nice it was decreed, that,Act. 2. Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles, who first gouerned the Apo∣stolicke Sea, did leaue the Principality of his Apostleship and Pasto∣rall care to his Successours, who are to sit for euer in his most sacred sea; To which successors Bshops he gaue and deliuered by Commande∣ment from God the power of authority, euen as it was granted to him by our Sauiour &c And the same Primacy of the Bishop of Rom and his succession to S. Peter, is taught by all Catho∣lickeBellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 2 c. 12. Rhem. Test. in Io. 21.17. writers of these tymes.
Points not defyned. SomePighius Hierarch. Eccl. l 4. c. 8. probably teach that the Pope cannot be an Hereticke, and consequently that he cannot in any case be deposed.Turre∣crem. l. 4. par. 2. c. 20. Others, that the Pope falling into heresy, though only interiour, is therby out of the Church and de∣posed by God, & for such may be declared by the Church. OthersCaietan. Tract. de au∣thorit. apae & Conc. c. 20. 11. that the Pope being a manifest hereticke, is not thereupon deposed, but may & ought to be by the Church. OthersDriedo de Script. & Eccl dogm l. 4 c. 2. p. 2. sent 2. Canus de locis. l. 4. c. 1. Bellar. de Rom Pont. l. 2. c. 30. and most probably, that the Pope if he be a ma∣nifest hereticke, doth therby of himselfe desist to be Pope & head, euen as he ceaseth to be a Christian and member of the body of the Church, and so may be iudged and punished by the Church. SomeCanus de locis. l. 6. c. 4. 5. 6 Driedo de varijs dogm. c. 4 part. 3. Turrecrem. de Eccl. l 2. c. 40. teach most probably, that by Christs Insti∣tution, the Bishop of Rome is, and so euer to continue, the successour of S. Peter in the care of the Vniuersall Church, OthersSotus l. 4. Sent. dist. 24. q. 2. Art. 5. affirme, that this Succession in the Sea of Rome, is only annexed by authority of the Church, & therfore by the same authority may be remoued to the Bishop of ano∣ther Diocesse, or to belong to no Diocesse determinatly, but to be an vniuersall Pastor of the vniuersall Church. But none of these are defyned by the Church. Protestants Vntruthes. Luther is not ashamed to say, that,In collo∣quus Latinis. Tom. 2. cap. de Papistis. The Pope teacheth foolishly Christes Priesthood, to be translated to the Pope the Vicar of Christ denying the Eternall Priesthood of Christ. Looke only vpon two Chapters of his Decretals, where with great Maiesty he extolleth him∣selfe aboue the authority of Scripture. In expounding them he giueth place to the Fathers, in defyning Causes, he preferreth the Authority of the Apostolicke sea, because he wilbe Lord of Scripture, not iudged by it. And in a Booke which he wrote but a yeare before his death, he affirmeth the Pope to say,L. aduer∣sus Papatum Rome fun∣datum. No man without me, my keyes and Masses can giue help; Christ and faith here can helpe no∣thing. Againe, Christ is drunke, foolish, mad, and forgetfull how great
power of bynding with keyes he hath giuen me. Also, be that doth not adore the Crackes of my belly committeth mortall sinne, and is worthy of hell. Yea he seriously affirmeth, that the Pope & all that adhere vnto him, do know nothing in the Scriptures, nothing of God, of Christ, of Baptisme, of the Eucharist, of the keyes, of good workes, and that without doubt no Ca∣tholicke knoweth any one of the 10. Commandements, or one Petition of the Lords Prayer, or any article of the Creed. But these are ouer grosse to confute. Chemnitius followeth his lying Father, auouching tha,Exam. Concil. Trid. See the like in Illiricus de forma & praxi Concil. Trident. The Fathers of the Councell say, that the Pope hath will for reason in those thinges which he willeth, that he may change the forme of Sacraments deliuered from the Apostles, that he may decree contrary to the Epistles of Paul, that he may dispense against the 4. first Councels, and against the words of the Ghospell. And this is as true, as if a man should say that Chemnitius were not a most impudent lyar, forger, and deceyuer. Rogers auoucheth Catholickes to belieue,Defence of the Art. art. 22. p. 122. that the Pope is God in that he can at his pleasure discharge guilty soules, both from the guilt of sinne, and from the punishment due for the same. In∣steed of this which Catholickes vtterly deny, they do indeed auouch that Luther, Rogers, and other Prot. writers, are knowne to be most lying Companions. Our English Prot. Church hath decreed, that,Art. 37. The Queenes Maiesty hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, & other her Dominions, vnto whom the chiefe Gouernment of all Esta∣tes of this Realme, whether they be Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill, in all causes doth appertayne, and is not, or ought to be subiect to any foraigne Iu∣risdiction &c. The Bishop of Rome hath no Iurisdiction in this Realme of England. Other Prot. deny this, affirming that the Church hath no other Head but Christ alone, for so the Heluetian Prot. say.Harm. of Confess pag. 309. We hould and teach that Christ our Lord is and remayneth still, the only vniuersall Pastor, and highest Bishop before God his Fa∣ther, and that in the Church he performeth all the dutyes of a Pastour or Bishop euen to the worlds end: and therfore standeth not in need of any other to supply his roome, for he is said to haue a substitute, who is absent: but Christ is present with his Church, and is the head that gi∣ueth
life thereunto. He did straightly forbid his Apostles and their Suc∣cessors all Superiority or Dominion in the Church. Againe,Ib. 310. We acknowledge no other head of the Church then Christ. And,Ib. 308. We do not allow of the Doctrine of the Romish Prelates, who would make the Pope their generall Pastour, and supreme Head of the Church of Christ militant here on Earth, and the very Vicar of Christ. So that according to these good fellowes, not only the Pope, but al∣so all Temporall Princes, are reiected from all Headship or Superiority in the Church, this being reserued only to Christ himselfe: And yet it isSee be∣fore Ch. 8. sec. 1. not long since they denied it to Christ himselfe, as man. Protestants agree with ancient Heretickes. The Clayme of Ecclesiasticall Primacy was condem∣ned in the Emperour Constantius, to whom the Catholicke Bishop Hosius said,See A∣thanas Ep. ad solitar. vitam agentes. Am∣br. Ep. 82.83. Zozom. l. 6. c. 7. Aug. Ep. 48.50.162.165. Conc. 3. Carthg. Can. 9. Do not intermedle in Ecclesiasticall af∣faires neither command vs in this kind, but rather learne those things from vs. God hath commuted the Empyre to you, and to vs those thin∣ges which belong to the Church &c. Take heed least drawing vnto you such thinges as concerne the Church, you be guilty of great crime &c. And againe, Who seeing him in decreeing to make himselfe the Prince of Bishops, and to be Chiefe Iudge in Ecclesiasticall Iudgments, will not iustly say, That he is that Abhomination of Desolation, which was foretould by Daniel. The Centurists also cōfesse thatCent. 4. Col. 549. Po¦lanus in Symphon pa. 836. & Ofiand. Cent. 4. pag. 477. Cartw. in Whitg. Def. p. 700. Emperours so metimes vnfittingly assumed to themselues the Iudgement of matters of fayth, which thing Athanasius reprehendeth in Constantius, and Ambrose in Valentinian. The sameSynod. 8. Can. 21. Conc. Roman 2. & 3. Platina in Nicolao. 1. Error is condemned in Photius Patriarch of Constantinople. AndBaron. An. 313. n. 30. Donatus the here∣ticke condemned by Pope Melchiades, appealed to the Em∣perour. Wicliffe and Huffe for denying the Popes Primacy were condemned by theSess 8. & 15. Councell of Constance. So directly do Protestants iumpe with Ancient Heretickes. Protestants Errors. Luthers Error was, that,In As∣sert. Tom. 2. Art. 30. Although S. Peter should go∣uerne
at this day at Rome, I will deny (sayth he) the Bishop of Rome to be Pope. For the Pope is a thing faigned in the world, neythes was, nor is, nor shalbe, but faigned to be. And,Ibid Art. 27. I permit that the Pope make Articles of fayth &c. as are, The bread and wine to be transubstantiated in the Sacramēt: the essence of God neyther to beget, nor to be begotten: The soule to be the substantiall forme of mans body: Himselfe to be the Emperor of the world, and the King of heauen & God vpon Earth: the soule to be immortall, and all those infinite Mon∣sters in the Roman dunghill of decrees; that such as his fayth is, such be his Ghospell, and such the faythfull and such the Church. And he placeth in the Margent, Articles made by the Pope. Swin∣glius also disliketh he Bishop of Rome, in that,De vera & fals. Relig. c. de clauib. To. 2. fol. 187. He hath decreed that the soules (of men) do not dye, when the body is extinguished. Who professing Christianity would hold in themselues such Atheisticall opinions, and condemne in o∣thers such certayne and generally receyued truthes? SECT. II. It is proued from Scriptures and reason, that the Primacy giuen to S. Peter, was giuen also to his Successours: & that the Bishops of Rome are the sayd Successours. THe first Argument in proofe that the Primacy giuen to S. Peter was likewise to be deriued to his Successours, and in them to continue vntill the end of the world, is ta∣ken from the Old Testament, where we fynd, that for the Synagogue of the Iewes, God still prouided one supreme Pastour, by whose authority Controuersies might be decy∣ded. So toNum. 20.28. Aaron succeeded Eleazarus, and toIud. 10.28. Elea∣zarus Phinees, and so of the rest: now we may not thinke, that the loue and care of God towards his Church, is lesse then was to the Synagogue. Neyther doth it suffice to answere withInst. l. 4. c. 7. Caluin, that the Synagogue, as also the Church in S. Peters tyme was contayned in a litle compasse, and therfore though one Pa∣stour was as then expedient, yet not so would it now be,
the Church being dispersed all ouer the world. Euen as if the tillage of one or two fields may conueniently be com∣mitted to the Care of one husbandman, would it thereupon follow, that the tillage of the fields of the whole world, might commodiously be committed to his Charge? This I say is impertinent, for the more dispersed the Church is, the more danger of dissentions, and thereby the more need of one Pastour, by whose authority Contentions may be com∣posed: proofe whereof may be the irreconciliable or euer∣lasting dissentions amongst Protestants, by not acknow∣ledging one supreme Pastour. The example also of the hus∣bandman proueth nothing, for though he alone cannot till all the fields in the world, yet the supreme Pastour of the Church, whose authority is spirituall, by committing to Inferiour Officers so much power as is sufficient for them, may well gouerne the same: yea it maketh as much agaynst the Bishops of seuerall Diocesses, for neyther can one hus∣bandman till all the fields in one Prouince. The same necessity of one Pastour euer to continue, is further proued two seuerall wayes out of those wordes of Christ to S. PeterIo. vlt. 15. Feed my sheep: first heerby he ordayned the Office of a Pastour, which is an Office ordinary & per∣petuall; for as the nature of the thing requireth, so long the Office of the Pastour must continue, as the fould or Sheep∣cote doth continue. Now this being the Church of Christ, doth and must continue vntill the end of the world: and Saint Peter being long since departed out of this world, can∣not as now feed the same in his owne person, therefore it must be done by his Successours. Secondly in that he sayth, my sheep, which euen vntill the end of the world will make one fould; now these, Peter being dead cannot by himselfe feed. And therefore S. Chrisostome demaunding,De sacerd. l. 2 init. Why Christ shed his bloud? answereth himselfe that, It was to gayne that flocke, the care whereof he committed to Peter, and to Peters Successours. Accordingly sayth S. Leo,Ser. 2. de Anniuers. Assumpt suae ad Pontifica∣tum. Peter continueth and liueth in his Successours. Agayne the Office of supreme Pastour was giuen to Peter for the good of the Chuch, according to that of S. Au∣stine,
L. de Pa∣storibus c. 1. In that we are Christians, it is for our selues, in that we are Prelates (or Superiours) it is for you. Now this good, is the preseruing of the Church in vnity, asL. 1. cont. Iouin. Cypr. l. de vnit. Eccl. Optatus l. 2. cont. Par∣men. S. Hierome teacheth; but in the Church there are now more Christians and worse then in the tyme of the Apostles, therefore there is the like, or greater necessity of one supreme Pastour. The Church is one body, which besides Christ hath a cer∣tayne head vpon Earth, as appeareth by S. Paul, who after he had taught the Churches to be one body, annexeth,1 Cor. 11.21. The head cannot say to the feet, you are not necessary for me; which cannot be vnderstood of Christ our head, for he may truly say vnto vs all, you are not necessary for me: But no other head can be assigned then S. Peter, and Peter dying, the body of the Church cannot be without a head, therfore som man must succeed him. Lastly, all arguments that proue the best gouernment to be monarchicall, proue also this. Now, that the supreme Pastour succeeding S. Peter is the Bishop of Rome, is proued first, in that there was neuer any one who affirmed himselfe to be the successor of Peter, or for such was accompted by others, but only the Bishop of Rome, & the Bishop of Antioch. Now the Bishop of An∣tioch succeeded not S. Peter in the gouernemēt of the whole Church, for succession to any is not but to him that yieldeth his place, eyther by naturall death, or by deposition, or gi∣uing vp of the same: whereas S. Peter yet liuing, & bearing rule himselfe, left the Church of Antioch, & placed his Sea at Rome, where he likewise dyed. Besides the Bishop of Antioch, had neuer but the thirdConc. Nicaen. Can, 6. place amongst the Patriarches, neyther euer sought he for a higher, whereas the Successour of Peter was doubtles to haue the first. Secondly, the histories of all ages do testify, that the Bishop of Rome hath exercised authority ouer all other Bi∣shops euen in forraine Nations, as by creating them him∣selfe, by confirming them created by others, by deposing them, by restoring them being deposed by others, by ap∣pointing them his Vicars, by finall decyding their Contro∣uersies, by accepting their appeales, by making lawes ouer all the Church, by dispensing in them, by inflicting his
Censures, by being President in Generall Councels and the like; All which do plainly proue him the supreme Pastour of the Church. SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe of the Bishop of Rome his succeeding S. Peter in the Primacy of the whole Church. GElasius affirmeth, thatIn De∣cretis cum 70. Episcopis. The Romane Church is preferred before other Churches, not by any Constitutions of Councels, but she obtayned Primacy by the Euangelicall voyce of our Lord, saying, thou art Peter, and vpou this Rocke &c. The Centurists say of Ge∣lasius, thatCent. 5. Col. 1274. he contendeth the Church of Rome by Gods law (iure diuino) to be the first (or chiefe) of all▪ in Ep. ad Brut. c. 11. S. Hierome writing to Pope Damasus saith,Ep. 59. ad Damas. I being a sheepe, do require from the Priest the Hoste of Saluation, and from the Pastor safeguard &c. I speake with the successour of the fisher &c. I following none first but Christ, am ioyned in Communion to thy Holinesse, that is, to the Chaire of Peter; vpon that Rock I know the Church to be builded: whosoeuer out of this howse eateth the lambe, is profane; whosoeuer shall not be in the Arke of Noe, shall perish in the deluge. Here S. Hierome acknowledgeth Pope Damasus to be the successour of S. Peter, and his Chaire, or Sea, to be the Chaire of Peter. S. Austine vseth against heretickes, this Argument of the Bishop of Rome his succeding S. Peter, saying,Ep. 165. If the Order of Bishops suceeding one another be to be considered, how much more certainly & indeed safely, do we number from Peter him∣selfe, to whom bearing the figure of the whole Church, our Lord said, Vpon this Rock I will build my Church. For Linus succeded to Peter, &c. Damasus to Liberius, Siricius to Damasus, Anastasius to Siricius. In this order of succession no Donatist is found. And writing to Pope Innocentius, he saith, WeEp. 92. thinke &c. that by the au∣thority of thy Holines, deriued from the authority of holy Scriptures, that they will more easily yield, who belieue such peruerse and perni∣cious things: So attributing the Popes authority to the Scrip∣tures
themselues. Againe,De vti∣litate creden∣di. c. 17. Shall we doubt to hyde our selues in the bosome of that Church, which &c. from the Apostolicall sea by succession of Bishops hath obtayned the height of authority; To which not to giue the Primacy, is truly either the greatest impiety, or head∣long arrogancy. Yea he teacheth further, that,Ep. 165. Although any Traytor in those tymes, had crept into that rancke of Bishops, which is continued from Peter himselfe to Anastasius, who now sitteth in the same Chaire, it would nothing hurt the Church and innocent Christians; for whom our Lord prouiding, saith of euill Pastours, what they say, do you, but what they do do you not. Lastly, this wholesome Counsaile he giueth to all Heretickes,In Psal. cont. part. Donati versus filinom. Come ye Brethren if you wilbe in∣graffed in the vyne, it is a griefe when we see you cut of so to lye. Num∣ber the Priestes from the Sea of Peter, and see in that Rancke of Fa∣thers who succeedeth another: that is the Rock which the proud gates of hell do not ouercome. S. Bernard writing to Pope Eugenius, amongst many other excellent thinges, saith thus:De Con∣sider. l. 3. ca. 8. & Ep. 190. ad Innoc. PP. Thou alone art not only the Pastour of sheepe but also of all Pastours. Thou demaundest how I proue this? Out of the word of our Lord. For to whom, I do not say of Bishops, but also of the Apostles, were all the sheepe so absolutely and indeterminatly committed? Peter if thou loue me feed my sheep, which? the people of this or that Citty, Country or kingdome? He sayth my sheepe. To whom is it not playne, that he did not assigne some, but all? nothing is excepted, where nothing is distinguished &c. To conclude, Iames who seemed a Pillar of the Church was content with only Hie∣rusalem yielding the vniuersality to Peter. The Fathers are so manifest for the B. of Romes Pri∣macy, that D. Bilson affirmeth, that,True Differ. part. 1 p 143. The ancient and learned Fathers call the Roman Bishop, Peters Successour. The Cen∣turists say of S. Leo,Cent. 5. Col. 1262. Leo very paynfully goeth about to proue that singular preheminence was giuen to Peter aboue the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacy of the Roman Church. But to be briefe,In Prae∣paratoriis ad Concilium. And see this in Chromerus de falsa & vera Relig. l. 3. We plainly confesse (sayth Bucer) that among the an∣cient Fathers, the Romane Church obtayned Primacy aboue others, as that which hath the Chayre of S. Peter, & whose Bishops haue almost alwayes bene accounted the Successours of Peter. So cōfessedly doth the B. of Rome succeed S. Peter in the Apostolicall Chaire.
SECT. IIII. That sundry of the learnedst Protestants do acknowledge, and teach the Primacy of the Roman Bishop. OVr very Puritanes do acknowledge and approue from Scriptures,English Puritanisme. p. 16. The high Priest of the Iewes was Typically & in a figure the supreme head of the whole Catholike Church: which though (say they) it were visible only in the Prouince and nation of Iewry; yet those of other Nations and Countries (as appeareth by the history of the Actes, euen though they were Aethiopians) were vnder this high Priest, and acknowledged homage vnto him. So that he was not a Prouinciall Metropolitan, but in very deed an Oecumenicall and vniuersall Bishop of the whole world &c. And therfore the Pope of Rome who alone maketh clayme vnto, and is in possession of the like vniuersall Supremacy, hath more warrant in the word of God to the same, then any Metropolitan, or Diocesan, not dependant vpon him, hath or can haue. So that by the word of God, eyther there must be no Metropolita∣nes and Diocesans, or else there must be a Pope. Heereof also sayth Carwright,In Whi∣teg. Def. p. 428. the high Priest was the head Priest ouer all the whole Church, which was during his tyme vnto our Sauiour Christ, and that therefore if by this Example we will haue an Archbishop, he must be such a one as shall gouerne the whole Church. The Centurists con∣fesse that,Cen. 1. l. 1. c. 7. In the Church of the Iewes there was by Gods Law one only Chiefe Priest, whom all were inforced to acknowledge, and to obey him. And the same is acknowledged byInst. l. 4. c. 6. §. 2. Caluin. Wicliffe submitteth his faith to the B. of Rome, as to the Chiefe Vicar of Christ, saying,Ep. ad Vrban. Sex∣tum apud Poxum. l. 1. Comment. I am plainly glad to discouer to euery one my faith, and specially to the B. of Rome; because I suppose that if it be orthodoxall, he will humbly confirme my faith, and if it be erroneous, he will amend it &c. I suppose also that the B. of Rome, seeing he is the chiefe Vicar of Christ vpon Earth &c. Perzibran the Hussites Confession is this,In Pro∣fessione fidei. I professe with a faithfull hart and mouth, that with all my will and desire, I am in hope and desire to be indeed wholy, inuiolably, and inseparably, a member of the holy Mother the Catholicke, Vniuersall, and Roman
Church, spread ouer the whole world, founded in the Apostolicall Seas by B. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and continued vntill this tyme, and so firmly strengthened vpon the firme Rock that the gates of hell can∣not any wayes preuayle against it. Husse himsele sayth,Questione de Credere. f. 170. We are not to belieue in the Pope, or the authority of the Pope; but we are to belieue, that the Popeis the immediate Vicar of Iesus Christ, & the Chiefe Priest here vpon Earth, by reason of his Office &c. hauing authority to absolue and excom∣municate, to giue Indulgences, and lastly of doing other things which belong to the keyes. In so much that in LuthersIn Assert. art 30. opinion, Husse seemeth not to withstand, but that there may be the Monarchy of the Pope. And Luther reproueth him, for that,Ibid. He did not resist the Popes Monarchy, but did attribute too much to the Ro∣man Idoll. M. Iohnson also sayth;In Ia∣cobs De∣fence &c. p. 13. Did not Iohn Husse, that worthy Champion of Christ, and others also of the Martyrs in former tymes say and heare Masse, euen to their dying day &c? Did not di∣uers of them acknowledge, some the Popes calling and Supremacy &c? Morgenstern confesseth, that,De Ec∣clesia p. 41. These thinges were pardona∣ble in the godly, who held the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and the head of the Church, the Papacy for the Church &e. Luther yet himselfe affirmeth, thatLoc. com. class. 1. c. 37. Whereas God would haue one Catholike Church throughout the whole world, it is ne∣cessary to haue one people; yea and of this one people one Father ought to be chosen. But yet more particularly he writeth to Pope Leo, thus,In resolu∣tionibus priorum Dis∣put. ad Leo∣nem decimum. Wherefore most blessed Father, I offer my selfe prostrate at the feete of thy Holynes with all that I am, and haue. Quicken, kill, call, recall, approue, reproue: I will acknowledge thy voyce, the voice of Christ ruling and speaking in thee. And in proofe of the Popes Primacy, he further sayth,In reso∣lutionibus a∣liarum propo∣sitionum. The first thing that moueth me that the Bishop of Rome is afore all others &c. is the very will of God, which we see in that fact, for the Bishop of Rome could neuer haue come into this Monarchy, without the will of God; but the will of God, howsoeuer it be knowne is to be receyued with reuerence: & therfore it is not law∣full rashly to resist the Bishop of Rome in his Primacy. This reason is so great, that though there were no other cause, yet this were suffi∣cient to represse the rashnes of those who resist. And cyted to Augusta before Cardinall Caietan the Popes Legate, he left this Protestation written: I Martin Luther an Augustine
Friar do protest to reuerence and follow the holy Roman Church, in all my sayings and deeds, present, past, and to come. But if any thing hath, or shalbe spoken contrary or otherwise, I do, and will haue it for not spoken. A good protestation, but badly performed. Melancthon doth acknowledge, that,Centuria Epistol. Ep. 74. p. 244. As certayne Bishops are president ouer certayne Churches, (so) the Bishop of Rome is President ouer all Bishops; And this Canonicall Policy, sayth he, no wise man doth, or ought to disallow &c. For, saith he furtherIbid. p. 245. And in Schlusselb. catal. haeret. l. 13. p 633. the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is profitable to this end, that con∣sent of Doctrine may be retayned: wherefore an agreement may easily be established in this Article of the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed vpon. And whereas I proued before, that S. Peter was head or Chiefe of the Apostles, and of the whole Church, D. Couell very pertinently sayth, IfAg the Plea of the Innoc. p. 106. it concerne all persons & ages in the Church of Christ (as surely it doth) the gouernment must not ceasse with the Apostles, but so much of that authority must remayne to them, who from tyme to tyme, are to supply that Charge. And D. Downham speaking of the Apostles and their tymes, tea∣cheth that,In his Sermon at Lambeth p. 79. Sara∣uia in his di∣uers degrees of Minist. c. 16. p. 44. The authority which they had &c. was not to end with their persons, but to be continued in their Successours. Hence with great reason D. Field teacheth that,Of the Church. l. 5. c. 32 p. 166. 167. Peter had a kind of Primacy of honour and order, that in respect therof, as all Metro∣politanes do succeed him &c. so the Patriarches yet more especially, and amongst them the Roman Bishops in the first place &c. as being chiefe for order sake, and to preserue vnity, and in such sort that all things must take their beginning from him. AndIbid. c. 35. p. 189. we willingly confesse the Roman Church to haue bene in Order and honour, the first and chiefest of all Churches. Yet more,Ibid. c. 52. p. 408. He that is in order first among the Patriarches with the Synods of Bishops subiect to him, may call the rest togeather, as being the Principall part of the Church, whence all actions of this nature take beginning. And lastly sayth he,Ib. p. 243. It is euident &c. that the Bishop of Rome as first in Order among the Patriarches, (assisted with his owne Bishops, and the Bi∣shops of him that is thought faulty,) may Iudge any of the other Pa∣triarches, that such as haue complaintes against them may flye to him and the Synods of Bishops subiect to him, and that the Patriarches themselues in their distresses may flye to him, and such Synods for re∣liefe
&c. By all which it appeareth that the Roman Bishop is confessedly the true Successor of S. Peter, & the supreme Pastor, or Head of the vniuersall Church. SECT. V. Obiections taken from Scripture against the Popes Prima∣cy, answered. SOme obiect hose words of Christ our Sauiour spoken to Pilate,Io. 19.11. Thou shouldest not haue any power against me, vnles it were giuen thee from aboue; wherby it seemeth that Imperiall power was giuen by God against him: and therfore much more the Pope, who termeth himselfe the Vicar of Christ, ought to be subiect to the power of Emperours & Princes. Answ. No man can dreame, that Christ who was God, & the sonne of God, was by right or any law subiect to any man, but that for the loue of man he voluntarily subiected himselfe to the Iudgment of Pilate, not therby giuing him any authority ouer him, but humbly permitting that which he had not of right, but of fact. And this he sheweth els∣where,Mat. 17.27. when being demanded Tribute, he proued that he was not bound to pay it, but yet that he might not scan∣dalize them, he caused it to be paid. And thus S. CyrilIn hunc locum. and S. Chrisostome do expound this place of S. Iohn, not of the power of Iurisdiction, but of Gods Permission. Others vrge that of S. Paul,Act. 25.10.11. At Caesars Iudgment-seat I stand, where I ought to be iudged &c. I appeale to Caesar. But if Paul acknowledge Caesar his Iudge, then ought the Pope to do the lyke. Answ.Turre∣crem. sum. de Eccles. l. 2. c. 96. Some affirme that Paul appealed to Caesar, because though not of right, yet of fact he was then Iudge. OthersPighius l. 5. Hier. Eccl. c. 7. thinke the difference to be great betweene Heathen and Christian Princes; for no Bishop is Iudge of the Heathen, but only of the faythfull, accor∣ding to that of the same Apostle,1. Cor. 5.12. What is it to me to iudge of them that are without? And so euery Bishop is subiect to his heathen Prince in all Ciuill causes, the law of Christ depri∣uing no man of his right and Dominion: & so1. Pet. 2. Rom. 13. tit. 3. S. Peter, & S. Paul, do exhort the faithfull to be subiect to their Prin∣ces, who were then Heathen: and accordingly S. Paul ap∣pealed
to Caesar as his Iudge, being accused of raysing sedi∣tion amongst the People. Now, Christian Princes hauing voluntarily vndertaken the lawes of the Ghospell, do ther∣by subiect themselues to the supreme Pastour of the Ecclesi∣asticall Hierarchy, as sheep to the Pastour, and members to the head, and therefore cannot now iudge him, but be iud∣ged by him. Others yet alledge, that in the old Law the King did Iudge and depose the high Priest, for so3 Reg. 2.27. Salomon de∣posed Abiathar, and substituted Sadoch: In like sort there∣fore in the new Law a Christian Prince may be Iudge and depose a Bishop. Answere. Salomon did not depose Abia∣thar, as a King, but as a Prophet, and the Executioner of Gods Iustice, doing this as the text sayth, that the word of our Lord might be fulfilled. Secondly, the similitude is not good, for seeing in the Old Testament, the promises were onely temporall, and in the New spirituall and eternall, as Saint HieromeL. 1. cont. Pelagianos. & Ep. ad Dardanum. Aug. q. 33. in librum Nu∣mer. & l. 19. cont. Faust. c. 31. & S. Austine teach; it was no meruaile, if in the Old Testament the temporall power were greatest, & in the New, the spirituall. But yet the Truth is, that euen in the Old Testament, the high Priest was greater then the King, as might be proued from theNum. c. 27.21. Leuit. 4.3.13.23.28. Scriptures,Philo l. de victimis. Theodoret. q. 1. in Leuit. Procopius in c. 4. Leuit. and the Fathers. It is yet further obiected, that seeing it is lawfull for a∣ny man to kill the Pope, if he should vniustly inuade him to take away his lyfe; much more lawfull may it be for Kings or Councells to depose him, if he should trouble the Commonwealth, or by his bad example endeauour to ruine soules. Answ. The consequence is not good, no authority being required for the resisting an Inuader, and defending a mans selfe, whereas to iudge, or punish, authority is ne∣cessary: wherefore as it is lawfull to resist the Pope, inua∣ding the Body, so also is it lawfull to resist him inuading the Soule, troubling the Commonwealth, or endeauoring to destroy the Church. I say it is lawfull to resist him, not do∣ing what he commaundeth, or hindering the Execution of his will; but it is not lawfull to iudge him, punish him, or depose him, because these only belong to him that is Su∣periour.
CHAP. X. The true State of the Question, concerning Antichrist. Whether Antichrist be yet come; And whether the Bi∣shop of Rome can be sayd to be Antichrist. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. FORMER ages not dreaming of so senseles a Paradoxe, as the Pope being Antichrist, there is not therfore in any ancient Councels any thing to be found concerning the same. But the vniformeBellar. de sum. Ponti∣fice l. 3. c. 1. &c. Rhem. Testam. A∣poc. 13. & in 2. Thess. 2. consent and doctrine of the Catho∣licke Church is, and euer hath bene, that Antichrist is not yet come, that he is to come neere the ending of the world, that he is to be one man, and to worke strange wonders, that his raigne is to be short, and sundry such like, which cannot be ascribed to any Pope that euer was. Points not defyned. Concerning the name of Antichrist, S. IreneusL. 5. thinketh it probable, that the name  may be applyed
vnto it, but more probable, that it shalbe called . O∣thersPrimasius, Anselmus, Richardus in hunc locum. Apoc. thinke, that he shalbe called . Others,Rupertus in Apoc. that these figures 666. shall not signify his name, but the tri∣ple preuarication of the Deuill to be fulfilled in Antichrist. OthersIren l. 5. Arethas in hunc locum Apoc. most truly acknowledge herin their ignorance, auouching that his name is not yet knowne. And most cleere it is, that the foresaid figures do agree with seuerall most di∣stinct Names. As touching Antichristes Character, somePrimasius, Beda, Ruper∣tus. affirme the leters wherewith his name is to be written to be the same.Hippol. Orat. de con∣sum. mundi. Others, the contemning, and abolishing of the Signe of the Crosse.Bellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 3. c. 11. Others professe their ignorance thereof. Some vnderstand by Gog and Magog, Heretickes.Aug. de Ciuit. l. 20. c. 11. Others by Gog the Diuell, and by Magog, Antichrists Ar∣my.Bellar. de Rom. Pont. l. 3. c. 17. Others, that the war of Gog & Magog shalbe the warre of Antichrist agaynst the Church. And that by Gog is signifyed Antichrist, and by Magog his Army. Protestants vntruthes. Hier. in Ezech. c. 38.Rogers auoucheth that,Def. of the Artic. art. 37. p. 210. The Pope doth performe no part of a Christian, but euery part of an Antichristian Bishop, in cor∣rupting the doctrine of the truth with errours and cursed opinions, in polluting the Sacraments of Christ by superstitious Ceremonies, in per∣secuting the Church and Saintes, with fyre and sword, in making merchandise of Gods heritage, in sittting in the Tēple of God as God, shewing himselfe that he is God, and exalting himselfe agaynst all that is called God, or that is worshipped. AndIb. Art. 37. p. 211. his Iurisdiction hath bene, and is iustly renounced and banished out of England by Kings and Parlaments, as by King Edward the 1. 3. and 6. by King Ri∣chard the second, by King Henry the 4. and 8. &c. There is not one Point heere auouched by M. Rogers which is not a grosse lye; and in particular, that the Popes Iurisdiction was not banished out of England by Kings and Parla∣ments, as Rogers pretendeth, will easily appeare, by view∣ing onely F. Parsons Answere to S. Edward Cookes Re∣portes. Caluin produceth seuerall reasons in proofe that the
Pope is Antichrist, as that,In 2. Thess. 2. He boasteth, that he can bynd Consciences with what law be pleaseth, and make them subiect to E∣ternall punishments: He at his pleasure either ordayneth new Sacra∣ments, or corrupteth those which are ordayned by Christ; yea altogea∣ther abolisheth them, that in place of them he may substitute those sa∣criledges which himselfe hath inuented. He deuiseth meanes of gaining Saluation altogeather different from the Doctrine of the Ghospell. To conclude, he sticketh not at his pleasure to change the whole Religion. What, I beseech you, is it to extoll a mans selfe aboue all that is repu∣ted God, if this the Pope doth not? If abhominable lyes were strong proofes, certainly these would demonstrate & con∣clude the Pope to be Antichrist. Protestant Doctrine. CaluinInstit. l. 4 c, 7 §. 23.24.25. Whi∣tak. of Anti∣christ. pa. 66. and other Prot. teach, that Antichrist is al∣ready come, and that not one man, but the whole succession of Popes for many ages, is the said Antichrist. A Point of such importance, that the Prot. assembled at Vapingum Anno 1603. did make it an Article of their faith, that,Article 41. they should belieue and defend the Bishop of Rome to be properly Anti∣christ, and the sonne of Perdition, foretold in the Word of God. WhitakerDe Ec∣cles, p. 144. Fulke in his Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 27. Downham of Anti∣christ. p. 4. and sundry other Prot. teach that, Boni∣face the third (who liued Anno 607.) and all his Successours to haue bene Antichrists. Rogers obiecting many Crimes against the B. of Rome saith,Def. of the Art. art. 37. p. 211. In respect of which fruites of impieties, the said B. of Rome in the holy Scripture is described to be very Anti∣christ, that wicked man, that man of sinne, the sonne of Perdition, and the Aduersary of God. But how absurd this is, and directly contrary to Scriptures, Fathers, and many others more lear∣ned Prot. I shall presently discouer.
SECT. II. It is proued by the Scriptures, that Antichrist is not yet come; and that the Bishop of Rome cannot be said to be Antichrist. IN cleerer Confutation of this foolish Paradoxe of the Pope being Antichrist, we must obserue that the word Antichrist, signifyeth one who opposeth himselfe to Christ; for the Proposition, , doth properly signify opposition; now because those thinges are not only said to be opposite, which impugne one another, but also those which are equi∣pollent, therfore  in composition, doth sometimes signi∣fy Contrariety, and other tymes equiualence, but neuer sub∣ordination, which the word Vicar doth, when the Pope is titled the Vicar of Christ. Againe, in Scriptures he is called Antichrist2. Thess. 2. who is extolled aboue all that is called God, and1. Ioan. 2. who denieth Iesus to be Christ, and affirmeth himselfeMat. 24. to be Christ, none of which is to be the Vicar, but the professed Enemy of Christ. And in this sense is vnderstood the word, . by HenricusIn his Thesaurus. Stephanus the great Grecian of Geneua. But to come to the matter it selfe, Christ our Sauiour sayth,Io. 5.43. I am come in the name of my Father, and you receiue me not, if another shall come in his owne Name, him you will receiue. Here our Sauiour speaking of Antichrist, (as FathersSee hereafter. next. sec. 3. gene∣rally vnderstand) opposeth not a kingdome or succession of men to himselfe, but another person, whom S. Paul calleth2. Thess. 2.3. The man of sinne, the sonne of Perdition; whom Christ also foretelleth, that the Iewes will receiue, which yet they ne∣uer did the Pope. S. Paul speaking of Antichrist giueth this good Coun∣saile,2. Thess. 2.34. Let no man seduce you by any meanes for vnles there come a Reuolt first and the man of sinne be reueyled, the sonne of Perdition, which is an aduersary, and is extolled aboue all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing himselfe as if he were God. This is spoken of Antichrist by our
AduersariesLamber∣tus, Anti∣christus, &c. p 75. Confession, & yet almost euery word doth conuince them. For first it is said, that there shall come a Reuolt, or falling away before Antichristes comming, which whether it be vnderstood of the Roman Empyre, (as sundryAmbr. in 2 Thess. 2. Hier. q. 11. ad Algasiam. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 10. c. 19. Cyr. Catech. 15. Chrysost. in 2. Thess 2. Fathers, and the Prot. PiscatorIn Epi∣stolas Pauli p 468. do thinke) or of Fayth and Religion (as some Prot. contrary to all Scriptures do imagine) is yet in neither sense performed before that tyme in which Protestants place Antichristes first comming. Secondly, these words, The man of sinne, the sonne of Per∣dition, he sitteth shewing himselfe, do signify one determinate person; and the rather in that the Greeke Article is prefiged, which doth determineEpiphan. haer, quae est Samaritano∣rum. the signification to one certaine thing: which is yet more manifest by those words of S. Iohn,1. Ep. 2.18. : where speaking of Antichrist, who is to be one man, the Article is set before, but speaking of Antichrist as it is taken for all such as any wayes impugne Christ, the Article is omitted. Thirdly Antichrist must be not only an. 2. Thess. 2.4. Aduersa∣ry to Christian Profession, but also (asIn Pauli Epistolas p. 245. Zanchius vnderstandeth the sayd words) an open and professed Ad∣uersary, such an one, as shallEp. Io. 2.22. deny the Father, and the Sonne, and extoll himselfe aboue all that is called God; shewing himselfe as though he were God, notDan. 11.37. caring for any God; And,Io. 5.43. will come in his owne Name, causing those to beAp. 13.15. slayne, that will not adore his Image. None of all which, yet did any Pope. Fourthly, he is to sit in the Temple of God, whereby is vn∣derstood the Temple of Hierusalem, which Antichrist will seeke to reedify. So S. Iohn telling that Enoch and Elias shalbe slaine by Antichrist, affirmeth, that,Apoc. 11.8. The Beast shall kill them, and their Corpes shall lye in the streetes of the great Citty (which spiritually is called Sodome, and Aegypt) where also their Lord was crucifyed. Whereby is euidently vnderstood Hieru∣salem, there, and not at Rome, Christ being crucifyed: the same also being called Sodome by the Prophet Esay in his vision concerningC. 1.1. Iude and Hierusalem, saying:Ib. ver. 10. Heare yee the word of our Lord, Princes of Sodome, giue eare to the
Law of our God, yee People of Gomorrha. Yea the word (spiritu∣ally) doth plainly argue, that thereby is meant one materiall and particular place, spiritually called, in regard of the wic∣kednes, Sodome and Aegypt. Fiftly, Antichristes Raigne must be but of short conti∣nuance, namely, as Christ preached but three yeares and a halfe; so likewise to Antichrist must be permitted no longer tyme for his preaching or teaching. This terme is mentio∣ned by the ProphetDan. 7.25. Apoc. 12.14. Daniel, and S. Iohn, to be A tyme and tymes and halfe a tyme: or as some Prot. translate,Dan. 12.7. in the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576. A tyme, two tymes, and halfe a tyme. For asIn Dan. c. 12. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 20. c. 23. Hier. in Dan. c. 7. Lyra (a naturall borne Iew) S. Austine & S. Hierome do obserue, the word tymes, without any other determinate number, signifyeth according to the Hebrew phrase, two yeares, & the word, tyme, in the singular number, one yeare: which sayd vnder∣standing of times for yeares, is made yet more euident by the same Prophet Daniel, who by the like phrase ofDan. 4.20. se∣uen tymes, signifyeth (as ProtestantsSee the Marg. No∣tes of the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576. in Dan. 4.31. And see Fr. du. Ion. in Reuel. 12. p. 151. themselues do vn∣derstand him) the seauen yeares of Nabuchodonosors chan∣ged Estate. To this yet further adde, that the continuance of An∣tichristes Persecution is elswhere explayned in a prescribed certaine tyme, not only of fourty twoApoc. 11.12. & 13.5. moneths, but also of aApoc. 12.6. & 11.3. thousand, two hundred, sixty dayes: both which do lite∣rally amount to the foresaid tyme of three yeares, and a halfe. Now, there was neuer any Pope which by any Prot. was imagined to be Antichrist, that raigned precisely three yea∣res and a halfe. Add also that the shortnes in generall of An∣tichrists raigne, is in many places of Scripture taught, as where it is said,Mat. 24.22. (his) dayes for the Elect shalbe shortned: that, heApoc. 12.12. hath but a short tyme: HeApoc. 17.10. must tarry a short tyme: HeApoc. 20.3. must be loosed for a little season. And lastly that Antichri∣stes raigneDan 7.9.10.12. A∣poc. 20.3.4. Mat. 24.14. 2. Thess. 2.8.1. Io. 2.18. is to be but a little before the end of the world. By all which it doth euidently appeare, that Anti∣christes Raigne must be but of short continuance, & ther∣fore Prot. making the Pope Antichrist, for these thousand yeares last past, do therby impugne the cleerest Scriptures. Now, wheras sundryChytraeus in Apoc c. 12 & 13. Bul∣ling. in Apo. c. 11. Ser. 46. fol. 141. & ser. 47. fol. 143. Deut. v∣pon the Re∣uel. p. 132. Prot. would euade by affir∣ming,
that in those foresaid numbers, of a tyme, two tymes & halfe, 42. moneths, and 1260. dayes, S. Iohn vseth a certaine number or tyme, for an vncertaine, not vnderstanding ther∣by indeed any definite certainty of tyme at all. This yet is insufficient, for though the numbers, 10. 100. 1000. should be vsed sometimes in the Scriptures for an vncertaine time, yet that course houldeth only in such like full and perfect numbers, wheras the other foresaid numbers now in exam∣ple or question, being each of them compounded of a mixt variety or inequality of numbers, as one, two and a halfe; fourty and two, and 1260. are vnlike to the other full and equall numbers, of 10. 100. 1000. And therfore not subiect to the like vnderstanding. Neither could that variety of numbers be to any end, if only an vncertaine number be vnderstood. But this is so euident, that, FoxeIn Ap. p 316. 365. Dan. cont. Bel. part. 1. p. 372. Nap∣pier vp▪ the Reuel. pag. 145 161. Brocard vp. the Reuel. fol. 110 123. Ford in Ap. p. 70. 71. 84. 87. with sundry other Prot. do all of them vnderstand heerby a cer∣tayne definite tyme, answerable to the euent thereby for∣tould. In the determining of which euent, Protestants do much vary amongst themselues; forCont. Bel. part. 1. p. 372. Danaeus, by a tyme, two tymes and halfe a tyme, vnderstandeth the 350. yeares, during which the Waldenses were persecuted. And byIb. p. 374. the 42. moneths, & 1260. dayes, he vnderstandeth three yeares and a halfe, in which Husse and Hierome of Prague preached.In Apo. c. 11. p. 304. 316. Ford in Ap. 11. p. 71. 84. Fox & Ford do by the 1260. dayes vnderstand the tyme of Herods first per∣secution: And by the 42. Months,In Ap. c. 13. p. 365. & Ford in Ap. c. 13 p. 97. & in c. 11. p. 70. Fox after great stu∣dy and doubtfulnes had thereof, vpon a suddayne recey∣ueth, to vse his words (arcano quodam admonitionis sibilo) by a certayne secret whispering admonitiō, the sense therof to be, a Sab∣both of yeares, which, sayth he, amount to 294. yeares, wherein the Primitiue Church was persecuted before Constātines time. By the 1260. dayes, and the 42. monethes BrocardVpon the Reuel. f. 110. Nap. vp. the Re∣uel. p. 43. 68. 145. 161. 168. 233. and Nappier do vnderstand the preuayling of the Papacy for the last 1260. yeares, since the tyme of Siluester and Constantine. So va∣riable and vncertayne are Prot. in their determining the tyme of Antichristes coming and Raygne. But supposing these different Interpretations were all of them true, as indeed not any one is, neither can any thing be
alledged in good proofe thereof, yet none of them do proue the Pope to be Antichrist: for first theSee the Prot. Apol. p 334. &c. 337. &c. Waldenses, Husse and Hierome of Prague, were in the opinion of Prot. con∣fessed Papists, and therefore in no danger to be persecuted by the Pope. But being truly heretickes, and holding sun∣dry grosse errours, which Protestants disclayme, and for which they were most iustly punished, this strongly argu∣eth the Pope to be a faythfull seruant of Christ, not Anti∣christ. Secondly Herods Persecution was before any Pope was. Thirdly the Persecution of the Primitiue Church, du∣ring the sayd supposed 294. yeares vntill Constantines ty∣me, was done not by the Pope, but by the then Heathen Emperours, who persecuted the then Popes of Rome. Fourthly the 1260. yeares of the Papacy preuayling since the tyme of Siluester and Constantine (the confessed antiquity of the Papacy being thereby deduced vp to the Ancient Fathers of those purer tymes) doth argue the Pope to be a true Bishop and Prophet, rather then Antichrist: as also the Church hauing bene grieuously persecuted before Constantine, if it hath also bene persecuted euer since till now, then the Predictions of the Prophets concerning the Churches florishing, quiet, and increase, were not as yet performed, which were wicked to thinke. But at Antichrists coming, the persecution shalbe such,Mat. 24.25. as was not since the beginning of the world, nor shalbe: In so much as then SathanApoc. 20.7. shalbe loosed out of his Prison, and shall go forth and seduce the Nations that are vpon the foure corners of the Earth: so that the persecution shalbe so much more grie∣uous then all former, by how much theSee hereof S. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l. 20. c. 8. 9. Diuell being loosed, and set at liberty, may tempt and tyrannize more then when he was bound: yea, as then the Diuine SacrificeDan. 12.11. See Iren. l. 5. Hier. & Theodoret. in hunc lo∣cum. shalbe taken away, which cleerly hitherto is vnaccō∣plished. And lastly the persecutions raysed by sundry Hea∣then Emperours, as Nero, Domitian, and Diocletian, did both for cruelty and number of persons persecuted, incom∣parably exceed all pretended cruelties of all Popes in all ages. The same also is confirmed by that of S. Iohn,Ap. 10. 1. 2. &c. The
Angell &c. apprehended the Old Serpent, which is the Diuell and Sa∣than, and bound him for a 1000. yeares &c. that he seduce no more the Nations, till the thousand yeares be consummate &c. And when the 1000. yeares shall be consummate, Sathan shalbe loosed out of his prison &c, and shall seduce the Nations &c. Heer though the nū∣ber of a 1000. yeares be vncertayne, as signifying more yea∣res, yet to signify fewer yeares it cannot: a thing so euident, that some Prot. doFr. d Ion. vp the Reuel. in c. 12. p. 153. accordingly affirme the same, colle∣cting thence that Antichrists coming is to beIb. in c. 20. Reuel. p. 257. after the first 1000. yeares from Christ. To which purpose also Hospinian speaking of the pretended corruption, which, as he affir∣meth, preuayled at the end of the 1000. yeares after Christ, sayth,Hist. Sa∣cram. l. 4. c. 2. p. 295. and see Ep. Dedic. Now began to draw neare the end of the Period of 1000. yeares, whereof Iohn in his Apocalips c. 20. writeth, then Sathan is to be loosed agayne. Willet affirmeth that Wicliffe taught the sayd 1000. yeares to endSynop. p. 63. Anno Domini 1600. And that then Antichrist should beginne to appeare.In Apo. c. 11. p. 245. & in c. 12. p. 346. Fox andIn Wil. Synops. p. 63. Wal∣ter Bruth thinke the sayd 1000. yeares to end 1300. Hence it now appeareth that most Prot. placing Antichrists coming within the first 1000. yeares next after this Reuelation (du∣ring which tyme at the least Sathan was bound not to se∣duce the Church) do thereby impugne the sacred Scriptures, and their owne other writers. Before this persecution to be raysed by Antichrist,Mat. 24.14. The Ghospell shalbe preached in all the world, for a Testimony to all Nations; so as no Nation may excuse its Infidelity. But this so generall preaching hath not yet been performed, as is eui∣dent in seuerall Kingdomes of the East and West Indies late∣ly found out, wherein no memory at all of Christ, or his Ghospell was found; neyther will it suffice to answere, that here it is not spoken of all the world absolutly, but only by a figure, the whole is taken for a part; for otherwise S. Paul should haue sayd vntrulyRom. 10.18. Into all the Earth hath the sound of them gone forth, and vnto the ends of the whole world the wordes of them. AndCol. 1.6. elswhere speaking of the Ghospell he sayth, In the whole world it is, and fructifyeth and groweth: AndCol. 1.23. is preached among all Creatures, that are vnder heauen. But Christ maketh this preaching in all the world, to be a signe of the
end thereof, for so he immediatly addeth, and then shall come the consummation; wherefore if this preaching were not taken to be properly in all the world, but only in some parts ther∣of, then it were no signe, for in that sense, in the first twē∣ty yeares after Christ, the Ghospell was preached by the Apostles in all the world: neyther in that sense could it be a Testimony to all Nations at the day of Iudgement. Besides, it was promised properly to Christ, thatPs. 71. All Nations shall serue him, and he dyed generally for all, and therefore in the (39) Apocalips, the Elect are described out of all Nations,Cap 7. and peoples, & Tribes: and in the same sense are these words vnderstood by S. AustineAug. Ep. 80. ad Hesych. Hier. & O∣rig. in Math. c. 24. S. Hierome and Origen. Now, to the place obiected from the Romans, S. Aust.Ep. 80. answereth, that S. Paul tooke the preterperfectēse for the fu∣ture, as Dauid also did, whose words they were: And that in the other place, S. Paul affirmed the Gospell, to be in all the world, not actually, but virtually, because the seed of Gods word was cast by the Apostles into the world, which fructi∣fiing & increasing, might fil the whole world, as one putting fire to seuerall parts of a Citty, may truly be sayd to haue burned the whole Citty, because he placed the fyre, which by litle and litle increasing, consumed the whole Citty. It may also be answered with S. HieromeIn Math. c. 20. D. Tho. in Rom. c. 10. and S. Tho∣mas, that the same of the Ghospell came to all Nations then knowne in the tyme of the Apostles, and that heereof only speaketh S. Paul. Enoch and Elias are reserued aliue, that they may op∣pose themselues to Antichist at his coming, and preserue the Elect in the faith of Christ, and at length conuert the Iewes; To which purpose it is said, BehouldMal. c. 4.5.6. I will send you Elias the Prophet, before the coming of the great and fearfull day of our Lord &c. EliasMat. 17.11. indeed shall come, and restore all thinges.Ap. 11.3. And, I will giue to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy 1260. dayes. Some answere that the words of Malachy are to be vnderstood of S. Iohn Baptist, of whom Christ said,Mat. 11.14. he is Elias that is for to come. But the truth is, that though S. Iohn Baptist, in regard of his office of being Precursor be∣fore
the first coming of our Sauiour, as also in regard of his preaching vnto the people, was called Elias, in that Elias is to be the Precursor before the second coming of Christ, & is to preach and conuert the Iewes; yet that the former wor∣des are to be vnderstood of the true Elias it is playne, in that the Prophet speaketh of the second coming of Christ, when he shall come to Iudgment, to wit, at the great and fear∣full day: whereas the first coming, when S. Iohn Baptist came, was not to iudge, but to be iudged, not to destroy, but to saue. Besides S. Luke explaineth the same saying,C. 1.17. And he shall go before him in the spirit and vertue of Elias; and our Sauiour himselfe, euen after S. Iohns death, auouched that,Mat. 17.11. Elias should come and restore all things. Some also reply, that by the two witnesses are vnder∣stood all the faithfull Ministers, which God rayseth vp in the tyme of Antichrist, as Luther, Swinglius, Caluin &c. But this is idle, for of the two witnesses S. Iohn sayth,Ap. 11.3.6.7.8.11.12. They shall prophesy 1260. dayes, cloathed with sackcloathes, they shall haue power to turne waters into bloud, and to strike the Earth with all plague. Antichrist shall kill them, and their bodies shall lye in the streetes in the great Citty &c. where their Lord also was crucified. And, after three dayes and a halfe, the spirit of lyfe from God shall enter into them. And, they shall go vp to heauen in a Cloud, & their Enemies see them: Now that all, or any of these particulars were performed in Luther, or any other Prot. Minister, I thinke no man will auouch. At Antichrists, coming his name and Character shalbe so knowne, as that,Ap. 13. 16. 17. He shall make all litle and great, & rich and poore &c. to haue a Caracter in their right hand, or in their fore∣heades. And, that no man may buy or sell, but he that hath the Chara∣cter, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name. Now what this name or Character is, hitherto is vnknowne. Antichrist, at his Coming will worke many strange si∣gnes and feigned miracles, his2. Thess. 2.9. Coming is according to the operation of Sathan in all power, and lying signes and wonders.Mat. 24.24. And both he and his MinistersAp. 13. 13. shall shew great signes and won∣ders: Yea he shall seeme to make fyreAp. 13.13. to come downe from heauen: and to makeAp. 13.15. the Image of the Beast to speake. In so
much thatAp. 13. All the Earth wilbe in admiration of him. Now neuer did any Pope worke such wonders as these. But the greatest wonder to me is, that so many men endowed with comon sense and reason as Prot. are, and professing to be∣lieue the sacred Scriptures for most true, should so directly contrary to all sense and reason, and to so many cleerest textes of sacred Writ, maintayne a Paradoxe so grosse and absurd. SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholikes, in proofe that the Pope cannot be Anti∣christ. S. HieromeEp. ad Algasiam. q. 11. Damasc. de fide. l. 4. c. 24. and S. Damascene, do interprete the word , to be one who doth emulate and op∣pose himselfe to Christ. The Centuristes confesse that,Cent. 5 c. 4. Col. 16. S. Austine teacheth the Etymology of Antichrist, in Epist. Ioannis, Tract. 3. He is called Antichrist in Latin, who is contrary to Christ &c. Some vnderstand Antichrist to be so called, because he is to come before Christ &c. It is not so said, it is not so written, but Antichrist, that is contrary to Christ &c. Likewise in Tract. de Antichristo, desi∣ring to know of Antichrist, first you shall marke why he is so called to wit, for that he wilbe contrary to Christ in all thinges &c. he will dis∣solue the Euangelicall law, and will recall into the world the worshi∣ping of Deuils. S. AustineTract. 29. in Ioan. himselfe expounding those wordes of S. Iohn,Hom. 15. in Io. 5. & Orat. 4. in 2. Thess. 2. Cyr. Alex. l. 3. in Io. c. 6. Am∣bros. in 2. Thess. 2. Ruf∣finus in Ex∣pos. Symb. Iren. l. 5. cont. haer. c. 25. He that speaketh of himselfe, seeketh his owne glory, affirmeth that, This shalbe he who is called Antichrist, extolling himselfe, as the Apostle sayth▪ aboue all that is called God, and which is worshiped: for our Lord declaring that he will seeke his owne glory, not the glory of the Father, sayth to the Iewes: I came in the name of my Father, and you receiued me not, another shall come in his owne name, him you will receiue; he shewed, that they would receiue Antichrist, who would seeke the glory of his owne name. And the same exposition of this place is giuen by S. Chrysostome
S. Cyril. S. Ambrose, S. Irenaeus, and Ruffinus. Concerning the tyme of Antichristes raigne, S. Ire∣naeusL. 5. cont. haer. c. 25. alleadging those wordes of Daniel, A tyme, tymes, & halfe a tyme, that is (saith he) three yeares and sixe monthes, in which Antichrist cōming, shall raigne vpon the Earth. HipolitusDe Con∣sum. mundi. & Antich. writing vpon those wordes of Daniel,C. 9 27. He will con∣firme the Couenant to many one weeke, and in the halfe of the weeke shall the hoast and the sacrifice faile, sayth: When Daniel said, he will confirme his Couenant to many one weeke, is signifyed seauen yeares. The Prophets shall preach halfe a weeke &c. that is three yeares and a halfe Antichrist shall raigne vpon Earth, after his king∣dome and glory shalbe taken away. S. Chrysostome affirmeth,Catech. 15. that,Ho. 49. ex c. 24. Math. operis imperf. Many Scriptures do signify, and especially S. Iohn in his Re∣uelation, that Antichrists kingdome is to continue three yeares and sixe moneths. Saint Hierome writing vpon the 11. Chapter of Daniel, teacheth that, Ours do better and more truly ex∣pound, that in the end of the world Antichrist is to do these thinges, who is to ryse from the Iewes &c. and is to persecute the Saintes three yeares and a halfe, that is, 1260. dayes, and after to perish vpon the famous and holy mountayne. And also,In Cap. 7. Dan. Tyme signifieth a yeare, Tymes, according to the propriety of the Hebrew speach, who also haue the Duall number, prefigure two yeares, and halfe a tyme sixe mon∣thes, in which the Saintes are permitted to the power of Antichrist. S. Cyril: Antichrist shall raigne only three yeares and a halfe, which we affirme not from Apocriphall Bookes, but from the Prophet Da∣niel S. Austine is so full herein, that he doubteth not to write, that,L. 20. de Ciu. Dei. c. 23. And ac∣cording to the Engl. Translation p. 823. he who being halfe a sleepe, readeth these thinges, may not doubt of the most cruel raigne of Antichrist against the Church, al∣though it is to be indured but a short tyme. For tyme, and times, and halfe a tyme, are one yeare, and two yeares, and a halfe. And by this it is manifest to be three yeares and a halfe; the number also of the dayes being afterwards set down: sometymes in the Scriptures it is declared by the number of moneths. S. Austine likewise affirmeth that he shall spring from the Iewes, saying.Tract. de Antichr. & de Benedict. Iacob. and see Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 416. As our Authors say, Antichrist shalbe borne of the people of the Iewes, of the Tribe of Dan, according to the Pro∣phet, saying,Gen. 49.17. Be Dan a snake in the way, a serpent in the path. This Prophecy is vnderstood of Antichrist, byIren. l. 5. adu. haer. Hip. Orat. de Consum saec. Ambr. c. 7. de bened. Pa∣triar. Aug. q. 12. in Iosue. Pros l. de praedict. q. 4. Theod. q. vlt. in Gen. Greg. l. 30. Mor. c. 18. Irenaeus,
Hippolitus, Ambrose, Austine, Prosper, Theodoret, Gre∣gory, and many others vpon the 7. Chapter of the Apoca∣lyps, where they suppose that S. Iohn did omit Dan, from amongst the Elect of the Israeliticall Tribes, in detestation of Antichrist to be borne of that Tribe. And certaine it is, that the Iewes will receiue and follow him for their Mes∣sias, as our Sauiour himselfe sayth,Io. 5.43. If another shall come in his owne name, him you will receiue; which maketh it very pro∣bable, that he shalbe a Iew borne, else they would not so easily admit him. The Fathers also teach, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of Hierusalem, and not in the Church of Rome. S. Cyril demaundeth,Catech. 15. What Temple saith the Apostle? In the Temple of the Iewes which is left: for God forbid that it should be in this, in which we are. S. Hilary affirmeth that,Can. 25. in Math. Anti∣christ is therfore called by Daniel, Abhomination, because comming against God, he challengeth Gods honour to himselfe &c. And, recei∣ued by the Iewes, shall sit in the place of Sanctification, that where God was inuocated by the prayers of Saintes, there he receiued by Infidels, should be worshiped with Gods honour. S. Gregory Na∣zianzen writeth:Orat. 47. As concerning this place, The Abhomina∣tion of desolation standing in the holy Place, they say, that the Tem∣ple of Hierusalem is to be built againe, and Antichrist is to be belie∣ued to be Christ, by the Iewes; and that he is to sit therin, and is to be thought to be the king of the whole world: But he shall come at the Desolation and ruine of the world. Arethas writing vpon the foresaid wordes of the Apocalyps, auoucheth that,In Apoc. 11. He shall cast their bodies vnburyed into the streetes of Hierusalem: for there shall he raigne as king of the Iewes. And the like is taught by S. IrenaeusL. 5. c. 30. Hipol. l. de Consum. mundi. and Hypolitus. Concerning Enoch and Elias their Coming to resist Antichrist, S. Ambrose writing vpon these wordes of S. Paul,1. Cor. 4.9. I thinke that God hath shewed vs Apostles the last, as it were deputed to death, expoundeth them thus:In. 1. Cor. 4. This ther∣fore doth he apply to his person, because he was alwayes in need, suffe∣ring persecutions and pressures aboue the rest, euen as Enoch & Elias are to suffer, who are to be Apostles in the last tyme for they are to be sent before Christ to prepare the people of God and to strengthen all
Churches for the resisting of Antichrist, who, the Apocalyps doth te∣stify,  suffer Persecution, and be slayne. And the like is taught mt plainly byDe Ciu. Dei l. 20. c. 29. S. Austine, saying, That Elias shall conuert the Iewes to Christ, vltimo tempore, before the end of the world &c. is most commonly belieued and taught of vs Christians, and is held as a point of Infallible truth, for we may well hope of the comming of him before the Iudgment of Christ, whom we do truly be∣lieue to liue in body at this houre, without euer hauing tasted of Death. But the Ancient Fathers were so wholy Romane Ca∣tholike in this Point, as that Fulke confesseth, saying,Ag. Rhem. Test. in 2. Thess. 2.3. Indeed most of the Ancient Fathers did Iudge that the Romane Em∣pire should first be decayed, before Antichrist were reueyled. Wher∣of also sayth Caluin,In Thes. 2.3. For as much as they haue expounded this place, of the defection of the Romane Empire, it is more friuolous then that it needeth any long Confutation: and I do meruayle that so many writers, otherwise learned and witty, haue bene deceyued in so easy a thing, but that when one had erred, the rest without Iudge∣ment followed the troupe. Of this also write the Centurists,Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 420. Austine in his Treatise of Antichrist, declareth in few words the tyme of Antichristes comming, therefore the Apostle Paul from hence affir∣meth, Antichrist not to come before into the world, vnles first a de∣parture shall come, that is, vnlesse all Kingdomes shall depart from the Romane Empyre, which were before subiect vnto it. So many se∣erall wayes do the Ancient Fathers testify from the Scrip∣tures, that the Pope is not Antichrist. SECT. IIII. That Prot. agree with Catholikes in the Doctrine of the Pope not being Antichrist. THough nothing be more frequently declaimed in Prot. Pulpits, thē the Pope being Antichrist; yet how much that foolery is disclaymed by the learnedst Prot. Writers, this present Section shall testify. M. Foxe writing vpon the 11. Chapter of the Apocalyps, where S. Iohn mentio∣neth
Antichrists Raigne to be (42) moneths, acknowledgeth that,In Ap. c. 11. p. 239. & in c. 12. p. 347. 347. And Fr. du Ion. vp the Reuel. in c. 20. p. 257. 258. It cannot be that a long tyme should be figured by the same short tyme, for by a short tyme, a short tyme is signifyed; to which end he also alledgeth the testimonies of Lambertus & Chy∣traeus. Wherefore it cannot be imagined, that the Popes of Rome for so many hundred yeares to haue bene Antichrists. Bucer is of opinion that MahometLiber Psalmorum, 5. in Ps. 22. fo. 146. 147. is that very Antichrist, who for many ages hath subiected most Nations of the (belieuing) Gentiles vnto the bondage of Sathan. Fox affirmeth that,Act. & Mon. p. 739. Al∣though, as S. Iohn sayth, there be many Antichrists, which are fore∣runners, yet to speake of the head and principall Antichrist he is to come in the later end of the world, whereby is meant no doubt the Turke. And he maketh the like exposition ofIb. p. 743. Sathan being loosed at the end of the 1000. yeares, which he vnderstandeth to be directly meant of the Turke, and but Anagogically of the Pope. Peter Martyr determineth as wellCom. plac. pa. 351. Mahomet, as the Pope to be Antichrist. ZanchiusIn Ep. Pauli ad Phil. Col. &c. p. 245. hauing recyted the opinion both of the Papists and Prot. concludeth, thatIb. p. 246. It may not be denyed, but that neere the end of the world, a certaine man shall aryse in the Church of Christ, who shall exceed all the other Antichristes in ma∣lice, power, and other wickednes: And of this man may be vnderstood the Prophecy of Iohn and Daniel, of 3. yeares and a halfe, in which he shall raigne. Lambertus in his Treatise much commended by Fox,In Apoc. c. 11. p. 239. affirmeth thatSee An∣tichristus siue progn. finis mundi p. 74. Antichrist is not yet come: and that the foresaid placeIb p. 75. to the Thessalonians, is to be vnderstood of an open professed Enemy; as also thatIb. p. 79. the Pope although he doth (in his opinion) corrupt with his lyes, the true sense of the Myste∣ries of faith; yet for so much, as he doth not openly forbid to belieue them, he therfore is not that great Antichrist. For which beliefe D. Doue reproueth some of his owne Brethren, saying,Serm. of the second Comming of Christ & the disclo∣sing of Anti∣christ versus fin. Some learned Prot. being ouer much modest, make a doubt whether Antichrist be yet reueyled or not. Add hereunto that such Prot. as do absolutely affirme the Pope to be Antichrist, do yet mainly differ in the assi∣gning of the Man, or the tyme of his comming: for first, Fulke,Answer. to a Coun∣terf. Cath. p. 36. Whi∣tak. of An∣tich. p. 66. Willet Sy∣nop. p. 160. Perkins vp. the Creed. p. 307. Whitaker, and others do giue instance of Boni∣face
the third Anno 607. Nappier collecteth the yeare of his comming, to be aboutVp. the Reuel. p. 66. 68. Anno 313. and that PopeIb. p. 43. Siluester was the man. Bullingers Iudgment is, that Anti∣christ should appeareIn Apo. in c. 13. ser. 61. fol. 198. that fatall yeare of our Lord 763. And another Prot. wryterFr. du Ion. vp. the Reuel. in. c. 20. p 257. assigneth yet a longer time, and nameth Hildebrand (who was Gregory the seauenth) and who liuedCow∣pers Chron. f. 197. 199. 1074. FoxIn Apo. p. 98. 245. 346. 347. thinketh his comming to be Anno 300. So variable is the Collection which Prot. make from Scriptures, concerning the person, and tyme of Antichrist: Wheras no doubt, at his comming, he will be easily knowne by reason of the great wonders he shall worke, the strange persecutions he shall rayse, and sundry such like, so plainly foretould vs by the Scriptures themsel∣ues. And yet this their confessed incertainty notwithstan∣ding, Fox termeth this point,In Apo. c 11. p. 326. the head, and body of all Controuersies. But the Premises considered, I thinke I may more truly terme it a mere fiction, begunne vpon splene or choller, and desperatly continued without Scripture, or reason. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures that the Pope is Antichrist, answered. SVndryFulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Ap. 17. sec. 7. Nap. vpō the Reuel. in c. 17. p. 205. Willet. Sy∣nop. p. 171. Prot. do vrge for their chiefest obiection, that by theAp. 17.9. 7. hilles vpon which the woman sitteth, is described the Citty of Rome, and consequently Rome is Antichrists seate. But I answere first, In the same verse, those 7. hilles, are said to be 7. Kings. Secondly,In Ps. 26. Arethas, Beda, Ruper∣tus, in Ap. c. 17. S. Austine and others do vnderstand by the Whore, the vniuersall Citty of the Diuel, which in the Scriptures is often called Babylon, and is op∣posed to the Citty of God, which is his Church: and by 7. mountaines they vnderstand the whole cōpany of the Proud, and especially the Kings of the Earth. Thirdly, though ther∣by be vnderstood Rome, (as some ratherApoc. 17.15.18. see Tertul. l. cont. Iud. & l. 3. cont. Marcion. Hieron. Ep. 17. ad Mar∣cellam, & q. 11. ad Alga∣siam. thinke) yet see∣ing the whore is thē sayd to be in being, for fiue of the Kings mentioned,Vers. 10. vpon which the woman sate, are sayd to be then
fallen, and that the sixt thenVers. 10. was, whereby it is manifest that the woman her selfe was then also in being, it cannot be vnderstood of the Church of Rome, whoseRom. 1.8. & 16.19. fayth was then renowned in the whole world, but of the heathen CittyApoc. 17.18. which hath Kingdome ouer the Kings of the Earth, and which wasVers. 6. drunken of the bloud of the Saints, and of the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus. In which manner was the Citty of Rome, during the extremest Persecutions of Nero, Domitian, and other Ro∣man Emperours. But some reply that Antichrist is to sit2. Thess. 2.4. in the Temple of God, and therefore in the true Church; and whereas we an∣swere, that by the Temple of God, is vnderstood the Temple of Hierusalem, they vrge that,Dan. 9.27. that long since was destroied and shall neuer agayne be reedifyed. But that thereby is truly meant the Temple of Hierusalem, is plaine, as isSee be∣fore, and see Apoc. 11.18. be∣fore proued; as also in that in the Scriptures of the New Testament, by the Temple of God, are neuer vnderstood the Churches of Christians, but alwayes the Temple of Hierusalem: yea the Ancient fathers both Greeke and Latine, for diuers ages did forbeare to call the Churches, Temples, but eyther Oratories, or howses of prayer, or the like. And this they did eyther in regard, that as then they had no Temples, but places in priuate houses appointed for prayer, or else that thereby they might distinguish the Church from the Synagogue; the memory of the Iewish Temple, being as then fully a∣bolished: for which reason lykewise the Apostles in their writings, called not Christian Priests, Priests, but eyther Bishops, or Seniors. Further, the Iewes who are to receyue Antichrist for their Messias and King, will receyue none that sitteth not in Hierusalem, they dreaming nothing more, then of resto∣ring Hierusalem and the Temple: yea at Antichrists coming Rome (if thereby be vnderstood theApoc. 17.16. harlot) shalbe made desolate, and burnt with fyre, so that it cannot be now sayd to be the Seat of Antichrist. Lastly, if Antichrist be to sit in the true Church, and to be accompted the head and Prince thereof, as Prot.Melanc. in Apol. Conf. Aug. art. 6 Cal. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 2. §. 12. &c. 7. §. 25. Illyr. Cent. 1. f. 2. c. 4. Col. 435. and many others. teach, and withall, if the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, as they further auoch, then it euidēt∣ly
followeth, that the Pope sitteth in the true Church, and is the head thereof. Now there is but one true Church, and there is but one Christ, which thing alsoCalu. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 1. §. 2. Caluin con∣fesseth, therefore Prot. and all others who are not in the Church which is vnder the Pope, are out of the true Church of Christ. Caluin foreseeeing this great inconuenience to follow, answereth,Instit. l. 4. c. 2. §. 11. That as oftentymes buildings are so pulled downe, that the foundations and ruines remayne; so Christ hath not suffered his Church eyther to be ouerthrowne by Antichrist from the foundation, or to be layd euen with the ground &c. but euen after the very wasting, he willeth that the building halfe pulled downe, shold yet remayne. But this maketh against Caluin, for first, if the ruines of the Church of Christ only remaine, then the Church is ruinous, and consequently the gates of hell haue preuayled against it, contrary to our Sauiours promise.Math. 16.18. Secondly, if the Church hath suffered ruine, and the ruines and foundation, yea the building halfe pulled downe, be possessed by the Po∣pe, then Prot. haue no Church, for the Church entyre and perfect, according to them is fallen to ruine, and the ruines are vnder Antichrist. What then haue they? Peraduenture some new building; but in that it is new, it is not the house of Christ: Who then (not besotted) doth not plainly see that it is far more safe to remaine in a Church, (though rui∣nous and halfe fallen) then in no Church? And who would thinke (considering the premises, and much more which may be gathered from the Fathers and otherwise) that men indued with common sense and reason, would endeauour to defend a fancy so idle, as this conceipt of the Pope being Antichrist?
CHAP. XI. The true State of the Question, concerning Euan∣gelicall Counsailes, and the State of Perfection. Whether there be Euangelicall Counsailes, or workes of su∣pererogation, which if they be obserued or done, are good and commendable, if omitted, not sinnefull; or whether all things that are good, be commanded by God, and the omission of them be sinnefull. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. ALTHOVGH men Sensuall, as or∣dinarily all Sectaries are, cannot endure to heare of the State of Perfection, or a∣ny thing that may tend to the contempt of the word & the mortification of the flesh, yet the same hath euer beene ap∣proued, taught and practised, by the Catholike Church. So in the Councell of Basill we are taught, that,Oratio Henrici Kal∣teisan de libe∣ra Praedica∣tione verbi Dei. Counsaile is a persuasion of a greater good, to which Christians are not bound vnles they will, but Commandement is obligation of a necessary good, to which all are bound, although they would not. In poofe heerof is also heer eyted the fourth Car∣thage
Councell to say, Counsayles are of our Lord, not comman∣ding but exhorting. And soBellar. de Monachis l. 2. c. 8. 9. & Rhem. Test. p. 55. all Catholikes belieue, that there are sundry workes which are not inioyned by Christ by any Precept, but only counsailed as matter of Perfection: & these if they be done in the state of Grace are commen∣dable and meritorious; if omitted, not sinnefull. Protestants Vntruthes. Luther affirmeth that,In Epi∣thalam. Moyses commanded Marriage to all the Iewes, so that it was not lawfull for any in the old Testament, to want a wyfe. But how then did Elias, Elizeus, Hieremy, & S. Iohn Baptist, who had no wyues, as S. HieromeL. 1. cont. Iouin. pro∣ueth. CaluinInstit. l. 4. c. 13. §. 11. auoucheth that Monasticall life was no where aproued by our Sauiour, not so much as by one syl∣lable. But this lye is confuted byEp. 89. q 4. S. Austine andHom. 17. ad popul. S. Chrisostome.Instit. l. 4. c. 13. §. 12. He likewise auerreth, that none of the Ancient Fathers thought that Christ counsayled any thing, but that euery word he spake was of necessity to be obeyed. But this will appeare most false in the 3. Section following. Rogers auoucheth Catholickes to say, that, Supererogatory workes,Def. of the Articl. art. 14. p. 61. are tokens of forgiuenes of sinnes, so well as Baptisme; yea deliuer from the wrath of God, so well as Christ. But if lying were a worke of supererogation and perfection, I would hould Rogers and his Brethren, to be men of the greatest perfection this world hath knowne. Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth that,Article 14. Voluntary workes besides, ouer, and aboue Gods Commandements, which they call workes of supererogation cannot be taught without arrogancy and impiety, for by them men do declare, that they do not only render vnto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is required &c. Caluin auoucheth that,Instit. l. 4. c. 13. §. 12. There is no litle word vttered by Christ, which we are not necessarily to obey. Beza much disli∣king Counsailes confesseth thus of himselfe,In 1. Cor. 7.15. I willingly
auoyd that false difference, betwene Precept, and Counsaile. And Melancthon thinketh, thatIn loc. tit. de pau∣pert. The Ghospell neither counsai∣leth nor commandeth to depart from riches, if they be not taken away, neither doth it counsaile nor command to giue thinges in common. So that according to Prot. whatsoeuer we do, or can do, that is good, we are bound of necessity vnder precept, and sinne to do it. Protestants agree with Ancient Heretickes. S. HieromeAd cap. 4. Osee. Aug. haer. 54. and S. Austine condemne Eunomius for affirming Virginity to be of no greater merit then Wedlock: and that leauing Monachisme he seduced Virgines to marry. And for the impugning of Virginity, Vigilantius and Heluidius are condemned by S. Hierome,Cont. Vi∣gilant. c. 1. Cont. Heluid. c. 10. Iouinian & FaustusHaer. 82. & cont. Faust. l. 30. c. 4. by S. Austine, and Ebion byHaer. 30. S. Epiphanius. S. DamasceneHaer. 98. reproueth the Lampetians for tea∣ching that Monkes ought to be free in their Monasteries, and not subiect to any Superiour. S. Hierome impugneth Vigilantius for defending that it was better for a man to keep his goods, and out of them to giue Almes, then to giue all away at once. The same heresies are the ordinary Tenets generally maintained by all New Sectaries. Cont. Vigilant.Protestant Errours. It is wonderfull to obserue the grosse Errours that the Enemies of Perfection do ordinaly fall into. No man could possibly imagine that any man but a LutherIn Epi∣thalamio. would af∣firme, that women were created for no other end but to mar∣ry: and that it is all one to aduise whether a man should marry, or whether he should eate or drinke. Who also tea∣cheth that virginity excelleth Marriage, and yet a marryed wyfe is better before God, then a Virgin: but heer the foole fighteth with himself. Yea such was his lust, that he blusheth not to say,In 1. Cor. 7. f. 107. We conclude, Marriage to be as it were gould and the spirituall State as dung. And,Tom. 6. in Gen. 2. fol. 26. Generation is the chiefest worke, after the preaching of the name of God, which certainly is
the reason that moueth Prot. preachers to marry so fast,Tom. 7. in Ep. ad Wolfang fo, 305. To marry, and to ete and drinke, necessity compelleth to do both alike, and God commandeth both alyke to be done. Who would not be ashamed, and afrayd to follow a Religion first taught by a man so carnall? HeL. de vobis Mona∣sticis. thinketh also that it would be the best forme of Religious Profession, if none should be ad∣mitted therto, before he were 70. or 80. yeares of age. With himTom. 4. in c 9. Isaiae. fol. 109. a Turke is better then these, who haue brought in this hor∣rible errour of Coūsayles. Peter Martyr:In Thess. p. 1002. It is not good for man to be alone, because it is not pleasant, not honest, not profitable. Heer∣by we see in what carnality our Prot. ministers do place their ction. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that there are Euangelicall Coun∣sayles or workes of supererogation: if they be obserued or done, they are commendable and meritorious; if o∣mitted, not sinnefull. TO find out the truth by the sacred Scriptures, the Pro∣phet Isay writeth:C. 56. 4. 5. Let not the Eunuch say, Behould I am a dry tree, because thus sayth our Lord to Eunuches: They that shall keep my Saboths, and shall choose the things that I would, and shall hould my Couenant, I will giue vnto them in my howse, and within my walls a place and a name better then sonnes and daughters, an euer∣lasting name will I giue them, which shall not perish. To be without children was ignominious amongst the Iewes in the Old Testament, because God hauing then chosen that only Na∣tion for his peculiar people, the conseruation and increase of his Church dependeth much vpon their multiplication: But seeing the Church of Christ in the new Testament, should be gathered and consist of all Nations, the Prophet heere forsheweth, that Christian Eunuchs liuing continent, should not be ignoble or inglorious, but more glorious, and haue a better name then (Gods other seruants) sonnes and daughters: because keeping Gods Precepts (such as was the
Saboth) they also of their free election, choose this state of life to keepe perpetuall Chastity, more then is commanded. And that this is spoken of voluntary Eunuches, not of such as are so borne, or after cut, it is cleere; for there is no reason why to these should be promised greater glory then to those that are maryed: And if it were vnderstood of these who contayne because they cannot do otherwise, and so to them be promised greater glory then to the maried, then with far greater reason is it promised to them who will contayne when they might do otherwise. Now that this Continency of Eunuches is not here commanded, but counsailed, appeareth by these wordes, Who will choose the thing that pleaseth me? for they are said to choose, who are not compelled by precept, as also in that those who are not Eunuches, are not excluded from the kingdome, which they were if this continency of Eunuches were here commanded. Lastly, that the said Continency is not only profitable, but likewise meritorious of eternall life, is proued by those wordes, I will giue them an euerlasting Name that shall not perish. But Peter MartyrL. de Cae∣lib. & votis Monast. replyeth, that God doth not here preferre Eunuches before others that keep his law, but on∣ly before them that transgresse the Law: But this doth not satisfy, for God here calleth them not transgressours, but his sonnes and daughters, before whom he preferreth holy Eu∣nuches: neither speaketh he of such as shalbe excluded from good place, or good name, but of such as shall enioy both, and saith, These Eunuches shall haue a better place and better name. Agreably hereunto, when the Apostles had said,Mat. 19.10. It is not expedient to marry; our Lord said, Not all take this word, but they to whom it is giuen: for there are Eunuches which were borne so from their Mothers wombes; and there are Eunuches which were made so by men, and there are Eunuches who haue gelded themselues for the kingdome of heauen: He that can take, let him take. Here Continency is not commanded, for in the beginning of the Chapter, Mariage is approued, and yet here it is said, that some liued chast for the Kingdome of heauen. And though Pe∣terDe Caeli∣batu & votis. Martyr expoundeth these wordes. For the kingdome of
heauen, only for the better preaching of the Ghospell, yet this is only his owne Imagination without ground: Nei∣ther will it agree to many women who liued chast, sure∣ly not for preaching, which to them is prohibited, but for their greater merit in the kingdome of heauen; And I see few Protestant Ministers liue Eunuches for the better prea∣ching of the Ghospell. Our Sauiour said vnto the yong man,Mat. 19.21. If thou wilt be perfect go sell the thinges that thou hast, and giue to the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come follow me. That these wordes import no precept is playne, in that the only ob∣seruance of the Commandements is alleadged by our Sa∣uiour a little before as necessary to saluation. As also if it were any Precept, it were of charity: now this only exa∣cteth that we loue our Neighbour as our selfe; wherfore it doth not bynd vs to giue all that we haue to our Neigh∣bour, but that we may reserue part for our selues. Lastly if it were a Precept, all whosoeuer, were bound to giue all that they haue vnto the poore, which is absurd. D. FulkeAgainst Rhem. Test. in Mat. 19. sec. 9. Par∣kins in his Reform. Cath. p. 241. Caluin l. 4. c. 13. sec. 13. and other Prot. reply, that Christ neither Commandeth nor counsaileth this Perfection to all men, but only to this one, to discouer the hypocrisy and vaine confidence that he had in himselfe: But this insteed of an answere, is a sclanderous fal∣shood, for besydes that the Euangelistes do none of them ac∣cuse the yong man of any such fault, no sooner had he said that he had kept all the Commandements from his youth, but Christ thereupon behoulding him, loued him, as S. MarkeC. 10. 21. witnesseth; which he would neuer haue done, if he had knowne him to be a lying Hypocrite. Secondly the yong man hearing our Sauiours speach of Perfection,Mar. 10.22. went away sorrowfull, for he had many possessions, which sorrow he would neuer haue had, if he had come with a dissembling mynd. Thirdly, after this his sorrowfull departure, Peter hereupon agreable to our Sauiours said admonition giuen, said. BehouldMat. 19.27. we haue left all thinges, and followed thee, what therfore shall we haue? To which our Sauiour answered not, that he would giue them nothing, or that which he had spoken was only to the yong man, and that not seriously,
but only to let him see his hypocrisy, as Prot. expound it; but insteed hereof, he promiseth them for their reward,Mat. 19.28. That they shall sit vpon twelue Seates, iudging the twelue Trybes of Israel: Yea to euery one whosoeuer thatVer. 29. hath left house, brethren &c. or lands for his name sake, he hath promised they shall receiue an hundred fold, and shall possesse lyfe euerlasting. But M. Perkins limiteth those words, If thou wilt be perfect &c. to that only man, sayingCases of Conscience l. 3. c. 4. col. 1626. Those words contayne a personall and par∣ticuler command. But this to be most false appeareth, in that Christ expresly distinguisheth here matters of Command, from matters of Perfection. But whether it be command or counsaile, it is ridiculous to apropriate the same to that only man: and cleerly most false, in that the Apostles imme∣diatly after affirmed of themselues that, they had left all things and followed Christ. Against the state of Perfection CaluinConcione 1. in Iob. writeth, Both the Greeke and Latin (writers) do interpret this word (perfe∣ctum) perfect: But because in later ages the name of Perfection hath been ill expounded, it is better to vse the word, Integrity. For many that are ignorant, do thinke, when a man is called perfect, thence to follow that Perfection may be found in vs, whilest we are conuersant in this lyfe. So displeasing is to Caluin the state, and the very word of Perfection. In the tyme of the Apostles themselues, many Chri∣stians, Art. 4. 34. 35. 37. who were owners of lands or houses, sould, and brought the price of those thinges which they sould, and layd it before the feet of the Apostles; And to euery one was deuided according as euery one had need. That this was commanded we do not read in any part of the Scriptures, but to the contrary to Ananias it was said,Act. 5.4. Remayning, did it not remayne to thee, and being sould, was it not in thy power? D. Fulkes answere hereto is, that,Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 5.2. Neither can it be proued that they promised the whole, but they affirmed they brought the whole, when they withdrew part. But this is so false, that D. Fulke himselfe a litle after confuteth it, saying,Ibid. in Act. 5.6. They that haue as great power to keep the vow of Virginity aduisedly made, as Ananias had to deliuer the whole price of his land, sinne damnably if they breake it; Where he must needs suppose, that Ananias
had made a vow of giuing the whole, as the other had made a vow of keeping Virginity, otherwise their sinne could not be alyke damnable. S. Paul teacheth in expresse wordes the difference be∣twene Counsaile and Command, saying,1. Cor. 7.8 9. I say to the vnma∣ried and to widdowes, it is good for them if they so abyde, euen as I also; but if they do not contayne themselues, let them marry:Ver. 25. Concerning Virgines a Commandement of our Lord I haue not, but Counsaile I giue:Ver. 28. Art thou loose from a wyfe? Seeke not a wyfe, but if thou take a wyfe, thou hast not sinned:Ver. 38. He that ioyneth his Virgin in Matrimony, doth well, and he that ioyneth not, doth better; Let the widowVer. 39.40. marry to whom she will, only in our Lord, but more blessed shall she be, if she so remayne, according to my Coun∣saile. These Textes are so plaine to distinguish Counsailes from Commandes, and to the praise and aduise of Counsailes, that no Catholicke at this day can speake more cleerly. Yet Caluin answerethIn. 1. Cor. 7.25. to these so plaine Textes, that they are not to be taken absolutely, but conditionally, and that the meaning is only this, that to liue chast is good if a man could, but1. Cor. 7.2. because of Fornication, let euery man haue his owne wyfe: euen as it were good (saithIn Com∣ment. huius loci. Caluin) for a man not to eate or drinke, if it might be, but because it cannot be without a miracle, therfore let euery one eate & drinke. But first the wordes of S. Paul are cleere to the contrary, for he sayth not, It were good for a man not to touch a woman, or I would giue Counsaile, (but) It is good &c. I do giue Counsaile. Secondly, if to liue chast, were so impossible, as Prot. Ministers both by their wordes and liues make show of, then would S. Paul neuer haue so highly commended it: yea how absurd a thing had it bene, may appeare by ap∣plying the wordes of S. Paul to the Example of Caluin, as if he had said, It is good for a man not to eate: wantest thou meate, seeke not for meate: of not eating I haue no Precept of our Lord, but I giue Counsaile that no man eate, and the like. This absurdity conuinceth, that S. Paul speaketh not of any impossibility. Thirdly, by those wordes, because of fornication, let euery man haue his owne wyfe, S. Paul doth not admonish euery man to marry, but that the marryed man do keep his owne wyfe,
and others vnmarryed, that they rather marry then burne, if they perceyue themselues in frequent temptation thereof; and so accordingly he counsaileth that,Vers. 9. If they do not con∣taine themselues, that they marry. Lastly, if it be as difficult to liue chast, as to liue without meate, in what wicked state liue the fellowes of Colledges in Cambridge and Oxford, and sundry other Ministers abroad, who liue not only, the most dangerous tyme of their youth vnmarryed, but euen many of them all their liues: These men I thinke liue not without meat, and yet without women, I hope themselues at least will acknowledge, and not publickly confesse the contrary, howsoeuer the case truly standeth with them. But the truth is, the foresayd wordes of S. Paul, As con∣cerning virgins a Commandement of our Lord I haue not, but Coun∣saile I giue, are so cleer and vnanswerable, as that the Rhe∣mistes therupon truly inferring, that a Counsayle is one thing, a Commandement another; D. Fulke who vnder∣taketh to make some answere or other to whatsoeuer they shal say, yet heer is content to passe it ouer in deepest silence not so much as taking the least notice thereof: which cer∣tainly could be for no other cause, but that the words were so splendent, as that his bleared eyes were not able to be∣hould them. S. Paul might haue receiued1. Cor. 9.7.11.14. maintenance for his preaching, yet, he vsed notVer. 12.15. this power, but, being free,Vers. 19. made himselfe the seruant of all, that he might gayne the more: and, soVer. 18. preached the Ghospell without cost, for which he expected a re∣ward,Ver. 17. and gloryVer. 15. so great, that it was good for him to dye rather then that any man should make his glory voyd. Heere S. Paul might haue taken maintenance for his preaching, and yet preached without cost to his auditours, for which he hoped for a reward and glory. Peter MartyrIn Com∣ment. buius loci. replyeth heerunto, that S. Paul in sight of God was bound to do the same, though not in the Iudgement of men; for he sayth,Ver. 15. It is good for me to dye rather &c. Now for a worke not necessary, no man can suf∣fer himselfe to be slayne: and,Ver. 16. If I preach it is no glory to me, that is, if I receiue gaine of the people,Ver. 18. what is my
reward then? that preaching the Ghospell, I yield the Ghospell without Cost, that I abuse not my power in the Ghospell. But this doth not satisfy, for in all this Chapter S. Paul goeth about to proue, that it was lawfull for him to liue at the Charges of the peo∣ple, which he confirmeth by the Example of the rest of theVer. 5.6. Apostles, by the example ofVer. 7. Souldiars, sheepheards, and husbandmen, by the law ofVer. 8.9. Moyses, and by theVer. 14. ordi∣nation of Christ. Secondly in answere to the places cyted, a man may lawfully suffer death for a worke not necessary or commanded, but only of Perfection, and so haue many Virgins beene martyred for refusing Mariages: so also by the second place, S. Paul did not thinke, that he should re∣ceiue no glory, but only that singular glory, which is due to a worke of Perfection. Lastly, by the word, abuse, isChrysost. bo. 8 de poen. oecum. & Theophil. in hunc locum. Plato Ep. 8. often vnderstood a full and absolute power of vsing, as if he had sayd, that, I vse not my power in the Ghospell as much as I may; and so also is the Greeke , abutor, often taken in a good sense. Adde yet heerunto, that, to auoid absurdity, we must eyther hould an arbitrary freedome, in the omitting or do∣ing of certayne lawfull actions, as for example, that we may lawfully in our Prayer bestow tyme and leasure, and in our Almes giue to the Poore more then in eyther we are bound; or else that in these, and other our particular actions, there is such a determinate point or period, as that to exceed the same, or to be short thereof, were sinne: which to af∣firme, is no lesse absurd, then scrupulous, and troublesome to all mens Consciences. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Sacred Scriptures an∣swerably with Catholikes, in proofe of Euangelicall Counsayles & workes of Supererogation & Perfection. COncerning the forsayd place of Esay, S. Austine wri∣teth,De sancta Virginit. c, 25. Why dost thou wrangle impious Blindnes? what dost
thou promise only tēporall profit to the chast Saints? I will giue them an Eternall name, and if perhaps here thou dost endeauour to take eternall, for long, I add, I heape, I reiterate, it shall neuer be wanting: what see∣kest thou more? What sayest thou more? This eternall name whatsoeuer it is to the Eunuches of God, which certes signifyeth a certaine proper & excellent glory, shall not be common with many, although placed in the same kingdome, and the same house: for therfore peraduenture it is called a name, because them, to whom it is giuen, it distinguisheth from the rest. This place of Esay is vnderstood of such as are voluntary chast, by sundryHieron. & Cyril. in hunc locum. Basil. l. de vera Virg Ambr. in Exhort. ad Virg. Greg. 3. part. Pastor c. 29. other Fathers. S. Cyprian in his booke of the habit of Virgines, wri∣teth thus: Let not them affect to be decked, or to please others then their Lord, from whom they expect the reward of Virginity, himselfe saying, There are Eunuches who haue gelded themselues for the king∣dome of God. Againe in the same place, Now when the world is replenished &c. those who can take Continency, liuing after the man∣ner of Eunuches, are gelded to a kingdome: neither doth our Lord command this, but exhorteth; he doth not impose the yoake of Ne∣cessity, when the free Power of the will remayneth. But seeing he saith, There areIo. 14.2. many mansions with his Father, he showeth the lodginges of a better house; these better lodginges you seeke; gelding the desires of the flesh, you obtayne the reward of a greater grace in heauen. Wherof also sayth S. Austine.De sancta Virginit. c. 24. Christ praysing those who haue gelded themselues, not for this world, but for the kingdome of heauen, shall a Christian gainsay it, affirming this to be profita∣ble, for this present lyfe, but not for the lyfe to come? And yet all Prot. will make bould to say it. As touching the yong man mentioned in S. Mathew, S. Ambrose sayth: ThatL. de vi∣duis post med. and see Dorotheus doctrin. r. thou mayest vnderstand the difference of Cōmandement & Counsaile, remember him to whom in the Ghospell it was formerly prescribed, that he should not murther, not commit a∣dultery, not speake false witnes; for there is a commandement, where there is punishment of sinne. But when he had said, that he had kept the Preceptes of the law, a Counsaile is giuen him, that he sell all thin∣ges and follow our Lord; for these things are not giuen vpon Com∣mand but vpon Counsaile are bestowed. To which sense also sayth S. Austine,Ep. 89. q. 4. & cont. lit. Petil l. 2. c. 104. & in Ps. 103 And see Chrysost. in illud ad Roman. Salutate Pri∣scam &c. Hieron. Ep. ad Demetr. 8. q. c. 7. The yong man saw how he had kept the Commande∣ments of the Law, but the good Maister hath distinguished the Com∣mandements
of the law, from this more excellent Perfection: for there he said, if thou wilt come to lyfe, keepe the Commandements, but here, If thou wilt be perfect go, sell all thinges &c. And the like Expo∣sition is giuen by S. Hierome in his booke against Vigi∣lantius. But S. Austine is so cleere in this, that M. Trig sayth,Vpon Iud p. 216. See Aug. Ep. 89. S. Austine counting it a degree of Perfection in Christianity, not to seeke after the riches of the world, thus writes of himselfe: I who write these thinges haue loued that Perfection wherof our Lord spake to the yong man, Go, and sell all thou hast: How far I haue gone for∣ward in this way of Perfection, I know more then any other &c. And to this purpose with all my might I exhort others, and &c. haue Com∣panions to whom this is persuaded by my ministery. S. Austine alluding to those wordes of the Samaritan,Luc. 10.53. Whatsoeuer thou shalt supererogate, I, at my returne, will repay thee, saith:De Vir∣ginit. c. 30. Those thinges are exacted, these are offered; if these be done, they are commended if those be not done, they are condemned; in those our Lord commandeth what is debt, but in these if you shall any thing supererogate, at his returne he will repay you. And a∣gaine:De Temp. ser. 61. One thing is Counsaile, another Command &c. He that willingly heareth Counsaile & doth it, shall haue greater glory; he that fulfilleth not the Commandement, vnlesse he repent cannot es∣cape punishment. What can be vttered more cleere for Euan∣gelicall Counsails? Now in proofe of S. Paul his counsailing of Virginity, S. Austine expoundeth his words wholly agreably with our Catholike Doctrine, saying,De sancta Virginit. c. 14. 15. 30. & de verb. Apost. serm 18. propè fin. Hypog l. 3. c. 8. There is no Cōmandment of our Lord concerning Virgins &c. and, because life Eternal is to be gone vn∣to, wherein there is a certayne excellent glory, not to be giuen to all who are to liue there for euer, but to some, for the gaining whereof, it sufficeth not to be freed from sinne, vnlesse to the Redeemer somewhat be vowod, which were no sinne not to haue vowed, & yet to haue vowed and performed were prayse; therefore the Apostle sayth, But I giue Counsaile. Agayne,De Temp. ser, 68. one thing is Counsayle, another Command, Counsaile is giuen that virginity be kept, that flesh be abstayned from, that all things be sould and giuen to the poore. But command is, that Iustice be kept &c. He that willingly heareth and doth counsayle, shall haue greater glory, he that shall not fullfill the Commandement, vnles
he shall do pennance, cannot escape sinne. The same Exposition of S. Paules words are giuen by S. Hierome:Ep. 22. c. 8. Concerning Virgines the Apostle sayth, I haue no Commandement of our Lord. Wherfore? because that himselfe should be a Virgin was no command, but his owne will. S. Chrysostome thus explaineth the same much more largely:Hom. 56. quae est 8. de poeni∣tentia. Do not accuse our Lord, he doth not Command impos∣sible things, many do exceed the Commandements themselues. There∣fore if they were impossible, they would not of their owne accord ex∣ceed them. He no where commandeth virginity, and many keep it, he no where commandeth to possesse no goods, and many giue from themsel∣ues their owne substance, the very workes giuing Testimony, that there is great facility in the lawes of the Cōmandments. They would not ther∣fore haue exceeded them, vnles those things which are commanded were easy. He commanded not Virginity, for he that commandeth Virginity, subiecteth also him that is not willing to the necessity of the law, but he that admonisheth, leaueth the hearer Lord of his owne will. There∣fore Paul sayd of1. Cor. 7.25. Virgins, I haue no Commandement, but I giue Counsayle. Thou seest not a Commandement, but a Counsayle. Thou seest not a Precept, but an admonition. The one, sayth he, is of Ne∣cessity, the other of will. I do not command, saith he, that I may not burden: I admonish and giue Counsayle, that I may persuade. A pure Papist was S. Chrysostome. Yet no lesse cleere heerein is S. Cyprian,Serm. de Natiuit. Christi. Concer∣ning Virgines the Apostle sayth, I haue no Precept of our Lord, but I giue Counsayle &c. Because although Marriage be good, yet Conti∣nency is better, and Virginity more excellent, which not Necessity or Command compelleth, but the Counsayle of Perfection persuadeth. Lastly, Origen, sayth,L 10. in Ep. ad Rom. c. 15 post. med. Those things which we do aboue debt, we do not by Command; for example, Virginity is not payd of debt, for it is not asked by Command, but offered aboue debt. Final∣ly, heare Paul saying of Virgines, I haue no Precept of our Lord. S. Austine repeateth many things done by Christ and his Apostles not commanded, but counsayled, saying:De A∣dulter. Con∣iug. l. 1. c. 14. And see l. de opere Mona∣chorum. c. 5. Many things are to be done, the Law not commanding, but vpon free Charity, and those things in our seruices are more gratefull, which when we might lawfully not bestow, yet for Charity we do them: wher∣upon our Lord himselfe, when he had shewed that he owed not tri∣bute,
yet he payd it, least he should scandalize &c. How the Apostle commandeth these things, his wordes do testify, where he sayth,1. Cor. 9.19. Whereas I was free of all, I made my selfe the seruant of all, that I might gaine the more; when he had said a litle before, Haue not we power to eate and drinke? haue we not power to lead about a woman, a sister, as also the rest of the Apostles &c. Who euer playeth the soul∣diar at his owne charges? who planteth a vine, and eateth not of the fruite therof? &c. thus he sheweth those thinges which are lawfull, that is, which are forbidden by no Precept of our Lord &c. So ma∣nifest it is according to the Fathers Exposition of the Scri∣ptures, that many thinges are lawfull, laudable, and Coun∣sailed, which are no where commanded by any Precept. SECT. IV. That Prot. do agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of Euangelicall Counsailes, and workes of Superero∣gation. TO come now to our Prot. writers expounding the Scriptures for Euangelicall Counsailes, and belieuing the same truth; D. Humfrey testifieth that, the Waldenses did leaueIesuit. par. 2. rat. 3. p 270. all things, and follow the Euangelicall Perfection, pro∣fessing a kind of Monasticall lyfe: and the same is reported of them by Luther;Loc. com. Lutheri. class. 4. p 83. who also affirmeth, that,In Assert. art. 30. Iohn Husse belieued the Euangelicall Counsailes: And Husse himselfe sayth, PaulIn 1. Cor. c. 7. sheweth, that though both be good, yet Virginity is better then Mariage. Againe,Tom. 2. f. 243. one is said more perfect then another, in as much as he doth not only keepe the Commandements, which are of necessity, but also Counsailes, which are of supererogation. And so Christ saith, Mat. 19. If thou wilt be perfect go and sell all that thou hast, and giue to the poore, and comming follow me. Hereof also sayth Luther,In Colloq. Latinis To. 2. c. de San∣ctis. Iohn Husse &c. affirmed 12. Euangelicall Coun∣sailes, & Luther himself acknowledgeth that one ofIn As∣sert. art. 30. Virgi∣nity, or vnmaried life, though he was content to practise the contrary with abhominable sacriledge. Chemnitius affirmeth of thoseEnchyrid. de coniugio. p. 411. who are indued with
the guift of Continency, that it is good for them to remayne vnma∣ryed, and yet if they will marry, they may do it without sinne. And the same is decreed by the ConfessionHarmory of Confess. p 543. 544. 545. of Bohemia in these wordes: Concerning the Condition of single lyfe Virginity and Wi∣dowhood, our Preachers do teach, that euery man hath free liberty, ei∣ther to choose it to himselfe, or to refuse it: for by way of a law nothing is Commanded of God to men touching these things &c. And we now teach, that the guift of Chastity, by the peculiar goodnes of God &c. both in tymes past was giuen, and at this day also is giuen to some &c. as Christ his speach doth euidently witnesse &c. And, the Examples of certaine in the Propheticall and Apostolicall writinges, and of Iohn Baptist, and of many Ministers, and women Ministers of the Church, do witnesse this thing. Againe, the Lord sayth, Mat. 19.Ib. p. 544. Those who haue made themselues Eunuches for the kingdome of heauen, that is, who be such as might be maryed, yet they do omit, and abstaine from it, because of the affection of the inward hart, and their loue towards God and his word. And a little after, speaking of the Commo∣dities of the single life of the Minister, it sayth,Ib. 545. By these thinges he may with lesse hindrance, and more easily and readily with great leasure, and more commodiously employ his labour to the Salua∣tion of the Church &c. And he may be a more Conuenient Minister then others &c. Yea it is certayne, that by the state of mariage, many lets many cares, and many thinges, wherby necessary quietnesse is di∣sturbed are cast in our way: And this is it, which Paul saith, I would that you should be without such Cares; He that is vnmaryed, is carefull for those thinges that pertaine to the Lord, how he may please the Lord &c. Yea PaulIb. 546. concludeth after this sorte: He is more happy in my Iudgment, if he remayne such a one, that is, vnmarried, then if he mary: and I thinke that I haue the spirit of God. In like sort in com∣parison of others, there be bountifull and peculiar promises & singuler rewardes offered vnto those that keepe themselues, to wit, that their worthy workes shalbe recompensed with a great reward; and that no man shall in vayne forsake any thing, as house, Father, Brother, so al∣so his wyfe &c. as the Apostles did, for the Lordes Cause. Here not only Euangelicall Counsailes, but many other Catholicke pointes of Doctrine are taught by these Bohemian Prote∣stantes. Bucer acknowledgeth that,In Mat. c. 19.10. f. 150. There are who haue
gelded themselues, that is, when they might haue maried, haue of their owne accord chosen single lyfe, and that for the kingdome of heauen, that they may proue themselues in all thinges holy in body and spirit, and that they may adhere vnto him without any distraction. Caluin writing vpon the first Epistle to the Corinthi∣ans cap. 7.8. confesseth that, This place sheweth that the A∣postle was then vnmarryed: and he directly confuteth Erasmus teaching, that S. Paul was marryed: yea inIn 1. Cor. 7. in ver. 26.28.32.33.34.38. seuerall pla∣ces he preferreth single lyfe before Marriage, and concludeth thus, The summe of the whole Disputation commeth to this, that sin∣gle lyfe is better then Marriage, because in it is greater liberty, that men may more readily serue God. M. Hooker collecteth and teacheth, vpon certayne of the before alledged Scriptures, thatEccl. Pol l. 3. sec. 8. p. 140. If when a man may liue in state of Matrimony, he make rather choyce of a contrary lyfe, in regard of S. Paules Iudgement 1. Cor. 7. that which he doth, is ma∣nifestly grounded vpon the word of God, but not commāded in his word, because without breach of any Commandement, he might do otherwise. And againe, explaining more fully, whatIb. l. 2. sec. 8. p. 122. belongeth to the highest perfection of man, he affirmeth, that to do cetayne things which we may lawfully leaue vndone, is of great digni∣ty and acceptance with God, and, that most ample reward in heauen is layd vp for them: that, heerupon dependeth the difference betwene the states of Saintes in glory; and so withall concludeth, that,Ibid. God doth approue much more then he doth command. For which very saying, he is charged by some Puritanes,The Christian letter to M. Hooker. p. 14. 15. to sow the seed of the Doctrine of workes of Supererogation. But he, and his Doctrine of the workes of supererogation, are defended byDef. of Hook art. 8. p. 49, 50, 51, 52. D. Couel. And thus we see that many of the learnedst Prot. do teach and maintaine from the Scriptures, our Ca∣tholicke Doctrine of Euangelicall Counsailes.
SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures against Euangelicall Counsai∣les, are answered. SOme pretend, because GodsMat. 22.37. Command is, that thou shalt loue thy Lord God from thy whole hart, and with thy whole soule, and with thy whole mynd; that therfore all that we can do, we are bound vnto. Answ. The word All, or whole, doth not signify all the thoughts of our hart, or all the intention pos∣sible, so that we should be commanded to thinke of nothing else in our hart, but only of louing God, and that with grea∣test vehemency of loue; but therby is only meant, that we loue God in such sorte, that in our loue, we prefer or equall nothing with him: so the word, all, in Scripture is often taken, not absolutly, but only for many, asMat. 2.3. Herod was troubled and all Hierusalem with him; manyAct. 1.41. wonders were done by the Apostles in Hierusalem, and there was great feare in all, and the like. Secondly in the Prot. sense it were impossible to keep this Precept of louing God, whereas the ScripturesDeut. 10.12.13. Luc. 10.25. teach it not only to be possible, but easy, as shalbe proued hereaf∣ter; and withall3. Reg. 14.8.4. Reg. 23.25. Ps. 118.10. Eccles. 47.8. giueth Example of such as kept it with all their hartes. Secondly it is obiected, thatMat. 7.14. the way to heauen is strait and narrow, which could not be, if a man can do more, then the law requireth. Answ. The law of God of its owne na∣ture is hard, and now the harder by the corruption of man, and so the way is said to be strait; but to one that hath Gods Grace (which cureth and perfecteth nature) the same law is easy, according to that,Mat. 11.30. My yoake is sweet, and my burden light:1. Io. 5.3. And his Commandements are not heauy. Thirdly such places are vrged, as seeme to proue that in all our workes we are wanting, wherfore we do not ful∣fill the law, & much lesse do any workes of supererogation. So S. Paul said,Rom. 7.25. With the mynd I serue the law of God, but with the flesh, the law of sinne: According to Esay,C. 64.6. All we
are become as one vncleane, and all our Iustices as the cloath of a men∣strued woman. King Dauid prayeth, EnterPs. 141.2. not into Iudg∣ment with thy seruant, because no man liuing shalbe iustifyed in thy sight. Answere. S. Paul only speaketh of the in∣uoluntary motions of the Concupiscence, which are not sinne, but only the punishments of sinne. Esay spea∣keth (according toIn hunc locum. S. Hierome) in the person of grie∣uous sinners, who if they did any Workes at least morally good, yet they defiled the same with many haynous crimes, whereas the question heer is not of sinners, but of the iust, when we say, that a man may not only fullfill the law, but do more then the same. That of K. Dauid,In hunc Ps. S. Austine, S. Hierome, and S. Gregory, do all of them expound of veniall sinnes, in that no man liueth, who offendeth not therein, but these not depriuing man of Grace, do not hin∣der, but that otherwise he may be iust.In hunc locum. Arnobius, S. Hilary, and others do heerby vnderstand, that no man can be iustifyed, if he be compared with God, his Iustice being so infinitly perfect, that in respect thereof, the iustice of all men and Angells may seeme Iniustice, euen as a Candle lighted in the sunne, serueth not to shine, but to make a shadow, according to that of Iob,C. 4.17. shall man be iustifyed in comparison with God? Fourthly, most insist vpon those words of our Sauiour,Luc. 17.10. When you shall haue done all things that are commanded you, say, we are vnprofitable seruants, we haue done that which we ought to do. Answere. Christ heere speaketh expressely of thinges commanded, not of workes of Perfection. And so S. Am∣brose expoundeth it, saying,L. de v duis post med. Those who haue fullfilled the Commandement, may say, We are vnprofitable seruants, we haue done that which we ought. This the Virgin doth not say, nor he who hath sould his goods, but expecteth rewards layd vp, euen as the holy Apostle sayth, Behould we haue left all things and followed thee, what there∣fore shall we haue? not as an vnprofitable seruant doth he say, he hath done that which he ought to do, but as profitable to our Lord, who hath multiplied the talents committed vnto him &c. So cleerely doth S. Ambrose answere his their common Obiection. And the same answer is giuen byL. 10. in c. 16. ad Rom. Origen. Adde yet
heerūto, that it is not sayd of those who obserue the Precepts that they are vnprofitable seruants, but only it is counsailed that they say so of themselues, that is, to be humble, and not to brag of their deserts. And so Christ himselfe calleth not his seruants vnprofitable, when they haue done their labour, but speaketh thus,Mat. 25.21. Good and faythfull seruant, because thou wast faythfull in a little, I will place thee ouer much: enter in∣to the ioy of thy Lord. Yea he affirmeth of such, that he will not nowIo. 15.15. name them seruants, but friends. And S. Paul saith expressely,2. Tim. 2.21. If any man therefore shall cleanse himselfe from these, he shalbe a vessell vnto honour, sanctifyed and profitable to our Lord, prepared to euery good worke. So many wayes is this Ob∣iection insufficient.
CHAP. XII. The State of the Question, concerning Vowes is proposed. Whether Vowes of Workes of Perfection, as Pouerty, Cha∣stity, and Obedience, be Lawfull, and Commendable now in the Law of Grace. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. TO examine now what the Church of Christ belieueth and practiseth concer∣ning the Vowes of workes of Perfection; in the fourth Carthage Councell it is de∣creed, that,Conc. Carth. 4. c. 104. If any widdowes &c. haue vowed themselues to our Lord, and casting of the lay-habit, shall appeare in Religious habit vn∣der the testimony of the Bishop and the Church, and afterwards haue passed to secular marriages, according to the Apostle, they shall haue damnation, because they haue dared to make voyd the fayth of Cha∣stity, which they haue vowed to our Lord. In the second Coun∣cell of Arles it is defined that,Cap. 25. Those who after the holy Pro∣fession do Apostatate, and returne to the world, and do not afterwards seeke the remedies of Pennance, shall not at all receiue Communion
without Pennance. Whom also we command, not to be admitted to the Office of the Clergy. And whosoeuer he be, after Pennance let him not presume to take a secular habit; but if he shall presume, let him be houlden an Alien from the Church. Agreably to this the Catho∣licke Church still teacheth, that,Bellar. de Monach. l. 2. c. 14 16. & Rhem. Test. in Luc. 10. p. 169 & p. 55. A vow being a Reli∣gious promise of some greater good made freely to God, is in it selfe lawfull, and a true and proper worship of God. Pointes Disputable. SomeCaiet. q. 89. art. 7. thinke, that the breach of a Vow delibera∣tely made, though in a matter or small moment to be a mor∣tall sinne: but othersSotus l. 7. de Iustitia. q. 2. art. 1. Na∣uar. in Man, c. 12. n 40. more probably teach, that it is but veniall. SomeS. Thom. q. 88. art. 7. teach, that the solemnity of a vow of cha∣stity doth essentially consist in a certaine spirituall Conse∣cration or Benediction of a Person, by which he is made vncapable of marriage. OthersScot. in 4. Dist. 38. affirme, that it essential∣ly consisteth in the Decree of the Church, forbidding Ma∣riage to them who solemnly do vow: Yet othersSotus l. 7. de Iustitia. q. 2. art. 5. Richar. in 4. Dist. 38. art. 7. q. 2. most probably thinke, that it consisteth in an actuall deliuery of a mans owne power, into the handes of God, and them who supply his place.S. Thom. q. 88. art. 11. Some teach that the Pope can∣not dispense in a solemne vow of Chastity, made by Pro∣fession of Religion: but othersRichar. in 4. Dist. 38. art. 9. q. 1. Nauar. in Man. c. 12. n. 71. affirme the contrary. None of these are defyned. Protestants Vntruthes. LutherL. de vo∣tis Monasti∣cis. auoucheth, that the Primitiue Church & the New Testament, were wholly ignorant of the vse of making Vowes: but this is disproued in the next 2. & 3. Sections. MelancthonIn Confess. Aug. art. 27 & in Apol. eius∣dem Arti∣culi. affirmeth, that in the tyme of S. Austine, Monasteries were free Colledges not tyed to any vowes: but S. AustineIn Ps. 75. & 99. teacheth expresly the contrary. He also reporteth that Monachisme is but a late inuention; and that we belieue a Religious lyfe to merit Iustification and Remission of sinnes, & being applyed to others, will saue them: but these are only his owne foolish fictions.
Protestant Doctrine. LutherL. de vo∣tis Monast. Caluin Instit. l. 4. c. 13. §. 7. and some other Prot. teach, that though vowes of things indifferent, may be made for some respe∣ctes, as for the better auoyding of sinne, & other good ends; yet to do the same for any worship to God, or as a thing of Perfection, they thinke vnlawfull; but as for the vowes of Pouerty, Chastity, and Obedience, they vtterly condemne them. According to Perkins,Tom. 2. in Gal. 2. Col. 82. The vowes of perpetuall Continency, Pouerty, and Regular Obedience, are indeed the state of Abhomination. And Caluin thinketh, that,In Re∣fut. Catalani, pag. 384. The vow of single lyfe is Rebellion against God. Beza sayth,In Con∣fess. c. 5. sect. 39. We thinke with the Apostle the vow of Perpetuall Chastity to be Diabolicall Doctrine; but where he fyndeth this in any Apostle, he doth not men∣tion. OneDe Cap. Babyl f. 77. thing I here add (saith Luther the Apostata Fryar) which I would to God I could perswade all men, that is, that all vowes might be altogeather taken away or eschewed; that is, that all would breake their vowes as himselfe did. The Decree of Tyndall and Foxe is,Act. Mon p. 1138. All vowes are against the Ordinance of God. So that Prot. do vtterly condemne all vowes of Perfection. Protestants agree with Ancient Heretickes. Guido reproueth one Gerhard for teaching that,De Erre∣ribus Pseudo-apostolorum. It was more Perfection to liue without Vow, then with Vow. The Lampetians are impugned by S. Damascene,Lide 100. haeres. circa. fin. for affir∣ming that Monasteries ought to be free without Perpetuall vowes. And the same Error is condemned in the hereticksTurre∣crem. l. 4. Summae de Eccl. punct. 2. c. 37. Fraticelli, and Wicliffe;Walden∣sis Tom. 3. c. 75. Conc. Constant. Act 8. yea for impugning of Religiou men, the Arrians were condemned by S. Atha∣nasiusIn vit. S. Antonij. Theodoret. hist. c. 8. Ruf∣finus. l. 11. hist. c. 3. and other Fathers, and the Donatistes by S. Au∣stineL. 3. cont. Petil c. 40. & in Ps. 132.; and consequently are condemned for Heretickes all Prot. that defend the same Errours. Protestant Errours. LutherL. de vo∣tis Monast. thinketh that if a man will vow piously,
he must do it in this forme: I vow Pouerty, Chastity, and Obedience euen vnto death freely, that is, that I may chāge it when I will. But if he promise continency vntill death, how then freely? if freely, how then vntill death? Melan∣cthonIn con∣fess. Aug. art. 27. & in Apol. eiusdem Articuli. auoucheth, that S. Bernard and S. Francis be∣came Religious only for corporall profit. But I persuade my selfe, Melancthon would deeme it little corporall pro∣fit for him, to walke barefooted, to weare hayrcloth, to fast with bread and water, to sleep vpon the ground & the like corporall austerities, which these good Religious men did vse, and many others likewise at this day. SECT. II. It is proued from the Scriptures, that the foresaid Vowes of Perfection are Lawfull, and Commendable. THat God was worshipped by the vowes of the fayth∣full in all tymes, appeareth first by the doctrine of the Old Testament, where it is saydPs. 76.11. Vow yee, and render your vowes vnto God.Deut. 23.21. Num. 30.3. Eccl. 5.3. When thou shalt vow avow vnto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not be slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and sundry such like. And accordinglyGen. 28.20. Iacob vowed a vow, saying &c. And,Ps. 131.2. Dauid vowed a vow to the God of Iacob. Now wheras Peter Martyr, Fulke, and others seeke to euade, in answering that,Pet. Mart. de caelib. & vot. p. 302. 303. 304. Fulk. in his Retentiue. p. 153. Bul∣ling. Dec. in Engl. p. 380. Hospin. de orig. Mo∣nach. fol. 104. Luth. to. 2. Wit∣temb. fol. 276. vowes were Ceremonies of the old Testament &c. abolished by Christes Comming, this is eui∣dently false. First, In that vowes were made euen in the state of Nature before Moyses tyme, as appeareth by the fore∣mentioned vow of Iacob. Secondly, in that vowes are foretoldEsa. 19.21. See the Marg. notes of Bible an. 1576. to continue during the New Testament. Thir∣dly, in that, as shalbe shewed in the next Section, the An∣cient Fathers of the Primitiue Church, taught the lawfulnes of vowes. And lastly, in that the Prot. themselues, as shalbe shewed in the 4. Section, do likewise proue and maintaine from the Scriptures, the lawfulnes of Christian vowes. But to come now to our tyme of Christianity, seeing
according to M. Perkins, and other Prot.Reform. Cath. p 155. Muscul. loc. com. de votis. p. 524. Wil∣let Synop. p. 241. Now in the New Testament we haue warrant to vow, certaine thinges that be law∣full, and notWillet Synop. p. 241. 243. commanded vs, as for example,Perk. Ref. Cath. p. 156. to keepe set tymes of fasting, to taske our selues in prayer, to giue set Almes &c. it hath bene proued in the precedent Chapter, that voluntary Pouerty, Chastity▪ and the like are workes of Perfection, & lawfull, therfore it euidently followeth, that they may be vowed to God by vs Christians. And to descend to particulars concerning the vow of Pouerty, S. Luke relateth that,Act. 5.1. Ananias sould a peece of land, and defrauded of the Price of the land &c. and bringing a cer∣taine Portion laid it at the feet of the Apostles. And Peter said, Ana∣nias, why hath Sathan tempted thy hart, that thou shouldest lye to the holy Ghost, and defraud of the price of the land? Remayning, did it not remayne to thee, and being sould, was it not in thy power? &c. Thou hast not lyed to men, but to God. Ananias, hearing these words, fell downe, and gaue vp the Ghost. Here the words, defrauding of the Price lying not to men, but God, do conuince, that his sinne was the breach of his vow, he hauing no other Obligation to giue all, or any portion of the Price. Wheras D. Fulke and M. Willet do answere herunto, that Ananias his offence was only his falseAgainst Rhem. Test. in Act. 5 sec. 4. f. 191. Willet Synop. p. 245. affirming that he brought the whole, when he withdrew a part, and so only sinned in lying and couetousnes; but this is but barely said, and indeed is most vntrue, for that he and his wyfe, had vowed with other Christians the Common life, appeareth in that, he defrauded of the price of the land, his wyfe being priuy therto; for he could not haue bene said to haue defrauded, vn∣les he had stolne away that which was bound by promise, and which after the said promise or vow so made, was due in Iustice to others no lesse then to himselfe. Now that they vowed a thing not commanded, is cleere by these wordes, Remayning, did it not remayne to thee, & being sould, was it not in thy power? And that this vow was made to God, and so the breach sacriledge, these words conuince, Ananias, why hath Sathan tempted thy hart, that thou shouldst lye to the holy Ghost &c. Thou hast not lyed to men but to God. Now what is it to lye to God, but to breake his promise giuen to God? Add yet
hereunto, that so grieuous a punishment as the inflicting of sodayne death doth strongly argue, that the fault was grea∣ter then only a Lye, or Couetousnes. Yea that it was the breach of a vow, D. Fulke himselfe telleth vs, saying,Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 5. sect. 4. They that haue as great power to keepe the vow of Virginity, aduised∣ly made, as Ananias had to deliuer the whole price of his land, sinne damnably if they breake it: where he must needes suppose that Ananias vowed the giuing of the whole, as the other had vowed the keeping of Virginity, otherwise their sinne could not be alike damnable. To come now to the vow of Chastity, that the B. Virgin Mary vowed the same, is proued from these her words,Luc. 1.34. How shall this be done, because I know not man? that is, because I cannot know man: for if she had only meant, that as then she had neuer knowne man, then her demand had beene needlesse, and idle, seeing it might haue been easily answered; that though now she did not, yet shortly afterwards she should: whereas the Angell declaring the manner how it should be, insteed thereof sayth,Ver. 35. The holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouershaddow thee. But Peter MartyrDe votis. replyeth, that by the like reason Moyses saying,Ex. 6.12. How shall Pharao heare me, be∣ing of vncircumcised lippes? And Nicodemus asking,Io. 3.4. How can a man be borne when he is old? should thereby, the one vow vncircumcision of lippes, and the other old age. But this is impertinent, for these things not depending of mans free∣will, do therefore cause such impediments, whether of speaking, or being borne, as cannot be remoued from man, and therefore they prudently asked those questions, though they had made no vow of the things, because without all such vow, they had such impediments of speaking, or be∣ing borne, as by themselues they could not remoue: wher∣as the B. Virgin being marryed, had it in her free power to haue known man: and therfore she had foolishly asked, how shall this be done, if by no law she had beene hindred to know man; now there was no generall or Common law, or Precept forbidding the same, therefore some Priuate law, which was her vow.
Christ our Sauiour affirmeth that,Mat. 19.12. There are Eunuches which haue gelded themselues for the kingdome of heauen; he is not an Eunuch who only containeth, but who cannot but con∣tayne; wherfore seeing the Eunuches heere spoken of, are not such by nature, or by cutting, as is plaine by the Text, where 3. seuerall sorts of Eunuches are distinguished; it fol∣loweth, they are such by voluntary vow: Also, none can be sayd absolutely to haue gelded themselues, who only for a tyme contayne, and afterwards at their pleasure marry. All that D. Fulke hath to answere to this place is that,Against. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 19. sect. 12. They that are assured of the guift of Chastity vnto their lyues end may lawfully vow, or determine of it, but without such assurance no man can vow continency lawfully. But this doth nothing satisfy the Text, which affirmeth that some Eunuches did geld themselues, that is, did actually vow Chastity, but of any assurance they had to continue chast, there is no mention. But besides I would know what assurance this is which D. Fulke requireth? Either it is some Reuelation from God of his perseuerance in Chastity, and then none must vow cha∣stity without this Reuelation, which is absurd: Or else it is a consident hope in the assistance of Gods Grace, and his owne good care and endeauours, and this no doubt euery mā hath, who freely & willingly do make the said vow, to the honour of God, so that according to D. Fulke with this ordinary assurance any man may make the vow of Chastity. S. Paules aduise concerning Widdowes was this,1. Tim. 5.9.11.12. Let a Widdow be chosen of no lesse then 60. yeares, which hath been the wife of one husband &c. but the yonger widdowes auoyde, for when they shalbe wanton in Christ, they will marry, hauing damna∣tion, because they haue mde voyd their first fayth. Heer it is eui∣dent, that whether the Widdow were yong or old, if after she was once chosen, or professed, she marryed, she there∣by incurred damnation, because by her second vow or faith giuen to her carnall husband in marriage, she did cast away her (other) first fayth, or vow made to God, when she was chosen. But LutherL. de votis Monast. vnderstandeth by fayth, our Christian fayth, or beliefe, which some Widdowes forsooke, that so
they might the better mary againe: but besids that this faith is not properly sayd to be made voyd, but to be lost or pe∣rish, whereas of vowes it is sometymes properly sayd, that they are irritated or made voyd, when they are broken; there was no cause why those widdowes, if they had not vowed Chastity, might not marry, vnlesse they fell from the Christian fayth, for who forbad them to marry with Christians? Doth not the Apostle say of such a one,1. Cor. 7.39. Let her mary to whome she will, only in our Lord? But Luther shalbe answered by one of his owne saying,Anti∣christus siue Prognostica finis mundi p. 148. 149. In that Lu∣ther vnderstandeth this first fayth, of iustifying fayth, and not of the fayth of Chastity, it is playnly inforced. Which opinion, as he was the first that had it, so was it without the assent of any learned man, and agaynst Paul. The Apostle speaketh of the fayth, or vow of office &c. but because Paul blamed them, that they would after marry, it is most cleere that this Condition was in their vow. CaluinInst. l. 4. c. 13. n. 18. an∣swereth, that they sinned returning to mariage, in that with∣all they gaue themselues to all wantones, according to that, when they shalbe wanton in Christ, they will marry. In answere heerto, some vnderstandTertul. l. de Monoga∣mia. Cypr. l. 3. ad Quirinum c. 74. those words of Spirituall delights, with which those Widdowes being replenished in the house of God, became vngratefull to their heauenly Spouse, by desiring earthly Mariages. Others,Theodo∣ret & D. Th. in bunc lo∣cum. of the abundance of temporall things, wherewith they were sustained at the charges of the Church:Chrysost. in hunc lo∣cum. Hier. Ep. ad Age∣ruchiam de Monog. Others of Carnall fornication, which hauing commited, they with∣all proceed to marriage. But howsoeuer it be vnder∣stood, the answere is of no force, for if it be not taken for fornication, then could they be only reprehended, in that they would mary against their vow: If it be taken for the same, then if they had not vowed, insteed of reprehension, they should haue been much commended, for passing from Fornication to honest Mariage, Lastly, Caluin confesseth, that they not only sinned by dishonest lyfe, but also in brea∣king their fayth giuen to the Church; which, sayth he, was a bond of continuall vnmarryed lyfe, the breaking whereof was sinne and damnation; but what is this in plaine wordes, but that they had made a vow or promise or vnmaryed lyfe? Cal∣uin
yet further replyeth, that by the first fayth is vnderstood the fayth giuen in Baptisme: But this is idle, for none at Bap∣tisme, do promise not to marry, therfore why should they be damned marrying after? A third answere yet hath Caluin, that these widdowes promised Continency, which promise they made voyd by marying; but none could make this promise but such as were 60. yeares old, and so not fit for Mariage, S. Paul saying, Let a Widdow be chosen of no lesse them 60. yeares. But first heere is grāted a Promise of Continency, the breach whereof was damnable. Secondly, though the Apostle aduiseth old Wid∣dowes to be chosen, yet not them, but the yong Widdowes he accuseth, that by marying they will make voyd their first fayth: which reprehension the Apostle would not haue giuen to yong Widdowes, if they might not haue vowed. Thirdly, when he sayth, Let a Widdow be chosen, he meaneth not to the vow of Continency, but as someTertul. l. de velandis Virg. & l. 1. ad vxorem. thinke to the Prefecture or Order of Diaconesses: or as othersChrysost. & Ambr. in hunc loc. Hier. Ep. ad Saluianum. thinke more probably, to the number of those Widdowes who were maintained by the Church, of which number S. Paul would not haue the yong widdowes to be, both because they were able by their owne labours to maintaine themselues, as also in that it would be greater difficulty to keep them continent, which otherwise would tend to the dishonour of the Church and scandall of others. So vnan∣swerable are our cleerest Texts of Scripture in proofe of Christian vowes. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the foresaid Scriptures in proofe of the vowes of Pouerty, Chastity, and the like. TO begin with S. Austine, he expounding these wor∣des of the Psalmist, Vow ye and render to our Lord your God, sayth of the Christians of his tyme,In Ps. 75.11. One voweth to God
Coniugall Chastity, that besides his wyse he will not know another. Others also vow, that although they haue made tryall of such mariage, yet neuer after they will, nor desire, or admit any such thing; and these haue vowed something more then the oher: Others do vow Virginity it selfe from their very youth, that they will not experience that which o∣thers haue, and haue left, and these haue vowed much: others vow their howse to be an hospitall to all holy people comming to it, these make a great vow: Another voweth to leaue all the goods he hath, giuing them to the poore and to enter into a Common lyfe, into the Society of Saintes, this man voweth a great vow. Yea S. Austine gathereth from those words of S. Paul,Cor. 6.10. As hauing nothing, and posses∣sing all things,In Ps. 113. that the Apostles did vow Pouerty. See the variety of lawfull and holy vowes, recounted by S. Au∣stine, and practised by the Primitiue Christians, & still con∣tinued by Catholickes: but amongst Prot. not so much as euer heard of, that they were euer practised by any one of them. Theodoret aduiseth that,Quaest. 19. in Deutr. After thou shalt promise any thing to God, thinking the promise to be due, vse diligence that forth∣with thou performe it; for this he saythDeutr. 23.21. Thou shalt not slack to pay thy vow, because our Lord thy God will require it; and it shalbe repu∣ted to thee for sinne. Afterwardes teaching, that it is in the power of the mynd to promise or not to promise he addeth but if thou wilt not vow, it shall not be sinne vnto thee; Wherupon also B.Ps. 65.13. Dauid, I will pay thee my vowes. The Fathers with vnanimous con∣sent do expound the Scriptures in behalfe of Ananias his vow, S. Hierome writeth,Ep. ad Demetriadem. Ananias and Saphira fearfull dispensers, yea of double heart, and therfore condemned, because af∣ter vow they offered as their owne, & not as his to whom they had once vowed them, and now reserued part to themselues of anothers sub∣stance. S. Austine, Whilest heDe verbis Apost. serm. 17. withdrew apart of that which he had promised he is condemned both of sacriledge and fraud. And, ifDe Diuer∣sis. ser. 10. alias 12. it displeased God to take from the money which they had vowed to God, how is God angry when Chastity is vowed and not kept? And a little after, that may be said to a sacred Virgin marying, which Pe∣ter said of the money; Thy virginity remayning, did it not remayne to thee, and before thou hadst vowed it, was it not in thy power? For who∣soeuer
haue vowed such things, and haue not payd them, let them not thinke to be condemned to corporall death, but to euerlasting fyre. A fearefull saying for Luther and other Apostataes. S. Chrysostome,Ho. 11. in Act. Ap. Why hast thou done this? wouldest thou haue it? thou shouldest at the first haue kept it, and not promised it, but now after thou hast consecrated it, thou hast committed grea∣ter sacriledge: for he that stealeth other mens goods, peraduenture doth it for the desire of them, but it was lawfull for thee to haue kept thyne owne, wherefore then didest thou consecrate them, and afterwards take them? S. Fulgentius,Ep. de Debito Con∣iugali. c. 8. How euill it is, and how carefully to be eschewed, if any man, of that which he vowed to God, shall en∣deauour by deadly transgression, to retayne or steale any thing, let A∣nanias and Saphira serue for Example. S. Gregory,L. 1. ep. 33. ad Venan∣tium. See S. Basil. de In∣stit. Monach. ser. 1. Ananias had vowed money to God, which afterwards he withdrew, being ouercome by the persuasion of the Di∣uell, but thou knowest with what death he was punished. If then he were worthy of that death, who tooke away the money that he had gi∣uen to God, consider what great perill in Gods Iudgement thou shalt be worthy of, which hast withdrawne not money, but thy selfe from Almighty God, to whome thou hadst vowed thy selfe vnder the habit or veile of a Monke. How different are these Expositions from D. Fulkes, affirming that Ananias his sinne, was only ly∣ing, not breaking any vow. As touching our B. Virgin Maries vowing of Virginity, Saint Austine writeth,De S. Virginit. c. 4. Greg. Niss. Orat. de Na∣tiu. Domini. Bern. ser. 4. super Missus est. & Ser. signum ma∣gnum. Christ before he was conceyued, had cho∣sen her dedicated to God, of whome he would be borne. This the words shew, which Mary gaue to the Angell telling her of her ofspring: How sayth she, shall that be done seeing, I know not man? which truly she would not haue sayd, if she had not formerly vowed herselfe a Virgin to God. But because the customes of the Israelites did yet re∣fuse this, she was despoused to a iust man, who would not violently take away, but rather preserue agaynst the violent, that which she had vowed. This is so cleere, that D. Fulke sayth,Aga. Rhem. Test. Luc. 1.34. sec. 13. Though S. Austine gather, that she vowed Virginity, yet it followeth not &c. And although Gregory Nyssen be of S. Augustines opinion &c. In like sort touching the Eunuches, S. Epiphanius wri∣teth,Haer. 58. Valesiorum. who were these who gelded themselues for the Kingdome of heauen, but the generous Apostles, and Monkes, and Virgins? Now
that Monkes and Religious Virgins do vow Chastity it is certayne. S. Austine alluding to this place, saith,De S. Virginit. c. 30. He that can take, let him take, but you who haue not yet vowed this, who can take, take. And,De S. Virginit. c. 23. what can be said more true or more cleere? Christ saith, Truth sayth, Vertue and the Wisdome of God sayth, those who with godly purpose contayne themselues from Mariage, do geld themselues for the kingdome of heauen. And on the contrary, humane vanity with impious rashnes contendeth, that those who do this, do only auoid the present necessity of the troubles of Mariage, but in the king∣dome of heauen shall haue no more then others. S. Fulgentius ex∣presly saith,L. de fide c. 3. Whosoeuer hath gelded himselfe for the kingdome of heauen, and vowed to God Continency in his hart, &c. not only if he be stayned with the deadly Cryme of fornication, but also if either a man will take a wyfe, or a woman mary, according to the sentence of the Apostle, he shall haue damnation, because he hath made his first faith voyd. In proofe that the widdowes mentioned by S. Paul vowed Chastity, S. Austine writeth,In Ps. 85. de S. Virgin. c. 23. de bono viduitatis. c. 8. 9. see de Ciu. Dei. l. 17. c. 4. What saith the A∣postle of some who vowed, and performed not? Hauing damnation (sayth he) because they haue made void their first faith; what is this, They haue made void their first faith? they haue vowed and not perfor∣med. And the same he teacheth most plainly in sundry other places. In the fourth Carthage Councell it was decreed that,Can. 104. Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 55. If any widowes though of yonger yeares &c. haue vowed them∣selues to our Lord, and casting away their Laical habit, haue appea∣red in Religious habit vnder the Testimony of the Bishop, and the Church, but afterwardes shall returne to secular mariages, according to the Apostle, they shall haue damnation, because they dared to make void their faith of Chastity, which they had vowed to our Lord. This Canon is so disliking to Daneus, that he chargeth the Coun∣cell and S Austine,Primae part. alt. par∣te, p. 1011. with abusing manifestly the word of God; and as Osiander thinketh,Cent. 5. l. 1. c. 1. p. 20. This Canon hath great errors in it. But I suppose all of Iudgment will giue greater credit to this Exposition of Scripture, made by this Councell and S. Austine, then to any giuen by New Sectaryes. S. Epiphanius,Haer. 61. Apostolico∣rum. If she who is a widow, and dedicated to God, and afterwardes hath maryed, shall haue Iudgment and Con∣demnation,
because she hath cast away her first faith; how much more the Virgin dedicated to God, and maryeth, and being wanton against Christ, and casteth away a greater fayth, shall haue Iudgment? S. Chrysostome,Ho. 15. in 1. Tim. When they haue vowed themselues, they will mary, hauing Damnation, because they haue made void their first faith. And the same exposition is giuen by sundry otherTertul. l. de Mong. propè fin. Ba∣sil. l. de. Vir∣ginit. post med. Hieron. l. 1. in Iouin, & in. c. 44. Ezech. Am∣br. Theodor. in hunc lo∣cum. Fathers. The ancient Fathers did so confessedly allow of vowes, as that Chemnitius sayth,Exam. part. 3. p. 41. We are not ignorant that the Fa∣thers allowed the vowes of perpetuall single lyfe, and that they also brought them to be Obligatory. Peter Martyr thinkethDe vo∣tis. p. 524. Epi∣phanius with many other of the Fathers to erre, in that they said, It was sinne to breake such a vow, when need required, and that they badly ascribed it to Apostolicall Tradition. Caluin,Instit. l. 4. c. 13. n. 17. They say this was obserued from longest memory, that those who would dedicate themselues wholy to our Lord, should bynd themselues with the vow of Chastity: Truly I confesse that this Custome was anciently receaued, but I do not grant that this age was free from all vice. Hospinian affirmeth further, that, NotDe orig. Monach. fol. 102. only Austine, but other Fathers also erred in the vowed Chastity by mutuall Consent of marryed Per∣sons. So cleere and confessed it is, that the Ancient Fathers did expound the Scriptures in behalfe of the lawfull vse of vowes, and that themselues did approue and practise the same Doctrine. SECT. IV. That Protestants defend with Catholikes the vowes of Po∣uerty, Chastity, and the like: And that they con∣firme the same from the sacred Scriptures. BVllinger confesseth that in the Old Testament,Decades in Engl. p. 380. The Nazarites, because they should more freely attend vpon God, did of their owne accord, take vpon them a more strict trade of lyfe, then the Common people vsed: and soIb p. 381. were consecrated to the Lord, by a certayne peculiar kind of liuing: Of whose Vow and Professi∣on theNumer. 6.2.3.5.9.12.21. Scriptures make mention.
And althoughAga. Rhem. Test. f. 191. D. Fulke wil not acknowledge a∣ny sacriledge in Ananias, yet Bullinger affirmeth tha,Dec. in Engl. dec. 4. 8. p. 717. Pe∣ter accused Ananias of theft, yea and also of sacriledge. M. Hooker maintayneth that,Eccl. Pol. l. 2. p. 103. It was indifferent for Ananias to haue sould or held his possessions vntill his solemne Vow and promise vnto God had strictly bound him one only way; So confessed it is that Ana∣nias vowed, & committed sacrilege by breaking his vow. Caluin affirmeth of S. Pauls Widdowes, that in regard of their attendance vpon the Church,Instit. l. 4. c. 13. sec. 18. They had vnderta∣ken the law of a perpetuall vnmarryed lyse, and that if they marryed they cast of the Vocation of God &c. and sinned. And he is other∣wise so agreable with vs, that as D. Bancroft alledgeth him,Suruey. p. 218. by the wife of one husband in that place, he doth (as doth alsoIn 1. Tim 5.9. p. 374. Marloret) vnderstand such a Widdow as was neuer marryed but once: hisSuruey p. 218. Iudgement (being that) there might no Widdow haue attayned to the sayd Church Office, if she had bene twice marryed: which exposition being the same with Catholikes concer∣ning Bigamy, is therefore misliked bySuruey p. 219. Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. in 1. Tim. 5. sec. 5. fol. 180. Beza, Cart∣wright, and D. Fulke. ChemnitiusExam. part. 3. p. 23. 38. Bohe∣mian Con∣fess. in the harmony. p. 544. and other, Prot. do confesse, that the sayd Widdowes made publike profession to liue vnmarryed; Marlo∣ret sayth more fully of them,In 1. Tim. 5.21. pa. 375. they will marry (sayth the Apo∣stle) and truly to marry is of it selfe without fault, for marriage is honourable &c. but because they did once giue their fayth to Christ the spouse, and the Church, and willingly barred themselues from mariage, hēce it is &c. that their mariage doth decline to the ignominy of Christ. Another Prot. sayth, thatAnti∣cbristus pag. 148. 149. Luther vnderstandeth this first faith, of iustifying faith, and not of the fayth of Chastity, it is plainly inforced &c. the Apostle speaketh of the faith, or vow of office &c. But because Paul maketh it a fault, that they would afterwards mary, it is most cleere that this Condition passed by vow. With these agreeth M. Alison, telling how some ofConfut. of Brow∣nisme. p. 71. these yonger widowes through the lust of youth, do betake them∣selues to mariage againe, which, sayth he, though it be a matter law∣full in it selfe, yet it is vnlawfull to those, that before God and his Church haue vowed the Contrary. And thus is this place (of Paul) expounded by Theophilact, Ambrose, Bullinger, Claudius, Guilliand, and others.
Iohn Husse is so confident in this, that he wisheth all toIn 1. Cor. c. 7. note, according to Hierome, that for such as vow Virginity, it is not only a sinne to mary▪ but to will to marry &c. The third impedi∣ment of Mariage is a vow made to God, to keep Continency. But what shall we expect from Luther? certainly no lesse hen this, thaD Ec∣clesiasticis & Monasti∣cis votis. To. 6. Germ. p. 181. 216. No man can deny that it is commanded by God▪ that vowes be kept, as the Scripture sayth, Vow ye and pay, so that it is lawfull for no man to dispute, whether vowes are to be kept. It is Gods Commandement Vow yee and py. This will deceyue no man but him alone who doth not belieue that it is commanded and a∣greable to truth. AgaineDe 10. Praeceptis in 6. Prae∣cepto. It is sacriledge, when a Religious man, Priest, Nunne, and all ohers who haue vowed Continency to God to commit fornication &c. It is Sacriledge, where not only Cha∣stity is defyled, but she who also was offered to God alone, is taken a∣way &c. But this in Priestes is rather from the Institution of the Church, then from God, but in Religious men it is most grieuous, be∣cause they haue of their owne accord consecrated themselues to the Lord, and withdrawne themselues againe. But this being most true which Luther here teacheth, what may we thinke is be∣come of Luther, who not only through Pryde and Carna∣lity broke his owne vowes, which he had made in a Reli∣gious lyfe, but withall tooke away her also, who was offe∣red to God alone, Katherine Bore? But it seemes he would haue vs to do what he saith, not what himselfe doth. But howsoeuer, it is manifest by the Premises, that many of the Primest Protestantes haue expounded the sacred Scriptures agreably with Catholickes, in proofe of the lawfull vse of vowes. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against the vowes of Pouerty, Chastity, and the like, Answered. PEter MartyrL. De vo∣cis & caeba∣tu. obiecteth, that vowes are only mentio∣ned in the Old Testament, not in the New: but when there is mentiō made of Iudaicall vowes, therfore they only
belōg to the Iewish Ceremonies. Answ. Though the word, Vow, be not in the New Testament, yet the thing it selfe, I haue formerly proued from seuerall places therof: Vsury is mentioned, and forbidden expresly in the Old Testament, in the New Testement it is not expresly mentioned, and yet is forbidden to Christians. But this Peter further vrgeth, that professing our selues Christians, we are therby bound to giue our selues wholly to Christ, and therfore no place is left for vowes. Euen as it were ridiculous for a Child to bynd himselfe by Bill or Bond to obey his Father; and therfore were the Israelites forbidden to vow to God the first borne of their cattel, be∣cause they were otherwise dew. Ans. The Iewes were wholly bound to God by reason of their Creation and deli∣uery from Aegypt, and yet according to Prot. they might lawfully vow. Wherfore true it is, that all we haue, we haue from God, who if he pleased might require it from vs a∣gaine, and we bound to do what he commandeth; But be∣cause he leaueth to vs many things free, in which according to our liberty, we may do this or that, therfore many things are both Gods and ours; Gods, because by his guift we haue them; ours, because we may freely dispose them, so that it be not against God, and of these we may therfore vow. And so a sonne may bynd himselfe to his Father in those thinges, which are in his owne power, of which sort, is to marry or not to marry: So that if he promise to marry, when, and in what sort his Father commandeth, he is bound to performe it. That of the first borne of Cattel, maketh for vs, for the rest of them might be vowed to God, and yet all are Gods guiftes. The next Obiection is taken from those textes, which affirme that good workes ought to be done freely and vo∣luntarily, not of necessity, which vowes cause:2. Cor. 9.7. Euery one as he hath determined in his hart, not of sadnes, or of necessity, for God loueth a cheerfull giuer. And,Philem. 14. that thy good might be not as it were of necessity, but voluntary. Answ. These places only speake against Necessity by compulsion or coaction, wherby a man is forced by feare, to do that which willingly he would
not; but as for necessity which ariseth by Precept, or vow, which a man at first doth voluntarily vndergoe, and after∣wards if he will sinne, hath power and liberty to breake the same, this doth so well stand with the commendation and merit of a good worke, as it doth rather increase then diminish the same. And this is so farre from any compulsion, that it is often done with greatest alacrity, according to that,1. Paral. 29.9. The people reioyced when they promised vowes of their owne accord, because they did offer them to our Lord with all their hart. And if at any tyme it fall out otherwise, the fault is not in the nature of the vow, but in the vice of the Votary. Thirdly,Roger Def of the Art. art. 32. p. 188. are obiected such places, as seeme to per∣suade marriage to those who suffer temptations,Ver. 2. and there∣fore the vow of Continency should be rash and vnlawfull, seeing no man knoweth how long he shal liue without the sayd temptations:1. Cor. 7.9. If they do not containe themselues, let them marry, for it is better to marry, then to be burnt: Because of Fornication let euery one haue his owne wyfe:1. Tim. 5.14. I wil therefore the yōger to marry, to bring forth children. Answ. In none of these places are those called to marriage who only are tempted, but who liue in∣continently: for first the words are, because of Fornication: If they do not containe: for your incontinecy, and the like. And this Exposition is made by sundryClem. Alex. l. 4. strom. init. Hieron. in Apol. pro li∣bris conc. Io∣uin. Aug. l. de S. virginit. c. 34. & de bo∣no Coniug. c. 10. fathers, Besids,2. Cor. 11.7.8. Rom. 7.15.16.19.23.25. Saint Paul,Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Eu∣stoch. S. Hierome, and sundry others haue suffered m¦ny temptatiōs of the flesh, & yet neuer marryed, which they had beene bound vnto, if the Obiection were of force: Yea seeing according to Prot. all motions of the flesh, euen the most inuoluntary are mortall sinnes, and none without spe∣ciall Priuiledge are free therof, it followeth, that all without exception were bound to marry, which is against common, and allowable practise. Secondly, though by burning we vnderstood not only Incontinency; but euen euery Temptation, yet in none of these places obiected is there found any Command, but only a permission of Mariage, as let them mary, let them haue a wyfe: and so is this place vnderstood by seuerallAmbr. l. de viduis. Hieron. Ep. 11. ad Age∣rucb. Aug l. de bono vi∣duit. c. 8. Chrysost. in hunc locum. Fathers. Be∣sides this is confirmed by the reason giuen by S. Paul, say∣ing, It is better to mary, then to be burne, for this concludeth not,
that mariage is necessary, but only lawfull, and better then fornication; and yet there is a third thing better then them both, to wit, by fasting, praying, and other holy Exercises to contayne. As if one should say, he that will not fight, let him fly, for it is better to fly, then to be slaine; this man doth not forbid fighting, and ouercoming, which is better then either flying, or being slaine, but only permitteth flight: So also the Apostle, when he bad the maryed, who by consent had con∣tained for a tyme, to returne againe togeather, explicateth himselfe, saying, but I say this by Indulgence, not by Commandent. The words, Let euery one haue his owne wyfe, are spoken of those (according to S. Gregory)In l. Re∣gum. l. 6. c. 1. who are maried already, whom, for feare of incontinency, he perswadeth to liue to∣geather, and this not by Command, but by Indulgence. Lastly, as he sayth, I will therfore the yonger to marry, so he also saith, I would all men to be as my selfe: therfore if the first should imply a Precept, the second also should do the like, and so he should command contraries: he therfore wisheth the one absolutely, and permitteth the other, in reguard of the weaknes of the yonger widdowes. Thirdly I answere, that whether the words obiected, import Permission or Com∣mand, yet they concerne nor such as are bound with vow, but only such as are at liberty to marry: & thus is this place vnderstood by manyAmbr. ad virg. lap. c. 5. l. 1. in Io∣uin. Aug. l. 1. de Adult. coniug. c. 15. & de bono viduit. c. 8. Greg. l. Pa∣stor. part. 3. Admon. 28. Chrysost. l. de Virgin. c 39. & bo. 19. in 1. ad. Cor. Epi∣ph. haer. 61. Fathers. Fourthly, are obiected such places as teach, that Conti∣nency is the guift of God, which is not giuen to all, and ther∣fore that none may vow the same, seeing that none know∣eth whether he hath, or still shall haue the said guift,Mat 19.11.12. not all take this word, but they to whom it is giuen; he that can take, let him take. I1. Cor. 7. would all men to be as my selfe, but euery one hath a proper guift of God, one so, and another so.Ver. 37.7. He that hath determined in his hart, being setled, not hauing necessity, but hauing power of his owne will &c. to keepe his Virgin, doth well. Answere. Some guiftes of God are giuen to man without his owne cooperation, as health, beauty, prophecy, working of miracles, and the like, and these are not in our power, neither can euery man haue them that will, and so cannot be vowed. Others depend of Gods grace and assistance, &
withall of mans freewill and Election, as to belieue, hope, loue, resist temptations &c. and these are also most truly Gods guifts, because if God by his Grace should not preuent, moue, and helpe vs, we were not able to do any of them; and yet withall they do depend of mans choyce, and are in his power, because though God doth help, yet he doth not compell, or necessitate him therto, and in these things man is sayd to haue ability to do good; of which sort of guifts is Continency, and therefore in our Power. And as they on∣ly haue the guift of fayth, who indeed truly belieue, which as we see, all do not, according to that,2. Thess. 3.2. All men haue not fayth, and yet all may belieue if they will when they heare the word preached, otherwise their Infidelity were no sin: so likewise of Continency it is sayd, All take not this word, but to whome it is giuen, and yet all may containe, if they will, because sufficient Grace thereto is denyed to none. And as it were Childish and ridiculous to conclude, that because fayth, hope, charity, resisting of temptations &c. are the guifts of God, therefore we ought not to belieue, hope, loue, or resist temptations; so though Continency be the guift of God, yet it is absurd therupon to inferre, that therefore it is vnlawfull to liue a single lyfe. And the same Exposition is giuen byDe bono viduit. c. 17. S. Austine. But S. Chrisostome directly an∣swereth this, saying,I de virginit. c. 36. which things I haue spoken, that when thou shalt take that from him,1. Cor. 7.7. Euery one hath his proper guift, thou shouldest not faint in mynd, nor reason thus with thy selfe; for this matter there is no need of my labour and study, for Paul hath cal∣led it a guift; for he sayd not so, because he would ranke Continency amongst the number of heauenly guifts, but he called it a guift for mo∣desty, for he would not haue so differed from himselfe and from Christ, whose that is, There are Eunuches who haue gelded themselues for the kingdome of heauen; and that, He that can take, let him take. He should lesse agree with himselfe, condemning them who when they had chosen widdowhood, remayned not in that mynd, for if it be a guift, why dost thou threaten them? Hauing damnation,Math. 19.12. because they haue made voyd their first fayth. For Christ neuer punisheth those who haue not had guifts, but he alwayes punisheth those who liue dishonestly. So many waies is this great Obiection easily answered.
These things obserued; that the guift of Continency (Gods Grace supposed) is euer in our power, may be proued first by such places as plainly teach, that the same is in mans freewill.1. Cor. 7.36. Let him do what he will: she sinneth not if she marry.Mat. 19.12. There are Eunuches who haue gelded themselues.1. Cor. 7.25. Concer∣ning Virgins a Commandement &c. I haue not, but I giue Counsayle.Mat. 19.12. He that can take, let him take: the two first places expresly teach, that it is in mans will, and power to be Continent; the two later containe an exhortation to the same. Now who of wisdome will exhort men to that which is impossi∣ble? And in this sense are these places expounded by manyTertul. de Monog. propè fin. Orig. & Hie∣ron. in illud, Non omnes capiunt. Nazianz. orat. 31. Am∣br. l. 3. de virg. & l. de vi∣duts. Aug. in Ps. 137. Fathers: neyther doth Peter Martyr satisfy, by answe∣ring that these exhortations are directed to those only, who haue the guift of God, for such (according toIn Math. 19. Bucer) cannot but contayne: if therefore those who haue not the guift, cannot containe, and those who haue it, cannot but contayne, to whome doth Christ, and the Apostle direct their Exhortations? Secondly, if all cannot contayne that will, then many may lawfully commit fornication; for if the husbād or wife be long languishing, of if he be long detayned, by reason of Captiuity, bannishment, or tedious iourneys vpon traf∣ficke or merchandise, then the party tempted, not being in their power (according to Prot.) to containe, might law∣fully commit Adultery. But in these CasesSynop. Controu. 6. 9. 4. p. 250. Calu. Harm. in Mat. 19.9. Luther serm. de Matrimo∣nio. Willet confesseth, that God doth giue possibility and grace to containe, because (asCont. Duraeum l. 4. p. 341. 342. Whitaker answereth) these things are necessarily imposed vpon vs, and not voluntarily, or by our owne default; but the merchants absence vpon aduenture is not inforced, but voluntary, as also the adulterous wife, who through her owne offence, is by her husband lawfully dismissed, & yet she may not marry agayne,Mat. 5.33. for he that marryeth her (so) dismissed, committeth Adultery: as also the offendour against the state, who is many yeares detained in prison, and his wife not suffered to conuerse with him; in these cases the parties voluntary offences, are the very causes of the Necessity im∣posed vpon them. And so Willet and Whitaker haue sayd
nothing to the purpose. To Conclude then this answere, where it is said, All take not this word, it is not meant, that all are not capable ther∣of, or haue it not in their power, for then in vayne should our Sauiour haue exhorted all hereunto, saying, he that can take, let him take; but as when it is sayd,Mat. 1.9. He that hath eares to heare, let him heare, it is not meant, that all haue not eares, but all are admonished therby, to vse that faculty of hearing, which they haue. In the last place obiected, Neces∣sity, doth not signify necessity of Marriage, for want of the guift of Continency, but only extrinsecall necessity of the Father, either because his daughter will not liue single, or because himselfe being a Bondman, is compelled by his maister to marry her away. Fiftly, many obiect, that if all should containe, the world would perish. But S. HieromeL. 1. in Iouin. Aug. de bono Con∣iugali. c. 10. and S. Austine answere, that there is no danger therof, seeing there will al∣wayes be more imperfect, then perfect. Yea S. Austine thin∣keth, that though the world should perish therby, yet it were good for all to contayne. His wordes are theseIb. & l. de bono vi∣duit. c. 2. I haue knowne some who murmur (doubtlesse our Prot. Predecessours) what, say they, if all would abstaine from generation, how should man∣kind subsist? I would to God all would this only in Chastity from a pure hart, and good Conscience, and faith vnfaigned; much sooner would the City of God be filled, and the end of the world would be hae∣stened. What else doth it appeare that the Apostle doth exhort, where he sayth, when he spoke therof, I would haue all to be as my selfe? or in another place,1. Cor. 7.29. This therfore I say Brethren, the tyme is short, it remayneth that they also which haue wyues, be as though they had not &c. For the figure of this world passeth away: But I would haue you to be without carefulnes. So cleerly Saint Austine answereth this Obiection. But if in that extremity of the worldes perishing, men were bound to returne to marriage, the former vow were no let, seeing that vowes bynd not, when Gods law prescribeth otherwise, as in this Case it would. Sixtly, Propension to Generation is naturall & good, as being when nature was perfect and continuing in all li∣uing
Creatures, wherfore to hinder the same altogeather by vow of single lyfe, is sinfull, seeing this is to resist nature, & God himselfe who ordayned nature. Answ. The naturall inclination of man is twofold; one, to a thing absolutely, & as it is considered in it selfe; another, as it is considered with all Circumstances. If we consider death, sicknes, and the like, as they are in themselues, we dislike and abhorre them; but if we consider them as matter of patience, the way to heauen, and occasion to glorify God, we loue and desire them. Now because this later propension only is truly and properly humane, as being according to true iudgment and reason, therfore to do against this, is sinne: But single lyfe is only against the former propension, and agreable with the latter, and therfore there is no offence to do against the former. Many Prot. obiect those words of S. Paul,Heb. 13.4. Mariage honourable in all; therfore the vow of single lyfe is vnlawfull. Answ. It is honorable in all such as may lawfully marry, & are lawfully married; not in brother and sister, nor in per∣sons, that haue vowed the contrary, to whom the same A∣postle sayth,1. Tim. 5.11. it is damnable. Hereof also sayth very well an ancient wryter,De fide ad Petrum. c. 3. apud Aug. in fine. The Apostle sayth, Marriage honourable in all, and the bed vndefyled; And therfore the seruants of God, in that they are not marryed, thinke not the good of Mariage to be a fault, but yet they doubt not perpetuall Continency to be better then good Mariage, specially in this tyme, when it is said of Continency, He that can take, let him take. But to see how Prot. corrupt this place, first, they insert the verbe, is, which is not in the Originall. Secondly they make it of the Indicatiue Mood, where it ought rather to be the Imperatiue, Let Mariage be honourable, that so the speach may be an Exhortation, or Comman∣dement to those that be, or wilbe married, to vse themselues in that state in all fidelity, and coniugall Continency. And this is euident by other parts and circumstances of the place, both before and after, all which are Exhortations according to the Protestant Translations: this only being in the mid∣des, and as indifferent to be an Exhortation, as the rest (by their owne Confession) they restrayne of purpose. Thirdly,
theyEngl. Bible of 1577. translate, in all, among all men, wheras they cannot tell either by the Greeke or Latine, that in omnibus, in all, should be the Masculine gender, rather then the Newter (as not only Erasmus, but the Greeke DoctoursSee S. Chrysost. & Theophilact. in hunc lo∣cum. Oecum∣nius in Col∣lect. also take it) to signiy that Mariage should be honourably kept in all respects, for there may be many abuses in Wedlock. Four∣thly, BezaIn Nouo Testam. Grae∣co. Lat. an. 1565. insteed of, in omnibus, in all, shameth not to translate, inter quosuis, amongst euery one, with a Marginall in∣terpretation to signify all Orders, Conditions, States, and qualities of men. This shamles and impious corrupting of the word of God, doth euidently conuince, that the Textes of Scripture taken and vnderstood in that true sense, which the wordes of themselues do import, do directly make a∣gainst all such Errors, as these Prot. Corrupters do obstinatly maintaine.
CHAP. XIII. The true State of the Question, Concerning the Marriage of Priestes. Whether the Vow of Chastity be so annexed to holy Or∣ders, that after Ordination, they who are consecra∣ted, can neither marry, nor vse their wyues formerly married. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. I DO not heere dispute of Prot. Bishops and Ministers, who being meerly lay men, and deuoyd of all sacred Ordina∣tion, no man doubteth but that they may lawfully marry, & enioy their wyues, and all their Neighbours will professe it to be expedient: But the Question heer is, onely of Catholicke Bishops and Priests duly consecrated. Concerning whome, in the first Councell of Nice, is was decreed that,Can. 4: Arab. Bishops do not dwell with women &c. And, the same is decreed of euery single Priest, and of Deacons vnmarryed: only after there are excepted, old women, the Mother, Sister, Aunt, and Grandmother.
But there is no mention or allowance for a wife, which would haue beene in the first place, if it had been approued. In the Councell of Neocaesarea it is defined, that,Can. 1. If a Priest shall marry, he shalbe deposed from Order: but if he shall com∣mit fornication or Adultery, let him be cast out of the Church, and do Pennance amongst the Laity. In the second Councell of Car∣thage,Cap. . By all the Bishops it is sayd, It pleaseth all, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or such as touch the Sacraments, keepers of Chastity, shall abstayne euen from wyues. And it giueth this good reason thereof, that what the Apostles haue taught, and Antiquity it selfe hath obserued, we also may keepe. And the same is defined by sundry otherConc. Elibertin. c. 33. Conc. Are∣lat. 2. c. 2. Conc. Latera. Sess. 9. Refor∣mationes Cu∣riae &c. Councels: and is theBellar. de Clericis. l. 1. c. 19. Rhem. Test. in 8 14. generall Do∣ctrine and practise of the present Catholike Church. Pointes Disputable. SomeMaior in 4. Dist. 24. q. . thinke that the vow of Chastity made by Priests, is ordained by Gods Law, and therefore indispensable: butS. Tho. in 1. 2. q. 88 art. 11. others more truly teach, that it is commanded onely by Decree of the Church, and therefore is dispensable. Protestants vntruthes. MelancthonIn Con∣fess. August. art. 23. auerreth that the first law imposed vpon Clergy men for single lyfe, was in Germany, some 400. yeares agoe: And that no such law is to be found in a∣ny Councell, but was only brought in by the Pope, against the mynd of the Councells. But all this is disproued by the Councells heere before cyted. CaluinInstit. l. 4. c. 12. §. 51. auoucheth that all the Ancient Fathers al∣lowed Mariage in Bishops: But this to be false, wilbe yet further shewed in the next 3. Section following. Rogers falsly affirmeth vs to teach that,Def. of the Articl. art. 28 p. 187. None may be a Priest though he will vow a single lyfe, if he haue bene a maried man: for this he citeth the Rhemists in 1. Tim. 3.2. But there is not any such thing to be found: and the falshood herof is conuinced, by the frequent practise to the contrary, in the Catholicke Church.
The English Church decreeth that,Article 32. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Law, either to vow the state of single lyfe, or to abstaine from Mariage. Therfore it is law∣full also for them, as for all other Christian men, to marry at their owne discretion, as they shall Iudge the same to serue better for Godlines. And the same is taughtSee the Harm. of Conf. p. 348. &c. generally by all Protestantes. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. S. Hierome writing against Vigilantius for his impu∣gning the single life of Priests, relateth the generall practise of the Church of those tymes, saying,Cont. Vi∣gilant. c. 1. What do the Churches of the East, of Aegypt, and of the Sea Apostolike who take Clergy men eyther such as are Virgins, or Continent, or if they haue wyues yet cease to be as husbands? D. Fulke granteth that Iouinian was con∣demned for, that,Answ. to a Coun∣terf. Cath. p. 4. See Hier. l. 1. Cont. Iouin. c 14. & 19. & Apol. ad Pamach. c. 8. Epiph. haer. 59. He taught that such as could not con∣taine, though they had vowed virginity, should neuertheles be marryed. AndProt. Appeal. p. 604. D. Morton acknowledgeth that Vigilantius and Io∣uinian are condemned by S. Hierome for impugning the vnmaried life of Priests. And so also was Simon Magus by S. Irenaeus.L. 1. c. 20. And whereas Bellarmine affirmed, that Vigilantius taught, that Ecclesiasticall persons ought to be maryed, Whi∣taker answereth,Controu. 2. q. 5 c. 7. p. 516. If Vigilantius meant the lawfull mariage of Pastors, in that he thought rightly. So that the Ancient here∣tickes Vigilantius and Iouinian, condemned by S. Hierome and S. Austine, are here defended, and followed by our Carnall Ministers. Protestants Errours. Luther thinketh,Tom. 2. de votis fol. 271. it is impossible, that God approue the vow of Continency, and not rather detest it.Tom. 5. serm de ma∣trim. fol. 119. Increase and mult∣ply is not a Precept, but more then a Precept. Swinglius auoucheth that,Tom. 1. in Paraenesi ad Heluetos. fol. 114. The sacred Scripture is so far from prohibiting the Mini∣sters of the Church the vse of holy Mariage, as that it doth often com∣mand the same. Yea saith Bullinger,In. 1. Tim. 3. pag. 438. A Bishop is the Mini∣ster of Gods word: but this man ought to be the husband of one wyfe, euen because he is a Bishop. So that such Prot. Bishops & Mi∣nisters,
as do not marry, do contrary to the command gi∣uen by the Scripture, as these Prot. dreame. SECT. II. It is gathered from the Scriptures, that the vow of Chasti∣ty is rightly annexed to holy Orders. THe vow of Chastity in Priests not being a Diuine Pre∣cept expressed in Scripture, but an Apostolicall Tra∣dition and law of the Church, it cannot be expected, that cleere Texts of Scripture should be produced for it, yet from thence may be deduced many strong probabilities: as first that, in the tyme of the Old Testament, Continency from wyues was required, when the husbands were to be busied in any holy Office. Those that were to eate the Paschall lambe, were commanded to do the same with theirExod. 12.11. loynes girded, that is, according to S. Gregory,Greg. bo. 22. super Euang. obseruing Conti∣nency. When the People of Israel were to receiue the law from God, Moyses commanded, that they should,Exo. 19.15. be ready agaynst the third day, and not come neare (their) Wiues. A∣chimelech the Priest,1. Reg. 21.4.5. would not giue the holy bread to Da∣uid, and his company, except they had contayned some tyme from women; much more then ought Priests now to contayne from wyues, seeing they consecrate, receyue, and giue to others, the body of Christ, which was prefigured in that holy bread. To these and sundry other such places,Calu. In∣stit. l. 4 c. 12. §. 25. Caluin an∣swereth, that the Leuiticall Priests, being types and figu∣res of Christ, were to represent his Excellency with what purity and sanctity they could, but now by Christes com∣ming, those figures and shadowes are ceased. But this hel∣peth nothing, for as those Priests did beare the figure of Christ to come, so Christian Priests represent him as comen, and therfore the like and greater purity is required in them. But indeed the chiefe reason why the Leuitical Priests were to abstayne from their wiues, was not because they were
the figure of Christ, but because they ministred vnto God, for it is sayd,Ex. 19.21. The Priests that come to the Lord, let them be sanctifyed, least he strike them. Dauid also was alwayes the fi∣gure of Christ, and yet he was only commanded to abstaine from his wife, when he was to eate the hallowed bread. In the New Testament S. Paul teacheth, that a Bishop must be giuenEp. ad Tit. c 1. 8. to Hospitality, gentle, sober, iust, holy, Continent: he sayth to S. Timothy,2. Ep. 2.3.4. Labour thou as a good soldiar of Christ Iesus: no man being a soldiar to God, in tangleth himselfe with secular businesses, but the state of marriage necessarily causeth many secular businesses and cares. He counsayleth the married,1. Cor. 7.. by consent to contayne for a tyme, that they may giue themselues to prayer. Wherefore Clergy men ought still to contayne, see∣ing daily they ought to persist in prayer. SECT. III. The Fathers do gather from the Scriptures, that the Vow of Chastity is rightly annexed to holy Orders. IN the second Carthage Councell it is thus decreed,Can. 2. It pleaseth vs all, that Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or those who handle the Sacraments, keepers of Chastity, shall abstaine themselues euen from wyues, that what the Apostles haue taught, and antiquity it selfe hath obserued, we also may keep.In Nu∣mer. ho. 23. Epiph. haer. 59. Ambr. in. 1. Tim. c. 3. If the prayer of the iust (sayth Origen) be offered as incense in the sight of our Lord &c. And the A∣postle sayth to them who are marryed,1. Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one another, except perhaps by consent for a tyme, that you may giue your selfe to prayer; it is certayne that the daily Sacrifice is hindred by them who serue the necessities of mariage; whereupon it seemeth to me, that he only is to offer the dayly Sacrifice, who hath vowed himselfe to daily & perpetuall Chastity. Agreably heerto sayth S. Hierome,L. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 19. If a lay man &c. cannot pray vnlesse he want the duty of mariage; a Priest must alwayes pray, who alwaies must offer sacrifice for the people. If he must al∣wayes pray therfore he must alwayes want mariage: for in the Old law they who offered hostes for the people, not only were not in their owne
howses, but were purified for a tyme, separated from their wyues, and they did not drinke wyne and sicer, which prouoke lust. Maryed men are chosen to be Priestes, because there are not so many Virgins, as are necessary to be Priestes. Againe,Apol. ad Pamach. c. 3. If married men take it ill, let them not be angry at me, but at the holy Scriptures, yea at Bishopes, Priestes, and Deacons, and at all the Priestly and Leuiticall Quyre, who know they cannot offer Sacrifice, if they serue the act of Marriage. And,Ad. c. 11 ad Titum. If the Laity be commanded, that for prayer they abstaine from the company of their wyues, what is to be thought of a Bishop, who daily is to offer vnspotted Sacrifices to God for his owne, and the peoples sinnes? Let vs read the bookes of kinges, and we shall fynd, that the Priest Achimelech would not giue to Dauid and his seruants the bread of Proposition, vntill he had demanded whether they were pure from women, not only strangers, but their owne wyues. And vnlesse he had heard, that for two dayes they had forborne the act of Marriage, he would not haue giuen them the bread, which formerly he had de∣nyed. There is so great difference betwene the bread of Proposition, & the body of Christ, as betwene a shadow and a body, betwene an Image and the truth, betwene the patternes of things to come, and the things themselues which are prefigured by those Patternes. AndL. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 14. he pro∣ueth, that the Apostles after they were called to follow Christ, had no more carnall company of their wyues, by those wordes of our Sauiour,Mat. 19.29. He that hath left wyfe &c. But the Fathers Doctrine and practise, were so cleere in behalfe of the vnmaryed life of Priestes, that Iewell sayth,Defence of the Apo∣logy. p. 195. Here I grant M. Harding is like to fynd some good aduantage, as hauing vndoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his syde. And Bucer acknowledgeth that,Gratula∣tio ad Angl. p. 35. The Church of the East, Ae∣gypt, and the Sea Apostolicke were accustomed in S. Hieromes tyme, not to take for Priestes, but either such as were not maryed, or ceased to be, by abstayning from their wyues. The Councell of Nice, which Whitguift calleth, that notable and famous Councell of Nice, & which is of all learned and wyse men reuerenced, esteemed, and imbraced next vnto the Scriptures themselues, did (as Cartwright acknowledgeth) teach that,In his second Re∣ply. part. 1. p. 483. Vnto those that were chosen to the Ministry vnmarryed, it was not lawfull to take any wyfe after∣wardes &c. And, Paphnutius sheweth, that not only this was before the Councell, but was an ancient Tradition of the Church, in which both
himselfe, and the rest of the Councell rested. So confessedly are the Ancient Coūcels & Fathers, against the Mariage of Priestes. SECT. IV. That Protestants teach the Vow of Chastity to be righly annexed to holy Orders. THe allowance of wiues to the Clergy, is a Doctrine so pleasing and agreable to the Prot. Ministry, as that litle can be expected to be sayd by any of them agaynst the vse thereof. I find that the Church inThe booke of the 6. Arti∣cles, set forth in the tyme of K. Henry the eight. K. Henry the eight his tyme (whichFulke against Hes∣kins. p. 564. sec. 80. 82. Protestants acknowledge for a true Church) and also the now Waldenses do both of them man∣taine, and defend the vnmarryed lyfe of Priests: the Walden∣ses (saythDe Eccle∣sia. p. 150. 224. 226. Morgēsterne) do inforce their Ministers of the word to single lyfe: They deny (saythConfil. Theol. part. 2. p. 152. Melancthon) marriage to their Priests. It is likewise confessed that,Harmo∣ny of Conf. & the ob∣seruation therto an∣nexed vpon the Confess. of Behemia▪ obseru. 4. For the most part it is vsed in the Churches of Bohemia, that a single man should be taken into the Ecclesiasticall Ministery; whereof also saith Lascitius,De Russo∣rum &c Re∣lig. pa. 157. All the Ministers for the most part in Bohemia and Morauia do liue vn∣marryed most holily. Iohn Husse teacheth that,In. 1. Cor. c. 7. Order is the seauenth impedi∣ment of Marriage, because a Clergy man in greater Orders, ought not to marry, because he hath made a vow. Againe,Serm. de pace. Clergy men are greatly bound aboue the Common people to keep Chastity, both by rea∣son of Diuine Precept, and by reason of their proper Vow, and by rea∣son of the most holy Ministery, and by reason of the profitable Example. All these reasons notwithstanding, I do not fynd amongst all the brood that are come from Luther, any one to allow the Vow of Chastity, to be annexed to the Clergy. Yea that which deserueth our obseruation is, that wheras throgh this whole booke I do confirme euery Point of our Catho∣like Doctrine, euen by the Testimonies and Grants of the learnedst Prot. themselues, yet in this of obliging the Clergy to a single Chast lyfe, they especially heere of England do
all forsake me. So pleasant is Wedlocke to our fleshly Mini∣sters. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures against the Vow of Cha∣stity in Priests, answered. MOst Prot. do vrge that S. Paul foretelleth1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. that in he last tymes, certaine shall depart from the faith, attending to spiris of Error, and doctrines of Deuils &c. forbidding to marry &c. Answ.L. 1. in Io∣uin. Aug. l. 30. cont. Faust. c. 4. 6. Ambr. & Chrysost. in hunc locum. Fulgent. de fide. c. 3. S. Hierome, S. Austine, S. Ambrose, and other Fathers, do vnderstand this of those who absolutly forbid Mariage in all men, as being of its owne nature euill; of which sort were Tacianus, Marcion, and Manichaeus. He for∣biddeth (sayth S. Austine)L. 30. cont. Faust. c. 6. to marry, who saith that it is euill, not he who preferreth before this good, another thing better. Wheras Catholickes thinke Marriage to be a holy Sacrament, and compell none absolutly to Continency, but only for iust respectes require that Condition in them, who of their owne accords desire to take holy Orders: euen as the Church doth not prohibit temporall Iudges, or the office of a tormenter or Executioner, & yet those Offices she will not suffer Ecclesiasticall men to execute. Some reply, that the foresaid Heretickes are to come in the last tymes, & ther∣fore it cannot be verifyed in Tatian, Marcion, & Manichaeu: but by last tymes is vnderstood the last whole age, frō Christ vntill the end of the world; for the Apostle speaking of him∣selfe, and others of his tyme sayth, that vpon them1. Cor. 10.10. the ends of the world are come: and S. Iohn speaking of his owne tyme, sayth,1. Ep. 2.18. Litle Children it is the last houre: And though amongst the Manichees many did marry, yet (asL. 30. cont. Faust. c. 6. S. Au∣stine testifyeth) this was not because they thougt it lawfull, but because they would not be debarred therof. Secondly it is obiected by M. Rogers,Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 32. p. 186. that S. Paul requireth in a Bishop, that he be1. Tim. 3.2. the husband of one wyfe. Answere. If this proueth any thing for Protestants, it proueth that euery Bishop ought to haue a wyfe, and con∣sequently
if they haue not (as many of their owne Su∣perintendants are wanting) they do not as Saint Paul pre∣scribeth. Besides in the same verse he teacheth, that a Bi∣shop must be chast, the true meaning then is, that he ought not to haue bene twice maried; euen as in the like phrase, & in the same Epistle, he sayth,1. Tim. 5.9. Let a widdow be chosen &c. which hath bene the wyfe of one husband: Wherby it is plaine, that the former place cannot be vnderstood, as CaluinIn. 1. Tim. c. 3. & in c. 1. ad Tit. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 451. and o∣thers would inforce, to wit, that S. Paul only counsaileth or commandeth, that a Bishop shall not haue many wyues at once, for there was no reason that he should command, that a Widow should be chosen who had but one husband at once, seeing in no tyme or place was it euer vsed, that one woman at the same tyme should be wyfe to many hus∣bands. Besides in the tyme of S. Paul, it was not vsuall a∣mongst the Gentiles or Iewes, and much lesse amongst Christians, for one man to haue many wyues at once, ther∣fore needlesse had it bene to haue prohibited holy Bishops the same. As for the Gentiles in the Romane Empyre, wher∣with the whole world was as then gouerned, Polygamy was infamous, and prohibited by many lawes,ff. de his qui nota. infam. l. 1. & e. de incest. nup. L. nemi∣nem. & ad L. Iuliam. de Aduet. L. Eum qui. which though they were enacted after the Apostles tyme, yet do they shew the prohibition therof, to haue bene much more Ancient. And as for the Iewes and Christians, we see that when mention is made vpon any occasion in the New Te∣stamentMat. 5.33. & 19.3.29. Luc. 14.26. 1. Cor. 7.2.27. Eph. 5.28.31.33. of wyfe, the same is done in the singular num∣ber: and we may well thinke, that if as then it had bene law∣full, that Zacharias, and others who had their wyues bar∣raine, would haue marryed others, which yet neither he, nor other priuat man did; though K. Herod peraduenture and some other great Princes would sometymes be careles therof. This vnderstanding of this place, to wit, that he should not be chosen Bishop who had bene twice marryed is giuen by S. Austine,Aug. l. de bono Con∣iug. c. 28. Hie∣ron. in c. 1. ad Titūm. Am∣br. l. 10. op. 82. Tertul. l. 1. ad vxorem. Epi¦phan. haer. 39. Chrysost. ho. 2. in Ep. ad Tit. S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, and sundry other Fathers. But S. Chrysostome answereth directly to this place, saying,Hom. 2. in Iob. Paul the Apostle when he went to the Gentiles, did not impose vpon them the greatest waight of vertue; but willing to place
Pastors in the world which was replenished with Adulteries and for∣nications: and becaus vertues were rarely found, ordaining Bishops he said to Titus OrdaineTit. 1.5. Bishopes, as I haue also appointed thee &c. the husband of one wyfe not so, that now this be obserued in the Church, for a Priest ought to be adorned with all Chastity; but be∣cause that to those who liued in fornication, it was a great thing, ther∣fore he sad, Ordaine Bishops &c. the husband of one wife not that he made this a law but that he pardoned their Error or infirmity. Thirdly it is obiected that,Instit. l. 4 c. 19. §. 27. Rogers Def. of the Art. art. 32. p. 188. Mariage is honourable in all. Ergo in Priests. Answer. By the like reason might be pro∣ued, that marriages of kinsfolkes in the first and second de∣gree, and of Children without consent or their Parents, is honourable and lawfull, which yet Caluin denyeth. The meaning therfore is, that it is honourable in all lawfully ioi∣ned togeather, whether they be old or yong, noble or base, Greekes or Hebrewes &c. And thus is it expounded byIn hunc locum. Theophilact. Also it is honourable in all things which belong to Marriage, as in that it is a Sacrament, in that ther∣by they mutually giue their faith, in regard of their yssue. Lastly, this place maketh as much agaynst those who haue the guift of Continency, as against Priests, seeing such, according to Protestants, are bound to contayne. But S. Austines answer will peraduenture better satisfy, who sayth,Quaestio∣nibus vet. ac. Nou. Test. q. 127. fin. But perhaps it wilbe sayd, if it be lawfull and good to marry, why it is not lawfull for Priests to haue wyues? To this he presently answereth, who knoweth not that euery thing hath its or∣der; for there is something which is not altogeather generally law∣full, to all, and there is something which is lawfull to some, and not to others: and which is sometymes lawfull, and sometymes not. It is neuer lawfull for any man to commit fornication; but it is law∣full to bargayne somtymes and somtimes not; for before a man be of the Clergy, he may lawfully bargaine, but after not. It is lawfull sometymes for a Christian to company with his wife, sometymes not. Vpon dayes of Procession sometimes it is not lawfull, because absti∣nence must be euen from lawfull things, that what is desired may more easily be obtayned &c. Is euery thing Lawfull before an Emperor, which is lawfull before others? how much more in matters concerning God? Heereby it is, that the Bishop ought to be purer then others, for he see∣meth
to beare his person, for he is his Vicar, that what is lawfull for others, may not be lawfull for him; because he must daily supply the place of Christ, eyther praying for the people, or offering, or baptizing. And generation is not only vnlawfull to him, but also to his Ministery, because he ought to be purer, seeing the thinges which he ministreth are holy. So plainely is this Obiection answered by S. Au∣stine. Fourthly, isRogers Def. of the Art. art. 32. p. 186. obiected that the Apostles themselues had wyues, and that they carryed them about with them when they peached,1. Cor. 9.5. Haue we not power (sayth S. Paul) to lead about a woman a Sister, as also the rest of the Apostles? &c. And,Philip. 4.3. I beseech thee my sincere companion: in both which places Prot. dreame of wyues. Answ. But I will refer them toL. 1. cont. Iouin. c. 14. S. Hierome, answering herein their forefather Io∣uinian in these wordes: Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, that I may grant him for the present, out of our aboundance, had wyues; but such as they tooke when they knew not the Gospel: who afterwards taken to be Apostles, they relinquish the Office of Marriage. For when Peter in the person of the Apostles, sayd to our Lord, Behould we haue left all, and followed thee? Our Lord answereth him: Amen, I say to you, that there is no man who shall leaue house, or Parents, or Brethren, or wyfe, for the kingdome of heauen, who shall not receiue much more in this world, & in the world to come life euerlasting. But if he shall obiect that vnto vs (as Prot. do) to proue that all the Apostles had wiues, Haue we not power to carry about women or wyues (because  with the Grecians signifyeth both) as the rest of the Apostles and Peter? let him ioyne that which is in the Greeke bookes. Haue we not power to carry about sisters, women, or wyues? Wherby it appeareth that he speaketh of other holy women, who according to the custome of the Iewes, did minister to their Maisters of their owne substance, as we read, they did to our Lord himself. And the order of the words doth signify this. Haue we not power to eate and drinke; or to carry about si∣sters women? where &c. it is plaine, wyues ought not to be vnderstood &c. or if we will by , vnderstand wyues, not women, that which is added, sisters, taketh away wyues, and sheweth that they were allied in spirit, not wyues. Although, excepting Peter the Apostle, it is not plainly recorded of the other Apostles that they had wyues. And see∣ing it is written of one, and nothing sayd of the other, we ought to vn∣derstand
that they were without wyues, of whome the Scripture signi∣fieth no such thing. Thus far S. Hierome. Adde yet heerunto, that in the word  (asDe opere Monacho∣rum. c. 4. S. Austine noteth) according as the Apostle hath put it down with all circumstances, there it no ambiguity, for that Saint Paul had no wife, himselfe witnesseth, saying,1. Cor. 7.8. I say to the vnmarryed and widdowes, it is good for them if they so abyde, euen as I also; but if they do not containe, let them marry. And the same is the consent ofChrysost. de virgin. c. 34 Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Eustoch. c. 8. Hilar. in Psal. 127. Aug. l. de Gra. & lib. Arb. c. 4. cir. med. Epiph. baer. 58. Vale∣fiorum. Am∣bro. in 1. Cor. c. 7. Tertul. l. ad vxorem. Chrysost. & Theodor. in c. 4. ad Phi∣lip. Antiquity. Besides the word  of it selfe, (asAnnot. in Mat. 5.28. & 1. Cor. 7.1. Beza confesseth) doth rather si∣gnify a woman, then a wyfe, and therefore he reprehendeh Erasmus for translating, It is good for a man not to touch a wyfe, because (sayth Beza) there is no circumstance annexed, why it should so signify; Wherefore much more when the circumstance (as S. Austine sayth) maketh it certaine, that so it doth not si∣gnify. But let vs heare S. Austines owne words,Lib. de opere Mona∣chorum. c. 4. Faith∣full women hauing earthly substance, went with them, and mini∣stred of their goods, that they might not be in neeed of any thing which belongeth to the necessities of this life; which blessed Paul sheweth was lawfull to him, euen as the other Apostles did; but afterwards he re∣lateth that he would not vse that power. Some not vnderstanding this (let our Protestant Translatours and Interpreters attend) do interpret not a woman a Sister, but a wyfe, whereas he sayd,1. Cor. 9.5. Haue not we power to carry about a woman a Sister; The ambiguity of the Greeke word  deceiued thē, in that, wyfe and woman by the same word in greeke is signified, although the Apostle hath so placed it, that they ought not to haue bene deceiued: for he neither speaketh on∣ly of a woman, but a woman Sister, nor of marrying, but of carrying about. But this ambiguity hath not deceyued other Interpreters, ex∣pounding a woman, not a wyfe: so particularly doth S. Austine satisfy this common Obiection. Lastly, note, that whereas amongst all the Fathers, onlyLib. 3. Strom. Clemens Alexandrinus vnderstandeth the forsaid places of wyues, yet he addeth, that the Apostles liued not with them, as with wyues in the state of Marriage: yeaLib. . c. 24. Eusebius thinketh, that he wrote the same , by way of Contention or disputation, whilest he wrot against them that impugned marriage: so that in the true sense, it is
spoken of holy women, who followed the Apostles, and ministred vnto them of their goods. In like sort, whereas in the later place, Protestants trā∣slate for a faithfull Companion, a faithfull yoak-fellow, that ther∣by cannot be vnderstood S. Paules wife, besides what hath beene sayd it is playne, in that faithfull, germane, , is the Masculine gender, and so translated by Caluin and Beza: thereby therfore is meant, some man who was fellow with S. Paul in preaching of the Gospell. Lastly, it is so certayne, that S. Paul was not marryed, that Caluin commenting vpon these words, I say to the vnmarryed and Widdowes, it is good for them, if they so abyde, euen as I also, affirmeth thus plain∣ly,In. 1. Cor. 7.8. This place sheweth the Apostle then to haue bene single. For whereas Erasmus argueth that he was marryed, because amongst mar∣ryed men he maketh mention of himselfe, it is tryfling and weake, be∣cause it might by the same reason be gathered, that he was a widdower, because amongst widdowers he speaketh of himselfe. But the wordes sound, that then he was not marryed. Neither do I admit that Con∣iecture, that he left his wife somewhere, and of his owne accord de∣barred himselfe of the vse of the Marrriage-bed. So tryfling and weake are these Obiections, and so cleerly answered by Scriptures, Fathers, and Protestants.
CHAP. XIV. The true State of the Question, Concerning Christ his descending into Hell. Whether Christ our Sauiour truly descended in soule into Hell; And there redeemed those who were in Abra∣hams bosome, or Limbus; Or that by Hell, should only be vnderstood his Graue; Or his suffering, the paynes of Hell. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. WHAT the Church of Christ belieueth concerning this Article of our faith, will cleerly appeare by her holy De∣crees, amongst which that of the an∣cient Councell of Ariminum was this.Apud Athanasium de Synodo Arimin. We belieue the sonne of God according to the will of his Father, to haue bene Crucifyed and dyed, and to haue descended to hell, and there to haue performed what belonged to his charge whom the Porters of Hell beholding were afraid, and that the third day he rose from hell, and conuersed with his Disciples. The Councell of Toledo further defyneth, that,Conc. To∣let. 4. c. 1. He descended to hell that he might take out from thence the Sain∣tes that there were kept, and the power of death ouercome, he rise a∣gaine.
This it the faith of the Catholicke Church, this Confession we keep and hould. According to the Councell of Laterane,Cap. 1. The only begotten sonne of God &c. suffered vpon the wood of the Crosse and dyed, he descended to hel, &c But he descended in Soule, he rose in flesh, ascended alike in both. And it is the constant faith of allBellar. de Christi ani∣ma. l. 4. c. 12. &c. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 16, 22. & in. 1. Pet. 3.19. Catholickes, that Christ in soule truly descended into hell, and deliuered the holy Fathers that were in Lim∣bus, or Abrahams bosome; and that by Hell is not vnder∣stood his graue, or his suffering any paines of Hell, which were most impious to imagine; but a place vnder the groūd, where the said Fathers were reserued vntill Christes Comming. Pointes Disputable. SomeS. Tho. 3. part. q. 52. art. 2. teach that Christ descended by reall presence only to Limbus Patrum, and by effect to all places of hell. O∣thersBellar. de Christo. l. 4. c. 16. thinke that his soule truly descended to all places of Hell. SomeCaiet. in Act c. 2. S. Tho. 3. part. q. 52. art. 13. affirme, the dolours of death to haue conti∣nued with Christ vntill his resurrection, by reason of the penalties, which by death were left, as the separation of the soule, the being therof in a place vnworthy of it, and the be∣ing of the body in the Graue. OthersBonau. 3. Dist. 22. q. 4. better teach, that Christes soule, whilest it was in hell, was without all paine, the same ceasing with his death. SomeS. Tho. 3. p. q. 52. art. 8. teach that Christ descending, deliuered only such soules out of Purgatory, as had made due satisfaction, or that had peculiar Deuotion to the future Passion of Christ. OthersS. Bo∣nau. 3. Dist. 22. q. 5. Tho. Argent. ea∣dem. Dist. q. vnica art. 4. Gab. eadem Dist. q. vnica art. 3. dub. 3. affirme that he de∣liuered from paine all the iust and Elect of God, and conse∣quently those that were in Purgatory. Protestant Doctrine. Protestants in this Article of faith are much deuided a∣mongst themselues. For someBucer in c. 27. Mat. Beza in . 2. Act. teach, that Christ only descended to his graue, and that by hell is vnderstood his Graue. Others by Hell vnderstand, that he suffered the paines of
the Damned. thus Caluin:Instit. l. 2. c. 16. §. . & ad. c. 30. Iob. & in Catech. edit. 1562. Teaching further, that to vse his words, This fable of Limbus Patrum, for the deliuery of whom they say Christ descended, although it haue great authors, yet it is no∣thing but a fable. Whitakers faith concerning this Article of our Creed is this,Cont. Dur. l. 9. sec. 27. I do belieue that the soule of Christ loosed from the body, not only not to haue descended to Hell, but forthwith to haue bene taken into heauen. And the like is taught by sundry o∣ther Prot.Perkins in his Expo∣sition of the Creed. To. 1. Col. 678. Polanus in Disput. pe∣riodo 2. disp. 236 some wherofApud Aret. in loc. part. 1. fol. 72. do plainly say, that this sentence, or (Article) is to be taken out of the Creed. D. Hill a Prot. wrote a booke in defence of this Article according to our Catholicke vnderstanding therof, in which he citeth for his opinion Aretius, Apinus, M. Nowel, and Melancthon. M. Carlile wrote another booke directly to the contrary, cy∣ting sundry Prot. in his behalfe. So that the Reformed Church is yet to determine what is to be belieued concer∣ning this Article. Protestants agree with Ancient Heretickes. OrigenHieron. Ep. ad Aui∣tum. taught that Hell was nothing but the horrour of Conscience. And the same is taught byIust. l. 3. c. vlt. Caluin. Protestant Errours. BrentiusIn Cate∣chismo Anni 1551. vnderstandeth, by descending into hell, to be vtterly Destroyed. Caluin,Inst. l. 2. c. 16. §. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. in Ha∣mon. Euang. ad c. 27. Math. that Christ suffered the paines of the damned soules. And others professe, that,L. Con∣cordiae. p. 750. they simply belieue, that the whole person God and Man after Buriall descended into Hell. But if Christ Man descended into Hell, then he descended alyue not dead, for he that is dead is not man, seeing euery man by death ceaseth to be man. And if a liuing man he descended, then not only his soule, but like∣wise his flesh descended, for the soule alone cannot be said to be man. Now if the soule and flesh descended, what remai∣ned in the Graue? M. Rogers acknowledgeth certaine Prot. to teach, that,Def of the Art. art. 3. p. 16. Christ alyue vpon the Crosse humbled himselfe vsque ad Inferni
tremenda tormenta euen vnto the dreadfull torments of Hell: endured for a tyme those torments which the Reprobate shall euerlastingly suf∣fer in hell: euen despayred of Gods mercy, fynding God at this tyme, non Patrem sed Tyrannum, not a Father, but a Tyrant: and ouercame despayre by despayre, death by death, hell by hell, and Sathan by Sa∣than: suffered actually all the torments of Hell for our Redemption: & descended into the heauiest torments that Hell could yield: suffered the torments of Hell, the second death, Abiection from God, and was made a Curse, that is, had the bitter anguish of Gods wrath in his soule and body, which is the fyre that shall neuer be quenched. And in like sort, Parkes affirmeth, that,Against Willet p. 114. Luther, Illyricus, Latimer, did teach Christ to haue descended into hell in soule and body, and there suffered torments after Death. But these Blasphemies are to be abhorred, and yet they are vttered by Luther, Caluin, and other principall Protestants. Neither do they stay here, but euen proceed to the ta∣king away both of Heauen and Hell, and to sundry other such Errors tending to Atheisme. Luther sayth,Tom. 6. in Gen. c. 25. fol. 321. I cannot affirme whether the soules of the wicked be tormented presently after death. I amTom. 4. in c. 2. Ionae. fol. 418. not very certaine what Hell is before the last day. Schultetus,Medul. in Tertul. part. 1 c. 42. That assertion of his as it is new, so false; the soules to suffer in hell before the bodyes. Schlusselburge,Theol. Caluinist. lib. 1. art. 27. fol. 145. The Cate∣chisme of the Heidelbergians, maketh it doubtfull, whether indeed there be any Hell, and place ordayned, in which the wicked and the damned after this lyfe, togeather with the Deuils, must be afflicted with Eternall punishments.Apud Hospin. part. 2. Hist. anno 1562. fol. 308. Brentius, I laugh at your Old wiues fooleryes, of that your corporall and locall Heauen and Hell.Ib. p. 331. Lo∣call Hell is faigned. Perkins,Tom. 2. in Apoc. 2. Col. 90. We must not faigne Hell to be some certaine determined & corporall place. Caluin,Instit. l. 2 c. 16. §. 9. It is chil∣dish to inclose soules in the Prison of the Dead. And,In Mat. 3.12. & in Mat. 25.39. & in. c. 30. Isaiae. Concerning fyre eternall we may gather, that it is a Metaphoricall speach. Da∣naeus,Controu. 6. p. 181. It is a thing impossible that the soules of men, separated from their bodies, can be tormented and afflicted with any Corporall fyre.Ibid. That the sacred Scripture treating of the Punishment of damned men, euen in their soules, doth call it fyre, those speaches are not naturall, but Metaphoricall, neither there is it treated of materiall fyre. Perkins,Tom. 2. in Apoc. 2. Col. 90. Vor∣stius in An∣tibel. p. 269. Tilenus in syntag c. 68 Lobech. dis∣put. 6. p. 13. & Disp. 9. p. 459. Pola∣nus in syl∣log. Thes. part. . p. 508. We must not faigne the Torments (of Hell) to be corporall, but rather spirituall, seeing it is the apprehension of
Gods wrath and reuenge. B D. Bilson confesseth that,In his Suruey p. 44. S. Austine long since hath plainly resolued that the fyre of Hell is not only a true fyre, but a corporall fyre, that shall punish both men and Deuils. Yea S. Hierome condemneth Origen, for teaching that,Ad A∣utum. An see Bilsons Suruey p. 51. The fyre of Hell &c. doth not torment, but the Conscience of sinners. And it is vndoubted, that these broachers of such impiou Doctrines do presently after their deathes see and feele their errors, fynding a locall Hell, and corporall Fyre, tormenting their soules for all Eternity. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that Christ our Sauiour truly des∣cended in soule into Hell; And there redeemed those who were in Abrahams bosome, or Limbus. THe truth of this Article of our Creed is proued by such Scriptures as teach, that Christ was the first that ascen∣ded into heauen: for hence it followeth, that the soules of the iust departed before his tyme, were detayned somewhere els To this purpose sayth S. Paul,1. Cor. 15.20. Now Christ is risen againe from the dead, the first fruites of them that sleepe. And in this respect Christ is called,Col. 1.18. Ap. 1.5. the first borne of the dead: And we are further taught, that,Heb. 7.19. The law brought nothing to Per∣fection, but an Introduction of a better hope. And therfore that,Heb. 9.8. the way of holyes (by which is meantHeb. 9.24 & 10.19. heauen) was not yet manifested, the former Tabernacle (by which is vnderstood theHeb. 9.1, 2. Old Testament) as yet standing. And this way of holyes is called,Heb. 10.19. A new and liuing way, which (Christ) hath dedicated (or begunne, ) to vs. And in reguard hereof the Fathers of the Old Testament, are said to haueHeb. 11.13. dyed ac∣cording to faith, not hauing receiued the Promises:Heb. 11.40. God for vs prouiding some better thing, that they without vs should not be Con∣summate. All these Textes shew, that the way to Heauen was not opened before Christes Resurrection, and that him∣selfe was the first that did dedicate, or beginne this way vnto vs.
The same truth is confirmed by such places, as show that the forsaid soules of the iust before Christes Comming were in hell. Iacob bewayling his sonne Iosephs supposed death, saith,Gen. 37.35. I will descend to my sonne in Hell. Iacob & Io∣seph were both iust, and yet here it is said, that they descen∣ded into Hell. Diues being in Hell, saw AbrahamLuc. 16.23. a far of, and Lazarus in his bosome: which argueth that both soules were in the same gulfe, though far distant amongst them∣selues. Neither will it suffice to answere that, this of Laza∣rus is only a Parable, and therfore not strong in proofe: for in the Iudgments of S. Ambrose,In c. 16. Luc. Hier. l. 2. in Iouin. Aug. de cura pro mort c. 14. Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 29. S. Hierome, S. Au∣stine, and S. Gregory (the 4. great Doctours of the Catho∣licke Church) it is a true History, their proper names being set downe. And though it were a Parable, yet it maketh ful∣ly for the present purpose, as euery Circumstance therof doth cleerly shew. In like sort that it was Samuels soule that ascended from the Earth, and appeared to Saul, it is playne by these wor∣des,1. Reg. 28.11. When the woman had seene Samuel, she cryed out with a loud voyce &c. And Saul vnderstood that it was Samuel, &c. And Samuel said to Saul, why hast thou disquieted me, that I should be ray∣sed vp? And it is placed among the prayses of Samuel, that,Eccl. 46.23. After this he slept, and he notified to the king, and shewed him the end of his lyfe, and he exalted his voyce out of the Earth in Pro∣phecy &c. This place sheweth that Samuels Soule was raysed out of the Earth. Neither was the Soule of so great a Pro∣phet subiect to the enchantment of a Witch, but preuented the same, wherat the woman1. Reg. 28.12.13. was much troubled. The same is confirmed by such Textes as show, that Christ deliuered the Captiue out of Prison, so the Prophet Zachary sayth,Zach 9.11. Thou also in the bloud of the Testament, hast let forth thy Prisoners out of the lake, wherin is no water. This to be spoken of Christ, is euident by the9.10. precedent verses: And S. Peter saith of Christ, In1. Pet. 3.19. the which spirit comming he preached to them also that were in Prison, which all vnderstand of the Prison of Hell. All such places proue the same, as teach, that before the Ascension of Christ, the soules of sundry dead persons retur∣ned,
and were reunited agayne to their bodies: whereof we may find examples ofIo. 11.43. Lazarus, theLuc. 8.55. Mayde, & ofMat. 27.52. many bodies of the Saints that had slept (and) rose. Now that these reuturned from heauen, or the Hell of the damned, none do imagine. This also is yet further conuinced by all such places as teach, that Christ himselfe was in Hell, or the lower parts of the Earth,Mat. 12.40. As Ionas was in the whales belly, three dayes & three nights: so shall the sonne of man be in the hart of the Earth 3. daies, and 3. nights. Now by the hart of the Earth is vnderstood Hell, which is in the depth of the Earth, as the hart is in the depth of a body: whereas the Graue is in the superficies of the Earth, and Christs sepulcher was peraduenture aboue the Earth: besides in the sepulcher was only Christs dead body, whereas Ionas was aliue in the body of the whale. In like sort it is sayd,Act. 2.27. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell; this being plainely spoken of Christ, is so conuincing that Be∣za to auoid the same, doth translate most absurdly, Thou shalt not leaue my carcase in the Graue, or, my soule in the Graue, as shal∣be shewed next heerafter. S. Pauls words also are most pregnātEph. 4.8. Ascending on high, he led Captiuity captiue &c. And that he ascended, what it is, but be∣cause he descēded also first, into the inferiour parts of the Earth. These words litterally taken, do conuince Christ to haue descēded into Hell, & to haue deliuered the iust that were Captiues. But now to obserue how Prot. corrupt the Texts of Scripture in fauour of their heresy: because these wordes,Act. 2.27. Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, do proue Christs soule to haue descended to hell, Beza in hisAnno 1557. Translation chā∣geth it thus, Thou will not leaue my carcasse in the Graue; which he defendeth in these words,Ad de∣fens. Castal. p. 460. My soule, in the Text, I In∣terpreted, my Carcasse, but in the Annotation, my Lyfe. And we may take my soule, insteed of the Pronowne (me) which expositiō is most simple. And wheras he addeth, he obserueth Errour to haue risen by the Old Translation, animam meam, my soule, he sayth, I did it not rashly seeing we see this place principally to be wrested by the Papists, for the establishing of their Limbus, and the Ancient (Fathers) also from thence haue found out that descending of Christs soule into hell. In
like sort where it is sayd,Act. 2.31. forseeing he spake of the Resurre∣ction of Christ, for neither was he left in hell; theAnno 1562. 1567. 1568. 1605. Prot. of Geneua, in their Bibles insteed of Hell, do make Graue. AndAnno 1603. Tremelius followeth them therein in his latin Bible. And the like corruption is frequentlySee the Engl. Bib. of 1578. Ose. 13.14. Ps. 85.13. Gen. 7.35. to be found in our English Translations. In like sort, where S. Paul saith, thatHeb. 10.20. Christ hath dedicated to vs a new and liuing way, to wit, the way into Heauē,Eng. Bib. of 1578. Fulk. in Heb. 10.20. Prot. translate, he prepared: wher∣as the Greeke word, , intrauit, signifyeth to make new, to beginne a thing, to dedicate. SECT. III. That the Anciet Fathers do agreably expound the Scrip∣tures in proofe of Christs descending into Hell, and his deliuering of the iust in Captiuity. SAint Irenaeus expoundeth many Texts of Scripture for Christs descending into Hell, saying,L. 5 fine. During the 3. dayes he conuersed where the Dead were,Ionas. 2.2. as the Prophecy sayth of him he remembred his Holy Ones that were dead, those that before slept in the land of Promise, he descended to them to fetch them out, and saue them. And our Lord himselfe,Mat. 12.40. As Ionas was in the Whales belly &c. The Apostle also,Eph. 4.9. He ascended, what is it, but because be des∣cended first into the inferiour parts of the Earth. Dauid also prophecy∣ing of him, sayth,Ps. 86.13. Thou hast deliuered my soule from the lower Hell: so fully S. Irenaeus. Origen teacheth that,Ho. 15. in Gen. Towards the end of the world, the only begottten sonne for the saluation of the world, descended euen to hell, and from thence recalled (Adam) the first framed: for that which he sayd to the Theefe,Luc. 23. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise, do not vnderstand as sayd to him alone, but also to all the Ho∣ly Ones, for whome he descended to hell. S. BasilHo. in Ps. 48.16. vpon these words, God will redeeme my soule out of the hand of Hell, affirmeth that, he plainly prophesieth the des∣cending of Christ to Hell, who was to deliuer togeather with others the soule of the Prophet himselfe, that he should not remayne there.
S. Chrysostome auoucheth that,Ser. 5. de resurrect. Christ the sunne of Iu∣stice this day ascended, hauing preached to the soules of the Iust, lifting vp with him from Hell their bodies, as it were the Quyres of spiritu∣all starres. Hierusalem shyned, wherein those who rose are seene &c. And it is truly called the day of light, in which the darknes of blynd∣nes fell away; they shouted outIsa. 9.2. who were in darknes, because they saw great light, and to those who dwelt in the Country of the shad∣dow of death, light is risen. Agayne, alledging these plainest wordes of the Prophet Isay,C. 45.2. I will breake the brasen gates, & will burst the iron barres, And, I will giue the hidden treasures &c. he sayth,Demon∣strat aduers. Gentiles, quod Christus fuit Deus. Thus he calleth Hell, for though it were Hell, yet it kept the holy soules and precious vessels, Abraham, Isac, and Iacob: for which cause he calleth them treasures, but hidden ones, because as yet the sunne of Iustice hath not shined there. Lastly,Ho. 4. in Mar. Before the comming of the Sauiour, before Christ with the Theefe opened the gates of Paradise, all the soules of the iust were carryed to Hell. Finally, Iacob sayth,Gen. 37.35. Mourning and groaning I will descend to Hell; Therefore our Lord dyed, therefore he descended to Hell, that the soules which were there bound, might be loosed. What more plaine for Christes descending into Hell? And yet in no lesse plaine termes speaketh S. Hie∣rome,Ep. 25. c. 3. Iacob bewailed his sonne whom he thought was slaine, to whom himselfe also was about to descend into Hell, saying,Gen. 37.35. Mourning I will descend to my sonne in Hell; because Christ as yet had not broken open the gate of Paradise; as yet his bloud had not quen∣ched the fiery sword &c. of the Cherubims that had charge: Wheru∣pon Abraham also, though he was in a place of rest, yet it is written,Luc. 16.23. that he was with Lazarus in Hell. Againe,Ad. c. 3. Ecclesiastici. Before the Comming of Christ, all thinges were caryed togeather to Hell, wheru∣pon Iacob said, that he was to descend to Hell. And Iob complained that both the Godly, and the wicked were detayned in Hell. And the Ghospell testifyeth, that there is a great Chaos in Hell, placed bet∣wene, and that Abraham is with Lazarus, and that the rich man is in punishment. And indeed before Christ with the Theefe had at the gates of Paradise layd open the flaming wheele, and burning sword, the hea∣uens were shut. So manifest it is, that before Christes com∣ming none ascended into heauen.
But no man explayneth the Scriptures more plainly in this behalfe then S. Austine, who alleadging these wordes of our Sauiour, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, affirmeth that,Ep. 57. ad Dard. Christ Iesus Man was not to be that day in heauen, but ac∣cording to his soule in Hell and according to his flesh in the graue: and of the flesh, that it was layd that day in the graue, the Ghospell is most manifest. And that the soule descended into Hell, the Apostolicall Do∣ctrine teacheth,Act. 2.27. Because thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell, nor giue thy Holy One to see corruption. Againe,Ep. 99. ad Euod. that our Lord dead in flesh, came to Hell, it is playne inough, for the Prophecy cannot be gainsaid which sayth, Because thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell, which least any should presume to vnderstand otherwise, Peter ex∣poundeth the same in the Actes of the Apostles, euen in those his wordes in which he affirmeth, that,Act. 2.24. he loosed the sorrowes of Hell, accor∣ding as it was impossible that he should be holden of it. Who therfore but an Infidell, will deny that Christ was in hell &c. That according to his soule he was in hell, the Scripture plainly declareth &c. And in another place,In Psal. 85. And see Tract. 111. in Ioan. Our Lord was not yet come to Hell, that he might deliuer from thence the soules of all the Iust that went before him, & yet Abraham was in rest; and Diues tormented in Hell, when he saw Abraham, he lifted vp his eyes, for he could not see him with eyes lifted vp, vnlesse Abraham were aboue, and himselfe below. This was so cleerly his Doctrine, thatSuruey of Christes suffer. p. 626. 598. 599. Aret. loc. com p. 33. D. Bilson and Aretius do al∣leadge S. Austine for Christes descending into Hell. So that in S. Austines Iudgment they are Infidels, who deny this Ar∣ticle of our faith, He descended into Hell. That it was truly the soule of Samuel that was raysed vp, and appeared vnto K. Saul, it is constantly taught by S. Austine,De cura pro mort. c. 15. Ambr. in Luc. 1. Bas. Ep. 80. Hier. in Isa. 7. S. Ambrose, S. Basil, and S. Hierome. Lastly S. Thaddaeus, one of Christes Disciples in his Doctrine published by Eusebius, and by himEuseb. Hist l. 1. c. vlt. Collected from Ancient Chronicles, and publick tables therof reserued in the Cit∣ty of Edessa, where the said Doctrine was by Thaddaeus deli∣uered, sayth of our Sauiour,Ibid. fin. He descended into Hell, and broke in sunder the wall, which during the worlds space remayned whole and vnmoued. After he rose the third day, he raysed the dead, who had slept for many yeares; and although he descended alone, yet he ascended to his Father with great multitude. This was so certainly
the saying of S. Thaddaens, that Frigiuilleus Gaunius a Prot. maketh mention herof from Eusebius, and concludeth that,Palma Christiana p. 74. Those things which Eusebius deliuereth of the Preaching of Thaddaeus at Edessa, and the Conuersion of Agbarus to Christ, no man of mature Iudgment will impugne. And D. Hill alleadgeth sundry times this Testimony and saying of Thaddaeus in his booke of the Defence of the Article, that Christ descended into Hell. This the Fathers so plainely taught, that M. Iacob con∣fesseth that,In Bil∣sons full Re∣demption p. 188. All the Fathers with one consent do affirme, that Christ deliuered the soules of the Patriarches and Prophets out of Hell at this coming thither, and so spoyled Sathan of those that were then in his present possession. D. Barlow sayth,Def. of the Articles of the Prot. Rel. p. 173. This passeth most ryfe among the Fathers, who taking Inferi, for Abrahams bosome, ex∣pound it that Christ went thither, ad liberandum liberandos, to con∣ney the fathers deceased before his Resurrection, into the place where now they are. Duraeus alledging many testimonis of the Fathers for Limbus Patrum, Whitaker his best answere is this,Cont. Duraeum. l. 8. p. 567. That I may freely and briefly answere thee what I thinke, one litle word of Scripture vttered, hath more wayght then a thousand Fathers without Scripture; therefore do not expect whilest I particularly do wash away these errours of the Fathers. But Whitaker, and all Heretickes must know, that the Fathers not opposing, but grounding themselues vpon Scripture, as this Section conuinceth, do thus vnanimously teach, Christ his descending into Hell. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the Descending of Christ into Hell, and the deliuery from thence of the iust that were in Captiuity. LAscitius a famous Protestant affirmeth, that,De Rusto∣rum, Musco∣uit. &c. Re∣lig. p. 122. Abrahams bosome was not in heauen, And in proofe that the Fathers of the Old Testament were not in heauen before Christs comming, he alleadgeth aswell theIb. p. 123. Scriptures before ci∣ted,
and the foresaid Testimony of Thaddaeus, and another of Ignatius, as also the like answerable opinion and Doctrine of the Hebrewes,Ibid. and of the remote Christians both in Sy∣ria and Aethiopia: and the like plaine testimonies for this Doctrine may be seene inCommon plac. in Engl. part. 2. c. 18. p. 621. & part. 3. c. 16 p. 377. 378. Oecol. in l. Epist. Oeco∣lamp. & Swing. l. 1. p. 19. Swingl. ib. l. 3. p 560. 561. Peter Martyr, Oecolampa∣dius, and Swinglius. Our English Prot. Church teacheth that,Art. of Relig art. 3. As Christ dyed for vs and was buryed, so also it is to be belieued, that he went downe into Hell. And in the Apostles Creed in English mee∣ter they sing lowdly and Iustily in the Churches, His spirit did after this, descend into the lower partes, to them that long in darknes were, the true light of their hartes. A saying so euident, thatDef. of the Engl. Transl. c. 7. p. 204. Whi∣tak. cont. Dur. l. 9. p. 773. D. Fulke and D. Whitaker, do therfore greatly dislike it. Schlusselburge in proofe of Christes Descending,Theol. Calu. l. 1. f. 146. alleadgeth the authority of the Ancient Fathers; and saith thus fully:Ib. l. 1. c. 27. The Catholicke and Orthodoxall Church of Christ hath euer belieued from the beginning to these very tymes the Descen∣ding of Christ, and hath alwayes numbred it amongst the Articles of Fayth, and hath alwayes proued it by the Testimonies of Scripture: Therfore it is not to be suffered that, that Article, as added, should be confounded with the rest, or be wholly taken away by obstinate Swin∣glians, deseruing Hell. Caluin affirmeth that,In 1. Pet. c. 3. The soules of the faithfull gone out of the bodies, were detayned in Prison, where they were bound with a burning desire of Christes comming; because as yet they were not ful∣ly enriched with the spirit of liberty. But what other Prison this was then Abrahams Bosome, no man can imagine. This do∣ctrine of Christes descending in soule into Hell, is taught by D. Hill in his Defence of the Articles that Christ descended in∣to Hell, throughout that Booke: Also by D. BilsonPag. 650. &c. in his Suruey of Christes sufferings &c. And of his descent into Hell: by the AuthorPag. 112. of Catholicke Traditions: By Luther, Aretius, Apinus, Nowel, and Melancthon, alleadged inP. 23. 44. See. 33. 34. Hill his forsaid booke; by the Lutherans generally, & many Caluinistes. Add herunto that some Prot. teach, that the soules of the Iust shall not before the day of Iudgment enioy heauen and the sight of God: so LutherPraelect. in Gen. And see in c. 9. Ec∣clesiastic. & in Ionam. & in c. 5. Gen., so the ProtestantsSee Las∣citius de Russ. &c. Relig. p. 123.
of Bohemia, and therto doth CaluinInst. l. 3. c. 20. sect. 20. &c. 25. sect. 6. most dangerously incline. YeaIn Psal. 16. Appinus,In Fulke Def. of the Engl. Transl. c. 7 p. 204. Latimer, and someSee Me∣lanct. in Consil Theol. part. 2. p. 131. & in l. 1. Ep. p 376. And Beza in Act. 2. other Prot. trembled not to maintayne, that Christ did after his bodily death, descend into Hell in his soule, therin to suffer torments of the damned. In so much as Melancthon testi∣fyeth the dissension had among Prot. concerning this Do∣ctrine. Into such Blasphemies and absurdities do Heretickes fall, when they forsake the sure Rule of the Catholicke Church in the vnderstanding of Scriptures. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against Christes descending into Hell, answered. FVlke demandeth,Confut. of Purgat. p. 57. To what end was Christ called the LambeApoc. 13.8. that was slaine from the beginning of the world, but that the benefit of his Passion extendeth vnto the Godly of all ages alike? Answere. Protestants themselues do vnderstandMarg. note of the Engl. Bible of 1576. in Reuel. 13.8. only by those words, that his death was so long before preordayned of God, and prefigured, and that in the faith of Christ, the Iust from the beginning of the world, were to be saued. Others obiect, that before Christes Ascension, the Theefe was in heauen, to whom our Sauiour said,Luc. 23.43. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Answ. D. Hill prouethDef. of Christes Desc. into Hell. f. 19. 20. that, This day may signify, for euer, comparing it with this other Text,Ps. 2.7. Thou art my sonne, this day haue I begotten thee: and so it importeth only the perpetuity of the Ioyes promised him. Secondly though the words should concerne the only na∣turall day then present, in which Christ descended into Hell, or Limbus Patrum; yet I answere with S. AustineEp. 57. ad Dardan. solut. 1. quaest. Orig. ho. 15. in Gen. and Origen, that the foresaid Hell, or Limbus Patrum, was then to the Theefe made a Paradise, or a place of blessednes by reason of the Essentiall Beatitude, which as then there accompanied the soule of Christ. Thirdly I say againe with
S. Austine,Ep. 99. ad Euod. that euen before Christes descending into that place, it was a place of rest freed from sensible paine, and of great blessednes in regard of the great Comfort and Ex∣pectation of those that were therin, and was therfore calledLuc. 16.12. Abrahams Bosome.
CHAP. XV. The true State of the Question, Concerning Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. Whether besides Heauen and Hell, after this lyfe there be a place of Purgatory, wherein the soules of the Faythfull are temporally punished for their sinnes committed in their lyfe tyme: and whether they may be relieued by the Sacrifices, prayers, and almes of their liuing friends. Or otherwise, that instantly after death, euery soule ey∣ther immediatly ascendeth into Heauen, or des∣cendeth into Hell. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. WHAT the Church of Christ vni∣uersally teacheth concerning Purgato∣ry, and Prayer for the dead, her irre∣fragable Decrees will presently tell vs. For in the Coūcel of Trent it is defined that,Concil. Trident. Sess. 25. Decret. de Purgato∣rio. Seeing the Catholike Church instru∣ted by the holy Ghost, hauh taught in Sacred Councels &c. from the holy Scriptures, and ancient Tradition of Fa∣thers, that there is a Purgatory, & that the Soules there detayned are holpen by the suffrages of the faythfull, but especially by the acceptable
Sacrifice of the Aultar: The holy Synod commandeth Bishops, that they diligently take care, that the wholsome Doctrine of Purgatory, deliue∣red by holy Fathers, and sacred Councels, be belieued, houlden, taught, and euery where preached by faythfull Christians. By the first Nicene Councell it was appointed that,Cap. 65. Arab. When a Bishop dyeth &c. notice of his death be giuen to all Churches and Monasteries in the Parish, that Prayer may be made for him. And the lyke is taught in sundryConc. Cath 3. c. 20. Cn. Carth. 4. c. 79. Conc. Florent Sess 1 Quaest. de Purgatorio. other Councells. In the second Councell Cabilonense, it is thus decreed.Cap. 39. It further seemeth good to vs, that in all the solemnities of Masses, our Lord be prayed in due place for the soules of the dead: for as no day is excepted wherein our Lord is not beseeched for all Necessities, so no day ought to be excepted, but that prayers be powred to our Lord in the so∣lemnities of Masses, for the soules of the faythfull. Therefore the holy Church keepeth anciently this custome, that in the solemnities of Masses, and other prayers, she may commend to our Lord the Sou∣les of the departed &c. What these Councels haue defined, the Catholike ChurchBellar. de Purg. l. 1. c. 3. &c. & l. 2. c. 15. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 12.31. still belieueth, to wit, that after this lyfe, for such as dye in the Grace of God, and haue not done due Pennance, for their sinnes, there is a place of Purgato∣ry or satisfaction, wherein they are temporally punished, & may be relieued by the Prayers, Sacrifices, and other good workes done for them by their liuing friends. Pointes Disputable. Some CatholikeS. Tho. in 4. Dist. 10. q. 1. art. 2. writers affirme, that Poena damni, the punishment of losse, is the greatest punishment eyther in Purgatory or this life. And that the least paine in Purgatory, is greater then the greatest in this lyfe. ButS. Bona∣uent. in 4. Dist. 20. q. 2. others teach, that the foresaid punishment of losse in Purgatory, is not greater then all the other punishments in Purgatory, or this lyfe. And that the greatest punishment in Purgatory is grea∣ter then the greatest Punishment in this life, though some punishment in Purgatory, is lesse then some punishment in this life. M. RogersDef. of the Art art. 21. p. 121. obiecteth that Catholickes differ a∣mongst themselues in assigning the place of Purgatory, as whether it be in the center of the Earth, the bottome of the
Sea, or in Hell. As also in the Tormentors, whether they be holy Angels, or diuels; in the Torments, whether they be only by fire, or fire and water, and sundry such like. All this is true, but impertinent, for none of these Points are de∣fyned by the Church. Protestants vntruthes. Rogers auoucheth that according to Catholikes,Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 122. the Pope is God, in that he can at his pleasure discharge guilty soules, both from the guilt of sinne, and from the punishments due for the same. AndIb. p. 12. Purgatory in another world, both denyed hath alwayes bene by the Greeke Churches &c. But this appeareth to be most false, by S. Epiphanius, a Greeke Father, immediatly heerafter cyted, condemning for the same Aerius, and in him M. Ro∣gers for heretickes. And I must also needs condemne M. Ro∣gers for an egregious Lyar, in auouching, that Catholikes affirme the Pope to be God, and that at his pleasure he can discharge guilty soules both from fault and punishmēt: both which all Catholikes disclaime, as meere vntruthes. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church hath Decreed, thatArticle 22. The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory &c. is a fond thing, vain∣ly inuented, & grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather re∣pugnant to the word of God. According to D. Iewell,In Art. 18 sect. 3. p. 158. This kind of praying for the Dead is plainly superstitious, and wanteth all authority of Gods word. And so most Prot. professeHarm. of Conf. p. 483. to belieue that the faythfull after the bodily death, go directly vnto Christ, and therefore do not stand in need of the help or prayers for the Dead, or a∣ny such duty of them which are aliue. In like manner we belieue that the vnbelieuers be cast headlong directly into Hell &c. This is the or∣dinary Doctrine of Protestants. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. Aerius was condemned by S. AustineHaer. 53. and S. Epi∣phanius,
Haer. 75. for denying prayer for the Dead.Answer to a Coun∣terf. Cath. p. 44. 45. I will not dissemble (saith D. Fulke) that which you thinke the greatest matter: Aerius taught that prayer for the dead was vnprofitable, as witnesse both Epiphanius and Austine, which they count for an errour. And the like of Aerius is acknowledged byOf the Church. l. 3. p. 138. Osian∣der. cent. 4. p. 434. D. Field, and sundry other Protestant writers: the same heresy is also condemned in theGuido de Armenijs. Armenians, andCasarius l. 5 c. 21. Albigenses. Protestant Errours. If it were not that men were drunke with heresy, they would neuer broach such absurd and contrary positions, as these that follow. And first that of BrentiusIn Do∣minic. 12. post Trinit. Although it be lawfull to wish all thinges happy to the dead, yet prayer for the dead is vayne: here is a mysticall difference betwene wishing and praying. And yet the like maketh Caluin,Ep. 366. The forme of prayer that God may giue to the dead a good and happy resurrection, because it doth not square with the Rule of Praying well, let it be re∣iected: I do not vrge, but that it is lawfull to conceiue such a desire, Here a man may lawfully conceiue a Desire of a thing, and yet must not pray for it. Caluin affirmeth that,In Ex∣plicat Perfi∣diae Gentilis. p. 677. A certaine Prot. said often, there was no better short way to take away the Patronages of Saintes, su∣perstitions Prayers for the dead, the fiction of Purgatory, and the like, then if we should belieue death to be the destruction of soules. And certainly that man said very wisely, supposing that he could make that beliefe good of the mortality of the soule. But who doth not heerby well discerne, the desperate case of them, who thinke it the best and shortest way to impugne the truth, to fall into Atheisme, and so at once to pull vp all Religion by the roote?
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that after this life there is a place of Purgatory: and that therin the soules of the faithfull may be relieued by the Sacrifices Prayers; and other spirituall helpes of their liuing friends. THis truth is manifestly taught in the Bookes of Ma∣chabees, by the Charitable fact of Iudas Machabaeus,2. Ma∣chab. 12.43.44.45. who making a gathering he sent 12000. drachmes of siluer to Hierusalem, for sacrifice to be offered for sinnes, well and religiously thinking of the Resurrection, (For vnlesse he hoped that they that were slaine should ryse againe, it should seeme superfluous, and vaine to pray for the dead.) And because he considered, that they which had taken their sleepe with Godlines, had very good Grace layd vp for them. It is therfore a holy and healthfull Cogitation, to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed from their sinnes. This place is so conuin∣cing for Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, that for want of all other answere, Prot. pressed herewith, are forced to be∣take themselues to that shamfull, last, and desperat refuge, of denying the Bookes of Machabees to be Canonicall Scri∣pture. The wickednes and falshood of which answere isSee be∣fore Chap. 5. &c. heretofore most euidently discouered. This also may be confirmed by the Example of Dauid, and the whole people of God, and more particularly by the singular seauen dayes fast of the men of Iabes Galaad, for the death of their K. and maister Saul. And first as the Princely Prophet2. Reg. 12.21. Fasted and wept for his sicke Child whiles it was a∣liue, as thinking therby to obtaine that the Child might liue: But when the chield was dead, be did ryse vp and eate, and so gaue ouer fasting. (for Infants who dye freed from originall sin stand not in need of any further prayer or suffrage, because they neuer committed any actuall sinne, therby to deserue punishment.) So also after the death of Saul and Iona∣thas, it is said, that he then king with all his Court & people, in like manner mourned2. Reg. 1.12. wept, and fasted for them. Neither could this fasting so generally made be only in signe of sor∣row
for the losse or death of a friend, wheras the fast was extended by the men of Iabes Galaad to seauen1. Reg. 31.13. dayes, which to do only for sorrow, were vnlawfull,1. Thess. 4.13. immode∣rate, vnreasonable, vnworthy the people of God, and the approbation of so great a Prophet, and incomparably more then he either did, or permitted to be done, vpon the death of his owne Child: Therefore the probable Collection hence to be made is this, that as he wept and fasted for his sicke Child being yet alyue, not altogeather for sorrow, but especially that God would haue mercy vpon the Child, that it might liue: so in like manner he wept and fasted, blessed the men of Iabes Galaad, for showing mercy vnto their Lord and King, all which he did and approued to be done for Saul and Ionathas, being dead, not only in signe of sorrow, but chiefly to obtaine mercy for them, as hoping of their Repentance before their death, and that they were ca∣pable of reliefe, by this mercy, of the liuing showed to them. But to come now to the Scriptures of the New Te∣stament, which do strongly confirme the same: first, these words of our Sauiour seeme very expresse,Mat. 12.32. And who∣soeuer shall speake a word against the sonne of Man, it shalbe for∣giuen him; but he that shall speake against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. The conclusion hence deduced is, therfore at least some other sinnes may be forgiuen in the world to come; but in Hell there is no remission, since out of Hell there is no redēption, & in Heauen there needed no remission, since none pollu∣ted with sinne can enter thither, therfore a third place must be admitted, where those sinnes may be forgiuen. Some reply that Christ compareth heere some sinnes with others, to wit, sinne against the Father and the sonne, with sinne against the holy Ghost, therfore if he meane, that any sinnes may be remitted in the world to come, chiefly those which he compareth with the sinne against the holy Ghost, but not these, seeing only veniall sinnes are there re∣mitted. But the answere is easy, for Christ speaketh of a full and perfect Remission, including remission both of fault & Punishment, and so not only veniall, but also mortall sin∣nes,
are pardoned in the next world, because the guilt or fault of Mortall sinne being in this world pardoned, but the punishment not alwayes here satisfyed, but afterwards discharged in Purgatory, the remission therfore euen of mortall sinnes is there perfected. Others yet would euade by affirming, that of a nega∣tiō doth not necessarily follow an affirmation, as for exam∣ple (say they) king Iohn is not king of the Venetians, ther∣fore some other is their king: or, finall impenitence shall not be forgiuen in this world, nor in hell, therfore some sinnes may be forgiuen in hell. But this forceth nothing, for al∣though the Rule be not so generall, that euery negation doth inforce an affirmation to follow vpon it: yet in our present case, it must needs follow, since it were impertinent to say, this sinne shall not be forgiuen in this world, nor in the next, if none could be forgiuen in the next; euen as it were impertinent to say, King Charles will neither pardon thee in Englād, nor in Spaine, since in Spaine he hath no au∣thority to pardon. And therfore as it is well said, king Char∣les will neither pardon thee in England, nor in Ireland, nor in Scotland, because he hath equall power of pardoning in those places; euen so proportionably it is fitly said by our Sauiour, that Blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall nei∣ther be forgiuen in this world, nor in the world to come, partly for that our Sauiour hath equall power to pardon in both places, and partly for that this double Distribution of tyme and place, I meane this world and the next, equally belongeth to Gods Iudgment seate; and lastly for that this World, signifying a tyme, and Hell a place, are not opposite members in the diuision vsed by our Sauiour, as this world and the next be. And most certaine it is, and granted by all, that by the next world cannot be meant hell, since out of Hell there is no redemption, as in hell there is no remis∣sion. Lastly, it is obiected against this place, that whereas S. Matthew sayth, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, S. Marke (a sure Interpreter of these wordes (saythAgainst Rhem. Test. in Mat. 12.32. D. Fulke) explicateth the same, saying,C. 3.29. he hath not forgiuenes for
foreuer. This euasion being a meer illusion of the text, will not serue D. Fulkes turne, for euery one who explicateth ought to be larger, then he whome he explicateth; now S. Marke is not larger then S. Matthew, but contrariwise S. Matthew is larger then S. Marke, and therefore S. Mar∣kes briefly touched neuer-forgiuenes, is dilated and explica∣ted by Saint Matthew his distribution, neither in this world, nor in the world to come: since it is euident, that neuer-forgiuenes importeth both tymes of this world and the next, where sinnes may be forgiuen. Besids this manner of obiecting, is of set purpose a willfull mistaking of the point vrged, for without all Conference or explication falsly by D. Fulke supposed to be vsed by S. Marke, it is manifest of it selfe, that he who is not forgiuen neither in this world, not in the world to come, shall neuer be forgiuen; what needeth then any Explication to be added by S. Marke in a point so cleer. A second place for Purgatory, is that Exhortation of our Sauiour concerning reconciliation,Mat. 5.26.27. Be at agreement with thy aduersary betymes, whilest thou art in the way with him: least perhaps the aduersary deliuer thee to the Iudge, and the Iudge deli∣uer thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Amen. I say vnto thee, thou shalt not go out from thence, till thou repay the last farthing: Heer by the way, is vnderstood this present life, by prison (out of which there is no cōming, vntil the vttermost farthing be payd) hell, in which there are many mansions, some for the damned, and others for those that are to be purged: by the Aduersary,Orig ho. 35. in Luc. Ambr. in c. 12. Lucae. Hieron ep 8. ad Demet. some vnderstand the Diuell,Hilar. & Hieron. in Mat. 5. others, some other man, butAmbr. in Luc. 12. Aug. in Mat. 5 & ho. 1. de verbis Dom. Greg. ho. 39. most, the Law of God, or God him∣selfe, as he commandeth things contrary to the flesh; or the Conscience, which obiecteth to a sinner the breach of Gods law; all may be true, as meant by that all-seeing spirit: but howsoeuer it be taken it litle importeth, as not hindering the maine point hence to be inferred. TheIo. 5.22. The Father hath giuen all iudgment to the sonne. Iudge, all a∣gree to be Christ, the officer, the goodAmbr. in Luc. c. 4. Aug. l. 1 de ser. Dom. in Monte. c 21. Angell or theGreg. ho. 39. Theophil. in Luc. 12. Diuells, eyther is probable: by the last farthing little sinnes are vnderstood. Now of this it followeth, that there is a place of imprisonment, after this lyfe, forth of which there is an out-coming, when the vttermost farthing is discharged.
Now whereas some obiect that, vntill, doth not signi∣fy a certaine determined tyme, but Eternity, accordingly as where it is sayd of the B. Virgin Mary,Mat. 1.25. He knew her not till she brought forth her first borne sonne, as much as to say, he had neuer knowledge of her: the answere is, that this is a wilful dissembling of the point vrged, for the word, vntill, or before, though it signify a determined time, yet it referreth the accomplishment of that tyme, not to that which goeth before the sayd word, but only to that which followeth the same: and so, for so much as it is sayd, he knew her not vn∣till (or before) she brought forth her sonne; the argumēt hence is good, that therefore she brought forth a sonne, and that before his birth Ioseph did not know her: but it neyther inferreth this knowledge, or not knowledge of her, after the birth of that sonne. And so likewise in our present case, where it is sayd, Thou shalt not go out from thence, vntill thou re∣pay the last farthing, proueth, that the vttermost farthing may be payd, and so the prisoner discharged. Which truth yet appea∣reth more plainly by the end and scope of the Parable, for the similitude is not taken from a murtherer, theefe, or trai∣tour, who are ordinarily condemned to death, or perpetu∣all imprisonment; but from a deptour, who not for any crime, but for debt, is cast into prison, vntill he pay the same, the which ordinarily after some tyme he doth, and so is freed. The third place for proofe of this Doctrine, is that of the Apostle S. Paul,1 Cor. 3.12.13.14.15. And if any man build vpon this founda∣tion, gould, siluer, or precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, the worke of euery one shalbe manifest; for the day of our Lord will declare, because it shalbe reueyled in fyre; and the worke of euery one of what kind it is, the fyre shall try: if any mans worke abyde, which he built thereupon, he shall receyue reward; if any mans worke burne, he shall suffer detriment: but himselfe shalbe saued, yet so as by fyre. The Apostle heere vseth the similitude of two work∣men, the one building his house vpon a stony and so∣lid foundation of precious matter, which feareth not fire, as gould, siluer, & precious stones: the other building vpon the the like solid foūdation, but after the māner of poore men, of
wood, clay, couering the same with hay or straw. Now sup∣posing fire were put to these two houses, & the workmē with in them, the first would receaue no hurt, but the other would shortly be consumed with fyre, and if the workman within will escape, he must passe through the fyre: In which pas∣sage though he dye not, yet shall he receiue some hurt or payne. In this similitude, by the builders,Aug. l. de fide & oper. c. 16. & in Enchyr. c. 68. some vnder∣stand all Christians; OthersAmbr. & Sedulius in hunc loc. Pastours and Preachers, which sense is more literall, as may be gathered by the wordes pre∣cedent and subsequent. By the foundation is vnderstood Christ preached, and made knowne by the Apostles. By gould, siluer, & precious stones, is vnderstood the profitable, and wholsome do∣ctrine of other preachers, who instruct them that already belieue, by word and example. By wood, hay, and stubble, is vn∣derstood doctrine not hereticall or false, but curious, vayne, and vnprofitable, which some preach to Catholike people, but not with that fruite, which God requireth, but rather with veniall sinnes in themselues; a fault whereunto the Corinthians were addicted. By the day of our Lord, is vnder∣stood the day of Iudgment, partly for that the word, day, is so taken in2. Tim 1.12.18. 2. Tim. 4.8. Hebr. 10.25. Rom. 2.16. other places of Scripture; partly for that here in this life euery ones worke is not tryed, tribulations being common both to the good and euill; partly for that the Greeke Article going before the word in the originall,. hath an Emphasis in it, importing as much as,1. Cor. 5.5. 2. Cor. 1.14. Philip. 16.10. 1. Thess 5.2. 2. Thess. 2.1. dies illa, or dies Domini; and lastly for that dies Domini doth vsually2. Pet. 3.10. Luc. 17.24.26. signify the day of Iudgment. By the fyre which shall try the worke of euery one, cannot be vnderstood the fyre of Hell or Purgatory, or of that fyre which shall consume the world at the day of Iudgment, for all these being fyres for punishments, cannot try those who haue built gould, sil∣uer, and precious stones, vpon the foundation Christ; therfore the fyre heere meant, is the fyre of Gods Iudgment, which shall not purge or torment, but try and examine euery mans worke. By fyre in the last place where it is said, he shalbe saued, yet so as by fyre, must needs be vnderstood some tempo∣rall and Purgatiue punishment, to which such are iudged after death, as in their particular Iudgment are found to
haue builded wood, hay &c. and that therby cannot be meant Hell-fyre, is playne, in that it is said, they shalbe saued, nor the fyre which shall burne the world at Dooms-day, for then those who committed veniall sinnes could not enter into heauen before the day of Iudgment: nor yet, as Caluin and other Prot. would, by fyre, vnderstand the Iudgment of God approuing sound Doctrine and confuting false, which happeneth (say they) when a man is conuerted, and chiefly in the houre of death, at which tyme many are enlightened, and so perceiue themselues to haue bene deceiued, at which they are ashamed, and so are saued as by fyre. But this Expli∣cation is false: for first, many who haue builded stubble &c. dye so sodainly, as that they haue no tyme for repentance and amendment of their Errors, and yet they shall not be damned, because they had Christ for their foundation; and the Apostle auoucheth of all such, that they are saued; nei∣ther can they be saued, vnlesse Purgatory be admitted, because seeing they dyed in the stubble, hay, and straw of their veniall sinnes, they cannot be saued, but as by fyre. Se∣condly, he that shall be saued, yet as by fyre, shall suffer detri∣ment, or as the originall hath it, , shalbe punished; wheras he that is enlightened to see and follow the truth, therby receiueth gaine, comfort, and reward: euen as he would not thinke himselfe to suffer lesse, who hauing found a counterfait Diamond, at first thinking it good, perceiuing afterwards his errour, should haue a true one giuen him insteed therof. Some reply that S. Paul in the same sentence would not vse the word, fyre, so diuersly, as for the Iudgment of God, & Purgatory fyre. But besides the former reasons pro∣uing the different acception of the word, fyre, to be necessa∣ry, S. Paul vseth one and the selfe same word of, sinne, in other places in a double signification: for example,2. Cor. 5.21. him that knew no sinne, he made sinne for vs, and in another placeRom 8.3. euen of sinne, damned sinne; where in both places, sinne, signi∣fieth a Sacrifice for sinne, as also the transgression of the law. Others reply, that as the other words, gold, siluer, building
&c. are taken Metaphorically, so also may the word, fyre, be taken, and the rather, for that it is not said, they shalbe saued by fyre, as though it were a true fyre, but, as by fyre, to insinuate therby vnto vs, a similitudinary, or metaphoricall fyre only. By the like reason the wordes, worke, saued, Christ, and the like being in the same sentence, should be taken metaphori∣cally, which is absurd. And as for the word, as, or, quasi, it doth not signify a similitude with fyre, but with one passing through the fyre, so that the sense is, he that buildeth hay &c. shalbe saued, but after the manner of him, who to come to some place, passeth through the fyre: yea the word, quasi, doth not alwayes extenuate the truth of the thing, but doth sometymes much strengthen & confirme the same, as where it is saidIo. 1.14. We saw the glory of him, glory as it were (quasi) of the only begotten of the Father, that is, we saw him glorious, as became the only begotten sonne of God. Thirdly, it is pretended that this place is obscure, & ad∣mitteth great variety of Interpretations, both by the Fa∣thers, and others, wherfore it cannot be of force to proue any point of Faith. By the same reason many other places of Scriptures, especially the Epistles of S. Paul, (which in the Iudgment of S. Peter are hard) might not be vsed in argu∣ment against Hereticks. Againe, are the Scriptures hard & obscure, and so granted to be by Prot. here being pressed with this place for proofe of Purgatory, as indeed they be, both of thēselues, or notwithstanding any Conference of o∣ther places; how then stādeth this with their pretēded facili∣ty of Scripture at other times? Lastly, as for variety of Inter∣pretatiō, it is no let for proofe of doctrine, when one place (as I haue formerlySee heretofore Preparatiue. sect. 7. proued) may admit many true literal senses, so long as the same are not repugnant to themselues, to other places, or pointes of faith: yea what one place al∣most is not diuersly interpreted, by ancient Fathers, and yet all senses may be meant by the holy Ghost, who indited the Scriptures. And do not Prot. themselues bring diuers Inter∣pretations of one and the same Scripture? Fourthly, S. Paul1. Cor. 15.29. prouing the Resurrection, a∣mongst other argumēts, vseth this for one, proposed by way
of Interrogation, intimating this great absurdity, following vpon the deniall of the Resurrection, What shall they doe that are baptized for the dead, if the dead ryse not at all? why then are they baptized for the dead? Here whether we take it, that the Apo∣stle (in proofe of the resurrection of the dead) doth reason from the Errour of those, who knowing the great force of Baptisme, and thinking the dead were in case to be relieued, did, vpon these true grounds, erroneously practise to be bap∣tized for, and in the name of their dead friends, (an Errour reported of those beginning tymes by S.Haer. 28. Epiphanius) or that in this place by Baptisme he vnderstand the Baptisme of Teares and Pennance, vndertaken for the dead by Almes, fa∣sting, and prayer, in which like sense of voluntary affli∣ction, the word, Baptisme, is often vsed in the ScripturesMat. 20.22.23. Mar. 10.38.39. Luc. 12.50. And Marc. 1.4. Luc. 3.3. Act. 13.24. & 19.4. andCypr. de caena Dom. Nazianz. Orat. de Epi∣phania. Fathers. Now this place taken in either sense, proueth, that in the Common opinion of those tymes, the dead were in case to be relieued. This argument is so con∣uincing, that the Protestant DanaeusCont. Bellar. 1 part. alt. parte. p. 1174. doth therfore in answere hereto vnderstand in this place by the Dead, not (sayth he) those who are naturally dead, but such as are liuing vpon Earth, and dead in sinne, directly against the forsaid words and circumstances of the place, which do most manifestly con∣cerne the Resurrection of the dead. S. Iohn directeth and limiteth our Prayer for the dead, saying,Ep. 5.16. He that knoweth his brother to sinne, a sinne not to death, let him aske, and lyfe shalbe giuen him, sinning not to death. There is a sinne to death; for that I say not, that any man aske. Hence Purgatory is proued two wayes, for first by a sinne to death, all vnderstand finall impenitence, and for such dying im∣penitently in mortall sinne, we are forbidden to pray, wherby it is insinuated, and we admonished, that for such as dye in sinnes repented, or which are not mortall, we may lawfully pray. Secondly, whereas we are forbidden heer to pray for certayne sinners, and allowed to pray for certayne others, to wit, for such as sinne not to death, this place must be vn∣derstood eyther of prayer for the liuing, or for the dead; if of prayer for the dead, then it proueth the thing in question,
namely that as we are forbidden to pray for some dead, so also we are admonished to pray for others. And that it can∣not be meant of prayer for the liuing, is proued by the for∣sayd sinne vnto death, for which we are forbidden to pray, and whereof S. Austine sayth accordingly,De ciu. l. 21. c. 24. And see Conc. Bra∣char. 1. c. 34. If any vnto death haue an impenitent hart &c. doth the Church pray for them, that is, for the soules of such departed? And this cannot be meant of any sinne of the liuing, because there is no sinne so great and haynous, but we may (without particular Reuelation to the contrary) lawfully pray for the remission thereof, and for the amendement and conuersion of the Committer ther∣of, whylest he is yet liuing. And though there were a de∣gree of sinne so grieuous in this life, as were irremissible, (the contrary whereof the learnedst of the Prot.Vrbanus Regius loc. com. c. de pec. fol. 20. 21. Wigandus. Syntag. Col. 380. 581. 584. Chem. in En∣chyr. p. 269. 273. Smyth in his Trea∣tise of prayer in generall for all men &c. wri∣ters affirme) yet were the committing thereof in others, knowne to God only, for we are not able to discerne the secrets of the hart, much lesse to know, if the party haue pro∣ceeded to that height of iniquity, and therefore this sinne (though admitting there were any such) cannot be the sin meant in this place, for the remission whereof, we are for∣bidden to pray. Now wheras some obiect, that the Prophet Hieremy was forbidden to pray for the Iewes then liuing,C. 11.14. Thou therfore pray not for this people, & take not to thee prayse and prayer for them: therefore we may not pray for all sinners during lyfe. To this the answere is first, that the Prophet had a speciall Reuelation to the contrary, and therefore might not do it. Secondly, this obiection is impertinent, for he was not for∣bidden to pray for the Remission of their sinnes, but for re∣mission onely of theHier. 11.11 12.23. plague, or temporall punishment which they should not escape by Gods Decree: which is nothing to this present purpose, where we speake of pray∣ing for the Remission of sinne.
SECT. III. The ancient Fathers expound the forsayd Scriptures agrea∣bly with Catholikes in proofe of Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead. BEcauseAgainst Rhem. Test. in Mat 12.32. D. Fulke thinketh, It is sufficient, for (Prot.) that, neither the Scripture teacheth Purgatory, neyther the Pri∣mitiue Church did admit of it for many hundred yeares after Christ &c. and that, S. Austine doth not affirme any thing certaine of it; as I haue next before proued our Doctrine of Purgatory from sundry cleerest Textes of Scripture, so now I intend the like by the Ancient Fathers, and particularly by S. Au∣stine. S. Austine then hauing taught that some depart this lyfe so bad, that they are incapable of any reliefe by their li∣uing friends, and others so good, that they need not the same; doth yet notwithstanding in proofe of the practise of the Catholike Church praying for such departed, as in their lyfe tyme merited the same, further confirme the same out of the Booke of the Machabees in these wordes following,L. de cura pro mort. c. 1. We read in the Booke of the Machabees Sacrifice offered for the dead, but although it were nowhere at all read in the Old Testament, yet notwithstanding not small is the authority of the vniuersall Church, which shyneth with this Custome; where the Commendation of the Dead hath its place in the prayers of the Priest, which are powred to our Lord God at his Aultar. Here S. Austine teacheth first, that the bookes of Ma∣chabees are part of the Old Testament; Secondly that the said bookes do teach Sacrifice offered for the dead; Thirdly that though it were not taught in the old Testament, or the Scriptures, yet the authority of the vniuersall Church, which shyneth with this Custome, would suffice; Fourthly, that Priestes at the Aultar, did powre out their prayers to God for the dead. And lastly as Prot. reiect the bookes of Machabees, because they teach Sacrifice, and prayer for the dead: so S. Austine belieueth, and approueth Sacrifice, and
prayer for the dead, because (amongst other reasons) they are taught in the said bookes. The same S. Austine likewise in proofe of the same Do∣ctrine, expoūdeth the forsaid place of S. Mathew thus,De Ciu. Dei. l. 21. c. 13. for neither cold it be truly sayd of certaine, that they should not be forgiuen neither in this world, nor in the world to come; vnlesse there were some who though they were not forgiuen in this world, yet should be in the world to come. Conforme to S. Austine saith S. Gregory,Lib. 4. Dial c. 39. So as a man departeth hence, so is he to be presented in Iudgement; but yet purging fire of certayne light sinnes, before the generall Iudgement, is to be belieued to be, in that Truth sayth: Because, if any shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, he shall neither be forgiuen in this world, nor in the world to come: In which sentence there is giuen vs to vnderstand, that certayne sinnes may be forgiuen vs in this world, and that certaine may be released in the world to come; for that which is denyed of one, in true consequence is granted of some. With these accordeth S. I∣sidore, saying,De Offi∣cijs Eccle∣siasticis. c. 8. q. 818. When our Lord sayth, He that sinneth agaynst the holy Ghost, shall not be forgiuen neither in this world, nor in the world to come, he doth demonstrate, that vnto some, sinnes are there to be forgiuen, and to be purged with a certaine Purgatory fire. So expresse are the Fathers expositions of those wordes of our Sauiour in behalfe of Purgatory. Now touching the fathers interpreting those other words of our Sauiour, Agree with thy Aduersary &c. Origen writeth thus,In Ep. ad Rom. & ho. 35. in Lu∣cam ho. 14. in Leuit. ho. 25. in Num ho. 2. in Ps. 38. bo 12. in Hie∣remiam. & l. 8. in Rom. c. 11. Although a releasment out of Prison be somtymes promised, yet it is designed, that none can get forth thence, but he which payeth the vttermost farthing. With Origen agreeth S. Cyprian spea∣king of the same Text thus:Epist. 52. ad Antonia∣num post med See also S. Cyprian in his 66. Epi∣stle. &. l. 3. ad Quirinum. c. 57. It is one thing to stand way∣ting for pardon, another thing o come to glory: one thing for one to be cast into Prison, and not to come forth vntill he haue payd the vtter∣most farthing, another thing immediatly to receyue the reward of faith and vertue: one thing, that one tormented a long tyme for sinnes, be amended and purged long by fire, another to haue purged all sinnes by suffering, or Martyrdome. With Origen and S. Cyprian agreeth Eusebius Emissenus, his words are these:Ho. 3. de Epiphania. But these who haue done things worthy of temporary punishment, shall passe through a floud of fire, to whome the word of God is directed, that they do not goe out thence, till they pay the vtmost farthing. Which vtmost farthing S.
Hierome expoundeth to be little sinnes, saying,In c. 5. Mat. And see S. Ambr. in Luc. c. 12. Tertul. l. de anima c. 35. This is that which he saith, Thou shalt not go out of Prison, vntill thou shalt pay euen to thy litle sinnes. Lastly S. Bernard,De obitu Huberti. Know ye this, that after this life in purging places, those things which are here neglected, are to be paid a hundred fould, euen vnto the last farthing. So cer∣tainly are these words of our Sauiour, vnderstood of Pur∣gatory by the Ancient Fathers. But to Examine now, what the Fathers thought of that hard place of S. Paul. 1 Cor. 3. &c. S. Ambrose expoun∣deth it thus,Ser. 20. in Ps. 118. & S. Hier. in c. 4. Amos. & l. 2. in Io∣uin. post med. & in fine Comment. in Isaiam. But wheras S. Paul saith, yet so as by fyre, he sheweth indeed that he shalbe saued, but yet shall suffer the punishment of fyre, that being purged by fyre he may be saued, and not be tormen∣ted for euer, as the Infidels are, with Euerlasting fyre. With S. Ambrose agreeth S. Austine, writing thus,In psal. 37. & l. 2. de Gen. cont. Manichaeos. c. 2 & l. 21. de Ciu. c 13. Purge me in this lyfe, and make me such a one, as shall not further need the amending fyre, being for them which shalbe saued yet so as by fyre: wherfore, but because here they build vpon the foundation wood, hay, and stubble: but if they should build gold, and siluer, and precious stones, they should be secure from both fyres, not only from that euerlasting, which shall torment the wicked for euer, but also from that which shall amend such as shalbe saued by fyre. For it is said, he shalbe saued, yet so, as it were by fyre. And because it is said, he shalbe saued, this fyre is contemned: yea verily although they are saued by fyre, yet notwith∣standing that fyre is more grieuous then whatsoeuer a man may suf∣fer in this lyfe. Againe,Serm. 41. de Sanct. prope init. There are many, who not rightly vn∣derstanding this reading, are deceiued with false security, whilest they belieue, that if they build Capitall sinnes vpon the foundation of Christ, those sinnes may be purged by transitory fyre, and they afterwards come to lyfe euerlasting. This vnderstanding &c. is to be corrected, because they deceiue themselues, who so flater themselues; for with that transi∣tory fyre, wherof the Apostle said, He shalbe saued, yet so as by fyre, not Capital (or deadly) but litle sinnes are purged. So cleere is S. Au∣stine for the difference of litle and great sinnes, and of tem∣porall and eternall fyre in the next lyfe, S. Gregory expoūdeth the same words to the same sense, making the like difference of little & great sinnes, saying,Lib. 4: Dial. c. 39. See the like in Ps. 1. Poenit. propè init & Ps. 3. Poenit. init. Seeing Paul affimeth Christ to be the foundation, he addeth. If any shall build vpon this foundation, gould, siluer, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble, the worke of euery one what kind it is, fire shall try: if any mans worke abyde which he built thereupon, he shall re∣ceyue reward. If any mans worke burne, he shall suffer detriment, but himselfe shalbe saued, yet so, as by fyre. Although this may be vnder∣stood, of the fyre of Tribulation giuen vs in this lyfe; yet if any shall vnderstand it of the fire of future purging, it is diligently to be conside∣red that he sayth, he may be saued by fyre, not he who buildeth vpon this foundation, Iron, brasse, or lead, that is, greater sinnes, and ther∣fore harder, and then vnsatifysable: but wood, hay, stubble, that is, litle sinnes, and the lightest, which fyre may easily consume. S. Chrisostome proueth Sacrifice for the dead, by the fact of Iob, saying,Ho. 41. in. 1. Cor. See ho. 3. in Ep. ad Philip. If the Sacrifice of the Father did satisfy for the sonnesIob. 1.5. of Iob, why dost thou doubt, whether we sacrificing for them, who haue departed, they haue any comfort therby? for God is accustomed to bestow his benefits vpon some, for others. To conclude, the Fathers are so cleere in this, that D. Fulke (directly contrary to what he said before) acknow∣ledgeth that,Confut. of Purg. p. 110. Austine de ciu. Dei. l. 21. c. 13. concludeth very cleerly, that some suffer temporall paines after this lyfe, this may not be denyed. And,Ibid. p. 78. Austine speaketh indeed of the amending fyre, &c. but had no ground of that fyre, but in the common errour of his tyme. Againe,Ibid. p. 319. See Cent. 4. c. 6. In the buryall of Constantine is mention of prayer for his soule, according to the errour of the tyme.Ib. p. 320. 326. Am∣brose indeed alloweth prayer for the dead: it was a common errour of his tyme. M. Gifford affirmeth, that,De∣monstration. ag. Browni∣stes. pa. 38. This corruption of prayer for the dead was generall in the Church, long before the dayes of Austine &c. It was the practise of the Church in generall, and the Cor∣ruption so ancient, that Tertullian sayth, It was obserued by Tra∣dition from the Apostles &c. The Doctrine of Purgatory was crept in also. So ancient and generall was the Doctrine of Purga∣tory, and Prayer, and Sacrifice for the dead.
SECT. IV. Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead taught, and belieued by Protestantes themselues. IOhn Husse expresly teacheth that,In fidei suae elucida∣tione & serm. de Exequijs & suffragiis defunctorum. & adc. 3. in. 1. Ioan. The vniuersall Church is deuided into three parts, the Church militant, triumphant, and dormitant &c. The Church dormitant is the number of the Prede∣stinate suffering in Purgatory &c. The blessed in this lyfe do help with their prayers, fastinges and Almes, and other holy workes, the holy dormitants of the Church, that they may goe out of the paines of Purgatory, and be sooner placed in the Country of the blessed. By the Vniuersity of Prage it was thus decreed,Tom. 1. operum Hus∣si. f. 82. We confesse euen with belieuing 3. receptacles of soules loosed from the flesh, to wit, Heauen, Purgatory, and Hell. Perzibran doubteth not to say,In profes∣sione fidei. c. 23. I professe and firmly belieue, that a place of Purgatory fyre after this lyfe of soules departed from the body, and to be saued, not heere ful∣ly purged by the remedy of satisfaction, is to be placed: and that the faithfull here in the way, for the band of Charity and spirit, may and ought piously help them, by fasting, prayers, almes▪ and other holy Obla∣tions. Almost all Doctours do ground this opinion vpon the words of Christ, saying: Some sinne, not to be forgiuen neither in this world, nor in the world to come. D. Martin Luthers Confession of faith, is this,In assert. art. 37. I do belieue there is a Purgatory; And againe,Tom. 2. Wittem∣berg. 1545. in resolutionibus de Indulg. conclusione 15 fol. 112. prope fin. & concl. 16. 17. 19. I am sure that there is a Purgatory: which Doctrine he doth there more at large defend, calling it,Ibid. fol. 112. b. initio. Fidem tot saeculorum, the beliefe of so many ages. Yea,Aduersus Bullam. Tom. 7. fol. 132. I neuer denied Purgatory. And, I yet belieue it, as I haue often written and confessed. And,Disp. Lips. c. de Purg. I know nothing of Pur¦gatory, but that soules there suffer to be holpen by our Prayers and workes. It sufficeth that we know them to suffer, and that we ought to helpe them &c. Lastly the said D. Luther in another place is so confident of this Doctrine, that he concludeth thus,In Dis∣put. Lypsic. cum Ecchio c. de Purgat. I do strongly belieue, yea I dare auouch I know, that there is a Purgatory, for I am easily induced that there is mention made therof in Scri∣ptures; as Gregory in his dialogue induceth that of Matt. 12. This sinne
shall not be forgiuen, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. And I admit that of 2. Machab. 12. It is a holy and wholsome thought to pray for the dead. So fully doth Luther belieue, and teach Purgatory, euen from Scriptures themselues. Vrbanus1. Part. operum n formula caute loquendi. fol. 86. & loc. com. c. 19. Regius, fellow-labourer with Luther, al∣loweth prayer for the sinnes of the dead; and in proofe ther∣of alleadgeth the practise of the Ancient Church,Loc. com. c. 18. de Purg. & part. 1. de Missae negotio fol. 72. and te∣stimonies of Nazianzen, Nyssen, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Austine, Da∣mascene &c. He also thinketh that, BaruchLoc. com. impress. 1545. de San∣ctis n. 16. f. 124. prayed for the dead: and yet further alleadgeth his owne Iudgment and Luthers, saying,In 1 part. operum in formula caute loquendi. c. de Sanctorum cultu. The man of God Martin Luther, our for euer reuerend maister, thinketh it agreable with Christian piety, that of our free deuotion we should pray for our deceased friends. M. Fox acknowledgeth, that M. LatimerAct. mon. p. 1313. & p. 1315. acknow∣ledged Purgatory. And William Thorpe a constant Profes∣sour, prayed for his FathersAct. mon. p. 149. and mothers soules. Melancthon confesseth, that,Apol. Confess. Au∣gustanae in Disput. de vo∣cabulis Mis∣sae. Epiphanius testifyeth, Aerius to haue thought that prayers for the dead are vnprofitable: that he reprehendeth, neither do we defend Aerius. Sundry Prot. through euidence of truth, not daring ab∣solutely to deny Purgatory and prayer for the dead, do yet speake thus doubtfully and inconsequently therof:Confess. Wittem∣berg. It is lawfull to wish for the dead all quiet and happines in Christ, but it is not lawfull to pray for them. Luther thinketh,Postil. in Dom. 2. post Trin. fol. 286. & in die omnium Sanctorum. fol. 441. that it is lawfull sometymes to pray for the dead, but not often: also to pray for them at home, and in our Chamber, but not in the Church. And the same is taught by Vrbanus RegiusIn. form. caute loquen∣di. tom. 1. fol. 86.. D. FieldOf the Church. l. 3. c. 17. is of opinion, that it is lawfull to pray for the dead presently after death, but not afterwards. Zwinglius sayth of himselfe,In Art. 60. If one carefull for the dead, doth implore or beseech fauour for them from God, I do not condemne him: but it is Diabolicall to determine the tyme for this. M. Ant. de Dominis thinketh that,De R∣pub. l. 5. c. 8. n. 132. At the Intercession of the Church, God doth re∣mit lesser sinnes a litle after death, but not long after death. But these are capriches raigning in the braines of men distracted, vn∣worthy of Confutation. And we haue here seene, that o∣ther Prot. without all exceptions, haue taught the Doctrine of Purgatory and prayer for the dead, euen from the Scri∣ptures
and practise of the Primitiue Church. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures against Purgatory and Prayer for the Dead, answered. THe first Obiection is taken from those words of the Psalmist,Ps. 126.3. When he shall giue sleepe to his beloued, behould the Inheritance of our Lord. Hence our Aduersaries would proue, that immediatly after death the inheritance of Hea∣uen followeth. To this I answere with S. Austine,In Ps. 126. circa med. this place is meant of the general Resurrection, Dat ergo dans &c. sayth he, God therfore bestoweth this when his beloued shall sleepe: then his beloued, to wit, of Christ shall aryse for all shall aryse, but not as his beloued, for there is Resurrection of all. And then citing that place of the Apostle, (we shall all indeed aryse, but we shall not all be changed) he addeth, they do aryse to torment, we aryse as our Sa∣uiour arose, that we may follow our Head, if we be his Members. So that this place is meant, in S. Austine his Iudgment, of the Generall Resurrection, after which the Elect go presently to heauen, and are to expect no Purgatory. Besides where ProtestantsEngl. Bi∣ble of Anno 1592. translate the same words thus, behould Chil∣dren are the Inheritance of the Lord, and the fruite of the wombe his reward: this place is altogeather impertinent, & making no∣thing at all against Purgatory. Secondly, that of Ecclesiasticus is obiected,C. 9. 10. What∣soeuer thy hand is able to do, worke it instantly: for neither worke, nor reason, nor wisdome, nor knowledge, shalbe in Hell. Answere. S. HieromeIn Com∣ment. huius loci, affirmeth Salomon to speake this, in the per∣son of the wicked, who take away both Purgatory & Hell, thinking no life to remayne after this: his wordes are, Now he (meaning the Preacher) induceth as it were the humane Error and Custome, wherby they exhort ech other to enioy the goods of this lyfe, and making a Prosopopeia, after the manner of Poets and Rhetori∣cians, say: O man because then after death thou art nothing, and death it selfe is nothing, heare my Counsaile; and whilest thou liuest in this
short lyfe, enioy thy pleasure &c. Secondly the same S. Hierome thinketh, that Salomon may speake this to those, who liuing wickedly, went directly to Hell, where it is most true, that there is no Comfort for them, and therfore concludeth thus of them. AsIbid. fishes are taken with the hooke and nets, and birdes flying at liberty through the ayre, are ensnared at vnawares, so also men according to their desert, shalbe brought to Eternall torments &c. Thirdly, this Text may also be applyed to those in Purga∣tory, for such only are holpen by the Prayers of their liuing friends, who by their good workes in their lyfe tyme, deser∣ued the same, and therfore euery one had need to worke instantly in this lyfe. And thus it is expounded also by S. GregoryL. 4. Dial. c. 39.. Thirdly, some obiect that of Ecclesiastes,11. 3. If the tree shall fall to the South, or to the North, in what place soeuer it shall fall, there shall it be: therfore there is no Purgatory out of which it may be taken. Answere. Literally this is spoken of Corpo∣rall death, that men are necessarily to dye, and being dead, they can no more ryse by themselues, then the tree that fal∣leth: But if we will apply this to the Condition of the Soule, then the meaning only is that, in what state or con∣dition soeuer, be it of Saluation or Damnation, that a man departeth out of this lyfe, in the same State shall he euer re∣mayne, fall the wood to the South, that is, dy the man in state of Saluation, or fall it to the North, that is, dye he in state of damnation: In what place it falleth, there it shall be, that is, his Condition shall neuer be changed: for nei∣ther if he depart in grace, shall he be able any more to loose it, neither if he dye out of the state of Grace shall he be euer able hereafter to recouer it, or to rayse himselfe vnto it, as the tree being fallen, cannot aryse vp it selfe. Now he who is in Purgatory, is fallen to the South, because he dyed in state of Saluation, and therfore after due purging shall goe to Hea∣uen. Nothing therfore can be inforced out of this place a∣gainst Purgatory, since it belongeth to the South. Lastly this place of Ecclesiastes, maketh no more against Purgato∣ry, then against Limbus Patrum, which was the place where the Fathers were before Christes Incarnation and death.
Fourthly, others do vrge those wordes of the Apostle,2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all be manifested before the Iudgment Seat of Christ, that euery one may receyue the proper thinges of the body, according as he hath done, either good or euill, by which it may seeme that Purgatory is quite taken away. S. Austine giueth the ans∣were vnto this Text, thus,In En∣chyr. ad Lau∣rentium. c. 110. & l. de Cura p o Mort. c 1. Dionysius de Eccles. Hier. c. vlt. Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 39. But the tyme interposed bet∣wixt mans death, and the last Resurrection, doth keepe the soules in secret Receptacles, as euery soule is worthy either of ease or misery, according as the soule hath wrought liuing in flesh: neither is it to be denyed, that the soules of the Dead are relieued with the piety of their liuing friends, when the Sacrifice of the Mediatour is offered for them, or Almes giuen in the Church. But these thinges auaile them, who li∣uing merited, that these thinges might afterwards profit them: for there is a certayne manner of liuing, neither altogeather so good; that it may not require these helpes after death, nor altogeather so bad, that these things may not helpe it after death. But some kind of liuing is so good, that it needeth not these helpes, and againe, another so euill, that it cannot be holpen with these after this lyfe; wherfore here all the merit is to be got, wherby any may be relieued, or payned after this lyfe &c. These things therfore which the Church frequenteth for the Commen∣ding of the Dead, are not against that saying of the Apostle, We shall all stand &c. Because ech indeed merited this for himselfe whilest he liued, that these thinges might auayle him, for these things do not pro∣fit all, and why do they not profit all? but for the difference of lyfe which euery one held in flesh, therfore when Sacrifices either of the Aultar, or of what Almes soeuer are offered for all the dead baptized; for those who are very good, they are thanks-giuings, for those which are not ve∣ry euill they are propitiations, for those which are very euill, although they are no release of such dead, yet are they some Consolations to the liuing. So far S. Austine, both in proofe of Purgatory, and Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, and for full answere to this Obiection. Fiftly those wordes of S. Iohn are cōmonly obiected,Apoc. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in our Lord, from henceforth now, saith the spirit, that they rest from their labours, for their workes follow them, But all the Godly dye in our Lord, therfore there is no Purgatory for them. Answere. S. Anselme,In Com∣ment. huius loci. by these wordes, from henceforth, vnderstandeth the day of Iudg∣ment,
wherof S. Iohn speaketh in all that Chapter, and so it maketh nothing against Purgatory, which then shall cease. VictorIn hunc locum. and Haymo expound this place to be meāt of very perfect men, and especially of holy Martyres, whom S. Iohn in this place is willed to comfort, and who are said absolutly to dye in our Lord, not hauing any thing after death to be purged: wheras those who dye in veniall sinne, or with punishment to be paid for mortall, dye not absolu∣tly in our Lord, but partly so, by reason of their Charity, and partly otherwise, by reason of their sinne, and so they are called by S. Austine,L. 3. contr. duas Ep. Pelag. c. 3. partly the sonnes of God, and partly the sonnes of the world. A sixt Obiection is taken from that Promise Christ made to the Thiefe cōuerted at his death; S. Luke recordeth it thus,C. 25. 43. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise: therfore no Purgatory remayneth, no not for those who haue done no Pennance. The answere is: A death so cruel, suffered so patiently, and a Confession of Christ so admirable, euen then, when the Apostles themselues denied him, might well be taken for a full satisfaction: neither do the Priuiledges of a few, make a Law; but besides, seeing the good Thiefe rea∣dy to dye, desired our Lord that he would remember him when he came into his kingdome; it strongly argueth that the Thiefe thought, that immediatly after death, he was not to go to heauen, otherwise he would haue prayed him to haue taken him with him to his kingdome, and yet withall, he hoped not to be damned; wherupon it followeth, that he thought there was some other place besides heauen, and hell, where he was to remayne for a tyme, vntill Christ, comming to his kingdome, should remember to take him thence, which was the vttermost which the good Thiefe could hope for. Brentius obiecteth, that all are included within these words, Come ye blessed &c. and go ye accursed &c. Answere. The words precedent and subsequent, do manifestly show, that this is spoken of the day of Iudgment, when Purgatory shall cease. Some argue thus: In Purgatory a man cannot merit,
therfore neither satisfy. But for answere, I may truly say that the Consequence is false, for to merit, besydes Grace is required liberty, and the state of this lyfe, wheras a man may truly satisfy, though he be compelled therunto by the Iudge. Lastly M. Rogers thinketh that,Def. of the Art art. 11. p. 119. In the sacred Scri∣pture there is mention but only of two wayes, one leading vnto destru∣ction the other bringing vnto lyfe; of two sortes of men, wherof some belieue, and they are saued, some belieue not, and they are damned: And of two states, one blessed, where Lazarus is, the other cursed, where Diues doth abyde. A third way, or sort, or state, cannot be found in the word of God. Answ. It is rrue, that wayes, states, and sortes of men, in regard of Eternity, are but two, but this nothing hindreth but that temporally, and before the day of Iudgment come, there may be more, as hath bene proued formerly from the Scriptures themselues, the An∣cient Fathers, and sundry Protestant writers.
CHAP. XVI. The true state of the Question, concerning the In∣tercession, and Inuocation of Angels, and Saintes. Whether the Angels and Saintes in Heauen, do pray for men vpon Earth; And whether we may lawfully pray to them as Intercessors to God for vs: Or whether the said Angels and Saintes do heare our Prayers, or know things done vpon Earth: and their Intercession be not a derogation from Christes Mediation. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. ALTHOVGH it be the ordinary practise of Prot. to endeauour the priua∣tion of all honour to Angels and Sain∣tes from men vpon Earth, and to hin∣der men from the help of their suffra∣ges; yet the Church of Christ to the con∣trary hath euer exhibited vnto them their due honour, and hath made vse of their holy prayers. So the Church of Christ commandeth,Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de in∣tercessione Sanctorum. all Bishops and o∣thers sustayning the Office and charge of teaching, that according to the vse of the Catholicke and Apostolicke Church, receyued from the
very first tyme of Christian Religion, and according to the consent of holy Fathers, and the Decrees of sacred Councels, they first of all dili∣gently teach the faithfull concerning the intercession and inuocation of Saintes &c. teaching them that the Saintes raigning togeather with Christ▪ do offer their prayers to God for men; that it is good and pro∣fitable humbly to inuocate them, and to fly to their prayers, helpe, and ayd for the obtayning of benefits from God by his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer and Sauiour: And that those who deny, that Saintes enioying eternall felicity in heauen are to be inuo∣cated, or such as do affirme, either that they do not pray for men, or that by Inuocation of them, they pray not for vs in particular, is Idola∣try or against Gods word, or opposite to the honour of one Mediatour of God & man, Iesus Christ; or that it is foolish either by word or thought to supplicate the Saintes raigning in heauen, are of wicked opinion. Thus the Councell of Trent. The Fathers of the Councell of Chalcedon pray thus,Act 11. Flauian liueth after death, the Martyr pray for vs. The Coun∣cell of Constantinople decreeth,Conc. 6. Constanti∣nop. c. 7. See Conc Gan∣grense can. 20. that a Christian adoring only God his Creator, may inuocate Saintes, that they would vouch∣safe to pray for him to the diuine Maiesty. And the Bishops in the Councell of Cabilonense make this prayer to S. Vincent,Cap. 1. Being assembled togeather in the Church of S. Vincent, asking the Intercession of this holy Martyr, that we may deserue by his suffrage the long lyfe of the forsaid Prince. The second Councell of Nice aduiseth thusAct. 6. & Act. 3. Let vs do all things with the feare of God, asking the intercessions of the vnspotted Mother of God, & al∣wayes Virgin Mary, also of the Angels, & all Saintes. Agreably to these Councels the present ChurchBellar. de Sanct. l 1. c. 17 &c. Rhem Test. in Luc. 16 9. & in 2. Pet. 1.15. of Christ teacheth, that although it be not lawfull to pray to Angels or Saintes, as the authors and giuers either of Grace or glory, or of any thing requisite to saluation; or as though they were our so immediate intercessors to God, as to aske any thing without Christes mediation, and his merits; yet that they do pray for vs both in generall and particular, & that we may pray to them, all Catholikes belieue.
Pointes Disputable. SomeAugust. l. de cura pro mort. c. 15. Catholicke writers teach that the Saintes in heauen do know thinges vpon earth by the relation of An∣gels.S. Hieron. cont. Vigil. Others, that by the celerity of their nature, they are as it were, euery where, and do heare by themselues the prayers of their suppliants.Aug. l. de cura pro mort. cap 15. Others yet, that our prayers when we make them, are reuealed to them by God. ButS. Greg. l. 12. Moral. c. 13. S. Tho. 3. part q. 10. art. 2. others most probably, that from the very beginning of their beatitude, they do see all things in God, which in any respect do belong vnto them, and therfore our prayers, dire∣cted vnto them. Protestant Vntruthes. Luther affirmeth, that,Ad E∣uangelium de festo Annun∣tiationis. The Papistes make the Virgin Mary a God, they attribute vnto her omnipotency in heauen and in earth &c. In the Papacy all haue betaken themselues to Mary, and haue expected more fauour and grace from her, then from Christ him∣selfe. According to Caluin,De ne∣cessitate re∣formandae Ecclesiae. We do not only adore Saintes insteed of Christ, but also their bones, garments, shooes and pictures. And,Instit. l. 3. c. 10. §. 22. euery one takes to themselues peculiar Saintes, into whose custody they giue themselues, no otherwise then if they were guardian Gods. Yea he auoucheth,Ib. l. 1. c. 20. §. 21. that in our Hymnes and Lytanies we make no mention of Christ. Other Prot. auouch, that,Confessio Mansfiel∣denfium cap. de erroribus Iesuitarum. The error of the Iesuiticall sect is, that Christ although he was our Mediatour, and intercessor, yet now he is not any more but Saints only are our Intercessours, and mediatours. D. White speaking of Catholike Pastours sayth,Way to the Church, Pref. to the Read. n. 14. In their open seruice and printed bookes (they) serue the Saints and worship them, with the same ser∣uice that they giue to Christ. Agayne, The same titles are giuen to the Saints, and the same things, by the same merits asked of them, that appertaine to Christ alone. And, they ioyne the Virgin Mary with Christ in the very worke of our Redemption, & ascribe to her no lesse then to him, the execution of all Gods mercyes towards vs. Rogers affirmeth that,Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 128. All Gods people in the purer and former tymes haue &c vtterly condemned the inuocating or paying vn∣to creatures whatsoeuer. But these & sundry such like vntruths
broached by Prot. deserue no other answere, but truly to say, that they are lyes vttered by the legitimate children of the father of lyes, the Diuell. Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth that,Article 22. The Re∣mish doctrine touching inuocation of Saints &c. is a fond thing, vain∣ly inuented, and grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. The French Huguenots say,Confess. Gal. art. 24. We belieue that whatsoeuer men do imagine concerning the Interces∣sion of Saints departed, is nothing else then fraud and fallacies of Sa∣than. Whitaker sayth of himselfe and other Prot.Ad rat. 4. Camp. p. 19. See Perkins tom. 1. c. 21. in serie cau∣sarum. col. 31. Reinolds in his Confe∣rence. c. 1. sect. 2. We do not know whether Martyrs and Saints may pray to Christ for vs: ButAd rat. 4. Camp. It is certayne, that they are ignorant what we do. Daneus proceedeth yet further, affirming thatControu. 7. p. 1310. It is a false proposition, that the Saints who are already receyued into heauen, do pray God in generall for vs who liue heere. And againe,Ib. p. 1315. Polanus Disp. 25. Cal. Instit. l. 3. c. 20. §. 21. They do not aske any thing of God eyther in generall or particular for the necessities of men liuing vpon Earth. And the like is taught by sundry other Protestants. Sundry Prot. likewise teach, that the Saints in Heauen do not take any care of vs vpon Earth, neyther do know our Prayers, or other things heere done. Caluin teacheth, that,In Za∣char. 1.12. We know the of offices of Charity are restrayned to the course of this present lyfe. And,In Luc. 16.29. The Papistes are heer foolish subtill, whilest they will proue that the dead haue care of the liuing, then which cauill nothing is more vnsauory. Beza admi∣reth,In Luc. 15.10. Who shall rightly persuade himselfe or others, that the soules of Saints receyued into Heauen, do take care of these thinges which are done vpon Earth, or that they are knowne; much lesse that they ought to be inuocated. But how rightly these Prot. agree with ancient Heretickes, obserue. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. D. Fulke confesseth, thatAnswer to a Coun∣terf. Cath. p. 46. Hieron. cont. Vigil. c. 3. Vigilantius writ agaynst In∣uocation of Saints &c. him Hierome reproueth. And the same is confessed of Vigilantius by otherParker ag. Symbo∣liz. part. 1. p. 74. 83. Cris∣pinus estate of the Church. p. 131. Prot. D. Humfrey sayth,Ad rat. 3. Camp. p. 26. Vigilantius ordayned, that Saints were not to be worship∣ped
&c. we ordayne the same. And so you ranke your selfe M. Humfrey to be an hereticke with Vigilantius. In like sort, Sarauia and others acknowledge, that Aerius was also condemned by the Fathers for his then teaching that,Defens. Tract. de di∣uersis. p. 349. 346. Bucanus loc. com. p. 514. The Saints departed are not to be prayed vnto. And the same heresy is taught byAzoara 49. Mahomet. Vigilantius (22) and the WaldensesGuido de Walden∣sibus. denyed that Saints could heare vs: and so did D. Whitakers and others next before; but they are all censured by S. Hierome, and Guido, of Heresy. Hier. cont. Vigil. c. 3.Protestant Errours. Caluin thinketh, itInstit. l. 4. c. 25. §. 6. foolish and temerarious to seeke in what place the soules of the Iust are, whether they enioy glory or not. In the meane tyme seeing the Scripture euery where cōmandeth to de∣pend of the expectation of Christes comming, and differreth the glory and Crowne till then, let vs be content with these limits prescribed by God, the soules of the godly hauing performed the labour of warfare to fit togeather in blessed rest where with happy ioy they expect the frui∣tion of promised glory: here Caluin contradicteth himselfe, first censuring it for foolish, to enquire after the state of the sou∣les of the iust departed, and yet himselfe afterwards determi∣neth the matter, and that most wickedly, by denying pre∣sent glory to the soules of Saintes. Perkins acknowled∣ged that,Reform. Cath. controu. 14. c 2. when Angels did appeare, they were lawfully honou∣red, but not now. Wheras Catholikes do call the blessed Virgin Mary, our B. Lady, M. Rogers affirmethDef. of the Art. art. 20. p 106. that we falsly call her so: It seemes he would haue no greater title giuen vnto her, then Mistres Mary, which any Minister expecteth to be giuen to his wyfe. Caluin affirmed (as before) thatIn Za∣char. 1 12. we know the office of Charity to be restrayned to the course of this present lyfe So that according to him, there is no exercise of Charity in heauen. Tindall demandeth,In Fox Act. Mon. p. 1237. To what end dost thou erect Chur∣ches in honour of Saintes that thou shouldest make them thy friends? they need it not, yea they are not thy friends. Most agreable with
that of Luther,Postil. in Dom. 9. post Trin. fol. 309. Neither are they thy friends, but the friends of them from whom in their tyme they receiued benefit. We must not according to Luther imitate Saintes,Postil. in fest. Sancti Ioannis. fol. 378. These trifles ought not to be preached to men, that they imitate Saintes and tread in their steppes.In ferijs eiusdem fol. 91. Calu. in Io. 4.20. A long error hath possessed and preuayled, that we should all consider the workes and conuersation of Saints, and study to follow them, we fooles thinking this to be greatest piety. And the like is taught by Caluin. And their counsaile is diligently ob∣serued by all their followers. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that the Angels, and Saints in Heauen do know our prayers vpon Earth, and that they pray for vs, and we may lawfully pray vnto them, as In∣tercessours for vs. SEeing nothing is more frequent in the mouthes of late Sectaries, then that praying to Saints is no where taught in the Seriptures; I will therfore endeauour to proue from thence three points, all necessarily belonging to this Que∣stion, The first is, that Angells and Saints do heare our Prayers & know things that are done vpon Earth; the se∣cond, that they pray for vs not only in generall, but also in particular. And the third is, that we may lawfully pray to them. The first shalbe proued from the Prophecy of holy Daniel, where it is sayd,C. 10.11. And he (to wit the Angell) sayd to me, feare not Daniel; Because from the first day that thou didest set thy hart to vnderstand, to afflict thy selfe in the sight of God, thy words haue been heard, and I am come for thy words. Now by the words of Daniel, no man doubteth but are vnderstood his prayers, which were both heard and knowne by the An∣gell, since the Angell giueth the hearing of his prayers to be a cause of his comming vnto him. So that Daniel praying vpon Earth, was heard by the Angell in heauen. Secondly this point is proued by these wordes of Saint Paul,1. Cor. 13.8.9.10.12. Whether Prophecyes shalbe made voyd, or tongues shall
cease, or knowledge shalbe destroyed: for in part we know, and in part we prophesy; but when that shall come that is perfect, that shalbe made voyd, that is in part: we see now by a glasse in a darke sort; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then I shall know, as also I am knowne. The necessary deduction out of this place is this, that the knowledge of the Blessed, farre exceedeth any supernaturall knowledge, whether of Fayth or Prophecy giuen to man in this lyfe, in so much, as what∣soeuer is knowne by any knowledge of this lyfe, is much more perfectly knowne by that knowledge of the blessed. Now it is most certaine that many Prophets and holy men vpon Earth, knew the thoughts of other mens harts, and things far distant from them, as is made manifest by the Pro∣phet Eliseus, when he demanded Giezi4. Reg. 5.26. Was not my hart present, when the man returned out of his Chariot to meet thee? Yea he discouered vnto him further, all the particulers of his bry∣bery, togeather with the end, and cause which moued him, which must needs argue, that he was priuy to his very in∣ward & secretest thoughts: againe, was not the same Prophet priuy to all the ambushments that the King of Syria layd to entrap the King of Israel? & did he not by Propheticall for∣sight, premonish the King of Israel thereof, saying,4. Reg. 6.9. See the like Act. 5.3.9. Be∣ware thou passe not into such a place, because the Syrians are there in ambushments. And the King of Israel following the coun∣sell of the Prophet, preuented him of the ambush: and when the King of Syria suspected some of his owne to betray his Counsaile vnto the King of Israel, did not one of his Coun∣saylors reply?Ibid. vers. 12. And see Act 5.1.2. &c. S. Peters knowing the fraudulent dealing of Ananias and Saphira. Not so my Lord King, but Elizeus the Prophet, which is in Israel, telleth the King of Israel all words, whatsoeuer thou shalt speake in thy priuy Chamber. Which point of liuing Prophets knowing mens thoughts and wordes, though ne∣uer so secret, and distant, was so euident, that the very In∣fidels themselues acknowledged it; and yet our Aduersaries pretending themselues to be Christian, and Reformers, will not grant this Priuiledge to the Angells, and Saints trium∣phing, and raigning in heauen. Thirdly, it is generally houlden that the damned Spi∣rits in hell do know things done vpon Earth; and shall we
deny the like knowledge to the Saintes in heauen? Daneus sayth,Chri∣stian. Isagog. part. 2. c. 33. p. 83. The deuils do excell with admirable knowledge of these temporall and earthly things. And experience is strong herein, as appeareth by many Examples, namely of the spirit Orthen mentioned by Froyzard, and of possessed children, which in their fits, tell of things done in their absence: In so much as that the Deuils from this their knowledge of things done, did probably coniecture such things to come as were ther∣upon depending, as appeareth by their so many Oracles. Yea this point is so true, that AretiusLoc. com. p. 546. 548. proueth the same by sundry Examples of the Scriptures. Did not Abraham after his death, and yet not in heauen, know that Moyses & the Prophets were teaching vpon Earth, when he said,Luc. 16.29. They haue Moyses and the Prophets, let them heare them. Yea the damned DiuesIbid. ver. 27.28. was not ignorant that he had fyue Bre∣thren alyue. Now then if wicked spirits and damned Deuils are not ignorant of things done vpon Earth, shall not the blessed Angels and glorifyed Saintes, who are nor infe∣riour in knowledge, much the rather vnderstand & know the same? Thirdly this point is proued by those words of our Sa∣uiour mentioned by S. Luke,15.10. there shall be ioy before the Angels of God vpon one sinner that doth pennace. Now none can reioyce, but such as know, what the thing is at which they reioyce: but the Angels reioyce at the conuersion of a sinner vpon Earth; therfore it followeth euidently, that they know of the Conuersion of sinners vpon earth, that being the cause of their Ioy. Fourthly the same may be proued from such places as show that we haue Angels to guard vs, as that of S. Ma∣thew,18.10. See that you despise not one of these litles ones, for I say to you, that their Angels in heauen, alwayes do see the face of my Fa∣ther Here amongst other reasons, it is vrged, that we should take heed of despising or scandalizing others, because their Angels seeing God, see the same. And when S. PeterAct. 12.14.15.16. de∣liuered out of Prison, knocked at the doore where many of the faithfull were assembled, it is said, at the first they would not belieue, that it was he, but his Angel. The like knowledge
of Angels might be proued from K. Dauid, saying,Ps. 137.2. In the sight of Angels I will sing to thee. And from S. Paul,1. Cor. 4.9. we are made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men. Which Words plainly import that Angels do looke vpon vs. But some do reply and say, though it be granted, that Angels do know things vpon earth, yet it followeth not that the blessed soules do the like. But this forceth nothing: for first, that granted to Angels that they know things vpon Earth, then it euidently followeth, that they knowing our necessities, do in their Charity pray for vs, and that we may lawfully pray to them. Secondly of Saintes it is said, thatMat. 22.30. they are as heauenly Angels, and in another place,Luc. 20.36. equall to Angels, and yet in a third place, there is said to be in heauen,Apoc. 21.17. The measare of a man, which is of an Angell. All which ar∣gueth, that the Saintes in heauen may enioy equall glory with the Angels. Besides they are indued with their vnder∣standing, glorifyed, and eleuated with the light of glory, & with the presence and true sight of God, as the Angels are, and therfore nothing is wanting to them herein, which is granted to the Angels. And they haue this more then An∣gels, that they are members of the body of the Church, more conioyned with vs, then the Angels, and haue experienced our miseries and dangers. Caluin confesseth this argument to conuince, if we can proue, that as the Angels haue charge of men, and do guard them, & are present at their affayres, so the blessed soules of men do the like. But this is easily proued by these texts fol∣lowing,Apoc. 2.26.27. He that shall ouercome, and keepe my workes vnto the end, I will giue him power ouer the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and as the vessel of a Potter shall they be broken, as I also haue receyued of my Father.Apoc. 3.12. He that shall ouercome, I will make him a Pillar in the temple of my God.Mat. 24.46.47. Blessed is that seruant, whom when his Lord cometh, he shal fynd so doing: Amen. I say to you, that ouer all his goods he shall appoint him. Here we haue that the soules of Blessed men after their death, and before the Resurrection, receiue power ouer Countryes, to gouer∣ne and feed them, and to be pillars to support the Church, & to haue care ouer Gods goods, which S. Hilary sayth, is his
Church: all which show, that they haue to do with our af∣fayres in this world. The guardes of Saintes (saithIn psal. 124. S. Hilary) and the defence of Angels, are not wanting to those that will stand. S. Ambrose also teacheth, thatL. 8. in Lucam fine. As the Angels haue charge, so also these who haue deserued the lyfe of Angels. And S. Leo auoucheth, that S. PeterSerm. 2. de Anniuer∣sario suae Assumpt. now more fully and power∣fully performeth those things which are committed vnto him, and exe∣cuteth all the parts of offices and cares, in him by whom he is glorifyed. So cleere it is that the B. Soules, do take care, and help our affaires in this world. The same is proued from the very state of their beati∣tude, for their appetite is so fully satisfyed, as that nothing is wanting vnto them, which otherwise naturally they could desire, agreeing with that of the Psalmist,Ps. 16.15. I shalbe satisfyed when thy glory shall appeare; as also with that of S. Iohn,C. 16.25. Aske and you shall receyue, that your ioy may be full. But it is vndoub∣ted, that they naturally desire to know the state of their bre∣thren, friends, benefactours, wyfe, or Children, and the like left behind them vpon Earth, therefore the Saintes in heauen know the affaires, much more the prayers of their friends vpon Earth, otherwise they could not be satisfyed in their glory, and their ioy made full. ¶ Now followeth the second part of this Section, viz. That Angells & Saints pray for vs. And first we read in the Prophet Zachary, that the Angell prayed for the people,C. 1.12. And the Angell of our Lord answered and sayd: O Lord of Hostes how long wilt thou not haue mercy on Hierusalem, and on the Citties of Iu∣da, with which thou hast beene angry? This is now the 70. yeare. Heere the Angell prayeth in particular for Hierusalem, and the Citties of Iuda. Secondly, we read in the Booke of Tobias, that the Angell Raphaell sayd to Tobias,C. 12.12. When thou didest pray with teares, and didest bury the dead &c. I offered thy prayers to our Lord. And againe,C. 12.15. I am Raphael an Angell one of the seauen which assist before our Lord. This place is so plaine for the In∣tercession of Angells, that in want of better answere, Whi∣taker sayth,Ad rat. Camp. rat. 2. p. 15. Little do we regard the example of Raphael the An∣gell mentioned in Toby, neither do we acknowledge those seauen An∣gells
whereof he speaketh: all this is different from the Canonicall Scri∣pture, and sauoureth I know not of what superstition. But it seemeth Whitaker did not well remember, that mention is made of those 7. Angels, Apoc. 1.4. and 5.6. And that the booke of Toby is Canonicall Scripture, I haue proued before. Thirdly, it is recorded in the 2. booke of15.12.14. Macha∣hees, how Iudas Machabeus saw in vision Onias stretching forth his hands, praying for all the people of the Iewes; & that Onias said of Hie∣remy, This is a louer of his brethren, who prayeth much for the people, & for al the holy Citty. To this Whitaker only answereth,Ad rat. Camp. p. 16. I let passe that dreame of Iudas concerning Onias, whereof we read 2. Mach. 15. But it litle skilleth whether thou vnderstād intercession of the dead, or Sacrifice: both is false. So that no other answere is left to these places, but only the deniall of the said bookes to be Canoni∣call Scripture, wheras the contrary is already proued at large. Fourthly, Almighty God sayd vnto Hieremy,Cap. 15.1. If Moyses and Samuell shall stand before me, my soule is not towards this people; which argueth, that they were wont to stand before God, praying for others. Caluin answereth, that from this place rather the contrary is to be gathered, for seeing it is said, if they shall stand, to wit, to pray, it importeth that they nei∣ther stood, nor prayed. But though peraduenture it be signi∣fyed, that as then they did not pray, because they vnderstood the matter then to be desperate, yet it is signifyed that at o∣ther times they were accustomed to pray, whē they thought they might obtayne: for otherwise Gods speach had not beene apt & congruous. For if a man should say, If my horse should pray for thee, I will not graunt it, he should speake foolish, because horses cannot pray: and in like sort, if one should say, if Demosthenes shall come, he shall not persuade me, this speach also were foolish, because dead men do not vse to come. And the same, which God forbid, might be sayd of those words, If Moyses and Samuel shall stand before me, if they neyther could, nor were accustomed to pray. And it is to be noted, that it is not sayd, If they should stand, that is, if by im∣possibility they should now liue and pray, but, if they shall stand, which signifyeth what they might do, to wit, pray. Fifthly, S. Iohn relateth that,Apoc. 5.8. The 24. Elders feldown
before the Lambe hauing euery one of them harpes, and golden violls full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. These wordes cleerly teach, that the Saints in heauen offer vp the prayers of holy persons in Earth, (called heere, and in other places Saints) to Christ: and that these odours were prayers. Sixtly, the Martyrs in heauen cry with a loud voyce, saying,Apoc. 6.10. How long Lord, holy and true, iudgest thou not, & re∣uengest not our blood of them that dwell vpon the Earth? Now if they pray for reuenge of their enemies, much more for mercy and grace for their friends. This place is so conuincing, that Prot. vnderstand the sae of such praiers as the Saints made when they were vpon Earth, not as they are in heauen.Confess. Wittem∣berg. c. de in∣uocatione Sanctorum. In the Apocalyps (say they) the soules of the Saints slayne, do cry out that their blood may be reuenged, not that now resting in the Lord, they are desirous of reuenge, according to the manner of men, but that the Lord euen after their death, is myndfull of the prayers, which whilest they liued vpon Earth, they powred out for the deliuery of themselues and the whole Church. But this is directly contrary to the words of the Text, which affirme, that they then in heauen did actually pray for reuenge. Besydes, it is false and iniurious to Martyrs, to say, that whilest they were liuing, they desi∣red reuenge of their Persecutors, for they rather with Christ our Sauiour, and S. Steuen, prayed for their pardon: whilest they were liuing, they were subiect to sinne, and so might haue bene in danger if they had asked reuenge, to haue done it vpon anger, hatred, and malice: Wheras now in heauen, according to S. Bedes exposition, they do it in regard, and loue of Iustice. S. Peter promiseth to pray for his flock after his death, saying,2. Ep. c. 1.13.14.15. I thinke it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you vp by admonition, being certaine that the laying away of my Tabernacle is at hand, according as our Lord Iesus Christ also signi∣fyed vnto me: and I will do my diligence, you to haue often, after my decease also, that you may keepe a memory of these things. Now it is euident, that by the laying downe of his Tabernacle, he meaneth his death, as by being in his Tabernacle he vnder∣standeth the terme of his lyfe: & where he saith, that after the Deposition of his Tabernacle or decease, he will do his
diligence to haue them often, what else can be meant, but that after his death, when he is in heauen, he will often haue them in mynd, and pray vnto God for them: signify∣ing plainly that his care ouer them, should not cease by death, and that by his Intercession before God, after his de∣parture, he would do the same thing for them, that he did before in his lyfe by teaching and preaching. And agreably to this, it was a common practise among ancientSee Eu∣seb. Hist. l. 6. c. 4. Cypr. Ep. 57. fin. & de Discipl. & habitu virgi∣num Hier. Ep. 1. ad He∣liod. c. 2. Chri∣stians of the Primitiue Church, and alwayes since among Catholickes, to make couenant in their life tyme, that whe∣ther of them went to heauen before the other, he should pray for his friend yet liuing. D. Fulke for his best euasion corrupteth the Text, for where it is said, I will do my diligence, you to haue often, after my decease also, that you may keepe a memory of these things, he transla∣teth it thus,Against Rhem. Test. in 2. Pet. 1.15. I will euer also giue my diligence, that ye may haue wherwith to stir vp the remembrance of these things after my depar∣ting; which saith he,Ibid. p. 443. he performeth in wryting this Epistle: So making the Epistle to be that, which must stir vp the re∣membrance of those things after his departing, wheras S. Peter speaketh of himselfe, that he will do his diligence, them to haue often after his decease also. Lastly, the Scriptures plainly teach the Communion of the Church Triumphant, with the Milirant, for so the Apostle saith,Heb. 12.22.23. We are come &c. to the Church of the first borne, which are written in the heauens, and so are Cittizens therof.Gal. 4.26. And Hierusalem which is aboue &c is our Mother. And,Col. 1.18. Eph. 4.15. Christ is the head of the body, the Church. Now this Communion doth necessarily require, that, all the Members of this body be carefull and helpfull one to another, this being the na∣ture of members liuing vnder one Head, as the sameRom. 12.4. 1. Cor. 12.12. Apostle teacheth. And so S. Austine expresly teacheth that,De Ci∣uit. Dei. l. 20. c. 9. Neither are the soules of the godly deputed separated from the Church, which also now is the kingdome of Christ, for otherwise there should not be Commemoration made of them at the Aultar of God, in the Communication of the body of Christ: So certaine it is that there is a holy Communion betwene the Saintes in Heauen, and the faithfull vpon Earth.
Hauing thus declared already, that the Angels and Saintes know and heare our prayers, and further that they pray for vs; because D. Fulke thinketh that,Against Rhem. Test. in 2 Pet. 1.15. p. 443. if it were proued, that the Saintes departed do pray for vs, yet haue we no war∣rant out of Scriptures to pray to them: I will now in the residue of this Section, endeauour to proue from the Scriptures, that we may lawfully pray to them; which indeed necessarily followeth by force of Argument drawne from the premis∣ses, thus. We may lawfully and profitably pray vnto them, who are able in respect of their power with God, fit for their knowledge of our Estates, and lastly willing to pray for vs, in regard of their great and excessiue Charity: But the Saints and Angels haue power with God, & so are able, haue knowledge of our affaires, and therefore fit, are full of Charity, and therefore willing to pray for vs; Therfore we may, and do lawfully and profitably pray vnto them. But this is proued further by warrant of Scripture & manyfold examples therin contained: for fitst the Patriarch Iacob coming to blesse the children of his sonne Ioseph, E∣phraim, and Manasses, inuocated the Angell thus,Gen. 48.16. The Angell who hath deliuered me from all euill, blesse these Children. To this someSee the Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1578. Prot. answere, that by Angell, is vnderstood Christ: which is impossible, seeing he was not incarnated for some thousands of yeares after. The Prophet Osee also saith of Iacob,Cap. 12.4. He preuailed against the Angell and was strengthned, he wept, and besought him. Heere the Prophet expressely affir∣meth, that Iacob besought the Angell,The English Bi∣ble of 1578. or as some Prot. trā∣slate, he wept, and prayed vnto him: so cleere it is, that Iacob prayed to the Angell. Moyses desiring to auert Gods heauy wrath greatly kindled against the Israelites, for their Ido∣latry of the goulden Calfe, cold light vpon no more effectu∣all meanes to stay Gods hand frō destroying them at once, then thus to pray,Exod. 32.13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy seruants &c. which place doth virtually imply both inuo∣cation of Saints, as also inuocation of God by the merits of his Saints, as we shall see when we come to the exposition of the Fathers vpon these places. In the meane tyme obserue that, the Iust who dyed before the coming of Christ, did not
enter into heauen, or see God, neither could they ordina∣rily know the prayer of the liuing; and therefore it was not vsuall in the Old Testament to say, Holy Abraham pray for me, but men of those tymes only prayed to God, and alled∣ged the merits of Saints, who then were dead, that by them their praiers might be holpen. Caluins reply to this place is, that God is not heere in∣uocated by the merits of his Saints, nor elswhere, but onely that there is a rehearsall made of the Couenant, which God made with the Patriarches, concerning the helping & pro∣tecting of their posterity. But this euasion being a meer col∣lusion of Caluin, wil not serue his turne; for in these kind of praiers, not only mentiō is made of Gods Couenant, but fur∣ther, the righteousnes & merits of Gods Saints are cōmemo∣rated. And so you shal read in the Psalmes, that Salomon in∣uocating God, praied thus,Ps. 131.1. Lord remember Dauid, & all his meeknes: & a litle after,Ibid. 10. For thy seruāt Dauids sake turne not away the face of thyne annointed Christ. These are the words of Salomon, inuocating God by the merits of his Father Dauid deceased, as2. Pa∣ral. 6.42. appeareth elswhere. Againe3. Reg. 15.4 5. For Dauids sake our Lord his God gaue him a lampe in Hierusalem, that he might rayse vp his sonne after him, and establish Hierusalem because Dauid had done right in the eyes of our Lord &c. And there would be no end, if I should cyte all those places, where God is inuoca∣ted by the merits of his Saints, all which make against Cal∣uins imposture: and therfore see Daniel 3. Exodus 34. and Hieremie 32. Iob is sent by his friend Eliphas to the Angels, to inuocate them,Iob. 5.1. Call therefore if there be any to answere thee, and turne thee to some of the Saints. And Iob himselfe in anoher place in∣uocateth the Angells thus,C. 19. 21. Haue mercy vpon me, haue mer∣cy vpon me, O you my friends, for the hand of God hath touched me. S. AustineIn an∣not. in Iob. c. 19. by Saints in the first place, and friends in this last, thinketh the holy Angells to be vnderstood: Which sup∣posed, it is euident, that it was then a custome of the Church to inuocate the holy Angels. S. Iohn the Euangelist himselfe inuocated the 7 Spirits for grace and peace to the Churches of Asia, praying thus,
Apoc. 1.4. and see c. 5.6. Grace to you and peace from him that is, and that was, and that shall come, and from the 7. spirits which are in the sight of his Throne, and from Iesus Christ &c. where we are to note, that S. Iohn thought it no Idolatry to inuocate the 7. Spirits, in the same place, where he inuocated two persons of the B. Trinity; but the meaning is, that the 7. spirits should be Intercessors, for obtayning at Gods hand, Grace and peace for the Chur∣ches of Asia. Now, that by those 7. spirits, are meant 7. An∣gels, is confirmed by those words of Raphael, saying,Tob. 12.15. I am one of the 7 holy Angels, which present the prayers of the Sain∣tes. And in the fifth Chapter of the Apocalyps, mention is made agreably to this, ofC 5.6. the 7. spirits of God sent into all the Earth: for which cause S. Paul calleth the Angels,Heb. 1.14. Ministring spirits sent to minister for them which shall receiue the Inheritance of saluation: Yea this place is so strong for inuoca∣tion of Angels, that the Prot. Wygandus, though he will not acknowledge inuocation of Angels herby proued, yet saith herof,Syntag∣ma Col. 396. Praeter morem reliquarum Scripturarum &c. Contrary to other Scriptures, he asketh grace from the 7. spirits in the first Chap∣ter. So that this Prot. best answere, is to make this place of Scripture contrary to the rest. And it is more then probable, that the Iewes present at our Sauiours death, could not haue bene so easily persuaded to thinke and say, that our Sauiour saying,Mat 17.46. Marc. 35.34. Eli, Eli, Lammae Sabacthani, called Elias, if the Inuocation of Saintes had not then bene familiar and vsuall to them: which might be further proued by seuerall testimoniesFlauius Iosephus de bello Iudaico. l 3. c. 14. Iose∣phus Bengo∣rion in Bello Iudaio. c. 21. Symbolum fi∣dei Iudaeorum fol 22. 28. of the ancient Iewes, and later Rabines. Throughout the whole Scriptures you shall read, how the liuing called vpon the liuing, to pray for them; did not AbrahamGen. 20. pray for Abimelech, and that by Gods ap∣pointment and promise to Abimelech? Did not IobIob 42.8 by Gods appointment pray for his three friends, when God said vno them, Go to my seruant Iob, be shall pray for you him will I accept &c.? Did not the Israelites cry vnto Samuel,1 Reg. 7 Cease not to cry to the Lord our God for vs, that he deliuer vs out of the hands of the Philistines? Did not GodEzech. 22.30. seeke for a man that should stand before him in prayer for the Land,
that he should not destroy it? Did not the Israelites, when they had sinned, intreat Moyses to prayNumer. 21.7. for them, which he did accordingly? Did not S. Paul say,Rom. 15.30. I be∣seech you brethren help me with your prayers, which elswhereEphes. 6.1. Thess. 5.2. Thess. 3. Co∣loss 4. Heb. 13. he often beggeth? And doth not S. IamesIacob. 5.16. giue the rea∣son, for the continuall prayer of a iust man auayleth much? And are we not admonished to prayIac. 5.16. one for another? And although these Examples do concerne the liuing only, yet the reason which S. Iames rendreth, which is, because the prayer of the iust auayleth much, doth much more extend to the Inter∣cession of the Saintes and Angels in heauen, by how much they are more iust, and also more gracious in behoulding the face of God for vs, for which cause they are called our An∣gels, as it is said beforeMat. 18.10. Act. 12 15. Their Angels behould Gods face. The truth and sequele wherof is more certaine, in that no Texts of Scripture be alleadged against our inuocation of Angels and Saintes, but the same do as much impugne the inter∣cession of the liuing. Lastly, if there can be imagined any reason or impedimēt to hinder this our Inuocation of them, either it is because they will not help vs, and this is against their Charity, which is far greater, and much more increa∣sed, then it was in this life, they being in the height of their Charity: or because they cannot; and not this, for this were infirmity, and should much derogate from their state of glo∣ry; and if they could helpe vs by their prayers when they were here with vs, and absent from God, in regard of their Pilgrimage, much more now can they ayd vs, being now present with God, and possessed of their kingdome of hea∣uen: or peraduenture because they know not we aske, and this were to charge them with greater ignorance, then is as∣cribed to the Deuils, and to depriue them of a knowledge necessarily belonging to their state of happines and con∣tent: Or lastly, for that it were derogatory to Gods honour, and Christes Mediation, if any other were inuocated, and made Aduocate to God; and not this, for first this maketh more for Gods honour, since the more honourable the In∣tercessors to God for vs be, the more honour redoundeth to God: And if our inuocation of them for their Intercession
to God for vs, were derogatory to Christes mediation, then neither could we pray for one another without iniury to Christ, seeing we make one another now liuing, in the same sense, Mediatours and Aduocates to God. SECT. III. Scriptures expounded by most ancient Fathers in proofe of the Intercession of Angells and Saints, and that we may lawfully inuocate them. IN proofe that Saints know things vpon earth, S. Austi∣ne expoundeth some Texts by me alledged saying,De Ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 29 If the Prophet Elizeus absent in body saw his seruant Giezi receyuing re∣wards, which Naaman Syrus had giuen him &c. how much more shall the Saints see all things in that spirituall body, not onely if they shut their eyes, but also where they are absent in body? for then shallbe perfected that, whereof the Apostle speaking,1. Cor. 13.9. In part, saith he, we know, and in part we prophecy, but when that shall come that is per∣fect, that shalbe made void that is in part. S. Hilary expoundeth seuerall Texts of Scripture for the Intercession of Angells, saying,In Com∣ment. in Ps. 129. There are according to S. Iohn Angels deputed for the Churches of Asia and by the Testimo∣ny of Moyses the limits of the Nations were appointed o the sonnes of Adam, according to the number of the Angells. And in the doctrine of our Sauiour, the Angels of litle ones do daily see God. There are accor∣ding to Raphael speaking to Tobias, Angels assisting the diuine Maie∣sty and Clarity, and offering vp vnto God the prayers of such as inuo∣cate God &c. Therefore not the nature of God needeth the Intercession of these Angells, but our infirmity; for they are sent for them who shalbe heyres of saluation: God being ignorant of nothing that we do, but our infirmity needing the ministery of spirituall Intercession to intreate &c. In which passage of this glorious Confessour, two things are worthy of obseruation; first, that three of the ve∣ry same places of Scripture cyted by me, are likewise cyted and vrged by him, for proofe of the Patronage, Intercessi∣on, and Inuocation of Angels, to which he addeth a fourth
out of Genesis. Secondly, that the booke of Tobias is estee∣med by him for Canonicall Scripture, since it is ranked by him equally with the Apocalips, and Genesis. S. Hierome writing vpon those wordes of the Angell to Daniel, Et ego ingressus sum ad verba tua, saith,In C. 10. Dan. This is the meaning thereof, After thou didest begin with good workes, and teares, and fasting, to inuocate Gods mercy, and I tooke occasion that I might enter into the sight of God, and pray for thee &c. And in the same place Commenting vpon these words of the Angell a little after, Et nemo est adiutor meus in omnibus his, nisi Michael princeps vester. None is my helper in all these, but Michael your prince, be con∣cludeth thus, speaking in the person of the Angell; I am, sayth he, that Angell who offers thy prayers to God, and I haue no other helper to in∣treat God for you, but Michael the Archangell to whose Patronage & protection, the people of the Iewes is commended. The same S. Hierome writing vpon these words of S. Matthew, Their Angels in heauen alwayes do see &c. saithIn Mat. 18.10. Great is the dignity of soules, in so much that euery one hath from his Natiui∣ty, an Angell deputed by God for his Patronage. And immediatly after in further proofe of guardian Angels, he citeth both that ofApoc. 1.2. & 2.1.8.1.18. & 3.1.7. S. Iohn vnto the Angell of Ephesus, Thyatira, and the Angell of Philadelphia, and to the Angells of the other 4. Churches: as also that of the Apostle,1. Cor. 11.10. that women ought to haue their heads coue∣red for the Angels. S. Austine writing vpon those words of the Psalmist, Annunciabitur Domino generatio ventura &c. he expoundeth it thus,Epist. 120. c. 29. It is not so to be vnderstood, that any thing should be tould vnto God, as being ignorant of any thing, to the end that he may know it; but euen as the Angels do declare, not only Gods benefits vnto vs, but also our prayers vnto him &c. And then for warrant of this Ex∣position, he citeth that place ofTob. 12.12. Tobias by vs formerly al∣ledged, and so expounded by S. Hilary, as you haue heard. For it is written, where the Angell sayth vnto men, I haue offered vp by way of mentioning your prayers, not that God shall know what we will, or what we stand in need of, for your heauenly Father, saith our Lord, knoweth what you stand in need of before you aske of him: but because &c. And in like sort writethEuseb. Caesar. l. 12. de Praepar. Euang. c. 1. Eusebius2. Mach. 15.14. In the booke of Machabees, Hieremy the Prophet is sayd to be seene after his
death praying for the people, as hauing care of men yet liuing vpō earth. S. Austine expounding those words of Iob, Miseremini mei &c. writeth thus.Annot. in c. 19. Iob. Conc. 2. ad c. 19. He seemeth to inuocate the Angells, that they would supplicate for him, or certainly the Saintes, that they would pray for him penitent. And elswhere,L. 1. de loquutionibus in Genes. Iacob blessing his Nephewes, the sonnes of Ioseph, amongst other things sayth,Gen. 48.16. My name shallbe called vpon them, and the name of my fathers; where it is to be noted that not only hearing, but also inuocation sometymes are affirmed, as things not proper vnto God, but to men, also. Origen in proofe that Saints do pray for vs sayth,Ho. 3. in Cant. All the Saints which are departed out of this life bearing yet Charity towards the liuing in this world, it shall not be inconuenient, if they be sayd, to haue a care of their saluation, and to help them with their prayers, and intercession with God for them: for it is written (sayth he) in the booke of Machabees thus,2.15. This is Hieremy the Prophet of God, who alwayes prayeth for the people. S. Chrysostome is of opinion, that it was an Angell whom Icob inuocated, and not Christ, as Prot. imagine, when he blessed Iosephs Children, his wordes are plaine,Tom. 3. ho 7 in laudi∣bus Pauli. For if Angells be designed by him that is Lord of all, to those who only gouerne their owne lyfe and doing nothing for the common vtility, as one of the iust testifyeth, saying, The Angell which hath de∣liuered me from my youth: much more present are those heauenly powers vnto them, to whom the care of the whole world is commit∣ted, and to such as carry the burdens of such guiftes. S. Chrysostome building as it were vpon the promises of the Apostles to pray for the Church after their Martyr∣domes, and especially vpon that of S. Peter before mentio∣ned, inuocateth them thus,Tom. 5. in orat en∣com. in natali Apost. seu Martyr. Pet. & Pauli pro∣pè finem. Reioyce euer (you blessed Apo∣stles) in our Lord, without intermission pray for vs, fulfill your pro∣mises: For ô Blessed Peter, thou cryest out speaking thus,2. Epist. 1.15. I will do my diligence, after my Comming to make mention of you. We are much bound (sayth S. Leo)Ser. 3. in Anniuers. Assumpt. ad Pontif. to giue thankes to our Lord and Redeemer Iesus Christ, that hath giuen so great power to him, whom he made the Prince of the whole Church, that if in our tyme also any thing be done well, and be rightly ordered by vs, it is to be imputed to his workes and his Gouernment, to whom it was said, And thou being Conuerted, confirme thy brethren: And to whom our Lord
after his Resurrection said thrice, feed my sheep: which now also without doubt the godly Pastor doth execute, confirming vs with his Exhortations, and not ceasing to pray for vs, that we be ouercome with no temptation. What more plaine for S. Peters praying for vs after his decease? But D. FulkeAgainst Rhem Test. in.  Pet. 1.15 p. 443. himselfe confesseth that, Leo indeed &c. ascribeth much to the prayers of S. Peter for him. YeaTom. 1. Conc. Ep. 1.5. Clem. init. S. Clement affirmeth, that S. Peter encoura∣ging him to take after his decease the charge of the Aposto∣licke Roman Sea, promised that after his departure he would not cease to pray for him and his flocke, therby to ease him of his Pastorall burden. Thus then you see, as ap∣peareth by these Fathers Exposition of Scriptures, how cleere the Scriptures are for Inuocation of Angels and Sain∣tes, if credit may be giuen to the ancient Blessed Fathers so expounding them. But the Fathers Doctrine is so cleere for Inuocation of Saintes and Angels that D. Fulke sayth,Reioin∣der to Bri∣stow. pa. 5. I Confesse that Ambrose, Austine, and Hierome, held inuocation of Saintes to be lawfull: And,Against Rhem. Test. p. 443. that many of the ancient Fathers held this opi∣nion, that the Saintes departed do pray for vs, we deny not &c. In Nazianzen, Basil, & Chrysostome, there is some mention of the In∣uocation of Saintes to helpe with their prayers &c. Theodore also speaketh of prayers vnto Martyrs. Chemnitius hauing allead∣ged S. Austine praying to S. Cyprian martyred before, con∣cludeth this therof,Exam. part. 3. p. 211. (34) Austine did this without the Scripture, yielding to the tymes and custome.Ibid. p. 200. And againe, (35) Inuocation of Saintes began to be brought into the publick assemblies of the Church, about the yeare of our Lord 370. by Basil, Nyssen, and Nazianzene. The Centuristes speaking of the tymes of Cyprian and O∣rigen, do confesse, that theyCent. 3. c. 4. col. 83. Contayne manifest tokens of the Inuocation of Saintes. Now, wheras D. Morton would euade all testimonies of Fathers in this behalfe, by affirming that they were butAppeale p. 27. Rhetoricall Apostrophe's, Chemnitius shall giue him a brotherly checke for this so simple and vn∣true Euasion, by not excusing with Rhetoricall Apostrophe's, but flatly accusing and reiectingExam. part 3. p 211. See Perkins vol. 2. p 592. Most of the Fathers, as Na∣zianzen, Nyssen, Theodoret, Ambrose, Hierome &c. who sayth he, did not dispute, but auouch the soules of Martyrs and Saintes &c. to
heare the Petitions of those that prayed, and to carry them to God &c. they went to the Monuments of Martyrs, and often inuocated the Martyrs by name. This is confessedly more, M. Morton, then to make Rhetoricall Apostrophe's. But D. Whitguift, and D. Couell doe both of them af∣firme, that,Def p. 472. Couell against the Plea of the Innoc. c. 9. p. 120. Almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greeke Church, and Latin also for the most part▪ were spotted with Doctrines &c. of Inuocation of Saintes, and such like. So generally was this our Catholike doctrine of Inuocation of Saintes taught by the ancient Fathers. Now for the closure of this Section from Fathers, Bul∣linger labouring to confute the distinction of Dulia and La∣tria, and falsly affirming, that Catholickes do attribute more by Dulia to Saintes and Angels, then by Latria to God, he addeth that,Ser. 84. in Apoc. 19. S. Iohn (the Euangelist) was enwrapped in this Errour. And that, he would exhibite the worship of Dulia to the Angell: but God permitted so great a man to sinne. Yea, saith he,Serm. 97, in Apoc. 22. forgetfull of all the admonitions by the Angell, he fell againe into the same fault. So that S. Iohn is heere condemned with Catho∣likes for worshipping of Angels with Dulia. But now whe∣ther S. Iohn did better vnderstand what honour was due, & to be giuen to Angels, then Prot. do, I leaue to any mās iudgment. And though S. Iohn erred in the person of the Angel, as thinking him to be Christ himselfe, yet that he was ignorant in knowing what honour was due to Christ, and what to Angels, no Christian will affirme. SECT. IV. That Protestants do agreably teach with Catholikes that the Angells and Saints in heauen do heare our prayers, do pray for vs in particular: and that we may lawfully to them. THat Angels and Saints do know things done vpon E∣arth, and pray tor vs, Piscator and Bullinger confesse of Angels,Vol. 1. Thes. p. 96. sec. 47. & p. 294. sec. 27. Bulling. in his Dec. in Engl. p. 739. and see Luc. 15.10. That they reioyce at our repentance. Fulke,Ag. Rhem. Test. f. 115. That
they know our fruites and true effects thereof. Piscator,Pisc. vbi supra p. 98. That we should be ashamed to commit any vncleane actions, seeing that they do behould and obserue all our actions. Fulke, and others,Fulke vbi sup. in Mat. 18. sect. 2. Bulling Dec. p. 741. Hip∣pius metho. Theol. l. 2. p. 290. That they do wayte for our preseruation. Bullinger that,Ib. p. 665. They offer the prayers of the faythfull in Gods presence. OthersConf. of Sax. in the Harm. p. 43. that both Saints and Angells such as are in hap∣pines do pray for the Church: and thatIb p. 12. we ioyne in prayer with all Saints in heauen and Earth: Also thatOecolamp. ad serm. Chry∣sost. de Iuuen∣tio & Maxi∣mo. Brent. ad c. 10. Luc. Chytr. ad c. 25. Mat. Cru¦ciger in Conc. de Natiu. See Fox in Apoc. c. 8. p. 127. The Saints in heauen, do not cease to make Intercession for vs. The Lutherans that write the Apology for the Con∣fession of Augusta, do gather from the forcyted place of Za∣chary, thatApol. Confess. Au∣gust. de inuo∣cat. Sancto∣rum fol. 179. Angels pray for vs. OecolampadiusAd orat. Chrys. de Iuuent. & Max. affirmeth that, The Saints in heauen burning yet with their Charity do not cease to pray for vs. And in an∣other place,Ad c. 12. Danielis. The blessed Spirits &c. are not without desire of our Saluation, which I thinke to be their prayers: And so Peter and Paul do pray with vs. Thy kingdome come. Melancthon is so confident heerein, as that he saith,In loc. com Manlij. fol. 151. I will cyte a manifest place out of the New Testament, prouing that the dead are carefull of the Church and vs, for so Matthew saythMat. 17.3. E∣lias and Moyses spake with Christ of things to come. It is certayne that the Saints which are in heauen in care of vs, are affected towards the Church of those that liue vpon earth: Euen as they there disputed with Christ of his Passion, & the gathering of the Church through the whole world. Brentius proposeth this QuestionAd. c. 10. Lucae. Do the dead then pray for the liuing? And now he giueth his answere, Surely it cannot be denyed, but these who liue in Christ, do wish well to the Church and her members: for if they Angels pray for vs, asC 1.12. Za∣chary witnesseth, and if Christ himselfe pray for vs to his Father, how then are not the Saints affected towards vs in Charity in Christ, and by Christ, and with vs all happines of God. Faber writeth thus plainly.De statu defunctorum. c. 7. I do not doubt but the sou∣les of the dead remember their parents, brethren, Sisters, and kins∣folkes, which they haue left heere, and pray, to God that he will also deliuer them out of the vale of teares &c The example of the rich mā Luc. 16. confirmeth this doctrine: for if a damned soule remembreth his (friends) much more a blessed Soule is so affected towards Pa∣rents,
Children, Brethren, Sisters, and kinsfolkes. And wheras Pot. to auoyd the history of Lazarus and Diues, which plainly sheweth that soules departed this lyfe do yet know things done vpon Earth, do affirme, that it is only a Parable: Yet Caluin for his part thinketh otherwise with vs, saying,Harm. in Luc. 16.19. Although to some it seeme only a single Para∣ble, yet because the name of Lazarus is expressed, I rather thinke, that a thing done is declared. Concerning the Patronage of Angels, Caluin writeth,Inst. l. 3. c. 20. §. 23. Edit. Gal. 1562. 1563. See. l. 1. c. 14. §. 7. They say, the prayers of Angels are often read of, and not this only, but the prayers of the faithfull are said to be carried by their hands into the sight of God: I confesse it. And a little after, It is as∣signed to the Angels that they be ministring spirits, to whom the mini∣stery is committed of the care of our Saluation, to whom the Charge is giuen of keeping vs in all our wayes, who may compasse vs about, who may admonish, and comfort, and may watch for vs. And againe,Inst. l. 1. c. 14. §. 7. God appointed Angels ouer vs, to take care of our safety: wherupon they frequent the holy assemblyes, and the Church is to them a Thea∣ter in which they admire the different and manifold wisdome of God. To conclude, I dare not affirme for certayne, whether to euery one of the faithfull seuerall Angels be appointed.Dan. 10.13.20. & 12.1. Truly when Daniel bringeth in the Angell of the Persians, and the Grecians, he signifyeth that certaine Angels are deputed, as Gouernours ouer kingdomes and Prouinces. Christ also when he saith,Mat. 18.10. The Angels of Children do alwayes see the face of the Father, doth insinuate, that there are certaine Angels to whom their safety is committed. But I know not whether from thence it may be gathered, that euery one hath his An∣gell to haue charge ouer him. And somewhat after, There is one place a litle cleerer then the rest, which seemeth to confirme it: for whenAct. 12.15. It is his Angell. Peter brought out of Prison knocked at the gates of the howse in which the brethren were gathered togeather, seeing they could not sus∣pect that it was he, they said it was his Angell. It seemeth this came into their mindes from the common conceipt, that Angels are assigned as Gouernors to euery one of the faithfull. With Caluin agreeth Luther saying,Ad. c. 2. Zachariae. Euery Emperour King Prince, yea euery man hath his Angell. And,Ad. c. 18. Matthai. The Scripture testifyeth euery Christian to haue his Angell. Add yet heerunto the professed faith of sundry of our
English Foxian Martyrs, Lambert belieued that,Act. Mon. p. 549. a. initio. The Saintes departed pray for vs. The like also didIbid p. 462. b. post. med. Bilney. La∣timer also acknowledged the same saying,Ibid. p. 1312. a. init There be two manner of Mediators, the one by way of Redemption, the other by way of Intercession. And againe,Ibid p. 2315 a. paulo ante med. Take worshipping of Saintes for praying to them, I neuer denyed but that they might so be worshiped, & be our Mediators &c. by way of Intercession. Of like beliefe was the Church in the tyme of K. Henry the Eight, and so also were sundry other Prot. Martyrs in M. Fox his Monuments, whome we do not fynd charged with the contrary Do∣ctrine. Iohn Husse was accustomed to inuocate the B. Virgin and other Saintes,In fidei suae Elucida∣tione. I aske also (sayth he) for my very ac∣cusers the most chast Virgin the Mother of my Sauiour, the repayrer of mankind, the Queene of heauen, which by the title of grace added to nature, excelleth the Angelicall nature; who amongst all the blessed ex∣cepting her sonne, is more blessed, by singular Priuiledge, more glo∣rious, by grace and the guiftes of glory, more fruitfull. Of whose ful∣nes, saith Bernard, all receyue; the sick health, the sorrowfull comfort, the Angels ioy, the sonne of God the substance of humane flesh, the whole Trinity glory. And in another place,In 1. Io. c. 2. We haue an Ad∣uocate, to wit, in matters of Soules, not of possessions. And not only an Aduocate, but also an Aduocatresse: whereupon we sing, Eia ergo Ad∣uocata. And to other Saintes he prayeth also,Ep. 22. Peter and Paul glorious Martyrs, so ioyned to the K of glory, vouchsafe to pray for vs, that by their help we being made strong, by suffering humbly, may be partakers of their glory. Againe, he inuocateth S. Iohn Baptist saying,Ep. 30. Vouchsafe to pray for vs vnto our Lord Iesus Christ, Amen. To try now what Martin Luther thinketh,Resp. ad Louan. in Tom. Wit∣temb. I ne∣uer denyed (sayth he) vs to be holpen by the merits and prayers of Saintes, though imperfect. And,In Ep. ad Georg. Spalatinum. I neuer thought the Inuoca∣tion of Saintes to be offensiue &c. this do our hereticall Picards and Bohemians know. And in another place he sayth,In Ep. ad Erphordien∣ses. Suffer them to implore the Patronage of Saintes, since they so will, yet with that Condition, that they know they must take heed, least they put any trust and presumption in any of the Saintes, being induced therto by a false persuasion. And yet more fully;In pur∣gatione quo∣rundam Ar∣ticulorum. Concerning
the Intercession of Saintes, I agree with the whole Christian Church, and iudge that the Saintes are to be inuocated and honoured, for who can contradict those things which God doth wonderfully, and visibly worke, euen to this present day at the Sepulchers of Saintes? Yea his aduise is this,De praep. ad mort. At the houre of death, let him not cease to inuo∣cate the B. Virgin, his Apostle, and the rest of the Saintes, whom he hath serued in his lyfe, that they may pray for him to our Lord. And now he teacheth the manner how we may lawfully pray to Saintes saying,In fest. Ioan Bapt. Some man may heere say, of what vse, and in what steed shall Saintes be to vs? Thou vsest them as thou vsest thy Neighbour, for as thou sayest to him, Pray to God for me, so thou mayest say to them, S. Peter pray for me. Againe,Super Magnificat. Tom. 6. Germ. fol 21. and see de 1. Praecepte. I said, Ma∣ry would not be a Goddesse, she maketh nothing: God worketh all things. She ought to be inuocated, that God by her may giue and worke what we aske, and in this sort all the rest of the Saintes are to be in∣uocated &c. So Catholickly Luther. With Luther agreeth Oecolampadius saying,Ad orat. Chry∣sost. de Iu∣uentio & Maxim Martyribus. Nei∣ther will I affirme it to be Idolatry, to request the Patronage of Sain∣tes, for the Saints in heauen burning yet with their Charity, do not cease to pray for vs, and what euill is it, if we request that to be, which we belieue God would, although he hath not commanded any such thing &c. This do Chrysostome and Nazianzene; and this also almost all the Churches of the East and West do obserue. Bucer affirmeth, thatIn De∣fens. cont. Abrincen∣sem Episco∣pum. If any weighing the infinite In∣dulgence &c. of God towards his Saints &c. And do intreat them to make intercession to God for them, although that be not taught in the Scripture, yet if it be done, none of vs condemne it. And in another place he iustifieth our Catholike māner of praying to Saints saying,In Disp. Ratisb. de publicis Ecclesiae pre∣cibus. Seeing in these prayers whatsoeuer is ascribed to the In∣tercessions and merits of Saints, al that is asked is not from the Saints thēselues▪ but from the mercy of God by our Lord Iesus Christ: heerby such as pray thus, confesse and testify themselues to acknowledge those things to be the free giftes of God, which they beg of God by the inter∣cession and merits of Saints. HaffenrefferusLoci Theol. l. 3. stat 4. loco. 5. p. 463. affirmeth, that the Deuines of Po∣lonia in their late Synod, defended prayer to Saints with this moderation, as namely, that they should be inuocated not as gran∣ters, but as Intercessours.
And somewhat agreably heerunto say sundry Prot.Wit∣temberg. in the Harmo∣ny. p. 172. If we will speake of the true and great Mediatour, there is but one Mediatour betweene God and man, Iesus-Christ: (but) If we will speake of the Mediatour of praying, euery godly man is made a media∣tour ech for other: according as it is said,Rom. 15.30. Help me with your prayers:1. Thess. 5.25 & 2. Thess. 3.1. & Col. 4.2. Brethren pray for vs And this kind of Intercession doth not (as the Prot. Viril confesseth)Trea∣tise concer∣ning the principall grounds of Chr. Relig. p. 188. take any thing away from the Intercession of Christ. So euident it is both by Scriptures, Fathers, and Prote∣stants, that euery man hath his Angell guardian, that the Angels and Saints do heare our praiers, do pray for vs, and that we may pray to them. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures against Inuocation of Angells and Saints, answered. SOme obiect, that none must be inuocated, but in whom we belieue, according to that of S. Paul to the Roma∣nes,10.14. How then shall they inuocate, in whome they haue not belie∣ued? Answere. This is spoken of Gentiles, who not belie∣uing in Christ, nor hauing heard of him, could not inuocate him: and in like sort it may be sayd, that those who do not belieue that there are Saints, or do not hope in them as Pa∣trones, cannot inuocate them. Besides the words, Inuocation and Faith, are not alwayes attributed to God only, for Iacob sayth,Gen. 48.16. Let my name be inuocated vpon these Children, and the na∣mes of my Fathers, Abraham, Isaac &c. Vpon which wordes S. Austine commenteth thus,lib. loquu∣tionis de Gen. prope fin. Whereupon it is to be obserued not onely that hearing, but also inuocation somtimes are affirmed as things not proper to God, but to men. In like sort cōcerning Faith, S. Paul writeth,Philem. v. 4. I giue thankes to my God &c. hearing thy Charity and fayth which thou hast in our Lord Iesus, and towards all the Saintes: vpon which place S. Hierome demandethIn Ep. ad ad Philem. how any one can haue the same fayth in Christ Iesus, & towards his Saints? To which himselfe answereth, for the exposition of this place let vs take ex∣ample from14.31. Exodus, The people belieued God and Moyses his ser∣uant:
one and the same beliefe is referred towards Moyses, & towards God, that the people which belieued in our Lord, should a like be sayd to beleeue in his seruant: but this is not only towards Moyses, but towards all his Saints, that whosoeuer hath belieued in God, could not otherwise haue had fayth, vnles he had belieued towards his Saints, for it is not perfect Charity, & fayth towards God, which is lessened towards his seruants with hatred and Infidelity. Secondly, in proofe that Saints do not know our pray∣ers, it is obiected, that3. Reg. 8.39. God only knoweth the harts of all the Children of men; and in the booke of Iob,C. 14.21. Whether his Chil∣dren be noble or ignoble, he shall not vnderstand. And yet in a third place,Ecclesia∣stes 9.5. For the liuing know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing at all. And that also of Esay,C. 63.16. For thou art our Father, & Abraham hath knowne vs, and Israel hath been ignorant of vs. And lastly that of the Kings4. Reg. 22.20. I will gather thee to thy Fathers &c. that thy eyes may not see all the euill which I will bring vpō this place. From these and such other like places is inferred, that it is vaine to Inuocate Saints, seeing they know not our prayers. Answ. All grant, that only God knoweth naturally, and by his owne power, the thoughts of all mens harts, but this hindreth not, but that Saints may know such thoughts as God manifesteth vnto them, whether this be by cleere and perfect vision of God himselfe, or by particular reuelation from his Deity, or lastly by the ministery of other his ser∣uāts, be they Saints or Angels. And as for the words of Iob, they only proue that naturally the dead do not know the deeds of the liuing; & the very selfesame thing proueth the place following of Ecclesiastes: but what maketh this against such as are enlightned supernaturally with the presence of God, hauing their vnderstandings to that end eleuated with the light of glory, or els that come to know of thinges pas∣sing heer by supernaturall meanes. That of Abraham, SaintIn Com. in Isaiae. 63.16. Hierome expoundeth of the knowledg of approbation, or acknowlegement of them for his, so that the meaning is, Abraham knew vs not, that is, he tooke vs not for his Chil∣dren, but despiseth vs, because he knoweth, that we haue departed from thee our God. Abraham knoweth vs not &c. saith S. Hierome giuing the reason, because we haue offended thee;
neyther do they acknowledge those for their Children, whome they vn∣derstand not to be beloued of their God. In which very sense our B. Sauiour speaketh vnto the foolish VirginsMat. 25.12., Amen I say vnto you, I know you not. Which phrase of speach Christ also v∣seth vnto those reprobate, who stood knocking at the doore whē Christ was entred,Luc. 13.25. I know you not whence you are. But if this knowledge whereof mention is heere made, be vn∣derstood properly, it proueth no more (as neyther any of the places obiected do) but that the Fathers who were in Lymbus Patrum, or Abrahams bosome, knew not as then naturally, or by any ordinary supernaturall meanes, what their poste∣rity liuing did, seeing as then they were not blessed with the cleere sight of God, which I hope Prot. dare not affirme of the Saints departed, since our Redemption by Christ. In conclusion, for full satisfaction of these obiectiōs, let S. Austine answere for me, who hauing moued diuers obie∣ctions pro & con, both how the dead should know and not know, did know and did not know, the affayres of their li∣uing friends, at last resolueth the point thus:L. de cu∣ra pro mort. agenda. c. 14. & 15. Therefore we must confesse, that the dead indeed do not know what is done here, but whilest any thing is here done, that afterward truly they heare of them, who go hence to them by dying: not all things verily▪ but such things as they are suffered to declare, who are suffered both to remem∣ber these things, as also such things as is meete for them to heare, to whom they relate these things. Moreouer the dead may heare of the Angels who are present to things done here somthing, which he, to whom all things are subiect, iudgeth cōuement for euery one of them to heare: for vnlesse there were Angels, who might be present at the places both of the liuing and dead, our Lord Iesus had neuer said, It happened also that the poore man dyed, and was caryed by Angels into Abrahams bo∣some. Now therfore heere, now there may they haue bene, who haue taken hence thither those whom God would. Moreouer the spirits of the dead may know somethings done here by the spirit of God reuey∣ling, which it is necessary that they should know, and not necessary that they should be ignorant of not only things past or present, but also things to come: as not all men, but Prophets did know, whilest they li∣ued here; neither did they know all things but such things as the Pro∣uidence of God did iudge meete to be reueyled vnto them. Hitherto
S. Austine. The summe of all is but this, that Saintes de∣parted know things done here three manner of wayes, to wit, by Saintes hence departing to them, by Angels decla∣ring, and Gods holy spirit reueyling: and this may suffice for a full answere to all places brought in this second obie∣ction. The third Obiection is taken out of that place of S. Paul to Timothy,1. Tim. 2.5. For there is one God, one also Mediator of God and men, Iesus Christ, therfore we must not make any Sain∣tes our Mediatours. To make this the stronger, the Prot. of Geneua in their Bible of Anno 1601. by Mathew Berion, do adde the word, solus, one only Mediatour. Answere The word, solus, is neither in the Greeke, nor the vulgar latine, nor in those of Beza of 1589. 1590. nor others of Geneua of 1555. 1563. 1564. 1570. and so the place is ma∣liciously corrupted. Secondly, this maketh as much against the prayers of the liuing for vs, as of the dead: for when we desire our Neighbour to pray for vs, therein we de∣sire him to be our mediatour, in the same manner as we desire the Saints. Thirdly, Christ is our Mediatour, in that he gaueIbid. ver. 6. himselfe a redemption for all, in that he satis∣fyed the infinite Iustice of God for the sinnes of the world: which kind of Mediation is only proper to Christ; Saints only are our Mediatours, in that they pray for vs: and so as Christ is sayd to be ourEpist. Io. 2.1. Aduocate with the Father; and yet in a secondary sense, we make iust men liuing, also our Aduocates; so the same may be sayd of Mediatour, and so Moyses sayd of himselfeDeut. 5.5. I was an Arbiter, and Mediatour be∣twixt our Lord and you at that tyme; to which words S. Paul al∣luding, saythGal. 3.19. of the old law, that it was ordayned by An∣gels in the hand of a Mediatour, viz. Moyses. S. CyrilL. 11. Thesaur. c. 10. proueth that Moyses according to the Scri∣ptures, and Ieremy, and the Apostles, and others be media∣tours. And if the name of Sauiour and Redeemer be in the Scri∣pturesIudic. 3.9.2. Esd. 9.27. Act. 7.35. 1. Tim. 4.16. giuen to men without derogation to him, who is in a more excellent and incomparable manner the only Sa∣uiour and Redeemer of the world, why may not there be many Mediatours in an inferiour degree, to the onely and singular
Mediatour? S. Bernard sayth,Ser. Sig∣num mag∣num. We haue need of a mediatour to Christ the Mediatour, and there is none more for our profit then Ma∣ry. S. Basil in the sameIn Conc. Nycen. 2. Act. 4. sense desireth the Mediation of our B. Lady, the Apostles, Prophets, and Martyrs, for pro∣curing of Gods mercy and remission of his Sinnes. Lastly, M. PerkinsPerkins in his Ref. Cath. p. 259. granteth that the Saints depar∣ted, pray generally for the whole Church: wherfore by the lyke argument, they make themselues Mediatours, and so offer iniury to Christ, which is most absurd to say, and blas∣phemous. A fourth Obiection is vrged by reason of those words of the Apostle,Coloss. 2.18. Let no man seduce you willing in the humility and Religion of Angels, walking in the things which he hath not seene. Answ. This place condemneth the heresy ofSee S. Chryso∣stome in hunc locum. Epiphan. haer. 21. Simon Magus, who following the Platonists, taught, that certaine Angels were to be adored as lesser Gods, by whom he thoght the world to be made, and by whome the highest God who is inuisible, was only to be pacifyed: which Errour the said Hereticke had from Plato, who taught that Spirits (which he calleth Daemones) were to be honoured as Mediators next to God. Against whichDe Ci∣uit. l 8. 9. 10. S. Austine disputeth, and con∣demnethL. 10. Confess. c. 22. the same vndue worship. S. HieromeEp. Io. ad Algafiam ex∣poundeth this also of ill Spirits, or Diuels, whome he proueth (our of S. Steuens sermon Act. 7.) that the Iewes did wor∣ship. TheodoretIn hunc locum. declareth, that the Iewes defended their superstition towards Angels, by that the law was gi∣uen by them, deceiptfully inducing the Collossians both to keep the law, and to honouring of the Angells, as the giuers of the same. Whereby diuers of the faythfull were so seduced, that they forsooke Christ and his Church, and committed I∣dolatry to the sayd Angells; against which abhominations the Councell of Laodicea made aCap. 35. Decree.L. 5. cont. Mar∣cion. Tertul∣lian expoundeth this place of false reachers, that feigned thēselues to haue Reuelation of Angels, that the law should be kept touching difference of cleane and vncleane meates.Vpon this place. Haymo saith further, that some Philosophers of the Ie∣wes and some of the Gentils taught, that there were 4. An∣gells Presidents of the 4. Elements of mans body, and that
in feigned hypocrisy (which the Apostle calleth here humili∣ty) they pretended to worship by Sacrifice the said Angels. So many wayes is this Obiection satisfyed. Fiftly, some obiectRogers Def of the Art. art. 22. p. 128. that of S. Mathew,11.28. where God biddeth vs to come to him: as also that of S. Luke,11.9. to aske and it shalbe giuen vs: and that of S. Iohn,16.23. And if we aske the Father any thing in Christ his name, he will giue it vs, & so dire∣cteth vs to pray,6.9. Our Father which art in heauen &c. Answ. These places as much forbid the prayers of the liuing, as of the dead: and because prayer requireth disposition in the party praying, which yet he alwayes hath not, therfore God Almighty (the former places notwithstanding) directeth vs to seeke help by the prayers of others, whereof see in Iob42.8. & Genesis20.17., and sundry other places. Besydes, when we pray to Saintes, we do thereby the better (they being better able and more worthy by reason of their perfe∣ction, to obtaine any thing at Gods hands then we) come vnto God himselfe, and more effectually pray vnto him. And as for the Pater noster, it doth no more prohibit praying to Saintes, then to God the sonne, and God the holy Ghost. Add yet in further satisfaction of this so frequently ob∣iected; He that giueth to one of the Kings Counsaile or Chamber, his Petition directed to the king, intreating him earnestly, that he will exhibite the same to his Maiesty, and further his suite, doth not therby deferre the Kings honour to his Seruant, nor desire his suite to be granted by the ser∣uant, but by the king. The Gentiles which came to Philip and asked himIo. 12.21. saying, Sir, we are desirous to see Iesus, did not ascribe Christes honour to Philip, though they came vn∣to him first, and with great humility called him, Dominum, Sir, and made their desire knowne vnto him: neither did Christ reproue them, for not comming immediatly vnto him, as therby iniurious to him, but rather taught that this did more illustrate his glory, seeing the Gentiles had him in so great reuerence, as that they durst not come into his pre∣sence, but by the Mediation and Commendation of his be∣loued Apostles. And so Phillip telling Andrew, and Andrew and Phillip telling Iesus; Iesus answered them saying, The houre is come,
that the sonne of man shalbe glorifyed. The CenturionLuc. 7.7.3. also not thinking himselfe worthy to come to Christ, sent vnto him the Ancient of the Iewes, desiring him to come and heale his Seruant. And yet the holy Ghost affirmeth by S. Matthew,Mat. 8.5. That the Centurion came vnto him &c. And Iesus said to him, I will come &c. And the Centurion making answere, said, Lord I am not worthy &c. And yet it is playne, that this Dialogue passed betwene Iesus and the CenturionsLuc. 7.6. friends, and not with the Centurion himselfe. And this pra∣ctice of the Centurion was so gratefull to Christ, that he said, Amen, I say to you, neither in Israel haue I found so great fayth. Yea God directed Iobs friends saying,Iob. c. 42 7.8. My fury is wrath against thee, and against thy two friends &c. Take therfore vnto you 7. Oxen, and 7. Rammes, and go to my Seruant Iob, and offer ho∣locaust for your selues, and my seruant Iob shall pray for you; his face I will receyue, that the folly be not imputed to you. So impertinent is this Obiection so often inculcated. Sixtly it is obiected, the Saintes in heauen can merit or obtayne nothing for themselues, much lesse for others. Ans∣were. Though as then they cannot merit, yet through the merits of their life past, they may obtayne what they aske, either for themselues or others. CaluinL 16. de ratione vera reformationis Ecclesiae, and Melancthon in Apol. art. 21. Conf. August. obiecteth that many are inuocated, who whether they be Saintes, or whether any such euer were, no certaine history doth confirme, as Christopher, George, Catharine &c. I answere, though the histories of some Sain∣tes be Apocryphall and vncertaine, yet therof it doth not follow, that such Saintes were not. Of the calling of the A∣postles we read in the Ghospell, but of the lyfe and death of many of them, we fynd litle or nothing; and many things which are related of them out of Abdias and others, are not approued as altogeather certaine. Besides though the histo∣ries of some three or foure be doubtfull, yet of the rest they are most certaine: and what Saintes of all Sectes Prot. haue registred into their Kalendar, let Fox beare witnes. Some vrge with Vigilantius, thatHier. cont Vigil. c. 3. init. whilest we liue, we may pray for one another, but after we are dead, the prayer of none is to be heard for another, especially seeing
MartyrsApoc. 6.10. expecting the reuenge of their bloud, cannot obtayne it. But S. Hierome answereth hereto in these wor∣des, If the Apostles and Martyrs whilest they were liuing, could pray for others, when yet they were carefull for themselues; how much more after their Crownes, victories, and triumphes? Moyses alone obtayned of God pardon for sixe hundred thousand armed men: and Stephen &c. beggeth pardon for his persecutors: and shall they be of lesse power, after they shall beginne to be with Christ? Paul the Apostle affirmeth 276. soules to haue bene pardoned to him in the ship; and after being dissolued, shall begin to be with Christ, shall he then shut his mouth & shall he not be able to mutter for them, who all ouer the world haue be∣lieued at his preaching? Shall Vigilantius a liuing dog, be better then he a dead lyon? And the very like is taught by S.Ser. 9. de Sanctis. Austine. And as for that of the Martyrs, it is most false to say, that the Martyrs here were not heard, nor their Petition granted, for it was granted to be fulfilled in tyme appointed by God (wherunto they did and do alwayes conforme themselues) for it was said to them next after, That they should rest yet a litle tyme, till &c. And Christ our Sauiour speaking of this very case, sayth,Luc. 18.7. And will not God reuenge his Elect that cry to him day and night &c? I say to you that he will quickly reuenge them. But if God do not sometymes grant requests of the Saintes, yet it doth not therfore follow, that they do not, or may not pray for vs, for Christ himselfe prayed to his Father to re∣moue the bitter Cup of death from him, and yet it was not granted.
CHAP. XVII. The true State of the Question, concerning the vse & reuerence to be exhibited to Images of Christ, and his Saintes. Whether it be lawfull to make the Images of Christ and his Saints, to place them in Churches, and to exhibite any honour or reuerence vnto them: or that all this is Su∣perstition and Idolatry, contrary to the Commande∣ment of God. SECT. 1. Catholike Doctrine. WHAT the Church of Christ belie∣ueth and practiseth concerning Ima∣ges, these Generall Councells follow∣ing will cleerly discouer. The Coun∣cell of Trent decreeth that,Concil. Trident. Sess. 25. Decret. de sacris Imag. The I∣mages of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to be had and retay∣ned especially in Churches, and that duehonour and worship is to be imparted vnto them: not for that any diuinity is to be belieued to be in them, or vertue, for which they are to be worshipped; or that any thing is to be begged of them, or that hope is to be put in them, as in times past
the Pagans did, who put their trust in Idols: but because the honour which is exhibited to them is referred to the first patterne which they resemble. So that by the mages which we kisse and before whom we vncouer our heads and kneele we adore Christ and his Saintes, whose likenes they beare, we reuerence that which is ratifyed by the Decrees of Councels especially of the second of Nice, against the Impugners of Images In which second Nicene Councell it is saidAct. 7. See Conc. Senon. De∣cret. 14. We de∣fyne in all cerinty and diligence that as the figure of the pretious &c. Crosse, so the veneble and holy mages are to be set forth &c. in the holy Churches of God in Sacred Vessels, garments walls tables, houses and wayes: aswell the Image of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, as of our vnspotted Lady, the holy Mother of God, and of the honourable Angells, and all Saintes and Holy Men; for the more of∣ten they are seene by Images the more those that behould these are more cheerfully eleuated to the memory and desyre of the Pro∣totypon, and to giue the kisse, and honourable worship vnto them; but not to giue true Latria &c. which belongeth only to the Diuine nature. Agreably herto the Catholicke ChurchBellar de Imag. c. 7. &c. Rhem. Test. in. 1. Ioan. 5.21. now tea∣cheth, that Images of Christ and his Saintes are not prohi∣bited by the Scriptures to be made, or to be placed in Chur∣ches, or howses, or to be honoured: but it likewise teacheth that no Confidence is to be placed in them, or any thing to be asked of them, but only that they be honoured for those whom they represent vnto vs. Pointes Disputable. SomeAbulen∣sis in. c. 4. Deutr. q 5. Durand. in 3. Dist. q. 2. Pe∣resius de Tra∣dit. part. 3 in Tract de Imagin. Schoolmen teach, that the Images of God are not to be made, and that they are rather permitted, then approued by the Church: But othersCaiet. in 3 part q. 25. art. 3. Cathae∣rin. l de cult. Imag. Sande∣rus de cult. Img. thinke it very pro∣bable, that the same is lawfull. SomeAlex. 3. part. q. 30. art. 12. vlt. Durand. l. 3 Ceut. Dist. 9 q. 2. affirme, that an Image is not in any respect to be worshipped in it selfe, but only relatiuely for the E∣xemplar:S. Th. 3. part. q 25 art. 3. S. bouau. and others in 3 Dist 9. Others auouch that the same honour is due to the Image, and the Exemplar:Peresius l. de Tradit. Tract. de Imag. San∣der. l. 2. c. vlt. de Imag. Others yet are of opinion that the very Images are to be honoured in themselues, and
properly, but with lesser honour then the Exemplar it selfe. None of these opinions are defyned by the Church. Protestant Vntruthes. CaluinInstit. l. 2. c. 11. §. 13. auoucheth that during the tymes of the first 500. yeares, there was not any pictures placed in Churches. ButL pro Imaginibus, qui habetur post 7. Synod. circa fin. Adrianus 1. proueth at large the contrary from the testimonyes and practise of Siluester, Damasus, Celestinus, Sixtus, Leo and others, who all liued before the yeare 500. TheCent. 4. c. 13. Col. 1447. Centuristes affirme that Christs Picture was broken and cast downe with a thunderbolt for a testimony that such superstition, wherewith any vertue is ascribed to Images, doth not please God: But all histories testify that not Christes, but on∣ly Iulian the Apostataes picture, was so cast downe with a Thunderbolt. CaluinInstit. l. 1 c. 11. §. 10. also teacheth that the Iewes and Gentiles did not call their Idols, Gods: but this is disproued by ma∣ny expresse places ofExod. 32. Iudic. 18.3. Reg. 12. Dan. 5. Sap. 13. Scripture. Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth thatArticle 22. The wor∣shipping and adoring of Images is a fond thing▪ vainly inuented and grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. Heer all honour vnto them is denyed. Other Prot. prohibit their placing in Churches. Luther sayth,In c. 7. Deut tom. 3. fol. 41. I do not much loue Images & I would not haue them pla∣ced in the Church. Zwinglius;De vera & fal. Relig. c. de statuis. Peter Mar∣tyr in loc. tit. de cult. Imag. 22. Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 11. §. 13. Images ought to be abolished in Churches. Others yet proceed furth teaching that Images are not so much as to be made Hffmā sayth,Apud Zwing. tom. 2. fol. 631. 630. That Good∣man thinketh that Images many be kept and made, so that one do not adore them or worship them. But this Opinion fighteth with testimo∣nies of Scripture, in which the Lord commandeth that we do not make them. So that according to Prot. Images must not be ho∣noured, nor placed in Churches, nor so much as made.
Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. Nicephorus writeth,Hist. l. 16. c. 27. Xenaias first (O audacious soule, and impudent mouth!) vomited forth that speach, That the Images of Christ, and those who haue pleased him, are not to be worshipped. According to which the Prot. Euactius confesseth, thatCom∣ment. in prae∣cedent. Chron. l. 7. Anno Christi. 494. See Cedrenus in compend. hist. Xenaias first raysed war in the Church agaynst Images. Iulian the A∣postataSozom. l. 5. c. 20. Eu∣seb. l. 7. c. 14. cast downe the Image of Christ, which the wo∣manMat. 9.20. mentioned in the Ghospell had made.Alco∣ran. c. 15.17. Prateolus verb. Maho∣met. Ma∣homet also imugned Images and the Crosse. And Probia∣nus alsoHist. tripart. l. 2. c. 19. denyed veneration of the Crosse. We haue seen next before that the same is taught by the Prot. Church. Protestant Errours. Nappier blusheth not to write,Vpon the Reuel. p. 89. 90. 214. 215. 219. and Propo∣sition 31. p. 72. 73. &c. The signe, or Crosse which appeared in vision to Constantine with these words in hoc signo vinces, in this signe thou shalt ouercome, was the first publick and visi∣ble marke of Antichrist. So that the badge, or marke of Anti∣christ, who is to be such a one as doth directly oppose him∣selfe against Christ, must be the signe or Crosse which hath al∣wayes bene holden the badge of Christ, in regard of his dying vpon the Crosse. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that it is lawfull to make the Images of Christ, and his Saints, to place them in Churches, and to exhibit honour, or reuerence vnto them. FOr the progresse, and fuller vnderstanding of this Con∣trouersy, we are first to obserue, that the words Image & Idol, are taken in the Scriptures, and with Ecclesiasticall writers in different senses: an Image is a true representation
or likenes of a thing, as whē we paint a man, a horse &c. An Idol, is a false similitude which representeth that which truly is not, as the statues of Venus, of Minerua, which represent women-Gods who neither are, nor can be Gods. The holyColoss 1.15 Heb. 1.3. Sap. 7 16. Scripture calleth the sonne of God, the Image of his Fa∣ther: Salomon is said to make Images of Cherubims;3. Reg. 8.7.8. but neuer is the sonne of God called the Idoll of God, or the Ima∣ges of Cherubims called Idols; wheras an Idoll is said to be aAbac. 2.18. see S. Hier. in hunc loc. & in c. 13. Zachar. false Image, and S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idoll is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one: Yea through the whole Scriptures,3. Reg. 7.16. Leuit. 19.4. Num. 23.1. Ose. 6. the word Idoll, as also in the Fa∣thers,Synodus 7. Act. 5.7. Orig. ho. 8 in Exod. Theo∣dore quaest. 38. in Exod. it is taken for a false God, and Idolatry for the worshipping of false Gods, and so they are still taken in the worse part, & forbidden: Wherby is discouered the falshood of StephanusIn his Thesaurus. V. . affirming the word , to be vsed by Ecclesiasticall writers for any Image, representing that which we may worship, including therin the Images of Christ, and his Saintes. In like manner the word Simula∣chrum, deriued of simulo, to dissemble, or lye, is vsed for Idoll, for where the Latin Interpreter hath simulachrum,Ps. 113.12. Act. 15.29. 1. Io 5.21. S. Aug in Ps. 135. Hier. in c 7. Ose. alwayes in Greeke it is . But of these who confound Image and Idol, I would de∣mand when the Scriptures say,Gen. 1.26.27. God sayd, Let vs make man to our Image. And God created man to his Image: to the Image of God he created him.Gen. 5.3. Adam liued 130. yeares, & begat to his owne I∣mage and likenes, and called his name Seth.1. Cor. 11.7. Man ought not to couer his head, because he is the Image and glory of God, & the like; I demand whether in these places the words Image & Idol do signify one & the same thing or no? if they affirme, then they must acknowledge of necessity, not only Adam when he be∣gat his Sonne Seth, to haue made to himself an Idol, but also that man is the Idol of God, & that God when he created mā framed to himselfe an Idol, and so nothing remayneth, but that they likewise proclayme God to be an Idolater: if they deny, then their retractation of their former assertion, is lau∣dable, and we shall heerafter in this expect their silence. Secondly, all agree, that to mke or kep an Image, is not of it selfe vnlawfull, the Artes of painting and caruing be∣ing
allowable, and the same practised and permitted a∣mongst Prot. themselues. The first thing therfore in question is, whether it be lawfull to make the Image of God himselfe, or of the B. Trinity? To which I answere, that though the same be not so certaine a matter of faith, as the other of the making of the Images of Christ and his Saintes is, yet the lawfulnes therof may sundry wayes be proued. First, God hath bene pleased to appeare, & to haue bene seene in corporall shape or figure, as appeareth in sundry places of Scripture, as first,Gen. 3.8. where it pleased him to be heard walking and seene of Adam, and Eue in Paradise after their fall, and to hould a long Conference and Expostulation with them touching their sinne, and the occasion therof, therby to draw them to repentance, and to saue them, all which was not done with∣out some forme, or shape by God assumed. Secondly, Iacob flying from the face of his brother Esau, had a vision wherin he sawGen. 28.12.13. A ladder standing vpon Earth, and the top therof touching heauen, & the Angels of God ascending & descending by it, and God leaning vpon the ladder, speaking vnto him saying, I am the God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac, the land wheron thou sleepest, will I giue to thee, and thy seed; the which sensible sight and hearing of God by Iacob, could not be had without some shape assumed by God, wherby he might be seene and heard. And elswhereGen. 32.24. it is recor∣ded that a man wrestled with him vntill morning, which man was God, as appeareth by these wordes,Ib. 28. If thou hast bene strong against God &c. and himselfe confesseth the same afterwardsIb. 30. saying, I haue seene God face to face, and am yet alyue. Whēce it is euident, that God vouchsafed to appeare in shape of man, when he wrestled with Iacob. Thirdly,Gen. 18.1.2.3, God ap∣peared vnto Abraham in the valey of Mambre, as he sate in the doore of his Tent, in the very heate of the day: & when he had lifted vp his eyes, there appeared to him three men standing neere vnto him &c. Here it euidently appeareth by the contexte of the whole Chap∣ter, that it was God that appeared to Abraham in shape of man, as by his promising of a child to Sara, & by the Com∣munication passing betwene God and Abraham, touching
the destroying of Sodome. Fourthly, you shall read in diuerse other placesGen. 3.8. & 28.13. Exod 33.23. Isaiae 6.1.3. Reg. 22.19. Amos. 9.1. & 7 7. Dan. 7 9. of holy Scripture, where God hath appeared and bene seene by men, walking, leaning, standing, sitting, with description of head, hayre, and garments, mentioning also his seat, throne, and footstoole, which could not be done without the assuming of some bodily shape. And God the holy Ghost assumed the shape of a Doueat. 3.16. when he descended from heauen, and lighted vpon Christ at the tyme of his Baptisme in Iordan. Angels also being incorporeall, haue appeared often in mensGen. 18.2.19 1. Isa. 6.6. Dan. 9.21. Math. vlt. 2. Luc. vlt. 4. Io. 20.12. shapes. Now as God and Angels haue appeared in these corporall shapes, so may they in like manner be painted; there being no iniury to draw them in those formes and shapes, wherin they were pleased to appeare to men. The second question is, whether it be lawfull to place Images in Churches, and that alone without any history pertayning therto. To this I answere, God himselfe com∣manded Angels to be placed in the highest places of the Temple, for so you shall read, where he speaketh thus vnto Moyses,Exod. 25.18.19.20.21.22. Two Cherubims also thou shalt make of beaten gould, on both sydes of the Oracle, let one Cherub be on the one syde, and the other on the other; let them couer both sydes of the Propitiatoy, sprea∣ding their winges, and couering the Oracle, and let them looke one to∣wardes the other, their faces turned vnto the Propitiatory, wherwith the Arke is to be couered, wherin thou shalt put the Testimony which I will giue thee: thence will I command, and will speake to thee ouer the Propitiatory, and from the middest of the two Cherubims which shalbe vpon the Arke of the Testimony, all things which I Command the Children of Israel by thee. Againe concerning the renewing of these Cherubims, at the building of the Temple by Salo∣mon, you shall read thus of him,3. Reg. 6.24.25.26.27.28.29. And he made in the Ora∣cle two Cherubs of Oliue trees, of ten Cubits in height, one wing of a Cherub of fyue Cubits, and the other wing of a Cherub fyue Cu∣bits, that is, hauing ten Cubits from the end of one wing to the end of the other wing: of ten cubits also was the second Cherub, in like measure, and the worke was one in both Cherubs, that is to say, one Cherub had the height of ten cubits, and in like manner the second Cherub: and he put the Cherubs in the middest of the Inner Temple,
and the Cherubs extended their winges, and the one wing touched the wall and the wing of the second Cherub touched the other wall: and the other winges in the middle part of the Temple touched ech other. He couered also the Cherubs with gold; and all the walles of the Tem∣ple round about he graued with diuerse engrauinges and caruing: and he made in them Cherubs and Palme-trees, and diuers pictures as it were standing out of the wall, and comming forth. Caluin cannot deny the forsaid placing of those pictures in the Temple, & yet he affirmeth them to be made,Instit. l. 1. c. 2. §. 3. Who endeauour to de∣fend the Images of God and Saintes, by the example of Cherubims. But if by the appointment of God, the two Cherubs were made, which were the Images of Angels, and by God also commanded to be placed within the Tabernacle, before the building of the Temple, and within the Temple after the building therof, and if both Tabernacle and Temple were then vnto the Iewes places consecrated to Gods worship, as our Christian Churches are now; then followeth it neces∣sarily, that it is as lawfull now to make Images, and to place them in the Churches, as it was then lawfull to make Che∣rubs and other pictures, and to place them in the Taberna∣cle and Temple, and that without all history therto, as these were; nay which is more, this was done in the tyme of the old Testament, when the Iewes were most prone to Idola∣try. Neither may we greatly feare any great inconuenience now a dayes to ensue, by placing Images in Churches, seeing there is none so ignorant, who belieueth not in one only God, and knoweth perfectly that Images and Pictures, are but the handy workes of men, & this the rather through the care and industry of their Pastours, who are strictly chargedConcil. Trid Sess 25. and commanded to informe the more ignorant, of the right and lawfull vse therof, and of that honour which is proper to God alone, not to be communicated to his Crea∣tures: Yea insteed of hurt, many commodities aryse therby, as to those who cannot read, and the more vnlearned,Greg. Nyssen. orat. in Theod. instruction and knowledge, to all a betterGreg. Mag. l. 7. Ep. 109. & l. 9. Ep. 9 and more frequent remembrance of Christ and his Saintes, and of their singular vertues and actions, and therby a more feruent desire in vs,Greg. l. 7 Ep. 53. to loue and imitate the same; and lastly an
exhibitionSynod 7. Act. 6. & Basil. Orat. in 40. Mar∣tyres. of due honour to God and his Saints, it be∣ing vndoubted, that to erect statues and Images to great personages, was euer done for their greater honour: and someEuseb. Hist. l. 7. c. 14. thinke this the chiefest cause, why Christians de∣sired the Images of Saints. The third, and greatest difficulty or question is, whe∣ther any worship or reuerence may be exhibited to Images? I answere, though they may not be honoured with Inuo∣cation, or by placing any confidence in them, yet otherwise that they may be worshipped in reguard of them whome they represent vnto vs, is proued first by the former places of Scripture concerning the Cherubims and the brasen Ser∣pentNum. 21.8.9., which was theIo. 3.14.15. figure of Christ: for the Ima∣ges of Cherubims placed vpon the Arke, were necessarily a∣dored of them who adored the Arke. In so much that S.Hier. in Ep. 17. ad Marcellum. Hierome sayth, The Iewes in tymes past did worship the Holyes of Holies, because there were the Cherubims, and Propitiatory, and the Arke of the Testament, Manna, Aarons rod, and the golden Aul∣tar. And the Brazen serpent by Gods Commandement pla∣ced on high could not but be worshipped of them, who by looking thereon were immediatly cured. In so much thatAug. l. 3. de Trinit. c. 10. S. Austine speaking of certayne Religious signes which deserue worship, giueth example in the Brasen serpent. And it is a certayne Rule that,Aug. l. 3. de doct. Christiana c. 9. profitable signes ordayned by God, (such as the Cherubims and brasen Serpent were) are to be honoured, seeing their honour passeth to the first patterne or exemplar, the Angels and Christ. Caluin con∣fesseth that,In Num. 21.8. The brasen Serpent was a shaddow, figure, and similitude of Christ. And that it was a signe of spirituall grace. And that,In Psal. 105.19. the Arke was the Image of God. Now that the Iewes did exhibit great honour to these, theIos. 7.6. 2. Reg. 6.12 &c. Num. 21.8. Scriptures are manifest. And Caluin confesseth that,In Num. 21.8. The brasen ser∣pent was layd vp as a precious treasure, and diligently preserued ma∣ny ages in the Sanctuary of God: Wherby it appeareth that they were greatly honoured. Secondly, the same may be proued by such places as teach that Creatures may be honoured for the relation they haue to God, asMat. 5.. Sweare not at all; neyther by heauen, for it is the
throne of God; neyther by the earth: here note that an Oath be∣ing an Act of Religion, wherby first God, and then that wherby we sweare is honoured, God forbiddeth Oathes by heauen or Earth without due circumstance, least those creatures as they haue relation to him, should thereby be dis∣honoured: so also it is said,Ps. 98.5. Adore the footestoole of his feete, where by, footestoole, is vnderstood the Arke of God, accor∣ding o that of King Daui1. Paral. 28.1 & Psal. 131 7.8.2. Reg. 6.2. I prepared a house where the Arke of our Lord should rest, and the footestoole of our God: which also might be further proued by sundry other places of Scri∣pture. Now if this Arke being but a Creature, was so high∣ly had iIos. 3.3.4.5 6. 1. Reg. 6.19. 2. Reg. 6. Hebr. 6.4.5. reuerence for the relation it had to God, why not Images who haue a neerer and more perfect relation? Thirdly, the same is taught by such places as testify that Creatures are sayd to be sacred, or holy, for the relation they haue to holy things; so to Moyses it was sayd,Exod. 3.5. Put thy shooes of thy feete, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground; which whether it be called holy for the presence of God, or of some Angell, is all one. The day of theExod. 12.14. Passe-ouer was commanded to be kept an holy feast, for the signification it had, and for the dedication thereof to God. The garments of the Priests were calledExod. 28.4. holy vestments, for that they were ordained for the seruice of God. The2. Tim. 3.15. Scriptures are called holy Scriptures, in that they are signes of holy things. Concerning the reuerence due to the sacred name of Ie∣siu, though S. Paul sayth thereof,Philip. 2.9. For the which thing God also hath exalted him, and hath giuen him a Name which is aboue all Names, that in the Name of Iesus euery knee bow, of the celestialls, terrestrialls, and infernals: and though the AncientConc. Lugdun. 2. cap. Decret. de immunit. Eccl. in Sex∣to Orig. ho. 1. in Iosue. Fa∣thers do from this place exhibite much reuerence to the sayd Name, yet Caluin trembleth not to say, to vse his owne words, that,In Phi∣lip. 1.9. The Sophisters of Sorbon are more then ridicu∣lous, who gather from this present place, that the knee is to be bowed, as often as the name of Iesus is pronounced; as though it were a coniuring word, which had all it force included in the sound. But by this more the ridiculous impudency & blaspemy, Caluin rāketh him∣selfe among th fals Prophets, whereof God complaineh, saying,Ierem. 23.27. who will make my people to forget my Name, through
their dreames, which euery one telleth to his neighbour: as their Fa∣thers forgot my name for Baal. And it sheweth plainly that Cal∣uin vttered these words by the suggestion of the Diuell, for as S. Paul obserueth,1. Cor. 1 3. No man speaking in the spirit of God, sayth Anathema to Iesus, and, no man can say our Lord Iesus, but in the holy Ghost: whereas those who are guided by the holy Ghost do bow and reuerence at the name of Iesus, not for the sound or sillables of the word, as Caluin foolishly preten∣deth, but for the relation which it hath to Christ our Saui∣our. And I verily thinke, that when due reuerence is giuen by hat and knee at the hearing of our Kings name, when it is read in Proclamations, or otherwise, not one Caluinist in England durst censure the Kings name, for a word ma∣gicall, in regard of the honour done vnto it. Now it is e∣uident, that in what respect a thing is sayd to be sacred, ho∣ly, or to haue any Excellency in it, in the same it may be worshipped and reuerenced: therefore Images hauing as perfect relation to holy things, as the earth, dayes, garments, or words, may truly be sayd to be sacred or holy, and so al∣so may be worshipped. Fourthly, the Images of Kings may be worshipped with Ciuil honour, therefore the Images of Christ and his Saints with Religious honour, the things represented being sa∣cred, as the other are ciuil. And whereas theCent. 8. c. 9. Centuristes reply, that the Kings Image is therefore worshipped, by reason of the Kings absence, who cannot at the same tyme be in all, or sundry partes of the kingdome: this is most idle and false; Idle, because the question is not, why, or for what cause the kinges image is worshipped, but whether it be to be worshipped: false, for as it were greater indignity to in∣iure the kings picture in his owne presence, then in his ab∣sence, so to honour it in his presence, were most gratefull. Further, an Image is capable of iniuryEuseb. hist. l. 9. c. 10. Chrysost. hom. 2. & 3. ad po∣pulum An∣tiochenum. Theodor. hist. l. 5. c. 10. See Calu. inst. l. 4. c 17. §. 33. Pet. Mart. in 1. Cor. 11. and re∣proach, therfore also it is capable of honour and worship. And Idols or Images of false Gods are therfore despised & detested, because they are the Images of false Gods; therfore by the contrary, Images of Christ and his Saintes, signifying true and holy thinges, may therfore be honoured.
But to proceed further concerning the vse of sacred Images: if the vse of them were vnlawfull, either it must be, because the vse therof were of its owne nature dishonoura∣ble to God, or else for that it is forbidden by some Com∣mandement. Touching the first part, that it is not disho∣nourable to God, is proued thus: Howsoeuer God alone is to be aored with diuine honour, yet withall a Religious worship is due to such things, as haue relation to him, or to his Saintes, accordingly as M. Iewell confesseth, saying,Reply against Har∣ding. p. 379. We only adore Christ as very God, but we worship also and reuerence the Sacrament, we worship the word of God, we worship all other like things, in such religious wyse to Christ belonging. And Caluin con∣fesseth of the Eucharist, as it is a figure of Christs body and bloud,Instit. l. 4 c. 17. §. 33. Edit. Gal. dignam esse quae omni reuerentia exaltetur, worthy to be extolled with all reuerence. In this sense Saint Iohn Baptist thought himselfeLuc. 3.16. vnworthy to vnloose the lachet of Christes shooes, a thing otherwise by him not reguarded, but as ha∣uing relation to Christ. Also it was commanded, that the Arke or Mercy-seat should be adored,Ps. 98.5. Adorate scabellum pedū eius, for so both Fathers & Prot. read, worship you the foote∣stoole of his feete. And this honour done and giuen to Creatu∣res being commanded by God to be giuen to creatures, ney∣ther is nor can be dishonourable to God, for it resteth not in the foresaid things themselues, but passeth ouer from them, as bothIn his Reply. p. 409. Iewel andHist. Sacram. l. 5. c 8. p 477. Hospinian expresse, saying, The Sacraments be adored, but the whole honour resteth not in them, but is passed ouer from them to the things signifyed; and heerunto SaintDe Doctr. Christ l. 3. c. 9. Austine agreably sayth, qui veneratur vtile signum &c. he that worshippeth a profitable signe ordayned by God, the force and signi∣fication whereof he well vnderstandeth, doth not reuerence that which he seeth, but that rather vnto which such signes haue relation. This point is so euident and free from all danger of Idolatry, that Danaeus debating the same with Bellarmine, confesseth in plaine termes concerning the worshiping of Images by him defended,Primae partis altera parte. p. 1383. It consisteth vpon so many obseruations and restri∣ctions that the honour which they exhibite to their Images, is (as he thinketh) indeed none, as being only cultus reductiuus, non pro∣prius, that is, a worship reductiue or belonging to the first patterne,
not proper or abyding in the Image, as giuen to it for it selfe. This is yet made more plaine by Example of that ciuill reuerence which we do exhibite before the Princes Image, or cloath of Estate: wherof S. Athanasius saith,Ser. 4. cont. Arria∣nos. and see the like in S. Ambr. ser. 10. in ps. 118. He that worshippeth the kinges Image, doth therin worship the king himselfe. And S. BasilBasil. de Spiritu san∣cto ad Am∣philochium. c. 18. thinketh of the Honour done to the King, and his Image, that it is one, & not many, or diuerse, & that therfore the honourBasil. Ibid. vt supra. done to the Image, is referred to the first Exemplar. Vpon this ground it is to be imagined that Antichrist (who will striue to be2. Thess. 2.4. exalted aboue all that is called God) will yet in further satisfaction of his proud humour, cause his ImageApoc. 13.5. to be adored; which thing he would neuer do, if the honour done to his Image were a dishonour to himselfe. By all which it is euident, that the vse of sacred Images, and the Religious worship done to them, by the Catholicke Church, is not of its owne nature dishonoura∣ble to God. Concerning the second point, namely, whether any law or precept be made against the worshipping of Images: If any were, it were that of Exodus,20.4.5. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any Idoll, or similitude: but this Commandement vr∣ged so much by Prot. against the vse of sacred Images, is al∣togeather impertinent; first, for that by Idoll, and similitude here mentioned in the Precept, is meant the false resem∣blance of that thing for God, which indeed was not God, & which the Iewes being prone to Idolatry, did grosly wor∣ship as their God, according to the error of the Gentils. And this is proued by S. Paul, saying,1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idoll is nothing in the world: and so likewise did the FathersOrig. bo. 8. in Exod. Theodor. q. 38. in Exod. Hieronymus in c. 2. Aba∣cuc. & in c. 13 Zachr. vn∣derstand the word Idoll. The Prophet Abacuc also calleth itC. 2.18. a false Image; or as the Prot.Engl. Bib. of 1578. translate it, a teacher of lyes, that is, a representation of that which is not: wherfore this Commandement maketh nothing against the vse and worship of sacred Images. And D. Whitguift confesseth, that,In his Def. against. Cart∣wright. p. 542. versus fin. We cannot fynd in all the Scriptures, where God hath made any law or ordinance, against his owne Commandement. And therefore had God almighty by his Commandment forbid∣den
the making of such Images as did signify a Truth, he would not then, as afterwardes he did,Exod. 25 18. & Num. 21.8. haue comman∣ded them to be made and erected. And let our Prot. vnderstand whatsoeuer they will, by Idoll and similitude here, yet is it manifest, that therby is only forbidden the worshipping of them for God, as appea∣reth by all wordes and circumstances of this place, as where it is said there next before,Exod. 20.3. Thou shalt haue no other Gods be∣fore me: and after, YouExod. 20.23. shall not make with me Gods of siluer and Gods of gold: and yet more plainly,Leuit. 26.1. You shall make none Idols, or grauen Images, &c. to bow downe therto, for I am the Lord, and myIsa. 42.8. glory I will not giue to another, neither my praise to grauen Images. All which argue, that therby is forbidden that kind of honour which is only due to God, and which of its owne nature was forbidden and dishonourable before the publishing of this Commandement. But suppose that the Iewes had bene forbidden gene∣rally to make and worship Images in any sort, yet had this Commandement bene but temporall, and peculiar vnto them, in reguard of their danger and strong inclination to Idolatry: and so accordingly Martin Luther, and Brentius affirme, as Beza witnesseth of them,Vide Resp Bezae ad acta Colloq. Mon∣tisb. parte al∣tera Praef. p. 12 post med. That the second Commandement of the first Table concerning Images, pertayned only to the Iewes, as being part of the Ceremoniall Law. Vpon all these Premises the Conclusion is. 1. That since by the Protestantes confession, the Image of Christ may be made: 2. since likewise for the direction of our vn∣derstanding, the Image of Christ is the same to our eye, that the sound or name of Iesus is to our eare: 3. since also, a Re∣ligious kind of reuerence is to be exhibited at the name of Iesus, and as M. Iewell and Hospinian haue affirmed, to Sacramentes, and to all other like things in such religious wise to Christ belonging: since as M. IewellIn his Reply. p. 409. and Hos∣pinianIn Hist. Sacram. l. 5. c. 8. p. 477. further say as before, and the other premisses ar∣gue, the forsaid honour resteth not in them, but is safely without all danger of Idolatry, or dishonour passed ouer from them to the thinges signifyed; that therfore the Image of Christ and of his Saintes, as they may be lawfully made,
so also vpon the forsaid ground they may be safely wor∣shipped. The conclusion of all which is no other, but that Christ and his Saintes may be worshiped in their pictures, no lesse then Christ is in his name and Sacraments, and no lesse then an Earthly King is in his Image, or Cloath of Estate. As for the forsaid Commandement, it is cleere by the premisses, that therby is only forbidden, not such forsaid worship, as not being of its owne nature dishonourable, should then first become vnlawfull by force of that Com∣mandement, but such worship as was then before of it owne nature vnlawfull, in reguard wherof that Commandement was published: this, as appeareth by the premisses, was then only Idolatry, which became not euill because it was then prohibited, but then was prohibited, because it was before that, euill. Lastly it is to be obserued how impiously Prot. cor∣rupt the sacred Scriptures in hatred to holy Images: And heerin of very many to touch but some few; Wheras S. Paul sayth,Eph. 5.5. No couetous person, (which is the seruice of Idols) hath inheritance &c. Fulke translateth, nor couetous person, which is a worshiper of Images. &c. And forCol. 3.5. Auarice, which is the ser∣uice of Idols, he saith, Couetousnes, which is worshiping of Images. And yet in our common phrase of speaking, we say, such a rich man maketh his money his God, euen as S. Paul said of others,Philip. 3.19. whose God is the belly. And wheras S. Iohn sayth1. Io. 5.21. Keep your selues from Idols, though Fulke translateth in the text, Idols, yet he putteth in the Margent, or Images: and the Church walls still say, Keep your selues from Images. But not content with this, sometimes they adde the word, Image, to the text, when it is neither in the Latin or the Greeke, as may be seene in Fulke Act. 19.35. and in the Engl. Bib. of Anno 1562. in 2. Paral. 36.8. I omit sun∣dry such like, only for breuity.
SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures for the lawfull vse of Images, and Religious Reuerence done vnto them, agreably with Catholikes. SAint Athanasius in iustification of this Doctrine writeth thusAd An∣tiochum Principem. c. 38. God forbid, and let it be farre from vs, that we Chi∣stians adore Images as Gods, as the Greekes do. We declare only our affection, and the care of our loue towards the figure of the person expressed, by his Image: therefore oftentymes we burne as vnpro∣fitable the wood which erstwhyle was an Image, if the figure be worne out. Therefore as Iacob when he was to dye, adored the top of Iosephs rod, not honouring the rod it selfe, but him who held the rod: so we Christians do no otherwise adore Images, but euen as moreouer, when we kisse our Children and Fathers, we declare the desire of our mynd. Euen as the Iew also did adore in tymes past the tables of the Law, and the two golden Cherubims, and certayne other Images, not worshipping the nature of the stone or gold, but our Lord who comman∣ded them to be made. With S. Athanasius agreeth Tertullian saying,L. 2. Cont. Marcio∣nem. c. 22. And therefore he forbidding the similitude of all things to be made, which are in heauen, and in Earth, and in the waters, he doth shew the cau∣ses restrayning, to wit, the substance or matter of Idolatry; for he addeth afterwards, you shall not adore them, nor serue them: but the figure of the brasen Serpent which our Lord commanded Moyses af∣terwards, did not belong to the title of Idolatry, but to remedy and helpe those,Def of the Engl. Traslat. c. 3 p. 119. who were infested by the serpents And I say nothing of the figure of the remedy (to wit the Crosse) so both the golden Cherubims & Seraphims &c. The Fathers were so full for our Catholicke vse of Images, as that they allowed the publicke placing of them in Churches, though Fulke thinketh this to beL. 2. Cont. Marcio∣nem. c. 22. against the Commandement. For sundry examples and testimonies of the Ancient Fathers are in proofe therof alleadged by the Prot.gainst Symoz ng. part 1. p. 32. hem. Exam. part 4. p. 26. 29. 30 Cent. 4. Col 409. Parker, Chemniius, and the Centuristes. In so
much, that in respect of such publick allowance of Images, the Prot. Functius affirmeth, that,Lib 7. Comment in praeced. Chro∣nol. at anno 494. Anno 494. Xenaias was the first in the Church that stirred vp war against Images. And wheras Prot. pretend, that we Catholickes do take away the second Commandement, S. Austine affirmeth this part of the Commandement, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing, not to be a seuerall distinct Precept of it selfe, but parcell of (and therfore explayned by) this for∣mer, Thou shalt not haue strange Gods. In this he writeth so lar∣gely and plainly, & his Iudgment is so confessed, that Mus∣culus speaking of Catholickes sayth,Loc. com. de Decalogo. p. 39. They diuide the pre∣ceptes of the first table into three, and of the second into seauen, and so they leaue out the Commandement concerning Images, and grauen thinges, following Austine, who l. 2. quaest. super Exod. c. 71. ap∣pointeth three Precepts to the first table, and the other 7. to the second, Willet also confesseth, thatComment. vpon Exod. in c. 20. p. 515. Austine would haue but 3. Pre∣cepts in the first table. And againe,Ibid. p. 314. The Romanistes opinion is, that there are but 3. Commandements in the first table, putting the 2. first into one &c. of this opinion is Austine, quaest 71. in Exod. And whereas S. Austine taught this our Catholike Prin∣ciple, thatDe Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9. The houour giuen vnto profitable signes appointed by God, passeth from them to the thing signifyed, Hospinian affirming that Sacraments may as signes be honoured, sayth euen as we say of ImagesHist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 5. c. 8. That honour stayeth not in them, but passeth from them to the things which are signifyed: in proofe whereof he alledgeth S. Austine, saying, Those things which Austine writ, de doct. Christ. lib. 3. c. 9. do agree with these: Who adoreth (sayth he) a profitable signe appointed by God, whose power and signification he vnderstandeth, doth not honour that which is seene or passeth, but rather that whereunto all such things are to be referred. This place is so pregnant, that it is therefore alledged to the same pur∣pose by PeterDefence de Euchar. loc. 1. col. 382. Martyr. In further proofe yet of Images, let vs see what honour the fathers gaue to the Crosse. Perkins acknowledgeth that,Vol. 2. p. 596. and Fulke aga. Hesk. p 657. Paulinus Ep. 12. saith, The Bishop of Hierusalem yearely at Easter set forth the Crosse for the people to worship, himselfe being the chiefe of the worshippers. Now Paulinus according to Osiander,Cent. 5. l. 3. c. 2. was familiar with Hierome, Austine, and Ambrose. Danaeus auoucheth
that Cyril and sundry other learned Fathers1 art. all pt. ad Bella . contou. Resp p 1415. and Parker g. Symbol. part. 2. c. 7 p. 61. were plainly superstitious and blinded with this enchantment of the Crosses adora∣tion. Burges confesseth that,In Co∣uels Answ. to Burges. p. 130 136. There is nothing ascribed to the Crosse in or out of Baptisme, by the rankest Papists, but the Fathers are as deply engaged in the same: so as if we wll vse it as the Fathers did &c we take the Soule to be fenced with crossing of the Body, and the Crosse to haue vertue of consecrating the Sacrament, dryuing away Diuels, witchcraft &c. In proofe whereof he alledgeh sundy Ancie Fathers, and the like is acknowledged by otherCent 4. Col. 302. and 1493. Trea∣tise of the signe of the Crosse. p. 21. Protestants. Directly contrary to all Puritanes, and the more vsuall practise of Proestants, S Austine teacheth that,In E∣uang. Ioan. Tract. 118. See also de Temp. ser. 182. c 3. ser. 19. de San∣ctis. vnlesse the signe of the Crosse be applyed, whether to the foreheads of the bee∣uers, or to the water wherewith they are regenerated, or to the oyle wherewith they are annoynted, or to the Sacrifice wherewith they are nourished, none of these are rightly administred. The Centuristes reciting this saying, affirme that,Cent. 5. c. 6. Col. 657. He speaketh superstitious∣ly. And D. Fulke acknowledgeth that,Aganst Rhem. Test. in 1. Cor. 11.34. Indeed S. Austine in Ioan. Tract. 118. sayth, that the signe of the Crosse was a Ceremo∣ny vsed in all the Sacraments, which if it were not vsed, nothing of them is duly done: with whome agree other Prot. reprouing S. Austine for his Catholike doctrine of the signe of the Crosse. And yet S. Chrysostome (liuing in the same age with S. Austine) giueth like testimony for the Greeke Church saying,In Math ho. 55. All things which help to our saluation are perfected by the Crosse for whē we are regenerated, the Crosse of our Lord is present, when we are nourished with the most sacred meate, when we take Or∣ders euery where and alwayes that ensigne of victory is at hand. So vsually and generally was the signe of the Crosse vsed, by the Fathers in the Administration of the holy Sacraments. And as concerning the signing of our foreheads with the si∣gne of the Crosse S. Austine sayth,Cont. Faust. Man. l. 11 c. 30. The people are marked in their foreheads with the signe of our Lords Passion, in preseruation of their safety. And he auoucheth, that, ChristIn E∣ung. Ioan. Tract. 3. would not haue a starre to be his signe in the forheads of the faithfull but a Crosse. Yea speaking of himselfe and his owne practce, he glorieth of the Crosse in these wordes,In Ps. 141. & 46. I am so far from being ashamed of the Crosse, that I do not keepe the Crosse of Christ in a
hidden place,In Ioan. Tract. 36. but I carry it on my forhead. And speaking against a Pagan he sayth,In Ps. 141. Let him insult against Christ crucifyed, let me see the Crosse of Christ in the forheads of Kinges. Surely all this is superstitious with Protestantes. Now to the many miracles wrought by the signe of the Crosse, and by vs obiected in this behalfe, from the Fathers, D. Couell auoucheth that,Answ. to Burges. p 138. No man can deny but that God manifested his power, to the amazement of the world in this contem∣ptible signe, as being the instrument of many miracles. And Hspi∣nian confesseth that,De Tem∣plis. p. 301. Austine telleth many true miracles done by the signe of the Crosse, and the Deuill put to flight. De Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. And whereasAug. serm de Temp. ser. 130. Orig and the rest in Comment. in Mat. 24.30. S. Austine, Origen, Chrisostome, Hierome, Hilary, Theophilact, Euthimius and Bede do teach, that at the day of Iudgement Christ will come, with the signe of the Crosse before him, the same is defended by the Prot. Trig. saying,True Catholicke. p. 295. Gualter of famous memory so expounds Mathew 24.30. And by the signe of the sonne of man, he vnderstan∣deth the Crosse, these be his words: Most of the Ancient Fathers ex∣pound the Crosse to be this signe &c. Also Thomas Cowper Bishop of Lincolne sayd, My Brethren, can you not endure that signe to be made heer vpon Earth, which before the comming of the Iudge shalbe con∣spicuous in heauen? Wherefore though Prot. and Diuells can∣not endure the signe of the Crosse, yet Christ, and his true seruants will euer honour it. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do acknowlege and allow the vse of Images in Churches: and that due honour may be ex∣hibited vnto them. TO begin first with Wicliffists, Wicliffe himselfe con∣fesseth that,L. 18. Ep. 4. It is euident, that Images may be well nd ill made; well, to excite, facilitate, and inflame the myndes of the sayth∣full, that they may more deuouth worship their God. AgayneDe Eu∣char. c. 9. Therefore it is granted that Relickes, Images, and Sacraments, are
with wisdome to be worshipped. To come to the Hussites, Iohn Husse acknowledgeth thatCont I∣mginum adoationem. Although before the Image of Christ or any Saint, men may lawfully kneele downe, pray, sacrifice place candles and do so but yet they ought not to do those things in the Name of the Image but in the name of him whose Image it is: euen as the Image not for it selfe, but for the thing drawn, is to be grauen, placed, painted before men. Perzi∣ban alloweth the placing in Chuches, saying,Cap. 4. I pro∣fesse that Images of Christ and his Saintes, all secular indecency, in vndecent worship omitted may lawfully be had and profitably kept in the Churches of Christians. So superstitiously Popish are the Hussites. The Lutherans also are no lesse faulty, for Doctour Luthern Beza in Resp ad Acta Col∣loq. Montisb. part. alt. Praef p. 12. and Brentius were of opinion, that the Com∣mandement in Exodus against grauen thinges, was but pecu∣liar to the Iewes, and Ceremoniall. But Luther further tea∣cheth that,Centra caeestes Pro∣phetas. The spirit of Images-breakers is not good, it breatheth slaughters and seditions &c It is proued from Moyses, that the Ima∣ges of the Crucifix, and Saints are to be permitted. Againe,De Com∣munione sub vtraque spe∣cie. It is lawfull to keep mages, because God himselfe in the Old Testament commanded a brasen serpent to be erected, and a Cherubim at the golden Arke &c. Beza and IacobusIn Epi∣tom. p. 39. Andreas thought the making of Images, and which is more, euen the pla∣cing of them in the Church, to be a matter of indifferency.Exam. part. 4. p. 14. & 33. Chemnitius is also of the same mynd, alledging Luthers testimony for the same. Bucer also sayth,In Cen∣tur. Epist. Theol. 170. We do not con∣demne the Image of Christ and of his Saints. And Brachman iusti∣fyeth Images by way of demand and comparison thus,In Cen∣tur. Exercit. Theol. Cen∣tur. 1. p 53. post med. What was the cause thatExod. 25. God himselfe commanded to make two golden Cherubims &c? That therefore if it were lawfull to paynt o∣xen and lyons in that most sacred Temple, why may it not be lawfull for vs in our Churches to haue the Images of Christ himselfe, holy Angels, and of the Apostles? TheFulke in his Def. of the Eng Transl of the Bibl. c. 3. pag. 1. 9. Lutherans yet retayne the vse of Sacred Ima∣ges in their Churches. And Beza speaking of the Lutherans, maketh them as yet farre more chargeable, saying vnto thē.Ad acta Coloq. Montisb. resp. part. alt. p. 23. Vos autem &c. do not you. D. Luthr himself leading you knecle downe to your Crosses and Images of the Crucifie? Do you not also in
token of reuerence, light therto in the day tyme, waxen Candles &c. and this how litle and how great soeuer it be, is it not, I pray you, ex∣ternall and religious adoration, which being done vnto the Image (is not as he there telleth them to be excused) by our pretence of carrying your mynd to the Exemplar (or thing signified) for (saith he a little there before) the wiser Papists will answere, that they also exhibite this worship not to the Image of the Crucifixe, but in mind to Christ himselfe. Fulke confesseth, that,Def. of the Engl. Transl c. 3. p. 119. Lutherans haue still Images in their Churches, and they are therein desended by sundry otherFother by answ. to certaine ob∣iect. pa. 83. & 53. Touch∣burne Antid. p 91. Bucer in Cent. Ep. Theo. p. 270. Pet. Mart. & Melanct. in Palmerus de Imag. sect. 374. 476. 471. Protestants. The booke of Reformation in the tyme of King Hen∣ry the eight, which was allowed amongst others, by M.Act. Mon. p. 1472. B. ante med. Latimer and Cranmer, affirmeth,Act. Mon. supra. The worshipping of Images: which article wasAct. Mon. supra. written, and added by the Kings hand. M. Thomas Bilney affirmed, and belieued in plaine termes the adoration of Images. Add thatIn Cent. Exercit. Theol. cent. 1. q 19. p. 45. Brach∣man confesseth, that the Papistes do not adore the Images them∣selues, but their first patternes. And agayne, they teach, that they do not adore the Images, but the things signifyed thereby Concerning the worship due to the sacred name of Ie∣sus, which is the same to the eare, that the Image is to the eye, and being lawfull, proueth the like for Images; the same is appointed and allowed by the IniunctionsArt. 52. made in the tyme of Q. Elizabeth, & it is defended by D.Defence aga. Cart∣wright. tra. 21. c. 7. p. 74. Wright in his Sum∣mons for slepers. p. 30. Whitguife and Leonard Wright. D. Fulke granteth that,Ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 340. Capping or knee∣ling at the name of Iesus, is of it selfe an indifferent thing, and there∣fore may be vsed &c. & that, it may be well vsed in signe of reuerence to his Maiesty. Musculus also sayth,Loc. com. in Ex∣planat. 3. Praecept. p. 59. Thou mayst find those who at the naming of their King do vncouer their heads, or shew some other signe of Reuerence &c. And amongst Christians very many do make mention of God the Father, and of his sonne Iesus Christ &c. without any signe of honour and reuerence. This is playne blockishnes. Caluin cōfesseth that,In Math. 1.23. The Diuine Maiesty of Christ is so to be steemed of vs in this Name, that it may gayne that reuerence with vs, which is due to the One and Eternall God. Concerning the vse of the signe of the Crosse, Luher saith,In Ca∣techismo. When thou risest in the morning, first thinge of all, thou shalt signe
thy selfe with the signe of the holy Crosse, saying, In nomine Patris, & Filij, & Spiritus Sancti. Amen. Other Prot. giue testimony of the Lutherans doctrine herin, saying,Descri∣ptio & e∣fut, caerim. Missae. p. 118. We do not disalow the signe of the holy Crosse, if sometimes without superstition it be free∣ly applyed and vsed in the diuine Offices; yea if our meate and drinke be freely signed: for when we go to bed, or ryse from bed, we signe our selues with the Crosse, according to the Instruction of Luther, and other godly men. M. Parker mentioneth,Against Symboliz. part. 1. c. 2. sec. 30. A Catechisme of Luthe∣ranes, which hath these wordes, Let the signe of the Crosse be made in the forhead and breast of him that is to be baptized. And next after he further sayth, Luther crossed himselfe euery morning, and euery euening, and is neuer seene painted, but praying before a Crucifixe. And the like of Luthers practise is affirmed by ManliusLoc. com. p. 636. Luthers owne scholler. But to looke neerer home, the Com∣munion booke in tyme of K. Edward the 6. (penned by aduise and approbation of Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and other Prot. Deuines of that tyme, and printed Anno 1549.) prescribeth the Priests signingFol. 11. of the Sacrament with the signe of the Crosse, and the Priests like consecrating the131. Fountayne of Baptisme, with the signe of the Crosse. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture, vrged by Protestantes against the lawfull vse of Images, answered. SOme obiect that of Isay,40. 1. to whom will you lyken God, or what similitude will you set vp vnto him? The like may be ob∣iected out of otherIsai. 46.5. Deutr. 14.15.16. Act. 17.29. places. Answ. These places only concerne such Images, as are adored and made for Gods, as may plainly be gathered out of the same places. But for more full answere, obserue that a thing may be painted three wayes: first, to expresse the perfect similitude of the forme & nature of the thing it selfe, and thus only Corporall thinges can be painted, and in this sort to endeauour to paint God, is to make a true Idoll. Secondly, to represent to our sight some history, as God almighty walking in Paradise in the
shape of a man, Adam and Eue naked hyding themselues amongst the trees, and the Angell in mans shape with a sword in his hand. And thus to paint, were not to represent the nature of God or the Angell, but only by painting to exhibite that to the eyes, which another by reading the Scri∣pture would exhibite to the eares. Thirdly, a thing may be painted without a history, to expresse the nature of the thing, not by any immediate or proper similitude as it is in it selfe, but by Analogy, or metaphoricall and mysticall sig∣nification; and so we paint Angels as young men, beauti∣full, bare-footed, hauing winges, therby to expresse their strength, agility, & glory: and both these wayes may God & Angels be painted. TheRogers Def. of the Art. 21. p. 126. second obiection is taken out of diuersExod. 20.4.5. Deut. 4.15 6. Le∣uit 6.1. Ps. 96.7. Rom. 1.23. pla∣ces of Scripture, which seeme to forbid the making o any similitude, as, Thou shalt not make any grauen thing, neyther any si∣militude &c. Thou shalt not bow downe to them, neyther serue them. To this S. BedeDe Tem∣plo Salomo∣nis. c 19. answereth, that heerby is as plainly pro∣hibited the making of any Kings Image, or bowing downe therto,Deut. 4.24. Leuit. 26.2. Ps. 96.7. Rom. 1.23.15. Exod. 10.13. num. 26.1. Esa. 41.8. or to his Chayre of Estate, the wordes being gene∣rall, as the making of the Images of Christ and of his Saints, or worshipping them. Secondly, that heereby is only for∣bidden the making & adoring of Idols or false Gods, is ma∣nifest, euen by the place obiected, & the circumstances ther∣of, for it is said immediatly before,Deut. 20.3. Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me: and after, Thou shalt not bow downe to them for I am the Lord thy God: and see the like explication els-where often set downe in the Scriptures. Yea this place is so impertinently vrged, that Caluin as ashamed therof sayth, MoysesIn Exod. 20.4. Edic. Gal. only speaketh of Idols. And a litle after, That which some foolishly haue thought, here to be con∣demned all grauing and Images, needeth no Confutation, seeing Moy∣ses had no other intent, but to exempt the glory of God from all fictions, which tend to corrupt it. And vpon that of Exodus,Exod. 25.18. Thou shalt make two golden Cherubims, he affirmeth,In Exod. 25.18. that they were Images that had wings, which did represent Angels. Some reply vnto this, that both the Iewes and Gen∣tiles did adore their true God in their Images,Calu. Inst l. 1. c. 11. §. 9. 10. not thin∣king
the Images to be Gods, and yet such their worship was forbidden. But the falshood of this reply is sundry wayes discouered: for first the Iewes called their Idols expresly their Gods;Exod. 32.4.8. . Reg 12.28. Iud. 18.24. Ierem. 2.28. Deut. 2.17. and so also did the Gentiles.Dan. 5.4. Sap. 13.10. Secondly, wheras CaluinInst. l. 1. c. 11. §. 9. auoucheth, that the Iewes were not so vnaduised, to forget that it was God by whose handes they had bene brought out of Aegypt: to the contrary it is directly said of them.Deut 31.15.17. Thou hast forsaken God which made thee, and hast for∣gotten the Lord thy Creatour. And elswhere,Ps. 105.19.11. They made a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the grauen thing: they forgot God their Sauiour which had done great thinges in Aegypt: And in ano∣ther place,Hier. 2.5.6. They haue walked after vanity, and they haue not said, where is our Lord that made vs come out of the land of Aegypt. Neither as CaluinInst. l. 1. c. 11 §. 8. further pretendeth, did they make these Images that therby they might know that God was the guide of their Iourney: for if they desired a Corpo∣rall signe, they had already a Cloud, and a Pillar of fyre, which were moe fit to guide them then a Calfe, which of necessi∣ty must be carryed: besydes no cause can be giuen why they rather made a Calfe, then a Sheepe, or other thing, but because they were accustomed to see the great God of the Aegyp∣tians, which was a blackeCicero l. 1. de natura deorum. Aug. l. 18. de Ciu. Dei. c. 5. Calfe with white spots called Apis. And also in vaine had bene that choyce which IosueIosue 24 15. offered the Hebrewes, to serue the Gods which their Fa∣thers serued, or the Gods of the Amorites, or the true God. And Elias3. Reg. 18.21. aing, If the Lord be God, fellow him, if Baal be he, then go afer him therin cleerly opposeth Baal to the true God. And lastly that of Deutronomy,32. 17. They offered vnto Deuils, not to God, to Gods whom they know not, new Gods that came newly vp. So cleere it is, that the Iewes forsooke the true God, and committed Idolatrie in seruing strange Gods. Concerning the Heathens or Gentiles, it is also cer∣taine that they adored in their Images false Gods, for the Prophets labouring to teach, that the Idols of gold and sil∣uer were not God, proued the same because they could not speake,Esa. 46.67. Ps. 113.13.14.15.134.16.17. Abac. 2.19. Bar. 6.7 11.13 14. see &c. which had bene in vaine, if none had belieued the same. And though CaluinInst. l. 1. c. 11 §. 9. Da∣naeus Contro. 7 p. 394. Zuing Resp. ad Vaentin. Tom. 1. fol. 247. and others would persuade vs, that the Heathens were not so blockish,
as to thinke there was no other God but stones, stockes &c. yet it is most manifest, that many of them were so blockish, as that they thought them to haue sense, and lyfe, and to be Gods: wherunto they were moued by the doctrine of the Priestes, by the generall conceipt therof almost through the whole world, and chiefly by the cunning of the Deuill, by whose art the Idols seemed to mooueAug. de doct. Christ l. 3. c. 7. & ep. 49. & in Ps 113. & de Ciuit. l 8. c. 23. Arnobius l. 1. contra gentes. speake, and prophesy. Neither maketh it against this, that they changed their Idols, or made new ones, or made many for one God: for with the like ignorance, that they thought them Gods, with the like they thought they might make and destroy them at their pleasure: and hauing some in heauen, and some in Earth, they thought it no absurdity, that an heauenly God as Iupi∣ter, Apollo &c. might haue many lesser Gods of the same na∣ture in Earth. Lastly, both IewesExod. 32.6.8. 1. Cor. 10.20. and Gentiles offered Sacrifice vnto their Idols, which is a worship only proper to the true God. Thirdly the fact of Ezechias4. Reg. 10.4. pulling downe the brasen Serpent, and breaking it in peeces, is obiected against Images, which yet was a figure of Christ. The Answere is, The Iewes offered incense to it as to God, for with them it was not lawfull for any to incense, but the Priest, which see∣meth to argue, that they sacrificed vnto it as to God, and so committed3 Reg. 11.32.33.2. Paral. 26.16.13. Idolatry A fourth obiection is, An Image hath neyther life, sense, nor reason, therefore it is not capable of honour. I answere, This only proueth that in regard of it selfe, it deserueth no honour, but it proueth not the same in regard of the rela∣tion which it hath to the Exemplar. Fiftly, some Images of Christ, or our Lady, are more for example frequented and reuerenced, then others of the same in other places, therefore this argueth, that we place some diuinity and vertue in the sayd Images. I answere, the more frequēting or reuerencing of some Images then others, is not by reason of any supposed vertue, but eyther because God worketh miracles by some, and not by others (which also is the cause why we rather pray to one Saint then an∣other) or else by reason of the sanctity of the maker of some;
for some are thought to haue been made by ourEua∣grius l. 4. c. 26. Meta∣phraces in vita Constan∣tini Magni. Damascen l. 1. de Imagini∣bus. Sauiour, others by anEuodius l. 2. de mira∣culis. Angell, others by S.Theo∣dorus. l. 1. Collectaneo∣rum. Niceph. hist. l. 14. c. 2. Metaphr. in vita S. Lucae. Luke, and otherSee Eu∣seb. hist l. 2. c. 14. Sozom l. 5. c. 20. Da∣mascen l 1. de Imag. Atha∣nas. de Passio∣ne Imaginis Domin. c. 4. holy men: or lastly because some do more perfectly re∣present the Exemplar then others. Many obiect, that in fauour of Images, we take away the second Cōmandement. Answ. Though our in Catechis∣mes, which are made for a briefe memoriall or abstract or our Cristian fayth, we do not set downe all the wordes at large which are in the Byble, as neither do we in sundry other Points of Christian Doctrine; yet hauing them in our Bbles as largely as Prot. haue, if any thing could be produ∣ced from thence, agaynst Images, it were much more for∣cible agaynst vs, then if it were in our Catechismes neuer so often. But besides, this difficulty is further solued thus;Clemens Alex. l. 6. strom. Aug. q. 78. in Exo. Ep. 119. c. 12. Some deuide the Decalogue so, as the Precept against grauen things, and the adoring of any other but one God, is all one Precept; and so all grauen things are not prohibited, but only such are taken for a strange God: and those of this opinion, do make these two, Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wyfe, &, Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours goods, to be distinct Precepts. OthersPhilo l. Decalogo. ant. med. Ioseph. l. 3. Antiq. c. 6. 8. Orig. ho. 8. in Exod. Ambros. & Hier. in c. 6. ad Ephes. make the Precept, Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours wyfe, and his goods, to be all one, and so these de∣uide the first Precept into two, making, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen thing &c. and, Thou shalt not adore them nor worship them to be two distinct Precepts, and these conse∣quently thinke, that the making of Images to adore them for Gods, is only prohibited by the second. Wherfore after what manner soeuer we deuide the Commandments, not the ma∣king or vse of Images, but the making or adoring them for Gods, is heer only prohibited.
CHAP. XVIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Sa∣craments of the New Law conferring grace. Whether the Sacraments of the New Law do truly conferre grace to the worthy receauer, as Gods Instrumentall causes: or that they are only signes, and remembrances of grace receiued by Faith. SECT. I Catholike Doctrine. THE Holy Sacraments being euer estee∣med amōgst the principall meanes wher∣by the merits of Christ are to be applyed vnto vs, and his heauenly Grace to be obtayned to the remission of Sinne, and the gayning of eternall glory: what the Catholike Church in this belieueth, is cleerly set downe by the Councell of Trent in these words:Concil. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 4. If any man shall say, that the Sacraments of the new Law are not necessary vnto Saluation, but superfluous, and that men may obayne of God only by fayth the grace of Iustification without them, or the de∣sire of them, although all of them be not necessary to eery particul man &c.Can. 5. Or that the Sacraments were ordayned for nourishing of fayth alone &c.Can. 6. Or that the Sacraments of the new Law do not
contayne the grace which they signify or do not conferre grace it selfe, to such as put no impediment, as though they were only extenall signes of Grace receyued by fayth, or of Iustice, and certayne badges of Chri∣stian Profession, wherby amongst men the faythfull are distinguished from Infidel. &c.Can. 10. Or if any shall say, that all Christians haue po∣wer in the word, and in administring of the Sacraments &c.Can. 11. Or that in the Ministers, when they do make or giue the Sacraments, In∣tention is not required, at least of doing what the Church doth; let him be accursed. The Councell of Florence speaking of the Sacraments of the new Law, defineh thatConc. Florenc. in Decret. Eu∣genij P. 4. They differ much from the Sacraments of the Old Law: for they did not cause grace, but did fi∣gure the same to be giuen through the Passion of Christ; but these ours do both contayne grace, and giue the same to the worthy receyuers. And the like is taught by the Councell ofCap. 11. Moguntia. And so allBellar. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 3. &c. Rhem. Test. in Act. 21.17. &c. in Rom. 4.11. Catholikes still teach, that the Sacraments instituted by Christ, are true instrumentall causes of his grace, not on∣ly signifying, but truly conferring the same to the worthy receiuer. Pointes Disputable. SomePaludan. & Capreol. in 4. Dist. 1. q. 1. thinke that the Sacramentes produce grace by some qualitie superadded, inherent in them, which some teach to be corporeall, others spirituall.Sotus in 4. Dist. 1. q. 3. Alanus de Sacram. c. 36. Others only by the obedientiall power of the thinges sensible, by which all thinges created may serue God instrumentally for any effect. SomeLedesmus in 4. Dist 1. q. 3. art. 1. Ca∣nus in rele∣ctine de Sa∣cram. and others in 4. Dist. 1 teach that the Sacramentes are only mo∣rall Causes of Iustification:D. Tho. 3. par. q. 61. art. 4. Others more truly, that they are causes physicall. SomeMagist. Sent. in 4. Dist. 1. that the Sacramentes of the old law, Cir∣cumcision excepted, do not iustify ex opere operantis, through the faith and deuotion of the Receiuer. But othersBellar. de effectu Sa∣cram. l. 2. c. 13. more probably teach the contrary. SomeAlex. part. 49. 7. Memb. 7. art. 4. ouauent. Scotus, Gabr. in 4. Dist. 1. that Circumcision did conferre grace ex ope∣re operato. OthersD. Tho. 3. part. q. 70. art. 4. Capreolus, Sotus, edes∣mus, in 4. Dist. 1. deny it, ascribing only that power to the Sacramentes of the New Law: and this is much more probable.
SomeOcham. Maior. Ri∣char. in 4. Dist. 1. that a Sacrament cannot properly be defy∣ned, seeing it is either, aggregatum quoddam per accidens, seeing it consisteth of thinges and wordes; or Ens rationis, if it be formally taken.Scotus Dist. 1. q. 1. Sotus. Dist. 1. q. 1. art. 2. Others, that a Sacrament is Ens rationis, & vnum per se, and therfore may be defyned imperfectly.Bellar. de Sacram. in ge∣nere. l. 1. c. 10. Others, that if a Sacrament be taken morally, it may pro∣perly be defyned, but not if it be taken physically. SomeDom. Soto. in 4. Dist. 1. q. 1. ar. 1. Caiet. in 3. part. q. 60. art. 6. teach, that in the Sacraments the thing sen∣sible, is the matter, whether it be thinges wordes, or both, and the signification to be the forme. Others,D. Tho. 3. p. q. 60. art. 6. that the Sacrament consisteth of things as the matter, and the wor∣des as the forme. Others,Durand. in 4. Dist. 1 q. 3. A∣drian. q. 2. de Bap. that not all the Sacramentes, but only some do consist of thinges, and wordes. Others,Alex. 4. part. sum; q. 8. Mem. 3. art. 1. 3. that all the Sacraments of the new Law, do consist of thinges and wordes. SomeDuran. in 4. Dist. 4. q. 1. thinke that the Character imprinted by som Sacramentes is not any reall thing distinct from the Soule.Scotus dist. 6 q 9. Others that it is a reall relation:Bellar. de effectu Sa∣cram. l. 2. c. 19. others an absolute quality, which some make to be inherent in the vnderstan∣ding, others in the will, and others in the substance of the Soule. But these are all points that may be disputed by De∣uines, not being defined by the Church. Protestant Vntruthes. Luther falsly sayth of Catholikes,Serm. de Baptismo. They are inforced to ascribe so much to the Sacraments of the New Law, that they decree them to profit euen those who are in mortall sinnes, neyther fayth or grace to be requisite, but to suffice, not to haue put a barre, that is, an actuall purpose not to sinne againe &c. They say they profit the wicked and vnbelieuers, so that they put not the barre, as though in∣credulity were not of all things the most obstinate, and deadly barre of grace. But all this is meer forgery. He also accusethIbid. the Maister of the Sentences & School∣men, for that they write only of the matter and forme of Sacra∣ments &c. but leaue vntouched the spirit, lyfe, and vse, that is, the truth of Gods promise and our fayth: But he, and they l. 4. Dist. 4. & 9. treat at large of the fayth of the receyuer, and true vse of the Sacraments.
HeIn as∣sert. 1. Arti∣culi. maketh Scotus the first author of that opinion, that the Sacramentes do conferre grace to him that putteth not a barre. But the same was formerly taught byC. Ma∣iores de Bap∣tismo. Innocentius 3. & S.Ep. 23. ad Bonif. Austine. And he chargethIn as∣sert. 1. Arti∣culi. the Scotistes, not to require in the vse of the Sacramentes, fayth, good purpose, or good motion of the hart. But the contrary appeareth in their owneScotus in 4. Dist. 4. q. 2. & q. 5. & dist. 17. q. 1. writings. Heshusius chargeth the Fathers of the Councell of Trent to teach that,De er∣roribus Pontific. lo 15. de Sacra∣mentis. Without externall Papisticall Ceremo∣nies, neither the truth, nor dignity, nor efficacy of the Sacramentes to consist. But no such thing is to be seene in theSee Sess. 7. Can. 13. Councell. Protestant Doctrine. Prot.Willet Synop. p. 418. Muscu∣lus loc. Com. c. de fignis Sacram. p. 299. teach that the Sacramentes of the new Te∣stament are no better in efficacy then were the Sacramentes of the old. And that,Willet. Synop. p. 145. they be only Seales of Righteousnes, and not workes of Grace. In so much that Caluin sayth,Instit. l. 4. c. 14. §. 23. What∣soeuer he hath giuen vs in the Sacramentes, the same the Iewes in tymes past receyued in theirs. What vertue ours haue, that also they perceyued in theirs. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. D. Whitaker confesseth that,Cont. Duraeum l. 10. p. 883. Sarer. loc. com o 1. de Bap fol. 232. The Manichees were accustomed to deny, sinnes to be forgiuen and grace conferred in Bap∣tisme. For which also they are condemned by S.a. 46. Austine Petilian the Donatist taught that, The Baptisme of Iohn and Christ. were all one, for which he is impugned by SaintL. 2. cont lit. Pe∣til. c. 32. 34. 37. Austine. The MessaliansDa∣mascen. de Haeresibus. also were condemned for de∣nying to the Sacraments the power of Sanctificatiō, which they ascribed to prayer. TheGuido de Armeijs. Error 16. Armenians taught, That the Sacraments of the new Law do not conferre grace, and the self∣same you haue lately heard to be taught by Protestants. Protestant Errours. The very word Sacrament is so hatefull to Prot. that
Zwinglius sayth.L. de vera & fal. Relig. c. de Sacram. I greatly wish that word Sacrament had neuer bene receyued by the Germans. And the like dislike therof shew sundry otherLuther. l. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de matrim. Caro∣lostad. l. de Imaginibus & Sacram. Caluin. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 14. §. 13. Protestants. In so much that Me∣lancthon in his Common Places intituleth the Chapter wherin he treateth of Sacramentes, De signis, Of signes. We (sayth he) call signes, that which others call Sacramentes. CaluinInstit. l. 4. c 14. §. 4. Beza in sum∣ma Doct. de re Sacra∣mentaria. is of opinion that the wordes which with the Element maketh a Sacrament, are not any wordes of Consecration, but the Ministers Sermon preached aloud. I will not say (saithL. de Missa priuata. & vnct. Sa∣cerd. Luther) what the Papistes say, that none of the Angels, nor Mary herselfe can consecrate: But I say to the con∣trary, that if the Deuill himselfe should come, and I afterwards know the Deuill so to haue crept into the Office of the Pastor of the Church, in the shape of man, to be called to preach, and publickly in the Church to haue taught, baptized, celebrated Masse, and absolued from sinnes & to haue performed that Office according to the Institution of Christ, then we should be inforced to confesse, that the Sacramentes were not therfore without efficacy, but that we receyued true Baptisme, true Gospell, true absolution, true Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ. He also teacheth in sundry places that,L. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de or∣dine. In Ar∣ticulis à Leo∣ne 10. dam. art. 13. l. ad Pragenses de instituendis Ministris Ecclesiae. All Chri∣stians are Priests: and produceth seuerall ExamplesL. de Abroganda Missa. out of Scripture, to proue that women may preach. A great friend to women will Luther euer be. And so likewise to the De∣uill, whom he acknowledgeth may be a Minister, with power to preach, baptize, say Masse, consecrate the Sacra∣ment &c. Luther,De Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Bap. & art. 12. à eone. damn. Calu. in Antidot Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 12. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 141. 154. 1045. Caluin, and other Prot. teach, That in∣tention in the Minister is not required in the administra∣tion of Sacraments, but that the same are effectuall though they be not giuen in the name of God, or seriously, but on∣ly in iest, or skorne. Whitaker auoucheth that,Cont. Dur. li. 8. sect. 18. Paul expresly teacheth, the Israelites to haue had indeed the selfesame Sacraments, which Christ hath giuen to vs. Wherfore according to Prot. the very Iewes inioyed the selfesame Sacramentes, which Christians do.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures that the Sacraments of the New Law do truly conferre grace to the worthy receauer. THe efficacy which Catholikes ascribe to the holy Sa∣craments may first be proued by the differēce betwixt S. Iohn Baptists & Christs baptisme. S. Iohn saith,Mar. 1.8. Mat. 3.11. I haue baptized you with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost; heer so great difference is put betweene the efficacy of Iohn, and Christes Baptisme, as betweene water and the Spirit: But the Baptisme of Iohn was sufficient to stirre vp & nou∣rish fayth, no lesse then the Baptisme of Christ, therin be∣ing externall ablution and the word of promise, for he prea∣ched not only the Baptisme of Pennance vntoLuc 3.3. remission of sin∣nes, but euen theAct. 19.4. fayth in Christ Iesus. Caluin heereCalu. in Mat. c. 3. replyeth, that the difference of these two Baptsmes consisted only in this, that Iohn was the Mi∣nister of the externall Ceremony, and Christ the Author of the internall Sanctification: but this is easily confuted, be∣cause had it bene so, Iohn neyther could, nor ought to haue said, I baptize &c. he will baptize &c. as before; but should haue sayd, I baptize, he doth baptize: neither would Saint Paul haue cōmanded those to be baptized with the Baptisme of Christ, whom he had already heard, to haue beeneAct. 19.3. 8.16.17. baptized be∣fore, with the Baptisme of Iohn. Neyther will it suffice to answere withIn Act. 29. Caluin, that they were not baptized againe, but only visibly receaued the guift of the holy Ghost; but against this the text is ouer plaine; Hearing these things, they were baptized in the name of our Lord Iesus. And when Paul had imposed hands on them, the holy Ghost came vpon them, and they spake with tongues and prophesyed. Agreable to this, whenAct. 8.12.15.16.17. S. Philip had baptized many in Samaria, S. Peter and S. Iohn comming thither afterwardes prayed for them that they might receiue the holy Ghost, for he was not yet come vpon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of
our Lord Iesus. Then did they impose their handes vpon them and they receyued the holy Ghost. So different thinges are Baptisme, & the receiuing of the holy Ghost by the imposition of hands. Secondly Christ sayth,Mar. 16.16. he that belieueth and is baptized shalbe saued. Here saluation which is not wrought but by Iustification, and washing away of sinne, is attributed alike to Baptisme, and to fayth. To reply, that Baptisme saueth, by stirring vp faith, is insufficient; for first faith goeth before, wheras it is absurd to place the effect before the cause, euen as it were absurd to say, he that is cured, and taketh phisick &c. and so, seeing to heare the word of God, is truly the cause of fayth, therfore the same in the Scriptures is set be∣fore, as,Io. 5.24. he which heareth my word, and belieueth him that sent me, hath lyfe euerlasting: See the likeIo. 6.45. elswhere. Besides Christ here ioyneth not the Sacrament with preaching, as Protestants do, but with fayth, which is the effect of prea∣ching: wherfore as fayth according to Protestantes doth im∣mediatly iustify, by applying the merits of Christ, not by stirring vp any other cause, why may not the same be said of Baptisme, seeing Christ alike attributeth Saluation to both? Thirdly our Sauiour sayth,Io. 3.3.5. Vnles a man be borne a∣gaine of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. Here Baptisme is plainly made the cause of our new birth, which cannot be said, by stirring vp faith, for then it had bene false to haue said, Vnles a man be borne againe of water &c. seeing that fayth, which according to them only iustifyeth, is otherwise sufficiently without Baptisme stirred vp. Caluin here againeIn Com∣ment. huius loci. & l. 4. Instit. c. 16. §. 25. answereth, that it is not spoken of the Sa∣crament of Baptisme, but only of internall renouation, and so the sense to be, Vnles a man be borne againe of water, that is, of the holy Ghost, who clenseth like water. But this is Idle, for if it were lawfull thus to peruert the Scriptures, we might easily take away not only Baptisme, but all other Misteries. Secondly, water here is placed before the holy Ghost, wheras first to place the Exposition, and after the thing to be expounded, is most absurd. Thirdly the Ancient Fathers do generallyCypr. l. 3. ad Quirin. Ambr. l. de Spir. S. c. 11. Hieron. in c. 16. Ezech. Aug. Chry∣sost. & Cyril. in Comment. huius loci. Basil. Nazian. Nyssen. Ser. de Bap. expound this place of the Sacra∣ment of Baptisme.
Fourthly, of Baptisme it is sayd,Act. 2.38 & Act. 22.7. Do pennance, and be euery one of you baptized in the name of Iesus-Christ for remission of your sinnes.Tit. 3 5. He hath saued vs by the lauer of Regeneration,Ephes. 5.26. & 1 Pet. 3.21. clensing her (viz. the Church) with the lauer of water in the word. In which places is taught, that by Baptisme a man hath his sinnes remitted, is clensed and saued. Fiftly, of the efficacy of other Sacraments it is sayd.Act 8.18. When Simon had seene that by the imposition of the hands of the Apost∣les, the holy Ghost was giuen &c. and agayne,2. Tim. 1.6. I admonish thee that thou resuscitate the grace of God, which is in thee by the impositiō of my hands: these places cannot but be vnderstood of the Sa∣craments of Confirmation and Orders: And heere the impositions of hands is manifestly made the cause of the giuing of grace & the holy Ghost; neyther can it be sayd, that this they do by stirring vp fayth, for those vpon whome hands were impo∣sed, were already belieuers. SECT. III. Reasons in proofe that the Sacraments do con∣ferre Grace. SEeing the Scriptures do referre the giuing of Grace and remission of sinnes to theLuc. 5.21. Godhead, toLuc. 5.2. Christ, & toIo 3 5. Act. 22.16. Tit. 3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21. Sacraments, yea vnto theIo. 20.23. Ministers therof, none of these therefore is to be excluded, but an explication is to be made, in what fort euery one of these conferreth and worketh the same: and heer an example may be giuen in a mans writing, that as in the action thereof, the person of the writer is the principall Agent, his hand is the Instru∣ment conioyned to his person, and his penne the instrumēt separated from his person, euery one of these working in its kind, without iniury of th'one to th'other: so likewise there is a semblable subordination in the other, the Godhead be∣ing the principall Agent, Christs Humanity & Passion be∣ing likewise the instrumental, conioyned to the God-head, and Sacraments as being the separated instrument. Sundry Prot. writers acknowledge euery one of these in theirChem. Exam part. 2. p. 17. Haf∣fenr. loc. Theol. l. 3. p. 277. Andreas Halthamerus in concilias. locorum pug∣nantium fol. 218. 212.
degree to concurre and worke: the Godhead without disho∣nour to Christs Passion, his Passion without offence to his Godhead, and lastly Sacraments by grace & vertue from the Godhead and Christes Passion, and without dishonour to eyther: and vnderstanding thus Sacraments to serue only as working instruments, there is (asIn Exa. part. 2. p. 21. Chemnitius cōfesseth) reserued to God his owne glory. And this efficacy of inward grace thus attributed to Sacraments, is no more dishonourable to God, then were the like effectes of corporall health referred to the brasenNum. 21.9. Serpent, to theIo. 5.2.3.4. Pond vpon Probatica, to S.Act. 19.12. Paules Napkins, to S.Act. 15.16. Peters shaddow, and our Sa∣uioursMar. 5.28.29. garment; or then was Sampsons strength being referred to theIudic. 16.17. hayres of his head, which as they wereIbid. ver. 19.20. cut off, and didIbid. 22. grow againe, so did his strengthIbid. 19. decrease, andIbid. 22. increase accordingly. And wheras it is commonly affirmed in Catholike boo∣kes & Schooles, that the Sacraments conferre Grace ex opere perato, of the worke wrought, this phrase of speach is vsed for two reasons, asDe effectu Sacram. l. 2. c. 1. Bellarmine obserueth: first therby to si∣gnify that Sacraments are not only signes of Grace, but also instruments instituted to worke and conferre the same. Se∣condly to exclude all efficacy in this behalfe from the party that worketh; whose worke (in distinction from other) is called opus operantis, the worke of him that workteh, intending heeerby, that the efficacy of Sacraments resteth not in the worthines of him that worketh, that is, of him that mini∣streth or receyueth the Sacrament, but, ex opere operato, of the worke wrought in the Sacramentall action it selfe, as it is insti∣tuted by Christ to that end. As for fayth, & repentance,Bellarm. vbi supra. we hould them to be needfull dispositions for our receiuing of the Sacramentall grace, and such as may not be wanting in such as are of discretion, yet it is not our fayth and repen∣tance that worketh the Sacramentall action it selfe, as it is the Institution of Christ. The second reason, is drawne from the nature of signes, which are of two sortes, the one Theoricall, which doth on∣ly represent the obiect, not working any thing immediat∣ly, or by its owne power, as the signe of a Tauerne, or the
like: and another practicall, which worketh immediatly, & by its owne power: so a Seale doth not only represent the Imge, but doth also impresse the same in the waxe. Prote∣stanes make Sacraments only signes of the former kind, af∣firming them not oherwise to iustify, but by stirring vp faith. But the same is disproued euidently, in that they may be righly administredAug. l. 4. Confess. c. 4. & l. de adult. coniu∣gijs c. 26. & 28. Leo Ep. 91. ad Theodo∣rum. Concil. Carthag. 4. Can. 76. A∣rauficanum. 1. Can 12. to Infants, to the deafe, and to the mad, to whom to apply preaching or other signes only to stir vp ayth, were foolish and vayne. Thirdly if the Sacramens be bu bare figures to stir vp fayth, then they might easily haue bene ordayned by men, and haue had the same power; for what skilleth it, to bare signification, who ordayned them, so that they represent the same obiect; by whomsoeuer the signe is placed at the Inne, it representeth alike. The Hebrew words written by God in the Tables, do signify alike with the same written in Hebrew, Greeke, or Latin by men: And the TrumpetsNum. 10.2. commanded by God to be made, do but in the like manner encourage to battayle, as the trumpets of the Heathens. Now it is granted by the Protestants that the Sacraments could not be ordained by man but only by God. Fourthly, Scraments depend of God, not only in their Institution, but also in their vse; for it is God who by his Ministers doth baptize, consecrate, absolue &c. And this truth is generallyChrysost. ho. 83. in Mat. & Aug. Tract. 5. in Ioan. holden, and granted euen by Pro∣testants: But this dependance were not needfull, if they were only bare and not working signes; for that words and other signes may only signify and moue the mynd by repre∣sentation, it is impertinent from whome they proceed, for whether the Mr. or seruant speake the same words, they do alwayes signify the same thing. Fifthly, Sacraments ministred in Greeke or Latin, are of no lesse efficacy then administred in the vulgar, which the party baptized, for example, peraduenture only vnder∣standeth; so Protestants admit Catholike Baptisme, which alwayes is ministred in Latin. But this were false, if they wrought only in māner of a Sermon, which profieth only those who vnderstand it: Besydes the Sacraments only pro∣fit
those who receiue them, though many other present do see and behould the administration thereof, and yet all pre∣sent may be stirred vp to fayth, the promise of God being denounced, and the visible signe put before their eyes; fur∣ther, whilest the Priest sayth, I Baptize thee, according to Prot. he doth not say, I wash away thy sinnes, but I testify to thee, thy sinnes to be forgiuen: Now this testification profiteth not him that is baptized, according to them, but be∣cause in the meane tyme he thinketh and belieueth, that God, through Christ is mercifull vnto him. But all present, may thinke and belieue the same, the promise being gene∣rall: for not therfore is God propitious vnto him that is bap∣tised, according to Protestantes, because he is baptized; but therfore the Testification of Baptisme is true, because God is mercifull vnto him, so that by fayth he apprehend this mercy of God. Lastly if our Sacramentes be but bare signes, then they do not excell nor differ from the Sacramentes of the old law, which in the Scriptures are but little esteemed,1. Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, sayth S. Paul: who also calleth the Old Sacramentes,Galat. 4.9. Weake, and poore Elements. SECT. IV. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures a∣greably with Catholickes in proofe of the Sacraments conferring grace. THe former textes of Scripture produced in proofe that the Sacraments instituted by Christ, do conferre grace, are in like sort interpreted by the Ancient fathers: of Baptis∣me, S. Clemens Romanus writeth thus,Epist. 4. But you will say peraduenture, what doth the Baptisme of water conferre to the wor∣ship of God? First truly because Gods will therein is fullfilled: second∣ly, because the frailty of the former natiuity, which came to you by mā is cut of to one regenerated of water, and borne of God, and so at last you may come to saluation, otherwise, it is impossible: for so the true
Prophet hath witnessed vnto vs with the Sacrament, saying, Verily I say vnto you, vnles a man be borne of liuing water, he shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen: and therfore make hast to these waters, for in these waters there is a certaine mercy of him, who in the beginning was carryed vpon the waters, and he acknowledgeth those who are baptized vnder the Appellation of a threefold Sacrament, and doth deliuer them from punishment to come, offering vp their Soules to God consecrated by Baptisme, as a certaine guift. Fly therfore to these wa∣ters, for they are they alone, which can quench the fury of the fyre to come: to which he which lingreth to come, it is manifest, that the Idoll of Infidelity doth yet remayne in him &c. With S. Clement agreeth Origen, saying,Tract. 7. in Math. Much company followed Iesus vntill he came beyond Iordan, whom he al∣so healed in those coastes of Iudea beyond Iordan, where Baptisme was giuen vnto men, and peraduenture therfore it is said of the Com∣pany following our Lord to the Bapisme of Iordan: and he healed them there, for all are truly saued from all their spirituall infirmities in Bap∣tisme.Ho. 14. in Lucam. Againe, Therfore also Infants are baptized, because by the Sacrament of Baptisme the filthes of Natiuity (or Originall sinne) are put away or clensed, for vnlesse a man be borne againe of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen. The Councell of Nice decreeth thus of Baptisme,L. 3. de Sanct. Bapt. Our Baptisme is not to be considered with the eyes of the body, but with the eyes of the mynd. Doest thou see water? consider the power of God hidden in the waters, for the Ghospell doth teach vs, that we are bapti∣zed in the holy Ghost, and in fyre, for in the faith of the Baptizer, & in the fayth of the Baptized, by a holy Inuocation consider the waters full of sanctification of the Spirit, and of diuine fyre: for he sayth, he shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fyre, therfore he who is baptized descendeth full of sinnes, and obnoxious to the seruitude of Corruption, and he ascendeth freed from this seruitude and sinne, being made a Child of God, and heire of his Grace, and coheire with Chrst hauing put on Christ, as it is written: Whosoeuer you are who are baptized in Christ, you haue put on Christ. S. Hierome for the power of Baptisme writeth thus,Epist 83. ad Ocean. c. 2. All strumpets, and the publicke sinkes of naughty company, impiety against God, incest with Parents and extraordinary carnall sinnes, the nature of either sexe being changed, are purged by the fountayne of
Christ &c. all crymes are pardoned in Baptisme: neither is seuerity to be feared after the Iudges pardon, the Apostle saying,1. Cor. 6.11. And these thinges truly were some of you, but you are washed, but you are sancti∣fied, but you are iustifyed in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the spirit of our God, all sinnes are pardoed well and faithfully. What ef∣ficacy Baptisme hath, and what grace the water sanstifyed in Christ hath, I will teach a little after. S. Gregory affirmeth that,L. 4. mo∣ral. c. 3. Whosoeuer is not loosed by the water of regeneration, he is held bound with the bonds of the first gult. And what with vs auayleth the water of Baptisme the same wrought only fayth amongst the Fathers of the Old Testament, either for their litle ones, or the vertue of Sacrifice for them of ripe age, or the mistery of Circumcision, for them who came of the Stocke of Abraham: for that euery one is conceyued with the sinne of his first Parent, the Prophet testifyeth saying,Ps. 50.7. Behould I am conceiued in iniquityes, and in sinnes hath my mother conceyued me: & because he whom the water of Saluation doth not wash, doth not escape the punishments of originall sinne, truth plainly witnesseth by it self saying, Vnles a man be regenerated of water, and the holy Ghost he shall not haue eternal lyfe. Concerning Confirmation M. Hooker will tell vs that,Eccl. pol. l. 5 sect 66. The Fathers euery where do impute vnto Confirmation the guifte or grace of the holy Ghost, not which mketh vs first Christian men, but when we are made such, assisteth vs in all vertue, armeth vs against temptation and sinne. And in this truth the Fathers are appro∣ued by D. Couell,Modest. Examinat. p. 192. & by the Communion Booke turned into Latin, and printed at London Anno 1574. In so much that the Protestants are herin reprehended by theNichols in his Plea of the Inno∣cent p. 25. Ministers of Lincolne Diocesse in their Abridg∣ment. p. 76. Carthw. in whitg. Def. p 76. Puritans. Concerning the Eucharistes conferring grace, S. Cy∣prian sayth: ButDe coena Domini. since our Lord said: do this in remembrance of me: this is my flesh: this is my bloud: as often as it is done (to wit this mystery) with these words, and in this faith, this supersubstantiall bread, and Cup consecrated, and offered to God by solemne benediction, it auayleth for the lyfe and Saluation of the whole man, being togea∣ther a medicine and a holocaust, to heale our Infirmities, and to purge our iniquities. S. Basil the great speaking of the profit that commeth by often receyuing, sayth:Epist. ad Caesaream Patriciam. To Communicate euery day, and to participate of the holy bread and bloud of Christ, is both amiable &
very profitable, our Lord himselfe manifestly saying: he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, hathIo. 6.54. eternall lyfe; for who doubteth but the often participation of lyfe, is nothing else but to liue many wayes? we therfore Communicate foure tymes euery week, Sunday, Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, and other dayes if there shall hap∣pen any Commemoration of any Saint. The like Efficacy of the Sacrament of Pennance, is taught by sundry Fathers, S. Ephrem sayth,De Poe∣nit. & Con∣uers. Thou art good O Lord and mercifull, and although once by rapine we haue fallen, by pennance we will study to be healed; and if like men we are violently caried away with our perturbations, let vs not to the very end cast down our Courages, but acknowledging him God who hath called vs, and the vocation wherwith we are called, let vs heare him speaking; DoMat. 3.2. Pennance for the kingdome of heauen is at hand. For neither hath he limited his Pennance vpon some sinnes, and not vpon others, but for eue∣ry wound of our sinne, that great Phisitian of our Soules, hath giuen vs this great remedy. S. Chrisostome vseth these words of admiration,Ser. d Poenit. O Pennance which forgiuest sinne God shewing mercy, and openest Pa∣radise, which healest the contrite man, and exhilaratest the heauy harted, callest life from death, restorest our state, renewest honour, giuest confidence, and reformest our strength, and powrest out most boundant grace! O Pennance, what new thing shall I rehearse of thee? all things bound thou loosest, all things loosed thou makest free, thou mitigatest all aduersity, thou healest all contrite things, thou cleerest all confused things, all desperate things thou encouragest! O Pennance more glittering then gold, more bright then the sunne, which sinne doth not ouercome, nor infirmity vanquish, nor desperation blot out, or ex∣tinguish! Pennance refuseth Couetousnes, abhorreth Luxury, dry∣ueth away fury, strengthneth loue, treadeth vnderfoote pride, contey∣neth the tongue, composeth manners, hateth malice, excludeth enuy. O Pennance Mother of mercy, and Mistres of vertues, great are thy workes, wherby thou loosest the guilty, & dost repayre the delinquents, helpest such as be fallen, recreatest such as despayre, by thee Christ hath designed the Kingdome of heauen appropriated for vs, saying; Do pen∣nance, for the Kingdome of heauen is at hand. Pacianus his opinion is that,Ep. 1. ad Simpon. No∣uat. God would neuer threa∣ten the vnrepentant, vnles he meant to pardon the Penitent: thou wilt
say, only God alone can do this, it is true, but what he also doth by his Priests, is his power: for what is that which he sayth vnto the Apo∣stles,Mat. 16.19. What you bind vpon Earth shall be bound also in heauen &c. to what end is this sayd, if it were not lawfull for men to bynd and loose? Or was this only lawfull for the Apostles, therefore for them only it is lawfull to baptize, and to giue the holy Ghost? S. Ambrose teacheth that,Exhort. ad agend. Poenit. A man baptized, if after∣wards he shall become a forsaker and violater of the Sacrament he sin∣neth and driueth God for him: but if he do Pennance from his whole hart, where God seeth, he shallbe saued; as God saw the hart of Da∣uid, when being grieuously reprehended by the Prophet, after Gods ter∣rible Comminations, he cryed out aloud saying, I haue sinned & im∣mediatly he heard, God hath taken away thy sinne: how much do three syllables preuayle, for three syllables are, peccau, but in these three syllables the flame of the Sacrifice of his hart ascended to heauen &c. S. Hierome auoucheth that,Ad c. 14 Ose The Nouatians call theselues pure, when as they are the impurest of all, denying Pennance, whereby sins are cleansed. according to that which is written;Ps. 50.9. Thou shalt wash me, and I shallbe whyter then snow: & as it is in Esay,Esa. 1.16. Wash yee be cleane. But this lauer he calleth not Baptisme but euery Pennance which wasketh away the filth of sins. These & sundry other places of the fathers considered, it was no small impudency for Me∣lancthon to say,In A∣pol. art. 13. Not any one letter can be produced from the ancient writers, which doth helpe the Schoolmen in this matter. But this is contrary to the acknowledgment of his owne Bre∣thren: for Luther saith,L. cont. Cochlaeum. But if there be any of the Fathers who hath thought the Sacraments to iustify by their owne vertue, though it be Austine, as Cochlaeus contendeth, I nothing care, they are the say∣ings of men. Agreably to which writeth Caluin,L. 4. inst. c. 14. sect vlt. Perad∣uenture those immoderate Commendations of the Sacraments, which are read in the Ancient writers, as that of Austine &c hath deceyued these miserable Sophisters. And agayne,Instit. l. 4. c. 15 sec. 7. Chemnit. Exam. part. 1. p. 38. Let it trouble no man that the Ancient Fathers striue to make a difference betweene the one and the other (to wit, the Sacraments of the old Law, and New) their authority ought not to be such as to shake the Infallibili∣ty of Scriptures &c. neyther is that quirck of Austine to be approued, that by the Baptisme of Iohn, sinnes are forgiuen in hope, but by the Ba∣tisme of Christ, sinnes are forgiuen in deed. And whereas S. Au∣stine
speaketh thus cleerly,In Ps. 73. There are some Sacraments gi∣uing Saluation, others promising the Sauiour. The Sacramentes of the New Testament giue Saluation, the Sacraments of the Old Te∣stament promise the Sauiour. This saying is so pregnant against Pot. as that Musculus blusheth not to say,Loc. com p. 299. See Calu. inst. l 4. c. 14. sect. vlt. It was spoken inconsideratly by Austine. Swinglius sayth,De Bap. fol. 701. It was a great error of the old Doctours, in that they supposed the externall water of Baptisme to be of any value, towards the purging of sinne. So con∣fessed are the Fathers. SECT. V. That the learnedst Protestants do, agreably with Catho∣lickes, teach that the Sacraments of the New Law do conferre grace to the worthy Receauer. THis Doctrine of the Efficacy of Sacraments conferring grace is so cleerly conuinced from sacred Scriptures & holy Fathers, that many Prot. subscribe to Catholickes a∣gainst their owne brethren. Husse belieueth, that,In Ps. 117. The Sa∣cramentes of the old law did not iustify &c. but the Sacramentes of the New Law do iustify. Haffenrefferus teacheth that,Loc. Theol. l. 3. p. 315. Baptisme is not only a signe signifying regeneration, but it is the Instrument wherby God con∣ferreth and worketh in vs regeneration. IacobusIn Con∣fut. Disp. Ioan. Iacobi Grinaei. p. 187. Andraeas eui∣dentlyIbid. su∣pra. fine p. 187. 188. & 210. compareth Baptisme to fayth, and referreth to them both alike the force of Iustification, in so much as he reproueth Grinaeus for denying, that the force of Iustification, was to be attributed to Sacramentes. Beza is also charged with errour,Iacobus Andraeas in Epitom. Col∣loq. Montisb, p. 58. prope iit. for that he affirmed it, mere Idolatry to assigne any in∣trinsecall force to Sacramentes: and in like manner he is further reprehended for vnderstanding MetaphoricallyIbid. p. 42. the former Scriptures alleadged concerning Baptisme. Adamus Francisci reprehendeth the Swinglians and Caluinistes, saying of them,In Mar∣garita Theol. loc. 24. de Bapt. pa. 221. They dare impudently write that Baptisme properly speaking is not the lauer of Regeneration, but fi∣guratiuely by a Sacramentall Metonymia. Chemnitius teacheth
expresly that,Examen. Conc. Trid. part. 2. p. 52. Baptisme is a meane or Instrument, by which is made a Communication of Christes benefits, and hauing produ∣ced in proofe therof the sundry textes before alleadged, he sayth of them,Exam. part. 2. p. 20. These be most manifest testimonies, which do ex∣presly attribute efficacy to Sacramentes, and that, they are not to be peruertedIb. prope fin. by tropes from the naturall sense, which the significa∣tion of the wordes doth affoard. And he further explaineth this truth, saying,Exam. part. 2. p. 17. Those thinges that are necessary to Saluation, are to be distinguished, as Christ meriting the Father Lord (or giuer,) the instruments, or Sacramentes &c. by which the holy Ghost doth of∣fer and apply those benefits of the New Testament &c. Euery one of these in their manner and degree, are ordained for our saluation &c. It doth not follow, The Sacramentes are necessary to saluation, therfore not Christ alone by his merit hath gained it for vs. The like Ex∣planation is made by Haffenrefferus, teaching thatLoc. Theol. l. 3. p. 277. We are saued by Christes merit, we are saued by the Sacramentes, we are saued by fayth, a peculiar respect being reserued for euery one. Which is directly our Catholicke fayth. In like manner Benedict Morgensterne not only af∣firmeth that,In Tra. de Ecclesia p 74. paulo ante med. Baptisme is not only the Seale of Grace and Iu∣stification, but also doth regenerate. But he reprouethIb. Ini∣tio. as well Caluin for his contrary doctrine, as also Vrsinus, for affir∣ming the aforesaid textes of Scripture to be improperIb. p. 73. or figuratiue. Luther expresly teacheth that,In Ser∣monibus Conuiualibus, titulo de Sa∣cramento Altaris. The Sacramentes of the New Law are not only bare signes, such as were in the Old Testa∣ment, but they worke remission of sinnes, Iustice and saluation in them who vse them with true fayth. Againe,Ep. Cont Regem Angliae. The Swermery Sacra∣mentaries are to be detested, who esteeme the Sacraments for externall signes, wherwith Christians are marked, as sheepe with red roddle. But to omit certaineSee Philip. Mar∣bachius in Disp. Theol. de sacr. Bap. Sacram. sect. 76. 77. 87. 96. see Lobechius Disp. Theol. 1. p. 22. & Disp. 15 p. 331. Schlus. in Theol. Caluin. l. 1. f. 58. Amandus Polanus in Partit. Theol. l. 1 pag. selb. 239. Calu. Instit. c. 12. de coena Domini. others, and to come vnto some of our owne writers at home, one of them doubteth not to reproue his Puritane Brethren for extenuating the force of Baptisme,The book intituled Quarimonia Eccle∣siae. p. 79. Our New Reformers make no great recko∣ning of Baptisme, and in that point from their Brethren the Anabap∣tistes
are wont to differ, though more fearfully, and more diffidently. D. Bilson also teacheth that,In his true diffe∣rence bet∣wene Chri∣stian sub∣iects. part. 4. p. 539. Christ hath annexed Grace to his Sacramentes, and power to his creatures after an vnspeakable manner, and he dislikethIbid. p. 591. them who affirme and defend, that the Sacramentes do only signify, and not exhibite grace: affir∣ming of Children that,Ib. p. 368. post med they are new borne of water and the holy Ghost. M. Hooker also is so full and plaineIn his Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sec. 57 p. 127. 128. & p. 132. in this question, that he is therfore reproued by a lateSee the Chr. letter to the Reue∣rend man M. Rich. Hook. p. 27. writer. I omit D. WhitguitDefence. p. 527. and M.Ibid. p. 532. Cartwright. M. D. Whitaker doubteth not to say,Cont. Camp. rat. 8. That Bap∣tisme is the conduit of Grace, it deriueth Christes merits vnto vs: neither doth it only signify saluation but doth also performe and bring the same: Yea he alloweth hereinCont. Duraeum l. 8. p. 664. Alani sententiam, the o∣pinion of D. Allen, affirmingIb, with him that, God doth worke grace in the soule of mn by his Sacraments, as by an Instrumentall cause and no lesse truly then a man is sayd to write by his penne. Which Example for comparison of writing with the penne, is in M. Parkins iudgment so pregnant for Catholikes, and so di∣rectly against the Protestants, thatIn his reformed Cath. p. 292. 293. he to that end men∣tioneth and reiecteh the same. D. Couell writeth thus Ca∣tholikely,Defence of M. Hook. art. 14. p. 96. That sauing grace which Christ originally is, or hath for the generall good of his owne Church, by Sacraments he seuerally deriueth vnto euery member thereof &c. Now, Agent causes we know are of two sorts, the Principall, which worketh by vertue of his forme, as fire maketh hoa, and thus nothing can cause grace but God himself: the Instrumentall which worketh, not as the other &c. but only by that motion which it hath from the principall and first Agent; thus do Sa∣craments worke. And somwhat after he therfore saith,P 98. For God doth iustfy by the Sacramens. And yet further,P. 99. Sacramēts passiuely may by the worke done affoard Grace, for in that iustification and meanes of righteousnes, whereof man is made partaker by the Sa∣craments, many things do concurre: first on Gods behalfe, a will, that we should vse those sensible Elements: on Christes behalfe, his Passion, from which the Sacraments haue their vertue &c. In respect of the Sa∣crment it selfe, the externall action which aryseth out of the fit appli∣cation of the matter and form of Sacraments: Now, that which in all this actually and Instrumentally bringeth Grace is the externall action, which is commonly called the Sacrament. No Catholike writeth
more plainly for the Sacraments conferring Grace, then D. Couell. Lobechius a Lutheran Doctour and Professour of Di∣uinity, is so confident in this truth, as that he explayneth the matter, and answereth the Zwinglians Obiections,Disp. Theol. &c. p. 331. 332. The obiections made by Zwinglians(sayth he) are easily answered: If the Sacraments (say they) do conferre grace, and apply the promise of gra∣ce, & saue, then they shalbe made equall with the holy Ghost, and with the merit of Christ &c. I answere: The efficient cause of Saluation is only God, the materiall cause is only Christ &c. The Instrumentall causes by which God the Father doth cōmunicate his grace to the fayth∣full are the Sacramentes &c. therefore there is a double agent cause &c. the principall and instrumentall. SECT. VI. Obiections from Scripture, in proofe that the Sacraments do not conferre Grace, answered. LVtherIn Baby∣lon. c. de Bap. & in assert. art. 1. obiecteth these words of Christ,Mar. 16.16. He that belieueth and is baptized, shalbe saued, but he that belieueth not shalbe condemned: From whence he argueth first thus, he that belieueth and is baptized is saued, he that belieueth not, is damned, though he be baptized: therefore not Baptisme, but only fayth saueth. Againe, Christ sayd, He that belieueth not, shalbe condemned, but he sayd not, he that is not baptized shalbe condemned; therefore Baptisme is not necessary to Iustification. Answ. The first Consequence is false, for from that Antecedent, is only truly inferred, that therefore, not only Baptisme saueth; for by the lyke reason I might con∣clude, that S. Paul affirming.1. Cor. 23.1. Fayth without Charity not to profit, therfore fayth nothing profiteth. To the second, Christ sayd not, He that is not baptized shallbe condemned, not that this is not most true, when it is the parties fault that he is not baptized, seeing the same Christ sayd,Io. 3.5. Vnlesse one be borne agayne of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen: but because it was not needfull to say it,
it being of it selfe vnderstood by those other wordes, He that belieueth not, shalbe condemned: for he that belieueth not, consequently will not be baptized, and although he would, yet it would not profit him. Now in the affirma∣tion it is requisite to add baptisme to fayth, because not eue∣ry one who belieueth is baptized. Argumentes drawne thus from genus to species, are of force negatiuely, as, He is not a li∣uing creature, Ergo, not a man: but not affirmatiuely: It is a liuing creature, Ergo, a man. Some obiect all suchHabac. 2. Rom. 1. Heb. 10. Rom. 4. & 10. textes of Scriptures as affirme, that a man is iustifyed by fayth, therfore (say Prot.) he is not iustifyed by the Sacramentes. Answ. No texte affirmeth that a man is iustifyed only by faith, and therfore there may be place left also for the Sacramentes to iustify. For other∣wise God and Christes merits should also be excluded from the working of Iustification. Wherfore as Iustification is as∣cribed to fayth, so also is it often ascribed to the Sacramentes, as I haue formerlySee next before sect. 2. proued. Zuinglius vrgeth those wordes,Luc. 5.21. Who can forgiue sin∣nes but only God? The Pharisees (saythL. de vera & falsa Relig. Zwinglius) vnderstood that God only, not the Sacramentes, cold iustify: according to that,Isa. 43.25. I am he that blots out iniquities. Answ. It seemes Zwinglius desireth rather to belieue the Pharisees, then Christ our Sa∣uiour: for if the Pharisees said, who can forgiue sinnes but only God? Christ also in answere therto said, but that you may know that the sonne of man hath power in Earth to forgiue sinnes, he said vnto the Paralyticke, take vp thy bed. And so also he said vnto men.Io. 20.23. Whose sinnes you shall forgiue, they are forgiuen them, The wordes of Esay are vnderstood of him, who by his owne proper authority doth forgiue sinnes, who is only God.
CHAP. XIX. The true state of the Question, concerning the number of the Sacramentes. Whether there be seauen Sacramentes instituted by Christ our Sauiour: to wit, Baptisme, Confirmation, Eucha∣rist, Pennance, Extreme Vnction, Order, and Matri∣mony: or only two, Baptisme, and the Lords Supper. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. IF the word Sacrament be distastfull to some Protestantes (as I haue formerlySee be∣fore Chap. 18. sect. 1. shewed) much more will they di∣slike so great a number of them, as the Catholicke Church decreeth in these wordes:Conc. Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 1. If any man shall say, that the Sacramentes of the new Law were not all of them instituted by our Lord Iesus Christ, or that they are more, or fewer then seauen, to wit, Baptisme, Confirmation, Eucharist, Pen∣nance, Extreme Vnction, Order, and Matrimony; or that any of these seauen are not truly and properly Sacramentes, let him be accursed. In the Councell of Florence it is defyned, thatDecret. Eugenij P. 4. &c. Concil. Moguntin. . 11. There are seauen Sacraments of the new Law, to wit, Baptisme, Confirma∣tion, Eucharist, Pennance, Extreme Vnction, Order, and Matri∣mony &c. By Baptisme we are spiritually borne againe; By Confir∣mation
we are increased in Grace, and strengthened in fayth: being borne againe and strengthened, we are nourished by the diuine food of the Eucharist: And if by sinne we incurre the sicknes of the Soule, by Pennance we are spiritually cured: and both spiritually and corporally (as is best for the Soule) by Extreme Vnction: By Order, the Church is gouerned, and spiritually multiplyed: by Matrimony, it is corporally increased. The opinionBellarm. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 24. Rhem. Test. in Gal. 4.3. of Catholickes is, and euer hath bene, that the forenamed 7. Sacramentes, are all of them truly and properly Sacramentes instituted by Christ. Pointes Disputable. All Catholickes holding the Sacrament of Confirma∣tion; SomeS. Bona∣uent. Duran. & Adrian. in 4. Dist. 7. hould, that by Dispensation it may not be administred by a Priest: but othersS. Tho. 3. p. q. 72. ar. 11. more truly teach the contrary. Some,Canus. that the matter therof substantially consisteth in Oyle & Balme, but disiunctiuely, as integrall partes of the matter.Sotus di. 7. q. Vnica. art. 2. Others, that both iointly are of the substance of the matter, and so of necessity of the Sacramēt. OthersCaiet. in 3. p. art. 2. Na∣uar. in Ma∣nuali. c. 22 n. 8. Victor. in sum. de Sa∣cram. q. 41. yet more probably, that in the Oyle consisteth the matter of the substance therof, and so is of necessity of the Sacrament. And that the Balme is only of necessity of Pre∣cept, whether Ecclesiasticall, or from Christ. SomeRichar. Dist. 7. art. 5. q. 1. Palud. q. 4. Siluest. verbo, Confir∣matio. n 3. thinke, that by Precept diuine, or Ecclesia∣sticall, this Sacrament is necessary to Saluation: OthersD Th. 3. p. q. 71. art. 1. & 8. better the contrary, if contempt be wanting. All acknowledge Orders to be a Sacrament: someCanonistae ap. Nauar. in Man. c. 22 n 8. make nine degrees, adding the degree of Bishop, and first Tonsure. OthersTil∣man. l. de Sacram c. 3. add yet Singers. OthersS. h q. 7. art. 2. Alex. 4. part. q. 79. mem. 8. only make seauen, &Altisio∣dor. l. 4. Sum. c de Ord. q 1. Waldens. Tom. 2. de Sacram. c. 116. Caiet. Tom. 1. opusc. Tract. 11. others 8. adding the degree of Bishop. Some,Durand. in 4 Dist. 24. q. 2. See Victoria. q. 226. de Sacram. & Caiet. Tom. 1. Tra 11 of all these degrees thinke only Priesthood to be a Sacrament.Sotus in 4. Dist. 4 q 1. art. 4. Nau. in Man. c. 22 n. 18. Others the 3. greater Orders, excluding the lesser. OthersS. Th. q. 37. art. 2. & l. 4. cont gent. c. 65. S. Bonauent. in 4. Dist. 24. art. 2. q. 4. most probably, thinke the greater and
lesser Orders to be a Sacrament. SomeDurand. in 4. Dist. 24. q. 2. Palud. 19. q. 7. Na∣uar. in Man. c. 22 n 18. most probably thinke, the degree of Bishop to be of it selfe a Sacrament.S. Bo∣nau. Alber∣tus M. Ri∣chard. in 4. Dist. 4. Others thinke that it doth not differ from Priesthood, and other Orders. SomeDom. So∣tus. dist. 4. q. 1. art. 4. thinke that imposition of hands, is only accidentall in the Ordination of Priestes and Deacons; and the giuing of the Instruments, to wit, the Chalice, and the Patten to the Priest, and the Ghospell to the Deacon to be only essentiall: ButHosius in Confss. Polon. c. 50. Pet. Sotus lect. 5. De Sa∣cram. Ordinis. others more probably, that imposition of handes is also matter essentiall to them. All belieuing Matrimony to be a Sacrament, someCanus de locis. l. 8. c. 1. Gul. Pari∣siensis. l de Sacramentis, Tract. de Ma∣trim. c. 9. q. 1. Schoolmen thinke, the matter therof to be the mutuall con∣sent of the parties contracting, expressed by wordes of the tyme present: and the forme to be the wordes of the Priest, wherwith he conioyneth them in Marriage. OthersPalud. in 4. Dist. 26. q. 4 Adrian. in 4. q. 1. Couar∣ruuias in E∣pitome l. 4. Decret. 2. part. c. 1. teach, that the parties contracting, are the matter, and their wordes expressing their consent, the forme. OthersS. Tho. in 4. Dist. 26. q. 2. ar. 1. Dist. 1. Victoria q. 245. de Sac. Sotus Dist. 26 q 2. Art. 3. that the wordes of the parties contracting are to themselues mat∣ter and forme, so that the wordes of the party lastly expres∣sing the consent, are the forme, and the wordes of the first speaker, the matter.Cancuista commu∣niter super Caput, Tua nos. Extra. de sponsalibus. Nauar. in Man. c. 22. n. 20. Others most probably, that the mutuall consent is the matter, and the wordes or signes ex∣pressing the same, the forme. SomeCano∣nista tum Glossa in cap. ex publico. Extra. de Conuers. coniug. Anton. 3 p. tit. 1. c. 21. §. 3. teach that the Pope may dispense in Matri∣mony contracted but not cōsummated:Couarru. in Epit. l. 4. Decret. 2. par. c. 7. n. 13. Others deny it. SomeAlphons. à Castro l. 11. cont. haer. verbo, Nuptiae, haer. 3 Pet. à Soto. lect. 2. de Matrim. teach that Matrimony was a Sacrament in the Old Law, with the Iewes, and so not first instituted, but confirmed by Christ: ButS. Tho. in 4. Dist. 26. q. 2. art. 2. 3. S. Bona. in 4. Dist. 26. art. 2 q 2. Scotus Dist. 26. q. vnica Conclus. 4 others much more truly teach, that it was first instituted by Christ, and doth excell in grace the mariages of the old Law. As touching Extreme Vnction: someTh. Waldens. To. . de Sacram. c. 163. Alph. à Castro. l. de haer. verbo, Extrema Vnctio. thinke, that the Apostles did administer the Sacrament of Extreme Vn∣ction
when they annointed the sick, cured them. Mar. 6. but othersIansen. in c. 6. Mar. Dom. à Soto. Dist. 23. q. 1. art. 1. more probably teach, that this was only a fi∣gure or shadow therof. None of these differences are defy∣ned by the Church. Protestant Vntruthes. Caluin affirmeth, that theInst. l. 4. c. 19. §. 12. Ancient (writers) when they speake properly, do no where mention more then two Sacramentes: but this o be false is cleere by S. CyprianL. 2. Ep. 1. & S. AustineAug. l. 2. cont. Ep. Pe∣til. c. 10. He also auoucheth, thatInst. l. 4. c. 19. § 12. Austine plainly affirmeth that imposition of handes (or Confirmation) is nothing els but prayer. But S. Austine himselfe sayth,L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 104. The Sacrament of Chrisme, in the kind of visible signes, is holy, euen as Baptisme it selfe. Chemnitius teacheth, that,Exam. ad Sess. 4. in fine Disput. de Traditioni∣bus. Siluester inuented the Con∣firmation of Children: But this is no where read of him. And there are DecreesDe Con∣secrat. Dist. 4. Can. in Catechismo. & Can. Non plures. & Dist. 5. Can. 1. 2. &c. of Popes more Ancient then S. Sil∣uester, where not the Sacrament it selfe, but some other Ce∣remonies cōcerning the administration therof, are ordained. Yea ChemnitiusExam. part. 2. p. 198. himselfe deriueth Vnction of Chrisme from Montanus, and addeth, that it was confuted by S. Hierome. But wheras manyEpiph. haer. 48. Euse∣bius Hist. l 4. c. 14. Clem. Alex. strom. 4. Philastrius in Catal. Hier. Ep. ad Mar∣cellam. Aug. haer. 26. Theodoret. lib. 3. de Fab haer. Damasc. l. de 100. haer. Fathers do write a∣gainst the Errors of Montanus, not one of them mentioneth or numbreth this amongst his Errors: neither doth S. Hie∣romeDial. con. Lucifer. in the place obiected confute any such matter. CaluinInst. l. 4. c. 19. §. 24. affirmeth, that Minor Orders are a late In∣uention; no where read of but in the Sorbonistes, and Ca∣nonistes. But before all Sorbonistes and Canonistes, they were mentioned by S. Isidore,Isid. l. 7. Etym. c. 12. Conc Carth 4. a. c. 1. ad 10. er in c. 2 ad Tit & Ep. ad Nepotin. Conc. Laod. c. 24. Cornel. apud Euseb. Hist. l. 6 c. 3. Ignat. Ep. ad ntiochenses. by the 4. Carthage Councell. by S. Hierome, by the Councell of Laodicea, by S. Cornelius, and by S. Ignatius. CaluinInstit l. 4. c. 19. § 34. teacheth, that Matrimony was not houlden for a Sacrament before the tyme of S. Gregory: but this to be false is conuinced by S.L. de bono coniug. c. 18. & l. 1. de nupt. & concupisc. c. 10. Austine. He alsoIust. l. 4. c. 19. § 36. af∣firmeth that we call it impurity and pollution: and Chem∣nitius
Exam. part 2. pag. 1207. in proofe therof alleadgeth Siricius in his Epistle to Himerius: but Siricius only speaketh against Priestes ma∣riages, which he calleth Sacriledge: and in the like sense, that it is said,Apoc. 14. Those are they who with women are not defyled, for they are Virgins, may Mariage be called impurity. CaluinInst. l. 4. c. 19. §. 10. vrgeth from Sigebert, that Extreme Vnction was instituted by Innocentius the first, andExam. part. 2. p. 1135. Chemnitius by Faelix the fourth. But this Faelix liuing aboue an 100. yeares after Innocentius, Chemnitius is answe∣red by Caluin; and as for Sigebert, he relateth onely that which is to be seene inEp. 1. c. 8. Innocentius his Epistle, where he affirmeth it to be a Sacrament, and alledgeth S. Iames in proofe thereof: but there is no intimation of any Institution by Innocentius. Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church hath Decreed, that,Article 25. There are 2. Sacraments ordayned of Christ our Lord in the Ghospell, that is to say, Baptisme and the supper of the Lord. Those 5. common∣ly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Pennance Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme-Vnction, are not to be accounted for Sa∣craments of the Ghospell being such as haue growne partly of the cor∣rupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of lyfe allowed in the Scriptures; but yet haue not like nature of Sacraments, with Baptisme and the Lords Supper, for that they haue not any visible signe, or Ce∣remony ordayned of God. Other Prot. teach that thee are 3. Sa∣craments, others that there are 4. others 7. all which I shall shewSee hereafter sect. 4. heerafter in the Section of Protestants. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. The Sacrament of Confirmation was reiected by theTheodo∣ret. l. 3. de haer. Fab. de Nouato. Nouatians,Conc. Nicen. 1 Can. 31. Arab. Conc. Arlat. 2. Can. 17. Arrians,Optatus l. 1. cont. Par∣men. Donatistes, andGuido Error. 21. Ar∣men. Armenians Holy Chrisme was spitte vpon, and tro∣den vnderfoot by theOptat. l. 2. cont. Parm. Donatistes, and despised by theTheod l. 3. de haer. Fab. Nouatians. The Sacrament of Pennance was denyed by theCyprian l. 4. c 2. Am∣bros. l. 4. de Poen. c. 2. Nouatians. The Sacrament of Extreme Vnction
was reiected by theGuido de haer. Arm. Armenians,Guido de Walden∣sibus. Waldensians, andAntoni∣nus 4. part. sum. tit. 11. c. 7. Albigenses. The Sacrament of holy Orders was denied byRobert. Montensis in append. ad Sigebert, Tandemus, and byPrateo∣lus Verb. Mahomet. Mahomet. And Aeius was condemned by S.Haer. 75. Epiphanius, and S.Haer. 53. Austine for making Priests to be equall in authority by Gods law with Bishops. And the Sacrament of Matrimony was impugned by theAlphon∣sus Zamu∣rensis. c. de Matrimonio. Armenians. All which heresies were condemned by the Ancient Fathers, and writen of in those tymes, and yet are all renewed by the Sectaries of these dayes. Protestant Errours. CaluinInstit. l. 4. c. 19. §. 11. professeth not to esteeme Oyle, whether in Baptisme or Confirmation, so much as a litle dunge. AndExam. part. 2. p. 314. Chemnitius deemeth it not impious for a trauailer, ha∣uing his bootes hardened with heate, to annoynt or grease them with this Chrisme. Luther is in such dislike of Extre∣me vnction, that he opposeth himselfe against S. Iames say∣ing,Lib. de Captiuit. Ba∣Bylon. c. de Extrema Vnctione. If it were Iames the Apostle, I would say it were not law∣full for Apostles by their owne authority to institute a Sacrament &c. for this belongeth to Christ alone; as though S. Iames after the re∣ceyuing of the holy Ghost, should erre in a matter of such waight, or would assume to himself what is proper to Christ alone: but heer you may see Luthers zeale and humility. Caluin,Instit. l. 4. c. 19. §. vlt. Bucer in c. 19. Math. Brent. in Confess. Wittemb. c. de coniugio. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 1249. Melanth. loc. Theol. Tit. de coniugio. Lu∣ther in c. 7. 1. ad Corinth. & l. de causis matrimontalibus. Bucer, Brentius, Chemnitius, and other Prot. teach that it is lawfull in case of Adultery to haue di∣uorce, and the innocent party to marry another. Luther is a man of such indifferency, that,In Genes. c. 16. He will neyther being in Poligamy, nor condemne it: So that if one man haue 4. or 5. wyues at once, Luther will not reproue him for it.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that there are seauen Sacraments instituted by Christ our Sauiour. ALl parts agree, that 3. things are necessary and suffi∣cient to the Essence of a Sacrament. First, that it be an externall and sensible signe: secondly, that it haue a pro∣mise of grace annexed vnto it: and thirdly, a Commande∣ment, or at least an institution of God, whereby it is cōman∣ded or ordained to be administred. Now, that none of these 3. things is wanting to any of the foresayd 7. Sacraments (for defect whereof they should be reiected for Sacraments, as they are by Protestāts) is proued first of Baptisme, where the externall signe is,Ephes. 5.26. the lauer of water; the Commande∣ment,Io. 3.5. vnlesse a man be borne agayne of water &c. & elswhere,Mat. 28.19. Go therefore teach you all nations, baptizing them in the name &c. the promise of grace annexed is,Mar. 16. he that belieueth & is baptized, shalbe saued. In the Eucharist the externall signe is,Mat. 26.26. he tooke bread and blessed, and brake &c. the commandement,1. Cor. 11.25. This do yee; andIo. 6.53. vnles you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man &c. you shall not haue lyfe in you: the promise of grace,Io. 6.52.58. he that eateth this bread shall liue for euer. In Confirmation, the Externall signe is the Imposition of hands,Act. 8.18. And when Simon Magus saw that by the imposition of hands of the Apostles &c. And agayneAct. 8.17. then they viz. Pe∣ter and Iohn) put their hands vpon them &c. the effct or pro∣mise of Grace is, the holy Ghost was giuen; the Commandemēt from these Scriptures is deduced by necessary consequence; for what man can institute a Ceremony, vpon the appli∣cation whereof the Grace of the holy Ghost shall follow? And shall we thinke, that the Apostles would so confi∣dently and so ordinarily haue imposed hands, o communi∣cate therby the Grace of the holy Ghost, vnles God had com∣manded it vnto them? But the Apostles did confidently & ordinarily vse imposition of hands vpon the baptized, to the
end that therby the holy Ghost might come vpon them, ther∣fore it must needs follow, that herin either the Apostles did amisse (which were absurd to say) or else, that they had Commandement from Christ to do what they did, since they knew right well, that no manChem. Exam. part. 2. p. 13. could institute a Ceremony to which the Grace of the holy Ghost should in∣fallibly follow. Now, that this Ceremony of Imposition of handes was ordinary and necessary, is proued by many places of holy Scriptures, as where it is said of S. Peter and S. Iohn thus,Act. 8.15.16.17.18.19. They prayed for them, that they might receiue the holy Ghost, for as yet he was not come vpon any of them, but they were only baptized in the name of our Lord Iesus: then they laid their handes vpon them, and they receiued the holy Ghost. And when Simon saw that by Impo∣sition of handes of the Apostles, the holy Ghost was giuen, he offered them money saying: Giue vnto me also this power, that vpon whomsoeuer I lay handes he may receiue the holy Ghost. Againe,Act. 19.6. when Paul had laid his handes vpon them the holy Ghost came vpon them, and they spake with tongues and prophecyed. And in another place,Heb. 6.2. Not laying againe the foundation of Pennance from dead workes, & of faith towardes God, of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of Imposi∣tion of handes, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of Eternall Iudgment. These places conuince, that by the imposition of handes, the Holy Ghost, and his Grace were giuen by the Apostles. That Pennance is a Sacrament of the New Law truly and properly, it is proued out of these wordes,Io. 20.22.23. As my Father hath sent me, I also do send you, when he had said this, he brea∣thed vpon them and he said to them, Receiue ye the holy Ghoste, whose sinnes you shall forgiue they are forgiuen them, and whose you shall re∣turne, they are retayned. Here we haue an Externall ryte or signe of the Actes of Contrition and Confession, manife∣sted by the Penitent, & the Iudiciall absolution of the Priest, vttered in those wordes, Whose sinnes you shall forgiue. Second∣ly there is a Promise of Grace annexed vno them in these wordes, they are forgiuen them. Thirdly we haue a Comman∣dement in these wordes, as my Father hath sent me, I do also send you. And vnto this Sacramēt the Apostle alludeth saying,2. Cor. 5.18.
God hath giuen vnto vs the ministery of reconciliation &c. That Extreme Vnction is also a Sacrament true and proper, is likewise proued from these wordes of S. Iames,Iac. 5.14. Is any man sicke amongst you? let him bring in the Priestes of the Church, and let them pray ouer him, annoyling him with oyle in the name of our Lord; and the Prayer of fayth shall saue the sicke, & our Lord shall lift him vp, and if he be in sinnes, they shalbe remitted him. Here is first the signe or externall ryte, Is any man sicke amongst you? let him bring in the Priestes of the Church, & let them pray ouer him, annoyling him with oyle in the name of our Lord. Secondly here is a promise of grace. And the prayer of fayth shall saue the sicke, and our Lord shall lift him vp, and if he be in sinnes, they shalbe remitted him. Thirdly the Commandement is euidently ga∣thered out of those generall wordes, Is any man sick? let him &c. neither durst the Apostle so absolutly haue promised so great an effect, as remission of sinnes therby, if he had not re∣ceiued the same of our Sauiour. Whitaker not able to deny, but that S. Iames commā∣ded the sicke to be annoyled, yet he numbreth this Argu∣ment amongst Sophismes:Ad rat. 3 Camp. p. 43. Iames commandeth to annoynt the sicke, therefore the sicke are to be annointed by vs. As though Christians were not bound to obey the Apostles, and their writings. Molinaeus answereth that those wordes,Scuto. part. 2. p. 51. If he be in sinnes, they shalbe forgiuen him, do signify the same, That health shalbe restored him, the sinnes being forgiuen, for which God had affli∣cted him. And he addeth, thatIb. p. 52. Christ, Mat. 9. doth teach vs, That to say to the sicke man, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, and to say aryse and walke, are things equiualent. So that a Minister may say, Aryse and walke, when he declareth remission of sinnes to the people. But what more absurd then to confound remis∣sion of sinnes, with restoring to corporall health, as though these were but all one? That Order is a Sacrament, it is proued first, because here is the externall rite, to wit, imposition of handes,1. Tim. 4.14. with imposition of the handes of Prieshood, or as it is elswhere,2. Tim. 1.6. by the imposition of my handes. Secondly here is a promise of Grace,1. Tim. 4.14. Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which is giuen thee by Pro∣phecy,
with imposition of hands: and elswhere,2. Tim. 1.6. I admonish thee that thou resuscitate the Grace of God, which is in thee by the imposition of my handes. And thirdly here is the Institution or Commandement,Ephes 4.11.12. And he gaue some Apostles, and some Pro∣phets, and other some Euangelistes, and other some Pastors and Doctors &c. But these three in the iudgment of our Aduersaries are sufficient to make a true and proper Sacrament of the New Law. Besides how could the Apostle know, grace to be gi∣uen to Timothy by the imposition of handes, if he had not learned of God, by that signe Grace to be giuen? That Matrimony is also a Sacrament, is proued from those wordes spoken of Matrimony,Eph 5.32. This is a great Sa∣crament: and although Protestantes wrangle vpon the word  in the Originall, yet it importeth as much as Sacra∣mentum doth: & here the externall signe is the visible Con∣tract betwixt the man and woman; for of that the Apostle speaketh in the place cited, according to S HieromeIn hunc locum. & S. Chrysostome. Secondly we haue the Institution, where it is said,Mat. 19.3. That therfore which God hath ioyned togeather, let no man separate. Thirdly the promise of grace is gathered by ne∣cessary inference, for that Matrimony amongst Christians, which is Coniunction of man and woman, doth signify the Coniunction betwixt Christ and his Church, which is by grace and Charity, not only in regard of conformity of na∣ture, but also in spirituall loue: but that cannot be signified vnles besides the ciuill Contract, there were also a spirituall vnion of the mindes of the husband and wyfe. Therfore since Almighty God hath for that end instituted matrimony amongst the faithfull, no doubt he therin conferreth his grace, whithout which the said spirituall vnion cannot be had. And it might be confirmed out of other places of Scri∣pture,1. Tim. 2.15. 1. Cor. 7.14.1. Thess. 4.4. as where it is said, by generation of Children the shalbe saued, if they remayne in fayth and loue, and sanctification with sobrie∣ty. We fynd then in the Scriptures, that all thinges required to a true Sacrament, are also found in these seauen.
SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers agreably with Catholickes be∣lieued, and taught that there were seauen Sacraments of the New Law. COncerning the number of the Sacramentes, it is to be obserued, that the Fathers not foreknowing our pre∣sent Controuersy therof, did but speake of them, as also of other pointes of Faith casually, and as occasion was mini∣stred, and so accordingly S. Austine sometymes mentioneth but one, sometimes two, and sometimesIn ps 103. con. 1. & de Bap. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 20. & Ep. 119. c. 7. more, therfore it is sufficient if the Fathers in this sort do make mention of all our Sacramentes. And yet in our behalfe the Testimony of Luther is very strong, who writing of this point, obiecteth thus,Tom. 2. Wittemb. de Captiuit. Ba∣byl. f. 84. But thou wilt say, what do you answere to Dionysius, who numbreth vp six Sacramentes &c. I answere (sayth Luther) that h alone of the old (writers) is to be had for seauen Sacramentes, al∣though omitting Matrimony he only reciteth six. And the like is confessed of him by D. Humfrey,Iesuit. part. 2. p 519. who affirmeth that S. Dionisius in this respect displeased Luther. A great offence. Exam. part. 2. p. 7.ChemnitiusVpon the folio 187. confesseth out of S. Cyprian, that he numbreth fyue Sacraments. And only euadeth that the Ser∣mon de ablutione pedum, is not S. Cyprians, but forged vnder his name: but certaynly it was the writing of an Ancient Authour, who liued in the tyme of S. Cyprian; the booke de operibus Cardinalibus Christi, whereof this Sermon is a par∣cell, being dedicated to Cornelius B. of Rome, in S. Cy∣prians tyme, and to whome S. Cyprian himselfe wrote, lib. 1. ep. 1. & 3. In so much as Erasmus in his Annotations an∣nexed to Cyprians workes, affirmeth it to beVpon the folio 187. The worke of some learned man of that age; and Fulke acknowledgeth that,Against Rhem. Test. in 1 Cor. 11.20. sect. 6. The Author was not in tyme much inferiour to Cyprian. In like sort where Tertullian casually mentioneth di∣uers of our Sacraments, namely, Baptisme, Extreme-Vn∣ction, Confirmation, Orders, and the Eucharist, saying
most wittilyL. de re∣sur. Caruis. c. 8 The flesh is washed, that the Soule may be clensed, the flesh is anoyled that the Soule may be consecrated, the flesh is signed, that the Soule may be armed, the flesh is couered with imposition of hands, that the Soule may be enlightened with the Spirit, the flesh ea∣teth the body and bloud of Christ, that the soule may be fatned to God. This saying is so displeasing to Prot. that Mr. Parker in great choller demandeth,Ag. Sym∣bol. part. 1. sect. 11. p 77. & part. 2. sect. 10. p. 13. Who can brooke it? S. Austine also teaching,In Euang. Ioan. Tract. 118. Vnlesse the signe of the Crosse be applyed, whether to the forhead of the belieuers (by Confirma∣tion) or to the water wherwith they are regenerated (by Baptisme) or to the Oyle wherwith they are annointed (by Extreme-Vnction) or to the Sacrifice wherwith they are nourished (by the holy Eucharist) none of these are rightly administred. The CenturistsCent. 5. c. 6. Col. 657. Fulke ag. Rhem. Test in 1. Cor. 11.34. and D. Fulke reciting this his saying, do reproue him for the same. And yet the like saying to this of S. Austine, is vsed byIn Math. ho. 55. S. Chrysostome. But more in particular concerning Chrisme or Confir∣mation, sundryMini∣sters of Lin∣colne Dio∣cesse in their Abridgment p. 42. And see Perk. ag. Symbol. p. 1. p. 133. Protestants reproue Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with Error of vsing the Crosse in Confirming those that were baptized. M. Perkins sayth,Vol. 2. p. 653. This Vnction pertayned to Bap∣tisme in the West till aboue 300. yeares after Christ, for then was there another Confirmatory Vnction deuised by Melchiades, or as some say before him by Vrban the first, who liued about Anno 223. S. Cyprian teaching, that,L. 1. ep. 1. It is necessary that he who is bapti∣zed, receiuing Chrisme, should also be annoynted, theCen. 3. col. 115. Cen∣turistes reproue him for the same, affirming further, that in the Ancient tymes, Vnction and imposition of hands followed Bap∣tisme, of which Tertulian &c. which custome Cyprian erroneously ma∣keth necessary.Exam. part. 2. p. 58. Chemnitius also reprehendeth S. Cyhrian for saying of Baptisme and Confirmation, then they may be cleerly sanctifyed, and become the sonnes of God, if they be borne of both Sa∣craments. Mr.Against symbol. p. 133. Parker reproueth S.Ep. ad Iubaianum. Cyprian for ter∣ming the Oyle, Signaculum Dominicum, our Lords Seale. AndExam. part 2. p. 58. 64. 65. Chemnitius chargeth not only S. Cyprian, but also the Laodicean Councell, Melchiades, Cornelius, and Tertulian for the Sacrament of Confirmation: for which also Danaeus reciteth and reiecteth sundry of the Ancient Fathers, in these wordes,Resp. ad tom. 2. Bell, p. 451. 452. Ambrose fauoureth ouer much his Siricius, and the
Roman Bishops, who brought forth that Confirmation. Therefore what &c. Ambrose wrote, it is to be attributed to his Error, or fauour towards the Pope of Rome, not to the truth: Hieromes sentence against the Luciferians corrupteth the place of the 8. Chapter of the Actes: Au∣stine was ouerwhelmed with the Error or shipwracke of his age. So ge∣nerall was this Doctrine in S. Austines age. And others do report, that M.Confer. at Hampt. Court p. 10. 10. Down∣hams Def. l. 4. p. 23. Whitguift shewed at large the Antiquity of Confirmation, as being vsed in the Church euersince the Apostles tymes. And sundry Puritanes chargeAbridg∣ment. p. 41. Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with Errour of vsing the Crosse, in confirming those that were bapti∣zed. Concerning holy Orders, to omit that already it is confessed heere, that S. Cyprian, Tertullian, and S. Denis, did teach them to be truly a Sacrament, numbring them a∣mongst the rest: the very Minores Ordines, inferiour Orders of Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, Exorcistes, Acolytes, are so plainly taught in the Primitiue Church, that D. Field makethOf the Church. l. 5. p. 121. O∣siand. Cent. 1. p 131. no question, but these Minor Orders were very ancient; alledging in proofe thereof, the testimonies of Cyprian, Cornelius and Ignatius; and for the same theCent. 4. Col. 873. 874. Centu∣ristes alledge the Fathers of the fourth Age. ButTom. 6. Wittemb. f. 53. Luther confesseth, that S. Denis (S. Pauls Scholler) affirmeth that there are in the Church, Bishops, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectours, Exor∣cistes &c. That Matrimony is a Sacrament, S. Austine teacheth, that,De nupt. & concup. l. 1. c. 10. A certayne Sacrament of Marriage is commended to the faythfull that are marryed, whereupon the Apostle sayth, Husbands loue your wyues, as Christ loued the Church. This Doctrine is so cleer in S. Austine and others Fathers, that Fulke granteth, that,In Rhem. Test. in Eph. 5.32. sect. 5. Austine and some other of the Ancient Fathers take it, that matrimony is a great Mystery of the Coniunction of Christ, and his Church. In regard of which inseparable Coniunction, Me∣lancthon acknowledgeth; that,In Ep. ad Rom. c. 14. p. 367. The Mileuitane Councell, at which Austine was present &c. decreed concerning diuorce, that the innocent party should not many agayne. Whereof also say the Centuristes,Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 519. &c. 10. Col. 1233. The opinion of Austine is, that it is not lawfull for the Innocent party to marry agayne: for which also he is repre∣hended byExam, part. 2. p. 263. Chemnitius.
Lastly, as touching Exreme Vnction, S. Austine spea∣king of the sicke, sayth,Tom. 9. de Rectitudi∣ne Cath. Con∣uersationis post medium. Let him aske of the Church holy Oyle, wherewith his body may be annoynted, according to the Apostle, Iames 5. And againe,Ser. de temp. 215. & de visit. Insir. l. 2. c. 4 Orig. ho. 2. in Leuit. Prosper. de Praedict. l. 2. c. 29. Let him annoynt his body, that it may be fulfilled in him, which is written, Is any man sicke? let him bring in the Priests, & let thē pray ouer him annointing him with Oyle. S. Innocentius spea∣king of the same wordes of S. Iames sayth,Ep. ad Eugubin. Without doubt it is to be vnderstood of the faythfull being sicke, who may be annoynted with the holy Oyle of Chrisme. Affirming further that, Not only Priestes in their sickes, but also lay persons in theirs, may haue the benefit and vse therof. This is so cleere in Innocētius, that Bale saythPageant of Popes. fol. 26. Of the annoyling of the sicke, Innocentius hath made a Sacrament. Agreably to which writeth Szegedine, thatSpecu∣lum. Pontif. p. 33. Innocentius the first, and Felix the fourth haue made a Sacrament of the annoyling of the sike. But to cleere these good Popes of all Innouaion, the Epistle of S. Iames is for this very cause reiected by Luther in these words, (46) But I say, if in any place it be foolishly written, in this especially &c. But if it were the Epistle of Iames the Apostle, I would say, that it were not lawfull for an Apostle by his owne authority to institute a Sacrament &c. for this belongeth to Christ alone.Tom. 2. Wittem. de Captiu. Babyl. fol. 86. As though an Apostle would assume to himselfe the institution of a Sacrament, or any other authority that were not lawfull. S. Chrisostome sayth of the effect of this Sacrament,L. 3. de Sacerd. they (speaking of Priests) do not only remit sinnes in Baptisme, but afterwards also according to the saying of S. Iames, If any man be sicke, let him bring in the Priests &c. And such is the confessed ancient vse of Extreme Vnction in the Church, that Whitaker answering to the Ancient Fathers obiected testimonies in behalfe thereof, sayth,Cont. Du∣raeum. l. 3. p. 650. I acknowledge the superstitious custome of this Vnction to haue continued longer in the Church then was meet. So confessedly were all the seauen Sa∣craments taught, and belieued by the Ancient Fathers.
SECT. IV. Protestant writers do teach, and confesse the number of sea∣uen Sacraments agreably with Catholikes. Ib. p. 170. 171.COncerning Confirmation the English Communion Booke turned into Latin, & printedAnno Domini 1574. at London by ho∣mas Vautrollerius cum Priuilegio saith, Confirmatio illis adhibetur &c. Confirmation is exhibited vnto them that are baptized, that by Im∣position of hands & prayer they may receiue strēgth and defence against the inuasion of sinne, the world, and the Diuell. This is so cleere, that the Puritanes with much dislike say,Abridg∣ment. p. 76. The Communion booke giueth to Confirmation the definition of a Sacrament. In like man∣ner doth Mr. Hooker acknowledge and affirme, not only the visible signe ofEccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 66. p. 169. laying on of hands hitherto alwayes continued in Con∣firmation but also the guift or grace of the holy Ghost, which armeth vs agayinst Temptation and sin. And aswellIb. pa. 170. See Whi∣teg. defence of the ans∣were to the Admoni∣tion. Tract. 14 p. 582. 583. & 726. 727. he as other Prot. writers do affirme and proue the same from Scriptures. D. Couell sayth,Ag. the Plea of In∣noc. p. 192. In Baptisme we are regenerated to lyfe, but in Confirmation we are strengthened to battaile. As touching Orders, Melancthon defendeth it to be a Sa∣crament properly, saying,Loc. com. Edit. 1536. Maximè autē placet &c. I like very well to haue Orders (as they call it) numbred among the Sacramentes. And in other his Common placesEdit. 1552. 1558. of later Edition, he not only calleth it a Sacrament, but affirmeth further, that it is commanded by the Ghospell, and hath a promise annexed. In like manner dothL. de vera & falsa relig. Zwinglius accompt it for a Sacrament, as also doth M. Hooker, in acknowledging therin not only the visible signe ofEccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 77. p. 230. hand imposing, but also theIbidem. , and guiftIbidem prope init. of the spirit. Bilson also ackow∣ledgeth in like sort, the gracePerp. Go∣uern. p. 109. of the holy Ghost giuen by hands imposing: and alleadgth M. CaluinIb post med. confessing that it is a kind of Sacrament, and saying therof,Caluin. cited Ibid. vide Calu. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 9. sect. 28 31. 32. &c. 14. §.20. Libenter eo loco ha∣beo: I willingly accept it for a Sacrament for there is a Ceremony of hand imposing a sure signe of spirituall Grace; and that I put it not the third in number of Sacramentes, was (sayth he) because it is not
ordinary, nor common to all the faithfull, but a speciall rite for a cer∣taine function. And hence it is, that in his treatise againstIn An∣tidoto Con∣cil. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 1. the Tridentine Councell, he reiected from the number of the 7. Sacramentes, only the other foure.Chro∣nol. c. 8. Clapham al∣leating Austine, Caluin, Bucer, Melancthon, and others, affirmeth it to be a Sacrament. As concerning Extreme Vnction, the Deuines in their Con∣ference at Lipsia, wherat were present (as M. SleydanHistor. l 10. witnesseth) Melancthon, and other learned men of Lipsia and Wittemberge, acknowledge Extreme Vnction to be a Sacra∣ment: In so much as Illyricus doth therfore reproue them, saying,L. de ve∣ris & falsis Adiaphoris. They haue not obscurely restored as Sacramentes, Con∣firmation Order, and Extreme Vnction. Caluin speaking of Ex∣treme Vnction sayth,Com∣ment. in lac. 5. 14. & in Antidot. Conc. Trid. ad Can. 1. de Sacram. in genere. I do truly confesse, that it was vsed for a Sacrament, by the Disciples of Christ, neither do I assent vnto them, who thinke it was a medicine. Againe,De vera Eccles. re∣form p. 330. As we Confesse that Vnction was a Sacrament, which the Apostles ministred for the curing of the sicke, so we deny that it belongeth to vs: Here Caluin confesseth it to be a Sacrament, and that the Apostles in their tyme did minister it, and yet it must not belong to vs Christians, which is most ridiculous. As concerning the Sacrament of Absolution and Pennance, Luther in a Tract. of his published a litle before his death sayth,as∣sert. cont. Louan. As∣sert 35. We willingly acknowledge Pennance with the power of the absoluing keyes to be a Sacrament, for it hath a Promise, and faith of Remission of sinnes from Christ. Also the Apology of the Con∣fession of Augusta saith,Vide Apol. Con∣fess. August. Art. 13. de numero & vsu Sacram. f. 161. It is easy to iudge which be proper∣ly Sacramentes, therfore Baptisme, the supper of our Lord, and Abso∣lution are truly Sacramentes, for these rites haue the Commandement of God, and promise of Grace: and of the same iudgment, expres∣sed also in the very same wordes, is their learned DeuineMarga∣rita Theol. de Sacram. p. 116 117. Iohn Spangeberge. Melancthon also sayth,Loc. com. Edit. 1536. de Sacram. nu∣maro. The Sacrament of Pennance is profitably numbred amongst the Sacra∣mentes. And againe,Ib. de Poenit. It is easy to Iudge which be Sacramen∣tes (namely sayth he) Baptisme, the supper of our Lord, and Abso∣lution. And the same accompt is made aswell by AndreasIn Conc. loc. Script. pugn. n. 191. f. 211. & n. 195. f 119. Athamerus, as also byLoc. com. Tom. 1. de potest. Ec∣clesiae f. 305. Erasmus Sarrerius. As con∣cerning Matrimony, Zwinglius seemethL. de vera & fals. relig. c. de Matri∣monio. to acknow∣ledge
it for a Sacrament: Yet he is not willing that the name Sacrament be ascribed vnto it, because he thinketh the word Marriage, or Wedlocke, is much more excellent, then the word Sacrament. So this carnall Hereticke. Melancthon acknowledgeth, that, MatrimonyIn locis vltimo editis Anno 58. is a signe of a sacred thing, & hath a Commandement from God, and Promise of Grace annexed vnto it: only one thing (sayth he) is wanting vnto it, that it was before Christ. But this in his opinion can be no impediment, who teacheth that the Baptisme of S. Iohn Baptist was most truly a Sa∣crament, and the same with ours, and yet it was before Christ: wherfore as he thinketh Baptisme to be a Sacrament, because it was receiued & confirmed by Christ, by the same reason he may thinke of Marriage. And to conclude, it is manifest that Iohn HusseVide Conc. Con∣stant. Sess. 15. Act. 8. & Act. Mon p. 216. Huss. ad c. 5. Ep. Iac. & the WaldensesL. Luthe∣ri ad Wal∣denses. did acknowledge with vs, all the 7. Sacra∣ments. And Benedict MorgensterneTract. de Ecclesia p. 150. 123. reproueth the Waldenses, for that, sayth he. Cum Papistis septem Sacramenta numerant, with the Papistes they number 7. Sacraments. WiccliffeWic∣clif. in postil∣la super. 15. cap. Marci. & super. 1. Cor. 1. also belieued 7. Sacramentes. And so also, as IllyricusIn adhort. ad Constan. in agnita Christi relig. &c. witnesseth, did the Diuines assembled at the Conference of Lipsia, as also at the Conference of Ratisbone1541., wherat were present Melancthon and Bucer, and also, as M. BezaIn vita Caluini. af∣firmeth, Iohn Caluin; there those Deuines acknowledged 7. Sacraments. In so much that Bucer himselfe said therof,In Actis Colloq. Ra∣tisb. Protestantes non grauatim admiserunt septem Sacramenta, the Protestantes willingly admitted 7. Sacramentes. And Luther him∣selfe confesseth that,De Pote∣state Papae. Of all Ecclesiasticall (men) it is the same Baptisme, the same Church, the same Confirmation, the same word of God, the same Priesthood, the same of Pennance, Vnction, Marriage, and all Sacramentes. Rokizana confidently writeth thus,De Sa∣cramentis in genere. I constantly say, that there are seauen Sacraments of the New Law, Baptisme, Confirmation, Eucharist, Pennance, Extreme Vnction, Order, Matrimony. Perzibrane maketh this Confession of his faith in this point,Cap. 8. I Confesse, that the 7. Sacramentes of the holy Church deliuered by God the Author, and instituted by the Authority of his Apostles, are by all to be faithfully and inuiolably be∣lieued, kept, and reuerenced; which are, sacred Baptisme, Confirmation,
Order &c. But to conclude, you see the whole number of our Sacraments to be taught and belieued by Hussites, Walden∣sians, Wiccliffistes, and Lutherans, and most of them also by the Caluinistes. Only I must wish the Christian Reader to aduertise, that seeing Prot.Luth. l. de notis Eccl. & Confess. August. & Apol. Art. 7. do make a chiefe note of the true Church, to be the consent in the Doctrine of the Sacra∣ments, yet themselues could neuer with Common consent agree of the very number of them; some of them as you haue heard, teaching 2. others 3. others 4. and diuers 7. From which disagreement in a matter of such waight, we may well hope that their Heresies cannot long continue, seeing euery kingdome deuided within it selfe, shalbe destroyed. In so much that Luther himselfe obserueth, that,In ps. 5. See also S. Hilar. l. 7. de Trinit. No heretickes are ouercome by force of crafte, but by mutuall dissension: neither doth Christ fight otherwise with them, then by sending amongst them the spirit of giddines and dissension, as among the Sichimites, Iud. 9. and as among the builders of the Tower of Babel, Gen. 11. and in the New Law amongst Arrians, Donatistes, and Pelagians: to whom I may iustly ioyne Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinistes, Puri∣tanes, and all sorts of Protestantes. SECT. V. Containing certaine Reasons, or Congruences establishing the number of seauen Sacramentes. FOr so much as by the Confession of M. Hooker,Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 57. p. 128. There haue growne in the doctrine concerning Sacramentes, many difficulties for want of distinct explication, what kind, or degree of grace doth belong vnto ech Sacrament, I will therfore explaine the same vnder Example and resemblance of our Corporall life. In Baptisme we areIo 33.5. borne againe, and as1. Pet. 2.2. In∣fants new borne, it being to vs therfore the beginning, or la∣uer of our spirituallTit. 3.5. regeneration: OriginallTrue difference part. 4. p. 308. sinne (as Bilon accoucheth) being not remitted but in Baptisme. Secondly, being heerby thus entred into the Infancy
of our spirituall life, our B. Sauiour did institute Confir∣mation, for our spirituall growth, strengthThe Commu∣nion Booke of Anno 1574. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect 66. and defence: which power, or strengthening, as our Sauiour didLuc 24.49. Act. 1 8. promise, so did he also performe the same; instituting to this end, the visible signe of ImpositionAct. 8.17.18. of handes, and the giuing of the holy Ghost by the same, which guift though it was in the Apostles tymes accompanied with other miracu∣lous guiftes, as of languages &c. yet as M. HookerEccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 66. p. 170. con∣fesseth, and answereth herto, the said miraculous guift, was not the principall effect of the then giuing of the holy Ghost, but only an accident therto, as being a miraculous externall testimony, of the inward grace therby conferred, necessary for the increase of faith in those tymes, as in like manner the vnworthy receiuing1. Cor. 11.39. of the Sacrament, the preachingMar. 16.17.18. of the word, were accompanied with like externall testimony of miracles: and so also were offenders punished and excommunicated, accompanied with visible punishment, as appeareth by example of AnaniasAct. 5.5.10.11. and Saphira, the incestuous1. Cor. 5.4 5. Corinthian, and ElimasAct. 13.6.11. the Magitian: in so much as S. Austine speaking of the Confir∣ming of young Children, sayth,Aug. in Ep. Ioan. tract 6. Is there any of so peruerse a hart, as to deny these Children, on whom we now impose hands, to haue receiued the holy Ghost, because they speake not with tongues? af∣firming elswhere, that the miraculous guift of tongues, ac∣companied the other guift of the holy Ghost,Ibid. for the en∣larging of the Churches first beginning. Thirdly, the Eucharist is our spirituall nourishment & food, wherby is preserued our spirituall life and strength, be∣fore receiued in Baptisme: and so M. Hooker confesseth say∣ing,Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67 p. 173. The grace which we haue by the holy Eucharist, doth not beginne (as Baptisme doth) but continue lyfe: with whom a∣greeth Peter Martyr saying,Loc. com. Engl. part. 4. p. 153. In Baptisme Christ is giuen as a Regenerator, but in the Eucharist he is distributed vnto vs as meat & nourishment. Fourthly, being new borne, growne, and fed, as afore∣said, we are as Souldiars still subiect to a spirituall1. Pet. 2.11. Heb. 10.32. Ephes. 6.11.2. con∣flict with sinne, wherwith if we be wounded, we are not, as before, to be new borne againe, as in Baptisme, but to be
cured: in remedy therfore herof, God had ordained the Sa∣crament of Pennance, giuing our spirituall Phisitians power to cure our hartes: the viible and externall rite wherof, is the iudiciall Absolution, implied in these words,Io. 20.23. Whose sinnes you shall forgiue, and the inuisible grace annexed therto, which is remission of sinnes, in these other words,Ibid. They are forgiuen them. Fiftly, for our more secure departure out of this world, God hath instituted the Sacrament of Extreme Vnction, to preserue vs against all spirituall and sickly dispositions and relickes of sinne: the visible signe wherof is signifyed in these wordes,Iac. 5.14. Is any man sicke? let him bring in the Priestes &c. and let them pray ouer him, anoyling him with oyle; and the inuisible grace in these other wordes,Ibid. And the Lord shall lift him vp, and if he be in sinnes, they shalbe forgiuen him. And whereas the ProtestantsFulk. ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 433. Willet Sy∣nop. p. 549. would vnderstand this, not of any Sacra∣ment, but only of the miraculous cure of those who were annointedMar. 6.13. with oyle and healed; this collusion will not serue the turne, for this first miraculous curing by oyle mentioned in S. Marke, was vsed only as a preparatiue to the other mentioned by S. Iames, which did differ from the said first in many respects. As first we fynd our B. Sauiour in Cure of the diseased, vsed sometimesMar. 7.33.35. Clay, and spitle, and the Apostles, oyle &c. but that he generally appointed any of them for a generall medicine we fynd not. Againe men are no where commanded to seeke for their cure by miracle, but in this place of Iames is a commandement signified; also the guift of Miraculous cure was not common1. Cor. 12.9 10.27.28. to all Priestes or Elders, but to some only; wheras here the Com∣mandement is indefinite, referred indifferently to them all. Fourthly, S. Iames speaketh not of curing the party, but of easing, or lifting him vp in soule. And if this place of S. Iames had concerned a miraculous cure, which the sicke person had bene commanded to seeke for, and promised to obtayne (as the thing here intended is commanded to be sought for, and promised to be giuen,) who then would in those tymes haue dyed, when he might haue obtained his cure by miracle, and bene commanded so to do? And lastly to
omit many other differences, this conferreth Remission of sinnes, which a miraculous cure did not. And hereunto may be added, that the Catholicke Church throughout the world, obserueth this practise of Extreme Vnction, not as inuented by men, but affirmed by Fathers and Protestants, and vsed in all ages without any first Institution therof no∣ted, other then that which was in the Apostles time. A truth so certaine, that Caluin himselfe sayth,Com∣ment. in Iac. 5 17. & in Antid. Conc. Trid. ad Can. 1. de Sacram. in genere. I do truly confesse that it was vsed for a Sacrament by the Disciples of Christ, neither do I assent vnto them who thinke it was a medicine. Now concerning Order and Matrimony, as in our Cor∣porall life and Common wealth, there are required as well parents, who by propagation may continue and increase the same, as also Magistrates, to order and gouerne it: So in our spirituall commonwealth, Matrimony is established answe∣rable to the first, and the Sacrament of Orders for the other: and that as the visible contract betwene man and wyfe, is not only a ciuill and naturall contract, but also an externall Symbole of a sacred thing, namely of the Espousall of Christ with his Church, (in respect wherof he is called the bride-groome, and she the spouse) for example; And,Ose. 2.19.20. I will despouse thee to me for euer; And, I will despouse thee vnto me in Iu∣stice and Iudgment, and in mercy, and in Commiserations, and I will despouse thee to me in faith. And elswhere,2. Cor. 11.2. I haue despoused you to one man, to present you a chast Virgin to Christ. And yet in a third place,Apoc. 29.7. Let vs reioyce and exult, and giue glory to him, be∣cause the Mariage of the Lambe is come, & his wyfe hath prepared her∣selfe. And lastly,Apoc. 21.9. Come (sayth one of the 7. Angels) and I will show thee the Bryde, the wyfe of the Lambe. By all which pla∣ces it appeareth, that marriage conferreth grace, that the par∣ties maried1. Thes. 4.3.4. may know to possesse their vessell in sanstification &c. and being accordinglyEphes. 5.32. called a great Sacrament, or mistery: So also concerning the Sacrament of Orders, there is mentioned the inuisible grace, which is giuen by,2. Tim. 6.1. 1. Tim. 4.14 & with the externall ryte of Imposition of hands. The second reason or congruence, to proue the forsayd number of 7. Sacraments, is drawne om the number of our sinnes and wounds: for Baptisme is against Originall sinne,
Pennance agaynst actuall, Extreme Vnction against the re∣mainders of sinne, Confirmation agaynst infirmity, Eu∣charist against malice, Matrimony against Concupiscence, Order agaynst ignorance. The third Congruence ariseth from the number of ver∣tues. Baptisme answereth to faith, Confirmation to Hope, Eucharist to Charity, Pennance to Iustice, Vnction to For∣titude, Order to Prudence, Matrimony to Temperance. The fourth may be taken from the honour of the sea∣uenth Number vsed in Expiations by Sacrifice, as we may see inExod. 29. Leuit. 4. & 8.13.14.15.16.23 num. 19. Deut. 15. 3. Paral. 29. Iob. vlt. 4. Reg. 5. S. Th. in 4. Dist. 2. q. 1. 3. part. q. 65. art. 1. & cont. Gent. l. 4. c. 58. seuerall places of Scripture, where 7. beastes are offered, or 7. dayes, or 7. tymes sprinkled with bloud &c. Now whereas Chemnitius in answere to these our Cō∣gruences affirmeth, that,Exam. part. 2. p. 16. 17. 18. These are the Demonstrations, these the foundations, wherewith the number of 7. Sacraments was brought into the Church, and receyued by Scholasticall writers: And that in the Old Law there were vertues and sinnes, and a spirituall and corporall lyfe, and therefore by the lyke reason they should haue 7. Sacraments. As also, that in the Scriptures there are seueral numbers renowned and sacred, as 3. 12. &c. And therefore, that hence we may aswell proue that there are 3. 12. or more Sacraments. But all this is but weake, for no Deuine affirmeth, these to be demonstrations or founda∣tions, but only supposing fayth to be congruences. School∣men endeauour to shew, that those things which we be∣lieue, are not repugnant, but conformable to reason. In like sort, The Old Sacraments were not ordaind to perfect mā in a spirituall lyfe, nor for remedy of sinne, Circumcision excepted, but only to represent Christian Mysteries, and certaine other ends: Wheras our Sacraments are instituted in remedy of sinne, and to iustify and perfect man in spirituall life, and therfore these congruences may fitly be applyed to our Sacraments, not to the Old. So also the Congruence from Numbers, is not taken from all numbers whatsoe∣uer, but from such as signify Expiation or Satisfaction for sinne. Now, the number of 7. in Expiations, is so frequent in Scriptures, as that the whole Scripture may be thought
to haue proclaymed and fortould, that a tyme there should be, wherein 7. most excellent, and efficacious remedies of sinne should be giuen by God, for the Expiation, & Purga∣tion of sinne. SECT. VI. Containing certaine Obiections, had from Scriptures against the number of 7. Sacraments; with Answers thereto THe first Oiection is, The Scripture do no where name 7. Sacraments, therefore there are not seauen. Answ. Neyther do the Scriptures name or call Baptisme & the Eu∣charist, Sacraments, which yet are not excluded from being Sacraments. Secondly, if want of naming them in Scripture, were sufficient to abrogate and disallow them, by the same reason might, Trinity, and Vnity, be reiected, for that these names also are no where to be found in Scripture. If reply be made, that for Trinity, and Vnity, and for Baptisme, and the Eucharist, the substance of the things themselues are expressed in Scri∣pture, therefore these are to be admitted; I grant the whole, and consequenly likewise inferre vpon the same ground, that as for the things required to make the other 5. Sacraments, that is, a Visible signe, and Inuisible grace, and a Comman∣dement, these are sufficiently found in Scriptures, as hath beene already proued by Scriptures. In like sort though the Scriptures do not in expresse wordes say, there are 7. Sacra∣ments, yet neither do they say how many bookes there are of Canonicall Scriptures, and yet they say in generall, there are diuine Scriptures: the certayne number whereof is only knowne by the Tradition of the Church, and Generall Councels, not by the Scriptures themselues. And if they questiō must be de nomine, of Names, then who knoweth not, that the name Saccrament is ascribed often in the Scriptures to sundry things, which by the consent of all sydes are not properly Sacraments. So the Intention of calling the Gen∣tiles
to the faith, is calledEph. 1.9. The Sacrament of Gods will: the Incarnation of the sonne of God, is called1. Tim. 3.16. a great Sacrament of piety: & the signe written in the forhead of the woman re∣presenting Babylon, is called,Apoc. 17.7. The Sacrament of the woman. So many wayes is this Obiection answered. The second Obiection vrged byExam. part. 2. Chemnitius, is, that out of Christes syde yssuedIo. 19.34. only bloud & water, wherby is signifyed, that there are but two Sacraments, the Eucharist and Baptisme. I answere, though thereby were onlyChrysost. Cyril. & Theophilact. in hunc lo∣cum. Damasc. l. 4. de fide. c. 10. Aug. l. 2. de Symbolo. c. 6. & Tract. 9. in Ioan. si∣gnifyed these two, as being most principall, yet it doth not follow, that there are no more: So also S. Paul only rec∣konethHebr. 6.2. Baptisme, and the Imposition of hands, viz. Cō∣firmation. Secondly,Cyr. Ca∣tech. 5. Hier. Ep. 83. ad O∣ceanum. others vnderstand by bloud and wa∣ter, Martyrdome and Baptisme, and some, which seemeth also most litterall,Ambr. l. 10. in Luc. c. 105. Leo Ep. 4. Aug. & Beda in c. 19. Ioan. vnderstand by bloud, the price of our Redemp∣tion, and by water, Baptisme. Chemnitius also obiecteth that the Angell callethApoc. 17.5. the Beast which had 7. heads, a Sacrament, thereby signify∣ing the number of 7. Sacraments, to belong to Antichrist. Answ. If the seauen heads of the beast be the 7. Sacraments, then Baptisme and the Eucharist which are two of them, are two heads of the Beast, which any Christian might blush to affirme. Secondly, S. Iohn doth not call the 7. heads 7. Sacraments, but one Sacrament or Mystery: which agreeth better to Luther, who affirmedDe Capt. Babyl. sometymes, that there was but one Sacrament. Thirdly, S. Iohn expoundeth those 7. heads, to be 7. Kings, saying,Apoc. 27.9. The seauen heads, are seauen hilles, vpon which the woman sitteth, & they are 7. Kings. So weake & impertinent are these Obiections from Scripture.
CHAP. XX. The true state of the Question, concerning the necessity of Baptisme. Whether the Sacrament of Baptisme, or the desire thereof, be not absolutly necessary to Saluation, not only because it is commanded by Christ, but because it is a meanes necessary therto: so that children dying without Bap∣tisme, cannot be saued. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. AMONGST the greatest blessings which the Church inioyeth through the merits of Christ, one of the first & chie∣fest is the holy Sacrament of Baptisme: cōcerning which, the Catholike Church teacheth, that,Concil. Trident. Sess. 6. Cap. 4. The Iustification of the wicked &c. after the preaching of the Ghospell cannot be made without the lauer of Regeneration, or the desire ther∣of. And it further decreeth, that,Conc. Trid. Sess. 7. c. 1. If any shall say, that the Baptisme of Iohn, had the same force with the Baptisme of Christ &c.Can. 2. or that true and naturall water is not of the Necessity of Baptisme &c. orCan. 5. that Baptisme is free, that is, not necessary to Saluation,
&c.Can. 15. Or, that Children baptized, because they haue not actuall fayth, are not to be accompted amongst the faythfull, and therefore to be rebaptized when they shall come to the yeares of discretion &c. let him be accursed. In the first Councell of Nice it is decreed, that,L. 3. De∣cret. de S. Baptismate. He that is baptized descendeth guilty of sinnes, and subiect to the seruitude of Corruption; and ascendeth freed from his seruitude & sinne, made the Sonne of God, and the heyre of his grace, coheyre also of Christ, hauing put vpon him Christ himselfe, as it is written,Gal. 3.27. Whosoeuer you are that are baptized in Christ, you haue put on Christ. In the Couucell of Constantinople it is sayd in the Creed,Conc. Constantinop. 2. vniuersale in Symbolo. I be∣lieue one Baptisme to remission of sinnes. In the second Mileuitane Coūcell it is defyned, that,Conc. . Mileuit. cap. 2. Whosoeuer denyeth Children newly borne to be baptized, or say &c. that they contract nothing of Origi∣nall sinne from Adam, which may be clensed with the lauer of regene∣ration &c. Anathema. And the like is taught in sundry otherConc. Constantinen∣se Sess. 12. Fo∣rent. Decret. Eugenij Pa∣pae. Conc. La∣teran. 4 Oe∣cum. cap. 1. Councells. And agreablyBellar. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 4. &c. Rhem. Test. in Ioan. 3.5. all Catholikes now be∣lieue, the necessity of Baptisme to be so great, as that Chil∣dren dying without it cannot be saued, nor others of yea∣res of Discretion without it, or the desire thereof. Pointes Disputable. SomeS. Tho. in q. 5. de malo ar. 1. 2. 3. and he, and o∣thers in 2. Sens. Dist. 33. writers teach, that infants dying without Baptisme are damned with Eternall death, but yet so pu∣nished with the want of the fight of God, as that they suffer no payne internall, nor externall.Pet. Lomb. in 2. l. Sent. Dist. 33. Others thinke, they haue paine internall through the want of eternall happines.Greg. Ariminens. in 2. Sent. Dist 33. q. 2. Driedo in 1. l de gra. & lib. arb. tract. 2. c. 2. Others more seuere, thinke they are tormented with Poena damni, and Poena sensus, that is, with internall payne for want of Beatitude, and externall with fire and other punishments. SomeHugo de S. Victore l. 2. de Sacram. par. 6. c. 2. Magister. l. 4. Sent. Dist. 3. thinke, that the Inuocation of one Diui∣ne person, especially of Christ to be sufficient for Baptisme. But othersSee many Schoolmen in 4. Dist. 5. teach, that in that case Baptisme is to be re∣iterated, eyther absolutly, or conditionally. And this is
more probable. But none of these are defined by the Church. Protestant Vntruthes. All the Godly (saythIn An∣tidoto Conc. Trid. Sess. 7 Can. 13. Caluin) complaine, or at least grone that in Baptisme Chrisme, wxe, tast of salt, finally spittle to be more esteemed, then the lauer of water, wherin the whoe perfection of Baptisme consisteth: But this is so vntrue, that all Catho∣lickes belieue Baptisme with water without these to suffice to Iustification, and that these are only holy Ceremonies, not any thing essentiall: and that water is essentially ne∣cessary. Melancthon affirmeth S. Austine to say,In Apol. art. 2. Sinne it remitted in Baptisme, not that it is not, but that it is not imputed. Here he plainly confesseth sinne to be, that is, to remayne, although it be not imputed. And this opinion so pleased later writers that it is recited al∣so in the Decrees. And the same is auouched also by Luther,Assert. Art. 2. But it pleaseth Heretickes to be lyars and corrupters, for S. Austines owne wordes truly set downe are these,L 1 de Nupt & concup. c. 25. If it be demanded, how this Concupiscence remayneth in the regene∣rate, in whom there is made remission of all sinnes? It is answered, the Concupiscence of the flesh to be forgiuen in Baptisme, not that it is not, but that it is not imputed to sinne. And as for the Decrees, there is not any oneGratia∣nus Dist. 4. de Consecrat. Can. Per Baptismum. which affirmeth sinne, but only Concu∣piscence to remayne after Baptisme. Hence also appeareth Rogers grosse vntruth, affirming that according to our Ca∣tholicke Doctrine,Def. of the Art. art. 27. pa. 168. Baptisme serueth to the putting away of Originall sinne only. But it seemes M. Rogers little knoweth what is Catholicke Doctrine. Protestant Doctrine. Luther teacheth, thatCaptiuit. Babyl. c. de Bap. Baptisme iustifieth none, nor profitteth any but faith vpon the word of Promise, to which Baptisme is added, this doth iustify, and fulfill that which Baptisme signifieth. Zwinglius affirmeth that,Ad vr∣banum Rhe∣gium. de Orig. Pec. By the lauer of Baptisme no sinne at all is taken away. AndSwingl. l. de vera & fal. relig. Bu∣cerus in c. 3. Math. Cal∣uin in Anti∣dot. Concil. Trid. ad Sess. 6. c. 5. & Inst. l. 4. c 16 §. 24. §. 25. he, and others thinke, that it is not necessary to the remission of Originall sinne, or eternall
Saluation. Yea they thinke, the Children of the faithfull without Baptisme to be Saintes, and members of the Church, and though they so dye, yet to be saued. In so much, tha Zwinglius thinketh Baptisme to be onlyDe Bap∣tis. tom. 2. fol. 96. a Ceremony, winch the Church may omit, and duly take away. And according to Whitaker,Controu. 4. q. 7. c. 2. p. 716. It is lawfull to abstaine from Baptisme, so that in this fact there be no Contempt and scandall. And he plainly auoucheth, that,Controu. 1. q 6. c. 8. p. 376. & cont. Dur. fol. 8. sect. 73. The saluation of Infants doth not depend of the Sacraments. They also teach, that there is no diffrence betwene the Baptisme of Iohn, and the Bap∣tisme of Christ. Whitaker saith,Ad rat. 8. Camp. p. 40. It was the same Ceremo∣ny, the same doctrine, the same Grace. BezaL. quaest. & resp. p. 344. Calu. in Luc. 3.3. I say, that indeed it is the same, and one Baptisme ministred first by Iohn, afterwardes by the Commandement of Christ. Wherfore according to Prot. Baptisme is not necessary to saluation, but may be omitted, or taken away, so that it be without Contempt or scandall. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. The Pelagians were condemned by S. Austine,Haer. 88. & cont. Iu∣lian. Pelag. l. 6. c. 7. for teaching that children might haue lyfe euerlasting, although they were not baptized. This Error is so certaine in them, that it is confessed, and reported by the CenturistesCent. 5. Col. 585. andLoc. com fol. 88. Sarcerius. D.Synop. p. 415. Fulk ag. Purgat. p. 35. Willet, Fulke, and many other Prot. denying remission of sinnes and Grace to be giuen by Baptisme, are condemned in the Manichees, by the acknowledgment of D. Whitaker, saying of himselfe and some other Prot.Cont. Dur. l. 10. p. 883. Sarcer. loc. com. To. 1. de bap. fol. 232. We belieue and teach that sinnes are forgiuen, and Grace conferred in Baptisme, which the Manichees were accustomed to deny. S. EpiphaniusHaer. 28. condemneth Cerinthus, for tea∣ching that a man may be saued without Baptisme: which Error wa also maintained bPrateo∣lus verb. Mahomites. Mahomet. The deniall of Exorcisme and Exufflation vsed by Catho∣lickes in Baptisme, and reiected by Prot. was condemned by S. AustineDe Nupt. & Concup. l. 2. c. 29. &c. 17. & cant. Iul. Pe∣ig. l. 6 c. 2. in Iulian the Pelagian. Iulian (sayth he) reprocheth the most ancient Tradition of the Church, wherby children are Exorcized, and breathed vpon. And M. Parker alleadgeth
NazianzenAgainst Symbolyzing. Part. 1. sec 13. p. 152. & Part. 2. sect. 9. p. 132. reporting that, Iulian laught at the sufflations of Baptisme. And yet all Prot. are content to laugh with him, and therfore must be content to be censured with him. Protestants Errours. Beza teacheth that,Ep. sua Theologica 2. Thomae Tilio. If water be wanting and the Bap∣tisme of any one cannot, or ought not with Edfication to be differred, that then in any other liquour he may Baptize, as duly as in water. LutherIn Col∣loquiis Sym∣posiacis c. 17. being asked whether water being wanting, it was lawfull to baptize in milke or beere, answered first, that it was to be referred to Gods Iudgment: but afterwards he added, that whatsoeuer might be called by the name of Bathe, that was fit for Baptisme. Now, no man doubteth, but that there may be bathes of wyne, milke or beere. Pola∣nus teacheth that,In Syl∣log thes. part. 2. p. 556. The externall & sensible matter of Baptis∣me is water, or that wanting, other like liquour. And the same is taught by sundry otherHunnius in disput. 45. p. 273. Vor∣stius in An∣tibel. p. 367. Protestantes. Luther thinketh that,De Capt. Babyl. Tom. 2. fol. 75. In what manner soeuer Baptis∣me be giuen, so that it be not giuen in the name of man, but in the name of the Lord, it doth truly saue: Yea I do not doubt, if any one shall re∣ceiue it in the name of the Lord, although the wicked Minister do not giue it in the name of the Lord, him to be truly Baptized in the name of the Lord. I am not Ignorant (saithTom. 2. ad struthio∣nem. fol. 312. & de Bap. fol. 66. 67. Zwinglius) the Apostles not to haue taken these words (In the name of the Father &c.) for such, as without which Baptisme could not consist. And sundry other Prot.Calu. de vera Eccles. reform. p 325. Vorstius in Antibel. p. 366. Polnus in Disp. pri∣uat. disp. 30. do teach, that the forme of Baptisme, with In∣uocation of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, is not ne∣cessary or essentiall. LutherL. de Captiuit. Ba∣byl c. de Bap. & l. cont. Cochlaeum & & l. ad Wal∣denses. taught, that Infants Baptized had actuall faith. Luther,L. de Captiuit. Ba∣byl. c. de Bap. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 15. §. 3. 4. Caluin, and other Prot. defend that sin∣nes committed after Baptisme, are forgiuen by the memory and faith of the Baptisme formerly receiued. Wherof Perkins saith,Tom. 1. in serie causa∣rum. c. 33. Col. 77. Zanchius in Confess c. 15. col. 517. In Baptisme once ministred remisson is giuen not only of sinnes past but also of present and to be, through the whole life. They likewis ach, that Children are borne Chri∣stians
before they be Baptzed; so Zwinglius,Tom. 4. in. 1. Cor. 12. p. 477. Children of Christians are within the Church and the body of Christ, euen be∣fore they be baptzed. Caluin,In Act. 8.37. I say the Children of the Godly are borne the sonnes of the Church, and from the wombe are reputed amongst the members of Christ.De re∣form. Eccles. p. 347. They belonged to the body of Christ before they were brought to light, and acccording to Perkins,Tom. 2. in Gal. 2.15. Col. 83. The chldren of the faythfull are borne holy. But Zwinglius teacheth the same concerning the Children of Infidels,Tom. 2. de Bap. fol. 91. I leaue to the Iudgement of the Omnipotent and iust God, Children who are borne of Parents not belieuing although I can fynd no cause of Damnation in them:De ratio∣ne fidei. fol. 540. We rasy condeme Children borne of Christian parents, yea the Children also of Gentiles. And the same is taught bySee Vor∣stius in An∣tibel. p. 542. Hemingius in Enchyr. class. 3. p. 322. other Protestants. By this we see what poore esteeme Prot. make of Bap∣tisme, neither thinking water to be necessary, nor the words In the name of the Father &c. and that Children, may be saued without it, being borne Christians, euen the Children of Infidels. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures that Baptisme is ne∣cessary to Saluation. CHrist our Sauiour auoucheth, thatIo. 3.5. Vnles a man be borne agayne of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the King∣dome of God. Which wordes as S. AustineDe pec. mer. & rem. l. 1. c. 30. demonstrateth, do not only signify a Precept, but euen the meanes necessa∣ry for the entring into the Kingdome of God. This place taken litterally, conuinceth the necessity of Baptisme: wher∣fore Prot. to euade the force thereof, are enforced to deny the sayd wordes to be so much as vnderstood of Baptisme: and so heere by water, they vnderstand only the holy Ghost, & the sense they make this, vnlesse a man be borne agayne of water, that is, of the holy Ghost, who clenseth lyke water &c. To which end they also alledge these words,Mat. 11. He shall baptize you in the holy Ghost and fyre, where by fyre, they vnderstand the said holy Ghost, as he hath a similitude with fyre. Thus Bullinger and Caluin expound this place, and therefore
sayth Caluin,Inst. l. 4. c. 16. sect. 25. Falluntur &c. They are deceiued, who thinke mention to be made of Baptisme in this place, because they heare the name of water; with whom agreeth Bullinger,In his Decades. p. 1408. init. Fulke,Ag. Rh. Test. in lo. 3. sect. 2. f. 143. Peter Martyr,Loc. com. Anglic. and D. Whitaker,Cont. Duraeum. l. 8. p. 676. all of them af∣firming, vnder the name of water, nothing else but the holy Ghost to be signifyed. But this reply is most absurd, and false. First, in that the forsaid place of S. Iohn is vnderstood of Baptisme by the Ancient Fathers, as will appeare in the Section follow∣ing. Secondly, by the like liberty of Exposition, we may vt∣terly deny the Sacrament of Baptisme at all, vnderstanding alwayes by the name of water, the holy Ghost, and in like sort it is most easy to peruert all the misteries of out faith. Third∣ly, the comparing it with that other Example of Baptizing in the holy Ghost and fyre is impertinent, for that the word, Fyre, may be taken properly, and is, without further que∣stion, most rightly vnderstood of the Externall fyre, which visibly descended vpon the Apostles, vpon theAct. 2, 1. day of Pentecost, in clouenAct. 2.3. tongues, as it were of fyre: and so our Sa∣uiour foretelling the same, calleth it expresly their Baptisme, which is so plaine a performance of S. Iohn Baptistes pre∣diction of our Sauiour his Baptizing of his Apostles with fyre, that the very English BibleEdit. an. 1576. and the marginall Citations in Luc. 3.16. where is ci∣ted Act. 2.5. & Act. 15.16. See also in the same Bible the Marg. citat. in Act 15.16. where also is cited Mat. 3.11. & Luc. 3.16. in the Marginall cita∣tions, ouer against both the said places, doth make a mutuall relation, reference, and citation of the one place vnto the other. In so much as M. HookerIn his Eccl. Pol. sect. 50. p. 131. and other Protestant writers affirme, that the Baptisme of fyre meant by Iohn, was real∣ly performed by the forsaid visible descent of fyre. Fourthly, though the word (fyre) should not here sig∣nify materiall fyre, as is aforesaid, but only the holy Ghost; yet it is impertinent to proue, that the word Water, in the other place should be so likewise vnderstood: for wheras the ex∣position doth ordinarily follow the thing which is to be expounded, the word fyre being placed next after the, holy Ghost, might therby the rather be taken improperly as to ex∣plaine the word, Holy Ghost, in signifying the purifying ef∣fectes therof: but in the other place the word, Water, is pla∣ced before the, holy Ghost, and therfore cannot be takn as a
like Exposition therof, nor without great absurdity be said to be an Explication, of the clensing effectes therof. Fiftly, wheras Nicodemus did misvnderstand our Sauiours first wordes of (a man to be borne againe) and asked our Sauiour,Io. 3.4. how it could be? our Sauiour therupon answering (with the forsaid wordes now in question) therby to explaine to Nicodemus his owne firster saying, and to satisfy his de∣mand, must needs be thought to vse the word Water, proper∣ly, for otherwise he had rather obscured, then explained his former saying, and not so much haue satisfyed, as increased Nicodemus his doubt. Sixtly, for as much as the Scripture elswhere calleth Baptisme, theTit. 3.5. lauer of Regeneration, or being borne againe, that therfore the other forsaid mention of our being regenerate, or borne againe of water, being in termes so answerable therto, is in like manner to be vnder∣stood of Baptisme. Seauenthly, this point is so euident, that aswell the Ancient Fathers (euen by the Protestants owneHook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 59. p. 130. Confession) as also theLuth. in his Ser. En∣glished. p. 145. Conf. of Sax in the Harm. pag. 405. of Bohem. pag. 339. Hofman de poena l. 3. c. 4. p. 229. Now els Catech. p. 141. Bilson in his true diffr. part. 4. p. 168. Aret. loc. 4. p 136, Daaeus Isag Christ. l. 5. de Sacra. c. 39. Prot. learned writers, do take the word, Water, properly, and so do vnderstand the said place of Baptisme: in so much as M. HookerHook. vbi sup sect. 59 p. 13. men∣tioning the foresaid conference, or obiection of the holy Ghost, andHook. ibid. Fyre, answereth the same notwithstanding, that the forsaid saying of our being borne againe of Water, is according to the generall consent of Antiquity, to be vnderstood of externall Baptisme, and termeth it aIbid. pag. 130. in fine. Criticall conceipt to expound is otherwise. Danaeus, to auoyd the forceTom. 2. Controu. de Bap c. 4. p. 323. of these words, expoundeth them thus, Vnles a man be borne a∣gaine of water, and the holy Ghost, the particle Et, and, is to be taken for the disiunctiue, Aut, or, (sayth he.) But this is meerly his owne fiction, and by the like liberty a man may affirme or deny any thing from the Scripture: Yea according to this Exposition, it were sufficient to be baptized with water without the holy Ghost, which is most impious to affirme. Others yet reply; that although the forsaid place be vn∣derstood of Baptisme, yet it proueth no further the necessi∣ty therof, then doth this like saying,Io. 6. 53. Vnles you eate the flesh of the sonne of man &c. you shall not haue lyfe in you; which eating doth not include any such necessity. But the Com∣parison
is vnlike, for our Sauiour sayth not so generally, vn∣lesse one eate the flesh, as he said before.Io. 3.5. Vnles one be borne a∣gaine of water, for he saith but, vnles you eate the flesh, directing so his speeches to those that were of discretion and capable of his Commandements, and so this place pertayneth not to Infants; wheras the other firster saying, being generall, and without limitation, must needs comprhend them. Againe the wordes obiected, whether they be taken in the Prote∣stant sense of eating Christes flesh, to wit, the effectes and merit of his Passion by fayth, or in our sense of receiuing really Christes flesh in the Sacrament, contayneth after ei∣ther sense, a necessity in it, and therfore make against Prot. that vge them: for being taken in their sense, they imply a necessity, in that they thinke faith absolutly needfull. And being taken in our sense, they do the like: for both Prot. and Catholickes thinke, that such as be of Discretion, whom on∣ly these wordes concerne, are vnder paine of sinne, bound to receyue the Sacrament, and cannot be excused from this necessity, but only when in straites of tyme, when the Sa∣crament cannot be had, the parties owne effectuall desire, which is in wanting in Infants, is in Gods mercy accepted, insteed therof: As also in the like case, the same supplieth the place of Baptisme, and the performance of all other like Commandementes. The Scriptures also ascribe remission of sinnes, and Saluation to Baptisme,Mar. 16.6. He that belieueth, and is baptized, shalbe saued:Act. 2.38. Do pennance and be euery one of you baptized in the name of Iesus Christ for remission of your sinnes:Act. 22.17. ryse vp and be baptized, and wash away thy sinnes inuocating his name:Tit. 3.5. be hath saued vs by the lauer of regeneration; and sundryEphes. 5.26. 1. Pet 3.21. other such like: which textes are so plaine for the necessity of Bap∣tisme to remission of sinnes that Zwinglius insteed of all o∣ther answere, most wickedly writeth thus:Tom. 2. de pec. orig. fol. 122. How foolish would he seeme, who for the wordes (of Scripture) should contend that we are washed from sinnes by the water of Baptisme? But if it be foolishnes to belieue Articles of fayth, because the Scri∣ptures wordes are plaine for them; I do not know wherin the wisdome of a Protestant will consist, who vsually de∣nieth
all other proofe, but only Scripture. But it wilbe worth the laughing to heare Zwinglius expound the forsaid places,Tom. 1. Ep. ad Lin∣douerum. fol. 204. Thou (sayth he) seest here, 1. Pet. 3. Baptisme saueth vs. First, Baptisme is to be taken for faith. And,Tom 2. fol. 201. l. de Relig. cap de Bap. He knew that they were by Apolo baptized, that is, taught. Againe,L. de Bap. fol. 68. It is to be noted, the word, Baptizing, in these wordes of Paul, Act. 16. to be taken for doctrine. AndIn subsi∣dio Ibid. fol. 254. Baptisme, 1. Pet. 3. is taken for Christ when he sayth, we are saued by Baptisme. And,To. 2. l. de Bap. fol. 73. They haue learned often of vs, by, Water, in this place (Io. 3.) ought to be vnderstood the knowledge of Christ, and the comfort of fayth: So that in none of these places must be vn∣derstood by Baptisme, the Sacrament, but either fayth, tea∣ching, doctrine, Christ, or what you will, so that it be not the Sacrament of Baptisme. But the best refuge that Protestants haue against cleere textes, is to corrupt them. And so because these wordes of S. Paul,Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy he hath saued vs by the lauer of Regeneration &c. do proue that Baptisme doth concurre to the working of our Saluation; the Geneuians do take away these wordes, He hath saued vs, and haue placed them in the verse precedent, where they do not so cleerly make against them. This is their surest way of answering, by chopping, changing, adding, taking away, as their need shall require. Lastly the necessity of Baptisme is proued by ouer∣throwing the Protestantes contrary ground, who therfore thinke Baptisme not to be necessary, because according to them, the Children of belieuing Parentes are borne free, though not from Originall sinne it selfe, yet from the guilt therof, it being not imputed vnto them. But this to be false, it appeareth first, in that Iacob and Esau were both the sonnes of holy Isaac, and yet God louedRom. 9.11.13. Iacob and ha∣ted Esau, before they had done any good or euill. Secondly the pla∣ces of S. Paul for Originall sinne are generall, viz.Rom. 5.12. in which all haue sinned:1. Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all dye, so also in Christ all shallbe made alyue. Neither can it be said, that those places are to be vnderstood of the vice of nature, not of the guilt, for then none should haue had the same guilt of sinne. Neither can it be said, the sonnes of the faithfull to contract Originall
sinne, but forthwith the sinne to be forgiuen them before they be borne: for if they be therfore sanctifyed, because they are the sonnes of the faithfull, then in the same mo∣ment they begin to be holy, wherin they begin to be the sonnes of the faythfull: but in the same moment wherin they beginne to haue being, they beginne to be the sonnes of the faithfull; therfore they neuer haue Originall sinne, which is against the Prot. themselues, who admit the same, and yet do not obserue that they contradict themselues. La∣stly the said ground is against a generallTertul. in Apolog. &c 17 Hie¦ron. Ep. 7 ad Laetam. principle gi∣uen y the Ancient Fathers, which is, that we are not borne, but made Christians, which were most false, if without Bap∣tisme we were Christians, by being only borne of Chri∣stian Parentes. SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the sacred Scriptu∣res in proofe of the necessity of Baptisme. NOw that the foresayd cleerest texts of Scripture are an∣swerably expounded by the Fathers; we fynd, that Clemens Romanus maketh this demand,Epist. 4. But you say per∣aduenture; what doth the Baptisme of water conferre to the worship of God? first of all truly, it is accomplished, because it pleased God: secondly, because the frailty of our former Natiuity, which is made yours by man is cut of to one regenerated of water, and borne ef God, and so at last you may come to Saluation, otherwise it is impossible. For so the true Prophet hath testifyed vnto vs, with the Sacrament, saying; verily I say vnto you, vnles one be borne agayne of liuing water, he shall not inter into the Kingdome of heauen: And therefore hasten you to it, for there is in these waters a certayne mercy of him, which mercy was carryed vpon the waters from the beginning: and he (viz. the holy Ghost) doth acknowledge them who are baptized vnder the Appella∣tion or name of the threefold Sacrament (e meaneth the mystery of the B. Trinity) and doth deliuer them from torments to come offe∣ring the Soules consecrated by Baptisme, as a certayne guift vnto God:
fly therefore to these waters, for they are they alone, which can quench the rage of the fyre to come, vnto which waters whosoeuer lin∣greth to come, it is euident that the Idoll of Infidelity doth yet remayne in him and that he is forbidden of that Idoll to hasten to the waters which conferre Saluation. Here according to S. Clements ex∣position of the Scriptures, Baptisme giueth Saluation, deli∣uereth from Hell, and that it is Infidelity not to hasten to that Sacrament. With S. Clement agreeth S. Iustinus Martyr, writing thus,Orat. 2. ad Antonium. Afterwardes the Catechumens are brought thither by vs where water is, and are regenerated with that manner of Regenera∣tion, wherwithall we our selues are regenerated: for in the name of the Father of all thinges, and of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, and of the holy spirit, they are then washed in water, for Christ himselfe hath said: Vnles you be regenerated of water and the spirit, you shall not enter in∣to the kingdome of heauen &c. since that being Ignorant of our for∣mer byrth by a certaine necessity &c. and brought vp in euill manners and naughty Custome, that we my not remaine Children of necessity and Ignorance, but sonnes of Election and knowledge, and may ob∣taine in water remission of our sinnes formerly committed &c. Thus from the wordes of Christ Iustinus proueth Baptisme to ob∣taine remission of sinnes. Consonant vnto these forsaid Fathers S. Gregory tea∣cheth most plainly that,L. 4. Mo∣ral. c. 3. whosoeuer is not loosed by the water of regeneration, he is held bound with the bands of the first guilt, for what the water of Baptisme is able to do with vs, this did in former ages, either sole faith, for litle ones, or the vertue of Sacrifice for great ones or the mistery of Circumcision for those who were of the Stocke of Abraham, for that euery one is conceiued with the sinne of his first Father, the Prophet witnesseth saying,Ps. 50.7. Behould I am conceiued in iniquity, and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me, and that he whom the water of Saluation doth not wash, doth not escape the punishment, truth witnesseth of himselfe, saying, vnles a man be borne againe of water and the holy Ghost, he shall not haue life eternall. To conclude this place of S. Iohn is vnderstood of the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme by mny others of the learnedstIustin. Mart. Apol. 2. Tert. l. de Bap. Cyp. l. 3. ad Quir. c. 25. Amb. l. 3. de SS. c. 11. Hie∣ron in c. 6. Ezech. Basil. Nazianzen. Nyssen. in Ser. de Bap. Orig. Chry∣sost. Aug. Cyr. Bed. Theophil. Enthymius & aij in hunc loc. Fathers. S. Austine demandeth,Aug. de pec. mor. & rem. l. 1. c. 23. 24. what Christian may abyde when it is said, that one may be saued, though he be not borne againe in
Christ, which Christ would haue to be done by Baptisme &c. Wher∣fore the Apostle sayth &c. He hath saued vs by the lauer of Regenera∣tion. S. Austine is so cleere forCont. 2. Ep. Pelag. l. 3. c. 3. Baptisme, washing away all sinnes, altogeather, of deeds, words, thoughts, or ori∣ginall, as that theCent 5. c. 4. Col. 368. Chemn. Exa. part. 2. p. 38. Centurists and Chemnitius do al∣ledge sundry his sayings, and confesse his Iudgement in our behalfe. But Zwinglius confesseth of the Fathers in generall thus:Tom. 2. de Bap fol. 76. Heer most of the Doctours vnderstanding by the name of water, that materiall and externall water of Baptisme, haue attri∣buted vnto it, much more then was fit, whereupon it afterwards came to passe, that they ascribed the clensing of soules to the Element of water. Of which also saith Luther,Tom. 2. Wittem. fol. 229. I excuse the Fathers who driuen eyther by temptation or necessity, stoutly denyed sinne to remaine after Baptisme. And as concerning the necessity of Baptisme, S. Austi∣ne auoucheth that,De anima & eius ori∣gine l. 3. c. 9. & de verb. Ap. Ser. 14. If thou wilt be a Catholike, do not belieue, do not say, do not teach, that Children dying before they be baptized, can come to forgiuenes of Originall sinnes,Ep. 28. ad Hieron. And whosoeuer sayth, that Children shalbe reuiued in Christ, who dye without participation of this Sacrament, this man truly contradicteth the Apostolicall prea∣ching,Ib p. 516. and condemneth the whole Church &c. And, though,De pec. mor. & re∣miss. l. 1. c. 16. it may be truly sayd, that children dying without Baptisme are to be, in damnatione omnium leuissima, in the easyest state of damnation: yet he deceiueth, and is deceyued, who teacheth that they are not to be dā∣ned. These sayings are so vnanswerable in S. Austine, that Mr. Cartwright confesseth, thatIn Whi∣teg. def. p. 521. Austine was of mynd, that children could not be saued without Baptisme: for which he impu∣dently chargeth him, (15) with absurdity. And for the same Doctrine is S. Austine reproued by otherBulling. in his Decad. in Engl. Dec. 5. ser. 8. Mus∣cul. loc. com. c. de Bap. Di∣lingae. de Symb. p. 45. Centurist. cent. 5. c. 4. col. 379. Protestants. Yea the Fathers were so resolute heerin, that as Caluin te∣stifyethInst. l. 4. c. 15 sect. 20. It was vsuall many ages since, euen almost from the beginning of the Church, that in danger of death lay people might Ba∣ptize, if the minister was not present in due tyme. Cartwrigh al∣so acknowledgeth that,In VVhi∣teg. Def. p. 522. Austine doth seeme to allow of the Baptisme of a lay man, in tyme of necessity. And Whitguift con∣fesseth that,Ib. p. 523. Austine doth say, that a lay man may baptize in tyme of necessity. And D. Bilson auoucheth tha,Con∣fer at Ham∣pton Court. p. 18. The de∣nying
of priuat persons in case of necessity to baptize, were to crosse all Antiquity. Thus cleerly teach the Fathers the necessity of Bap∣tisme, confirming the same from the sacred Scriptures. SECT. IV. That Protestnt writers do teach and defend the Catholicke Doctrine of the necessity of Baptisme. M Hookers beliefe is, that,Eccl. pol. l, 5. p. 154. Originall sinne is purged by Baptisme; and M. Blson acknowledgeth,In his true diffe∣rence part. 4. p. 368. that, Originall sinne is not remitted but by Baptisme. Now if Originall sinne be purged by Baptisme, according to M. Hooker, if Originall sinne be not remitted but by Baptisme in the Iudgment of M. Bilson, the Consequence according to them is ineuitable, that Baptisme must be necessary vnto Saluation. And this they proue also by those former places of Scripture, which haue bene vrged. Chemnitius teacheth that,Exam. part. 2. p 53. & 17. God doth not saue vs without meanes, but by the lauer of Regeneration. Tit. 3. And,Ibid. p. 53. Baptisme is a meane or Instrument by which is made the Communication of Christes benefits, for by Bap∣tisme Chist clenseth and sanctifyeth. Eph. 5. Yea sayth he,Ibid p. 20, The testimonies of Scriptures are manifest, which as they cannot be denied, so they ought not to be shifted of. Tit. 3. Baptisme is called the lauer of Regeneration. Eph. 5. Clensing her with the lauer of water in the word. Io. 3. Vnles one be borne againe of water &c. Act. 22. Be bap∣tized and wash away thy sinnes. 1. Pet. 3. speaking of water &c. he sayth, Baptisme being of the like forme (to wit of the Arke of Noe) saueth vs. And hence he concludeth, These being most manifest testimonies, which expresly ascribe Efficacy to Sacramentes, and declare what that (efficacy) is, are not to be peruerted by tropes (as other Prot. vse to do) from their simple and natiue significa∣tion, which the proper signification of the wordes giueth, and so the An∣cient (Fathers) haue vnderstood these testimonies simply, as they sound. So absolute is Chemnitius, prouing our Catholicke Do∣ctrine, from so many testimonies of Scripture, and the ans∣werable Interpretation therof made by the Fathers. Vrbanus Regius affirmethIu. 1. part. operum in Catechismo minori. f. 105. That the Scripture, and the
authority of the Ancient Church constraine him to belieue, that little children dying vnbaptized are damned. Mr. Hofman (commended bySee the prefaces of Melancthon and Bren. set before the beginning of Hofmans booke. Melancthon & Bren∣tius) sayth expresly,In Com. de poenit. l. 3 c. 4. de Bap. In∣fant f 229. Ideo certum est &c. It is therefore right and Godly that the sinnes of Infants be washed away by the Churches Ministery by Baptisme; seeing that without this lauer of Regeneration, they cannot be saued. D. Bilson also concludeth from S. Austi∣ne & the ScripturesIn his true diff. part. 4. p. 368. that if children be excluded from Baptisme, they be likewise excluded from the Kingdome of God, & that without Baptisme they cannot be saued, by reason Originall sin is not remitted, but in Baptisme. This Doctrine of the necessity of Baptisme for the Saluation of children is further taught byLoc. com. de Bap. f. 238. 239. 240. Erasmus Sarcerius, & by the Confession ofSee the Harm. of Conf. p. 403. 404. Auspurge, where it is taught, that, Baptisme is necessary to Saluation as a Ceremony ordai∣ned by Christ. Also that by Baptisme the grace of God is offered. And that young Infants are to be baptized, and that they being by Baptisme cōmended vnto God, are receyued into Gods fauour, & are made the sons of God as Christ witnesseth, speaking of little children in the Church, Mat. 18. It is not the will of your heauenly father, that any of these little ones should perish. They condemne the Anabaptists, which allow not the Baptisme of Infants, & hould that infants are saued, though they dye without Baptisme, and be not within the Church of God. The Prot. also of Saxony confesse the same in these wordsHarm. of Confess. p. 40. That the holy Ghost is giuen in Baptisme, Paul affirmeth in his Epistle to Titus, saying. By the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. And in Iohn it is sayd, Except a man be borne agayne of wa∣ter and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of heauen. Therefore we teach that Baptisme is necessary &c. To these I might add sundrySee Chemn. par. 2. Exam. p. 52. and in his Treatise ag. Osorius. p 421. See also Iac. Andraeas cited by Beza ad Act. Col. Monsp. resp. part. 2. p. 126. See also Conradus Sclusselb. in Catal. haer. l. 13 & ep. Ded. pag. 24. Protestant writers: in so much as Peter Martyr doth therefore reprehend certayne of his Brethren, because sayth he,In collect. annexis loc com. Anglic. and there see Pet. Mart. his Ep. to the Engl. Church. They despayre that chil∣dren can haue Saluation without Baptisme: And in reguard of this necessity manySee Schusselb. in Theol. Calu l. 1. f. 68. Iac An∣draeas in Ep. Col. Montisb. p. 46. 58. Hook. Eccl pol. l. 5. sect 61. 62. Hofman Com∣ment. de poen. l. 2 c. 13. Lābert. in Act. mon. p. 541. Woodman Ib. p. 1590. Sarc. loc. com. tom. 1. de Bap. f. 229. 230. 234. See Whitg. in his Def, p 518. 522, 523. Zwing, ib, p. 518. Bucer. ib. p. 521. Prot. do allow & defend Baptisme mi∣nistred
by lay persons, men or women in case of neces∣sity. Concerning the necessity of the matter and forme in Baptisme, M. Antonius de Dominis teacheth that,L. 5. de Repub. c. 5. n. 4. In the very materiall Baptisme, there are, by diuine expresse institution, both things and words, because Christ commanded that they should baptize, In the name of the Father &c. Reinectius reproueth Beza, saying,Tom 1. Armat. c. 18. p. 201. Beza vainly thinketh, water wanting, that it is law∣full to take other liquour: but this he confuteth by many pla∣ces of Scripture. Yea Beza himselfe auoucheth thus for the contrary,L. quaest. & resp. vol. 3. Theol. p. 348. If any one should not baptize in the Trinity, or for water (especially knowing) should vse I know not what other thing, altogeather different, this were not truly the Baptisme instituted by Christ. Pareus therefore affirmeth very well, that,In Col. Theol. 9. Disp. 22. No Christian truly doubteth, but that the Baptisme of water ought to be administred according to Christs Institution, only in the name of the Father &c. So confessed it is euen by Prot. that Baptisme is necessary to Saluation. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture, against the Necessity of Baptisme, answered. THe first obiection is vrged vpon occasion of those wordes of Almighty God to Abraham,Gen. 17.7. I am thy God and of thy seed: which wordes, say Prot. were spoken to A∣braham and to his Posterity, which we by Christ our Sa∣uiour are. Answ. Litterally this concerneth a Promise of pe∣culiar Protection and worldly felicity: and though it may be vnderstood in a mysticall sense, of the spirituall promis∣ses of remission of sinnes, and of eternall life, and the same to belong to vs: yet this is not by carnall generation of our Parents, but by our spirituall regeneration; for S.Rom 4.12.13. & 9.7.8. Galat. 3.7.8.9.29. Paul plainly teacheth, those to be the sonnes of Abraham, not which are the sonnes of the flesh, but which are the Sonnes of fayth: that is,
who imitate the fayth of Abraham, which children do not, but when they are baptized, for to them to beAug. l. 1. de pec. merit. & remiss. c. 27. bapti∣zed, is to belieue. Besids, by Carnall generation we cannot be made the sonnes of Abraham, seeing our Parents descen∣ded not from Abraham: but because Christ was truly the sonne of Abraham, then also beginne we to be the sonnes of Abraham, when we beginne to be the sonnes or Brothers of Christ, which vndoubtedly we are not but by Baptisme, we being also therfore called Christians. Besides these wor∣des no more seclude the necessity of Baptisme, then of Re∣pentance, or good life, they making no difference herin, but extending to all alike. Againe these wordes, notwithstan∣ding the Commandement for Infantes to be Circum∣cised, did strictly bynd, after the Couenant made with Abraham. A second Obiection is from those wordes,1. Cor. 7.14. The man, an Infidell is sanctifyed by the faithfull woman, and the woman an Infidell is sanctifyed by the faithfull husband, otherwise your children should be vncleane, but now they are holy: therfore Children borne of faithfull Parents, are holy without Baptisme. Answ. In the like sense that the Children here are said to be sanctifyed and holy, is the Infidell husband or wyfe said to be sancti∣fyed, and yet none belieueth that the Infidell husband by only liuing with the faithfull wyfe, without conuersion to God and Baptisme can be saued: and therfore this place doth no more proue the Saluation of Children without Bap∣tisme, though borne of a belieuing mother, then it doth proue the saluation of the vnbelieuing husband without Baptisme, who by this Text is no lesse sanctifyed then are the Children. And therfore howsoeuer this place may im∣port the legall Sanctity of the Marriage, and that the Chil∣dren are borne holy, that is to say in wedlocke, yet to the saluation of Children without Baptisme, this is a very for∣lorne Argument, answered and reiected long since by S. Augustine, who expoundeth this place thus,L. 3. de pec. merit. & remiss. c. 12. It is to be held without doubting, whatsoeuer that sanctification was, it was not of power to make Christians, and to remit sinnes, vnles they were made faithfull by Ecclesiasticall Institution and Sacramentes: neither litle
ones, how iust or holy soeuer their Parents were, of whom they were borne, can be absolued from the guilt of Originall sinne vnles they shall be baptized in Christ &c. Wherupon it commeth to passe, that none can be regenerated in their parents not being borne, but if he shallbe borne, it is meet he be regenerated, because vnles one be borne againe, he can∣not see the kingdome of God. And M. Bilson also conforme to S. Augustine, repeating the forsaid text of 1. Cor. 7.14. ther∣vpon writeth thus,In his true diffe∣rence bet∣wixt Chri∣stian subie∣ction &c. part. 4. p. 368. This is spoken not of the secret election of the faithfull, which is neither common to all, nor knowne to any but of their Christian Profession. And a litle after sayth, If then Infantes be partakers of the same vocation and holines with their Parentes, & without Baptisme &c. neither we nor our Children can be holy: sure∣ly the Children of Saintes, if they be excluded from Baptisme, are as vnholy and vncleane, as the Children of Infidels. The like answere is giuen by Marbachius, saying,Disp. Theol. de Baptismatis Sacramento. sect. 111. 112. It doth nothing helpe them, that which they dispute from the place of Paul, that the Children of Christians do take sanctification from their Parentes &c. For the word Sanctity in that place, doth not signify spirituall sanctity, wherof the Controuersy is, but legall, or ciuill. The true sense of the place obiected then is, that wheras Children are said to be holy, the meaning is,Ambr. S. Thom. & Anselmus in hunc locum. that they are borne lawfull, and not base, which some might well haue doubted of, by reason of disparity of Religion in their Parents, or else because they wereTertul. l. 2. ad vxor. Hieron. l. 1. in Iouin. & in Ep. 153. ad Paulin. l. 2. Aug. l. 2. de pec. mer. & remiss c. 26. & l. 3. c. 12. et. l. 1. de serm. Dom. in mōte c. 27. consecrated to God by the faithfull parent, being baptized and brought vp in the feare of God; which they had not bene, if the Infidell had departed from the faith∣full, for then the Children would haue followed the Infi∣dell Parent. A third Obiection is, If Baptisme were so necessary to Saluation that none could be saued without it, then many Children should perish without their fault, which seemeth neither to stand with Gods Iustice, or Mercy. I answere, theAug. l, 2. de bono perseueran∣tiae. c. 11. Prosper l. 2. de vocat. Gen∣tium c. 8. Iudgments of God are iust, true, and righteous, yet secret, inscrutable, and a bottemles depth: when he permitteth man Children to perish, euen then are his Iudgements most iust, for though it is with∣out their fault, that they are not baptized, yet without their fault they do not perish seeing, being tainted, and
found guilty of Originall sinne, they iustly perish. Fourthly it is vrged, that Baptisme is to vs, as Cir∣cumcision was to the Iewes; but it is not likely, that all such as dyed before the eight day vncircumcised, perished, therfore Baptisme is not so necessary vnto saluation, as that all perish without it. Answere. The whole Argu∣ment standeth vpon vncertainties, forPhilo l. de Circumci∣sione. Iose∣phus. l. 1. An∣tiquit. c. 12. Iustin. Mar∣tyr Dialogo cum Try∣phone Iudaeo. ant med. Iren. l. 4. c. 30. &c. 28. 29. 32. 34. E∣piph haer. 8. Chrysost. ho. 27. in Gen. Tertul. l. cont. Iudaeos. c 1. Cypr. l. 1. cont. Iud c. 8. & l. 3. Ep. 8. Am∣bros. Ep. 72. Hieron in c. 3. ad Gal. Aug. in ps. 73. many hould that Circumcision was not ordained, as a remedy against sinne, neither do we know whether the Infantes of the Iewes had any other remedy, or what it was. And lastly it it not a like reason of Christians & them, for now there is a certaine Remedy determined by Christ, which is most com∣mon and easy, what then it was, we certainly know not, seeing the Scripture sayth nothing. Lastly it is obiected, and further excepted, that ac∣cording to our Catholicke Doctrine many are saued with∣out Baptisme, namely such as haue the vow, wish, and desire of Baptisme, which could not be, if Baptisme were so absolutely necessary to saluation, as Catholickes teach. Answere. This Exception of such so dying with a vow, or desire of Baptisme, is grounded vpon Scriptures, as where it is said,Ezech. 18.21. If the impious shall do pennance from all sinnes &c. liuing, he shall liue, and not dye. And the reason which Deuines giue for this is, Voluntas reputatur pro facto, The parties effectuall desire of Baptisme, when in straites of time it cannot be had, supplyeth the place of Baptisme: as also the like desire sup∣plieth the performance of all other like Commandemen∣tes, though otherwise neuer so necessary. And this Exce∣ption is also warranted by the holyAmbr. in Orat de obitu Valentini ini Iunioris. Aug. l. 4. de Bap. c. 12. Bern. Ep 77. Fathers. But the former Exception is impertinent, and cannot be applied to the Case of Infantes, because all such Effectuall desire in them to haue Baptisme, is wanting, and the forsaid holy Fathers do therfore iustly vpon warrant of Scri∣pture, for want of Baptisme, togeather with the desire therof, which Infantes cannot haue, exclude them from heauen: Excepting alwayes the Case of Martyrdome, by which Infantes are saued,See Mat. 2.16. Mat. 10.39. Mar. 8.35. Aug. de Ciu. Dei. l 13. c. 7. though not baptized: for so S. Cyprian affirmeth,Praefat. lib. de Ex∣hort. Marti∣rij. Martyrdome to be a Baptisme, and
more excellent then Baptisme of water.In ps. 118. serm. 3. S. Ambrose di∣stinguisheth three Baptismes, one of water, another of bloud, and another of Purgatory in another life. AndHier. in c. 4. ad Eph. Aug. l. 3. de Ciu. Dei. c. 7. Cyril. Catech. 3. Nazianz. Orat. in sanctae Lumina. many other Fathers do distinguish the Baptisme of water, from the Baptisme of Martyrdome.
CHAP. XXI. The true state of the Question, concerning the B. Sacrament of Christes Body, and Bloud. Whether in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, vn∣der the formes of Bread and wine, there be truly, and really, and not only in signe, figure, or representation, contayned the very Body and Bloud of Christ our Sa∣uiour, which was borne of the B. Virgin Mary, and af∣terwards crucifyed. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. WHEREAS Protestants pretend to belieue two Sacraments, Baptisme & the Lords Supper; in the precedent Chapter I haue shewed how little es∣teeme they haue of Baptisme, as thin∣king it not necessary to remission of sinnes or saluation, and that it may be omitted, or taken away: I intend in this to shew thei lyke, and farre greater contempt of the most diuine and heauenly Sacrament of the Eucharist, making it in substance to be no∣thing
else but bread and wine, and only in figure, signe, and representation the Body and Bloud of Christ. But in Condemnation of this Heresy, the Catholike ChurchConcil. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 2. teacheth, and doth openly and simply professe, that in the sacred holy Sa∣crament of the Eucharist, after the Consecration of Bread and wyne, Our Lord Iesus-Christ, true God and Man, is truly, really, and sub∣stantially vnder the forme of these sensile things contayned: for neyther are these things repugnant amongst thēselues, that our Sauiour himselfe may alwayes sit at the right hand of his Father in heauen, according to the naturall manner of being, and that notwithstanding, his substance may be present with vs, in many other places Sacramentally, in that manner of being, which although we can scarcely expresse with wordes, yet by our thoughts illuminated by fayth, we may apprehend it possible to God, and constantly we ought to belieue it: for so all our Elders, so many as were in the true Church of Christ, who haue dispu∣ted of this holy Sacrament, haue most openly professed, that our Redee∣mer hath instituted this most admirable Sacrament in his last Sup∣per, when after the Benediction of Bread and Wyne, he witnessed in euident and plaine wordes, that he did giue them his owne very Body and Bloud: which wordes rehearsed by the holy Euangelistes, and af∣terwardes repeated by S. Paul, seeing they beare that proper and most plaine signification, according to which they were vnderstood of the Fa∣thers, it is verily a most haynous wickednes, that those words should be wrested by certaine contentious and naughty men, to faigned and Ima∣ginary tropes, wherby the truth of the flesh and Bloud of Christ is de∣nied, against the vniuersall sense of the Church, which as a Pillar and foundation of truth, hath detested these false fictions, as Sathanicall, deuised by wicked men, acknowledging euer with a gratefull and myndfull hart, this most excellent benefit of Christ. And therefore,Can. 1. If any shall deny, that the Body and the Bloud, togeather with the soule and Diuinity of our Lord Iesus Christ, and therfore whole Christ, to be really and substantially contayned in the Sacrament of the most holy Euchariste, but shall say, that he is only in it, as in a signe, or figure, or virtually, Anathema.Can. 2. And, If any shall affirme in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, the substan∣ce of bread and wine to remayne togeather with the Body and Bloud of our Lord Iesus-Christ: and shall deny that admirable and singular Conuersion of the whole substance of Bread into the Body, and whole
substance of wine into the Bloud, the formes of Bread and wine onely remayning, which conuersion the Catholike Church doth most fitly call Transubstantiation, Anathema.Can. 4. If any shall affirme, that Conse∣cration being made, there is not the Body and Bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ in the admirable Sacrament of the Eucharist, but onely in the vse, whilest it is receyued, but not before or after: And that in the Hostes or particles consecrated, which are reserued, or remayne after Communion, not to remayne the true Body of our Lord, Anathema. And,Can. 6. If any shall affirme, that in the holy Sacrament of the Eu∣charist, Christ the only begotten sonne of God, is not to be adored with the worship of Latria (or diuine) euen externall &c. AnathemaCan. 8. Or that Christ exhibited in the Eucharist, is only eaten spiritually, & not also Sacramentally and really, let him be accursed.Can. 9. If any shal deny, that all and euery Christian of eyther sexe, when they shall come to the yeares of Discretion, to be bound yearely, at least at Easter to cōmunicate, according to the Precept of our holy Mother the Church, A∣nathema.Can. 11. And if any shall say. Only fayth to be preparation suffi∣cient to receiue the Sacrament of the most holy Eucharist, Anathema. And least so great a Sacrament should be receiued vnworthily, and so to death, and condemnation, the holy Synod doth ordayne and declare, that Sacramentall Confession is necessary to be first vsed by them if they haue meanes of a Ghostly Father, whome the Conscience of Mortall sinnes doth burden, although they thinke themselues neuer so contrite. So cleerly and particularly is our Catholike Doctrine decla∣red, and Decreed by this sacred Synod. In the first and most famous Councell of Nice, it is thus determined,Conc. Nicen. 1. l. 3. Decret. de di∣uina Mensa. Let vs not be a litle attent to the Bread & Cup pro∣posed on the diuine Table, but eleuating our mindes by faith, let vs vnderstand that Lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world, to be placed vpon that sacred Table, to be sacrificed by Priestes vnbloudily, and that we receyuing his precious Body and Bloud, to be∣lieue these to be the signes of our Resurrection. This Canon is ack∣nowledged for true, by the Prot. writers,Apud Iac. An∣draeam. in Confut. Disp. Grinaei. de coena Do∣mini. p. 88. Oecolamp. l. Epist. Oecol. & Zwingl. p. 663. 667. Bils. true dif∣fer. part. 4. pag. 553. Grinaeus, Oecolampadius, & D. Bilson. In the second Councell of Nice, it is saydAct. 6. Tom. 3. eius∣dem fine. of Christ our Sauiour, that hauing taken Bread giuing thankes, he brake, and gaue to his Disciples, and said, Take yee, and eat yee. This is my body &c. And he said not, take yee, and eare yee the image of my
Body &c. Our Lord, or his Apostles, or Fathers, haue in no place called an Image (or figure) the vnbloudy Sacrifice, which is offered by the Priest, but the very Body it selfe, and the Bloud it selfe &c. Before they are sanctifyed they are called types, but after Sanctification, they are called, are, and belieued, properly the Body and Bloud of Christ. In the Councell of Laterane it is defined that,Conc. Lateran. 4. Oecum. sub. Innoc. 3. Cap. 1. There is one vniuersall Church of the faythfull, out of which none at all is sa∣ued: In which Christ Iesus is both the Priest, and the Sacrifice, whose Body and Bloud in the Sacrament of the Aultar, are truly contayned vnder the formes of Bread and wine; the Bread by diuine power tran∣substantiated into the Body, and the wine into the Bloud, that for the perfecting the Mystery of Vnity, we might receiue of his, what he hath receyued of ours. No man can make this Sacrament, but a Priest, who is duly ordered according to the keyes of the Church, which Christ Iesus granted to the Apostles, and to their Successours. And the like is taught by the other General Councels ofSess. 13. Constance, andDecret. Eugen. P P. Florence. Answerably to these holy Councells, allBellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 2. &c. & l. 3. c. 18. &c. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26.26. & in Luc. 22.19. Catholi∣kes now belieue, that in this blessed Sacrament, the Body and Bloud of Christ are not only figuratiuely, spiritually, or by fayth, but truly and really, the Substance of Bread & wine being wholly changed or transubstantiated into that very Body and Bloud of our Lord, which he tooke from the euer B. Virgin Mary, and which was afterwards offered vpon the Crosse. Pointes Disputable. All teaching, that the Accidents of Bread and Wine re∣mayne without subiect: yet concerning the manner,Scotus in 4. Dist. 22. q. 1. Some thinke, that nothing of new is added vnto them, but that God only doth preserue them without subiect.Caieta∣nus. O∣thers, that God giueth them a certayne substantiall manner of being, by vertue whereof they subsist by themselues. SomePaludan. 4. Dist 18. q. 3. Capreol. ea∣dem Dist q. 1. Concil. . Pet. à Soto in In∣stit. Sacerd. lect. 2. de Eu∣char. thinke, that the forme consisteth in all those wordes (enim excepted) which according to the rite of the Latin Church, are pronounced at Consecration. ButAlex. Halen. 4 p. q. 33. mem. 4. art. 3. Bo∣nau. in 4, Dist. Art. 1. q 2. Alanus de Euchar. c. 19. others more truly teach, that the wordes Noui, and Eterni, and
the rest that follow, are not of the Essence of the forme. SomeSee Bellar. de Eu∣char l. 3. cap. 28. and D. Morton in his Masse of Christ. l. 3 c. 3. Sect 1. teach that, Transubstantiation is made by Production; Others by adduction; Others by Conserua∣tion: but none of these are determined by any Councell. Protestant Vntruthes. LutherL. de Captiuit. Ba∣byl. c. 1. quod est de Euchar. affirmeth, that S. Thomas was Authour of that opinion which all Catholikes teach, to wit, that in the Sacrament of the Aultar, there is not the substance of Bread and Wine, but only accidents. But to omit more Ancient testimonies, this Doctrine was defyned in the Councell ofC. 1. Lateran, before S. Thomas was borne. CaluinInstit. l. 4. c 17. §. 43. teacheth, that Pope Alexander was the first that vsed vnleauened bread: but is cleere thatMat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Christ vsed it before vpon the first day of the Azimes. LutherL. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. 1. Pet. Mart. l. 1. cont. Gar∣din. obiect. 228. Calu. In∣stit. l. 4. c. 17. § 15. and others auouch, that Transubstantiation was first inuented by the Councell of Laterane. But to o∣mit all other proofes; the Centuristes affirme, that S. Chry∣sostomeCent. 5. Col. 517. seemeth to teach Transubstantiation: and that, Euse∣bius EmissenusCent. 4. c. 10. Col. 985. 295. did speake vnprofitably of Transubstantiation: & that S. AmbroseCent. 4. c. 4 col. 295. did not write well of Transubstantiation. Vr∣sinus confesseth, that,Commo∣nefactio cuius∣dam Theol. de S. Coena &c. p. 211. 218. In Cyprian are many sayings which seeme to affirme Transubstantiation. And Adamus Francisci, will not deny, but thatMargari∣ta Theol. pa. 256. Transubstantiation entred early into the Church. Peter Martyr and Chemnitius report, that the Greci∣ans do reiect Transubstantiation: but this is proued cleerely false, by theCensura Orientalium ad August. confess. c. 10. Censure of the Grecians, giuen vpon the Confession of Augusta. Chemnitius accuseth Andradius to teach, that Transub∣stantiation is one of those points which cannot be proued from Scriptures: but he corrupteth him, his words are these:Lib. de coena Dom. Although Transubstantiation could not be proued by manifest Scriptures, as you thinke &c. But Chemnitius to serue his own purpose, can easily change a Conditionall speach into an absolute.
Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth, that,Article 28. Tran∣substantiation, or the change of the substance of Bread and wine in the supper of the Lord, cannot be proued by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture, ouerthroweth the nature of a Sacra∣ment, & hath giuen occasion to many Superstitions. The body of Christ is giuen, taken, and eaten in the supper only after an heauenly and spi∣rituall manner. And the meane whereby the Body of Christ is receaued and eaten in the supper, is fayth. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was not by Christs ordinance reserued, carryed about, lifted vp, or worshipped. Zwinglius teacheth that,Tom. 2. de coena fol. 289. Bread is only a figure where∣by that Body is signifyed, whereof we ought to be myndfull.Ibid. fol. 291. The drinke was indeed nothing else then wyne. Cartwright,Apud Martyr. in disp. Oxon. p 134. The Eu∣charist is only a signe. PerkinsTom. de coena. Col. 858. Bread is called the body, when as it is only a signe, or seale of the Body. All know that Luther and his followers do belieue the Reall Presence, but their Error was, that with the Body and the Bloud, there was also Bread and Wine in the Sacra∣ment. Caluin condemneth in this both Luther and Zwin∣glius, and inuenteth another way of his owne, which I shall examine and confute, in the next Section at large. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. The first Heretickes (as S. AustinIn psal. 54. termeth them) that impugned the Reall Presence, were the Capharnaites, saying,Io. 6.52. How can this man giue vs his flesh to eate? But they were re∣proued by Christ himselfe in these wordesIo. 6.53. Amen, Amen I say vnto you, vnles you eate the flesh &c. And wheras not only the Capharnaites, but some of Christ his Disciples doubted al∣so herof, as appeareth by these wordes,Io. 6.60. Many therfore of his Disciples bearing it said, This saying is hard, and who can heare it? These also are reprehended by ChristIo. 6.61.64. for murmuring and Incredulity. Now, that Iudas was one of these Disci∣ples
who did not beliue the Reall Presence, S. ChrisostomeHo. 46. in Ioan. gathereth out of these words:Io 6.64. But there be certaine of you that belieue not: for Iesus knew from the beginning who they were that did not belieue, and who he was that would betray him: and S. Austin affirmeth,Tract. 27. in oan. Iudas to haue stayed then with Christ, not to vnderstand and belieue, but to deceiue. Yea S. AustineIn Enar Ps. 4. aduer. 22. & ps. 55. aduer. 7. affirmeth Iudas to haue bene the chiefest suborner and man∣tainer of this heresy, and that this was the first Heresy against Christes doctrine: and he commendeth Peter for his hum∣ble obedience, infirmely belieuing Christes wordes to be true, which he did not yet vnderstand. So that as the Iewes vsed Iudas for their Captaine & chiefe helper in the betray∣ing and apprehending of Christ; so the Sacramentaries vse the same Iudas, as their ringleader and Maister for their ta∣king Christ from the Sacrament, and Aultar. And as Iudas was tempted by the Deuill to betray Christ, forLuc. 22.3. Satan entred into Iudas &c. so also by the Deuill was he made a Sacramentary: for as I haue shewed before, that he was one of those Disciples that did not belieue the Reall Presence, for which he was reproued by Christ, so presently after this Christ sayth of himIo. 6.70. Haue not I chosen you the 12. and of you one is a Deuill? So that the first Impugner of the Reall Pre∣sence, was the Deuil, after him the Capharnaits & Iudas, frō whom our moderne Prot. are lineally descended: and so I may say of them,Io. 8.44. You are of your Father the Deuill, and the desires of your Father you will do. But this their Pedigree is so certaine, that LutherIn Col∣loquio Wit∣temberg. auoucheth Martin Bucer to haue bene taught by a Malig∣nant Spirit to deny the Body and Bloud of Christ to be tru∣ly and really in the Eucharist. Zwinglius confesseth of him∣selfe, that he had,L. de sub∣sidio Euchari∣stiae. An admonisher black or white, he remem∣breth not; who taught him by Scriptures to make the Eucha∣rist only a figure: but Schlusselburg determineth, that itTheol. Caluin. l. 2. fol. 76. was the blacke spirit of darknes, from whom the Zwinglians tooke this their Sacramentary opinion. And diuersBaronius Anno 1208. Nicolaus Serrarius in opusculo de M. Caluin. authors do record of Berengarius, that he being in the Chamber of Bishop Ful∣bertus, formerly his Maister, who was at the point of death,
the Bishop commanded, that he should be cast out of the chamber, because he saw the Deuill vpon his shoulder, bec∣koning with his hand to others to follow him, and therby foresawGuliel∣mus Malmes∣buriēsis l. 3. de Rebus gestis, Anglorum. that by the Instigation of the Deuill, he would proue a great deprauer of Catholicke doctrine, S. CyrillL. 4. Pentab. apud Turria∣num. l. 1. de Can. Apost. c. 11. of Alexandria gathereth from S. Paul, (38) that some of the Corinthians did not belieue this mystery: for the Apostle against this their Error, with great vehemency of wordes re∣peateth the Institution of Christ: You meeting (sayth he) to∣geather, I heare there are diuisions amongst you, and in part I belieue, for there must be Heresies &c. for seeing (sayth S. Cyrill) some of them did not know the Tradition and force of the Mistery,1. Cor. 10. & 11. they made in the Churches, dainty bankets, and pleasing suppers. So that, they had not the Celebration of that mistery, for a thing so sacred as the Body and Bloud of Christ, but almost for a vulgar, or peraduenture mysticall supper, in regard of some signifi∣cation: which Error, with some other Abuses that the Apo∣stle might confute, he repeateth the Institution euen as he had receyued it from our Lord &c. And he inferreth, that they did receiue vnworthily, because they did not discerne the Body of our Lord, as not being so in their opinion. S. Austine writing of this point, affirmeth, thatEp. 118. c. 3. The Apostle sayth, therfore they recei∣ued vnworthily, who did not discerne this from other meate: (venera∣tione singulariter debita) with honour singularly due: for forthwith when he had said, He eateth and drinketh Iudgment to himselfe, he annexed, that he might say, not discerning the Body of our Lord: which sufficiently appeareth in all that place of the first Epistle to the Corin∣thians, if it be diligently marked. Here S. Austine insinuateth (as also S. Cyrill did obserue) that to this belongeth that which the Apostle said in the precedent Chapter; The Bread which we breake is it not the Communication of the Body of Christ? and the Cup of Benediction which we blesse, is it not the Communication of the Bloud of Christ? as though some there were amongst the Corinthians which did deny this, although there were o∣thers that did belieue it. And though some vnderstand this place not of heresy, or Error in Doctrine, but of Error in Manners, in that some of the Corinthians did bancket in the Church, and did not
admit the poore to the holy Communion: yet in that it is said heerof that, There must be Heresies, which sundry AncienCyprian l. de vnit. Eccl. & l. 3. ad Quirinum. c. 93. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 16. c. 2. & l. 1. de Gen. cont. Ma∣nich c. 1. & in Ps. 67. Fathers do expound of heresies in Doctrine, I do not see but it must be vnderstood both of heresies in doctrine, & abuses in Manners. The Sacramentaries then haue for their Ancient Patrones, certaine of the Corinthians, but they haue also S. Paul reprouing and condemning them. The Saturnians did not belieue the Diuine Word to haue taken vnto him mans body, but only a certaine figure or Image therof; wherupon they thought consequently, that in the Eucharist there was only a figure of a mans body; S. Ignatius sayth of them,Ep ad Smyrn ap. Theodoret. Dial. 3. And see Iren. l 5. cap. 2. They do not admit Eucharistes and Oblations, because they do not confesse the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sinnes. These words are acknowledged and cyted for the words of Saint Ignatius, byExam. part. 1. p. 94. Hamelman. de Tradit. Apost. Col. 746. Simon Method. ali∣quot. loc. part. 3. fol. 172. Chemnitius, Hamelmanus, Simon Pau∣li, and other Protestants. To omit many others, for the same Errour was con∣demned Berengarius by the Councell of Vercelles, vnder Leo the nynth. And after by the Councell of Tours, vnder Victor the secōd: where being present, he promised by Oath neuer to defend that Heresy agayne. But afterwards falling into a relapse, a generall Councell was assembled at Rome, by Nicolas the second, in which he was agayneDecret. de Consecrat. Dist. 2. Can. Ego Berenga∣rius. con∣demned, and himselfe, in the presence of the Pope and the whole Councell, burned his owne Bookes, and renewed his Oath, andSee Thom. Wal∣dens. tom. 2. de Sacram. c. 43. forme of faith which he had formerly made. But for all this he relapsed agayne, and thereupon was cal∣led to aGuliel. Malmesb. de gestis Angl. l. 3. Councell assembled at Rome vnder Gregory the 7. where he was agayne condemned: and there, it is said, he seriously repented, & afterwards dyed well and piously. The Antropomorphites denyed the Eucharists reseruation, but they were condemned by S.Ad Ca∣losyrium. Cyrill, as is also con∣fessed and disliked by Pet.Cont. Gardin. col. 838. Fulk against Heskins p. 8. Oecolamp. l. 3. Ep. 89. Martyr and other Protestāts. From these condemned Heretickes our Moderne Sectaries haue learned to deny the Reall Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Blessed Sacrament of the Aultar.
Protestants Errours. Beza broacheth this strange Doctrine,Epist. Theol. 2. Tho. Tilio circa med. Where bread or wine are eyther not vsed, or not great plenty thereof at som∣tymes, must no supper of the Lord be celebated? Yea it wilbe duly celbrated, if that which eyther by common vse, or, by reason of the tyme, supplyeth the place of Bread and Wine, be vsed insteed of Bread and wine. So that a Pye-crust, and a bowle of Beere or milke, wilbe matter sufficient for a Protestant Commu∣nion. And in further proofe of this his Errour, he producethEp. 25. Tilenus in syntag. c. 61. p. 719. Buca∣nus Instit. Theol. loc. 48. p. 661. Hunnius Disp. 47. p. 282. at large the same Doctrine of Caluin, and other Prote∣stants. Luther speaking of the Preparation to be made before receyuing, sayth,In Con∣cione de digna Praeparatione ad Sacram. Euch. The best disposition is none but that where∣with thou art worst disposed: and on the contrary, then thou art worst disposed, when thou art best disposed. And heerupon he persua∣deth not to repent before Communion, but after. AndIn Con∣cione de Con∣fessione & Euchar. thinketh that man most fit for Communion, who is fallen into fowlest crimes. I will (Tom. 3. in psal. 5 fol. 172. saith he) speake rashly and free∣ly, There are not any neerer to God in this lyfe, nor more gratefull & louing sonnes, then these haters and blasphemers of God. Yea he iud∣geth thatDe Cap∣tiuit. Babyl. c. de Euchar. only those may receyue worthily, who haue sor∣rowfull, afflicted, troubled, confounded, and erroneous Consciences. And in the same place he contradicteth himselfe, for he af∣firmeth that, only sayth is the peace of Conscience, only Infidelity the trouble of Conscience. And yet he exhorteth Christians to come to receiue with vndoubted fayth. But if they only receyue worthily who haue troubled Consciences, & only Infide∣lity is the trouble of the Conscience, then they only receaue worthily who want fayth, for those that haue fayth, haue peace, not trouble of Conscience, and therefore according to him, it is vnlawfull to exhort Communicants to come with fayth. HeIn Tra. de Commu∣nione populi. further teacheth, that none ought to be admitted to Communion, but those who acknowledge they come, because they are troubled with the Conscience of mortall sinne, whereby he excommunicateth the B. Vir∣gin, and all the Apostles after their receiuing of the holy
Ghost, for doubtles they could not say, that they were trou∣bled with the Conscience of mortall sinne. Concerning Gods Omnipotency, a Protestant writeth thus,Resp. ad calum. Ne∣bulonis. p. 730. Caluin in sundry places sharply refuteth the fiction of Gods absolute power, which the Sophisters do publish in their Schooles. And yet others of his Brethten teach, that so potent is Fayth, thatSadeel. de Sacram. man∣duc. p. 300. Whitak. l. 2. Cont. Dur. sect. 8. it can make things future, absent, and most remote, to be pre∣sent. Whereupon Andreas inferreth very well, that,Apud Schluss. l. 4. Theol. Calu. art. 9. p. 344. they attribute more power to fayth, then to Christ. Some Prot. thinke the reall Presence to be impossible: for Beza writeth, that, GodIn Col∣loq. Montisb. p. 27. cannot make that the Body of Christ at one, and the same tyme essentially be present in many places. Sadeel sayth,Resp. ad Art. 14. abiu∣rat. p. 433. 414. We haue shewed, that the Body of Christ cannot indeed be present in many places at the same tyme, and that the Om∣nipotency of God cānot do this. The like is taught by sundry Prot.Tilenus in syntag. p. 75. Beza l. quaest vol. 1. p. 658. Da∣naeus apud Andr. in Colloq. Montisbel. p. 170. concerning Christ his Body penetrating the doores, the stone of the Sepulcher &c. and his body not occupying place. Zwinglius professeth his damnable Infidelity concer∣ning the B. Sacrament, in these words:Apud Schlusselb. l. 4 Theol. Caluin art. q. p. 344. And see the like in Resp. ad Billicanum. Tom. 2. fol. 263. Although God with all his Blessed Angells should descend from heauen, and should sweare, in the supper of the Lord the Body and Bloud of Christ to be giuen to all that receiue it; yet I neyther could, nor would belieue it, vnles with my eyes and hands I should see and feele Christ present. So that according to this accursed Hereticke, we must in this Sacred Mystery, rather belieue our eyes, and hands (being but fallible senses) then the Oathes of God, and all his blessed Angels, being of Infallible verity: what argument then can be expected to be so powerfull, as to withdraw an hereticke from his obstinate blindnes?
SETC. II. Wherein is enquired what Protestants vnderstand by re∣ceyuing spiritually, or by fayth. I Desire to premonish the Reader of the strange procee∣dings, shamefull contrarieties, & desperate shiftes which Prot. vse in their disputes with vs, in this weightiest Con∣trouersy of the B. Sacrament. The Question of the Reall Presence being but propounded, they presently tell vs, that Christ neuer intended or willed it. And when to declare his will, we alledge his word, they make then new question of his power, vnder pretence, that it is impossible. And when in reply thereto, we proue to them directly and con∣fessedly that it is not impossible, then returning by a Circle to their former Euasion, they answere, that the Question is not of his power, but only of his wil. And whē we vrge the wordes of Christ himselfe, their answers sometymes are, that the wordes are plaine for Transubstantiation: but at o∣ther tymes they maintaine, that they are full of figures and obscurities. The figure they will sometymes haue in the Pronowne, This; but this being by vs cleered, then they re∣moue it to the verbe. Is: and when this also is conuinced of falshood, then they fly to the Substantiue Body: and when this will not serue their turne, then they looke out figures in the Cup, in the Bloud, and in the Testament: but these be∣ing cleerely discouered to be false or impertinent, they fi∣nally charge the Euangelist S. Luke with Solecisme, incōn∣gruity, and error in the Text. That these and sundry other such lyke Rounds the dance, and betake themselues to such base and vnworthy shiftes, I referre my selfe to this subse∣quent Discourse. Protestants vnderstand by receiuing spiritually or by Faith, that they do receiue in their Communion, not only the Sa∣crament of Christs Body, neyther only the grace and spiri∣tuall effects of his Body, but besids all this, they affirme, that
they do really and truly receiue the very Body and Bloud of Christ after a spirituall and wonderfull manner. To this end M. Whitaker sayth,Whitak. cont. Du∣raeum. l. 2. p. 169 circ. med whereas you do affirme that I do slip from the Body of Christ, to the force and benefit of his Body, it is very idle; as though I separated the force and benefit from the Body it selfe, or when I denyed that we excluded the Communion of his Body, I did not openly affirme the Body it selfe to be receyued. The Confession of Belgia doth likewise teach, that,See the Harm. of Confess p. 431. that which is eaten is the very naturall Body of Christ &c. And, that this Supper is the Spi∣rituall Table, in which we are partakers as well of Christ himselfe, as of the merits of his death and Passion. In like manner Amandus Polanus sayth,Syllog. Thesium de coena Domini. p. 304. et. l. 1. partit. Theol. p. 279. Not only Bread and wyne, neyther only the Dei∣ty, neyther only the vertue and efficacy of Christ is present in the Sup∣per; but the very Body and the very Bloud of Christ, are in very deed present in the Sacred Supper. And the like presence as well of his Body, as of the efficacy thereof, is yet further plainely affirmed by sundry other ProtestantSee Smith ser. 1. p. 103 & the French Con∣fess in the Harm. p. 426. & Ob∣seru. an∣nexed ther∣to. sect. 14. writers; in so much as D. Whitaker declaring what is in question betweene them and vs, sayth expressely,Whitak. cont. Du∣raeum. p. 169. We make not question of the Pre∣sence of Christs Body, but only we dispute of the manner of his Presence, which you affirme to be Carnall and Capharnaicall; and we heauenly, spirituall, and diuine. And howsoeuer Zwinglius, Oecolam∣padius, PeterIn Ep. annexed to his com. places in Engl. Ep. 25. p. 107. Martyr, and someOeco∣lamp. l. de verbis Domi∣ni. Hoc est corpus meum. Lauatherus Hist. Sa∣cram. p. 4. Art. Serm. 3. de coen. others stand aduerse to this Protestanticall Reall Presence of Christs Body, yet as M. Hooker confesseth, the former opinions of Zwinglius and Oecolampadius notwithstanding,Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 174. All sides at length are growne to a generall agreement, concerning the Real participation of Christ: whereupon he concludeth, that,Ib. p. 177. the Eucharist is not a figure only, and that the efficacy of Christes Body & Bloud, is not all we receyue in this Sacrament; affirming further, that these my∣steries do make vs partakers both of the Grace of that Body, and besides also do impart to vs, euen in true and reall, though mysticall manner, the very person of our Lord himself. This may seem much to come from Protestants. But yet they further confesse, that although they say, they receyue Christes Body spiritually, yet they say, they vse not the word (Spirituall) meaning thereby to seclude their
former real receyuing of Christs naturall Body: for the De∣uines of Geneua do explayne the matter,Vide Apol. moest. ad acta Con∣uentus 15. Theologorum Torgae nuper habit. p. 49. Spiritualis per∣ceptionis nomine &c. by the name of spirituall receiuing, we do not meane that, whereby is receiued the only spirituall Grace of Christ. And the French Confession answerable to this sayth,Sect. 14. We do vtterly deny, that insteed of the very Body & Bloud of Christ, we do place only his merits, or his spirituall force and operation, affir∣ming further that they, though spiritually and mystically, do yet notwithstanding truly participate Christ himselfe. And heere Prot. giue a twofold reason for the vsing of the word, spirituall: first, for that their spirit or fayth, and not their bodily mouth receiueth Christs Body in the Sacrament. Secondly, for that according to M. Fulke,In his Defence of the Engl. Translat. ag. Gregory Mart. p. 455. The Creatures or elements, being blessed and consecrated, are by the working of Gods spirit, changed into the Body and Bloud of Christ, after a Diuine and spirituall man∣ner vnto the worthy receyuers, the cooperation of his Omnipotent po∣wer making it his Body and Bloud vnto vs. Now for the manner of their Reall spirituall Presence of Christes Body, they explaine it in diuers of their Confes∣sions, as first in that of France thus,In Harm. Confess. p. 426. We say it is done spiri∣tually, not that we may counterfayt an Imagination &c. but rather because this mistery of our vnion with Christ is so high a thing, that it surmonteth all our senses, yea and the whole Order of nature; and be∣cause it being diuine and heauenly, cannot be perceiued, nor apprehen∣ded but by faith. Secondly, the Confession of Belgia sayth,In Harm. Con∣fess. p 431. The manner it selfe being far aboue the reach of our Capacity, cannot be comprehended of any &c. Neither shall we erre in saying that, that which is eaten is the very naturall body of Christ &c. Fur∣thermore this supper bringeth to passe, that we in it are partakers aswell of himselfe, as of the merits of his death and Passion. Thirdly, the Brethren of Geneua expresse the manner, by way of demand saying;In A∣pol. modest. ad acta con∣uentus. p. 47. ante med. But how can it be brought to passe, that we liuing vpon Earth, should participate the flesh of Christ now placed in Heauen, and though it be spiritually, yet it is truly and by fayth &c. This I say surmounteth our Capacity, and is that Mistery which the Apostle pronounceth to be Great. Lastly Iohn Caluin concludeth for all, saying.Inst. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 7. Nothing remayneth but that I should burst out into admiration of that Mistery, to which neither
mind in thinking, nor tongue in speaking can be equall. And the like is affirmed by diuers others. But this Doctrine and manner of the Prot. Reall Pre∣sence thus explicated, is chargeable with manifest and mani∣fold Contradictions: as first, that Christes naturall body should be truly and really present, and yet not bodily but spiritually: if they vnderstand, spiritually, as excluding the Reall substance and being of a thing corporal, this seemeth a manifest contradiction, for as the true substance of Christes spirit cannot be corporally or bodily present to vs, because it is no body but a spirit, so neither can Christes body be pre∣sent to vs spiritually, (except we vnderstand the word spiri∣tually as the1. Cor. 15.44. Apostle doth, which would be imperti∣nent to the matter in hand) because it is no spirit but a Bo∣dy: and therfore whether the Protestants affirme Christes Body to be truly present in, or with the Sacrament, or truly present to their faith, yet the true presence therof, must needs be bodily, and not spiritually in the aboue mentioned sense, vnles they will change his Body into a spirit. Secondly, what more contradictory, then Christes bo∣dy must be contained in heauen, only, and that vntill the day of Iudgment, and yet also the same Body is truly present to them vpon Earth? here also they are forced to fly to their i∣magined Euasion, crying out, that this also is wonderfull & aboue all course of nature. Caluin sayth hereof,Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect, 10. Although it may seeme incredible, that in so great a distance of places as of hea∣uen and Earth, the flesh of Christ should penetrate to vs, that it may be meate for vs, we must yet remember, how much aboue all our senses, the secret power of the holy Ghost can shew it selfe. And after:Ib. Calu. sect. 31. If any man (saith he) aske me the manner herof, I shall not be asha∣med to confesse, that it is a secret more high then can be comprehended by wit, or declared by wordes. With Caluin agreeth Bza, in like manner saying herof,De re Sacram. Neuertheles we confesse the Mistery of God to be incomprehensible, wherby it commeth to passe, that, that which is in heauen and no where else, should be truly communicated to vs who are now vpon Earth and no where els. And the Deuines of Gene∣ua conclude, and say of this very point,Apol. modest. ad acta conuen∣tus. p. 23. & 47. antemed. that it surmoun∣teth all vnderstanding euen of the Angels themselues, and sheweth suf∣ficiently
that we do by this our doctrine, attribute more to the Omnipo∣tency of Christ, then they who thinke the true Cōmunicating of Christ to be abolished vnles the Reall Presence and receiuing of Christes Body with the mouth, be established. But now the Instrument or meanes of this great won∣der D. Whitaker teacheth to be ourL. 2. cont. Du∣raeum. p. 170. Faith, the same being the ground of thingesHeb 11.2. hoped for, and an argument of things not seene: our faith therfore it is, and the holy Ghost, which as Caluin sayth, dothCalu. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 10. verè vuire quae locis disiuncta sunt, truly vnite togeather things which are seuered in places: and which as Ba∣stingius teacheth,In Cate∣chismo An∣glic. fol. 150. maketh things absen to be present. Whence also it commeth to passe, that Christes Body, though not then in being, was yet, according to their Do∣ctrine, truly present to the Fathers of the Old Testament, & that not in efficacy only, but in very deed, and as truly as he is now present to them in the Sacrament. In so much that in reguard of the Fathers said Reall eating of Christes Body, before it was borne or in being (which manducation or ea∣ting is but an accident therunto) they doubt not to defend, that, non ens, may haue accidentia, nothing may haue accidents: Yea D. Whitaker goeth so far in this kind of the Fathers eating Christes true and Reall Body by faith, that he deliuereth this Doctrine following for currant,L. 1. cont Dur. p. 170. But the Body of Christ was not yet borne or framed? that hindreth nothing wherby faith may not enioy the Body of Christ not yet created &c. For if Christ were slaine, from the beginning of the word, then was he present to the An∣cient Fathers by his Body and Death. And in the fame place fol∣lowing, he addeth,Ib p. 171. That all the Fathers did eat the same spirituall meate, and drinke the same spirituall drinke, to wit, Christ: but if they did eate and drinke Christe, it followeth, that Christ was present vnto them. And to the like effect speaketh Grinaeus a Caluinist, in answering a Lutheran Opponent in a publick Disputation, his wordes are these,See Acta Disp. de S. Coena in Academ. Heidelburg. habit. Anno 1584. fol. 73. Therfore there is a dou∣ble crauing of the thing in question; first, that in the Old Testament the Body of Christ was not at all present, and elswhere, Grinaeus fur∣ther answereth, saying,Ib. p. 74. Now because you do confesse, that the Fathers of the Old Testament, by a liuely faith were made par∣takers of the efficacy of the Body of Christ, you must also necessarily
confesse this thing further, that the same Fathers also were made par∣takers of the Body of Christ. And yet againe returning vpon the Opponent, he saith,Ib. vt scip. p. 74. Either you must deny that the Fa∣thers of the old Testament were made partakers of the Efficacy of Christes body, or you must grant that they no lesse then we, were made partakers of Christes Body &c. Neither do I dissse, or debate the point touching Christes benefits alone, as if the Fathers were made partakers of sole grace of the goods & benefits of Christ, neither speake I of the efficacy. And yet againe in another place, he conclu∣deth saying,Fol. 76. loc. sup. ci∣tato. I plainly say, that the substance or Essence of the Body and Bloud of Christ, was truly, and in very deed receiued, but no otherwise then spiritually, of either Fathers, aswell of those who liued in the Old Testament, as of those who haue bene in the New, and yet are. And for last vpshut of all, wheras the Lutheran Opponent against this Caluinisticall conceipt of the Old Fathers Reall eating of Christes Body, had rightly vrged, Non entis nulla esse accidentia, that nothing could haue no accidents; and therfore Christes Body hauing no Existence, or being at all, could not be eaten at all, (because the eating of Christes body, was an accident to his Body) Grinaeus replyeth,Vide ib. f. 73. & 77 & 78. Maio∣rem negamus esse vniuersalem, in qua dicis non entis esse nulla acciden∣tia: we deny the Maior to be vniuersall, wherin you say, that nothing can haue no accidents. To such grosse absurdities are Prote∣stantes driuen by this Imaginary Conceipt of receiuing on∣ly spiritually and by fayth. But the truth is, these Caluini∣stes, resoluing to oppose the Catholicke truth, and affecting to haue some Nouelty, different from Lutheranisme and Zwinglianisme, inuented this of receiuing the true and reall Body of Christ spiritually and by fayth. A mistery so deepe, as that they thinke, neither mind in thinking, nor tongue in speaking can be equall to expresse it.
SECT. III. The Reall Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Sa∣crament, is proued by Testimonies of Scripture taken from the Old Testament. THe figures of the Old Testament were accomptedCol. 2.17. And see S. Hieron. in c. 1. ad Titum. shadowes of things to come. And so, that the Paschall Lambe was a figure of the Eucharist is generallyTert 1.4. in Mar∣cion. Iichius in c. 23 Leuit. Hieron. in c. 26. Mat. Chrysost. ho. de prodit. Iu∣dae. Cyp. l. de vnit. Ecclesiae. Aug. l. 2. cont. liter. Petil. c. 37. Leo ser. 7. de Pass Dom. Greg. hom. 22. in Euang. taught, and the same may be proued, in that our Sauiour immediatly after the eating of the Paschall Lambe, instituted the Eucharist, therby to signify, that the old Rite wasLuc. 22.18.19. Mat. 26.26. fulfilled in this new Sacrament, and so to be taken away: and that the Pas∣chall Lambe of the Iewes was a thing more excellent then the Eucharist, if therin be not contained the Body of Christ, is euident, for if they be considered according to their owne natures, a lambe excelleth bread, and if they be considered as Sacraments or externall signes, the difference betwixt them manifestly appeareth; for the flesh of Christ is more perfect∣ly signifyed by the flesh of a Lambe, then by bread: and the death of Christ is better represented by the death of a Lambe, then by breaking of bread: and so also Christs innocency, and other properties, are better figured by that chosen Lābe with∣out spot, which in the Law was commanded to be offered vp & eaten, then by bread, which hath none of these. S. Au∣stine speaking of this figure sayth, One thing is the Pasche, which the Iewes celebrated of a sheep, another that which we receyue in the Body and Bloud of Christ. The same may be also proued by the Bloud of the Te∣stament, vsed by Moyses, as God had commanded him,L. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 37. Exod. 24.8. And he tooke the bloud, and sprinckled it vpon the People, and sayd, This is the bloud of the Couenant, which our Lord hath made with you vpon all these wordes. And yet further in the Epistle to the Hebrews.Heb. 9.18. Whereupon neyther was the first certes dedicated without bloud: for all the Cōmandment of the Law being read of Moyses to all the people: be taking the bloud of Calues and Goates, with water, and scarlet
wooll, and Hyssope, sprinkled the very Booke also it selfe, and all the People saying, This is the bloud of the Testament, which God hath commanded vnto you. The Tabernacle also, and all the vessells of the Ministery he in lyke manner sprinkled with bloud, and all things allmost according to the law are clensed with bloud, and without sheeding of bloud there is not remission. Now that this figure was fullfilled in the Institution of the Eucharist, appeareth in that our Sa∣uiour sayth,Luc. 22.20. This is the Chalice, the new Testament in my bloud, so that at his supper his Testament was made. Secondly, in that our Sauiour as it were of purpose, vsed also the same wordes with Moyses, saying,Mat. 26.28. For this is my bloud of the new Testament. And thirdly in that our Sauiour, as Moyses before proposed a Law; so did he, saying,Io. 13.34. A new Commandement I giue vnto you, that you loue one another: sprinkling as it were the bloud into the breast of the Apostles. Now, that this Bloud of the Old Testament is better then Wyne, is easily proued by the lyke Argument, whereby we proued a Lambe, to be better then Bread. In like sort the same may be proued by the Manna which God rayned downe to the Iewes in the desert, for that it was a figure of the Eucharist is manifest, by those words of our Sauiour,Io. 6.49.50. Your fathers did eate Manna in the desert, and they dyed. If any man eate of this bread he shall liue for euer. So also S.1. Cor. 10.1.2.3. Paul compared the red sea to Baptisme, and Manna to the Eucharist. and the great similitude betweene them, plainly confirmeth the same; for Manna was giuen in the desert, whilest the Children of Israel hauing passed the red sea, went to the land of promise; so theAug. tract. 12. in Ioan. Eucharist is giuen in the desert of this life, whilest by Baptisme we passe to our true country, which is lyfe euerlasting. Manna had this singular Prerogatiue, that though some seemed to ga∣ther much, others little, yet all found the same measure,Exod. 16.18. and they measured by the measure of a Gomer: neyther he that gathered more had aboue nor he that prouided lesse, found vnder: so in the Eucharist, the same vertue and fruite, is in a litle part of the signes, which is in a greater: and that Manna was a figure of the Eucharist, it isChrys. Cyr. Theo∣phil. & Aug. in 8. Ioan. Ambr. l. 5. de Sacram. c. 1. & de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs c. 8. & 9. commonly taught by the Ancient Fathers.
Now that Manna was more excellent then our Eu∣charist, if it contayne not the Body of Christ, is plaine, it being made by the handes of Angels, this of the baker; it coming from heauen, this from the Ouen or fornace; i ta∣sting whatsoeuer the eater desired, according to that of the Booke of wisdome,Cap. 16.20.21. For the which things thou didest nou∣rish thy people with the meate of Angels, and bread prepared thou ga∣uest them from heauen without labour, hauing in it all delectation, & the sweetnes of all tast. For thy substance did shew thy sweetnes which thou hast towards thy children, and seruing euery mans will, it was turned to that euery man would: but this of the Eucharist tasteth only Bread. Manna also better represented Christ, then bare figuratiue bread, it comming from heauen, hauing all sweetnes, and equall measure being receiued by all, though it seemed diuerse: And yet our Sauiour much pre∣ferreth the Eucharist before Manna, saying, YourIo. 6.49.50.51. Fathers did eate Manna in the desert, and they dyed; this is the Bread that des∣endeth from heauen, that if any man eate of it, he dye not. I am the liuing bread that came downe from heauen: If any man eate of this bread he shall liue for euer: and the bread which I will giue is my flesh, for the life of the world. This preheminence giuen by our Sa∣uiour in this place vnto the Bread, and calling it his flesh, conuinceth that the same is not bread, as only a figure of Christes Body, but euen the Body it selfe, and in that res∣pect far more excellent then Manna. Against these Arguments taken from the figures of the Old Testament, PeterIn sua Defens. de Euchar. part. 3. p. 692. Martyr replyeth, that though the signes and formes of the Sacramentes of the Old and New Testament be different, yet the thing receiued by both is the same, to wit, Christ,1. Cor. 10.3.4. S. Paul affirming the He∣brews to haue eaten the same meat with vs. But first S. Paul doth not say, as this lying Martyr forgeth, that the He∣brewes did eate the same meat with vs, but only that them∣selues did eate the same meat. Neither doth he say, that bread or drinke of the Hebrewes or the thing receiued in those Sa∣craments, to haue bene Christ, which yet this Martyr affir∣meth with greatest confidence, for his words are truly these: And they drunke of the spirituall Rock that followed them, and the
Rock was Christ. where he doth not say, that Christ was the water which they did drinke, but the Rock from whence that water flowed; & not that materiall Rock from whence the water did visibly flow, but that inuisible Rock which did follow the Hebrewes, to wit, Christes prouidence and power, which was the efficient cause of that water, and all other their blessings. SECT. IV. That the Scriptures of the New Testament, conuince our forsaid Catholike reall Presence of Christs Body, & Bloud in the Eucharist. THe first proofe is taken from the Promise of our Sauiour saying,Io. 6.51. The bread which I will giue is my flesh. And a∣gaine,Ib. vers. 53.54.55. Amen, Amen. I say vnto you, vnles you eate the flesh of the sonne of Man, and drinke his Bloud, you shall not haue life in you: he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud hath life euerlasting &c. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my Bloud is drinke indeed. In answere to this plaine Testimony for the reall Presence, which is so cleere, that nothing can be deuised to be spoken more plainly, yetLuth. l. de Capt. Babyl. c. 1. Zwingl. l. de ver. & fals. Relig. c. de Euch. Chem∣uit. Exam. part. 2. p. 657. Caluin. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. §. 33. Prot. reply, that these wodes do not concerne the Eucharist, and therfore by bread, they indeed vnderstand Christ, but not as in the Sacrament, vnder the formes of Bread and wyne, but as taking vpon him our hu∣man nature, and we receiuing him by fayth. But besids that theChrys. Aug. Cyr. Theoph & alij in hunc locum. Orig. ho. 7. in Nu. Basil. l. 1. de Bap. c. 3. & in reg. mor. c. 21. Cyril. Hier. Catach. 4. Mystag. Epiph. haer. 55. Theod. hist. l 4. c. 11. Damasc. l. 4. de fide. c. 14. Cypr. Ser. de Orat. Dom & l. 1. cont. Iudaeos. c. 21. Hil. l. 8. de Trinit. Ambr. l 6. de Sacram. c. 1. & deijs qui initiantur mysterijs. c. 8. & l. 4. de fide c. 5. Hier. Ep. ad Hedib. q. 2. & in. 1. c. ad Eph. Aug. Ser. 2. de verb. Domini. Leo. ser. 6. de Iiu. Greg. l. 7. Moral. c. 4. Ber. Ser. 2 in Vigil. Natiu. & ser. 1. de Paschae. contrary is taught by many Fathers, the truth herof is proued first, in that our Sauiour spake of the tyme to come, when he said, the bread which I will giue is my flesh, wheras that spirituall eating of Christ by fayth, is common to all times, the Fathers of the Old Testament receiuing Christ in that
sort. Secondly the similitude betwixt these wordes of Pro∣mise, and those of the Institution, take eate, this is my body, which is giuen for you to remission of sinnes, where the promise was performed, confirmeth the same. Thirdly it is said, The Iewes therfore stroue amongst themselues, saying, how can this man giue vs his flesh to eate, And many therfore of his Disciples hearing it, said, this saying is hard, and who can heare it? From these places the deduction is, and very euident, that the Iewes and those Disciples thought some new and strange thing to be pro∣mised by Christ, and yet our Sauiour did not correct their conceipt, but persisted still saying, as it followeth in ex∣presse wordes,Io. 6.53.54.55.56.57.58. Iesus therfore said vnto them, Amen, Amen I say vnto you, vnles you eate the flesh of the sonne of Man, and drinke his Bloud, you shall not haue life in you; he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud, hath life euerlasting. And I will raise him vp at the last day; for my flesh, is meat indeed, and my Bloud is drinke indeed: he that ca∣teth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud, abideth in me and I in him; At the liuing Father hath sent me, and I liue by the Father, and he that ea∣teth shall liue by me. This is the bread that came downe from heauen &c. And now these Textes being so plaine, who would imagine that our louing Sauiour would with such offence, scandall and hurt, yea Apostacy of his Disciples, whom he loued so dearly, couer with so many darke pretended Meta∣phors, a thing so easy, as to belieue in Christ, wheras he might haue declared the same almost in a word, by telling only that his meaning was no more, then that they should eate his Body and drinke his Bloud spiritually, and by faith, or eate only the figure of this Body. Besids our B. Sauiour had that care that his auditors should vnderstand him, that alwaies when he speake any thing ob∣scurely in Parables, he was wont to explicate the same after∣wards to his Disciples: asIo. 3.3.4.5. first where he had tould Nico∣demus, Vnles a man be born againe, he cānot see the Kingdom of God: and Nicodemus vnderstood him not, as appeareth by his de∣mand, how can a man be borne when he is old? our B. Sauiour explicated his former speach, saying, vnles a man be borne againe of water and of the spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, A∣gayne, when Christ sayd,Io. 10.2. But he that entreth by the doore is
the Pastour of the sheep, and his Disciples vnderstood him not, for it followeth.Ib. ver. 6. This Prouerbe Iesus sayd vnto them, but they knew not what he speake vnto them: he explicateth himselfe say∣ingIb. vers. 7 & 11. Amen, Amen I say vnto you, that I am the doore of the sheep. The good sheepheard giueth his life for his sheep. The like explicatiō of darke speaches, Prouerbs, and Parables, explicated by our Sauiour vnto his Disciples you shall further read of in anotherIo. 16.17.19.20. Mat. 13.36.37. Mar. 4.10.14.34. Luke. 8.9.10.12. places: so that out of these places, and the lyke I may draw and make this generall Rule and Collection, that our B. Sauiour, howsoeuer sometymes vpon iust occa∣sions, he did not explicate euery darke or parabolicall speach vnto the prophane and common people, eyther because they were not capable, or cared not for it, or that it was imper∣tinent vnto them, or for that he would not cast pearles before swine, or giue the Childrens bread to dogges: yet he neuer spake to his best beloued Disciples, who had left all to follow him, and to whome by his owne Confession it was giuen, as be∣longing vnto them, to vnderstand all mysteries belonging to the Kingdome of God; for as much as they were not on∣ly thereby to saue their own soules, but many others, which they could not haue done without a true conceipt and right vnderstanding of all that proceeded from our B. Sauiour his sacred mouth: To these I say, his best beloued Disciples, he neuer spake any thing parabolically, but at one tyme or other ordinarily he explicated the same, and so left them possessed and inuested with the true and right sense of his meaning. And shall we thinke, that heere he would not haue done the like, but that the sense was easy, plaine and litterally to be vnderstood, as the very words went & soun∣ded? And yet we see heere he doth not declare himselfe o∣therwise, but saith to them who did not depart,Io. 6.67. What will you also depart, as if he should haue sayd, I haue not o∣therwise to tell you, he that will not belieue, let him de∣part. Fourthly, spirituall receiuing by fayth, needeth not that frequent distinction of Flesh & Bloud, Meat & drinke, seeing that in receiuing by fayth all is one to eate and drinke
seeing that in receiuing by fayth all is one to eate & drinke. Fiftly, our Sauiour would neuer so seriously by Oath haue auouched saying, Amen, Amen, that we must eate this flesh, if he had meant the same onely figuratiuely, seeing Oathes must be made of things playne and certaine, & not of things figuratiuely spoken. Sixtly, the Iewes and the Disciples offended not in misvnderstanding our Sauiours wordes, but in no belie∣uing them, saying accordinglyIo. 6.52. How can this man giue vs his flesh to eate? AndIb. vers. 60. this saying is hard, who can heare it? Our Sauiour also in the beginning of his speach in this mat∣ter, exhorteth them to belieue, saying,Ib. vers. 47. He that belieueth in me hath lyfe euerlasting: and in the later end he noteth their not belieuing, and sayth,Ib. vers. 64. But there be certayne of you which belieue not: He sayd not, sayth S.In Ioan, Tract. 27. Augustine, There be some among you which vnderstand not. Besids, if they had beene mistaken in taking that litte∣rally, which our Sauiour spake figuratiuely, he would ne∣uer so earnestly haue persuaded them to belieue his wordes without any Explication, seeing none can belieue that which they do not in some sort vnderstand; neyther is it credible, that he who thirsteth after saluation of Soules, would suffer his owne Disciples to depart from him, if he might haue recalled them, by affirming only that his fore∣sayd words were figuratiue. Lastly PeterL. cont. Gardinerum. ob. 34. Martyr con∣fesseth, that the Capharnaites hearing our Sauiour his words, did thinke, that Christs flesh should be eaten corporally as the Papistes thinke. Whereupon it followeth, that seeing the Capharnaites were reprehended for not belieuing as they vnderstood, that therfore the Papistes beliefe, is a right beliefe. But some reply, that our Sauiour explicated himselfe, when he saydIo. 6.63. It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profiteth nothing; the words that I haue spoken vnto you, are spirit and lyfe. Answ. When our Sauiour saith, The flesh profiteth nothing, he doth not vnderstand the same of his owne flesh (which doubtles profiteth our Redemption) but of theChrysost. Theophil. En∣thymius in hūc locum. Orig. l. 3. in Epist. ad Rom. Cyp. ser. de coena Domini. carnall vnderstanding of the Capharnaites, as S. Chrysostome and other Fathers do expound it: which Explication to be true,
appeareth first, in that the word flesh is vsually taken in Scri∣ptures, for carnall wisdome and vnderstanding, asIo. 8 15. You iudge according to the flesh. FleshMat. 16.17. and bloud hath not reueyled this vnto thee.Rom. 8.6 7. The wisdome of the flesh is death: The wisdome of the flesh is an Enemy to God. I1. Cor. 3.1. could not speake vnto you as to spirituall, but as to carnall.1. Cor. 2.13.14. We speake not in learned wordes of humane wisdome, but in the Doctrine of the spirit &c. But the sensuall man perceyueth not those thinges that are of the spirit of God. And in this sense the flesh profiteth nothing, that is, to vnderstand the flesh of Christ to be eaten after a carnall manner, as though it were to be deuided into partes, and to be boyled, rosted, broyled, and chewed, and conuerted into the substance of the receiuer. And according to this faith S. Chrisostome,Chrysost. in Ioan. hom. 46. what then, the flesh profiteth nothing, he doth not speake this of his owne flesh, god forbid, but of those who vnderstand carnally what is spoken. And a litle after, know, that this particle, the flesh profiteth nothing, is not spoken of his flesh, but of a Carnall hearing. The like Expli∣cation is giuen also by S. Cyprian in these wordes,Ser. de coena Domi∣ni. There rose a question of the newnes of this speach, as it is read in the Ghospell of Iohn: and the auditors were astonished at the Doctrine of this Mystery, when our Lord said, Vnles ye shall eate the flesh of the sonne of Man, and shall drinke his bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you. Which because certaine of them did not belieue, nor could vnder∣stand, they went back, because it seemed to them horrible and wicked to eate mans flesh, thinking that it was spoken in such sort, that they should be taught to eate his flesh, either boyled or rosted, and cut in peeces; wheras the flesh of that person, if it should be deuided in peeces, could not suffice all Mankind, and which being once consumed, Religion would seeme to haue perished, no Sacrifice remayning vnto it any lon∣ger. But in these kind of thoughtes, flesh and bloud doth not profit any thing: because, as the Maister himselfe hath expounded, these wordes are spirit and lyfe: neither doth Carnall sense penetrate to the vnder∣standing of so great depth, vnles faith be added to it. In like sort answereth S. Austine,Tract. 17. in Ioan. 6.63. O Lord my good Maister, how doth the flesh profit nothing, seeing thou sayest, vnles one shall eate my flesh, and shall drinke my bloud he shall not haue lyfe in him? doth life profit nothing, and for what end are we that which we are, but that we may haue life euerlasting, which thou promisest by thy flesh? What is this
then, it profiteth nothing? The flesh profiteth nothing, but as they vnder∣stood it, for they so vnderstood flesh, as it is torne in the carcasse, or sold in the shambles, not as it is quickned with the spirit. And againe, For if the flesh profited nothing, the Word would not haue ben flesh, that it might dwell in vs. And a litle after, As they haue vnderstood flesh, I do not giue so my flesh to eate. So fully and cleerly do the Fa∣thers answere this Common Obiection. Secondly, as by flesh is vnderstood knowledge depen∣ding vpon sense and reason, so by spirit and lyfe (which is here opposed to flesh) is vnderstood such knowledge as be∣ing aboue humane and naturall reason, submitteth it selfe to faith; which opposition and explication, the Apostle be∣fore expressed saying,Rom. 8.6. The wisdome of the flesh, is death, the wisdome of the spirit is lyfe. And for this want of faith, our Sa∣uiour in the same place complaineth, saying: But there are some of you which do not belieue. Thirdly, the word spirit, or spirituall, can nothing hin∣der the Reall presence, seeing it is said of the Body.1. Cor. 15.44. It is sowen a naturall Body, it shall aryse a spirituall Body, if there be a naturall Body, there is also a spirituall Body. Lastly it cannot be vnderstood of the eating of the flesh of Christ, that it profiteth nothing, seeing our Sauiour saith there himselfe plainly,Io. 6.54. He that eateth my flesh &c. hath lyfe euer∣lasting, andIb. vers. 53. vnles you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man &c. you shalt not haue lyfe in you. So euident is is, that those obscu∣rer words make nothing indeed against the other plentiful, most cleere and manifest sayings to the contrary. And yet all this notwithstanding,Hist. part. 2. fo. 181. Hospinian relateth that Zw∣inglius in sundry places inculcateth, that flesh eaten profi∣teth nothing. And therefore Zwinglius inuenteth these strā∣ge interpretationsIn Exe∣gesi. fol. 50. Flesh in this place Ioan. 6. is put for the di∣uine nature; so that by flesh must be vnderstood Christs Di∣uinity: And,Tom. 1. in Explicat. Art. 18. fol. 37. Thou seest heere Io. 6. the Body and Bloud of Christ to be nothing else, then the word of fayth: to wit, that his Body dead for vs, and his bloud shed for vs, hath redeemed vs: heere flesh must be vnderstood fayth, or Christs death. But these are ouer grosse to require confutation. The second proofe out of the new Testament, is taken
from the words of the Institution of the Sacrament, where our Sauiour performed his former promise, when at his last Supper,Mat. 26.26.27.28. Mar. 14.22.23 24. Luke. 22.19.20.1. Cor 11.24 25. He tooke bread and blessed and brake, and he gaue to his Disciples and sayd, take yee, and eate, this is my Body. And taking the Chalice he gaue thankes, and gaue to them saying, drinke yee all of this, for this is my Bloud of the new Testament, which shalbe shed for many vnto remission of sinnes. These wordes of themselues are most plaine for the real Presence, and almost euery word doth confirme the same. In so much that Zwinglius speaking heereof sayth,In Ex∣planat. Art. 18. what can be spoken more cleerly, then, This is my body? In like sort Caluin,Admo∣nit. vlt. ad VVestphal. p. 812. Beza ad repetit. San∣ctis. p. 8. I do not deny, but that Christ would speake most plainly. Beza,Mus∣cul. in loc. tit. de coena. Perkins of the supper. Col. 858. Hospin. Hist. part. 1. c. 2. Christ could not speake more plainly or significantly of the Sacraments. And the like is acknow∣ledged by sundry other Protestants. Yea these wordes of Christ are so playne for vs, that Caluin will not haueInstit. 4. c. 17. §. 20. The wordes of Christ to be made sub∣iect to the common Rule, nor to be squared by the Grammer. And indeed the words of Institution are so conuincing, that Pro∣testants refuse to be tryed thereby. Peter Martyr sayth,Cont. Gardiner. fol. 440. That which he addeth is Idle, that in the mystery of the Eucharist we are to fly to the words of our Lord ordayning it. CaluinDe rat. Concor. p. 866. It is not agreable to reason, to insist in the essentiall Verbe (is). Bullinger,De rat. Concor. p. 866. We desire of our Aduersaries, that they do not heerafter as heer∣tofore they haue done, make the wordes of the Lords Supper, whereof the Controuersy is, as it were the foundation of their opinion. Zwin∣gliusDe vera & fal. Relig. c. de Euchar. p. 267. We do not reply of those wordes (of the Supper) but vpon this one word, The flesh profiteth nothing, Yea they scornefully call this proofe,Apud Schlusseth. l. 4. Theol. Cal∣uin. art. 20. Pet. Mart. apud Schluss. l. 4. Theol. Caluin. art. 20. A fyue words proofe. Burensis calleth thē,Apud Schluss tom. 3. catal. haeret in Praefat. four impotent words. Shelden,De mi∣raculis Antichristi. p. 82. fiue omnipotent wordes. HospinianHist. part. 2. fol. 63. fyue magicall words. And Peter Martyr further saithIn Dial. Col. 130. You haue alwaies seemed to me to be lesse wise then is meet, when you so labour for an opinion as absurd as vnprofitable, nor haue any thing to defend it but the word of Christ, This is my Body. So that the wordes of Christ himselfe, though most plaine, must not now be sufficient to confute and confound an hereticke, though neuer so absurd.
But though the wordes be thus confessedly plaine as you haue seene, yet Prot. greatly labour by sundry sleightes to euade them; for so concerning the word, blessed, wheras we affirme that our Sauiour vsed not to blessed insensible creatures, but when he was to worke some great and won∣derfull thing:Io. 6. Mat. 15.36. Mar. 8.67. Io. 11 44. Luc. 9 16. so that his Benediction was not only praying, but euen working, as when God gaueGen. 1.22. Fecun∣dity to liuing creatures, it is said, he blessed them; Euen as on the contrary when Christ cursed the fig-tree, forthwith it withered. Protestantes reply, that blessing, is not referred to the Bread, but that therby only praise and thankesgiuing is giuen to God. But first seeing S. Marke saith,14, 22. Iesus tooke bread, and blessing, brake and gaue to them, it cannot be said, but as, brake, and gaue are referred to the matter which was in his hands, so also, blessed, must likewise be referred to the same matter. Secondly S. Paul directly applyeth the blessing to the Cup, saying,1. Cor. 10.1. The Chalice of Benediction which we blesse &c. And in like sort it is vnderstood by the AncientIustin. in Apol. 2. liturg. Iaco∣bi. Basilij, Chrisost. Cypr. l 2. Ep. 3. ad Caeci∣lium. Fathers. But yet for all this Zwinglius expoundeth Blessing thus,Tom. 2. in Exegesi fol. 355. It came to passe when he Blessed, that is, when he had them farewell. So that blessing the bread in the Institu∣tion of the B. Sacrament, is a bidding farewell to the Apo∣stles: to such blind absurdity doth obstinacy bring an here∣ticke. But when such foolish Interpretations will not serue their turne, then they spare not to corrupt the Text it selfe: for so, because the words, Benediction, and we blesse, in those wordes of the Apostle1. Cor. 10.16. The Chalice of Benediction which we do blesse, do proue the wine in the Chalice to be conse∣crated: Zwinglius in great dislike therof, sayth,De coena. fol. 294. Tom. 2. They ought not to vse in this place the words of Benediction and blessing, for these are vsually taken almost for the word of Consecrating. And therfore to auoyd Consecration, he translateth the forsaid wor∣des thus,Tom. 4. in. 1. Cor. p. 470. The Cup of thankesgiuing wherwith we giue thankes, is it not the Communion of the Bloud of Chrst? CaluinIn Math. 26.26. also not only expoundeth the word , benedixit, blessed, by gratias egit, gaue thankes; but also in the very Text of S. Ma∣thew he translateh, when he had giuen thankes: And yet as him∣selfe
there confesseth. Marke and Mathew vse the word of blessing. This iniury vnto the sacred Text is so great, that Illyricus saith therof,In 1. Cor. 5. Some corrupt this Texte, translating the Cup of thankesgiuing wherwith we giue thankes, and so they vse in their Ly∣turgies a corrupted Texte, insteed of the wordes of Institution, or the sacred supper, doubling their Sacriledge. To this Corruption of the Texte of Scripture, our Prot. still flye, when all other shiftes do faile them. But to proceed, (for few of these sacred wordes must escape them, against which they will not offer some vio∣lence) by the Pronowne, this, some Prot. vnderstand Bread or wine, making the sense to be this, This Bread is my Bo∣dy. But this to be false, appeareth in that the word, this, must either be taken substantiuely, or adiectiuely; if the later, then it cannot agree with Bread or wine, seeing this both in Greeke , and in Latin, Hoc, is the neuter Gender, which agreeth with Body, which also is in Greeke, , and in Latin, Corpus, the neuter Gender; wheras bread both in Greeke, , and Latin Panis, is the Masculine Gender. So also wine in Greeke is the Masculine Gender, and Bloud, the Neuter: and so this is the Neuter Gender, to wit, ; hoc, not, , hic. And of the contrary in Latin, wine is the Neuter Gender, and Bloud the Masculine, and yet all read, hic est sanguis. If, this, be taken substantiuely, for, this thing, then it cannot be vnderstood of Bread, for it cannot be so taken, when the thing it selfe is present, & openly seene & knowne, vnles the said thing be also of the Neuter Gender: Wheras here our Sauiour tooke bread, accepit panem &c. and said, hoc est &c. Who seeing his Brother present, and poin∣ting to him, would say, Hoc est frater meus, this thing is my Bro∣ther. Danaeus obseruing the great aduantage giuen here by the Pronowne, This, hath inuented an excellent helpe in these words;L. de Euchar. c. 1. p. 543. What if I shall except the naturall wordes of Christ, to haue bene only these two, My flesh: I shall with one word make void, all that proofe of the Pronowne, Hoc, This. Nothing lesse, but you would strongly proue your selfe to be a man void of all honesty or conscience, by so grosly corrupting
the word of God. Some Puritanes are not ashamed to mi∣stranslate the words thus. This Bread is my Body: of which ad∣dition to the Text M. Hutton saith,Answ. to the last part of reasons for refusall of subscri∣ption. p. 29. 266. Had it beene in our Communion booke, we should haue bene challenged for adding these words (This bread) more, then is in the Euangelists, or S. Paul &c. But the matter is so cleere that Carolostadius doth referre the particleIn Zwingl. l. E∣pist. p. 543. This, not to Bread, but to Christs Body: wher∣of he giueth this good reason,In dial. de coena.  is a Greeke pronowne of the neuter Gender: now the word , in Latin panis, is the Masculine, and therfore the pronowne  cannot be ioyned to it &c. Therfore I must of necessity confesse, that Christ saying, This is my Body, to haue pointed vnto his Body, not to bread. So cleere and confessed it is, that the pronowne, This, cannot relate to bread, but to Body. Besides all this S. Luke plainly sayth,Luc. 22.20. : Hic calix Nouum Testamentum in sanguine meo pro vobis effusus, where the wordes, which is shed, in Greeke, differing in Case from Bloud, and in Gender from Testament, haue true relation only to the Cup: now it was not the vessell or wine which was shed for vs, but the true Bloud of Christ, therfore the Cup doth not signify the Cup of wyne, but the Cup of Bloud. To this Argument, Beza had no other Answere, but only to deny the Text of the Ghospell to be perfect, for writing vpon this place he sayth,Annot. in Luc. 22. Seeing these wordes, if we looke vnto the Construction, do necessarily belong not to bloud, but to the Cup, and yet they cannot be vnderstood of the wyne, much lesse of the Cup, either it is a manifest incongruity, seeing it should haue bene said, : or rather, seeing these were noted at the Margine of Matthew and Marke, they afterwardes crept into the Texte. And agreably Beza in his Latin Translation changeth, Quod, into, Qui, saying, Hoc poculum est Nouum il∣lud Testamentum per sanguinem meum, qui pro vobis effunditur. And the same Corruption is vsed in the French Caluinian Bibles. But it seemes this charging S. Luke with incongrui∣ty, did make him somewhat ashamed of himselfe: And ther∣fore in another place he sayth,Ad Re∣petit. Santis. c. 8. p. 18. My Coniectures tend to this, that rather then I will contend Luke to haue committed a Soloecophe∣nes,
either this particle, to &c. to be inserted into Lukes Texts, out of the other Euangelistes, or to haue bene casually il changed by the writers (or Printers) although Coppies do agree: to such hard shiftes is Beza driuen. Piscator willIn Re∣fut. Sophism. Hunnij. p. 648. not admit, , to be refer∣red to the Cup, and addeth that, It may be, that Clause crept out of Matthew. Bucanus acknowledgeth that,Loc. 48. p. 688. If we looke into the construction of the wordes according to Luke, , is re∣ferred to the Cup. Zwinglius thinketh that it isResp. ad Confss. Lu∣theri. Tom. 2. fol. 511. an Enal∣lage of the Nominatiue Case for the Datiue: but if it were lawfull to go by, may be, and such strange changing of Ca∣ses, any man may from Scripture defend what he list. But this truth is so cleere, as that our owne Whitaker confesseth that,Ad rat. 1. Camp p. 11. If thou wilt adhere to the wordes themselues, it is necessa∣ry either that thou confesse the Cup to be shed for vs, or that thou bring in a Soloecisme: which is either to acknowledge our Catho∣licke Reall Presence, or to accuse the Euangelist of Incon∣gruity. But Castalio, (whose Translation is by seuerallHum∣fred. de Rat. interpret. l. 1. p. 62. 63. Prot. preferred before all others) translateth thus,Gesnerus in Biblioth. Sebast. Castal. Furius in Defens. Cast. p. 236. Hoc po∣culum est Nouum foedus, quod fit per meum sanguinem, quod est pro vobis effundendum: so plainly referring quod and effundendum, to poculum, and not to sanguinem. And Beza himselfe confesseth that,Annot. in Luc. 22.20. These wordes if we respect Construction, necessarily do not belong to the bloud, but to the Cup. Agreably to which saith Whi∣taker,Answere to Reinoldes p. 210. The wordes in Luke 22.20. in the Greeke that Beza translated, by Construction indeed require, that the Cup is called the New Testament, which is shed for vs: In which respect Beza transla∣teth them otherwise &c. But Enthymius expounding these wordes saith expresly,In Luc. 22. That which is said, which is shed for you, is to be referred to the Cup. So vnanswerable are the wor∣des of Scripture, when they are not corrupted by Prote∣stantes. To come now to the litle word, is, Zwinglians therby vnderstand, to signify: but this to be false, appeareth, in that it hath another signification most ordinary and common, in so much as all other verbes are resolued into this, and some o∣ther thing. Wherfore Ochinus maketh this strange Euasion
saying,Apud Schluss. l. 2. Theol Calu. Art. 23. fol. 125. We answere it may be that when Christ said, This is my Body, he would haue said. This bread signifyeth my Body. So ma∣king it doubtfull whether Christ spake those wordes, which he would and intended to speake. But I will answere this impious foolery with the wordes of S. Hilary,L. 8 de Trinit. Doth he which is the Word, not know the signification of the word &c. And he that is vertue, was he in that Infirmity, that he could not vtter what he would haue to be vnderstood? he vttered plainly the true and sincere Sacramentes of Euangelicall faith. Zwinglius hath a better shift, which the Prot. Schlus∣selburge relateth in these wordes,Theol. Caluin. l. 2. art. 6. fol. 43. It is most certaine that the Sacramentaries do falsify and change the word of God himselfe: And truly we haue a notable and euident Example of this in Zwin∣glius I de vera & fal. Relig p. 262. where in recitall of the wordes of Institution of the sonne of God, for the verbe is, he putteth, signifieth for so Zwinglius reciteth the Text: So therfore hath Luke, with whom of the Euangelistes, we will content our selues: And taking Bread, he gaue thankes, and brake, and gaue them, saying, This signifyeth my Body which is giuen for you: hitherto Zwinglius &c. Neither can this wickednes of Zwinglius be excused, with any colour, the thing is most manifest &c. And in like sort the Tigurines in their Bibles, haue changed it into (significat, doth signify) asTheol. Caluin. l. 2. c. 6 fol. 44. Schlusselburge testifieth himselfe, to haue seene and read. And Zwinglius himselfe dared to write thus,Tom. 2. de vera & fal. Relig. c. de Eucharistia. fol. 210. So therfore hath Luke, with whom of the Euangelistes we will be content, Hoc significat Corpus meum quod pro vobis datur: this signifyeth my Body which is giuen for you. For as himselfe confesseth elswhere,Tom. 2. l. de coena, fol. 174. If (est, is,) be put substantiuely it must needs be confessed the true substance of Chri∣stes true flesh to be present in the Supper. And,Resp ad Billican. fol. 261. If thou take, est, is, substantiuely, then the Papistes haue conquered. This Corruption is so grosse and wicked, that the Prot. Schlusselburge sayth therof,Theol. Caluin. l. 2. c. 6. fol. 43. This only one Corruption of the wordes of the Sonne of God, ought to terrify all men, from the Company and impiety of the Caluinistes. The absurdity heerof is yet further proued by these words of S. Luke, This Cup the new Testament in my Bloud: where the sentence standing thus imperfect, for want of a Verbe to
knit the partes togeather, it cannot be supplied by the word signifyeth, because the Nowne, Testament, is heere put in the Nominatiue Case, whereas the word, signifyeth, would re∣quire the Accusatiue. Wherfore in this respect, Prot. in their Bybles, are enforced to supply the sentence with the Verbe, is. Now is it but coulourable, that the Verbe, is, being not expressed, but only vnderstood, and thereupon placed to make vp the sense of the Text, should so soone as it is so of necssity placed, be immediatly cast out, and changed into the verbe signifyeth: that the vse of speaking doth often make it left out, as being easy to be supplied or vnderstood. I willing∣ly graunt; but that euer any vse of speach, should in such case, cause it to be (as in this exāple) brought in & placed, & yet withal to loose its proper signification, is no lesse strange, then is our Aduersaries Doctrine grounded thereupon. And seeing the Pronowne, this, as I haue proued, cannot relate to Bread, but to Body, to say, that his Body should signify his Body, were more then Idle. And therfore M. Hooker & other Prot. teach, that there can be no figure in the word, is. M. Hookers words are,Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 177. We do not interpret the wordes of Christ, as if the name of his Body, did import but the figure of his Body, and to, be, were only to, signify. By the word, Body, some vnderstand Christ his mysti∣call Body, to wit, his Church: but this is most absurd it not being giuen for vs, nor shed for vs, nor yet can possbly be eaten of vs. Others a signe of his Body; but this cannot be, for as not a signe of his Body, but the true Body of Christ, was giuen for vs vpō the Crosse, so also Christs Body in the Scipture is neuer taken, but eyther for his mysticall or true naturall Body. This is so certaine, that D. Whitaker and M. Hooker do both confesse. That,Whitak. Cont. Dur. l. 2. p. 280. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 5. sect. 67. pa. 177. The Trope is not in the Body or Blood of Christ, nor in bread or wyne &c. Bsides, the Pro∣nowne, This, not signifying Bread (as before) there is not any thing whereof a signe of the Body should be affirmed or predicated, vnles they will haue the Naturall Body of Christ, to be a signe of it selfe. But all this is so impertinent, that other Prot. disclaime in affirming, that,Collatio Cath. & orth fidei, p. 358. In the words of Chrsts Testament, by the
word, Body, they vnderstnd nothing els, but the figure of Christs Bo∣dy, the true Presence of Christs Body denyed. And the very same is affirmed byEccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. M. Hooker. Z inglius is of opinion, that,Apud Shlussel. in Theol. Calu. l 1. art. 22. fol. 101. Body in the words of the Supper, may also be expounded for the Church. And,Tom. 4. in Io. 6. Heer∣by the ords of Christ are made cleere, This is my Body, where Body is put for Death: according to which, Christ is made to say, Take yee, and eate, This is my Church, or this is my Death. Ridiculous. To proceed, these other wordes, is giuen for you, is shed for you according to the Greeke in all the three Euangelists, and S. Paul, are in the Present tense, and before his Passion, and therefore cannot agree to Bread and wyne, which can∣not be sayd to haue beene then giuen for vs: neyther to his giuing vpon the Crosse, for that guift was not then present; they do therefore only relate to his Body and Bloud, which he then gaue & offered for vs at his last Supper. Now wher∣as Fulke replyeth that,Ag. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26 sect. 10. The Apostles and Euangelistes vsed the Present tense for the Future, as signifying Christs Passion was at hand: and that the Vulgar Interpreter translateth accordingly,Mat. 26.28. which shallbe shed: it is easily answered, that though the Pre∣sent tense be vsed sometymes for the future, yet much more often to signify a thing present: and the rather heere, in that not one only, but all the three Euangelists, and S. Paul do to our Sauiours action then present, add and vse the Present tense. As for the vulgar Translation, Prot. are in great straits when they do appeale from the Originall text to it, which they affirme to beWhi∣tak. in his Answere to Reinolds. p. 25-26. 344. An old rotten Translation, full of Corrup∣tions in all parts thereof, and of all others most corrupt. But yet in defence of the vulgar Interpreter, I say, that as he translateth in the Future tense, which shalbe shed; so also he vseth the Present tense, translatingLuc. 22.19. which is giuen, both which he vseth to signify a certaine truth, the Present tense signifying, that his Body was then giuen in the Sacrament, the future not impugning the former sense, but signifying withall fur∣ther, that it should be then, and also afterwards giuen vpon the Crosse. So little do these Euasions preuaile agaynst the truth.
The third proofe is taken from such places as contayne the vse of this Sacrament, as1. Cor. 10.16. The Chalice of Benediction which we do blesse, is it not the Communication of theSee Chrisost. ho. 24. in 2. ad Cor. c. 10. Bloud of Christ? and the Bread which we breake, is it not the participation of the Body of our Lord? As also,1. Cor. 11.29. he that eateth and drinketh vn∣worthily, eateth and drinketh Iudgment, or (as the Prot. Transla∣tion hath it) damnation, to himselfe not discerning the Body of our Lord: or, as it is elswhere;Ib. vers. 27. shalbe guilty of the Body and Bloud of our Lord. Here some are reprehended for receiuing vnworthily the BodyBasil. l. 2. de Bap. c. 3. Chrys. ho. 14. in 1. Cor. ho. 83. in Mat. ho. 45. in Io. Hieron. in c. 1. Malach. Theophil. Oecom. cum. Ambr. Theodor. in. 1. Cor. c. 11. Aug. l. 5. de Bap. c. 8. l. 10 cont. Cresc. c. 25. Ep. 120. ad Honorat. c. 27. et. ep. 162. and Bloud of Christ; but these re∣ceiue not with spirit and faith, for then they receiued, accor∣ding to Prot. worthily, therfore they receiue only with the Body, and yet, as so, they are said to receiue the Body and Bloud of Christ, euen to the vnworthy Receiuer: therfore the Body of Christe is present in the Eucharist; for as it is in heauen, it cannot be receiued with the corporall mouth. I wil but name vnto you the Interpretation made by Zwin∣glius of these wordes, The Chalice of Benediction which we blesse, which he expoundeth thus,In. 1. Cor. 10. The Cup of thankesgiuing wherwith we giue thankes, what I pray you is it else then we our sel∣ues? So that according to him, Blessing is only Thankesgi∣uing, and the Cup, is our selues, that drinke the Cup. Lastly by these wordes, This is my Body, our Sauiour in∣stituted a Sacrament, and which is more, with a Comman∣dement therto annexed, saying, Take eate &c. Do this &c. He also hereby made his last Will, and Testament, which he would neuer do in wordes so figuratiue and obscure, as that the most learned could not vnderstand the same, seeing therby insteed of greatest Blessings, which doubtles he only intended, he should haue giuen and left vnto vs most dan∣gerous occasions of errours, scandall, ruine, mischiefe, stryfe and Contention. And I would demaund of a Sacramenta∣ry Minister, whose Father making his will, should by ex∣presse wordes and writing, make this his sonne his heire of all his gould; what he would thinke of that Iudge, who should expound his Fathers wordes not of true gould, but of Counters, figures, or Pictures of gold? Certainly he would thinke his sentence to be false, vniust, & maliciously
wrested. Now if his Fathers mind was truly agreable to this Sentence, then would he complaine, that his owne Fa∣ther had deceiued him: none of which without blasphemy can be applyed to Christ. But this is a truth so certaine, that Melancthon sayth,In l. Epist. Oeco∣lamp. and Zwing. Ep. ad Prideri∣cum. p. 645. I do not fynd a firme reason, why by the name of Body in the wordes of the Supper, only the signe of a Body absent, should be vnder∣stood, for although in the sacred Scriptures, there be wordes full of fi∣gures of all sortes, yet there is great difference betwene the narrations of thinges done, and diuine ordinations, or decrees of the nature, or will of God &c. For it is necessary that the meaning of those places be certaine, from whence Decrees, or Articles be taken: if it were lawfull to interpret these any waye, all thinges might be depraued &c. In like sort Musculus acknowledgeth that,Loc. com. c. de Cae∣na p. 332. Christ at his last supper made his Testament, which argueth that he did it in wordes plaine to be vnderstood; for as the Apostle sayth,Gal. 3.15. A mans Testa∣ment being confirmed no man despiseth, or further disposeth, accor∣ding to Beza's Translation, if it be but a mans Testament &c. no man addeth thereto, much lesse then to our Sauiours Testament may Prot. add so many of their owne most different and absurd Glosses. To this purpose sayth Andraeas,Collat. Cath. & orth. fidei &c. p. 321. n. 39. The words of Christ are the words of a Testament, in which he speaketh expressely and perspicuously, that his will may be vnderstood by al. But to conclude, what Scriptures can be so plaine, or reason so conuincing for the recalling of an Heretike, when Zwin∣glius auouched, as before, that,Apud Schusselb. l. 4. Theol. Calu. art. 9. p. 344. And see the like in Resp. ad Billica∣num. To. 2. fol. 263. Although God with all his Blessed Angels, should descend from heauen, and should sweare in the Supper of the Lord the Body and Bloud of Christ to be giuen to all that receyue it, yet I neyther could, nor would belieue (saith he) vnles with my eyes and hands I should see and feele the same. Yea so plaine are the words of Scripture in our behalfe, that Zwinglius saythIn Ex∣plan. Art. 18. What can be spoken more cleerly, then, This is my Body? CaluinIn Ad∣mon. vlt. ad West ph. p. 812. I do not deny, but that Christ would speake most cleerly. Beza,Ad Repetit. Santis. p. 8. Christ could not speake more expressely, and more significantly of the Sacramentes. AndDe coe∣na cont. Westphal. in Tract. I heol. p. 216. we haue truly often said, that which now also I will repeat, that there cannot be kept , the Propriety of the words, in these wor∣des, This is my Body, but the Papisticall Transubstantiation must be
established. Chamierus repeateth and alloweth this last saying o Beza for most true, saying,Epist. Iesuit. part. 1. p. 49. 16. I acknowledge my Maister his speach to be most true. The Deuines of Geneua professe to belieue, that,Apol. Modest. &c. p. 18. If the wordes of Christ be to be taken simply, it is necessary that the dotage (so are heretickes pleased to terme it) of Transubstantiation must infallibly follow. D. Reinolds is in∣forced to say,In his Confer. c. 2. sect. 1. p. 13. I will grant the wordes of Christ, This is my Body, in shew rather to fauour your Reall Presence, then that Sacra∣mentall which we defend. So confessedly cleere are the sacred Scriptures taken in their literall sense, for the Reall Pre∣sence and Transubstantiation. SECT. V. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of our Catholicke Doctrine of the Reall Pre∣sence and Transubstantiation. THe Ancient Fathers are no lesse cleere in their Inter∣pretations: so S. Iustin Martyr writing herof, saith,In Apo∣logia. 2. ad Antonium. This nourishment is called amongst vs the Euchariste, the which is lawfull for no other to receiue, then he who belieueth our Doctrine to be true, and is washed with the lauer for remission of sinnes, and re∣generation, euen as Christ hath giuen it to the liuing. For we do not re∣ceiue these Elements, as common bread, nor as common drinke, but euen as Christ our Sauiour was made flesh by the word of God, and had flesh and bloud to procure our Saluation. After the same manner also, we haue bene taught, that, that nourishment, wherin thankes are giuen, by the prayers of his word proceeding from him, is the flesh and bloud of that incarnated Iesus, whereupon our bloud and flesh are nourished by mutation. For the Apostles in their Commentaries, lefte written by them, which are called the Ghospell, haue so deliuered, that Iesus com∣manded them; for that he taking bread, when he had giuen thanks, did say; do you this in remembrance of me, This is my Body. And the Cup likewise being taken, and thankes being giuen, to haue said, This is my Bloud. The Centuristes speaking of Iustin and Irenaeus, say,Cent. 2. Col. 48. Neither did they thinke Bread and wine to be only naked figures of
the Body and bloud of Christe &c. They taught according to the word and Institution of Christ himselfe, with bread and wine the flesh and bloud of Christ Incarnate to be distributed, as the place of Iustine doth plainly testify, in Apol. 2. So confessedly are these two Ancients for the reall Presence. Origen comparing the former figures with our truthes, saith,Ho. 7. i Numer. In former tymes Baptisme was in obscurity in the Cloud & in the Sea, now Regeneration is in kind, in water and the holy Ghost: then obscurely Manna was the food, but now, in forme, the flesh of the word of God is the true food: euen as he saith, because my flesh is truly meate, and my bloud is truly drinke. And inHo. 16. in Num. another place, Seeing the drinking of bloud is forbidden by God with so strong Com∣mandes, what people is this that vseth to drink bloud? To this he ans∣wereth, But Christian people, a faithfull people, heareth and imbra∣ceth these thinges, and followeth him who sayth,Io. 6.54. Vnles you shall eate my flesh and drinke my bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you: be∣cause my flesh is truly meate, and my bloud is truly drinke. And the same Origen elswhere to the like effect affirmeth,Ho. 5. in diuersis. When thou receiuest the holy foode, and that incorruptible banquet, when thou dost enioy the bread and Cup of lyfe, thou dost eate and drinke the Body and Bloud of our Lord, then our Lord entreth vnder thy roofe: and therfore then humbling thy selfe imitate this Centurion, and say, O Lord I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder the roofe of my house: for where he entreth vnworthily, there he entreth to Iudge, and punish the receiuer. The Prot. Scultetus acknowledgeth that,Medulla Theol. p. 169. The Centuristes of Magdeburge c. 10. cent. 3. do ascribe to Origen the erroneous doctrine of Consubstantiation. Magnes also another Greeke Father, and very ancient, liuing in the age 350. teacheth the same doctrine, saying,Ad Theosthenem. l. 3. If therfore the earth be affirmed of the Body, (that is, if the Body be called Earth) in reguard of the ancient origine, and the Earth was Christes owne and proper Creature, by reason of Creation, and of this Earth Bread and wyne hath come, of it (to wit Bread) the body of man hath bene made againe, and this Body Christ hath put on worthi∣ly, iustly, deseruedly, when he tooke Bread and wyne he hath said, This is my Body &c. For it is not a figure of his Body or bloud, as some by a stupid and senseles Exposition haue tryfled, but rather truly the Body & Bloud of Christe &c.
But who can speake more plainly then S. Cyrill of Hierusalem?Catech. 4. Mystag. When then Christ himselfe doth thus affirme and say of Bread, This is my Body, who euer hereafter dare doubt? and the same Christ also confirming and saying, This is my bloud, who I say, may doubt, and say, there is not his bloud? In tymes past he changed water into wyne, which is neere to bloud, in Cana of Galilee, by his on∣ly will, and shall he not be worthy whom we may belieue, that by trans∣mutation, he turned wyne into his bloud? For if being inuited to corporall Mariages he wrought a stupendious Miracle, shall we not much more confesse him to haue giuen his body, and his Bloud to the Children of the spouse? Wherfore with all certainty and assurance let vs receiue the Body and Bloud of Christ, for vnder the forme of Bread, there is giuen thee the Body, and vnder the forme of wyne, his bloud is giuen thee, that receiuing the body and bloud of Christ, thou mayest be made vnto him compartner of his body and bloud: , we shalbe made bearers of Christ, when we haue receiued his body & bloud into our Members, and so, as Peter saith, we shalbe made partakers of the diuine nature &c. Knowing this, and houlding it for most certaine, that this bread which is seene of vs, is not bread, al∣though the tast perceiue it to be bread, but that it is the body of Christ: and the wyne which is seene of vs, although to the sense of taste it seeme to be wyne, yet it is not wyne, but the bloud of Christ. And in another place,Ad Ca∣losyrium. Do not doubt whether this be true, he manife∣stly saying, This is my Body. So manifest are Christs wordes, & S. Cyrils Exposition for the Reall Presence, and Transub∣stantiation. S. Chrysostome also to the like effect sayth,Ho. 83. ex. c. 26. Mat. Let vs therfore euery where belieue God, neither let vs gainsay him, al∣though it seeme absurd to sense, and our cogitation, that which he speaketh; his word surmounts both sense and our reason: what we do in all thinges, but especially in the mysteries, let vs do it, not looking vpon those thinges only which lye before vs, but also behoulding his wordes, for we cannot be deceiued by his wordes, but our sense is most apt to be deceyued: his wordes cannot be false, this sense is often and often de∣ceiued: therfore because he said it, This is my body, let vs not doubt, but belieue, and let vs behould it with the eies of our vnderstanding, for no sensible thing is giuen vnto vs by Christe, but by thinges indeed sensible: but all things which he deliuered are insensible. So also in Bap∣tisme
by water which is a sensible thing; that guift is granted: but that which is done therin, to wit, the regeneration and renouation, is a cer∣taine thing to be conceyued, for if thou wert incorporeall, he had giuen vnto thee barely those incorporeall guiftes, but because thy soule is con∣ioyned to a Body in sensible thinges, thinges intellectuall, or to be vnder∣stood, are deliuered vnto thee. O how many do now say, I would see his forme and shape, his garmentes, his shooes; him therfore thou seest, him thou touchest, him thou eatest &c. these workes are not of humane power, which Christ wrought in that supper: he also doth now worke, he doth perfect: we hould the Office and order of ministers, but it is he who truly sanctifyeth, and by transmutation altereth. I will rather giue my lyfe then I will giue our Lordes Body to any one vnworthily, I will rather suffer my bloud to be shed, then deliuer that sacred bloud, except to a worthy person. Againe,Hom. de prodit. Iudae. quae est Tom. 3. There was sometimes a Pasche of the Iewes but it is abrogated, and made voyd by the comming of the spirituall Pasche, which Christ deliuered, for when they did eate (sayth he) & drinke, he tooke bread, & brake, & said, This is my Body which shalbe giuē for you &c. And againe, he tooke the Chalice & said, This is my bloud which shalbe shed for many to remission of sinnes. And Iu∣das was present whē Christ spake these words, This is the bloud: Speake Iudas, This is the Bloud which thou souldest for 30. pence, for which before thou bargaynedst with the Pharisees? O mercy of Christ, O mad∣nes of Iudas! who couenanted to sell him for 30. pence, and Christ of∣fereth to him the bloud which he hath sould, that he might haue forgi∣uenes of sinnes, if so be it he would not be wicked, for Iudas was pre∣sent, and made partaker of that Sacrifice. And expounding those words of the Apostle,1. Cor. 10.16. The Chalice of Benediction which we do blesse, is it not the Commnication of the Bloud of Christ, he sayth: the meaning of these (wordes) is this, that which is in the Chalice, is that which flowed from his syde, and we are partakers of it. The Centuristes cyte many particular sayings of S. Chrysostome wherein, say they,Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 517. He seemeth to confirme Transubstantia∣tion. But he is so farre from only seeming, that most direct∣ly he teacheth Real Presence, Transubstantiation, Iudas his receiuing the Bloud, the Sacrifice at the last Supper, & that these things are to be belieued, though they seeme absurd to sense and reason. S. Cyrill of Alexandria secureth vs of this truth, say∣ing,
Ep. ad Calosyrium. Neyther doubt thou whether this be true, he plainly saying, This is my Body, but rather receiue & belieue the words of our Sauiour, for wheras he is the Truth, he doth not lye: they are mad therefore, who say that the mysticall Benediction doth cease from sanctification, if any relickes thereof remaine to the next day: for the most holy Body of Christ shall not be changed, but the vertue of Benediction, & the quick∣ning grace is euerlasting in it; for the quickning vertue is the only be∣gotten word of God the Father, which was made flesh, not ceasing to be the word, but making the flesh quickning &c. It did therefore be∣seeme him to be in some sort vnited to our bodyes, by his holy flesh and precious bloud, which we receyue in the quickning Benediction in bread and wine: for least we should abhorre flesh and bloud, put vpon the Sacred Aultars, God descending to our frailties, doth instill to the things offered the power of lyfe, turning and conuerting them into the truth of his owne flesh, that the body of lyfe as a certayne quickning seed, may be found in vs. Whereupon he addeth, Do this in remem∣brance of me. S. Cyril is so playne heerein, that Peter Martyr sayth,In his Ep. to Beza annexed to his Com. Pla. p. 106. I will not so easily subscribe to Cyril, who affirmed such a Communion as thereby euen the substance of the flesh and bloud of Christ is ioyned to the blessing. S. Iohn Damascene proueth the same thus,Ortho∣doxa fidei. c. 14. Wher∣fore if the word of God be liuely and efficacious, and our Lord did all whatsoeuer he would; If he said, Let there be light, and light was made, Let there be a firmament, and it was made: if the heauens were esta∣blished by the word of God, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth; If heauen and Earth, the water also and fyre, and aire, and all the ornamentes of them, were made complete and accomplished, and moreouer this noblest Creature called Man: If God himselfe the word, since so it was his will became man, and framed to himselfe flesh, with∣out humane seede, of the pure and immaculate bloud of the holy and euer Virgin, what can at last be alleadged, but that of Bread he cā make his Body, of wyne and water he can make his bloud? He spake of old, Let the Earth bring forth the greene herbe and she produced, inforced, and strengthened by his diuine precept, her fruite and buddes, when as yet there was no raine. God said, This is my Body, This is my bloud &c. this do you in remembrance of me, and by his Omnipotent Com∣mandement this is done till he come (for he vsed these wordes, till he come) and the raine for this new Corne is the ouershadowing vertue of
the holy Ghost: for as whatsoeuer God made, he made it by the power of the holy Ghost, in like manner now also the working of the spirit doth effect those thinges which surmount nature, and which cannot be com∣prehended or vnderstood but by only saith. After what manner, at the last shall this be done, demanded the holy Virgin; because I know not men? The Archangell Gabriel answered, The holy Ghost shall come v∣pon thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee. Thou also now demaundest, how bread and wyne mixt with water, is made the Body and bloud of Christ? And I in like manner answere thee: the ho∣ly spirit commeth vpon, and maketh them; which thinges so made, exceed all ability of speech and vnderstanding of the mynd. Moreouer bread and wyne are therfore vsed, because humane imbecility is well knowne and manifested to God; because for the most part it is auerse, and can∣not endure but thinges common by Custome. Hence it commeth to passe, that God for his accustomed Indulgence towards vs, worketh those thinges which surmount nature by things vsuall & familiar to na∣ture. And euen as he hath therfore coupled the Grace of the holy Ghost in Baptisme with oyle & water, & hath made it the Lauer of regeneration, because it is vsuall amongst men to be washed with water, and annoin∣ted with oyle: in the same manner, because the vse and custome of men, doth so beare it that men eate bread, and drinke wyne and water, ther∣fore he hath ioyned his diuinity with these, and hath made them his Bo∣dy and his Bloud, that by things vsuall and agreable to nature, we may aryse to supernaturall things. Doubtles the body truly vnited to the Di∣uinity, is that body which was borne of the holy Virgin, not that, that Body was assumed of the heauen and descended, but because the very Bread and wyne are changed into the Body and bloud of God. But if thou require how it be done, let it suffice thee to heare, that it is done by the holy Ghost, as our Lord also framed to himselfe, and in himselfe flesh of the holy Mother of God by the holy Ghost. Neyther any more is knowne and searched out of vs, then that the word of God is true and efficacious and omnipotent, for the manner is such, that no reason can search it out. Moreouer let it not seeme strange to say this also, that euen as Bread by way of foode, and wyne and water by way of drinke are changed into the Body and Bloud of the eater and drinker, and be∣come another body, and diuerse from the body they were: So the bread of Proposition, and the wyne and water by Inuocation of the holy Spi∣rit and his comming, are turned into the Body and Bloud of Christ af∣ter
an admirable manner, neyther are they two, but one and the same. Neyther truly are bread and wyne the figure of Christs Body (for be this farre from vs to say) but the very selfe same body of our Lord, qua∣lifyed with his Diuinity: because where our Lord himselfe hath sayd; this is not a signe of a body, but a Body: nor a signe of bloud, but bloud &c. That S. Damascene taught Transubstantiation, it is ac∣knowledged, and disliked by manyCarlile that Christ descended not into Hell. fol. 58. Oecolamp. in Epist. l. 3. p. 661. Whitak. cont. Du∣raeum. p. 238. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 83. 90. Protestants. To come to the Latin Fathers, S. Cyprian writing purposely of this point, speaketh thus,De coena Domini. This bread which our Lord did reach vnto his Disciples, changed not in forme or figure, but in nature, became flesh by the Omnipotency of the word: and euen as in the person of Christ the humanity was seene, and the Diuinity lay hid; so the Essence infuseth it selfe after an vnspeakable manner into the visible Sacrament &c. Agayne,De coena Dom. propè init. They had eaten and drun∣ken of the same bread according to the visible forme, but before those words, that common bread was only fit to nourish the body &c. but after it was sayd by our Lord, Do this in Commemoration of me, this is my flesh, and this is my bloud, as often as it is done with these words, and this fayth, that substantiall bread and Cup, consecrated with so∣lemne Benediction, profiteth to the lyfe & saluation of the whole man, being both a medicine and holocaust to cure Infirmities, and to take a∣way sinnes. The difference also of spirituall and corporall meate is made manifest, that it was one thing which at first was set before them and eaten, another which was giuen and distributed by our mayster. And in another place of the same Sermon he saith, The Doctrine of this Sacrament is new, and the Euangelicall Schooles brought forth this first Maistership (or teaching,) and Christ being the Maister, this Doctrine was first made knowne vnto the world, that Christians should drinke Bloud, the eating wherof the authority of the old Law doth most strictly forbid: for the law forbiddeth eating of bloud, the Ghospell com∣mandeth that it be drunke. S. Cyprian is so cleere, that the Prot. Vrsinus confesseth that,Commu∣ne factio &c. Many things are spoken by Cyprian, which seeme to establish Transubstantiation. With S. Cyprian agreeth S. Hilary, writing thus,Lib. 8. de Trinitate. If the word be truly made flesh, and we truly receiue the word made flesh in our Lordes food, how is not Christ thought naturally to abyde in vs who now borne man both assumed vnto himselfe the inseparable na∣ture of our flesh, and also hath ioyned the nature of his flesh, to the na∣ture
of Eternity, vnder the Sacrament of Communicating his flesh vn∣to vs? For so we are all one, because the Father is in Christ, and Christ is in vs &c. Touching the naturall truth of Christ in vs, what thinges we speake, vnles we learne of him, we speake foolishly and wickedly. For he saith. My flesh is truly meate, and my Bloud is truly drinke; he that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, abydeth in me, and I in him. Touching the verity of his flesh and bloud, there is lefte no place of doubting, for now both by Confession of our Lord himselfe, and by our faith, it is truly flesh, and it is truly bloud: and these being receiued and drunken, do worke that thing, that both we are in Christ, and Christ in vs: what is not this verity it selfe? Therfore he is in vs by his flesh & we are in him whilest this which we are is with him in God: And that we are in him by the Sacrament of his flesh and bloud, communicated, he witnesseth saying. And this world now seeth me not, but you shall see me, because I liue, and you shall liue, because I am in the Father, and you in me and I in you. S. Hilary is so plaine in this, that Cal∣uin professethL. Epist. &c ep. 208. 392. He will not subscribe vnto him. But who can speake more cleerly then Saint Ambrose doth in these wordesDe ijs qui misterijs initiantur. c. 9. Peraduenture thou mayest say, I see another thing, how dost do affirme vnto me, that I receiue the body of Christ? and yet this remayneth vnto vs to proue: how great examples therfore do we vse? We proue that it is not that which nature framed, but what Benediction consecrated; and that greater is the power of Benediction then of Nature, because by Benediction Nature it selfe is changed. Moyses held a rod, he cast it from him, and it became a ser∣pent &c. And after he had tould many other miracles of Moy∣ses, Elias, and Eliseus, he concludeth: But if humane Bene∣diction were of such power, that it could conuert Nature, what do we say of the very diuine Consecration, where the words of our Lord & Sauiour worke? For this Sacrament which thou dost receiue is made by the word of Christ: but if the word of Elias was so potent, that it could call for fyre from heauen, shall not the word of Christ be of so much power, that it may change the formes of Elements? of the workes of the whole (world) thou hast read: Because he spake, and thinges were made, he commanded and they were creaed. Therfore the word of Christ which could make of nothing the thing that was not, can it not change the thinges which be into that which they were no? for it is no lesse to giue new natures to thinges, then to change natures &c Our
Lord Iesus cryeth out. This is my Body; before the Benediction of the heauenly wordes another forme is named (he meaneth Bread) after Consecration the Body of Christ is notifyed: he calleth it his bloud, be∣fore Consecration it is callled another thing, after Consecration it is na∣med the Bloud of Christ. And thou saiest Amen, that is, it is true: What the mouth speakth the inward mynd acknowledgeth &c. It is eui∣dent that besides the order of nature a Virgin brought forth, and this Body which we make, is of the Virgin: why dost thou seeke here the or∣der of nature in the Body of Christ, wheras besydes nature the Lord Ie∣sus was borne of a Virgin? And the same S. Ambrose elswhere goeth yet further, and sayth,L. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. Peraduenture thou sayest, My bread is vsuall Bread, but this bread is bread before the wordes of the Sacraments, when Consecration shall come of bread is made the flesh of Christ. This therfore we affirme how can that which is bread be∣come the body of Christ? by Consecration. Consecration therfore with whose words, and with whose speaches? of our Lord Iesus Christ. For all other things which are said, praise is giuen to God, supplication is made for the people for kings, for others: but when it is come, that the Venerable Sacrament must be made, now the Priest doth not vse his owne wordes, but he vseth the wordes of Christ Therfore the word of Crist doth make this Sacrament. What word of Christ? to wit, that, wherby all thinges were made. Our Lord commnded and heauen was made: Our Lord commanded, and the Earth was made: Our Lord commanded and the seas were made; Our Lord commanded and eue∣ry Creature was made. Thou seest therfore how powerfull in opera∣tion Christs word is! If therfore there be so great power in the word of our Lord Iesus, that thinges which were not begunne, to haue being; how much more is it able in operation to cause that thinges which were, should be, and be changed into another thing? heauen was not, Sea was not, Earth was not, but heare one saying.Ps. 148.. He spake, and thinges were mde, he commanded, and they were created. Therfore that I my answere thee, There was not the Body of Christ before Consecra∣tion, but after Consecration I say vnto thee, that there is now the Bo∣dy of Christ &c. therfore thou hast learned, that of Bread there is made the Body of Christ, and that wyne and water is put into the Cha∣lice, but it is made bloud by the Consecration of the heauenly word but peraduenture thou sayest, I see not the forme of bloud but it hath the similitude, for as thou hast taken the similitude of his death, so also thou
drinkest the similitude of his precious Bloud, that there may be no hor∣rour of his Bloud, & yet it worketh the price of Redemption. Thou hast learned therfore that, that which thou receiuest, is the Body of Christ. And elswhere he concludeth,L. 4. de Sacram. c. 5. Before it be con∣secrated, it is but bread, but when the words of Consecration, come, it is the Body of Christ. To conclude, Heare him saying, Take and eate of it all, for this is my Body: and before the words of Christ, the Chalice is full of wyne and water; when the wordes of Christ haue wrought, there it is made Bloud, which redeemed the peo∣ple: Therfore marke you in how great matters the word of Christ is potent to conuert all things. Moreouer our very Lord Iesus testifyeth vnto vs that we receyue his Body and Bloud: What ought we to doubt of his fidelity, and Testimony? Agayne, expounding those words of the Psalmist,Ps. 98.52 Adore yee the footestoole of his feete, he saith,L. 3. de Spir sanct. c. 12. It is no small question, and therefore let vs consider more diligently, what is the footestoole: for we read els where,Isa. 66.1. Hea∣uen is my Throne, but the Earth the footstoole of my feete. But neyther are we to adore the Earth, because it is a Creature of God: yet let vs see if the Prophet doth not affirme that earth to be adored, which our Lord Iesus tooke in the Assumption of flesh. Therfore by the footestoole, the Earth may be vnderstood, but by the Earth the flesh of Christ, which at this day we also adore in the Mysteries, and which the Apostles ado∣red in our Lord Iesus &c. And the like exposition heerof is gi∣uen by S. Hierome,In ps. 98. who also further sayth,In Tit. 1. There is as great difference betweene the Bread of Proposition and the Body of Christ, as betweene a shadow and bodyes, betweene an Image and the truth, betweene patternes of things to come, and the things them∣selues which are prefigured by those patternes. S. Ambrose is so cleer for the Real Presence, that he is therefore reproued byOeco∣lamp. in l. E∣pist. Oeco∣lamp. 19 c. l 3. p. 756 & Cent 4. c. 4. Col. 295. Me∣lancth. 16. p. 636. Luther. l. cont. Regem Anglia. sundry Protestants. Gaudentius also a very Ancient Father, liuing in the yeare 400. writeth to like effect, saying:Tract. 2. de Exod. The same throughout the seuerall howses of the Churches being offe∣red in the Mistery of Bread and wyne, doth reuiue being be∣lieued, doth quicken being Consecrated, doth sanctify such as Consecrate. This is the flesh of the Lambe, this is the Bloud, for the bread which came downe from heauen doth say, The bread which I will giue, is my flesh, for the life of
the world: with good reason and very aptly euen then is bloud expressed vnder the forme of wyne, because where he sayth in the Ghospell, I am the true vine, he doth sufficient∣ly declare, that all wine which is offered in the figure of his Passion, is his bloud. Whereupon the most B. Patriarch Iacob prophesied of Christe, saying: He shall wash his stole in wyne, and in the bloud of the Grape his cloake; because he was to wash the cloathing of our Body with his owne pro∣per Bloud. He therfore the Creator and Lord of Natures, who brought bread forth of the Earth, and againe of Bread (because he both can, and hath promised) doth make his owne Body: and he who made wyne of water, and of wine his bloud &c. O depth of the riches of the wisdome and knowledge of God! It is the Pasche of our Lord, that is, Our Lords Passe-ouer. Esteeme it not terrene, which is made heauenly by him who passeth into it, and made it of his Bo∣dy and bloud &c. Belieue thou must that which is denoun∣ced and spoken, because that which thou receiuest is the Bo∣dy of that heauenly Bread, & the bloud of that sacred vyne: for when he taught and gaue the Consecrated Bread and wyne to his Disciples, he thus spake; This is my Body. This is my Bloud. Let vs belieue him whom we haue belieued, truth cannot lye &c. let vs not infringe that most solid word of his mouth. This is my Body, This is my Bloud. But if any thing euen now in any mans opinion or vnderstan∣ding remayne, which he hath not cōprehended in this Ex∣position, let the flame of a fiery faith consume it. S. Austine expounding the title of the Psalme in which it is written, And he was caryed in his owne hands, sayth.Conc. 1. in ps. 33. Brethren who can vnderstand how this could be done in man? For who is caryed in his owne hands? A man may be caryed in the hands of ano∣ther, in his owne hands no man is caryed. How this may be vnderstood in Dauid himselfe, according to the letter, we fynd not, but in Christ we fynd. For Christ was caryed in his owne hands, when commen∣ding his owne Body, he sayd, This is my Body: for he carryed that Body in his hands. This place is so vnanswerable that Hos∣pinian vndertaking to set downe,Hist. Sacram. part. 2 l 4. p. 292. 293. The Hyperboli∣call phrases of the Fathers, doth among others, for such place
this saying of S. Austine. In like sort commenting vpon these wordes, Adore ye the footstoole of his feete because it is holy, he saith,In ps. 98. What are we to adore? The footstoole of his feet &c. But Brethren consider what he commandeth vs to adore. In another place the Scripture sayth,Isa. 66.1. Heauen is my seat, and the Earth my footstoole. Therfore he commandeth vs to adore the Earth, because he said in another place, that it was the footstoole of God? And how shal we adore the Earth, seeing the Scripture saith plainly,Deut. 6.13. Mat. 4.11. Thou shalt adore the Lord thy God; And here he saith, Adore ye the footstoole of his feete? And expounding to me, what is the footstoole of his feete he saith, The Earth is the footstoole of my feete. I am become staggering, I feare to adore the Earth, least he damne me, who hath made the heauen and Earth. Againe, I feare not to adore the footstoole of my Lords feete, be∣cause the psalme saith to me, Adore yee the footstoole of his feete &c. Wauering, I turne my selfe to Christ, because I seeke him heere, and I fynd how without impiety the Earth may be adored; without impiety the footstoole of his feete may be adored: for he tooke earth of earth, be∣cause flesh is of Earth, and he tooke flesh of the flesh of Mary: And be∣cause he walked here in his flesh, and gaue to vs his flesh to be eaten to Saluation: now no man eateth that flesh, but first adoreth it. It is found out how such a footstoole of our Lords feet may be adored, and that we shall not only not sinne by adoring, but sinne by not adoring. Now wheras Bilson answereth herto that,True difference part. 4. p. 536. It is eaten with the spirit, adored with the spirit, yea the very eating of it, is the adoring of it, S. Austine directly to the contrary distinguisheth eating from adoring, and maketh, as we do, adoring in priority to eating: and this adoring not to be only in spirit, but by ex∣ternall bowing downe and prosternation. Lastly sayth S. Austine,Ser. ad Neophitos. Receiue this in Bread, which hunge vpon the Crosse; Receiue this in the Chalice, which flowed from the syde of Christ. S. Austine is so cleere herin, that Bucer sayth,Scripta Anglic. p. 679. How often doth Austine write that euen Iudas receiued the very Body and Bloud of our Lord.Ibid. p. 678. And Austine writeth in many places, that the Body and Bloud of our Lord, is to be honoured and receiued in the visible signes. Hospinian confesseth S. Austine to say,Hist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 5. p 531. We do truly ho∣nour in the forme of Bread and wyne which we see, things inuisible, that is to say, flesh and bloud. So cleere and confessed is S. Au∣stine for the reall Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in
the Sacrament, and our Adoration therof. Eucherius of Lyons his wholesome aduise and doctri∣ne is this:Ho. 5. de Pascha. Let all doubtfull infidelity depart, since he who is the authour of the guift, he also is the witnesse of the truth; for the inuisible Priest doth by his word and secret power conuert the visible creatures, into the substance of his Body and Bloud, saying thus, Take yee, eate yee, for this is my Body. And the sanctification being reiterated; receiue and drinke, This is my Bloud. Therefore as at the becke of our Lords commanding, immediatly the highest heauens, the deepest waters, the vastnes of the earth subsisted, with like power, the vertue of the word doth command in spi∣ritual Sacraments, and the effect obeyeth. Nor let any man doubt, that the primary Creatures at the becke of this po∣wer, by the presence of his Maiesty may passe ouer into the nature of our Lords Body, when he seeth man himself made the body of Christ by the workemāship of heauenly mercy: and as he who belieuing before the words of Baptisme, is yet in the Bond of his old debt, but the words of Baptis∣me once sayd, presently he is freed from all degres of sinne: euen so when the Creatures blessed with the heauēly wor∣des, are put vpon the sacred Aultars, before they are conse∣crated by the Inuocation of the supreme Deity, there is the substance of Bread and wine; but after the words of Christ, it is the Body and Bloud of Christ. And what meruaile is it, if he can conuert things created, which he could create by his word? Yea now it seemeth to be a lesse miracle, if that which he is knowne to haue made of nothing, being now created, he be yet able to change into a better thing. In like sort S Leo aduiseth,Ser. 6. de ieiun. 7. mens. Because our Lord saith, except you eate the flesh &c. let vs so communicate, that we nothing doubt of the truth of Christs Body and bloud: for that is receiued with mouth, which is belieued in hart. The Fathers do so confessedly agree with Catholickes heerein, that it is acknowledged by Prot. themselues,Humfr. Ies. part. 2. rat. 5. That, Gregory the great taught Transubstantiation: that,Cent. 5. Col. 517. Chrysostome is thought to confirme Transubstantiation: that,Anto∣ny de Ada∣mo in his Anatomy of the Msse. fol. 21. The Bookes of Sacraments ascribed to Ambrose, affirme the opinion of
Christs bodily presence in the Sacrament: That, S. Ignatius sayd of the heretickes of his tyme,Theodo∣ret. dial 3. Hamem. de Trad. Apost. Col. 746. Chemnit. Ex. part 1. p 94. They do not admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confesse the Eucharists to be the flesh of our Sauiour Iesus-Christ, which flesh suffered for our sinnes:Adam Fancisci in Margar. Theol. p. 256. That, Transubstntiation entred early into the Church: And that,Ant. de Adamo A∣natomy of Masse. p. 236. they haue not yet hitherto beene able to kow, when this opinion of the Real and bodily beig of Christ in the Sacrament did first be∣ginne. So confessedly most ancient is the doctrine of Real Presence and Transubstantiation: and so cleerely are the sa∣cred Scriptures expounded in proofe thereof by the learned and holy Fathers, both Greeke and Latine. SECT. VI. That Protestant wryters do teach and belieue from Scrip∣tures, the Real Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Eucharist. TO examine now what sundry Prot. teach and belieue concerning the Reall Presence; and first to beginne with the Hussie, Iohn Hsse himselfe prescribeth tha,L de coena Domini. c. 2. Whatsoeuer Christ Iesus deliuered by himselfe to his Apostles, and by them and other holy Doctours; and whatsoeuer his holy Roman Church houldeth of this Venerable Sacrament, that firmely is to be belieued &c. By power & Institution of Christ &c. by the ministery of Priestes, his true Body is in the venerable Sacrament, which was conceiued and borne of the most chast Virgin Mary &c. Likewise the bloud which was shed vpon the Crosse in remission of sinnes out of the same Body. And now for Transubstantiation, saith heCap. 3 the Sonne of God &c. with his word by Transubstantiation maketh true Bread, flesh, and wyne by Transubstantiation is made bloud. Lastly for Adoration he telleth his owne practse saing.Tract de omne Sangui∣ne Christi glorificato. We adore the Body and bloud of Christ being at the right hand of God the Father, and hid in the venerable Sacrament which Priestes mke and so we know what we adore. Againe,Contra Bulam Papae de Electione Crucis. The Eucharist is more to be worshipped by the faithfull, then the relckes of other Saintes. Perzibane another Hussite declareth the vnanimous consent of the Hussites in this point, saying,Cap. 21. I truly pro∣fesse,
that aboue 20. yeares agoe M. Iohn Husse, with the Maisters & Doctors of the Country of Bohemia, by their full Counsell, and vna∣nimous Consent, none, as they said contradicting haue reiected, and confuted, and prohibited publickly those Articles of Wiccliffe, to wit, that materiall bread remayneth in the hoste after Consecration: also that in the Sacraments, Accidents do not stand without their subiect: Also that Christ is not in the same Sacrament identically, and really. We need not doubt to fynd the Lutheranes fully ioy∣ning with vs in the reall Presence. Luther wrote a speciall booke, entituled,Extat. tom. 7. Defensio verborum Coenae Accipite, comedite, Hoc est corpus meum: contra fanaticos Sacramentariorum spiritus, wherin he auoucheth that.post init. The Deuill with blaspheming the Supper of our Lord Iesus Christ doth assault vs at this day by fanati∣call men, who dreame that therin is giuen only Bread and wyne in signe or symboll of Christian profession neiher will they grant that the Body and bloud of Christ is there, when as the wordes are most expresse and cleere, Eate ye this is my Body &c. nothing doth more promote this he∣resy, then nouelty &c. I cannot perswade my selfe, that this heresy will long continue: for it is very grosse and immoderate, and it doth not im∣pugne doubtfull opinions, and doubtfull Testimonies of Scripture, but plaine and expresse sentences of Scripture. Againe, I will take God to witnes, and the whole world, and I will confesse, that I will not be of opinion with the Sacramentaries, nor neuer was, nor world with∣out end, God willing, wilbe. And I will haue my handes cleane from the bloud of all those, whose soules by this poyson they dryue from Christ, they seduce and kill &c. And I would friendly and familiar intreat them, that they would not be angry at me for this, that I condemne their doctrine, and ascribe it to the Deuill: For I cannot do, or speake other∣wise, then I beare in my hart and belieue. And some pages after, Doctor Carolostadius of these sacred wordes, This is my Body, doth pitifully wrest the Pronowne, This, Zwinglius vexeth the Verbe sub∣stantiue, Is. Oecolampadius putteth the Nown, Body, vpon the torture; others teare in peeces the whole texte &c. These tread vnderfoote and destroy all thinges: and yet the holy Ghost is in euery one of these, and none will be reproued of Errour &c. So grosly and cleerly doth the De∣uill take vs by the nose. Againe, This is worthy of admiration, that none of the Fathers, who are infinite in number, do so speake of the Sa∣crament, as the Sacramentaries do. And in another place he wri∣teth
thus Catholickly,De sermo∣ne Euchr. In the Sacrament of the Aultar it is not Bread and wyne, but the formes of bread and wyne: for bread is chan∣ged into the true and naturall Body of Christ, and wyne into the true and naturall Bloud of Christ. But this Doctrine of Reall Presence is so cleerly taught by Luther, that Prot. confesse, that he maintaynethSee Bridges in his Defence of the Go∣uernment, and Perkins in his 4. Treatises how to ap∣ply Gods word. Con∣substantiation, or the reall Presence in the Sacrament. We haue here then from Luther, that the impugning of the reall Pre∣sense proceeded from the Deuill, and is hereticall: and that the Testimonies of Scripture for it are cleere, and not doubt∣full, as also of the Fathers: and that for his part, he will not be a Sacramentary, world without end. Neither was this Luthers particular opinion, for Chem∣nitius hath also written purposely anotherExam. part. 2. p. 110. Booke against the Sacramentaries, as also Iacobus Andraeas, entituled, Confu∣tatio disputationis Ioannis Iacobi Grinai de coena Domini: wherin all the foresaid authors of these Bookes, haue (vncharitably as Prot. complaine) condemned them forVide li∣bros sup. cit. Sacramenta∣ries, and Heretickes. And heerin they haue proceeded so far, that they affirme with Catholickes against Protestantes, that, theIac. Au∣draeat in Confut. Disp. Grinide coena Dom. p. 110. wicked do verily receiue the Body of Christ. In so much that the Prot. do therforeVide A∣pol. Modest. ad Act. Conuentus 15. Theol. reproue them. But the Lutherans do not rest only with the reall Pre∣sence, for they defend also with Catholickes against Prot. the Adoration of Christes Body in the Sacrament. This doth Chemnitius cleerly defend;Exam. part. 2. p. 92. affirming moreouer this point of Adoration to be extra Controuersiam, out ofIb p. 92. post d. Con∣trouersy, betwene him and the Papistes: Yea saith he,Ib. p. 94. circ. med. herby we separate our selues from the Sacramentaries. And another Luthe∣ran Benedict Morgernsterne affirmeth, thatTract. de Eccl p 135. initio & pro∣pe fin. Christ is to be adored, not only in heauen, but also in the Mysteries, as being present in the Supper. Brentius saith,In Apol. Confess. Witt. We confesse that Christ the sonne of God is alwayes, and euery where to be adored, whether in heauen or in Earth, or in the Eucharist, or out of the Eucharist. Georgius Prin∣ceps Anhaltinus affirmethVide Georg. Princ. Anhalt. pro∣pofit. Magdeb. conc. 4. de Sa∣cram. Alta∣ris. fol. 188. That, 1541. he conferred with Luther vpon this point, and shewed by sundry Argumentes, that Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament, no lesse then was the Holy Ghost des∣cending in the forme of a Doue. Timotheus Kirchmerus teacheth
also out of Luther that,In the∣sauro &c. fol. 586. The Sacrament is to be adored knee∣ling, because that the true Body of our Lord is there present And D. Luther himselfe adored also in like manner, and writ a spe∣ciall Treatise therof, entituled, DeOf this Booke see in Benedict Morgern∣sterne Trac. de Eccl. p. 147. circa med. & 149. ant. med. adoratione Sacramenti ad fratres. Which opinion of Luthers, concerning the Ado∣ration of the B. Sacrament, the Prot.Vide Apol. Mod. ad Act. Conuent. 15. Theol. Torgae nuper habit. p. 40. circ. med. acknowledge and reprehend; of which reprehension made by Prot. Luther himselfe taketh notice and complaineth, saying:Luther Tom 7. Wittmb. de Euch. f. 335. They mocke vs at their pleasure, calling vs shamfull eaters of flesh and drin∣kers of bloud, and that we worship a God made of Bread. This is so cleerly the Doctrine or Luther, that Caluin saith of Luher for calling it Adorabile Sacramentum,Ep. 7. ad Bucerum. Madnes draweth with it Idolatry. For to what nd is that of Luther, adorabile Sacramentum, a Sacrament to be adored, but that an Idoll should be erected in the Temple of God? And yet this notwithstanding Calui estee∣meth Luther.L 1. de lib. arb. cont. Albert. Pigh. See more of Luther in Gualt. fol. 30. For an excellent Apostle of Christ. Well thus Luther belieued and his followers, and in this faith he per∣sisted euen after that the Protestants doctrine was explainedHerof Cowpers Cronicle. fol. 290. circ. med. And M Sleidam Comment. l. 6. f. 8. vnto him by other learned Protestantes: And yet not∣withstanding all this, Prot. do owne and challenge him for theirs. But to come to Caluinistes also, who speaketh more plainly then Beza, who writeth two homilies with this in∣scription,Extant Tom. 3. ope∣rum eius. Two homilies against the Error of the Sacramenta∣ries, for the true Presence of Christ in the supper of the Lord: In the later wherof, to omit sundry such like, he sayth,Anto med. W dissent from them, who for the thing of the Sacrament, do place the ver∣tue and merits of Christ, seuered from Christ himselfe: for Christ said not, This is the merit of my Body, deliuered for you, but, This is my Bo∣dy and this is my bloud. Neither is it added in vaine &c. which is gi∣uen for you, and which is shed for you: so that it could not be said more plainly, Christ himselfe, whose Body was giuen for vs, and bloud shed for vs, to be truly giuen to vs in the supper, to the nourishment of eter∣nall life: And therfore the thing of that Sacrament is that very Body, which he offered for vs vpon the Crosse, and that very bloud which he shed for our sinnes; we are so far frō dreaming of any Symbolicall or ty∣picall body, or allegoricall Bloud. And the same he teacheth inQuaest. & resp. q. 29. q. 6. other places. And the like might be produced frōInstit. l. 4. c. 17. § 5. § 10. §. 16. §. 19. §. 33. Caluin.
Barnes, a Foxian Martyr, in his protestation at his death, said expresly, that the Sacrament after the wordes spoken by the Priest, doth change the substance of Bread & wyne, into the very Body and bloud of Christ: which his Protestation being then published by a professed Ghospel∣ler of that tyme, and then also answered vnto by D. Stan∣dish in his Booke then printed in English, the said wordes are yet extant therin, though fraudulently since omitted by Foxe,Act. Mon. p. 610. 611. 612. who following the said Copy verbatim, and comming by course to these very wordes, doth purposely ouerpasse them. The same Doctrine of Transubstantia∣tion, was belieued also by theAct. Mon. p. 27. L. Cobham. So that we haue Hussites, Lutherans, and Caluinistes teaching with vs from the Scriptures the Reall Presence of Christes Body & Bloud in the most Blessed Sacrament. SECT. VII. Obiections taken from the Scriptures, in disproofe of the Reall Presence, answered. THe Textes of sacred Scripture being so confessedly cleere for the Reall Presence as hath bene shewed, let vs now see what poore Obiections they make against it. Some obiect, that what our Sauiour tooke into his handes, bles∣sed, and brake, that he gaue to his Disciples: but he tooke, blessed and brake bread; therfore it was but Bread which he gaue to his Disciples. Answ. It was not the same which our Sauiour tooke, and which he gaue, for he tooke common bread, but by his blessing and power of his word, he chan∣ged the same into his Body, and so gaue it to them, and so betwixt tooke and gaue, passeth the word, blessed, which ma∣keth, that all the verbes gouern not the same accusatiue case in the same manner: as if one should say, a certaine man struck Peter, slew him, and buried him, he doth not meane that he buryed him aliue, though he stroke him aliue. Yea Prot. themselues are inforced to answere this Argument, for
they teach, that our Sauiour taking common and ordinary bread, made it Sacramentall: so that it was not the same thing which he tooke and gaue. Secondly it is obiected, that the word (is) is oftentimes taken in Scripture for (signify,) therfore in the Sacrament there is not Christes Body, but Bread a signe therof. Answ. Though this hath bene sufficientlySee be∣fore. sect. 5. answered before, yet I add, that the word (is) is more often taken for its owne si∣gnification. Secondly, it is so taken in Explication of wor∣des, as to say, Amare est diligere, because here one signe is af∣firmed of another, and because the very being and Essence of a signe is to signify: and so euen in these propositions, is, doth signify to be, and because the very being and Essence of words, is to signify, therefore, is, is explicated by, signify; but in other propositions of things, not of words, as in this Proposition, Hoc est corpus meum, where, that which is the praedicatum, is not formally a signe, (is) cannot be expressed by signify. This truth is so certaine, as that M. Hooker spea∣king heerof sayth,Eccles. Pol. l. 5. sect. 67. p. 177. We do not interprete the words of Christ, as if the name of his Body did but import the figure of his Body, and to be, were only to signify. And the same is defended by Kecherma∣nus, saying,System. Theol. p. 444. Others will haue the figure to be in the Copula (is) which also cannot be proued, for &c. So confessed it is that, is, is not taken for, signify. The third Obiection is, the Lambe is called theExod. 12.11., Passe∣ouer,Gen. 17.10. Circumcision the Couenant, being but figures thereof; so also our Sauiour is called aIo. 15.1. Vyne, aIo. 10.9. Dore, a1. Cor. 10.4. Rocke, and the like, all which are figuratiue speaches: therefore in like sort is the Sacrament figuratiuely called the body of Christ. Answ. Of this Obiection I say with S. Austine,De Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 10. If the preiudice of any erroneous persuasiō preoccupate the mynd, what∣soeuer the Scripture hath to the contrary, men take it to be a figuratiue speach. Wherefore first I answere. By the same consequence may be proued all other speaches in Scripture to be figura∣tiue. 2. The Lambe is not called the passouer figuratiuely, be∣cause it signifyeth the same, for what similitude is there bet∣wixt the killing of a Lambe, and our Lords passing ouer? wherefore it is so called properly, euen as the festiuall day
was called Pascha, because the Lambe was sacrifyced, and the festiuall day kept in memory and honour of the sayd Passeouer of our Lord: and so in the Ghospell, the Paschall Lambe is absolutly called theLuc. 2.7.8. Mar. 14.12. Pascha. And though it were taken figuratiuely, yet is it expounded sufficiently, being called theExod. 12.27. Sacrifice of our Lords Passe-ouer, and the bloud ther∣of, beingExod. 12.13. a token for thē vpon the houses. 3. Circumcision is not only a signe, but euen the Couenant it selfe; And so Iaco∣bus Andras a Prot. teacheth that,Confut. Disp. Io. Iac. Ginaei. p. 209. It doth not only signify the Coueant, but also is in very deed the Couenant (it selfe.) And though the Scripture should, as is obiected, call it the Co∣uenant figuratiuely, yet as otherBulling. Dec. p. 988 & Commone∣fact. de sacra coena. &c. p. 102. Prot. do obserue, the Scripture doth explaine it selfe sufficiently in the same place, in that it doth there also call Circumcision,Gen. 17.11. The signe of the Couenant. Luther himselfe decydeth this Argument, thinking it as wise a proofe, as if a man should argue, thatDefens. verb. Coenae. fol. 386. Sara or Rebecca brought forth Children, and remayned virgins, because our La∣dy did so. As for the words Rocke, doore, vyne, and the like, they are sufficiently explained in Scriptures. Christ is called the1. Cor. 10.4. Spirituall Rocke by S. Paul. AndIo. 15.4.5.6. Christ himself expoun∣deth in what sense he is a vyne, and his Disciples, branches. And when he calleth himselfe, a Dore, it is expressely sayd, that he spake it by way of aIo. 10.6. Prouerbe. So that it is euident, euen by the places obiected, that the foresayd sayings are not ta∣ken litterally, neyther were they euer so vnderstood by any one Interpreter: whereas the foresayd words, This is my Bo∣dy, are not expounded or qualifyed, by any of the Euange∣lites, or S. Paul, otherwise then the litterall sense of it selfe affoardeth. And the same Interpretation of the foresayd ob∣iected places, is giuen by sundryBulling. in his Dec. in Engl, Dec. 5. ser. p. 988. See Vrsinus his Commo∣nefactio &c. p. 202. Iosias Nichols in his Abrahams Faith, p. 111. Praetorius de Saramentis. p. 18. Prot. writers. But be∣cause this Obiection is so frequently vged, I further adde, that whereas in the example of the B. Sacrament, our Sa∣uiour did take a certayne portion of Bread into his hand, & pointing to that determinate Substance, sayd, This is my body; in the other examples he pointed not, or spake to any de∣terminate substance, so much as then present, or in being, into which he might be changed; but vseth only a generall
name of a kind of Substance, as I am a vyne &c, which hath in it selfe no determinate and proper being, and therefore must needs be figuratiue. Agayne, in these obiected exam∣ples, one different nature is affirmed of another, which would be cleerely false, if thereby should be signifyed iden∣tity of nature or Substance, and not only lykenes of Condi∣tion or Property: whereas in these wordes, This is my Body, one different nature is not affirmed of another, for I haue proued before, that the Pronowne, This, pointeth not at all to Bread, but to Body. Lastly, these and other such lykeGen. 41.26. Apoc. 17.. Mat. 13. examples vulgarly obiected, are all of them spoken vpon occasion of Explication, and to explaine some other truth or saying, then formerly in being, or precedent; whereas these other wordes, This is my Body, are not spoken vpon oc∣casion, or for explication of any other saying, or truth then precedent, but are originally vttered, as by way of Insti∣tution, to ordaine no lesse then a Sacrament, then before not in being. It is therefore more then licentious bouldnes, to affirme these wordes to be figuratiue, because the other are. And by like liberty, a man may defend any old or new heresy, though neuer so damnable. Fourthly it is obiected that these words,Luc. 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.15. This Cup is the new Testament in my Bloud, must be taken figuratiuely, for first the Cup is taken for the thing contayned, and whe∣ther the same be wine or bloud, yet it is not the Testament, but the signe thereof. I answer. 1. to take the Cup for the thing contayned, is a figure most ordinary, and the same withall is cleerely expressed by our Sauiours saying, take, drinke, This is the Cup, for not the vessell, but the liquour is drunke, neyther was the vessell, but the liquour shed for vs. Besides insteed of those wordes, This is the Cup, set downe by S. Luke and S. Paul, S. Matthew and S. Marke say, This is the Bloud: now, wordes obscure and figuratiue, are to be expounded by other more cleer and proper. And certainly if a man should say of the same vessell, drinke of this Cup, & should annex, drinke of this wyne, none would doub, but that wyne, were contayned in that Cup, and that man in∣tended to make known the same: wherfore seeing the holy
Ghost by two of his wryters, saith, This is the Cup, & by other two of the same thing, This is the Bloud, it may not be doub∣te, but that bloud is contained in the Cup. 2. The word Testment, is not taken improperly, for the body and bloud of Ct vnder the formes of Bread and wyne, but is truly his Tstament, wherby is giuen to the worthy receiuer, title and interest to an euerlating Inheritance: & though it were figuatiue, yet it is sufficiently expressed by S. Matthew, plaily saying, Ths is the bloud of the new Testament. A fith Obicton is, Christ sayd,Luc. 22.2. Do this for a Commemoration of me; but memory or Commemora∣tion i of thinges absent, therefore Christ is not really present in the Sacrament. I answere, what this meaneth Saint Paul teacheth saying:1. Cor. 11.26. As often as you shall eate this Bread, and drinke the Chalice, you shall shew the death of our Lord vntill he come. Now, Christes death and Passion is not present, but absent, yea it is not, but was. Secondly it is not said here, to be only a Commemoration or remembrance, but only we are here commanded to do it in remembrance, which we daily do. Thirdly, one and the same thing in sundry respectes may be a body, and yet a figure, signe, or remembrance therof: so was Christes Body transfigured v∣pon the MountMat. 17.2. Thabor, a figure of his Body glorifyed in heauen; and so also is he called,Heb. 1.3. See the like Phil. 2 6. 2. Cor. 4.4. The figure of his Fathers substance, and is yet also of, and the same substance. This Ob∣iection though most common, is yet so poore, as that it is answered by Caluin saying,In omnes Pauli Epist. in. 1. Cor. 11. p. 323. The supper is a remembrance &c. But where some gather from hence, that therfore Christ is absent from the supper, the Answere is ready &c. Sixtly it is obiected, that after the Institution of the Sacrament, Christ said,Mat. 26.29. I will not drinke from henceforth of this fruite of the vyne: therfore it was wyne which before he had immediatly drunke. I answere first, S. Luke who vndertooke toLuc. 1.3. write thinges in order, setteth downe the forsaid wordes before the Institution of the Sacrament,Luc. 2.18. applying them to the tyme of the eating of the Paschall Lambe, of which in the sam place he vseth the same wor∣des, saying, FromLuc. 22.1. this tyme I will not eate it, till it be fulfilled
in the kindome of God: which being true, it euidently follow∣eth, that seeing our Sauiour said at the tyme of the eating of the Paschall Lambe, which was before the Institution of the Sacrament, that he would not drinke from that tyme of the fruit of the vyne, that therfore that which he dranke af∣terwards, was not wyne, but his precious bloud. And that this Interpretation is most true, is confessed by Hutterus, saying,De sa∣crificio Mis∣sae. p. 393. Those wordes, I will not drinke of this fruite of the Vyne &c. our Sauiour spake in treating of the Sacrament of the old Testament, to wit, the Paschall Lambe. 2. Though it were vn∣derstood of the Sacrament, yet it might be called Wyne, as the Body also is called1. Cor. 10.16. Bread, for 3. causes. First be∣cause it was so before; so Aarons rod being turned into a serpent,Exod. 7.10.12. was yet afterwards called a rod: So water tur∣ned into wyne,Io. 2.9. was yet after called water. 2. Because it keepeth the formes of bread and wyne, and thinges are called as they appeare, so Angels appearing in the shape of men, were calledGen. 18.2.29.5. Mar. 16.5. Luc. 24, 4. Act. 1.10. men. 3. Because Christ in this Sa∣crament, is very true and principall bread & wyne, feeding and refreshing vs in Body and Soule, vntill we arriue to e∣uerlasting happines. And lastly Prot. themselues do teach thatAretius loc. com. p. 260. & 40. Marloret. in Encbyr. at the word Panis. vnder the name of Bread the Scripture doth (sometymes) vnderstand not naked bread, but all kind of food, which concerneth this present lyfe, or the eternall: according to which acceptance, the Sacrament may be called Bread, and so is Christ him∣selfe calledIo. 6.35.48.52. Bread. Many obiect that the very word Transubstantiation, was but lately inuented. Answ. The word Transubstantiation was read and knowne some hundreds of yeares before the name Protestāt was heard or dreamed of; for that was expressed in the Coūcel of Laterane, which was celebrated Anno 1215. this was but stamped since the tyme of Luther, some hun∣dred yeares agoe. And that difficult places of Scripture may be cleered and expressed by words not set downe in Scrip∣ture, CaluinInst. l. 1. c. 13. §. 3. acknowledgeth and proueth by examples of the words Trinity, & Persons.
SECT. VIII. Obiections, against the possibility of the Reall Presence, answered. SOme Prot. thinke the Doctrine of the reall Presence to imply in it certaine and seuerall Contradictions, and therfore to be impossible; As first, that the being of Christes Body in many places at once (which must needs be admit∣ted if the reall Presence be granted) doth contradict the V∣nity of his Body, which is but one, and not multiplied. 2. The being of Christes whole Body in so small an host, doth also contradict the greater quantity of his Body. 3. His being there inuisible, and without Circumscription, doth likewise (say they) contradict the truth and naturall pro∣perties of his humane Body. In reguard herof Beza saith, NegoCont. Brent. Deum pesse &c. I deny that God is able to make Christes Body present in the Eucharist. Ridley also saith,In the Actes and Monum. p. 964. I do affirme, that it is impossible for Christ to be both in heauen, and earth at one tyme. In like mannerIn his Answ. to Reinolds p. 179. & 180. D. Whitaker discourseth at large, endeauouring to proue the Reall Presence, to be a Contra∣diction, and therfore impossible. For our better proceeding and easier dissoluing of all these falsly pretended difficulties & contradictions, faigned and deuised only by the Aduersaries of the Reall Presence, we affirme first, that according to Rules of Logicke (accor∣ding to which only, a Contradiction must be examined) a Contradiction doth consist of two Propositions, or say∣ings, wherof the one is an affirmatiue, the other a negatiue, or deniall of that which is affirmed; as for example to say, that Christs Body is present in this place, and Christs Body is not present in this place, these two sayings are contradi∣ctory, and being taken (secundum idem) that is, in one and the same respect, they cannot by any possibility be both of them true. Or secondly a Contradiction is that which can∣not stand with the essence of the things, as to say, that one
and the same tyme, and other like Circumstances, is, and is not. But the Presence of Christes Body in this place, and that place, yea in a million of places at one tyme, is not of this kind, for it denieth not the being of his Body in either place, but only affirmeth the Presence therof in all places where it is. Neither is it against the essence of Christes Bo∣dy, or destroyeth the nature of Christes Body, to be in the Sacrament, and in as many places, as that sacred and imma∣culate host is offered vp. For better illustration wherof, I will giue some like resemblances: first in the mystery of the B. Trinity, do we not belieue, that one and the selfesame substance, and diuine Essence in number to be at once and for euer in three seuerall and distinct persons? A matter no lesse wonderfull, then the manifold Presence of Christes Body in many places: for as there is in the Sacrament a Di∣stinction of places, so in this Mistery of the Trinity a di∣stinction of persons; and therfore, as there is in this a most simple vnity, of nature or essence, notwithstanding the di∣stinction of persons, so in the other also without all danger of Contradiction, there may be a like vnity of Body, not∣withstanding the aforesaid distinction of places. And here the Arrians might, and did aswell cauill about this Mistery of the Trinity, as the Protestantes do now about the Reall Presence. A second resemblance of this Mistery, may be giuen in the soule of Man: this soule not being proportionable to the extension of the Body, (for so it were materiall depending of the Body, and mortall with it) but an indiuisible vnity and immortall, is notwithstanding, as both Philosophy and Truth teacheth, wholy in the whole Body, and wholy in euery part therof; and we may easily imagine, that God by his power is able to conserue it at once in seuerall members cut of, and deuided from the said Body, euen as it was be∣fore in the same members, when they were vnited to the Body. This difficulty may also be better conceiued, though not proued, by example of one and the same word, the which being once vttered, is therupon at one and the same
instant in the hearing of sundry persons, and not as a confu∣sed and indistinct noyse multiplied in the ayre, but as one peculiar word distinguished with the same syllables, wherin it was vttered. As also one Seale doth impart to sundry peeces of waxe, one and the same Print or forme; and sun∣dry looking glasses can in like manner containe in them at one tyme, euen one and the same fauour or resemblance. Add herunto, that albeit Prot. do say and thinke, that Luther erred in point of the Sacrament, yet certes they can∣not doubt, but that he was so learned as to discerne a Con∣tradiction: thus then he sayth therof,Luth. tom Wit∣temb 157. defens verb. oe ae f 388. See further Luthers opi∣nion herin alleadged by Pt. Martyr in his Disp. annexed to his com. plac. in Eng. p. 221. What Scriptures haue they to proue, that these two Propositions be directly contrary, Christ sitteth in heauen, and Christ is in the supper. The contradiction is in their carnall Imagination, not in faith, or the word of God. The like is affirmed by Ioachim Westphalus, saying,In Apol. cont. Calu. c. 19. p. 194. The body of man is circumscribed in one place, therfore at one tyme it cannot be but in one place, therfore not in all places where the supper is ministred. Is not this Geometricall Argument fetched from Euclids demonstrations, the Pillar and vp holder of all these Sacramentaries &c? Philosophy brought forth all heresies, and she begat the Errour of Zwinglius. And with him agreethHo. 50.2. Tom. in E∣uang. Lucae. Brentiu, whom M. Iewell termeth,In his Defence of the Apol. p. 473. A most graue and learned Father: and so do the 15. Protestant Deuines assembled togeather in Saxony, their wordes are as followeth,In Apol. Modest. ad acta conuent. 1. Theol. Torge nuper babit. p. 26. ante med. Whereas the Sacramentaries do say, that the Body of Christ is in heauen, therefore it is not in the Supper, &c. Therefore Luther prouoketh all Sacramentaries, that they tell him, and shew him the Antithesis, and repugnance betwixt them. But Saint Chrysostome answereth this Obiection, say∣ing,In Ep ad Hebraeos. ho. 17. S. Ambr. in Heb c. 10. Nyss in orat. Catech. c 37. and see S. Chys stome de Saerd. l. 3. c 4. & ho. 2. ad Pop. fin. This is one Sacrifice, otherwise by this reason, because it is offered in many places, there should be many Christes; not so, but one Christ in euery place, heere whole, and there whole, one Body. Lastly M. Foxe, (who should be able, as a man would thinke, to discerne a Contradiction, who was able to write such a huge volume of lyes, as is his Actes and Monuments) saith,In his Act. & Mon. p. 998. And see many more Prot. confessing the possibili∣ty in the Liturgy. Tract 2. see. 4 p 150. 11. That Christ abyding in heauen, is no let, but that he may be in the Sacrament, if he list. Add heerunto, that a body to be in a place, is not of the Essence of a Body, but meerely extrinsecall, and ac∣cidentary,
for the highest heauen is a true Body, and is not yet in any place: wherefore to be in any place, or more pla∣ces, is not to contradict the Essence of a true Body, and by Consequence possible. Christ our Sauiour when he appeared to S.Act. 9.4.5.17. & 22.8.9 15.16. Paul, was at the same tyme in the highest heauen, and vpon the Earth, or in the ayre neere the Earth: therfore, as then Chri∣stes body was in heauen, and neere vnto the Earth. That Christ as then was in heauen Prot. grant, and it appeareth by those words spoken of him,Act. 3.11. Whom heauen truly must receiue, vntill the tymes of the restitution of all things: that he was al∣so neere the Earth in the ayre, is euident by the text, and wilbe made more euident by the ensuing discourse. Heerto two answers are framed by Iohn Caluin. 1.Inc. 9. Act. that S. Paul saw not Christ in his owne person, but only in some shape or figure, neyther heard a voice from Christs owne mouth, but only some voyce from heauen, such as was that of God the father, at his Baptisme and Transfigu∣ration. 2.Calu. instit. l. 4. c. 7. §. 29. that he truly saw and heard Christ himselfe, but as remayning in heauen, so that the eyes and eares of Paul did pierce the highest heauen. And heere it seemeth to me, that Caluin did not remember himselfe, forgetting in one place what he had sayd in another: for in his Com∣mentaries vpon the 9. of the Actes, he auoucheth, that Paul neyther saw Christ in his owne person, nor yet heard any voyce from Christes owne mouth; and in the fourth Booke of his Institutions the 7. Chapter, he affirmeth that S. Paul truly saw and heard Christ himselfe: is not this a Contradi∣ction? but pardon him, for he had forgotten the saying, opor∣tuit mendacemesse memorem. But letting this Contradiction passe, against Caluins first glosse, that S. Paul truly saw Christ himselfe, appeareth by these places,Act. 9.7. But the men that went in Company with him, stood amazed, hearing the voyce, but seeing no man: Where a diffe∣rence is made betwene S. Paul and his Companions, in that they saw no man, but only heard a voyce. Againe,Ib. ver. 27. Barnabas tould the Apostles, how in the way Paul had seene our Lord, and that he spake vnto him. And yet in a third place,Ib. vers. 17. Ana∣nias
sayd, Iesus hath sent me, he that appeared to thee in the way that thou camest. And yet further,Act. 22.15.26. God hath preordinated thee, that thou shouldest &c. see the iust one, and heare a voyce from his mouth: because thou shalt be witnes to all men, of those things which thou hast seene and heard. See the likeAct. 1.15.16. 1. Cor. 9.1. elswhere. And in proofe of Christs Resurrection, numbring the other Apostles, of whome Christ was truly seene after his death, Saint Paul sayth,1. Cor. 15.8. Last of all, as it were of an abortiue, he was seene also of me, which proofe had beene of no force, vnles he had tru∣ly seene the very body of Christ, as the rest of the Apostles had before. Concerning the second, that he saw Christ not as in heauen, but in earth, or in the aire neere the Earth, may be proued first, in that the light of him that appeared was so great, that it struck PaulAct. 9.8. blynd, which it could not haue done, vnles it had beene neere. Besydes his Companions also saw a light, and heard a voyce, which argueth, that Christ was neere them, for it is not probable, that their eies and eares could pierce the highest heauens; they also did not heare the voyce of himAct. 11.20. that spake with Paul, which argueth that Christ was neerer to Paul, whereas if he had spoken from heauen, all might haue heard alyke. Further if S. Paul had seene him in the highest heauen, he would not haue doubted who he had been, saying, who art thou O Lord, nor yet haue needed that answere of our Lord, I am Iesus whome thou persecutest. Lastly, Prot. much meruaile, how the Saints in heauen can haue so long eyes and eares, as to see & know thinges done vpon Earth. Much more may we meruayle, how the Carnall eyes, and eares of Paul could reach from Earth to heauen: and if this perforce they must attribute to the power of God (which though it did not happen, yet to be possible we grant) with farre lesse reason can they de∣ny through the same power, the like priuiledge to the glo∣rifyed soules. S. Paul being in prison, it is sayd,Act. 23.11. The night follow∣ing our Lord standing by him, sayd, be constant: for as thou hast te∣stifyed of me in Hierusalem, so must thou testify at Rome also. This place is so conuincing, that the Prot.Anno 1560. 1562. 1568. 1605. of Geneua, in∣steed
of standing by him, assistens, or adstans, in Latin, do tran∣slate, se presente, he being present: and Tremelius changeth it to, visus est, was seene. But as by saying, being present, this doth not impugne, but rather proue Christs being in the prison with S. Paul; so to change standing into seeing, is a Corruption ouer grosse, standing, and seeing being things so different: And thereforeAgainst Rhem. Test. in Act. 23.11. Bib. of 1578. Fulke and other Transla∣tours do truly say, stood by him. Now this proueth that though he was in heauen, yet was he also at the same tyme in the prison with Paul; neither will it suffice to say, that it was an Angel that stood by him, for the Text saith, it was our Lord. Neither was it an Angell, but Christ our Lord, of whome he had testifyed in Hierusalem, and whome he was to testify in Rome. Examples of other like apparitions of Christ vpon earth, are plentifull in the ancient Fathers: as to S. Peter whereof S.In orat. cont. Auxen∣tium. Egefip. l. 3. de Excidio Hierus. c. 2. Ambrose: Also vnto S. Anthony, as appeareth in S.Atha∣nas. in Apol. pro fuga sua. Athanasius: To S. Tharsilla, whereof see S.L. 4. Dial. c. 16. Gregory: To S. Gregory himselfe, witnesse whereof is Io∣annesL. 2. vi∣tae ipsius. c. 12. Paulinus Ep ad Ma∣charium. Diaconus. But against this some further vrge, that Christes Body as it is vpon the Aultar is not continuated with it selfe, as it is in heauen, for many other Bodies are betwixt; therefore it is deuided, and so not one. To this, I answere, in that Case it is neither continuated, nor discontinuated or deuided, for this doth properly belōg to things which be many, whether they the wholes or parts. And therefore though many Bo∣dies be betwixt Christs Body, as it is in heauen and vpon the Aultar, yet this proueth not that Christes Body is deui∣ded in respect of it selfe, but only in respect of the place, to wit, that heauen and Earth are discontinuated. It is vrged againe, if a Body can be in two places at one tyme, then at the same tyme it may be remote & neere, come to, and go from the said place; in one place be ex∣treme hoat, and in another place extreme cold, in one place be wounded and slayne, and in another be safe and aliue, or the like, all which imply. Answ. Such respects are multiplied as follow the places, not others: so in the forsayd case it might be aboue and below, neere and
remote, moue and rest &c. none of which do repugne, see∣ing they are in diuers respects, to wit, in reguard of diuers places: euen as the soule of man, which as it is in the head and feete, is remote, and not remote from the Earth; & one hand mouing, the other resting, the soule at the same tyme is sayd to moue and rest. Now such actions and qualities as do not agree to the Body in reguard of the place, but in re∣guard of it selfe, and so are receiued and inherent in the bo∣dy it selfe, are not multiplied, no more then the Body it selfe: So a Body hoat in one place, is also hoat in another; and if extreme heate should be applyed in one place, and extreme cold in another, it should be in the same state, as if the sayd Contraries were applyed to a body in one place, that is, neither extreme hoat, nor extreme cold: and so if a man should be hungry, wounded, slaine &c. in one place, the like he should be in another. Add lastly what Melancthon saith heereof in generall,Ep. ad Marti∣num Gereli∣tium. I had ra∣ther dye, then affirme this which the Zwinglians affirme, that Christs Body cannot be but in one place. Therefore constantly reproue them publickly and priuatly when occasion shalbe. And this may suffice for answere to the first supposed Contradiction of Christes Body being in diuers places. The second supposed Contradiction is, that it doth im∣ply, for Christes Body to be contained within so small a compasse, as is the Sacramentall host. But to this I answer, as it is not essentiall to a Body to occupy a place, so neither is it essentiall, that the greatnes of the place must portio∣nably answere the greatnes of the Body: for neyther place, nor answerable greatnes of place to the body, is put in the definition of a Body, which they should be, if they were essentiall to a Body; and the highest heauen hath exceeding great magnitude, and yet is without all place. Againe, it is no more impossible for Christes Body to be in the Sacrament, then it is for a Camel to goe through the ee of a needle: & yet our Sauiour sayth,Mat. 19.24. Mar. 1.25.27. It is easier for a Camel to goe through the eye of a needle, then a rich man to enter into the kingdome of God. And whereas the Apostles heerupon demanding, who then can be saued? Christ answered, with men
this is impossible, but with God all things are possible: heere, that which is more hard, to wit, a Rich man to be saued, is sayd to be possible; therefore much more possible is that which is sayd to be more easy, to wit, for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle; but this is not possible to be but by the Camel not occupying place: therefore a Body may be, and not occupy place; & by what meanes soeuer it be, it is more incredible & improportionable according to humane sense, then for the Body of a man to be in the Sa∣crament: but with God these & all other thinges are possible. This possibility is affirmed by the AncientAug. de Spir. & lic. c. 1. Nazian∣zen l. 4. de Theol. Orig. in c. 19. Ma∣thaei. Fa∣thers, yea and by some of the Prot. writers: for M. Willet in his Synopsis confesseth that,Printed 1600. p. 526. God by his absolute power, can draw the huge Body of a Camell, remayning still of that bignes, through a needles eye: only he denyeth that it can be, that God will do it, because (sayth he) it is contrary to the law of nature. And heere I would demaund, whether it were not as strange, that the Godhead of Christ being infinite, should yet be wholly in the limited nature of humanity, and be∣fore his natiuity wholy also in his Mothers wombe, she be∣ing therefore called the Mother of ourLuc. 1.43. Lord, and the Mother ofVide Vincent. Lyrin. l. ad∣uers. her. paul. ant. med. Amb. l. 2. de Virg. Ephrem de laud. Mariae. Et Conc. E∣phes. in Ep. ad Nestor. Et Conc. Con∣stantinop. 5. sub Iustin. Imperat. c. 6. Epiph. in An∣chor. iuxta med. And see the Cen∣turistes con∣fessing and reporting this. cent. 5. col. 802. 608. 124. See also Socra∣tes hist. l. 7. c. 2. God? This may be somewhat explayned by the example of the sight of the eye, which being but a small member, com∣prehendeth in it (in full proportion of outward shew, in∣comparably aboue the bignes of it selfe) the externall figure and largenes of a great part both of heauen and earth, with a distinguished and answerable proportion of hills, dales, fields, and buildings, which at once, it receyueth and dis∣cerneth. And, which is more, we see by experience that, a Looking glasse, or a litle Diamond, do comprehend in them the externall shew of breadth and length of great Chambers & places exceeding greater then themselues, & that (which is most) in such due and answerable proportion, that who∣soeuer behouldeth but in the sayd glasse or Diamond the said figures so in them represented, shall withall behould in them a shew of proportion and largenesse far exceeding the sayd glasse or Diamond, and so great as if he had seene the things
themselues. And it is in reason no more strange, for a man to be in no greater a roome then the Sacrament, then it is for the soule of man (which is an indiuisible vnity, & of it selfe can fully reide in lesse then a needles point) to be as it were dilated, and extended as far as the whole Body of Man. But this Doctrine is so true, that Luther affirmeth,Luther cited by Pet. Martyr. in Dip. an∣nex loc. com. Anglic. that a body of quantity, may be without a quantitiue measure. And M. Iewell likewise acknowledgeth,Reply against Har∣ding, p. 352. That God is able by his omnipotent power, to make Christes Body present, without place and quantity: so far in his opinion was this matter from all con∣tradiction. This also is strongly confirmed by this relation made by S. Iohn, that,Io. 20.19.26. When the doores were shut where the Disciples were gathered togeather for feare of the Iewes, Iesus came and stood in the middest. Whereupon the DisciplesLuc. 14.37. were troubled, and affrighted, and imagined that they saw a spirit. Now this could not be, but either by his Body not occupying a place, or else by penetration of Bodies, which is as difficult. And the like might be shewed in Christes Natiuity, Resurrection, and Ascension. Besides it is as naturall for fire to burne, for a thing coloured to be seene, for a thing heauy to waigh downe, for the water to be fluxible, and not to haue the quality of sustayning a heauy body, as it is for a Body to occupy a place: and yet with all these thinges hath Gods Omnipotency miraculously dispensed, yea sus∣pended and hindered the naturall course therof, though the organs, obiects, meanes, and all other things were applied, as appeareth by the Bush whichExod. 3.2. Moyses saw burne and consumed not: by the fyery fornace, whereinto the 3. Chil∣dren wereDan. 3.22.25.27. cast: by the axe which falling into the wa∣ter,4. Reg. 6 5.6. by vertue of the Prophets word, did swimme a∣boue the water: by Christes walkingMat. 14.26. vpon the waters, at the sight wherof, the thing being supernaturall, the Disciples were so affraid that they cryed out, it was a spirit: By ChristesLuc. 4.29 30. passing through the middest of them, that had brought him to the edge of a hill &c. that they might throw him downe head∣long: By the Israelites passing through the red sea,Exod. 14.22. Ios. 3.14. for the water was as it were a wall vpon their right hand and left. All which
passages recorded in sacred Scripture, are as miraculous, as Christes Body being in the B. Sacrament, and yet that only must by Protestantes be denied, and all these granted. Lastly, the third supposed Contradiction is of Christes Body, being in the Sacrament without Circumscription. Answ. But how was Christes Body cicumscribed, when he entred in to his Disciples, as before, iannas clausis, the doores being shut? for we read no where that they were miraculosly opened, as the Angell opened the gates of the Prison,Act. 5.29. & 12.5.10. where S. Peter was: but heer at our Sauiours entrance, the miracle consisted not in the opening of the doores, but the miracle rested in our Sauiour his suddaine standing in the mid∣dest of the Apostles when the doores were shut: for which cause S. Iohn very carefully obserueth, and twyce ouer reciteth, the dores being shut: in so much that the Apostles at this his appea∣rance, wereLuc. 24.37. afraid, supposing they had seene a spirit, as in like manner they cryed out, and were troubled, when they sawMat. 14.16. him walking vpon the Sea. This truth is acknowledged by S. Ambrose, who wri∣ting herof sayth,Ambr. in vlt. cap. Luc. It was a wonder how the corporall nature passed through the impenetrable body. S. Hilary likewise testi∣fieth, that,Hilar l. 1. de Tria. post med. Nothing of that which is solid giueth place, neither d the wood or stones by their nature loose any thing &c. Our Lordes Body doth not depart from it selfe, that it should resume it selfe of nothing, & sense and speach giueth place, and the truth of the fact is without mans reason. I might alleadgeChrysost. de Resur. ho. 9. & in loan. ho. 86. Aug. in tract. sup. dicta verba Euang. & de agone Chri∣sti c. 24 Et Ep. 3. ad vo∣lus. Eiph. haer. 64. & 20. Hier. cont. Iouin. l. 1. c. 21 & ad Eu∣soh. & in Ep. ad Pam∣mach. de erro∣ribus loan Hierosol. Cy∣ril. in loan. l. 12. c. 53. Theodoret. Dilog. 2. Leo Eo. 22. ad Flau. & Ep. 83. ad Pa∣lestinos. sundry other Testimonies of the Fathers, all confessing it to be miraculous. But I will content my selfe with the Doctrine of the great Deuines of Geneua, who graunt,Vide Apol. Mo∣dest. ad acta Conuent. 15. Theol. Torgae nuper habit. p. 35. That suddainly to vnish out of sight &c. neither also to penetrate through a solid body, do take away the truth of corporall substance. As also of M. Cran∣mer, who speaking hereof, teacheth that by possibilityAnswere to Gardiner and Smith. p. 454. Christes body may be in the Bread and wyne, also in the doores which were shut, and stone of his Sepulcher. Wherupon the Conclusion must needs be, that our Sauiour his Body passing through the doores, either was not as then circumscribed in place; or else, which were as strange, it and the doore being two se∣uerall bodies, were circumscribed both in one place.
The summe of all briefly is this, If God haue often her∣tofore miraculously suspended from sundry sortes of Bodies, sundry of their naturall qualities, the truth and natures of the said Bodies still preserued notwithstanding, as hath bene already shewed: And as touching our Sauiours sacred Bo∣dy,Mat. 14.26. If he walked vpon the Sea, against the naturall property either of his bodies waight, or the waters fluxibili∣ty apt for diuision: If, as before, he passed through the sacred wombe of his Virgin Mother, sealed vp without reserua∣tion, penetrated the stone in his Resurrection, the doores at his apparition to his Disciples; if his Body was transformedMar. 6.49. Mat. 17.2. Luc. 9.29. Mar. 9.3. vpon the mountaine, appeared to his Disciples inMar. 16.12. another shape: If he suddainly vanished,Luc. 14.31. as he sate at table with two of his Disciples, , became vnseene of them: as also in like manner,Luc 4.29.30. Of his like escape read Iohn. 10.39. & 8.59. whence all the Synagogue &c. cast him out of the Citty, and brought him to the edge of the hill &c. that they might throw him downe headlong, he by like miracle passing through the middest of them, went his way, and so escapedSeehte Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible prin∣ted 1576. in Luc. 4.30. miraculously: I say, if na∣ture and naturall actions haue bene suspended in all these, & euery one of them, be as miraculous, as is the being of Chri∣stes B. Body in the consecrated host vpon the Aultar; and seeme withall to imply in each of them as much contradi∣ction in nature, as doth the B. Sacrament, and yet there is no Contradiction in any of them against nature, but only the Prerogatiue and supreme power of the God of Nature, working aboue nature: why then should the Reall Presence of Christes sacred Body in the B. Sacrament, imply in it a Contradiction, and consequently an Impossibility? I con∣clude all with a notable sentence of Iustinus Martyr, Quae sunt earundem virium eamdem habent fidem, siue concedantur, siue tol∣lantur. Thinges of equall power haue the same credit, concerning be∣liefe, whether they be granted, or denyed. Now let the Prot. ap∣ply, and either graunt the reall Presence, which is no more miraculous, then the former instances, or els deny all, since they are all alike, built vpon Gods power, working aboue nature: but the former they dare not deny, therfore neither let them dare to deny this.
These premises considered, sundry Prot. vpon a second and better Consideration do acknowledge the possibility of the Real presence. Caluin sayth,1 Instit. prin. Ar∣gent. de coena Dom. c 11. p. 336. Heere that they may cause vs enuy, they cause vs to speake maliciously of the power of God Omnipotent: but they eyther erre foolishly, or maliciously: for it is not heere questioned what God can do, but what he will do. The deuines of Wittemberge say,Harm. of Conf. p. 454. We belieue that the omnipotency of God is so great,Harm. of Conf. p. 454. that in the Eucharist he may eyther annihilate the substance of Bread, or els change them into his Body: But that God doth exercise this his absolute Omnipotency in the Eucharist we haue no certayne word of God for it. Cranmer affirmeth that,Answ. to Steuen Gard, p. 454. The Controuersy in this matter is not, what may be, but what is: Christs Body may be as well in the Bread, as in the Doore (which was shut) and stone of his Sepulcher. Whitaker his contrary as∣sertion notwithstanding, sayth,Answere to Reyn p. 192. That Christ can make the Bread his Body, we grant; only shew that Christ will make of Reall Bread, his Reall flesh, and then this Controuersy is brought to an end. And the same words are vsed byIn his Serm. vpon the Sacram. ser. 3. fol. 85. Bruis. So confessedly is the Real Presence possible. SECT. IX. Obiections agaynst the Real Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Eucharist, in regard of certayne preten∣ded indignities thereupon ensuing, answered. THeWillet in his Sy∣nop. p. 454. See Algerus mentioning the like Ob∣iections of the Here∣tickes of his tyme. l. 2. de Sacram. Euch. c. 1. Indignities which Prot. imagine to follow v∣pon the Real eating of Christs Body, are two: First, that Christ should be in continuall voyage of ascending vp agayne to heauen, vpon the daily corruption of the formes of Bread and wyne. Secondly, he that should passe into such vndecent places, as mens stomackes &c. eaten by myce, bur∣ned by the fyre &c. Concerning the first, it is explained by example of the soule being wholly in euery part of mans Body, the Com∣parison is this; euen as when an arme or leg is cut off, the soule that informed that member before it was cut off, doth
not perish with it, for then he that lacked his arme should loose his soule; neyther doth it hang in the ayre, because the ayre is not organized to receiue the information, but ceasing to informe the member cut off, it doth without any motion to place, only loose that subiect and place, keeping still the place and residence in the Body where it was before: euen so the Body of Christ, when the formes of Bread and wine are corrupted in the stomake, doth without any motion frō place to place only become absent, or leaueth that aboad, which it had in the stomake, and keepeth the place which then, and before it had in heauen. To the second I answere, that as the Diuinity filleth all places how vndecent and vncleane soeuer; the Sunne bea∣mes also beating vpon a dunghill, and not defyled there∣with; so Christs Body being immortall & impassible, can∣not be defyled with the touch or impression of any infecti∣on, or vncleane Creature. The stench of sinne when he cō∣uersed vpon earth amongst sinners, did much more dislike the smell of his soule, then this other could molest his Bo∣dy. And as it was not vndecent, but a signe of great mercy and loue, that he should suffer that; so it is not more vnsee∣mely, that his Body should admit the other, seeing there∣by he suffereth nothing, but only his remaining there to te∣stify and worke admirable effectes of loue and Grace. And heere for full payment and answere to all these vile, base, grosse and carnall Obiections of these Dunghill Heretickes; these Obiections and the like, are but raked out of the ashes of the old Heathens and Pagans, of whom sayth S. Austine.Ep. 49. ad Deo-Gratias. q. 6. We should not belieue in Christ himselfe, if we feared the laughing of Pagans. They, & some ancient heretickes obiected the very like to this against theTertul. de carne Christi. & l. de Resur. carnis. Hier. Ep. ad Pa∣mach. Eua∣grius hist. l. 1. c. 2. Theodor. l. 4. haer. fab. Incarnation, Death, Passion, and Resurrection of our glorious Sauiour, pretending that it was vndecent, that GodHilar. de Trin. l. 9. 11. 12. & l. cont. Constant. See Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 4. See 8. p. 183. should lye in a womans wombe nine monthes, that he should take vpon him the Prison of our flesh, that he should indure the diffi∣culties of our Infancy, should be Circumcised, & comming to mans state, shouldSee in Iustin Mar∣tyr. in Dial. cum Try∣phone. Mi∣nutius Faelix in Octauio. And see the Centurists. Cent. 5. Col. 1510. suffer most shamefull and dishono∣rable death; and all this because Adam did tast an Apple, the
offence wherof, as the Heathens thought, god was more like to pardon, then thus to redeeme. And yet all this Christians firmely belieue. Wherfore I will conclude this with the good aduise of S. Chrysostome, saying,In Mat. ho. 83. Let vs alwaies belieue God, and not resist him, although, that which he sayth, may seeme absurd both to sense and thought &c. his wordes cannot deceiue vs, but our sense is ea∣sily deceiued &c. For so much therfore as he hath said, This is my Body, let vs in no sort doubt, but belieue. SECT. X. The foresaid truth of the Reall Presence of Christes Body and Bloud in the Blessed Sacrament, is further pro∣ued by cleere and confessed Miracles, wrought by God in testimony therof. SInce the stumbling blocke of pretended impossibility & absurdity conceiued against our Doctrine, and wherat flesh and bloud hath taken such scruple and offence, is by that which hitherto hath bene alleadged, so cleerly remo∣ued, and that this matter is now at last confessed to be pos∣sible, as depending only vpon Gods holy will: Since like∣wise his will, which cannot be better knowne to vs, then by his word, is herin made so plaine vnto vs, euen by his written word, that if Protestants would but for the tyme suppose, that the holy Ghost were mindfull and desirous to decree by Scripture the Reall Presence, themselues can hardly imagine wordes more euident to that purpose, then are these, This is my Body which is giuen for you, which as Rei∣noldsConfer. with Hart. p. 68. granteth, are plainer in shew for our Reall Presence, then for their Sacramentall: Since also the answerable sense of the same wordes is accordingly confirmed to vs, not only by our Sauiours forsaid promise, The bread which I will giue is my flesh, as also by S. Paules agreable Explication, whom sun∣dry Protestantes confesse herinCalu. in Ep. 333. p. 662. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 2. p. 188. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l 5. p. 176. to be Christes best inter∣preter: and likewise by the confessed testimonies of the Pri∣mitiue
Church, which according to Prot.Confess. of Bohemia, in the Harm of Confess. p. 400. is the true and best Mistres of Posterity, but euen also by the Doctrine and be∣liee of Prot. themselues, who enforced through the Eui∣dence of truth, haue taught and maintayned the same Real Pesenc: heereof Luther himselfe shall giue vs a plaine te∣stimny,In Epist. ad Argenti∣nenses. Ths I cannot, nor will not deny (sayth he) that if Crolost ilius or any other could for the last fiue yeares haue persuaded me that there had beene nothing in the Sacrament but bread and wine, he should hau bound me vnto him by a great good turne: for I haue taken great care in the discussion of this matter, and haue endeauou∣red with all my power, and sinewes stretched out, to be rid thereof, for I did will see, that thereby I might very greatly hurt the Papacy &c. But I do see my selfe captiue, no way being left to escape, for the Text of the Ghospel is so plaine and strong &c. These so conuincing proofes thus premised, I will now conclude this Controuersy with onely adding thereto in further Confirmation to vs of Gods holy will in this be∣halfe, some few, of many vndoubted miracles, reported eyther by Ancient Fathers, or Prot. themselues. Paulus Dia∣conu in vita S. Gregorij, reporteth that, when S. Gregory to persuade an incredulous woman in the Real Presence, had, after prayer made, found the little portion of the (Sacramentall) Bread, which he had placed on the Aultar, to be made flesh, he sayd to the woman, learne, and now belieue him witnessing &c. my Bloud is truly drinke. This History is also related and acknowled∣ged by D.Iesuis, part. 2. rat. 5. p. 616. Humfrey, and insteed of better answer is on∣ly deryded. S. Ambrose reporteth, that,Orat. Fu∣neb. de obitu Frat. Satyri. His brother Sa∣tyrus being by shipwracke throwne into the Sea, and hauing tyed the diuine Sacrament in a stole, and fastened the stole about his necke, sought no boarde wherby supported, he might be holpen, but thinking himselfe therewith sufficiently defended required no other helpe: ney∣ther did his hope leaue him, nor his opinion deceiue him, but being the first that was saued from the water, he was set safe on shore &c. This is so certaine, that PeterLib. cont. Gardin. Ob∣iect. 88. Whi∣tak. l. 10. cont. Dur. p 872. Martyr and Whitaker, acknowledging the matter of fact, insteed of better answer, reproue both S. Ambrose, and his Brother Satyrus. S. Cy∣prian reporteth concerningSer. de lat sis. a certaine woman who when she would with vnworthy hands haue opened her Coffer, wherein was (re∣serued)
the holy thing of our Lord, there sprung vp fire from thence, whereby the was so terrifyed, that she durst not touch it. Fulke ac∣knowledging this fact, only answereth that,Against Heskins &c. p. 52. This was a iust punishment for her reseruing of that which should haue beene re∣ceyued: but S. Cyprian sayth, she was punished, for that she would haue touched it with vnworthy hands. But now to relate some miraculous apparitions of Bloud issuing from the Sacrament vpon the Iewes misbe∣liefe or violence offered thereto: S. Basil ministring the Sa∣crament, a Iew being present, and behoulding the Bread and wyne, laughed at the sacred Mysteries of Christians, which S. Basil perceiuing, offered both to be eaten, but they presently appeared to be flesh and bloud. This is rela∣ted by CyrusIn Epi∣gram. in D. Basilium. Theodorus Prodomius, who liued An∣no 440. and by theCent. 4. Col. 431. Century writers. In like sort sundry writers relate that,Surius in Chron. Nicol Basilius in additione ad Chronicon Naucleri. Pontanus l. 5. rerum me∣morabilium. In February 1510. in a towne called Knobloch, one Paul, a Sacrilegious person, went secretly into the Church by night, broke the Pixe where the Sa∣crament was reserued, and stole from thence two consecrated hosts, one of which he sould to a Iew: afterward the Iew blinded with ma∣lice sayd, If thou be the God of Christians manifest thy selfe, & that sayd, he pierced the Sacrament with his dagger, whereupon bloud did miraculously issue forth &c. This miracle was so knowne & dis∣couered, that thirty eight Iewes assenting thereto, were therefore apprehended, and publickly burned the 19. of Iuly 1510. in the Mar∣chie of Brandeburge; and all Iewes were also thereupon by publicke Decree banished out of the sayd Territories. This history is so cer∣tayne, that it is reported by the Prot. writers, Manlius, Beu∣ther, and Osiander. And sundry otherSee Breerley his Liturgy of the Masse. 187. such lyke might be produced, so free from all suspition of fiction, that the very tyme in which they happened, is specially described, the place particularly named, the numbers of the Offenders noted, and their publicke condemnation and execution e∣uen to death, certainly set downe, and the ffence in all these discouered, vpon occasion of astonishment at the mi∣racle shewed.
CHAP. XXII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Communion of the Laity, vnder one, or both kinds. Whether vnder eyther kind of the Eucharist, the Body and Bloud of Christ our Sauiour are truly contayned, and the true Essence of the Sacrament preserued; and con∣sequently whether it be lawfull to administer the Sa∣crament only vnder one kind vnto the Laity: or that, Christ hath commanded both kinds to be administred vnto them? SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE present Controuersy is not, whe∣ther Christ did institute the Eucharist vnder both kindes, or whether himselfe did administer the same in both to his A∣postles, or whether the Apostles, or the Bishops of the Primitiue Church, did in like manner at sundry tymes practise the same; for all this the Catholicke Church doth willing∣ly graunt: But the mayne point in Controuersy is, whe∣ther Christ did Commaund the Administration of both
kindes to the Laity, and whether the Essence of this Sa∣crament be entyre in one, and the same Grace necessary to saluation giuen to the Receiuers by one, as both. Now, in this Case, the Catholicke Church declareth and de∣creeth that,Concil. Trident. Sess. 13. Cap. 3. Alwaies this beliefe was in the Church of God, that immediatly after Consecration, the true Body of our Lord, and his true Bloud, togeather with his Soule and Diuinity, are vnder the forme of Bread and wyne; but the Body truly vnder the forme of Bread, and the Bloud vnder the forme of wyne, by vertue of the wordes; and the Body vnder the forme of wyne, and the Bloud vnder the forme of Bread, and the soule vnder both, by vertue of that naturall connexion, and concomi∣tancie, wherby the partes of Christ our Lord, who is now risen from the dead to dye no more, are coupled amongst themselues: and the Diuinity also, for that admirable hypostaticall vnion therof, with the Body, and the soule. Wherfore it is most true, that as much is contayned vnder ei∣ther kind as vnder both, for whole and entyre Christ is vnder the forme of Bread, and vnder euery part of the forme whole also vnder the for∣me of wyne, and the partes therof. Hereupon it doth further de∣cree that,Concil. Trident. Sess. 21. Cap 1. the Laickes, and Clerkes not celebrating, are bound by no deuine Precept, to receiue the Sacrament of the Eucharist vnder both kindes; neither by any meanes can it be doubted with a safe faith, but that the Communion vnder one kind sufficeth them to saluation: for although Christ our Lord instituted this venerable Sacrament, in his last Supper, vnder the kinds of Bread and wyne, and deliuered it vnto his Apostles: yet notwithstanding, that institution and deliuery tend not to this, that all faithfull Christians be bound by Decree of our Lord to receiue both kindes. But neither out of those wordes of Iohn the sixt is it rightly deduced, that the Communion vnder both kindes is com∣manded by our Lord, howsoeuer it be vnderstood according to diuers Interpretations of holy Fathers and Doctours: for he that said, Vnlesse you eate the flesh of the Sonne of Man, and drinke his Bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you; said also, If any man shall eate of this Bread he shall liue for euer. And he who said, Whosoeuer eateth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud, hath eternall lyfe; said also, The Bread which I will giue is my flesh for the life of the world. And to conclude, he who said, He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my Bloud, abydeth in me & I in him; said neuerthelesse, He that eateth this Bread shall liue for euer.
FurthermoreSess. 21. Cap. 2. it declareth, this power euer to haue bene in the Church, that in the dispensing of the Sacramentes, their substance preserued, she might ordayne, or change those thinges, which she iudged more expedient for the profit of the receiuers, or the reuerence of the Sacraments themselues, according to the variety of thinges, tymes, and places &c Wherfore knowing this her authority in the Administra∣tion of Sacramentes, although from the beginning of Christian Reli∣gion, the vse of both kindes was not rare; yet in processe of tyme, that custome being changed in many places, moued with great and iust Cau∣ses, she hath approued this Custome of Communicating vnder one kind, and hath Decreed that it is to be houlden for a law; which it is not law∣full to reiect, or at pleasure to change without the authority of the Church it selfe. AndCan. 1. therfore, if any man shall say; that all and singular Christians by Gods Cōmandement or necessity of Saluation, ought to receiue the Sacrament of the Eucharist vnder both kind as &c. OrCan. 2. that the holy Catholicke Church hath not bene moued for iust causes and reasons, that the Laickes, and also the Clerkes not cele∣brating, might not be communicated only vnder the forme of Bread, or that she erred therin &c. OrCan. 3. if any shall deny, whole and en∣tyre Christ, the fountaine and author of all graces, to be taken vnder the one kind of Bread because as some falsly affirme, he is not receyued ac∣cording to the Institution of Christ himselfe vnder both kinds, let him be accursed. Thus cleerly and particularly hath the Councell of Trent determined this Controuersy. It is defyned by the Councell of Constance. ThatSess 14. seeing in some partes of the world some presume rashly to affirme, that Christian people ought to receiue the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist vnder both kindes of Bread and wyne, and do not only in many places communicate the Lay people vnder the forme of Bread, but also vnder the forme of wyne euen after Supper, or otherwise not fasting &c. Hence it is, that this present Councell &c. doth defyne, that although Christ did institute thi venerable Sacrament after Supper and gaue it to his Disciples vnder both kindes of Bread and wyne, yet this not∣withstanding the laudable authority of Sacred Canons and the ap∣proued Custome of the Church hath and doth obserue, that this Sacra∣ment ought not to be Consecrated after supper nor receiued by the people not fasting but in the Case of infirmity or other necessity granted or admitted by the law of the Church. And as this Custome for the auoy∣ding
of some dangers and scandals, was iustly brought in, that though in the Primitiue Church this Sacrament was receiued by the faithfull vnder both kindes, yet afterwards it should be receiued, by those that Consecrate, vnder both, and by the Laity only vnder the forme of Bread, seeing it is firmely to be belieued, and no wayes to be doubted, that the whole Body, and Bloud of Christ is truly contained, aswell vnder the forme of Bread, as vnder the forme of wyne: wherfore seeing this Cu∣stome was rightly brought in by the Church and holy Fathers, & hath bene very long obserued, it is to be houlden for a law, which it is not lawfull to reiect, or at pleasure to alter, without the authority of the Church. And the same is Decreed by the CouncellSess. 30. of Ba∣sil. The Councell of Florence declared, and that with the assent of the Armenians, that,In De∣cret. Eugenij PP. 4. By vertue of the wordes, the substance of Bread, is turned into the Body of Christ, and the Substance of the wyne into his Bloud, yet so as Christ is contayned whole vnder the forme of Bread, and whole vnder the forme of wyne, as also whole vn∣dr euery part of the host consecrated, and the wyne consecrated, sepa∣ration being made. The selfesame which these Councels haue Decreed, is generally taught, belieued, and practised by allBellar. de Euchar. l. 4. c. 21. &c. Rhem. Test. in Ioan. 6. Catholickes. Protestant Vntruthes. Luther very impudently and falsly sayth,De Cap∣tiuit. Babyl. c. 1. de Euchar. I reguard not the Councell of Constance, whose authority if it be of force, why is not that of Basil of force also, which Decreeth to the contrary, that it was lawfull for the Bohemians to receiue both kinds. But this is vn∣true, for the same thing was decreed in bothConc. Constant. Sess 13. Ba∣sile. Sess 30. Councels, to wit, That the Laity were not bound by any diuine Pre∣cept, to receiue vnder both kinds, and therfore the law and Custome of the Church to be obserued: And though the Councell of Basil did allow the Bohemians to receiue vn∣der both kindes, yet it was but vpon their acknowledgmēt, that it was granted them by the Church, and that they were not obliged therto by any Diuine law.
Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth that,Article 30. The Cup f the Lord is not to be denyed to the Lay people, for both the partes of the Lords Sacrament by Christes Ordinance, and Commandement, ought to be ministred to all Christian men alike. And the same is taught byDe for∣mula Missae. Cal. Instit l. 4. c. 17. sect. 47. Chemnit. Exam part. 2. Sess. 11. Luther, Caluin, and sundry others. In so much, that if you will belieue M. Morton,Of the Institution &c. or Masse of Christ l. 1. c. 3. sect. 1. All Prote∣stants, whether you call them Caluinists, or Lutherans, hould that in the publick and set Celebration of the Eucharist, the Communion in both kinds ought to be giuen to all sortes of Communicants that are capable of both. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. Vrbanus Rhegius a Protestant writer, acknowledgeth that the Hereticke NestoriusLoc. com. fol. 56. communicated the Laity vnder both kinds, (but) the Councell of Ephesus withstood him. PeterAeneas Siluius Hist. Bohem. c 35. Dresdensis, and Iacobel Misnensis taught, that the lay people could not be saued, vnles they drunke of the Cup of our Lord. Iohn Husse taught,Act. Mon p 260. Drisserus in Millen. 6. p. 255. The necessity of Communion vnder both kinds. Protestants Errours. Luthers obstinate pryde was such, as that he affirmed, that,In for∣mula Mssae. If any Councell should ordayne or permit both kinds, we would not vse both, but in despite of the Councell and the Decree therof, we would either vse one or neither, and not both, accursing all who through the power and decree of the Councell should vse both. And, It isTom. 3. in ps. 22. fol. 348. not determined according to the spirit of truth, nor by the authority of Scriptures, but by the pipe of the Pope, according to the vaine Traditions of men, the Essence of God not to beget, nor to be be∣gotten, the soule to be the substantiall forme of the Body, bread and wyne to be transubstantied vpon the Aultar, one only forme to be giuen to the laity for the whole Sacramēt, & such like mōsters. Who but a Mōster in religion would censure Articles of faith to be Monsters?
SECT. II. That vnder eyther kind is contayned whole Christ, to wit, Body, Bloud, Soule & Diuinity: as also the true Essence of the Sacrament. THe proofe of the first point, of Christ being whole in eyther kind, is drawne from three Principles of fayth: first that by reason of those words of Christ, This is my bo∣dy which shalbe giuen for you, that in the Eucharist is tru∣ly & really the very body of Christ. The second, that Christ our Sauiour after his Resurrection from death was neuer to dye agayne according to those wordes of S. Paul,Rom. .9. Christ rising agayne from the dead, now dyeth no more, Death shall no more haue Dominion ouer him: whence it necessarily followeth, that vnder the forme of Bread is not the Body of Christ without Bloud and Soule, for so it should be without life, and cō∣sequently dead. The third, that Christ is one diuine person subsisting in two natures, from whence it immediatly ary∣seth, that since the Body of Christ hath no other subsistence then that of his Godhead, which really is all one with his Essence, that therefore wheresoeuer his Body is, there is al∣so his Diuinity. This argument supposing these 3. principles doth euidētly conuince; & for the two later I doubt not but most Prot. will admit; and the first is acknowledged for true by all Lutherans, and hath beene already proued. Secondly, the same is proued by those words of our Sa∣uiour,Io. 6.57. He that eateth me, the same also shall liue by me. Now, Christ is not eaten but vnder the forme of Bread, therefore vnder that forme is not only his sacred Body, but his blessed Soule, and precious Bloud, euen whole Christ: for of his Body only he would neuer haue sayd, he that eateth me; and I am the bread of lyfe which descended from heauen; And againe, This is the Bread which descended from heauen. Touching the second point, viz. that the true Essnce of the Sacrament is found in eyther kind, it is proued; for in
a Sacrament is only required that it be a signe and cause of Grace. The signe in the Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament, is twofold: the first of internall refection, according to those wordes of Christ,Io. 6.55. My flesh is truly meate; the second of perfect vnion of the faythfull among themselues, and with Christ, whereof S. Paul speaketh, saying,1. Cor. 10.17. for being many we are one Bread, one Body, all that participate of one Bread. Now, both these significations are found in eyther kind; for first, spirituall refection only importeth the refection of the soule, which wheher it be by way of meate or drinke, or both im∣porteth not, seeing in spirituall refections, one and the selfe∣same thing is sayd to be meate and drinke. For example, of of Iustice our Sauiour sayth,Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they who hunger & thirst Iustice, for they shalbe filled. Likewise of wisdome the wi∣seman sayth,Eccles. 24.29. They that eate me shall yet hunger, and they that drinke me shall yet thirst: Wherefore as our Sauiour sayd, my flesh is truly meate and my Bloud is truly drinke, so also in the same place he sayd, he that eateth this Bread shall liue for euer. And, he that eateth me shall liue by me. Concerning the second signification of the Vnion of the faythfull among themselues, it is expressed by many graynes of Corne wrought togeather, by making Bread thereof with flower and water, as S.L. 2. Ep, 3. ad Caecil. Cyprian testify∣eth, and the like may be shewed of the wine composed of many grapes, and mingled with water in the Chalice. And as for the cause of Grace requisite in a Sacrament, it is found in eyther kind, for it is Christ, Cause and Authour of all Sa∣craments, and of Grace thereby giuen, who vnder eyther forme is whole & entire, as hath beene before proued. Nei∣ther doth it heerupon follow, that because the Sacrament is Essentially contayned vnder eyther kind, that therefore the Priest receiuing vnder both, receyueth two Sacramentes, for being receyued both at once they make but one, as being or∣dayned to one refection, signifying one thing, and produ∣cing one effct: euen as sixe or seauen dishes of meat set vpō a Table, do but make one dinner, whereas part thereof be∣ing but serued one day, and the rest another, they would make two. And the reason why Priests receiue vnder both kinds, is because they offer vp a Sacrifice, which represen∣teth
the Sacrifice of Christ vpon the Crosse, which were not perfectly represented but by both kinds, for the only forme of Bread would not represent Christ, as dead, without some signe of bloud, nor the only forme of wyne would sufficiently represent him as sacrificed, seeing only wyne is not an host, or thing to be sacrificed: wherefore also in this sort was it prefigured in the Sacrifice of Melchisedech, offe∣ring vp both Bread and wyne. Hauing thus proued the Premisses, viz. That whole Christ is contained vnder eyther kind, and the true essence of the Sacrament: from hence it directly followeth, that neither irreuerence is offered to the Sacrament, it not being (as is obiected) giuen halfe or maymed, but essentially whole; nor iniury to the people by depriuing them of any Grace necessary to Saluation, seeing the very fountayne of Grace is no lesse receiued vnder eyther kind, then vnder both. By these premisses it is euident, that if we respect the nature of the thing, no obligation or necessity ayseth of receiuing both kinds: the only question therefore remay∣ning is, Whether therto we be bound by any Precept of Christ, whereof I will treat in the next Section. SECT. III. That Christ our Sauiour, gaue no Command of Receyuing vnder both kinds, it is proued by the sacred Scriptures, and by his owne, and his blessed Apostles Examples. THough in this question it belongeth to our Aduersa∣ries to proue, and to vs only to answere, they affir∣ming and we denying, yet in more full demonstrance of the truth, I will alledge sundry reasons, in proofe that Christ our Sauiour gaue no Commandement of receyuing vnder both kinds. And first, as there were figures, which did re∣present this Sacrament vnder both kinds; so also there were
others which did represent it vnder one only, as the Paschal Lambe: for the bloud which was sprinkled vpon the Postes, did not prefigure the Bloud in the Chalice, but (as AncientAug. l. 12. cont. East. c. 30. Hier. in c. 66. Isaiae. Cyp. in Tract. cont. Demetr. Isi∣dor. in c. 12. Exod. Fathers teach) the signe of the Crosse, for that bloud was not drunke, nor giuen to others, but the Postes were sprinkled therewith, and that before the Lambe was eaten; besides, in the old Sacrifices, those things which were li∣quid, belonged only to Priests, the lay people vsing, or re∣quiring no part thereof. So also Manna was giuen without drinke, for though S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 10.3.4. All did eate the same spi∣rituall food and all drunke the same spirituall drinke, yet they were two distinct figures, and giuen at diuers tymes; Manna be∣ing giuen in theExod. 16.14. Desart Sin, and afterwards water from the RockExod. 17.1. Raphidim: and so our SauiourIo. 6. comparing Manna with the Eucharist, maketh yet no mention of wa∣ter. Secondly, as our Sauiour sometymes doth mention both kinds, so also often he mentioneth but one, asIo. 6.49. He that eateth me, the same also shall liue by me: This is the Bread that came downe from heauen,Io. 6.57.58. he that eateth this bread shall liue for euer, and the like. Thirdly, the practise of our Sauiour is the best witnes of his Doctrine. S. Luke relateth of him, that being at sup∣per with two of his Disciples at Emaus, he tooke Bread and-blessed, and brake, and did reach to them, by which Bread is vn∣derstood the Eucharist, not only by S.Lib. 3. de consensu c. 25. Author ope∣ris imperfe∣cti. in Mat. ho. 17. Hie∣ron. Epitaph. Pauli. Beda & Theophil. in hunc lo∣cum Lucae. Austine and the other Fathers, but euen by Prot.Melancth. Apol. con∣fess. August. in Art. de vtraque spe∣cie. writers, and yet he maketh heere no mention of wyne, or of the Cup, but ra∣ther by the words and circumstances, of the want thereof, for it is sayd,Luc. 24.30. See Act. 2 42. And it came to passe, whilest he sate at the table with them, he tooke bread, and blessed, and brake, and did reach to them, and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight; so ioyning to the reaching of the Bread, and their knowing him, his vanishing away, not leauing any tyme for the Benediction and Consecration of the Cha∣lice. Fouthly, in like sort also was the practise of the Apost∣les after Christes tyme. For S. Luke speaking of the fayth∣full,
affirmeth.Act. 2.42. That they were perseuering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, & in the Cōmunication of the breaking of Bread; where also by breaking of Bread is vnderstood the Eucharist, aswel in that it is ioyned with Doctrine and Prayer, as also in that it had beene rather a dispraise then praise, to report of the faythfull, that they were perseuering in corporall dinners and uppers: and so also is it vnderstood byAuthor operis impef. in Mat. hom. 17. Beda in 2. c. Act. Fathers andLuther ser de Euch. Calu. l. 4. In∣stit. Chem. in Exam. Conc. Trid. Sss 21. part. 2. Exa∣minis. Protestant writers; and yet neyther heere is there made any mention of wyne, or the Cup. Besides there were many Christians in Hierusalem, whome in those beginnings, the Apostles did permit in some things toAct. 21.24.26. Iudaize, amongst whome were theNum. 6.3.4.5.18. Nazarits, who drunke no wine, nor shaued their heads, vn∣till the tyme that their vowes were expired; now, it is not credible, that those drunke against their vow, nor proba∣ble that they altogeather abstained from Communion, see∣ing S. Luke sayth, they were perseuering &c. Fifthly, many in hoat Countries do abstaine from wine from their Childhood, and eyther by nature or education do abstaine and abhorre it so much, as they cannot endure to tast it. Also in some Countries wine is so scarce, and so deere, as that sufficient can not be prouided for all the peo∣ple: To these and sundry such inconueniences, it is not pro∣bable that the All-seeing wisdome of God would bynd vs. To Answere with Chemnitius, that by breaking of bread, is vnderstood also the giuing of the Chalice, by Synec∣doche, by the Part vnderstanding the Whole, this I say is in∣sufficient, as being an answere only imaginary, and not grounded, & such, as by the like liberty any doctrine though neuer so impious or absurd, might easily be maintayned, against all Scripture though neuer so plaine. Neither is it any thing confirmed by affirming, that if the Chalice be not vnderstood, that then would follow therof, that the Apo∣stles did but Consecrate vnder one kind, which yet Catho∣lickes do not admit: for S. Luke doth not set downe what the Apostles did, but what the people did, and therfore they might Consecrate vnder both, though they did administer vnto the people only vnder one.
SECT. IV. That Communion vnder one, or both kinds being a thing indifferent, the Church might lawfully determine the same: And of the reasons that moued the Church in limitation therof. ALthough we were not thus stored with such plentifull and pregnant proofes, as in sundry other high myste∣ries of our faith we are not, nor with reason can expect; yet the Doctrine of the vniuersall Church, inspired by the holy Ghost, and made knowne vnto vs by the absolute and infal∣lible Decrees of Sundry Generall Councels, might suffi∣ciently serue to free the vnderstanding of any man from Er∣ror, or his Conscience from sinne; for it may not be auou∣ched without great temerity, either that she should so hay∣nously trespasse against the sacred Lawes of her dearest Spouse, or so vnnaturally or vncharitably depriue her owne Children of necessary blessings and helps bequeathed vnto them; yea in the end it should redound to the blemish of Christ himselfe, if he should suffer his Church so daunge∣rously to erre, in a matter of that moment, and that cleane contrary to so many promises made vnto her, of his dire∣cting and continuall assistance, by his spirit, and leading in∣to all truth. Wherfore in this our present Controuersy we are to as∣sume, that the Catholicke Church only, expresseth (that power which she euer had, to wit, in dispensing of the Sa∣craments, their substance or essence preserued, to ordaine or alter whatsoeuer she shall iudge more expedient for the pro∣fit of the receyuers, or reuerence of the Sacrament, according to the variety of things, tymes, and places: which her Au∣thority the Apostle seemeth not obscurely to insinuate, when he said,1. Cor. 1.4. So let a man esteeme vs as the Ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the Mysteries of God: and himselfe to haue vsed this power, it is manifest, both in many other thinges, as al∣so
in this Sacrament, when hauing ordayned some things concerning the vse therof,1. Cor. 11.34. the rest (sayth he) I will dispose when I come. Christ our Sauiour said to his Apostles,Mat. 28.19. Going, teach you all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the sonne, and of the holy Ghost, and yet the Church comman∣deth Infantes to be baptized, who are not capable of tea∣ching. In like sort the Church hath lawfully decreed,See S. Aug. l. 15. de Ciuit. c. 16. Ambr. Ep. 66. ad Pa∣tern. Greg. l. 12. Regist. Ep. 31 ad Faeli∣cem. certaine impediments of mariage, which yet neither the law of naure, nor any positiue diuine law exacted. And not on∣ly in the Sacramentes, but also in other things hath the Church vpon iust occasions exercised her said authority, by reducing things of their owne nature indifferent, to be mat∣ter of precept and necessity: so the Apostles themselues im∣posed vpon the Gentiles for a tyme a new Law of absti∣nenceAct. 15.29. from the things immolated to Idols, and bloud, and that which is strangled &c. Which yet Christ himselfe had neuer imposed, but left the eating of them a matter indifferent; wheras after the Apostles Decree, the said eating had bene sinne, and abstinence necessary, as is manifest by those wor∣des,Act. 15.28.29. It seemeth good to the holy Ghost and to vs, to lay no further burthen vpon you then these necessary things, that ye abstaine from things immolated to Idols &c. And so of S. Paul it is said, that heAct. 15.41. & 16.4. walked through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches, com∣manding them to keep the Preceptes of the Apostles and Ancients. And in the Primitiue Church it was not only thoughtTertul. in Apol. c. 9. Orig. l. 8. cont. Celsum. Cyril. Catech. 5. Au∣gust. Ep. 154. Leo Epist. 79. c. 5. Concil. Gang. c. 2. vnlawfull to violate the said Law, but also seuere punish∣ment was inflicted vpon theCan. Apost. c. 62. Concil. 1. Au∣rel. can. 19.20. transgressors therof; yea there hath scarce bene any Councell in the Church of God, which hath not commāded or forbidden vnder sinne some thing, which before the said Councell was free and indiffe∣rent: wherfore Communion vnder one or both kinds, be∣ing proued and acknowledged to be a thing of indifferen∣cy, the Church in fulnes of her power, might lawfully per∣mit or limit the same, and yet her Decree once past, the vio∣lating therof is vndoubtedly sinne. So S. Bernard saith,De prae∣cepto & dis∣pens. Although the quality of the worke inioyned of it selfe be free from fault, yet the waight of authority adioyned, maketh it subiect to Command, and the Commandement subiect to sinne. Yea D. Whiteguift tea∣cheth
that,Defence &c. p 258. Things indifferent of themselues, do after a sorte change their nature, when by some Commandement they are com∣manded or forbidden. And, they remayneIb. p. 91. indifferent, till the Church hath taken order in them, which being done they are no more indifferent. With him agreeth Beza affirming that,Ep. Theol. Ep. 24. p 155. Things of themselues indifferent, do in a manner change their natures when they are Commanded, or forbidden by any lawfull Command. Yea saith M. Powell,Of things indif∣ferent. p. 7. Such indifferent things, as by the Church haue bene lawfully and orderly instituted and approued, are so far hu∣mane, as that they are also diuine, and therfore haue more then hu∣mane Authority, yea plainly diuine &c. Therfore the Precepts of the Church in things indifferent, are both true and holy: and consequent∣ly seeing the Church hath determined, receiuing of the Sa∣crament to be vnder one kind which was formerly indiffe∣rent, it is now vnder sinne accordingly to be vsed, and ob∣serued. Now, the reasons mouing the Church to the restraint therof were many and forcible, as first to preuent therby the Occasion of Errour: for wheras in the beginning of the Church the vse of one or both kinds was indifferent, as may be shewed in Condemnation of the Manichees,See Aug. l. de haer. c. 46. Leo ser. 4 de Qua∣drag. Chem∣nit. Exam. part. 2. p. 145. Zepperus de Sacram. p. 41. Mortons Appeal. l. 2. c. 4. p. 139. who abstained from wyne, as a thing of it selfe vnlawfull, holy Bishops hereupon did much commend the vse of the Cha∣lice: but this errour being extinguished, and another arysing against the integrity of ChristAeneas Siluius hist. Bohem. c. 35. vnder either kind, as also auouching the absolute necessity of both; the Church of God herupon began more vniuersally to practise the Com∣munion vnder one, and withall in declaration of the truth & preuention of schisme and scandall, did absolutly Decree the lawfulnes therof, with prohibition of the contrary: so in ancient times when the Ebionites taught vnleuened bread to be necessary in Consecration of the Eucharist, the Church Commanded Consecration to be made in leuened bread: And when the Hereticke Nestorius denied our B. Lady to be the Mother of God, and only to be called the Mother of Christ, the Church condemned him, and commanded the contrary: so that no course hath euer bene found more effe∣ctuall for confutation and vtter extirpation of errour & he∣resie,
then by contrary Decrees to declare and establish the truth. A second reason mouing the Church, was the deserued reuerence of this highest Sacrament, in due Consideration wherof, the holy FathersAug. l. 5. ho. 16. ho. 25. Cyril. Ca∣tech. 5. Mi∣stag. Orig. ho. 13. in Exod. did carefully prescribe most diligent care to be vsed, least any litle particle of the Host, or drop of the Chalice, should fall vpon the ground. Now the multitude of Christians being very great, and their negli∣gence in sacred things, through want of zeale & Deuotion notorious, it could not morally be possible, but that frequent spilling of the Bloud would happen, if the Chalice were or∣dinarily to be giuen to the people, of whichAeneas Siluius Ep. 13. de errore Bohem. & narratio de Bohemis ad Conc. Basil. prophana∣tions ouer frequent experience hath bene had. SECT. V. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in Confirmation of the lawfulnes of the Administra∣tion of the blessed Sacrament vnder one kind. S. Austine writing by occasion vpon the forsaid place of S. Luke, sayth.De con∣sensu Euang. l. 3. c. 25. & Ep. 59. ad Paulin. Beda & Theophil. in hunc lo∣cum. Something hapned to the eies of them that went to Emaus, which is permitted so to remaine, vntill the breaking of Bread, for the reason of a certaine mystery that another forme might be shewed vnto them in that Bread, and so they should not know him but in the breaking of Bread, as it is euident by S. Luke his narration &c. And it is not amisse if we vnderstand, that this impediment was cau∣sed in their eyes by Sathan, least Iesus should be acknowledged; but yet the permission was wrought by Christ vntill the Sacrament of bread: that the vnity of his Body participated, the impediment of the Enemy might be remoued, that Christ might be acknowledged. Againe,Serm. de temp. 140. O Brethren where would our Lord be knowne? In the breaking of Bread, we are secure, we breake bread, and do acknowledge our Lord. He would not haue bene knowne there but for vs, who were not to see him in flesh, and yet we were to eate his flesh. Ionas Aurelianensis writeth thus,Lib. 3. de Imag. In the Actes of the Apostles, the Apostles are read to haue taught euery day in the Temple,
and at their houses, and to haue celebrated the Misteries of our Lords Body in the breaking of Bread. The Christians in Syria insteed of reading, in Cmmunion, and breaking of Bread, in their Sy∣riacke text read, in the breaking of the Euchariste, which pro∣ueth thi place to be vnderstood not of Common bread, but of the Echarist. Andreas Friccius sayth,L. 2. de Eccles. c. 2. p. 411. Christ at his last Supper ioy∣ned wyne with bread if therfore the Church separate these, she is not to be head: the Church of Hierusalem did separate these. S Iames (as some d  affi me) gue only one kind to the people of Hierusalem. What then? the word of God is playne and manifest, eate and drinke. This is to be heard of vs, and preferred before all Iames's, and words of the Church. So cleere and confessed then it is, that Iames the Apostle, and the Church of Hierusalem in his tyme admi∣nistred the Communion vnder one kind, that no other Answere is left to this Protestant, then only to make the Scriptures and the Apostles practise, one contrary to the o∣ther: then which, what more impious and absurd? SECT. VI. That Protestant writers do belieue, and teach the lawfull vse of Administring the Eucharist vnder one kind to the Laity. IOhn Caluin in his Commentary vpon the Actes, inter∣preteh the for-alledged place thus, Although (sayth he) breaking of bread did sometymes signify a domesticall banquet amongst the Hebrewes, yet in this place I do Interpret it of the holy Supper, moued thereto by two reasons: for wheras it is easily gathered by the sequele that no small multitude of men was there gathered togeather, it is not probable that a Supper could be prepared in a priuate house. A∣gayne, Luke afterwards declareth, that Paul, not at tyme of Supper, but after midnight, last of all to haue taken Bread, to which may be added, that he doth not say, that he tooke meate for refection sake, but only that he might tast Iohn Husse was so far from iudging the receiuing vn∣der
both kinds, to be absolutely necessary, or a Diuine pre∣cept, as that he writeth to a friend of his in this manner:Ep. 48. Concerning the Sacrament of the Chalice, you haue written what I wrot at Constance; If it may be, endeauour, that at least it may be per∣mitted by a Bull to them who shall of deuotion desire it, Circumstances annexed. Iohn Perzibrane a Bohemian Prot. after endeauour to proue Communion vnder both kinds, yet concludeth saying,In profess. fidei Cath. c. 19. Here fearing God, and taking heed of the euill Customes of others, I do confesse that I do not intend to condemne or censure for heretickes any such persons of the Church, as do impugne the Com∣munion of the faithfull vnder both kinds; which yet of necessity he must, if he had thought that Christ had commanded it. Luther affirmeth that,Ep. ad Bohem. & in Declar. Euch. & in Ser. de Euch. Although truly it were an excel∣lent thing to vse both kindes in the Eucharist, and Christ in this thing hath Commanded nothing as necessary; yet it were better to follow peace and vnity which Christ hath Commanded vs to follow, then to contend about the kindes. And againe,De Capt. Babyl. c. de Euch. They sinne not against Christ who vse one kind, seeing Christ hath not commanded to vse it, but hath left it to the will of euery one, saying, As often as you shall do these, you shall do them in memory of me. He teacheth further, that it is only a matter of indifferency,L. ad Chri∣stianam No∣bil. I am no author (saith he) that the Bohemians be compelled to the one part of the Sa∣crament, but that they be left to that manner which they will them∣selues: Let the Bishop only take care, that discord ryse not by the man∣ner of receiuing, but let him instruct them familiarly: that neither is ioyned with errour, euen as it is free from errour, that Priestes vse a different habit from the Laity. And elswhere.Tom. 2. Germ. f. 100. & in alia Edit tom. 7. fol. 360. l. de vtraque spe∣cie Sacram. If thou shalt come to a place in which one only kind is ministred, take only one, as they there receyue; if two be offered, take two, neither bring in any thing singular, or oppose thy selfe to the multitude. And further,In De∣clar. in ser. de Euch. Further I haue not said or counsatled, neither is it my intention, that one or more Bishops by their proper Authority, may beginne to minister to any both kinds, vnles it should be so ordayned, or Commanded by some Generall Councell. Hospinian alleadgeth Luther saying,Hist. Sa∣cram part. 2. fol. 12. It is not needfull to giue both kinds, but the one alone sufficeth: the Church hath power of ordayning only one, and the people ought to be content therwith, if it be ordayned by the Church. Luher here tea∣cheth as much in this behalfe, as any Catholick can require.
Hospinian further reporteth, that certayneIb. fol. 112. Prot. answered that, they belieued and confessed whole Christ to be really present, exhibited and receyued vnder eyther kind, and therefore vn∣der the only forme of Bread, neither did they iudge those to do euill who communicated vnder one kind. And bothIn Con∣fess. Wit∣temb. art. de Euch. Chem∣nit. in fin. Disp. De v∣traque specie. Brentius and Chemnitius do lykewise teach, that whole and entire Christ is receiued vnder eyther kind. And the same of necessity must all they teach, who belieue the vbiquity of Christs humani∣ty: for if Christ be whole euery where, then is he whole vn∣der the forme of Bread, and whole in the Chalice. Melancthon thinketh it a matter of indifferency, and would haue the vse free, which supposeth no Precept of Christ for both: he writeth thus,Centur. Ep. Theol. ep. 74. p. 251. 252. Concerning both kinds of the Lords Supper, we see many tumults to haue beene renewed &c. but the Pope without any hurt might easily help these inconueniences, if ta∣king away the prohibition, he would leaue the vse free. And this liber∣ty &c. would nothing hurt any, and the whole busines is in the Popes hands. Agayne he compareth the indifferency heereof, with our liberty of eating, or abstayning from swines flesh,In 2. Edit loc. com. impress Ar∣gent. Anno 1525 fol. 78. He erreth (sayth he) that thinketh it impious to eate swynes flesh; as also he erreth who thinketh it impious to abstayne from swines flesh; these things are indifferent and placed in our power, and so I iudge of the Eucharist, that they sinne not, who knowing and beliuing this li∣berty, do vse eyther part of this signe And whereas M. Harding alledgeth this last saying of Melancthon, as also Bucer, ad∣uising and wishing that the holy Church would giue free power of receyuing this Sacrament vnder one or both kinds &c. M.Reply p. 108. 109. 110. Ie∣well cannot deny these testimonies so alledged by M. Har∣ding, but acknowledgeth them for truly alledged: & fur∣ther he confesseth that Melancthon and Bucer accompted it indifferent. Amongst the Articles of the Conference at Ratisbone, which Bucer allowed, one was that, for decyding of the Con∣trouersy of one or both kinds, it would chiefly auayle if the holy Church would giue free choyce of receyuing this Sacrament, vnder one, or both kinds: which referring the matter to the Church, doth eui∣dently suppose that Christ our Sauiour had giuen no abso∣lute Command thereof. And the like Confession might be
shewed from others of their Brethren; but from hence will I inferre two things. First, that Communion vnder one or both kinds, being a thing confessedly of it selfe indifferent, that then the vse thereof vnder one, or both, cannot possi∣bly be censured of Sacriledge, in reguard of Christs Insti∣tution, or of any hurt or preiudice to the faythfull recey∣uers. The second, that then also, was it lawfull for the Church of God vpon iust occasions, absolutly to determine or limit the vse thereof. SECT. VII. Obiections from Scripture agaynst Communion of the Eu∣charist vnder one kind by the Laity, answered. THe chiefe cause of the difficulty in this question, & that which giueth our Aduersaries the best colour for impu∣gning the truth, and persisting in their errour, is, as they pretend, certaine texts of Sacred Scripture: wherfore I will endeauour by sundry forcible reasons to lay open the true sense, scope, and vnderstanding thereof, and therby to dis∣couer the insufficiency & weakenes of all such their grounds as they mainly insist on. First then, are vrged those wordes of Christ,Io. 6.53. Vnles you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, & drinke his bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you. AndMat. 26.27. taking the Chalice, he gaue thankes, and gaue to them saying, drinke you all of this.1. Cor. 11.23.24.25. I receyued of our Lord, that which also I haue deliuered vnto you, that our Lord Iesus &c. tooke Bread, and giuing thankes, brake and sayd, take yee and eate, this is my Body which shalbe deliuered for you; this do yee for the Commemoration of me. In like manner also the Chalice, after he had supped saying, This Chalice is the new Testament in my bloud, this do yee, as often as you shall drinke, for the Commemora∣tion of me: from these texts Prot. inferre three things: first, that we are not commanded only to eate, but likewise, and that expressely, to drinke. Secondly, that this commaund of drinking, is not giuen only to Priests, but extended to all, it being plainly sayd, Drinke yee all of this. And thirdly that
the Institution by Christ was vnder both kinds, which we are bound not to alter, but straitly to imitate. Answ. Tou∣ching those wordes of Christ,Io. 6.53. vnles yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drink his bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you: I affirme, that seeing, according to the Doctrine of sundryLuth. de Capt. Babyl. c. 1. Zwingl. l. de vera & falsa Relig. c. de Euch. Chem. 2. part. Exam. p. 657. &c. 1. Sess. 21. Conc. Trid. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. §. 33. Pet. Mart. l. l. cent. Gardi∣ner. part. 1. ad solutionem. 32. Obiect. Protestants, nothing in the sayd sixt Chapter of S. Iohn, concerneth the Sacrament of the Eucharist, but all there said of eating and drinking is only to be vnderstood of belieuing in Christ, that therefore according to them nothing can be produced from thence, for Communion vnder one or both kinds, seeing nothing therein concerneth the same: Yet ac∣cording to the true Doctrine and Generall opinion of Ca∣tholikes teaching, the sayd wordes, and sundry other of the sayd sixt Chapter, truly, and properly to concerne only the Eucharist; I answere secondly, that the words of S. Iohn obiected, do not necessarily import or containe a Precept: concerning which we are to note, that not alwayes in the doctrine of Christ, that byndeth of necessity and vnder sin, which seemeth to haue the marke or badge of a Precept, but in sundry cases, for the attaining of the true sense and vn∣derstanding, we are to make recourse to the intention of the speaker. So our Sauiour himselfe hauing cured two blind menMat. 9.30.31. he threatned them, See that no man know it: but they went forth and bruted him in all that Country, and yet none houldeth that eyther heereby they sinned, or that Christ intended a∣ny such bond. The Bill of diuorce which Moyses permitted, Christ expressely calleth a Command, andMar. 10.4.5. Precept; he ly∣kewise tould his Apostles that they ought toIohn. 13.14. wash one an∣others feete, and yet neyther by them, nor by vs since was it houlden for a matter of necessity: and sundry other such lyke. But supposing for the present, that it includeth a Pre∣cept, yet the Precept therein implyed, is not in the manner of receiuing, but in the thing receyued, for therein was co∣tayned one of the principall meanes or remedies for preser∣uation of our spirituall life obtained by Baptisme: which meanes and remedy consist not in the formes of receiuing, or manner of eating and drinking, but in receiuing of the
Body and Bloud of Christ, which in either kind we do (as is formerly proued) no lesse then in both; and so according∣ly our Sauiour declared himselfe saying,Io. 6.57. He that eateth me, the same also shall liue by me: which also further may be illu∣strated by heedfull consideration of the circumstances fol∣lowing. As 1. the occasion of the words obiected, which was the incredulity of the Capharnaits, whose doubt was not whether the Sacrament was to be receiued vnder one or both kinds, but as Protestants still doubt, whether he could giue vs his flesh to eate. The second, is the manner of his speach, which was not by making mention of either forme or kind in the said words, but only of the things themselues, all which are contayned in either kind: yea in other places of the said Chapter, where he maketh mention of eyther kind, it is only of the bread, and none at all of the wyne; and whereas sometymes he maketh mention both of eating and drinking, yet much more often doth he mention eating. The last thing to be considered is the cōclusion of his speach which was thatIo. 6.58. He that eateth this bread, shall liue for euer: from all which it followeth that, the Iewes not doubting of the manner of receiuing vnder one or more kinds, but of the possibility of the things to be receyued, and Christ out Sauiour thereupon asseuering, not only the possibility, but also the necessity thereof to our spirituall lyfe, did therefore intend no other thinge, but the instruction of the Iewes, & declaration of the need and profit thereof: all which is per∣formed, no lesse by receiuing one, then both kinds of the Sacrament. It is also vsuall in sacred Scriptures for the Coniunction copulatiue (&, and) to be taken for a disiunctiue; So it is sayd,Exod. 2.15. He that shall strike his father and mother shall dye; Al∣so,Act. 3.6. Gould and siluer I haue not, and sundry other such like; wherein it is manifest, the sense is disiunctiue, to wit, he that shall strike his Father, or Mother shall dy; and Gould, or siluer I haue not. And as Saint Paul speaking of this very Sacrament, sayd1. Cor. 11.29. He that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drin∣keth Iudgement to himselfe; so also he sayd,Ib. ver. 29. whosoeuer shall eate this Bread, or drinke the Chalice of our Lord vnworthily &c.
And we are also further to obserue, that the particle (nisi, vnles) including in it a negation, as, vnles, you shall eate, is all one to say, as if, you shall not eate, that the said Negation put in the beginning of a proposition copulatiue, doth deny both parts: and according to the Hebrew phrase (which not only the Latin Interpreters do imitate, but euen S. Iohn who wrote in Greeke, is noted by his Exposi∣tors often to follow) is vnderstood twice, to wit, as repea∣ted in both partes; so according to the Hebrew it is said,Ps. 1.5. The wicked shall not ryse in Iudgment, and the sinners in the Councell of the Iust, which yet by the Latin Interpreters is truly and properly translated,Ib. The wicked shall not ryse in Iudgment, nor sinners in the Councell of the iust; as also,Act. 3.6. Gould and siluer I haue not, that is, neither Gould, nor siluer I haue. So in the pre∣sent, Vnles you eate the flesh of the Sonne of Man, and drinke his Bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you; is all one with, If you shall not eate the flesh of the Sonne of Man, or, if you shall not drinke his Bloud, you shall not haue lyfe in you: according to which sense, he is only excluded from lyfe, who shall neither eate his flesh, not drinke his Bloud: and from this negatiue copulatiue propo∣sition, doth directly follow this affirmatiue disiunctiue, he that shall eate the flesh, or drinke the Bloud, shall haue life: and that this is the true sense of the wordes, it is manifest by these tex∣tes precedent: I am the liuing Bread that came downe from heauen, if any shall eate of this bread he shall liue for euer: and these subse∣quent, He that eateth me, the same also shall liue by me: He that ea∣teth this Bread shall liue for euer: By all which places it is eui∣dent, that the receiuing vnder the forme of Bread is suffi∣cient to life. Besides it is plaine to the Reader, that in this whole Chapter, Christ taketh for the same bread, his flesh, his flesh and bloud, and himselfe, and promiseth to euery one of them the same reward, to wit, lye euerlasting, and so to eate bread, to ete flesh, and drinke bloud, is nothing els but to eate Christ, seeing whether he be receyued vnder one or both kinds, nothing giueth life but Christ. And so I may la∣stly inferre, that the said sayings were plainly false, if the for∣said wordes, Vnles you shall eate &c. were to be taken copula∣tiuely, not disiunctiuely, or which is all one, if Christ had
giuen therby a Command of both kinds. And thus we see, this first Obiection according to the doctrine of Protestants altogeather impertinent, and according to the truth for sun∣dry reasons most insufficient. Concerning the second, taken from these words of Christ,Mat. 16.27. Drinke ye all of this; from whenceRogers Def. of the Art. art. 30. p. 180. Prot. would likewise inferre an vniuersall Commād, not only of eating, but likewise of drinking: I answere, the word (all) is not alwayes taken in Scripture most vniuersally for all men, or all things, but often for all of some certaine kind, otherwise that of S. Paul,Phil. 2.21. All seeke the things which are their owne, should include the most iust; and that,Rom. 3.23. All haue sinned, should comprehend Christ; and that,Mat. 27.22. All cryed Crucify him, and the like, should belong to the Apostles, which yet are most vntrue: and so if in the words obiected, the word (all) should be taken vniuersally for all, then the Sacrament were to be giuen to Turkes, Iewes, Heathens, Infants, and such as cannot drinke wyne, these being men; all which Protestants exclude: wherfore the word (all) being to be re∣strayned, it is cleere it concerneth here the twelue Apostles, who as then only sate with Christ at the Table, for so sayth S. Marke,Mar. 14.17.18. And when euening was come, he cometh with the twelue, and when they were sitting at the table, and eating &c. And further S. Marke sayth of the Apostles,Mar. 14.23. that they dranke all of it. And this sense also do all circumstances of the place conuince, asMat. 26.30. When it was euening, he sate downe with the twelue Apostles &c. And whilest they were at Supper, Iesus tooke Bread, and blessed, and brake, and gaue to his Disciples and said, Take ye and eate &c And taking the Chalice, he gaue thankes, and gaue to them saying, Drinke ye all of this &c. And an Hymne being said, they went forth vnto Mount Oliuet, then Iesus said vnto them, All you shalbe scandalized in me in this night. All which places iointly conspire in prouing the word (all) to cōcerne here only all the twelue Apostles. Now from the Example, or fact of the Apostles drinking or receiuing vnder both kinds, to inferre a necessi∣ty for the Laity to do the like, no Argument will be of force, as shall be hereafter cleerly conuinced. But though this Explication be most literall and a∣greable
with the Scriptures, yet Prot. obiect sundry things against it, as first that Christ forseeing, that some would de∣ny the vse of the Chalice to all, did therfore say, Drinke ye all of this; wheras he said not of the other kind, Eate ye all of this. But the answere is easy, or though not by the writtē word, yet by Apostolicall Tradition, the Church placeth in the Canon of the Masse these words, Eate you all of this. And so S. Ambose setting downe the Institution of this Sacra∣ment,L. 4. de Sacram. c. 5. See the like in Paschat. de corpore Chri∣sti c. 15. bringeth in our Sauiour saying to his Apostles, Take yee and eate yee all of this. And though it were certaine that Christ had not sayd so, yet it auayleth nothing, the dis∣parity being manifest, for Christ giuing one and the same Chalice, that all of them might drinke thereof, he might well say, drinke yee all of this, that so the first might know he was not to drinke all, but was to leaue so much as might suffice for all the rest; which forme of speach he vsed most plainly a little before in the Supper of the Pasche: for as S. Luke sayth,C. 22.17. Taking the Chalice he gaue thankes, and sayd, take and deuide among you: whereas breaking the bread him∣selfe, and giuing to euery one his part, not the whole to be deuided among them, there was no such necessity of the said words. But Luther further argueth, that to whome it is sayd, eate, to them it is sayd, drinke; wherefore the whole Sacra∣ment is eyther to be giuen only to Priests, or also to the Laity; if also to these, then to all it is sayd, eate and drinke; if only to Priests, then it is not lawfull differently from the Institution of Christ to giue any part thereof to the Laity, and of this Argument he thus insulteth, I confesse my selfe to be ouercome with this vnanswerable reason, neyther haue I read, heard, or found what to say agaynst it. But that you may see the weak∣nes of Luther so easily ouercome, and how small and super∣ficiall his reading, hearing, and fynding hath beene; I an∣swere: Admitting, that to the same was sayd, eate, to whome drinke, viz. to the Apostles; as also I graunt that the whole Sacrament is to be giuen not only to Priests, but al∣so to the Laity; but that which is inferred heereof is most false, to wit, that if the whole Sacrament be to be giuen to
the Laity, then they are to drinke: for I already haue demon∣strated, that the whole Sacrament is truly and essentially vnder eyther kind. Neyther did it further follow, that if the whole Sacrament vnder both kinds was giuen only to Pri∣ests by Christ, and not to the Laity, that then it may not now be giuen to them vnder one, for though Christ him∣selfe did not giue it, yet did he no where prohibite it, yea elswhere he commāded it, when he said,Luc. 22.19. Do this; which words immediatly follow the Consecration of the bread, & no where repeated by any of the Euangelists after Conse∣cration of the Chalice; and though S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 11.25. This do you as often as you shall drinke &c. yet these wordes are not ab∣solute, but with this restraint, viz. As often as you shall drinke, therby signifying not the necessity of drinking, but the man∣ner and end therof, viz. in Commemoration of Christ; so easily might Luther haue found what to haue said against his so vnanswerable a reason. But yet not satisfyed, he further replyeth, that seeing Christ said, This is my Bloud which shalbe shed for you, and for ma∣ny, that therfore it is to be giuen to all for whom it was shed, in which number no doubt the Laity is contayned, & of this reason he thus triumpheth, This of all chiefly vrgeth, and altogeather concludeth me: and so it may indeed for a singular asse; for if the Bloud were to be giuen to all for whom it was shed, then were it to be giuen to Iewes, Turkes, Hea∣thens, Infants, and most abhominable sinners, for all whom no doubt Christ spent his most precious Bloud; Wherfore the words obiected only conclude, (and that most manife∣stly against Prot.) that in the Chalice was truly Bloud, seeing Christ said therof, This is my bloud which shalbe shed for you, and for many. Lastly some reply, that though it be true, that Christ spake vnto his Apostles when he said, Drinke yee all of this, yet the Apostles as then representing all the faithfull, all the faithfull did therfore drinke in them, and therfore now are to do it in themselues. But this auayleth not, for besides, that it is only but imagined and not proued, that all the faithfull were as then represented in the Apostles, yet supposing it
were so, thence might we gather that now they are not bound to the Chalice, seeing that Precept they haue already either fulfilled in the Apostles, or at the least, that sufficient∣ty they fulfill the same in Priestes, who drinke of the Cha∣lice, and whome the Apostles as then did indeed truly re∣present. The thirdRo∣gers Def. of the Art. art. 30. p. 180. principall Obiection is taken from the first Institution of this Sacrament, which was by Christ our Sauiour vnder both, and vnder the said both kinds giuen to the present Communicants the 12. Apostles; Wherfore to Communicate vnder one kind seemeth to alter the Institu∣tion of Christ, and therfore is vnlawfull. The weaknes of this Obiection is presently discouered, if only we obserue the true natures of an Institution, and of a Precept, which of themselues are matters most distinct, for an Institution is only a Production of a thing, wherby the nature and sub∣stance of the thing is established and ordayned: and though the Institution in the end be referred to the vse of the thing, in that euery thing is for his vse; yet the Institution of it self commandeth nothing concerning the vse, wheras a Pre∣cept further prescribeth, whether, and how of necessity the thing is to be vsed. Matrimony for example is a thing ordai∣ned by God, and yet therfore all are not bound to mary, nei∣ther yet being maried, are they bound to vse the same at all tymes, or in all sortes, which according to Gods Institution they lawfully might. And so all Creatures were by God or∣dained to serue man, and yet all men are not bound therby to vse them all. The like is in the present: Christ instituted the Eucharist vnder both kinds, but thereupon it doth not follow, that therfore euery one is in such sort to receiue it, no more then because Christ instituted this Sacrament after wa∣shing of his Dsciples feete, and after supper, and so gaue the same to his Disciples not fasting, that therfore the like Cir∣cumstances now are to be obserued in the Administration therof: so exceeding carefull are our Protestantes of their Cup of wyne, and careles of the rest. In them is truly veri∣fyed that of the Prophet,Isa. 24.11. Erit clamor in plateis super vino, There shall be crying for the wyne in the streets.
CHAP. XXIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the Sa∣crifice of the Masse. Whether Christ our Sauiour did institute a true, proper, and externall Sacrifice of his Body and Bloud, to be offered to God in his Church, in Commemoration of his Death, and Passion. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THe richest treasure which Christ our Sa∣uiour left vnto his Church, was the holy and dreadfull Sacrifice of the Masse; con∣cerning which the Catholicke Church belieueth, thatConcil. Trident. Sess. 22. Cap. 1. Our Lord God, although he was once to offer himselfe to God the Father vpon the Aultar of the Crosse by death, that he might there worke eternall redemption: yet because his Priesthood was not to be extinguished by death; in the last supper, which night he was to be betrayed, that he might leaue a visible Sacrifice to his beloued Spouse the Church, wherby that bloudy one, once to be performed vpon the Crosse, should be represented, and the memory therof should remayne to the end of the world, and the wholsome vertue therof should be ap∣plyed for the remission of those sinnes, which we daily commit; decla∣ring
himselfe to be ordayned a Priest for euer according to the order of Melchisedech, he offered to God the Father his Body and Bloud vnder the formes of Bread and wyne; and vnder the signes of the same things, he gaue it to the Apostles, whom then he ordained Priestes of the new Testament, that they should receyue it, and by these wordes he com∣manded them, and their Successours in Priesthood, that they should offer it. Do ye this in Commemoration of me &c. And,Cap. 2. because in this diuine Sacrifice, which is performed in the Masse, the selfesame Christ is contayned and vnbloudily offered, who offered himselfe once bloudily vpon the Aultar of the Crosse; the holy Synod teacheth, this Sacrifice to be truly propitiatory &c. Wherfore according to the tradition of the Apostles, it is duly offered not only for the sinnes, punishments, satisfa∣ctions, and other necessities of the faithfull that are liuing, but also for such as are dead in Christ, as yet not fully purged. And,Cap. 3. although the Church vseth sometimes to celebrate certaine Masses in honour and memory of Saintes, yet she teacheth, that Sacrifice is not offered to them, but to God alone, who hath crowned them; wherupon it is, that neither the Priest vseth to say, Peter or Paul I offer to thee Sacrifice, but thanking God for their victories, he imploreth their Patronage, that they in heauen would vouchsafe to pray for vs, whose memory we make vpon Earth.Cap. 5. And seeing the nature of men is such, that without externall helpes it cannot easily be eleuated to the meditation of heauenly things, therfore our holy Mother the Church hath orday∣ned certaine rites &c. and Ceremonies, as mysticall benedictions, lights, incense, vestments, and many other such like, from Apostolicke disci∣pline and tradition, wherby both the Maiesty of so great a Sacrifice should be commended, and the minds of the faithfull by these visible signes of Religion and piety should be stirred vp to the contemplation of highest things which lye hid in this Mstery. In the first Councell of Nice it is said,Cap. de diuina mnsa. The Lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world, to be placed vpon that sacred table to be sacrificed by Priestes vnbloudily &c. his Ca∣non is mentioned, and acknowledgedOecol. l Ep. Oecol. &c. p. 667. Calu. inst. l. 4. c 17 sect. 36. Iewll in Apol. Bils. true differ. part 4. p. 555. by Oecolampa∣dius, Caluin, Iewell, and Bilson. In the second Councell of Nice, we are taught, thatAct. 6. Our Lord or his Apostles, or Fathers in no place haue called an Image (or figure) the vnbloudy Sacr fice, which is offered by the Priest, but the very Body it selfe, and Bloud it selfe. In the Councell Senonense these Articles were con∣demned,
In Anno∣tation. post decreta fidei. Masse ought to be said in the vulgar tongue; It is a ma∣nifest Errour to apply, or offer Masse for sinnes, for satisfactions for the dead, or for any other necessities of our owne, or others. According to these Councels allBellar. de Missa. l. 1. c. 5. &c. Rhem. Test in Heb. 10.5. Catholickes be∣lieue, that Christ our Lord did at his last supper, institute a true, proper, and externall Sacrifice of his Body and Bloud, to be offered to his Eternall Father in memory of his Death and Passion by the Ministery of Priestes: and that the same is propitiatory for sinne. Pointes Disputable. Some affirmeSee Mortons Masse. l. 6. c. 1. sect. 5. that Eleuation, & vocall Oblation do belong to the Essence of the Sacrifice. Others, place it in the Cōsecration. Others in the Consummation. But none of these are defyned by the Church. Protestants Vntruthes. Melancthon would seeme to haue so good liking of the Masse, that he writeth thus,In Con∣fess. August. art. de Missa. Our Churches are falsly accused that they abolish Masse; for Masse is retayned with vs, and ce∣lebrated with great reuerence: But if he meane by Masse only the receiuing and ministring of the Sacrament, then it is vn∣true to say, that they are accused for abolishing the Masse; and if he meane a true oblation or Sacrifice, then also it is vntrue, that they are falsly accused; seeing it isIn Arti∣culis Smal∣caldicis. confessed, that they haue abolished the Sacrifice of the Masse. He likewise affirmeth, thatIn Con∣fess. August. art. de Missa, & in Apol. eiusdem Ar∣ticuli. The Ancient (writers) before Gregory make no mention of priuate Masse: But this to be cleerly false, is to be seene in S.L. de Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. Austine. ChemnitiusExam. part. 2. p. 739. 744. 761. 766. auoucheth, that the state of the Que∣stion is, whether that representation by diuers gestures and garments, which is seene in the Masse of Catholickes, be the Sacrifice instituted by Christ: As alsoIbid. p. 777. that completnes of words, rites, gestures, actions, ornamentes, garmentes, which after were added to the Institution of Christ, to be the very synewes and substance of the Popish Masse. But
no Catholicke euer taught this, all confessing that these are only accidentall Ornaments, and Ceremonies instituted by the Church. HeExam. part. 1 p 359. also teacheth that Catholickes do so deuide the Grace of Iustification betwene the Sacrifice of the Masse, & the receyuing of the Eucharist, that to the Masse they attri∣bute ex opere operato, the remission of mortall sinnes, without any labour or daunger of the sinner, to whom that remission is made; and to the receyuing of the Eucharist only remis∣sion of veniall sinnes, and that not without great daunger of the Receyuer, who if he come not pure, receyueth to Iudgment. And hence it is, saith he, Catholicks are drawne from Communion, and are enticed to buy Masses. But all this is forgery, for no Catholicke euer wrote, that the Masse did remit mortall sinnes ex opere operato, without any busines or labour of the sinner: Neither is there any vse in the Church to aske or beg, much lesse to buy Masses for remis∣sion of sinnes. And indeeed we ascribe more to the receiuing of the Eucharist, which we say, ex opere operato, to conferre grace, then to the Masse, as it is offered for any sinner, which we only teach to impetrate for the sinner some speciall help, wherby he may by litle and litle returne to himselfe; & not without any busines or trouble, as Chemnitius falsifyeth, but by true Contrition, Confession, & Satisfaction obtaine at the length remission of sinnes. He also auerreth, thatExam. ad 4. Sess. de Tradit. p. 410. Popish writers haue noted what words were added by Roman Bishops to the words of Consecration vt∣tered by Christ. But though they haue noted what hath beene added in the rest of the Canon, yet in the words of Conse∣cration no man is found to haue added any thing since the Apostles: A truth auouched by PopeC. cum Marthae ex∣trade celebrat. Missarum. Innocentius the 3. He further vrgeth that in our opinion.Exam. ad 4. Sess. p. 420. The whole Canon of the Masse is from Apostolical Tradition, & if any shall but shew him∣selfe to doubt thereof, he is excommunicated. But we only say, that a great part of the Canon is from Apostolicall Tradition; & we all know that Commemoration of diuers Saints, who liued 200. yeares after the Apostles, was added. HeIbid. yet presseth, that Pope Alexander ordayned water to be mingled with
wyne in the Celebration of the Eucharist: But Pope Alexander, wordes truly related are,Ep. 1. for there ought not (as we haue receyued from our Fathers, and reason it selfe teacheth) in the Chalice of our Lord eyther wyne alone, or water alone to be offerd. HeIbid. al∣so teacheth, that P. Felix ordayned Consecration of Aultars: but all know, that Pope Syluester ordayned that ryte. Lastly, he writeth that,Ibid. Pelagius added to the Masse the yearely me∣mories of the dead: but Tertullian much more ancientlyL. de Monogamia. recordeth the same, andL. de Co∣rona militis. affirmeth it to descend from A∣postolicall Tradition. If you will belieue Rogers,Def. of the Art. art. 1 p. 5. The Papists giue out, how sacrificing Priestes are the Creators of Christ: wheras all Papistes hould that Christ is present in the Sacrament not by Crea∣tion, but by Transubstantiation. Againe,Ib. Art. 31. p. 183. 184. The Papists de∣liuer how the Masse is a Sacrifice &c. meritorious to all them for whom it is offered, although they be not &c. endewed eyther with zeale or knowledge, but quite destitute of fayth, and that, ex opere operato: But all Catholickes do necessarily require fayth as the foun∣dation to Grace, Merit, and Saluation. So true a Minister is false M. Rogers. But it is ordinary with Protestants to supply by lyes, what they cannot do by any Arguments of force. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church Decreeth, thatArticle 31. The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption Prptia∣tion, and Satisfaction for all the sinnes of the whole world, both ori∣ginall and actuall, and there is none other satisfaction for sinne but that alone: wherefore the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it was com∣monly sayd, that the Priest did offer Christ for the quicke and the dead, to haue remission of payne or guilt, were blasphemous fables and dan∣gerous deceypts. Whitaker teacheth that,Controu. 4. q. 1. c. 2. p. 522. Now there remai∣neth no sacrifice in the Church Caluin,In 1. Cor. 9.19. The ord hath orday∣ned no Sacrifices wherwith the holy Ministers should be busied. Surely this Caluins Lord foresaw that these holy Ministers would be so busied with their wyues and Children, that they could not well attend to pure Sacrifices.
Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. The Manichees were condemned by S.Tom 6. cont. Aduers. leg. & Pro∣ph. c. 19. Austine for denying externall Sacrifice: of whome he further sayth,Tom 6. cont Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 18. The Manichees being ignorant what is to be cōdemned in the Sa∣crifices of the Gentiles, and what to be vnderstood in the Sacrifices of the Hebrewes, and what to be houlden, or obserued in the Sacrifice of Christians, do sacrifice their owne vanity to the Diuell. The like impugning of Masse was condemed in theEuthy∣mius Pano∣pliae part. 2. Tit. 23. c. 17. Bogomili∣ans, andPetrus Cluniacensis Ep. 1. cont. Pe∣trobrusianos. Pseudo-apostles. But it proceeded originally from the Father of all Heretickes, the Diuell: for so ac∣cordinglyLib. de Missa priuata. & vnctione Sacerd. in Tom. 7. ope∣rum. fol. 228. Edit. Wit∣temb. 1558. Luther confessed, that he was dissuaded by Sathan from saying of Masse. The truth of this is proued at large by M. Breerly in his Lyturgy of the Masse, p. 369. S. Cyprian vrged against the Heretickes Aquarij, thatL. 2. Ep. 3. In the Chalice of our Lord water alone cannot be offered, neyther wyne alone &c. And for the same errour were the Armenians condemned by the 6. Councell ofCan. 32. Constantinople. The Donatistes despised Aultars, for which Optatus thus writeth agaynst them,L. 6. cont. Donatist. What is so sacrilegious as to breake, raze, and remoue the Aultars of God? &c. For what is the Aultar, but the seat of the Body and Bloud of Christ? These all, your fury hath razed, or broken, or remoued &c. what hath Christ offended you, whose Body and Bloud there resyded? &c. Yet all these ould he∣resyes are receiued by new Protestants. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that our Sauiour instituted a True, Proper, and Externall Sacrifice of his Body and Bloud, to be ffred in his Church to God, in Comme∣moration of his Death, and Passion. S. AustineEp. 49. q. 5. affirmeth, That in the diuine Scripture seuerall Sacrifices are mentioned, some before the manifestation of the New Testament &c. & another now, which is agreable to this manife∣station &c. and which is demonstrated not only from the Euangelicall,
but also from the Propheticall writings. A truth so certaine, that our now Sacrifice of the new Testament is cleerly proued by the Scriptures of both, as first from the Sacrifice of Mel∣chisedech, of whome, and whose Sacrifice it is said,Gen. 14.18.19. But Melchisedech king of Salem bringing forth bread and wyne, for he was the Priest of God most high, blessed him &c. And to make the figure agree to the thing figured, and the truth to answere the fi∣gure of Christ, it is said,Ps. 109.4. Heb. 6.20. & 7.15.17.21. Our Lord hath said, and it shall not repent him, Thou art a Priest for euer according to the order of Mel∣chisedech; from these places wilbe easily proued that Melchi∣sedech was a Priest, that he offered in Sacrifice bread and wyne, and that therin he did prefigure Christ our Sauiour, and his Sacrifice daily offered in the Church vnder the for∣mes of Bread and wyne. I thinke no Prot. will deny, but that Melchisedech was a Priest, the Scripture calling him, The Priest of God most high; as also they will acknowledge, that Christ was a Priest, ac∣cording to the order of Melchisedech; the same Scriptures saying most plainly of Christ. Thou art a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech: The maine difficulty therfore is, whe∣ther Melchisedech did offer in Sacrifice bread and wyne, and therin he, and his Sacrifice were true figures of Christ his Priesthood and Sacrifice; and therfore the title was giuen him in respect of the Churches daily Celebration of the Sa∣crifice of his Body, and Bloud, vnder the same formes of Bread and wine, which Melchisedech vsed in his Sacrifice. So that in briefe, from this discourse a twofold Argument may be drawne: first that Christ being a Pst, not ao∣ding to the Order of Aaron, who off red bludy Sacrie, but according to the Orde of Melchisdch, who  bread and wne, that the  bloudy Sacrifice, and  wne. Melhisede  w wa
the world, therefore his Sacrifice must continue as long, for he cannot be sayd to be a Priest, who hath not a sacrifice to offer: but the Sacrifice of the Crosse was finished at once, neither can it be reiterated, seeing Christ can dye no more, therefore some other Sacrifice must be, which dayly may be offered, but none such is, if the Sacrifice of the Masse be not admitted: therefore the holy Sacrifice of the Masse must needs follow. ProtestantsCalu. & Chemnis. in answere heereto, admitting Mel∣chisedech to haue beene a Priest, and to haue beene a type or figure of Christ, they first deny, that he offered bread and wyne in Sacrifice to God, but only brought forth the same to refresh Abraham and his fellowes, being weary returned from battaile. Secondly they affirme the Eternity of Christs Priesthood, not to consist in the daily offering of Sacrifice by the Ministery of Priests, but eyther in regard that he liueth for euer, or that the vertue of his one Oblation vpon the Crosse, continueth for euer. But none of this will satisfy, being all of it barely affir∣med without eyther proofe or reason, for though the sayd bread and wine was giuen to Abraham and his fellowes, yet were they first consecrated and offered vnto God, and then giuen vnto them, that they might partake of the Sacrifice. So that the bread and wyne principally and primarily were brought forth by Melchisedech for Sacrifice vnto God, and secondarily and accidentally they were bestowed vpon A∣braham and his souldiars for their refection; and this to be most true, may be confirmed by these reasons following. First,  that there was no cause why Melchisedech shld ing to Abraham coporall ood, seeing it is there  from the wa e, and  which were h things a belonged o  d  he,
necessary, that this Sacrifice should be somewhere set downe, since to sacrifice Priesthood is so ordained, that the Sacri∣fice being vnknowne, the Priesthood is likewise vn∣knowne. Now there is no where els in Scripture mention made of Melchisedechs Sacrifice, but only in this plce: her∣fore it is certaine that the Sacrfice which he offered, was of Bread and wine. Thirdly, for that in the Hebrew, the word protulit is a word properly pertayning to Sacrifice, as you shall read elswhere,Iudicum 6. 18. 19. where the same word is vsed in Sa∣crifice, intimating vnto vs, that as I said before, the bread & wyne were first offered in Sacrifice to God, and then giuen to the people to be eaten, though they wanted not other sufficient corporall foode. Lastly, the same is proued from the wordes immediat∣ly following, vpon which in Connexion dependeth the sense of the whole, for he was a Priest of the most high: which words can possibly beare no other sense, but that he did the function of a Priest in the bread & wyne which he brought; otherwise, if the only cause of bringing that prouision, had beene to haue relieued the Campe with victuals, the reason would rather haue beene yielded, for he was a bountifull King, a liberall Prince, a speciall friend of Abraham, as in∣deed he was; but none of these reasons, or causes fitted this purpose so well, nor so touched, or could touch the cause of his bringing forth bread and wyne, as to signify that he was a Priest, whose office is to offer Sacrifice. And heere let vs ioyne both senses, the Protestant and the Catholicke, with the reason giuen of the bringing forth of the Bread in those words, for he was a Priest of the most high God. Melchisedech brought forth bread and wyne to refresh Abraham and his souldiars, for he was the Priest of the most high God; heere is no connexion betwixt the precedent words and the rea∣son giuen, and yet this is the Protestant sense of this place. But to say as we do, Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine to offer in sacrifice vnto God, for he was a Priest of the most high God; heere is all connexion, and the sense made perfect in the reason, connecting the precedent the wordes with the subsequent.
But some reply that in the Hebrew it is not sayd, for he was a Priest, but, And he was a Priest &c. so referring the said words not to the bringing forth of wyne and bread, but to the blessing of Abraham. But neyther will this auayle any thing, for the learned in the Hebrew know, that this Con∣iunctiue particle (and) is often taken for the causall, and the Hebrew particle is better expressed in such places, by enim, or quia, for, or because, then by and; and so also it must be trā∣slated if the sentence be expressed elegantly in the Latine phrase, which S. Hierome vseth to do. Besides in the He∣brew after these words, and he was a Priest of the most high, there is an accent, which signifyeth there the periode to be ended, which plainly conuinceth that the said words are to be ioy∣ned with the precedent, he brought forth wyne and bread, not with the subsequent, he blessed: which distinction is likewise found in the Chaldee, Greeke, and Latin textes; also an En∣glish BiblePrinted 1552. readeth, Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth bread and wyne, for he was a Priest of the most high God: which Translatiō to be goodAnnot. in Luc. 1.42. Beza proueth by Theophilact, & sundry Examples out of the Scriptures. The later Editions also in like places haue not all of them the Copulatiue and, but some other word as the sense requireth, and so elswhere theyEngl. Bib. of 1578. in Gen. 20.3. translate,Gen. 20.3. thou art but dead, because of the woman which thou hast taken: for she is a mans wyfe, the Hebrew phrase is, and she is maried to a husband; and theGen. 30.27. Esa. 64.5. like in many o∣ther places may be obserued. Only I must desire the reader to aduertise, that when Prot. thinke it maketh for their pur∣pose, then they can be content to change the particle, And, into, Because; as where it is said,Luc. 1.41. Blessed art thou among wo∣men and blessed is the fruite of thy wombe, they translate,Engl. Bib. of 1578. Blessed art hou among women, because the fruite of thy wombe is bles∣sed. And in the Margent it is said, It sheweth the cause why Ma∣ry was blessed; therby to insinuate, that the B. Virgin was blessed, not for any intrinsecall vertue or goodnes in her∣selfe, but only because her sonne was blessed. So kind are Prot. to the Blessed Virgin. To come now to the second Euasion: that for Christ to be a Priest for euer, is not required a perpetuall Sacrifice by
the Ministery of Priests, but that himselfe liueth for euer, & the vertue of the Sacrifice of the Crosse continueth for euer. But this auayleth nothing, for otherwise the Leuiticall Pri∣ests, and all other Priests after the resurrection, should be called Priests for euer, because they were Priests, and shall liue for euer; Neither is the perpetuity of the vertue of the Sacrifice vpon the Crosse sufficient to make Christ a Priest for euer, no more then the effect of Noes SacrificeGen. 8. offe∣red after the Deluge, which was that the world should neuer be drowned agayne, make Noe a Priest for euer. And in like sort should Christes birth, passion, and death, be sayd eternall, and Christ himselfe to be euer borne, suffer, and dye, because the effects of these remaine for euer: wherefore S. Paul requireth more, sayingHeb. 8.3. Euery high Priest is ap∣pointed to offer guiftes and Hosts, wherefore it is necessary that he al∣so haue some thing that he may offer. Wherfore if Christ should not haue something euer to offer, he should not be said to be a Priest for euer. Now, the Sacrifice of the Crosse was fi∣nished at once, and cannot be iterated, seeing Christ can dye no more, therfore some other daily and perpetuall Sacrifice must be admitted, and none other was euer heard of, or ima∣gined, but the Sacrifice of Christes Body and Bloud, vnder the formes of Bread and wyne. Neither may it be said, that Christ is a Priest for euer, by any offering of himselfe in heauen to God the Father, by his daily representing to him his Passion for vs, for his Repre∣sentation is not properly any Sacrifice, yea any lay man may daily present and offer to God the Passion of Christ, & yet is not he therfore said to be a Priest for euer. No lesse insufficient is that which D. Fulke pretendeth, that heAgainst Rhem. Test in Heb. 8. sect. 5. fol. 409. exerciseth his continuall Priesthood in presenting his Church before God, and making continuall Intercession for vs: for neither is this Intercession any proper Sacrifice, as is cleere by the Examples of lay-people, as also of Angels and Sain∣tes who make Intercession for the Church: Neither is this according to the Order of Melchisedech, who offered Bread and wyne; wheras Christes Priesthood for euer is according to that order.
The second proofe from Scripture for the Sacrifice of the Masse, may be taken from the great Correspondence bet∣wene the Dedication and Celebration of the Old Testa∣ment and the New. The Old Testament was established by Moyses, with a solemne Sacrifice and sprinkling of Bloud, with these wordes,Heb. 9.20. Exod. 24. This is the Bloud of the Testament which God hath Commanded vnto you: Christ in Confirmation of the New Testament said,1. Cor. 11.25. This Chalice is the New Testament in my Bloud: and according to S. Matthew,Mat. 26.28. This is my Bloud of the New Testament which shalbe shed for many. Now the Bloud of the Old Testament which Moyses sprinkled, was the Bloud of an Host already offered, and truly and properly sacrificed. Therfore the Bloud of the New Testament with Christ, was the bloud of himselfe truly sacrificed, himselfe saying, This is my Bloud. Thirdly the Prophet Daniel speaking of the tymes of Christians, foretelleth,Mat. 24.15. Dan. 12.11. & 11.31. That the daily Sacrifice shalbe taken away, and the abhominable desolation set vp; which is to be per∣formed by Antichrist. Neither can this be vnderstood of spiri∣tuall Sacrifices, for neuer in Scripture is any called absolute∣ly a Sacrifice, and especially in the singular number, but on∣ly that which is truly and properly a Sacrifice: as also with the Hebrewes,Exod. 29.38.39. Num. 28.3.4. the daily Sacrifice was a proper Sacri∣fice, viz. two lambes, which were offered daily in Holo∣caust, one in the morning, and another in the euening.Mat. 24.15. And wheras ChemnitiusExam. part. 2. p. 156. 157. answereth to this, that it was spoken literally of Antiochus, who was before Christes tyme, and is not referred to Antichrist, but by Al∣legory, which kind of Argument is but of small force; I must needs reply, that the accomplishment of this Prophecy was prefigured, rather then fulfilled by Antiochus: and so according to the literall sense therof, the forsaid Chapter of Daniel is explained byApoc. 1 14. & 11.3. & 13.5. Compare these with Dan. 12.7. & 7.25. S. Iohn, and2. Thess. 4 Compare this with Mat. 24.15. S. Paul, as con∣cerning the tyme of the New Testament: as also by our Sa∣uiour himselfe, by the very words of DanielDan. 12.2 which concerne the Consummation of the world, by the Exposi∣tion of FathersAug. de ciu. Dei. l. 20. c. 8. & 25. Hier. in Dan. c. 11 Chrysost. opere imperf. hom. 49. andMarg. Notes of the Eng. Bible in Dan. c. 12. Protestantes. But ChemnitiusExam. part. 2 p. 157. further answereth, that though
this place doth concerne the tyme of Christians, yet it is on∣ly vnderstood of spirituall Sacrifices of prayer &c. Or of the preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments, which (thinke Prot.) shall vpon Antichristes comming, be either taken away, or greatly corrupted. I reply, concerning Prayers, that Persecution shall rather perfect them, then a∣bolish them: and as for the Preaching of the Word and Ad∣ministration of Sacramentes, Prot. themselues teach, that these shall cōtinue,Gifford vpon Reuel. ser. 21. p. 191. Fulk. ag. Rhem. Test. in Reuel. c. 11. sect. 4. Szeged. in Tabul. Ana∣lyt. p. 368. during all the tyme of Antichristes raigne: and that these areWhi∣tak. cont. Dur. l. 3. p. 260. Essentiall properties of the Church, which Church they confesseWhi∣tak. against Reyn. p. 34. Fulke. ag. Rhem. Test. in 2. Thess. 2. sect. 5. shall continue euen during Antichrists raigne. And as for the imagined corrupting of the Word and Sacramentes, our question vpon the Prophets words is not of corrupting them, but of the Sacrifice being taken away. Lastly Chemnitius and others betake themselues to this desperate and wicked refuge, that this taking away of the daily Sacrifice is not meant of Antichrist, but of our SauiourIn the Engl. Bible of 1576. in the Marg. notes in Dan. 12.11. Chemnit. Exam. part. 2. p. 157. Christ, who by his Sacrifice, shall take away the Sacrifice and Cere∣monies of the law. But this Answere is dangerous, as will ap∣peare by the Text it selfe,Dan. 12.11. The continuall Sacrifice shalbe ta∣ken away, and the abhomination to desolation shalbe set vp: or as the same Prophet sayth yet more plainly,Dan. 11.31. they shall take away the continuall Sacrifice, and they shall giue abhomination into desolation, which to apply to our Sauiours Passion were great blasphemy. To such grosse and impious euasions doth obsti∣nacy bring an Hereticke. Fourthly, God sayd by the Prophet Malachy,Malach. 1.10.11. I haue no will in you &c. And guift I will not receyue of your hands, for from the rising of the Sunne, euen to the going downe, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in euery place there is Sacrificing, and there is offered to my name a cleane Olation, because my name is great among the Gentiles. This to be spokē of the tyme of Christians is eui∣dent by all Circumstances, and Prot. do not deny it, but theyBilson in his true Difference &c. part. 4. p. 517. Fulk. ag. Heskins p. 121. Whi∣tak. cont. Dur. l. 9. p. 753. answere that the Prophet speaketh not peculiarly of our Priests, nor of a Sacrifice to be offered only by them, but of all Christians in generall, & their spirituall Sacrifices prayer, thankesgiuing &c. they being therefore called,1 Pet 2.5. A holy Priesthood to offer vp spirituall Sacrifices acceptable to God.
But this answere is many wayes defectiue. 1. In that the Prophet directed his speach of reiecting the Iewish Sacri∣fices, not to the people in generall, but only to the Priste, beginning his discourse,Mal. 1.7. O you Priestes that despise my name &c You offer vncleane Bread vpon my Aultar. And herupon then foretelleth the reiecting of their Sacrifice, and the allowance intee herof of the new and pure Oblation: by which op∣position he must in all due proportion be thought to meane, that as in reiecting the Priestes of the Old Law, & their Sa∣crifice, he spake not of all the people in generall, but only of Pristes in speciall, and their externall Sacrifices so reie∣cted; so likewise in his prediction of a pure Oblation to suc∣ceed in place of the other, he meant an Externall worship or Sac ifice to be offered. A truth so cleere, that Crastouius acknowledgeth the same, saying,L. 1. de opif. Miss. sect. 132. p. 60. Truly the Opposition of the Priestes doth require in this place a Sacrfice properly taken. Yea he further acknowledgeth Malachies ProphecyIbid. sect. 139. 144. 127. to be meant of the Eucharist. And Caluin speaking of this place of Malachy, granteth that therby,Calu. in Buxderfius Synagoga Iu∣daica. p. 555. And see the same in Calu. Latin Epistle. p. 683. A change of externall wor∣ship is plainly and cleerly foretould, sub Christo regnante, to be in Christes tyme. Now that this change was to be made into the Sacrifice of Christes Body and Bloud, S. Austine plainly teacheth in these words,De Ciu. Dei. l. 17. c. 20. It belongeth to the participation of this Table which the Priest himselfe the Mediatour of the New Te∣stament offereth according to the Order of Melchisedech of his Body & Bloud: for that Sacrifice hath succeeded all those Sacrifices of the Old Testament, because insteed of all those Sacrifices, his Body is offe∣red, and giuen to the Communicantes. Secondly the Pophet foretelling by whom this cleane Oblation is to be offered in the tyme of the Ghospell (as Prot.Rey∣nolds Con∣fer. p. 546. Engl Bible of 1476. in the contents and marg. notes of Mal. c. 3. vnderstand it) affirmeth and saith,Mal. 3.3. He shall purge the sonnes of Leui, and will streine them as gold and as siluer, & they shalbe offering Sacrifices to our Lord in Iustice. Now, that by the sonnes of Leui is not vnderstood all the people, but a pe∣culiar sort chosen to sacrifice, who therefore are figurati∣uely tearmed the sonnes of Leui, because by their Sacrifice and Priest-hood, they should abolish the Sacrifice & Priest∣hood of Leui, and succeed in place thereof; it is ackowled∣ged
by Prot. saying,Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1576. in Mal. 3.3. He beginneth at the Priests, that they might be lightes and shine to others: so cleerly distinguishing these Priests from the other People: as also by conference of this place with the Prophet Esay, who likewise vnder the same word foretelleth the Priesthood of the New Te∣stament saying,Isa. 66. And I will choose out of them Priests and Le∣uites:Reyn. Confer. p. 544. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. p. 236. Marg. notes of Bib. 1576. in Isa. 66.21. where Leuits signify not all Christians, but only as sun∣dry Prot. teach, (8) Ecclesiasticall Pastors. Thirdly, according to Prot.Luth. in asser. art 31. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 8. p. 572. there is not in our Prayer or other best actions any righteousnes, but impurity and sinne, wherefore by them cannot be vnderstood the pure oblation to God in Iu∣stice. Againe, the Spirituall Sacrifice of prayer is vnderstood agreably to the Prot. Translation, by the word, Incense, ac∣cording to the like vnderstanding thereof in otherApoc. 8.3.4 Ps. 140.2. Sap. 18.21. pla∣ces of Scripture. Wherefore the Prophet heere foretelling both Incense, and pure Oblation, as things different, it is therby apparant, that by pure Oblation cannot be vnderstood spi∣rituall Sacrifices, which are comprehended vnder the word, Incense: which distinction S. Chrisostome obserueth, say∣ing,In ps. 95. See how manifestly and plainly he hath expressed the mysti∣call Table, which is the vnbloudy Sacrifice; the Incense also he calleth the sacred prayers which are offered after the sayd Sacrifice. And in the same place he distinguisheth also this vnbloudy Sacrifice yet more expressely frō the spirituall Sacrifices of Prayer, Almes &c. in that he there numbreth vp these, and making this in expresse termes a distinct Sacrifice from the other. Againe in the Scriptures, the word Sacrifice or Obla∣tion is not taken improperly, but when it hath something adioyned vnto it, as the Sacrifice of Praise, of Iustice &c. and so is sufficiently declared to be taken for a spirituall Sa∣crifice. Neither as some others pretend, may it be sayd to be a pure Oblation only, because God reputeth it for such, for therefore the Oblation is sayd to please God, because it is cleane, not therefore to be cleane, because God so reputeth it. Besids if the Oblation were not truly pure in it selfe, it would not haue beene generally sayd, In euery place is offered vp to my name a pure Oblation; for in many places do wic∣ked Priests, euen among Christians, as much as lyeth in
them pollute the Sacrifice, and vndoubtedly offer vp many vncleane and vnacceptable prayers. Fiftly, the Sacrifice of the New Testament is strongly proued by the very wordes of the first Institution therof; for our Sauiour said not, This is my Body which is giuen to you, or, The Cup which is powred to you, but, pro vobis, for you, to wit, to God in Sacrifice for you. And he speaketh this in the present tense, concurring agreably with his action then present, which proueth, that he then did actually offer this Sacrifice. Neither auaileth it to answere, that the Vulgar Translation hathLuc. 22.20. which shalbe shed, to wit, vpon the Crosse, or that the present tense, as D. FulkeAgainst Rhem. Test. in Mat. 26. sect. 10. p. 54. vrgeth, is often vsed for the future; for the vulgar Translation vseth bothLuc. 22.19.20. tenses, the present in Consecration of the Bread, and future in Conse∣cration of the Chalice, and this to signify two certaine tru∣thes, one that as then it was giuen at the supper, another that it should be afterwards giuen vpon the Crosse: And though the present tense be sometimes taken for the future, yet much more often for the present, and the rather here, in that the 3. Euangelistes, with S. Paul, do vse the same: which also be∣ing more literall and proper, is not to be denied without most vrgent reason. Add yet hereunto that S. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 11.24. giuing thankes brake &c. which word of breaking must needs be referred to the Sacrament, in regard of the outward formes, which are in tyme of sacrificing broken, but not to the Crosse,Ioan. 19.33.36. For when they saw that he was dead, they brake not his legs &c. that the Scripture might be fulfilled, You shall not breake a bone of him. And according to this S. Chrysostome expounding these words of the Apostle,1. Cor. 10.16. The bread which we breake &c. sayth therupon,In. 1. Cor. hom. 24. Why doth the Apostle add, which we breake? this in the Eucharist may be seene, but on the Crosse not but alogeather the contrary for a bone of him (sayth the tex e) you shall not breake, therfore what he doth not suffer on the Crosse that doth he (by way of mystery, and signification) suffer in the Sa∣crifice of the last supper, when the formes are broken. Yea Caluin himselfe writing vpon the foresaid words of S Paul, sayth,In. 1. Cor. 11.24. p. 323. Here I expound, to be broken to be put, for to be sacrificed though improperly, yet not absurdly &c. For not simply and without addition,
our Lord doth offer vs his Body, but as it was sacrificed for vs. Chem∣nitius also saith of the Sacrament.Exam. part. 2. p. 153. There is the Sacrifice dispensed and taken, which was once offered on the Crosse for our sinnes. If then Christ was at his last Supper present in the Sacra∣ment by way of Sacrifice, and before his Sacrifice done v∣pon the Crosse, how can it be, but that the Eucharist, then was, and yet is a Sacrifice? But of this I haue spoken more largely before. Sixthly, whereas it is sayd, Do this in remembrance of me, the word, doe, doth signify to sacrifice, as it is often vsed in other partes of Scripture, asLeuit. 31.19. Facietis & hircum pro peccato &c. you shall offer a goate for a Sacrifice for sinne: AndNum 6.11. faciet Sacerdos vnum pro peccato, & alterum in holocaustum, The Priest shall offer one Sacrifice for sinne, and the other for a holocaust: so also is this word, doe, vsed for sacrifice amongst prophane authors, asVirgilius Eclog. 4. Cùm faciam vitula profrugibus ipse venito, when I sacrifice heyfers for fruites come thou. In the same sense do Varro, Cicero, Plautus, Macrobius, vse the word, doe, for Sacrifice. The last proofe our of Scripture for the Sacrifice of the Masse, is that of S. Paul,1. Cor. 10.16. &c. The Chalice of Benediction which we do blesse, it is not the Communication of the Bloud of Christ? And the Bread which we breake, is it not the participation of the Body of our Lord? for being many we are one Bread, one Body, all that participate of one bread &c. they that eate the hosts, are they not partakers of the Aultar? the things that the heathen do immolate, they do immolate to Diuells &c. you cannot be partakers of the Table of our Lord, and of the Table of Diuells. We haue an Aultar, whereof they haue not po∣wer to eate, which serue the Tabernacle. Heere S. Paul compa∣reth the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and the Aultars of Chri∣stians, with the Sacrifices and Aultars of the Iewes and the Gentils, which comparison were impertinent, if we had not true externall Sacrifices and Aultars, as the Iewes and Gentils had. But heere someEngl. Bib. of 1562. Protestants thinke to help them∣selues by falsly translating the wordes thus:1. Cor. 9.13. Know you not, that they which wayte of the Temple, are partakers of the Temple,1. Cor. 10.18. And are not they which eate of the Sacrifice, parta∣kers of the Temple? In both which places, the Apostles
wordes in Greeke is , which signifyeth Aultar, and not Temple. So that if no other Answere will serue their turne, they will rather corrupt the Scriptures, then yield to the truth. SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers expound the Scriptures agreably with Catholickes in Confirmation of the Sacrifice of the Masse. S. Clemens Alexandrinus applyeth Melchisedech his Sa∣crifice to the Sacrament of the Eucharist thus,L. 4. Strom. vers. fin. Mel∣chisedech King of Salem, Priest of God most high, gaue wyne and bread sanctifyed nutriment in type of the Eucharist. With whom agreeth S. Cyprian, saying,Ep. 63. ad Caecilium. Christ is Priest for euer according to the order of Melchisedech, which Order is this, comming from that Sacrifice, and thence descending, that Melchi∣sedech was Priest of God most high, that he offered Bread and wyne, that he blessed Abraham; for who is more a Priest of God most high, then our Lord Iesus Christ, who offered Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same which Melchisedech had offered, bread and wyne, viz. his owne Body and Bloud. And a litle after, That therfore in Genesis the blessing might be rightly celebrated about Abraham by Melchisedech the Priest, the Image of Christs Sacrifice consisting in bread and wyne went before, which thing our Lord perfecting and per∣forming, offered bread, and Chalice mixt with wyne, and he that is the plenitude, fulfilled the verity of the prefigured Image. S Cyprians sayings are so cleere for Sacrifice, that Fulke saith,Against Hekns. &c. p. 1. 0. It is granted that Cyprian thought the Bread and wyne brought forth by Melchisedech to be a figure of the Sacrament, and that herin also Mel∣chisedech resembled the Priesthood of Christ. The Centurists recite this speciall saying of Cyprian:L. 2. Ep. 3. Our Lord Iesus Christ, sayth Cyprian, l. 2. Ep. 3. is the high Priest of God the Father, and first of∣fered Sacrifice to God the Father, and commanded the same to be done in remembrance of him; and that Priest truly executeth Christes place, that doth imitate that which Christ did, and then he offereth in the
mongst vs, and taught a new Oblation of the New Testament, which Oblation the Church receyuing from the Apostles, throughout the whole world offereth to God, to him who giueth vs nourishment, the first fruits of his guiftes in the New Testament, of whom amongst the twelue Pro∣phets, Malachy hath thus foretould: I haue no will in you, sayth our omnipotent Lord, and I will take no Sacrifice at your hands, because from the rising of the Sunne, to the setting thereof, my Name is glori∣fyed amongst the Gentiles, and in euery place Incense is offered to my Name, and a pure Sacr fice, because my Name, is great amongst the Gentiles, sayth our Lord Almighty, manifestly signifying by these thinges, because the former people indeed ceased to offer to God, but in euery place a Sacrifice is offered to God, and this pure, for his Name is glorifyed amongst the Gentils. The Centuristes say thereof,Cent 2. c. 4. Col. 63. Irenaeus &c. seemeth to speake very incom∣modiously, when he sayth, He taught the new Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church receiuing from the Apostles, offe∣red to God ouer all the world. S. Hierome vpon this place of Malachy writeth thus,Com∣ment. in 1. Malach. And that they may know not in Iudaea one Prouince of the world, neyther in one Citty of Iudaea called Hieru∣salem, but in euery place an Oblation to offered, not vncleane, as was offered by the people of Israell but a cleane one, as in the Ceremonies of the Christians; for from the rising of the Sunne to the setting thereof, the name of our Lord is great amongst the Gentils, our Sauiour saying, Father I haue manifested thy name to men. And immediatly after he addeth, And therefore of you, Priests and Princes of the Iewes, in euery place a cleane Oblation is offered vnto me, & my Name is great among the Gentils. Eusebius Caesariensis wryting obiter vpon this place sayth,L. 1. De∣monst. Euang. c. 10. We sacrifice therefore to our highest Lord a Sacrifice of prayse: we sacrifice to God a full, odoriferous, and most holy Sacrifice, we sacrifice after a new manner, according to the New Testament, a pure host. S. Chrysostome expoundeth the same place thus,Ad ps. 95. The Church which euery where carryeth about Christ in it, is prohi∣bited from no place, but in euery place there be Aultars, in euery place doctrine; these things God foretould by his Prophet, for both declaring the Churches sincerity and bringing into obloquie the ingratitude of the other people, he speaketh vnto them, I haue no pleasure in you &c.
marke how cleerely, and plainly he interpreteth the mysticall Table, which is the vnbloudy host, and the pure perfume he calleth holy pray∣ers, which are offered after the host. Thou seest how it is granted that, that Angelicall Sacrifie should euery where be knowne, thou seest it circumscribed with no limits, neyther the Aultar, nor the song: In euery place Incense is offered to my Name, therefore the mysticall Ta∣ble, the heauenly and exceeding Venerable Sacrifice is indeed the prime pure host. S. Cyprian affirmeth that,L. 1. cont. Iudaeos c. 16. The old Sacrifice is abro∣gated, and the new celebrated, with Malachie; and then repea∣teth at large the place of the Prophet. And elswhereDe coena Dom. repeating our Sauiours wordes, This is my flesh, This is my Bloud, sayth thereupon, So often as with these words of this fayth it is done, this bread substantiall, and this Cup consecrated with ho∣ly blessing, profiteth to the health of the whole man, being both a me∣dicine and Sacrifice to heale Infirmities, and purge sinnes. S. Austine auoucheth, that,L. 18 de Ciu. Dei. c. 35. Malachias prophecying of the Church, which we see by Christ now propagated, speaketh plainly to the Iewes in the person of God, (I haue no pleasure in you &c.) This Sacrifice by the Priesthood of Christ according to the Order of Melchisedech, seeing we now see it to be offered vp in euery place, from the Sunne rysing to the setting thereof, but the Sacrifice of the Iewes to whome it is sayd, I haue no pleasure in you &c. they cannot deny to haue ceased &c. This is so cleereIn Tact. Theol. Calui∣ni. p. 389. in the Fathers that Caluin sayth, It is ordinary to those knaues (meaning Catho∣likes) to scrape togeather whatsoeuer is read faulty in the Fathers: when therefore they obiect the place of Malachy to be expouned by Ire∣naeus of the Sacrifice of the Masse, the Oblation of Melchisedech to be so handled by Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine, Arnobius, let it be briefly answered, the selfe same writers elswhere do interprete Bread, the Body of Christ, but so ridiculously, that reason and truth compel∣leth vs to dissent. Crastouius reproueth S. Gregory Nissen saying,De Opifi∣cio Missae. l. 1. sect. 164. p. 81. Doth he not know that the opinion of Nyssen is of it selfe absurd &c. He sayth, when therfore Christ gaue to his Disciples his body to eate &c. then latently &c. vnspeakably, and inuisibly the Body was sa∣crificed &c. S. DenisEccl. Hier. c. 3. setting downe how the Bishop cōmeth to
houres the Irons did without any outward help, fall loose from the said imprisoned persons. And afterwards they being set at liberty, & returned home, it fell out vpon obseruation and account of tyme, that as S. Bede saith of the one, His hands were loosed spe∣cially at those tymes when Masse was celebrated for him: And as S. Gregory saith of the other, his wyse calling to memory the dayes and houres, acknowledged him to be loosed euen then when for him she remembred the Sacrifice to be offered. S. Bede mentioneth the names of the party, and of the Priest, and the place of his aboad, affirmng that it was tould him by credible persons, who heard it from the party himselfe, whereupon (saith he) hauing so good proofe, I thought good to insert the same without any doubt into my Ecclesiasticall history. And the other was so certainly know∣ne, that S. Gregory beginning to speake therof saith Dearly beloued, I am persuaded that many of you do know that wherof now I will remember you. Other like to these are recorded byL. 4. Dial. c. 57. S. Gregory and SymeonIn vita Ioan. Eleemo∣synarij. apud Surium. Tom. 1. Metaphrastes. As also of the vi∣sion of Angels in tyme of the Sacrifice adoring, reported byDe Sa∣cerd. l. 6. c. 4. Pallad. Hist. Sanct. c. 20. & 71. So∣zom. Hist. l. 6. c. 29. S. Chrysostome, Palladius, and Sozomene: which vi∣sion was also made to S. ChrysostomeNilus Monachus. in ep. ad ua∣stasium E∣piscopum. himselfe, and by him declared in priuate to his speciall spirituall friends. These mi∣racles are so forcible for our Catholicke doctrine, as that in∣steed of all other answere, Humfrey thinketh itIesuit. part 1 p. 134. Dotage to belieue that Angels be there present: and of the other mentioned by S. Bede, Fulke sayth,Against Purg. p. 333. I weighe not worth a flye that tale you tell out of Bede, of him that had his Chaines fallen off in Masse time, that credulous and superstitious age had many such feigned miracles.Against Rhem. Test. in Heb. 10.11. p. 416. And the like fable (saith he) telleth Gregory, hom. 37. in E∣uang. So prophanely and contemptuosly do Heretickes, ha∣uing their hartes hardened, thinke and speake of vn∣doubted miracles: and so basely do they thinke of S. Chry∣sostome, S. Gregory, and S. Bede, men reuerenced by all Christian posterity for their Learning, Iudgment and San∣ctity. Lastly S. Austine relating, that,De Ciu. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. A house being haun∣ted with euill Spirits &c. a Priest went and offered there the Sacri∣fice of Christes Body, (for which the English Translation most corruptly sayth, one went, prayed, and ministred the Communion) praying very earnestly that the vexation might cease, & by Gods mercy
it forthwith ceased. This miracle is confessed by the Centu∣ristesCent. 5. c. 6. Col. 684. Hosp. Hist. Sacram. part. 1 p. 389. 591. and Hospinian, as also byDe spe∣ctris. part. 3. c. 10. p. 254. Lauatherus, who reciting the story verbatim, inferreth that it is cleere that Su∣perstition began &c. as also to Pray, and Sacrifice for Soules. And Moulin acknowledgeth this Miracle,Defence &c. art. 9. p. 208. of the house haunted with Spirits, and cleered by the Priest saying Masse in it. D. Reinolds confesseth.Confe∣rence &c p. 552. The Relation and mutuall dependance in which Aultar and Sacrifice are by nature linked togea∣ther. But Zepperus more particularly teacheth that,Politia Eccles. l. 1. c. 18. Aul∣tars of stone and Hostes do confirme the Sacrifice of the Masse for the mutuall relation of Aultars and Sacrifices. Now it is euident that the Ancient Fathers erected Aultars, and sacrificed vpon them. S. Austine saith,De Ci∣uit. Dei. l. 22. c. 10. We erect Aultars vpon which we Sa∣crifice to the one God.Ser. 11. d Sanctis. Vpon the Aultar the Body of our Lord is of∣fered.Cont. Faust. Ma∣nich. l. 20. c. 21. We build Aultars to the God of Martyrs, although in me∣mory of Martyrs; for what Bishop &c. standing at the Aultar, hath any tyme said, we offer to thee Peter, or Paul? S. Gregory Nazianzen affirmeth, that,In Iu∣lianum. Aultars take their name from the most pure & vnbloudy Sacrifice. Optatus asketh,L. 6. cont. Par∣men. what is the Aultar, but the seate of the Body, and Bloud of Christ? And in reguard of this Relation,In En∣chyr. c. 210. de cura pro mort. c. 18. Greg. in Luc. hom. 37. Saint Austine and S. Gregory do call it, The Sacrifice of the Aultar. This was so certainly the be∣liefe and practise of the Ancient Fathers, that they are ther∣fore in generall reproued by sundryPet. Mart. in his Com. pla. in Engl. part. 4. p. 225. Carth∣wright in his 1. Rply. the last. part. p. 264. Protestant wri∣ters. SECT. IV. That sundry Protestants do teach, and allow a true, and externall Sacrifice in the tyme of the New Testament, euen the Sacrifice of the Masse. HAuing proued before from Scriptures and Fathers, that Melchisedech was truly a Priest, and that the Sacrifice which he offered was in bread and wyne, and that therein he was a true type of Christ his Priestood, and of the Sacri∣fice which he was to offer vnder the formes of bread and
wine; I will now examine what sundry Prot. thinke heer∣of: And first, I fynd Iohn Husse to affirme,Ad Ps. 109. That Christ is a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedch who first offered bread and wyne: and Christ consecrated bread and wyne into his Body and Bloud, the similitude of which Sacrifice Melchisedech sent before &c: Melchisedech offered bread and wyne Gen. 14. and Christ consecra∣ted bread and wyne into his Body and Bloud offered it to God the Fa∣ther, and committed it to his Disciples to be offered. He also calleth it,Act. Mon. p. 209. The Sacrament of the Aultar, and being a Priest sayd Masse, as Iohn Iohnson acknowledgeth, euen to his dying day; to which his Masse the people during his last restraint resorted, at his Hosts house in Constance, as is witnessed by a CitizenHulde∣ricke Rei∣chental. hi∣stor. Teu∣ton. de Con∣cil. Con∣stan. of Constance, who liued in that time: And we do not any where fynd him charged for impugning the Masse. So Papisticall was Iohn Husse in the very Sacrifice of Masse. To come now to Wiccliffe, Perzibrane recordeth that,Cap. 28. Wiccliffe in his Booke de Apostasia c. 18. approueth all the rytes of the Masse, from the beginning almost to the end, affirming that it is excellent and excellently declared, and concluding of all that ryte, and saying: It is certaine, that all such things are so far forth lau∣dable, as they do stir vp, that Christ may be more loued. Thus he &c. Wiccliffe celebrated his Masses, after the rite, and forme of the Church &c. But no man speaketh more plainly then Martin Lu∣ther, who auoucheth, that,Ad Ps. 110. Tom. 8. fol. 197. Melchisedech was a King, and a Priest, he offered bread and wyne also for the Patriarch Abraham and his family &c. But what is the Oblation of bread and wyne for A∣braham? this expresseth the Priestood of Christ, from this tyme to the end of the world, in which tyme the Church offereth the Mysticall Sa∣crament of the Aultar, of his precious Body and Bloud. Heere Luther acknowledgeth Melchisedech to haue beene a Priest, to haue offered bread and wine for Abraham, and therein to haue exercised the Priesthood of Christ, and the Sacrament of the Aultar of his precious body and Bloud: which is the very same that Catholickes teach. Andreas Crastouius a learned CaluinistDe opi∣ficio Missae Cont. Bellar. l. 1. p. 18. sect. 9. acknowled∣geth the Fathers generall opinion of Melchisedechs Sacrifice of Bread and wyne, and in reguard of that their Harmony
(as he termeth i) or generall consent therin he professeth to be of their opinion: his wordes in the place before cited are, It is not lawfull for Christian Pastours to cast away the consent and Harmony of Interpretation, and that both for the neernes of the Apo∣stles age, as also for the singular concord of all, which is had in all pla∣ces &c. with the consent as it were of all: the sacred Oblation of Mel∣chisedech is proposed, that not only for Abraham and his Souldiars, but also to God the vnbloudy Sacrifice may seeme to be offered Symbolically: And immediatly after he answereth the Protestants common obiection, saying. But if some Doctours affirme, Melchisedech to haue giuen to Abraham bread and wyne, yet they do not deny that pri∣mary Oblation which was made to God. So that according to this Caluinist, all Fathers generally do interprete, that Mel∣chisedech offered Sacrifice, and that his Sacrifice did repre∣sent the vnbloudy Sacrifice of Christ. The Lord Cobham calleth the Eucharist,Act. Mon. p. 265. The Sacra∣ment of the Aultar,Ib. p. 267. the Sacred Host, and is no where char∣ged with the contrary doctrine; but as M. Foxe witnesseth,Ib p. 273. His opinion, as the Papists thought at that tyme, was perfect con∣cerning the Sacrament. And it is euident that King Henry the 8. and the Church in his tyme did publickly maintayne the Masse,Act. Mon. p 586. punishing the impugners thereof; and yet neuerthe∣les, the Prot. gladly acknowledge him for aFulke ag. Hekins, Saunders. p. 563. sect. 78. Member of the Catholicke Church of Christ, andIb. p. 564. the Church in his tyme for a true Church. Iewell acknowledgeth that,Reply in Engl. p. 7. Melchisedech by his bread and wyne signifyed the Sacrifice of the holy Communion: so that with M. Iewel, the Prot. Communion is now a Sacrifice: or as M. Morton calleth it, the Masse of Christ. According to Melan∣cthon,In Con∣cil. Theol. part. 2. p. 373. Melchisedech receyueth Abraham returning from the warre, and admitteth him to the Sacrifice, and blesseth him. Vrbanus Rhegius testifyeth that1. part. operum de Missae nego∣tio. fol. 65. Many there are who thinke a Sacrifice to be proued by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. where he dehorteth from the society of such as sacrifice to Idols by Arguments taken frō the beliefe of the Sacrifice vsed by the Iewes and Gentils for he seemeth to cōpare Sa∣crifice to Sacrifice as Chrysostome teacheth, & his Cōparison so to stand, that by it is gathered, Christians in the Lords Supper, to haue a cer∣tayne peculiar sacrifice wherby they are made partakers of our Lord,
as the Idolaters by their abhominable Sacrifice, are made partakers of Diuels: which thing if it be so, it seemeth it may be answered, that in the Supper of Christians are the Body and Bloud of Christ, which are a holy a Sacrifice, but commemoratiue: So plainly doth he ac∣knowledge the Eucharist to be no lesse truly and properly a Sacrifice, then were the Sacrifices of the Iewes, which were true Sacrifices, though they were commemoratiue, in res∣pect of Christes Passion then to come, as ours is now a true Sacrifice, and yet Commemoratiue, in reguard of his Pas∣sion already past. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against the Sacrifice of the Masse answered. D.Against Reynolds. p. 84. 85. Whitakers vrgeth from S. Paul, that ChristHeb. 7.24. Continueth for euer, and hath an euerlasting Priesthood, wher∣fore no Priestes do succeede him, and consequently no Priesthood, no Sacrifice: for therfore in the Old law, were PriestsHeb. 7.23. multiplied, because that by death they were prohibited to continue. Answ. We do not teach that Priestes do succeed to Christ, but only that they are his Vicars or Ministers, and that he by them doth truly offer Sacrifice, which doth no more derogate from Christ his Priesthood, then it doth from his being ourMat. 23.10. Isa. 9.7. Luc. 1.3. Mat. 26.31. Io. 10.11.14. Luc. 4.18. Eph. 2.17. Maister, King, Pastour, Preacher; that others also are Maisters, and Kings, Pastours and Preachers: Yea therfore is he said to be a Priest for euer, (as is shewed before) because though not by himselfe, yet by other Priestes as his Ministers, he sacrificeth for euer. And as for S. Paul ob∣iected (in proofe of the many prerogatiues of Christs Priest∣hood & Sacrifice before that of Aaron) he doth only exclude the multiplicity of Priestes in the same dignity & power; for in the old Law by reason of Aarons death succeeded Elea∣zarus, and to him Phinees &c. and so, as if Aaron had nuer dyed, none had succeeded him, and yet he liuing there were many other inferiour Priestes: so Christ neuer dying, none
succeedeth him, which yet doth not hinder the being of the other true, yet inferiour Priestes. Againe, according to D. Whitkers owne Exposiion,Against Reynolds pag. 83. that property is , (euerlasting) that psseth not away from one to another: But who of vs euer affied Crist his Priesthood to haue departed away from him? Yea we all acknowledge that he is a Priest for euer, according to the Order of Melchisedech. Seconly, it is vrged that the Sacrifice of the Crosse is of infinite value, therfore all others are iniurious to it and su∣pefluous I answere, this no more proueth the Sacrifice of the Masse to be iniurious to the Sacrifice of the Crosse, then it doth the lke of all the Sacrifices of the old Testament, all which depended vpon the vertue of the Sacrifice of the Crosse, Christ being therfore called,Apoc. 13.8. the lambe slaine from the beginning of the world; it being therfore of infinite value, doth only proue, that there is no neede for another, or the same Christ to dye againe, which maketh nothing against the multiplicity of Sacrifices, representing the said Sacrifice of the Crosse, and applying the fruite therof to vs: in one word, the Sacrifice of the Masse being no other but the same in substance with the Sacrifice of the Crosse, though in dif∣ferent manner offered vnder the formes of bread and wyne, which are truly turned into the Body and Bloud of Christ, wherupon it is called, Hostia incruenta, an vnbloudy Sacrifice; I say, the Sacrifice of the holy Masse, can be no wayes iniu∣rious to the Sacrifice of the Crosse. But because this Obiection is much insisted vpon, in further Explanation therof, I say; 1. that the Catholicke be∣liefe is, that our Sauiours Passion and death is in it selfe the sufficient and most accomplished price of our Redemption: And that the benefit therof is imparted to vs (as Prot.Chemnit. Exam part. 2. p. 21. al∣so teach) by speciall meanes in that behalfe subordinate, as not only by faith and preaching of the word, but also, as many Prot.Whiteg. Def. p. 527. Carthw. ib. p 532. Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 57. Co∣uel. in Def. of Hook art. 14. p 96 Bil∣son, true Diff. r. part. 4 p 539. Chem. Exam. part. 1. p 17. acknowledge, by the Sacraments, and so most especially by the Sacrifice of the Masse in our opinion, which we affirme Christ to haue instituted to be to vs not any new Redemption; with which some Protestant fal∣sly charge vs contrary to ourBellar. de issa. l. 2. c. 4. writings, and contrary
to the Confession had of vs by sundryVrsinus Commone∣factio &c. p. 289. Pro. in this be∣halfe; but onely as chiefe meanes appointed to continue the memory of his Oblation vpon the Crosse, and the ap∣plication of the generall vertue thereof to our particular ne∣cessities: to which very Doctrine sundry Prot. do also assent. Sigwartus sayth of this Sacrament,Disp. Theol. disp. 16. p. 146. It is the organ, mea∣nes, and instrument, by which the benefits of Christ may be conferred and applyed. If you will belieue Fulke,Retn∣tiue. p. 24. Euery Prot. doth acknowledge the Ministration of the Sacrament to be a dispensation of the Sacrifice of Christs death. Caluin affimeth, that by te S∣crament,I 1. Cor. 11.24. we are partakers of Redemption, and the benefit of the Sacrifice is applyed to vs. And if some reply to this, that how∣soeuer the Communicant may apply by Fayth Christs dea h to himselfe, yet it seemeth hard, that the Priest should in his Oblation make application of the benefit thereof, to, or for any other. I answere, that the efficacy which we attribute as proper to the Masse, being not any new Redemption, is not hard but easy to be conceaued, the same being (in re∣guard of the like peculiar effect) semblable (though in a far transcendent sort) vnto Prayer; which profiteth not onely the party praying, butIob. 41.8 Philem v. 22. Rom. 15.30. Iac 5.16. others also for whome it is made. Yea S. Paul speaking of Sacrifices, sayth most cleerly that,Heb 5.1.3. Euery high Priest &c. is appoynted for men in those things that appertayne to God; that he may offer Guiftes and Sacrifices for sinnes &c. and therefore he ought, as for the people so also for himselfe to of∣fer for sinnes. So many wayes is this common Obiection ans∣red. TheRogers Det. of the Art. art. 31. p. 184. third Obiection is that of the ApostleHeb. 9.25. Nor tha he should offer himselfe often, as the high Priest entreth into the Holyes euery yeare in the bloud of others. And agayne,Ib. c. 10.12. We are sanctifyed by the Oblation of the Body of Iesus Christ once. And yet thirdly,I. ver. 14. By one Oblation hah he consummated for euer them that are sanctifyed. And lastly,Ib. 18. Now there is not an Oblation for sinnes. Answ. These places are vnderstood of the Sacrifice of the Crosse, and so in the first place it is sayd,Heb. 9.26. Other∣wyse he ought to haue suffered often from the beginning of the world: so that they do not exclude all Sacrifice, but only the itera∣tion of the Sacrifice of the Crosse by Christes often suffe∣ring,
for no more do the words import. And though by that one Sacrifice of the Crosse, remission of sinnes be obtayned, that is, our Redemption wrought, and due satisfaction made to Gods Iustice for sinne; yet this nothing more excludeth such Sacrifices as represent, and apply vnto vs the Sacrifice of the Crosse, then it doth exclude Baptisme, the Euchariste, preaching, prayer, and other meanes and Instruments, wheby the fruite and profit of the Crosse is applied vnto vs. Besides that vnderstanding impugneth Christes Priest∣hood for euer; for whichHeb 8.3 it is necessary that he also may haue something that he may offer, and for this expresse reason, because euery high Priest is appointed to offer. Yea Prot. contrary to this their owne Obiection do confesse, that as now also in heauenBulling. in Decad. in Engl. Dee. . Se. 7. p. 707. Christ our Lord sacrificeth for vs: and of∣fereth a Sacrifice for sinnes vnto the liuing God, (euen) himselfe, al∣wayes an effectuall Sacrifice, & continuing stillIb. p. 707. our Priest, execu∣teth his office (of Priesthood) before God in heauen. And some Pro∣stants tell the Lutherans that,Vrsinus in Commons∣fact. p. 290. Wheresoeuer Christ is pre∣sent, there doth he offer himselfe in the fight of his Father to obtayne vs remission for his Sacrifice once offered vpon the Crosse &c. But accor∣ding to Lutherans, in the Masse he is corporally present, therfore in the Bread he presenteth himselfe to his Father for our Saluation no lesse then in heauen. And, the Reall Presence but admitted, the Sacrifice of Christes Body doth thence necessarily follow. In like sort sayth Altkircherus,De My∣stco &c. Sacrificio. p. 2. From this foundation (of corporall presence and eating) aswell Adoration as Oblation of the Body and Bloud of Christ in Sacrifice must necessarily follow, and be graunted. And he citeth Melancthon to say,Ib. p. 3. If Christ be contayned in the Bread, why is he not to be adored and offered? By all which it is cleere, that our vnbloudy Sacrifice doth nothing derogate from that one Sacrifice of the Crosse. Others obiect that we do not fynd in all the Scriptures that Christ or his Apostles said Masse. Answ. Christ himselfe said Masse at his last supper, when he said,Luke. 22.19.20. This is my Bo∣dy which is giuen for you: This is the Chalice the New Tstament in my Bloud which shalbe shed for you: from which wordes we haue formerly proued Sacrifice. And seeing Christ at the same tyme commanded his Apostles saying, Do this in remem∣brance
licke Church teacheth, that,1. Concil. Trident Sess. 14. Cap. 1. Our Lord did then chiefly or∣dayne the Sacrament of Pennance, when rising from death, he brea∣thed vpon his Disciples saying, Receaue yee the holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgiue they are forgiuen them and whose you shall retayne, they are retayned By which so notable act, and words so playne, the consent of all Fathers hath alwayes vnderstood, power of remitting & retayning sinnes to haue beene communicated to the Apostles, and their lawfull Successours. The Church furtherCap. 3. teacheth, the forme of the Sacrament of Pennance &c. to be placed in these wordes: I ab∣solue thee &c. The actes of the Penitent himselfe, to wit, Contriion, Confession, and Satisfaction, are as it were the matter of this Sacra∣ment &c.Cap. 4. Contrition is sorrow of mynd and detestation of sinne cō∣mitted, with purpose to sinne no more &c.Cap. 5. From the Institution of the Sacrament of Pennance &c. all the Church hath euer vnderstood, entyre Confession of sinnes to haue beene also ordayned by our Lord, & to be necessary by Gods Law to all that haue fallen after Baptisme &c. Concerning Satisfaction, the ChurchCap 8. declareth, that it is altoge∣ther false and different from the word of God (to affirme) the fault is neuer forgiuen by our Lord, but all the punishment is also pardoned &c. And therefore she further teacheth, that,Cap. 9. so great is the bounty of Gods munificence, that we may not only satisfy God the Fa∣ther through Christ Iesus with punishments voluntarily by our selues dertaken for the reuenge of sinne, or imposed by sentence of the Priest, according to the measure of the fault: but also which is she greatest ar∣gument of loue, by temporall punishments inflicted by God, and by vs patiently suffered. In the Councell Cabilonense it is thus decreed,Can. 8. Con∣cerning the Pennance of sinnes, which is the Cure of the Soule, we iud∣ge it profitable to all men; and that Pennance be appointed to Peni∣tents by Priests, Confession being made &c. In the Councell of Florence it is defyned that,Decret. Eugenij PP. Pennance is the fourth Sacrament whose as it were matter are the actes of the Penitent, which are dis∣tinguished into three parts, the 1. Contrition of the hart &c. the 2. Confession of the mouth &c. the 3. satisfaction for sinnes according to the sentence of the Priest &c. The forme of this Sacrament are the words of Absolution, which the Priest vttereth, when he sayth: I ab∣solue thee &c. The Minister of this Sacrament is the Priest, hauing authority to absolue, eyther ordinary, or by Commission of Superiours.
According to these Councels allBellar. de Poenitent. l. 1. c. 8. &c. Rhem. Test. in Ioan. 20, 22.23. Catholickes gene∣rally belieue, that the Sacrament of Pennance is truly and properly a Sacrament: that the Priest hath Authority from God therein to forgiue sinne: and that Confession of sinnes is therefore necessary. Pointes Disputable. All Catholiks belieuing that Contrition is a Cause of remission of sinne, yetCapreol. in 2. Dist. 40. q. vnica. Dom à Soto: l 2. de Nat. & Gra. c. 4. some teach, that it causeth as a disposition, not as truly deseruing the same: ButMagi∣ster. Sent. 2. l. Sent. Dist. 27. S. Tho in 1. Dist. 27 q. 4. others more probably teach, that it is not only a Disposition, but truly deseruing of congruity Iustification.Scotus in 4. Dist. 16. q. 1. Some place the essence of this Sacrament only in the Absolution.Durand. Dst. 14. q. 1. 3. Gabr. dist. 14. q. 1. art. 1. Others in Absolution & Confession.Sotus. Dist. 14. q. 1. art. 1. Others generally in Absolution, Contrition, and Confession as essentiall, and in Satisfaction as a part only integrall. SomeScotus in 4. Dist. 18. Nauar. in Man. c. 26. n 20. thinke, that the Penient is not bound to accept the Pennance imposed by the Priest, but may referre himselfe to Purgtory: but if he do accept thereof, then is he bound to performe it.Caiet. q. 2. de Satisfas. Others, that neyther is he bound to accept thereof, and if he do, yet is he not bound to per∣forme it. ButMagist. Sent. in 4. Dist. 16.18. S. Tho. eadem Dist. q 1. art. 3. others more generally teach, that the Pe∣nitent is both bound to accept, and performe his Pennance imposed by the Priest. Protestants Vntruthes. Luther blusheth not to auouch that,L. de Cap∣tiu. Babyl. Cap. de Foe∣uis. Our Babylon (meaning the Catholicke Church) is not content with this, she hath also so extinguished faith, as that with shamles forhead she de∣nth it to be necessry in this Sacrament, yea with Antichristian im∣pie she defyneth it Heresy, If any shall affirme faith to be necessary, But this to be most vntrue, Luher himselfe doth acknow∣lege in hese words.Aduersus execrab. Antichristi Bullam, de sexto Art. This I haue done by that Doctrine, Pennance to be of no waigt, vnlesse it be done in Faish and Charity, which themselues also teach, only that they neither know or teach, what
is Faith, or what is Charity. So cleerly doth Luther proue him∣selfe lyar. He also accuseth vs to teach that,L. de Captiu. Ba∣byl. cap. de Foenit. Contrition goeth before the faith of promise, and is much more profitable, as not being a worke, but merit of saith. But all Catholckes teach, that Con∣trition followeth faith, and that faith is so the guift of God, as that it cannot be gayned by Contrition, or any other worke, as of merit. HeIn Com∣ment. Epist. ad Gal. affirmeth lykewise that we make no mention in the Sacrament of Confession of the merit of Christ, but only inculcate humane Satisfactions; which he proueth by the forme of Absolution which Catholickes vse. But this is so absurdly false, that in the very forme of Absolution which Luther himselfe setteth downe in the same place, & which Heshusius reciteth out of Luther, the fst words are,L de Error. Pon∣tif. loc. 9. n. 57. The merit of Christs Passion &c. MelancthonIn Con∣fess. August. art. 12. & in Apol. ad art. 12. in sundry places affirmeth vs to teach. sinnes to be forgiuen not by fayth, but by Charity, workes, and satisfactions: whereas we teach that sinne is to be for∣giuen by Absolution, God applying the merits of Christ by the Ministery of Priestes, and this gratis, not for any merit, or worke of Contrition, of other workes of ours. CaluinInstit. l. 3. c. 4. §. 1. affirmeth, that we make Pennance to cō∣sist in externall Exercises, But of the interiour renouation of the mynd which draweth with it true amendment of life, a strange silence. But himselfe presently after in the same place make him∣selfe a lyar, by these wordes, with them there is much speach of Contrition and Attrition. He also introduceth Cathockes to say,In An∣tid. art. Paris. art. 3. For as much as concerneth Confession it is to be obserued, that the matter is by Gods Law, but the forme by Positiue Law. But no Catholike eue writ, that the forme of Aboluion was by Positiue Law. He also falsly auoucheth that,De ne∣cess. reform. Eccl. p. 60. The Aduersaries do not shew any necessity of Confession to haue beene im∣posed vpon the faythfull before Innocent the 3. But Innocent the 3. only declareth that none haue power to administer this Sacrament by Gods Law, bu only such as haue Iurisdicti∣on ouer others. Chenitus affmeth thatExam. 2. part. p. 955. Lombard first made of Pennance a Sacrament. But this to be most vntrue may be seene in S.Ep 180. ad Honor. Austine.
Protestant Doctrine. The English Prot. Church decreeth, thatArt. 25. There are two Sacraments ordayned by Christ &c Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Those commonly called Sacraments, that is, Confirmation, Pennance &c. are no to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospell &c. for that they haue not any Ceremony or visible signe ordayned by God. And eereupn Prot. teach, that,Willet. Synop. Con∣trou. 5. q. 4. Ecclesiasticall Mini∣sters haue only power graunted to them to declare and pronounce Re∣mission of sines according to the wil f God, and do not properly in their owne pwer absolue or release sinnes:Ib p. 211. They do not reconcile men to God, but pray them to be reconcyled. Caluin thinketh that,In refut. Cathol. p. 384. The Law established for auricu∣lar Confession is diabolicall. Iewel,Defence of the Apol. p. 132. We say, that it is neyther ordayned by Christ, nor is necessary to saluation, that priuate Con∣fession be made to the Minister. So that Prot. deny the Sacrament of Pennance, and all necessity of Confession. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. S. Ambrose affirmeth of the Nouatian Hereticks, that,L. 1. de Poenit. c. C. 7. See Cypr. l. 4. Ep 2. They say they giue the reuerence to God, to whome alone they re∣serue the power of forgiuing sinnes, but none do greater iniury vnto him, then those who will breake his Commandements: for seeing our Lord himselfe in his Ghospel hath sayd, Receyue you the Holy Ghost, whose sinnes you shall rem t they shalbe remitted, who doth more honour him, he who obeyeth his Commandements, or he who resisteth? And to omit the like censure giuen byEp. 1. ad Sympron. Pacianus against Sym∣pronianus the Nouatian, Socrates relateth the Hereticke Acesiu to haue syd, thatHist. tri. part. l. 2. c. 3. Sinners were to be inuited to Pē∣nance, but the hope of remission they were not to haue from Priestes, but from God alone, who hath power to forgiue sinnes: which when he had spoken, the Emperour sayd. O Acesius, set vp a ladder, and if thou canst ascend alone to heauen. Tis History is so true, that it is confessed byCent. 4. p. 119. Chem. Exam part. 1. p. 188. & part. 2. p. 193. Cent. 4. Col. 653. Osiander, Chemnitius, and the Century writers. And M. Dllingham granteth that,Disp. de natura Poe∣nit. p. 12. The Noua∣tians did reserue to God alone, the power of forgiuing sinnes. The
Montanists are also reproued by S.Ep. ad Marcell. Hierome, for de∣nying Confession; as also the Messalians by S.L. de haer. c. 80. Damas∣cene. And as concerning Pennance enioined after Confessi∣on by the Priest, Theodoret reproueth the Heretickes Au∣diani, for that,L. 4 hae∣ret. Fab. de Audianis. They giue remission to such as are Confessed without prescribing tyme for Pennance, as the lawes of the Church command. The Iacobites were condemnd Anno 600. for affirming that,Alphons. de Cast. aduer. haer. l. 4 c. de Confess and the Prot. Au∣thor of Catho∣licke Tradi∣tions. p 126. We are to confesse our sinnes to God onely: and that Confession of sinnes to a Priest is not needfull. So fully o Protestants symbolize with Ancient Heretickes. Protestant Errours. Danaeus affirmeth that,Controu. 4. c. 9. p. 195. Christ the Sonne of Man, & conuersing then vpon Earth, forgaue sinnes, but not as he was man, but as he was true God: euen as in the same diuine nature he wrought miracles, not as he was man. Yea sayth PerkinsIn Gal. 3.5. Christ him∣selfe as he was Man could not worke a miracle. It is no mruayle then if Prot. deny to Priests power to forgiue sinnes, when they deny it to Christ, as man. According to Luther,Ep. ad Senatum Pragensem. Priestes by no right, but damna∣ble abuse, do vse in Confessions and Excommunications the office of byn∣ding and loosing; for all we who are Christians, haue the Common of∣fice of the keyes. And elswere he affirmeth,Art. 13 à Leon. decimo Dam∣nato. that a woman or Child aswell as a Bishop or Pope, may absolue in the Sa∣crament of Pennance: wherin he followeth the Pepuzian Heretickes condemned by S. Augustine,L. de haer. c. 17. for that they gaue to women the Priuiledge to be made Priestes. Bu Lu∣ther proceedeth yet further, directing vs thus,L. de Capt. Babyl. fol. 86. Be now certaine, and let him acknowledge himselfe whosoeuer knoweth him∣selfe to be a Christian that we are all Pristes alike, that is, haue the same power in the word and euery Sacrament. So that euery Shoo∣maker may awell administer any Sacrament, as any Bi∣shop or Priest.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures that Christ gaue to his Apostles, and in them to Bishops and Priestes, true authority to forgiue and retayne sinnes, in the Sacrament of Pen∣nance: And that Confession of sinnes is necessary. CHrist our Sauiour claymed and receyued as being man power and authority to remit sinne here vpon Earth, in so much that when certaine of the Scribes blasphemed against him (as Prot. Ministers do now calumniate Catho∣licke Priestes) saying,Mar. 2.7. who can forgiue sinnes but only God?) he did therfore miraculously cure the man sicke of the Palsy,Mat. 9.6. Mar. 2.10. that they might know, that the Sonne of man hath power in Earth to forgiue sinnes: WheruponMat. 8.9. the multitudes &c. glorifyed God, that gaue such power vnto men. Neither is it probable or any way possible, that he receiued this power only for himselfe, or for his owne aboad here with vs vpon Earth, but to commu∣nicate the same ouer to his Church, to which end he accor∣dingly said to his Apostles,Io. 0.21. As my Father sent me, I also send you. Now, that Priestes haue power from Christ to forgiue sinne, it may be proued from the promise and performance of our Sauiour vnto the Prince of the Apostles S. Peter, that from him it might be deriued to all the rest.Mat. 18.19. I will giue to thee the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt bynd vpon Earth, it shalbe bound also in the heauens; and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose in Earth, it shalbe loosed also in the heauens: the like power also is promised to the rest of the Apostles, euen by our Sauiour himselfe saying,Mat. 18.8. Amen I say to you, whasoeuer you shall bynd vpon Earth shalbe bound also in heauen, and whatsoe∣uer you shall loose vpon Earth shalbe loosed also in heauen. Now that by bynding and loosing is meant forgiuing, and not forgi∣uing of sinnes, it is proued by another place in whic Christ after his Rsurrection repeated againe and confimed the same power, saying vnto them,Io. 20.22.23. Peace be to you, as my Fa∣ther
and an Egge to be an Oyster. A second proofe for this power in Priestes to forgiue sinnes, may be the Common practise of the Church, and Christians in S. Paul his tyme, confessing their sinnes, for it is said,Act. 19.18.19. And many of them that belieued, came confessing and de∣claring their deedes. And many of them that had followed curious things, brought togeather their bookes, and burnt them before all. Here it is euident, that they confessed themselues not only in ge∣nerall to be sinners, but their deeds in speciall, amongst which was their following of curious things, to wit, curious & vnlaw∣full sciences, as witchraft, negromancy, and other meanes of diuination, by soothsaying, figure-casting, interpretation of dreames, and the like, for which cause they burned their bookes of Curiosity, being enioyned so to do by S. Paul, who had heard their Confessions. Neither may it be said, that they confessed some of their mortall sinnes, and not all, for be∣sides that no cause can be assigned, why they should be boūd to confesse some sinnes and not others, whersoeuer the Scripture speaketh absolutely of sinnes, it is, and ought to be vnderstood of all, asDan. 4.24. Redeeme thy sinnes with Almes, that is, All thy sinnes. Againe,Mat. 1.21. He will saue his people from their sinnes: Lastly,Luc. 7.48 Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, and the like, where to vnderstand the word sinnes, of some, and not of all, were absurd. This place is so cleere for Confession of sinnes, that Caluin acknowledgeth, thatIn Act. Apost. c. 19. 18. p. 199. Of their owne accord they Confessed the sinnes of their life past: But as Caluin cannot proue that they confessed their sinnes only of their owne accord; so may euery one iudge that neither they not others, would make Confession of their secret sinnes, if there were not a iust necessity therin, Confession being a thing so con∣trary to mans naturall inclination: Howsoeuer, Caluin heere is inforced to acknowledge, that they confessed the sinnes of their life paste. This Confession in particular was prefigured in the ould Testament: for wheras seuerall Sacrifices were ap∣pointed to be offered for seuerall sinnes, as you shall read in diuers places of Scripture of theLeuit. 4.2.3.5.14. & 6 11.15 & Num. 5 22.23.24.25. old Testament, for which the Priest was appointed to offer and make atto∣nement
Leuit. 4.3.20. & 5.6.13. & 6.7.. This the Priest could not do, vnlesse the par∣ty offending confssed his seuerall sinnes vnto him: Yea it was expresly Commanded,Num. 5. 6 7. That man or woman when they shll do any of all the sinnes, that are went to chance to men, and by negligence haue transgressed the Cōmandement of the Lord, & haue offended, they shall confesse their sinne, & restore the principall it selfe. M. Morton to euade the force of this Argument, allead∣geth Lira as saying,Appeale p. 393. The people of the old Testament did not make Confession to the Priest of their particular sinnes; in proofe wherof he citeth Lyra in Leuit. c. 16. 21. as saying of the people, In veteri lege non omnia explicabant. But this is M. Mor∣tons vonted forgery and abuse of Authors, for Lyra spea∣keth not there, with explicabant, as in the plurall number, or of the peoples owne confessing, but only of the Priest and his generall Confession made to God for the people saying, Confiteatur omnes iniquitates non explicando omnia particulariter: let him confesse all iniquities, not expressing all things particularly: because he could not then haue either tyme to recite the peoples many sinnes, or memory to retaine each mans offen∣ces in particular. Read but Lyra in the place cited, and you will see iust cause euer to looke to M. Mortons fingers. Answerably to this practise of the old Testament it is sayd of S. Iohn Baptist,Mat 3.3.6. Mar. 1.5. then went forth to him Hierusalem and all Iewry, and all the Country about Iordan, and were baptized of him in Iordan confessing their sinnes. For the holy Baptist be∣ing a foreunner of Christ, did prepare the way to Christ & his Sacraments, not only by his Baptisme, but by inducing the people to Confession of their sinnes, which was not to acknowldge themselues in generall to be sinners, but also to vtter in particular euery man his sinnes. Caluin much troubleth himselfe, but cannot auoyde the force of this place in his answere thereto, and thereupon ac∣knowledgeth, thatIn Harm. in Mat. 3.6. p. 52. Before Baptisme Confession of sinnes is required, and that Baptisme ought not to be administred to them of yeares, nisi examine priùs habito, but after examination of Conscence. So confessedly is it, that the Sacrament of Pen∣nance and confession of sinnes, was prefigured in the Old Testament.
Besides these pregnant places of Scripture, reason doth conuince, that no worldly power or Policy of man could haue introduced Confession into the Church, for if Con∣fession had beene mans Inuention, and not the Institution God, then doubtles the same would haue beene earnestly contradicted at the first, seeing thereby euen the greatest Princes and Kings are forced to lay open to Priests their se∣cretest, fowlest, and most enormous sinnes, and to vnder∣goe and performe all such penalty as shalbe by the Priest im∣posed vpon thē for the same, which certainly being a thig so repugant to mans nature, is the heauiest burden in the Catholicke Church. Neyther is it probable, that te Pa∣stours of the Church durst euer haue endeauoured the ena∣cting of so burdēsome a law, or that the people of the world could haue beene persuaded and brought therunto, if this Sacrament of Pennance had not beene istuted by Christ, and put in execution by the Apostles, and the Primitiue Church. Add lastly, that seeing Priests are thus appoined by Christ as Iudges, that therefore particular Confession of sinnes is to be made vnto them: Otherwise their Iudgment would be no other then of a blynd mans, concerning co∣lours, or a deafe mans, touching musicke. SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe of Priests authority to retyne or remit sinne: And for the ne∣cessity of Confession vnto Priests. THe Fathers do most cleerly expound the Scriptures in this behalfe, so S. Autine aduising incontinent persons sayth,L. 50. ho∣miliarum, ho. 40. c. 3. See ho. 12. & 41. If you haue layn with any others besyds your wyues, do pen∣nance such as is done in the Church, that the Church may pray for you. Let no man say to himselfe, I do it secretly, I do it to God, God who pardoneth me, knoweth that I do it in my hart. Therfore withou cause is it sayd,Mat. 18.18. what things you shall loose vpon Earth, shalbe loosed in heauen? Then without cause are the keyes giuen to the Church of God?
we make frustrate the Ghospell of God, we make frustrate the wordes of Christ, we promise to you what he denyeth? Agayne,L. 2. de vi∣sit. imfirm c. 4. See Tract. 49. in loan. c. 11 & ix ps. 101. con. 1. There are some who thinke it sufficeth them to saluation, if they confesse their sinnes to God alone, to whome nothing is hidden &c. for they will not, or are ashamed, or scorne, to shew themselues to Priests, whome yet our Lord appointed by his Law-giuer to discerne between Leaper & Lea∣per. But I would not haue thee deceyued with that opinion, that thou shouldest be confounded to Cofsse before the Vicar of our Lord, lan∣guisng for hame, or stubboe for Anger: for his Iudgement is hum∣bly to be vndergone, whome our Lord doth not disdayne to be his Vicar. Thereore aske the Priest to come vnto thee, and make him wholly par∣taker of thy Conscience. Let not that superstition of dreamers seduce thee, which in visiting auoucheth, that Confession of sinnes to God doth saue, the Priest not consulted withall. But we do not deny, but that Confession of sines is to be often made to God &c. But we witnes, & sound Doctrine doth testify it &c. that first thou needest the wholesome sentence of the Priest, who may be a Mediatour to thy God; otherwise how should the diuine Answere be perfected, both vnder the law, and vndergrace,Leuit. 14. 2. Mat 8.4. Go and shew your selues to the Priests? how should be fulfilled,Iac. 5.16. Confesse your sinnes one to another? Therefore let the Priest be called, in Gods place to Iudge of thy wounds, and make knowne to him thy wayes, and he will giue thee the Preseruatiue of Re∣concilation. As also,In Ioan. Tract. 22. & de vera & falsa Poeni∣tentia. c. 10. Before he confssed he was hidden, but when he confessth he cometh forth out of darknes to light; And when he hath confessed what is sayd to the Ministers? That which was sayd at the Graue of Lazarus. Loose him and let him goe: how? It is sayd to the Apostles the Ministers, whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon Earth, shalbe loosed also in heauen. By which it appeareth, that Saint Austine expounding sundry Texts of Scripture, teacheth Confession to God alone is not sufficient, but that it must be also made to Priestes, to whome God hath giuen power to absolue from sinne. S. Ambrose reporteth the Nouatian Heretickes to say accordingly as Prot. still say,L. 1. de Poenit. c. 2. They reserue the honour to God, to whome only they attribute power of remitting sinne: But none do him greater iniury, then they who &c. dissolue the charge committed, for seeing himselfe sayd &c. whose sinnes you forgiue they are forgi∣uen, who therefore more honoureth him, whether he that obeyeth his
Commandement, or he that resisteth? S. Hierome teacheth that,In Mat. 6.16. The Bishop or Priest according to his office when he hath heard the variety of sinnes, knoweth who is to be bound, and who is to be loo∣sed. S. Chrisostome speaking of the great dignity of Priest∣hood affirmeth, that,L. 3. de Sacerd. who dwell vpon Earth, and are conuer∣sant therein, to them is committed the dispensing of those things which are in heauen: to them is granted that power which God would not giue to Angels or Archangels; for to them it is not said, Whatsoeuer you shall bynd vpon Earth, shalbe bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon Earth, shalbe loosed also in heauen. Earthly Princes haue indeed power of bynding, but the Bodies only; but this binding of Priests which I speake of, toucheth the soule it selfe, and reacheth to the hea∣uens: In so much, that whatsoeuer the Priests do vpon Earth the same God alloweth in heauen. And agayne,Ho. 5. de verbis Isaiae. Vidi Domi∣num To the Priest a Throne is placed in the heauens, and he hath authority to giue sentence of hea∣uenly matters. Who sayth so? The King of heauen himselfe, Whatsoe∣uer you shall bynd vpon Earth, shalbe bound also in heauen, and what∣soeuer you shall loose vpon Earth, shalbe also loosed in heauen. What can be compared with this honour? Or what can be spoken more plainly against Protestants? According to Pacianus,Ep. 1. Neuer would God threaten him that doth not repent, vnles he would pardon the Penitent: Only God (thou sayest) can do this; but what he doth by his Priests, is his po∣wer: for what is that which he sayth to his Apostles whatsoeuer you shal bynd on Earth &c. wherefore this, if it were not lwfull for men to bynd and loose? Was this only lawfull to the Apostles alone? then to them alone is it lawfull to baptize, and to giue the holy Ghst &c. S. Basil belieueth that,In regulis Breuioribus. Interrogt. 88. Sinnes of necessity are to be opened to them, to whome the dispensing of he Mystres of God i committed: for we see these ancient to haue followed this so men Pen∣nance, when it is written euen in the GhospellMat 3.6. that they confessed their sinnes to Iohn, and in the Acts,Act. 19.18. to the Apostles themselues &c. The Fathers Doctrine heerein is so cleere, that the Cn∣turists speaking of those ancientest tymes of Cyprian and Tertullian affirme that,Cent. 3. c. 6. Col. 127. & Cent 4. c. 6. Col. 4.25. They gaue Absolution from sinnes thus, If any did Pennance, they should first confsse their sinne, for so doth Tertullian in his Booke, De Foenitentia, greatly vrge Confession.
And it appeareth by certaine places of Cyprian, that Priuate Confession was vsuall, wherin they Confessed their sinnes and wicked thoughts, as in Ser. 5. de lapsis. & l. 3. Epist. ep. 14. & 16. where he expresly sayth of lesser sinnes also, which are not committed against God, it is need∣full that Confession be made, and this also he often commandeth to be, l. 1. Ep. 3 &c. That Satisfaction also was accustomed to be imposed according to the offence, it appeareth Ser. 5. de lapsis. And wheras M. Morton affirmeth against this Confession of the Centu∣ristes, thatAppeale l. 1. c. 14. p. 254. Cyprian mentioneth not sinnes of thought; this sheweth M. Morton to be either very ignorant, or very false: for if he but read Ser 5. de lapss, he shall fynd him say, But be∣cause they haue but thought herof, let them confesse this sorrowfully and simply to the Priestes of God &c. They disburden their mindes, they seeke for wholome cure, though but for litle and small woundes &c. I beseech you Brethren that euery one Confesse his sinne &c. whiles satis∣faction and remission, made by the Priests, is gratefull with our Lord. M. Morton if he please, may here see that S. Cyprian men∣tioneth euen sinnes in thought: & though he had not, what would this diminish from the forsaid Confession, made by the Centuristes of S. Cyprians cleerest doctrine for Con∣fession. Now as Concerning Pennance & Satisfaction, wher∣as the 4. Carthage Councell decreed, thatCap. 76.78. He who in his sicknes desired Pennance &c. should be reconciled by Imposition of handes &c. If he recouered &c. he should be subiect to the appointed lawes of Pennance, as long as the Priest who gaue him Pennance shall thinke good: this Canon is confessed byCent. 5. l. 1. c. 1. p. 15. Osiander, and approued. The great Pennance and corporall Austerities vsed in ancient tymes, is also acknowledged, and disliked by the Centuristes, who heerin reproueCent. 4. Col. 254 and see Col. 31. the Fathers of the fourth age, and the other ages precedent. Caluin houldethInst. l. 4. c. 11 n. 8. & l 3. c. 4. sect 38. Inexcusable the immoderate Asterity of the Ancient Fathers &c. And,Exam. part. 4 p 68. I am not ignorant, sayth Chemnitius, that the An∣cient do sometymes commend that Canonicall discipline ouer largely, and with oer great wordes. Wherof also saith Melancthon,Lii aliquot. fol. 11. All he Nicene Councell being ouercome with the consent of the mul¦titude and tyme, approued the Canons of Pennance. Whitaker saith
plainly, that,Cont. Camp. rat. 5. p. 78. The Fathers thought by their externall Disci∣pline to pay the paines due for sinne, and to satisfy Gods Iustice. And that,Ibid. Not Cyprian only wrote some things concerning Pennance very incommodiously and foolishly, but almost all the most holy Fathers at that tyme were in that Error &c. So confessed are the Fathers for the Sacrament of Pennance. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach that Priestes haue authori∣ty to retayne, or to forgiue sinnes: and that Confession of sinnes in particular is to be made to Priests: And that Pennance is truly a Sacrament. THough the practise of Pennance be litle pleasing to Prot. yet they spare not to preach and teach the great necessity euen of the Sacrament of Pennance and Confes∣sion. Lobechius Doctour and Professour in the Vniuersity of Rostocke, writeth thus confidently heerof,Disp. Theol. &c. disp. 13. art. 11. p. 295. We defend out of the Scriptures Absolution and Priuate Confession against the Caluinistes. And another saith,Theolog. Christiana Scripturae, Patrum &c. c. de Bap. p. 491. There be some who take away auricular Confession, as not commanded in the Scripture, but neuer∣theles all Godly men, do with Great Luther so greatly magnify it, that they had rather loose certaine millions of worlds, and whatsoeuer, then to take this from the Ministery, which they neither may nor will want. Luther giueth this wholsome counsaile,De prae∣par. ad Mor∣tem. A man being at the point of death, let him call the Priest vnto him, when he may con∣fesse all his sinnes. If the Priest absolue me, I rest with his Absolution, as the words of God, and vpon this I dye: for thou ought as firmely to be∣lieue the Absolution of the Priest, as if God should send vnto thee a spe∣ciall Angell, or Apostle, yea as if Christ himselfe shall absolue. In like manner other Prot. affirme,Anti∣christus fiue Prognost. fin. Mund. p. 140.141. Confession and Priuate Absolution to be necessary. In reguard wherof others of their Brethren name themIbid. Nostri noui Papa, Our new Po∣pes. But some proceed so far herin, that they reproueHeisbru∣nerus l. Schwenck∣feldio. Calui∣nismus. p. 55. Lobech. Disp. Theol. p. 295. 301. A liba∣merus in Concil. loc. Script. pug. . 4. fol. 218. the Caluinistes for contemning priuate Absolution, and belieuing that the Minister of the Church cannot forgiue sinnes, but only God.
Caluin expounding those words of the Apostle,2. Cor. 5.20. We are Legates for Christ, acknowledgeth, that theInst l. 4. c. 1. §. 22. Embassage of Reconciliation is left with the Ministers of the Church. And a litle before, when Christ gaue to his Apostles command and power of for∣giuing sinnes he did not only meane, that they should loose those from sinnes, who should be conuerted from Impiety to the faith of Christ; but rather that they should continually vse this function among the faith∣full. And more particularly concerning Confession he sayth,Instit. l. 4. c. 19. §. 14. I thinke that old obseruation wherof Cyprian maketh mention, to haue bene holy and profitable to the Church, and I should desire, that it were at this day restored. This later though I dare not disproue it, or at least more sharply impugne, yet I thinke it lesse necessary. And ha∣uing said, and confirmed from the Testimony of S. Iames, that,Inst. l. . c. 4. §. 2. The Scripture doth approue that forme of priuate Confes∣son, thatIac. 5.10. we confesse our sinnes one to another, he giueth this his Interpretation therof: Although Iames by naming none into whose bosome we should diburden our selues, permitteth vs free choice to confesse to him who of the flocke of the Church seemeth most fit; yet because Pastours for the most part, are to be thought more fit then others, they are therfore chiefly to be chosen by vs. And a litle af∣ter, Therfore let euery one of the faithfull remember, that it is his duty, if he be so priuatly vexed and afflicted with the feeling of his sinnes, that he cannot free himselfe, but by the help of another, not to neglect the remedy which is offered him by our Lord, to wit, that for his help he vse priuate Confession with his Pastour. Againe,§. 13. That the sheep present themselues to the Pastour so often as they com∣municate, I am so farre from gaynsaying, that I greatly wish it were e∣uery where obserued. As also,Inst. l. 3. c. 4. §. 17.18. Thou wilt say, what then, is not euery sinne to be confessed? Then no Confession is acceptable to God, but that which is included in these words, Peccator sum, I am a sin∣ner? But truly we are rather to vse diligence, that as much as is in vs, we powre out our whole hart before the Lord; Neyther let vs only in one word confesse our selues to be sinners, but as such, let vs truly and from our hart acknowledge our selues. Let vs remember withall our thoughts, how great and diuerse are the spots of sinnes; not only that we are vncleane, but of what sort, how great, and in how many parts our impurity is; not only that we are debtors but with how great debts we are burdened, and by how many names we are bound; not only
whereby is promised sinne to be forgiuen, the key absoluing. And the same is acknowledged by theCent. 1. l. 1. c. 4. Col. 53. Centuristes. Husse affirmeth that,Tract. de Penit. There are three parts of perfect Pennance, to wit, Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction. AgaineIbid. The second part of Pennance is Confession, which is a recounting of sinnes before God and the Priest, which ought to be playne and eu∣tyre: Plaine, that the Priest may vnderstand: entyre, lest he that con∣fesseth wittingly hyde any sinne, for he that hydeth his sinnes shall not be directed &c. Rokzana sayth,De Sa∣cram. c. 17. The second part of Pennance is Confession it selfe, which is made to Priestes, and vnles this Confes∣sion should haue Efficacy, is should seeme that Christ had superfluously giuen the power of the Keyes to the Apostles and Priests succeeding. And the same is taught by theIn Con∣fess. fidei exhi∣bita Anno 1508. Waldenses. Perkins speaking of Confession granteth, that the want thereof,Vol. 3. p. 446. Is a great fault in our Churches. A speach most true, seeing the want thereof causeth amongst all Protestants a generall inūdation of enormous sinnes. But by the premises all men may see that all sorts of Protestants, Hussites, Luthe∣ranes & Caluinistes, do acknowledge and teach the Sa∣crament of Pennance, and Confession of sinnes. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture agaynst the power giuen by Christ to Priests for the remitting of sinnes, answered. IT is ordinarily obiected by Protestantes now, as former∣ly it was by the Scribes against Christ, sayingMar. 2.7. Esa. 43.25. & 44.42. Ier. 32.34. Who can forgiue sinnes but only God? But in best answere herto S. Ma∣thew reporteth Christ himselfe to say:Mat. 9.6. Mar. 2.10. That you may know that the Sonne of Man hath power in Earth to forgiue sinnes, then said he to the sicke of the palsey; Aryse, take vp thy bed, and goe into thy house. And he arose, and went into his house. And the multitudes seeing it &c. glorifyed God that gaue such power to men: Yet in more Ex∣planation herof, it is to be obserued, that sundry things are attributed to God as proper to him, which are neuertheles in a secondary respect communicated also to creatures; so it
is said,Luc. 18.19. Mat. 19.16. None is good but only God; Yet our Sauiour as being Man was good, and so also areLuc. 6.45. Mat. 7.18. others. GodPs. 72.18. & 136.4. only doth miracles, and yet also MoysesDeut. 34.11 12. did Miracles, and so like∣wise areEccl. 48.4.14 Io. 14.12. Mat. 7.22. others said to do them; the very powerMat. 10.1. of hea∣ling euery sicknes, and casting forth of vncleane Spirites be∣ing in expresse termes giuen to his twelue Disciples, and therby so truly in them, that S. Peter said to the lame man,Act. 3.6. That which I haue, the same I giue to thee, In the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, Aryse and walke &c. And he went walking and leaping, and praysing God. In like sort it is sayd, that,3. Reg. 8.39. God only knoweth the harts of men, yet4. Reg. 5.26. others also knew the se∣crets of the hart. Lastly, D. Whiteguift doth proue, & ex∣plaine, how thatDefence. p. 300. Names proper to God may in some respect be attributed to others, for as he teacheth, they belong to God pro∣perly, and to man but in respect he is the Minister of God, and so God only by his proper power and authority forgiueth sin∣nes, and yet also men do actually and truly, yet ministerial∣ly forgiue sinnes, for to them is2. Cor. 5.18. giuen The Ministery of Reconciliation. This Obiection is of so small force, that it is an∣swered according to the Premisses by the ProtestantDisp. Theol. p. 301. Altham. in Conciliat. locor. &c. loc. 194. fol. 218. Hailbr. in Suenck∣feldio-Caluin. p 55. Lobechius, who repeating the same sayth, Only God can ab∣solue from sinne, but s, that he doth this somtymes immediatly (or by himselfe) & sometymes mediatly, by his Ministers, pardoning our fault &c. The Caluinists therefore erre, who &c. take away that efficacy from the Absolution of the Minister of the word &c. contending that the Minister doth absolue only as a Messenger. And the like is answe∣red by Althamerus and Hailbrunerus: and Sarcerius auou∣cheth thatLoc. com. de Con∣fess fol. 28. It is false, that Confession which is made to God, doth take away priuate Confession. So impertinent and weake is this so often repeated Obiection, being cleered by other most plaine Scriptures, and reiected by Protestant writers.
CHAP. XXV. The true State of the Question, concerning punish∣ment to be suffered after Remission of the fault. Whether the fault of Sinne, being pardoned by the Sacra∣crament of Pennance, the punishment due to sinne, is also alwayes pardoned therewith: or whether the sayd punishment is not afterwards to be payd, or satisfyed by Prayer, Fasting, and Almes, and the paines in Pur∣gatory? SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE liberty of the new Ghospell ex∣tending it selfe so farre as to the taking a∣way of all punishment after the forgiue∣nes of the fault: in condemnation there∣of the Catholicke Church teacheth, that In theConc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap. 14. Pennance of a Christian, there is not only contayned cessation from sinnes, and detesta∣tion of them &c. but also Sacramentall Confession &c. and Priestly Absolution; as also Satisfaction by Fasting, Almes, Prayer, and other pious Exercises of spirituall lyfe, not for the Eternall payne which to∣geather
with the fault is remitted by the Sacrament, or the desire ther∣of, but for the temporall punishment, which as the Scriptures teach, is not alwaies wholly forgiuen them, as it is in Baptisme &c. And ther∣fore she further Decreeth, that,Sess. 6. Can. 30. If any shall say, that after the Grace of Iustification receiued, the fault and guilt of eternall pu∣nishment is so remitted to euery Penitent sinner, that no guilt of tem∣porall punishment remayneth to be paid either in this world, or in the next in Purgatory before he can come to Heauen, Anathema. In the Councell Senonense it is decreed, that,Decret. 12. The fault by Pennance taken away, there doth often remayne the guilt of temporall punishment, as certaine relickes of sinnes remayning, which are to be purged by fruites worthy of Pennance; so that the iniquity and fault of sinne forgiuen, the sinner yet remayneth subiect to tempo∣rall punishment. Agreably to these Councels,Bellar. de Poenitent. l. 4. c. 2. 3. Rhem. Test. in Hebr. 12.6. Catholickes with one consent teach, that after the remission of the fault, there of∣ten remaineth the guilt of temporall punishment to be paid: And that the same may be satisfyed by the good works of Prayer, Fasting, Almes, and the like. Pointes Disputable. SomeTapperue in art. 6. Lo∣uan. teach that the temporall punishment so re∣mayning is the selfesame in kind with that which should haue bene paid in hell, and so is to be paid in Purgatory, if it be not redeemed in this life.See Va∣lent. Tom. 2. Disp. 6. Quaest. 17. Punct. 5. Others thinke it a paine of a different kind, which also may be paid in this life, according to the order prescribed, and appointed by Gods Proui∣dence. SomePalud. in 4 Dist. 15 q. 1 Conc. 7. Ca∣preol. ead. Dist. Sylue∣ster verbo, Satisfactio. thinke, that satisfaction done by a man that is not in state of grace, if the satisfaction be such as leaueth any effect behind it, as Almes, Fasting, and the like, that then it beginneth to be of force, when a man returneth to the grace of God. OthersCaiet. q. 2. de satisfact. thinke, that when satisfaction is imposed by a Priest by vertue of the keies, that then it reui∣ueth, when the Penitent recouereth grace. ButArian in 4. q. 1. de satisfact. So∣tus Dist. 19. q. 1. art. 5. others more probably teach, that, Satisfaction done in the state of sinne, doth neuer after reuiue, or be of force, whether the sa∣tisfaction
be imposed by a Priest, or leaue any effect be∣hynd it. SomeS. Tho. Durand Pa∣lud. in 4. Dist. 15. teach, that Satisfaction is not duly made by workes otherwise due: ButAdrian tract. de Poe∣nit. Caiet. q. 1. de satisfact. others not improbably thinke the contrary. SomeScotus, Gabriel. thinke, that the Penitent is not bound vnder sinne to accept the Pennance imposed by the Priest: but the commonS. Thom. and most others. opinion is to the con∣trary. Protestants Vntruthes. Protestants pretend that our Catholicke Doctrine of Satisfaction is neither taught by the Scriptures, nor the An∣cient Fathers. Luther saith,In As∣sert. Art. 5. Wherfore I said true, that this Arbitrary Satisfaction is neither found in Scriptures or Fathers &c. Melancthon following Luther affirmeth,Apol. Confess. Au∣gust. Art. de Confess. & Sa∣tisfact. That all this of Satisfaction is false, and lately faigned without authority of Scri∣ture, and Ancient Ecclesiasticall writers: And not Longobarde doth speake thus of Satisfaction &c. But that both Scriptures and Fa∣thers do teach our Doctrine of Satisfaction, the two next Sections will aboundantly proue. And as for Longobarde, Melancthon doth so fowly belye him, as that he hauing proued from Scriptures and Fathers Satisfaction, he con∣cludeth thus,Lib. 4. Sentent. di∣stinct. 16. To do Pennance it sufficeth not, to amend our manners, and to depart from euill deeds, vnles for these which are done, God be satisfyed by the sorrow of Pennance, by the groanes of humility, by the Sacrifice of a contrite hart, Almes working therwith. And this saying Longobard tooke fromLib. 50. homil. ho. 50. c. 15. S. Austine: so that we haue both Longobard and S. Austine for Satisfa∣ction to God. And by this may also Caluin be confuted, who affirmeth, that,Instit. l. 3. c. 4. What Catholicke writers bring from the Fathers for Satisfaction, is for the most part Canons, out of the absurd fooleries of Monkes. Melancthon also auoucheth that Catholickes,In loc. com. tit de satisfact. do obscure the Ghospell, beause they faigne eter∣nall Death to be abolished by our Compensation: yea the vnlearned do easily transferre Satisfactions also to the Remission of the fault. But this is so false, that this forgetfull lyar doth confute it him∣selfe in the same place saying, The Monkes (meaning Catho∣licke
writers) here defyne Satisfaction to be workes not due, wher∣with they will haue the paines of Purgatory to be redeemed, or cer∣tainly some other temporall punishments, for so they teach: God seeing he is mercifull doth remit the fault: but seeing he is Iust and a Re∣uenger, doth change the paine Eternall, into the temporall of Purgato∣ry: Then they adde, part of these punishments to be remitted by the Power of the keyes; Part to be redeemed with Satisfactions. So that according to our Doctrine, Eternall punishment is remit∣ted by Christes mercy and merits, and the temporall, by our Satisfactions, which also haue their vertue and value by the Grace of Christ, and his mercy and merites. Protestant Doctrine. The Protestant Church is in so great dislike of Satis∣faction and doing of Pennance, as that the very name therof is hatefull vnto them. Luther saith,In as∣sert. art. 5. I do much hate, and would haue the word Satisfaction taken away, which not only is not found in the Scriptures, but hath a daungerous sense, as though man could satisfy God for any sinne, when he forgiueth all gratis. The Pa∣pistes, saithInstit. l. 3. c. 4. §. 15. Caluin, assigne the third place of satisfaction in Pennance, wherof whatsoeuer they bable may in one word be ouer∣throwne. They say, it sufficeth not a Penitent man to abstaine from sinnes past, vnles he satisfy God for them which are committed: and that there are many helpes wherby thou mayest redeeme sinnes, as teares, fasting, workes of Charity &c. To such lyes, I oppose the free remission of sinnes, then which nothing is preached more cleere in the Scriptures. Beza,In Mat. 6.12. The opinion of the Sophisters thinking sinne to be forgiuen, the paine reserued, is not only false, but idle and foolish. And the same is taught by many other Protestantes. Protestant Errours. Bullinger,De Iu∣stif. serm. 6. fol. 17. What had Christ bestowed vpon vs, if (tempo∣rall) punishment should be yet exacted for our sinnes? as though Remission of the fault, & of the eternall punishment were not great benefites bestowed by Christ.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that temporall punishment often remayneth to be paid after the fault is remitted: And that the said Punishment may be taken away by the good workes of Prayer, Fasting, Almes, and the lyke. THe Scriptures do afford vs seuerall Examples, where death it selfe hath bene inflicted vpon sinners for pu∣nishment of their sinnes; the fault being pardoned: so to A∣dam God said,Gen. 3.17.19. Because thou &c. hast eaten of the tree wherof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eate, cursed is the Earth in thy worke; with much toyling shalt thou eate therof all the dayes of thy life &c. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eate thy bread, till thou re∣turne to earth: wherof saith S. Paul,Rom. 5.2. As by one man sinne en∣tred into this world, and by sinne death, and so vnto all men death did passe, in which all sinned. Here Prot. do not deny that Death is a Punishment of originall Sinne, and yet many dye to whom Originall Sinne is forgiuen; wherfore punishment remai∣neth after the fault is remitted. Some reply, that death is in∣flicted not for punishment, but for the Exercise of vertue. But this is cleerly false in Infantes, that dye presently after Baptisme, to whom Originall sinne is forgiuen, and yet by reason of their Infancy, they cannot practise any vertues, and yet in punishment of sinne they are taken away before they come to yeares of Discretion. And not only death, but also sicknes and paines Children often endure, which are al∣so punishmentes of Originall sinne, which can nothing profit them to preuent sinnes to come, or for the Exercise of vertue. When the Children of Israel had sinned, and Moy∣ses prayed for them, wherupon our Lord said,Numer. 14.20.22. I haue for∣giuen it according to thy word; yet he addeth withall their tem∣porall Punishment, saying, But yet all the men that &c. haue tempted me &c. neither haue obeyed my voyce, they shall not see the land for the which I sware to their Fathers: butVer. 32.33.34. your Carcasses
shall lye in the wildernes: Your Children shall wander in the Desart 40. yeares, and shall beare your fornications &c. 40. yeares, you shall receyue your iniquities, and shall know my reuenge. Againe, al∣though at their first passage out of Aegipt they committed horribleExod. 3.1.4.8. Idolatry, and were pardonedExod. 32.11.14. therof at the Instance of Moyses, their Punishment yet of the said sinne is signifyed in these worde:Ver. 34.35. I in the day of reuenge will vi∣sit this sinne also of theirs: our Lord therfore smote the people for the fault concerning the Calfe: So likewiseDeut. 32.51.52. Num. 20 24. Moyses and Aaron, though their incredulity was pardoned, yet were they af∣terwards punished with death before the Israelites entrance into the land of Promise. Here the sinnes are said to be for∣giuen, and yet the Sinners after punished for the same. Though Dauid so repented him2 Reg. 12.13.14. of his Adultery & mur∣der, that the Prophet said to him, Our Lord hath taken away thy sinne: but yet it was added, Neuertheles because thou hast made the Enemyes of our Lord to blaspheme, for this thing the Sonne that is borne to thee, dying shall dye. And though Dauids2. Reg. 24.10.12.13. 1. Paral. 22.8.10.12. hart stroke him after the people was numbred; and Dauid said to our Lord, I haue sinned very much in this fact, but I pray thee Lord transferre the ini∣quity of thy Seruant: yet for punishment he was to make choyce of famine, warre, or Pestilence. Add yet hereunto that the same K. Dauid expresseth this answerable con∣course of Gods Iustice and mercy in pardoning, and withall punishing the sinnes of the Elect, saying,Ps. 88.37.33.34. If they shall prophane my Iustices, and not keep my Commandements: I will visit their iniquities with a rod, and their sinnes with stripes; But my mercy I will not take away from him. Caluin and Fulke answere to the forsaid Examples of Gods punishments, that,Inst. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 31. 35. Fulke ag. Pugat. p. 41. 49 God did them not to reuenge or pu∣nish, but rather to teach and admonish vs to be more wary afterwards, in auoyding sinne to come. But this Euasion is idle, for first in the Example of Adams punishment by Corporall death, the same was inflicted vpon him, not only for his admoni∣tion against sinne to come (for how could the Admonition against sinne to come take place with him after his death?) but as punishment before hand appointed in penaltie of his offence afterwards cōmitted, accordingly as it was said,Gen. 2.17.
In what day soeuer thou shalt eate of it, thou shalt dye the death. And,Gen. 3.17. because thou hast eaten of the tree, cursed is the Earth for thy sake. In the Example likewise of Dauid, his punishment is said to be, Because thou hast made the Enemies of our Lord to blas∣pheme, for this thing thy sonne shall dye. Also, the Israelites pu∣nishment was first conceiued inEx. 32.10.12. fury and anger and their sinne threatned to be afterwards.Ex. 32.34. Visited in the day of re∣uenge &c. for the fault concerning the Calfe which Aaron had made. Lastly Moyses and Aaron who both dyed in Gods fauour, for their Incredulity being punished by death, and so pre∣uented for entring the land of Promise, could not haue this Punishment for any Admonition after their death, but it was done in Iustice and Iudgment, as the Prophet expres∣seth saying,Ps. 98.8. God thou wast propitious to them, and taking ven∣geance vpon all their Inuentions. S. Paul speaking of the Incestuous Corinthian,1. Cor. 5.3. appointeth to deliuer such an one to Sathan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saued in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ. These wordes cannot be referred to remission of the fault, but to some temporall punishment, to be paid, the fault re∣mitted; for not by death but by Pennance we obtaine par∣don of our deadly sinnes: Also in that he further sayth,2. Cor. 2.10. Whom you haue pardoned any thing, I also, for my selfe also that which I pardoned, if I pardoned any thing for you in the person of Christ: these words cannot concerne the remission of the fault, seeing that was pardoned2. Cor. 2.7. before by his great sor∣row; but only of the temporall punishment which was im∣posed in the name of Christ. This truthIn 2. Cor. 2. Caluin dareth not deny, norBeda Ib. Beza, who confesseth that the pardon of this rigour, was afterwards called Indulgence. Now, that this punishment may be taken away by workes of Satisfaction and Pennance, it appeareth cleerly by sundry Textes of Scripture; as where it is said,Dan. 4.24. Re∣deeme thy sinnes with Almes, and thine Iniquities with the mercies of the poore.Prou. 26.6. By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed. Here the word Redeeme, is certainly equiualent to satisfy; and Re∣demption doth as much belong to Iustice as Satisfaction: wherfore if it were vntrue or absurd to say, we satisfy by
workes, then the like were to be said of Redeeming by workes. And doubtles all Prot. would take it more hainou∣sly to haue men called in any sense Redeemers, then Satisfiers; Wherfore seeing the Scriptures affirme that sinnes are redee∣med by workes, in the like sense we may say, that they are satisfied by workes. Neither will it auayle to say with Caluin,Instit. l. 3 c. 4. §. 30. that this Redemption was of the debt due to men, as to restore what he had vniustly taken away: for it is cleere by the text, that the chiefe sinne for the which he was to be puni∣shed, was pryde, for hauing said,Dan. 4.27. Is not this Babylon the great City which I haue built to be the house of the kingdome in the strength of my power, and in the glory of my beauty? Immediatly it followeth, And when the word was yet in the kings mouth, a voyce came downe from heauen &c. Thy kingdome shall passe from thee, and from men they shall cast thee out &c. till thou know, that the High one ruleth in the kingdome of men, and to whomsoeuer he will, he giueth it. And so accordingly when he was restored to his senses, heDan. 4.31. presently praised and glorifyed God. Besides though the king sinned in Iniustice towards men, yet certainly he had many other sinnes, all which Daniel aduised him to re∣deeme with Almes, according to that elswhere,Tob. 4.11. Almes deliuereth from all Sinne and from Death. And,Luc. 11.41. giue Almes, and behould all things are cleane vnto you. This place of Daniel is so cleere, that Prot: for their last shift corrupt the Text, translating it thus,Engl. Bib. of 1578. Breake of thy sinnes by righteousnes, wheras the Greeke hath most literally, , redeeme with Almes: And the Chal∣dee, as Munster confesseth, signifyeth rather and more prin∣cipally to redeeme: And lastly, that which they translate righteousnes, in the Scriptures signifyeth also Almes, as the Greeke Interpreters translate it, and is most plaine, where our Sauiour saith,Mat. 6.1 Beware you do not your Iustice before men, which is in other Greeke Copies , almes: Yea Beza himselfe teacheth, that,Annot. in Mat. 6.1. by the name of Iustice with the Hebrewes, is also signifyed beneficence, or beneficialnes to the poore: and that in this place of Daniel it is specially taken for Almes.
God himselfe speaking of a perfect clensing from all sinne saith,Isa 1.16.17.18. Wash you, be cleane, take away the euill of your cogitations from myne eyes, cease to do peruersly, learne to do good, seeke Iudgment, succour the oppressed, iudge for the Pupill, defend the widdow; And come and accuse me, saith our Lord, If your sinnes shal∣be as scarlet, they shalbe made whyte as snow; and if they be red as ver∣milion, they shalbe white as wool. Here this full remission is not graunted to those that only repent and belieue, but withall they must exercise themselues in many good workes. Lastly all such textes as teach, that the workes of the iust are meritorious of life euerlasting do confirme this truth, for if they haue that Efficacy truly and properly to merit life E∣ternall, it cannot be denied but that they are also Efficacious to satisfy for temporall punishment. Glory eternall being a farre greater matter then the remission of temporall punish∣ment. But of this I shall hereafter haue occasion to speake more at large. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of Punishment remaining after the fault pardoned: And that the said Punishment is paid by workes of Pen∣nance. THe forsaid Scriptures are answerably expounded by the Ancient Fathers: so Blessed Dauid (saith S. Cyril)Catech. 2. Hilar. in ps. 118. forbeared not from Pennance although he had heard that our Lord had transferred his sinne: but insteed of Purple he vsed Sackcloth, and in place of a golden throne, the king sate vpon the Earth, and in ashes: neither did he only sit in ashes but also did eate them, euen as himselfe saith, I did eate ashes as bread: he reuenged with teares his coueting eye, saying, I will euery night wash my bd and I will water my Couch with teares: when the Princes intreated him to eate bread, he would not be persuaded, and continued his fst, euen vntill the seauenth day. S. Chrisostome expounding S. Paul, saith,Ho. 42. in Math. Hearken to
Paul saying, If we would iudge our selues we should not be iudged. But thou wilt say, how may I exact account and punishment of my selfe? powre out great floods of teares, afflict thy selfe with labours & watchings, remember thy sinnes of all kinds. The wounds, saithEpitome diuin. Decr. c. de Poeni∣tentia. Theodoret) which are made after Baptisme, are curable; but curable, not pardon giuen by only faith, but by many teares, weeping, sorrow, fasting, prayer, and labour answerable to the greatnesse of the sinne committed. S. Hierome teacheth that,Ep. 30. ad Ocean. c. 2. Peter blotted out his three∣fold denyall, by his threefold Confession. Aarons Sacriledge &c. his Brothers prayers corrected. Seauen dayes hunger amended Dauids &c. murder and Adultery; he lay vpon the Earth, he was rolled in Ashes, and forgetfull of his kingly power he sought light in darknes, and loo∣king only vpon him whom he had offended, with a crying voyce he said, To thee only haue I sinned. But none is more full herin then S. Austine,Ho. vlt. inter 50. bo. c. 5. It is not sufficient to amend your manners, and to giue ouer euill deeds, vnles for these which are done God be satisfyed by the griefe of Pennance, by the groning of humility, by the Sacrifice of a Contrite hart, Almes coo∣perating. For blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy. It is not said, that yee only abstaine from sinnes, but forEccles. 21.1. the sinnes past pray our Lord that they may be forgiuen thee. Againe,Ad ps. 50. aske mercy, but attend iustice: mercy is, that he pardon a sinner, Iustice is, that he punish sinne. What then? thou seekest mercy, will thy sinne remaine vn∣punished? Let Dauid answere, let those which are fallen answere, let them answere with Dauid, that they may deserue mercy as Dauid, and let them say, my sinne, O Lord shall not be vnpunished, I haue knowne his iustice whose mercy I seeke, it shall not be vnpunished: but therfore I wil not that thou punish me, because I punish my sinne. With S. Austine agreeth S. Gregory saying,Mor. l. 9. c. 17. Our Lord doth not spare the sinner, because he leaueth not the sinne without reuenge; for either the man penitent punisheth it in himselfe, or God re∣uenging it with man stryketh &c. So Dauid after his Confession deser∣ued to heare, Our Lord hath transferred thy sinne, and yet afflicted af∣terwardes with many punishmentes, and flying, he paid the guilt of fault which he had committed. God endeauoureth with temporall af∣fliction to wype from his Elect the spots of their sinnes, which he will not reuenge in them for euer. According to S. Cyprian,Serm de opere & ∣leemos. the
holy Ghost speaketh in the Scriptures and saith, with Almes and faith sinnes are purged, not those sinnes which were contracted before (Bap∣tisme) for those are purged by the Bloud and Satisfaction of Christ. But the Fathers are so cleere for Satisfaction and Pen∣nance, as D. Whitaker affirmeth, that theyCont. Camp. rat. 5. p. 78. Thought by their externall Discipline of lyfe to pay the paines due for sinnes, and to satisfy Gods Iustice. And that,Ibid. rat. 5. p. 78. Not Cyprian only, but al∣most all the most holy Fathers of that tyme were in that Errour. The Cenuristes speaking of the third Age, relate that,Cent. 3. Col. 1.7. Of those who so confessed litle sinnes, their lyfe also was looked into, and iudged, whether they had done iust Pennance, as it appeareth in the third Booke and 16. Epist. of Cyprian: that also accustomed Pen∣nance was imposed vpon them according to their fault, is to be seene in his 5. Sermon de lapsis. Tertullian also mentioneth the same in his Booke de Poenitentia. And,Ibid. Col. 81. Most of the writers of this age did strangly depraue the Doctrine of Pennance. Caluin also doth so much dislike the Fathers Doctrine of Satisfaction, as that he writeth thus,Inst. l. 3. c. 4. §. 38. Chemnit. in Exam. part. 2. p. 1082. & p. 306. Litle do those thinges moue me, which euery where occurre in the writings of the Ancient concerning Satisfaction: I see some of them, I will speake simply, Almost all whose Bookes are ex∣tant, either to haue erred in this, or to haue spoken ouer sharply and seuerely. So Confessed it is, that the Ancient Fathers taught our Doctrine of Satisfaction and Pennance. SECT. IV. That Protestantes do agree with Catholickes, in teaching that Punishment often remayneth to be paid for sinne, the fault being remitted: and that the same punishment may be satisfyed by good workes. THe great Deuine of Scotland Iohn Knox cōtesteth, & collecteth from the forsaid Scriptures, that the sinnes of such as are Elect, and therfore freed from Hell punishment, are neuertheles yet temporally punished, and that not for Admonition only against sinne to come, but in Gods Iu∣stice and hatred to the said sinnes already past: to this end he
saith,Answ. against the Aduersaries of Gods Predest. p. 215. We protest and acknowledge, that sinne is so odious to God, that he neuer suffereth the same vnpunished, in any of his Elect Chil∣dren. And,Ib. p. 216. we preach, wryte and maintayne, that sinne was so odious before God, that his Iustice could do no other, but inflict vpon Adam and his Posterity the penalty of Corporall Death, the punishments and plagues, which daily do apprehend Gods Children: that vpon Dauid he did execute his iust Iudgement, which in these wordes he pronoun∣ced, Now therfore the sword shall neuer depart from thy house; with sundry other Scriptures by him alleadged to the same ef∣fect. And yet it is certaine, that the fault of Adam, and Da∣uids sinnes were forgiuen them. Gaspar Oleuianus affirmeth that,In symbo∣lum Apost. p. 8. God is so iust, and sinne so great an euill, that he doth not then approue sinnes when he hath pardoned them, and that he may show this, he also after the re∣mission in those that are conuerted, punisheth them with most sharpe whippes, as in Dauid &c. MelancthonActa Colloq. Re∣genspurg. p. 111. in the name of all the Protestantes,Ib. p 82. who stood to the Confession of Auspurg, teacheth that,Ib. p. 130. The offences of the conuerted persons are punished with cer∣taine peculiar paines, as was Dauids Adultery: and that these paines areIb. p. 133. And see Me∣lancth. loc. com. de bonis oper. p. 158. In Concil. Theol. p. 547. And loc. com. de Satisfac. p. 241. mitigated through good workes. Sarcerius teacheth not onlyLoc. com. Tom, de Poenit. fol. 276. temporall paines, but also the mitigation of them by good workes. And here withall a∣greeth the Confession of Auspurg teaching that,Harm. of Confess. p. 219. Sinnes are punished euen by Temporall punishment in this lyfe, as Dauid, Ma∣nasses, and many others were punished: and we teach that these punish∣mentes may be mitigated by good workes, and the whole practise of Repentance, as Paul declareth, If we would Iudge our selues, we should not be Iudged of the Lord. And repentance deserued (that is obtained) that God should alter his purpose touching the Destruction of Niniue. And,Ib. p. 124. We are of that mynd, that the calamities of this lyfe may be asswaged by good workes, as Esay teacheth, Chap. 58, Breake thy bread vnto the hungry, and the Lord shall giue thee rest continually. The Confession of Saxony doth distinguish betweneHarm. of Confess. p. 235. eternall Punishment, and the Punishment of this lyfe: affirming further that, The temporall punishmentes are mitigated euen for the very Conuersions sake. Of the like Iudgment also is PeterCom. plac. in Eng. part. 3. c. 4. p. 114. Martyr. And the Confession of Wittemberg doth vpon this ground acknowledge,Harm. of that the Saintes haue
CHAP. XXVI. The true State of the Question, concerning Indulgences. Whether the Church of Christ hath Authority to graunt Indulgences or Pardons for the temporall punishment due to Sinnne, the fault being formerly pardoned by the Sacrament of Pennance. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. PROTESTANTS denying any punishment to remayne the fault being pardoned, do consequently affirme all Indulgences to be superfluous: as also that the Church hath no authority to grant them: But in Confutation heerof the Church hath Decreed, that,Concil. Trid. Sess. 25. Decret. de Indulgentijs. Seeing the power of giuing Indulgences is granted by Christ to the Church; and this power giuen her by God she hath vsed in most Ancient tymes; The Sacred Synod teacheth and commandeth that the vse of Indulgen∣ces most profitable to Christian people, and approued by the authority of holy Councels, be euer kept in the Church: And it accurseth them who eyther affirme, that they are vnprofitable, or deny that in the Church
there is power to grant them. Yet in the granting of them, it desireth moderation to be vsed according to the Ancient and allowed Custome in the Church; lest by ouermuch facility Ecclesiasticall Discipline be weakened. And desiring that the abuses which haue crept in them, and by occasion whereof this worthy name of Indulgences by heretikes is blasphemed, may be amended and corrected; by this present Decree it generally desieth, that all wicked gaines for the obtayning of them, from whence much cause of abuses in Christian people hath flowed, be vtterly abolished. And the rest which haue come by superstition, ignorāce, irreuerence, or otherwise howsoeuer, seeing for the manifold corrup∣tions of the places and Prouinces where these are committed, they fitly cannot be particularly prohibited, it commandeth all Bishops that eue∣ry one diligently gather the abuses of his Church, and that he make them knowne in the first Prouinciall Councell: that being tryed also by the udgment of the other Bishopt, they may forthwith be made known to the B. of Rome, by whose authority and wisdome that may be ordai∣ned, which wilbe expedient for the vniuersall Church: that so the be∣nefite of holy Indulgences may piously, godly, & purely be bestowed vpon all the faythfull. It was ordayned in the Councell of Arles:Conc. 2. Arelat. cap 10. Of those who haue transgressed in persecution, if they haue voluntarily denyed their fayth, the Nicene Councell hath Decreed this of them, that they shall spend 5. yeares among the Catechumens, and 2. amongst those that do Communicate &c. yet it shalbe in the power and liberty of the Bishop, that if he see them bewayle their errour from their hart, & do Pennance, by Ecclesiastcall fauour he may receyue them to Commu∣nion. In the fourth Laterane Councel it is graunted, that,Conc. 4. Lateran. Cap. 3. Catholikes &c. who shall prepare themselues for the banishment of Heretickes, shall enioy that Indulgence &c. which is granted to them that go to the ayde of the holy land, which is a Plenary. And it is eui∣dent, that Indulgences haue bene actually giuen by seuerall GenerallConc. Claramont. teste S. An∣ton. 1. part. Hist. tit. 16. c. 1. Conc. La∣teran. Con∣stantiense. Trident. Councels. AndBellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 1. &c. Rhem. Test. in 2. Cor. 2.10. Catholickes now belieue that to remit the temporall Punishment or chasticement due to sinners after the offence it selfe and the guilt therof be for∣giuen of God, is an Indulgence or Pardon: And that God hath giuen to the Pastours of the Church power and autho∣rity to giue the same.
Pointes Disputable. SomeDurand. in 4. Dist. 20. q. 3. Palud in. Ib. q. 4. An∣tonin. in. 1. par. Sum. tit. 10. c. 3. Catholicke writers teach, that Indulgences are only a payment or recompence of punishment taken out of the treasure of the merits of Christ, and his Saints, and applied by authority of the Pope.Dom. Soto in 4. Dist. 21. q. 1. art. 2. Bona∣uent. in 4. Dist. 20. p. 2. q. 5. Others thinke, that it is not only a payment, but likewise a Iuridicall Absoluti∣on. SomePet. à Soto, lect. 2. de Indulg. teach, that Indulgences are graunted only for punishments imposed.Tho. in 4. Dist. 20. q. 1. art. 3. Syluest. verbo Indulg. q. 2. n. 1. Others better thinke, that they do extend to all punishments due in the sight of God. SomeDom. à Soto. in 4. Dist. 21. q. 1. art. 4. Na∣uar, de Iubil. notab. 21. n. 2. thinke that a generall Councell without the Pope may giue Plenary Indulgences: ButBellar. l. 1. de Indulg. c. 11. others more probably deny it, and ascribe the same onely to the Pope. SomeS. Tho. in 4. Dist. 20. q. 1. art. 3. An∣tonin. 1. part. tit. 10. c. 3. §. 1. thinke, that no proportion is required bet∣weene the Indulgence, and the Cause, for the grant there∣of, so that the cause be truly pious, and not meerly tempo∣rall or vaine.S. Bonau. in 4. Dist. 20. par. 2 q. vlt. Caiet. tract. de causa Indulg. Nauar. de Iubil. notab. 5. n. 3. Others more probably thinke, that the Indulgence is not of force, if there be not obserued propor∣tion, as if for the smalest cause, the greatest Indulgēce should be granted. SomeCaiet. tract. 10. q. 2. tract. 15. c. 9. Pet. à Soto. c  de Indulg. teach, that to gayne an Indulgence a man must be in the state of grace, not only when he receyueth the Indulgence, but also when he performeth the satisfacto∣ry workes imposed for the same. OthersS. Antonin 1. part. tit 10. c 3. §. 5. Palud. in 4. Dist. 29. q. 4. art. 3. thinke, that the state of grace is only required when the Indulgence is to be receiued. SomeDom. à Soto in 4. Dit. 21. q. 2. art. 3. Nauar. de Iubil. notab. 22. n. 20. teach, that Indulgences profit the dead of Iustice, and of condignity.Caiet. tract. 16. q. 5. Pet. à Soto. lect. 3. de Indulg. Others only of Gods boun∣ty and congruity. But these and sundry such like, are not de∣fyned by the Church.
Protestants Vntruthes. Caluin very bouldly sayth of Catholikes,Instit, l. 4. c. 9. n. 41. Let them acknowledge whether these be their Decrees; Martyrs by their Death to haue performed more to God, and merited, then was needfull for them: and so great plenty of merits to haue abounded to them which might redound to others: Lest therefore so great a good should be in vayne, their bloud to be mingled with the bloud of Christ, and of both, the treasure of the Church to be made, for remission and satisfaction sinnes. By these imputations we acknowledge, that Caluin was eyther very ignorant, or impudent, or both: for our Decrees truly are, 1. Martyrs by their death haue not perfor∣med more to God then was absolutly needfull for them∣selues, but more then was needfull to satisfaction for the guilt of their tēporall punishment. 2. Though we acknow∣ledge satisfaction in some Saints to abound, yet we deny it of their merits, or that their merits do redound to others. 3. The Passions of Saints are not mingled with the Passions of Christ in the Treasure, as though these of themselues were not sufficient to take away all paine eternall and temporal, and all fault originall and actuall, mortall and veniall; but that thereby the excellencies of Christs suffering might be shewed, which was able to communicate to others the ver∣tue and power of satisfaction for temporall punishment. 4. The Passions of Saints not absolutly but as they are satisfa∣ctory, would be without fruite, if neyther themselues had need of them, neither could be applyed to others, though they be otherwise alwaies of great worth in regard of Gods glory, honour to the Martyrs, and profit or example to the Church. HeshussiusDesex∣centis errori∣bus ontfi∣ciorum. tit. 31. chargeth Popes to forgiue sinnes, and graunt Indulgences for money. But Popes neuer require money for Indulgences or Pardons, but onely command those who desire to haue the Indulgences, to pray, fast, and giue Almes, eyther to the Poore in generall, or to some pi∣ous vse, as building a Church, or the lyke. ChemnitiusExam. part 4. p. 218. auoucheth vs to teach, that the tem∣porall
That we ma be  washed in vaine, de  rem. Auor vitae S. Ber∣nardi. l. 1. c. 4. Abbas Vrs∣perg. in Chron. Lud∣gerus in vita S. Suibert. for corruptible gold and siluer  and workes, may and will ae v,  we will hat epenta  of necessity vnto saluation of man; for without the same a Popi h ¦don may saue: But without eyther a Pardon from the Pope  u  or Absolution of a Priest, there is no saluation, by the Doctrine of  Church of Rome: or els Rogers lyeth, as he doth most ou, Catholickes houlding the direct contrary to all that he eer ascribeth vnto them:Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 123. so ignorant, or maliciously wicked i this Minister. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church hath Decreed, that,Article 22. The Romish Doctrine concerning &c. Pardons &c. is a fond thing, vainly inuented, and grounded vpon no warrant of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of God. Luther affirmeth that, (29) Indulgences are the most wicked deceiptes,Art. 18. à Leone 10. damnat. and Impostures of most wicked Popes. Caluin professeth,Instit. l. 3. c. 9. §. 39. Indulgences euen clea∣ned from all spot, that is, if they be defyled with no abuse, to be no∣thing els but the prophanation of Christes Bloud, and the mockery of Sathan, wherewith they withdraw Christian people from the Grace of God, and from lyfe which is in Christ Iesus, and auert them from
FOr the cleerer proceeding in this Controuersy, we are st to know, that Indulgences are remissions o Par∣dons of the punishmentes which often remayne to be paid after forgiuenes of the fault and reconciliation obtained by the Sacrament of Pennance: hauing proued hertofore that punishment often remayneth to be paid after the fault be forgiuen, I must yet before I come to the mayne question confirme certaine truthes, which will much auaile for the better vnderstanding therof. As first, that in the actions of the iust a double valour or worth may be assigned, to wit, of merit and satisfaction. Almes giuing for example doth merit, seeing Christ said,Mat. 25.34. & 6.4. Possesse you the kingdome prepared for you &c. For I was hungry and you gaue me to eate &c. And it doth also satisfy, in that it taketh away sinne,Luc. 11.41. Giue Almes, and behould all things are cleane to you.Tob. 4.11. Almes deliuereth from all sinne.Eccl. 3.33. Water quen∣cheth burning fyre, and Almes resisteth sinnes. And so the same
worke is meritorious, as it is a good worke done in Charity, and it is satisfactory, in that it is laborious and painfull. The like might be exemplified in FastingIonas. 3.7.10. & Mat. 6.18. andMat. 6.6.12. Prayer. The second truth is, that a good worke in what respect it is meritorious, it cannot be applyed to others, but as it is satisfactory it may. The first part is cleere, for he is said to merit who doth good, and by his good is worthy of re∣ward; but it cannot be said because one doth well, therfore another doth well, or is worthy of reward. Againe no man can be depriued of his owne merit, though he pray, fast, & giue Almes for others, wherfore he cannot communicate his merit with others. And this is that which the Scriptures teach when they say,1. Cor. 3.8. Euery one shall receiue his owne reward according to his owne labour. The second part is also proued, for satisfaction is a releasing of the Punishment, or paying of the debt: now, one may so satisfy for another mans punishment and pay his debt, that he may truly be said to haue satisfyed and paid. Againe, he that satisfyeth for another, cannot by the same worke satisfye for himselfe, therfore he truly com∣municateth his Satisfaction with another. A friend may with his owne money so satisfy another mans debt, that it will not serue also to pay his owne: but he cannot by his owne good workes deserue, that another shalbe worthy of some great Office or Magistracy, which otherwise he were not worthy of. But in further proofe that the workes of the iust may help others by way of impetration and satisfaction; it is to be remembred, that as God in his Iustice, doth punish some for the offences of others, and visitethExod. 20.5. the sinnes of wicked Pa∣rentes vpon their Children to many generations; so likewise his mercy being answerable to his Iustice, and abouePs. 144.9. all his workes, he spareth some for the good deeds of others. Exam∣ples in these kinds may be, how God said to Salomon3. Reg. 11.11.12. when he had sinned. I will rent asunder thy kingdome &c. Neuer∣theles in thy dayes I will not do it because of Dauid thy Father. So al∣so when Abias had offended. God was mercifull vnto him.3. Reg. 15.4.5. for Dauids sake &c. because Dauid had done right in the eies of our Lord. God protesteth his mercy to Isaac,Gen. 26.5. because Abrahā
had obeyed (his) voyce and kept (his) Precepts. AndGen. 18.26. If I shall fynd in Sodome 50. iust persons within the City, I will spare the whole place for their sake. S. Paul persuadeth the rich Corinthians to releeue libe∣rally the poore Christians in Hierusalem, saying,2. Cor. 8.14. Let in this present tyme your aboundance supply their want; that their aboun∣dance also may supply your want, that there be an equality. So plain∣ly doth he teach, that the Satisfactory Deeds of one man, may be auaileable to others: yea, and that holy Saintes, or vertuous persons may in measure and proportion of other mens necessities and deseruings, allot vnto them, aswell the Supererogation of their spirituall works, as these that aboūd in worldly goods may giue almes of the superfluities to them which are in necessity: which enterchange, com∣munion, and proportion of thinges the Apostle doth here euidently set downe. The third truth to be proued is this, In the Church there is an infinite treasure of satisfactions from the sufferings of Christ, which can neuer be spent. Christ his Passion being the Passion of an Infinite person was of infinite valew, but the worth of Satisfaction receiueth its measure from the worth of the person satisfying, euen as the greatnes of of∣fence is measured by the worth of the person offended: ther∣fore Christ his Passion or Satisfaction was of infinite value. Againe, Christ suffered for all men (as is prouedSee Hereafter chap. 30. elswhere) but it is more then certaine, that to all those who haue hitherto liued, Christ his sufferings haue not bene actually applyed for the pardon of their sinnes, the greater part being damned; wherfore much of that price remay∣neth, which may alwaies be applyed, though it were not in∣finite, as indeed it is: And this the rather, seeing all the Satis∣faction of Christ may be applyed to vs, himselfe neuer sin∣ning, needing no satisfaction for himselfe. The fourth truth; To this Treasure of superaboundant Satisfactions, belong also the sufferings of the B. V. Mary, and of all other Saintes, who haue suffered more then their sinnes required. Supposing first, that Satisfaction for the fault and guilt of eternall punishment is not made by the suffe∣ring
of any Saintes, but only by the Bloud and suffering of Christ, the forsaid truth concerning the B. Virgin Mary is proued, in that according to the vniforme doctrine of the Church,Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 23. Ambr. ser. vlt. in ps. 118. Aug l. de Nat. & Gra. c. 36 Bern. Ep. 174. she neuer committed the least actuall Sinne, and therfore to her most aptly are applyed those wordes,Cant. 4.7. Thou art all faire, O my loue, and there is not a spot in thee: wherfore she needed not any satisfaction for herselfe, and yet she suffered much for God, and especially when accor∣ding to S. Simeons prophecy,Luc. 2.35. a sword should pierce her soule. The like might be shewed of S. Iohn Baptist, who from his mothers wombe was sanctifyed, liuing after most austerely, and suffering imprisonment, and death. As also of the Prophets, who being most holy men, yetHeb. 11.32. suffe∣red exceeding much: In so much as one of them said,Ioh. 6.1. Would god my sinnes were weighed wherby I haue deserued wrath, & the calamity which I suffer, in a ballance. As the sand of the sea this would appeare heauier. S. Paul reciteth2. Cor. 11.23. &c. And 2. Cor. 1.5.8. his many and most grieuous sufferinges, and yet how litle he had to satisfye for his sinnes, himselfe testifyeth, saying,1. Cor. 4.4. I am not guilty in Conscience of any thing. And.2. Cor. 1.12. Our glory is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and sincerity of God &c. We haue conuersed in this world. And he particularly1. Cor. 4.9. &c. numbreth the like sufferings of all the Apostles, who no doubt liued most holy liues. And the like might be said of Martyrs, and holy Confessours. These truthes supposed, I am now to proue that in the Church there is power to apply the forsaid treasure to such as haue need therof. And first that the said treasure may be applyed, it appeareth by the Article of Communion of Sain∣tes, for therby we are taught, that all the faithfull are ech othersRom. 12.5. 1. Cor. 12.11. members, and as it were one liuely Body: and as the liuely members do help one another, so the faithfull do Communicate their goods ech to other, specially when those that are superfluous to one, are necessary, or very profitable to another. The same is also proued from the words of S. Paul,1. Cor. 12.15. I most gladly will bestow, and will my selfe moreouer be bestowed for your soules.2. Tim. 2.10. I sustaine all thinges for the Elect.Col. 1.24. I reioyce in suffering for you, and
do accomplish those things that want of the Passions of Christ in my flesh, for his Body which is the Church. Though these texts may be so expounded, as that S Paul suffered much for the Elect, and the Church, because he exposed himselfe to many dan∣gers and labours that he might preach vnto them, and that by his example he might strengthen the weake, and encou∣rage others: yet it may also be truly vnderstood of the Com∣municarion of his sufferings or satisfactions, for these senses do not impugne one another, but may be all admitted. The Apostle desired to profit the faythfull by all wayes he could, now he might greatly profit them by communicating his Passions, which were superaboundant to him, as I haue for∣merly shewed, therefore no doubt by this way he did, help them. And so by suffering he fulfilled those things, which were wanting of the Passions of Christ, that is, such as Christ in his Saintes was yet to suffer for the Body of his Church. Now, that this Treasure is to be dispensed and applyed by the Churches Pastours, it appeareth by these wordes of Christ to S. Peter,Mat. 16.19. whatsoeuer thou shalt loose in Earth, it shalbe loosed also in the heauens; and these also to all the Apost∣les,Mat. 18.18. Whatsoeuer you shall loose vpon Earth, shalbe loosed also in heauen. These promises are most ample, generall, and not restrayned only to sinnes, as these others are,Io. 20.23. whose sinnes you shall forgiue &c. but they include all Bonds which may hinder the attayning of Eternall Saluation, as absol∣uing from censures, dispensing in lawes, vowes, oathes, vpon iust occasion. According to this we read, that S. Paul himselfe gaue Indulgēce to the Incestuous Corinthian, saying,2. Cor. 2.10. Whome you haue pardoned any thing, I also: for my selfe also that which I par∣doned; If I pardoned any thing for you, in the person of Christ, that we be not circumuented of Sathan. The Incestuous Corinthian being1. Cor. 5.3. excommunicated, and put to Pennance by S. Paul, heere at the intreaty of S. Timothy, and S. Titus (as Theodoret thinketh) as also vpon his owne serious repen∣tance, was by S. Paul absolued, and the rest of his Pennance pardoned: which S. Paul professeth to do in the person of Christ
that is, by authority receiued from him. Reason also confirmeth this, for in euery well gouer∣ned Commonwealth, it belongeth to the Prince, and his chiefe Magistrats to dispense the Cōmon treasures or goods: And it also belongeth to them to admit the satisfaction of one for another, when they shall Iudge it profitable for the Kingdome: wherefore the like is also to be granted to the Church. SECT. III. That the Ancient Fathers do agree with Catholickes in the Doctrine of Indulgences. M. Bell acknowledgeth, thatSuruey of Popery part 3. c. 11. Pardons sealed with lead, called the Popes Bulles, were graunted by Pope Adrian, Anno 772. The Prot. writer M. Symonds confesseth thatVpon the Reuel. p. 84. S. Gregory remitted Canonicall Pennance, and promised cleane remis∣sion of sinnes to such as frequented Churches on set dayes. Bale affir∣meth that,In Act. Rom. Pont. p. 46. 47. Gregory confirmed by Indulgences Pilgrimages to I∣mages for the Deuotion of the people: And that he was a defendour of Pardons, yet not a seller; As also that he first graunted Pardons for set dayes, and to such as visited Churches. In like manner Pan∣taleon auoucheth of him that,Chro∣nogr. p. 48. He first graunted Pardon of sinnes to the people visiting Churches vpon set dayes, in Decret. and in 3 Psal. Paenit. Hieronymus Marus thinketh, thaIn his Eusebius Captiuus published by Pezelius, vnder the title of 1. Diei de In∣dulg. fol. 48. Grego∣ry the 1 and Boniface the 8 were the chiefe Authors of Pardons. And the lyke is confessed of Saint Gregory by otherCyprian Valera of the liues of Popes En∣glished p. 32. Humfred. in Iesuit. part. 2. Rat. 5. p. 5. & 627. Prot. writers. But to cleere S. Gregory of all Innouation in this point, the Centuristes acknowledge that S. Chrysostome mentio∣nethCnt 5. c. 6. Col. 692. Dayes of Indulgence and Pardon. And D. Field con∣fesseth that,Of the Church. l. 1. c. 17 p. 33. The Ancient Bishops were wont to cut of great parts of enioyned Pennance, which Remission was clled an Indulgence. Yea M. Nappier affirmeth, that,Vpon the Reuel. p. 363. In the 10 Articles of the 1. Coun∣cell of Nice are superstitious rytes, euen the obseruation of dayes, to wit, of Peace (or Indulgence) and superstitious Pennances. But to ascend yet higher, Tertullian in his Booke de Pu∣dicitia
(written after he became an hereticke) doth euen by his impugningL. de Pu∣dic prope fin. of the Churches then practise in gran∣ting Indulgences vpon the Martyrs Intercessions, giue suffi∣cient testimony to the Churches allowance thereof: wher∣to himselfe, in his other writings, when he was Catholike, giueth also his owneL. ad Martyres post initium allowance. As also doth Cyprian mentioningL. 3. Ep. 15 16 18. & ser. de lapsis. Peace, or Indulgence giuen vpon the In∣tercession of Martyrs, before the parties enioyned Pennance was accomplished. And whereas it is proper to Catholicke Doctrine to haue no first beginning knowne therof, vnles we ascend to the Apostles and the Scriptures; Heresies alwaies hauing their first authour, tyme and place obserued, and remem∣bred; it is most certaine that no man yet was euer able to name the first Authour of Indulgences, or the place & tyme wherin it was first preached: yea all, whether Doctours, Popes, or Councels, who make any mention therof, do speake of it as a thing vsuall and receiued. And though Chemnitius would haue it thought, that this our Doctrine of Indulgences,Exam. part. 4. p. 73. had it beginning not long before the yeare of Christ 1200. yet this is cleerely refelled by the former graunts of other Protestants, for the much more ancient tymes of S. Gregory, S. Chrisostome, the Concell of Nice and Tertullian; as also by sundryLudge∣rus Ep. de S. Swiberto apud Surium. Tom. 2. Conc. Claromonta∣num apud Antonin. 2. part. hist. tit. 16. c. 1. § 23. Conc. Later. apud Vsperg. in Chron. 1116. writers and Coun∣cels much ancient to the tyme prescribed of 1200. yeares. Wheras it is cleere not only by all Catholicke writers, but euen by Chemnitius, that the Waldenses who liued about the yeare 1170. wereExam. part. 4. p. 83. the first that impugned Indul∣gences. SECT. IV. Protestant Writers teaching Indulgences. IOhn Husse being accused as an Impugner of Indulgen∣ces, exuseth himselfe in these wordes,Tom. 1. fol. 9. I am falsly accu∣sed to teach, that Indulgences were nothing. Yea I affirme,
that,Quaestio∣ne de Credere. fol. 170. The Pope who is the immediate Vicar of Christ hath au∣thority to graunt Indulgences &c. Luther himselfe granteth, that,In Resolu∣tionbus de Indulgentijs Indulgences do take away punishments imposed by Bishops, and holy Fathers &c. Bishopes and Curats are bound to admit with all reuerence the Commissaries of Apostolicall Pardons. So that according to these two prime Protestantes, the Church hath authority to graunt Indul∣gences. SECT. V. Obiections against Induldgences answered. MAny doRogers Def. of the Art. art. 22. p. 123. obiect, that our Doctrine of Indulgences doth derogate from the sufficiency of Christes Meri∣tes, Passion and Satisfaction, as though they without the Merits of Martyrs, Saintes, and our owne sufferings, were not sufficient to satisfy for the sinnes of the whole world, wheras the Scriptures euery where testify, that Christ by his Bloud satisfyed for the sinnes of the whole world. Answ. All Catholickes confesse that Christ hath most fully satisfyed for the sinnes of the world; but it doth not thence follow, that we are not to satisfy for the temporall punish∣ment due vnto our sinnes: euen as it is most true, that Christ by his Bloud merited for vs grace and glory, and yet we must seeke grace by faith and the Sacraments, and glory by stryuing and running for it. The reason herof is, because the price of our Redemption and Satisfaction paid by Christ, profitteth only those to whom it is applyed by certaine meanes or Instrumentes: for no other cause can be allead∣ged, why Pagans, Turkes, and Iewes are not saued, seeing Christ dyed and satisfyed for all. Now these meanes we af∣firme to be Faith, Baptisme, Contrition, Confession and Sa∣tisfaction: Neither do we adioyne these meanes to Christes Satisfaction, as though this of it selfe were not sufficient; but because it pleased him to giue vs this power to satisfy, that the Efficacy of his Bloud might the more shine, when not
only himselfe satisfyed, but that he communicated the power of Satisfaction, for temporall punishment, to his members. Others obiect, that Durand and some other Catholicke writers do acknowledge that the Doctrine of Indulgences is not to be found in the Scriptures. Answ. Though it be not taught in particular, and expresse wordes, which is all that Durand and others affirme, yet the grounds therof I haue formerly deduced out of the Scriptures. And though it were not at all in the Scriptures, yet thence it would not fol∣low, that it were a Doctrine humane and only Ecclesiasti∣call, seeing many articles are belieued as diuine, which are no where taught in the Scriptures, as hath bene prouedSee here∣tofore, chap. 7. hertofore. It is yet further vrged that some Indulgences haue been granted for 20000. yeares; whereas if any were to be pu∣nished so long in Purgatory, doubtles they were to be pu∣nished long after the day of Iudgement. Answ. Some thinke there were neuer any so graunted by any Pope, but that they were forged by Officers for their profit: for Popes do but vse to grant them for so many yeares, as Pennances were accustomed to be enioyned, which were for the most but for a mans life, which ordinarily is not aboue 100. yeares. But howsoeuer this be, it cannot be denyed, but that according to the Canons some deserue Pennances for some thousands of yeares; for if for one mortall sinne, the Canons do enioyne sometymes 3. yeares, sometymes 7. for punishment, who is able to number the yeares, which according to the Canons were to be enioyned to such as hourely sweare, forsweare, blaspheme, and frequently murther, rob &c. And therefore if Indulgences of many thousand yeares haue beene graun∣ted by any Pope, no doubt it was in this foresaid respect. But as in this life many yeares Pennance may be satisfyed in one houre through the feruour of Charity and Contrition, so the vehemency of the paine in Purgatory, may satisfy in 300, or 400. yeares, that which otherwise might require 10000. Others yet obiect, that some Indulgences do pardon
both the fault, and the punishment. Answ. This is onely meant in reguard, that with Indulgence Confession is or∣dinarily ioyned, by which the fault is pardoned. And ther∣fore when it is said, that by Indulgences sinnes are pardo∣ned, it is only vnderstood in regard of the punishment, the fault being supposed to be formerly forgiuen by the Sacra∣ment of Pennance.
CHAP. XXVII. The true State of the Question concerning prescri∣bed dayes for Fasting, and Abstinence from certaine meates. Whether certayne dayes prescribed by the Church for Fa∣sting: as also Abstinence at some tymes from certaine meates, be things lawfull, and to be obserued vnder sinne: or rather that they are to be left free according to euery mans Deuotion, and lyking. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. PROTESTANCY euer hauing for an indiuiduall Companion Sensuality, will by no meanes admit of appointed fastes, or abstinēce from the better mea∣tes: whereas the Church of Christ for iust reasons doth command both. So in the Laodicene Councell it is ordained, that,Can. 5. We ought not to breake fast in Lent vpon Thursday in the last weeke, and dishonour the whole Lent, but that it is more meete to honour the whole Lent with strict fasting. In the Councell A∣gathense it is decreed, that,Cap. 12. All the sonnes of the Church do fast in Lent, Sundayes excepted &c. In the eight Councell of To∣ledo it is defyned, that,Cap. 9. whosoeuer without ineuitable Neces∣sity
and weaknes, and manifest infirmity or impossibility of Age, shall presume to eate flesh in the dayes of Lent, he shall not only be guilty of our Lords Resurrection, but also shallbe made an alien from the holy Communion of that day: And this shalbe added to his Punishment, that for that yeare he shall abstaine from all eating of flesh &c. But those whome eyther Age hath bowed, or Infirmity weakened, or necessity vrged, let them not before presume to violate the things forbidden, then they haue receyued licence from the Priest. In the Councell Gan∣grense it is sayd,Can. 9. If any man shall dissolue the fastes which are commonly kept by the Church, Anathema. And the like is taught by sundry otherConc. Triburiense. can. 35. Conc. Carthag. 4. Can. 63. Conc. 6. Constan∣tinop. Can. 56. Councels. The CommonBellar. de bonis oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 7. Rhem. Test. in 1. Tim. 4.3. opinion of all Catholickes is, that they are bound in Cōscience to obserue such dayes of fasts, & Abstinence from such meates, as the Church shall commād: and that the infringing of these without iust cause is sinfull. Pointes Disputable. SomeIo. Medi∣na q 5. de ieiu∣nio. Catholike writers teach that, so often as a man eateth vpon a day of fast after his first refection, so of∣ten he sinneth. ButDurand. in 4. Dist. 15. q. 11. Siluest. Verbo, Ieiu∣nium. others thinke, that he only sinneth after the first eating.Nauar. c. 21 n. 22. Some affirme that such as haue Priui∣ledge to eat flesh vpon fasting dayes, are yet obliged to one meale or refection. ButAzor. l. 7. c. 10 q. 3. others deny it, and sundry such like are disputed, and not defyned by the Church. Protestant vntruthes. Chemnitius affirmeth that,Exam. ad 4. Sess. Telesphorus ordayned the fast of Lent. But this is most vntrue, for heIn Ep. sua. only decreed that the Clergy should adde 3. dayes to the customed fast of all Christians. He also chargeth Calixtus to haue ordained the 4. Ember weekes: butEp. 1. he only added one to the former three, which we haue from Apostolicall Tradition. HeExam. ad Sess. 25. auoucheth Catholikes to teach, that fasting of it selfe (and as he sayth) ex opere operato, is able to appease, or satisfy God without any other help of good workes or Grace, which is a meere fiction of his owne, not a Doctrine taught by any Catholike writer.
Protestant Doctrine. Luther teacheth that,De Do∣ctrinis homi∣num vitandis. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 12. §. 20. 21. It is erroneous and false, in that they impose a necessity of fasting at certaine tymes of the yeare, as the Vigils of the Apostles, and other Saintes: And this, vnder grieuous sinne, as a Decree and Commandement of the Church; For fasting, for as much as concerneth dayes and meates, ought euer to be free and in∣different. Perkins,Reform. Cath. Con∣trou. 12. c. 2. col. 434. The Papistes prescribe a certaine choyce of meates vpon fasts: but we iudge that difference of meates to be foolish and pernicious. Others teach, thatHarm. of Conf. p. 481. The fast of Lent hath Te∣stimony of Antiquity, but none out of the Apostles writings, and ther∣fore ought not, or cannot be imposed on the faithfull &c. And the Apo∣stle calleth the Doctrine of those, which teach to abstaine from meates, the Doctrine of Deuils. But how impertinent and vntrue this is, we shall see hereafter. Protestantes agree with Ancient Heretickes. For the impugning of prescribed Fasts S. AustineHaer. 53. and S. EpiphaniusHaer. 75. condemne Aerius: of whom D. Fulke saith,Ans∣were to a Counterf. Cath. p. 44. 45. He taught that fasting dayes are not to be obser∣ued. Yea saith D. FieldOf the Church. l. 3. p. 138. He disliked set fasts &c. he was iu∣stly condemned. And according to Osiander, he not only taught that,Cent. 4. p. 44. Set fasts are not to be obserued &c. but that ac∣cording to liberty a man is to fast when he will. In which he was so purely Prot. as that D. Whitaker affirmeth that,Cont. Dur. l. 9 p. 830. Ae∣rius taugh nothing concerning fasting different from the Catholicke faith, by which he meaneth his owne Prot. Faith. S. Austine also reproueth Iouinian for saying,Haer 82. Fasts, or Abstinence from certaine meates do nothing profite. Yea he auoucheth further, that.De Ec. l. Dogm c. 68. To belieue, that such as abstaine from wyne and flesh haue no greater merit, is not the part of a Christian, but of Iouinian. This Censure of S. Austin is cōfessed in himExam. part. 4. p. 142. by Chemnitius. Doctour Humphrey,Ad rat. 3. Camp p. 263. We grant it to be true what Sanders hath of the Iouinianists and vs, Fast and Abstinence from certaine meaes to profit nothing. And Iouinian is further defended here∣in3. Part. of his De∣fence of the Ref. Cath. p. 60. Wil∣let. in Anti∣log. p. 13. Dan. 1. part. alt part. p. 938. by Abbot, Willet, and Danaeus.
And wheras our purest Prot. do keep their strictest fasts v∣pon their Sabothes, S. Epiphanius witnesseth that theHaer. 75. Aerians desired rather to fast vpon Sunday, and to eat vpon wednesday and friday. S. Austine affirmeth, thatEp. 86. To fast on the Lords day is a great offence, especially since the detestable heresy of the Manichees &c. who appoint vnto their hearers this day as lawfull to be fasted v∣pon. This saying of S. Austine is alleadged by D. WhiteguiftDefence. p. 501. Cent. 4. Col. 401.445. and the Centurists, and the like of S. Ambrose byAgainst Symboly∣zing part. 2. p. 38. Parker. Luther,Tom. 4. in Ionae. 3 fol. 422. The fasts and haircloathes of Beastes are in as great esteeme with God, as of men, and of the contrary. Perkins,Reform. Cath. Con∣trou. 6. c. 4. Fasting of it selfe doth no more profit to gaine the kingdome of Heauen, no more I say, then meate or drinke. SECT. II. It is proued by the Scriptures, that dayes prscribed by the Church for Fasting; as also Abstinence at some tymes from certaine meates, be things lawfull, and to be obserued. THat it is lawfull to vse Abstinence from certaine meates not condemning the creatures as though they were of their owne natures vncleane and vnlawfull to be eaten, may be proued by the Example of Daniel, saying,C. 10. 2. 3. I Da∣niel mourned the dayes of three weekes, desiderable bread I did not eate, and flesh and wyne entred not into my mouth &c. S. Iohn Bap∣tist abstained from all meates, sauingMat. 3.4. Locustes and wyld∣hony. The Centuristes report of S. Imes the Apostle, that he abstainedCent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Col. 581. and Ae∣gesip. apud Euseb. hist. l. 2. c. 21. from wyne and flesh. The abstinence of Ti∣mothy, though then being sickly is so certaine, that S. Paul therfore aduiseth him in reguard of his health to1. Tim. 5.23. Drinke not yet water, but vse a litle wyne for thy stomacke, and thy often in∣firmties. Now none will say, that these holy persons, did for∣beare these meaes and drinkes, as thinking them of their owne natures to be vncleane, or vnlawfull. And that this Abstinence and fast may be limited by
the Church to certaine appointed and prescript dayes, ap∣peareth first, in that the thing in generall being it selfe law∣full and commendable (in so much as it is oftentimes in the ScripturesLuc. 2.37. Mat. 17.21. Mar. 9.29. Act 13.2. & 14.23. matched in mention with Prayer) the people may be bound therto at set tymes, euen as they are to prayer. 2. Sundry examples are herof in the Scriptures: IonadabHier. 35.14. commanded his sonnes not to drinke wyne: and they haue not drunke vntill this day because they haue obeyed the Commandement of their Father. InC. 8.19. Zacharie mention is made of 4. Fasts, which were called Fasts of Moneths, of the 4. 5. 7. & 10. which were not commanded by God himselfe, but by them who gouer∣ned the commonwealth of the Iewes, being brought in v∣pon seuerall occasions. Mardochaeus appointed a newHest 9.21. fe∣tiuall day to be celebrated for euerVer. 31. with fasts and prayer. ChemnitiusExam. part. 4. p. 437. 438. hath no better answere to these so plaine Textes, then to reprehend these obseruations of the Hebrewes, and to ascribe it to , a naughty zeale. But in this he manifesteth intollerable boldnes, and impu∣dency, seeing the Scriptures do not reproue but commend these lawes of fasts, greatly praising Mardochaeus and Iona∣dab, and auouching that those fasts mentioned by Zacharie should be changed into ioy and great solemnities. In the New Testament we haue the Apostles com∣manding the Gentils conuerted, & all Christians toAct. 19.29. Ab∣staine from things immolated to Idols, and bloud, and that which is strangled. And that this was a Command, & of Necessity to be kept, appeareth by these textes,Ver. 28. It hath seemed good to the holy Ghost and to vs, to lay no further burden vpon you then these necessary things.Act. 15.41. Paul commanding them to keep the Precepts of the Apostles, and the Ancients. And TertullianIn A∣pologet. reporteth, that the Christians would rather dye then tast bloud in those firster tymes. Now if the Magistrates in the old Testament, and the Apostles in the new might make lawes for good ends of Abstinence from certaine meates, and vpon certaine dayes, which yet were not commanded by God, and these lawes to bynd in Conscience, the Necessity therof yet not resting in the thing, but in the Commandement; no doubt the like power cannot be denyed to the Church, prescri∣bing
the same for other good ends; Especially seeing it is certaine, and might easily be proued, that the Church of Christ hath authority to make Lawes, which do bynd in Conscience. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proofe of the lawfull Abstinence from certaine meates, and the appointed dayes for fasting. S. Austine affirmeth, that fasting in generall is comman∣ded by the Scriptures:Ep. 89. ad Casulanum. I pondering (sayth he) that in my mynd, do see fasting to be commanded in the Euangelicall and Aposto∣licall letters, and in the whole Instrument, which is called the New Testament. But what dayes we ought not to fast, and what to fast, I do not fynd it defyned by command of our Lord or the Apostles. Wher∣fore concerning this last he further teacheth that,Ibid. In these things wherof the diuine Scripture decreeth nothing certaine, the cu∣stome of the people of God, or the Ordinances of our Ancestors, are to be kept for a law. And when the custome of the people is dif∣ferent, then saith he,Ibid. The Custome of them are to be followed to whom the Gouernment of the people is committed. Yea,Ep. 118. ad Ianua∣rium. c. 2. There is no better discipline in these things for a graue and wife Christian, then to do so, as he seeth the Church to do, where he cōmeth. And then relating how that for the satisfaction of his Mother he de∣maunded of S. Ambrose what was to be done, when the custome of fasting was various, he reporteth S. Ambrose his Answere to be this, To what Church thou shalt come, keep the Cu∣stome therof, if thou wilt not giue scandall to any, or any to thee: when I had tould this to my Mother, she willingly imbraced it. And I often thinking of this his sentence, I did euer so esteeme it, as if I had receyued it from a heauenly Oracle. S. Ambrose applyeth those words of the Apostle,1. Cor. 15.32. Let vs eate and drinke, to morrow we shall dye, to our moderne Epicureans that take away fasting, and deny the merit therof:L. 10. Epist. ep. 82. How can we be saued (saith he) if we wash not away our sinnes by fasting, seeing the Scriptures say,
Fasting and Almes deliuer from sinne? What are these new Maisters then that exclude all merit of fasting? Is not this the very voyce of the Heathen saying, Let vs eate and drinke, to morrow we shall dye? Concerning the fast of Lent, S. Austine affirmeth that,Ep. 119. ad Ian. c. 15. The fast of Lent hath authority both in the old bookes, from the fast of Moyses and Elias, & in the Gospell, because our Lord fasted so ma∣ny dayes, shewing that the Ghospell doth not differ from the Law and the Prophets. And of the bond therof he auoucheth that,Ser. 62. de Temp. to fast other daies is a remedy or reward, in Lent not to fast is sinne. He that fasteth another tyme shall receiue Indulgence, he that fasteth not in Lent, shalbe punished. Yea, saith S. Ambrose,Serm. 25. de Quadrage∣sima. It is no light sinne to violate the Lent appointed by our Lord for the faithfull &c. therefore if thou wilt be a Christian, thou must do what Christ did. He that sinned not, fasted Lent, wilt not thou who sinnest, fast Lent? And againe,Serm. 36. de Quadrag. some dayes agoe preaching the Deuotion of holy Lent, I brought forth Examples of holy Scriptures, wherby I might proue, this number of fourty, not to be ordained by men, but consecra∣ted from heauen, nor to be inuented by Earthly thought, but comman∣ded by heauenly Maiesty &c. These Commandements are not so much the Priestes, as Gods. And therfore he that despyseth (them) despi∣seth not the Priest, but Christ, who speaketh in his Priest. Lastly S. Hierome speaking of the practise and obliga∣tion of his tymes saith,Ep. 54. ad Marcel∣lam. We in the whole yeare fast one Lent, according to the Tradition of the Apostles, at a tyme fitting for vs. The (Montanistes) make 3. Lents in the yeare, as though three Sauiours had suffered. Not that it is not lawfull to fast all the yeare, excepting Pen∣tecost, but that it is one thing to offer a guift of necessity, another free∣ly. AndAd c. 58. Isaiae. our Lord fasted 40. dayes in the desart, that he might leaue to vs the solemne daies of fasting. The Fathers of the Councell Senonense do Decree that,Decret. 7. As concerning the choice of meates, although &c. now nothing is to be said commune or vncleane, yet nothing cold be ordai∣ned more holy or profitable &c. then that vpon the dayes of fasting and Abstinence ordayned by the Church, forbearing the eating of flesh, we should only eate dry meates: for truly the Authority of our holy Mother the Church is no lesse with vs then with the sonnes of Rechab the Com∣mand of their dying Father, who lest they should infringe the Ordi∣nance of their Father, did perpetually abstaine from wyne.
Prescribed fastes were so generally vsed in the Primi∣tiue Church, that Caluin saith,Inst. l. 4. c. 12. n. 19 20. I cannot altogeather excuse the Ancient (Fathers) in this respect, but that they layd some seeds of superstition &c. The obseruation of superstitious Lent was then euery where in force. Chemnitius acknowledgeth, that,Exam. part. 1. p. 89. Am∣brose, Maximus, Theophilus, Hierome, and others do affirme the fast of Lent, to be an Apostolicall Tradition. And the very same is confessed by Scroderus.Opusc. Theol. p. 71. And wheras S. Austine tea∣cheth, that,Ser. de Temp. Ser. 77. & 62. Not to keepe Lent at all is Sacriledge, and in part to breake it is sinne, this is confessed and disliked in S. Austine by the CenturistesCent. 5. c. 6. Col. 686. 687. Ham. de Tradit. A∣ost. part. 3. . 3. Col. 824., and Hamelmanus. Scultetus (to vse his owne words) affirmeth,Medulla Theol. p. 440. The superstition of Lent and fasting to haue bene allowed and commanded by Ignatius who was scholler to S. Iohn. So ancient and approued is our Catho∣licke custome of obseruing prescript fastes and Abstinence from certaine Meates. SECT. IV. That sundry Protestant writers do teach our Catholicke Doctrine of Abstinence from certaine meates, vpon Prescribed daies. THis Catholike truth is so cleere, as that M. Hooker vn∣dertaketh speciall proofe therof, and doubteth not to say,Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 72. We are &c. to make it manifest in all mens eies, that set tymes of fasting appointed in spirituall Considerations to be kept by all sortes of men, tooke not their beginning either from Montanus, or any other whose heresies may preiudice the credit and due estimation ther∣of, but haue their ground in the law of nature, are allowable in Gods sight, were in all ages hertofore, and may till the worlds end be obser∣ued, not without singuler vse and benefit. Againe, Of publick inioyned fasts, vpon causes extraordinary, the1. Paral. 20.3. Ierem. 36.9. 1. Reg. 7.6. examples of Scripture are so frequent, that they need no particular rehearsall &c. Touching fasts not appointed for any such extraordinary causes, but either yearly, or monethly, or weekely obserued and kept, first vpon the nynth day of the Moneth &c. And then reckoning vp the seuerall fasts of the
Iewes, and the causes therof, he concludeth. All these not com∣manded by God himselfe, but ordayned by a publick Constitution of their owne, the Prophet Zachary expresly toucheth. The Prot. Author of the Booke entituled, Qaerimonia Ecclesiae, doth purposely and at largeà pag. 90. ad p. 123. defend set fasting daies, and Abstinence from certaine meates, reprouing his other Brethren for reiecting the Ancient Fathers in this behalfe, and condemning Aeius for the now Prot. Do∣ctrine, and vndertaking a particular and large Defence of the fast of Lent. Caluin acknowledgeth thus much, that,Inst. l. 4. c. 12. §. 14. The other part of Discipline, which is not properly contayned in the power of the keyes, consisteth in this, that according to the necessity of tymes, Pa∣stours may exhort the People either to fasts, or to solemne prayers, or to other Exercises of humility, pennance, and faith, the tyme wherof, or manner, or forme is not prescribed by the word of God, but left to the Iudgment of the Church. The obseruation of this part, as it is profi∣table, so was it vsuall to the Ancient Church, euen from the very A∣postles. Neither were the Apostles themselues the first authors, but they tooke example from the Law and the Prophets: for we see that as often as there hapened any great busines, the People were assembled, Prayers appointed, fast proclaimed. M. Trig professeth to defend and vrge against his other Prot. Brethren,In his true Catho∣lick. p. 601. the fast of Lent, & solemne weekly fast of wednesday and friday. So free are our ap∣pointed fasts from any Doctrine of Deuils, or Superstition. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against Abstinence from certaine meates, and Prescript fasting-daies, answered. THe Ancient Hereticke Iouinian vrged against S. Hie∣rome, as Prot. do now against Catholickes, that God created all things for man, wheras hens, geefe, and some o∣ther Creatures are nothing for his vse, vnles they be eaten. Answ. S. HieromeL. 2. cont. Iou. to this Argument of Iouinian ans∣werth, that no liuing Creatures were made only for that
end, that they should be eaten, but either for phisicke or o∣ther vses, or at least for the Ornament of the world. This he proueth in that before the Deluge no man did eate flesh; as also, in that otherwise Owles, Toades, serpents, spiders, and the like were to be eaten, they being not in other respects vsefull for man: besides the forsaid Creatures are eaten vpon certaine daies, though they be abstayned from vpon dayes of Abstinence. Others obiect that,Mat. 15.11. Not that which entreth into the mouth defyleth a man. Answ. If this in all respectes were true, then gluttony and drunkenes should not defyle a man: wherfore it is to be said, that though meates of themselues, or their own nature, do not defyle the Soule, yet accidentally in that they make a man to sinne by gluttony or disobedience to God, or our Superiors, they do defyle; And thus is this expoun∣ded byDe mori∣bus Eccl. c. 33. S. Austine. Againe, as these wordes do not im∣port that the Iewes then might haue eaten of those meates which God forbad them, no more do they now that are Christians, eate of those which the Church forbiddeth: Neyther they then, nor we now abstayne, for that any meates are of their owne nature abhominable, or defyle the eaters, but they for signification, we for Obedience & Cha∣sticement of our Bodies. Some argue, that Christ said to his Apostles,Luc. 10.7. In the same house tarry you, eating and drinking such thinges as they haue. And that of S. Paul1. Cor. 10.25. All that is sould in the shambles eate, as∣king no question for Conscience. Ergo, this liberty is not to be taken from vs. Answ. Christ only commandeth that when we are entertayned, we seeke not sumptuous meates, but be content with such as are set before vs: And so is this place vnderstood by S. Ambrose.In hunc locum. Neither is it quesionable, but that he spake only of such meates as according to place and tyme were lawfull and profitable, for as then he would not haue had swynes flesh, or poyson eaten, if it had bene placed before them. In like sort S. Paul only freed the faith∣full from enquiring whether the flesh had beene offered to Idols or not, for otherwise we haue seene before, that he commanded that the Decree of the Apostles against eating
that which was strangled, and bloud, and offered to Idols, should be obserued. Againe, that is generally vrged of S. Paul,1. Tim. 4.1.2.3. In the last tymes certaine shall depart from the faith attending to spirits of Errour and Doctrine of Deuils &c. forbdding to marry, to abstaine from meates which God created to receiue with thansgiuing for the faithfull. Answere. The Apostle condemneth all Heretickes, who forbid meates as of themselues vncleane; and for that very cause (as S. Chrisostome,Chrysost. & Ambr. in hunc locum. Hier. l. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 11. & l. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. Aug. l. cont. Adi∣mant. c. 14. & l. 3. cont. Faust. Man. c. 5. 6. S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Austine teach) the Marcionistes, Eucratites, and Ma∣nichees. In so much, that S. Austine purposely answereth this Obiection saying,Cont. Faust. Ma∣nich l. 30. c. 4. See I beseech you, if this be not greatest madnes, to thinke that Paul said, that all abstinence of meates, and forbidding to marry, is the Doctrine of Deuils. And,Ib. c. 6. He forbid∣deth, who saith this is euill, not he who preferreth to this good, another thing better. And againe, There is great difference betwene those who Abstaine from meates for some holy representation, or for puni¦shing of the Body; and those who Abstaine from meates which God hath created, saying, that God did not create them. Therfore that is the Doctrine of Prophets and Apostles, this of lying Deuils. And,Cont. Adimant. c. 14. The Apostle most plainly signifyeth the (Manichees) when he saith, In the last dayes there shalbe some forbidding to marry, abstayning from meates which God hath created. These he properly designeth, who do not therfore Abstaine from such meates, that they may bridle their Concupiscence, or yield to the Infirmitie of another, but because they thinke flesh vncleane, and deny God to be the Creatour of them. Which Errour of the Manichees the Catholicke Church hath con∣demned inConc. Tolet. 1. in assertione fidei. Bracar. 1. Can. 14. seuerall Councels. But not only S. Austine, but euen Prot. themselues ans∣were this. M. Hooker sayth,Eccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 72. Against those Heretickes which haue vrged perpetuall Abstinence from certaine meates, as being in their very nature vncleane, the Church hath still bent herselfe as an Enemy: S. Paul giuing charge to take heed of them, which vnder any such opinion, should vtterly forbid the vse of meate, or drinkes. The Apostles themselues forbad some &c. but the cause of their so doing we all know. And the like Answere in our behalfe is giuen by IacobDefence of the Church and Minist. of Engl. p. 59. 65. the Puritane, saying, The place of Paul 1. Tim. 4.3.
is vnderstood of Marcion and Tatianus; who did absolutely condemne Mariage and certaine meates: and so are in no comparison with the Papistes, if they erred in nothing els. Neither do these wordes, In the last tymes, proue that they are to be vnderstood of some Heretickes which shall come long after the Apostles tymes: for by last tymes, the A∣postle vnderstandeth the whole tyme from the comming of Christ vntill the end of the world, which tyme he calleth1. Cor. 10 11. The ends of the world. And S. Peter expoundeth of his owne tyme, that which the Prophet Ioel foretould should beAct. 2.17 Ioel. 2.28. in the last dayes. And he affirmeth of Christ, that he was1. Pet. 1.20. Forknowne indeed before the Constitution of the world, but manifested in the last tymes for you. Finally S. Iohn said,1. Io. 2.1. Sonnes, it is the last houre. D. Fulke and other Prot. do commonly vrge that,Against Rhem. Test. in Mat. 15. fol. 2. Are∣tius loc. com. p. 272. Montanus the Hereticke was the first that appointed lawes of fasting. But M. Hooker their Brother doth answere them, that the Mantanistes were reprehended only, for that theyEccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 72. brought in sundry vnaccustomed dayes of fasting, continued their fastes a great deale longer, and made them more rigorous &c. Wheru∣pon Tertulian mayntaining Montanisme, wrote a Booke in Defence of the New fast &c. And another Prot. explaining this, affir∣meth that MontanusQuaeri∣monis Ec∣clesiae. p. 11. abrogating the fastes of the Church, in∣troduceth a new manner of fasting &c. So weake and imperti∣nent are the obiections made by Prot. against prescribed daies of fasting, and abstinence from certaine meates.
CHAP. XXVIII. The true State of the Question concerning Concupiscence. Whether Concupiscence remayning after Baptisme, is truly and properly sinne, though not imputed to the faith∣full: or only, that it is an Effect of Originall Sinne; And a corruption of Nature inclining men to Sinne. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THE Errour of Concupiscence being properly Sinne; being a sinke from whence many others are deryued, the Councell of Trent therfore hath De∣creed that,Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. Decret. de peccato orig. The Catholicke Church ne∣uer vnderstood (Concupiscence) to be called Sinne, as though truly and properly it were sinne in the regenerate but because it is (or aryseth) from sinne, and enclyneth to Sinne. If any shall thinke the contrary, Anathema. In the Councell of Moguntia it is Decreed, that,Cap. 11. Concupiscence whch is left in vs after Baptisme, for our Combat, not for fault, is not now sinne in the true nature of sin, but therfore called Sinne because it was caused by Sinne, and still enclyneth to Sinne. In the Councell Senonense this Article was condem∣ned,
In An∣not. post Decret. fidei. Concupiscence, although there be no actuall sinne, doth hinder a soule from entring into heauen: But this it could not doe, ex∣cept it were originall sinne it selfe. Agreably to these Councels, allBellar. de amiss. Gra. & statu pe. l. 5 c 7. &c. Rhem. Test. in Rom. 6.12. Catholikes belieue, that the Corruption of nature, or Concupiscence which re∣mayneth after Baptisme, is not originall sinne; not only be∣cause it is not imputed, but because it cānot be imputed, be∣ing of it selfe, and its owne nature, no sinne at all: but only an effect, occasion, and matter of Sinne, and as it were an Infirmity inclyning to Sinne, but not sinne it selfe without Consent. Pointes Disputable. SomeLombar. 2. Sent. Dist. 31. . 2. 3. Henriq. quodlib 2. q. 2 Greg A∣rimin. 2. Dist. 30. q. 1. teach, that Concupiscence is a positiue qua∣litie in the Soule euer stirring vp wicked desires: ButBellar. de pec. l. 5. c 15. o∣thers better, that it only proceedeth from the want of Ori∣ginall Iustice, which did cause the sensuality to be perfectly subiect to reason. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church Decreeth, that,Articles of Relig. art. 9. Ro∣gers Art. 9. p. 46. Although there is no condemnation for them that belieue, and are baptized: yet the Apostle doth confesse that Concupiscence & lust hath of it selfe the nature of sinne: And so by otherLuther in Assert. Art. 2. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c. 1. §. 8. Calu. Inst l. 4. c. 15. sect. 10. Willet Synopsis. p. 558. Prot. it is most generally houlden to be truly sinne. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. S. EpiphaniusHaer. 64. condemneth the Hereticke Proclu for teaching, that sinne did alwaies remaine in the Regene∣rate, and that Concupiscence was truly sinne, not taken away by Baptisme, but brought a sleepe by faith. And the same Errour was afterwards condemned in the Messalians, byL. 4 de baer. Fab. Theodoret.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that Concupiscence remayning af∣ter Baptisme, is not truly and properly Sinne. TO examine this by the sacred Scriptures, first, al suchSe chap. 20. textes as proue that not only debt of punishment is par∣doned, but euen the fault or spots of sinne are washed, pur∣ged, and taken away by Baptisme, do conuince that Concu∣piscence remayning after Baptisme is not sinne properly taken; But of this I haue spoken hertofore. Secondly, the same is cleerly taught in these wordes of S. Iames,C. 1. 14. 15. Euery one is tempted of his owne Concupiscence, ab∣stracted, and allured; Afterwardes Concupiscence when it hath con∣ceiued bringeth forth Sinne; but sinne when it is consummate engen∣dreth Death. Heere 4. things are distinguished, Concupis∣cence, that is a power of coueting prone to euill, and her 3. motions, Suggestion, Delectation, and Consent. Concu∣piscence and her first motion S. Iames doth not call Sinne, but a Temptation to sinne. Delight, but not fully deliberate, he calleth sinne, but not mortall: which only full Consent causeth. Thirdly, Concupiscence is the effect and Punishment of Originall sinne. Ergo it cannot be the Originall sinne it selfe; for although one and the same thing may be sinne, and the punishment of sinne, yea & the cause also, yet this is euer in diuers respects; for it cannot be conceiued that one thing may be sinne, and the punishment and effect of the same sinne, because it should be punishment and effect of it selfe, and, by this, be before, and after it selfe. Now that Concu∣piscence is the punishment and effect of sinne originall, ap∣peareth by S. Paul, saying,Rom. 5.12. By one man sinne entred into the world, and by sinne Death; and so vnto all men Death did passe in which all sinned. Here Death is said to be the punishment and effect of originall Sinne: now Death is parte of the corru∣ption of Mans nature, the other part of the same corruption
is Concupiscence, with Ignorance, and other wounds inflcted vpon our nature: so that the same reason is of Concupiscence, and Death: wheras Death is a Punishment and effect of Ori∣ginall sinne, so likewise is Concupiscence. And so in expresse wordes S. Austine saith,L. 5. in Iulian. c. 3. Concupiscence is the punishment of Sinne. Fourthly, if Concupiscence be taken for the inuolunta∣ry act, that is, for the first motions of Concupiscence to which the mynd resisteth, it is no sinne, as is cleere in Chil∣dren, Madmen, and Sleepers, in whose power it is not, not to haue the Acts of Concupiscence. Ergo much lesse it is sinne if it be taken for the pronesse & inclination to sinne. But neither is it in the power of wyse and aged men not to haue the first motions of Concupiscence: Ergo, neither is it sinne in them. Besides Gods law is not only possible, but ea∣sy to those who are indued with Gods grace: but it is impos∣sible, without particular Priuiledge from God, for euen the Iust not to haue the first motions of Concupiscence resisting the law of their mind, as experience teacheth, and S. Paul himselfe proued, when he said,Rom. 7.22.23. 2. Cor. 12.7.8. I am delighted with the law of God, according to the inward man: but I see another law in my members, repugning to the law of my mynd, and captiuing me in the law of sinne, that is in my members. The same also is confirmed by those wordes of S. Paul,Rom. 7.17.18. But now, not I worke it any more, but the sinne that dwelleth in me, for I know that there dwelleth not in me, that is to say in my flesh, good. These words are spoken of S. Paul himselfe, or any other iust person, in whom Con∣cupiscence cannot properly be sinne, because here it is said that the motion of Concupiscence is not his worke, & ther∣fore cannot be imputed to him to sinne, seeing it is not his. Againe, he affirmeth that this euill is not in him, but in his flesh, wheras it is certaine that the flesh is not capable of sinne properly taken. Neither will it suffice to answere with Caluin,Inst. l. 2. c. 1. §. 9. that by flesh, is vnderstood here the whole man, as he is accor∣ding to Nature corrupted. For if it were so to be vnder∣stood, then S. Paul had not truly said, not I worke it, for how did not he worke that, which the whole man, body, and
soule worketh? But if reason resisting, which is the chiefest part of man, the onely inferiour part doth worke, then it may be truly said, not I worke it. Secondly, to what end should he haue said, as it were by way of Correction, I know that there dwelleth not in me, that is in my flesh good, if that euill were in the whole man? Thirdly, S. Paul distinguisheth in expresse wordes, the flesh from the mynd, saying. I seeRom. 7.23. another law in my members, repugning to the law of my mynd, ther∣foreIb. ver. 25. I my selfe with the mynd serue the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sinne. All this is yet further established by these other wordes of the ApostleRom. 8.1. There is now therfore no damnation to them that are in Christ Iesus; for hauing in the former Chapters spoken much of Concupiscence, he at length concludeth, that the iust in Christ need not to feare, though they feele in their flesh that Concupiscence, resisting the law of their mynd. But Luther, Caluin, and others do reply, that the Apostle said, There was no damnation to the regenerate for Concupiscence, not that it did not deserue damnation, but because God forgaue the guilt therof by Baptisme. If this answere were solid, then these Prot. affirming the guilt or fault to be forgiuen in Baptisme, must needs consequently confesse, that there is nothing in the regenerate, which is truly and properly sinne;Calu. Inst. l. 3. c. 3. §. 11. themselues teaching the guilt or fault to be that which is properly sinne: according to that of S. Austine,L. 1. de Nupt. & con∣cup. c. 26. This is not to haue sinne, but to be guilty of sinne. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures, in proofe, that Concupiscence remayning after Baptisme, is not pro∣perly sinne. SAint Cyril expounding the wordes of S. Iames, affir∣meth, that,Cyr. l. 4 in Ioan. c. 51. A certaine pleasure goeth before all sinne, and a burning Concupiscence vseth to entice to sinne, which is before the
act of sinning, and it draweth the consent of mynd, persuading that this way we may easily come whither we desyre: which to be true the Disciple of Christ sheweth saying, No man who is tempted, let him say, that he is tempted from God, for God tempteth no man: But e∣uery one is tempted of his owne Concupiscence, abstracted, and allu∣red: Then Concupiscence after it hath conceiued, bringeth forth sinne, but the Consummation engendreth death. S. Austine alledging the same wordes of S. Iames saith,Lib. 5. cont. Iul. c. 5. Truly in these wordes the brood is distinguished from that which breedeth. For Concupiscence is that which breedeth, the brood is sin: But Concupiscence begetteth not, vnles it conceiue; it conceyueth not vnles it induce, that is, gayneth the assent of the will to commit euill. When therefore it is striuen agaynst, this commeth to passe, that it may not conceyue or trauayle with sinne. I will omit other Fathers, seeing Caluin confesseth that,Inst. l. 3. c. 3. §. 20. Neyther it is needfull to labour much in searching what old wri∣ters haue thought therein, seeing only Austine may be sufficient for it, who hath faythfully and with great diligence gathered all their opinions. Therefore let the Readers gather out of him, if they will haue any cer∣tainty of the Iudgment of Antiquity. But betweene him and vs there seemeth to be this difference, that he when he granteth that the faythfull, so long as they dwell in a mortall body, are so houlden bound with Concupiscences, that they cannot but couet (or lust) yet dareth he not call that disease Sinne: but being content to expresse it by the name of weakenes, he teacheth, that then only it becometh Sinne, when eyther deed, or Consent is added to conceiuing or apprehension; that is, when the will yieldeth to the first desire. But we account the very same for sinne, that man is tickled with any desyre at all agaynst the Law of God: yea that prauity it selfe which begetteth those desires in vs, we affirme to be Sinne. Therefore we teach that there is alwayes Sinne in the holy (or iust) vntill they haue put off the mortall body, because in their flesh that prauity of desiring resideth, which fighteth with that which is right. So directly (though most impudently) doth Caluin oppose his Prot. Doctrine of Concupiscence, to the Catholicke Doctrine of S. Austine, and all Antiquity. Agreably sayth Chemnitius,Loc. com. part. 3. in his theses therto an∣nexed. fol. 18. Austine began to dispute that it was not properly Sinne, but so called by a figure &c. which (if we will belieue Chemnitius) was spoken incommodiously. But
by this it appeareth, that S. Austine, and Antiquity did hould Concupiscence without consent, not to be Sinne. SECT. IV. That Protestant wryters do teach, that Concupiscence with∣out Consent is not properly Sinne. SZegedine affirmeth that,Loc. com p. 229. And see p. 223. 224. Sinne ryseth, and is perfitted by 3 degrees, Suggestion, Delight, and full Consent &c. He that doth not Consent, but resisteth delight, and temptation, yea refuseth delight, is not infected with the impurity of Sinne. SECT. V. Obiections taken from Scripture, in proofe that Concupis∣cence is properly sinne, answered. SOme obiect these wordes of S. Paul,Rom 6.12. Let not sinne ther∣fre raigne in your mortall Body, that you obey the Concupiscences therof. The Apostle doth not say, let not sinne be in your mortall Body, but let it not raigne, therfore sinne is alwaies in vs, though it doth not alwaies raigne, and this sinne he nameth Concupiscence. Answ. The word Sinne in Scri∣pture is taken in diuerse senses, sometimes properly for the fault sometimes for theDeut. 9.21. Zach. 14.19. Thren. 4.22. punishment, which is the effect of the fault, sometimes for theRom. 7.7. cause of sinne, and some∣times for Sacrifice2. Cor. 5.21 Ose. .8. of sinne. Againe it is euident by the Scriptures,Esa. 44.22. Io. 1.29. Act. 3.19. that sinne properly taken, is taken away in our Iustification. And it is no lesse cleere by the Scriptures,Rom. 7.22. that Concupiscence is not taken away in Iustification. Ergo, according to the Scriptures, Concupiscence is not properly sinne. But S. Austine shall giue the Answere, say∣ing,L. 1. Re∣tract. c. 15. This sinne wherof the Apostle so speaketh, is therfore cal∣led sinne, because it is made by sinne, and is the punishment of sinne: for it is spoken of the Concupiscence of the flesh. Againe,L. 1 cont. duas Ep. Pe∣lag. c. 1.
Though Concupiscence be termed sinne, yet it is not so called because it is sinne, but because it is caused by sinne, euen as a writing is said to be a mans hand, because the hand made it. Moreouer sinne properly taken cannot be said to be, or raigne in the Body, but in the mynd, for sinne being Iniustice, it must needs haue the same place that true Iustice hath: but no man euer placed Iustice in the Body or flesh, but in the soule or mynd. Others vrge that of S. Paul,Rom. 7.7. Sinne I did not know but by the law: for Concupiscence I knew not, vnles the law did say, Thou shalt not couet. Heere S. Paul affirmeth, that he knew Sinne by the law, and that, that sinne was Concupiscence, & that the law by which he knew it, was the Commandemēt, Thou shall not couet. Answere, Sinne is heere taken properly for the Transgression of the law, but Concupiscence is not heer taken for only pronesse to sinne, but for the voluntary act of Coueting, which is forbidden by the law, Thou shalt not Couet. And this appeareth in that, when the Apostle had sayd, the law was not sinne, that is the cause of sinne, but the cause of knowing sinne, he thereby proued it, in that men did not know the interiour Acts of desiring other mens goods, or wynes to be sinne, vnles the law had sayd, Thou shalt not Couet. And so accordingly Christ himselfe sayd,Mat. 5.28. You haue heard that it was sayd to them of old, Thou shalt not com∣mit Aduoutry; but I say to you, that whosoeuer shall see a woman to lust after her, hath already committed Aduoutry with her in his hart. This he spake agaynst the Pharisees, who still thought internall euill thoughts not to be sinne: and the same wasAnti∣quit. l. 12. c. 13. Dauid Kim∣hi in ps. 66.17. taught by Iosephus & Dauid Kimhi; of this Ignoran∣ce S. Paul speaketh when he sayd,Rom. 7.7. Concupiscence I knew not, vnles the law did say, Thou shalt not Couet. So that Concu∣piscence heere is taken for actuall Sinne consented vnto, & so nothing helpeth the cause of our Aduersaries. ManyChem. Exam. p. 506. Pt. Mart. in Comment. ep. ad Rom. vrge that, whatsoeuer is not conformable to the law of God, but differreth from it, is sinne, accor∣ding to that of S. Iohn,1. Io. 3.4. Sinne is iniquity: but the depra∣uation of mans nature is not conformable to the law of God, but differeth from it; Ergo, it is Sinne. Answere. If Sinne and iniquity be taken improperly or materially,
then as euery fault, not only in manners, but in nature, or are may be called Sinne, so likewise may Concupiscence: but if Snne be taken properly, as S. Iohn doth, for the trans∣gression of Gods law, then Concupiscence is not Sinne or iniquity. Neither is euery thing that differeth from the rule of the law, or that fighteth with it, properly Sinne & ini∣quity; for the Diuell tempting, man sinning, the will con∣senting, the action performing, do all of them differ from the rule of the law, and fight with it, and yet none of them are sinne it selfe, which properly consisteth in the deuiation or departing from the rule of the law. Now though Con∣cupiscence doth resist the law of the mynd, yet it is not the formall resistance, nor the action departing from the rule of the law, nor as a power, or person which is bound to fol∣low the law, but as a tempter, or inciter to breake the law, as I sayd of the Diuell.
CHAP. XXIX. The true State of the Question, concerning the di∣stinction of Sinne into Mortall, and Veniall. Whether all Sinnes be of their owne nature mortall & dam∣nable; and only veniall in the Elect by Gods not impu∣tation: Or rather that there be some mortall, others ve∣niall, which of their owne nature do not deserue eternal punishment, euen in the wicked, and reprobate. SECT. 1. Catholike Doctrine. AS in the former Chapter we haue seene the endeauour of Prot. to make the in∣uoluntary Motions of Concupiscence to be sinne: so in this we shall see their like labouring to make all sinnes, euen the least idle word, to be mortall and damnable. Against which the Church declaring, that,Cont. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5. All mortall sinnes ought to be recited in Confes∣sion by Penitents &c. And that, Veniall sinnes though they may be rightly and profitably spoken in Confession, yet without sinne they may be concealed, doth herby cleerly distinguish the different na∣tures of sinne Mortal, and Veniall.
In the Councell Senonense this Article was condem∣ned for hereticall:In An∣not. pos De∣creta fidei. Those who teach veniall sinnes, to be distinct from mortall, do wretchedly endeauour to draw mens Consciences to Madnes. TheBellar. de amiss. gra. & statu pec. l. 1 c 9. Rhem. Test. in Rom. 1.12. generall beliefe of the Church now is, that Ve∣niall sinne of its owne nature is distinguished from Mortall; and this without any relation to Predestination, or Gods mercy, or the state of the Regenerate, or the like: And that the sayd veniall Sinne doth deserue punishment, but not e∣ternall: And doth offend God, but not to the losse of his fa∣uour and grace. Points Disputable. SomeS. Tho. q. 72. art. 5. teach that Sinne Mortall and Veniall, if they be formally considered, as they do in different manner of∣fend God, and cause different guilt of punishment, that then their difference is not essentiall, but accidentall, as of the subiect into accidents.Nauar. in Manual. Praiud. 9. n. 6. Others thinke, that the diui∣sion of sinne into Mortall and Veniall, is a diuision of Sinne into diuers species, or kindes of sinne, and so a small Veniall theft to differ specie, from Mortall theft: but this Opinion is lesse probable. Protestants Vntruthes. Rogers affirmeth that,Def. o the Art. art. 12. p. 53. Allowed was both whordome and vncleane pollutions by the Carpocratians &c. and is of the Iesuites and Papistes. But this is a manifest vntruth forged by Rogers. Protestant Doctrine. Protestantes teach, that,Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 5 sect. 6. fol. 9. All sinnes of their owne nature are Mortall: and yetIbid. & in 1. Ep. 10. sect. 5. fol. 447. all sinnes are pardonable (or veniall) to the faithfull: forIbid. sect. 5. They are not imputed to the Elect. Caluin ex∣plaineth this Doctrine thus.Instit. l. de poen. c. 5. p. 178. We affime the sinnes of the faithfull to be veniall, not for that they do not deserue death, but be∣cause that by the mercy of God, there is no Condemnation to them that
are in Christ Iesus. Beza.In. 1. lo. .16. Herof it followeth, no sinnes to the E∣lect to be mortall, nor veniall to the reprobate. And so according to these men, the difference of sinnes is not in their owne na∣tures any, but only in regard of the Persons sinning, accor∣ding to their Predestination, or reprobation. Protestantes agree with Ancient Heretickes. Cicero reporteth that with the Stoickes,In Para∣doxis. All sinnes are alike. AndCont. Pelagianos Dial. 1. & 2. S. Hierome and S. AustineHaer. 58. reproue Pelagius for teaching that by euery sinne Iustice is lost, and so euery sinne to be Mortall.Hier. cont. Iouin. l. 2. c. 15. 16. Aug. Hae. 82. They likewise impugne Iouinian, for affirming, All sinnes to be alike. And the same Er∣rour was afterwards condemned inTho. Waldens. Tom 2. de Sacram. c. 54. Wiccliffe. Protestant Errours. Dauid (accordingIn the Towers Disp. 2 dayes Confer. to Fulke) when he committed A∣dultery, was, and remayned the Child of God: And as BezaAd acta Colloq. Montisbelg. p. 44. thinketh, By his Adultery and murther did not loose his faith, or the holy Ghost. Luther teacheth that,Loc. com. class 5. c. 27. p. 68. And see Act. Mon. p. 1337. As nothing iustifieth but faith, so nothing sinneth but vnbeliefe. And that,L. de Captiuit. Babyl. Treatise ag. the Defence of the Cen∣sure. p. 198. & in Whitak. cont. Dut. l. 8. p. 639. A Christian or baptized man is so rich, that although he would he cannot loose his Saluation by any sinnes how great soeuer vnles he will not belieue. Wotton,Answ. to the Pa∣pistes Artic. p. 92. Sinne is forthwith remitted when it is committed, or rather before it is committed, full remission of all sinnes present and to come being ob∣tained by a man once iustifyed. Paraeus.De Iu∣stif. l. 4. c. 1. p. 935. Where faith is, no sinne can hurt, what more true? Paraeus denieth that either Dauid by Adultery and murther, or Salomon by Idolatry, or Peter by denying of Christ,De Iu∣stif. l. 3. c. 14. p. 871. fell from Iustification. Luther,Tom. 5. in Cap. 3. Gal. fol. 335. A Christian is at the same tyme Iust & a Sinner, a Friend and Enemy of God. No Sophisters admitte these contraries, because they do not vnderstand the true reason of Iustification. Caluin speaking also of the same thing saith,Cont. Franciscan. libert. p. 471. Behould how contra∣ries may be in the same subiect. For life is begunne, and somewhat of death remayneth. Luther,Tom. 5. in Gal. 4. fol. 404. True knowledge of Christ, or faith doth not dis∣pute
whether thou dst good workes to Iustice, or euill to Damnation, but plainly so decreeth. Whether thou dost good workes, thou art not therfore iustifyed. Whether thou lost euill, thou art not therfore con∣demned. AndTom. 1. Epist. fol. 345. Be a siner and sinne strongly Sinne will not take vs away from Christ, although we should committe fornication, or murder a thousand tymes in one day. Whitaker,Controu. 2. quaest. 5. c. 7. p. 514. We say if any man haue an Acte of faith, sinnes do not hurt him, Luther affirmed this, and the same we all say. And therin you sy mt imiously, that murther, adultery &c. do not hurt a man, if he only belieue. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that all sinnes are not of their owne nature Mortall, but some Mortall, some Venial. THat Sins of their owne natures are some Mortal, others Veniall, our Sauiour teacheth saying;Mat. 5.23. Whosoeuer is angry with his Brother shalbe in danger of Iudgement, whosoeuer shall say to his Brother, Raca, shalbe in danger of a Councell: And whosoe∣uer shall say, Thou foole, shalbe guilty of the hell fyre. Here are set downe 3. degrees of Anger, the first is internall, when it doth not burst forth, which ordinarily is lesse; the second when it is vttered, but without reproach: the third when it tendeth to infamy: of the first it is sayd, that he is in danger of Iudgment, that is, (according to S. Austine)L. 1. de ser. Dom. in Monte c. 9. to be called in question or tryall, whether he haue offended or not: of the second, that he is in danger of a Councell; that is, his fault being certaine, but yet it being doubtfull what punishment it deserueth, the Iudges therfore are to meete in Councell to determine the same: of the last, whose fault and punishment is certaine, and knowne, it is said, that he is guilty of Hell fyre, Now this last being knowne to deserue Hell fyre, and th' o∣ther only making the offender guilty of Councell, that is, to be tryed, whether he deserue Hell or lesser punishment; it hence followeth, that some sinnes there are which deserue not hell, and so not mortall.
Christ also compareth great and litle sinnes to Camels and gnats, saying,Mat. 23.24. Blind guides that straine a gnat, and swallow a Camell. Betwene which, of their owne natures there is scarce any proportion. Also to a moate and a beame;Luc. 6.42. Hipo∣crite cast forth the beame out of thy owne eie, and then shalt thou see cleerly to take forth the moate out of thy Brothers eye. A moate may easily be caryed, but the beame being importable would not only destroy the eie, but euen depresse the whole body, if it were laid vpon it. Also Veniall Sinne is compared to a myte or farthing,Luc. 12.59. Thou shalt not goe out thence vntill thou pay the last myte, orMat. 5.27. the last farthing. S. Paul compareth Veniall Sinne to wood, hay, stubble:1. Cor. 3.12.14.15. If any man build vpon this foundation Gold, siluer, precious sto∣nes, wood, hay, stubble, the worke of euery one shalbe manifest. Here by gold, siluer, precious stones, are vnderstood (according to S. AustineL 21 de Ciu. Dei. c. 26. Ambr ser. 20. & in ps. 118. Hieron. l. 2. cont. Io∣uin. Greg l. 4. Dial. c. 39. and other Fathers) perfect and commendable workes, which examined in Gods Iudgment, shall receiue reward: By wood, hay &c. are vnderstood vnprofitable workes, for which the offender shall suffer detriment, but yet shall be saued: which cannot be meant of mortall sinnes, which bring Damnation, and which were more fitly com∣pared to yron, brasse &c. as S. GregoryIbid. thinketh. Christ our Sauiour compareth clensing of veniall sinne to the washing of the feete,Io. 13.10. He that is washed, needeth not but to wash his feete, but is cleane wholly: here by foulenes of the feete, when all the rest is cleane, is signifyed manifestly, not our grieuous sinnes, but imperfections of lesse impor∣tance. S. Iames exemplifyeth this in Concupiscence,C. 1.14.15. Euery one is tempted of his owne Concupiscence, abstracted and allu∣red: Afterward Concupiscence when it hath conceiued, bringeth forth Sinne, but Sinne when it is consummate, engendreth Death. Heere 3. motions of Concupiscence are set downe, the first inuo∣luntary, when one is incited to Sinne, but without all con∣sent, & this is not Sinne, but the cause of Sinne, when Con∣sent followeth. The second is imperfectly voluntary, and sinne, but yet but veniall, as being not fully deliberate, and for such distinguished heere from the last, which being
with full Consent, is sayd to be consummate, and to en∣gender death, and so mortall. And whereas D. Fulke replyeth that,Ag. Rhem Test. in Iac. 1. sect. 6. fol. 426. Our Sauiour condemneth lust of the eye for Adultery, and Anger for murder, Matt. 5. I haue shewed before, that our Sauiour expressed there the seuerall degrees of Anger, making onely the last Degree guilty of Hell fyre. And as for the lust of the eye, the words of the Text do only concerne the sight of the eye, & the lust of the hart, for the wordes are,Mat. 5.39. Whosoeuer shall see a wo∣man to lust after, hath already committed aduoutry with her in his hart; for though the Body were free from act, yet was the hart defyled with Consent, and this Consent we affirme to be mortall. SomeEzech. 18.24. 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Eph. 5.5. Sinnes are such, as do not stand with san∣ctity and Iustice, but do depriue a man of Grace, and ex∣clude him from heauen: other sinnes there are which are found euen in the iust, and therefore such as may stand with Grace and saluation,Prou. 24.16. The iust man falleth seauen tymes in the day, and riseth agayne: our Sauiour hath taught all to say, e∣uen the most iust, forgiue vs our trespasses: and Saint Iames, and Saint Iohn, who doubtlesse were iust men, affirme of themselues and others that,Iac. 3.2. In many things we offend al, and that,1. Ep. Io. 1.8. If we shall say that we haue no sinne, we seduce our selues, and the truth is not in vs. These texts cannot be vnder∣stood of mortall Sinnes which depriue men of Gods Grace and fauour, and deserue eternall punishment: for S. Iames and Saint Iohn, were doubtlesse men iust, and who li∣ued in the fauour of God, and not in the state of Damna∣tion. Some would euade all this, by teaching, that to the Predestinate all sinnes are Veniall by reason of Gods not im∣puting them vnto them, and to reprobate all mortall. But it cannot be denyed, but that Adam, Dauid, Peter, Paul, & sundry others were Predestinate, and yet that they com∣mitted haynous deadly sinnes, it is most manifest. And I would demand, whether these sinnes of theirs could stand, or remyne in them with iustifying faith? If not, then they are mortall, seeing according to their own grounds, such sins
are mortall which depriue a man of iustifying faith; but if the said sinnnes may stand with iustifying fayth, then a man once iustifyed may freely commit murther, Adultery, deny Christ with periury, and the like without offence to God, or damnation to himselfe, seeing God doth not impute any sinne to those that are once iustifyed: All which is Doctrine most absurd and pernicious. Besides it further also follow∣eth, that a man Predestinate, and once Iustifyed, needeth not to pray for remission of his sinnes, or of any paine due vnto them, seeing the same are neuer imputed by God, but at the same tyme are forgiuen in which they are commit∣ted. SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of the difference betweene Mortall and Veniall sinnes. SAint Chrysostome expounding these wordes of Christ,Ho. 24. in Math. What dost thou see a moate in thy Brothers eye? saith: Heere, as it appeareth, he doth not generally forbid all sinnes to be iudged, neither doth he take from all the power thereof: but onely from these who when they abound with many Crymes, rashly condemne others of euery litle Sinne. He seemeth also to me, to note the Iewes, who be∣ing most bitter accusers of their Neighbours for little Sinnes, them∣selues neuertheles do not refraine the greatest crymes. Which also our Lord in the end of the Ghospell vpbrayded (vnto them;) They bynd heauy burdens and importable, and put them vpon mens shoulders, but with a finger of their owne, they will not moue them. S. Hierome alledging the same wordes, why seest thou a moate &c. sayth,Ad. c. 7. Math. He speaketh of those who being guilty themsel∣ues of mortall Crime, do not permit lesser Sinnes in their Brethren, strayning the gnat, and swallowing the Camell: these therfore by coun∣terfeiting of Iustice are rightly called Hypocrites who through the beame of their owne eye, do behould the moate in their Brothers eye. Cassianus hauing spoken of Capital sinnes, aduiseth thatCollat. 20. c. 11. From those litle sinnes into which the iust man falleth seauen tymes,
as it is written, and ryseth agayne, let repentance neuer be wanting. Concerning the former different degrees of Anger made by Christ our Sauiour, S. Hierome sayth to Iouinian,Cont. Iouin. l. 2. c. 17. And see. c. 16. In that thou endeauourest to proue that reproach, and murder, Raca, and Adultery, and idle words and impiety, are to be repayed with one punishment; it is formerly answered, and now I will briefly answere. Either thou wilt deny thy selfe to be a sinner, that thou mayest not be guilty of Hell, or if thou be a sinner, euen for a litle fault thou art ta∣ken to Hell.Sap. 1.11. The mouth, sayth he, which lyeth killeth the Soule: I imagine that being a man thou hast somtymes lyed, for euery man is a lyar &c. Therfore either thou art no man lest thou be a lyar, or if thou be a lyar because thou art a man, thou shalt be punished with Parricides & Adulterer, for there is no difference amongst Sinnes; & they will not thank thee so much whome from below thou liftest on high, as they wilbe angry, whome for light and daily Sinnes thou thrustest into vtter dar∣knes. The same S. Hierome writing vpon these wordes of Christ, Thou shalt not go out thence vntill thou pay the last farthing, expoundeth them thus,In Mah. 5.26. Cyp. l. 4. ep. 2. post med. Ambr. in Comment. ad c. 12. Lucae. This is that which he sayth, thou shalt not go forth of Prison, vntill thou shalt pay the least Sinnes: and the same Exposition is giuen by S. Cyprian, and S. Ambrose. The former wordes of S. Paul are thus expounded by S. Austine,Ser. 41. de Sanctis. With that transitory fyre (whereof the Apostle said, he shalbe saued, yet so as by fyre) not capitall (or deadly) bu little sinnes are purged &c. by which sinnes though we do not thinke the Soule to be killed, yet they make it deformed &c. To the same pur∣pose writeth S. Gregory,Dial. l. 4. c. 39. Seeeing Paul affirmeth Christ to be the foundation, and addeth, if any shall build &c. he shalbe saued, yet so as by fyre: Although this may be vnderstood of Tribulation giuen vs in this lyfe, yet if any vnderstand it of the fyre of the purging to come, i is carefully to be considered, that he whome he affirmeth to be saued by fyre, is not he who vpon this foundation buildeth Iron, brasse, or lead that is, greater Sinnes, and therefore harder, and then vnsatia∣ble: but wood, hay, chaffe, that is, little and lightest Sinnes, which the fyre may easily consume. Agreably heereto sayth Origen,Ho. 14 in Leuit. & ho. 15 in Num. & ho. 2. in Ps. 38. & ho. 6 in Exod. Basil. in c. 9. Isaiae. we may yet further ad, that the nature of Sinne is like to a matter combustible; which S. Paul affirmeth to be built by sinners, who vpon the foundation of Christ, do
build wood, hay, stubble, wherin is manifestly discouered, that there are some sinnes so light, that they are compared to stubble, to which in∣deed as soone as fyre is brought, it cannot long continue: and other sin∣nes are like to hay, the which are with no great difficulty consumed by fyre; yet in these the fyre abydeth longer then in stubble: and lastly there are other sinnes which are compared to wood, in which according to the qualitie of the offences, the fyre may fynd long and store of food. So therfore euery sinne according to the quality and quantity therof, shall pay due punishment. S. Austine teacheth vs how to satisfye in this life for these litle sinnes, saying,Enchyr. c 71. And Concil. Tolet. 4. Can 9. For daily, short, and light sinnes, without which this life is not passed, the dayly prayer of the faithfull doth satisfy: for it belongeth to them to say, Our Father which art in heauen &c. This prayer doth wholly blot out the least, and daily Sinnes. Yea he instanceth some of these litle sinnes, saying,Enchyr. c. 22. Sometimes we lye for the good of others, a sinne therfore is it, but veniall. Also he calleth,Ser. 41. de Sanct. & Enchyr. c. 78. 79. Minuta peccata, litle sinnes, as often as a man eateth and drinketh more then is necessary, or speaketh more then is meete, or is more silent then is expedient: with many more such like. In so much that Peter Martyr acknowledgeth that,Com. plac. part. 3. c. 4. sect. 81. S. Austine in his bookes de Spir. & Lit. c. 28. saith, Euen as there are certaine veniall Sinnes, without which euery iust man cannot liue, and yet they hinder vs not from Saluation: So are there &c. Lastly, by the foulnes of the feet wherof our Sauiour spake, he vnderstandeth,In Io. Tract 56 and see him ep. 29. ad Hieron. The hu∣mane affections without which in this mortality we liue not. But the Fathers confessed Doctrine herof, is more plainly seene in their Doctrine of Purgatory. SECT. IV. That Protestants teach the true difference of Mor∣tall, and Veniall Sinnes. BVllinger confesseth, that when our Sauiour spake, as before, of the seuerall degrees of Anger, that he there∣by expressed,Dec. 3. Ser. 0. p. 508. The difference of Sinnes: he also by foulnes of
the feete, vnderstandeth,Dec. 4. Ser. 10. p. 771. The infirmity and imperfection which remayneth after Regeneration.Concil. Theol p. 546. We adde (sayth Melancthon) the difference of Sinne, mortall, or raigning, by which Grace is lost; & of Sinne, not raigning, or veniall.Acta Concil Re∣gensp. p. 151. The Princes & Prot. Estates (in their Answere to the Emperour penned by Melancthō) affirme that,Ib. p. 165. Because in the Saints in this lyfe there abyde sinnes, there must be put the difference of those Sinnes, for the which Grace is not left, and of other Sinnes, which do cleane cast out Grace, and ex∣clude the Holy Ghost. The Protestant Deuines of Saxony in their publicke Confession teach in like manner, that,Hrmo∣ny of Con∣fess. p. 80. seeing it is sayd, that Sinnes remayne in the Regenerate, it is necessary to haue a diffe∣rence of sinne deliuered &c. And it is manifest, that some who are re∣generate do grieue, and shake of the holy Ghost, and are agayne reiected of God, and made subiect to the wrath of God, and eternall Punish∣ment &c. Therefore it is necessary that those Sinnes which remayne in holy men in this mortal lyfe, and yet do not shake of the holy Ghost, be distinguished from other Sinnes, for the which man is agayne made subiect to the wrath of God, and to eternall punishments. Agayne,Ib. p. 81, 82, 290. Me∣lancth loc. com. de dis∣crim. pec. mort. ac ven. p. 108. 169. There be also other Sinnes in the regenerate, who keep fayth, and a good Conscience, which do not corrupt the foundation &c. but are the relickes of Originall Sinnes, as darknes, doubting, carnall security &c. Agayne, when we do after this sort withstand that corruption, which as yet remayneth in the Regenerate, these euils are couered, and it is called Sinne that doth not raygne, or veniall Sinne, and the holy Ghost is not shaken of. It is euident, that this doctrine concerning the difference of Sinnes, is true, playne, and necessary for the Church. If now there be such difference of Snnes, that in one and the same regenerate person, some sinnes do shake of the holy Ghost, and some not; what els then is this, but to af∣firme, that in one and the same man, some sinnes be mortal, and some venial? Others expressely teach that,Adamus Francisci in Marar. Theol. p. 469. 11. Some Sinne of the iust is mortall, other venial: it is mortall, whereby fayth is lost, that so they cease to be iust: it is veniall, wherewith the Holy Ghost and faith can continue: and the same is taught byCentur. Exercit. Theol Cent. 3. p. 663. 64. Bachmanus, who in proofe thereof alledgeth S. Austine in Enchyr. c. 71. pro∣duced
in the last Section. Iacobus Andraeas auoucheth that,Resp. Bezae ad Act. Colloq Mon∣tisb part. alt. p. 63. 69. Veniall Sinnes are the falls of humane infirmity; wheras saith he, it is said,Prou. 14.16. The Iust man falleth seauen tymes in the day by these the holy Ghost is not lost; but mortall sinnes are abhomi∣nations committed against the law of Gd. Wherin, and sundry o∣ther his sayings, his maning is so manifest, that Beza doth therfore reproue him saying therof,Resp. Bezae. p. 71. and see part. 1 p. 15. 3. 24. This diffrence which Andraes mketh betweene veniall and mortall sinnes, is vaine. Husse also acknowledgeth, as Foxe confesseth, that some sinnes beAct. Mn. p. 220. deadly, othersIb. Veniall, which do not vt∣terly expell, or put away the habite of vertue. Husse his owne wordes are, Iohn the Euangelist sometymes speaketh of grieuous or mortall sinne, as 1. Io. 3. You know that he appeared, that he might take away sinnes, and sinne is not in him. Euery one who abydeth in him,Ad ps. 118. sinneth not, and euery one that sinneth, seeth him not. Behould here he speaketh of grieuous Mortall sinne, or of Cryme. But there, 1. Io. 1. If we shall say, that we haue not sinne, we seduce our selues, & the truth is not in vs, he speaketh of light sinne, which is called by vs veniall. Lastly M. Iacob a great Precisian, though in wordes he will not grant veniall sinne, yet doth he in sequele of Do∣ctrine cleerly acknowledge the same, saying,Defence of the Curch and Ministery of Engl. p. 88. There are sinnes against the foundation, and there are sinnes that stand with the foundation, wherin men liuing and dying ignorantly, without particuler repentance may be saued. But what is this else but to say, some sinnes are Mortall, and others Veniall? SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against the difference of Mortall and Veniall sinne, are answered. SOme obiect that,Ezech. 28 10. The soule that sinneth shall dye: And ht,Rom. 6.23 The reward of sinne is Death: And that,Mat. 3.20. He that shall breake one of these leat Commandementes &c. shalbe called the least n the kingdome of heauen. And,Iac. 2.10. He that offendeth in one, is made guilty of all. But the former Scriptures which
proue the diuersity of sinnes, do sufficiently explaine these and such like, to be vnderstood, not of that degree of sinne, which is but conceiued, but of sinne consummate, which bringeth forth death: neither of such forsaid sinne, as maketh vs in daunger but of Iudgment, or Councell, but of that which mketh vs guilty of Hell fyre. Ezechiel speaketh of enormous innes which he there reciteth: S. PaulRom. 6.12 13.16, 19.21.22. spea∣keth of such sinnes as will not stand with Grace and Iu∣stice, and the true seruice of God; Our Sauiour speaketh not of such as in any reguard breake the Commandement of God, but of the Scribes and Pharisees who by false Interpre∣tation depraued the same; so commēding loue of our Neigh∣bours, as withall commnding hatred of our Enemies; so condemning Adultery, as allowing Concupiscence only in hart consented vnto. Nther are they here called the least, because the Transgression therof is inded litle sinne, but be∣cause in respect of the other, they are litle, it being a lesse sinne to desire, then to commit Adultery, and to say, Thou foole, then to murther. S. Iames explicateth himselfe to speake of great sinnes, for immediatly he saith, for he that said. Thou shalt not commit Adultery, said also, Thou shalt not kill &c. Now the reason why he saith, He that offendeth in one is made guilty of all, is giuen byE. 9, ad Hieron. S. Autine to be this, Because all Commande∣ments are reduced to this one of Charity, as S. PaulRom. 3.. teacheth, from whence it followeth, that who transgresseth any one Commande∣ment, violateth Charity, and therby the whole law. In whichAut. oper. imperf. in Mat. 0 33. he is not vnlike to that man who leauing one part or mem∣ber of his Body vnarmed, receiueth therin a deadly wound, though the rest be armed and fenced. Lastly as S. Iames said, he that offendeth in one is made guilty of all, so likewise he said of himselfe and other iust men,C. .2.3. In many things we offend all, which doubtles cannot be vnderstood of damnable sinnes.
CHAP. XXX. The true State of the Question, concerning the Au∣thour, and Cause of Sinne. Whether God doth Will, Decree, Predestinate, Counsayle, or Compell men to sinne, or to be damned, or only per∣mitteth the same; and that man himselfe is cause of his owne Sinne, and Damnation: And whether Christ dyed for all men, or only for the Predestinate? SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. SO blasphemous and abhominable is the Doctrine of sundry Protestants making God the Author and Cause of all sinnes that men commit, that for an Eter∣nall Condemnation therof the Catho∣licke Church hath Decreed, that,Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 6. If any shall say, that it is not in mans power to make his wayes euill, but that God worketh aswell euill deeds as good, not only by permission, but properly and by himselfe, in so much that the treason of Iudas is no lesse his proper worke, then the calling of Paul, Anathema. And,Can. 17. If any shall say, that the grace of Iustification doth not happen but to those who are Predestinate to life: and that all others who are called, are indeed called, but do not receiue grace, as by
Gods power being Predestinate to euill, Anathema. In the second Councell Arausicanum it is defined that,Conc. A∣raufian. 2. cap. 23. Men do their owne will, not Gods, when they do that which dis∣pleaseth God. And,Cap. 25. Any to be Predestinate to euill by Gods power, we do not only not belieue, but if there be any that will belieue so great an Euill with all detestation we denounce Anathema against them. In the Councell of Valence it is taught that,Conc. Va∣lent. sub Leone P. 4. Cap. 2. Gods foreknowledge doth not impose necessity to any that he cannot do other∣wise: but that which he was to be of his owne will, he, as God, who knoweth all things before they be done, forknoweth by his owne Omni∣potency and immutable Maiesty &c. Neither do therfore euill men pe∣rish, because they could not be good, but because they would not be good, and remayned through their owne fault, in the masse of damnation, ei∣ther by Originall desert, or also actuall. And,Cap. 3. we confidently con∣fesse the Predestination of the elect to lyfe, and the Predestination of the wicked to death: but in the Election of those that are to be saued, the mercy of God did goe before the good desert, but in the damnation of those that perish, the euill desert goeth before the iust Iudgment of God &c. But any by Gods power to be Predestinate to euill, as though they could not do otherwise, we do not only not belieue, but if there be any who will belieue so great an euill, with all detestation according to the Councell of Arausicanum, we denounce Anathema against them. According to these Councells the CatholikeBellar. de ami. Gra. & statu Pe. l. 2 c. 8. Rhem. Test. in Mat. 13.15. Church still reacheth, that God doth not Predestinate, Command, Counsayle, o Compel men to Sinne, but only permitteth Sinne: the true Causes whereof are the Diuell, and Man himselfe. Points Disputable. SomeS. Tho. q. 6. de veritate art. 1. Alex. Halens in 1. p. Summae. q. 28. num 2. art. 1.2. Schoolmen teach, that Predestination for∣mally consisteth in the act of Gods vnderstanding, where∣by the Predestinate are efficaciously ordained to a superna∣turall end by supernaturall meanes.Scotus in, 1. Dist. 40. q vnica. S. Bonauent. ead Dist. art. 1. q. 2. Others place it essen∣tially in the act of the Will, whereby the Predestinate are chosen by God. SomeDurand. 1. Dist 41. q. 1 n. 10. teach, that the effect of Predestination is only the meanes whereby the Predestinate attayne to bea∣titude,
but not the attayning of the end it selfe.Occam. 1. Dist. 41. q. vnica Gabr. 1 Dist. 40. q. vnica. art 1. Others teach the direct contrary: AndCommu∣nis Theolo∣gorum. others most probably make both the meanes, and the attayning of the end, the effct. SomeTho. de Argent. in. 1. Dist. 41. q. vnica. ad. 2. though very vntruly, make the meritorious Cause of Predestination according to all the effects thereof, such good morall workes as go before the Grace of Iustifica∣tion.Apud Durand. 1. Dist. 41 q. 2. Others deny this of those morall Workes, but grant it of such as follow Iustification.Heuric. Gandau. quod lib. 4. q. 19. & quodl. 8. q. 5. Others deny it of workes following Iustification, if they be considered as proceeding from the freewill of man, but not as they pro∣ceed from the grace of God.S. Th. 1. p. q. 13. art. 5. Ale. Halens. p. 1. q. 28. mem. 3 art. 3. and others. But the most probable opi∣nion is, that it Predestination be considered, according to all the effects thereof, there is no meritorious cause at all in him that is Predestinate, but all is to be referred to the meere Will and Grace of God, though also it is most true that God ordinarily doth Predestinate only those of yeares of dis∣cretion, whome he forknoweth from all eternity to coo∣perate with his diuine grace, euen to the end. SomeMagist. 1. Dist. 40. Durand. ib. q. 2. teach, that in the reprobate, there is not a∣ny meritorious cause of his reprobation, in reguard of all the effects thereof, to wit, Gods permission of his Sinnes, and his eternall Punishment.S. Bonau. 1. Dist. 41. art. 1 q. 1. Heruaeus 1. Dist. 40. q. vnica art. 2. Others affirme those sin∣nes wherewith a Reprobate departeth out of this lyfe, to be the meritorious cause thereof. Protestant vntruthes. D. White demandeth,Way to the true Church Pref. to the Reader n 12 Who will belieue that any can be so impious that houldeth there is a God, as to make him the Authour of Sinne, and yet they shame not to say we do it: Nor it seemeth that M. White shameth to deny it, but he shall see it plainly in the next Paragraph of Protestant Doctrine. M. Rogers writethDef. of the Art. art. 21. p 183. The Sauiour of men is Iesus Christ a man, and came into the world to saue no women but men, say some Papistes: And redeemed the superiour world only, which is man, said Postellus the Iesuit: and yet not all men neyther, for S. Francis hath redeemed so many as are saued since his dayes, say the Franciscan Fry∣ars.
The Sauiour of women, from her tyme till the end of the world, is S. Clare, affirme some other Papistes: as Postellus sayth, It is one Mother Iane. The Sauiour of men and women is S. Mary through her Virginitity, say some; is S. Christina by her Passion, say other Papists &c. Christ hath satisfyed, and was offered only for Originall Sinne, an errour of Thomas Aquinas. Thus lowdly lyeth Rogers: for in this one Sentence, there is not one Proposition, which is not a pure lye, framed by himselfe, in hatred of Catholickes and their Religion, Protestant Doctrine. Caluin teacheth, that,Iustit. l. 3. c. 23. §. 6. God doth by his Decree ordaine that among men some be borne deuoted from their mothers wombe, to certayne perdition, who by their destruction may glorify God.Ad acta Collo. Mont. part. alt. p. 212. 215. 216. Beza endeauoureth to answere such cleere Scriptures as teach that Christ dyed for the Sinnes of the whole world. And as concerning our Sinnes, Swinglius teacheth that,Tom. 1. de Prouid. Dei. fol. 365. When we commit Adultery or murder, it is the worke of God: God being the mouer, the authour, and the incyter. Caluin and Beza maintaine that, our sinnes are not by Gods permission only, but also by his Decree and will.Inst. l. 1. c. 4. sect. 3. 4. &c. c. 18. sect. 1. Beza in the Display of Popish Pra∣ctises. p. 76. Fulk ag Rh. Test. in c. 6. Mat. sect. 6. & in. 3. ad Ro. sect. 4. & in. . ad Ro. sect. 2. & in Art. 28. sect. 2. I haue now (saith Caluin) shewed cleerly inough, God to be called the Authour of all those things, which those censurers will haue only to happen by his idle permission, which are Sinnes: And,1. Instit. c. 14. §. 3. I do acknowledge this to be my Doctrine; Adam to haue fallen, not only by Gods permission, but also by his secret Coun∣sayle &c.De Prou. p. 73. Though Adam destroyed himselfe and others, yet it is necessary to ascribe the corruption and guilt to the secret Iudgement of GodIb. p. 738 I confesse I haue written, the fall of Adam to haue been ordayned by the hidden Decee of God. Zanchius granteth that,De Prae∣dest. c. 3. o. 7. Col. 13. There are not vulgr (Prot.) nor vnlearned men, which do ea∣sily grant this, that some are Predestinate by the Lord to Sinne. Andbid. c 4. Col. 318. It cannot be denyed, but that some are Predestinated to indura∣tion and execration. ThisPart. 2. Thss p 167. Doctrine of Predestination (as Pola∣nus thinketh) is the foundation, and chiefest part of the Ghospell, to wit, of Protestants. CaluinInst. l 1. c. 17. §. 11. &c. 18 §. de Pro. p 739 746. Beza in abst. Calu. Hethu∣i p 317. 324. 382. and Beza do in sundry places expressely teach that, God doth not only permit, but command Sathan to lye &
deceyue men. And heerof Beza sayth,Ib. p. 318. In this Doctrine is pla∣ced the Summe of our Saluation, and comfort. Caluin,Inst. l. 1. c. 18. § 4. & de Praed. p. 717. Beza de Prae∣dest cont. Cast p 401. Pe. Mart. in c. 9. Rom p. 363. & in c. 1. p. 37. Beza, and Peter Martyr, do in seuerall places defend that, God doth inforce, and compell men to sinne, and the Deuill to tempt them. And of this Doctrine Peter Martyr saith,In loc. class. 1. c 15 §. 9 That we can lesse vnderstand, how it doth not fight with Gods Iustice to punish sinnes, and yet by tempting to inforce them to them, it is no meruaile, for God can do more then we vnderstand. Caluin, Beza, and other Prot. teach, that,Inst. l. 3. c. 23 §. 9. Beza de Praed. p. 391. Swingl. de Prouid. c. 6. fol. 366. God doth necessitate and compell men to sinne: and yet, that men so necessita∣ted shalbe damned for the same. Yea (saith Caluin)Inst. l. 3. c. 23. §. 3. that I may a hundred tymes confesse God to be the Author (of damnation) which is most true. And,In Rom. 7.14. that God electeth some, reprobateth o∣thers, the cause is not elswhere to be sought for, then in his intention. Beza auoucheth that,De Pred. vol. 3. Theol. p. 438. God of his meere will, and therfore no respect had of worth or indignity, hath predestinated to hatred and de∣struction those whom he thought good &c. This he callethIb p. 406 The foundation of our faith. Grinaeus and other Prot. teach that,Apud Schlusselb. l 4. Theol. Calu. Art. 8. p. 76. Sinnes are not the Cause that men are damned. In reguard of the premisses Beza is inforced to say,De Prae∣dest. cont. Ca∣stal. p. 340. We thinke it a que∣stion inexplicable to mans sense, how God is not in fault, if he ordaine the Causes of Damnation. And let all Prot. who belieue this Doctrine, tremble to thinke in what miserable case they are, seeing D. Whitaker saith,Cont. Camp. rat. 8. p 215. If Caluin, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, or Luther, or any of ours affirme God to be the Author of sinne. I will not deny, but that we are all guilty of horrible blasphemy and wickednes. A large and desperate offer. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. Vincentius writing against this Errour, saith,L Cont. Haer post med. Who before Simon Magus &c. durst affirme God the Creatour, to be the au∣thor of our wicked deeds &c. And who before Nouatianus, that God would rather the death of him that dyeth, then that he should returne & liue? Herof also saith S. Austine,Ad Articulos si∣bi falsò impo∣sitos, art. 10. It is an hatefull & abho∣minable opinion to belieue, that God is the author of any euill will, or action. And the same ErrourHaer. 66. he condemneth in Florinus.
And the like dothL. 1. c. 29. Tertul. cont. Marcion. l. 1. c. 2. S. Irenaeus, & Tertullian in Marcion. There were also certainPrateo∣lus, verbo Praedestina∣ti. Genebrar in Sozimo. Si∣gebert Anno 415. Baron. Anno 490. n. 17. Heretickes called Predesti∣nates, who taught that neither good deeds would profit the good, nor euill deeds hurt the wicked, but that all things de∣pended only of Gods absolute Predestination, or Reproba∣tion; wherupon they auerted the good from doing good deeds, and incited the bad to do worse. Yea it is related a∣mongst theSand. haer. 125. ex Cedreno in Heraclio. Errours of Mahomet, that he taught God to be the Author of all euill. Protestant Errours. No Errour can be more grosse and impious, then the Protestant Doctrine related before; only adde herunto the great crime that Danaeus imputeth to Bellarmine, saying,Controu. 1. quaest. 14. p. 30. Bellarmine saith, Christ is predestinate the Sonne of God, which is Arrianisme. And the same is taught byL. 1. de Praedest. §. 70. Affelmannus. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that God doth not Predestinate, will, Decree, Counsaile, or compell men to sinne, or to be damned, but only permitteth the same: And that Christ dyed not only for the Predestinate, but for all men whatsoeuer. TO confute these blasphemies by the sacred Scriptures, they teach vs that god willeth not sinne, or the death of a sinner, but that he conuert and liue; as also that he ha∣teth and forbiddeth sinne.Ezech 18.32. I will not the death of him that dyeth, saith our Lord, returne ye and liue.Ib c. 33. 11. I will not the death of the impious, but that the impious conuert from his way, and liue. Con∣uert conuert yee from your most euill waies. And, why will you dye ô house of Israel?Isa. 5.3.4. Iudge betwene me and my vineyard, what is there that I ought to do more to my vineyard & haue not done to it? whether that I looked it should yield grapes, and it hath yielded wild grapes? ThouPs. 5.3. art not a God that willeth iniquitie. Because these words,Ps. 5.5. Thou art not a God that wilt iniquity, do proue that God doth
not will sinne, therfore theAnno 1568. Geneuians insteed herof do translate, Thou dost not loue iniquity. And, ThouAnno 1588. 1610. dost not delight in iniquity, that so they may defend their Errour, that God wil∣leth iniquity for some end; although he neither loue it, nor delight in it. And the same corruption is made byIn sua versione lat. Anno 1603. Tremellius andApud Vorstium in Paraseue. c. 3. Piscator.Ps 5.7. Thou hatest all them that worke iniquitySap. 14.9. The wicked man and his wickednes are hatefull to God.Eccles. 15.21. And see Ierem. 19.5. He hath commanded no man to do vngodly.Iac. 1.13. Eccl. 15.11.12. Let no man when he is tempted say, that he is tempted of God; for God is not a tempter of euills, and he tempteth no man. These textes are most cleere to proue, that God doth not will, com∣mand, or tempt men to sinne, but wisheth their Conuer∣sion and hateth sinne. Because these words of Ezechiel,Ezech. 33.11. I will not the death of a sinner, but that he conuert from his way and liue, do proue that God willeth not the death of a sinner, Musculus insteed ther∣of translateth thus,In loc. tit. de verita∣te Dei. p. 452. I do not delight in the death of a sinner; and the same is vsed byIn hunc locum. Tremellius and Piscator,In Thess. l. 2. p. 187. that so God may be thought to will the death of a Sinner, though he do not delight therin. Other places attribute sinne and damnation to our selues, and all our goodnes to God,Ose. 13.8. Ezech. 24.19. Isa 65.12. Prou. 1.24. Mat. 23.37. Perdition is thyne ô Israel, only in me is thy help.Io. 8.44. When he speaketh a lye, he speaketh of his owne, because he is a lyar and the Fa∣ther therof.1. Io. 3.8. He that committeth sinne is of the Deuill &c. For this appeared the sonne of God, that he might dissolue the workes of the Deuill. So that by these places it appeareth that sinne procee∣deth not from God, but from the Deuill & the sinner him∣selfe. All such places as conuince that Christ would haue all saued, and dyed for all, confirme the same,1. Tim. 2.4.6. God will all men to be saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, who gaue himselfe a Redemption for all;1. Io. 1.29. who tooke away the sinnes of the world. Who was1. Io. 2.2. the reconciliation for our sinnes, and not for ours only, but also for the sinnes of the whole world, and sundry2. Cor. 5.15. Rom. 8.32. Heb. 2.. Io. 4.42. 2. Pet 3.9. Apoc. 3.10. Isa. 5.3.4. Ezech. 18.32.33.11. such like. To these places Prot. answere, That they are only vn∣derstood of the Elect, and not of all in generall. Beza,In Col∣loq. Montis∣bel. p. 442. & part. 2. resp. ad acta illius colloq. p. 231. It is cleere that Peter speaketh only to the faythfull Zanchius,L. 5 de Nat. Dei. c. 2. col. 564.
It is only vnderstood of the Elect.In Mat. 6. p. 169. Bucer, It is vnderstood of them oly whom he hath chosen to this purpose, that they may be con∣uerted and liue: so restrayning vniuersall Propositions to particular; which herin they do so vniustly, that Iacobus AndraeasIn Mat. 6. p. 19. In col∣loq. Montis∣bel p. 422. in dislike therof saith, This sentence of Peter is so plaine, that it can by no meanes admitte this false Interpretation. Yea,In Col∣loq Montis∣bel. p. 419. it is mnfest impiety and abhominable doctrine, against the expresse letter of a Promise vniuersall, to make a particuler. And,P. 411. It is horrible to be heard, so plaine and vniuersall vocation, to de∣uise o be particuler. Agreable also saith Gerlachius,Tom. 2. Disp. 24. When∣soeuer in Scripture there is an vniuersall proposition, it is to be limited by no distinction, vles the same be grounded vpon certaine and cleere words of Scripture otherwise euery doctrine may be shifted of with the subtili y of distinstions. So litle helpeth this Euasion, euen in the Iudgement of Protestants. Yea the Scriptures teach that Christ dyed euen for the reprobate, & those that are damned:1. Tim. 4 10. We hope in the liuing God, which is the Sauiour of all men, especially of the faythfull.2. Pet. 2.1. In you there shallbe lying Maisters, which shall &c. deny him that hath bought them, the Lord; bringing vpon themselues speedy perdition:1. Cor. 8.11 Rom. 4.15. through thy knowledge shall thy weake brother perish for whome Christ hath dyed?Heb. 10.29. How much more thinke you doth he deserue worse punishment which hath troden the Sonne of God vnder foote, and esteemed the Bloud of the Testament polluted, wherin he is sancti∣fyed. Here the wicked man, who, as Prot. affirme,See the Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576. in Heb. 10.29. com∣miteth sinne against the holy Ghost, being therfore a reprobate, is yet said to be j,:ncl:jyed in thehlrud of Christ, which could not be, vnles it had bene shed for him. Here Prot. are inforced to corrupt the Scriptures: for because these wordes,1. Tim. 4.10. Who is the Sauiour of all men especially the faithfull, do shew Christ to haue redeemed all men, BezaIbid. insteed of Sauiour, pla∣ceth a Preseruer. saing, Because the name of Sauiour hath trou∣bled some, in reguard that it somwhat fauoureth life eternall to be gayned in Christ, therfore that I might eschew the doubtfull significa∣tion of the word I rather call him, Preseruer. Wherin Tremellius also followeth him.
BezaDisplay of Popish Practises. p. 186. 190. 191. & in colloq. Montiab p. 1. p. 182. 183. & part. 1. p. 173. Danaeus Isa∣gog. part. 4. l. 3. c. 38. p. 204. Kinnedon∣cius in his redempt. of mank. p 170. 162. Willet. Synop. p. 76. Luther de ser. Arb. Tom. 2. f. 450. and sundry other Prot. in answere to all the former places do affirme and teach. A double will in God; the one secret, fearfull, and vnsearchable; the other, the reuealed will of God in his word. Affirming herupon that, he will not the death of a Sinner in his will reuealed in his word, but willeth it by his vnsear∣chable will. But if God would not the death of a sinner by his will reuealed in his word, why then do Prot. vrge from his said word, that he willeth the death of a Sinner, as of E∣sau, Pharao &c. And if that other vnknowne will be not reuealed in the Scriptures, from whence then haue they knowledge of such a will in God, vnles it be from their owne vaine Imaginations? Besides, if God by his forsaid reuealed will, would seriously and in truth the Conuersion and Saluation of a sinner, and yet by his forsaid secret will, would it not; then he doth plainly will contraries, which to thinke, were absurd. And if to auoyd this contrariety in God, Protestantes only meane, that by his said reuealed will, he would not seriously & indeed the saluation of the said sinner, but only maketh outward shew by promise in word, as though he willed the same: this then were his re∣uealed dissimulation, rather then his reuealed will, which to say were blasphemous: so insufficient euery way is this ans∣were, either to satisfy the former plainest textes of Scripture, or to vphould this so impious doctrine of the Caluinistes. But because someKinne∣don. in his redempt. of mank. p. 161. demaund, why all are not saued, if God would haue them so indeed, seeing,Ps 113.3. He doth whatsoe∣uer he will? I answere with sundryHiper. Meth. Theol. l. 1. p. 156. Muscul. loc. com. de vo∣lunt. Dei. p. 415. Piscat. Vol. Thes. Theol. p. 174. Heming. de vniuers. grat. p. 16. A man∣dus Polanus partition. Theol. l. 1 p. 10. 12. Prot. that God willeth some things absolutely, and those do euermore accordingly come to passe; other things he willeth both seriously and truly, and yet but conditionally, if we our selues will, as our Conuersion, Repentance, and the like: so it is sayd,Ezech. 18.21.23. & 33.11.19. The wicked man shall liue, if he will turne from his wayes AndApoc. 3.20. If any man will heare my voyce, and open the gate, I will come into him In these things God doth not inforce our willes, but giueth vs condition ofDeut. 30.19. Eccles. 15.17. Choyce, as1. Cor. 10.23. not suffering vs to be tempted aboue our power: And therefore though these things come not alwayes to passe answerably to Gods fore∣said
will, the cause therof yet is through want, not of Gods will, but of our owne will not assenting to his: which our default, contray to Gods forsayd Conditionall will, himselfe plainly yet further signifyeth, as where it is said,Ezech. 24.13. I would clense thee, and thou art not clensed from thy filthines butMarg. notes of the Eng. Bibles, in Ezech. 24.13. wouldest notProu. 1.24. I called & you refused.Isa 65.12. I called & you haue not answered: I spake, & you haue not heard &c. and you haue chosen the things that I would not. And to Hierusalem,Ma. 23.37. How often would I &c. and you would not. And hence it is, that the wicked are sayd toAct. 7.51. resist the holy Ghost: So cleerely are we taught by the sa∣cred Scriptures, that God doth not decree or will the Sinne or damnation of men, but that he desireth their Saluation, and dyed for all men. SECT. III. That the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe that God doth not will or command Sinne: And that Christ dy∣ed for all. THe Ancient Fathers were so carefull and zealous in cleering God from being the Cause or Authour of sin, that S.Euseb. l. 5. hist c. 19. Irenaeus writ a whole worke agaynst that Here∣sy; S. Basill a whole Oration; TheodoretSer. 5. ad Graecos. confirmeth the same at large with the testimonies of Plato, and other Philosophers; S. Austine writ three books of freewill, chie∣fly to proue, that God is not the cause of Sinne: and S.L. 1. ad Mominum. Fulgentius in a whole booke disputeth this questiōs, whether sinnes be done by Gods Predestination, which is the selfesame we argue now with Prot. and he cōcludeth with vs negatiuely. S. Cyprian affirmeth that,L. 4. Ep. 2. Seeing it is written,Sap. 1.13. God made not Death, neither doth he reioyce in the perdition of the liuing, that he that would haue no man perish, desireth sinners to do Pennance &c. euill deeds come not from the holy Ghost but from the instinct of the Aduersary &c.Haer. 66. quae est Ma∣nich. propè init. It is absurd (saith S. Epiphanius) to as∣cribe malice to God, and the Character of diuine and Ecclesiasticall Scripture doth confesse, that God is farre &c. from Euill. For God made nothing euill, but all things very good as being good by nature &c. nei∣ther therfore was euill alwaies, nor was it made by God.
S. Ambrose demandeth,L. 1. Examern. c. 8. how God can beget malice, see∣ing the Prophet crieth, Cease from your malice? and especially S. Dauid sayth, Cease from euill, and do good: How therefore do we make our Lord the beginner therof? But this brutish opinion is theirs, who would haue the Church troubled. S. Hierome expounding those words of the Apostle, Who made all things according to the Counsaile of his will, saith,Comment. in c. 1. ad Ephes. Not that all things which are done in the world, are done by his will & Counsaile, for then euils (or sinnes) should be impued to him; but that all things which he doth, he doth by Counsaile, and will. In like sort vpon those words, God created man right, heComment. in Eccl. c. 7. wrieth, Lest he should seeme to make God the Authour of Euill, he wisely for∣warned, and affirmeth, that we are created good by God, but because we are left with freewill, by our owne fault we slyde to worse. S. Austine auoucheth that,De spir. & lit c. 31. We no where read there is no will (or desire) but from God, and it is well not to be written, be∣cause it is not true; for otherwise God is the Author of sinnes, which God forbid. And in another place,De lib. arb. l. 3. c. 16. I do not fynd at all nei∣ther that it can be found, nor indeed is, I do confirme, how our Sinnes can be ascribed to our God, when as in them I fynd him praysworthy, not only because he punisheth them, but also, that they are then done, when his truth is lefte. Yea yet further,Ad Art. sibi falsò im∣pos. Art. 10. It is a hatefull and abhominable opinion to belieue, that God is the Author of any ill will, or Action. Of the Fathers beliefe in this point Caluin saith:Instit. l. 2. c. 4 sect. 3. The Ancient Fathers were sometimes ouer religiously fearfull to con∣fesse the truth in this matter &c. not Austine was free sometimes from that superstition, as where he saith, That induration and execration pertaine not to the working of God, but to his foreknowledge. If Prot. had that religious feare which they reproue in the Fathers, they would not so execrably blaspheme, making God the Author of sinne.
SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the same doctrine with Catholickes, against God being the author of sinne, or Damnation. MAny of the learnedst Prot. both Lutherans and Cal∣uinistes do ioyne with vs in this Doctrine against Caluin and Beza; A thing so euident, that Perkins wrote a speciall Treatise,De Prae∣destinationis modo & or∣dine Ep. ad Lect. Vt criminationes &c. that he might do away the blame imposed vpon the truth: or saith he, as they call it, the Cal∣uinian Doctrine and appease the displeased minds of certaine brethren. Willet also confesseth and disliketh that,Synop. p. 784. 808. Vniuersality of Grace seemeth to be much approued euen of some of our owne Coun∣try men, and hath already gotten some Patron in our Church: the Doctrine wherof was preached by D. Harsnet at Paules. Couell teacheth that,Def. of Hook. p. 81. God hath a generall inclination to saue all. And thatIbid. p. 62. 63. with a Conditionall will, he willeth all men to be sa∣ued, who therfore that they are not, is not his Decree, but their owne fault. Sutcliffe chargeth CartwrightExami∣nat. of Cart∣wright. A∣pol. fol. 19. with blasphemy, for that he said, that God doth blast mens pens with a lying spirit, attri∣buting the wicked action to God. Nappier teacheth that,Vpon Reuel. c. 15. p. 190. Tem∣tation and euill is only from the permission of God. Foxe saith,In Apoc. p. 473. Seeing the benefite of Redemption, which taketh away the sinnes of the world, is an vniuersall thing; it is demanded whether the Grace of this Redemption do appertaine equally to all the Posterity of Adam, or be restrained to a certaine number? I answere saith he, that the in∣credulity of men, and no default of the Lambe maketh this restraint: which restraint, saith he, commeth to passe, not through any defect of the Reeemer but through the fault of men, who receiue not the Grace of Redemption. Yea this Doctine of Reprobation taught by some Prot. is according to Kinnedoncius,Redempt. of mank. l. 1. c. 11. p. 31. Satanicall Franticke; to Melancthon,Loc. com. de causa pec. & conting. Hurtfull to manners; to Christ∣manusDigaphe Electi nis p. 94. wicked; to RungiusDisp. 15. ex Ep. Pauli &c. disp. 14. Thes. 10. Blasphemous; to AndaeasEpit. Colloq. Montb p. 54. a horrible doctrine.
Beza is for his contrary Doctrine publickly reprehen∣ded by Andraeas,In resp. Bezae ad acta Colleq. Mon∣tisb p. 251. & Haffenrefferus: And Caluin, Beza and Znchius are reproued byTheol. Calu. l. 1. art. 12. fol. 39. 40. 41. Schlusselburge. And Caluin by Gesnerus,Disp. pro sancto. lib. concor. disp. 3. c. 3. p. 60. 61. 62. Lobechius,Disp. Theol. disp. 1. p. 14. & disp. 21. p. 507. 508 509. and Haffenreffe∣rus.Loc. Theol. l 3. p. 112. 188. Also Hemingius,Enchir. &c. class. 3. p. 220. 221. 222. Hiperius,Meth. Theol. l. 2. p. 431. 435. 436. 438. Manlius,Loc. com. p. 104. Chemnitius,Enhy∣rid p. 158. and BrachmanusCent. exercit. Theo. q. 223 p 316. q. 14. p. 319. do alleadge many Scriptures to proue, that God doth not ordaine any man to damnation, but that he would all men saued, and that he dyed for all. Paraeus affirmeth, that,In Col∣loq. Tol. 1. disp. 13. The Cause of positiue repro∣bation is the wickednesse of the reprobate, because as God doth punish no man in tyme but only for sinnes, so also he hath decreed from eter∣nity to punish no man. Snecanus (though otherwise a greatIb. p. 182. 525. 649. admirer and follower of Caluin and Beza) is neuertheles so full andIb. p. 182. 525. 649. euident, that Willet reprehendeth him, calling him therfore,Synop. pa. 18. 80. A Patrone of vniuersall Grace, Bullinger teacheth in like manner that,Vpon the Apoc. ser. 28 f. 7. The Lord hath dyed for all, but that all men are not made partakers of this Redemption, is through their owne fault, for the Lord excludeth no man. And of the like Iudgement isMrgrita Theol. pag. 277. 285. 283. 296. 298. Adamus Francisci alledging many Scriptures in proofe of his opinion. M. Hooker is so plaine in affirming that,Eccl. Pol. p. 104. Gods ge∣nerall inclination is, that all men might be saued, that he is there∣fore specially reproued by theChristian letter to Hook. p. 16. Puritanes. M. Gibbens mketh a speciall discourse heereof, affirming thatQuestions vpon Gen q . p 103. Su∣rely there was no cause in God eyther in his will, or in his knowledge or Decree, that man should fall. And that,Ib. pag. 109. 100. God willeth or de∣creeth things that are euill, not to do, or cause them to be done, or will them, but permit, or suffer them &c. God only willing to permit them. And the same is taught by AmandusPartit. Theol. l. 1. p. 75. 76. & 10. 11. 11. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 348. Polanus, and the Centurists. Melancthon and others do alledge Scriptures to proueMeth. discript. p. 410.
that,Lo. com. de causa pec. & con∣ting. & in Consil. Theol. part. 2 p. 111. 112. Kecker∣man. in Sy∣stem. Thol. p. 102. Brach. Cent Exer. p. 319. 320. God willeth not our Sinne: and that Pharaos hart was hardned by Gods permission, not by his will. And Melancthon sayth concerning Saul,Loc. com. c. de causa peccati. God foresaw the sinnes of Saul, but he willed them not, neyther doth he force his will, but permitteth, that the will of Saul may so rage, and he doth not force that he do otherwise. And many texts of Scripture are alledged to the same end byLoc. com. Tom. 1. de Praedest. f 31. 32. 79. 80. Snecan. Meth. des∣cript. p. 621. &c. Bulling. in Dec. in Engl p. 492. Sarcerius, Snecanus, and Bullinger. Yea Willet him∣selfe affirmeth that,Synop p. 789. 799. God decreeth not, but only forseeth sinfull workes: and thatIb. p. 800. God forseeth, but willeth not Sinne. Christmanus hath published a wholeDiagra∣phe Electio∣nis &c. Booke of this matter directly against Caluin, and other Prot. that ioyne with him; wherin the title of the eight Chapter is, De Caluinianorum absoluto decreto. Of the ninth Chapter, De obie∣ctionum pro absoluto Decreto refutatione. And of the tenth, Rationes immotae contra Caluinianorum absolutum Decretum, & quòd Deus vult omnes homines saluos fieri. Hemingius hath written a speciallDe gratia vni∣uersall &c. Treatise of this Argument, for which WilletSynep. p. 784. reprehendeth him, for that therin he teacheth that it is in mans power to giue assent to grace of∣fered, and to belieue. And himselfe auoucheth that, CaluinsDe Grat. vni∣uers p. 111. opinion fighteth with the word of God, calling and inuiting all to re∣pentance &c. And, that many are brought into despaire, whilest with that opinion the Doctrine of vniuersall grace is ouerthrowne. YeaIb p. 77. he chargeth his Brethren with ten seuerall Errours in this matter, all which he doth there particularly set downe. Marbachius also hath written a Treatise, the title wher∣of is, Disputatio Theologica de vniuersali Dei voluntate erga totum genus humanum, aduersus eos qui ad solos Electos & Credentes eam restringere conantur. Conraus Schlsselburg affirmeth that,Theol. Calu. l. 1. c. 6. de redempt. Christi. The Diuinity of Caluinistes teacheth Chrst to haue dyed only for the Elect: Yea, he affirmeth that the merit of Christ cannot be oppo∣sed to the Iudgment of God &c. Are not these Reuelations vpon the Re∣uelation, as D. Luther was accstomed to say of new and obscure wor∣mes, and tryfles of Fanaticall men &c. The wordes of Iohn the Apo∣stle are cleere inough, for he hath said Christ to haue dyed not only for the sinnes of the Apostles, and the Elect, but he addeth, to haue satisfyed for the sinnes of the whole world. In briefe, CastalioL. ad Caluin. de Praedest. writeth herin against Caluin,
and AndraeasEpi∣tom. Colloq. Montisb. p. 49. 53. against Beza: and after many Scriptures alleadged against Bez' as forsaid doctrine, he concludeth that it is,Ib p. 47. Horrendum auditu, fearfull to be heard. Yea the ProtSee the letters Sena∣tus Bernn∣sis ad Mini∣stros &c. Anno 1555. Magistrates of Berna made it penall for any of their Territory to preach Caluins forsaid doctrine, or for the peo∣ple to read any of his Bookes contayning the forsaid do∣ctrine. And yet such is the inconstancy of Caluin, as that sometimes he affirmeth, that,In. 1. Ioan. c. 2. This common opinion of the Schooles is true, Christ suffered sufficiently for the whole world, but efficaciously for the Elect alone. SECT. V. Reasons to proue that God doth not will, command, or in∣force men to Sinne, or to be damned, but that he only permitteth the same. 1. VVHosoeuer doth Command or inforce a man to do any thing, is the Principall Author of the same thing, and is so reputed by all, neither doth the na∣turall light of reason suffer vs to deny it. Besides the wicked man when he sinneth (according to Prot.) is the Instrument of God, but he that vseth the Instrument is the Principall author of that worke, which is wrought by the Instru∣ment. Ergo. Some answere heerto, that though God command or inforce men to sinne, yet the said sinnes, are not sinnes, as they proceed from God so inforcing, but as they proceed from the wicked mind and wicked intention of man: In so much that God in those actions doth propose to himselfe a goodCalu. Inst. l 1. c. 17. §. 5. Swing. loc. de Pro∣uid c. 6. end, to wit, the manifestation of his mercy and Iu∣stice, by shewing mercy to some, and condemning others, wheras man doth propose his owne lust or pleasure. But this doth not satisfye, for first it is not lawfull toRom. 3.8. do euill, that there may come good; as to steale, for to giue Almes, or to commit fornication, to beget Children. Besides I would know, whether the euill intention of man, which causeth it to be sinne in man, is commanded and forcibly caused by
God or no. If it be, then is God plainly the author of sinne, that euill Intention being it, which causeth the action to be euill, and to be sinne. And that he is this Author, according to them it is euident, for sinne is not sinne (as they teach) but by reason of the euill Intention, wherfore if he force them to sinne, he forceth them to the euill Intention. And if God to shew his mercy and Iustice decreed from all Eternity, that man should sinne, and sinne is not sinne except it be done with euill Intention, it followeth cleerly, that God decreed that man should worke with euill intention. And because the Decree of God cannot be vncertaine, not de∣pending of the freewill of man, it further followeth; that God did forcibly procure, that man should worke with e∣uill intention, and so be no lesse Author of the Euill Inten∣tion, then of the worke it selfe. Others seeke to euade by affirming, that, God doth not will sinne in that formall respect as it is Sinne, but for some other end: But so neither the Deuils themselues do will sinne, for as so, it is a meere priuation of Good, wheras the reason or obiect of willing, must needs be in some res∣pect good. Aretius further replyeth saying,Loc. Com. p. 130. & Zwingl. loc. de Pro∣uid. c. . We answere, God ha∣uing no Superiour, can haue no law prescribed him, and sinne hath on∣ly place, where there is a law; and that hence it followeth, that in the Actions of God there is no sinne: And so in the same worke the will of man transgresseth the law, and is euill, and the will of God transgresseth not the law, and is not euill. But though God hath no law imposed vpon him by any Supe∣riour, yet his wisdome and nature is as a law vnto him, wherfore no lesse is he bound not to impugne his owne wisdome, then man Gods law: And so if God should force men to commit those things which are contrary to his E∣ternall law, and so to his diuine wisdome, as to commit adultery &c. then should his will be euill, being contrary to the right rule of his diuine wisdome, which were God to deny himselfe, which is impossible. Againe, if God command a man to sinne, man is bound to obey his Command, and so a man committing Adultery, sinneth against one of his
Commandementes, & sinneth not in executing Gods will and Decree, and so God inforcing him, will haue him to sinne, and will not haue him to sinne. Lastly, though God hauing no Superiour can haue no law imposed vpon him, other then his owne wisdome, and so therby cleered from sinne in himselfe, yet this auayleth nothing to cleere him from being the author and cause of sinne in vs, which is the only point here in question. Adde yet herunto, what an im∣piety it is to teach, that God damneth men for doing those things, which himselfe commandeth and compelleth them to do. 2. If God doth intend, decree, command, and compell men to sinne, it further followeth, that he is not only the Author and cause of sinne in vs, but that he himselfe truly sinneth, which is extreme blasphemy to auouch: for ther∣fore are men said to sinne, because they are free and parti∣cular causes of such actions, as are contrary to reason, & the Eternall law of God: But according to Prot. God concur∣reth to the forsaid actions, not only as an vniuersall cause (as Catholickes teach) but euen according to Caluin,Instit. l. 2. c. 4. §. 2. as a particular Cause, willing, & commanding them as they are such in particular, which is nothing else but truly and pro∣perly to sinne. YeaIn A∣phorism. 22. Beza teacheth, that God doth not only moue and compell his Instruments to such actions, which in reguard of the Instruments are sinne, but also that he createth the said Instruments, that is, men to that end, that they should performe those actions which he intended and decreed from all Eternity: wherof it necessary follow∣eth, that the said euill actions, as they are such in particuler, were intended by God, and so to be attributed to him as the principall cause, and so consequently, that he truly and pro∣perly sinneth: This necessary Consequence inforced Beza to say,De Prae∣dest. ont. Ca∣stal. p. 30. We thinke it a question inexplicable to mans senses, how God is not in fault, if he ordayne the Cause of damnation. CaluinInstit. l. 1. c. 17. §. 3. would euade by affirming, that as the sunne doth cause in a dead Carcase noysome smels, and yet the beames therof contract no impurity, so may God be cause of sinne in vs, & yet not sinne himselfe. But this is many wayes
impertinent; for first before all concourse of the sunne, it is supposed, that the Body is already dead & disposed to corru∣ption, for in a sound body the sunne beames cannot produce any such effect: but according to Prot. God moued Adam & Sathan to sinne, when they were in perfect and innocent state. Secondly the sunne is only an vniuersall cause, which intendeth not corruption, but heate, which heate of it selfe is indifferent to produce different Effects, and is limited and determined by secondary and particular causes to produce rather one effect then another, as might be exemplifyed in an Apple, or perfume, and a dead Carcase, wheras according to them, God concurreth particularly, intending, commā∣ding, & forcibly procuring such actions as are sinne. Third∣ly, the Sunne concurreth necessarily not hauing free choice or will, and that by an action not immanent, or remaining in it selfe, but passing from it selfe into that wherein it wor∣keth: wheras God concurreth freely, and at his owne will, and with such a will and desire as still remaineth in himself, and therefore cannot corrupt another with sinne, but must needs remayne corrupted himselfe, seeing that will where∣with he willeth another to Sinne, is in himselfe, and not in another. Thirdly, it yet further followeth of this forsaid doctri∣ne of Prot. that God alone doth only sinne and not man: for it is most cleere and certayne, that no man can sinne in that which he cannot possibly eschew, but of necessity is forced to do: But according toDe Pro∣uid. c. 6. Calu. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. §. 7. 9. & de Praedest. p. 906. Zwinglius and Caluin, our first Parents euen in their Innocency could not eschew Sinne, but of necessity committed the same. Fourthly, from all the Premisses we may gather, that if it be intollerable blasphemy to affirme God to be authour of sinne, or him only truly to Sinne, that seeing man doth but that which God Commandeth and inforceth him to do, and God himselfe being the chiefest goodnes, can do no e∣uill; that, therefore there neyther is, nor euer was any sinne at all, and so by necessary seqele, no Iudgement, no hell, & in vaine Crists Incarnation & death for the Redemptiō of Mankind: into such Atheisticall blasphemies do Prot. fall.
SECT. VI. Obiections from Scripture, in proofe that God is the Au∣thor of Sinne, and decreeth the sinne or damnation of man, answered. SVch places are obiected as seeme to affirme that God caused sinne,Isa. 45.6.7. I the Lord, and there is none other, that forme light and create darknes, make peace and create euill.Michae. 1.12. Euill is des∣cended from our Lord, into the gate of Hierusalem.Amos. 3.6. Shall there be euill in the Citty which our Lord hath not done? and such like. But this is purposely answered and explained by sundry Fa∣thers, amongst which writeth Tertullian,Cont. Marcion. l. 2. c. 14. At all occasions God is ready, he striking and curing, killing and reuiuing, humbling & exalting, creating euill and making peace, that I also may here answere the heretikes: for behould, they say, he professeth himselfe the Creator of euill, saying, I am he that creates euill &c. But we vsing a distin∣ction of both kinds, separating the euill of sinne, and the euils of pu∣nishment, the euils of fault and the euils of paine, do allot, to euery part their owne author, the Deuill the maker of the euils of sinne and fault, God the maker of the euils of Punishment and paine, that, that part may be deputed to malice, this to Iustice, creating euill Iudgmen∣tes against the euils of sinne. And the like Answere is made by OrigenL. c. cont. Celsum. and by S. Basill in hisHom. 9. Homilie, that God is not the author of Euils; as also by S. Iohn DamasceneOrthod. fidei. l. 4. c. 20. Cass. Col∣lat. 6. c. 5. and Cas∣sian. But S. Austine explaineth this more fully in his Dia∣loge with Euodius, saying:De lib. Arb. l. 1. c. 1. Euod. Tell me I pray thee, whe∣ther God is not the Author of Euill? Aug. I will, If thou wilt make knowne of what euill thou demaundest. For two seuerall wayes we vse to call euill: one when we affirme any man to haue done euill, ano∣ther when he hath suffered euill. Euod. I desire to know of both. Aug. But if thou knowest and belieuest God to be good (neither is it other∣wise lawfull) he doth not euill. Agayne, if we confesse God to be iust (and to deny this, it is sacrilegious) as he giueth rewards to the good, so he giueth punishment to the euill, which punishments are euills to the sufferers; Wherefore, if no man is punished vniustly, which
is necessary that we belieue, seeing we belieue the whole world to be gouerned by diuine prouidence, of that first kind of euils (to wit Sin∣nes) God by no meanes is the Authour, but of the second (to wit pu∣nishment.) Thus cleerly S. Austine. Agreably to thisEngl. Bi∣ble of Anno 1576. in Esay 45.7. our owne English Bybles in their marginall notes do expound this place of Esay, of the euill of punishment, as namely of warre and aduersity; which also appeareth, more plainly by opposition of the word Peace, there next precedent. And NappierVpon Reuel. c. 15. p. 190. answereth that of Amos 3.6. and Mat. 6.13.Pet. Mar. in loc. com. in Engl. part. 1. p. 210. Fulke ag. Rhem. Test. fol. 12. sect. 6. commonly obiected by Caluins followers. Piscator answereth that these sayings are to be vnderstood,Vol. 1. Thes. Theol. p. 175. 176. 202. De malo non culpae, sed poenae, of the euill not of sinne, but of punishment. And the like answere is made out of S. Austine byMeth. Theol. p. 435. Bulling Dec. p. 493. Hi∣perius, and Bullinger. Other places also are obiected which seeme to affirme that God decreed from all eternity that Sinnes should be.Act. 4.27.28. And see act. 2.23. There assembled in this Citty against thy holy Child Iesus, Herod and Pontius Pilate &c. to do what thy Hand, and thy Councell decreed to be done. But this forceth nothing, for in euill deeds it of∣ten happeneth, that the action is euill and the passion good, as in the death of our Sauiour, his betraying and crucifying were damnable Sinnes in the Iewes, and his patient and charitable suffering was meritorious and good in him. God therefore when he decreed the death of Christ, decreed those vertuous actions which shyned in his Passion, the wicked∣nes of the Iewes he decreed not, but only foresaw and per∣mitted it, which forsight and permission were sufficient to make Gods decree of Christes death infallible. To this purpose writeth S. Epiphanius,Cont. Ca∣ianos haer. 38. Euseb. Caesar. de Praepar. Euang. l. 6. c. 9. Although the Scriptures say that Christ would be crucifyed, or that absurdities are to be committed by vs in the last dayes, yet none of vs who do euill, shall find excuse pro∣ducing the Testimony of Scripture fortelling these things to be heeraf∣ter; for we do them not because the Scripture hath sayd it, but because we were to do them, the Scripture fortelled by the forknowledge of God &c. So also of the Crosse, not because diuine Scr pture sayd it, the Iewes crucifyed and Iudas betrayed our Sauiour, but because Iudas was to betray him and the Iewes to crucfy him, therfore the Scripture fortould in the old Testament, and our Lord in the Ghospell. The
Prot. Sitzlinus also answereth this saying,In Disp. Theol. de Prouid Dei. sect 244. The worde Hand, and Councell, signify the good and healthfull end, for whic God permitted that wicked facts of the Iewes, which he did neythe assist nor allow: Euen as Ioseph sayd to his Brethren,Gen. 50.20. Ye thought euill against me, God disposed it to good, that he might & saue much people. Such textes also are vrged, as seeme to teach that Go created the wicked to that end, that in their punishment h might manifest his power and Iustice;Prou. 16.4. Our Lord ha wrought all things for himselfe, the impious also to the euill day.Rom. 9.21. Hath not the Potter of Clay, power, of the same masse, to make o vessell vnto honour, and another vnto Contumelie?Rom. 9.17. The Scriptur saith to Pharao, that to this purpose haue I raysed thee, that in thee may shew my power, and that my name may be renowned in the whe Earth. Answ. God createth not the wicked but only mate¦rially, that is, he createth those, whom he forseeth throug their owne default, wilbe wicked, that so he may vse thei iniquity, which he caused not or decreed, but only forsa to the manifestation of his Iustice and power. And so by that of the Prouerbs is vnderstood, that God who worke all things to his glory, hath created those whom he forsaw would be wicked, if they were created; that so in their de∣serued punishment he might manifest his Iustice. In like sort (as S. AustineEp. 105. ad Sixtum. & Ep. 106. ad Paulin. obserueth) God made not of matter, which was good or indifferent, vessels vnto contumelie, but of matter which was naught, contumelious, and dam∣nable, he made some vessells, such as the said matter required, that was to contumelie, and others of his owne will and mercy to honour: Euen as the Potter, of clay, being a base matter, may make some vessels for base vses and others for noble: so that the vessels made to contumelie, haue of God, that they be vessels, but of the matter, that they be to re∣proch, and the other made to honour, haue both of God. And indeed, if God of matter good or indifferent, that is, if God from all Eternity should haue decreed some to dam∣nation not forseeing their sinnes, it is plaine, that he could not be excused from iniquity and greatest cruelty. And as to the last place, I say with Rupertus,In Rom. 9.17. that God forseeing
Pharaos obstinacy, wheras he might haue preuented him both of life and Kingdome, did notwithstanding giue him both, that so he might vse his malice to the exercise of his people, and manifestation of his owne power in his punish∣ments. Lastly, these obiections are so litle forcing, that they are all of them explained and answered by Bullinger,Dec. 3. Ser. 10. p. 493. 494. Hiper. Meth. Theol. l. 2. p. 435. 438. Snecan. Meth. descri. de Praedest. c. 6. p. 514. 515. 520. 525. 701. Pisc. vol. 1. Thes. Theol. 7. p. 202. 176. Hiperius, Snecanus, and Piscator, all of them Caluinistes. Adde yet, that the long patience mentioned in the texte, wherwith God suffered the vessels of wrath, argueth, that, as Hiperius sayth,Mth. Th. l. 2. p. 438. They were created good, and afterwards became euill of their proper will, being made vessels of wrath, because that voluntarily they were to become euill. Otherwise if God had willed and decreed their destruction without respect of their sinne, how could it be said that he suffered them in long patience? Yea the same Apostle speaking elswhere,2. Tim. 2.20.21. Of vessels vnto contumelie, saith, that if any man shall clense himselfe from these, he shalbe a vessell vnto honour. Others further obiect such places as seeme to affirme that God moueth, compelleth, or commādeth men to sinne, or vseth them as his Instruments of sinne.2. Reg. 24.1. The fury of our Lord added to be angrie against Israel, and stirred vp Dauid a∣mong them saying, Goe number Israel and Iuda.2. Reg. 16.10. And see the like. 3. Reg. 22.11. Ps. 43.18. & 118.36. Mat. .12. Our Lord hath commanded him to curse Dauid. Answ. The true meaning of these and such like places is, that God permitteth the will to sinne: and so accordingly do other Scriptures explaine them, as where it is said,Mat. 19.7.8. And see Deut. 24 1.2. Why then did Moyses command to giue a bill of Diuorce, and to dismisse her? He saith to them, because Moyses for the hardnes of your hart permitted you to dismisse your wyues, but from the beginning it was not so. So also Dauids numbring of the people, is attributed to the Deuill.1. Paral. 21 1. And Satan rose against Israel, and moued Dauid to number Israel. Wherfore God is only said to moue Dauid therto, because he permitted the Deuill to do it, without which permission he had not done it. And this vnderstanding of these and such like places is made by S. Austine,Tract. 52. in Ioan. & de Gra. & lib. Arb. c. 20. & l. 2 ad Simpl. q. 2. & ep. 89. q. 2. and S. Iohn DamasceneOrthod. fidei. l. 4. c. 20.. Yea S. Austine speaking of those words of S. Paul.2. Thss. 2.11. God will send them the operation of Errour to belieue lying, expoundeth them thus,De ciuit. l. 20. c. 19. God will send, because he will permitte the Deuill to do
these things. Agreably saythAg. the Adu. of Gods Praed. p. 374. Knox, Neither to Pharao, nei∣ther to Semei, nor yet to any other Reprobate, doth God giue either wicked Commandement, or euill thought &c. Yea God himselfe mentioning the sinfull action of the people, explaineth this point, saying,Hier, 19.5. I commanded it not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mynd. Others yet obiect, that God hardeneth the harts of Sin∣ners.Ex. 7.3. I will indurate his hart, with sundry such like inIos. 11.20. Iob. 12.24. Isa. 63.17. Io. 12.40. Rom. 1.28.9.18. other places. Answ. The same Scriptures do explaine this saying,Exod. 8.15. & 9.34.1. Reg. 6.6. Pharao seeing that rest was giuen, he hardned his owne hart, and heard them not, as our Lord had Commanded. S. Austine also expoundeth it, that God hardned Pharaos hart,Ep 105. ad Sixtum. & l. 1. ad Simpl. q. 2. cir. med. & in Io. tra. 53. not by giuing him malice, but by not giuing him mercy. And for this ex∣position are the Fathers reiected byInst. l. 2. sect. 4. c. 3. Caluin. And that by Gods hardning of his hart is vnderstood his suffering it to be hardned; it is further taught by the Prot. writersDec. p. 492. 493. Hi∣per. Meth. Theol p. 438. Vrsin. Catech. p. 331. 332. Abeitz. Ru∣diment. art. Dial. p. 540. Marbach. Disp. Theol. de Prouid. sect 164. &c. Harm. of Confess. p. 61. Bullinger, Hiperius, Vrsinus, Paulus Abeitzen, Marba∣chius, and the Confession of Heluetia: In so much that Conradus Sclusselburge answereth directly heerto in these wordes:Theol. Calu. l. 1. c. de Praedest. God is not by any meanes the cause of Sinne, neyther doth he will sinne, or approue sinne. As concerning the phrases of Scripture, I will harden the hart of Pharao, He hath giuen them into a Reprobate mynd &c. it appeareth by the word of God, that those sayings are to be vnderstood of Gods permission, where∣by he suffereth man to rage in Sinne, by the iust Iudgement of God, wherewith he punisheth sinnes with sinnes, yet doth he not cause them nor approue them. Melancthon also giueth the lyke ans∣were sayingLoc. com. c. de caus. pec. & con∣ting. Neyther do those figures of wordes offend, I will harden the hart of Pharao, and the lyke: for it is certayne that in the Hebrew phrase they signify permission, not an efficacious will. Another Prot. agreably writeth,Corpus Doctr. Chris. p. 618. Let the studious know, the Hebrew phrase in those wordes, I will harden the hart of Pharao, to signify permission &c. And examples euery where concurre, which te∣stify by this Hebrew Phrase very often, Permission to be signifyed. An∣thony Maxey Chaplayne to the late Kings Maiesty sayth,In his 2. Sermon printed. 1607. It is well knowne vnto the learned, that where it is sayd, God hardeneth, the Hebrew Dialect doth signify, a permission, not an action. So that God hardeneth not the hart of a sinner positiue∣ly,
but only negatiuely, that is, by permitting, forsaking, and not taking pitty: wherin is no iniustice, seeing God forsa∣keth not but being first forsaken, and it is but iust, that those who forsake, be forsaken. And according to this as S. Paul saidRom. 1.24. God hath deliuered them vp vnto the desires of their hart in∣to vncleanes: so elswhere he explicateth this saying,Eph 4.19. Who despayring haue giuen vp themselues to impudicity, vnto the operation of all vncleanes. And so where God is said,Iob. 1.11. & 2.3.4. to haue afflicted Iob, it is euident by the story, that he onlyIob 1.11. & 2.5. at the instance of Satan, permitted him to afflict Iob. Esay also saithC. 6.9. make the hart of this people fat, and shut their eies: which S. Iohn alled∣ging saith,Io. 12.40. He hath blinded their eies and indurated their hart: Bt this our Sauiour himselfe and S. Paul explaine, saying,Mat. 13.15. Act. 28.27. their eies they haue shut. And K. Dauid most plainly say∣ing,Ps. 81.11.12. My people would not heare my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gaue them vp to the hardnes of their hart. Others greatly insist vpon these wordes of S. Paul,Ro. 9.11. When they were not yet borne, nor had done any good or euill (that the purpose of God according to Election might stand) not of workes, but of the caller, it was said to her, That the Elder shall serue the yonger, as it is written, Iacob I loued, but Esau I hated. Answ. This saying of the Apostle being taken, the first part therof fromGen. 25.23. Moy∣ses, the later fromMal. 1. 3. Malachie, is (as the Protestants Christ∣manusDia∣graph. p. 76. Kinned. in his Re∣dempt. of mankind. p. 294. and Kinnedoncius do acknowledge) spoken of the seuerall posterities of Iacob & Esau: which also is plain∣ly signifyed by the whole context of Malachie; for wheras Esau was calledGen. 25.30. & 36.1. Edom, Malachie vnderstandeth Esaus Posterity,Cap. 1.4. If Idumea shall say, we are destroyed &c. as also by these other euident words of Moyses,Gen. 25.23. Two Nations are in thy wombe, and two peoples shalbe deuided out of thy wombe, and &c. the Elder shall serue the yonger. And like as by Gods forsaid loue to Iacob is signified the temporall felicity of his Poste∣rityGen. 15.23. aboue the other; so likewise by Gods forsaid hating of Esau, is in like manner vnderstood the temporall infelici∣ty of his Posterity and Nation, as Malachy conuinceth say∣ing,Mal. 1.2.3. I loued Iacob, but hated Esau, and I laid his mountaines into a wildernes, and his Inheritance vnto the Dragons of the Desart. And though it appeare by this Epistle of S. Paul, that the
Iewes hauing indeed someRom. 3.1.2. Preheminence aboue the Gen∣tils, because the words of God were (first) cōmitted to them, did ther∣vpon ouer much extoll themselues aboue the other, as beingRom. 3.29. & 9.8. persuaded, that the Promises of Grace were peculiar to themselues and their carnall succession. In further Confu∣tation wherof, though also the Apostle in the place obie∣cted, do by application therof, transferre the forsaid Exam∣ple of Iacob and Esau being twinnes; and so vnder the re∣semblance or type of them, doth shew, that like as Iacob being the yonger Brother, was neuertheles by God loued, and preferred to the promised land of Canaan, before his el∣der Brother Esau; that so likewise in the promises of Grace and the Ghospell, the Iewes forsaid externall Prerogatiue doth not so preuaile, but that the Gentiles, being in reguard therof, but as it were the yonger Brother to them, are ne∣uerthelesse in the Grace and riches of the GhospellRom. 9.24. e∣qualled, if not preferredSee Rom. 9.30.31. before them: Gods Election and mercy so shewed, depending vpon his owne purpose & determination, and not restrained to any Nation, family, or people: yet all this auayleth nothing to establish Gods ab∣solute Decree of eternall hatred and reprobation; for if the forsaid wordes, I haue loued Iacob, and hated Esau (being her∣tofore proued to be spoken not of their persons, but of their posterity and Nations) should be vrged in this sense; then as ChristmanusDia∣grapha. p. 78. answereth, it would follow, that all the posterity of Iacob were Elect, and none of them reprobate, and all the posterity of Esau reprobate, and none of them Elect, which were absurd to hold. Secondly I further answere, that though the forsaid words of Gods hating Esau, should concerne the person of Esau, and withall wer not to be vnderstood of his tempo∣rall infelicity, but otherwise; yet this hatred of God is not to be taken positiuely, but as ChristmanusVbi sup. Snecan. Meth. de scrip. p. 517. and Sneca∣nus do explaine the same, negatiuely, that is to say, for, not to loue, or nor to haue mercy, according to other like exam∣ples herof in theIo. 12.25. Luc. 14.26. Scriptures. Thirdly, though it were to be taken positiuely, yet
should it be so referred, not to his Creature Esau, Which he made, for,Gen. 1.31. All that be made was very good, and,Sap. 11.25. Thou louest all things that are, and hatest nothing of those which thou hast made: for thou diddest not ordaine or make any thing hating it: but to the sinne of Esau, which he foresaw, and neuer made. And agreably to this saith Beza;Display of Popish practises. p. 17. We confesse God hateth nothing in man but sinne. Now that Gods forsight and hatred of Esaus sinne, doth not of necessity impugne free will in Esau, or proue his reall reprobation, appeareth most euidently by the example of Adam, whose sinne before his fall, God both forsaw andPs. 45.7. Zachar. 8.7. hated; and yet as Prot.Bulling. Dec. 3. Ser. 10. p. 490 Hip. Meth. Theol. l. 1 p. 214. 219. Snean. Mth. des∣cript. p. 123. 126. 778. confesse, the same notwithstanding, Adam before his fall had free will, & was also one of the Elect, as S. AustineL. de hae∣ras. haer. 25. proueth against the Tacianistes. Fourthly, wheras S. Peter forwarned vs that in S. Pauls2. Pet. 3.16. Epistles there are certaine things hard to be vnderstood, amongst the rest this his forsaid discourse vpon Iacob and Esau, hath euer bene taken for one of the Principall, wherfore it is al∣togeather vnequall, that this so obscure saying or discourse should be alleadged against so many and so cleere texts, as I haue formerly produced. Lastly this very Obiection is at larg answered byMeth. descrip. 1. p. 55. p. 537. Heming. de Grat. vniuer. p. 34. 37. Christm. Dia∣gr. p. 73. &c. Gesn. Disp. pro lib. con∣cord. p. 620. Snecanus, Hemingius, Christmanus & Gesnerus, all of them Protestant writers. Others yet obiect that,1. Pet. 2.8. Christ is to those that be∣lieue, honour; but to them that belieue not &c. a stone of offence &c. to them that stumble at the word, neither do belieue, wherin also they are put: wherupon it is inferred, that they were ordained by God not to belieue. Which sequele if it hold, how then is God excused from being author of their not belieuing, and so of their sinne? I answere therfore, that the sense herof (is most directly against Protestantes) that they were put or ordained to belieue, but did not; which sense is acknowled∣ged by Snecanus,Meth. descrip. p. 701 Cast. Defens. Transl p. 152. 153 &c Illic. Gost. in 1. Pet. 1.8. Luth. in 1. Pet. 1.8. Castalio, Illiricus, and Luther. Fulke vrgeth those wordes of Christ,Mat. 6.15. Lead vs not into temptation: wherby (saith he) is proued, not only a permission, but an action of God: and that, He not only permitteth, but also lea∣deth into temptation: Yea, saith Peter Martyr,Com. pla. in Engl part. 1. c. 18. p. 210. God tem∣pteth,Ag. Rh. Test. in Mat. 6.13. sect. 6,
andIbid. p. 211. driueth men vnto sinne by temptation: But though this be sufficiently answered in the Obiection of Indura∣tion: yet in further cleering therof, I say, 1. that the Scri∣ptures themselues do explaine this. LetIac. 1.13.14. no man (saith S. Iames) when he is tempted, say that he is tempted of God, for God is not a tempter of euils, and he tempteth no man: but euery one is tem∣pted of his owne Concupiscence &c. S. Paul teacheth that God is so farre from leading vs into temptation, that to the contra∣ry he deliuereth vs from temptation:1. Cor. 10.13. God is faithfull who will not suffer you to be tempted aboue that which you are able, but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to sustaine. 2. S. Austine saith,Ep. 89. q. 2. And do not lead vs into temptation, it is vn∣derstood do not permit vs to be led, by forsaking. S. Cyprian rea∣deth, Do not suffer vs to beled. 3. The Prot. Nappier answereth this saying,Vpon Reuel. in c. 15. p. 190. It is said in the Lords prayer, lead vs not into tem∣ptation &c. not that the Lord tempteth vs &c. but only that the tem∣ptation and euill doth flow from the permission, and sufferance of his Maiesty &c. And agreably saith BullingerDecad. p. 949. Suffer vs not to be led by a Deuilish and wicked temptation. And the same Exposi∣tion is made byLoc. com. cap. de Causa pec. &c. Melancthon, andCateche∣sis. p. 105. the Diuines of Wittemberge. So insufficient are all obiections made by Prot. in proofe of their blasphemous Doctrine.
CHAP. XXXI. The true State of the Question concer∣ning Freewill. Whether man after Adams fall hath freewill with Gods grace, to do such things as belong to Saluation, and not to do them: or whether the Will concurreth only as a naturall Instrument of God, and not as a free Cause. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. FReewill (according to S. GregoryIn Ec∣clesiast. ho. 2. & ho. 4. Cant. Nis∣sen) being of all things that are in man the best and the most excellent; and a thing so ma∣nifest that whosoeuer denyeth it, is not a Ca∣tholicke, saithL. de Gra. & lib. Arb. c. 2. S. Austine: In defence therfore therof against Heretickes, the Catholicke Church decreeth that,Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 4. If any shall say, the Freewill of man moued and stirred by God to cooperate nothing by assenting to God mouing and calling, wherby he may dispose, and prepare himselfe to obtaine the grace of Iustification, neither that he can dissent if he will, but as a thing without lyfe to do nothing at all, and to beare himselfe meerly passiuely, Anathema. And,Can. 5. If any shall affirme mans freewill to haue bene lost and extinguished after Adams sinne &c. Anathema.
In the fourth Toletane Councell it is decreed that,Conc. To∣let. 4. Cap. 57. de Iudaeis. As man by his freewill obeying the Serpent perished; so the grace of God calling, by conuersion of his owne mynd, euery man by belieuing is saued: Therfore not by force, but by the freewill of the mynd, they are to be persuaded, not inforced to be conuerted. In the Councell Senonense it is thus defyned,Cap. 15. de lib. Arb. This heresie wholly taking a∣way the liberty of the will, we do not so much condemne, being al∣ready long since condemned by the Church and sacred Councels, as we do declare it to be contrary to the common Counsaile of men, and to the plaine Testimonies of Scripture. All CatholickesBellar. de Grat. & lib. Arb. l. 6. c. 10. Rhem. Test. in Io. 1.12. & in 1. Cor. 3 5. belieue, that the Will of Man con∣curreth with Gods Grace actiuely, and freely to the workes of Piety; in such sort, that it is in mans free Choice to coo∣perate with Gods Grace, or to resist the same: And that this freedome is not only from Coaction, but from Necessity. Points Disputable. All Schoolmen granting Freewill,Pet. Lom∣bar. in 2. sent. Dist. 24. lit. E. Some place the same in the coniunction of 2. Actes, to wit, of the Iudge∣ment of Reason, and Election of the Will: ButS. Tho. 1. p. q. 83. art. 3. ad 2. others better, place it only in the Will. SomeHeruaeus quodlibet. 1. q. 1. make it consist in Act.S. Bonau. 2. Dist. 25. art. 1. q. 2.3.4. Others in a cer∣taine naturall habit arysing from Reason & the Will.Alex. Halens. 2. p. Sum. q. 72. Mem 1. art. 3. Others make it a particuler faculty distinct from the reason and the will.Durand. 2. Sent. dist. 24. q 3. Others, to be the very faculties of reason and will. OthersS. Tho. 1. p. Sum q. 83. Art. 1.2.3. & in 1.2. q. 13. most probably teach, that it is one particular facultie, to wit, the Will it selfe. SomePalud. 4. Sent. dist. 49. q. 3. Caiet. 1 p. q. 80. art. 2. teach, that the will of Man is partly actiue, partly passiue. OthersScotus 2. dist. 15. Henric. quodlib. 10. q. 9. better, that it is absolutly actiue. SomeLombar. l. 2. Sent. dist. 35. Occam. & Gabr. 1. Sent. dist. 38. thinke, that the will is not free in regard of actions present.Greg. Arimin. 1. Sent. Dist. 39. Others thinke the beginning of the action to be free, but the continuation necessary. ButScotus. 1. Sent. dist. 2. Capreol. 2. dist. 25. o∣thers best, make not only actions future free, but also present, & that either in regard of their beginning or continuation. SomeCaiet. 1. p. q. 22. art. 4. thinke it inexplicable in this lyfe to accord
Freewil with Gods Prouidence.Almai∣nus in Mor. c. 1.2. Others teach that God with his concurse doth determine the actions of mans will, and that put, the Will cannot but worke, yet absolutely is free in seuerall respects.Geg. Armin. Scotus, Gabr. in 2. Sent. Dist. 37. Others more probably, accord thē, in that Gods concurse doth not determine the Will, or worke any thing in it, but immediatly floweth into the ef∣fect, and produceth in the same moment wherin it is produ∣ced by the Will.S. Tho. 1. p q. 10. art. 5. & l. 3. cont. Gent. c. 70. Others most probably, do acknow∣ledge, that Gods cooperation doth so concurre with the will, that it doth not only giue, and preserue in it the power of working, but also doth moue, and apply it to worke: which diuine influxe or vertue, wherwith the will is mo∣ued and applyed, is receiued in the second causes, according to their disposition. Sundry other such like differences there are, not defyned by the Church. Protestant Vntruthes. Luther teacheth that,In Col∣loq. Latinis. cap. de lib. Arb. The name of Freewill was most hatefull to all the Fathers, although we our selues graunt, God to haue giuen to Man freewill. But this wilbe proued to be false by the third Section following. If you will belieue Swinglius,Tom. 1. de Prouid. c. 6. fol. 371. Freewill or merit cannot indeed be affirmed, although no man denyeth their names and mention to be found in the Scriptures, but truly no otherwise, then that they be names of those things, which are proper only to God. But I referre the reader to the next Se∣ction, wherin he shall see, that the Scriptures do aboun∣dantly ascribe Freewill also to man. Protestant Doctrine. Luther,De serue Arb. Cauin. l. 2. Inst. c. 3 §. 7. Willet. Sy∣nop. p. 808. 810. Caluin, and other Prot. teach that, the for∣knowledge and omnipotency of God do directly fight with our freewill. And that,Luth in Assert. art. 36. Freewill is but a fiction in things, or a title without Substance: because (say they) it is in no mans power to thinke any thing euill or good, but all things &c happen by absolute necessity. Ac∣cording to Whitaker,L. 2. de pec. orig. c. 3. p. 65. In our conuersion to God which is made by grace, our freewill hath no strength in it, but we carry our selues in this busines meerly passiuely. Perkins saith,Tom. 8. in Apoc. 3. col. 114. Hence I
gather the Papists to dote, in that they affirme, in Regeneration man to haue freewill, and the vse therof, and that he can dispose himselfe in Iustification. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. S. Hierome auoucheth that,Proom. l. cont. Pelag. fin. It is proper to the Mani∣chees to condemne mans nature, and to take away Freewill, and the Assistance of God. The Manichees (sayth S.De file cont. Manich. c 9. & Chri∣sost. ho. 45. in Ioan. Austine) barke against these with wonted blindnes, and when they are conuinced that nature is not an euill thing, and that it is in the power of man to do well or euill, they say that the soule hath not freewill, and they see not their blindnes. Herupon it is, that HemingiusDe vni∣uersali Gra∣tia p. 109. chargeth his other Prot. Brethren denying Freewill, with the Doctrine of the Manichees and the Stoickes. For the same Heresie of denying freewill, Simon Magus is condemned by S. Clement,L. 3. Re∣cognit. the Bardasanes by S.L. de haer. c. 35. Austine, the Priscillianists by S. Austine,Ib. c. 70. S. Leo Ep. 91. ad Turbium. Conc. Bracar. 1. Can. 10. S. Leo, and the Councell Bracarense. Protestant Errours. AbaylardusTho. Waldens l. 1. Doctrinalis fidei, c. 10. taught that God cannot make any o∣ther but those thinges which he maketh.Luther in Assert. Art. 36. Wiccleuus in Trialogo. c. 10. 11. Luther thin∣keth Wicliffes opinion good, which is, that all things hap∣pen of absolute Necessity. And BucerL. de concordia Doct. c. de lib. Arb. See Caluin. Inst. l. 1. c. 10. §. 3. auoucheth that, whatsoeuer God doth, he doth necessarily, and cannot do otherwise. Luther is of opinion that,Postil in die Nat. fol. 62. No otherwise then if God should conuert some dry stocke, into a new, greene, & flourishing tree, doth the Grace of God renew man: so making man a meere stock. And others belieue, that we concurre no more to our Conuersion, then to ourRiuellus in Contros. tract. 3 sect. 27. Creation, andL. Con∣cordiae c. de lib. Arb. p. 680. Resurrection. Some Prot. further teach, that man hath not freewill so much as to sinne. Caluin,Instic. l. 2. c. 3. §. 5. It is strange, if it seeme to any a hard speech, that I say, the Will being without liberty, is necessarily either drawne or moued to euill. And,Ib. The sensuall man doth necessarily yield himselfe obedient to euery motion of Satan. And therfore CaluinInstit. l. 2. c. 1. §. 4. wisheth that the Name of Freewill might be quite taken away. Danaeus,Controu, 6. p. 1224. This is false, sinnes to be the actes of freewill. They
are indeed the actes of spontane (or not compelled) not of freewill. Paraeus thinketh, that EueryColloq. Theol. 1. Disp. 3. sinne is not voluntary. So that according to these Prot. whatsoeuer God doth, he doth ne∣cessarily: and that all things happen of absolute necessity: Man concurring to his owne Conuersion to God, no more then a stock: and that he hath not so much as freewill to sinne. Then all which, what more blockish and impious? SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that Man after Adams fall, hath freewill with Gods Grace to do good, and eschew euill. TO examine now the Doctrine by the Sacred Scriptu∣res,Ge. 4.6 7. Our Lord sayd to (Cain) why art thou angry? If thou do well, shalt not thou receiue agayne: but if thou dost ill, shall not thy sinne forthwith be present at the doore? But the lust thereof shallbe vnder thee, and thou shalt haue Dominion ouer it. This text is so cleere for freewill, that some Prot.Bible of Anno 1576. And see the Marginall Notes therof vpon Gen. 4.7. See Cal. in Gen. 4.7. & Inst. l. 2. c. 5 n. 16. for their best euasion, do Translate, not ouer it, but ouer him, to wit, ouer his Bro∣ther Abel: but this satisfyeth nothing, for by congruity of construction, the word Sinne, being the Antecedent next before mentioned, the Relatiue illius, must be referred vnto it: the coherence also of sense argueth the same, for to read Sinne lyeth at the doore (to torment thy Conscience asIbidem. Prot. do expound) and thou shalt haue rule ouer him, thy Brother, is in sense dissolute and inconsequent: whereas on the contrary to read. Sinne lyeth at the doore, and thou shalt haue rule ouer it, is direct plaine & consequent: yea the former Trāslation is so corrupt, & absurd, that other Prot. in their TranslationsThe great Engl. Bible of An∣no 1577. & in 4. of Anno 1584. and see the marg. notes there, Castalio in his Bible. andHip. Meth Th. l. 2. p. 478. Luth. Tom. 6. Wittemb. f. 62. Wi∣gandus in syntag. col. 489. writings, do follow our vulgar, reiecting this other. Freewill is also proued by such places as teach that it is in mans free choice to do good or euill. So Moyses appoin∣ted by God said vnto the Children of Israel,Deut. 30.11.14.15.16.17.18.19. See also Ios. 14.15. Eccl. 15.12.16.17. And 31.11. And. 1. Cor 7.36.37. 2. Cor. 9 7. Dan. 13.20. 2. Reg. 24.12.3. Reg. 3 5. Ps. 83 11. & 118.30.173. Prou. 8.10. Isa 66.4. Dan 13.22. Mat. 11.14. Mar. 10.36.51. Luc. 10.42. Io. 6.67. Heb 12.24. This Com∣mandement that I command thee this day is not aboue thee &c. But te word is very neere thee in thy mouth, and thy hart to do it &c. Con∣sider that I haue set before thee this day lyfe and good, and contrari∣wise
death and euill, that thou maiest loue our Lord thy God, and walke in his wayes, and keepe his Commandements &c But if thy hart be auerted, and thou wilt not heare &c. thou shall perish &c. I call for witnesses this day heauen and earth that I haue proposed to you lyfe & death, blessing and cursing: Choose therfore lyfe that th mayest liue. Here God giueth free choice to men to do good or euill. But D. Fulke answereth, that this is vnderstoodDefens. of the Engl. Transl. p. 326. of the knowledge of the law, and not of the strength that men haue to keepe it: but the wordes of the text are directly against this, to do it, to walke in his wayes, keepe his Commandements, choose lyfe: In so much, that Hiperius acknowledgeth this saying of Deutronomy to be vnderstoodMeth. Theol. l. 2. p. 479. 480. Of the fulfilling of the Com∣mandementes, as some wordes next before (saith he) seeme to import. And then himselfe would further euade by affirming, that it was spoken, To men regenerate: wheras it is euident to the contrary by the circumstancesVer. 1.17.18.19. of the same place, that it was spoken to the promiscuous multitude in generall, con∣tayning in it both good and euill. Such places also confirme Freewill, as shew that it is mans fault why he doth not good, and eschew euill: so God complaineth by his Prophet Isay,C. 5.3 4. Iudge betwene me and my vineyard: what is there that I ought to do more to my vineyard, & haue not done to it? whether that I looked it should yeeld grapes, and it hath yeelded wild grapes? So likewise Christ reproueth Hieru∣salem, saying.Mat. 25.37. How often would I gather togeather thy Chil∣dren &c & thou wouldst not. And S. Stephen to the Iewes,Act. 7.51. You alwaies resist the holy Ghost. And the like might be produced from sundryNum. 14.43 Isa. 65.12. Hier. 7.13.13 24.26.27.28. Ezech. 18.31. Io. 6.67. Apoc. 3.20. Prou. 1.24. other textes: from which it may be argued, that either he who sinneth, hath it in his power to sinne, or hath it not: if the first, then freewill; if the second, then in vaine should God complaine of man for sinning, seeing he could not do otrwise. But Caluin answereth to these last wordes of S. Ste∣phen,In hunc locum. They are said to resist the Holy Ghost, who obstinatly re∣iect him speak  he Prophets, for it is not here treated of secret Re∣uelations whi  inwardly inspireth to euery one, but of the exter∣nall Minstery  they did obstinatly reiect him speaking in the Prop  en it proueth, that they had power and
will to reiect him so speaking: And no reason can be ima∣gined, why man may not aswell resist internall inspira∣tions, as externall Ministery. Neither will it suffice to answere, that God may well complaine, though man cannot but sinne, because that his weaknes proceded first from his owne fault and hereditary mlice: for originall sinne being remitted, that hereditary malice and weaknes is not a fault, but a punishment of the fault. And therfore as none ight rightly reprehend a man borne blind for stumbling, though the said blindnes pro∣ceed from from originall sinne; so neither ought sinners to be bla∣med, if without free consent, by the only corruption of na∣ture, which remaineth in them through Adams sinne, they at any tyme transgresse the Commandementes of God. Christ sayth,Mat. 1.33. Either make the tree good, and his fruite good; or make the tree euill, and his fruite euill: This sheweth, that it is in mans freewill to be a good tree, or an ill tree, to bring forth good fruite, or bad. Free will also is further taught by all such texts wherin something is promised by God with Condition, that he wil coopera so saih God himself.Isa. 1 19, 20. if you be willing & will heare me, you shall eate the good things of the Earth; but if you will not, and will prouoke me to wrath, the sword shall deuour you: So also Christ our Sauiour,Mat. 19.17. If thou wilt enter into lyfe, keep the Cōmandments; with sundry such like. Now if it be in our power to perform or fullfill the condition offered, then haue we Freewill, if it be not, then is it not any true conditionall Promise, but only a playne irrision, which were impious to affirme of God. The Scriptures also testify that,1. Cor. 10.13. God is faythfull, who will not suffer you to be tempted aboue that which you are able, but will make also with temptation yssue that you may be able to sustayne. And S. Iohn speaking of Christ faythIo. 1.12. As many as receiued him, he gaue them power to be made the Sonnes of God: where the word power, is so conuincing for freewill, thatIn Nou. Test. Londi∣ni. Anno 1587. Beza transla∣teth i dignity: but he is therefore forsaken by otherPulk. g. Rhem. Test. in. 1 Io. 12. And the Engl. Bible of Anno 1576. Prot. who translate with vs, power: and reproued for the same by Castalio, saying:In De∣fens. Translt. p. 18. In the 1. Chapter of Iohn and the 12 verse, be depraueth a most excellent place, and of greatest moment thus tran∣slating.
But as many as receiued him, he gaue them this dignity, that they might be made the sonnes of God. For , is Power, in o place, Dignity, or let him cite the place; but in behalfe of his owne opinion, he expounded it falsly: for he would not that Christians haue this power from Christ which is nothing else but to enuy Christes be∣nefit to Christians &c For it is a greater benefit of Christ, and more worthy the sonnes of God, to haue fr power then otherwise: euen as it is a greater benefit of God towards men, that they can freely speake or be silent, then if without free power they should speake as Balaams Asse. And wheras in common sense and reason, sinne must be voluntary, not necessary; Protestants yet answere her to, that sinne must be voluntary or free from coaction, but not from necessity, euen as the Deuils do necessarily do euill, & yet truly sinne, and the blessed Angels do necessarily do well, and yet their workes are truly good. But yet this no∣thing auayleth, for if liberty from coaction would suffice, then had beastes, Children, and mad-men liberty to sinne, seeing of their owne accord without compulsion they worke. And though the good and euill Angels in respect of the last end haue only freewill from coaction, yet in regard of the meanes, they haue freewill from necessity, because they do many things which are in their power not to do, and of the contrary; And in these do the one truly sinne, and the other do well. Freewill also is proued by such places as teach, that in our actions we are free not only from coaction, but also from necessity, hauing in our selues powe and liberty. He1. Cor. 7.37. that hath determined in his hart, being setld, not hauing necessity, but hauing power of his owne will, and hath iudged this in his hart, to keepe his Virgin, doth well. Againe,2. Cor. 9.7. Euery one as he hath determined in his hart, not of sadnes, or of necssity for God lo∣ueth a cheerfull giuer. And to Philemon,Ver. 14. without thy coun∣saile I would do nothing, that thy good mght not be as it were of ne∣cessity, but voluntary. But because the words do proue good workes to be voluntary, and free from necessity; the Prote∣stants of Geneua in theirAnno 1605. 1610. Bibles do add the particle (quasi) and make the Apostle to say, but as it were voluntary,
which is a grosse corruption. Peter also said to Ananias,Act. 5.4. Remayning, did it not remayne to thee, and being sould, was it not in thy power? why hast thou put this thing in thy hart? And S. Paul most expresly of himselfe said,1 Cor. 9.1. Am I not free? &c1. Cor. 9.3. Haue we not power to eate and drinke? So cleere it is, that man hath freewl from necessity. Lastly, by the denyall of freewill all these absurdities follow. 1. That there remayneth no place for punishment or reward. 2. That all should eyther be good, or all euill: and if all good, not one better then another, and if all euill, not one worse then another, but all equally either good or euill. 3. That all Exhortations, reprehensions, prayse, dis∣praise, Commandes, Counsailes, threats, promises of re∣ward, and the like, were in vayne: then all which, what more absurd? In regard heerof S. Austine sayth,De fide cont. Ma∣nich. c. 10. Who will not cry out, that it is a foolish thing to giue Commandements to him who hath not freedome to do what is commanded, and that it is iniury to condemne him who had not power to fullfill the Commande∣ments? Agreably sayth S. Irenaeus,L. 4. c. 72. If therefore it were not in vs, to do these things, or not to do them, what cause had the Apostle, & long before our Lord himselfe, to counsayle to do certayne things, and to abstayne from others, but because man had freewill from the be∣ginning? Adde yet heerunto, that most certayne, infallible and experimentall Lecture, written with legible letters in the booke of euery mans Conscience, learned and vnlearned, wherein we plainly read, & by experience know for true, that our Soule doth sometymes strugle against temptation, and happily ouercome the same, from whence followeth comfort and peace of Conscience; but other tymes it yiel∣deth, when it might haue withstood, from whence follow∣eth, feare, shame, and repentance: none of which would follow, if we had not freewill.
SECT. III. That the Fathers do expound the Sciptures agreably with Catholickes in proofe of Freewill. THe former wordes of God to Cain, S. Austine expo∣undeth thus,De ciu. Dei. l 15 c. 7. Thou shalt rule, ouer what, ouer thy brother? not so: ouer what then, but sinne? S.Ambr l. 2 de Cam. c. 7. Ambrose directly con∣futeth the applying thereof to Abel, saying. His brother is not giuen vp to him, but his fault is imputed, of which he was causer to himselfe. The fault, sayth he, is turned vpon thee, which began from thee. S. Hierome writeth,Quaest, in Gen & Geg l. 4. Mor. c. 22. Prosper. lib. 2 de vocat. Gent. c. 13. Because thou hast freewill, I warne thee that sinne haue no dominion ouer thee, but thou ouer Sinne. Saint Chrysostome sayth,In Gen. Hom 19. c. 4. The Lord of all things hath made our na∣ture to haue freewill &c. he suffereth all to lye in the will of him that is sicke, this therefore is now also done in Cain. Aben Ezra in his He∣brew Commentaries vpon Genesir, affirmeth it a meereIn c. 4.7. forgery to referre the Relatiue otherwise then to the word Sinne. And heerein the Rabins are so cleere, that D. Fulke answering thereto, sayth,Df of the Egl. Transl. p. 320. The Iewish Rabins erre in this pla∣ce. &c. And Caluin acknowledgeth thatIn Gen. 4.7. There is scarce any Expositour who doth not referre this to Sinne. In like sort the place of Deutronomy is expounded for freewill, by ancientLib. quòd Dus sit im∣mutabilis. Philo, saying, God created (man) free, that being left to his proper will, he might do whatsoeuer he pleased &c. that knowing what was good, what euill, and the difference betweene &c. vertue and vice, he might choose the better and fly the worse: To which sentence is extant the Oracle in Deutronomy; Behould I haue placed before thee life and death, good and euill, choose lyfe. S. Cyprian also saith,Lib. 3. ad Quiin. c 52. And Ambr. in ps. 40. the freedome of belieuing or not be∣lieuing to be placed in the will (is to be seene) in Deutronomy; be∣hould I haue placed before thee lyfe and death, good and euill, choose lyfe, that thou mayest liue. Also in Isaias. If yee will and will heare me, you shall eate the good things of the earth, but if you will not, and will not heare me, the sword shall consume you. Also in the Ghospell ac∣cording to Luke, the Kingdom of God is within you. S. Basil writing
vpon those former wordes of Isay, If you will, and will heare me, sayth:In. c. 1. Isaiae. In this place especially he setteth as it were before our eyes, the liberty of the will to be giuen to mans nature. And accor∣ding to Epiphanius,Haer. 16. ad Hier. in c. 5. ad Gal. It is manifest and cleere to all, and not to be doubted, that God hath giuen freewill vnto vs, speaking by him∣selfe, If you will, and will not &c. Wherefore in man it is, to worke good things, or to desire euill things. And the same Exposition is giuen by S. Hierome. S. Chrisostome alledging those words of Isay,Isa. 1.10. If you will, & will heare me &c. saith:Ho. 61. ad Pop. Ant. quae est. 8. de fato & Prou. God hath sayd, If you will, & if you will not, placing in our power vertue & vice, & putting it in our will. And a litle after, God sayth,Eccl. 15.7. I haue placed before thee fyre and water, lyfe and death, put thy hand whi∣ther thou wilt. The Diuell sayth, is is not placed in thee to stretch out thy hand, but this is done by certayne necessity and force. And the selfe same with the Diuell do Prot. still say. God, saith S.De Grat. & lib. Arb. c. 2. & Tertul. l. 2. cont. Mar∣cion. c. 5. Austin, hath reueyled vnto vs by his holy Scri∣ptures, that in man there is freewill: first because Gods Cōmandments themselues would not profit man, vnles he had freewill, whereby he do∣ing them, might come to the rewards promised &c.Eccl. 15.14. God from the beginning made man, and left him, in the hand of his owne Coun∣sayle &c. He hath set before thee water and fire, to which thou wilt stretch forth thy hand. Before man there is lyfe and death, good and e∣uill, what pleaseth him shalbe giuen him. Behould we see most plain∣ly expressed the free power of mans will. Wherefore is it, that in so many places God commaundeth all his Commandements to be kept and done? How doth he command, if there be not freewill? And then cyting to this end, seuerall other places he cōcludeth, what do infinit such other places in the old Testament shew, but the free power of mans will? If it were not in our power (saythL. 4. c. 72. Irenaeus, to do these things, or not to do them, what cause had the Apostles, and much before him our Lord himselfe, to counsayle to do certayne things, and to abstayne from others, but because frō the beginning man hath freewill? Origen cyting this Text, And now Israel, what doth thy Lord God require from thee? addeth,Ho. 12. in Numeros. Let them be ashamed of these words, who deny freewill in man. How should God require from man, vnles Man had in his power, what he ought to offer to God re∣quiring? And in another place,In Mat. c. 13. the Scriptures impugne this vnderstanding, declaring that there is freewill, both whilest they ac∣cuse
those that sinne, and allow those who do well. But none writeth more plainly then S. Cyprian, say∣ingEp ad Cornel. ante med. Turning to his Apostles he sayd,Io. 6.67. What will you al∣so depart? obseruing indeed the law, whereby man left to his owne li∣berty, and placed in his owne will, desireth to himselfe eyther deat or saluation. S. Hierome affirmeth that,In Isa. c. 55. That which is sayd in th GhospellMat. 7.18. A good tree cannot yield euill fruite, is not referred  the propriety of nature, as heretikes would, but to the will of the mind lastly it is inferred, Or make yee a good tree, and the fruite there good; whereby it is plaine, that euery one by his owne will doth mak to his Soule a good or euill tree, whose fruites are different. Theodoret auoucheth in generall that,De cu∣ratione Infi∣delium Grae∣corum. Ser. 5. de natura hominis. Whosoeu will, may easily find many other places of that kind, both in the Ghos∣pels, & in the monuments of the Apostles, by which is plainly shew the absolute will, and free power of man. S. Gregory reconcileth the concourse of Gods Grace & mans freewill in these wordes,Mor. l. 16. c. 11. Piety from aboue doth fir worke something in vs, without vs, that our freewill also following be may worke with vs the good that we desire, which yet, by Grace be∣stowed, at the last Iudgement he doth so reward in vs, as if it had pro∣ceeded from vs alone: because Gods goodnes doth preuent vs to mak vs Innocents. Paul sayth,1. Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God, I am that whi I am. And because our freewill followeth that Grace, he addeth, An his Grace in me hath not beene voyd, but I haue laboured more aboun∣dantly then all they: who when he saw that he was nothing of himselfe, he sayth, but not 1. And yet because he found that he was something with Grace, he annexed, but the Grace of God with me. For he would not say, with me, if with preuenient Grace he had not freewill fol∣lowing. That therfore he might show himselfe to be nothing without Grace, he saith, not I, but that he might show that by freewill he workes with Grace, he added, But the Grace of God with me. Finally, the Fathers are so cleare for free will, that Cal∣uinInstit. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 4. & l. 3. c. 3. sect 11 And see. Whiteg. Def. p. 472. reprehendeth for the same the Greeke and Latin Fathers in Generall. And other Prot. say that,Disco∣uery of vn∣truthes in D Ban∣croftes Ser∣mon p. 23. The Errour of freewill deryued from Iustine Martyr and Irenaeus, was at the tyme of the Nycene Councell in some rypenes &c. We know that euer since the Apostles times in a manner it flourished euery where, till Martin
Luther tooke in hand the sword against it. The Centurists thinke that,Cent 2. c. 4. Col 58. Scarcely there is any point of Doctrine which began so soone to be darkned as this of freewill: AndIb. col. 59. After the same man∣ner Clemens euery where affi meth freewill, that it may appeare, that not only all the Doctours of that age were in such darknes, but also that the same increased afterwards in the later ages. And the like is confessed byDef. p. 472. 473. Whiteguift. By all which we see, that the Fathers did not only belieue Freewill, but also proued the same from seuerall cleere Texes of the sacred Scriptures. SECT. IV. That sundry Protestant writers do teach, and defend our Catholicke Doctrine of Freewill. IOhn Husse teacheth that,I. 1. Cor. c. 7. Though grace, which maketh a man gratefull, is had by the guift of God, yet efficiently it is had from freewill consenting; for S. Austine saith, He that created thee without thee, will not iustify thee without thee. This grace is, (or proceedeth) from 3. Causes, from God as principally working, from Grace freely giuen stirring vp the freewill, and from Freewill as consenting. Bullinger affimeth that,Decades English. p. 481. God appointeth vs lawes, and layeth before vs rewards and punishments, he commandeth vs to im∣brace the good and eschew the euill to the performing wherof he doth neither deny vs his Grace &c. nor despise our good will. And,Ib. p. 646. The Lord requireth our endeauour, which notwithstanding is not without his assistance and grace. Willet hauing reproued Heminglus a Lutheran, and Snecau a Caluinist, for their Doctrine of freewill, affir∣meth of them and their followers that,Synop p. 8 8. 810. They are more er∣roneous concerning Freewill then are the Papistes. And whereas S.De fide cont. Ma∣nich. c. 9.10.24. & in Actis cum Felice Ma∣nich. l. 2. c. 4. Austine and S.In Io. ho. 45. Chrisostome do condemne the Ma∣nichees for denying freewill, Hemingius coupleth his Prot. Brethren with the sayd Manichees, saying,De vni∣uers. Grat p. 209. 107. Certaine De∣uines of great name and otherwise excellently deseruing of the Church of Christ, whome as Brethren in Christ I loue, drawing most neare
to the Manichees and Stoickes, do from the same principle build their opinion of freewill, and other euents. Hence some are not affrayde to inferre, that God ordained the Adultery of Dauid. Other Prot. charge Melancthon with teaching freewill,See Morgenst. tract. de Ec∣clesia. p. 6. Schlusseb. in Theol. Calu. l. 2. f. 86. and, making our assent cooperating with the word and holy Ghost. And Melancthon himself saith,Loc. com. cap. de lib. Arb. Three causes of a good action concur, the word of God, the holy Ghost, & mans will assenting or resi∣sting the word of God &c. The furies of the Manichees are not to be ad∣mitted. The Conuersion in Dauid is not made, as if a stone should be changed into a fig, but the freewill in Dauid doth something, when he heard the chiding and promise, willing then, and freely he confesseth his sinne, and his will doth something. Foxe reporteth how that oneAct. & Mon. p. 1533. 1605. Trew, and sundry other Protestant Professours of those tymes taught freewill, and were as then by their other Brethren,Ib. p. 1605. called the Free∣will men. And though M. Parkins in words impugneth free∣will, yet in consequence of truth he acknowedgeth the Do∣ctrine, teaching that,Reform. Cath p. 26. Because God giues men Comman∣dement to repent and belieue, therefore they haue power to repent and belieue:Ib. p. 52. God with the Commandement giuing Grace, that the thing prescribed may be done. Caluin writing vpon these words of IosueIos. 24.14. Feare our Lord and serue him, &c. but if it lyke you not to serue our Lord, choyce is giuen you choose this day that which pleaseth you &c. ex∣poundeth them thus:In Ios. 24.15. Edit. Gal. Not without cause gaue he them liberty of choyce, that being tyed by their owne consent, they could not pre∣tend, that, that which they did, shey did of necessity, and could not but do it. So plentifull are our Prot. in teaching from the Scriptures, the Doctrine of Freewill. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture agayst Freewill answered. SOmeRogers Def. of the Art. art. 10. p. 48. obiect that,2. Cor. 3.5. we are not sufficient of our selues to thinke any thinge as of our selues, but our sufficiēcy is of God. And
agayneIo. 6 44. No man can come to me, vnles the Father that sent me draw him. Answ. We do not defend freedome or sufficiency of our will by nature, but by assistance of Grace, which as I haue proued before, God offereth to all men: which suppo∣sed, the former texes mke directly for vs, affirming our suf∣ficiency, and only withall teaching, that this sufficiency is not of our selues, that is, no by force of nature, but of God, that is, through Grace, which is the very doctrine we teach. This same answere will also serue for the second text, only I will adde, what S. Chrisostome saith to the Manichees ob∣iecting the sam text,In. Io. ho. 45. No man can come to me, except my Fa∣ther that sen me draw him. Here the Manichees ryse vp contending by testimony of this text, that we can do nothing of our selues; But this taketh not away our freewill, but sheweth that it needeth Gods help. And afterward,Ibid. ho. 4. Wherfore it is euident, that it is in our choice, whether we will be saued or damned. It is also obiectedRogers Def of the Art. art. 10. p. 50. that,Philip. 2.13. It is God that worketh in you both to will and to accomplish. Answ. True it is, that God doth worke, but we also do by his Grace cooperate, accor∣dingly as immedialy before it is said,Philip. 2.12. With feare d trem∣bling worke your Saluation: And so M. Perkins confesseth that,Ref. Cath. p. 14. Mans freewill concurs with Grace as a Co-worker. And that,Ib. p. 16. being moued by Grace, it acteth and moueth it selfe. And thus doth S. Austine answere this very obiection, saying,Tom 7. de Grat. & lib. Arb. c. 9. For not because he said, It is God that worketh in you, both to will, and to accomplish according to his good will therfore is he to be thought to haue taken away freewil: for if it were so he would not haue said before with feare and trembling woke your saluation; for when there is command that they worke, their freewill is called vpon. It is also further vrged that we are said to beEph. 2.5. Dead by sinne, and so no power in our Will, to will to spirituall actions: But the same place likewise affirmeth, that we are quickned in Christ, by whse grace (we) are saued. And therfore athough not of our seus, yet by his quickning and pre∣uenting grace, we are sufficiently holpen and enabled to worke. Some obiect those words of Christ.Mat. 18.7. It is necessary that scandals do come. And,Luc. 17.1. It is impossible that scandals should
not come, and the like. Answ. S. Chrisostome answereth to these very places saying,Ho 60. in Math & ho. 27. in 1. Cor. See S. Aug. de Ciu. Dei l. 5. c. 10. When he calleth is so necessity, he saith it not, because the Will may take away liberty, and power of Freewill, nor because it may subiect mans lyfe to the necessity of things; but because it is certainly to come to passe, he fortelleth it Which Luke expresseth in other wordes. It is impossible that scandals should not come &c. not the fortelling therfore therof is to be thought to bring scandals; for they do not therfore come, because he fortold scandals would be, but because they were certainly to come, therfore he fortould them. Others vrge those worde of the Parable,Luc. 14.23. The Lord said to the Seruants, Goe forth into the waies and hedges, and compell them to enter. Answ. The vehement persuasion that God vseh both externally by words and miracles, and internally by his grace, to bring vs vnto him, is called compelling, not that he forceth any against their owne willes, but that he mollifyeth a hard hart, making him willing, that before would not. S. AustineEp. 50. & 204 & l. 2 cont. Ep. Gaud. c. 25. referreth this compelling to the penall lawes, which Catholicke Princes do iustly vse a∣gainst Heretickes and Schismaticks: And so in this sense, by the two former partes of the Parable, the Iewes first, and se∣condly the Gentiles, that neuer belieued before in Christ, were inuited by faire sweet meanes only: but by the third, such are inuited, as the Church of God hath power ouer, be∣cause they promised in Baptisme.
CHAP. XXXII. The true State of the Question, concerning the pos∣sibility of keeping Gods Commandements. Whether the Commandementes of Godt, hrough his holy Grace, though not by the only power of Freewill, are possible to be kept by iust men in this lyfe: or rather that they are so impossible, that in euery worke that men do, they transgresse them. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. SAINT Austine sayd exceeding well that,De Temp. Ser. 61. God who is iust cannot command any thing impossible, nor he that is holy, will damne man for that which he cannot eschew: Yea,De Temp. Ser. 191. We accurse (sayth he) the blaspemy of them who affirme any thing impossible to be commanded by God: According to which the Catholicke Church decreeth, thatConcil. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 11. No man though iu∣stifyed ought to thinke himselfe free from the keeping of the Comman∣dements No man ought to vse that temerarious speach, and forbidden by the Fathers vnder Anathema the Commandments of God to be im∣possible to be kep by a man iustified: for God doth not cōmand impossible things, but by commanding doth admonish to do what thou canst and to
aske what thou canst not, and he helpeth that thou mayest &c. And although the most holy and iust in this mortall lyfe do sometymes fall, at least into light and dayly Sinnes, which also are called veniall, yet they do not therefore cease to be iust. And therefore,Sess. 6. Can. 18. If any shall say, that the Commandements of God are impossible to be kept by a man iustifyed, and in the state of Grce &c o .Can. 1. Nothing is commanded in the Ghospell but fayth, ote things are indifferent, neyther commanded nor prohibited but free; or that the ten Comman∣dements do not pertayne to Christians, Anathema. In the second Councll Arausicanum it is ordayned, that,Cap. 25. According to Catholicke Fayth we belieue, that Grace re∣ceyued by Baptisme, all such as are baptized. Christ helping & coo∣perating may, and ought to fulfill, if they will lbour faythfully, those things that belong to Saluation. In the second Mileuitane Councell it is defyned, that,Cap. 4. Whosoeuer shall say, that the Grace of God, doth in this only help vs not to sinne, because by it the vnderstanding of the Commandemēts is reueyled and opened vnto vs, that so we may know what we ought to desire or eschew, but that by it is not giuen vs that, what we know to be done, we may loue, and be able to do, Anathema. AllBellar. de Iustif l. 4. c. 10 Rhem. Test. in 1. Io. 5.3. Catholickes with one consent teach, that the Commandments of God are possible to be kept by iust mē, not by the only power and strength of Freewill, as hereti∣kes do calumniate; but by the help of Gods grace, and the spirit of Fayth and Charity infused in their Iustification. Pointes Disputable. SomeDom à Soto. l. 2. de Iust. & Iur. q. 5. art. 4. Schoolmen thinke, that Christians are not only freed from the Ceremoniall law, and from the guilt & terrour of the morall law, but also from all the law written in the bookes of Moyses, not that we are not bound to keep the law of Moyses, as it is naturall, and as it is renewed in the Ghospell, in the Epistles of the Apostles, but as it is wri∣ten by Moyses himselfe: yetBellar. de Iustif. l. 4. c. 6. others thinke that the mo∣rall law euen as it was giuen by Moyses & the Prophets, & and so as it is written in the Bookes of the Old Testament, truly to oblige Christians.
Protestant vntruthes. If you will belieue Luther,Ad lib. Ducis Geor∣gij script. Anno 1533. The Papistes teach that man by his owne force of nature, without Grace, may keep the Com∣mandements of God. My maister Occam writteth, that the sacred Scri∣ptures do no where testify, that for the keeping of Gods commandements the singular guift of God is necessary. Melancthon demaundeth,In Apol. c. de Tradit. humanis. What difference betweene the Pelagians, and our Aduersaries? Seeing both thinke, that men without the holy Ghost may loue God & keepe Gods commandements according to the Substance of the actions, merit grace and Iustification by workes, which things reason it self doth without the holy Ghost. How many absurdities follovv of these Pela∣gian opinions, vvhich are taught in Schooles vvith a loud voyce. But these are meere fictions of Luther, and Melancthon. Protestant Doctrine. Luther teacheth, thatIn Con∣fut. Rationis Latonianae. So many Testimonies of Scripture proue the Commandments to be impossible to vs, that nothing is more manifest. And,Luth. in Resp. ad Dial. Siluestri Prieratis. Thou dost most badly, denying our Sauiour to Command things impossible: but thou dost worse then most badly, in that thou darest call this a falshood, We cannot in this lyfe fullfill the Commandements of God. Yea sayth Melancthon,Ad c. 4. Ep. ad Rom. Calu. Instit. l. 2. c. 7. When the Law commandeth God to be loued, it commandeth a thing as impossible, as if it should command vs to fly ouer Caucasus. Whitaker affir∣meth, that it is the foundation of Christian Religion, thatControu. 2. q. 6. c. 3. p. 563. The law of God cannot be performed, and fullfilled by vs. PerkinsTom. 1. of Bap. fol. 833. The Papists thinke that men in this life may keep, & fullfill the law. Danaeus,Controu. 5. p. 947. Bellarmine answereth, It is easy for him who hath Charity to fulfill the law. I answere, yea it is impossible for him. Adamus Francisci:Marga∣rit. Theol. loc. 5. p. 52. Although men regenerate be holpen and guided by the holy Ghost yet by he relickes of sinne they are hin∣dered, that they cannot satisfy the law. Caluin.In Rom. 13.8. No man fulfil¦leth the law, nor euer hath fulfilled it.Instit. l. 3. c. 17. § 13. They cannot produce any one who hath fullfilled the law, and the same is taught by sundry others. Luther,Luther, Tom. 5 in Gal. 3. fol. 343. Confess Sot. art 15. God requireth that we loue him with all our hart, which thing no mortall man can do. Caluin,Instit. l. 2 c. 7. § 5. Brentius ho. 1. in Dom. 13. post Trin. p 777. Da∣naeus Cōtrou. 5 p. 973. Pa∣raeus de iustif. l. 4. c. 11 p. 175. I say, there was
no Saint, who compassed with the body of Death, attayned to that end (or height) of loue, that he loued God from his whole soule, from his whole hart, from his whole power. And the same is taught by sundry others. Wherefore according to Prot. No man hath euer kept the Commandements, nor possibly can. Protestantes agree with Ancient Heretickes. This daungerous Doctrine of the impossibility of kee∣ping Gods Commandementes, was condemned in cer∣taine Heretickes by S. Hierome, saying, WeIn Ex∣pln Symb. ad Damas. accurse the Blasphemy of them who say, that any thing impossible is commanded by God to man. And the same words vseth S.De Temp. Se. 191. Austine. In so much that Hofman in great discontent herof saith,Com∣ment. de Poe a l. 1 fol. 55. Hierome writes, Let him be accursed who hath said. God to haue Commanded impossible things: but why is not Hierome rather accur∣sed, who so audaciously thinketh agaynst God? And the like dislike of this Censure of S. Hierome, is shewed byTom. 2. Wittemb. fol 210. Cent. 4 Col. 148. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c. 7. § 5. Luther, the Centuristes, and Caluin. For the same errour S.Haer. 33. Epiphanius taxeth Ptolomaeus. Protestant Errours. WeIn An∣tid. Concil. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 21. p. 21. deny (sayth Caluin) Christ to be a Law-giuer, who gaue any new lawes to the world.In Mat. 5.41. Christ bringeth not new lawes. And the selfsame is taught by sundry otherBeza in Mat. 19.19. & in 2 Cor. 3.6. & in. 1. Ioan. 2.7. Pet. Mart. in Rom. 3. Powel. in Ep. Dedic. of things indff∣rent. Protestants. Luther writeth that,In Com∣ment ad c. 2. ad Gal. When it is thus taught, Fayth in Christ iustifyeth, but withall the Commandements of God ought to be kept, because it is written; If thou wilt enter into lyfe keep the Com∣mandements; there forthwith Christ is denyed, and fayth abolished, be∣cause that is ascribed to the Commandements, or the law, vvhich be∣longeth to God alone. AgayneIbid. Only fayth is necessary, that vve may be iust, all other things are most free, neyther commanded more nor forbidden &c. If thy Conscience tell thee thou hast sinned, answer, I haue sinned: Therefore God will punish, and damne thee? No, But the law sayth so. But I haue nothing to do with the law, Where∣fore? Because I haue liberty. And,Tom. 5. Ger. Wit. in Comment. Exod. 20. fol. It is altogether manifest that the ten Commandements were giuen only to the Iewes, not to vs.Tom 1. Ger. Wit. in Gal. 5. fol. 273.
We neyther ought nor wil suffer one very law, or one preceept of Moyses to be layd vpon our neckes.In Gal. 4 fol. 215. Be carefull that thou be wyse, and command Moyses with his law to depart a farre off, and to go to the mischiefe. Be nothing moued with his terrour and threats, but al∣wayes suspect him as the worst Hereticke, a man accursed and con∣demned, and worse then Pope, or the Diuell himselfe. And yet in another place he acknowledgeth that,Tom. 2. Ger. Ien. l. de abusu Missae. fol 39. Moyses reiected, therwithall Christ also is reiected. Againe,In Col∣lo q. slb de Panaticis. fol. 369. Let the ten Com∣mandements of God be quite taken away, and all heresies will cease: for the ten Commandementes are the fountaine, from whence as from the spring all heresies do flow, for the sacred Scripture is the booke of all Heretickes. Now wheras Luther thus affirmed, that,Serm. de Moyse. The Decalogue pertaineth nothing to Christians, Whitaker saith herof,Cont. Dur. l. 8 sect. 91. This Article is truly most worthy of Luther for it containeth a greatest truth and comfort. So that the greatest com∣fort to a Prot. is to quite take away Gods Commandements And the good reason herof is giuen by Tyndall saying,In Cal∣uino. Turcis. l 4. c 22. Thou owest nothing to God but faith, that thou mayest confesse Christ Iesus, and belieue him to haue risen from the dead: For so thou shalt be saued, In all other things God hath made it free to thee, that thou mayest follow thine owne will. Though it be to murder, adulte∣rate, steale &c. M. Rogers confesseth ofDef. of the Art. art. 7. p. 39. Ioannes Isebius and his fol∣lowers the Antinomies; that they will not haue Gods law to be preached, nor the Conscience of sinners to be terrified and troubled with the Iudg∣ments of God. Of Banister, (among our selues) who held how it is vt∣terly euill for the Elect so much as to thinke, much lesse to speake, or heare of the feare of God, which the law preacheth. According to Beza.2. Par. Resp. ad Act. Colloq. Mon∣tisbelg p. 226. See Calu. in Act. 15.10. God commandeth something, which he would not haue done, and promiseth also something which he will not performe. Piscator saith,In thes. lib. 2. p. 200. God sometimes by his word doth signifye that himselfe willeth that which truly he willeth not, or that he willeth not that which truly he willeth. And, fromIb. p 201 hence we may perceiue, that there is a certaine holy dissimulation, euen law∣full to men, much more to God the most free agent. And in another place he affirmeth,Loc. 12. p. 172. that Christ dissembled. Not vnlike to Luther, who feareth not to giue Christ the lye, in these words:Tom. 6. in cap. 20. Gen. f. 244. That which they call an officiously, is also faigned for the
profit of our Neighbour: so Christ in Luke faigned himselfe to go fur∣ther. And thus Prot. are content to allow of lying, and most blasphemously to ascribe it to Christ himselfe, but yet accor∣ding to the tendernes of their Consciences, they cannot in∣dure in any respect Aequiuocation in men, though vpon iust causes. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that the Commandements of God through his holy Grace, are possible to be kept by man in this lyfe. THe Scriptures teach, that the Commandements are not only possible, but also easy to be kept,Mat. 11.30. My yoake is sweet and my burden light:1. Io. 5.3. His Commandements are not heauy. To answere that they are not heauy, because God doth not impute them, is all one to affirme, that a man at euery foote falling vnder a heauy burden, yet the said burden is easy, because he hath a Cōpanion to help him vp againe: which is most absurd, and directly contrary to the Apostle, affir∣ming of the Commandements themselues, that they are not heauy. In which sense king Dauid said,Ps. 118.32. I ranne the way of thy Commandements when thou didst dilate my hart. And the same also is forteould by Ezechiel,36.27. I will put my Spirit in the midst of you, and I will make that you walke in my Preceps, and keep my Iudgments, and do them. The Scriptures also teach, that in this life we may fulfill the law, do the will of God, and obey Christ,Rom. 8.4. God sen∣ding his sonne &c. that the iustification of the law might be fulfilled in vs: these words proue, that the Law iustifyeth, and that it may be fulfilled in vs, by Christs Grace. We are also taught to pray that,Mat. 6.20. The will of God may be done in Earth, as it is in heauen Now it is the will of God, that we keep his Com∣mandements.De Iustif. Controu. 12. p. 191. And ChristHeb. 5.9. is made to all that obey him cause of eternall Saluation. These places are so conuincing, that Schar∣pius is inforced to giue this absurdest answere, From these pla∣ces
nothing followeth, but that the faithfull fulfill the law of God: but it followeth not, that they fu fill it in this lyfe. As though it were not more then cleere, a osaid texts do speake of our Iustification, obedience, and fufilling the law, and will of God in this life. The Commandements e kept by louing God and our Neghbours,Io. 14.  21.23. If you loue me keep my Commandementes: And,Rom. 13. 8 Gal. 3.14. He that loueth his Neighbour hath fulfilled the law: But we lought, and my loue God and ou Neighbour, for o∣ther i we no be Chstes Disciples and friends, him∣selfe saying,Io. 13.35. In this all men shall kno that you are my Disci∣ples if you haue loue one to another.Io. 15.14. You are my friends if you do the things that I command you. And,Io. 15.22. This is my Precept, that you loue one another. To answere, that none can loue as they ought and are bound, is to exclude all from being Christes friends and Disciples. But besides, God requireth nothing else in loue, but that we loue with all our harts, which not only to be possible, but also indeed to be practi∣sed in the tyme of the New Testament, the Scriptures testi∣fy,Deut. 30.6. God will circumcise thy hart, and the hart of thy seed, that thou mayest loue the Lord thy God, with all thyne hart, and with all thy Soule. Y a they further witnes, that we may be perfect, and so perfectly loue, for Charity is the bond of Perfecti∣on,Gen. 6.9. Noe was a iust and perfect man:Gen. 17.1. Walke before me and be perfect, and sundry such lyke. The Scriptures do exemplify this in diuers who kept the Commandements: of Iob it is said,Mat. 5.48. & 29.21. Philip. 3.15. thatC. 1.18. he was a man simple and right, and fearing God and departing from euill. Of Da∣uid God sayth,3. Reg. 14.8. & 15.5. Act. 13.22. He kept my Commandements, and followed me in all his hart, doing that which was well liked in my sight. Of Iosias it is written,4. Reg. 23.25. Like vnto him was there no King before him that returned to our Lord in all his hart, and in all his Soule, & in all his power, accoding to all the law of Moyses. Of Iosue we read that,Ios. 11.25 See Eccl. 44 o As our Lord had commanded Moyses &c. so did Moyses command Iosue, and he accomplished all things: he omitted not of all the Cmmandements, not so much as one word which our Lord had commnded Moyses. O Zcharias and S. El zbeth S. Luke tetiyeth that,C. 1.6. They were both iust before God, walking in
all the Commandements and Iustifications of our Lord without blame. Caluin in answere to this only saith,In hunc locum. I answere those praises wherwith the seruants of God are so higly honoured, are to be taken with exception. But Caluin doth not find in all the Scri∣ptures, that this exception is to be from keeping the Com∣mandementes. Because these wordes,Luc. 20.6. They were both iust before God walking in all the Commandements, and Iustifications of our Lord without blame, do help to proue workes to iustiy eza v∣pon the same place though he confesse  (which Greeke word S. Luke vseth) to be translated according to the word iustificationes, yet he reiecteth this interpretation, that (saith he) I might cut off this occasion of calumniating Iustifica∣tion by Faith (alone). And for Iustfications, he translateth, rites. Him heerein the English Protestants follow in the Kings Bible. S. Luke relateth,Luc. 18.18. A certaine Prince asked our Sauiour saying, By doing what shall I possesse lyfe euerlasting? And Iesus said &c. Thou knowest the Commandementes: Thou shalt not kill &c. Who said, All these things haue I kept from my youth.Mar. 10.21. And Iesus behoulding him loued him &c. To answere as Protestantes do, that this young man dissembled or lyed, these last words of S. Marke, Behoulding him, loued him, will no waies permit. But Paraeus further answereth, that,Lib. 3. de Iustif. c. 12. p. 812. The Lord re∣mitteth him to the workes of the Law, not that he thinketh this way of Saluation to be possible, but that he might confound his Hypocrisy: so making Christ to thinke one thing and speake the contrary. But Brentius proceedeth yet further, affirming that,Apud Paraeum. ibid l. 4. c. 2. p. 965. Christ answered thus, that he might rather show him the way to eternall damnation. Which answere (saithIb. p. 967. Paraeus) is no lesse true, then that sentence of the Apostle: You are made voyd from Christ, who are iustifyed by the law. So making Christ to direct the yong man to Hell, who desired to learne of him the way to heauen. Luther also answering to the same place, saith,Tom. 5. in Gal. 3. fol. 347. I vnderstand this place in generall, that this saying of Christ, Do this and thou shalt liue, is a certaine mocking and scoffing. Herof also saith Paraeus,De iustif. l. 4. c. 2. p. 967. Luthers scoffing may be defended. AndIb. p. 69. It was indeed a serious conference, but that nothing hindreth a scoffe to be
mingled by the Lord. And wheras Christ said, Yet one thing is wanting o thee, sell all that thou hast, and giue to the poore: BezaIn h locum. answereth to the contrary; Yea all things (are wanting) seeing no man can obserue one Commandement so, as the law prescri∣beth. Christ therfore speaketh with a certaine holy Ironia, or sfing. So impudent are these Heretickes to make Christ a scoffer: And so vnanswerable is this text for the keeping of the Commandements. Reason also conuinceth this truth; for first we may do more then God commandeth, (as is prouedSee hertofore Chap. 1 hertofore) therfore much more that which he commandeh. 2. If the Commandements were impossible to be kept, they could not bynd, and consequently were not precepts, for it is not imaginable, that any can sinne in that which he cannot es∣chew. 3. God herby is made more cruell, and vnwise then any tyrant, who should exact such a tribute of his very friēds, as they could not possibly pay, and would enact such lawes vnder greatest penaltie, as he certainly forsaw were impos∣sible to be kept. 4. Christ teacheth vs to pray,Mat. 6.10. Thy will be done as in heauen in earth also: here we desire grace to fulfill the will and Commandements of God, which if it were im∣possible, the Prayer were fruitles, and idle. SECT. III. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe, that the Commandements are possible to be kept. SAint Basil hauing alleadged these wordes of S. Paul.Eph. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as most deare Children, & walke in loue &c. teacheth that,In Regu∣lis breu. Resp. 176. without dubt he who is good and iust would not haue commanded this, vnes he had giuen power wherewith we should do it. And vpon these wordes o Moyses; Attend to thy selfe, he affirmeth that,Hom. in illud Moyses, Attende. It is impious to affirme the Com∣mandements of the holy Ghost to be impossible to be kept. S. Hierome writing vpon that saying of Christ, Loue your Enemies, sayth,Ad. c. 5. Mat. Many measuring the Precepts of God by
their owne weaknes not by the strength of holy men, do thinke those things to be impossible which are commanded &c. But we are to know, that Christ doth not Command things in possble, but perfect, which Dauid did in Saul and Absolom. Steuen t e Martyr prayed for his ene∣mies stoning him: And Paul desired to be accursed for his Persecutors. S. Austine teacheth thaDe Nt. & Gra 9. In that it is firmly belieued, that God who is iust and good, could not command things impossible, hence we are admonished what to do in easy things, and what to aske in hard things, for all things are easy to Charity to which alone Chri∣stes burden is easy, or that alone is the burden it selfe which is easy: ac∣cording to this it is said. His Commandementes are not heauy. A∣gaine,Ser. 61. de Temp. But some may say, I can by no meanes loue my Enemies. In all the Scriptures God telleth thee, that thou canst. Thou of the con∣trary answerest, thou canst not. Consider now whether God, or thou art to be belieued. And therfore because truth cannot lye, let humane frailty leaue of her vaine excuses: because he can neither command any thing impossible, who is iust; nor damne man for that which he could not eschew, who is good. And,Ser. 191. de Temp. This is the beliefe of our Fathers, we belieue in God the Father Almighty &c. We accurse the blasphemy of them who say, that God hath commanded any thing impossible to man, and that the Commandements of God cannot be kept by euery one, but by all in common. This very saying being vsed by S. Hierome, is therfore reproued byTom. 2. Wittemb. fol. 216. Calu. Inst. l. 2. c. 7. sect. 5 Cent. 4. c. 10 Col. 1243. Ha∣mel de Tra∣dit. Apost. col. 96. Hof. comment. de poen fol. 55. Luther, Caluin, Cen∣turistes, Hamelmannus, and Hofman. S. Austine also pon∣dering those wordes of the Psalme 108. Non dominetur mei omnis iniquitas, hauing alleadged diuers textes of Scripture, he addeth,L. 2. de pec. mer. & remiss c. 6. By these, and other like innumerable testimonies I cannot doubt, neither God to haue commanded to man any thing im∣possible or any thing to be impossible for God to worke and help, wher∣by that which he commandeth may be done; and so herby man holpen by God, may be without sinne if he will. But S. Austine is so cleere herin, that Melancthon confesseth, and reprehendethL. 1. Ep. p. 290. Imaginationem Augustini de impletione legis, Austines imagination of fulfilling the law. S. Chrysostome affirmeth that.Ad ps. 111 Not the nature of the Commandements, but the slouth of many doth vse to make difficulty. Therfore if any vndertake them with loue and alacrity of mynd, he shall see that they are light and easie. Wherfore Christ said,Mat. 11.30. My
yoake is sweet and my burden light. The Centurists reproue Ter∣tullian saying,Cent. 3. Col. 240. No law would be imposed vpon him, saith Ter∣tullian, who had not in his power due obedience to the law: With the same Errour he inclyneth euery where to the possibility of the law. A∣gaine,Ibid. Col. 5. Origen maintaineth the possibility of the law &c. and saith, that the Baptised may fulfill the law in all things. So cleerly do the Fathers expound the Scriptures in proofe of the possibility of keeping the Commandements. SECT. IV. Protestants teach, that the Commandements of God are possible to be kept. M. Perkins confesseth that,Ref. Cath. p. 51. 52. Whatsoeuer God com∣mandeth in the Ghospell, that a man must, and can performe &c. The Commandements of the law shew vs what we must do, but minister no power to performe the thing to be done: but the Doctrine and Commandements of the Ghospell do otherwise, and therefore they are called spirit and lyfe; God with the Commandement giuing Grace that the thing prescribed may be done. M. Hooker affirmeth that,Eccl. Pol. l. 5 p 285. Distributiuely at the least, all great and grieuous actuall offences, as they offer themselues one by one, both may, and ought to be auoyded: wherein he is so plaine, that he is therefore reprehended by certayneChristian letter to M. Hook p 15. Wllet vpon the Is 122. p. 91. Pu∣ritanes, saying, Heere we demand to be informed, that if all offend in many things &c how your sayng can be true, that it is possible to auoyd all great and grieuous sinnes? Castalio so cleerelyDe per∣fect obed. leg. Dei. tea∣cheth the same doctrine, that he is therefore namely contra∣dicted by D2. Con∣clus annex to his Confer. p 697. Reynolds. Luther in this agreeth with Catholickes saying,Defens. contra Ec∣m. The Commandements of God, euen the lghtest and least are impossible to man by himselfe; bu with the Gace of God they are most easy: As the Apostle (sayth) I can do all things in him that strenghteneth me. Therefore Hierome sayd wll Let h m he accused who shal sa the Commandements of God to be impossible, but he denyed not, they were impossible to vs, to wit, without Gods Grace.
Paraeus auoucheth that, The morall law, seeing it is thee ter∣nall Rule of Iustice,Colloq. Theol. 1. Disp. 8. and summarily requireth the loue of God and our Neighbour (which are temporall duties of Man) cannot be sayd to be abrogated, or euer to be abrogated. And the same is taught byHom. in Circumcis. c. 67. Brentius. Wherefore according to these Prot. the Com∣mandements are possible to be kept. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures in proofe, that it is impossible to keepe Gods Commandements, answered. IT is obiected, that Saint Paul sayth of himselfe,Rom. 7.18. To will, is present with me, but to accomplish that which is good, I fynd not. Answ. The Apostle (according to S.Tract. 41. in Ioan. & l. 6. in Iu∣lian c. 11 & l. 1. ad Bonif. c. 10. Austine) speaketh of Concupiscence, which often is felt, though it be not consented vnto: in which Case though it be not sinne, yet is it troublesome to a chast mynd. Others vrge those wordes of S. Peter,Act. 15.0. Why tempt you God, to put a yoake vpon the neckes of the Disciples, which neyther our fathers nor we haue bene able to beare. Answ. The discourse of the whole Chapter plainly sheweth, this to be spoken only of the Ceremoniall law of Moyses, which yet neyther was so importable, as was impossible to be kept, for before we heard of sundry that had kept it, but because it was not kept but with great paine and difficulty. Againe it is vrged, that,Iac. 3.2. & 1. Io. 1.8. In many things we offend all: whereas whosoeuer fullfilleth the Law, sinneth not. Answ. This is spoken of veniall Sinne, which isS. Tho. 1. 2. q. 88. art. 1. not simply & absolutely Sinne, but imperfectly: neyther is it altogeather agaynst, but besides the law: so that the fullfilling of the law may stand therewith.
CHAP. XXXIII. The true State of the Question, concerning the best workes of the lust, being Sinne. Whether all the workes of the Iust, euen the best, are in thmselues and of their owne nature truly sinnes, and deseruing damnation: or rather that they are truly, and properly iust and good. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. SEEING no impediment can be grea∣ter to the promoting of vertue, or sput more sharpe to incyte men to vice, then for men to persuade thēselues that not∣withstanding all care and diligence to the contrary, yet the very best actions are stayned with Sinne and those mor∣tall: therefore in Confutation of this so pernicious Errour the Catholicke Church decreeth that,Conci. Trid Sess. 6. Can. 23. If any shall say that in euery good worke the iust doth Sinne at least venially, or which is more intollerable, mortally, and so to deserue eternall punishments; and only therefore not to be damned, because God doth not impute those workes to damnation, Anathema.
In the Councell Senonense it is expresly defyned, that,Decret. 16. All workes are not sinne. And this Article is there condem∣ned.In An∣not. post De∣creta fidei. The iust man sinneth in euery good worke: Euery good worke euen the best is veniall. Answerably herunto allBellar. de Iustif. l. 4. c. 15. Catholickes belieue, that the workes of the Iust, by the help of Gods Grace, are not only not sinne, either morall or veniall, but truly iust, vertuous, and pleasing to God. Points Disputable. SomeSee Sua∣rez in. 1. 2. Disp. 19. sect. 1. 2. 3. Schoolmen teach that euery worke we do in particular, is either good or euill. Others thinke that there are some indifferent, neither good nor euill. Protestant Doctrine. Protestants teach that,Calu. In∣stit. l. 3. c. 24. §. 9. & l. 3. c. 12. §. 4. No worke can come from the iust, which doth not deserue iust reward of reproach. And,In An∣tidoto Conci∣lij Sess. 6. c. 11. Good workes if they be censured with exact rigour, are rather worthy of e∣ternall Damnation, then the reward of life.Calu. In∣struct. cont. Libertinos. c. 14. No other thing can we choose desire, or do, but euill. Whitaker, InherentDe pec. orig. l. 2. c. 3. p. 656. Concu∣piscence causeth, that we sinne in euery action of ours, euen good. And we teach, that the Iust, according to the nature of the thing, and their actions, do alwaies sinne mortally. A fearfull and desperate opi∣nion. Protestant Errours. LutherExtat Tom. 1. oper. Lutheri. fol. 196. Edit. Wittemb. 1558. wrote a whole Booke entituled, Qòd iustus etiam inter bene operandum, peccet: That the iust man sinneth euen when he doth well, that is, as he through the whole Booke ex∣poundeth himselfe, in all his actions. In so much, that to vse Luthers owne words,Argu∣mento. 10. ex 24. All things that he doth are the workes of the Deuill, the workes of sinne the workes of drknes the workes of folly And,Serm. de Ascensione Domini. We constantly affime, the lust man to sinne by praying. Beza proceedeth so far, that he affirmeth vertues to be
sinnes his words are.Tom. 1. oper. p. 665. q. 95. Qestion. But Philosophicall vertues certes are not sinnes Answere Yes sinnes, If sinne be , that is, whatsoeuer declineth but the least from the law of God. But good God, what times are these, wherin vertues are called sinnes? What would Aristotle say if he were now liuing, if he should heare men professing learning and vertue, to auouch, that it is sinne to do prudently in our actions: that it is sinne to be temperate and sober, in eating and drinking: that it is sine to be valiant and couragious in daungers and aduersities: that it is sinne to be liberall and bountifull in gi∣uing our goods dul: lastly that it is sinne to giue euery man his owne, and to imbrace Iustice. But what shall I say a∣gainst hese, but that which is thundred vpon their head by the Prophet say,C. 5.20.22.23. Woe vnto you that call euill good, and good euill, putting darknes light and light darknes; putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter &c. Wo to you that are mighty to drinke wyne & stout men in drunkenes; which iustify the impious for guiftes, and take away the Iustice of the Iust from them: Which certainly none would do, but mad-men or drunkards. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that all the workes of the Iust are not Sinne, nor deseruing Damnation. THe Sciptures expressely teach, that some workes of the Iust are not sinne,Iob. c. 1.22. In all these things Iob sinned not with his lippes. And that he sinned not in hart it is further sayd,C. 2.3. Hast thou considered my seruant Iob, that there is not the like to him in the Earth, a man simple and right, and fearing God, and departing from euill, and yet retayning Innocency? In lyke sort King Da∣uid sayth of himselfe.Ps. 7 9. Iudge me O Lord according to my Iustice, & according to my Innocency vpon me.Ps. 16.3. By fyre thou hast examined me, and there is no Iniquity found in me.Ps. 17.11.22. & 118.101. Our Lord will reward me accord ng to my Iustice and according to the Purity of my hands he will reward me. Because I haue kept the waies of our Lord; neither haue I done ip ously from my God. In these places he auoucheth his workes to be Iutices, Innocency, Purity, and without
Iniquity: Yea he confidētly hoped that they might stand in the Iudgment of God; otherwise desiring to be iudged ac∣cording to his Iustice, insteed of pardon, he should aske Damnation. The Scriptures distinguish betwene good and euill deeds,Iac. 2.8. If you fulfill the Royall law according to the Scriptures, (Thou shalt loue thy Neighbour as thy selfe) you do well but if you ac∣cept persons you worke sinne &c. And, whosoeuer shall keep the hole law, but offend in one, is made guilty of all. So also S. Peter.2. Pet. 1.10. Labour the more, that by good workes you may make sure your Voca∣tion and Election. For doing these things you shall not sinne at any tyme. These textes proue a distinction of good and euill workes, so that all are not sinne. According to Caluin,Inst. l. 3. c. 12. §. 1. Nothing is acceptable to God, but what in euery part is entyre and absolute, and defyled with no impuri∣ty: and yet Scriptures teach that,Act. 10.36. He that feareth (God) and worketh Iustice is acceptable to him.Philip. 4 13. I was filled after I re∣ceiued of Ephaphrodites the things that you sent, an odour of sweetnes, an acceptble hoast pleasing to God.1. Pet. 2.5. See 1. Io. 3.22. To offer spirituall hoasts ac∣ceptable to God. Now to say that good wokes are not accep∣table, but only Christs imputation, is indeed to affirme, that deadly and enormous Crimes are acceptable and pleasing to God by his imputation, which is most absurd. Againe, if in all our best actions we cannot but sinne, to what end are we so much dehorted from Sinne,Io. 5.14. Sinne no more.1. Cor. 15.34. Awake ye Iust, and sinne not.Ps. 4.5. Be angry, and do not sinne. And see the like in2. Pet. 1.10. 1. Io. 2.1. other places. But the workes of the iust are expresly said to be good,Mat. 5.17. Let your light shyne before men, that they may see your good workes:1. Tim. 6.17.18. Command the rich of this world &c. to do well, to be∣come rich in good workes.Tit. 3.8. They which belieue in God be carefull to excell in good workes. Now seeing that (according to S.De diuin. Nem. c. 4. Dionysius) is said to be euill, which in any thing is wan∣ting, and that only to be good, which is entirely and abso∣lutly good, therfore seeing the holy Ghost calleth the workes of the iust, good, they are truly and absolutly good, and consequently not sinne. If all our best actions be Sinnes, then all these absurdi∣ties
follow. 1. That the workes of fayth, whereby a man is iustifyed, and Charity, were sinne, and so we iustifyed by Sinne. 2 When we say, forgiue vs our Sinnes, by Sinne we seeke to obtayne remission of Sinne. 3. For sinnes we should expect a2. Tim. 4.8. Crowne of Iustice. 4. When we are com∣manded to pray, fast, giue Almes, preach, read the Scrip∣tures, we are commanded to Sinne. 5. SeeingPhilip. 2.13. God it is who worketh in vs all good deeds, God sinneth. 6. Then Christ did notTit. 1.14. redeeme vs from all iniquity, and clense to himselfe a people acceptable, a pursuer of good workes. 7. All good workes are to be done, but according to Protestants, some mortall Sinnes are good workes: Ergo some mortall Sinnes are to be done. Agayne no mortall Sinne is to be done, but al good workes are mortall Sinnes, Ergo no good worke it to be done. Lastly, seeing it is saydProu. 24.16. For the iust man shall fall 7. tymes a day, and shall ryse agayne: I would demand whether the iust man sinneth by rising agayne, or no? If they affirm, then must they needs say, that to rise is the same that to fall, & to fall the same that to rise; and so consequently a man is as much behoulding to him that casteth him into a pit, as to him that draweth him out: & on the contrary, as much iniu∣red by him that draweth him out, as by him that cast him in: and so for a full contradiction, that both these actions are iniurious and beneficiall. If they deny the forsayd rysing to be sinne, then we haue our Intent, that all the actions of the iust are not Sinne. SECT III. That the Ancient Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe that the workes of the iust are truly good, and not sinne. SAint Gregory vpon the former words concerning Iob writeth, If we say that Iob sinned in his words,L. 2. Mor. c. 8. which were
wickednes to thinke, we say that God lost the victory, in that which he proposed. S. Autine expounding those words of Iob, man cannot be utifyed compared with God, writeth,L. ad Oro∣fin cont. Priscillian, & Oigeni stas. c. 10. It seemeth to me ot an vfit speach, in comparison of Gods Iustice, if the holy An∣gels in heauen be not sayd to be iust, not that they should be this, are they fallen from utce, but becuse they are made, and are not God, neither can they hue so mch spirituall light, as he hath by whome they are mde: for there is greatest Iustice, where greatest wisedome & this is G &c. By participation of whome they are iust, in comparison of him they are not iust. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach, that the workes of the Iust are truly good, and not Sinne. ALl such Protestantes as I haueSee be∣fore Chap. 31.32. formerly produced, teaching that Man hath freewill with Gods Grace to do good, and eschew euill: and that with the same Grace it is possible to keep Gods Commandementes, and so not sinne; As also such others as I shallSee here∣after Chap. 16. afterwards alledge, in proofe that man is iustifyed by faith and good workes: and that the said good workes do merit Grace and Glory; all these I say do, and must needs belieue, that iust men may do workes truly good, and not sinfull. For to say, that a man by sinfull and wicked workes doth keepe Gods Commande∣mentes, is iustified, and doth merit Grace and Glory, is most absurd and impious.
SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture in proofe, that the workes of the iust are truly Sinne, answered. SOme obiect these words of K. Dauid,Ps. 141.. Enter not into Iudgment with thy seruant, because no man liuing shalbe iustifyed in thy sight. Answ. S. Austine writing vpon this place affir∣meth, that no man can be iustifyed in Gods sight, because he hath no Iustice of himselfe, but that which he hath, he hath from God. 2. S. Hierome,Aug l. de Perfect. iusti∣tiae. Greg. in hunc locum. Hieron. Ep. ad Cesiphontem. S. Austine, and S. Gregory do likewise expound this of veniall sinnes, wherof none can iustify himselfe in this world. 3. According to S. Hilary,Hil. Hier. Arnob. Eu∣thym. in hunc locum. Bern Ser. 5. de verbis Isatae. S. Hierome, and others, None can be said to be iustifyed in the Presence of God, not that there is not true Iustice in ho∣ly men, but that the purity and worth of the Iustice of God is such, that all the Iustice of Angels and Men compared therwith seemeth Iniustice: Euen as the stars in themselues most cleere, waxe yet darke in the presence of the Sunne. In which sense Iob said,C 9.2. Indeed I know it is so, and that man can∣not be iustifyed compared with God; wherof see S. Austine here in the third Section. Others obiect that,Isa. 64 6. All we are become as one vncleane, and all our Iustices as the cloath of a menstrued woman. Answ. The word, all, in Scripture is oftenGen. 9.12. 1. Cor 1.5. 7 8. & 1. Cor. 32. vsed only for many. 2. Isay speaketh not here of the iust, but of notoriousIsa. 64.5 7 sin∣ners, for whose crymes, the Citty and all the people were to be deliuered into the hands of the K.See Isa. 6.5.7. of Babylon. 3. Though he had spoken of all the people, yet spake he not of all tymes, and therfore though as then they were wicked when they were giuen as Captiues, yet both beforeVer. 11. and after, they might be iust. 4 And though he had spoken of all tymes, yet spake he not of all their workes, but only of those which they thought to be their chiefest Iustfications, as their Sacrifices, Feasts, New-Moones &c which because they performed not with pure intention, and in such sort as they
ought, they were compared to foule Cloathes, and were hatefull to God; and accordingly it was said,Isa. 1.83. Offer Sa∣crifice no more in vaine: Incense is abhomination to me. The New-Moone, and the Sabboth, and other fest uties, I will not abyde &c. Some obiectEccl. 7.21. Rom. 3.10. That there is not a iust mn vpon Earth, who doth good, and not sinne. Answ. These words only import, that there is none so iust, that he alwaies doth that which is good, but that all men do sometimes sinne, either mortally or venially, which we do not deny. And so it is said ofIob. 1.1.8. Luc. 1.6. Iob, Zichary, Elizabeth, and such like, that they were iust be∣fore God, and yet no man denieth, but that they sinned some∣times, at least venially.
CHAP. XXXIV. The True State of the Question, concerning the In∣fallible knowledge of our Predestination and Saluation. Whether Man in this world, without speciall Reuelation from God, can haue infallible knowledge of his present Iustification, Predestination, and Eternall Saluation: In so much that euery one is bound as firmly to belieue his owne Saluation, as he doth the Articles of his Creed: Or only that in this world a morall certainty can be had therof. And whether true faith, and Iustice once had, may be lost. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THIS desperate Presumption of being Predestinate, doth so dangerously draw men to the perpetration of all vice: as that in preuention thereof, the Catholicke Church hath decreed, that,Concil. Trid Sess. 6. Cap. 9. It is not to be affirmed, that those who are truly iustifyed, ought to determine with themselues without all doubtfulnes, that they are Iustifyed, and that no man is absolued from sinne, and lust fyed, but he who certainly belieueth himselfe to be Ab∣solued
and Iustifyed and by this only faith, Absolution and Iustification to be perfected: as if he that doth not belieue this, should doubt of the Promises of God, and of the Efficacy of the Death and Resurrecion of Christ; for as no Godly man ought to doubt of the mercy of God, of the merit of Christ and of the vertue and Efficacy of the Sacramen∣tes: so euery one whilest he behouldeth himselfe, and his owne infirmi∣tie, and indisposition, may doubt and feare of his owne Grace, seeing no man can know with certainty of fayth, which is not subiect to falshood, that he hath obtained the Grace of God. It likewise teacheth that,Sess. 6. cap. 12. No man in this lyfe ought so much to presume of the secret Mystery of Gods Predestination, as that he should certainly determine himselfe to be in the number of the Predestinae: as though it were true, that a man iustifyed either can sinne no more, or if he sinne, that he ought to promise to himselfe assured repentance: for without speciall Reuelation it cannot be knowne whom God hath chosen. And againe,Sess. 6. Can. 13. If any man shall say, that for the obtayning pardon of sinnes, it is necessary for euery man that he certainly belieue, and without any doubt of his owne Infirmitie and Indisposition, that his sinnes are forgiuen him, Ana∣thema. Agreably heerunto allBellar. de Iustif. l. 3. c. 3. Rhem Test. in Rom. 8.8. Catholickes do belieue, that without speciall Reuelation from God, no man in this life can be assured with certainty of diuine fayth, that his sin∣nes are forgiuen him, that he is truly iustifyed, one of the Predestinate, and certainly to be saued. Points Disputable. Although all agree that none can be certaine of present Grace and future Saluation, with such certainty of fayh as is not subiect to falshood; yetVega. in Concil. Trid. l. 9. c. 46. some thinke, that some spirituall men haue such humane certitude therof, as is alto∣geather voyd of all doubt and feare.Barth. Medina. 1.2. q 112 art. 5. Concl. 5. Others teach, that the Iust man hath not such morall certainty of Grace, exclu∣ding all hesitation or doubt. SomeSee Them. apud Magi∣strum. in 3. Dist. 13. teach, that it is not the same numero, or indiuiduall fayth, ioyned with Charity and without it. ButTapperus To. 2. art. 8. p. 64. and o∣thers. others, more truly, teach the con∣trary.
Protestant Vntruthes. CaluinIn Anti∣doto Concil. affirmeth, that the Fathers of the Councell of Trent do confound Doubt with Faith: But Chemnitius lasheth further auouching,Exam. ad Sess 6. that they make Doubt the vertue and ornament o fayth, in such sort, that Fayth with∣out Doubt should not be true & iustifying. Yea he maketh the question between vs & Protestāts, to be, whether Iustifying fayth be fiducia, an dubitatio de remissione peccatorum, trust or doubt of remission of sinnes. But all this is so vntrue, that therefore ra∣ther the Councell reiecteth the speciall fayth of Heretickes, & affirmeth it to be, not Fayth, but vayne confidence, seeing, that Fayth cannot be certaine, wheras true Fayth must be most certayne. Protestant Doctrine. Prot.In Con∣fess. August. art. 6 & 20. Melancth. loc. com. de Iusti∣fic. Calu. In∣stit l. 3. c. 2. Chem. Exam. cap 9. Sess. 6. Whitak. cont. Dur. l. 8. p. 635. 637. Perkin Re∣form. Cath. p. 38. 54. Wil∣let. Synop. p. 582. teach, that all belieuers ought no lesse cer∣certainly and infallibly to belieue, that they are already re∣ceyued into Grace, then that God is one in Essence, & three in Person, or any other Article of Fayth to be true. And they thinke, this assent principally to be that assent of Chri∣stian fayth, which is required in Scriptures for Iustification, and without which, the beliefe of other Articles, is Histori∣call, and Diabolicall. Whitaker,Concione vlt. This one thing I say, those who deny that we are certayne of saluation with certainty of fayth, do leaue vs no fayth. Iewell affirmeth that men of his sort,Def of. Apol. part. 2. c. 6 sect. 3. Perkins To. 1. of Bap. Col. 820. Som. ibid. Col. 206. Are as certayne of the forgiuenes of their sinnes in the Blood of Christ, as if Christ were pre∣sent, and should tell it vnto them. Bucer,Apud Zanch. Tom. 7 de Perseuer. c. vlt. There is nothing more profitable then to preach, that it is impossible for the faythfull that they euer fall from Grace. Perkins,L. de de∣sertione. col. 1026. This Axiome is to be houlden: He that is once in the state of Grace is alwayes to perseuer in it. And others teach, thatEpit. Colloq. Mon∣tisb. p. 44. 48. he that doth once truly belieue, cannot af∣terward fall from the Grace of God, or loose his fayth by Adultery, or any other lyke sinnes. A comfortable Doctrine for Adulterers murderers, drunkards, and the lyke.
Protestantes agree with Ancient Heretickes. S. IrenaeusL. 1. c. 1. reproueth the Gnostickes, for that they deemed themselues so perfect & iust, that they thought they could not be defyled with Sinne. Protestant Errours. Christ our Sauiour (according to Luther)Tom 3. in Ps. 22. fol. 330. suffered the feare and horrour of a Conscience troubled, and tasting wrath e∣ternall &c. but what absurdity to attribute to Christ a Conscience fea∣ring for a small tyme? YeaIb. fol. 330. Christ at the same tyme to be excee∣ding Ioyfull, and exceedingly despayring. According to Melan∣cthon,In Mat. 26. The third, and that the chiefest cause of Christes feare, was a certaine feeling of Gods forsaking and anger, whereby Christ was vncertaine betweene Hell and lyfe. Yea sayth Caluin,In Mat. 26.37. A horrible depth of destruction with feare & anxiery did grieuously vexe him. The like in sundry places teacheth BezaIn Heb. 5.7. & in Luc. 22.44. and con∣cludeth, that in this deiection of Christ the summe of our comfort cō∣sisteth. Lastly, Serranus blasphemeth that,Cont. Hayum. part. 2. p. 289. he strugled with the horrour of eternall death, and extremely feared the waight of eter∣nall punishments. Heere Prot. make Christ our Sauiour to be fearefull and doubtfull of his owne Saluation: and yet eue∣ry one of them is assured by fayth of their owne. Caluin,In. Mat. 17.24. Seeing perfect fayth is no more extant, it follow∣eth in part that men are incredulous. And,Instit. l. 3. c. 2 S. 8. Certainty is mingled with doubt. Beza,L. Quaest. p 672. In one and the same subiect yet in diuers res∣pects, there are vnpurity and vncleanes, light and darknes, fayth and incredulity. Peter Martyr,In loc. Closs. 2. c. 15. § 1. It is not absurd, One and the same worke to be good and wicked. Paraeus,De Iu∣stif. l 4. c. 17. p. 1239. I answere. It is no ab∣surdity, Fayth to haue diffidence or incredulity mingled with it, which is sinne, and so by accident Fayth to be sin. Perkins,Tom. 2. in c. 5. Gal. True faith is alwaies mingled with contrary incredulity, in so much that those who belieue, may feele in themselues much incredulity. Yea sayth Scar∣piusDe Iust. Controu. 5.5 p. 88. With fayth may stand an Act of incredulity, but not with full force. Luther.Postil. in die Natiu. fol. 52. He must first be damned, before he can be damned for whome he gaue himselfe. Caluin,Instit. l. 4. c. 17. §. 2. We dare promise
securely to our selues lyfe eternall to be ours, neyther can the Kingdom of heauen more fall away from vs, then from him (to wit) Christ. Tindall,Act. Mon. p. 1137. Thou canst not be damned vnles Christ be damned, nor Christ saued vnles thou be saued. Perkins,Conflict. of Satan. Tom. 1. Col. 1305. I thinke my selfe as certayne of Saluation, as if my Name were expresly written in the sacred Scriptures. Zanchius,Tom. 2. l. 2. de Nat. Dei. c. 2. Euery one is bound by the Com∣mandement of God, to belieue, that he is elected, and predestinated in Christ, to eternall Saluation. When we say euery man to be bound to belieue, we except no man, not the reprobate, who neyther will belieue, nor can belieue in Christ. Who would imagine, that any man professing Christianity, would belch out such blaspemies and absurd impieties? And yet they are the Doctrines of Lu∣ther, Caluin, Beza, Zanchius, Tindall and Perkins; men renowned amongst Prot. but deseruedly infamous and hate∣full to all others. SECT. II. It is proued by Scripture, that man in this world without speciall Reuelation from God, cannot haue infallible knowledge of his present Iustification, Predestination, and eternall Saluation: And that true fayth and Iu∣stice once had, may be lost. TO examine this by the sacred Scriptures, they expresly teach our Ignorance or vncertaine knowledge of our Predestination or Saluation.Prou. 20.9. Who (saith Salomon) can say, My hart is cleane, I am pure from sinne? And yet it is certaine, that some are cleane, according to that of S. Paul,1. Cor. 6.11 Ps. 50.11. Ps. 18 1. But you are washed, but you are sanctifyed, but you are iustifyed &c. Againe.Eccl. 9.1. There are iust men and wyse, and their workes are in the hand of God: and yet man knoweth not whether he be worthy of loue or hatred: but all things are reserued vncertaine for the tyme to come &c. In like sort prayeth K. Dauid,Ps. 18.13. Sinnes who vndstandeth? from my secret sinnes clense me. And S. Paul affirmeth of himselfe thus,1. Cor. 4.3.4.5. To me it is a thing of least account to be iudged of you, or of mans day: but I iudge not my selfe neither, for I am no, guilty in
Conscience of any thing, but I am not iustifyed heerin, but he that iud∣geth me is our Lord: therfore iudge not before the tyme vntill our Lord do come, who also will lighten the hidden things of darknes, and will manifest the Counsailes of the harts &c. These textes expresly teach, that no man can giue an infallible Iudgment of his present Iustification, or Saluation. Such places also as require certaine Conditions of our part for our Iustification, proue the like vncertainty of knowledge: So Moyses saith to the Israelites,Deut. 4.29. Isa. 1.19.20. When thou shalt seeke there the Lord thy God, thou shalt fynd him, yet so if thou seeke him with all thy hart. In like sort Ezechiel,C. 28.21. f the im∣pious shall do Pennance from all sinnes &c. And shall keep all my pre∣cepts &c. liuing, he shall liue, and not dye &c. But if the iust man shall turne away himselfe from his iustice, and do iniquitie &c. shall he liue? All his iustices which he had done, shall not be remembred &c. Yea Christ himselfe sayth,Io. 15.10. If you keep my Precepts you shall abyde in my loue. And,Io 13.14. You are my friends, if you do the things that I command you. But,Io. 15.6. If any abyde not in me, he shalbe cst forth as the branch, and shall wither &c. Now no man knoweth with certainty of faith, that he performeth these Conditions, see∣ing no Scripture testifieth the same of any man in particular. As also these places conuince, that he that is once iustifyed, or in state of Grace, may afterwards fall, and loose the same. But some reply, that these workes are not required as a Condition vpon which the promise of eternall life depen∣deth, but because true faith cannot be without good workes. But first the words of the text are cleere conditionall. 2. We do not here inquire why workes are necessary, but are con∣tent that it be granted that they are necessary, and that with∣out them eternall Saluation cannot be gained. For hence we conclude euidently, that without diuine Reuelation no man can certainly decree himselfe to be of the number of the Elect, seeing no man (as Prot. will confesse) can assure him∣selfe that he doth all those good workes which Christ com∣manded to be done: yea a litle before they cleerly taught, that in our best actions we breake Gods Commandements, and sinne. Other places also shew, that it is vncertaine whether we
obtaine remission of our sinne: so Ioel saith of God,C. 2.14. who knoweth if he will conuert and forgiue &c. And S. Peter said to Si∣mon Magus,Act. 8.22. Do pennance therfore from this thy wickednes, & pray to God, if perhaps this Cogitation of thy hart may be remitted thee. Though these and the like places do not proue any vn∣certainty in Gods promises to such as truly repent, yet they proue the vncertainty of remission of our sinnes, in regard of the vncertainty of our Disposition requisite to the same. The same truth also is confirmed by such textes as ex∣hort vs to worke our Saluation with Feare.Philip. 2.12. Ps. 2.21. With feare and trembling worke your Saluation.1. Pet. 1.17. In feare conuerse yee the tyme of your sciourning.Rom. 11.20.21. But thou by faith dost stand; be not too highly wyse, but feare: for if God hath not spared the naturall boughes, lest perhaps he will not spare thee neither. And therfore,1. Cor. 10.12. he that thinketh himselfe to stand, let him take heed lest he fall: Yea,Heb 4.. Let vs feare therfore lest perhaps forsaking the Promise of entring into his rest, some of you be thought to be wanting. Yea S. Paul himselfe was not assured, but carefull,Philip. 3.11. If by any meanes I may come (saith he) to the Resurrection which is from the dead. And,1. Cor. 9.27. I chastice my body, and bring it into seruitude, lest perhaps when I haue preached to others, my selfe become reprobate. Caluin and Chemnitius answere, that these wordes are vttered by the holy Ghost, not that there is any danger, that the faythfull shall fall from saluation, but only to shake of the slouth and carnall security of men negligent in doing good workes. But though it be true, that those who are predestinate shall not fall from Saluation, and that the holy Ghost doth speake these wordes to stirre vp the Elect to care and diligence, yet they cannot be vnderstood of those who certainly know and belieue their Predestination, but of such as are ignorant thereof: for these who are so certaine cannot feare the losse of Saluation, yea they ought not to feare it, if they as certainly belieue it, as they belieue Christ to be God: and therefore the holy Ghost should exhort them to Infidelity, when he exhorteth them to feare the losse of their Saluation: euen as he should do the lyke, who should exhort a Christian to feare whether Christ were God. Wherefore seeing by these places we are com∣manded
to feare, we neither ought nor can firmly belieue, that we are certainly of the number of the Predestinate, and of those that infallibly are to be saued. And Reason conuinceth this truth: for nothing can be certaine with certainty of faith, but what is either imme∣diatly contained in the word of God, or by euident conse∣quence deduced from thence; but this particular proposition, Luther is predestinate, is neither of the former waies proued from the Scripture: for that which in this point can be de∣duced from thence is, that such as belieue, and repent, and so continue, shall certainly be saued, and so are predestinate. Now that Luther did thus, is no waies deduced certainly from Scripture: But that he did to the contrary, many strong proofes might be produced. The forsaid vncertainty of our Saluation is further pro∣ued, by all such textes as conuince, that true faith and Iu∣stice once had, may afterwards be lost. Moyses saith to God,Exod. 32.32. Either forgiue them this trespas, or if thou do not strike me out of the Booke that thou hast written. To whom our Lord answered: he that hath sinned to me, him will I strike out of my booke. According to which saith K. Dauid,Ps. 68.29. Let them be put out of the booke of the liuing, and with the iust let them not be written. Christ saith,Luc. 8.13. For they vpon the rocke; such as when they heare with ioy receyue the word: and these haue no rootes, because for a tyme they belieue, and in tyme of tentation they reuolte. So likewise S. Paul,Rom. 11.20.21.23. Be∣cause of Incredulity the boughes were broken, but thou by faith dost stand &c. see then the goodnes and seuerity off God: vpon them surely that are fallen, the seuerity: but vpon thee the goodnes of God, if tho abyde in his goodnes, otherwise also thou shalt be cut off. But they also, if they do not abyde in Incredulity, shalbe grafted in, for God is able to graffe them in againe.1. Tim. 1.19. Hauing faith and a good Conscience, which certaine repelling haue made shipwracke about the faith.1. Tim. 4.1. & 1. Tim. 6.10. In the last tymes certaine shall depart from the faith.Heb. 6.4.5.6. It is impos∣sible (or rare, and difficult) for them that were once illuminated, haue tasted also the heauenly guifte, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost &c. and are fallen, to be renewed againe to Pennance. And the like might be shewed out ofIo 15.2.6. 1 Cor. 9 27. Gal. 5.4.2. Pet. 2.21.22. sundry other pla∣ces of holy writt. But wheras these Scriptures affirme of
some,Luc. 8.13. that, for a tyme they belieue, that,1. Tim. 1 19. They haue made shipwracke about faith, that1. Tim. 4.1. They will depart from faith, and sundry such like; Scharpius answerethDe Iu∣stif. controu. 5. 6. 7. o all these, that they are not to be vnderstood of true faith, but only of counterfaite and dead faith. But this Exposition is directly contrary to the expresse word, & sense o the textes, as eue∣ry one may obserue by the bae reading of them. Sundry exmples do lso confirme this: for first the damned Angels bfore thir fall, were iust, as the Fathers gather from the 14. Chapter of Esay, and the 28. of Eze∣chiel. Prot. grant our first Parents to haue bene in dued with faith and grace, and yet their grieuous fall we all yet feele. The like might be exemplified in1. Reg. 9.2. & 15.26.35. Aug l. 2. ad Simpl. q. 1. Cypr. l. . ep. 5. Saul, in1. Reg. 11.4.15. Act. 13.22. Dauid, in1. Reg. 7.14. & 12.34.25. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 5. Aug. l. 22. cont. Faust. c. 88. Salomon, inMat. 16.17. Io 13.10. & Mat. 26.74. Peter, inAct. 8.23.20.21. Simon Magus, and IudasIo. 17.12. Mat. 26.24. & 27.4 5. the traytour. The Examples of Adam, Dauid and Peter, proue that true Iustice may be lost, and recouered; the other of Satan and Iudas conuince that such as are truly iust, do sometimes fall from the same, & become reprobate. This point is yet made more euident from the Do∣ctrine of Protestantes, for wheras they teach that,Fuk. ag. Rhem. Test. in. 1. Cor. 13 f. 90. Iu∣stifying faith cannot be without Charity, no more then fyre can be without heate, it hence followeth, that if a man may loose his Charity, he doth also therewithall loose his faith, and so by consquence loose the certaine knowledge of his owne Saluation, Now that a man may loose his Charity, besides that it was said to the Church of Ephesus,Apoc 2.4. Thou hast left thy fist Charity, it may be proued by Dauid, the chosen ser∣uant of God, who lost the same, when he, as Bruce confes∣seth, slptSerm. vp. the Sa∣cram. p. 24. Knox. ag. the Aduer∣saies of Gods Pre. p 219. in sinne of Adultery1. Reg. 11.4.15. and murther: for vo∣luntary intended murder, is a Priuation of Charity: to which end S. Iohn saith,1. Io. 3.10. Euery one that is not iust is not of God and he that loueth not his brother.1. Io. 3.14. He that loueth not aby∣deth in death: therfore Duid in his murther of Vrias, and be∣fore his repentance was not of God, but for the tyme aboad in death, & so had neither Charity, nor (according to Prot.) Faith. Some answere herunto, that Dauids faith was not lost,
but was for the tyme, as it were sleeping: but this is no ans∣were, but the begging of the thing in question fully confu∣ted by the premisses; for if Dauids Charity was lost by his Murther, then was his faith also not only sleeping, but like∣wise lost, seeing according to Prot. faith cannot be without Charity: Also if Dauid during his forsaid sleeping in that Sinne, was therbyIo. 8.34. 2. Pet. 2.17. Rom. 6.16. the seruant of sinne, and1. Io. 3.8. of the De∣uill, and also (as before) not of God but aboad in death, his faith and Charity were then for the tyme lost. Lastly the nature of faith is not to be sleeping or idle, butGal. 5.6. working by Cha∣rity, andIac. 2.17.26. without workes dead. Others do answere, that,Fulk. in Disp. in the Tower. 2. Daies confe∣rence. c. 1. Dauid when he committed adultery was and remayned the Child of God, andResp. ad acta. Col. Montisb. par. alt. p 73. did not faile from his faith: But as Beza and Bastingius do most grosly af∣firme,Beza ib. p. 37. asting. in Comment. of the Cate∣chis. Engli∣shed. p. 241. at one and the same tyme he sinned and sinned not. And therfore (saith BezaIb. p. 74. he sinned not wholly, but so far forth as not regenerate. To such absurd and inexplicable difficulties are they driuen through the cleerest words of Scripture. All Infants by Baptisme are truly iustifyed, yea with∣out Baptisme according to sundry Prot. the Children of the faithfull are truly holy: but how incredible is it, that all the Children of the faithfull, or all such as are baptized are Pre∣destinate and cannot sinne: Besides hence all Catholickes in their Infancies baptized, should also be Predestinate, which I thinke few Prot. will admit. Agayne, Pagans differ from Heretickes in that they neuer had fayth, but these hauing had it, haue lost it; which argueth, that eyther fayth may be lost, or that there are no hereticks. Lastly, this doctrine is the beaten path to despaire: for if none be truly iust, but who is certaine of his perseue∣rance, so that he is assured he shall neuer fall, or according to others if he do fall, yet he is assured to rise agayne; how can any of true Iudgment certainly hope himselfe to be iust, seeing he daily seeth himselfe and others to fall into diuers sinnes, euen agaynst their owne Conscience?
SECT. III. The Sacred Scriptures expounded by the Fathers agreably with Catholickes, in proofe of our vncertainty of our Predestination and Saluation: As also in proofe that Fayth and Iustice once had, may be lost. VVHereas Salomon most cleerly auoucheth, that the iust mensEccl. 9 1. wokes are in the hand of God, and yet man knoweth not whether he be worthy of loue or hatred, but all things are reserued vncertayne for the tyme to come; S. Hierome in his Cō∣mentary vpon this place sayth: The sense is, I haue found the workes of the iust to be in the hands of God, but whether they be be∣loued of God or not, now they cannot know &c. And his Transla∣tion heere of according to the sense of the Hebrew is, that, Man knoweth not whether he be worthy of hatred or loue. S. Ambrose writing vpon those words of the psalme,Ps. 118.39. Take away my reproach which I haue feared, speaketh thus: HeSer. 5. in. Ps. 118. would haue his reproach taken away, which he feared, eyther because he had thought it in hart, and had not done it; and though it were ta∣ken away by Pennance, yet he feared left peraduenture his reproach yet remyned, and therefore he prayeth God to take it away, because he alone knoweth that, which he who did it, can be ignorant of. And he addeth in proofe heerof the words of S. Paul, I am not guilty in Conscience of any thing, but I am not iustifyed heerein. S. Austine expounding those wordes of King Dauid,Ps. 41.7. My soule is troubled towards my selfe, writeth:In Ps. 41. I know that the iustice of my God remayneth, but whether myne remayne, I know not. For the Apostle terrifeth me saying He that thinketh himselfe to stand, let him take heed lest he fall. AndDe Ciu. Dei. l. 11. c. 12. though holy men may be assured of the reward of teir perseuerance yet they are found vncer∣tayne of their owne perseuerance; for what man knoweth that he is to perseuer vnto the end, in the action and progresse of Iustice, vnles by some reuelation he be assured from him who by his iust & hidden Iudg∣ment, doth not instuct all heerein but deceyueth no man. Yea,L. de Cor. & Grat. c. 13. who amongst all the faythfull as long as he liueth in this mortality, can presume himselfe to be in the number of the Predestinate? Because it is
necessary that to be hid in this place, where pryde is so to be taken heed of, that euen so great an Apostle was to be buffeted by the Angell of Satan, lest he should be puffed vp. Agayne,Ep. 107. ad Vital. It is profitable to all or most for their sound humility, that they may not know what heer∣after, they are to be: to this end it is sayd he that seemeth to stand, let him take heed lest he fall. And,De Prae∣dest. Sancto∣rum. c. 14. Why is it graunted to some, that they be taken out of the daungers of this lyfe whyle they are iust, and others that are iust do liue longer in the same dangers, vntill they fall from Iustice? Who knoweth the sense of our Lord? And whereas S. Paul before pronounced himselfe not to be assured, but carefull, If by any meanes, I may come (sayth he) to the resurrection which is from the dead; S. Chrysostome from hence thus inferrethHo. 11. in Ep. ad Philip. If Paul who suffered so much, was not yet secure of that resurrection: what shall we say? Vpon these words of the Prophet Ionas,Io. 3.9. Who knoweth if God will con∣uert and forgiue; S. Hierome writeth, Therefore it is put doubtfull and vncertayne, that whilest men are doubtfull of their saluation they may more seriously do Pennance, and more prouoke God to mercy. S. Austine alledging the same place saith:In. Ps. 50. It is vncertayne, seeing is is sayd, who knoweth? They haue done Pennance for that which is vncertaine, and haue deserued certayne mercy. S. Gregory is so playne heerin, that Caluin repro∣ueth him for his teaching that,Instit. printed Ar∣gentor. 1539. c. 8. de Praedest. & Prouid. Dei. p. 260. We are vncertayne of our Election. But I will conclude with S. Bernard,Ser. 1. de Septuag. Who (sayth he) can say I am elect, I am of the Predestinate to lyfe, I am of the number of the Sonnes? Who I say, can say these things the Scri∣pture gaynsaying, Man knoweth not if he be worthy of loue or hatred? We haue not certainty, but the confidence of hope comforteth vs, that we be not wholy tormented with the anxiety of this doubt. Agayne,Ser. 2. in Octaua Pas∣chae. Our Lord knoweth who are his, but what man knoweth, whe∣ther he be worthy of loue or hatred?
SECT. IV. That sundry Prot. do teach from the sacred Scriptures the vncertainty of our Predestination and Saluation: and that Fayth and Iustice once had may be lost. M. Perkins, though our Aduersary in this point, yet ne∣uertheles confesseth, aswell of the Elect: that,In his 4. Treatises to be consi∣dered of Christians. Treat. 4. sect. 14. This testimony of being persuaded that we are adopted and chosen in Christ &c. is weake in most men, and can scarcely be perceiued: As also the reprobate, that,Ep. to the reader. They may do outwardly all things which true Christians do: tbat, they do willingly subiect themselues to the Mini∣stery of the Word, are as forward as any, & as ioyfull in frequenting Sermons, and do condemne them of impiety, which be negligent hea∣rers of the word; they are also voyd of Hipocrisy, and heerein dissemble not that fayth which they haue not, but rather shew that (fayth) which they haue. And all this so truly and vnfaignedly, that,Ibid. A man being in this Estate may deceyue himselfe, and the most goodly in the world, which haue the greatest guift of discerning how they and their brethren stand before the Lord. Marke heere the best signes of an elected Puritane, which yet according to M. Perkins a Reprobate may haue. Zanchius confesseth that,Tom. 1. l. 2. de Nat. Dei. c. 2. Who those may be which are to be saued, God truly knoweth: but by the Ghospell he doth not teach it; and this because it is not expedient. Now if God doth not re∣ueyle this by the Ghospell, Prot. eyther haue not fayth of their Saluation, or they haue it by some other meanes then the Ghospell. What then can that be but the Diuell and Presumption, let any man iudge. Agayne, that fayth and iustice may be lost, the Luthe∣rans teach that,Confes∣sion of Sa∣xonie in the Ham in En∣glish. p. 80. and see p. 233. It is manifest that some who are regenerate &c are agayne reiected of God, and made subiect to eternall punisment ThatIb. p 293. Iustification and regeneration may be shaken of, and we loose eternall lyfe. The Confession ofb. p 224. Auspurge condem∣neth the contrary doctrine for Anabaptisme. Lobechiuisp. Theol p. 317. 318. defendeth our Catholicke Doctrine, alledging to that end
the Confession of Augusta, and a great number of particular Scriptures, charging the Caluinists with Anabaptisme in tea∣ching otherwise. Chemnitius affirmeth that,Exam. part. 2 p. 103. and see part. 1. p. 190. True liuely iustifying fayth may be lost, and the party made guilty of eternall Dam∣nation.Loc. Theol. p. 188.3.1. Haffenrefferus reproueth heerein Caluin & Be∣za.Disp 7. ex Ep. ad loc. poster. part. 1. Thes. 5. That a man truly regenerate (saith Rungius) may finally fall from the Grace of God and perish, I haue proued by vndoubted test monies, and Examples of Scripture. SchlusselburgeTheol. Calu. l. 1. art. 14 fol. 45. &c. reie∣cteth herin Caluin. Zanchius, and the Deuines of Geneua. Adamus Francisci concludeth from the Scriptures, thatMarga∣rita Theol. p. 101 158. A regenerate man doth loose faith, & is made guilty of Eternall paine. Wigandus proueth by many Testimonies of Scripture, that,Syntag∣ma ex nouo Test. col. 732. 733. Fayth may be lost. And Melancthon auoucheth that,Consil. Theol. p. 332. Men fall from Grace, and loose iustifying fayth. And the same truth is taught and defended by sundryAn∣draeas in Epit. Col. Montisb. p. 47. 61. Ges∣nerus Disp. 17. pro lib. concord. Disp. 16. p 155. 156. 157 650. Mor∣genst. tract. de Eccl p 71. Hunnius in Co. loq. Ra∣tisb p 433. Christman∣nus in Dia∣graphe Ele∣ctionis p. 125. other Lutheran wri∣ters, who purposely and at large confirme from the sacred Scriptures this our Catholicke Doctrine, impugning by name many of their owne Brethren for teaching the con∣trary. To come now to the Caluinistes, Musculus teacheth that,Loc. com. loc de pec. Sec 5. 29. If he who hath bene made partaker of the heauenly grace, do fall from that grace, and of a iust and faithfull man, do become vniust and vnfaithfull &c. this mans Conscience (the purity of faith being lost) is made guilty vnto Damnation. And then signifying his dissent herin, from his other Brethren, concludeth: I know that in this point sundry are of another mind, but what my opi∣nion is, I tell freely, without iniury to them. Rollocks admonition is this,Lectu∣res vpon the Colloss. Lecture. 6. c. 1. p. 64. I tell thee, that notwithstanding thou art redeemed, and by this bloud of Christ freed from sinne and death, yet if thou takest delight in sinne, the greater shall be thy Damnation. M. Harsnet made a Sermon in proofe herof at Pauls Crosse And of He∣mingius and Snecanus Willet fayth,Synop. p. 811. These Patrons of vniuersall Grace and Conditionall Election, do consequently hould, that men may loose their Election and faith, Hemingius p 30. The same is also maintained by Snecanus. p. 976. Caluin writing vpon these words of the Apostle,Heb. 11.15. By faith Moyses being borne was hid 3 monthes by his Parents, saith:In Heb. 11.13. It is to be noted, that the faith here praysed was very weake. For
wheras the feare of his death set apart, they ought to haue bred him, they expose him to danger. It is euident therfore that their faith for a short tyme did not only wauer, but was fallen away. Againe,Instit. l. 3. c. 2. §. 24. Neither do I gainsay, what I lately said, that sometimes certaine inter∣ruptions of faith do happen, as the weaknes therof amongst violent mo∣tions is hither and thither bended. So in the thick darknes of tentations the light therof is choaked. And in another place,Epist. 68. cuius init. Heri vt plu∣rimùm. Let that of Paul be alwaies in your mynd,1. Tim. 1.19. That certaine haue fallen a∣way from faith, because they were turned from a good Conscience, lest that we also be Examples to others of so fearfull a shipwracke. Iohn Husse teacheth this Doctrine distinctly saying,Ad. c. 1. poster. Epist. D. Petri. Here it is doubted whether any trauailer (or man in this life) can be certaine of his owne Predestination. And it seemeth that not, by that of Ecclesiastes 9. No man knoweth whether he be worthy of loue or hatred: To the contrary Peter seemeth here to be, saying, Make your vocation and Election certaine, and so certaine Predestination. Here it is to be noted, that no man in this lyfe knoweth certainly without reue∣lation made to him herof, that he is Predestinate, and so neither that he is in grace, or his worke to be vertuous. Lastly D. Luther teacheth that,Thes. 1.10. Wittemb. Anno 1517. proposita. No man is secure of the truth of his Contrition, much lesse of the obtayning of plenary re∣mission. Againe,Ep ad Episcopum Moguntin. Man by any office of the Bishop is not made se∣cure of Saluation, seeing neither by the Grace of God infused, he is made secure of Saluation: but the Apostle commandeth vs alwayes to worke our Saluation in feare and trembling. So that Hussites, Lu∣therans, and Caluinistes do defend our Catholicke Do∣ctrine of our vncertaine knowledge in this life of our Pre∣destination and Saluation. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture in proofe of our certainty of Pre∣destination and Saluation, and that faith and Iustice cannot be lost, answered. SOme obiect that, WeRom. 8.16.17. haue receiued the Spirit of Adoption of Sonnes, wherin we cry Abba Father, for the spirit himselfe gi∣ueth
testimony to our Spirit, that we are the sonnes of God. And if Son∣nes, heyres also &c. yet if we suffer with him, that we also may be glo∣rifyed with him. Answ. The testimony which the spirit giueth is not by any Reuelation, but by a certaine feeling and ex∣periment of internall Comfort, and peace of Conscience, which begetteth a hopefull, yet coniecturall knowledge: And though it be most true, that the Iust during their present Estate of Iustice are the Sonnes of God, and so also heires; yet, which is the only point in question, that the Iust may not finally fall, or that the Heire may not for his after vn∣worthines be disinherited, is not so much as insinuated in this place: And the contrary might easily be proued by the example of Lucifer, and the other Angels who fell from heauen,Isa. 14.1.1. Pet. 2.4. and were during their aboad there, and before their sinnes, the Children of God, and yet afterwards by sinne fell from that state. And the same is heere plainly taught, in that these sayings are but deliuered with this for∣said annexed Condition, if we suffer with him: which like Condition to be necessarily euer vnderstood in all other sayings, where it is expresly wanting, is once for euer suffi∣ciently explained by God himselfe in these words,Ezech. 33.13.4. If I shall say to the iust, that liuing he shall liue, and he trusting in his Iu∣stice, do iniquity, all his Iustices shalbe forgotten, and in his iniquity &c. shall he dye. And if I shall say to the impious, Dying thou shalt dye, and he do Pennance from his sinne &c. liuing, he shall liue, and not dye. IewellDefence of the Apo∣logie. p. 78. obiecteth these words of S. Paul,Rom. 8.38. I am sure that neither death nor lyfe &c. shalbe able to separate vs from the Cha∣rity of God. Answ. In theRom. 8.28.29.30. &c. precedent verses it is cleere, that S. Paul speaketh of the Predestinate in generall, and so ly∣kewise is this place expounded byL. de Cor∣rep. & Gra. c. 7. S. Austine; now of the Saluation of these in generall no man doubteth. Second∣ly if S. Paul spake of himselfe in particular, and of others lyke vnto himselfe, yet by those words, Certus sum, I am sure,Comment. in hunc locum. Hier. Ep. ad Algafiam. q. 9. S. Ambrose and S. Hierome vnderstand, I am per∣suaded, or I trust: and the Greeke word , which S. Paul heere vseth doth so certainly signify, persuasus sum, I am persuaded, thatTransla∣tion of the New Test. in Latin, prin∣ted Londini 1587 Kin∣ned. in his Redempt. of manknd. p. 365. Beza, Kinnedoncius, and our English Bi∣bles
of Anno 1576. and 1590. do accordingly so translate it: and so the certainty which this text affoardeth, is not of faith, but of pesuasion or hope; in respect whereof, in the same Chapter it is sayd,Rom. 8.24. We are saued by hope. Thirdly, though this certainty were of knowledge and fayth, yet it is imper∣tinent to that particular knowledge which Prot. pretend, which according toBeza Annot. in Nou. Iest. in ep. ad Rom. 11. c. 2. them, extendeth to euery man for himselfe only, but not concerning any other: whereas, though Iewell corruply for his purpose translateth, shalbe able to remoue me; S. Paul yet sayd, shalbe able to remoue vs, thereby professing to know as much of others, as of himselfe which in sndry other verses he there explaineth to be the Elect in generall. Lastly S. Paul elswhere sayth, AndRom. 25.14. I my selfe lso, my brethren, am assured (certus sum) of you, that you also are full of loue, replenished with all knowledge &c. And yet no man will say, that he belieued with certainty of faith, that all the Romanes were full of loue, and of all know∣ledge: & the same phrase and sense is vsed inLuc. 0.9. Heb. 6.9. other pla∣ces of Scripture. Ohers further obiect that,1. Cor. 2.12. We haue receyued not the Spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God: that we may know the things that of God are giuen vs. Answ. This is not spoken of the knowledge of those benefits which belong to this or that man in particular, but of those which are bestowed vpon true belieuers in generall, in this tyme of Grace, as to know Christs Incarnation, Passion, & the ioyes of heauen, which Pagans, Iewes, and Heretikes being ignorant of, do deryde. Some vrge those words of S. Paul,2. Cor. 13.5. Try your owne selues if you be in the fayth: proue yee your selues: know you not your selues that Christ Iesus is in you, vnles perhaps you be reprobate. Answ. Though a man might know or feele the act of fayth to be in himselfe (because it is an act of our vnderstanding, which is all that this place affordeth) yet that this fayth may not be afterwards lost, which is the point questionable, remay∣neth heerby vnproued. 2. As concerning the Corinthians knowledge, that Christ was in them, the sense is not of Christes being in them, according to his grace of Iustificati∣on (for then would not S. Paul so grieuously haue repre∣hended
and threatned them as inIn this and the three prece∣dent Chap∣ters. seuerall places of the same Epistle he doth) but of his being in them2. Cor. 12.12. in signes, wonders, and mighty deeds, which if they did not aknowledge, they were reprobates. Lastly, suppose it were vnderstood of Christes being in them by his grace of Iustification, yet this only argueth for the tyme present, but as concerning their future knowledge of their finall perseuerance in that estate, & not falling after∣wards from thence, this place yieldeth no colour. And euer remember these wordes of the same Apostle,Heb. 3.14. We be made partakers of Christ; yet so if we keepe the beginning of his substance (or fayth) firme vnto the end. Agayne it is vrged that,1. Io. 3.14. we know that we are translated from death to life because we loue the Brethen.1. Io. 4.13. In this we know that we abide in him & he in vs, because he of his Spirit hath giuē to vs.1. Io. 5.13. These things I write to you, that you may know that you haue eter∣nall lyfe which belieue &c. Answ. The word (know) doth not ne∣cessarily import infallible knowledge by fayth, but likewise that which is gathered by hopeful signes & coniectures. But in particular to the two former places, I say, that though the Apostle speaketh in the first person, because he cōfident∣ly hoped himselfe to be one of them who loued the brethren and had the Spirit of God, yet his sayings are generall, signi∣fying these to be translated from death to life, who loue their brethren, and those to abyde in God and God in them who haue the Spirit of God. Now those are said to loue the brethren, or,1. Io. 2.2. the Children of God, who loue God and keep his Comman∣dements; which seeing Protestants thinke impossible, insteed of certainty of their Saluation, they were rather to belieue the impossibility thereof. To the third place, to omit that by lyfe eternall, S. Iohn may be sayd to meane the knowledge of God, which true belieuers haue, according as elswhere he writeth,Io. 17.3. This is life eternall, that they know thee &c. I further answere that those who belieue, haue eternall lyfe, not in deed (not being actually in heauen) but in hope on∣ly, according as it is sayd,Rom. 8.4. We are saued by hope; for to the obtaining of it actually, is requisite our perseuerāce in faith, which none can promise to himself: & I haue formerly pro∣ued, that true Faith may finally be lost.
Others yet vrge that,Rom. 8.30. whome he called, them also he iu∣stified, and whom he iustified, them also he glorifyed: therefore he who is once Iustifyed, is Elect and so cannot finally fall. Answ. This proueth no more of him that is iustifyed, then of him that is called, for the words respect both a like: Now that euery one who is called, is not elect, appeareth in that,Mat. 2.14. Many are called but few elect; the words therefore are to be vnderstood not of euery one who is called or iustifyed in generall, but only (asRom. 8.33. is signifyed) of the Elect, whome in his forknowledge, heVer. 29. foreknew, to beVer. 28. according to purpose called: & of these we grant none do finally fall out who these are who can know? ForRom. 11.34. who hath knowne the mynd of our Lord? or who hath been his Counsailour? WilletSynop. p. 556. obiecteth these places,Rom. 11.29. Without repen∣tance are the guifts and vocation of God;Io. 13.1. whereas he had loued his &c vnto the end he loued them.Io. 10.19. My father that which he hath giuen me is greater then all, and no man can plucke them out of the hand of my Father: therfore he who is once in Grace shall per∣seuer vnto the end. Answ. Though God doth not for his part repent him of his goodnes in bestowing his guiftes vpō vs, yet in regard of our abuse of them, it is sayd (according to our capacity) that he dothGen. 6.6. 1. Reg. 15.11. repent him: Also the be∣nefit of our calling heere mentioned, which (as before is proued) may be cast off, argueth and explayneth, that his other guiftes lykewise heere mentioned, may in like man∣ner also be lost. As to the second, it is most true, that Christ for his part loueth to the end: and so heMar. 1.21 12. and see Mat. 19.22. loued the rich man who went away from him, and yet this argued not that mans Election. And it may not be imagined, that God is wanting in his loue to all sinners, as they are hisSap. 11.21. Crea∣tures, though he hate their Sinne. To the third, Christ said,Io. 17.1. Whome thou gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them perished, but the Sonne of Perdition: whereby is cleere that all whome God giueth, do not perseuere: the meaning therefore only is, that neyther the Diuell, nor his Instruments can per∣force take them away, but only their owne voluntary assēt to fall 2. Admit. that the place obiected were to be vnder∣stood of the Elect in generall (whose finall perseuerance
God forknoweth) of whome, we confesse none doth pe∣rish, for God isAug. de Correp. & Grat. c. 7. not deceiued in his forknowledge, and yet asHier. in c. 26. Hier. Aug. To. 7. de Praedest. & Grat. c. 15. de ciu. Dei. l. 5. cap. 9 Tom 1. de lib. Arb. l. 3. c. 4. Tom 7. Hy∣pog. l. 6. Fathers, andHiper. Method. Theol. l. 1. p. 319 Amand. Polan. par∣tit. Theol. l. 1. p. 8. & in Disp. de Prouid. Dei. sect 38. 39. 40. Prot. teach, things are not, because God did forknow them, but because they are, God therefore doth forknow them. This I say doth not proue, eyther that euery one who is once faythfull or iustifyed is E∣lect, or that such as are Elect, should know themselues in particular to be Elect. WilletSynop. p. 557. Kin∣ned in his Redempt of Mank. p. 74. and others further vrge that S. Paul sayth,2. Tim. 4.7 8. I haue consummate my course &c. there is laid vp for me, a Crowne of Iustice, which our Lord will render to me in that day, a iust Iudge. So assured was S. Paul of his owne saluation. Answ. M. Perkins confesseth, that both Catholikes & Prot. doRefor. Cath p. 38. hould that a man may be assured of his Saluation through extraordinary reuelation, as Abraham and others were. But this is impertinent to Prot. pretended knowledge byPerk. ib. p. 39. ordinary fayth: and that S. Pauls knowledge heere vrged was extraordinary, appeareth by his like foresayd know∣ledge signifyed in this very same place of the tyme of his re∣solution (or death) being at hand: As also (by lyke reuelation) he sayd in like manner to the Ephesians,Act. 20.25. Behould, I do know that you shall no more see my face, all you. To omit then, that this place doth more cleerly conuince merit and reward of good workes, it maketh no more for our certainty of Sal∣uatiō by ordinary fayth, then it doth for the certayne know∣ledge of the tyme of our death, for it concerneth both these a like, and therefore proueth eyther both, or neyther. KinnedonciusRe∣dempt of Mank. p 382. obiecteth, that S. Peter aduiseth vs thus,2. Pet. 1.. Labour the more that by good workes you may make sure your vocation and Election. Answ. 1. Omitting how forcible this text is for Iustificaion by workes, I demand, Be not the faythfull already cetaine of their Election by their fayth, but are they yet to seeke for this certainty therof from their wor∣kes? If so: What more plaine agaynst Protestants preten∣ded certainty by fayth, or to proue that the certainty of Gods Promise dependeth but vpon our workes, and therefore is to vs but conditionall, as the text there yet further explay∣neth,2. Pet. 1.11 for doing these things you shall not sinne. This
text obiected is so litle fauouring to Prot. thatIn his Translat. a∣gainst the Rhem. Test. and the En∣glish Tran∣slat. of Anno 1576. and Beza of 1587. Fulke & others do purposely omit this rehearsall of good workes, thogh they be translated as parcell of the text by otherKinned. in his re∣demp. of mank p. 382. Pro∣testants, and in all Latine Copies, and some Greeke also, as Beza confesseth. In so much that the other forsayd omis∣sion is most weakely excused, not defended by D.Against Rhem. Test. fol. 441. Fulke. DAgainst Purgat. p. 15. Fulke vrgeth, that the EphesiansEph. 1.13.14. were signed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our Inheritance. And,Eph. 4.30. Grieue not the Spirit of God, in which you are signed vnto the day of redemption. Answ. By the Spirit heere is only meant the holy Ghost,Luc. 14.49. promised, andAct. 1.4. giuen to them inAct. 19.2.6. their Confirmation. 2. By the foresayd signing and pledge of Inheritance, there can be no further vrged, but the con∣uention or promise made vpon Gods part, the performance whereof is on his behalfe most certayne: but that the Ephe∣sians were heerby assured to performe the condition requi∣red on their part, is not so much in this place as intimated; but they rather in regard of the contrary are heere premoni∣shed not to grieue the Spirit; and so accordingly it is elswhere sayd,Esa. 63.10. they prouoked to wrath, and afflicted the Spirit of his ho∣ly One: theyAct. 7.51. resisted the holy Ghost: andHeb. 6.4.6. some who were once illuminated, haue tasted also the heauenly guift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost &c. are fallen &c. So weake are the Obiections made by Prot. from Scripture for their infallible knowledge of their Predestination and Saluation.
CHAP. XXXV. The True State of the Question, concerning the for∣mall Cause of Iustification. Whether the formall Cause of mans Iustification is any Vertue, or Grace infused by God, and inherent in the Soule: or that it consisteth only in Christes not im∣putation of Sinne, or in the only remission of Sinne without any infusion of Grace. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. THe Catholicke Church Decreeth, thatConcil. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 7. Iustification is not only remission of sinnes, but also Sanctification & renouation of the in∣teriour man, by the voluntary receiuing of grace and guiftes, wherby man of vniust, is made iust, and of an Enemy a friend &c. The Causes of this Iustification are; The final, the Glory of God and Christ and life eternall; The efficient, our mercifull God &c. The meritorious the most beloued only begotten Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ &c The instrumentall, the Sacrament of Baptisme &c. The only for∣mall cause is the Iustice of God, not wherwith himselfe is iust, but
wherwith he maketh vs iust, by which we, being bestowed vpon vs by him, are renewed in the spirit of our mynd, and are not only repu∣ted, but truly called, and are iust, euery one receyuing Iustice in vs, according to his measure, which the Holy Ghost deuideth to euery one as he will, and according to the proper disposition and cooperation of euery one. For although no man can be iust, to whom the Merits of the Passion of our Lord Iesus Christ are not communicated: yet, that is done in this Iustification of the wicked, whilest by the merits of the same most sacred Passion the Charity of God by the Holy Ghost is pow∣red into their hatts who are iustifyed, and inhereth in them: Wher∣vpon in the Iustification it selfe, with remission of sinnes, man by Iesus-Christ, to whom he is ingrafted, receiueth all these things together in∣fused, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And therfore,Can. 10. If any shall say, men, without the Iustice of Christ by which he merited to vs, to be iu∣stifyed, or that by it they are formally iust, Anathema.Can. 11. If any shall say, men to be iustifyed, either by only imputation of Christes Iustice, or by only remission of Sinnes, excluding grace and Charity, which by the holy Ghost is powred into their hartes; or that grace wherby we are iu∣stifyed, is only the fauour of God, Anathema. In the second Mileuitane Councell it is decreed, that,Cap. 3. Whosoeuer shall say, the Grace of God wherin we are iustifyed by our Lord Iesus Christ, to be of force only for remission of Sinnes al∣ready committed, but not to the help that they may not be committed, Anathema. AllBellar. de Iustif l. 2. c. 2. Rhem Test. in Mat. 6.11. Catholickes with one consent teach, that the formall cause of mans Iustification is not Gods iustice wher∣by himselfe is formally iust, nor Christes Iustice imputed to vs, nor only remission of Sinne, or Gods not imputation of it; but it is Gods Iustice wherby he maketh vs truly iust by infusing into our soules the sacred vertues of Faith, Hope, and Charity. Points Disputable. All agreeing, tht man is iustifyed by Grace infused:S. Tho. 1. q. 110. art. 3. Dom. Soto. l. 2. de Nat. & Gra. c. 17.18. Some teach that this Grace is a habit really distinct from Charity, hauing for her subiect the Substance of the Soule, as Charity the Will.Alex. Halens. in Sum p. . q. 69. mem. 2. art. 4. Others distinguish them not really,
but formally.Durand. 1 Dist. 26. q 1. 8. Others thinke them to differ in nothing but only in name. All also teaching, that according to the ordinary course, mortall sinne cannot be forgiuen but by the guift of grace: yet someScotus 2. Dist. 28. q 1. & 4. Dist. 1. q. 6. thinke, that God by his absolute power may remit sinne without all Grace. But others probably teach, that without iustifying grace, sinne cannot be remitted by Gods absolute power. Protestants Vntruthes. Caiet 1. 2. q. 113. art. 2.Chemnitius tragically complaineth, that we take away the force of Iustification from the merits of Christ, and as∣cribe it to our vertues and qualities. But truly we ascribe it to the Grace of God as the formall cause, and to the merits of Christ as the meritorious cause. Caluin affirmeth, that according to our Doctrine,In An∣tid. ad Sess. 6. Our Iustification consisteth partly vpon imputation partly vpon quali∣tie. But weConc. Trid. Sess. 6. Cap. 7. teach that there is only one formall cause of Iustification, which is the Iustice of God, infused and inhe∣rent in vs. Protestant Doctrine. Caluin setteth downe the Prot. Doctrine in these wor∣des,Instit. l. 3 c. 11. §. 2. We simply do expound Iustification to be acceptation, wherby God houldeth vs receiued into his Grace for iust: And we af∣firme, that it consisteth in remission of sinnes, and the imputation of Gods Iustice. The same is taught byIn Mat. 12.37. Zuing. in Luc. 1. Zanchius tom. 2. li. 2. de Nat. Dei. c. 2. Beza, and sundry others. D. Humphrey setteth downe the English reformed doctrine thus,Ad rat. 2. Camp. p. 142. That which we say and teach of Grace infused, that is of Inherent Iustice; in vs there is no habit goten, no vertue in∣graffed, no quality infused no iustice wherwith we may be iustifyed before God inherent in vs; but all iniquity, all rebellion contumacy of the flesh is ingraffed and inherent. So that in a perfect Prot. iusti∣fyed, regenerate, predestinate, there is no vertue infused by God, or inherent in his Soule, but still it remayneth stayned
and stored with all iniquity, all rebellion and contumacy of the flesh, these only being ingraffed and inherent in her. Protestantes agree with Ancient Heretickes. The deniall of Inherent Iustice was condemned in Iu∣lian the Pelagian by S. Austine, saying.Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 11. Thou dost not depart from thy opinion wherin thou affirmest, the Grace of God to consist in the only remision of Sinnes. And the same errour was reiected by CaeestinusEp. 1. c. 10. Conc. Mil. c. 3. Aug. l. 1. Retract c. 13. & ep. 106. and the Mileuitane Councell. And for the same was censuredEpiph. haer. 64. Proclus, and theTheod. l. 4. de haer. Fab. Mssalians. Protestant Errours. The French Hugonots teach that,Confess. Gal. Art. 11. Euen those who excell in Sanctity are defyled with many sinnes as long as they conuerse in this world. CaluinLib. de coena. p. 2. Let vs certainly know, that although we be wicked and impure, yet the Lord to acknowledge and receiue, yea and to esteeme vs for iust. WhitakerAd rat. 8. Camp. p. 38. We affirme our Iustice to be the hyding of the Sinne. And,L. 3. de pec. Orig. Remission pardoneth the pu∣nishment (but) doth not actually take away, or remoue all the fault. Piscator,In Thes. l. 1 p. 428. forgiuenes of the fault is nothing else, then not to punish for the fault. Hence also Luther teacheth that,Tom. 7. in Mat. 7. fol. 96. A Christian is as good and holy as Peter and Paul, neyther is any man greater or bet∣ter then he.Postil. in Dom. 24. fol. 346. S. Peter is not better then the thiefe vpon the Crosse: Mary the Mother of God doth not excell Mary the sinner.In Fes. Natiu. Ma∣riae. fol. 436. We are as holy as Mary and other Saintes. ParaeusDe Iu∣stif. l. 2. c. 7. p. 470. By Christes iustice imputed to vs we are accounted no lesse iust then Christ himselfe, pro∣portion at least being kept of the members and the head. So that e∣uery faythfull Prot. is as holy and iust, as S. Peter, S. Paul, the B. Virgin, yea as Christ himselfe, a litle proportion be∣ing obserued.
SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures, that the formall Cause of mans Iustification is true vertue and Grace inherent: & that it doth not consist only in Christes not imputation of Sinne, or in the only remission of Sinne. TO make tryall of the truth in this question by the Srip∣tures, S. Paul writeth,Rom. 5.17. For if in the offence of one, death raigned by one: much more they that receyue the aboundance of Grace and of donation and of Iustice shall raygne in lyfe by one Iesus-Christ. Therefore as by the offence of one vnto all men to condemnation: so also by the Iustice of one vnto all men to Iustification of life. For as by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so also by the Obedience of one many shalbe made iust. Heere we are sayd to be made lust by Christ, no lesse then we were made vn∣iust by Adam, which was not only by Adams Iniustice im∣puted vnto vs, but by Iniustice truly and really inherent in our selues. Againe,1. Cor. 15.49. As we haue borne the Image of the earthly, let vs beare also the Image of the heauenly: but the Image of earth∣ly Adam we haue truly borne by internall Sinne, therefore we must uly beare the Image of Christ by internall Grace. Also,Eph. 4. Be renewed in the Spirit of your mynd: and put on the new man, which according to God is created in Iustice and Holines of the truth: heere New man is not sayd to be imputed to vs, but put on vs, and that not only to the sight of the world, but according to God, and this in Iustice and Holines. But what more conuincing then thatTit. 3.5. God according to his mercy hath saued vs by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost, whome he hath powred vpon vs aboundantly by Iesus Christ our Sauiour: that being iustifyed by his Grace, we may be hei∣res according to hope of life euerlasting: heere we are sayd by Bap∣tisme to be regenerated and renewed, which cannot be, but by some mutation in our selues, whereby of hated Ene∣myes, we become beloued Sonnes. Such texts also confirme this, which teach, that Sinnes are not only couered by Gods not imputation, but are truly
taken or blotted out of the Soule by Grace. So K.1. Paral. 21.8. Da∣uid prayed, I beseech thee take away the iniquity of thy seruantIsa. 44.22. I haue cleane taken away thyne iniquityes as a cloud, and thy sinnes as a most.Ezech. 36.25. I will powre out vpon you cleane water, and you shalbe clensed from all your contaminations.Ps. 50.9. Thou shalt sprinkle me with byssope, and I shalbe clensed; thou shalt wash me, and I shalbe made whyter then snow.Ps. 102.1. As farre as the East is distant from the West, hath he made our iniquities far from vs.Ps. 9.5. His sinne shalbe sought, and shall not be found.Prou. 15.27. By mercy and fayth sins are purged.Mich. c. 7.19. He will returne and haue mercy on vs: he will lay away our iniquities: he will cast all our sinnes into the bottome of the Sea.Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fayre, O my loue, and there is not a spot in thee. The like phrases are vsed in the New Testament,Io. 1.29. Behould the Lambe of God, behould him that taketh away the sinnes of the wolrd.Act. 3.19. Be penitent and conuert, that your sinnes may be put out. And the like may be seene in1. Io. 1.7. Act. 22.17. Heb. 1.3.1. Cor. 6.11. Eph. 5.8.27. sundry other places Reason also confirmeth this, for doubtles the same iu∣stice is restored vnto vs by the merits of Christ, which he lost in Adam, according to that of S. Paul,Rom. 5.21. Where sinne abounded, grace did more abound. And S. Austine affirmeth,De Spir. & lit. c. 21. & de Gen. l. 6. c. 21. In the inward man renewed by the Grace of Christ, that Iustice to be written, which fault had cancelled: But all confesse, that Adams Iustice before his fall was not imputatiue, but inhe∣rent and true Iustice, which made him gratefull in the sight of God, Againe, the Iustice wherewith Children baptized are indued, is not the extrinsecall iustice of Christ, apprehended by actuall fayth, which they, wanting reason, cannot haue, but the habits of Fayth, Hope, and Charity: so likewise then are we iustifyed. Besides, one and the same thing can neuer be the effi∣cient, and formall cause of the same effect: but the Iustice of Christ is the Cause of our Iustification, producing Iustice in vs, forIo. 1.. Of his fulnes we all haue receiued, according to the measure of his guift: which cannot be vnderstood of impu∣tatiue Iustice, which without proportion of measure is e∣qually referred to euery one, therfore of inherent: wherof Christs Iustice being the efficient, cannot be also the for∣mall cause.
In like sort, the Grace wherwith we are here iustifyed vpon Earth, is the same which shalbe Crowned in heauen, for the reward of glory is proportioned to the small or great measure of Iustice & grace which here we haue. Now, that which is crowned in heauen is certainly inherent, wher∣with the Soule is truly beautified for all eternity. Further, as none can be truly the Obiect of Gods hatred and worthy of Damnation, by meere imputation of fault, vnles he be faulty indeed; so none can be the obiect of his loue and worthy of heauen, by extrinsecall imputation, vn∣les he be truly free from Sinne, and endued with Grace. And as none can liue by the life which is in another, so neither can he be formally iust, by the iustice which is in another. Againe the denomination of a subiect is more truly and properly taken from the inherent quality, then from the outward forme; therfore if sinne doth still in here in vs, for all Christes imputation, we cannot be truly termed iust, holy, innocent, immaculate, the Children of God, the hei∣res of heauen, as we are styled by the Scripture; but rather defyled and wicked sinners, slaues of the Deuill, and wor∣thy of hell. Lastly Christ himselfe had vpon Earth, and hath still inherent Iustice, and so likewise his holy Angels; but the members of one mysticall Body partake of one life with the head,Gal. 4.. Because you are sonnes (saith S. Paul) God hath sent the spirit of his Sonne into your harts. Thus cleerly do the Scriptures make for inherent Iustice. SECT III. That the Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of Inherent Iustice. S. Austine writing vpon those words of the Psalmist,s 98.4. Thou hast done Iustice and Iudgment in Iacob exalt yee the Lord our God, saith:n Ps. 98. Truly exalt yee well exalt yee, let vs prise and exalt him, who made the Iustice which we haue. He made it in vs; for who made in vs iustice, but he that iustifyeth vs? We therfore vngodly,
he the iustifyer, seeing he made that iustice in vs, wherwith we may please him. Againe,Ser. 15. de verb. Apo∣stoli. He that shall belieue in him, shall not haue his owne Iustice which is from the law, although the law be good, but he shall fulfill the law, not by his owne, but by Iustice giuen from God; for Charity is the fulnes of the law. From whence is that Charity powred into our harts? not truly from our selues, but by the holy Ghost which is giuen vs. S. Hierome speaking of Baptisme, saith,L. 3. cont. Pelagianos. Now thou art made cleane in the lauer, and of thee it is said, who is she that ascen∣deth whyte? and let her be washed, yet she cannot keep her purity, vnles she be strengthened from our Lord. But S. Hierome is so cleere, that Luther saith,In Com∣ment. S. Petri. See Cent. 4. c. 10. Col. 1249. This point which in Christian Doctrine, is to be vndoubtedly established, that in Saintes sinne abydeth, was neuer by Hierome vnderstood. Caluin also sayth of S. Austine touching this point,Inst. l. 3. c. 11. §. 15. The very sentance of Augustine, or at least his manner of speaking is not alto∣gether to be receiued. Chēnitius of many other fathers writeth,Exam. part. 1. We sue not processe against the Fathers, albeit they commonly take the word (to iustify) for the renewing whereby the workes of righ∣teousnes are wrought in vs. And, I am not ignorant, that the Fathers do often vse the word (iustify) in this signification, namely to make inherently iust. The Centuristes reproue Origen, for that he dothCent. 3. c. 4. Col. 78. With open mouth declayme of the Iustice of Iob. They blame Cyprian for saying,Ib. Col. 82. He that baptizeth, imparteth the holy Ghost, and inwardly sanctifyeth the baptized. They affirme of Clemens Alex. that,Cent. 2. c. 4. Col. 58. In all his writings it appeareth, he neuer knew the force of Originall Sinne, or the inherent malady thereof. So confessed are the Fathers. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers do teach the Doctrine of inherent Iustice. LVther,Tom 5 in Gal. 3 fol. 335. These things fight one against another, a Christian to be iust and to be loued of God, and yet at the same tyme to be a Sinner: for God cannot deny his owne nature, that is, he cannot but hate sinne and sinners, and this he doth necessarily, for otherwise he hould be most vniust: how then are these two contradictories togeather
true: I haue sinne, and am most worthy of anger & the hatred of God; and the Father loueth me? This absurdity followeth, by affir∣ming a man to be iustified, and yet his sinnes not to be taken away, nor any vertue infused into his Soule. SECT. V. Obiections from Scripture against inherent Iustice, answered. D. WhitakerCont. Camp rat 8. fol. 224. obiecteth that,2. Cor. 5.21. Him that knew no sinne, for vs he made sinne, that we might be made the Iustice of God in him: therfore seeing Christ was not truly made sinne, but by imputation, so are we no otherwise made iust by him. Answ. Christ is said to be made sinne, not that he was truly a sinner himselfe, but that he was made an hoast, or Sacrifice, for the taking away of sinne, for so often the word sinne is taken in theLeuit. 4.21.24. Ezech. 44.29. Ose. 4.8. Scripture, and so our sinnes were imputed to him, in that he did voluntarily vndertake to make satisfa∣ction for them: wherfore as Christ not by the meanes of a∣nother, but in his owne person tookeRom. 8.3. The similitude of the flesh of sinne, and was truly made a Sacrifice for sinne, so we not only by Imputation, but truly and really in our selues, ought to be the Iustice of God. S. Austine explaining these former wordes, that we might be made the iustice of God, saith:De Spir. & lit. c. 18. & ep. 120. ad Honorat. Euen as when we read Saluation is our Lord, it is not meant that Saluation wherby our Lord is saued; but wherby they are saued whom he saueth: so when it is sad, Gods Iustice, that is not to be vnderstood, wherwith God is iust, but that wherwith men are iust, whom by his grace he iustifyeth. Others obiect, that God,Eph 1 6. hath gratifyed vs in his belo∣ued Sonne, that is, only houldeth vs acceptable in him. Answ. That the word  doth truly signify to make gracious, S. Chrysostome teacheth saying,In Com∣ment. huius loci. He made vs gracious, that is, he not only freed vs from Synnes, but he also made vs his beloued friends. For if one hauing a man scabbed corrupted with plague, dis∣ease, old age, pouerty and hungar, should presently make him a beau∣tifull
young man, who should excell all in fayrnes, sending out great splendour from his cheekes, and darkning the brightnes of the eyes with reflexions: whome also he should place in the very flower of his age, and should withall cloath & adorne hi  purple and all things fyne: No otherwise doth Christ make our S polished, beautifull, de∣sired, and beloued. These words also of S. Paul are vrged,Philip. 3.9. And may be found in him not hauing my Iustice, which is of the law, but that which is of the faith of Christ, which is of Gods Iustice in fayth: as thogh heer∣by it should appeare, that the Apostle would haue no Iu∣stice of his owne, but only that Iustice which is in Christ. Answ. S. Paul calleth that a mans owne Iustice, which he challengeth by the workes of the law or nature, without the Grace of Christ: and that Gods Iustice (as S.L. 3. cont. 2. Ep. Pelag. c. 7. De Spir. & lit. c. 9. Austine ex∣poundeth this place) not which is in God, or by which God is iust, but that which is in man from God, and by his guift.
CHAP. XXXVI. The true State of the Question, concerning Iustifi∣tion by Faith and Workes. Whether man is truly iustifyed by Faith only, or that Hope, Charity, and good Workes are likewise causes of Iustfication. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. HAVING proued mans Iustification to be made by some vertues infused by God into the Soule; it remayneth now to shew what Vertues these are wher∣by man is Iustifyed: In manifestation wherof the Catholicke Church hath de∣creed, that,Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 9. If any shall affirme, the im∣pious man to be iustifyed by only faith, so as he vnderstandeth nothing else to be required, which may cooperate to the obtaining of the Grace of Iustification, and that in no respect it is need∣full that he be prepared and disposed with the motion of his will, Ana∣thema. And,Can. 24. If any shall say that Iustice receiued is not preser∣ued and increased before God by good workes, but that the good workes are only fruites and signes of Iustification already obtained, but not the Cause of the increasing therof, Anathema.
In the Councell of Moguntia it was defyned, that,Conc. Mo∣gunt. Cap 7. See Conc. Se∣nonens. De∣cret. 16. He who after the grace of Iust fication receiued, falleth againe by sinne receiueth Iustification by the remedies of Pennance: which with remis∣sion of sinnes giueth lso sanctifiation and renouation of the internall man in that by the merits of Christs Passion, which now is communi∣cated to him tha belieueth with pardon of sinnes, man also receiueth the Grace of God and by the holy Ghost togeather with Faith, Cha∣rity also and Hop powred into the hart. And these guifts of God re∣mayning in him, he is not now only reputed, or named, but truly is iust &c. CatholickesBellar. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 13. Rhem. Testam. in Iac. 2. generally teach that Fayth, Hope, and Charity are the formall cause of mans Iustification, which is euer further increased by good workes, so that not only faith, but likewise Hope, Charity, and good Workes do all of them concurre, as true causes of Iustification. Protestant Vntruthes. Luther was not ashamed to say,Ad. c. 15. Ioan. Our Papistes haue nei∣ther taught nor vnderstood any thing of faith. And,In Colloq. Germon. c. de morte. Shew yee me one place of Instification, of fayth, in the Decrees, Decretals, Clemen∣tins, in all the writers of all Summes and Sentences, in all Sermons of Monkes, in Decrees of Councels, in all Postils, in all Hierome and Gre∣gory &c. But whosoeuer shall but looke into these bookes by Luther cited, shall easily fynd that euery one of them will condemne Luther for an impudent Lyar. Melancthon affirmeth that,In Disp. de poenit. pro∣pos. 7. The Schoolmen haue taught foolishly and wickedly, Sinnes to be forgiuen by Contrition without faith. And thatIn Con∣fess. August. art. de con∣fess. & in A∣pol. art. 11. & art. 15. Satisfactions formerly were extolled immo∣deratly, but no mention was made of faith and the merit of Christ, and the Iustice of faith. The same iust censure will all School∣men giue of Melancthon, which formerly was giuen of Luther. Protestant Doctrine. The English Protestant Church decreeth, that,Articles of Relig. art. 11. Calu. In∣stit. l. 3. c. 11. §. 13. 14. 17. 18 19. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our
Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, by faith, and not for our owne workes or deseruings. Wherfore that we are iustifyed by faith only, is a most wholsome doctrine, and very full of comfort. Luther,De Po∣stil. in Do∣min. post Na∣tal. Nothing else is required to Iustfication, but to heare, and belieue Iesus Christ our Sauiour. And,De libert. Christian. fol. 6. A Christian needeth no works for this that he may be iust and saued. Perkins,Tom. 2. in Gal. c. 4. Col. 19. The doctrine which dreameth of Iustification by workes bringeth in Idolatry. And,Tom. 1: c. 51. Col. 103. It is false & ridiculous, that we are iustifyed by workes. Whitaker,Ad rat. 3 Camp. p. 7. That our doctrine is most true and most holy, Man to be iustifyed only by faith. So that euen Charity by these men is excluded from being any Cause of our Iustification. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. S. Austine condemneth certaine of the Pseudoapostles, for that they taught that,De fide & oper. c. 14. Only fayth sufficeth to gaine Sal∣uation, because S. Paul had said, Man is iustifyed by faith without the workes of the law. He alsoL. de haer c. 54. reproueth Eunmius, for that he taught that, The committing or continuing of any sinnes whatsoe∣uer could nothing hurt any man, if he were partaker of that faith, which was taught by him. That our moderne Prot. teach the same, Whitaker shall testify:De Ec∣clesia p. 301. We say that if any man haue an acte of faith. Sinnes do not hurt him: this truly Luther affirmeth, this we all say. And for this your saying M. Whitaker, you, and your All are condemned by S. Austine for Heretickes. Protestant Errours. Faith being vndoubtedly the beginning and foundati∣on of mans Iustification and Saluation, and according to Prot. at sometymes the only cause thereo: yet it is wonder∣full to see at other tymes how litle esteeme they make of it: for thus writeth Caluin,Instit. l. 3. c. 11 §. 7. Properly speaking we say, only God to iustify, we compare fayth as it were to a vessell &c. Fayth although of it selfe it be of no worth or price, it doth iustify vs by bringing Christ, euen as a pot full of money doth enrich a man. Peter Martyr.n loc. Class. 3. c. 4. §. 8. If fayth it selfe be considered, as it is our worke, we cannot be iustifyed therwith, seeing it is a worke both lame and imperfect, far worse then
the law requireth &c. He compareth it,In Rom. 11 to a hand infected with lepry, infirme, scabbed. Dnaeus,In c. 31. Enchir. S. Aug. p. 785. If we consider Fayth by it selfe, and as it is in vs, it is imperfect, lame, polluted, and defyled and migled with infidelity, so that it is not truly worthy the name of Vertue Paaeus,De Iu∣stifi. l. 4. c. 17. §. 12. 9. It is no absurdity, Fayth sometymes to haue mingled diffience or increduliy, which is Sinne, and so by accident faith to be Sin. And, Fayth iustifyeth as the beggar by his scabbed hand receyueth almes. Perkins,Tom. 2. in Gal. 3. Col. 19. Saluation doth not depend of our Fayth. Luther,Tom. 1. in Disp. hab. an. 1520. fol 371. See Schluss. tom. 7 Catal. haeret. p. 182. 193. Fayth vnles it be without all euen the least wor∣kes doth not iustify; yea it is not faith. Amsdorfiu,In Col∣loq. Alde∣burg. script. 6. p. 121. Good wor∣kes euen according to their nature and substance, as they are comman∣ded by God, are hurtfull to saluaion Luther,Tom. 3. in Ps. 5 fol. 171. Let this be thy rule, where the Scripture commandeth a good worke to be done, so vn∣derstand it, that it forbiddeth thee to do a good worke, seeing thou canst not do it.Tom. 2. Wittemb. de Captiu Ba∣byl. fol. 74. A Christian or baptized person is so rich, that although he would, he cannot loose his Saluation by any sinnes how great soeuer, vnles he will not belieue. And this good reason he giueth herof elswhere,In 2. part. Postil. Germ. fol. 140. For only Infidelity condemneth all men that are con∣demned: and on the contrary, Only Faith maketh all men blessed. So that a right Lutheran may liue and dye a Traytour, a mur∣therer, Adulterer &c. and yet is sure to be saued. SECT. II. It is proued by the Sacred Scriptures, that not only Faith, but likewise Hope, Charity, and other good Workes do truly iustify, and cause remission of Sinne. TO examine this so waighty a point by the Scriptures, all such Argumentes taken from Scriptures, as con∣uince Faith to iustify, do likewise proue the same of the rest. Of faith it is said,Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that cometh to God must belieue that he is, and is a rewarder to them that seeke him.Ab. 2.4. The lust shall liue in his faith.Act 13.39. In him euery one that belieueth is iustifyed: and theRom. .27.28. Gal. 3.6.14. like. Now ans∣werably herto it is said of feare.Eccles. 1.27 28. The Feare of our Lord ex∣pelleth sinne; for he that is without feare cannot be iustifyed.Philip. 2.12.
With feare and trembling worke your Saluation. Of Hope,Ps. 36.40. He will &c. saue them, because they haue hoped in him.Ro 8.24. By hope we are saued Of Charity and good Workes,Luc. 7.47. Many sinnes are forgi∣uen her, because she hath loued much: But to whom lesse is forgiuen, he loueth lesse.1. Io. 3.14. We are translated from death to lyfe, because we loue the Brethren.1. Pet. 4.8. Prou. 10.12. Charity couereth the multitude of Sinnes. By mercy and truth Iniquity is redeemed.Tob. 12.9. Almes purgeth Sinne.Luc. 11.41. Giue almes, and behould all things are cleane to you.Mat. 25.34. Come &c. possesse the kingdome &c. for I was an hungry &c.Prou. 16.6. Dan. 4.24. Redeeme thy sinnes with almes.2. Pet. 1.10. Labour the more, that by good workes you may make sure your vocation and Election. These last wordes are so cleere for vs, thatIn suis Biblijs Ger∣man. & in Comment. in 2. Pet. 1. tom. 5. fol. 487. Luther, Beza, Tremelius, and our EnglishIn the kings Bible. Prot. do quite leaue out these words, By good workes. So expresse it is, that Almes and good Workes do cause remission of sinnes, and iustify. Because these wordes,Dan. 4.24. Redeeme thy Sinnes by Almes, do proue that good workes do iustify and satisfy for Sinne, Gesnerus therefore affirmeth thatCompend. doct. ca. l. loc. 23. p. 495. This Translation is cor∣rupt. And yet Peter Martyr auoucheth that the Chaldee, in which this Epistle was written, hath verbatim, Redeeme thy sinnes in Iustice.: and that, the Vulgar reading is taken from the Greeke text. And whereas concerning this last place of Daniel, some Prot. for redeeme, translate, breake of; yet by the iudgment ofIn Ps. 84. Englished c. 6. part. 4. p. 517. Hemingius, the Hebrew word signifyeth to redeeme. S. Hierome heere readeth accordingly, and so also dothLuth loc. com. class 1. p. 72. Pet. Mar. in his com. plac. in Eng. part. 3. c. 4. p. 114. Melancth. loc. com. c. de bon. opib. p. 157. Calu. Inst. c. 5. pa. 181. Bull. Dec. in Engl. p. 584. Aret. loc. com. p. 321. Luther, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, Caluin, Bul∣linger, with sundry other Prot. and so also are some of our EnglishOf Anno 1566. Bybles. This place is so conuincing, that Herbrandus saith ther∣of, I answere, If  the word be vrged, it is manifest the sense of those wordes (of Daniel) to fight with the scope of the whole Scripture, and with analogy of fayth. So that according to the lit∣terall wordes, the sense directly maketh agaynst Protestāts. In like sort wheras Christ before sayd, Giue Almes, and behould all things are cleane to you, Prot. in answere heerto, do expoūd
the same in a direct contrary sense. Vallada,Apol. cont. Epis∣cop. Luzo∣nensem c. 22. p. 300. Christ is far from teaching, that sinnes are redeemed by Almes, that to the contrary he derideth and reprehendeth the Pharisees, because they had this opi∣nion. Peter Martyr,In Rom. 11. p. 518. These words, Giue almes &c. may be ex∣pounded 3. waies, first, that we decree that it is an Ironicall speach &c. And the same answere is giuen byApol. Confess Au∣gust. c. de res∣pons. ad argu∣menta. Art. in loc. part. 1. fol. 90. others. But if such Ironicall speaches may be houlden for good, it wil be easy to euade all textes of Scripture though neuer so plaine, for any one Article of our Christian faith. Lutherans expound those wordes,Apol. Confess. Au∣gust. c. de im∣pletione legis. Because she loued much, that is, because she truly worshipped me with faith, and with the exercises and signes of faith, still flying to their signes and fi∣gures, and strangely confounding Faith and Charity, being vertues most distinct. Because those wordes of Christ,Luc. 7.47. Many sinnes are forgiuen her because she loued much, do make for iustification by workes; Beza insteed of quoniam, because, pla∣ceth nam, for. And this he saith he did, that it might more easily be vnderstood, the cause of remission of Sinne not to be shewed in these wordes. Illyricus vpon this place doth follow Beza. But what more plaine then those wordes and exam∣ples produced by S. Iames,C. 2.21.22.24.25. Abraham &c. was he not iusti∣fyed by workes, offering Isaac his sonne vpon the Aultar. Seest thou that faith did worke with his workes, and by the workes the faith was con∣summate &c? Do you see that by workes a man is iustifyed, and not by faith only? &c. Rachab the harlot was she not iustifyed by workes &c? S. AustineL. 83. quaest. q. 76. noteth, that of purpose S. Iames tooke the very same example of Abraham, whom S. Paul said to be iustifyed by faith, and declareth that he was also iustifyed by workes, specifying the good worke for which he was iustifyed, to wit, his obedience, and immolation of his only Sonne. CaluinInstit l. 3. c. 17. sect. 1. Fulk. again. Rhem. Test. fol. 49. And the Marg. notes of the Engl. Bible of 1576. Whitak. cont Dur. l. . sect. 13. and others do answere herto, that here, by faith is vnderstood a barraine and dead faith: But this is to offer violence to the words and meaning; for the Apostle hauing tould, that faith without workes is idle, alleadgeth in fur∣ther proofe thereof the example of Abraham iustifyed by workes, whose faith did worke with his workes, and then
concluding immediatly therupon, Do you see that by workes a man is iustifyed and not by faith only: so cleerly is it spoken of such faith, as wrought with workes, and wherby Abraham was called the friend of God, which cannot be a barraine and dead faith. PerkinsReform. Cath. p. 92. would euade by affirming, that by the word, iustifyed, is vnderstood only our Iustification before man: but this is as helples as the former, for the Apostle say∣ing, By workes a man is iustifyed, and not by faith only, doth here at once and alyke referre the word Iustifyed, both to workes & faith: wherfore if by fayth he meant a true faith, then doth that iustify before God; & if a barraine and dead faith with∣out workes, then doth it not iustify so much as before man. Againe, the Example of Abraham who belieued, and it was reputed to him for iustice, and who was called the friend of God, conuinceth that this Iustification was before God. Paraeus his answere is, that S. IamesDe iu∣stif. l. 4. c. 18. p 1157. addeth the An∣tithesis, or contrary, and not by faith only, by imitation of hypocrites: But so farre was S. Iames from hypocrisy or dissimulation, that by those wordes he spake as plainly and fully for Iu∣stification by workes, as any Roman Catholikce at this day can do. Lastly this place is so vnanswerable, that sundry Prot. reiecting this Epistle, for Apocryphall, do yield for their reason therof, that Iustification by workes is taught therin. Wher∣of Luther saith,Tom 6. in c. 12. Gen. fol. 282. Iames concludeth naughtily; It followeth not as Iames doteth, therfore fruites iustify. Let our Aduersaries therfore be packing with their Iames. Melancthon,Tom 2. de sacris Con∣cionibus fol. 23. But if they cannot be mitigated by any exposition, as that of Iames, you see &c. such sim∣ply are not to be receiued. Beza,In Ep. Iac. 2.14. This Epistle for that Cause is altogeather reiected by some, as though it did impugne sound doctrine. And the same is taught by otherMuscul. in loc. tit. de instif. p 504. Schlussel. Theol. Cal. li. 1. art. 15 fol. 50. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 4. Col. 54.71. Prot. So that when the Scriptures are so plaine, as that by no Exposition they can be euaded by Prot. then they must be cast away for Apo∣cryphall. But the Scriptures are so plaine & plentifull in behalfe of good workes, that Luther being much vrged there∣with, hath instructed his Schollers to answere them
thus,Tom. 3. in Gal. 3 fol. 345. Here is Christ, there the Testimonies of Scripture, for the law and workes: But Christ is Lord of the Scripture &c. thou vrgest the Seruant, that is, the Scripture: I leaue the seruant to thee; I vrge the Lord, who is the king of Scripture. So making Christ and the Scriptures to be contrary one to another: which is intolle∣rable blasphemy, and an euident signe of a desperate Cause. But to proceed, if neither Hope, Charity, nor other vertues, but only Faith doth iustify, then it necessarily fol∣loweth, that if true faith were separated from other vertues, the same would truly iustify, wheras it is most certaine that,1. Io. 3.14. He that loueth not, abydeth in death. And, If1. Cor. 13.2. I should haue all faith, so that I could remoue mountaines, and haue not Cha∣rity, I am nothing. Because these words,1. Cor. 13.2. If I should haue all faith, so that I could remoue mountaines, and haue not Charity, I am nothing, do proue no faith to be sufficient to Iustification without Charity; Beza heere for , omnem, translateth, totam: and this he saith, he did, lest this should deceiue any man. Besids it would follow, that a man hauing true faith were truly iust, though he had a full and deliberate intention to blaspheme, murther &c. which is most absurd. Now, that a mā may haue true faith without Charity, be∣sides the next recited wordes of S. Paul, is by sundry other texts manifest, as, YetIo 12.42.43. of the Princes many belieued in him: but for the Pharisees they did not confesse, that they might not be cast out of the Synagogue, for they loued the glory of men more, then the glory of God. What (54) will it profit &c. if a man sayth he hath faith,Iac. 2.13. but hath not workes? shall fayth be able to saue him?Tit. 3.8. They which belieue in God, be carefull to excell in good workes. All these places speake of true fayth, and not only of an imperfect know∣ledge of Christ, as some would euade; agreably to which sayth S. Austine,Trct. 5. in Ioan. See how the Euangelist noteth, and repro∣ueth some, which yet he sayth to haue belieued in him; who if they should profit in this entrance of fayth, they would by profiting ouercome the loue of humane glory. But if this fayth could profit, and by profiing ouercome the loue of humane glory, certainly it wa a true fayth. Agayne sayth the same S. Austine.Tract. 54 in Ioan. Some hau belieued being Predestinate to life eternall, but some haue not belieued: But of those who haue belieued, some did so confesse, that
taking boughes of Palmes they met him coming, reioicing in the same Confession of prayse: But others of the Princes durst not confesse, lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue. Heere the same Fayth is ascribed to those which professed Iesus manifestly, and to those who durst not professe him. Now no man will deny, but that those who did professe him, had true faith in Christ, therfore also it was true in those that did not confesse him: but in the first it worked with Charity, in the later it was alone without Charity. Lastly, he expresly teacheth that,De Tri¦nit. l. 15. c. 18. Fayth truly may be without Charity, but not to profit. This truth is further proued by all suchMat 3.12. & 13.48, & 22.10. & 25.2. places as shew, that in the true Church (in which none can be with∣out true faith) some are good, and some are euill: And yet the bad are not reprehended for want of fayth, but for want of the mariage garment, that is, Charity, and for want of oyle, which signifyeth workes of mercy. AndMat. 7.21. not euery one that sayth to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of hea∣uen, but he that doth the will of my father, which is in heauen, he shall enter into the Kingdome of heauen. These men haue Fayth, o∣therwise they could not inuocate Lord, Lord; according to that of S. Paul,Rom. 10.14. How then shall they inuocate in whome they haue not belieued, and yet besids this fayth, to enter into Hea∣uen, they must do the will of the Father. Lastly, Prot. do therefore teach Iustification by only fayth, because if it depēded conditionally vpon workes, then no man could be assured of his Iustification, in which assu∣rance or certainty they place their Iustification, and so their sayd Iustification should be impossible. But if fayth be ne∣cessarily ioyned with workes, then, in that our Iustification dependeth of fayth, it dependeth also at least for our know∣ledge thereof, of good workes, and so thereby none can be assured, that he is iustifyed, directly agaynst Protestants.
SECT. III. The Fathers expound the Sacred Scriptures in proofe of Iustification not only by fayth, but lykewise by workes: Also that true fayth may be without workes. IN cleerest proofe heere of S. Austine writeth thus,De fide & oper. c 14. Wherefore now let vs see that which is to be cast from Religious harts, lest by euill security they loose their Saluation, if for the obtay∣ning therof, they shall thinke only faith to suffice, and shall neglect to liue well, and by good workes to keep the wayes of God. For euen in the tymes of the Apostles, certaine hard sentences of Paul the Apostle not being vnderstood, some thought that he said this, Let vs do euill that good may come, because he had said.Rom. 5.20. The law entred in, that sinne might abound. And where sinne abounded, grace did more abound &c. When then the Apostle saith, that he accounteth a man to be iustifyed by faith without workes of the law, he doth not this, that faith being obtained and professed, the workes of Iustice should be contemned, but that euery one may know, that he may be iustifyed by faith, although the workes of the law be not precedent. For they follow him that is iu∣stifyed, do not go before him that is to be iustifyed &c. Therfore because this opinion was then begunne, the other Apostolicall Epistles of Peter, Iohn, Iames, Iude, do chiefly direct their intention against it, that they may strongly confirme, that Faith without workes doth profit nothing: Euen also, as Paul himselfe hath not defyned any fayth whatsoeuer wherby God is belieued, but that wholsome and plainly Euangelicall, whose workes proceed of loue;Gal. 5.6. Faith, saith he, which worketh by Charity. Wherupon that faith which seemeth to some to suffice to Sal∣uation, he so affirmeth to profit nothing, that he saith,1. Cor. 13.1. If I should haue all faith, that I could remoue mountaines, and haue not Charity, I am nothing. And,De fide & oper. c. 15. I see not why Christ should say, if thou wilt haue lyfe euerlasting, keep the Commandements, if without obseruing of them by only faith, a man might be saued. S. Ambrose demaundeth,L. 10. Ep. 82. What Saluation can be to vs, vnles we wash away our sinnes by fasting, seeing the Scripture saith,Iob. 4. & 12. Fasting, and almes do free from sinne. Who then are these new
maisters, who exclude the merit of fasting? Origen affirmeth that,Tract. 32. in Mat. Those who professe faith in Iesus, but do not prepare them∣selues with good workes to saluation, are to be compared to the foolish Virgins. Wherof also saith S. Cyrill,Catech. 15. Do not trust in this, that thou hast the lampe only, but keep it burning. Do not trust in this only, that thou belieuest, but keep faith burning, that thy light may shine before men by good workes &c. S. Chrysostome demaundeth,Ho. 30. in Ioan. Is it sufficient for life eternall to belieue in the Sonne? And his answere is, No, For not euery one,Mat. 7. saith he, who saith to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen &c. If thou shalt rightly belieue in the Fa∣ther, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, but shalt not rightly liue, it doth nothing profit thee to Saluation. To the same effect saith Cyrill of Alexandria,L. 10. in Io c. 18. That faith doth not suffice to Saluation, the Disciple of Christ sheweth, writing.Iac. 2.19. Thou belieuest there is one God, the Deuils also belieue and tremble. If therfore only faith should be sufficient, the multitude of Deuils could not perish: wherfore the workes of Charity must come to faith. The Fathers did so confessedly teach Iustification by workes, that Melancthon saith,In Ep. ad Rom. p. 391. Origen, and many others following him, faigned men to be iust for their workes. Whitaker chargeth withResp. ad Rat. Camp. p 78. Fulk. in Def. of the Engl. Transl. p. 368. Errour herin not only Cyprian, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that tyme. The Centurists say of those ancient times,Cnt. 3. c. 4. Col 79. It seemeeh, that for the most part this chiefest Article of Iustification to haue bene obscured, for they attributed to workes Iustice euen before God.Cent. 3. Col. 265. 266. Origen made good workes the Cause of Iustification Luther termethIn Gal. c. 4. Hierome, Ambrose, Austine and others, Iustice-workers of the old Papacy. Bullinger ac∣knowledgeth that,Vpon the Apoc. Serm. 87. The Doctrine of Merits, Satisfaction, and Iustification of workes, did incontinently after the Apostles tymes lay their first foundations. So confessedly did the ancientest and learnedst Fathers teach our Catholicke Doctrine of Iustifi∣cation by workes.
SECT. IV. That sundry Prot. do teach our Doctrine of Iustification by Workes, and not only by Fayth. IT is supposed, that Husse, Wicliffe, and other preten∣ded Prot. before Luthers tyme agreed with Catholickes heerin, as well for that we do not find that they were char∣ged, or troubled for any contrary doctrine, but also for that Foxe auoucheth that,Act. Mon. p. 402. Our free Iustification by fayth only was long hid before Luthers tyme, and opened by him. And so Melan∣cthon censuredEp. ad Frider. Micon. Wicliffe, that, He did not at all vnderstand, nor hould the Iustice of fayth. M. Napier vpon these wordes of the Apocalypse,Apoc. 20.12. The dead were iudged &c. according to their workes, writeth thus,In Apoc. c. 20. p. 296. 297. By workes heere are we iudged and iustifyed, and not by fayth only, as also Iames 2.24. testifyeth, meaning heerby, that of liuely fayth and of the good workes that follow thereupon, man is iustifyed, and not of that dead fayth, that is by it selfe alone without any good workes. And then reconcyling the seeming repugnance bet∣weene S. Paul and S. Iames, he affirmeth that S. Paul saith, We are iustifyed by fayth without the workes of the law, that is to say, not without good worke, whatsoeuer &c. although it be without the precyse workes that the law requireth &c. Yea shall fynd both Ia∣mes and Paul agree in diuers places, that fayth without workes is a dead fayth, and serueth nothing to Iustification. Yea he spareth not to say, we are iustified by faythfull workes &c. Caluin affirmeth,Iustit. l. 3. c. 17. §. 8. Iustification not to stand without wor∣kes, and that good workes are not only acceptable to God, but also are to haue reward. And good workes of the faythfull are causes why our Lord doth bestow his benefis vpon them, Finally that, our Lord doth imbrace workes as the inferiour Causes of our Saluation. Rogers confesseth that,Def. of the Art. art. 20 p. 110. Iustification by fayth only, is ground vpon Gods written word, though not by our common and vulgar termes to be read therein: which is in playne termes, to acknowledge, that Iu∣stification by fayth only, is not to be read in Gods word.
Peter Martyr expounding the foresayd wordes of Da∣niel, Redeeme thy Sinnes with Almes, confesseth that,Hom. 21. in Dan. This see∣meth to be the most playne sense of all; If thou wilt heare me, thou shalt consider hew thou mayest purge thy Sinnes, and mayst returne into fa∣uour with God: this may be done, if thou shalt redeeme thy sinnes by Iustice, and Beneficence. SECT. V. Obiections taken from Scripture in proofe of Iustification by only Fayth, and not by Workes, answered. IT is obiected from S. Paul that,Rom. 4.2. If Abraham were iusti∣fyed by workes, he hath glory, but not with God. And,Rom. 3.28. We account a man to be iustifyed by fayth without the workes of the law. Answ. Luther to make this later place the stronger, addeth thus to the text, we account a man to be iustifyed by only Fayth: And in defence heerof he sayth to a friend of his,Ep. ad a∣micum. de vo∣ce (sola) quam Rom. 3. de suo adiecit. See tom. 5. Germ. Ien fol 141. & tom. 4. Ger. Wit. fol. 475. If thy Papist shew himselfe angry and discontented for the word (sola) forth∣with tell him, A Papist, and an Asse are the same thing. Agayne, I knew long since, that in this place neyther in the Greeke nor the Latin text the word (sola) was read, neyther was there any need that the Papistes should admonish me thereof &c. I repent me that I added not (omnes) and (omnibus) that so it should be without all workes of all lawes, and so I had spoken well and roundly. Wherefore this word shall remayne in my Testament, although all Bishops should runne md togeather, and should be transformed into Asses, yet they shall not shaue it thence from me. But to omit this cursed adding to the Scirptures, and Luthers scurrill impudency, the Gentils did boast of their Philosophy & morall vertues proceeding of nature: and the Iewes did lykewise boast of their law & legall Obseruations, both which the Apostle confuteth in that Epistle, and proueth that neyther of these are of any force to Saluation, without the Grace of Christ and fayth in him; to that end in the later place expressely naming and excluding the Workes of the Law, that is, sayth Iohn Husse,In Ep. Iac c 2. The legall Ceremonies: and in the first, explayning himselfe, saying there next before,Rom. 4.. What did Abraham find
our Father according to the flesh? Agreably herto answereth an∣cient Sedulius,Ad c. 3. ad Rom. Without what workes of the law is the Apostle to be thought to affirme man to be iustifyed by faith? to wit of Circum∣cision and the Saboth, and other such lyke, not without the workes of Iustice, of which S. Iames sayth, Fayth without workes is dead. Lastly, this is answered by S.De Gra. & lib. Arb. c. 7. Austine saying: Men not vn∣derstanding that which the Apostle saith (we count a man to be iusti∣fyed by faith without the workes of the law) did thinke that be said, faith would suffice a man though he liued ill, and had no good workes. Which God forbid that the Vessell of Election should thinke: who in a certaine place after he had said, In Christ Iesus neither Circumcision nor Prepuce, auayleth any whit, he straight added, but faith which worketh by loue. And wheras some oppose S. Paul to S. Iames, S. Au∣stine thus Catholickly reconcileth them,L. 83. Quae∣stionum. q. 76. fin. & l de fide & operi∣bus c. 14 init. Wherfore the sentences of the 2. Apostles Paul and Iames, are not contrary in them∣selues: when one saith, a man is iustifyed by faith without workes, and another saith, Faith is voyd without workes: because he, speaketh of workes that go before faith, this, of those which follow faith, euen as Paul himselfe sheweth in many places. Heerof saith D. Whitaker,Resp. ad Camp. rat. 1 p. 12. See Cent. 5. c. 10. Col. 1133. Austine reconcileth Iames to Paul, wherfore, saith Austine, the Sentences of the two Apostles, Paul and Iames, are not contrary in themselues &c. because Paul speaketh of workes which go before faith (vnto which neuer any Catholicke ascribed Iustification) and Iames of those workes that follow faith: which is the same truth that Catholicks now teach. Others obiect that,Io. 1.11. As many as receiued him, he gaue them power to be made the Sonnes of God, to those that belieue in him. And,Io. 3.14. So must the Sonne of Man be exalted, that euery one which belieueth in him perish not, but may haue life euerlasting. Answ. Wheras many causes concurre to the producing of one ef∣fect, as our Iustification, sometimes the Scriptures attribute the same effect to one Cause, sometimes to another; yet ne∣uer so as excluding the rest. And so, as in these places it refer∣reth our Iustification and saluation to Faith; so in other, it re∣ferreth toLuc. 71 47 1. Io. 3.14. 1. Pet 4.8. Charity,Rom. 8.24. Hope,Tit 3.5. Baptisme, & other ver∣tues. And agreably vnto this saith S. Clement.L. 4. Strom. post med. Wherfore when we shall heare, Thy faith hath saued thee, we do not vnderstand
him to say absolutly those to be saued, who any waies belieue, vnles their deeds shall follow: And so where it is said in S. Marke,Mar. 16.16. He that belieueth and is baptized, shalbe saued, S. Mathew also ad∣deth these wordes of our Sauiour,Mat. 28.20. teaching them to obserue all things whatsoeuer I haue commanded you, which contayneth all good workes, and the whole Iustice of a Christian man. Such places also are vrged, wherin our Iustification is said to be gratis.Rom. 3.24. Iustifyed gratis by his grace:Rom. 11.6. If by grace, not now of works, otherwise Grace is not Grace. Answ. The word, Gratis, is either taken, as it is opposed to debt of Iustice, and true merit de condigno, & this hindreth not, but that as faith, so likewise good workes may concurre gratis to our Iustifi∣cation, as dispositions, and as meritorious de congruo: or els it is taken as it is opposed to workes done without grace, only by the force of nature; but this excludeth not absolu∣tely all merit, but only our owne merit, that is, such as is from our selues, and not from God: so that Iustification gra∣tis, is not all one with Iustification by only Faith: neither doth it exclude such workes as proceede from Grace, for so it also should exclude faith, which proceedeth from Grace, and which also is a most excellent worke it selfe.Io. 6.29. This is the worke of God that you belieue in him &c. but it only excludeth such workes, as are done only by the strength of nature, & such as should merit our Iustification de condigno, Iustice, and debt. Some obiect those words of our Sauiour,Luc. 8.50. Belieue only, and she shalbe safe. Heere some thinke they haue found only faith to saue: But heere Christ speaheth not of Iustifi∣cation and remission of sinnes, but of the miraculous raysing of one from death to lyfe. Now for the working of miracles fayth alone doth sometymes suffice, as might be easily pro∣ued from Mat. 7.22. Now that true fayth cannot be without good workes, some obiect that of1. Tim. 5.. S. Paul, But if any man haue not care of his owne, and especially of his Domesticalls, he hath denyed the faith, and is worse then an Infidell. Answ. S. Chrisostome and others do expound this of those who are sayd to deny their fayth, because they do not liue as their fayth teacheth them, who,
as the same Apostle sayth,Tit. 1.16. Confesse they know God, but in deeds deny him. Who are said in this respect of want of Chari∣ty towards their owne, to be worse then Infidels, who haue a care of their owne; and so deny their fayth not in hart or mouth, but in deeds. Others vrge those wordes of S. Iohn,1. Io. 2.4. He that sayth he knoweth him and keepeth not his Commādements is a lyar. Answ. Knowledge heere is taken, according to S. Bedes and Oecu∣menius Exposition, for the knowledge of loue and friend∣ship, in which sense Christ sayth to the wicked,Mat. 25.12. I know you not: wherefore if any man vaunt himselfe to know God by familiar and experimentall knowledge of his Graces, and yet keepeth not his Commandements, this man is a lyar. And therefore such are all moderne heretickes, who professe themselues to be in the fauour of God, by onely fayth, and yet they acknowledge they neyther keep, nor possibly can keep his Commandements. Some obiect that,1. Io. 5.. Whosoeuer belieueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God, and therfore doubt∣les hath Charity. Answ.Tract. 20. in Ep. Ioan. S. Austine teacheth that this is spoken of fayth informed, which worketh by Charity.
CHAP. XXXVII. The true State of the Question, concerning me∣rit of Workes. Whether Workes proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory. SECT. I. Catholike Doctrine. HAVING proued that good workes do iustify, it remayneth now to shew that they are truly meritorious of Grace and eternall Glory. To which purpose the Catholicke Church decreeth that,Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 16. Seeing Christ Iesus doth continually powre vertue into those that are iustifyed, as the head into the members, and the vyne into the bran∣ches: which vertue doth alwaies precede & accompany, and follow their good workes, and without which they can by no meanes be gratefull to God and meritorious; nothing more is to be thought to be wanting to the iustifyed, but that by those workes which are done in God, they may be iudged to haue fully satisfyed Gods law, for the state of this lyfe, and to haue truly deserued lyfe eternall to be gained in its tyme, if that they shall depart in Grace, &c. neither is that to be omitted, that al∣though so much be ascribed to good workes in the sacred Scriptures, that
to him who shall giue to one of his least ones a draught of could water, Christ promiseth he shall not want his reward &c. Yet God forbid, that a Christian should either trust or glory in himselfe, and not in our Lord; whose goodnes is so great towards all men, as that those things which are his guiftes, he will haue to be their merits. And because all offend in many things, as euery one ought to haue before his eyes mercy and goodnes, so also seuerity and iudgment: neither let any man iudge himselfe, although he be guilty of nothing to himselfe; because the lyfe of men is not to be examined and Iudged by mans Iudgment, but Gods, who will enlighten the hidden things of darknes, and will manifest the Counsailes of the hartes. And then praise shalbe to euery one from God, who, as it is written, will giue to euery one according to his workes. Wherfore,Sess. 6, Can. 32. If any shall affirme, a iust mans good workes so to be the guiftes of God, that they are not also the good merites of him that is iustifyed: or that he who is iustifyed by good workes, which are done by him through the Grace of God, and the merit of Iesus Christ, whose liuely member he is, doth not truly merit increase of Grace, life eter∣nall, and the obtaining of lyfe eternall, if so he dye in Grace, as also the increase of glory, Anathema. In the Councell of Moguntia it is defined, that,Cap. 8. See Conc. Senon. Decret. 16. Those workes which the iustifyed do &c. to be truly good and gratefull to God, and worthy the reward of eternall lyfe. And so all Catholikes teach, that workes proceeding from Gods Grace, through the merits of Christ, are truly and properly meritorious of Grace and eternall Glory.Bellar. de Iustif. l. 5 c. 1. 2. &c. Rhem. Test in Rom. 2.6. Points Disputable. All belieuing that workes proceeding from Grace do truly merit: someDurand. 1. Dist. 17. q. 2. teach, that the reward giuen to such workes is according to the forme of communicatiue Iustice. ButCaiet. 1. p. q. 21. art. 1. others more probably teach, that it is according to the forme of distributiue Iustice. SomeDurand. 2. Dist. 28. q. 5. Gabr. 2. Dist. 28 q. vnica. teach that the naturall motions of the mind do merit ex congruo, the first grace.Vega q. 7. de Iustifi. Others ascribe this only to the supernaturall motions of perfect fayth, Charity &c. Whereby we are sufficienly disposed to grace, considering them, not as they proceeded from Grace, but from free will.
Valent. Tom. 2. Disp. 8. q. 6. P. 4. §. 2. Others more probably deny merit ex congruo, to all actes disposing to Grace. SomeCaiet. in. 1.2. q. 114. art. 3. Sotus l. 3. de Nat. & Grat. c. 7. thinke, that the good workes of the iust do merit ex condigno lyfe eternall, by reason of the worke, al∣though there were no pact or promise from God.Scotus 1. Dist. 17. q. 2. Vega de Iu∣stificat. q. 5. O∣thers thinke that they only so merit by reason of the pact & Gods acceptation. ButS. Tho. 1.2. q. 114. art. 1.3. S. Bonauent. in 2. Dist. 27. others most probably teach, that they are so meritorious by reason of the pact, and the worke also. Protestants Vntruthes. MelancthonIn Apol. art. 12. affirmeth, that Catholikes belieue that, by good workes done out of the state of Grace they merit grace by Gods couenant, that, by attrition they merit grace: that, for the blot∣ting out of sinne only detestation of the crime sufficeth: That, by Con∣trition, not by fayth in Christ we may obtayne remission of sinnes &c. Againe,In Apol. p. 112. Our Aduersaries are plainly deafe it hath beene so of∣ten sayd, the law not to profit without Christ, for whome good workes pleased. But they euery where Christ excluded, do teach the workes of the law to merit Iustification. But these are all so grosse, that I persuade my selfe insteed of further answere, that no man will belieue him. Accordingly Rogers sayth,Def. of the Art. art. 11. p. 52. Sinnes mortall, not by the me∣rits of Christ only, but many wayes besides are clensed, thinke the Pae∣pists, as by the merits of dead Saintes, namely of S. Mary the Virgin. And,Ib. Art. 14. p. 61. Supererogatory workes do merit (say they) remission of sinnes, and that not for the doers of them only but for others besids. But the Rhemistes whome he cyteth for this, haue not the word merit, but only satisfy: teaching as all other Caholic∣kes do, the good workes of one, though they cannot merit for another, yet they may iustly satisfy for him. Protestant Doctrine. The Doctrine of merit of workes is so displeasing to Prot. as thatIustit. l. 3. c. 15. §. 2. Caluin much disliketh the word Merit, or Reward, reprouing the ancient Fathers for vsing the same:
And further saying.Ibid. c. 16. §. 2. We take from men the opinion of meri∣ting. According to M. Perkins,Reform. Cath. Contro. 5. c. 1. Man cannot merit a mor∣sell of bread. Scharpius,De Iust. Cntrou. 15. p. 218. We say, that the workes of the faythfull in he sight of God are no wayes meritorious, neyther of congruity, nor condignity. Protestants agree with Ancient Hereticks. We condemne (sayth S.De temp. Ser. 191. Austine) the Errour of Ioui∣nian, who sayd there was no difference of merits in the world to come. And S.Conc. Te∣lense & Res∣criptum Am∣brosij & alio∣rum ad Siri∣cium. Pap. Ib. Ambrose with others terme it a rude howling &c. to confound all things promiscuously &c. and to take away the degrees of different merits. Protestant Errours. Luther teacheth thatL. de li∣bert. Christ. good workes do not make a man good, nor euill workes euill. And,L. de Captiu. Ba∣byl. c. de Bap. Thou seest how rich a Chri∣stian or baptized man is, that although he would, he cannot loose his Saluation by any sinnes how great soeuer, vnles he will not belieue; for no sinnes can damne, but only Infidelity. ManyCaluin in Epist. duabus ad Polones. Chem. l. de duabus natu∣ris. Melancth. in loc. cap. de filio. & in l. concor. p. 556. 645. 736. Prot. teach that Christ is our Mediatour ac∣cording to both natures, diuine and humane. Yea Swin∣glius teacheth that,L. de vera & fal. Relig. c. de Euchar. Christ is to vs a Sauiour by that part wher∣in he descended from heauen, not by that he was borne of the most vn∣spotted Virgin. And further addethTom. 4. in c 6 Ioan. p. 310. elswhere, that the flesh of Christ profiteth nothing, it profiteth nothing at all. Caluin affirmeth that,Instit. l. 2. c. 17. § 6. to aske whether Christ merited to himselfe (which the Schoolmen do) is no lesse foolish curiosity, then temerarious definition, where they affirme the same &c. by what merits could man obtayne that he should be the Iudge of the world, the head of Angels? And the same is taught byControu. 2. p. 207. Pa∣raus de Iu∣stif l 5. c. 3. p. 1227. Danaeus, and Paraeus. Tyndall thinketh that,In Fox his Act. & Mon. edit. 1610. p. 1138. For as much as concerneth plea∣sing of God, no worke is better then another To make water, to wash dishes, to be a Schoomaker, or Apostle, is all alike. And this do∣ctrine Foxe himselfe thinketh to be free from heresy. Luther, If I should see heauen open, and that I could merit it by taking a strawApud Scioppium in Ecclesiastico. c. 7.
from the ground, I would not take vp the straw. So poore esteeme haue Prot. of all merits of good workes. SECT. II. It is proued by Scriptures that workes proceeding from Faith and Charity, do truly merit increase of Grace and Glory. TO decyde this by Scripture, such texts proue our Ca∣tholike Doctrine as teach lyfe eternall to be called , merces, wages, hyre, or reward.Mat. 5.12. Reioyce for your reward is very great in heauen.Mat. 20.8. Call the workemen, and pay them their hyre. That by reward and hyre in these places is vnderstood lyfe eternall, it is so manifest, that I thinke none will deny it: And that this reward is due not only in regard of Gods pro∣mise, but also in regard of the workes, these words cōuince: Call the workemen & pay them their hyre: Neyther can any with∣out great abuse in speach entitle with the name of wages, hyre or reward, a guift of a King promised vpon meere libe∣rality without all respect of desert and worke in the recey∣uer. If the reward of heauen be giuen according to the mea∣sure and proportion of our workes and labours, then in the bestowing of that reward, respect is not had only of the pro∣mise and bounty of God, but also of the dignity and desert of the workes.Mat. 16.17. Rom. 2 6. Apoc. 22.12. The Sonne of Man shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels: and then will he render to euery man according to his workes.Luc. 6.38. With the same measure that you do meat, it shallbe measured to you agayne.2. Cor. 9.6. He that soweth sparingly, sparingly also shall reape, and he that soweth in blessings, of blessings also shall reape.1 Cor. 3.8. Euery one shall receyue his owne reward according to his owne la∣bour.Luc. 7.47. Many sinnes are forgiuen her because, she hath loued much: but to whomelesse is forgiuen, he loueth lesse. These and sundry o∣ther such places conuince that the greatnes or smalnes of our reward, is proportionable to the greatnes or smalnes of the dignity and worth of our workes: which conuinceth the workes to be meritorious.
Good workes are further sayd to be the cause, why life Eternall is giuen vs.Mat. 25.34. Come you blessed of my father, possesse you the Kingdome &c. for I was hungry, and you gaue me to eate &c. Because thou hast beene faythfull ouer a few things,Mat. 25.23. I will place thee ouer many things; enter into the ioy of thy Lord.Apoc. 7.14.15. sect. 1. Io 3.22. These are they which are come out of great tribulation, and haue washed their robes and made them whyte in the blood of the Lambe, therefore they are be∣fore the throne of God &c.2. Cor. 4.17. Our tribulation which presently is mo∣mentane and light, worketh aboue measure exceedingly an eternall wayght of glory in vs. For the auoyding of this place,Ag. Rhem. Test. 2. Cor. 4.17. Fulke and other English Translatours of the Byble, do insteed of worketh, translate, prepareth, whereas the Greeke Word, , signifyeth worketh, and someOf 1576. English Bybles translate, causeth; yea Fulke himselfe confesseth that,In de∣fence of the Engl. Tran∣slation. p. 173. That transla∣tion of preparing, is not so proper. The reward of good workes is sayd to be giuen of Iu∣stice.2. Tim. 4.8. There is layd vp for me a Crown of Iustice, which our Lord will render to me, in that day, a iust Iudge: and not only to me, but to thē also that loue his coming.2. Thes. 1.4.5.6. Our selues glory in you &c. for your patience and fayth in all your persecutions &c. for an example of the iust Iudgement of God, that you may be counted worthy of the King∣dome of God &c. If yee be iust with God to repay tribulation to them that vexe you, and to you that are vexed rest with vs in the reuelation of our Lord Iesus from heauen with the Angels &c.Heb. 6.10. God is not vn∣iust to forget our workes And hence it is, that our good workes are calledLuc 1.6. Apoc. 19.8. , Iustifications. A promise made vpon Condition of some worke, the worke being performed, is of Iustice to be kept, and the worker truly deserueth it: but life Eternall is promised to good workes.Iac. 1.12. Blessed is the man that suffereth tentation for when he hath beene proued, he shall receiue the Crowne of life, which God hath promised to them that loue him.1. Tim 4.8 Piety is profitable to all things, hauing promise of the lyfe that now is, and of that to come.Mat 19.29. Euery one that hath left house or brethren &c. for my sake, shall receyue an hundred fould, and shall possesse lyfe euerlasting. To be worthy, to merit or deseue, signify all one thing. Christ sayth,Lu. 10.7. The workeman is worthy of his hyre.Col. 1.10.
That you may walke worthy of God, in all things pleasing, fructifying in all good workes.2. Thess. .5. See Luc. 20.35. & 21.36. That you may be counted worthy of the King∣dome of God; for the which also you suffer.Ap 3.4. They shall walke with me in whytes, because they are worthy. And,Sa. 3.5 God proued them and found them worthy of him. Now whereas Prot. for Worthy, translate, Meete, it is so vnworthily done, that Fulke him∣selfe sayth,Defence of the Engl. Transl p. 276. For my part I wish they had retayned the vsuall signification of that word, and sayd, worthy of himselfe, God being a lust Iudge, & not accepter of persons, doth thereupon giue to euery one according to his merits.Rom. 2.11. Gal. 2.6. There is no accep∣tion of persons with God.1. Pet. 1.17. Act. 10.35. If you inuocate the Father, him which without the acception of persons, iudgeth according to euery ones worke. But the Scriptures are so vnanswerable and conuincing in behalfe of good workes, that Luther for want of other answere doth fly to his desperate and damnable refuge, say∣ing,Colloq. Islb de Chri∣sto. fol. 96. tom. 1. Ger. Wit. part 2. fol. 190 tom. 5 len. fol 500. in Colloq. de Sanct. fol. 15. de tenta∣tionibus fidei, fol. 288. om. 6. Ger. Ie. fol. 86. tom. 7. Ger. Wit. fol. 483. Although the Papists dobring a great heape of Scriptures, in which good workes are commanded, yet I nothing care for all the words of Scripture, although more then those were yet produced. Thou Papist dost greatly contemne, and with the Scripture makest thy selfe couragious; which yet is inferiour to Christ, as Lord. Therefore I am nothing moued therewith. Go too then, rely vpon the seruant as much as thou wilt, but I do rely vpon Christ the true mayster, Lord and Empe∣rour of Scipture. To him I do assent, and know that he will lye to me in nothing, nor will lead me into Errour. I do rather make choyce to honour and belieue him, then that, with all the sayings of Scripture, I will suffer my selfe to be remoued from my opinion a nayles breadth. So conuincing then are the Scriptures, for the merits of wor∣kes, as Prot. are inforced to disclayme from the Scriptures, and to appeale only to Christ himselfe, as though the do∣ctrine of Christ and the Scriptures were contrary.
SECT. III. The Fathers do expound the Scriptures in proofe of Merit of Workes. S. Ambrose demaundeth,L. 10. Ep. 82. What saluation can be to vs, vnles we wash our sinnes away by Fasting, seeing the Scripture saith,Tob. 4. & 12. Fasting and almes do free from sinne: who are therfore these new Maisters, who exclude the merit of fasting? And vpon those wor∣des of the Psalmist, Be mindfull of thy word, he further saith,Ser. in Ps. 118. God wilbe agreed with, that if any following the rewards propounded to vertues, shall striue well, he may expect suite of reward, yea he may exact it. Tertullian asketh.In Scor∣piac. c. 6. How there are many Mansions with the Father, if it be not for the diuersity of merits? And how shall a1. Cor. 15.41. star differ from a star in glory, vnles it be for the diuersity of beames? Clemens Alex. writeth that,L. 4. Strom. There are with our Lord many rewards and Mansions by proportion of their liues. For who,Mat. 41. saith he, receiueth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall re∣ceiue the reward of a Prophet. And he that receiueth a Iust man in the name of a iust man, shall receiue the reward of a iust man; and who shall receiue one of these litle Disciples, shall not loose his reward. Let vs returne (saith S. Austine)De Grat. & lib. Arb. c. 6. & ho. 14. ex 50. & in Ps. 83 & in Ps. 100. to Paul the Apostle, whom we fynd without any good desertes, yea with many euill deserts to haue obtained the Grace of God, giuing good for euill. Let vs see what he saith now, his Passion drawing neere, writing to Timothie:2. Tim. 4.. For I am euen now to be sacrificed, and the tyme of my resolution is at hand. I haue fought a good fight, I haue consummate my Course, I haue kept the faith. These his good merites he now rehearseth, that af∣ter good merits he may obtayne the Crowne, who after euill merites obtayned Grace. Finally attend what followeth: Concerning the rest, saith he, there is layd vp for me a Crowne of Iustice, which our Lord will render to me in that day, a iust Iudge. To whom would the Iust Iudge giue a Crowne, if the mercifull Father had not giuen Grace? And how had that bene a Crowne of Iustice if grace had not gone be∣fore, which iustifyeth the wicked? How should it haue bene giuen as
due, if it had not formerly bene giuen gratis? And againe,Tract. 7. in Ioan. Al∣though one be stronger then another, one wyser then another one more iust then another one more holy then another in my Fathers house there are many mansions. None of them shalbe estranged from that house, where euery one is to receiue a Mansion according to his merit.Mat. 20.2.10. That penny truly is equall to all which the Maister of the family com∣mandeth to be giuen to all them who wrought in the vinyard, not in tha making difference who had laboured lesse and who more: by whch penny lyfe eternall is signifyed, where no man liueth longer then ano∣ther, because in eternity there is no different measure of liuing: but ma∣ny Mansions do signify the diuers dignities of merits in one lyfe eter∣nall: for one is the glory of the Sunne, another of the Moone, another of the Stars, for star differeth from star in glory, so also is the resurre∣ction of the dead. As stars the Saintes obtaine in the kingdome diuers Mansions, diuers excellencies as it were in the heaueus Yea saith he,Ser. 191. de Temore. We condemne the Errour of Iouinian, who saith there is no dif∣ference of merits in the world to come. Of this say the Centuri∣stes,ent. 5. c. 4 Col. 518. See Chemnit. Ex. part p. 4. 110. 142. and Wotton in defence of Perkins. p. 500. It appeareth, that Austine was of that opinion, that Virgins dedicated to holines, haue more merit with God then the faithfull that are maried: for because Iouinian thought the contrary, that they had no more merit, this in him reprehendeth Austine. S. Gregory in proofe of merits argueth thus;L. 4. Mor. c. 31. Be∣cause in this lyfe there is difference of workes, there shall no doubt in the other, be difference of honours, that by how much here one excel∣leth another in merite, there one shall exceed another in reward. Wherupon in the Ghospell the Truth saith,Io. 14.2. In the house of my Fa∣ther there are many Mansions. But in those same Mansions, there shall be in some respect an agreeing diuersity of rewards: because such force of loue doth ioyne vs in that peace, that what any one receiueth not in himselfe, he reioyceth to haue receiued in another. S. IrenaeusL. 4. c. 28. produceth Salomon saying,Prou. 19.17. He len∣deth our Lord that hath mercy on the poore. For God who needeth no man, taketh vnto himselfe our good workes to this end, that he may be∣stow vpon vs the retribution of his goods. Euen as our Lord said,Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, receiue the kingdome prepared for you, for I was hungry, and ye gaue me to eate &c. Sundry Prot. do reproue S. Austine for our Doctrine of the merits of good workes. Osiander saith,Cent 4. 4. c. 23. Austine
sometime in the Article of Iustification seemeth to attribute ouer much to the merits of good workes, which are done after a mans Conuersion. Others charge him for teaching that,English Ham. of Conf sect. 16 c 25. We obtaine remis∣sion of our sinnes and lyfe, not only for Christ his sake through faith, but also for the merit of our workes. Doctour Humfrey saith,In Ie∣suit. part. 2 p. 530. It may not be denyed, but that Irenaeus, Clemens, and others whom they ca Apostolicall haue litle Apostolically inserted into their wri¦tings the opnion of Freewill, and Merit of workes Caluin,Instit. l 3. c 15 n 1. I confssnat the writers of the ancient Church haue euery where vsed the nme of Merit, and I would to God, that by the abuse of this word they bad not giuen t sterity occasion of Errour. White guift acknowledgeth thDf. p. 472. Almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greeke Church, and Latin also for the most part were spotted with doctrines of Freewill of Merit &c. And the very same is affi med byAgainst the Plea of the Inno∣cent. c. 9. p. 120. D. Couell Wherfore the Fathers are most cleere in their Expositions of the Scriptures for merits of workes, and are therfore reproued by Prot. writers. SECT. IV. That Protestant writers teach our Catholicke Doctrine of Merit of Workes. PRotestantesSee Fulke g. Rhem. Test. in 2. Cor. 9. sect. 2. f. 312. In his Ans∣were to the Marginall notes. teach that good workes shalbe rewarded in heauen: And that,Ib. in Heb. 11. sect. 3. fol. 417. & in. 1. Cor. 9.23. sect. 7 f. 76. & in Mat. 19. sect. 13 f. 38. Men may or ought to do good in respect of reward. That,Cla∣pham in his Soueraigne remedy ag. Schisme. p. 46 Hook. in Eccl Pol. l 2. sct 8 p. 122. Haffent. loc. Theol l. 3. loc. 10. p. 4. the degrees of glory shalbe according to our workes. Friccius teacheth that,D Eccles. l. 4 c. 18. Christ doth plant in vs vertues of new lyfe, and imparting to vs Merit and Iustice with most singu∣lar fruite, he is sayd, to liue in vs, and by this meanes the glory of Christ is not obscured, but made cleere. Perkins acknowledgeth that,In his 4. Treatises. 4. treat. n. 9. The man iustifyed doth deserue and merit at Gods hands the kingdome of heauen and eternall lyfe in, and by Christ. The Confession of Auspurge speaking of Fasting, saith,Harm. of Confess. p. 495. These Exercises be good in the godly, and are meritorious workes. And the like is more then insinuated by MEccl. Pol. l. 5 sect. 72. p. 208. Hooker. The same Confession also acknowledgeth
good workes to be,Harm. of Conf. p. 273. a righteousnes worthy of reward: andIb. p. 273. Spirituall Sacrifices deseruing reward. And that,Ib. p. 229. Re∣pentance deserued that God should alter his purpose touching Niniue. And the like is taught by otherIb. p. 300. And Spang∣burg in his Margar. Theol. de Sa∣cram. p. 48. 50. Hook. Eccl Pol. l. 5. sect. 72. Prot. amongst whom Melancthon saith that,Loc. Com. de bonis operibus. After we apprehended our Reconcilia∣tion by faith, the worthines of our workes is not (then) to be extenua∣ted, for the Scripture setteth honourably forth this Iustice of workes. Caluin saith,Instit. l. 3. c. 15. §. 3. Our Lord calleth the good workes which he hath bestowed vpon vs, ours, and testifyeth that they are not only acceptable to him, but that they shall haue reward. And a litle after, Therfore good workes do please God, neither are they vnprofitable to the workers, but rather in liew of reward they bring the greatest benefits of God. So certaine it is, euen by the Confession of Protestants, that good workes proceeding from Grace, do truly merite Re∣ward. SECT. V. Obiections from Scriptures against Merit of Workes, answered. SOme vrge that,Rom. 8.18. The Passions of this tyme are not condigne to the glory to come. Answ. The Passions of this tyme con∣sidered in their owne nature, or only in reguard of their short continuance, are not worthy of the forsai glory, which hindreth not their due worth considered as procee∣ding from faith and Charity. The Passion of Christ himselfe in reguard of that immense glory, which therby he purcha∣sed to himselfe, and that vnspeakable good which he meri∣ted for man, was but short, and yet he truly merited therby his owne glory, and our redemption. So likewise the plea∣sures of this world are but few and of litle esteeme, in respect of eternall and most painfull damnation. In like sort it is most true that,Cor. 4.18. Our tribulation which presently is momentane, and light, worketh aboue measure exceedingly an eternall waight of glory in vs. Others vrge those places wherin our Reward is said to
be giuen vs of mercy and not of Iustice,Ps. 10.4. Who crowneth thee in mercy and commserations.Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the mercifull, for they shall obtaine mercy. Answ. Our reward (as S.Ep. 105. & l. de correp. et. gra. c. 13. Greg. in Ps. 7. Poenis. Austine & S. Gregory do expound) is attributed to mercy, not because merit hath not a true reward, but because our merits are gi∣uen of mercy; for no man can merit vnles he be first iusti∣fyed, which first Iustificaion is not merited by workes, but giuen gratis, and of mercy. To the same effect are vrged these textes,Isa. 55.1. Come ye and buy without siluer, and without all change wyne and milke.Dan. 9.18. Not in our Iustifications do we prostrate prayers before thy face, but in thy many Commiserations. Answere. Wyne and milke (according to S.In Com∣ment. Hierome) do not signify Eternall glory, but pre∣sent Grace, which though it be not obtained without workes, yet not for workes but gratis. And in signe that wine and milke do signify Grace, S. Hierome testifyeth, that Christians were accustomed to giue to such as were newly baptized, wyne and milke to tast. Daniel prayeth not here for eternall glory, but for deliuery out of temporall Capti∣uity, into which the people of God through their sinnes were cast. But many vrge that,Luc. 17.10. when you shall haue done all things that are commanded you, say, we are vnprofitable seruants; we haue done that which we ought to do. Answ. According to S.L. 8. in Lucam. Ambrose Christ commandeth heerby, that we acknow∣ledge that which we are of our selues, to wit, vnprofitable seruants, vnable to fullfill those things which he comman∣deth, whereas by his grace we are made profitable, accor∣ding to that of the Apostle,2. Tim. 2.21. If any man therefore shall clense himselfe from these, he shalbe a vessell vnto honour, sanctifyed and profitable to our Lord, prepared to euery good worke. 2. According to S.Ser. 3. de verb. Dom. Austine, we may be sayd to be vnprofitable ser∣uants, when he haue done all things that are commanded vs, because we do nothing but that which we ought, ney∣ther can we exact any reward, had not God of his volun∣tary and liberall Couenant agreed with vs: for of our own condition we are the basest slaues of God, bound without expectation of all reward to performe all workes himselfe
pleaseth. And this our base estate, for the preseruation of humility, Christ heere directeth vs to acknowledge: which nothing hindreth, but that, supposing the bountifull pact and promise of God, we may throgh his grace truly merit, and expect reward, himselfe saying,Mat. 20.13.14. and see ver. 2. Didst thou not coue∣nant with me for a peny? take that is thyne, and go. 3. SIn Illud, Elatum est Cor Isaiae. Chri∣sostome obserueth that Christ sayth not, you are vnprofita∣ble seruants, but say, you are &c. willing vs after our good deeds to thinke humbly, lest they be corrupted with pryde; for that those which worke euill be only vnprofitable, and that those who worke good, profitable, our Sauiour testify∣eth saying,Mat. 25.20.21.30. Well fare thee good and faythfull seruant, because thou hast beene faythfull ouer a few things, I will place thee ouer ma∣ny things; enter into the ioy of thy Lord. And the vnprofitable seruant cast yee out into the vtter darknes. Agayne it is obiected that,Rom. 6.23. The stipend of Sinne, death: but the grace of God, lyfe euerlasting: And,Rom. 4.4 To him that wor∣keth, the reward is not imputed according to grace, but according to debt. Answ. The Apostle (as S.L. de Gra & lib. Arb. c. 8. 9. & ep. 105. in Enchyr. c. 107.) Austine teacheth) might truly haue sayd, The wages of Iustice, lyfe eternall, as he sayd, The wages of Sinne, death; but yet he did not, lest any should thinke, that as of our selues we haue sinne, so likewise we haue Iu∣stice: wherefore life eternall is called Grace, not because it is not the reward of merit, but because our merites proceed from grace. In the second place S. Paul speaketh only against such workes, as are done without the Grace of God, only by theSee Eph. 2.8. naturall power of our freewill. Lastly, it is generally vrged, that if any thing be attri∣buted to our merits, iniury is thereby done to Christes me∣rits, as though they were not sufficient. Answ. The merits of the iust are not to be opposed to the merits of Christ, but springing from them, whatsoeuer prayse they haue, redoun∣deth to the merits of Christ.Io. 15.5. He is the vyne, we are the bran∣ches.Io. 15.4. As the branch cannot beare fruit of it selfe, vnles it abyde in the vyne; so we neyther without Christ. Now as i nothing detracteth from the glory of the vyne, that the branches are fruitfull, but rather augmenteth the same; so doth it neither diminish the glory of Christ, but ra∣ther
addeth thereunto, if his seruants through Fayth, Chari∣ty and other vertues, inspired and giuen by him, do produce such workes, as are truly iust and meritorious. Neyther are the merits of man requisite for any insufficiency of the me∣rits of Christ, but rather for proofe of their great vertue and efficacy: for the workes of Christ not only merited with God our eternall Saluation, but also that we might obtaine the same through his grace and merits, by our owne merits. To giue light to the world by the sunne, or to giue heate or cold therto by fyre or water, doth nothing derogate from the power of God, but rather more proueth his Omnipo∣tency, wherby he could worke those things, not only him∣selfe, but likewise could giue to his Creatures, the power of working. Laus Deo, & B. Virgini.
Faults escaped in the Print. In the Text. Page, Line, Errour, Correction. 39. 8. contending contenting 57. 24. was opinion was of opinion 71. 21. satisfaction sanctification 73. 29. certainty certainly 86. 6. to so 89. 8. promiseth premonisheth 96. 27. vnauoidable vnauaylable 97. 12. for or Ibid. 13. Elections Election 115. 2. teacheth teach 117. 34. know it, know not the truth, but also the that know it, 130. 10. or of 145. 7. alike Ass-like 244. 12. word world 247. 12. ction perfection 261. 37. his this 306. 9. intrauit initiauit 354. 29. not we not what we 374. 28. many may 406. 18. perato, operato, 411. 23. boundant aboundant 414. 17. for or 433. 5. alleating alledging 484. 8. another other 488. 26. reply rely 505. 20. do thou 512. 23. neuer euer Idid. 26. familiar familiarly 531. 9. reseruation reseration Ibid. 15. whence when 53. 27. he that that he
170. penult. dele the 582. 25. of you O you 661. 26. but not 689. 12. Patron Patrones 698. 3. facts fact 719. 31. dole to will 721. 4. Godt, hrough God, through In the Margent. Page, Figure, Errour, Correction. 8. fig. 9. 81. 18. 13. 11. 52. cap. 52. 38. 40. 2. 32. 40. 56. 218. 288. 57. 32. 82. 8. 2. 64. 28. 573. 533. 71. 40. 3. 13. 76. 6. 324. 243. 83. 7. 235. 335. 90. 3. 106. 166. 98. 30. 16. ib. 103. 12 c. c. 4. 117. 21. Io 1.27. 1. Io. 2.27. Ibid. 24. 62. 26. 255. 8. 53. 35. 276. 11. 180. 380. 287. 5. in 8.14. in Mat. 8.14. 325. 34. Ep. 5. 1. Ep. 5. 343. 49. 309. 306. 396. 17. 10. 18. 401. 37. 145: 415. 405. 20. 2. 24. 446. 45. 67. 77. 448. 3. Mat. 11. Mat. 3.11. Jbid 5. 1408. 1048.
Pag. 491. 61. 266. 260. 498. 106. 16. 61. 504. 21. &c. &c. p. 211. 515. 19. 6. 60. 587. 68. 18. 12. 588. 5. 597. 579. 590. 4. 3. 33. 595. 14. 442. 422. 689. 3. 82. 62. 690. 2. 23. 23.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE, Directing where to find the particular Points handled in this Booke, throgh euery Chap∣ter and Section, with reference to the Fi∣gures, where they are to be found. A. Absolution. FROM sinne, giuen by Priestes, See Pen∣nance. Abstinence. FRom certaine meates: See Fastes. Absurdity. OF Prot. Reall Presence. ch. 21. sect. 2. Adoration. OF the B. Sacrament. ch. 21. sect. 1. fig. 5. Sect. 5. fig. 30. & f. 7. Angels. SEe Intercession and Inuoca∣tion of Angels and Saintes. Antichrist. PRot. lyes to make the Pope Antichrist. Ch. 10. sect. 1. f. 14. Prot. belieue the Pope to be properly Antichrist. ib. f. 17. Antichrist is not yet come, nor any Pope Antichrist. sect. 2. He is to be one man. ib. f. 5. An open Aduersary to Chri∣stian Religion. ib. f. 14. Is to sit in Hierus. ib. f. 20. His Raigne short. ib. f. 23 Enoch and Elias are to oppose him. ib. f. 63. See also for these pointes the Fa∣thers. sect. 3. & Prot. sect. 4. Obiect. answered. sect. 5. Apostles. ERred in their doctrine ac∣cording to Prot. ch. 2. sect. 1. f. 29.
B. Baptisme. NEcessary to saluation. ch. 20. sect. 1. f. 1. sect. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes cōcerning Baptisme. sect. 1. f. 7. They thinke it not necessary. ib. f. 23. And are ther∣in condemned with ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 31. Their er∣rors concernig Baptisme. ib. f. 40. Obiect. answered. ib. sect 5. C. Chastity. COunsailed. cha. 11. sec. 2. f. 1. sec. 3. f. 1. sec. 4. f. 7. vowed. ch. 12. sec. 2. f. 13. sec. 3. f. 1. by the B V. Mary. ib. sec. 3. f. 13. sect. 4. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Christ. THe first man that entred in∣to Heauen. ch. 14. sec. 2. f. 1. See Limbus Patrum. Church. ROman Church mother of all Christians. Ep. Ded. to the Prot. Nob. Best Interpre∣ter of Scriptures. Prep. sec. 10. What is vnderstood here by the Church. ib. sec. 11. Iudge of Controuersies. ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes con∣cerning the Church. ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 15. Church cannot erre in matters of faith and manners. ch. 2. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes in disgrace of Church and Councels. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. Accor∣ding to Prot. the whole Church may erre. ib. f. 15. And the same was taught by ancient Here∣tickes. ib. f. 22. Obiections a∣gainst the Churches not erring answered. ib. sec. 5. Commandements. THe 10. Commandements re∣iected by some Prot. ch. 5. sec. 1. f. 18. They are possible to be kept. ch. 32. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. They deny them to be possible. ib. f. 13. And therin agree with for∣mer heretickes. ib. f. 24. Their Errors. ib. f. 29. Obiect. answe∣red. sec. 5. Communion. VNder one kind lawfull. ch. 22. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Prot. vntruthes sect. 1. f. 11. They defend the vse in both kindes. sec. 1. f. 13. And are ther∣in condemned in ancient Here∣tickes. ib. f. 16. Their grosse Er∣rors. ib. f. 19. Obiect. answered, sec. 7. Concupiscence. WIthout consent not sinne. ch. 28. sec 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. teach the contrary. ib. sec. 1. f. 7. And agree therin with former Heretickes. ib. f. 9. Ob∣iect. answered. sec. 5. Confession. OF sinnes. See in Pennance. Confirmation. A True Sacrament. ch. 19. sec. 1. f. 2. sec. 2. f. 9. sec. 3. f. 7. sec. 4. f. 1.
Councells. AVthority to determine Cō∣trouersies. ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 3. sec. 2. f. 31. sec. 4. f. 28. Cannot erre. ch. 2. sec. 2. f. 26. sec. 3. f. 7. sec. 4. f. 19. Counsailes Euangelicall. PRoued. ch. 11. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes concer∣ning Counsailes. ib. f. 3. They deny all Counsailes. ib. f. 10. For which ancient Heretickes were condemned. ib. f. 14. Prot. Errors concerning Counsailes. ib. f. 20. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Crosse. TO be honoured. ch. 17. sec. 3. f. 12. The signe therof to be made. ib. f. 17. sec. 4. f. 26. D. DEcrees. See Councells. E. Errours. SEe in euery Chap. sec. 1. §. Prot. Errours. Eucharist. SEe Reall Presence. Extreme-Vnction. A True Sacrament. ch. 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. F. Fastes prescribed. ANd abstinence from cer∣taine meates proued to be lawfull. ch. 27. sec. 1. f. 1. sec 2. 4. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. They impugne them. ib. f 15. They agree with ancient Here∣tickes. ib. f. 18. Their Errors. ib. f. 33. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Fathers. AVthority to interpret Scri∣ptures. ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 5. sec. 4. f. 47. Freewill. PRoued ch. 31. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec. 1. f. 24. Prot. deny it. ib. f. 26. And agree therin with ancient Heretikes. ib. f. 30. Their grosse Errors. ib. f. 36. Obiections ans∣wered. sec. 5. H. Hell. SEe Limbus Patrum. Heresies. SEe sec. 1. of euery Chapter. 5. Prot. agree with ancient He∣retickes. I. Iesus. THis name is to be honou∣red. ch. 17. sec. 4. f. 21. Images of Saintes. MAy be made, and worship∣ped, proued. ch. 17. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes. sec. 1. f. 9. Prot impugne Images ib. f. 14. For which ancient Heretickes were condemned. ib. f. 18. Prot.
Errors in this. ib. f. 24. The I∣mage of God himselfe, or the B. Trinity may be made. sec. 2. f. 12. They may be placed in Chur∣ches. ib. f. 21. f. 3. & worship∣ped. f 30. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. The second Commandement not taken away in behalfe of Images. sec. 3. f. 6. sec. 5. f. 33. Indulgenc s. PRoued. ch. 26 sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3 4. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec. 1. They impugne Indulgēces ib. f. 25. And are therin condēned, with ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 28. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Intercesion & Inuocation. OF Angels and Saintes pro∣ued ch. 16. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes. sec. 1. f. 11. They deny this Intercession & Inuocation. ib. f. 18. And are therin condemned with ould Heretickes. ib. f. 27. Prot. Errors herin. ib. f. 34. The Angels and Saintes do know our Prayers. sec. 2. f. 1. sec. 4. Angels and Saintes do pray for vs. ib. f. 26. sec. 3. 4. We may pray to them. sec. 2. ib. f. 45. sec. 3. 4. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Iudge of Controuersies. SEe Church, and Scriptures. Iustice and faith may be lost. PRoued. ch. 34. sec. 2. f. 20. sec. 2. f. 20. sec. 4. f. 5. Iustice inherent. PRoued. ch. 35. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. deny it. ib. sec. 1. 1. 14. And therin agree with an∣cient Heretickes. ib. f. 17. Their Errors. ib. f. 21. Obiect. answe∣red. sec. 5. Iustfication by faith & workes. PRoued ch. 36. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes. ib. sec. 1. f. 7. They teach only faith to iu∣stify. ib. f. 11. wherin they agree with condemned Heretikes. ib. f. 17. Thir Errours. ib. f. 20. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. K. Knowledge. KNowledge of true Religion necessary. Pref. to the Prot. Read. how to be gained. ib. KNowledge of our Predesti∣nation, & saluation not in∣fallible. ch. 34. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec. 1. f. 9. They teach that euery man ought infallibly to belieue his owne Predestination and Sal∣uation. ib. f. 11. Prot. Errors. ib. f. 18. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. L. Limbus Patrum. CHrist descended into Hell. ch. 14. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. in the vnderstanding of this Arti∣cles are deuided amōgst them∣selues. ib. sec. 1. f. 11. Their Er∣rors in this ib. 18. Before Chri∣stes descending the soules of the iust were in Limbus. sec. 2. f. 10. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Luthers grosse errors. c. 9.
sec. 1. f. 30. and sec sec. 1. of euery Chapter. §. Protestant Errors. M. Masse. A True Sacrifice. ch. 23. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 1. 4. Prot. Vntru∣thes. ib. sec. 1. f. 10. They deny all proper externall Sacrifice. ib. f. 28. And are therin con∣demned with ancient Here∣tickes. ib. f. 31. Obiect. answe∣red. sec. 5. Matrimony. A True Sacrament. ch. 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Methode. OBserued throughout this Booke. Pref. to the Prot. Reader. Moyses. A Priest. cha. 1. sec. 2. f. 4. sec. 3. f. 1. N. Nobility. WHerin it consisteth. Ep. De∣dic. to the Prot. Nob. No∣bility by birth much to be ho∣noured. ib. by vertue more. ib. Christian Nobility what, and most to be esteemed. ib. To de∣generate from Nobility disho∣norable. ib. O. Omnipotncy of God DEnyed by Prot. ch. 21. sec. 1. f. 75. Orders. A True Sacrament. ch. 19. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. P. Pastours of the Church. ARe to decide controuersies. ch. 1. sec. 2. f. 32. sec. 4. f. 56. According to some Prot. the Church for some ages had no Pastors. ch. 2. sec. 1. f. 25. Pa∣stors of the Church are to be obeyed. ch. 2. sec. 2. f. 42. Pennance a true Sacrament. PRoued. ch. 19. sec. 2. fol. 15. ch. 24. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Priestes power to forgiue sin∣nes. ib. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. f. 1. sec. 3. sec. 4. Confession of sinnes ne∣cessary. ib. sec. 1. f. 4. sec. 2. f. 14. sec. 3. f. 1. sec. 4. Prot. vn∣truthes. ib. sec. 1. f. 18. They re∣iect this Sacrament, and all ne∣cessity of Confession. ib. f. 20. And are therein condemned with former Heretickes. ib. f. 34. Their dangerous Errours. ib. 43. Pennance imposed after Confession. sec. 3. f. 17. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. S. Peters Primacy. PRoued. ch. 8. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. giue this Primacy some to Ministers, others to the Laity, others to Temporall Princes, men or women. ib. f. 10. Deniall of S. Peters Prima∣cy condemned for heresy. ib. f. 14. Primacy denyed to Christ
as man by Prot. ib. f. 16. Ob∣iect. answered. sec. 5. Pope. POpe cannot erre in defy∣ning matters of faith. ch. 2. sec. 2. f. 48. sec. 3. f. 10. Successor to S. Peter in Primacy. ch. 9. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vn∣truthes against the Pope. sec. 1. f. 16. Some Prot. made a woman their supreme head. ib. f. 20. Others admit none but Christ. ib. f. 21. The deniall of his Pri∣macy condemned in ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 25. Obiect. ans∣wered. sec. 5. Pouerty. COunsailed. ch. 11. sec. 2. f. 5. sec. 3. f. 5. Pouerty vowed. ch. 12. sec. 2. f. 10. sec. 3. f. 2. 6. sec. 5. f. 4. Priestes. ARe not to be maried. ch. 13. see. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes for Priestes mariage. ib. sec. 1. f. 1. They allow their Bishops and ministers to marry. ib. f. 11. For which they are codemned with ancient heretickes. ib. f. 13. Prot. Errors cōcerning Priestes mariage. ib. f. 18. Obiect. answe∣red. sec. 5. Priestes power to for∣giue sinnes. See in Pennance. Priuat spirit. NOt sufficiēt to decide Con∣trouersies, or to interpret Scriptures. ch. 4. sec. 1. f. 1. 2 3. 4. 5. Challenged by Prot. and ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 6. 8. Obiect. answered. ib. sec. 6. Punishment, or Satisfaction. REmaineth, the ault being pardoned. ch. 25. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes. ib. sec. 1. f. 14. They deny all necessity of any Satisfaction. ib. f. 20. Ob∣iect. answered. sec. 5. Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead. PRoued. ch. 15. sec. 1. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes concerning Purgatory. sec. 1. f. 9. Prot. deny Purgatory. ib. f. 11. And are ther∣in cōdemned with ancient He∣ret. ib. f. 14. Prot. Errors con∣cerning Purg. ib. f. 20. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. R. Reall Presence. PRoued. ch. 21. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 3. 4. 5. 6. 10. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec 1. f. 21. Their Reall Pre∣sence what. ib. sec. 1. f. 33. sec. 2. They are condemned with an∣cient Heret ib. sc 1 f. 38. And teach grosse Errors. ib sec. 1. f. 68. Obiect. answered. sec. 7. 8. 9. Reseruation of the B. Sacra∣ment. ch. 21. sec. 1. f. 4. sec. 5. f. 15. S. Scaments. THey conferre Grace. ch. 18. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5 Prot. vntruthes concerning the Sa∣craments ib sec. 1. f. 27. They e∣quall them only with the Sa∣craments of the old Law. ib. f. 36. They are condemned with
ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 39. They dislike the word Sacra∣ment. ib. f. 44. And teach that the Deuill may administer Sa∣cramentes. ib. f. 47. That wo∣men may rech. f. 49. That all Christians are Priestes. f. 48. And that Intention is not ne∣cessary in the Aministration of them. ib. f 50. Obiect. answe∣red. sec. 6. Sacraments seauen. ch. 19 sec 1. f. 2. sec. 2. 3. 4 5. Prot. vntruthes concerning the num∣ber of Sacraments ib. sec. 1. f. 33. They allow only o. ib. f. 58. herin they are condemned with ancient Heret. ib f. 55. They hould grosse Errors her∣in. ib. f. 70. Obiect. answered. sec. 6. Sacrifice. SEe Masse. Scriptures. ARe the true word of God, and in all thinges to be be∣lieued. Prop. sec. 1. f 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Reiected by some Prot. ib & ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 53. To corrupt or reiect Scriptures impious. Pre. sec. 5. Scriptures true sense ne∣cessary to be found Prep. sec. 6. Scriptures how said to be the booke of Heretickes. ib. f. 7. They admit seuerall true senses. ib. sec 7. The literall sense af∣foardeth the strongest argu∣ment. ib. sec. 7 ep. 16. Misticall sense not so forcible. ib. f. 13. How to discerne the literall sense from the figuratiue. ib. sec. 8. And how to fynd out the true sense. ib. Rules obserued by Prot for the fynding out of the true sense, refuted. ib sec. 9. The certaine Rule therof is the Church. ib. sec. 10. What Ca∣tholickes heere vnderstand by the Church, ib. sec. 11. Scriptu∣res according to some Prot. sole Iudge of Controuersies. ch. 1. sec. 1. f. 24. according to others the Priuate spirit. ib. f. 30. Appealing to Scriptures v∣sed b Prot. cōdemned by the Fathers in Ancient Heretickes. ib. f. 35. Prot. Errors against te Authority of.  Scripture. ib. f. 53. Scriptures difficult to be vnderstood. ch. 3. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5. According to Prot. most easy. ib. f. 3. Conference of Scripture doth not make it ea∣sy. ib. sec. 6. Obiections answe∣red. ib. sec. 7. Sundry Bokes of Script. reiected by Prot. ch. . sec. 1. f. 18. Sinnes. MOrtall and Veniall. ch. 29. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Accor∣ding to Prot. all Mortall. ib. sec. 1. f. 7. wherin they are con∣demned with Ancient Here∣tickes. ib. f. 12. Their grosse Er∣rors. ib. f. 17. Obiect answered. sec. 5. God is not the author of sinne. ch. 30. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. 5. Prot. lyes. ib. sec. 1. f. 19. They teach that he is the Au∣thor of sinne. ib. f. 12. And agree therin with former Heretickes. ib. f. 43. Obiect. answer. sec. 6.
T. Toby, Iudith &c. ARe Canonicall Scriptures. ch. 5. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. De∣nied as Apocriphall by Prot. ib. f. 9. Obiections answered. sec. 5. Traditions. PRoued. ch. 7. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. lyes concerning Traditions. ib. sec. 1. f. 6. Tra∣ditions denied by Prot. ib. f. 16. And ancient Heretickes. f. 21. Sundry particular Traditiōs by Prot. sec. 4. f. 4. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Translations of the Bible. THe vulgar Latin proued to be best. ch. 6. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. f. 34. Reiected by some Prot. sec. 1. f. 15. Luthers Translation corrupt. sec. 2. f. 1. And so are all other Prot. Translations. ib. Obiect. against the Vulgar Translation answered. sec. 3. Transubstantiation. CHap. 21. sec. 1. 3. V. Vowes. VOwes of perfection lawfull. ch. 12. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. Vntruthes, concerning vowes. ib. f. 2. 1. f. 11. vowes im∣pugned by Prot. ib. f. 14. For which they are condemned with ancient Heret. ib. 20. Ob∣iections answered. sec. 5. W. Workes of the iust, are not all sinnes. PRoued ch. 33. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. teach all workes of the iust to be sinfull. ib. sec. 1. f. 5. Prot. Errors. ib. f. 9. Ob∣iect. answered. sec. 1. f. 5. Prot. Obiect. answered. sec. 5. Workes that are good do merit. PRoued ch. 37. sec. 1. f. 1. sec. 2. 3. 4. Prot. vntruthes. ib. sec. 1. f. 13. They deny all merit to workes. ib. f. 17. And therin agree with former Heretickes. ib. f. 21. Their Errors. sec. 1. f. 32. Obiect. sec. 5. Workes that are good, do iustify. SEe Iustification. FINIS.
