5866 99851640 16926
A Direction to the wa∣ters of lyfe. Come and beholde, How CHRIST shineth before the Law, in the Law, and in the Pro∣phetes: and withall the iudgements of God vpon all Nations for the neglect of his holy worde, where∣in they myght haue seene the same: Both which are layde before your eyes in this litle discourse, by ROGER COTTON Draper. Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Simson and William White, and are to be solde at their house in Fleete lane. 1590.
TO THE GODLIE AND LEARNED MAI∣STER HVGH BROVGHTON, TEACHER OF DIVI∣NITIE, GRACE AND peace in Christ. FOR as much as it hath pleased the Lorde (Right reuerent) to make your selfe vnto me a most comfortable Father: in that you haue begotten me vnto Christe, euen as Paule did Tymothie, nay rather as he did Onesimus, that is, much more then from a ser∣uant of Philemon, to be a brother of Pilemon, euen from a seruaunt of sinne, to be a seruaunt of Iesus Christe. For as much I say, as it hath pleased the Lord you shoulde beget me after this sort, I thought good to present vnto your learned view some part of the fruites of your owne labour in me begotten, not to the intent in any respect to benefite your selfe therewith (sauing that you wyll reioyce to see, that your labour on me bestowed is not altogeather lost) but onely to the intent to incourage others to the studie of the most absolute & perfect word of God: because that Satan our old enimie striueth styl most lyke a subtle Serpent, especially to perswade men to the contrarie: Therefore so much as in me lyeth, I labour to ouerthrow him therein, and to styrre vp others in lyke sort, to take vp the weapon of their warfare the worde of God
against him, and to haue them constantly to hold on in the meditation thereof, vntyll such time as they shal haue skill to handle that sworde of the spirite aright, and vntyll such tyme as they shall attayne vnto the sounde knowledge of euery poynt of that heauenly mysterie of our saluation: vn∣to the which high mysterie of saluation you haue ful often, as a most heauenly Orator, not onely called me, but also many more, to their vnspeakable comfort, euer warnyng vs in lyke maner to geue attendaunce for the furtheraunce thereof, vnto the reading of the same most pure and holy worde of God: Euen for this cause only haue I put foorth this lytle and vnlearned Treatise. VVherefore, seeing the Lorde hath made you a Paule (from the Apostle Paule, and other his felowes) to plant in me these thinges, and that it hath pleased his heauenly maiestie to geue the increase, I thought it meete to dedicate these some part of the fruites vnto you a speciall meanes thereof: humbly beseeching you to shielde them vnder your most graue & learned pro∣tection, that so the benefite thereof may redownde to them, for whose sakes I brought them foorth. The summe whereof is, to shew the brightnes of our sauiour Christ in all ages: according as it is sayd by the Apostle, Christ yester∣day, and to day, and the same for euer: As also to what ende the Lord hath created man: which is, to set soorth his praise and glory aboue all the creatures that he hath made: and lykewyse, how that can not be done but by the knowledge and direction of his owne most perfect worde: and howe that all nations and people that haue delighted or not de∣lighted herein, haue founde accordingly the louing kind∣nes, or the seueritie of the Lord. And thus I cease, beseech∣ing the Lord to blesse you with a long and happie lyfe euen to the begettyng of thousandes more, vnto the kingdome of the euer-lyuing God: that so your selfe may shine as a most glorious starre in the life to come. Amen. Yours begotten in the Lord, Roger Cotton.
TO THE READER. I Finde in the Booke of GOD, (most gentle Reader) that aMat. 10 32. 33 and Psal. 119. 46. man shoulde not be ashamed to speake of the testimonies of the Lorde, yf it were before Kinges: as also a charge ge∣uen,2. Tim. 2. 1. 2. that a man shoulde not let to delyuer those glorious thynges whiche hee hath heard of by many witnesses, to iust and faythfull men: to the intent that they also might be able to teach, and to delyuer the same vnto others, accor∣dyngDeut. 4. 9. 10. and. 6 6. to 10. and Ioel. 1. 3. as other Prophetes commaunde, saying: Tell you your chil∣dren of them, and let your children shew to their children, and their children to an other generation. For as much then as I finde suche a charge there geuen, I thinke it no shame to speake thereof at this time vnto you: but holde my selfe bounde, accordingMath. 25. 15. to 31. and Deut. 6. 6. to 10. to that talent which God hath geuen me, to make a rehearsall of those glorious thinges which to me haue been reuealed: to the intent that you also may come to the Booke of God, where you shalbe com∣passed with such a cloude of heauenly witnesses, both of perfect skill and also willingnes, that yf you will, you may be made able to de∣scribe at large vnto others, both the wysedome, prayse, power, glory, and state of that euerlastyng King and kingdome. Therefore as some haue sayd vnto me: Come and see the Booke of God, for there shall you finde the Messias: yea there shall you finde that gloryous King, whose wysedome is so great, that it farre exceedeth the wyse∣dome1. Kinges 4. 29. to end, of all the sonnes of the East, or of Egypt: Nay, there shall you see him whose wysedome so much excelleth other mens, that it farre surmounteth the wysedome eyther of Ethan, Heman Chal∣cole, or Derda. I say, as some haue sayde vnto me: Come and see the booke of God, that so you may beholde this glorious King, whose fame is spread throughout all the nations, euen so throughout this litle Discourse, say I vnto you: Therefore yf you will so do, I doubt
not but that you wyll say the lyke vnto others, and also say vnto me, it was a true report indeede that we heard of by you, concernyng1. Kinges 10. the wysedome of this King, and also the glory of his kingdome: how be it we scarce beleeued it, vntyll we came, and that our owne eyes had seene it. But now we perceyue that you tolde vs not the one halfe of the wysedome of this great King, nor yet of the glory of his kingdome: for indeede it farre surmounteth the fame that we heard thereof by you. Therfore happy are those men that stande in the courtes of this King: yea thrise happy are his seruauntes, which alwayes stande before his presence to heare his wysedome: I meaneMath. 12. 42. & Luke 11. 31. in the presence of that heauenly King, who farre excelleth Salo∣mon, euen Salomon, who so farre surmounted those aforenamed, and in whose presence is the fulnes of all ioy and gladnes. But yf you wyll not come to heare the wysedome of this great King, nor yet to see the glorie of his kingdome which so farre excelleth Salomons, he hath pronounced with his owne mouth, that the Queene of the South shall ryse in iudgement against you. And this is the summe of my lytle and vnlearned Treatise. Therefore yf you looke vnto the booke of God, whether this my vnskilfull draught woulde drawe you, I shall thinke my laboure well bestowed, and you your selfe shall remayne no longer, as that lytle Syster which hath no brestes: butCan. 8. 8. Can. 4. 2. you shall be lyke that flocke of Sheepe, where not one is barren a∣mongst them: and as that florishyng Tree fast planted by the Riuer side, whose leafe shall euer shew it selfe most fresh and greene, euenPsal. 1. 1. Kinges 7. 21. & Apoc. 3. 12. Can. 4. 4. to the bringing foorth of fruite in great abundance. And moreouer you shall be then as a Pillar in the house of the Lorde your God, and also as the Towre of Dauid most strongly buylt for your owne defence, and shall continually remayne in the eyes of this Salomon as one that findeth peace. The which peace, the Lord graunt youCan. 8. 10. may speedely inioy. Amen. Yours in the Lorde, R. C.
The reason why all Creatures ought to prayse the LORD, and why Man ought so to do aboue the rest. WHereas the holy Prophet prouo∣keth the Heauens, and all thinges therein, the Earth and Sea also,Psalm. 148. 5. and. 33. 9. with all thinges therein, to prayse the Lorde: he yeeldeth a reason why they ought so to doo, and that is, for that he spake the worde, and they were created: he commaun∣ded, and they were made. And ther∣fore,Actes. 17. 28. because that all creatures haue their breath and beeing by him, (as the Apostle sayth) the Prophet calleth them all, to sounde foorth the prayse and glory of their Creator: but especially he vrgeth Man to aduance the same aboue the rest, because that he most chiefly aboue all others, was thereunto appoynted. For, the Lorde speaking of his chosen Israel, sayth, This people haue I formed for my selfe, and therefore sayth he, They shall shew foorth my prayse and glory: asEsai. 43. 7. 21. Deutro. 7. 6. to. 11. also Moses taught them, that vnto that ende and purpose they were chosen. And lykewyse the Lorde speaking of the cal∣lyng of the Heathen, from all quarters of the earth, to be his Sonnes and Daughters in Christ: Them also, saith he, haueEsai. 43. 6. 7. 8. Esai. 42. 10. 11. 12. Psalm. 100. and. 117. Rom. 15. 9. 10. 1. 12. Psalm. 95. I created for my glory: and to none other ende, but that they shoulde shew foorth his prayse amongst the rest, as in diuers places of scripture may be seene. So that for this cause, were all the holy Prophetes and Apostles so much moued to call vpon Man, to set foorth the prayse and glory of God: and not onely because he was thereunto appoynted, but also so much the more, for that he hath done for him such wonderful and ex∣cellent
thynges: as first, to elect him in Christ vnto saluationEphesi. 1. 4. 2. Thess. 2. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Gen. 1. 26. 27. before the foundation of the worlde was layde. Secondly, to create him in so glorious an estate, euen after his owne image and lykenes, and as Lorde and King ouer all his creatures. Thirdly, to redeeme his soule from the iawes of Satan1. Pet. 1. 18. 19 Apo. 1. 5. 6. and. 5. 9. 10. with the precions blood of Christ his Sonne, as of a Lambe without spot and vndefiled. Fourthly, to exalt his horne onEphe. 2. 6. 1. Thess. 4. 17. Apo. 3. 21. high, euen to syt with his Sonne in the heauenly and highest places. Fifthly, to sanctifie, and to endue him with his holy spirite, whereby he may be led into all trueth. Sixthly, toIohn. 14. 26. and. 16. 13. lade him dayly with his manifolde and gratious benefites. And seuenthly, to sanctifie one day of seauen for his ownePsalm. 68. 19. glory, and to the ende, that man shoulde rest from his owneGen. 2. 2. 3. Ebre. 4. 4. 10 1 workes, and be workefull vnto God, in geuing due prayse and thankes vnto him for the former benefites receyued. And therefore as the holy Prophet sayth, Let all them that seekePsal. 40. 16. the Lord, reioyce and be glad in him: and let them that loue his saluation alwayes say, The Lord be praysed. Man ought dayly to consider for what cause the Lord shoulde so bountifully deale with him: and beholding the Heauens, be driuen thereby to confesse his owne duetie. SEeing that the Lorde hath created Man to none other ende, but to shew foorth his prayse and glory: and seeing that he la∣deth him dayly with his gratious bene∣fites, to the ende to induce him therunto: O that men woulde therefore enter into deepe meditation with the holy Prophet, and so consider with them selues, yea, and consider agayne, and agayne: that when they beholde the Heauens, euen thePsalm 8. 3. workes of Gods fingers, the Sunne, the Moone, and Stars, which he hath ordeyned, what man shoulde be, that he shoulde be so mindfull of him? yea, or what sonne of Adam he shoulde be, that he shoulde thus consider of? for he hath made some
one to haue dominion ouer the workes of his handes, and hath put all thinges in subiection vnder his feete: SurelyEbrew. 2. 5. to the ende. therefore I wyll seeke him out, to whom this glory doth be∣long, and I wyll also seeke the cause, why the Lord hath thus aduaunced me. For he hath geuen me the vse of all these his goodly creatures: and therefore once agayne say I, What is man, O Lorde, that thou shouldest deale in this sort with him? Surely thou hast thus aduaunced him for some great purpose: and I can see none other ende, but to aduaunce thy prayse and glory, and that in the highest degree: for when as I behold the Heauens, I see that they haue neither toonge norPsalm. 19. voyce, and yet I see that they declare thy glory, and the Fir∣mament doth shew forth the workes of thy handes. Day vnto day vttereth the same thing, and nyght vnto nyght teacheth such knowledge, there is no speach nor language where their sounde is not heard: and surely to none other intent, but thatRoma. 1. 20. men shoulde be without excuse. Wherefore, I for my part wyll dayly say, as the holy Prophet did, My soule praysePsalm. 103. 1. thou the Lord, and al that is within me, prayse his holy name. My soule prayse thou the Lord, and forget not all his bene∣fites. Yea, and I wyll also call and say, Let all the nationsPsalm. 117. prayse the Lorde, and let all the people shew foorth the glory of God, euen their saluation. If man be styrred vp by all the workes of God, to consider his owne duetie, which is, to prayse the Lord: it must not be according to his owne fantasie, but according to the rule of Gods worde. NOW we haue considered, that all the workes of God do set foorth his prayse and glory, and that man is bounde there∣unto aboue the rest, we must consider one thing farther with the holy Pro∣phet, which is this: My lippes, sayth he,Psal. 119. 171. shall speake thy prayse, when thou hast
taught me thy Statutes. Therefore when you haue learned them, then may you set foorth the prayse and glory of God in such sort, as he shall like of, but otherwyse it is vnpossible you should: for notwithstanding Moses was brought vp in all theActes. 7. 22. learning of the Egyptians, yet he confesseth him selfe to be ig∣norantExod. 10. 26. concerning the worshyp of the Lord, vntyll such time as he shoulde be directed by his owne most perfect worde: How much more then ought we to confesse great ignorance therein, vntil such time as we also shal be directed by the same. Moreouer, for as much as no prayse or worshyp is accepted in the sight of the Lord, but such as shalbe done according to the rule thereof, we must learne to worshyp him according to the same, & in no case to go one foote farther. For as Moses was not to do any thyng about the Tabernacle, or for the geuing of lawes, statutes, ordinances, rites, ceremonies, or whatso∣euer, according to his owne wyl or fantasie: but in all thingesExodus. 25. 40 and. Hebr. 8. 5. to do according to the paterne, and prescription shewed him in the Mount, and elswhere, by the Lord: no more must we in the very smallest thing we take in hand, concerning the wor∣shyp of the Lorde, but in all thinges therein must we also be directed by the most pure & perfect worde of God. For as the Cloude was a direction to their Iornies in the Wildernesse,Numb. 9. 15. to the ende. and they not to steppe one foote forwarde or backwarde far∣ther, then by it they were ledde: Euen so the Lawes there ge∣uen by the Lord, are a most perfect rule for men to walke by whyle the worlde shall stande. For wherewithall (sayth thePsalm. 119. 9. Prophet) shall a young man clense his way? The holy Ghost doth answere: Euen in taking heede thereto, according to the worde of God: and therefore did the holy Prophetes and Apostles alwayes pray, that it woulde please the Lord, to di∣rect their steps according to the same. For in no case can the Lord abide any will worship, seeme it neuer so holy: but in allIohn. 4. 22. 23. 24. thynges wyll he be worshypped according to his holy wyll, layde downe in his holy worde: for otherwyse we worshyppe him in vayne, as our Sauiour sayth, If insteade of the doc∣trineMatthe. 15. 9. of his holy worde, we obserue the preceptes and foolysh traditions of men: so that, To obey his holy worde (as the
Prophet Samuel sayth) is better then al kind of sacrifice: and1. Sam. 15. 22. to hearken therunto, is better then the fatte of Rams. There∣fore let vs pray with the holy Prophet, that it woulde please the Lord, to encline our hartes vnto his law, & not vnto coue∣tousnesse,Psalm. 119. 36 and that we may esteeme al his preceptes most pure and iust, & hate al false wayes, and abhor al vaine inuentions.Psal. 119. 113. Seeing that euery man is but as a beast by his owne knowledge, we must learne to be made wyse by the worde of God. NOw that we know the Lord hath created vs to none other ende, but to set foorth his prayse & glory: and seeing we know also, that no prayse or worshyppe wyll please him, but that which shalbe done accordyng to his holy worde: let vs pray vnto him with the holy Prophet, that euen as it hath pleased him to make vs, and to fashion vs, euenPsalm. 119. 79 so it woulde please him therefore to geue vs vnderstandyng, that we may learne his commaundementes, and chuse the way of trueth. And agayne, seeing that euery man is but as a Beast by his owne knowledge, as the Prophet IeremieIeremy. 10. 14. doth say: and seeing also the Prophet Dauid confessed himPsalm. 73. 22. 17. selfe so to be, vntyll he went into the house of the Lorde, and so through his holy worde became wyse: We ought there∣fore to pray vnto the Lorde to geue vs grace to leaue of from leaning any longer vnto our owne wysedome, as the holyPro. 3. 5. Ghost vs warneth, and onely to hearken withall the holyPsalm. 85. 8. Micah. 6. 1. Habakuk. 2. 1. Psal. 119. 105. Psalm. 73. 24. Prophetes and Apostles, what the Lorde wyll say vnto vs, that so his holy worde may be a Lanterne to our feete, and a lyght vnto our pathes: and that by his counsell alone, we may be guyded, as the Prophet saith, euen vnto righteousnes, iudgement, equitie, and to euery good path: which thing be∣ingPro. 2. 9. 10. done, and preceptes kept, it shalbe vnto the Lorde a sacri∣fice of a more sweete smelling sent, then the fatte of thou∣sandes of Rammes, and Goates, or riuers of Oyle. Where∣fore
I beseeche al you, that are as my selfe, euen of the simpli∣est sort, vnto whom onely I direct my speeches, and such as feare the Lord, that you woulde cause your eares to hearken vnto wysedome, and incline your hartes to vnderstandyng. But what am I, that I shoulde so beseeche you, since that Wysedome her selfe doth intreate you, and dayly offerethPro. 1. her selfe vnto you? And yet because the holy Ghost com∣maundes that we should one exhort another, I can not chuseHebrew. 3. 13 1. Thessa. 5. 11 but with the holy Prophet, euen desire you to taste and see how sweete the Lord is. Now if you aske me what this wyse∣domepsalm. 34. 8. is, that you shoulde hearken so vnto her, and this vnder∣standing, that you shoulde so incline your hartes thereto, the Lord himselfe doth tell you: Behold (sayth he) the feare ofIob. 28. 28. the Lord is wysedome, and to depart from euill, is vnderstan∣ding. And in an other place, the Knowledge of holy thingesPro. 9. 10. is vnderstanding: and the only way for you to finde the feare of God, which is to haue wysedome, and to finde the know∣ledge of holy thinges, which is to haue vnderstandyng, is, for to repayre vnto the worde of God: for the Lorde onelypro. 2. 6. and Iames. 1. 5. geueth wysedome, and out of his mouth commeth knowledge and vnderstanding. So that if you searche and seeke in the Booke of God, you shall be sure to finde the knowledge of the Lord, and then as he is knowen of you, euen so shall you feare him, and also by your continuall meditation therein, you shall be sure to be made wyse vnto saluation: for the worde of God is fully able so to do, as sayth the Apostle: and therefore in any wyse, see that you alwayes pray vnto the Lorde, that it2. Timo. 3. 15. woulde please him to geue you such a taste therein, as that it may be more sweeter vnto your hart, then the Hony, or the Hony combe vnto your mouth: yea, and more desired for your necessitie, then golde, yea then much fine golde, or trea∣sures for your plentie. The which the Lord for his mercies sake graunt vnto vs euery one, whereby we may haue suche a feeling and knowledge therein, as that the bryghtnesse of the glorious Gospel, may shyne most cleerely in our mindes, euen to the vtter abolishyng of our former and most damna∣ble darkenesse.
Certayne Obiections vpon the former exhortation, answered. PEraduenture you wyl now say vnto me,The fyrst Ob∣iection. yf it be so that we can not attayne vnto Wisedome, which is to vnderstande holy thynges, and those holy thinges not to be founde, vnlesse we read and meditate in the Booke of God: alas, that is so hard, that we cannot attayne vnto the vn∣derstandyng thereof: and agayne, it is for great Clarkes, and not for vs simple soules to meddle withall, for many tymes the vnlearned peruert the Scriptures, euen to their owne2. Peter. 3. 16. destruction, and so I haue heard some say, that S. Peter sayth they do so. But I may say vnto you in the name of God, Be not deceyued, for it is the subtiltie of Satan that so perswa∣deth you: and not you onely, but almost all men generally throughout the whole world. And wherfore trow you doth he so? Surely to none other ende, but that his owne kingdome may be the better thereby maynteyned: for euen as the king∣dome of God is dayly inlarged where his worde is continu∣ally taught, and soundly vnderstoode: euen so also, where that doth want, the kingdome of Satan is dayly more and more increased. Heare therefore I beseeche you, what the Lord doth speake vnto vs: He commaundeth that we shouldIoshua. 1. 8. Deu. 6. 6. to. 1 not let his Booke depart out of our mouthes, but to meditate therein both day and nyght, and hath also tolde vs that thePsal. 119. 130. very entraunce thereunto, will shewe light, and geue vnder∣standing to the simple, yea to the very simpliest sharpnes ofPro. 1. 4. witte, and to the lytle childe (euen such a one as Timmothy2. Timo. 3. 15. was) knowledge and discretion: yea and that a very wyse man shall increase in learnyng there, and also a man of greatPro. 1. 5. vnderstanding, shall attayne vnto wyser counsels. So that you may see that wysedome doth not onely beseeche you to hearken vnto her, as before I tolde you: but also the Lorde
doth straightly commaunde you, yf you will obey him: and doth also tell you, if you will beleeue him: How chat his word will geue you lyght, and shew vnderstanding in greater mea∣sure vnto all sortes, whereby the simpliest shoulde haue no cause at all of discouragement, nor that the great wyse men should loath, or ouerreach. Therefore, whereas S. Peter saith, that the vnlearned do peruert the Scriptures, you must learne to knowe who those vnlearned be: not the simpliest Clarkes (as you woulde thinke:) but euen suche as haue not had their wittes as yet exercised in the booke of God. For be it that a man had all the learning in the worlde in humaneHebr. 5. 13. 14 artes, yet if it be so that such a one be inexpert in the worde of God, the holy Ghost doth count him as a Babe: but that sim∣ple man, which through long custome hath had his wittes ex∣ercised therein, the holy Ghost doth count him to be of a most ripe age, and to be suche a one, as is able to discerne betwixt good and euyll. Therefore, who so euer that he be, vntyll he make the worde of God his continuall meditation, he may well be sayd to be vnlearned, and vnstable also: and no mar∣uell is it, though by such the Scriptures be peruerted, euen to their owne destruction. Yea, but you wyll say agayne, if the Lord haue thus boundAn other Ob∣iection. vs by commaundement to reade the Scriptures, we must needes then haue a Phillip to be a guyde vnto vs, as the Eu∣nuchActes. 8. 27. to the ende. had to him. True it is, that you must haue a guyde, but then your Phillip must not be such a one, as when you shall aske him what is ment of this place, or that: or what way Sir, shal I take to finde this Christ, of whom you speake, that so I may beleeue that he is the Sonne of God, and may haue my conscience comforted in him, and also my fayth so surely setled, as that if tryall come, the very gates of Hell shall not preuayle against me? I say, he must not be such a one, when as you shall aske him these thinges, that shall appoynt you fyrst to reade this mans Booke, and then that, vpon such, and such places of Scripture: and when you haue read them, then direct you to others, as such, and such great Uolumes, I know not what, but sure I am, farre greater then the whole
Bible, and so intangle your head a thousande wayes, yea, and leade you to such intricate matter, and great time spending: that when you haue all done, you shall be litle, or nothing at all the wyser, but rather the cōntrarie, euen frayght with a thousande fonde opinions, and blinde conceytes. For I pray you, what is the cause that there is such a quoile amongst vs now adayes, as though there were no certaintie of the trueth, but such kinde of dealing? And I pray you further, what is the cause that mens heades are filde so full of such fonde, yea and also damnable opinions, but the like? For doth not ourMath. 22. 29. and. 15. 9. Sauiour say? Ye erre, not knowing the Scriptures: but are intangled with the preceptes and doctrines of men. Euen so is the worlde now, for the Papist he is so perswaded of his Writers, that he thinkes there is no other trueth but what they write, and vpon them he onely buyldes his Fayth, andFlat agaynst the commaun∣dement of God. leaues the Scripture altogether, and in no case may the simplier sort therein looke, or reade: and we also like wyse men, deale in a maner after the same sort. For notwithstan∣ding we make a great shew that we loue the Bible, and onely buylde our fayth by it, yet is there not one amongst ten thou∣sande, that doth geue him selfe to the reading thereof, as he ought to do: but rather to the contrarie, euen to the readyng of the wrytinges of men, although the Lorde haue geuen them no such commaundement, and so delyght themselues a great deale more in them, then in the worde of God: which in deede shoulde be vnto them their onely ioy, and pretious Pearle: and so euery one is grounded vpon hym, whose Bookes they are affected to reade, or whose fonde conceytes by them are fed: But your Phillip and Guyde must not be such a one. For I pray you, was Phillip the Eunuch his guyde such a one? I trow not: for he being demaunded a reso∣lution by that gratious Scholler (whose godly exercise was like to haue good successe) began, as the text sayth, euen at that same Scripture where he was then readyng, and prea∣chedActes. 8. 35. vnto him IESVS. And agayne, did not the maister teacher himselfe, euen our Sauiour Iesus, deale in like sortLuke. 24. 13. to 36. with his two Schollers? yes for sooth: for, whereas they be∣ing
weake in fayth, and greatly troubled in conscience at the thinges then happened: and yet like good Christians confer∣ring and talking together, with a desire to knowe the trueth, as all men ought to do: I say our Sauiour dealt in like sort with them. For S. Luke noteth, that he began at Moses, andLuke. 24. 27. at all the Prophetes, and interpreted vnto them in all the Scriptures the thinges which were written of him, with a great reprofe vnto them, that they for their partes were so slowe, and dull of hart, as not to beleeue that Christe was to suffer all those thinges, and so to enter into his glory, seeing that al the Prophetes had of those thinges so plainely spoken. And furthermore you see, that euen that eloquent man A∣pollos,Actes. 18. 24. the ende. who had taught diligently the thinges of the Lorde, in a kinde not altogether vnprofitable: yet was contented to be taught by a couple of meane persons, to come to a more perfect way of teaching, then before he had vsed: And that was, to proue and shewe mightily, as he did, by the Scrip∣tures, that IESVS was the CHRIST. So that you see these Guydes did not sende their doubtfull Schollers to this, or that mans booke to finde out Christ: but they founde him out, and taught him by the Scriptures. Nay you see that Apollos did not teache the right way to finde him out, vntyll he tooke that course to teach him by: and then S. Luke tel∣leth you, that he mightily confuted all gayne-sayers. For so strong and mightie is the worde of God in operation, that if it be rightly expounded, or propounded, it is sharper then any two edged sworde, and entreth through, euen to the deuidingHebrew. 4. 12. a sunder of the very hart and soule of the hearers thereof, as the Apostle sayth. You see also by these former examples of Schollers, and Guydes, what is both your duetie, and also theirs. Yours, how diligent you ought to be in reading of the holy Scriptures, and also conferring of Christ, and his king∣dome: And your Guydes, what course they ought to take in teaching of you, when as you shall demande to be resolued of your doubtes: and that is, to teache you Christ by the Scrip∣tures, and thyther to sende you to finde him out your selfe, and not els where: for no where els is he rightly to be found.
For, searche the Scriptures, sayth our Sauiour, for they beIohn. 5. 39. they that testifie of me. So that when you shall be thus in∣structed by your Guyde, eyther priuatly at home, or publikely abroade, and that you haue perfourmed the one part of your duetie: which is, to heare them with all diligence, and wil∣lingnes: you must alwayes remember with the Noble men of Berea, to performe the other part: which is, that hauyngActes. 17. 11. heard the worde of God with all willingnes, went and sear∣ched the Scriptures dayly them selues, to see whether those thynges were so or no: whereby you may learne, that you are not onely to beleeue that this is Christ, or that is Christ, or he is here, or there, in the wildernes, I know not where: be∣cause such, and such a man, telleth you so. Or yf he do tel you aright which is he, you are not to beleeue him onely because he telleth you so: for you see they of Berea went and searched the Scriptures them selues, to see whether it were so or no: Euen so must you: for otherwyse you disobey that which our Sauiour Christ hath commaunded you to do: for sayth he, Search the Scriptures. Yea but you wyll say, he spake that to such as woulde notAn other Ob∣iection. beleeue him: but we beleeue them that tell vs. I thinke so in deede, for a great many beleeue too much them that tell them, vnles they tolde them a more trueth. But although they were vnbeleeuers that our Sauiour commaunded to search the Scriptures: doth he therefore commaunde you, that you shall not search them? Thinke not so in any wyse: for dothPsalm. 1. not the holy Ghost pronounce a blessing on al those that reade the worde of God continually? And doth not S. Peter wyll2. Peter. 1. 19 them, whom he had taught, that notwithstandyng they had knowledge, and were established in the trueth: yet to geue more heede vnto the Prophetes, as vnto a most sure worde, and as to a light that shineth in a darke place, vntyl the day did dawne, and the Daystarre shyne more cleere in their hartes. And likewyse, doth not S. Paule commende those whomActes. 20. 32. he had taught vnto the worde of God, as vnto a Schoole∣maister, which was able to buylde them further? yes for∣sooth: So that by these examples, you may see that you are
not onely bounde to heare the worde of God, but you are al∣so bound to search and read the Scriptures dayly your selfe: for you see in geuing credite onely to the Teachers thereof, many thousande soules goe to destruction, as specially amongst the Papists they do. Therefore yf you loue to keepe your selfe from destruction, you were best to beare in minde that which our Sauiour hath geuen you in charge, that is, to take heede what you heare, as also to take heede of falseMark. 4. 24. Math. 24. 23. to. 27. Mark. 13. 5. 6. 21. 22. 23. Luke. 8. 18. Prophetes: and that you beleeue them not, no although their comming wyll be with such signes & woonders, as that (yf it were possible) the very elect shoulde be deceyued thereby: Yet notwithstanding, I say, he commaundeth you not to be∣leeue them, but to search the Scriptures, because in deede they are the true touchstone whereby you may easely trie the true Christ from the false, as also the true Prophet from the false Prophet. Now it may be that you wyll aske me here agayne, whe∣therA Question. you may read no other Booke, but the Scriptures only? The answere is, that yf you wyll you may: but yf it be for matters of saluation, the Booke of God is the onely Apo∣thecaries shoppe for you to resort vnto, because there you may be sure to haue a most precious medicine for euery disease, or curing salue for euery sore. And surely the Prophet Dauid found it so to be: for sayth he, I had euen perished in the mid∣destPsalm. 119. 92 of mine afflictions, had not the booke of God been my delyght: and therefore made he that his only meditation both day and nyght. So that when you haue bestowed long time, with lyke delight and diligence therein, as he did, and that your wittes thereby are quickened, so that you may be well able to discerne of Spirites, that is, betwixt good and euyll: then you may, if your leysure serue you, reade other Bookes and catch no hurt. Or yf it be so that you haue not as yet heard of the Booke of God, you may also reade some bookes, and take no harme: for some Bookes there are which are good, and tende to very good purpose, because their dryft is (as I suppose) to draw you to the Booke of God, euen to that fountayne of all ioy: but otherwyse, yf their drift be to draw
your delight vnto them selues, they can in no wyse be good. For Iohn the Baptist being tolde that more Disciples follo∣wedIohn. 3. 26. to the ende. Christ, then followed him, he taketh them selues to wit∣nes that he had tolde them plainely, that him selfe was not the Christ, but that he was sent to shew them which was he: and hauing once shewed him vnto them, that he him selfe was then to ceasse: and therfore when he heard that all men ran to Christ, he sayth, that then was his only ioy fulfilled, because in deede that was his onely drift and purpose. So that yf any man write to that ende, as of late most learnedly one hath done, in a lytle Booke called a Consent of Scripture: you are to be thankefull vnto God for such a one, and when he, or any other, haue by their wrytinges, thus led you vnto Christ, in saying, Come and see the Booke of God: for there we haueIohn. 1. 39. 41 45. 46. Iohn. 4. 41. 4 founde the Messias: Then may you say also with the Sama∣ritans when you haue so done, Now we beleeue, not onely for your sayinges, but also muche more because of his owne worde: for we haue heard him speake our selues now, whom before you told vs of, and we know now by his owne worde, that this is in deede the very CHRIST, the only Sauiour of the worlde. Againe, some Bookes there are which in respect of the holy stories conteined in the Booke of God, we cal pro∣phane Stories, as the Macchabees, Iosephus, and the Roman stories: the which prophane stories yf you reade, you may learne thereby (yf you know the Scriptures before) how iust the Lord is in all his sayinges, because that some Prophecies in ye holy Scriptures there are, whose euent is not altogether in Scripture shewed, and yet by those Prophane stories you may see they tooke effect: as namely the Prophet Daniel, and also the Reuelation of S. Iohn, the which by eye sight we are also able to witnes, how that Booke is fulfilled by the Popes in all their dealinges. But yf you thinke that you can not at∣tayne vnto perfect wysedome, and knowledge of Christe, without the helpe of other Books, then are you greatly de∣ceyued: for the Worde of God is an absolute perfect rule,2. Timo. 3. 15. 16. 17. sayth the Apostle, and fully able to make you wyse in Christ, and by it onely may you attayne to the perfect knowledge of
Christ, without the helpe of any other, and is also playne and easie of it selfe for your vnderstanding: yf you wyll the LordPsal. 119. 130. beleeue, as I sayde before, especially yf you wyll come in sim∣plicitie of hart, and cast off your owne wysedome: for in very deede, that is the onely hinderance of the attayning thervnto. Agayne, some Bookes there are which take vpon them to lay downe preceptes for your lyfe & conuersation, which bookes, yf you thinke you are bounde to read as well as the Scrip∣tures, then are you also as greatly deceiued: for the Lord hath commaunded you vpon payne of damnation, to reade theIoshua. 1. 8. Iohn. 5. 39. and. 3. 36. Deutro. 32. 47. Scripture, because in deede it is the very lyfe and norish∣ment of your soule: but as for the reading of such kinde of Bookes, you haue no such charge, neyther was it needefull for you so to haue, because there is nothing that the hart of man can thinke on, eyther for vertue to imbrace, or vice to eschew, but the Booke of God doth contayne a rule, and pre∣cept for it: and therefore, what neede we the helpe of man to lay downe preceptes for our lyfe, when as the Lorde him selfe hath taken vppon him to be our Guyde, and Teacher. Therefore in the name of God, take heede of the subtiltie of Satan, in this poynt aboue all others: that is, that he deceiue you not so herein, as to make you beleeue that you shall at∣tayne vnto as great wysedome or holynes, by the wrytinges of men, as you shall do by the booke of God: or that the booke of God is not perfect of it selfe, to instruct you fully in all thinges touching your saluation: for then hath he you euen as he woulde: therefore rather then he shoulde make you so to thinke, better were it for you with them of Ephesus toActes. 19. 19. burne them all, yea though the price of all such Bookes were founde to be in value worth fiftie thousande peeces of siluer. And God doth know, a most heynous sinne it is, and reigneth most abundantly amongst vs here in Englande, euen this, that we esteeme a great deale more of the preceptes and doc∣trines of men, then we do of the Booke of God: so that, as that hath been the very cause of the destruction of all the worlde, greatly it is to be feared, least the lyke plague wyll befall vs, and our Nation: for how fewe haue we that doth
take so great delight in the booke of God, as to make it the chiefe ioy, and reiocing of their hartes, as the Prophet Iere∣mieIeremy. 15. 16. did make it vnto his. Therefore much more fewe there be to be founde, that do make so rare accompt thereof, as the holy man Iob did: that is, to esteeme of the wordes of God,Iob. 23. 12. euen much more then he did of his appoynted foode: but in the contrary, multitudes do take euen that delyght: therefore take heede of that in any wyse. Now it may be that you wyll aske me agayne, WhatA Question. part of the Scripture it is, that you were best to reade? The answere is, euen all: for so you may learne by the last Com∣maundement of our Sauiour, that I spake of: for be com∣mandeth to search the Scriptures: so that al which is called Scripture you must search, for all that doth testifie of him. And so you see S. Luke sayth, he began at Moses and all theLuke. 24. 27. Prophetes, that is, from the beginning of Genesis to the ende of Malachie for the old Testament, which only then was writ∣ten: and all that was nothing els, but to teach Christ: And now you haue also the new Testament, which tendeth to none other ende then the former did, and that is, to teache Christ. For so the Apostle sayth, I taught nothing, but whatActes. 26. 22. Moses and the Prophetes did say shoulde come. And in an other place, I kept nothing backe, but haue shewed you allActes. 20. 27. the counsell of God: and what was that? To wit, that Christ shoulde suffer, and that he shoulde be the fyrst that shouldeActes. 26. 23. rise from the dead, and shoulde shewe lyght vnto the people, and to the Gentiles. So that you may see, that all the Scrip∣ture tendeth to none other purpose, but to teach you that: and therefore you must of necessitie reade all, that so you may, as S. Luke sayth, Acknowledge the certaintie of those thinges whereof you haue been instructed, not onely by the Euange∣listes, and the Apostles, who haue declared vnto you the thinges of Christe, from the day that Zacharias went into the Temple, and that the Angell tolde Marie concerning her conception: but also what you haue been instructed by Moses and the Prophetes, euen from the day that he was first promi∣sed, that so you may be able to deliuer the glory thereof from
poynt to poynt, and to stande firme your selfe, agaynst all the assaultes of the Deuyll. Yea but you wyll say agayne, S. Paule, of whom youAn other Ob∣iection. spake before, forbids vs Genealogies, and commaundes that we shal geue no heede vnto them, because they are endles,1. Timo. 1. 4. and breede questions, rather then godly edifiyng, which is by fayth: And so in deede a great number of our Guydes wyll tell vs. For many times because we fynd them very hard, we go to them to aske the meaning thereof: then their answere is, that the Genealogies tende not to edification, but rather to strife and contention, and therefore is it that S. Paule forbiddes them. And so likewyse for many other harde places in the Bible, when we goe to aske them (whoseMala. 2. 7. lyppes shoulde preserue knowledge) What is the mea∣ning of such and suche places? in steade of resoluing vs, they cast them off, as superfluous, & not tending to our saluation. Therefore why do you say, that all the Scripture testifieth of Christ, and is profitable for our saluation, and must of necessi∣tie of vs be read, and learned? I wyll tel you why: no not I,Psalm. 12. 6. Pro. 30. 5. but the holy Ghost wyll tell you, how that all the Wordes of the Lorde, are most pure wordes, yea more pure then golde which in the fire seauen times is tryed. And moreouer, the same Apostle, that you say speaketh agaynst them, wyll tellRoman. 15. 4. you the contrarie: for sayth he, What so euer thinges are written aforetyme (meaning in the Scriptures) are written for our learnyng. Therefore, woo be vnto those blinde Guydes, that woulde so leade you into the dytch, as to make you beleeue, that y• Apostle meaneth the Genealogies contey∣ned in the holy Scriptures. In deede, he meaneth that endles Genealogies are vnprofitable: but you must well know, that there is none such in the Scripture, neyther any thyng su∣perfluous, or vnprofitable for our saluation. Therefore who woulde thinke that men, who pretende to haue great zeale and knowledge, shoulde be so beastly and foolyshe, as to ex∣pounde the Apostle in that meaning: as though the Apostle, who spake by the spirite of God, woulde speake agaynst the spirite of God. For I pray you, did not the same spirite set
downe them, that set downe all the rest: and dare men be so bolde then, as to speake against the wysedome of the holy Ghost: And I pray you, what part of the Bible is there, that doth not thereof consist? be not men the grounde and cause of all the matter there? And how can we knowe the matter as we ought, vnlesse we know the men of whom the matter speaketh? As for example, yf the holy Ghost say, Sheba andPsalm. 72. 10. Seba shall bring gyftes, or Nebaioh and Kedar shall comeEsai. 60. 7. and serue: how can we know rightly what is meant hereby, vnlesse we know the people of whom the holy Ghost doth speake, and also the cause why they were estranged from the Lord, and now shoulde come agayne? Or yf the Lorde do tell you, how that he will subdue the Canaanites, Heuites, Iebu∣sites,Deutro. 7. 1. Gergesites, and the rest of those nations, to geue vnto Israel their possessions: must you not of necessitie (yf you wyl know the cause cleerely) vnderstande what these people are, and of whom they come, and also vpon what former prophesie and promises these matters do depende? Yes you are bounde to know them: for the holy Ghost commaundeth you, and all the world to consider of it: euen of this, how that when y• most High God deuided to the Nations their inheritaunce, he ap∣poyntedDeutro. 32. 8. the borders of A people (meanyng Canaan and his sonnes, according to the number of the sonnes of Israel) that in tyme they might haue it: So that yf you wyll know any thing in the Booke of God cleerely (as all thinges therein you are bounde to knowe) you must of necessitie knowe the persons that the holy Ghost doth intreate of. For when as the holy Ghost doth tell you of blessednesse to befall Sem, andGene. 9. 26. 27. his posteritie: and lykewyse the contrarie vnto Canaan and his posteritie: and also of a reuersion of Sems blessednes to befall Iapheth in the ende, and his posteritie, and also how Canaan & his posteritie shall be seruantes vnto both them and theirs: how is it possible, I say, for you to vnderstande any thing with iudgement, vnlesse you be able in some good sort to distinguysh of these Families? For all the whole Bible from the ninth of Genesis to the ende of the Reuelation, de∣pendeth vpon this one Prophesie: euen on this, which by
the spirite of God was vttered in the Chapter before cyted. Or agayne, yf the holy Ghost do tell you of Moab, Ammon,Psalm. 83. 6. to. 9. Edom, and diuers mo with them, to be ioyned in league agaynst the people of God: must you not of necessitie also, (yf you wyll know the cause cleerely herein) vnderstande of what rootes those wicked branches do also proceede: and like∣wise how, & for what cause they became suche rotten ones as they were: and also how, & for what cause the other, the Isra∣elites became the people of God, & of whom they also come? Yes in deede must you, or otherwyse your hart shall remayneMath. 13. 19. 20. 23. Mark. 4. 3. o 21. Luk. 8. 5. to. 16 that hard way, and stony grounde vnfallowed vp, vpon the which the seede of the Worde being cast, is not able to take roote to the bringing foorth of fruites. And why? because without the knowledge of these thinges, you are neyther able to heare or reade the worde of God with vnderstandyng. Therefore in the name of God take heede, that you be not so perswaded by them, to beleeue that the Genealogies in the holy Scriptures be endles, or vnprofitable, or super∣fluous: for yf you so thinke, then do you nothing els, but takeReuel. 22. 19. away from the Scripture, and so the cursse of God wyll come vpon you, euen to your vtter damnation. Therefore yf it be so as Moses sayth, that the thinges reuealed in the holyDeutro. 29. 29. Scriptures, are for vs, and our chyldren for euer. And also that the same Apostle that you spake of, doth tel you, that AllRom. 15. 4. thinges that are therein written, are written for our learning: You must in any wyse take vnto you, the whole armour and instrumentes that God hath you appoynted, that so your buylding may be so coupled and knit togeather, in euery ioynt of the furniture thereof, and so surely grounded vpon that precious foundation of the Apostles, and Prophetes, Christ him selfe being the chiefe corner stone, as that it may stande firme and sure against all the assaultes of the Deuyll, in the stormy and euyll day. Wherefore seeing that these blinde Guydes, whose lyppes do not preserue knowledge, but woulde take away the key thereof, and neyther enter inAs those in Luke the. 11. 52. and Math. 25. 13. them selues, nor suffer you that woulde: Be you carefull your selfe, to lay your grounde-sieles so sure and fast vppon
the former Rocke, as that your spirituall buyldyng may grow vp as an holy Temple for the Lord: and in any wyse geue an entrance to the buylding therof, by the holy worde of God: and assure your selfe, the Lorde wyll geue you lyght, yea such exceeding shyning lyght, as that the hardest knot, and darkest place therein wyll seeme most cleere and bryght, yf you wyll the Lord beleeue. For you shall vnderstande that he doth tell you, that yf you woulde but seeke after know∣lege,Pro. 2. 3. 4. 5. as you woulde do after syluer, and search after vnder∣standing, as you would do after treasures, then you should be sure, not onely to fynde the knowledge of the hardest Genea∣logie in his Booke conteyned, but also in them, and by them, the feare and knowledge of the Lorde your God. Therefore leaue of so much your seeking after trashe, which perisheth, and seeke for that true knowledge which neither Moth, norMath. 6. 19. 20 21. Canker, nor Theefe decreaseth, as our  you com∣maundeth. Yea but you wil say, that some of our guydes do also tel vs,An other Ob∣iection. that if we shoulde get this great knowledge & vnderstanding that you speake of, it woulde be very hurtfull vnto vs, for it would puffe vs vp, & make vs vnreasonable proude: for so say they, the Apostle sayth: and it is more meete (say they) that we should learne Mortification, & to do good workes: and as for such great knowledge, it forceth not. It is true in deede, that the Apostle sayth, that knowledge puffeth vp: and it is most1. Cor. 8. 1. meete also that you should learne Mortification, & also to glo∣rifie y• Lord through your workes. But you must know what knowledge it is that the Apostle speaketh of: a man woulde thinke not heauenly knowledge, for who knewe more then he2. Cor. 12. 11. him selfe: or who knew more then Moses, Samuel, Dauid, Da∣niel, or any of the Prophetes, or Apostles, and yet were they thereby puft vp with pride? I would thinke, and yf they looke well about them, they shal finde the more knowledge they had of the heauenly maiestie of God, the more base & vile they be∣came in their owne eyes. Alas how are they deceyued, that thinke the Apostle meaneth, that true & heauenly knowledge puffeth vp with pride? Why, how blind are men? can they not
see that he commandeth the same Corinthians not to be chyl∣dren1. Corin. 14. 20 in vnderstanding: but as concerning maliciousnes to be children, but in vnderstanding to be of a ripe age? Nor can they not see that he telleth the Colossians, that he will not ceasse to pray vnto the Lord, to fill them with all knowledgeColo. 1. 9. of his heauenly will in all wysedome and spirituall vnder∣standing? Nor can they not see, that he doth the lyke vnto the Ephesians, and to al others, vnto whom he writeth? Nor howEphes. 1. 16. 17 Rom. 10. 1. 2, 3. 4. 5. Roma. 15. 14 1. Cor. 1. 5. and 10. 1. and. 12. 1. 31. and. 14. 1. 12. 15. 20. and 15. 34. Gala. 4. 19. Psalm. 119. 66. he telleth the Romanes, that the Iewes had a zeale in deede, but not according to knowledge: and therfore nothing worth? Nor can they not see how the Prophet Dauid in lyke sort prayeth vnto the Lord, that it woulde please the Lord to teach him knowledge: and that not once nor twyce, but many and many times? But what should I speake of one or two exam∣ples, when as all the Prophetes and Apostles, and deare chil∣dren of God, haue euer most hartely desired it at the Lordes hands? Since it is so then, that they can not see that, I would they could see, & consider this: My people, sayth the Lord, are spoyled for lacke of knowledge: and because they haue refu∣sedHosea. 4. 6. knowledge, I wyll also refuse them. O most fearefull sentence, and most true and terrible vnto all those that haue so done, as anonue you shall see at large. So that by this you may see the Apostle meaneth not, that heauenly know∣ledge doth pusse vp with pride: but he meaneth suche lyke knowledge as some of the Corinthians seemed for to haue, who in deede knew nothing at all, as they ought to knowe, because they wanted loue: for though a man coulde speake1. Cor. 13. 1. to the ende. with the toonges of men and Angelles, and had all know∣ledge, yet yf he haue not loue, it profiteth nothing, but is euen as a sounding Brasse, or tinekeling Simball. Agayne he meaneth suche like knowledge as the king of Tyrus had, whom the Lord doth floute (as he doth all others that are the like) Beholde, sayth he, thou art wyser then Daniel, there isEzek. 28. 3. to. 8. no secrete, that they can hide from thee: with thy wysedome and thy vnderstanding hast thou increased thy riches, and so thine hart is lyfted vp, because of thy ryches. And also suche like knowledge as the king of Babel had, whose hart was lyf∣tedEsai. 14. 13. Dan. 4. 27.
vp so high therewith, as that nothing woulde serue his turne, but to exalt his throne aboue the cloudes, and so to beDani. 4 28. to the ende. euen like vnto the most High: but full soone was he brought downe full low, euen to the eating of Grasse with Oxe and Asse. And likewyse such knowledge and wysedome as2. Sam. 17. 14. 23. had that wyse Ahithophel, who was puffed vp with suche swelling pride thereby, that if good Hushai for wysedome and counsell be better thought of then he, he goeth and hang∣eth him selfe for very spite: and so the wyse counselling Ahi∣thophel shewed him selfe to be, according to the nature of his name, that is, euen the brother of a very foole. And suche wysedome and knowledge the Apostle meaneth, as the Gre∣cians,1. Corin. 1. 17 to the ende. and all other worldlinges here amongst vs seeke after: who, as our Sauiour sayth, attayne to woonderfull great wysedome in their generation and kinde, and are full of knowledge, and so puft vp with a proude conceite they haue thereof, as that the word of God & preaching of the Gospell,1. Cor. 1. 18. 3 as the Apostle sayth, is but vnto them euen meere foolishnes.1. Tim. 6. 17. And therefore sayth he vnto Timothie, charge them that are rich in this worlde, that they be not so high minded, and that they trust not so much in vncertayne riches, but in the lyuing God. So that by this you see what kinde of knowledge it is that the Apostle sayth, wyl puffe you vp with pride: the which yf any of you haue, or seeke after for to haue, let him in anyPro. 23. 4. 1. Cor. 3. 18. wyse ceasse from such wysedome, and let him become a foole, that so he may be made wyse in deede, as the Apostle sayth: Therefore once agayne I say, take heede, that Satan do not so deceiue you, as to make you beleeue, that the knowledge of the worde of God will pusse you vp with pride: No, yf you refuse to increase your knowledge therein, you shew your selfe to be proude then in deede, and wicked also: for so spea∣keth the Prophet: The wicked is so proude, sayth he, that hePsal. 10. 3. 4. 5. seeketh not for God, but contenmeth him. And God doth know, innumerable there are amongst vs, that do euen so. For who can number the troupes of those most vile prophane beastes, who notwithstanding do take the name of God in their mouthes, yet do their deedes declare playnely that they
say in their hartes, there is no God, as the Prophet speakethPalm. 14. 1. and. 53. 1. of them. And agayne, who can number the troupes of a se∣conde sort? Who notwithstanding their owne hartes do tell them there is a God, and as the Apostle sayth, they professe also that they know him: and yet by workes they denie him:Titus. 1. 16. and also say vnto him, as Iob saith they do, Euen depart fromIob. 21. 14. vs, for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes. Agayne, who can number the third sort? Which are those vnto whom most chiefly I direct my speeches, who notwithstanding haue woonderfull great zeale, and also great care of the true wor∣shyp of the Lorde: yet are so grounded in a blynde conceyte they haue of foolysh zeale in mortification, and also in doing well towardes men, thinking that that is the onely thing the Lord requireth, as that it is greatly to be feared, least in the ende they wyll fall into the lyke danger of our blynde Pa∣pistes, and also of the Iewes their predecessoures in that poynt: whom the Apostle witnesseth of, to haue a great zeale, but notRoma. 10. 2. 3. according to knowledge: and therefore being ignorant of the righteousnesse which is in Christ, went about to establishe their owne. I say it is greatly to be feared, least this dam∣nable errour shoulde befall this thirde sort: for truely for ought that I can perceiue, they are come to the same passe of those in Esai already, that is, euen to say vnto other men, Stande farther from vs, because we are holyer then you.Esai. 65. 5. Euen so foolyshe they are, according as the Apostle speaketh to the Galathians, that after they haue begunne in the spirite,Gala. 3. 3. they woulde now seeme to be made perfect by the fleshe. For truely I say, for ought that can be perceiued, they make more accompt of a lytle shew of humilitie and well doing (as they tearme it) then they do to haue their mindes renewed by sound knowledge, that so the darkenes that is in them mightLuk. 11. 35. 36 be turned into lyght, and that so they myght be able, as the Apostle sayth, euen to comprehende with any, how exceedingEphe. 3. 18. and 1. Timo. 3. 16. great that heauenly misterie of our saluation is. Therefore much lyke they are vnto those blinde zelous Scribes and Pharisees, who as our Sauiour sayth, made more accomptMath. 23. 23. 24. 25. 26. of tything tryfling toyes, then they did of tything iudgement,
and weightier matters: that is, they made more accompt of foolyshe zeale in outwarde shewes and ceremonies of religi∣on,Mark. 7. 1. to 15. and Luke. 11. 38. to. 43. then they did to haue a sounde knowledge of Christe the Sonne of God: Who was not onely a bare sonne desended of Dauid, and no more as they thought him, but also euenMath. 22. 42. to the ende. And Marke. 12. 35. 36. 37. and Psalm. 110. 1. Dauids Lorde and God. So that notwithstanding all this their blinde zeale, yet missing of a sounde knowledge herein, yght most woofull wooes doth the Lorde our Sauiour pro∣nounce agaynst them. Therefore in the name of God (whatMatthe. 23. 13. 14. 15. 16. 23. 25. 27. 29. soeuer such ignoraunt Guydes do tell you) take heede how you despise to encrease your knowledge of the Sonne of God, least the lyke plague befall you, that befell them: and take heede also how you suffer such to beare rule ouer you, as the Apostle commaundeth. For whatsoeuer shewe of humili∣tieColo. 2. 18. such blynde guydes woulde seeme to haue: yet you shall finde in the ende, that they are suche as the Apostle speaketh of to the Colossians, whom in flatte wordes he tearmeth to be puft vp with a fleshly minde, and also to aduaunce them selues in those thinges which they neuer saw: whose fault (as it see∣meth by the Apostles exhortaion to the Colossians) was much in the same kinde of theirs, who woulde haue you to make no accompt of knowledge. For the Apostle greatly vrgeth them, especially to be increasing therein, euen so farre, as toColo. 2. 7. and 1. 9. and. 3. 16. be rooted, and buylt, and stablished, and styll to be abounding in height, vntyll they became as fitte Temples for Christe to dwell in. Euen so in the name of God do you, for you are so bounde, as further you shall see a non: and assure your selfe, the more knowledge you haue in the worde of God, the more shall you be humbled in your owne eyes: for it is myghtie through God to cast downe all strog holdes, and to bryng2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. into captiuitie euery high thought, to the obedience of our Sauiour Christ. Now whereas they tell you, that of necessitie you mustThe other part of the last Ob∣iection answe∣red. learne to mortifie your selfe, and also that you must endeuour to do good workes: it is meete you shoulde so do in deede. For mortifie your earthly members saith the Apostle Paule.Colo. 3. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 11. And agayne, Abstayne from the lustes of the fleshe, which
fight agaynst the soule, sayth the Apostle Peter. And againe, let your workes so shyne before men, that they seeing may glorifie your Father which is in heauen, sayth our Sauiour:Math 5. 16. and reason good you shoulde so do, for to that ende tendeth all your knowledge. For yf you haue learned Christ, sayth theEphe. 4. 20. 21. to. 25. Apostle, and haue heard him, and haue been taught by hym, as the trueth is in him, then you must of necessitie cast off the conuersation in tymes past: for otherwyse your knowledge is in vayne, and you remayne as yet the seruantes vnto sinne,Rom. 6. 16. to the ende. whereunto you were bounde, euen as slaues, geuing your members as seruantes to fulfill the wyll thereof. Wherefore yf you wyll be freed by Christe, and be seruantes vnto God, you must also geue your members as seruantes vnto righte∣ousnesse, in obeying his wyll, vnto whom you now stande bounde. And for this cause the Apostle sayth, cast off the oldeEphe. 4. 22. 23. 24. man, which is corrupt through the deceiueable lustes: and be renewed in the spirite of your minde, sayth he: and then put on the new man, which after God is created in righteounes, and true holines. So that you see true mortification con∣sisteth in castyng off the olde Adam, and putting on the new, which is Christ. Now yf one should aske you what this olde Adam is, the which we are so often commanded to cast off: how can it be answered, I pray you, but by the booke of God? For by no write els in all the worlde, can you describe him a∣right: vnles it be so, as that they haue learned thence: but there you may beholde him as in a glasse most cleere, euen to his very thoughtes, and intentes of the hart, for the worde of GodHebr. 4. 12. is a searcher and tryer thereof. If then you can not discerne throughly what this olde man is which you are to cast off, but by the worde of God: How much les then are you able to discerne what this new man is, which you are to put on, which after God is created in righteousnes and true holynes, but by the same? For if we be not able in this our corruption, to iudge and discerne throughly of our corruption: but that the Law came & shewed it, that so it myght appeare playnelyRom 5. 20. and.. 3. 20. and. 7. 13. to abounde: How is it possible then (being altogether blinde in iudgement) that we shoulde discerne that exceeding righte∣ousnes
of Christe, which we are to put on, but that the same hath also shewed it? And therefore the Apostle telleth you,Ephe. 4. 23. 24 that you must be renewed in the spirit of your minde before he bidde you put on the newe man. For howe can you put on Christe, vnles you knowe him? and how can you knowe him, but by the booke of God where he only is described? So that the first steppe you are to make to true mortification, is to mortifie your follie: and that can not be done, but by the quickening of your wysedome: neyther can that be done, but by the worde of God. For by thy Statutes haue I beenPsalme. 19. 93. quickened, sayth the Prophet: therefore as the Apostle sayth,Colo. 3. 16. Let the worde of Christe dwell in you most plenteously, euen in al wisedome, wherby you may be so changed by the renew∣ingRom. 12. 2. of your mindes, as that you may be able to proue, what is the goodwyll of God, and acceptable and perfect: andRom. 12. 1. when you haue so done, then in any wyse geue vp your bodies as liuing sacrifices, holy, and acceptable vnto God, by your obedience in seeking to fulfill the same: alwayes prouided, that the knowledge thereof must first goe before: for so much may you also wel perceiue by the Apostle Peter his speeches, which are these: I wyll not be negligent, sayth he, to put you2. Pet. 1. 12. alwayes in remembrance of these thinges, though that you haue knowledge. Wherby you may learne that the Apostles did euer plant the knowledge of Christe in mens brestes, be∣fore they woulde commaunde them to walke: because that otherwyse their mortification, or walking had been in vaine. For yf an vnbeleeuing Iew, or a Turke, or a Papist, or any other what so euer, that knoweth not Christ aright, should do all the good workes in the worlde, or mortifie the fleshe neuer so much, yet shoulde none of all these thinges profite him any thing at all, vnles he knew the vertue of Christ his resurrecti∣on, and also the righteousnes which he shoulde haue by him: because it is not the workes that maketh the man good, but the man that maketh the workes good. For you must well know, that yf Abraham had not beleeued the Lord, he had not been counted righteous: The workes which Abraham did, as y•▪ offering of his Son made perfect to y• syght of men that fayth which he had be∣fore, and so the workes being ad∣ded, made the for∣mer fayth to ap∣peare to be a ly∣uely fayth, & no a dead fayth, as S. Iames spea∣keth. for although he were iustified byGen. 15. 6. and Roman. 4. 3. Read the  Chapter. workes in the sight of men, and thereby had somwhat wherin
to reioyce, yet had he not so in no respect with God. For what sayth the Scripture: doth it not tell you how that Abraham beleeued the Lorde, and he counted that vnto him for righte∣ousnes? So that ye workes which he did, had been but as dead workes and rotten in the sight of God, had he not beleeued the promyse of God concerning the Seede that shoulde come of him. Agayne, you must as well knowe that Israel obteynedRom. 11. 7. not that which they sought through workes, but the election obteyned it: neither were they elected vnto saluation because of the workes which in tyme they woulde do: but they were elected through the grace of God in Christ Iesus, accordyng as the Apostle also testeth the phesians they were, saying:Ephe. 2. 8. 9. By grace are ye also saued through faith in Iesus Christ, and not of workes (sayth he) least any man shoulde boast him selfe:Rom. 3. 9. 20. 23 &. Gala. 3. 0. 11. and therefore the Scripure hath concluded all vnder sinne, that so men might see playnely how they are iustified freely by the grace of God, and not through workes: for yf it were of workes, then were it not of grace: but since it is of grace,Rom. 11. 6. it can not be of workes, as sayth the Apostle. Therefore weRom. 3. 28. conclude (sayth he) that a man is iustified freely through fayth in Iesus Christe, and not through workes: for to him that worketh, the wages is not counted by fauour, but by debt:Rom. 4▪ 4. 5. . 9. but to him that worketh not, but beleeueth on him that iustifi∣eth the vngodly, his fayth is counted for righteousnes: euen as Dauid declareth the blessednes of the man, vnto whom God imputeth righteousnes without workes, saying: Bles∣sed are they whose iniquities are forgeuen, and whosePsalm. 32. 1. Rom. 4. 6. sinnes are couered: blessed is that man to whom the Lorde imputeth not sinne. And good cause the holy Prophet had so to say, fr yf men shoulde be rewarded according to their workes or desartes, they should be rewarded with euerlasting death, because the wages of sinne is death, and there is noRom. 6. 23. man but he hath sinned, and gon a stray: therefore no man,Rom. 3. 9. to 24▪ & 1. Iohn. 1 8. 9 10. &. 1. King. 8. 46. & 2. Cro. 6. 36. & Dan. 9. 4. to 20 . 6. 23. but he deserueth the wages of hell and death. But yf men do looke for eternall lyfe, they must know it commeth as a free gyft of God through fayth in Christe, and not in any respect as a due debt vnto them, because of their workes. For as
Abraham receyued not the promise concerning the heireshipRom. 4. 13. of the worlde, through the fulfilling of the Law, but through the righteousnes of fayth: no more doth any man receiue the promise of the heireshyp of eternall lyfe, through the workesRom. 4. 16▪ to the end. Gala. 3 & 1. Iohn. 5. 11 which he can do, but through the fayth which he hath in Iesus Christ. What shall we say then concerning good workes? Shall we vtterly exclude them? No in no wyse: for God hath ordeyned them also euen to the ende, that those whom heEphe. 2. 10. hath elected in Christ, shoulde walke in them: but not in any respect for men to thinke, that they shoulde be the cause of their election, neyther that they shoulde thinke the free gift of eternall lyfe commeth as a due debt for them. But in deede they are as most excellent fruites, which shoulde al∣wayes floorysh from those whom God hath elected, according as the Apostle sayth: God hath chosen vs in Christ before theEphe. 1. 4. As it is vnpossi∣ble for a good tree to be with∣out good fruites, so is it for an e∣lect vessel, or liue∣ly fayth, to be without good workes. foundation of the worlde, to the ende that we shoulde be holy and without blame before him in loue. So then ye fruites not being the cause of the goodnes of the tree, but the tree the cause of the goodnes of the fruites, it had ben in vayne I say, for the Apostles to looke for good fruites to come from men, yf they had not first taken care for the sounde plantyng of the tree, that is: If they had not first taught men the sounde knowledge of Christ, wherby they might see plainely where∣inMen ought fyr to teache others the sounde know∣ledge of Christe, that so their be∣liefe being surely groūded on him▪ they might be i deede trees of righteousnes and the planting of the Lord, as it is in Esa. 1. 3. Pro. 19. 2. their goodnes stoode, it had profited their hearers nothing at all: no although they shoulde haue done all the good workes in the worlde, or haue mortified them selues neuer so much in the sight of men: because without the sounde know∣ledge of Christ, the soule can not be good. For I pray you, had not the Apostle Paule as great cause to reioyce in the fleshe, as any man in the worlde, yf by suche thinges God woulde haue been pleased? Yes in deede had he: for you see he was Phil. 3. 3. 4. 5. . to 11. and Actes. 26. 5. & Gala. 1. 13. 14 circumcised the eight day, & of the kinred of Israel, and of the trybe of Beniamin, and an Hebrew of Heber, and by the Law of the strictest sect, euen a Pharisee: and also as con∣cerning zeale, no man more feruent then he: yea and as tou∣chyng the righteousnes which is by the Law, euen vnrebuke∣able: and yet you may see that he counteth all these thinges
but as dung & drosse, in respect of ye excellent knowledge sake which he had founde in Christe: by the which knowledge hePhilip. 3. 9. 10 Gala. 2. 14. to the ende. and. 2. 10. 11. was made to see, that notwithstanding all his former righte∣ousnes by the Law, yet had he gon to eternall destruction, had he not founde the righteousnes which is through fayth in Christ: and therefore no maruell was it, though he made small accompt of his former righteousnes in respect of the knowledge he had now of Christ. Wherefore in any wyse see that you alwayes desire the same thing: for assure your selfe that is more worth in the syght of God, then all the burnt of∣feringes or sacrifices in the worlde, for so the Lorde him selfeHosea. 6. 6. doth tel you. Therefore blame me not, I beseech you, though somewhat longer I stande vpon this poynt, euen vpon this, that the sounde knowledge of Christe for vs to haue, is more accepted in the syght of God, then all the workes which we call good in the worlde. For I pray you further, was not Cornelius the Captayne that heathen man, a godly man asActe. 12. 1. 2. 3 4. 5. 36, to the nde. well as Paule? Yes euen one whom the holy ghost commen∣deth to be very deuout, to haue the feare of God before his eyes, to pray vnto him continually, to haue care to teache his whole householde the like: and besides all this, to be one that gaue much Almes vnto the people: and yet you see he was not in that case as he ought to be, vntyll such time as Peter had made knowne vnto him the Lorde IESVS, that so he myght know that by his death and resurrection came remis∣sion of sinnes, and onely vnto those that woulde beleeue in his name: so that notwithstanding all his former righteous∣nes, yet was he to be counted a most greeuous sinner, vntyll such tyme as he apprehended Christ by fayth, and therefore is it that the Apostles say, so sone as they heard of this: We per∣ceiueActe. 11. 17. 18 now that▪ God hath also graunted vnto the Gentiles repentance vnto lyfe. So that the necessitie of this poynt is farre greater then I can wel declare, because men are geuen generally to thinke, that yf they can frame them selues to do well (as they tearme it) and to mortifie the lustes of the fleshe,Ieremy. 7. 22. 23. 24. and. 9. 3 24. that that is the onely thing the Lorde requireth and accepteth of: but they are marueylously deceyued. For the Lorde de∣lighteth
more that men shoulde haue the sounde knowledge of him, then he doth in all the workes which we call good, be they neuer so many by vs perfourmed: for yf it stoode onely vpon good workes and mortification, wherewith the Lorde woulde be pleased, I am sure you can not denie, but that all the people in the worlde were then in as good case one as an other. For who can deny, but that the verie As namely Fe∣stus for one ex∣ample, for who could haue beha∣ued him selfe bet∣ter then he in Paule his cause, and yet you may see howe lyke a prophane beast he speaketh, when as he talketh f our Sauiour Christ. Reade for this Actes 25. 13. to. 22. and in the same ma∣ner spake y• stiffe necked Iewes, as you may see Actes. 17. 7. Iohn. 3. 36. and 17. 2. 3. Insidels for out∣warde actions behaue them selues as well as men can do, and yet notwithstanding they go to eternal destruction. And why? Because they know not God in Christ. For this is an eternall rule whch you are bounde to holde, that is, that who soeuer knoweth not the Sonne of God, nor beleeueth in him, shal neuer see lyfe, but the wrath of God abydeth on him. Therefore yf you be one of those which loue eternall lyfe, you must haue an earnest minde to know him aright, that so your beliefe in him may stande most firme and constant, and then assure your selfe you haue perfourmed the chiefest worke that God requireth at your handes. For when the people demaunde of our Sauiour what they shoulde do, wherebyTherefore if F∣lix, or Festus,  Agrippa, or any other such as they were shoulde be∣haue them selues a thousand thou∣sande tymes bet∣ter then they did, yet yf they know not Christe no better then for  warren we haue they did, you may safely say they go to e∣ternall destruc∣tion. they myght worke the workes of God. His answere is, that they shoulde Beleeue in him whom the Father had sent: for that in deede was the onely worke that God required at their handes, as he also telleth them. Agayne, when the keeper of the Prison demaundeth of Paule and Silas what he shoulde do whereby he might be saued. Their answere is in like maner, that yf he woulde beleeue in the Lord Iesus Christ, he shoulde then be saued. Now it may be you wyll say vnto me in this place, yf that be all in all, to beleeue in him, what neede you then to bestowe such long speech in this poynt. For we beleeue in the Lord Iesus, and know well enough that all the workes in the worlde will not helpe vs, vnles we do so. Then must I sayReade for these three Actes 24. and. 25. and 26. Iohn. 6. 28. 29. Actes. 16. 30. 31. vnto you agayne, yf it be so that you do beleeue in him, as you say you do, it must folow then of necessitie, that you haue a minde to knowe him: for those that beleeue in Christe the Sonne of God, the Lord hath geuen a minde to knowe him,2. Iohn. 5. 20. & Iohn. 8. 47. &. 10. 26 27. sayth the Apostle Iohn▪ therfore if you haue an earnest minde
to be increasing in the knowledge of the Sonne of God, then may you safely say, that you are one of those that do beleeue in him: and then agayne, yf you be one of those that do sted∣fastly beleeue in him, you haue then perfourmed the chiefestIohn. 6. 29. worke that God requireth at your handes: yea then haue you also learned true mortification in deede, otherwyse you haue it not. For true mortification consisteth not only in humilitie, or in not sparing of the body, or in not satisfiyng of the fleshe, to fulfill the lustes thereof. Neyther do good workes, as youColo. 2. 18, to the ende. see, onely consist in the doing of that which is required vnto men, for so the Papistes, and many others, as the forenamed, woulde goe before you in that kinde: but they both consist chiefly in the soundnes of your knowledge, which you ought to haue of the Sonne of God. Therefore whereas the most part of people are brought to this passe, that is, euen to thinke that yf they can say they do beleeue in Christ, and learne with∣all to bring foorth the fruites of a christian lyfe, which is to feede the hungrie, to cloath the naked, to visit the sicke, to re∣lieue the prisoners, to do vnto all men, as they woulde be done vnto, and to mortifie the lustes of the flesh: all which in deede are their dueties concerning the seconde Table, and therefore worthy of commendation for so much. But whereas they are brought to this passe I say, which is to thinke, that yf they can performe these thinges, that they haue then performed the only thing the Lord requireth, they are greatly deceyued: for the Lorde requireth a great deale further matter at their handes then so. For knowe you not the answere of our Sa∣uiour vnto the Ruler, who had asked what he might do to in∣herite eternall lyfe? yf you do not, this is it: Yet lackest thou one thing, sayth our Sauiour. Now what this one thing was that he then lacked, I wyll shew you. First then the RulerMath. 19. 16. to 26. & Mark. 10 17. to. 25. and Luke. 18. 18. to. 26. demaunding of our Sauiour what he myght do to inherite eternall lyfe, and our Sauiour reciting the dueties of the seconde Table: and he replying, that he had kept them all, euen from his very youth. Our Sauiour trieth him then with a further and more chiefer poynt, that is, with his duetie concerning the fyrst Table, and telleth him playnely, that
he lacked one thing yet, and that in deede the most chiefest thing of all, which was his loue towardes our Sauiour Christ: and therefore sayth our Sauiour vnto him: Sell all that thou hast, and come and folowe me, thinking thereby to try his obedience towardes the first Table, that is, to see whether he did so loue the Lorde in hart, mynde, and soule, as that he coulde be contented to leaue all that he had, and folow him, as Abraham, Moses, Dauid, Daniel, and diuers othersMatth. 4. 18. to 3. & Mark. 1. 16. to 21. and 10. 28. to 32. in the Gospell did: but when he came to that poynt, the case was altered: whereby you may playnely see that yf men ne∣uer so well performe their dueties concerning the seconde Table, and yet misse therein as touching the chiefest poynt of the fyrst, it profiteth them nothing at all. Therefore this is the marke the which most earnestly I do shoote at, euen this, to haue you and all men well to know, that the Lorde requi∣reth most chiefly your whole duetie, as touching the fyrst Table, which is not fulfilled onely in saying there is but one God, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, nor in saying you beleeue to be saued by the seconde person in the trinitie: but you must well knowe that the Lorde doth also require a most intire loue to be shewed towarde him, that is, he wyll haueDeutro. 6. 5. 6. to the ende. you to loue him euen with all your hart, with all your minde, with all your soule, with all your strength, the which loue can in no wyse be so greatly expressed, as when you haue a most earnest desire to heare his voyce, and when as ratherMy sheepe heare my voyce, and I nowe we them, and they folowe me. Iohn. 10. 7. then you woulde be hindered from the hearing thereof by worldly matters, you woulde rather be contented to forsake them all. Therefore it is not enough onely to say you know this, or beleeue that, but you must shewe a willing minde to know & beleeue according to Scripture: for the Lord wyl in no case like that you shoulde be troubled about many mattersLuke. 10. 38. to the ende. with Martha, but wyll haue you without all excuse to choose the best part with Marie, because that in deede, is ye most excel∣lent thing you can desire: I meane, the hearing of his voyce continually, as Marie did: that so you may haue all his most gracious words printed in your hart, as Moses speaketh. And why so? Euen to the intent you may be able to rehearse
them continually vnto your chyldren, and that so you may beDeutro. 6. 4 to 10. and Mark. 12. 29. to. 35. able to teach them and your selfe, to knowe aright how that he IEHOVAH your God is one, and that there is noneMarke the con∣ference  our Sauiour & the Scribe the. but he, according as he requireth in that first & great Com∣maundement, saying: Heare O Israel, IEHOVAH, thy God IEHOVAH is one. Therefore yf you holde them happie, as happie & blessed they are, whose God this IehouahPsalm. 33. 12. is, and that your selfe woulde be of this happie sort, you must learne to know him aright: that is, you must learne to know according to the Scriptures, how that vnder this name and nature, there be three, the Father, the Worde, and the holy2. Iohn. 5. 7. Ghost, and that these three are but one God: for the Worde isIohn. 1. 1. 14. the Sonne, and yet he is IEHOVAH, as S. Iohn in his twelfth teacheth you out of Esai the sixth. And the holy Ghostohn. 21. 41. & Esai. 6. is IEHOVAH, as S. Paule in the Actes. 28. teacheth you out of the same text of Esai. And how this name IEHOVAHActes. 28. 25. to. 28. is opened, S. Iohn in Apocalips the first sheweth you in this sort: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ende,Reuel. 1. 8. sayth the Lord, euen he who was, who is, and who will be. The knowing of this true God, who is but one: as also thatIohn. 17. 3. the seconde person in this Trinitie, was to take the nature of man, that so he might suffer, to the intent that in death he might destroy him that had the power thereof, and so geue lyfe vnto the worlde. The knowing of this I say, according to the Scripture, the which in all ages most playnely hath been manifested, is the chiefest thing the Lorde requireth at your handes: therefore you are to vnderstande that the holy Prophetes and Apostles did euer first and most chiefly labour to set foorth this: and afterwardes exhorted men to walke ac∣cording to their dueties layde downe in the seconde Table. Consider these scriptures. Acte▪ 13. 24. to. 42. and 14. 15. 16. 17. and 16. 30. 31. and 20. 21. and. 26. 17. 18. Paule in this. 26. of the Actes sheweh the summe of all their doctrine, that is, euen that both Iewes and Getiles were to turne from dark∣nes vnto lyght,  from the power of Satan vnto God, that so they myght receiue forgeuenes of sinnes, & inheritaunce amongst them which are sanctified by fayth in Christ: and therefore the Apostle sayth, that he wit∣nessed both vnto Iewes and Gentiles, that they shoulde haue repentaunce towardes God, and fayth towarde our Lorde Iesus Christ. Actes. 20. 20. 21. For you are not to thinke that when Iohn the Baptist came preaching in ye wildernes, that his only drift was to bring the people to a more perfection of workes, although after their demaunde, he tell them, that thus and thus they were to do:
but you are to vnderstande, that most chiefly his drift was toZacharias y sa∣ther of Iohn she∣weth what was the chiefe marke that Iohn shotte at, as you may see in Luke. 1. 76. 77. and Iohn. 1 6. to. 9. and Luk. 5. 32. 33. Math. 3. 2. Marke. 1. 7 Iohn. 1. 15. Luke. 3. 16. 17 Math. 3. 11. 12 bring them to a change of iudgement, and to a more perfecti∣on of this knowledge, and to a repentaunce of their former ignoraunces, and a beleefe in Iesus Christ. For you see he tel∣leth them playnely, that the kingdome of God was euen now at hand, and that a stronger then he came presently after him, who in deede was before him: and that him selfe was not wor∣thy to stoope downe and vnlose the latchet of his Shoes: and that although he baptised but with water, yet he that came after him woulde baptise with the holy Ghost and with Fire: and that he would come with his Fanne in his hand, to make cleane his floore, and to gather his Wheate into his Gar∣ner, and to burne vp the Chasse with vnquenchable Fire: And therefore vnles they did beleeue in him which shouldeThe sum of Iohn his doctrine was that they shoulde repent them of their former ig∣norances, and be∣leeue in Christe, as you may see Actes. 19. 4. & Math. 21. 32. to the ende. and that was the fruites in deede which the Husbandmen shoulde haue brought forth vn∣to the Lord of the Uineyarde. Math. 3 9. Gene. 3. 15. & Iohn. 8. 33. to the ende. come after him, that is, in Christ Iesus, they woulde prooue to be this chasse. Wherfore he telleth his kinsmen the Iewes, that notwithstanding they for their partes began to say with∣in them selues, We haue Abraham to our Father, and there∣fore we are the onely people, because the couenauntes and promises of God belong onely vnto vs: and also for that the Oracles of God were committed chiefly vnto vs: and also because we are the Circumcision, whereby we are separated from the sinners of the Gentiles: I say notwithstandyng they beganne to bragge in this sort, of all these outwarde thynges, yet he telleth them, that vnles they did beleeue in him of whom all the Prophetes before had spoken, and was now come into the worlde, they shoulde finde them selues to be this Chasse here spoken of, and not the good Seede of the woman, and of faythfull Abraham: but euen the naturall seede of that olde Serpent, their father the Deuill, and that God was able to rayse vp sonnes vnto Abraham in steade of them, euen of the very stones. Whereby is meant, that where∣as the Gentiles vnto that time had hartes as hard as stones, for asmuch as they regarded not to knowe the Lorde aright,Rom. 1. 28. and therfore he regarded not the time of this their ignorance,Acte. 17. 30. & Rom 1. 21. to 29. &. Act. 14 15. 16. 17. but suffered them to runne on in the hardnes of their hartes, euen to their owne destruction: Yet now he admonisheth all
men eery where to repent them of their former ignorance, and beleeue the Gospell. Yea now Iohn telleth them, that theMath. 3. 10. axe is put euen to the very roote of the trees: and therefore yf these Gentiles woulde repent them of their former igno∣rances, and beleeue in Christ, as faythfull Abraham did, then shoulde they be counted the sonnes of Abraham, and the other shoulde be cut off euen according, as the Apostle sayth: ThoseAs our sauiour sayth of Zacheus Luke. 19. 9. & Gala. 3. 7. Rom. 2. 28. 29. which are of fayth, are the chyldren of Abraham. And againe, He is not a Iew, which is one outwardly: neyther is that cir∣cumcision which is outwarde in the fleshe: but he is a right Iew which is one within, and whose hart is filled so full with the knowledge of God, that he can alwayes prayse the Lorde aright: and likewyse that is true circumcision which is of the hart, and in the spirit, and not in the letter: and therefore yf these Gentiles woulde be such, they shoulde then be thePhil. 3. 3. Iohn. 1. 11. 12. 13. true circumcision in deede: yea, they should then be the true seede of Abraham, and also the right Iewes: and so their praiseRom. 2. 29 and Psalm. 24. 6. Hebre. 6. 1. shoulde be of God, and not of men. Agayne, whereas the Apostle vrgeth the Hebrewes to be led forward vnto perfecti∣on: you are not to thinke he meaneth it of workes (although no man will be so madde as to thinke otherwyse, but that by those that haue knowledge a perfection of workes must also be practised, for otherwyse (because you shall not mistake me) I tell you still, your knowledge is in vayne: For what hastPsal. 50▪ 16▪ 17 thou to do with my couenant in thy mouth (sayth the Lorde) if thou hatest to be reformed: And therfore as we are to growHebr. 6. 1. 2. Corin. 7. 1. vp in knowledge, so are we also, as the Apostle saith, to grow vp in holines:) but in this place you are to vnderstande that the Apostle meaneth it of the perfection of knowledge, which not onely y• Hebrewes, but also all others ought to attayne vnto: that so they might see how Christ was answerable to all the former types, figures, shadowes, and ceremonies in the Law: and how that at y• very houre of his death, al those wereDan. 9, 24. to the ende. Exod. 26, 31. 32. 33. and Matth. 27. 51. Hebr. 9. 24. & 10. 20. to ceasse, according as Daniel long before had told. In token whereof the vaile that separated the two holy places rent a sunder: because then Christe passed through the vaile of his owne fleshe from the Crosse, vnto the holyest of all, euen vnto
the very heauen it selfe. Wherefore they were to be ledde for∣ward vnto all such high poyntes of knowledge, and to learne to know how that Christ entering into that holy place (which was not made with handes) made a more perfect reconcilia∣tion betwixt God and the people, then euer coulde Aaron do in the holy places made with handes. And also they were to know that Christe was a sacrificer after another maner of or∣derPsalme. 110. 4. and Hebr. 5. 5. 6. & 7. to the ende. then was Aaron, euen one after the order of Melchize∣dek: the which Melchizedek is described in Scripture as though he were without father, and without mother: and asGen. 14. 18. concerning that name, as though he had no beginning of dayes, nor ende of lyfe, but continuing a Sacrificer for euer. And yet notwithstanding though some would haue him kept in obscuritie, because their owne wittes According as y• Apostle sayth, Hebr. 5. 11. to the ende, & there∣fore he geueth men a sharpe re∣proofe, for that they continued styll as babes, & not able to con∣ceiue of deeper matters. Hebr. 7. 4. are dul of conceite, and not exercised in the booke of God: the Scripture is playne enough concerning the person who he was, and in what sence he is sayd to be without father, without mother, without beginning of dayes, without ende of lyfe: Therefore what modestie count you that, to forbid where the holy Ghost hath commaunded: Nay what bold∣nes is there in you that are not afrayde so to do. yea, and geueth a straight commaundement to consider how great a man he was: that so the Hebrewes, and all others myght see how farre he excelled Abraham, on whom the Iewes so much relyed: and also how farre his Priesthood excelled the Priest∣hood of Aaron, or any other of the sonnes of Leuie. For wher∣as they had a commaundement according to the Law, to take Tythes of the people their brethren, though they came out of the loynes of Abraham: yet he whose kinred is not counted amongst them, receiued tythes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises. And moreouer here men that die, re∣ceiue tythes: but there he receiued them, of whom it is wit∣nessed that he lyueth for euer. And to say as the trueth is, Leuie also which receiueth tythes, payde tythes in Abraham, for he was yet in the loynes of his father Abraham whenNum. 18▪ and Deutro. 18. Gen. 14. 18. 19 20. Melchizedek met him. After the order of this Melchizedek, I say, were the Hebrewes and all others to knowe, that our Sauiour Christ was made a Sacrificer, who as concerningNum. 20. 28. & Hebre. 7. 23. Gen. 14. 18. 19 20. &. Psalme 110. 4. his humane nature, was without a father, and as concerning his diuine nature, without a mother: and who also in proper
signification, had no beginning of dayes, nor ende of lyfe: but continueth a Sacrifices for euer, and sitteth at the right handHbr 7. 24, 25. and. 10. 12. & Roman. 8. 24. of God, to make continuall intercession for all those that will come vnto God by him: and who also is able perfectly to saue them that do so, seeing he euer liueth to make intercession forHebr. 7. 25. them. Unto these and such lyke high poyntes of knowledge beseeming a Christian, doth the Apostle vrge the Hebrewes vnto: of the which, two or three more I wyl note vnto you, as to know how Christ had been proclaymed heyre of al thingesHebr. 1. 2. 3. euen from the very day of Adam his creation: and how that by him the father made the worlde: and how that he being the bryghtnes of his glory, and the ingraued forme of his person,Exod. 23. 20. 2, & Colo 2. . beareth vp all thinges by his mightie worde: and how that he hath by hym selfe and his owne blood, purged our sinnes from dead workes to serue the lyuing God: and howe that notwithstanding he was made a litle inferiour to the Angels,Hebr. . 9. 14. through the sufferyng of death, yet was he crowned with glory and honour, in that through death he destroyed him that had the power thereof, that is to say, the Deuill. And is alsoHebr. 1. 4. 6. 7. 13. made much more excellent then the Angelles, inasmuch as he hath obteyned a more excellent name then any of them: and in as much as they must all do worshyp vnto him, and are but his messengers: And in asmuch as it was not sayd vnto any of them, Sit at my ryght hand vntill I make thine eni∣miesPsalm. 110▪ 1. thy footestoole, but vnto him it was, and so he doth, euen at the right hand of God in the heauenly and highest places,Ephe. 1. 20. to the ende. far aboue all principalitie, and power, and might, and domi∣nion, and euery name that is named, not in this worlde only, but also in that that is to come, and hath made all thinges subiect vnder his feete. They were also to knowe howe that he was worthy of much more glory then was Moses, in as∣muchHebr. 3. 3. to. 7. as he which hath buylded the house hath more honour then the house: and in asmuch as he was as the sonne ouer his owne house, and Moses but as a faythfull seruaunt in the house, euen a seruaunt to beare witnes of those thinges which afterwardes should be done by him. As you may see in the whole  to the He∣brewes, as also i all other the Epistles of the Apostles. These, and thou∣sandes of suche lyke heauenly poyntes of knowledge were
the Hebrewes to be led forwarde vnto: and not only they, but also you and all men in the worlde, that looke to appeare with Christ in glory, must set their chiefest affection on theseColo. 3. 1. 2. heauenly thinges. Therefore when you haue subdued your affection from delighting in the thinges of this worlde, and brought it to delight only in the booke of God, that so your hart may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all these heauenly poyntes of wysedome, and spiritual vnderstanding,Colo. 3. 16. then may you walke worthy of the Lord, and shall please him in all thinges, otherwyse it is vnpossible you shoulde: ney∣ther wyl your mortification be accepted in the sight of God, no although you neuer so much pull downe your selfe: for God delighteth not in fooles, but in those that loue to heareEcclesi. 5. 3. eremy. 9. 24. & Iohn. 10. 27 his voyce, and desire to know him aright, in them doth he de∣light. And therefore to conclude this speech, you must know that of necessitie you are first bounde to learne Christe, before you can know how to put him on: and then when you haue by him founde lyght, you must endeuour your selfe to walke as chyldren of the lyght, for otherwyse the wrath of God wyl come vpon you, as vpon all the chyldren of disobedience it hath: for God is holy, and therefore must we be holy, or elsLeuit. 20. 26. & 1. Pet. 1. 15. 16 be sure he wyll not spare our misse-deedes, as he speaketh vn to Moses, but euery transgression and disobedience shall beExodu. 23. 2 sure to finde a iust recompence of rewarde. So that the more knowledge you haue in his holy worde, wherein you shall vnderstande, that not one iot of his iustice passeth vnperfor∣med, the more, yf any sparke of grace you haue, will you learne to mortifie your earthly members, and also to do those workes that God requireth: for as God is knowen, euen soPsalm. 90. 11. is he feared, sayth the Prophet. Therefore in any wise desire to be instructed in the worde of God aboue all other thinges, and then no doubt but you wyll be ashamed, yf any thing be done amisse, yea and often strike vpon your thygh with so∣rowe of hart, as the Prophet Ieremie also speaketh.ere▪ 31. 19. Now it may be you wyll say agayne, Euery one can notAn ether Obiection. reade, neyther hath euery one leysure to get suche great and perfect knowledge as you speake of: And moreouer many
dye before they come to yeeres of discretion: as also many in their mothers wombe: How then shall all these do▪ shall none be saued, but those that vnderstande the whole Bible: Yes forsooth, for yf they do in steadfast fayth but touch theMath. 9. 20. 21 12. & 14. 36. & Mark. 5. 27. to 35. &. 6. 56. & 12. 42. 43. 44. & Luke. 21. 1. to 5. hemme of Christ his garment, they shalbe saued: for aswell doth he accept the poore Wydowes myte, as the Riche mans great gyft, especially yf it come with such willingnes of hart, that yf they had, or coulde get more, more they woulde geue. But seeing that fayth is the gyft of God: and seeing also2. Cor. 8. 12. Ephe. 2. 8. Rom. 10. 17. 1. Pet. 2. 2. and 2. Pet. 3. 18. that the ordinarie meanes that he hath appoynted to come thereby, is the hearing and reading of his holy worde, we must euery one of vs desire the sincere Milke thereof, as the Apostle Peter sayth: that so we may growe thereby, both in fayth, in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ. And most meete and necessarie it is that so we shoulde do: for seeing that Satan goeth about lyke a roaring Lion, continually seeking whom he may de∣uoure:1. Pet. 5. 8. How muche more needefull therefore is it, that we should continually be as carefull, to get such skill in the hand∣ling of the sworde of the spirite, which is the worde of God,Ephe. 6. 17. as that we may be able, not onely to resist him, but also to wounde him most deadly therewithall: for otherwyse, yf we shall be founde ignoraunt in the vse of our weapon, we shall be sure to receiue most deadly woundes our selues, because that ignoraunce therein shall not excuse any man. Therefore whether a man can read or no, that shall not excuse him: for yf he can not, he must haue the more care to be taught by o∣thers, that in any wyse he may get some knowledge in this spirituall weapon offered for his helpe, least when he shoulde geue the woundes, he receiue them most deadly him selfe. And as for Chyldren which die in their mothers wombe, or before they come to be of discretion to vse y• ordinarie meanes, we must commende them vnto the Lord, who is able without the meanes to saue whom pleaseth him, being elected in Christ before the worlde was made: the which Babes elected it pleaseth the Lorde to inlighten their mindes, by the work∣ing of his holy spirite, euen in their mothers wombes: as well
you may perceiue by Iohn ye Baptist, who, when he heard butLuke. 1. 44. onely the voyce of the mother of our Lord, sprang for ioy: as also by the Prophet Ieremie, of whom the Lord sayth, beforeIere. 1. 5. thou camest out of the wombe, I sanctified thee, and so foorth. Now as it pleaseth the Lorde to inlighten such Infantes, as are elected by such secrete meanes as pleaseth him, so is he able to do the lyke vnto all others of greater yeeres. But since that he hath appoynted an ordinarie meanes for such to come by the knowledge of his Sonne, we must looke to that, and desire of the Lord, that it woulde please him to inlighten our mindes thereby. And whereas you say, that all men haue not tyme and leysure to attayne vnto skill and knowledge in the booke of God. That is not so: for yf they woulde bestowe but that one day of seauen, which the Lord hath commaunded them, eyther in hearing the worde or reading therein them∣selues, they myght attaine vnto very great knowledge: yea so great, as that they might be able at the least to geue a sound reason of their fayth: yea and to auoyde the deadly blowes of Satan, although not able to cast off al: especially if that one day were bestowed with like delyght and desire of the attey∣ning thereunto, as they woulde do yf it were a worldly com∣moditie, or vayne desire they shoulde seeke after. How much more knowledge trow you, myght then be attayned vnto, yf men woulde bestow all the houres therein, the which they be∣stowEsai. 41. 21. in vayne delights: as huntyng, hauking, tabling, dicing, carding, bouling, shooting, or any such lyke: no doubt but to a woonderful great knowledge, euen to so great, as that they shoulde be able then, to bryng foorth (as the Lorde speaketh) euen their most strong reasons, If men would exercise their wis in ye booke of God, as Heb. 5. 14. they shoulde then be able without pre∣meditatiō before hand to put to si∣lence any aduer∣sary whatsoeuer, according to Luke. 21. 14. 15. Examples you haue of Ste∣uen in Actes. 7. & diuers others Psalm. 90. 12. wherby they myght so foyle Satan and his ministers, as that they woulde be ashamed, and afrayde to offer combate with them any more. So that if men woulde consider with them selues, how short the tyme of their abode is here, and also how vncertaine: and so learne with Moses to pray vnto the Lord, that it woulde please him to teach them to number these their few dayes aright, that so they myght apply their hartes vnto wysedome: No doubt but they shoulde attayne vnto plenty thereof. For the Lorde
hath so promised. But the Deuyll hath so bewitched men, and so blinded them, and beareth such sway with them, that they had rather spende a whole yeere, yea all their lyfe tyme, in those vayne thinges, which tende to none other ende, then to draw them vnto him, who seeketh for them, which is the Deuyll: then they woulde bestow one houre, yea one minute of an houre, in those thinges that shoulde tende to their salua∣tion, and to the pleasing of their maister and Sauiour Christ: so that in them is fulfilled the saying of the Apostle: For in the last dayes sayth he, Men shall be louers of pleasures more2. Tim. 3. 4. then louers of God. And notwithstanding our Sauiour doth dayly call and seeke for them, euen to shroude them as the Henne woulde do her Chickens, yet wyll they not come vn∣derMath. 23. 37. the couert of his winges for ought that he can do: but thinke it is enough, yf they can say (as commonly they do) I beleeue in Christe, and hope to be saued by hym as well as you, although I take no such paynes to get this great know∣ledge: for what neede I so to do? For is it not sayd, He that beleeueth in him shall neuer perishe, but haue eternall lyfe? Which is true in deede, yf they knewe what they spake: but they must well know, it is not enough to speake the bare wordes, for so much one myght make a Parrat to do: but their beliefe must be setled vpon him, accordyng to the testi∣monie which Moses and the Prophetes haue geuen of hym: that so they may say with Peter, We beleeue, and also know,Iohn. 6. 69. that thou art the Christ the Sonne of the lyuing God: there∣fore this speech of theirs doth import nothing els, but euen to contemne Christ: so, for men to content them selues with slothfulnes. And therefore the holy Ghost doth geue vnto such a maruellous great reproofe, saying: O you foolyshe,Pro. 1. 22. how long will you loue foolyshnes: and you skornefull, how long wyl you hate knowledge? So that by this their hating of knowledge, it may well appeare they are none of Christes, but are of that wicked sort, who, according as the Prophet sayth, haue vtterly left of to vnderstande, and who in no wysePsalm. 36. 3. regarde to haue knowledge. Therefore in any case see thatPro. 29. 7. you for your partes alwayes remember what the holy Ghost
commaundeth you to beware of: that is, That you be not likePsalm. 32. 9. the Horse and Mule, which haue no vnderstanding, whose mouthes are bounde vp with byt and brydle: but that you be of that sort, whose mouthes are alwayes open to speake ofPsalm. 37. 30. wysedome, and whose oonges are euer ready to talke of iudgement. So that by this it may wel appeare, that it is not enough for a true Christian to content him selfe with a fewe sentences of Christ, and so thinke he hath enough: but he that professeth him selfe to be a scholler in the schoole of Chrise, must haue a woonderfully desire to learne Christe, euen so farre as that he may dwell in his hart most plenteously in allColo. 3. 16. wysedome, whereby he may be able to admonishe him selfe in all spirituall thinges, as the Apostle sayth: yea he must desire and thirst after the worde of God, euen as the Hart doth after the water brookes: that when he commeth thereunto, he may so drinke, as that he may be fylled with all fulnesEphe. 3. 19. Colo. 1. 10. and Ephe. 4. 15. Ephe. 3. 18. 19. of God: Yea he must continually desire to be increasyng in the knowledge of God, that if it be possible for him, he may be able to comprehende with all Saintes, what is the breadeth, and length, and deapth, and highth of the glory that we shall receiue by Christ: Yea and to knowe his loue towardes vs, which in deede passeth all knowledge, as the Apostle sayth. So that in no wyse must we stande styll, but euery one must goe on forwarde, eyther by hearing of others, or readyng therein him selfe, euen in the vnitie of fayth, to the knowledgeEphe. 4. 13. of the Sonne of God, vntyll he become a perfect man in Iesus Christe. For we must not in any wyse remayne asEphe. 4. 14. and Hebr. 13. 9. chyldren, waueryng and readie to be carried about with euery wynde of doctrine, by the deceyte of men, as greatly it is to be lamented we are now adayes: but we must folowEphe. 4. 15. the trueth in loue, and in all thinges grow vp vnto him which is the head: that is Christ. For not to go on forward in religi∣on, is to go backward, because Satan draweth most stronglyIerem. 7. 24. & 9. 3. that way, and so to remayne in our former folly, and con∣temptuously to cast off the worde of God: yea whatsoeuer he be, pretende he neuer so much zeale, and shewe of holynes: Yet yf his chiefest care be not continually to be increasing in
the knowledge of Christe, he doth nothing els but say in hisAs Iob spea∣keth of them. Iob. 2. 14. 15. hart vnto God: Depart from me, for I desire not the know∣ledge of thy wayes. For the which cause, as you shall see a∣non, the wrath of God hath been extended on all the worlde, euen to the vtter excluding of them from his presence, and ca∣sting off from their countries. For what thing can men do to please the Lord, when that his worde of them shalbe reiected? It is not then an outwarde shewe of foolyshe zeale or morti∣fication,Micah. 6. 6. 7. 8 that the Lord wyll lyke of. No, although the Papist do for his part in neuer so great zeale, afflict his body eyther by whypping, or lanching the fleshe with kniues vntyll the blood come foorth, lyke vnto Baalles Priestes, or in fastingEsa. 29 9. to. 14 fourtie dayes togeather, lyke foolysh Apes in imitation, or in dropping neuer so many prayers, according to the number of his Beades, or in vowing single lyfe, or in running on pil∣grimage, or in punishing the body in what sort so euer he wil: which thinges in deede haue a shew of wysedome in them, as the Apostle sayth, euen in this their voluntarie religion, andColo. 2. 23. humblenes of minde, and in not sparing the body: but yet they shall finde in the ende, that all this is but as an abhomi∣ation to the Lord. And why? Because they haue reiectedAcoording as the Scribes & Pha∣risees had done, and therfore they are worthy of the lyke condemn∣tion that befell them, & also their foolysh hartes to continue full of darknes, as theirs did and styll doth. the worde of God, and ouerthrowen the principles thereof, and established in steade of it the doctrines & preceptes of men. And so their feare towardes God is taught by the preceptes of men, according as the Prophet Esai speaketh: and also as those nations placed in Samaria, of whom it is said: They fea∣red the Lord, but serued their Images also: Euen so, I say, do the Papistes. And therefore notwithstanding all their blind zeale, it must be sayd of them as of the other, that is, they nei∣ther feare God, nor do any thing after his commandementes: and therefore whatsoeuer they do, it must needes be an abho∣minationEsai. 29. 13. 2. King. 17. 33 to the ende. to the Lord. Or yf the Protestant pretende neuer so great shewe of religion in his kinde, or neuer so great a zeale: yet vnlesse it be seasoned with the true knowledge of Christ, none of all this wyll the Lord regarde, or therewithal be pleased. For when his worde is not delighted and estee∣med as it ought to be, although we now & then do the thinges
that it requireth: yet are they not accepted, because his worde was not our rule to square them by. For to what purpose, sayth the Lorde, do you bring vnto me Incense from Sheba,Ierem. 6. 20. and sweete Calamus from a farre countrey? your burnt offe∣ringes are not pleasaunt in my sight, neyther are your sacrifi∣ces sweete vnto me, sayth the Lord. And why? Because they had reiected the worde of the Lord, therfore did these their ho∣lyere. 6. 10. 11. 19. 0. actions turne vnto an abhomination. So that you see that who so euer he be, reade, or reade not, haue he tyme, or haue he not, no excuse shall serue him, to be ignoraunt in the wordeRom. 2. 12. of God, and so of Christe. For the Lorde that knoweth best what is good and fitte for man, knewe well enough in the be∣ginning, that when he appoynted but one day of seuen to beGen. 2. 2 3. sauctified vnto his glorie, that that was enough to make man voyde of all excuse. And why? Because that yf they woulde bestow but that one day of seuen, accordyng as he hath com∣maunded, that is, not in any respect to do their owne willes,Esai. 5 8. 13. & Exodus. 20. 8. 9. 10. or to folow their owne affayres, no nor so much as to speake one vayne worde: but to call the Sabboth a delight to conse∣crate it as glorious vnto the Lord: They might I say, yf they would bestow it in this sort, soone learne by his holy worde to honour him with such worshyppe as he requireth: and also to know a right how Christ is IEHOVAH their God, whoExod. 20. 1. 2. and. 1. Iohn. 5. 20. and Leuit. 26. 4. 45. & Dani. 9. 23. to the ende. & Apoc. 5. 9. & Hebr. 2. 14. 1 Ephe. 2. 3. Iohn. 17. 3. brought them not only from the bondage & slauery of gypt, Babell▪ or Rome, but also from the bondage and thraldome of hell and death. But since it is so, that all men as they are borne of Adam, are the chyldren of wrath, and styll remayne in this captiuitie: and seeing there is no meanes neyther in heauen nor earth, to redeeme them thence but only by Christ: and he likwise not beneficial vnto any, but such as know him aright by his holy worde: And hauing most gratiously besto∣wed this his holy worde vpon vs, and we lyke most brutyshe beastes, hauing as yet refused the same, and taken no delyght at all therein: let vs harken what he sayth vnto vs. UntoIere. 6. 10. whom shall I speake and admonishe, sayth the Lord, that they may heare? Beholde, their cares are vncircumcised, and they can not hearken: beholde the worde of the Lorde is vnto them
as a reproch, and they haue no delight at all therein. For the Pastores, they are become as beasts, and haue not sought theIeremy. 10. 21. Lord, therefore haue they none vnderstanding: And the wiseIeremy. 8. 9. men of the worlde, they are ashamed of the worde of God: Lo, saith the Lord. They haue reiected the worde of the Lord, and therefore what wysedome can there be in them: And the peo∣pleHosea. 4. 6. lykewyse, they are spoyled for lacke of knowledge, and haue also refused it. Therfore heare O earth, sayth the Lord,Ierem. 6. 19. & Hosea. 4. 6. I wyll cause a Plague to come vpon this people, euen the fruite of their owne imaginations, and because they haue re∣fused knowledge, I wyll also refuse them: and as they haue not taken heede vnto my worde, but cast it off, euen so wyll I cast off them. Wherfore seeing that the Lord hath commaun∣ded the earth to heare, what a controuersie he hath therewith, and euer more hath had, and onely for the contempt and re∣iecting of his holy worde: and we as full of impietie in that kinde, as euer any Nation was: My purpose is to bring to your remembraunce his iudgementes of olde, and to lay themPsalm. 119. 30 52. before your eyes, as the Prophet sayth he did before his: to the end that who so is wyse amongst you (as sayth the same Pro∣phet)Psalm. 107. 43 may obserue and vnderstand these thinges: and also be∣holde with the Apostle, both the louing kindnes, and the seue∣ritieRoman. 11. 22. of the Lord: His louing kindnes towardes all those that haue delighted in his holy word, and by faith imbraced his co∣uenantes therein conteyned, and with willingnes obeyed his commandementes: and his seuerity against all those that haue rebelled against him, and the same. That so when you haue heard & seene how seuere a Iudge the Lord is, you may with all speede (euen while it is called To day) get you to theHebr. 3. 7. 8. & Esai. 55. 6. Booke of God: that so you may heare his voyce, and to plough vp the fallowe grounde of your hart: that so that im∣mortallIeremy. 4. 4. & Hosea 10. 12. 1. Pet. 1. 23. seede of the worde of God may take such deepe roote therein, as that it may beget you anew euen to the bringing foorth of fruite, not only of thyrty, or sixty folde, but also euenMath. 13. 23. of a full hundreth. The which the Lord for his mercies sake, graunt vnto vs euery one. Amen.
The Iudgementes of God vpon the Angelles that sinned, and likewyse vpon our fyrst Parentes, and the rest of the olde worlde. SO farre foorth as the Scripture spea∣keth of Angelles, or of other creatures, or of any other matter els whatsoeuer, so farre may we be bolde to speake, and not further: For the hid thinges belongeDeutro. 29. 29. vnto the Lorde, but the reuealed thynges belonge vnto vs and our chyldren for e∣uer, sayth Moses. First then for those Angels, which through rebellion agaynst the Lorde beganne to exalt them selues, not being contented with their first estate, but grudging ther∣at,Iude. 6. and 1.▪ Pet. 24. & Iob. 4. 18. and also repining at the glorious estate of Mankinde, and so leauing their owne habitation and calling: them the Lord hath not spared, but cast them downe euen into the bottomles pit of Hell, and hath delyuered them into cheynes of darknes to be kept vnto damnation, euen vnto the Iudgement of the great and terrible day of the Lorde. Agayne, our fyrst Pa∣rentes whom the Lorde had created in so glorious an estate,Gene. 1. 26. 27. euen after his owne image and lykenes, and giuen them rule ouer the workes of his handes, and dominion and Lordshyp ouer all his creatures, yet full sone forgate they his precepts, and cast off his commaundementes: Wherefore he suffered not them to continue in this their fyrst honour, but presently tooke he away euen all their glory: and so they became lykePsalm. 49. 12. 20 vnto the Beastes that peryshe. And through that one offenceRom. 5. 12. to the ende. of theirs sinne entred into the worlde, and death by sinne: which death went ouer all men, for asmuch as all men haue
sinned: for by that one offence the fault came on all men, to their vtter condemnation. And Kain their eldest Sonne1. Iohn. 3. 12. who was of the wicked, euen that seede of the Serpent, thatGen. 3. 15. should begin to bruse the heele of the seede of the woman, hee I say, made plaine their corruption: for he continued in stri∣uing against the Lord, and despised the couenant of saluati∣on pronounced to his father Adam in Paradise: the whichGen. 3. 15. counant he was taught as well as his brother Abell, and yet would he not imbrace the same by faith, as his brother did: but made a mocke thereat, and trode vnder foote the Sonne of God: So that this his great wickednes by the euent ap∣peared, in that he murdered his owne brother, whereby heeGen 4. 8. shewed himselfe to be of his Father the Deuill, who as our Sauiour sayth, was a murderer from the beginning: that isIohn. 8. 44. to say, from the very first day of Adam his creation: for the which cause this Kan had an open curse, and was excommu∣nicatedGen. 4. 11. to 15. from the presence of the Lorde, euen as a vacabonde and a runnagate giuen ouer to his owne wayes. His wicked posteritie, as rotten braunches of an euill rote, hold on in theGen. 4. 19. 23. 24. lyke vngodly dealings and euill sayings: Unto whom He∣noch the seuenth from Adam prophesied, saying. BeholdeIude. 14. 15. you wicked ones, the Lorde commeth with thousands of his Saincs to giue iudgement against al men, and to rebuke all the vngodly amongst them of all their wicked deedes, which they haue vngodlie committed, and of all their cruell speak∣ings, which wicked sinners haue spoken against the Lorde. Now if you will know what they sayd, the holy Ghost doth tell you, how that they sayde vnto God, Depart from vs, forIob. 22. 17. 18. we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes: and lykewise they asked what the almightie colde do for them, notwithstanding he had filled their houses with all good things. Yea and moreouer, though Noe were a Preacher of righteousnesse2. Pet. 2. 5. & Geneis. 6. 3. & Hebr. 11. 7. vnto these wicked ones, by the space of sixe score yeares, all which time he prepared himselfe to the making of the Arke, through the which he condemned the whole worlde: yet not∣withstanding they made but a floute of the threatninges of the Lord, saying: Where is the promise of his comming: for2. Pet. 3. 4. 5. 6.
euer since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the beginning of the creation. And moreouer, tush say they, let vs eate, and drinke, and take our pleasure: Let vs marrie,Math. 24. 37. 38. 39. and giue in marriage: Let vs build our houses huge and high and so foorth. And thus were these wicked wretches willingly ignorant, euen vnto the very day that Noe went into the Arke, and would not know how that the same word,2. Pet. 3. 5. 6. & Gen. 1. 9. which in the begeinning caused the waters to vncouer the earth, might commaund them to ouerflow the same agayne. But yet they found it most true: for in the seuenth age of thisGen. 4. 1. 17. to. 23. wicked generation, the wrath of the Lord was well knowne amongst the sonnes of men: for they were cut downe beforeIob. 22. 16. the tyme, and their foundation was as a Ryuer that ouer∣flowed.2. Pet. 2. 5. So that he spared not this olde worlde, which noweYou may cast these yeeres in Gen. 5. and. 7. Chapters. had continued one thousand sixe hundred fiftie and sixe yeeres, but onely saued Noe with seuen more of his familie, and brought in the floud vpon the rest of the worlde of the vngod∣ly: yea he commaunded the fountaines of the great deepe toGen. 7. 11. be broken vp, and the windowes of heauen were opened, so that all the high mountaines that were vnder the whole hea∣uen were couered, because that the wickednes of man wasGen. 6. 5. great on earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughtes of his hart were onely euill continually. And therefore did the Lorde smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lippes did he destroy the wicked: Yea hee made them to perish as though they had been doung: so that they which had seene them, might say, where are they nowe? But if you will know what is become of their soules, Saint. Pet. 3. 19. 20 Peter will tell you, how that they are now in prison, that is, in hell, for disobeying the spirit of Christ, who then prea∣ched vnto them by the mouth of Noe, while the Arke was in making. Againe, if you will know how they might know that the spirit of Christ did so: the answere is, that euen the very same Gospell that was preached vnto Adam and Eue in Paradise: and afterwardes to Abell, to Seth, and the rest of the godlie, was also preached vnto them. And this preaching was, that the Seede of the woman should breakeGen. 3. 15.
the head of the Serpent: which notwithstanding being but a verie short Sermon, yet was it so effectall, and so full of matter, as that all the whole booke of God is no more then that. But as the preaching of this Gospell was a sauour of life vnto life, to all those that laide holde thereon, euen so was it also a sauour of death vnto death, to all those that re∣iected the same. So that for this first age, you see both the louing kindnesse, and the seucritie of the Lorde. The iudgements of God on Chams posteritie, as also on their confederats vntill the giuing of the Lawe. NOtwithstanding now the former desola∣tion of all things breathing on earth, the which a man would thinke shoulde haue been a terrour vnto men for euer after, yet full soone do they forget it: For anAs you may cast it in Gene. 11. 10. to. 20. and Gene. 10. 25. Gen. 10. 6. to 11. & Gen. 11. 1. to. 10. Micah. 5. 6. Gen. 9. 8. to. 18 Gene. 9. 26. Gen. 1. 1. to 10. hundreth and about some thirtie yeeres after the flood, in the daies of Peleg, do the posteritie of Cham with their adherents, reuiue the olde impietie of Kain, and his wicked race, in that they also de∣spise the couenants of God, and the blessing pronounced vn∣to Sem: And so goe about to buyld a Cittie and a Towre, whose top (as they thought) should reach vnto heauen, wher∣by they might get vnto them selues a Sem, or name: But full soone was the holy Trinitie aware of this their wicked intent, and so he came down from heauen in his fierce wrath, to confound their most foolish deuices: and also to scatter them from thence ouer the whole earth. And therefore the name of it was called Babell, or Confusion, because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: so that they were not onely cut from the holy Language of Sem, but al∣so from the religion and true worship of the blessed God of Sem, the which continued in his tents. Agayne, in the These. 10. you may reckon in Gene. 11. from the. 10. to. 27. tenth age after the flood, in the dayes of Abraham, the wickednes
of those fiue Cities in Canaan (as Sodom, Gomorrah, Ad∣mah,These fiue cities are cyed togea∣ther in Gen. 14. 2. Zeboiim, and Zoar) brake out into such filthinesse, as that the stincke thereof ascended vp into heauen, and cryed for vengeance to be powred vpon them. And notwithstan∣dingGene 18. 17. to the ende. the Lorde being mercifull, and was intreated to haue spared them for tene righteous men their sakes, yet could they not therein be found: so that their sinnes being so great and greeuous in the sight of GOD, his great anger was so kindled against them, that in his fierce wrath hee ouer∣threw them, and turned foure of them into ashes, and condem∣nedDeutro. 29. 23. 2. Pet. 2. 6. them, and made them an esample of eternall fier vnto all ages that afterwards should liue vngodly: So that heere the curse of Noe vpon Cham extending to Canaan, tookeGen. 9. 22. 24. 25. 27. effect on these some part of his wicked branches. Likewise in the seuenth age from Abraham, in the dayes of Moses,These seuen a∣ges you shall find thus. Gen. 21. 5 & 25. 26. &. 29 34. &. 46. 11. & Exod. 6. 18. 20. the wrath of the Lord was manifested also in most vehement sort in Egypt euen in that land of cursed Cham, vpon that proude Pharaoh and his countrie: the which were other braunches euen of Cham himselfe that wicked roote: I say the wrath of the Lord was manifested vpō them in most vehe∣mentExod. 3. Psal. 78. 51. & 105. 23. By these places you may see that E∣gypt was the land of Cham. Exod. 7. 19. & 8. 6. 16. 17. 24. & 9. 3. 10. 23. & 10. 13. 22. &. 12. 29. and 14. . 28. Exod. 5. 2. 9. Exo. 15. 6. 7. 8. sort, by tenne seuerall plague bestowed vpon man and beast, and at last Pharaoh and all his host ouerwhelmed in the Red Sea. For sayth he vnto Moses concerning the Lorde: Who is he that I should heare his voyce, and let Israell go? I know not the Lord, neyther will I let Israell go: neyther do I regarde his words by you spoken, for they are but vaine. But the right hand of the glorious Lorde ouerthrewe these rebellious treatours, which in this sort rose against him, and sent foorth his wrath, which consumed them as the stubble: and also by the blast of his Nosethrils the waters were ga∣thered, and the floods stoode still as an heape: yea, the depthes congealed together in the hart of the Sea, to intice them in:Exod. 15. 5. & Psal. 106. 11. but presently the waters couered them, and they sancke to the bottome as a stone. And why so? because indeede they had forsaken the hope of Israell, euen that most precious fountaineere. 17. 1. of liuing waters. But he brought foorth them his chosen Israell, through the middest of the Sea on drie ground, andExod. 14. 19.
made the waters vnto them a wall both on the one side, and on the other. So that heere you may see againe, both the lo∣uing kindnesse, and the seueritie of the Lord: his louing kind∣nes on Sem and his posteritie, as also on all others that held the same fayth: His most seuere seueritie on Cham and his posteritie, as also on all other their confederats. Now if you will knowe the chiefe cause why these horrible plagues befell them: the aunswere is, because they regarded not the prea∣ching of the Gospell of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. For as he was made the author of eternall saluation vnto allHebr. 5. 9. them that did beleeue in him, and obey him, euen so is it sayd,Iohn. 3. 36. that he that beleeueth not in ye Sonne of God, nor giueth due obedience vnto him, shall neuer see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him. But the very same Gospel that was preached vnto Sem, aphet, and their posteritie, was also preached vnto Cham and his posteritie. Now if you will knowe agayne what this preaching was: it was no more but euen this: Blessed be the Lord God of Sem. And tenne ages after that,Gen. 9. 26. an other, In thy seede O Abraham shall all the nations ofGen. 12. 3. the earth be blessed. Now out of all doubt two meruellous short Sermons as possible can be heard, and yet so full of vertue and grace, that whosoeuer wroung out the iuice ther∣of, and applied it to his sores, found euerlasting lyfe thereby: but he that trode them vnder foote, a biting Serpent, whose sting was vnto eternall death and destruction. The iudgements of God vpon the Israelits, in the time of their being in the wil∣dernes, and also vpon their successors, vnto the time of Samuel and Saule. THus you see then the louing kindnes of the Lord towards the Israelites, the seede of A∣braham, the seede of Sem, in that he deliueredIerem. 11. 4. Exodus. 20. 2. them from the Iron furnace, the lande of E∣gypt, the house of bondage, according to
his promise made vnto Abram: which was, That they shouldGen. 15. 13. 14 16. be straungers in a lande that was not theris, where they should be afflicted and euill intreated for the space of foure hundreth yeeres: But in the ende he woulde iudge that na∣tion, and bring them againe to the lande of Canaan in the These 4. were Rohath, Amrā, Aaron, & Elia∣zar, for Rohath was one of y•. 70. that went downe unto Egypt, as you may see in Genesis. 46. and Elyazar is one that parted the land of Canaan, as you may see in Ioshua. 14. 1. fourth generation: euen so it came to passe. For all the host of Israell came out of the lande of Egypt by the blood of a Lambe, figuring the seede that was promised to Abraham, euen the selfe same day foure hundreth and thirtie yeeres before, by whose bloud they were deliuered from that spiri∣tuall Pharaoh the Diuell. Yet notwithstanding all this, this grudging Israell the sonnes of Iacob, the seede of Abraham, who had seene the meruellous workes of God in the land ofExod. 12. Gen. 12. 3. Gala. 3. 16. 17. Psal. 78. 12. 43. Exod. 19. 4. Exod. 13. 21. & Nehe. 9. 12. Exod. 19. 18. & Nehe. 9. 13. to 16. Egypt, and his wonders in the fielde of Zoan: and howe he had brought them thence, as vpon the winges of an Eagle: and howe he went before them by day in a pyller of a cloude, to leade them the way, and by night in a pyller of fire, to giue them light: and how he came downe vpon mount Sina, and spake vnto them from heauen, and gaue vnto them right iudgements, and true lawes, ordinaunces, and good com∣maundements, and declared vnto them his holy Sabothes,Exo. 16. 15. & Nehe. 9. 15. Exod. 17. 6. & Nehe. 9. 15. and commaunded them precepts, ordinances, and lawes by the hand of Moses his seruaunt: and how he gaue them bread from heauen for their hunger, and brought foorth water for them out of the rocke for their thirst: and how he rayned fleshExod. 16. 13. 15. & Psal. 78. 27. vpon them as dust, and fethered foule as the sande of the Sea: and how he suffered them to lacke nothing, for theyr clothesDeut. 8. 4. and Nehe. 9. 21. Deut. 8. 3. waxed not olde, and their feete swelled not: And all this hee did to teach them, that man liueth not by bread onely, but byPsal. 78. 11. Psal. 78. 4. and Exo. 14. 11. 12 & 15. 23. 24. & 16. 2. 7. 8. &. 17 2. 6. & 32. 1. & Num. 11. 4. 5. 6 & 14. 2. & 16. 13. 14. 41. and 21. 5. euerie worde that proceedeth from him. Yet notwithstand∣ing I say, all these his great benefites bestowed vpon them, full soone did they forget his noble actes, and the woonderfull workes that he had shewed them, and styll they rebelled a∣gaynst him: yea, full often did they prouoke him in the wyl∣dernesse, and greeue him in the Desart: they made a Calfe in Horeb, and woorshyped the molten Image: and thus they turned their glorie into the similitude of a Calfe that ea∣tethExod. 32. 4. & Psal. 106. 10. 20
Haye. Wherefore his wrath was so greatly kindled a∣gaynstPsalm. 106. 18. Deutr. 1. 32. & Num. 13. 32. 33 and. 14. 11. them, that the fyre burnt vp the wicked: yea, they prouoked hym so greeuously in misbeleeuyng styll his worde, that he swore in his wrath, that onely two of sixeNum. 14. 28. to 36. & Psal. 95. 8. to the ende. hundreth thousande shoulde enter into his rest, which by the tyme that fourtie yeeres was expired in the Wildernes, their chyldren whom they had sayd shoulde be a pray for theNumb. 14. 3. enimie, they I say, sawe the performaunce of this othe: For they saw this wicked company consumed, and their Carkei∣sesNumb. 14. 35. & Iohua. 5. 6. ouerthrowen in the Wildernesse. So that not one of theNumb. 26. 65. sixe hundreth thousande was left, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephunneh and Ioshua the sonne of Nun. Here then might you pause a lytle, and consider with your selfe of the ingra∣titude of man, and how that yf the Lord shoulde deale with vs according to our desertes, we shoulde be sure to fynde, that we shoulde deserue no better then here you see: because as the Apostle sayth, these men are euen as very stampes of our owne natures. But because I would not haue you to tarry in this Booke, I wyl proceede to the rest, that when you haue heard all, you may consider the drynes of your owne soule, and so get you with all speede to the fountayne it selfe, where∣in you may drinke, yf you wyll, euen your fyll of those wa∣ters of lyfe, the which sprang out of the Rocke that here folo∣wed1. Cor. 10. 4. them: and also learne to auoyde that vnholsome pit of mistrust, the which became vnto them their onely poyson.Ioshua. 3. &. 4. Chap. & Acte. 7. 45. Agayne then, when as now it had pleased the Lord to bryng in the younger sort (as all vnder twentie by Ioshua or Iesus) euen into the borders of his Sanctuarie, and to the holyPsal. 78. 54. 35 Mountayne, which his right hand had purchased (that so heGene. 12. 7. & 13. 14. 15. 16. & 26. 4. &. 28. 13. 14. myght perfourme his promyse made vnto their fathers) and had cast out the Heathen before them, and geuen them their possessions: and lykewyse had fylled them with all goodPsal. 105. 44. Nehem. 9. 25. Deutr. 9. 4. to the ende. thinges in great abundance, although not of theyr owne de∣sertes Iwis, but through his great goodnes: Yet notwith∣standing they also became disobedient, and rebelled agaynstNehe. 9. 26. & Iudg. 2. 10. to 15. the Lord, and cast his heauenly Lawes behinde their backes: yea they tempted and prouoked him, and kept not his testi∣monies,Psal. 78 56. 57
but turned backe, and dealt falsly lyke vnto their fathers: yea they turned euen lyke vnto a deceitfull Bowe: So that he gaue them vnto the handes of most cruell oppes∣sours,Iudg. 2. 14. Iudg. 3. 8. 14. &. 4. 2. & 6. 1. & 10. 7. 8. &. 13. 1. that greatly vexed them, as vnto the Aramites, Moa∣bites, Canaanites, Midianites, Ammonites, and the Phili∣stimes. Yea they prouoked him to anger in such sort with their high places, and moued him to wrath with their grauenPalm. 78. 58. Images, that in the ende he greatly abhorred Israel, euen so farre, as that in the dayes of Ely he forsooke the habitation1. Sam. 4. 18. to the ende. Palm. 78. 60. 61. 62. of Shilo, euen the Tabernacle where he dwelled amongst them: and so he deliuered his power (the Arke so called) into captiuitie, and his beautie into the enimies handes: Yea he gaue vp his people to the sworde, and was marueylous an∣grie with his owne inheritaunce. For sixe tymes now since they came into the Land, had the Lorde suffered them to be most cruelly oppressed by the a forenamed: So that here we may say agayne: O beholde both the louing kindnes, and the seueritie of the Lord. His louing kindnes towardes Israel, whyle they tooke good heede vnto the couenaunt that he the Lorde their God made with them: and his seueritie when so euer they began to tempt Christ, in not obeying his voyce, ac∣cording1. Cor. 10. 9. Exod. 23. 20. 21. as the Lord had tolde them. Now yf you wyll know in what sort Christe was preached vnto them, that they were thus destroyed for not obeying his voyce: The answere is, euen in as plentifull sort as the Apostles, and the rest of the Iewes in our Sauiours tyme had, for so sayth the Apostle in these wordes: As the Gospell was preached vnto vs, euen soHebre. 4. 2. was it also vnto them. Now in this place he hath onely re∣lation vnto the Hebrewes, in the tyme of their being in the Wildernes: but in the same sort that he was preached vnto them, who left their carkeises there, was he also preached vnto the younger sort that went into the Land: and in lyke maner to their successours for the fyrst seuen Iubilees, or three hundreth and fyfty yeeres: the which I haue here ioyned to∣geather as one speech. So that it wyl not be amisse, if we con∣sider here in what sort Christe was preached vnto these He∣brewes or Israelites of both these tymes. Fyrst then they
were to consider with them selues whyle they were in Egypt,Eze. 20. . Gen 1. 2. 3 chap and there serued Idols, that they were not bonde slaues for a tyme onely in body vnto Pharaoh, but they were also to looke backe vnto their first father Adam his storie: that so they myght see how they were bond slaues both in body and soule vnto the spirituall Pharaoh the Deuyll. Now yf you aske how thy might know this, seeing those Bookes of Mo∣ses which should shew it were not written, tyll they came into the Wildernes: The answere is: they myght, and also dyd§ As you may cast in Gen. 11. 10. to. 27. but when you come at the. 26. verse, where it is sayd, Terahat. 70. Y. begate Abram. you must cast Terah to be. 130 for so he was, as you may proueby these places. knowe it very wyll: for you shal vnderstande, that Adam he lyueth As you may cast your selfe in Gen. 5. two hundreth fourtie three yeeres with Methusalah to teach him: Methusalah he liueth one hundreth wanting but two yeeres with Sem to teach him: Sem he lyueth vnto the As you may cast your selfe in Gen. 5. 25. 26. 27. 32. & 6. 6. & 11. 10. 11. hundreth and fiftie yeere of Abrahams life to teach him: A∣braham he lyueth to teach his owne sonne Isaak, and also Ia∣cob his graundchylde: Iacob he lyueth in Egypt seuenteene yeeres, and there dyeth: and as he foretold his sonnes at hys death of their redemption by Christ, & also of which of themGen. 11. 32. and 12. 4. & Actes 7. 4. Christ should come: euen so you may be sure he would, and also had taught them of the creation, and the story of their first† Abram was an. 100. y. olde when Isaak was borne Gen. 21. 5 and lyueth. 75. y. after. Gen. 25. 7 And Isaak at. 60 y. begate Iacob Gen. 25. 26. so that Abram might teache Ia∣cob. 15. yeeres. father Adam, and what intollerable bondage both of body and soule by his meanes they were brought vnto: that so they might receiue such comfort, as they ought, of their redempti∣on by Christ. And to put you out of all doubt that they were thus taught before the law, you haue Iob & those that dispute with him for an example: for those matters fell out before Moses wrote the lawe, and the story of the creation, and yet you see how plentiful they are in the handling of ye creation, & likewise of the corruption which they had by Adams fall: and¶ For the tyme that Iacob lyued in Egypt you may read Gen 47. 28. also how Iob for his part saw Christ in most cleere sort. For notwithstanding all the assaults of Sathan, yet was he fully assured that his redeemer liued, and that hee should see him with his owne eyes, though wormes destroied that tabernacleGen. 49. 8. to 13. which hee then carried about him: so that by these men you may see how carefull Abraham was (according as the LordIob. 4. 17. to the end, & 9. 20. & 31. 33. &. 19 23. to. 28. Gnn. 18. 19. giueth commendation of him) to teach his sonnes the know∣ledge of the Lord. For of him by Keturah (as most like it is)
commeth Iob: and as he was carefull to teach his sonnes he had by her, both of their captiuitie by Adam, and redemption by Christ: so you may be sure he was as carefull to teach hys other sonnes by Sarah, which are those of whome we nowe speake. So then these Israelites being thus taught aswell of the captiuitie by Adam, as of the redemption by Christ, as of necssitie so it must be, they were I say to consider with them selues, that they were not onely in bondage of body for a time vnto Pharaoh: but also in most intollerable bondage of body and soule vnto that spiritual Pharaoh the deuil: & that not for foure hundreth yeeres, but eternally, vnles they had some one to redeeme them thence. So that hauing wel considered with themselues of this double bondage and captiuitie, they were also as well to consider and know being come out of Egypt, that as they were deliuered from that outward bondage and destroyer by the bloud of a silly poore lambe, euen so shouldExod. 12. Iohn. 1. 2. Heb. 2. 14. 15. & 9. 13. 14. 15 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19 20. & Reue. 1. 5 &. 5. 8 to the end. &. 1. Cor. 5. 7. they be deliuered from that spiritual bondage, and destroying destroyer the deuill, by the bloud of Iesus Christ, as of that immaculate lambe of God, which was slaine from the begin∣ning of the world: that is to say, from the verie day of their fa∣ther Adams his creation to recouer then his fall. Now if you ask how they might know that this lambe did signifie Christ: the answere is, very well: for many of them did know it, & all the rest might, and ought to haue knowne as well: for if they had but thought vpon one sermon made to their father Abra∣ham,Gen. 12. 3. and Exod. 12. 40. 41. & Gal. 3. 16. 17. euen the very selfe and same day foure hundreth & thirtie yeres before, they might haue found therein a seed promised, in whome all the nations of the earth (if they would put their trust in him) should be blessed. And to make the matter more plaine, that this lambe did signifie Christ that seede then pro∣mised, saith Moses vnto them: It is a day to be kept holy toExod. . 41. 42. the Lord, because he brought them out of the land of Egypt: This is that day of the Lord, saith he, Which all ye children of Israel mut keepe throughout al their generations: And why▪ Euen to put them still in remembrance not onely of their out∣warde, but also of their spirituall redemption: and for thisExod, 13. 1. to 17. cause were the fathers bound to teache their children the vse
heereof. For vnlesse they saw the spiriuall meaning heere∣in, as well as the outward, it profited nothing: because the vaile that couered Moses face that they coulde not be∣holde the brightnes thereof, remained also ouer their hartes, and so they went to eternall destruction. But that Moses taught this matter playnely, that Christ that Lambe of God shoulde suffer, it is manifest: for so sayth the Apostle. Now itActe. 26. 22. 23 must needes be that herein it is to be considered, for you see he appoynteth this day to be obserued throughout their gene∣rations: and he also telleth them, that when they shall neglect their Sabaothes, and fall from the Lorde, he wyll cary them into their enemies Land, and they shall be there vntyll their owne Land haue enioyed her Sabaothes. But yf there they be humbled, and turne vnto the Lord their God, then wyll he remember his couenaunt of olde made vnto their father A∣bram: which is euen this, by the which he brought them from the land of Egypt. So that yf you consr the ninth of Da∣niell with the twentie sixe of Leuiticus, you shall see how Moses sawe Christe playnely to be that Lambe of God that should be killed: that so he myght confirme this couenant forGen. 12. 3. & 17. 1. to the ende. &. 26. 4. &. 28. 13. 14. the Many of all nations that woulde trust herein: euen this couenaunt of olde made vnto Abraham, to Isaak, and to Ia∣cob, and there doth the Angell Gabriel tell Daniel, euen the* From the tyme that y• comman∣dement came forth to returne the Iewes from Babell, vnto the houre of Christe his death is. 70. seuens, or foure hundreth & nintie yeeres. Danie. 9. 21. to the ende. Utyll whihe houre the Iewes coulde haue no power to kyll Christe, as yu may see in Luke 22. 53. 54. & Iohn. 8. 20. & 11. 23. very yeere, weeke, day, and houre, of the day when Christe the King the most holy that Lambe of God shoulde be killed: which was the ende and summe of all Moses sactifices and ceremonies: and therefore they shoulde ceasse, accordyng as the Angell sayth, when Christ shoulde perfourme this: the which fell out according to Gods decree vpon the very same day that the Lambe we now speake of was killed. And lyke∣wyse that the promyse was made to Abram: and also that the commaundement came foorth for the Iewes to returne from Babell: and therefore no maruell, though Moses tell them it is a woonderfull day, yea suche a day, as is to be obscrud throughout their generations. So that yf they shoulde haue had no more teaching but onely this, to hae ledde them vnto Christ, they myght haue seene him most clecrely herein, and
had been enough to haue made them voyde of all excuse. But many and manifolde wayes besides this, was Christ prea∣ched vnto them, as in all other their bloudie sacrifices: ForLeuit. 16. and Numb. 19. and Hebre. 9. they might well knowe, that notwithstanding the bloud of bulles, and of goates, and the ashes of an heifer being sprinck∣led, sanctified, as touching the purifiyng of the flesh: yet was it not able, be it neuer so often princkled, to purge and make cleane their consciences: and therefore they were driuen to looke for one to come, who through his eternall spirite would offer hymselfe without spot to God: that so hee might purge their consciences from dead workes, to serue the liuing Lord.Pal. 40. 6. to 11. & Heb. 10. 5. to. 11. Agayne, they might well know it was neither burnt offring, nor sinne offring, that the Lord required or delighted in: For what great pleasure could it be vnto the Lord to haue the bo∣die of a poore beast wholy burnt: and therefore they were driuen to looke for one to come, who would fully doe the will of God, and in whose heart his whole lawe should fully rest: and who by offering his owne body once for all, should runne through all the fire of afflictions and torments due vnto man.Leuit. 16. 5. 7. 8 9. 10. 20. 21. 22 and Esai. 53. 4. 5. 6. 10. 11. 12. & Heb. 9. 1. to the ende. Againe, he was preached vnto them by ye scape Goate, for they might well knowe it was not the backe of a poore goate that could so carrie away their sinnes, as neuer to be burthensome againe vpon their owne backes: and therfore they were driuen to looke for one to come, who should be able, being cast down with the burden thereof, to raise himselfe vp againe, and to carry them so cleane away vppon his backe, as that theirExod. 13. 21. Iohn. 1. 8. 9. & Exod. 23. 20. to 24. owne backs should neuer be troubled againe with the weight thereof. Furthermore, he was preached vnto them by the cloude and pillar of fire in the wildernesse: for they might well knowe that he was that pillar that gaue them the true light, & also that cloude that led them the right way. Againe,Exod. 17. 6. & Num. 20. 8. to 12. & Exo. 16. 15. & 1. Cori. 10. 3. 4. and Iohn. 6. 31. to the ende, and ohn. 4. 13. 14. he was preached vnto them by the rocke that followed them, and also by the Manna: for they might well knowe that he was that spiritual rocke, from whom flow & gush out waters of life to all those that aske of him: and likewise they might as wel know, that he was that true Manna which came down from heauen, of the which who so eateth spiritually, shall liue
for euer. Againe, he was preached vnto them by the brasen ser∣pent,Num. 21. 6. to 10. and Iohn. 3. 14. 15. for they might wel knowe it was he that must so e lif∣ted vp, as that he that beleeueth in him should not perishe, but haue eternall life. Againe, he was preached vnto them by the high sacrificer his whole office, for they might well knoweExod. 28. & 29 & Leuit. 16. & Hebr. 4. 14. to the ende, & 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. & 10. chapters. that he was but a figure for the time present, because he was not suffered to indure, by reason of death: and therefore they were driuen to looke for one to come, whiche shoulde not be made priest after the lawe of the carnall commandement, but after the power of the endlesse life: that is, one who should liue for euer, after the order of Melchisedech, being made with an othe by him who will not repent. Againe, seeing there came no suche perfection by the giftes and sacrifices, which their high priest once a yeere offered, as to take away either his owne sinnes, or the sinnes of the people: but that euery yeere there must be a remembrance againe: because of this imperfection, I say, they were driuen to looke for one to come, who should be able perfectly to saue those that would come vnto God by him, and who would in the end appeare to take away their sinnes by the sacrifice of his owne bodie once made: and so enter not into the holy places made with handes, but euen into y• very heauen it selfe, to appeare in the sight of God, and there to sit for euer to make intereession for them: and by whose bloud they might be bold to enter in∣to that holy place themselues, euen by that newe and liuing way which he would prepare for them, not through the vaile of silke, but euen through the very vaile of his owne flesh. And thus was Christ preached vnto them by all the sacrifices and ceremonies done according to the law: for they might well know, that they were al but as shadowes of those good things which were to come. Againe, hee was preached vnto them in most plaine speeches, euen in the first saying deliuered on the mountaine: for whereas the Lord sayth vnto them, I am Iehouah thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of boudage: it must needes be in re∣spectExo. 20. . of Christ, that he calleth himselfe their God: for other∣wiseHebr. 12. 29. he is vnto men euen A consuming fire. Againe, and so to
conclude this speeche, Christ was preached vnto them in most comfortable, and also most terrible sort, as by the effect they found it. Behold, saith the Lord, I send an angel before thee,Exod. 23. 20. to the ende. to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I haue prepared. Beware of him (saith the Lord) and heare his voyce, for I tel thee, he will not spare your misdeedes, be∣cause my name is in him. But if thou hearken vnto his voyce, and doe all that I speake, then I will be an enimie vnto thine enimies, and will afflict them that afflict thee: for mine angell shall go before thee, and bring thee into the land of the Ammorites, y• Hethites, the Peresites, the Cananites, the He∣uites, and the Iebuzites, and I will destroy them: but if ye turne from me, and serue their Gods, surely it shall be your destruction. Now here you see againe in what plaine words Christ was preached vnto thē, for they might well know that this Angel must needes be Christ the sonne of God: and so the1. Corin. 10. 9. Apostle expoundeth it, euen of this Angel of the couenant which Malachie also speaketh of. For who is the brightnesseMala. 3. 1. of the glorie, or thē ingrauen forme, or the verie character ofHebr. 1. 3. the person of the father, but onely Christ? In whome, as theColo. 2. 9. Apostle saith, dwelleth all the fulnesse of the Godhead euen corporally. Who although he had not as yet taken the nature of man, yet he appeareth to Ioshua in the forme of a man, toIoshua. 5. 13. to the end. shew that in time he so would be: and therefore doth Ioshua doe worshippe vnto him, as acknowledging him to be his only God & sauiour Christ. So that by this they might well knowe, it was not Iesus the captaine sonne of Nun, that conquered the lande for them: but Iesus the sonne of God, euen that noble captaine of the Lords host, who not onely set∣led them in the rest of that earthly Canaan, but also in the heauenly. So that if the sixe hundreth thousand in the wilder∣nesse, and all the other, for the space of three hundreth and fif∣tie yeares in the land, had but considered well of these fewe sermons of Christ (which I haue heere layd downe amongest many more) their carkeises had escaped the wrath of God, and they had entered into the rest of Canaan, which throughHebr. 3. 19. vnbeliefe they did not: and also the other in the land had re∣mained
as Lordes ouer their enimies, where as nowe theyPsalm. 106. 41. became Lordes ouer them: and therefore in any wise see that you alwayes remember the louing kindnesse and the seueritie of the Lord, and the chiefe cause of both. The iudgements of God vpon the house of Israel and Iuda for the time of seuentie seuens of yeares, that is, from the time of Samuel and Saul, to the captiuitie of Babilon. THe Lord nowe being full of compassion, and not willing to hide the light of hys countenance ouer long from his people, causeth such horrible plagues to befall1. Sam. 5. &. 6. chapters. the Philistians while y• Ark was amongst them, which was seuen monthes, as that full glad are they to be rid therof: For as there can be no agreement betwixt God and Belyall, no more2. Corin. 6. 15. 16. could there be betwixt the Arke of Gods presence and Da∣gon the God of the Philistians. So that home againe doe they send it by a couple of milch kyne, who haue more wit to shew the cause of all those plagues that befell them, then all the priestes of Dagon had: by these two kyne then to Bethshe∣mesh the Ark of God is brought. Where you haue a most no∣table example of foolish zeale running before wit, punished: for there doth the Lord kill euen of his owne people fiftie1. Sam. 6. 19. thousand threescore and ten men, because they had looked into the Arke, which was not lawfull for them to do. So that euenNumb. 4. 15. 20. at this first entrance of Gods presence againe amongest them, they had a good warning (a man would thinke) to take better heed vnto the booke of God then before they had done: that so they might heare his voyce, and in hearing learn ther∣by to doe that which he commandeth, and no more: yet neuer∣thelesse they rebelled still against the Lord, euen as they had done euer since he brought them from the land of Egypt. For
notwithstanding all the great thyngs the Lorde had done for them, as styll to rayse vp deliuerers to deliuer them from the crueltie of their oppressours, which through their owne ido∣latrie befell them: Notwithstanding all this I say, and many other his great benefites bestowed vpon them, they continued still in that great sinne of infidelitie and mistrust of the Lorde his goodnes. Although he had often told them that so long as they did worship him according to his holy wil layd downe in his word, he would defend them from all their enimies round about: yet no sooner commeth Nahash the king of the chil∣dren1. Sam. 12. 12. of Ammon against them, but they cry out vpon Samuel, that they might haue a king forsooth, yea a king to reigne o∣uer them, as al other nations had, when as yet the Lord Ieho∣uah of hoastes was their king. So that their wickednes, as ye holy ghost recordeth, was maruellous great herin, for they1. Sam. 12. 17. cast not away only Samuel & such other iudges or deliuerers,1. Sam. 8. 7. but also the Lorde himselfe, that he shoulde not reigne ouer them: wherefore his wrath for this was so kindled against them, that he gaue thē a king indeed, euen according to their1. Sam. 8. 7. to the ende. Hose. 13. 11. desire: but out of all doubt in his verie great anger, and there∣fore tooke him away in his sore displeasure: and so establisheth his couenant with Dauid, vnto whom the crowne and king∣dome did belong, as being a figure of Christ their king euen that true Dauid, who should raigne ouer them for euermore. Yet notwithstanding al this, and although rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednesse and ido∣latrie, in the dayes of Rehoboam ten of the tribes despise this1. King. 12. sonne of Ieshai of the tribe of Iuda, from whence theyr gloryGen. 49. 8. to 13. was to arise: and so became children of fornication in follow∣ingHose. 1. 2. 1. King. 12. 25. to the ende. the wayes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, who erected two calues, and set the one in Dan, and the other in Bethel, and made the people to confesse that those were their Gods that brought them out of y• land of Egypt. And thus Ephraim vnder whom is named the ten tribes, ioyned themselues vntoHose. 4. 17. Idols, and so became children of fornication, euen worse then an harlot, committing whoredome with all the chosen men ofEzek. 23. Ashur, and with all on whome they doted: neyther left they
their fornications learned of the Egyptians: for in their youth they lay with them, and they brused the brestes of their virgi∣nitie. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was so greatly stirred vp against them, that hee gaue them into the handes of the kinges of Ashur, as vnto Pull-ashur, Tiglath Pilesser and2. King. 15. 19 29. & 17. 3. 6. Salmanesar, euen into the hands I say, of the kinges of Ashur, vpon whom they doted: and they discouered their shame, andEzek. 23. 9. 10. tooke away their sonnes and daughters, and slew them with the sword: and why? because they would not obey the voyce of2. King. 18. 12. the Lord their God, but transgressed his couenant: that is all that Moses the seruant of the Lord had commanded them, and woulde neither obey them nor doe them. And therefore E∣phraim became vnto the Lord as an abhominable branch, andHosea. 5. 12. & 13. 7. he vnto them as a moth, and as a very Lyon: yea they becameHose. 1. 9. vnto him Loammy, that is, not his people, & therefore would not he be their God. For when he saw that this rebellious Is∣rael,Ierem. 3. 8. Ezek. 23. 4 5. euen Aholah which is Samaria, had played the harlot when she was his, he cast her away, and gaue her a bill of di∣uorcement. And yet for all this was not her rebellious sisterIere. 3. 8. Iudah afrayd, but she went and played the harlot likewise, euen Ierusalem, which is a holy bath, the other two tribes,Ezek. 23. 4. Iuda and Beniamen, euen they his pleasant plant defiledEsai. 5. 7. Ezek. 23. 11. themselues with inordinate loue more then the other, and with their fornications more then the other with their fornications: for according to ye number of their Cities were their Gods,Iere. 11. 13. and according to the number of the streetes of Ierusalem did they set vp altars of confusion, euen altars to burne incense vnto Baal: and also committed their abhominations in theIere. 32. 34. & 2. Cron. 33. 3. 4. 5. house of the Lord, whereupon his name was called, to defile it. Being altogether disobedient to receiue doctrine, though he taught them rising vp yeerely and instructed them con∣tinually,Iere. 32. 33. yet would they not heare, neyther would they re∣memberIere. 7. 13. and 25. 3. 8. Iere. 7. 12. 14. what he had done vnto Shilo: but stil prouoked hym vnto the like anger with the workes of their handes: for theyIere. 32. 30. became such rebellious traytors, that the Lordes ministersIere. 6. 10. 28. the prophetes knewe not vnto whome they should speake and admonish, because the word of the Lord was vnto them, as a
reproch, and they had no delight at all therein: neyther would they take any heede thereto, nor to his lawes: but cast them off, and rather inclined to the statutes of Omry, and kept allMicha. 6. 16. the maner of the house of Ahab. And therefore because they cast off the law of the Lord of hostes, and contemned the wordEsai. 5. 24. 25. and Iere. 6. 19. of the holy one of Israel, his wrath was so kindled agaynst them, that as a flame of fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chaffe is consumed of ye flame, euen so became their roote as a rottennesse, so that theyr land shooke them cleane off: for1. King 24. 1. in the dayes of Iehoiakim, Iehoakin, & Zedekias, the wrath10. &. 25. 1. of the Lord was so kindled, that he stirred vp the spirite of theHaba. 1. 6. Caldeans that bitter and furious nation against them, and gaue them into the hands of Nebuchadnezar king of Babel,Iere. 25. 9. Dan. 1. 2. & Gen. 11. who carryed them into the land of Shinar, euen to the place where the Hebrew toonge at the first was confounded by the foolish building of the seuentie families, & so likewise at this time almost vtterly lost: and the Lord caused them to remaineEzek. 37. 2. Cron. 36. 20▪ 21. & Leui. 26 33. 34. 35. and that whole chapter. there as dead bones for the space of seuentie yeeres, vntil their owne land had payd her sabbothes, according as ye Lord long before by Moses had told thē. For sayth he, If ye wil not obey me; but walke stubbornly agaynst me, and despise mine ordi∣nances, and abhorre my lawes: then will I walke stubbornly agaynst you, and I will scatter you amongst the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you, and your land shalbe wast, & your cities desolate: then shall the land inioy her sabbothes as long as it lyeth voyd, and ye shall be in your enimies land: that so your land may rest & inioy her sabbothes, euen all the dayes that it lyeth voyd it shall rest▪ because it did not rest in your sabbothes, when ye dwelt vpon it: and euen so it came to passe: for hauing neglected their sabbothes of euery seuenth yeare, they were carried vnto their enemies land, vntill theyr owne land had her fil of her sabbothes: for al the daies that she lay desolate, she kept sabboth to fulfill seuentie yeares, accor∣ding, as the prophet Ieremy did likewise tell them: who for2. Cro. 36. 21. &. Iere. 25. 11. 12. the space of fortie yeares laboured amongest them before he could make them beeleue that so it should be: but yet in y• end they found it most true: for the Lord of hostes bent hys boweLament. 2. 4.
as an vtter enimie agaynst them, and his right hand wasLamen. 2. 4. stretched out as an open aduersary: so that he powred out his fierce wrath like fire, and consumed all his pallaces, and de∣stroyedLamen. 1. 5. his strong holds, and made her aduersaries the chiefe, and her enimies to prosper agaynst her, euen agaynst Ierusa∣lem the perfection of bewtie, did he cause the Chaldeans to prosper, who brake downe the walles thereof, and burnt the house of the Lord, and the kings house, and all the great hou∣ses in Ierusalem burnt they with fire: and the holy vessels, andReade. 2. King. 25. &. 2. Cron. 36. &. Iere. 39. &. 52. &. Lam. all the instruments of the house of the Lord by these prophane were carryed to Babell. So that notwithstanding the kinges of the earth, and all the inhabitantes of the worlde would not haue beleeued (as the prophet sayth) that euer the aduersarie and the enemie should haue entered into the gates of Ierusa∣lem: yet now did they enter euen into the very sanctuary, and made a noyse in the house of the Lord, as in the day of solem∣nitie, and stretched out their handes vppon all her pleasant thinges: and thus was this famous citie made solitarie, that was ful of people: yea she that was great amongst the nations became now as a widdow, and shee that was as a princes a∣mongest the prouinces, was nowe made tributary, and the Lord caused her feastes and sabbothes to be forgotten: yea he vtterly forsooke his altar, and abhorred his sanctuarie: so that the waies of Sion, as it were lamented, because no man came to her solemne feastes, but in stead thereof the enimies that passed by, clapped their handes at her, hissing and wagging their heades at the daughter of Ierusalem: saying, Is this the citie that men call the perfection of bewtie, and the ioy of theLament. 2. 15 whole earth? yea all her enimies opened their mouthes a∣gainst her in ye day of her destruction: saying, Let vs deuoure her, for certainly this is the day that we looked for, we hauePsal. 137. 7. & Amos. 1. 11. & Obad. 10. to. 15 Zechar. 1. 15. Ezek. 25. 6. 8. 12. 15 & 26. 1 & 28. 21. to 25 & 29. 2. 6. 7. & 35. 5. 15. &. 36. 2. ▪ found it, & seene it: therefore downe with her say the sonnes of Edom, and rase her walles, yea rase the euen to the ve∣ry foundation thereof. And thus most despitefully did all her enemies helpe forward her affliction, and reioyce ouer her in this her visitation: and those that were the tayle, are nowe be∣come the head, and aduance themselues as Lordes ouer them:
but from the daughter of Sion is all bewtie departed, and her princes are now become as heartes that finde no pasture, yea all the noble princes of Sion, which were comparable to fine gold are now esteemed but as earthen pitchers: and all those that were brought vp in skarlet are nowe driuen to im∣brace the doong, and those that fed most delicately, perish now in the streetes: yea the toonge of the suckling childe cleaueth to the roofe of his mouth for thirst, and the yong children aske bread, but no man breaketh it vnto them: but rather the hands of the pitifull women are vpon their owne children to seeth em to be their meate, euen vpon the fruite of their owne bo∣ children of a span long. So that here we may say againe,  behold both the louing kindnesse and the seueritie of the Lord: his louing kindnesse towardes the house of Israel and Iuda, so long as they delighted to heare hys voyce, and were willing to obey hys commandementes: and hys seueritie, so soone as they reiected the same: according as by all hys pro∣phetesDan. 9. 11. 13. 14. & Leui. 26 & Deut. 27. he had tolde them, euen so came the curse vpon them, as it is written in the law of Moses. The iudgementes of God vppon the Iewes, after their returne from Babell vnto our sauiour Christ his birth, and also of their vtter reiecti∣on within seuentie yeares after, for not receiuing hym. THe prophet Daniel, being carried into Babylon in the third yeare of Iehoia∣kimThe ende of Ie∣hoiakims thirde yeere, and the be∣ginning of his fourth, maketh Nebuchadne∣zer his first, as you may see in Dan. 1. 1. and Iere. 25. 1. and 2. King. 24. 1. king of Iuda, and continuing there vnto the first yeare of Cyrus king of Persia, and vnderstanding al∣so by the scriptures, the number of yeares whereof the Lord had spoken vnto the prophet Ieremie, how that he would accomplishe seuentie yeares in the desolation of Ieru∣salem: knew very well, that in the first yeare of Darius of theIere. 25. 11. 12. & 27. 6. 7.
seede of the Medes, as also of Cyrus king of Persia, these Both of y• Em∣pire of Babel, & to that desolation which  wrought in his first yeere. Dan. 1. 2. seuentie yeares were expired: Whereupon he turneth hym∣selfe vnto the Lord with fasting, and in sackcloth and ashes, making his confession, and praying: This is it. Dan. 9. 4. to. 20 O Lord God which art great and fearefull, and keepest couenant and mercy toward all them whiche loue thee, and toward them whiche keepe thy commandementes: but wee haue sinned, and haueHis whole prayer wylbe no small ornament to my Booke, and lyght to my Discourse. committed iniquitie and haue done wickedly: yea, we haue rebelled, and haue departed from thy preceptes and from thy iudgementes. For we would not obey thy seruaunts the pro∣phetes, which speake in thy name to our kinges, to our prin∣ces, to our fathers, and to all the people of the land. O Lord, righteousnesse belongeth vnto thee, & to vs open shame, as appeareth this day vnto euery man of Iuda, and to the in∣habitantes of Ierusalem: yea vnto all Israel, both neere and farre off, through all the countries whither thou hast driuen them, because of their offences that they haue committed a∣gaynst thee: O Lord, vnto vs appertaineth open shame, to our kinges, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we haue sinned agaynst thee. Yet compassion and forgiueuesse is in the Lord our God, albeit we haue rebelled agaynst him. For we haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lord our God, to walke in his lawes which he had layd before vs, by the ministerie of his seruantes the prophetes. Yea all Israel haue transgressed thy law, and are turned backe, and haue not heard thy voyce: therefore the curse is powred vppon vs, and the othe which isMarke wel that Daniel confesseth here that the cause of all these plagues that be∣fel them, was for that they vnder∣stoode not the trueth, the word of God. written in the lawe of Moses the seruant of God, because we haue sinned agaynst hym, and hee hath confirmed his wordes which he spake agaynst vs, & agaynst our iudges that iudged vs, by bringing on vs a great plague: for vnder the whole heauen hath not bene the like, as hath bene brought vpon Ie∣rusalem. All this plague is come vpon vs, as it is written in the lawe of Moses: yet made wee not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turne from our iniquities, and vnderstand thy trueth, therefore hath the Lord made readie the plague, and brought it vpon vs. For the Lord our God is righteous in all his workes which he doth: for we would not
heare his voyce. And now O Lord our God that hast brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mightie hand, and hast gotten thee renowne, as appeareth this day, wee haue sinned, we haue done wickedly: yet O Lord according to all thy righteousnesse, I beseeche thee, let thine anger and thy wrath be turned away from thy citie Hierusalem thine ho∣ly mountaine, for because of our sinnes, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Ierusalem and thy people are a reproche to all that are about vs. Now therefore O Lord our God heare the prayer of thy seruant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine vpon thy sanctuary that lyeth wast: for the Lords sake, O my God, incline thine care, and heare: open thine eies and behold our desolations, and the citie wherupon thy name is called: for we doe not present our supplications before thee for our owne righteousnes; but for thy great tender mercies. O Lord heare, O Lord forgiue, O Lord consider and doe it, deferre not for thine owne sake, O my God: for thy name is called vpon thy citie and vpon thy people. So here you see a prayer framed vpon a sounde grounde,Leuit. 26. 40. to the ende, and 1. King. 8. 46. to. 54. and squared by that iust rule of Moses, and according to the forme of that by Salomon, with full assurance (beeing done according to that rule) that the Lord would shewe himselfe a righteous iudge: and therefore whiles hee was speaking and praying, and confessing his own sinnes, and the sinnes of his people Israel, and presenting his supplications before the Lord his God for the holy mountaine of his God: euen while he was thus praying (which was about the time of the eueningDani. 9. 21. 22. 23. 24. oblation) came the Angel Gabriel vnto him to giue know∣ledge and vnderstanding of their deliuerance: and not onely, how that at the very beginning of his supplications, the com∣maundement came forth to returne them from Babylon: but also that from that very houre, the former seuentie yeares were to be multiplied by seuen, and then should Christ the king the most holy be killed: and not for himselfe, but to con∣firmeGen. 12. 3. and 17. 7. to  Esai. 56. . 1. & Rom. 4. . 12. 16. 17. 23. 2. the couenant of olde, made for the many of all nations that would imbrace the same. By the bloud of which coue∣nant, they should be freed from confusion, and redeemed not
onely from the bondage of the outward, but also of the spiri∣tuall Egypt and Babell: and which bloud beeing shed for theMath. 26. 28. remission of sinnes, and for a reconciliation of all their iniqui∣ties, should cause all sacrifice and oblation to cease. So thatDan. 9. 27. & Hebr. 10. here this welbeloued prophet, who alwayes abode constant in the true worship of his God, notwithstanding the rage of theDan. 1. 8. to end & 6. 1. to ende. The summe of Moss doctrine was to shew that Christe was to sufer, and being risen from the dead, should gene lyfe to the people and to the Gen∣tiles, as you may see in Actes. 26. 22. 23. enimie, was shewed the summe and effect of all Moses: and was also heard in that which he required: for the Lord euer in wrath remembring mercy, doth also at this time remember his mercie, and promise of old, made vnto their fathers: and so bringeth them to the holy hill of Sion agayne, euen to that freshe springing mountaine, from whence suche gratious streames of doctrine continually issued as were sufficient (if rightly vsed) to coole the intollerable heate of all the soules that euer were, or shalbe in ye world: thither I say, were these Iewes the people of God agayne brought. And from whence? Euen from a most filthy pit, & that without any such water:Zacha. 9. 11. which deliuerance was so great and myraculous, as that from this time forward they were not to say any more, the Lord liueth, that brought the Children of Israel out of theere. 16. 14. 15 land of Egypt: but the Lord liueth, that brought them out of the land of the North, and from all the landes where he had scattered them: yea it was so strange, and so farre beyond their expectation, as that when it came to passe, they were euen like vnto men that dreamed, or as men amased at so so∣daynPsal. 126. a decree, and their mouthes were then filled with laugh∣ter, and their toonges with ioy: yea they confessed that the Lord had done great and woonderfull thinges for them. But full soone doe they forget it, for notwithstanding all this his great mercy and iudgementes shewed vnto them: yet still they rebelled agaynst hym, prophaning his holy Sabbaothes a∣gayne,Nehe. 13. 15. to. 22. and making them dayes of marchandice: and also ioyned themselues with strang women of y• land, contrary toEza. 10, 10. to end. the law: yea they greatly neglected the worke of his holy tem∣ple and citie, saying: The time is not yet come, that y• LordesHagg. 1. & 2. chapters. house should be built: but they thought it was high time to build for themselues: that so they might be setled againe in
their sieled houses, though the Lordes house lay wast. Wher∣fore he was againe so displeased with them, notwithstanding all their pretence of zeale, and shewe of holynesse, that they were but as a polluted & an vncleaue people in his sight: yeaHagg. 2. 15. all the workes of their handes, and that which they offered, was vncleane in the sight of the Lord: so that hee caused theHag. 1. 6. to. 12 heauen ouer them to stay it selfe from dewe, and the earth stayed her fruit: for when they had sowen much, they brought little in: yea, and when they came to their heapes of twentie measures, they found but ten: and to their wine presses, think∣ing to draw out fiftie vessels, they found but twentie: and thus the Lord smote them with blasting, with Meldewe, and with Hayle, in all the labours of their handes, and onely to teache them to looke better vnto his holy worde, that so they myght obey his wyll. And yet for all this, would they not try thereby wherein they had done amisse, but thinke they shoulde wellZacha. 7. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. please the Lorde, yf they wept and fasted, in the first and sea∣uenth moneth, as they had done the seauenty yeeres before, which was a thing that the Lord had not, neyther would now approue: but telleth them, they shoulde rather geue care vnto his worde, which by the ministerie of his Prophetes he had delyuered vnto them. But in steade thereof they harden their hartes, and geue stoute wordes agaynst the Lord, saying: ItMala. 3. 13. 14. 15. is in vayne to serue God: and what profit is it that we haue kept his commandementes, and walked humbly before him? Doe we not see that the proude are blessed, and that euen they that worke wickednes, are set vp ouer vs, and how they that tempt God are delyuered? As yf they shoulde haue sayd, Do we not see that the Babylonians reigned ouer vs for seauentie yeeres, and then we were deliuered? But what are we the bet∣ter for that? for all the tyme since, the Medes and Persians reigne and rule ouer vs. And lykewyse we are cursed in all the labours of our handes. But whereas they shoulde haue looked into the booke of God, to see the cause of all this, they are as men blynde: Yea, and although the Lorde geue them a speciall commaundement, euen in the last elause of the oldeMala. 4. 4. Testament, to remember the lawe of Moses, which shoulde
leade them as it were by the hand vnto Christe, euen to that Angell of the couenaunt whom they desired to beholde: yetMala. 1. 1. most rebelliously do they reiect the same, and so growe worseAccording to Dn. 2. 31. to 46. & 7. 1. to the ende, & 8. 1 to the ende, & 11. 1. to the ende, & 12. and worse, euen tyll at length they become Pharisees, Sadduces, and such like beastes: wherefore the Lord suffereth most vyle beastes, lyke vnto them selues to reigne styll ouer them, euen vntyll the comming of his sonne our Sauiour in∣to the worlde. And then who so blynde (as the Prophet spea∣keth) as they? for whereas he that Worde, which in the begin∣ningEsa. 42. 19. 20 21. commaunded all thinges to haue a beeing, was noweGen. 1. & Iohn 1. become Fleshe, and dwelt amongst them, whose glory they might haue behelde, as the glory of the only begotten SonneIohn. 1. 11. Luke. 1. 78. of the father, full of grace and trueth: yet woulde they not re∣ceyue him, no although he were the day spring which wasIohn. 1. 9. now come from on high to visite them, and the true lyghtIohn. 3. 19. which lighteneth euery man that commeth into the worlde:Iere. 30. 9. 10. & Ezek. 37. 22 24. 25. & Iere. 23. 5. 6. & Psal. 132. 11. to the ende, & Luk. 1 68. to the ende. & Hose. 13. 14 & Iohn. 1. 49. Hebre. 5. 16. 26 Hebr. 9. 9. 10. 11. 12. 24. yet loued they darknes more then lyght, and to walke in the shadow of death, rather then in the way of lyfe: yea and al∣though he were that true King of Israel, by whom they should haue had delyuerance, not onely from their mortall enimies, but also from their spirituall, euen hell and death: and also that hygh Sacrificer, whose priesthoode was not made after the lawe of the carnall commaundement, but after the power of the endles lyfe, euen that most holy and iust one: which was seperate from sinners, and was now come to en∣terMath. 27. 28. to. 32. Mark. 6. 3. according to Isai. 53. for them, not into the holy places made with handes, but into the true Sanctuarie, euen the very Heauen it selfe, and there to appeare in the sight of God, to make intercession forMath. 2. 7. & 23. 33. them: yet woulde they not acknowledge him so to be, butMath. 27. & Mark. 15. & Luk. 23. & Iohn. 18. & 19 & Actes 3. 13. 14. 15. & Mar. 10. 33. 34. & Luk. 23. & Act. 4. 25. to. 30. despised him, and most shamefully reiected him, counting him most base and vile, and had no desire at all vnto him, but drew away their shoulders, and became styfnecked, and of vn∣circumcised hartes and eares: yea a generation of very Uy∣pers, still stopping their eares like deafe Adders, and harde∣ning their hartes agaynst him, vntyll at length they vtterly denied him to be their king, in the presence of Pylate the Ro∣maneLuk. 23. 4. 13. 14. 15. & Iohn 19 14. 15. 21. gouernour, saying, We haue no king but Caesar. And
so ioyne with the Romans to crucifie the king of Glorie, euen the Lord of life, whō Pylate, as bad as he was, could not chuse but confesse him to be their king, and also to pronounce him guiltlesse, and to say he could finde no cause at all of death in him: yea and although the diuels themselues, coulde not chuse but confesse him to be that holy one of God, yet desiredMark. 1. 24. & 3. 11. & 5. 2. to 18. & Luke. 4. 34. they rather to haue Barrabas a murtherer giuen them, then the Lord of life: saying. Let hym be crucified, let him be crucified, and let his bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our children for euer.Luke. 23. 21. Math. 23. 13. to the ende. 1. Thess. 2. 16. And so according to their owne wish it befell them: for moste woefull curses hath the Lord pronounced agaynst them, and his wrath (as the Apostle sayth) is come on them, euen to the very vttermost, and hath scattered them as vagabondes dete∣stedMath. 24. 34. ouer the whole earth: for before that generation passed, they fell on the sword of the Romaines, who as with a floud wrought a finall consummation of them, their citie, and sanc∣tuarie, euen to vtter desolation, according as our Sauiour standing on mount Oliuet had told them, and referred themMath. 24. 15. & Dan. 9. 27. to Daniel the ninth: saying, When you see the abhomination of desolation spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in theLuke. 21. 20. holy place: Let them that read it, consider of it: that is, when you see Ierusalem besieged by the abhominable campe of the Romaine infidels, then knowe that your destruction is neere: which before that age passed came to passe, euen those dayes of vengeance, of wrath, and of great distresse to that land and people. So that here we may say, especially with the Apostle,Rom. 11. 22. O behold both the louing kindnesse and the seueritie of the Lord: his louing kindnesse towards the sonnes of Abraham, so long as they continued in the fayth of Abraham: his seuere seueritie so soone as they became bastardes, reuolting from the fayth of Abraham: for as our sauiour colde them, if theyIohn. 8. 39. had bene the sonnes of Abraham, they ould haue done the works of Abraham, that is, they would haue beleeued in him,Gene. 12. 3. & 15. 6. as Abraham did: but sayth he, you goe about to kill me, andIohn. 8. 40. 56. so did not Abraham: but contrariwise he saw my dayes, andMath. 13. 17. & Luk. 10. 24. greatly reioyced: yea and many others desired greatly to haue seene these dayes that you see, and would also haue re∣ioyced:
but you seeing will not see, and hearing so manie testi∣monies giuen of me, ye will you not vnderstand that the sayinges of the prophets might be fulfilled. Now if you aske me in what sort the prophets before time had testified of Christ, whereby they might haue knowen him to be that Messias that should come into the worlde: the an∣swere is very plentifull, and very plaine, and many of them did knowe that then was the time that the kingdome of GodMark. 15. 43. & Luk. 23. 51. & Luk. 2. 25. 38. was to appeare, and all the sort of them might haue knowne as well, if they had considered well of the ninth of Daniel: for there doth the angel Gabriel tell Daniel when Christ theDan. 9. 21. to ende. king should be killed, euen to the very houre of the day wher∣in he dyed. Likewise they had Moses and all the prophetesMath. 11. 13. 14. 0 20. and Actes. 3. 24. Hebr. 1. 1. euen vnto Iohn, to lead them as it were by the hand vnto Christ, and that at sundrie times, and in diuers manners: so that it will not be amisse to run briefly them ouer, to shew you in what sort as I neere as I can, he was described vnto them. First then, where as Adam by his disobedience brought notGen. 2. 16. 17. & 3. 1. to end. onely death vpon himselfe, but also vppon all his posteritie, and withall lost that dominion and Lordship he had ouer the creatures of God, euen the very day of his creation, the verieand Rom. 5. 12 to end. same day was Christ proclaymed heire of the world, and a ful conquerour of Satan, in these wordes: I will put enmitieGen. 3. 15. & Reuel. 12. 7. to 11. & Iohn. 16 33. & Rom. 16 20. & Colo. 2. 15 (sayth the Lord vnto Satan) betweene thee and the woman, and betweene thy seede and her seede: thy seede shal bruise the heele of the seede of the woman: but her seede, euen hee that speciall seede, meaning Christ, shal breake thy head: the which came so to passe, when as the fulnesse of time was come: that is, when as our sauiour tooke the nature of man vpon hym,Hebr. 2. 14. 15. & 12. 31. and so through death destroyed him who had the power there∣of,Gen. 9. 26. and Rom. 9. 5. that is to say, the deuill this olde serpent. The which seede of the woman was also sayd by Noe, to be the blessed God ofGen. 12. 3. and 26. 4. & 28. 14. & Actes. 3. 25. & Luk. 19. 9. Sem, whom also Sem resembled. Hee was also sayde by the Lord himselfe, to be that special one seede of Abraham, Isaake and Iacob, in whome all the nations of the earth shoulde be blessed. Likewise he was spoken of by Iacob to be that specialGen. 49. 10. & Reue. 5. 5. and Mah 5. 1. and Iohn. 6. 5. 10. childe Shillo, the Lyon of y• tribe of Iuda, who if he did but lye
downe and couch, none durst stirre him vp, and that vnto hymIob. 19. 25. 26. 27. &. 1. Cor. 15. 12. to end. Exod. 23. 20. & Heb. 8. 6. & 13. 20. the people should be gathered: the which Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, that holy man Iob saw to be his redeemer, and was most assured to see him one day with his owne eyes, and none other for him, although wormes should destroy that body. HeNum. 24. 17. & Math. 2. 2. was also sayd by the Lord himselfe, to be that angel of the co∣uenant that kept their fathers in the way, and brought themDeu. 18. 15. 18 19. & Actes. 3. 22. 23. & Iohn 12. 47. 48. and Math. 17. 5. 2. 2. Sa. 7. 13. 14. & Luk. 1. 32. 33. & Heb. 1. 5. into the land of Canaan, as also that star of Iacob, whome Ba∣lam, prophet false though he were, sawe to strike the costes of Moab, and to subdue all the sonnes of Seth. He was also said by Moses to be that great prophet, whome the Lord would rayse like vnto him, vnto whom all the world should hearken: as also by the Lord himselfe, that he should build an house vn∣toPsalm. 2. 7. & Heb. 1. 5. Actes 13. 32. 33. his name, and that he would establish the throne of his king∣dome for euer, and that he would say vnto him, I will be thyPsal. 40. 6. 7. 8. to 12. & Hebr. 10. 5. to 10. father, and thou shalt be my sonne. Likewise it was sayd of Christ by the prophet Dauid, that the Lord sayd vnto him:Psal. 22. 22. & Hebr. 2. 12. and Iohn. 17. 26. Thou art my sonne, this day begat I thee: & that forasmuch as the Lord delighted not in sacrifices, he should come to doe the will of God: That in his heart his whole law should fullyPsal. 2. & Actes 4. 25. & Reuel. 2. 27. and Luk 23. 6. to 13. & Actes, 4. 25. to 29. rest: That he would not conceale the righteousnes thereof, but declare it in the great congregation, euen in the middest of the congregation would hee declare the name of the Lord a∣mongest his brethren, and how that notwithstanding, that, yetPsal. 22. 6. 7. 8. 12. 16. 8. and Math. 27. &. 9. 24. and 26. 66. 67▪ 68. & Mar. 15. and. Luke 22. and, 23. would the kinges and princes of the earth assemble themselues together agaynst hym: That they woulde make him the con∣tempt of the people, haue hym in derision, mocke hym and nod their heades at him. That they would hit him in the teeth with the trust he had in the Lord, as though hys hope thereinMath. 12. 14. and Mark. 11. 18. and. 14. 1. Iohn. 19. 34. & Exo. 12. 46. & Zach. 12. 10. had bene frustrate: That they would like bulls of Bashan, nay like dogges compasse hym about, pearce hys handes and feete, giue him vineger to drinke, cast lottes vppon his gar∣mentes, and part them amongest them: and yet notwithstan∣ding all this their spight, the Prophet sheweth that the LordeLuk. 23. 34. 36 and. Iohn. 19. 23. 24. would laugh them to skorne, and breake them to peeces like a potters vessell. That he would set Christ as king vpon y• holyPsal. 2. 6. 8. 12 and 18. 43▪ and Reue. 14. 1. hill of Sion, and deliuer hym from the contentions of the
people: That hee would grant him the heathen for his inheri∣tance,Psal. 2. 8. Psa. 72. 10. 11. and the vttermost partes of the earth for his possession:Math. 2. 1. 2. 10 Psal.  8. 44. That he should be the head therof, and that a people whom he had not knowne, should serue hym, euen such as were theMath. 8. 5. to 14. and. 9. 18. kinges of Tarshish, and of the Iles, who should bring hym presentes, and also such as were the kinges of Sheba and Seba, who should bring hym giftes: yea and that all kings vp∣on earth should worship him, and all nations serue hym: and that as soone as they should heare hym, they should obey hym, and be in subiection to hym: and that whosoeuer would not Psa. 2. 12 But not with an hi∣pocriticall kisse, as Iudas, Mark 14. 44. but with such a one as was Maries in Luke 7. 45. and Iohn II. 2. kisse the sonne should be sure to perish: but those that would put their trust in hym, should be blessed for euermore.Psal. 45. 7. Againe, it was sayd of hym by the same prophet, that heePsal. 69. 9. Math. 21. 12. 13. & Marke 11. 15. 16. 17. would so loue righteousnesse and hate iniquitie, and be so carefull for the house of the Lord, that the zeale he would haue thereof would euen eate hym vp: and that the Lord wouldePsal. 45. 7. and Iohn. 3. 34. therefore annoynt hym with the oyle of gladnesse aboue hysPsal. 45. 17. & 17. 18. 19. fellowes: That hee would cause hys name to be remembred throughout all generations, euen hys glorious name for euerPsalm. 91. 11. 12. Math. 4. 6. and euer: And that all nations should blesse hym, and be bles∣sedPsal. 118. 22. & Actes. 4. 10. 11 Psal. 16. 10. & Actes. 2. 22. to 37. & 13. 35. to 40. in hym, and giue thankes vnto hym worlde without end. And that notwithstanding all the rge of the deuill and his ministers, yet should none euill come neere vnto hym, for the Lord would giue hys Angels charge ouer hym, to keepe him in all his wayes, that hee should not hurt hys foote agaynst aPsal. 8. & Hebr. 2. 6. to end. stone. And that notwithstanding himselfe should be that stonePsal. 68. 18. & Ephe. 4. 8. and Actes. 1. 9. 10. 11. and▪ 2. 34. 35. 36. which the builders would refuse, yet should hee be made the head of the corner. Moreouer this holy Prophet sheweth, that the Lorde woulde not leaue the soule of Christ in graue, neyther suffer hym his holy one to see corruption: That hePsal. 110. 1. & Math 22. 42. to end, & Luk. 22 69. 70. & Actes 7. 56. would rayse him vp from death to life, and crowne him with glory and honour: That hee should ascend on high, and leade captiuitie captiue: That he shoulde sit at the right hande of God, vntil he had made his enimies his fotestoole: And lastly,Psal. 110. 4. & Heb. 5. 6. and. 6 20. and. 7. 1. to ende, and. 10. 12. 13. that he shoulde continue there a Sacrificer for euer after the order of Melchisedech. And therfore not onely this prophet, but also the whole church desired him whom their soule mostCant. 1. 6.
dearely loued, that it would please him to shew them whereCant. 1. 3. his abiding was, and to drawe them after him, that so they might runne and behold king Salomon, euen runne and be∣holdeCant. 3. 11. him with the crowne wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the glad∣nesse of hys heart. Agayne, it was sayd of Christ by the prophet Esaiah, thatEsai. 11. 1. 2. & Rom. 15. 12. there should come a rod forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe should grow out of hys rootes, vpon whome the spirite of the Lord should rest, euen the spirite of wisedome and vnderstan∣ding,Esai. 7. 14. and Math. 1. 22. 23 the spirite of counsell and courage, the spirit of know∣ledge, and of the feare of the Lord. That a virgin should con∣ceiue and bring him forth: That they shoulde call his nameEsai. 9. 6. and Luk. 1. 31. to 34. Emmanuel, that is, euen God with vs: That they should call his name wonderfull, councellor, the mightie God, the euer∣lasting father, the prince of peace. And that wheras the faith∣fullEsai. 1. 21. Esai. 9. 7. and Luk. 1. 32. 33. citie had lost both iudgement and iustice, Christ shoulde come and sit vpon the throne of Dauid to order it, and to esta∣blishEsai. 40. 3. 5. & Math. 3. 1. 2. 3. & Mark. 1. 3. & Luk. 3. 4. both iudgement and iustice thereon for euer. Moreouer, it was sayd by the same prophet, that a voyce shoulde goe be∣fore hym in the wildernesse: That it should cry, prepare theEsai. 42. 1. and 61. 1. 2. 3. and Iohn. 1. 33. way of the Lord, make straight in y• desart a path for our God: That the glory of the Lord should be reuealed by hym, andMath. 3. 16. 17 & Mark. 1. 10. 11. and Act. 10 38. that all fleshe should see it together. That the Lord would say of him, Behold my seruant, vpon whome I will stay, myne elect, in whome my soule delighteth: That the Lord wouldeMath. 9. 35. & 11. 1. & Mark. 1. 38. 39. Esai. 35. 5. & Math. 15. 30. 31. annoynt him with his holy spirite, and send hym to preache good tidinges to the poore, to binde vp the broken hearted, to preach libertie to the captiues, and to them that were bound the opening of the prison: That by hym the eyes of the blindeEsai. 61. 1. 2. 3. and Luk. 4. 17. to 24. should be lightened, & the eares of the deafe be opened: That the lame man should leape as an heart, and the dumme mans toonge should sing for toy. That he should preach that moste acceptable yeare of the Lord, euen that great Iubilee, wherby they might inioy bewtie for ashes, the oyle of ioy for mour∣ning, and the garment of gladnesse in stead of the spirite ofEsai. 25. 6. 7. heauinesse. And moreouer, that hee should make vnto all peo∣ple
a feast of fat thinges, euen a feast of fined wynes, and ofMath. 26. 26. to 31. & Mark. 14▪ 22. to 27. and Luk. 22. 14. to 22. & Math. 22 2. to 15. and Reue. 19. 9. fat thinges, full of marrow, and of wynes, fined and purified. And that he should destroy the couering that couered all nati∣ons, that so the people that walked in darkenes might see great light, and that they that dwelled in the land of the sha∣dow of death, might say, that vpon them great light had shi∣ned.Esai. 9. 2 and Math. 4. 13. to 18. And that not onely should hee be giuen for a light of the Gentiles, but aso for a couenant of the people, euen to be theEsai. 42. 6. and 49 6. 8. full glory of them, & the ioy of the whole earth: because that like sheep they had all gone astray, and for that they had tur∣nedLuk. 2. 32. Esai. 53. 6. euery one vnto theyr owne wayes: Therefore the pro∣phetEsai. 3 and  Pet. 2. 24. 25. Actes. 8. 26. to 40. sheweth, that Christ should be wounded for al their trans∣gressions, and broken for their iniquities. That the chastise∣ment of theyr peace should be vppon hym, and that with hysEsai. 50. 6. 7. 8. and Math. 26. 66. 67. and Mark. 15. 18. 19. stripes should they be all healed. That he should be oppressed, afflicted, brought as a sheepe to the slaughter, and yet woulde he not open his mouth agaynst them. That his backe shoulde meete with smyters, hys cheekes with nippers, his face withEsai. 53. and Math. 8. 17. and Mar. 9. 12. shame and spitting, and yet would hee not hide it from them, but put it forward as a flint. That notwithstanding Christ would poure out his soule vnto death as an offering for theyr sinnes, A farre grea∣ter & more gree∣uous burden to be , then euer bare the scape Goate in Leut. the. 16. 21. . beare all their infirmities, carrie all their inquities and sorrowes on his backe: yet would they iudge hym as one plagued and smitten of God: yea the prophet sheweth that they would condemne him amongest the transgressors, and make his graue with the wicked. That they would despiseEsai. 53. 12. & Mark. 15. 28. and Luke. 22. 37. him, reiect hym, and accompt hym as one without forme or bewtie: yea and although he should be as a sanctuary, yet would they make him as a But who so e∣uer stumbleth thereat, as they did, it grindeth him to pouder, as you may see in Luk. 20. 18. Act. 4. 10. 11. 12. Esai. 11. 10. to ende. stone to stumble at, and as a rockeMark. 6. 3. to fall vpon, euen to both the houses of Israel should he becomeEsai. 8. 14. as a snare, and as a net. Agayne, the prophet sheweth, that notwithstanding they for theyr partes would forsake him, yet should hee the roote of Ishai stand vp for a signe vnto the people, to the intent that all nations should seeke vnto hym, because hys rest should be glorious. And that the Lord would stretch out hys hand again the second time, that so he might possesse the remnant of hys
people, euen of hys people which shoulde be left of Ashur, of Egypt, of Pathros, of Ethyopia, of Elam, of Shinar, of Ha∣mah, and of the Isles of the sea, and that he would destroy the toonge of the Egyptian sea, and with hys mightie winde lift vp his hand ouer the riuer, & smit hym in hys seuen streames, and cause men to walke therin with shoes: that so there might be a path to the remnant of hys people which should be left of Ashur, euen a path to seeke vnto this signe that should be set vp, not onely for the naturall Israel dispersed, but also for allEsai. 56. 8. nations and strangers that would cleaue vnto the Lord: as for them of Medyan, of Ephah, of Sheba, of Nebaioh, and Ke∣der,Esai. 1 1. to ende. and that all these would bring giftes of gold, of incense,Math. 2. 1. . 10. 11. and 8. 10. 11. and of all their riches to the house of the Lord, and set forth his prayses therein, to the intent they might be accepted vponMark. 11. 17. him the holy aulter, and that by them the house of the Lorde myght be bewtified. That they shoulde say of him, Lo thisEsai. 25. 8. 9. and Reue. 7. 17 and Luke. 2. 26. to. 33. is our God, we haue wayted for him, and he wyl saue vs: Lo, this is the Lorde, we haue wayted for him, we wyll reioyce and be ioyfull in his saluation, because as sayth this Prophet, he should destroy death for euer, and wype away teares from all faces, & because he would take away the rebuks of his peo∣ple from all the earth. And moreouer, for that he shouldeEsai. 22. 2o. to end, and Rue. 3. 7. haue the key of the house of Dauid committed to his charge, and power geuen hym to shut, and no man to open, and to open, and no man to shut agaynst hym: and for that in mercie shoulde his throne be prepared, and for that he shoulde sitteEsai. 16. 3. vpon it in stedfastnes in the tabernacle of Dauid, iudging, and seeking iudgement and hasting iustice: and for that he woulde not be discouraged, vntyll he had brought foorth iudgement in trueth, and vntyll he had established both iudge∣mentEsai. 42. . 4. and Math. 1. 17. to 22. and iustice in the earth, that so the Iles myght wayte for his law, though Israel woulde not so: and therefore sayth this Prophet: Though Israel would not be gathered by hym, yet shoulde he be most glorious in the eyes of the Lorde, andEsai. 40. 5 6. and Actes. 1. 46. 47. be geuen as a lyght of the Gentiles, that so he myght be their saluation vnto the ende of the worlde. Lastly, Christ was seene by this euangel call Prophet, sit∣tyng
vpon his glorious and high throne, and the SeraphimsEsai. 6. Iohn. 12. 41. standing before him, and crying holy, holy, holy, is the Lorde God of hostes, the whole worlde is full of thy glory. And therefore the Prophet maketh a proclamation, saying: Be∣holdeEsai. 62. 11. thou daughter Sion thy Sauiour commeth vnto thee: beholde his wages is with hym, and his worke before hym. Aryse therefore O Ierusalem, and be bryght, for thy lyght isEsai. 60. 1. come, and the glory of the Lord is rysen vpon thee. Agayne, it was sayde of Christe by the Prophet Micheas,Mich. 5. . and Math 2 5 6. & Iohn. 7▪ 41. 42. that notwithstanding Bethlehem were but lytle amongst the thousandes of Iuda, yet shoulde there come one thence who should rule in Israel: euen one, whose goinges foorth had been from the beginning, and from euerlastyng. And by the Pro∣phetHose. 3. 5. Hosea to be that king Dauid, vnto whom the Israelites should seeke, & of whom the Lord would say, Out of EgyptHose. 11. 1. & Math. 2. 14. 15 Iere. 30. 21. haue I called thee my Sonne. The which Sonne by the Prophet Ieremie, was sayd to be that noble Ruler that shouldIere. 23. 5. and 3. 14. 15. and Rom. 1. 3. 4. & Luke. 2. 68. to 76. arise from amongst them selues: as also that ryghteous branche which shoulde growe vp vnto the house of Dauid, to perfourme those good thynges promised to the house of Israel and Iuda. And by the Prophet zekiel, to be that one He cam not only to feede their bo∣dies, but also their soules with the true bread of lyfe, which was him selfe. Ioh. 6. Ezek. 21. 26. 27 Dan. 12. 1. Sheephearde, which should be set ouer them to feede them,Ezech. 34. 23. 24. 29. and Mark. 6. 34. to 45. and to be a Prince amongst them, and to be that plant of re∣nowme, vnto whom the crowne and diademe did specially belong: as being that Michael their chiefest Prince (as sayth the Prophet Daniel) who woulde stande vp for their defence, and so delyuer them, not onely from those beastly kingdomes that long tyme ouerruled them here on earth: but also as the Prophet Hosea sayth, euen from the kingdome of hell and death. Moreouer, it was sayde of Christe agayne by the ProphetDan. 7. 17. 22. 26. 27. Daniel, that notwithstanding Nabuchadnezzer saw hym to be but as a base stone in his base eyes, yet such a stone he wasHose. 13. 14. Dan. 2. 34. to 46. in the eyes of Daniel, as should dash those beastly kingdomes all to pouder. That he shoulde become a great mountayne, and that the whole earth should be filled with his glory: ThatDan. 7. 13. he shoulde come in the cloudes of heauen, and approch againe
vnto the Ancient of dayes: That the Lord God woulde geueDan. 2. 44. 45. & 7. 14. & Luk. 1. 33. him dominion, honour, and a kingdome, that shoulde neuer be destroyed, and that all people, nations, and languages shoulde serue him. Againe, it was sayd of Christ by the prophet Amos, that heAmos. 9. 11. & Actes. 15. 15. 16. 17. should raise vp ye tabernacle of Dauid that was fallen downe, That he should rayse vp the ruines thereof, as in the dayes ofAggi. 2. 5. 6. 7. old. And therefore sayth the prophet Aggai vnto the people, be not discouraged, but haue patience yet a little, and you shal see, that euen he the glory and desire of all nations, will spee∣dily come: Wherefore reioyce greatly O daughter Sion,Zach. 9. 9. sayth the prophet Zachary: shout for ioy O daughter Ieru∣salem, because thy king commeth vnto thee: euen hee doth come to thee, whose name is called the branch, & he by whomZach. 6. 12. 13. thy temple shall be built: euen one that shall beare the glory of the Lorde, that shall sit and rule vppon his throne, and be a priest thereon for euer: euen one, who notwithstanding willZach. 9. 9. & Math. 21. & Mark. 11. come but poorely, as riding on an Asse, yet shal all mountains be made as plaines, that agaynst him will stand vp: one that shall be able to bring foorth the head stone of thy temple, andZach. 4. 7. that with shoutinges, and crying grace, grace vnto it: one thatZach. 9. 9. 11. & Iohn. 10. 17 18. &. Act. 5. 31. shal be able to saue not onely himself, but Ierusalem also: euen to saue Ierusalem, sayth this prophet, shoulde Christe be able through the bloud of his euerlasting couenant. Moreouer, it was sayd of Christ by the prophet Ieremie,Iere. 23. 6. & 33. 16. that in his dayes Iuda should be saued, and Israel should dwell safely: That they shoulde be no more deuided into two king∣domes,Ezech. 37. 15. to end. as sayth the prophet Ezechiel, but that they should be as one people, and haue one king to raigne ouer them, euenIere. 23. 6. & 33. 16. one king whose name, as saith the prophet Ieremy, they should call the Lord our righteousnesse. And therfore sayth the pro∣phetMich. 4. & 5. chapters. Micheas, why doest thou cry out with lamentation, O daughter Sion, as though there were no king in thee? Be not afrayd, for one shall raigne in thee foreuer: euen one that shallnd yet woulde they not knowe him that was their peace, as you may see in Luke. 9. 42. stand and feede in the strength of the Lord, and in the maiestie of the name of the Lord his God: euen one, who shall be thy peace, when Ashur, or anie such like commeth agaynst thee.
And yet for al this would they value him for nought, saith theZach. 10. 12. 13. 16. 17. & Math. 26. 15. & 27. 9. prophet Zachary, euen value him for thirtie smal peeces of sil∣uer. And that because they would so doe, hee sheweth that the Lord would raise vp a sheepheard, euen a sheepheard y• would not looke the thing was lost, neither would he heale the thingBut y• true sheep∣heard woulde do both, and came o that ende, as yu may see in Luk. 19. 10. & Iohn. 10. 11. was hurt: that woulde not feede the thing that would stand vp, but eate the fat, & leaue the flocke: euen one that would in no wise lay downe hys lyfe for hys sheepe. And therefore it was sayd by the prophet Daniel, that when Christ the true sheepheard should come: That he would lay down hys life forIohn. 10. 12. 13. Dan. 9. 24. to end, & Math. 20. 28. & Mark 10. 45. & Iohn 10. 15. 17. 18. and Rom. 5. 8. hys sheepe, and not for hymselfe: That he would confirme the couenant for them, and seale it with his bloud: That he would cause all sacrifice and oblation to cease: That he would con∣sume wickednes, and abolish sinnes: That he would make re∣conciliation for iniquities, and bring in euerlasting righteous∣nesse: That he would seale vp vision & prophecie. And lastly, that the whole common weale of Iudea should be consumed, by that abhominable campe of the Romaine infidels, euen consumed and washt away as with a floud, if they would not regard this true king, priest, and sheepheard. And therfore itMala. 3. 1. 2. 3. & Mar. 1. 1. 2. was sayd by the prophet Malachie that the Lord would send his messenger before hym to prepare his way, and that the Lord whome they sought, should speedily come to his temple: euen that messenger of the couenant whom they desired to be∣hold. But yet sayth the prophet, like a purging fire, and like fullers sope, that so he might trie them euen as siluer is tried. And therefore the Lord gaue them a speciall commandementMala. 4. 4. euen in the last clause of the olde testament to remember the law of Moses his seruaunt, which hee commanded hym in Horeb for all Israel, with all his statutes and iudgementes: all which should leade them (if they would) vnto Christ this Angel of the euerlasting couenant. And thus you see in part, after what sort the prophetes dyd paynt out Christ vnto them, who when he came, did al things that before were written of hym, that so all thse sayinges ofLuk. 24. 25. 26 27. 44. 46. & Acts. 13. 29. Iohn. 12. 37. the prophets might be fulfilled: and yet beleeued they not in him, no although he had done so many great workes and
myracles before them, but still despised the councell of GodLuke. 7. 30. 31. agaynst themselues, and would not daunce nor leape for ioy, no although y• prophets, as you see, had cōtinually piped vnto them. Now if you maruell how they could be so blinde as notReade Actes. 7. 51. 42. to see, since the light was so bright, and Christ so plainly ma∣nifested vnto them: I will shew you why in few wordes: that is, because they knewe not the scriptures: for so our sauiourMath. 22. 29. & Mark. 12. 17 Math. 15. 6. 7. 8. 9. & Mar. 7. 7. 8. 9. to 14. doth tel thē, saying: Ye erre not knowing the scriptures. For whereas they should haue made the word of God their onely meditation, they had established in stead thereof the pre∣cepts and doctrines of men, and so made the word of God of no authoritie, as our sauiour also telleth them. Besides, it was so far from their delight, as that they had skarce read so much thereof, as that one part which told them that the stone whichMark. 12. 10. they would refuse, should be made the head of the corner. And therefore because they had thus cast off the law of the Lord of hostes, and would not beleeue the writinges of Moses and theIohn. 5. 45. 46. 47. prophetes, all which would haue lead them vnto Christ: No maruell was it though he cast off them: neyther that he should take from them, that little vnderstanding which they seemed to haue, according as he telleth hys Disciples: saying, To him that hath, shall be giuen in more aboundance, and to hymMath. 13. 12. 13. 14. 23. and Mark. 4. 23. 24 25. that hath not, shall be taken away euen that little which hee seemeth to haue. So that to those that had a desire to know the booke of God, which paynted them out the Messias, to them it was giuen to know the secretes of y• kingdome of heauen: but to al those that cast it off, to them it was not giuen. So that in them was fulfilled y• prophcie of Esaias, which prophesie saith,Esai. 6. 9. 10. & Math. 13. 14. 15. & Mark. 4. 11. 12. by hearing they should heare, but not vnderstande, and seeing they should see, but not perceiue. And the reason was, for that their hearts were waxen fat, and their eares were dul of hea∣ring: & also with their eyes they winked, least they should see, and stopped their eares, least they should heare, and so vnder∣stand wt theyr heartes, & should haue returned, that hee mightRom. 1. 28. haue healed thē. And therfore as y• apostle saith, when men re∣gardPsal. 81. 11. 12. Pro. 1. 29. 30. 31. not to know the Lord aright by his holy word, no more doth he regard to know them, but giueth thē vp into reprobate
minds, and also to follow their own inuentions in al things, and so to runne to their owne destruction, for not obeying the sonne of God. For as it is eternall life to knowe one true andIohn. 17. 3. euer-liuing God, and to beleeue in hys sonne whom he the fa∣ther would, or nowe hath sent: so he that beleeueth not in theIohn. 3. 36. sonne, nor obeyeth hys voyce shall neuer see life, but the wrathDeu. 6. 6. to 10 and 11. 18. 19. 20. & Iosh. 1. 8 & Deut. 32. 46 47. & Psal. 1. & Mala. 4. 4. of God abideth on hym. Now his voyce was, that they should continually meditate in his lawe, the which shoulde lead them vnto Christ: but they did not, and therefore well worthy to be blinded as you see: for men must learne to heare the voyce of the Lord, while it is called to day, and to take heede howePsal. 95. 7. 8. & Hebr. 3. 7. 8. they harden their heartes when the voyce of God doth call, least when they would they shall often call them selues, andEsai. 55. 6. Pro. 1. 28. 29. not be hard. Nowe if iudgement began at the house of the Lord in this sorte as you see, what shall wee thinke befell the rest of the nations before the comming of our sauiour into the world? Surely they escaped not: for the Lord hath rendred vengeance vnto all those that haue not knowne him, & which haue not obeyed vnto the Gospel of our Lord and sauiour Ie∣sus Christ: not onely vnto the Iewes and the citie Iersusalem where his name shoulde haue bene called on, who moste of all deserued it, because most graces were offered vnto them:Iere. 25. 12. to end. but also vnto all nations in the world hath hee sent the cup of the wine of the greatnesse of his indignation, and hath entered into iudgement with all flesh: forasmuch as they haue not desi∣red the knowledge of hys holy lawes: and for as much as heeActe. 14. 16. 17 left not hymselfe without witnesse to any nation, in as much as he gaue them rayne from heauen and fruitfull seasons, and filled them with all good things in great aboundance. Ther∣fore all those nations or people that haue refused the know∣ledgeRom. 1. 18. to ende. of hym, he hath also refused them. And as they regarded not to knowe hym a right by his holy word, neyther had anie delight at al therin, but cast it off: euen so hath he cast off them, and giuen them vp into reprobate minds, as the apostle saith. And thus hauing layd his iudgementes before our eyes hi∣therto,Psal. 119. 30. 52. we see what is become of all those that haue sayd vnto God, depart from vs, & haue not desired (aboue gold) ye know∣ledgeIob. 21. 14. 15.
of hys holy lawes, the which lawes shoulde haue bene esteemed of them aboue gold, yea aboue much fine gold: and also haue bene more sweeter vnto theyr heartes then the hony or the hony combe vnto theyr mouthes: and looke how preti∣ous it should haue been vnto ye Iewes, so ought it to haue been to all other nations in the world, for all nations heard therof,Rom. 10. 18. or at leastwise might haue done: and thus much of the iudge∣mentes of God from the beginning of the world, to the vtter casting off of the Iewes. The iudgementes of God vpon the Ro∣maine Emperours the first beast, Apoc. 13. as also vpon the Popes theyr successours the latter beast, and on all them that receiue the beasts marke. SInce we haue seene the iudgementes of God from the beginning of the world hitherto, and also the cause why, whiche was the neglect of hys holy worde, in the which worde they might haue seene hys will, and so haue knowne hys true wor∣ship: let vs proceede in briefe sort, and lay the like before our eies euen frō our sauiour hys time vnto the end of the same. First then we are to remember, that after the destruction of y• low Ierusalem was that to be fulfilled which was spoken of by the prophets, that is. That a IerusalemEzek. 48. 35. should be built, the name whereof shoulde be called, The Lord is there: and that this citie should be lifted vp aboue al moun∣taines:Esai. 2. 2. 3. & Mich. 4. 1. 2. and that from the Sanctuary therof should go watersEzek. 47. & Zach. 14. 8. of life, which should runne to the east sea, and to the west sea: and that there should be plentie thereof both in sommer and winter: and that whatsoeuer tree should be planted by the ri∣uer of waters which should runne out of the sanctuary of thisEzek. 47. 12. citie, the leafe thereof shoulde neuer fade, neyther should the fruit thereof at any time fayle: and that the waters of this ri∣uerEzek. 47. 8. 9. should be so wholesome, that whither soeuer they should
runne, the fih that should be nourished therewith should liue thereby: whereby is meant, that whosoeuer were a tree plan∣tedEsai. 61. 3. & 55. 1. 2. 3. and Apo. 22. 17. & Psal. 1. 2. 3. and 1. Corin. 3. 6. 7 Math. 4. 19. & Iohn. 4. 10. by the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles, and watered with the graces of the holy spirite, shoulde be a fruitfull tree indeede, and whosoeuer were a fish nourished by the same wa∣ters of the holy spirit, should be sure to liue for euer. And like∣wise it was further sayd, That whosoeuer they were of al the families of the earth, that woulde not goe vp to this citie toZach. 14. 17. 18. 19. worship the king Iehouah of hostes, and to keepe the feast of tabernacles, that vpon them shoulde come no raine: whereby is also meant, that vppon them that woulde not worship the Lord according to the rule of his owne most perfect word (as the faythfull companie of christians ought to doe) vpon them I say, that would not so doe, should fall no part of that grati∣ousDeut. 32. 1. 2. & Esay. 55. 10. 11. raine the doctrine of the prophetes and apostles. And moreouer it was further said, That whosoeuer they were that should be found fighters agaynst this citie and the king ther∣of,Zacha. 14. 12. shoulde be smitten with a very great plague, euen with so great a plague, as that it should consume both their flesh, eyes,Reue. 1. 2. 3. & 21. chapters. and toonges: and therefore according to these prophesies it was reuealed vnto Iohn presently vpon the destruction of the low Ierusalem, in what sort the heauenly should be built, and who they were that fought, and still woulde fight agaynst theReue. 12. 13. chapters. same: which were the Romaine Emperours, and the popes2. Thess. 2. and Reue. 17. their successors, which popes most vehemētly should continue afflicters of the high Ierusalem, as y• former had begun withDan. 9. 27. and Math. 24. 1. 2. 15. 16. 34. and Luk. 21. 20. 21 Reue. 3. 5. the low: and likewise a certayne time shoulde continue it a∣gaynst the high. Therefore we are here to consider the state of Rome, and to marke howe the Lord hath reserued them as a corporation of moste filthy beasts, and as a cage of vnleaneReue. 18. 2. kytes for hys wrath to ayme at while the worlde shall stand. And why so? Euen because that by their policie was the king of this high Ierusalem the Lord of life crucified, and because that this his citie the companie of faithful Christians, by them should continually be persecuted: & likewise for that they would refuse to be norished by those waters of life, euen the most pure doctrine of the holy prophets & apostles: and for
that by them the brightnesse thereof shoulde be continually darkened, euen darkened by the smoke that should arise from that bottomlesse It is sayde in Apoc. the 8. that out of the pitte came a smoke that darkened the sunne & the ayre: wherby is meant that all brighnes of Scripture should be darke∣aed by the pre∣ceptes and doc∣trines of men, whiche y• rabbie∣ment of Popes woulde vrge vp∣pon the Church. Reue. 18. 4. and 14. 9. 10. 11. 12. pit of their owne doctrines, preceptes, and foolish traditions: and so by that meanes turne those liuely fountaines the doctrines and preceptes of the holy prophetes and apostles from waters of life into waters of bitter gall and wormewood, yea euen vnto filthy salt pittes of eternall death and destruction. For these and such like causes, I say, hath the Lord set that cage of Romaine infidels, as a marke for his wrath to ayme at while the world shall stand, and hath also described them and their villanies, by the moste horrible villanies of all ages throughout the old testament, and onely to the intent to giue vs warning to auoyd them, as also theyr maners and theyr condemnation. First then I will shewe you in what sort saint Iohn descri∣beth the Romaine Emperours, and afterwardes in what sort the corporatiō of filthy popes. The Emperours he describeth in this sort. I saw a beast, sayth he, arise out of the sea, hauingReue. 13. 1. 2. the mouth of a Lyon, the feete of a Beare, the colour of a Leopard, seuen heades also and ten hornes. As if hee should haue sayd, I sawe euen one moste vgly and monstrous beastDan. 7. A shur doth here signifie y• Babi∣lonians, Medes, and Persians: but you are not to thinke they came of A shur, for the Babylonians came of Nim∣rod of Chush of Cham: and the Medes of Ma∣dai of Iaphet: and the Persi∣ans of Elam of Sem: but here these three nati∣ons are called A shur in respect that they ouer∣came the Assyri∣ans who are pro∣perly of A shur. compounded of those foure, the which my fellow seruant the prophet Daniel sawe in the seuenth of hys booke: the which beast hath not onely borowed from Ashur, that is, from the Babylonians, Meedes & Persians, the lyons mouth and beares feete, nor from Kittim all readie dead, that is, from the Gre∣cians, the Leopards colour, nor from Gog & Magog, that is, from Syria and Egypt the tenne hornes and teeth: but hath also the Dragon that old serpent readie, euen to giue him hys whole throne, power, and authoritie likewise: and onely to the intent hee might be the more able to make warre against thys citie of faithfull Christians, and that so hee might be able to ouercome them, and to force them to forsake the word of god, and the testimonie which the mayntayned: & so to haue them to doe worship vnto him, and to the Dragon who gaue hym his power: but yet notwithstanding all this his strength hee could not ouercome them, no although hee persecuted them
dayly, euen to the losse of their goodes, landes, life, and all: for the which cause the wrath of God, and of the lambe, was so stirred vp against these prophane Emperours, as that they were forced in these dayes to wish the mountaynes to fall vp∣onApoc. 6. 14. to end. them, and to desire the hilles to couer them, euen to couer them from the presence of him that sate vppon the throne, and from the wrath of the lambe: for the great day of hys wrath was come, and therefore they were not able to stand before hym. For as the Lord Iesus was that Michael, that stood vpDan. 10. 13. 21 and. 12. 1. for the desence of his people agaynst those tyrantes in Daniel, euen so was hee in like maner in the dayes of these prophane Emperours: for hee fought agaynst them as riding vppon aReue. 6. 2. and Psal. 45. 5. white horse, & as hauing a bowe in his hand with sharpe ar∣rowes, to pearce the hartes of them his enimies. And more∣ouer, as hee was a iudge sitting vppon a fiery throne, fromDan. 7. 9. to 15 whose presence riuers of fire ishued to consume those beastsApoc. 4. 2. 3. & 1. 14. & 6. 16. 17. in Daniel: euen so was he in like maner in the dayes of this beast ye Romaine Emperours: for he sent his threefold iudge∣mentes vpon them, as sword, famine and death altogither: theApo. 6. 4. 5. 8. which plagues were expressed by three horses, red, blacke, and pale. So that like as these prophane Emperours had shed theApo. 6. 9. 10. and. 16. 5. 6. 7. bloud of hys seruants the holy martyrs, euen so the holy and iust Lord was stirred vp with reuenge to spill and shed theyr bloud, and to giue it them in great aboundance to drinke: and in ye end vtterly to roote them out. So then this beast hauing now the wound of a sword, & one head cut off, & Sathan notApo. 13. 3. able by hym to preuayle agaynst the Church: you are to looke for that other instrument of hys to appeare in hys likenesse, that is, you are to looke for a description of that corporation of beastly popes, who are not lesse in strength and mischiefe, then the former were, but rather far exceeding them in both: and therefore most fitly is their power described by a beast of the same forme of the other. But before I come to saint Iohn to shew you that, I will giue you a note or two from the Apostle Paul, that so you may see how fitly they agree in the discouery of this latter beast, & that so you may the better here∣after beware and take heede least you be deceiued by them.
Saint Paul telleth the Thessalonians, who had been put in mind that the last day of iudgement was at hand, that, that2. Thess. 2. day shoulde not come vntill there came a departing from the fayth, and vntill that man of sinne the sonne of perdition shoulde be disclosed: the which, sayth he, shall come to passe, when the withholder (meaning the Romaine Empire) shall be taken away: euen then, sayth hee, shall this man of sinne appeare, whose comming shall be by the power and working of Satan as the formers was, yea and in a farre more dange∣rous sort then the former did, because he will come with lying signes and great woonders, yea and with all sleightes of de∣ceipt and guile, euen with suche as, if it were possible, the ver, elect should be deceiued therwith: yet notwithstanding marke you well what followeth, and then if you will not take heede of them, wel worthy are you to be deceiued by thē. He telleth them further then, that this man of sinne or companie of beast∣ly popes woulde set themselues as aduersaries to the trueth. Thessa. 2. 4. the worde of God, and that they would set themselues in the temple of God as if they were God, and that they would for∣bid1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3 marriages and the eating of meates, which thinges God had commanded to be done: euen thus, sayth the Apostle, will they teach the doctrine of that olde serpent their father the deuill: therfore if you should haue had no more markes giuen you to know thē by then these, they had bin sufficent for you: but since it hath pleased the holy ghost to giue you more, you were best to take notice of them all. Heare you therefore in what sort saint Iohn hath described them: he telleth you, that he saw another beast of the same forme of the Empire beast,Apo. 17. that is, with seuen heades and tenne hornes, and with some addition more, to betoken further crueltie: that is, he saw this beast to be of a skarlet colour, & to haue a woman sitting vp∣on hym full of names of blasphemie: whiche woman was arayed also in purple and skarlet, and a cup of golde in her hand, full of abhominations and filthinesse of her fornicati∣ons: and besides in her forehead was a name written, a mi∣sterie, great Babylon the mother of whoredomes, and abho∣minations of the earth: and that with her should the kings of
the earth commit fornication, and that the inhabitantes of the earth should be drunkē with the wyne of the same. And more∣ouer that this whore her selfe shoulde be drunken with the bloud of saintes, and with the bloud of the martyrs of Iesus: so that here you haue a description of the Empire beast again reuiued by the popes, yea and that in so plaine a maner, that euery litle childe may know who is meant hereby. For the an∣gell expoundeth it in this sort: The seuen heades of the beast, which thou hast seene (sayth y• angel vnto Iohn) are vii. kings,You may see in Dan. 7. ver. 17 that by a king is meant any polli∣ticall gouerne∣ment. And so here of Rome as first they had Kinges. 2. Consuls. 3. Decemuires. 4. Dictators. 5. Triumuiris. 6. Caesars. Popes and Em∣perours make the 7. which after a sort are the 8. wherof fiue are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come, and when hee commeth, hee must continue but a short space. And the beast that was, and is not, is euen the eight, and yet is one of the seuen: the whiche beast shall goe into destruc∣tion with the former: so that all the world whose names were not written in the booke of life, wondered at this mistery, that is, they wondered to see the beast that was, and afterward was not, and yet now to be agayne. For indeede heere is the minde, as saint Iohn sayth, that hath wisedome, which to him that can dig out the meaning thereof, and beware of the po∣licie here described, it shalbe farre more worth then the golde which hee can digge, eyther out of the East or West Indies. Thus it is, you are to vnderstād that Rome had her policie, or gouernement altered fiue times before the Caesars, and they made the sixt, whiche was the gouernement when Iohn had this reuelation shewed hym. The which Caesars or part ofKittim was the sonne of Ianan, of whom came the Grecians & Italians, but the Italians are they who here are meant. Kittim began to afflict the chiefest of the sonnes of Heber our sauiour Christ, and continued it vpon his sonnes by faith the Christians, about the time of three hundreth yeares, the whiche three hundreth yeares was noted by two and for∣tie monethes by an allusion to the time of our sauiour his affliction, the whiche was also two and fortie monethes,Apoc. 13. 5. Dan. 9. 27. or three yeares and an halfe, beeing the full tyme of hys preaching and publicke life: so that all ages after that halfe seuen wherein our Lord finished all ceremonies, and allApo. 12. 14. & 13. 5. & 11. 2. 3. thinges touching our saluation, and wherein hee suffered in∣tollerable affliction, are called by an allusion vnto that tyme, eyther a time, two times and halfe, or monthes two and fortie,
or dayes a thousand two hundreth and sixtie: the first for Sa∣thanThe thirde num∣er signifieth the tyme of the  of the Gos∣pell, by an allusiē also to our saui∣eur his tyme. his whole rage, the second for the Romaine Empire, and the popes: for it is sayd, that both of them had power giuen them to doe hurt vnto the holy citie two and fortie monethes. So that as our sauiour y• head of y• Church, was himself most cruelly afflicted by the Dragon, and also by his ministers, for these three yeeres and a halfe, the which began at his bap∣tisme, and ended at his death: euen so shoulde his members be after the same maner while the world should stand. For wher∣as this sixt gouernement these prophane. Emperours were rooted out, as if the beast had had the wound of a sword, & one head cut off, or as if he had been dead for a long time by means first of Constantinus that good christian Emperour, and af∣terwardes of other nations who greatly spoyled Rome: yet now by these popes is hee reuiued agayne. For they setting themselues in the temple of God, as if they were God, and causing all nations to worship them in the same maner that they had done the former beast, and ruling themselues ouer the Empire, are sayde heere to make the seuenth policie in Rome, and likewise after a sorte to be an eight: the whiche policie is sayd to haue the whole power of Sathan, as the former had, euen to haue the strength as it were of warlike horses, to make battle against y• citie of Saints. Now if you thinke that the former exposition by the angel concerning the seuen heades of the beast be not plaine inought, he will let you haue it yet more plaine: for he telleth you further, that ye seuen heades are also seuen hilles, whereon the woman sitteth: andApoc. 17. 9. 18 he also telleth you, that the woman is the great citie that raigneth ouer the kinges of the earth. If this be true as most true it is, then can you not doubt of the plainnesse heere∣of: for you are to vnderstand that Rome standeth vpon seuen hils: and you are to vnderstand also, that when saint Iohn had this reuelation shewed hym, that Rome was then the great citie that raygned ouer the kinges of the earth: and likewise that now it is: and therefore moste fitly was it sayd, that the latter beast had ten hornes, as well as the former: forasmuch as the popes had ten nations or kingdomes to yeeld obedience
vnto theyr power as the former had to theyrs. And to make the matter more playne, that Idolatrous Rome was reuiued agayne by these popes: saint Iohn hath another vision shewed hym, which is this: Hee seeth a beast aryse out of the earth, ha∣uingApoc. 13. 11. two hornes like vnto the lambe. Meaning thereby, that these popes would come as pretending great shew of religiō, and as if they were the vycars of Christ that lambe of God, but hee telleth you that he spake like the Dragon, and that hee did all that the first beast could doe that was before hym: yea and that hee caused the image of the former beast to be made, and gaue hym spirite and life, and made all the earth to wor∣ship hym, whose deadly wound by them was healed. And fur∣thermoreApoc. 13. 13. 14. for their helpe therein, saint Iohn sheweth you that this lambe should worke great signes and wonders, euen so great as if it were to bring fire from heauen, as Elyas did:1. Kinges 18. 21. to 41. to the end that as hee thereby caused all Israel to turne from the worship of Ieroboams calues vnto the Lord to worship him, euen so in a contrary sort woulde this lambe seeke with the signes which were permitted hym to doe, to turne all men both small and great, rich and poore, free and bond, from the worship of the Lord, to the worship of the beast, and to force them thereby to receiue his marke, eyther in their right hands or in yt forheads, or at leastwise to beare his name, or the num∣ber of hys name: for vnlesse they would so doe, they shouldeApoc. 13. 15. 16. 17. neyther buy nor sell, but be killed. So that heere you see, how fitly this agreeth with the other vision for the popes to be re∣uiuors of the former beast, and also howe fitly it falleth out ac∣cording to that whiche our sauiour and saint Paul before had told you, that is: that there should come false prophets whichMath. 7. 15. & 1. Thess. 2. 9. 10. woulde come in sheepes clothing but inwardly be rauening Wolues, and that they woulde come with all lying signes, woonders and sleightes of deceice, and therefore is it that our sauiour giueth vs so great charge to take heede of them. And moreouer therefore is it, that it pleaseth hym to paynt them out so playne vnto vs: for although they woulde seeme neuer so muche to beare the hornes of a lambe, or ne∣uer so much to pretend religion, or shew of holynesse, yet the
Lord hath so plainly noted them by one especiall mark aboue the rest, as that euery simple man may know them, howsoeuerReuel. 13. 11. Gen. 3. & Reuel. 13. they would seeme to change their shape: & that is, their voyce: the whiche you see, saint Iohn sayth, is all one with the Dra∣gons.2. Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15. And therefore although Sathan come not now as vntoGen. 3. Adam and Euah, nor as in the daies of the primitiue Church:Reuel. 13. That is, although he come not now in y• carkas of a luttle ser∣pent,Exod. 20. 4 & Deut 5. 8. & 4 15. to 0. nor yet in the forme of a seuen headed beast: but contrari∣wise euen in the skinne of a poore and simple lambe, yet thePsal 50. 15. & 1. Kings. 8. 22. to 55. & 2. voyce being the selfe and same, you may knowe hym howso∣euer he transformeth himselfe. It is good for you here then toChro. 6. 13. to end, and D. 9. 3. to 20. and 2. Kings. 19. 15. to 20. and 2. Chro. 14. 11 & Esay 63. 16. and Psal. 65. 2. consider the voyce both of the one and of the other: The voyce of the serpent and of the beast commandeth that whiche God forbiddeth, and forbiddeth that which God commandeth: euen so doth the voyce of this counterfeit lambe. as for example, The voyce of God forbiddeth the making of grauen images to bowe downe vnto them: but the voyce of this counterfeitNote well the two last and Math. 6. 6. to 14. lambe commandeth the making of them and the bowing vn∣to them. The voyce of God commandeth prayer to be made vnto him alone, and not vnto any other: but the voyce of thisIohn 3. 16. 17. 18. and Math. 26. 28. and Actes 10. 43. and 1. Pet. 1. 18. 19. counterfeit lambe forbiddeth prayer to be made vnto God alone, and commaundeth it to bee made vnto Saintes withal. The voyce of God sayth, that whosoeuer he be that be∣leeueth in Christ his sonne shall be sure to haue pardon of his sinnes through the shedding of his moste precious bloud∣but1. Cor. 14. For when the word of God is brought in a lan∣guage that the people vnder∣stand not, it is a signe of the wrath of God vpon that people as you may see in this 14. of the first of Cor. 21. 22. vers. the voyce of this counterfeit lambe sayth, that whosoeuer he be that will beleeue hym, hee shall be sure to haue pardon for his sinnes through the bloud of the leaden bulles, whiche for his monie hee will send hym. The voyce of God sayth, that better were it for hys ministers to speake fiue wordes in the church to the vnderstanding of his people, that so they might say Amen thereunto, then to speake ten thousand in a strange toonge, vnto the which the people cannot say, Amen: but the voyce of this counterfeit lambe sayth, better is it for hys mi∣nisters to speake ten hundreth thousand in a strange languageEsay. 58. and Math. 15. 11. 17. 18. 19. vnto the whiche the people cannot say Amen, then to speake one word to their vnderstanding, least so they shoulde spye
out their knauerie. Agayne, the voyce of God commaundethEsai. 58. and Math. 15. 11. 17. 18. 19. vs not to abstaine from meates, but to abstayne from sinne, and celleth vs that it is not the meate which a man eateth that can defile him, but the sinne that resteth in his heart: and yet dare the voyce of this counterfeit lambe command men to ab∣staine1. Tim. 4. 3. 4. from meates: and to make them beleeue that vnles they doe so vpon such dayes as he appoynteth, they shall not onely be defiled therewith, but also be damned for euermore therby, especially if they eate but a bit vpon good Friday. Further∣more the voyce of God commaundeth marriage as a mosteGen. 2, 24. lawfull thing vnto all men: but the voyce of this counterfeit1. Tim. 4. 3. lamb forbiddeth it as an vnlawfull thing vnto some men. TheMath. 20. 26. & 3. 11. 12. and Mark. 9. 34. 35 & 10, 42, 43. 44. voyce of God forbiddeth his ministers the exalting of them∣selues aboue their brethren, but the voyce of this counterfeite lambe exalteth himselfe not onely aboue hys brethren, but also aboue all that are called Gods, and moste presumptuously set∣teth. Thess. 2. 4. That is, aboue ll Kinges and Lords, and other magistrates whiche are called Gods, as you may see, 1. Cor. . 5. 0. himselfe in the temple of the Lord God, as if hee were God, commaunding what him liketh, and forbidding what hym liteth: as most like a suttle serpent in one thing, which is to be noted aboue all others, that is, whereas the voyce of the Lord God commaundeth all men to read and meditate in hys holy word, that so they might weare hys cognisance, and be retayners vnto his kingdome: the voyce of this counterfeyteIosha. 1. 8. and Deu. 6. 6. to 10 &. 11. 18. and Iohn. 5. 39. and Psal. 1. 2. lambe forbiddeth it, that so they might weare his marke & be retayners vnto his kingdome. And therfore is it that hee dea∣leth most impudently, as followeth, that is, wheras the voyce of the Lord God commandeth vs to worship & feare him thatReue. 14. 7. made heauen and earth, the sea and all fountaines of water: and that wee should giue glory to him, and to the Lambe thatReue. 1. . & 5. 9. standeth on mount Sion, because he onely was worthy, foras∣much as hee hath redeemed vs vnto God by hys bloud: I say, whereas the voyce of the Lord God commandeth vs thus to do, and contrariwise forbiddeth vs the worship of the Beast orReue, 14▪ 9▪ to 10. his image, threatning withall, that if any man doe worship the beast or his image, or receiue hys marke, eyther in hys hand or in hys forhead, yea or so muche as the prynt of hys name in any part, they shoulde then drinke of the pure wyne of the
wrath of God, and should haue no rest neyther day nor night, but be tormented in fire & brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the lambe of God for euer and euer. And yet dare the voyce of this counterfeit Lambe command and forbid theReue. 13. 11. to ende. contrary, saying vnto al men: See that you worship the beast and the image of the beast, and that you receiue his marke either in your right hand or in your forheads, or at leastwise beare his name or the number of his name: for as many as wil not thus do, shal neither buy nor sel, no nor liue vpon y• earth. And thus you see how plainly God hath noted vnto you, the markes not only of the first beast, but also of this counterfeyteReue. 13. Lambe the second, whose voyce is all one with the thirde thatGen. 3. Reue. 12. 3. 9. and 20. 2. deceiued Adam, & all three speake the wordes of the Dragon, that is, of the very deuill himselfe, whose rage notwithstan∣dingReue. 4. 7. and 6. 9. was most fiercely exercised in the first beast the RomaineReue. 20. 2. Emperours for the space of three hundreth yeares: yet couldeReue. 13. 11. to end. & 2. Thes. 2. 4. to 13. he not so preuaile by them, but that many stoode as couragi∣ous Lyons most manfully to y• trueth. But after that he hadReue. 14. 8. and 17. 2. bene thus tyed by good christians for the space of a thousand yeares from the dayes of our Lord, so that he could not haueReue. 17. 12. 13. 16. 17. his full sway, yet then doth he so preuayle by the second beastNumb. 24. 24. this lambe the popes, whose commings were as you see, withKittim doth con∣teyne the Greci∣ans & Italians. Now as the fyrst part the Greci∣ans perished be∣fore the first com∣ming of Christe, being one part of y• afflicters of his people in Dan. 7. so shall this lat∣ter part the Ita∣lians by his se∣conde commyng being the only af∣flicters of y• high Ierusalem, as you may see Reu. 11. 2. & Luke 21. 24. all lying signes and wonders, and vnder the pretence of reli∣gion, that al the worlde was made drunken with the wyne of their fornication, and deceiued with their inchantmentes. But as kinges then gaue their power and authoritie vnto this se∣cond beast, so God hath told vs that in the end he will put in∣to the heart of kinges to hate the beast, and to eate her fleshe, and to make her desolate, naked and bare. The which we giue hym thankes for, we see begunne in diuers countries, and I trust we dayly more and more shall see for notwithstanding all their strength hitherto, yet know you that they are but that Kittim that shall perish in the end, euen as Moses the seruant of the Lord from Baalam doth tel you, who although he were but a false prophet like vnto these we nowe speake of, yet the Lord made hym to speake the trueth herein in spight of hys heart. Knowe you agayne, that the Lord will consume them2. Thes. 2. 8.
with the spirite of his mouth, as that holy Apostle saint Paul doth also tell you: yea and knowe you once agayne, that the holy Ghost doth assure you, that he will giue vnto them and their mountayne, the discomfiture of Sisera at Magedon: yeaReuel. 16. 16. 19. 21. and Iudge. 4. 17. to end. and 5. 19. 20. 21. and that hee will giue vnto them the cup of the wyne of the fiercenesse of his wrath, and that the deuill whiche deceiued them, I meane the Romaines the first beast, as also the false prophets the second beast with all that haue receiued y• beastesReuel. 14. 8. to 12 and 18. to end. marke, I say, all these with their author the deuill shall be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where they shalbe tormentedReuel. 20. 10. and 19. 19. 20. euen day and night for euermore. So that here we may say a∣gayne with the holy Apostle: O let vs often behold, and be∣holdeRom. 11. 22. agayne the louing kindnesse, and the seueritie of the Lord: hys louing kindnesse towardes vs in that it hath plea∣sed hym so graciously and louingly to giue vs hys most holy worde, by the which wee may see as by a glasse the spottes of this moste filthy state of Rome: And his seuere seueritie to∣wardes all those that are depriued of the same. Now if you will know the cause here, why the Lord doth so deale, as to take hys holy word from so many thousandes of people, and so by that meanes to suffer them to runne headlong to eternall destruction. The answere is: because they themselues haue not a loue of the trueth, for so speaketh2. Thess. 2. 10. 11. 12. and Iohn. 17. 17. the Apostle, when men haue not a loue to the trueth (sayth he) which is the word of God, by the which worde they might be saued, it pleaseth the Lord to send them strong delusions, that so they shoulde beleeue lyes: and also to suffer them to giue1. Tim. 4. 1. heede vnto the spirites of error and doctrines of deuils: and so by that meanes to depriue themselues of the true light which should giue them life: wherby in y• end they might be damned: and onely because they would neyther receiue nor beleeue the trueth, but rather delighted in the preceptes and doctrines of men: and as concerning the doctrine of lyfe had no courage to goe on forward, but rather delighted to remayne therin, as children euer ready to wauour, and to be carryed about with euery winde of straunge doctrine, and to bee as wandering starres who easily fall from theyr standing. And therefore
well worthy is the blackenesse of darkenesse reserued to such for euer. Wherefore let vs that account our selues Christians be thankfull vnto the Lord, that it hath pleased hym to call vs from the power of this damnable darkenesse, euen to the most cleere light of the glorious Gospel, and let vs not onely be thankfull vnto the Lord, for that it hath pleased him to call vs out of this mysticall Babylon: but let vs also be much moreApoc. 18. 4. carefull then heretofore wee haue bene, to let the heauenly le∣rusalem come into our mindes: and let vs in any wise giue an entrance to the building of this spirituall worke by the mosteEphes. 6. 17. holy word of God, and euermore hold fast that sworde of the spirite in the one hand, while we worke with the other: that so we may put in feare al such enemies as would hinder or keep backe this spirituall building. And let vs also giue more dili∣gent heede, as the Apostle commandeth vs, vnto the thingesHeb. 2. 1. 2. 3. which we haue heard, least at anie time wee should let them slip: for if the wordes spoken by Angels was steadfast, and euery transgression and disobedience receiued a iust recom∣pence of reward, as before we haue seene, howe then shall weHeb. 1. 1. 2. & 2. 3. 4. escape, if wee neglect so great saluation, since the Lord hath spoken vnto vs in these last dayes by the sonne hymself, whose doctrine was further confirmed vnto vs by them that heard hym: Therefore let vs in any wise, I say, giue more aboun∣dant heede vnto the thinges which we haue heard of hym, least we also be plucked away with the error of the wicked, and so. Pet. 3. 17. fall from our owne steadfastnesse: for assuredly in the same condemnation are all they, who liue in ignorance of his truth, and despise the knowledge of hys holy word. Therefore it is meete you learne to redeeme the tyme, euen this very houre, and not to moue the patience of God any longer: for assure your selfe, if he spared not the Iewes, which were the na∣turallRom. 11. branches, but hath cut them off euen from theyr na∣tural roote, from whence they should haue had theyr life, and y• through theyr vnbeliefe, which vnbeliefe befell them through the hardnesse of theyr owne heartes, and the hardnesse of theyr heartes through the contempt of the word of God: much more then will he not spare vs, if we harden our heartes a∣gaynst
the delight we should take therein, because that we by nature are but as a wilde Oliue tree, and are but graft vppon theyr stocke: and therefore let vs take heede in what case wee stand, for feare least we also fal by the like example of disobe∣dience, and so bring the wrath of God vpon vs, as the former haue done vpon thē. For you must not be ignorant of this one thing in anie wise, that is, that the Lord will be slacke concer∣ning his threatnings (as some men count slackenesse) but that he is patient toward vs, and would haue no man to perishe, but woulde that all men shoulde come to repentance, because he is a mercifull God, and full of compassion. And to assure men that he is so, he hath giuē his most holy word vnto them,Psa. 147. 19. 20 Deut. 32. 47. & Iohn. 5. 39. whereby they may perceiue that hee greatly loueth them, be∣cause therby he offereth eternall life vnto them: so that if they will imbrace that, they may finde eternall life: but if not, they shall be sure to finde eternall death, because they can not see without that in what sort to walke, as to please the Lord ther∣with: neyther can they without that see the loue wherewith the Lord loueth them: that is, without that they cānot see how that God so loued the world, that he gaue hys onely begotten so to suffer for their sinnes: To the intent, that if they wouldIohn. 3. 16. beleeue in hym they shoulde not perishe, but haue eternall life. Therfore al those that haue delighted in hys most holy word, and layd hold on his promises therein contayned, and by faith imbraced hys couenantes concerning Christ, and thought vp∣on hys commaundementes to indeuour to doe them, he hath neuer fayled to thousandes of generations. For when as our first parents had brought vpō themselues swift damnation by reason of their owne disobedience, yet ne∣uerthelesGen. 3. 15. imbracing the holy worde of couenant, wherein all grace consisted, by fayth receiued life againe. In this faythGen. 4. 4. and Hebr. 11. 4. Abell offered vnto God a greater sacrifice then Kaine, by the which he obtained witnes that he was righeous, God testifi∣yng of his gifts: by the which faith also he being dead yet spea∣keth. In this fayth was Enoch taken away that he should not see death, being a figure of ye resurrection, by the which faythGen. 5. 21. 22. 23. 24. and Hebr. 11. 5. he was reported of to haue pleased God. In this fayth Noe be∣ing
warned of God of the thinges whiche were as yet not seene,Gen. 6. 13. 14. to end. and Heb. 11. 7. being moued with reurence, prepared the Arke to the sauing of his houshold: through the whiche Arke hee condemned the world, and was made heyre of the righteousnesse which is by fayth. In this fayth Abram when he was called obeyed God,Gen. 12. 1. 4. and Heb. 11. . to goe into a place which afterwardes hee shoulde receiue for inheritance, and he went out not knowing whether he went, and in this faith he abode in the land of promise as in a strange country, as one that dwelt in tentes with Isaak and acob heyres with hym of the same promise, and looked for a City hauing a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. In this fayth also Sara receiued strength to conceiue seede, andGen. 17. 19. & 18. 10. &. 21. 2 to 8. and Hebr. 11. 11. was deliuered of a childe when she was past age, because she iudged him faythful which had promised, & therfore sprang thereof one, euen of one which was dead, so many as the stars of the skye in multitude, and as the sand of the sea shore whichGen. 22. and Heb. 11. 17. & Gen. 17. 19. 20 is innumerable. In this fayth Abraham offered vp Isaak when he was tryed, and he that had receiued the promise offe∣red his onely begotten sonne, to whome it was sayd, in Isaak Shall thy seed be called: for he considered that God was able to rayse hym vp euen from the dead, from whence also after a sort he had receiued hym. In this fayth Isaak blessed Iacob & Gen. 27. and Heb. 11. 20. Esau concerning things to come. In this fayth Iacob when he was a dying blessed both the sons of Ioseph. In this faith Io∣sephGen. 48. and Hebr. 11. 21. when he died, made mention of the departing of the chil∣drenGen. 50. 24. to end, & Heb. 11 12. of Israel out of y• land of Egypt. In this fayth Moses whē he came to age, refused to be called the sonne of PharaohesExod. 2. 2. 3. & Actes. 7. 20. 21. & Heb. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. daughter, and chose rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God then to inioy the pleasures of sinne for a season, estee∣ming the rebukes of Christ greater riches then all the crea∣sures of Egypt: for he had respect vnto the recompence of the reward. And in this fayth he forsooke Egypt, and feared notExod. 2. 11. to end, & Actes. 7 23. to 31. and Hebr. 11. the kings fiercenesse, for he indured as he that saw him which is inuisible: and in this fayth he ordayned the passeouer and the effusion of bloud, least hee that destroyed the first borneExod. 12. and Heb. 11. 20. should touch them. In this fayth they passed through the red Sea as on drie land, which when the Egyptians assayed toExod. 14. and Hebr. 11 29.
doe, they were drowned. In this fayth Ioshua or Iesus. 1. 1. 2. & 3 &. . chapt. & Actes. 7. 45. I sh 1. 12. 24. Iosh 1. 6. and Hbr 11. 30. soshu. 2. and Hebr. 11. 1. Iudg. 6. 11. and  8 chap. & . & 11. & 13. & 14. & 15. & 16. chapters. Dan. 3. 25. and Esai. 43. 2. brought in the people of God into the land of promise, and in this fayth he conquered one and thirtie kinges. In this faith the walles of Iericho beyng compassed about seuen dayes fell downe. In this fayth Rahab the harlot perished not with them which obeyed not, when she had receiued the spyes peaceably. In this fayth Gedeon, Barac, Sampon, Iephte, Dauid, Samuel, and all the prophetes subdued kindgdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtained the promises, and stopped the mouthes of Lyons. In this fayth Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego quenched the heate of fire. And in this fayth Daniel refused the glory of Babell and Paras, by the which faith he abode constant in the true worship of his God, thoughDan. 6. amongest the Lyons hee should be cast. In this fayth many that were weake in the dayes of Antiochus were made strongDan. 8. 9. to  & Hbr. 1. 35. and waxed valiant in battell, and turned to flight the armies of the allients. In this fayth women receiued theyr dead rai∣sed to lyfe, and others also were racked, and would not be de∣liuered, because they looked for a better resurrection. In thisIeb. 11. 36. 37. to end. fayth ohers haue bene tryed by mockinges and scourginges: yea moreouer by bondes and imprisonmentes, they were sta∣ned and hewen asunder, and were tempted and slaine with the sword, and wandered vp and downe in sheepes skinnes, and in goat skinnes, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, whom the world was not worthy of, they wandered in wildernes, & mountaynes and dennes, and caues of the earth. And these all through fayth obtayned good report, and receiued not the promise, God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they with∣out vs should not be perfit. Yet al these dyed in fayth, and sawHeb. 11. 13. 14 15. 16. the promises a farre off, and receiued them thankefully, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrimes on earth, for they that say such thinges, declare plainly that they seeke a country not hereupon earth, but the desire a better, that is, an heauenly: wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be cal∣led theyr God, and hath prepared for them an heauenly eitie. Now then, seeing that fayth is the ground of thinges hopedHebr. 11. 1. for, and the euidence of thinges whiche are not seene: Let vs
in any wise vse the meanes that God hath appoynted to come therby. And seeing we are compassed with so great a cloud ofHeb. 12. 1. 2. witnesses, Let vs also cast away euery thing that presseth downe, and the sinne that hangeth on so fast: and let vs runne the race with patience that is set before vs: still looking vnto our Lord and Souiour Iesus Christ, who is the author and finisher of our fayth. And let vs aboue all thinges take heede that we despise not him that speaketh: For if all these whiche before I spake of, and manie more escaped not which refused those that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turne away from him that speaketh from heauen. And seeing we know that the iudgementes of God are according to truth agaynst all them that haue so lyghtly regarded to heare and knowe, and haue counted them worthy of death which haue done so: let vs not thinke if we doe the same, that we shall es∣cape the iudgementes of God: but that the like famine will befall vs and our nation that hath befallen others: I do notAmos. 8. 11. 12 meane a famine of bread, as made of corne, but of that hea∣uenly bread the worde of God. Therfore seeing his word is no vaine word (as Moses saith)Deut. 32. 47. concerning men, but is euen their very life: Let vs (as y• Apo∣stle sayth) as new borne babes desire the sincere milke therof,1. Pet. 2. 2. and 2. Pet. 3. 18. that so we may grow thereby, both in grace and in the know∣ledge of our Lord and sauiour Iesus Christ, especially foras∣muche as that in the knowledge of him standeth our eter∣nal life: & no where els is he to be found, but in the holy scrip∣tures, for so he hymselfe hath sayd in these words: Search the scriptures, for in them ye thinke to haue eternall life: & so youIohn. 5. 39. shal, for they are they that testifie of me, by whō you haue your life, breath & being, and that eternally: but you will not comeActes. 17. 28. Iohn. 5. 40. Iohn. 3. 36. vnto me (sayth hee) that ye might haue life: Therefore hath the holy Ghost sayd in another place, hee that obeyeth not the sonne of God shall neuer see life, but the wrath of God abi∣deth on hym. Seeing therefore that the sonne hath giuenIohn. 5. 39. Ioshua. 1. 8. commandement to search the Scriptures, and the father that we should not let them depart out of our mouthes, and the ho∣ly Ghost hath pronounced a blessing onely on them whichePsal. 1.
doe therein delight: Let vs in anye wise take vnto vs (as the Apostle commandeth) euen the whole armour thereof, andEphe. 6. 10. to 19. with the holy Prophet make it our onely meditation conti∣nually, then shall we be sure to prosper and to haue good suc∣cesse:Ioshu. 1. 8. for so the Lord himselfe hath tolde vs: yea then shall we be like a tree that florisheth beeing planted by the riuer side,Psal. 1. which bringeth forth her fruit in due season: yea then shall our prosperitie be as a floud, and our righteousnesse as the wauesEsai 48. 18. of the sea, for then will the sonne of righteousnesse hymselfe ouershadow vs, vnder whose winges we shall be sure to findePsal. 91. 4. euerlasting health and safetie, whereas otherwise we see that God is a consuming fire, and hath troden downe the wickedDeut 4. 4. and Heb. 12. 29. that would not delight herein, as wee haue seene in all ages. Therfore most heartily I beseech you, yea and beseech you a∣gayne and agayne, that you will alwayes remember that great commandement of the Lord our God, whiche is this: Euen to remember the law of Moses his seruant, the which heMala. 4. 4. hath commanded, with al his statutes and iudgementes: and also that most sure word of the holy prophetes with the com∣mandementes2. Pet. 1. 19. & 3. 2. of the apostles of our Lord and sauiour: and to labour therein both day and night: that so you may remayne no longer as children without vnderstanding, but to bee of a most ripe age therin, and that so it may be sayde of you, ThisDeut. 4. 6. 7. 8. people is onely wise, and of an vnderstanding heart: For they haue knowne the holy scriptures from their childhood, which2. Timo. 3. 1t. are onely able to make them so to be. Come therefore I be∣seeche you, and let vs with the holy prophet confesse before all men & say, Oh how loue we the law of the Lord: It is ourPsal. 119. 97. onely meditation continually: we haue had as great delight inPsal. 119. 14. the way of his testimonies as in all maner of riches. There∣fore shall our eyes preuent the night watches to meditate inPsal. 119. 148. hys word, because the law of hys mouth is better vnto vs thenPsal. 119. 72. thousandes of gold & siluer: yea we hys seruants wil continu∣ally meditate in hys statutes, and hys testimonies shall be ourPsal. 19. 23. 117. delight, and our onely councellors. And because that by hysPsal. 119. 24. preceptes hee hath quickened vs, wee will neuer forget hisPsal. 119. 93. word: but wee will still hearken vnto hys voyce, that so weePsal. 119. 16. Deut. 26. 17.
may learne to feare it, and diligently to obey it all the dayes of our life. And we wil also set vp the Lord this day to be our God, & we wil walke in his wayes, and keepe his ordinances, hys commaundementes and his lawes for euer, and his voiceIoshu. 24. 24. alone will we obey. And so doing the Lord our God will setDeu. 26. 18. 19 vp vs to be a pretious people vnto himselfe, as he hath promi∣sed: yea so shall wee be set on high aboue all nations of the earth in prayse, in name, and in glory: yea so shall we be coun∣ted an holy people vnto the Lord, whiche in time past were not a people: so shall our enemies that dayly rise agaynst vsDeut. 28. 7. fall before our faces: yea where as they come out one way a∣gaynst vs, they shall flie before vs seuen wayes: yea so shall fiue of vs chase an hundreth of them, and an hundreth of vs putLeuit. 26. 8. ten thousand of them to flight, as in good part, of late we haueDeut. 28. 12. seene: yea so will the Lord open vnto vs his heauenly trea∣sureLeui. 26. 45. 6. and giue vs rayne in due season, whereby our land shall yeeld her increase, and the trees of the field shall yeeld their fruit: yea so shall our thressing reach vnto the vintage, & the vintage shall reache vnto sowing time: yea so shall wee eate our bread in great plenteousnesse, and dwell in our land in safetie: yea so shall wee haue peace in our land, and our sleepe be in quiet, and none shall make vs afrayd: yea so shall all theDeut. 28. blessinges contained in the whole booke of God come vpon vs and ouertake vs, if we shall hearken vnto the voyce of the Lord our God, and obey it, and delight in hys holy worde as in the chiefest treasure, and in delighting therein learne thereby to keepe hys commaundementes, and indeuour to doe them. Then blessed shall we be in the Citie, and blessed in the field, blessed shall be the fruite of our body, and the fruit of our ground, the fruit of our cattell, the increase of our kine and flocks of our sheepe. Yea so shall we find blessednesse in all things we set our hands vnto: And aboue all other blessings,Reue. 2. 7. and 22. 2. 7. our right shalbe in the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradice of God, & we shal enter in through the gates into the Citie. Therfore this one thing I wishe you to vnderstand, and alwayes to beare it minde, that is, that euen Iesus our
sauiour, who is the roote and the generation of Dauid, andReu. 22. 16. 17 & Esay. 55. the bright morning starre hath sent his Angel to testifie vnto you, and to all men, that who so thirsteth, and will come, hee may be bold to come, and drinke of the waters of life freely. And thus I end at this time my direction vnto them: besech∣ing the Lorde Iesus Christ, that his grace may be with you,Apo. 22. 21. and to directe you thyther, who is the only guyde thereunto.Apo. 7. 17. Amen. FINIS. Yours in the Lord, Roger Cotton. Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Simson and William White. 1590.
