6909 99843932 8698
A DISCOVRSE OF THE medicine called Mithridatium,  declaring the firste beginninge, the temperament, the noble vertues, and the true vse of the same: Compiled ra∣ther for those which are to vse it, then for the learned. 1585.
¶A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE OF THE MEDICINE called Mithridatium. WEe doe read in ye Ro∣maine histories, that Mithridates a Pui∣sante king of Pontus & Bithinia, for cau∣sing all ye Romaines in Asia to bee slaine, and the Proconsul Oppius to bee cast in prison, was assaulted by Silla, discomfited by Lucullus, and lastly vtterly vanquished by Pompey the great: and when this valiaunte king perceiued himselfe to be ouercome, and that he was to be taken of his enemies: first he destroyde his wyfe & daughters with poy∣son, and then tooke the same poyson, desiring rather so to dye, then as a captiue to fal into ye hands of his enemyes: But hauing dronken much of the poyson, could not dye therewith, and then caused his seruant Bistocus a french∣man (as it is written) to kill him with a sword. Such was the magnanimity of this mighty king to escape the hands of the Ro∣maines, yt he might not bee caried to Rome,
and in captiue maner be shewed in triumph. For this noble king was not only valiante in warre, but also in phisicall matters very ex∣pert, had the knowledg of many hearbes, and making tryall of sundry simples that doe re∣sist poyson in men condemned to dye, as Galen writeth in his first booke de Antidotis, and finding some to remedy ye poyson of Spiders, some of Scorpions, some to doe good against the byting of Vipers, others of mad Dogs, many to remedy the poison of hearbes, and so sundry others to help the venime of sundry poisons: he endeuoured to make a mixture of diuerse simples, hoping thereby to haue a ready remedy against all kindes of poison, & the same was termed after his name Mithri∣datium: wherein he was nothing deceiued. For this noble king in his life time vsed much and often ye medicine. And (as it is written) be∣ing subdued by the Romaines, and making choise rather to dye then to be led captiue to Rome, attempting to kill him selfe with poi∣son, and taking of it great quantity, tooke no harme thereof, for that his body (as ye histo∣ry saith) by vse of ye medicine altered, & resi∣sted the action of the poison. Notwithstan∣ding his wife and two daughters dyed before his face wich the same poison. Since that
time, the efficacy and strength of ye medicine, hath in all ages (euen vnto these our dayes) bene confirmed. For after that Pompey the great had cōquered this valiante king, search made in his Closets, amongst sundry Iuels, many secret medicines to expell diuerse poi∣sons, and to cure other internall diseases, were founde: where also was the description of this medicine. And albeit Pompey, as a martiall man, had greatest care of other matters, yet aduertised what goodnes might come by such secret medicines, commaunded one Pompeius Lineus his libertine, well seene in sciences, to conuert all those medi∣cines written in the Pontike tongue, into la∣tine. And it doth appeare by the history, that many volumes of phisicall maters were there founde, which perused and considered of by Asclepiades, in those dayes a famous phisiti∣on in Rome, were by him commended, and at his petition translated into latine, whereof Pliny writeth in his 25. booke. Of so many excellent medicines left by Mithridates, none was so highly esteemed, & so well accompted of in all respectes, as that termed Mithri∣datium: whose excellent vertues against poi∣son were first approued in Mithridates owne body, and after confirmed by ye Romaines.
In trueth a man may iustly blame the histo∣ryographers, which in describing the noble actes of Pompey the great, doe so slenderly passe ouer this his facte, in translating of this medicine experienced of this noble king. For in my iudgemēt things iustly weighed, none of all Pompeyes valiante feates of armes, no not the royall triumph made at Rome to de∣clare the victory in cōquering king Mithri∣dates, hath so largely aduaunced his name, as the making knowen to the world of this medicine. For the profit of yt victory came on∣ly to Rome, and the triumph and praise for ye same done at yt time in Rome: But the profit of this medicine hath bene by his meanes im∣parted to ye whole world, & the cōmendation and praise for the same, is iustly to be yeelded from all the world in all ages and times: So that as all the world is greater then Rome, & all times more then one age, so doubtlesse more renowne is due vnto Pompey for di∣uulging of this medicine, then by the conque∣ring of this king, or by the triumph for the same. Although in the Emperoure Nero his time, succeeded a learned phisition called An∣dromachus, who to the imitation of this me∣dicine compounded an other, adding to the de∣scription of Mithridatium the flesh of Vi∣pers,
and some other simples, which medi∣cine he called Theriaca, of the Greeke worde , which doth signifie a wilde and vene∣mous beast, whereof the Viper is one. Yet this ought not to imbase any praise due to Mithridates for compounding of Mithrida∣tium. For all men doe know that it is easier to adde to a thing done, then to finde out the same, and greatest praise is to be geuen to the first inuentor. So that the dishonour yt came to Mithridates by Pompey his victory was not so great, as the praise and commendation for the inuenting and compounding of Mi∣thridatium. And his calamity to be ouer∣throwen is greatly easied, his ignomy to be cōquered after a sorte aduaunced, that by the same this medicine was diuulged, which happely would not haue bene performed, at ye least so generally, had he dyed otherwayes, and not bene by Pompey ouercommed. For had not Mithridates in him felfe approoued the excellency of the medicine, purposing to haue killed him selfe rather then to come in∣to the handes of the Romaines, surely the no∣table vertues of the medicine would not so well haue bene belieued. And had not this king in that his miserable estate made triall in his owne body, who would haue belieued
that a mans body might by any meanes be brought so strongly to resist poison? Who but one in so desperate a case, would attempt to take strong poison vpon the credit of any me∣dicine? Great good therefore to the whole world this ouerthrowe of Mithridates did breede: And great renoume thereby came, not to the conqueroure onely, but to the con∣quered: to the one for inuenting, to the other for diuulging of so great a medicine, which for these two thousand yeares hath bene of all men in all ages had in great estimation, not in Pontus onely & Bithinia, & Greece adioy∣ning to the same, but in all other nations and countryes where any learning is, commen∣ded by all writers, Grecians, Arabians, and Latinists. And what greater assurance can there be of the notable vertues of this medi∣cine, then the confirmation of the same from Mithridates to this our time, then that all phisitions of the world in all ages, times, and places, in Greece, in Arabia, in Italia, in all partes of Germany, in France, in Spayn, in Portingal, in Hungaria, in England, in Scotland, Moscouia, Tartaria, Sueuia, yee in all partes of Asia, Aphrica, and Europa, euen amongest the saluage and barbarous na∣tions, hath and doth greatly esteeme of Mi∣thridatium,
and so of Theriacle, and seeke and prouide for them to serue their countryes in cases of neede. How carefully all princes & rulers, hath & doth take order for the well cō∣pounding of these medicines. Doubtles had not experience confirmed their excellent qua∣lyties, the estimation would not haue so ma∣ny yeares continued: but longe before this our age, would haue bene diminished, and by this time come to nothing. Great therefore are these medicines, and in a heigh degree to be esteemed. And albeit great prayse and cō∣mendation is due to both medicines (I meane Mithridatium and Theriacle) yet greatest praise is to be geuen to Mithridatium. First because of his antiquytie, which was of Mi∣thridates inuented, & approued many yeares before Theriacle was compounded. For long after Mithridates was ouerthrowen▪ Andro∣machus phisition to Nero ye Emperour, & ve∣ry expert in cōfecting of medicines) as Ga∣len writeth in his first booke de Antid.) with diligence considering the composition of Mi∣thridatium, chaunged some of the simples, toke out some, and added others, supposinge by that alteration to make the medicine more perfite, & of mightyer force against poison. In which consideration he added the flesh of vi∣pers
to the composition of Mithridatium, and leauing out some simples vsed of Mithri∣dates, added others, in number moe, and (as he thought) of greater power against poyson. Whereby it may reasonably bee gathered, yt Andromachus not fully satisfied with the cō∣position set downe by Mithridates, supposing some defect in it, by that his alteration, ende∣uoured to make an other medicine in all de∣grees more perfite, in which no want might be found, and so he addressed the same, and cal∣led it Theriaca. Whereby no doubt some good time after, Mithridatium was lesse e∣steemed, and the credit thereof much imbased, vntill time by longe experience had sufficient∣ly declared, wherein Theriacle doth excell Mithridatium, and in what poynts Mithri∣datiū is not onely not inferiour to Theriacle, but of more efficacy then it. So Galen in his first booke de Antidot. writeth. Because of the flesh of Vipers in The∣riacle, it is much better in the byting of the Vi∣per then Mithridatium. But in all other effects, Theriacle can not onely not doe more then Mi∣thridatium, but is inferiour. The same Galen in 2. de Antidot. writeth in like sorte. We will begin (saith he) with the description of Mi∣thridatium, for it is stronger against many poi∣sons
then Theriacle, though this be better a∣gainst the byting of the Viper. Whereby we may gather yt where Andromachus endeuou∣ring to make a more perfit medicine, then yt lefte of Mithridates, did in some part accom∣plish his purpose, leauing a medicine excel∣ling the other in one particular thing, but not of like efficacy generally. It happened there∣fore in this case (if a man may compare na∣tures actions to arte) as in ye framing of mā, who doth in all actions exceede all creatures, yet not so generally, but yt in some one action some one beast doth excel man, as we reade yt the Aegle hath perfiter sighte then man, the Dogge doth passe man in smelling, the Ape in agility, the Tiger in swiftnesse. But who∣soeuer will with reason conferre all actions, he shall find in all together, that man passeth all creatures, for such is his constitution and temperature, that moe and perfiter actions doe proceede from man thē any one creature. So it came to passe, that Andromachus in∣deuoring to make a medicine of greater per∣fection then Mithridatium, obtayned that in one thing his medicine excelled, but in many other was inferiour to Mithridatium. For a man may gather the vertues of these two me∣dicines, at large displaied in Galens workes,
into three orders. First that they are good against the byting and stinging of venemous beastes, be they Serpentes, Scorpions, mad Dogges, or others. Secondly they serue to cure all kinde of poysons taken into the body. Thirdly to remedy other inwarde diseases. Now it is certaine, and long experience hath confirmed, that both these medicines haue strong and mighty vertues to remedy al three kindes of effectes: yet no doubt one of them is in some effectes of more power then the o∣ther. As Galen writeth that Theriacle for ye byting of Vipers, is stronger then Mithrida∣tium: In other it doth exceede Theriacle. So we may iustly conclude with Galen, that against the byting & stinging of beastes, The∣riacle hath more force: But for inward poi∣sons & inward diseases, truly Mithridatium is of more might. Wherefore albeit both me∣dicines are noble, & greatly to be desired, yet Mithridatium is to be accompted of greater price, as hauing more generally stronger ver∣tues, and seruing to moe purposes. And it may be obiected, that in Theriacle cō∣piled by Andromachus are many simples ad∣ded, which haue great vertue against diuerse kindes of poysons, and happely are therein of more efficacy, then those in Mithridatium,
left out by Andromachus in his Theriacle. Whereby it may be coniectured, that Andro∣machus making choyse of the simples, selec∣ted such as were of greatest force to remedy poisons, & omitted the weaker, adding in their place, some other of more strēgth: so it is pro∣bable, yt Theriacle so compiled, is of greater myght in all kinde of poysons. But Galen in his workes declareth, that experience in his time did shewe the contrary, and reason con∣firmeth the same. For let the simples in The∣riacle be in number moe, and in qualytie of greater efficacy, yet it must be remembred, that it is certayn, that when in compositions some one simple is set as the base and ground of that medicine, that that simple doth drawe the force and strength of all ye rest to his pro∣perty and action, and so euery such compound is specially good in that one thinge for which it was deuised. Now when Andromachus did make the flesh of vipers as the base and grounde of his Theriacle, it foloweth that the same doth drawe to it the qualities and ver∣tues of all the simples in Theriacle: so it doth come to passe, that Theriacle is far better thē Mithridatium, against the bytinge of vipers and such venemous beasts. And for that all o∣ther simples in it, are caried by the flesh of the
vipers, to exercyse their force strongly therin, they haue the lesse power to remedy other poi∣sons. When no such thinge was intended in the composition of Mithridatium, it is a∣greable to reason that the simples in it eue∣ry one retayneth his owne power and pro∣perty, and so one such quality or forme doth resulte by the myxture, of great strength a∣gainst all poysons. Moreouer it is certayne that in the composition of Mithridatium, are fewer simples in number then are in the con∣fection of Theriacle, then it followeth that when like quantity of both is taken, as for e∣xample, ʒ j, surely a greater portiō of euery one simple is taken in Mithridatium, and lesser in Theriacle, the lesser quantity must needes haue lesser strength in remedyinge o∣ther poysons, saue that, to the which the base or grounde doth call them. So it remayneth fyrme that Galen writeth, as obserued in his time, that Theriacle is in deede better then Mithridatium in bytinge of vypers and like beastes, and that Mithridatium exceadeth th'other in remedying all other poisons taken into the body and inward diseases. Where∣fore in this our countrey where no such perill and danger is of vipers, Mithridatium by good reason ought to be reputed of greater e∣stunation then Theriacle.
Of the composition of Mithridatium. IT shall not be amisse in this place, to declare the compo∣sition of this medicine. And it is to be noted, that where all writers doe greately cō∣mend it, yet certayne it is, that they do not in one sorte describe the ma∣kinge of the same. But almost euery authore hath a seuerall description, differinge in the number of the simples, and also in ye propor∣tions and quantities. In time past ye Apothe∣caries in making of Mithridatium, folowed most the description of Nicolaus Praepositus, of Auicenna, and of Nicolaus Mirepsicus, some of Aetius, some of Paulus. The former descriptions contayninge aboue one hundred simples, were long and laborious, and requi∣red many supplyes, for simples vnknowen. Wherefore in these our later daies, in which learned men haue examined euery thing per∣fitly, the most part haue commended one of ye three compositions expressed by Galen in 2. de Antid. of the which, two were taken (as Ga∣len wryteth) out of the bookes of Androma∣chus. The first found without name is attri∣buted
to Andromachus, as compounded by him, of others supposed the very same, which was found in the closets of kinge Mithrida∣tes, & after transcribed in the workes of An∣dromachus. The second description is also recyted out of Andromachus bookes, vnder the names of Antipater and Cleophantes. The thyrd is referred to Damocrates: It doth not appeare by any thing written by Galen, which of these three compositions is best to be folowed. And so of ye learned men of our time, some hath vsed the one, and some the other. Many doe best like of the first description at∣tributed to Andromachus, both for that An∣dromachus by the opinion of Galen and of all other auncient wryters, was adiudged very skilfull in cōpounding of medicines, & there∣in did farre excell all phisitions of his time, and also because it may bee iustly gathered, that that description is the very same, which Mithridates vsed. For in ye Andromachus was phisition to Nero the Emperour of Rome, it appeareth that he obtayned to see and to consider, of all the bookes which found in Mithridates closet, were translated into latine by Lineus the grammarian, and brought to Rome. And it is not agreable to reason, that Andromachus studying to make
a more perfit medicine then that which came vnder the name of Mithridatium, woulde also inuent an other vnder the same name. But it is very probable that Andromachus with diligence perusinge the recept of Mi∣thridatium, vsed of Mithridates, would leaue it in such forme as Mithridates compoūded it, and deuise an other by the same, which hee meant to make more perfite. Andromachus therefore not alteringe the description of Mi∣thridatium, but leauing it in the same forme as it was founde, confected an other, which he called Theriaca. And where we doe reade in ye 2. de Antid. of Galen, an other recept set downe vnder the name of Theriaca Mithri∣datis, with assertion that the kinge vsed the same: yet it seemeth not to be yt Mithridatium which was foūd in the closet of that king. For all writers doe confesse, that Andromachus long after added to that recept of Mithrida∣tes, the flesh of vipers: so that Mithridatium compounded by Mithridates had not in it the flesh of vipers, and that Theriacle which Ga∣len in that place calleth Theriaca Mithrida∣tis, doth receaue the flesh of vipers, so it fo∣loweth that it is not the Mithridatium vsed of Mithridates. And he that will with dili∣gence peruse that recept mentioned of Galen,
by the name of Theriaca Mithridatis, shal finde it in ye simples not much differing from Theriaca Andromachi, and many things re∣peated twyse in diuers clauses doth argue an imperfection: that Galen may be thought in yt place to speake after ye common opinion, whē hee affirmeth it to be the same which Mi∣thridates vsed, being in deede farre different from that medicine. Wherefore we may rea∣sonably conclude, that the first recept tran∣scribed by Galen in 2. de Antid. out of An∣dromachus workes, is in truth the selfe same that Mithridates vsed, and in mine opinion, in that respect the better to be liked, and the rather to be followed. For what better assu∣rance can we haue of the true and perfect con∣fection of this medicine, then that which was deliuered by Mithridates? and what descri∣ption can more assure vs of the effects of this medicine, then yt composition which Mithri∣dates followed, who first gaue so notable proofe of the medicine, and thereby the first credite to the same? So that if by discourse of reason it may be proued, that an other descri∣ption is more artificiall and more agreable to the rules of confection of medicines: yet in mine opinion this description, being the same that Mithridates vsed, set downe happely by
the king, more according to experience then art, is rather to be folowed then any other, thought more cunningly addressed. Neuerthe∣lesse it is not to be deemed that kinge Mi∣thridates was altogether vnskylfull, when many volumes concerning phisike were found in his closet, & translated into latine, brought to Rome. And it appeareth that he taking delight in medicinall matters, had about him dyuerse phisitions, who mighte artificially dispence the simples in Mithridatium. And Galen in the sayd booke de Antid. com∣mendeth the discription of Mithridatium at∣tributed to Andromachus: whereby it appea∣reth, that this description of Mithridatium is not addressed altogether without arte. For which cause, ye learned of our time, haue great reason to preferre that description of Mithri∣datium before others. Albeit some do more esteeme the composition of Damocrates, as with more arte and more cunning dispensed. Notwithstanding because it is very likely yt the precept attributed to Andromachus, as found in his bookes, is the selfe same that Mithridates vsed, and hath of many, in this our countrey, of late yeares bene folowed: I thought best in this place to expresse ye same, as I doe finde it in Galen, in 2. de Antid. and
is in many antidotary bookes allowed, which is as foloweth. Rec. glicirrizae ʒ vij. ob. iiij. Spicae nardi ʒ vij. ob. iij. Croci, cinnamomi, Zinziberis. ana. ʒ vij. ob. ij. Galbani. ʒ vij. Castorei, costi, ana. ʒ vj. ob. ij. Scordij, iunci odorati, Opoponacis, Terebinthinae. Seminis dauci. ʒ vj. ob. iij. Opobalsami, ana. ʒ vj. ob. iiij. Thlaspios. Thuris, myrrhae, ana. ʒ vj. Succi hyppocistidis. Polij, Seelios, ana. ʒ v. ob. ij. Cypheos, Casiae. Stiracis ʒ v ob. iiij. Petroselini ʒ iiij. ob. iij. Opij. ʒ iiij. ob. ij.
Nardi gallicae, anae ʒ. i. Seminis feniculi, Nardi indicae, Gentianae, Mei athamantici, Rosarum siccarum, Cardamomi, Folij. Anisi, ʒ. iij Acori, Hiperici, ana ʒ ij Gummi Acaciae, Phu pontici. Scinci, ʒ ij. ob. ij Vini choi, & mellis Attici desoumati, ana q. s. BEcause many learned men of this age doe best allowe the description of Mithridati∣um, deliuered by Damocrates, as more artifi∣cially done, in which the rules of compound∣ing of medicines are more exactly followed, and is in truth easier to be made of the Apo∣thecaries, better digested in orders, not ha∣uing so small diuisions in the proportions, as this attributed to Andromachus, and so may better be made of the Apothecary in what quantity shall seeme good to him: therefore
I doe thinke it not amisse in this place to re∣cite that description also of Mithridatium of Damocrates, as the same is expressed in the second booke of Galen de Antidot. that such as shall thinke better to follow the same, may by this pamphlet knowe the ingredience, which is this. Rec. Mirrhae, croci, ana. ʒ. x Agarici, Zinziberis, Cinnamomi, thuris, Spicae, Nardi, Thlaspios, Seselis, stechados, ana. ʒ. viij Opobalsami, costi, Iunci odorati, styracis, Galbani, terebinthinae, Piperis longi, castorei, Sucoi hypocistidis, Opoponacis, Folij malabathri recētis, Cassiae ligneae, ana. ʒ. vij Polij, scordij, Se∣minis dauci, bdellij, Piperis albi, cypheos, Carpobalsami,
Nardi celticae, Gūmi, ana. ʒ. i boni pon∣deris. Petroselini, Opij, Car∣damomi, gentianae, Se∣minis feniculi, dictāni, Foliorum rosarum, Anisi, asari, acori, ana. ʒ. iij Phu, sagapeni, Succi glicirrizae, Mei Athamantici, ana. ʒ. ij Acaciae, Ventris scinci, Sem. hiperici, Vini & mellis q. s. PLiny in his 22. maketh mention of a kinde of Mithridatium made of two dry Wal∣nuts, two Figges, xx. leaues of Rhue, one graine of falte: Aetius and other writers die recite the same. And they greatly cōmend it against poison, & other pestilentiall diseases. Of the quality and temperament of Mithridatium.
IT is of all men of our age cō∣fessed, and taken for a truth, that medicines compounded haue their vertues, and doe their effectes according to the nature of the simples whereof they are compounded. So it must needes fol∣lowe, that Mithridatium compounded of ma∣ny simples, hath diuers & sundry properties, & those agreable to the ingredience. And wher∣as in Mithridatium are simples differing in quality, some hauing power to heate, some other to coole, yet the greatest number are in quality whot and dry. And albeit these being contrary, and repugnant, do make alteration the one with the other: notwithstanding it must needes follow, that those reactions not being infinite, at the last one forme and quali∣ty must result in the compound, agreable to the natures of those simples, which doe beare and cary dominion. Now whereas in Mithri∣atium ye most simples haue quality to heate and dry: it followeth that Mithridatium hath a whot and dryinge power. And as com∣pounds must haue a time of fermentation, and rypening (for the reactions of the simples are not perfited in a moment) So the quality or forme which doth aryse by the workinge of
one simple with an other, hath not his perfec∣tion presently after ye mixture, but a certayne space of time must be geuē before we can iust∣ly expect the true action of the medicine com∣pounded, as proceeding from the forme of the medicine, which doth resulte by fermentation of the working of the simples in ye compound. So that before ye due time, we may not loke for the vertues aunswerable to the composition, but that some one simple aboue the rest may shew his quality, that the compound medicine may do an effect aunswerable to that simple, and not as proceeding from the whole cōposi∣tion. In which respect, Galen wryteth that Theriacle newly made, doth greately prouoke sleepe, by reason that Opium (that is the ioyce of Poppy prepared) myngled in it, being of greater force then other simples, before fer∣mentation doth exercise his quality more then the rest: and after that his quality is by fer∣mentation with other simples broken, he can not so strongly do his operation. So Theriacle after the iust time of fermentation doth not so mightely prouoke sleepe, as newe Theriacle doth. The same is obserued in Mithridati∣um, and all other compounds, that immedi∣ately after myxture, the qualities of the sim∣ples are strongest, and shewe their powers
best. But certaine it is, that after due time of working, when the compound is fully rype, no one simple doth worke in it according to his owne nature, but by the reactions one com∣mon nature doth result, which cannot be at∣tributed to any one or moe simples, but may be truely sayd a common nature arysinge out of all the ingredience, and from that forme the actions of the compound do proceede. Which forme is to vs not certainely knowen, ye effects are best learned by experience. Wherfore it is very wysely wrytten of Ioannes de sancto A∣mando in his exposition vpon the antitodary of Nicolaus, that it is better alwaye to vse a me∣dicine compound exercised, then one lately in∣uēted whereof we haue no experience. For al∣though we may by discourse of reason gather that ye compound, as Mithridatium, is whot, and dry, because ye simples wherof it is made, are the most part whot and dry, and then ex∣perience doth confirme this coniecture: yet o∣ther qualities of Mithridatium and of other compounds are not so easely knowen by any discourse or method, but chiefly learned by ex∣perience. For the cōmon forme from whence many secrete vertues doe procede, is not kno∣wen by any learning or methode. So it must needes follow, that the actions of ye same forme
are not learned by methode or doctrine, but chiefly by experience. In which respect also, we haue reason to retaine the description deli∣uered by Mithridates, before any other, for yt that noble king gaue better proofe in himselfe of the vertues of the medicine, then any other hath of it by any other composition. That Mithridatium is not so whote as Theria∣cle, compounded after Andromachus de∣scription, which is in these dayes most followed: and that it may more safely bee vsed. Some learned men of our time, by reason go about to discourse, and prooue, yt Theriacle is not in quātity so whot as Mithridatium, & in that respect doe in∣ferre, that it may more safely bee vsed. Which they doe gather, for that in Theriacle a greater quantity of Opium (that is the ioyce of Poppy prepa∣red) is, then in Mithridatium, whose cooling power doth much abate the heating qualities of other medicines. This argument in these
two medicines newly made, before fermētati∣on is perfite, may take place. For then in deede euery simple retayning his owne vertue, Opi∣um may remitte the whot qualities of the rest: at what time neither of these medicines is ge∣nerally to be vsed, but for some speciall point, as Galen to prouoke sleepe, doth counsell new Theriacle. But after fermentation is perfi∣ted, all the simples one altering the other, eue∣ry one hath qualities so broken, that not one retayneth his owne nature: then surely the cō∣mon forme resulting, doth follow the simples which doe beare dominion, and they in both these medicines are whot and dry, and ye whot and dry simples in Theriacle are moe in num∣ber, and of greater force, then in Mithridali∣um: as may appeare to him that will compare both confections. Whereby it followeth that the common quality arysinge in Theriacle, doth heate more then that in Mithridatium. Neyther the increase of Opium doth in pro∣portion aunswere the strength of heating in it: neither hath it any such force so greately to contemper the simples, as these men doe ima∣gine. For although Opium hath speciall pro∣perty aboue other medicines to induce sleepe, yet his cooling quality (of many writers) is not accompted so great, for it hath so strong bitter∣nes:
that many doe suppose that it hath a myxt nature, consisting of many whot partes: if it be true that Galen wryteth in his 5. booke of simples, that all bitter thinges are whot, and being certaine yt Opium doth stupefy, & strong∣ly cause sleepe, it is of some inferred yt that po∣wer doth rather proceede of a property of sub∣staunce, then altogether depend of his cooling quality. Wherefore it is not without reason affyrmed by learned men wryting hereof, that Mithridatium doth not so strongly heate as Theriacle: and experience doth also confirme the same. For who so vseth these medicines, doubtles he shall finde that Theriacle rightly compounded after Andromachus description (which is in all this treatise to be vnderstood, and is in these dayes of the Apothecaries most commonly made, and so of the wyser sort in most vulgare vse) doth heate more then Mi∣thridatium, which is confessed of the wry∣ters, commenting vpon the antidotary of Ni∣colaus, and in this our age of many learned men affyrmed. For which cause, many in these dayes without daunger do vse Mithridatium when neede requireth. In sōmer time, & whot seasons, very few and seldome Theriacle. And Galen doth expresly forbyd to gieue Theriacle to children. More safe therefore is the vse of
Mithridatium then of Theriacle, not onely in respect of the heating quality, which seemeth lesse, & more gentle in Mithridatium: but al∣so in respect that a greater quantity of Opiū is in Theriacle. For admit that Opium by fer∣mentation sustayneth great alteration, not∣withstāding ye common forme of Theriacle ta∣keth some infection of Opium, yt some effecte declining to his nature, doth also proceede, and the more, if that stupefying and dormitory power in Opium, doth depend rather of pro∣perty of substance, thē of manifest cooling qua∣lity, as some do argue. For the properties of substance in medicines, haue not like alterati∣on by fermentation, as the manifest qualities haue by reaction: we may therefore feare the common and often vse of Theriacle for ye quan∣tity of Opium in it. For like reason, often vse of Theriacle may be suspected, because of the flesh of vipers added to it, as the base & groūd of the medicine. For notwithstanding ye great care of the place, of the time, of the kinde ob∣serued in taking and choosing of the viper, the diligence in preparing, the care of myxture with other things, for the better correction of the malignity of ye beast, which hapely might remaine in the flesh: yet a man may doubt of some errour cōmitted▪ in so daūgerous a case.
And though all thinges therein bee ryghtely done, yet some little quality of the nature of ye beast will remayne, that a man may suspect often to vse the medicine. And where kinge Mithridates was expert in phisicall matters, it is not to be adiudged but that he did aswell know the nature of the flesh of vipers, as hee knewe the venime of the beast: so it is very likely that he purposing to compounde a me∣dycine to be often taken for his safty against poison, did of purpose make it without the fleshe of vipers, knowing that if he shold haue added that, he myght not with like safty haue dayly vsed ye same. And what learned men doe so often in these dayes counsell Theriacle, as do Mithridatium? and we doe in this our time with lesse danger and more security, for the measels, the smale pockes, the wormes, and for internal diseases in children, geue Mithrida∣tium▪ then Theriacle. We may therefore in mine opinion iustly conclude, that Mithrida∣tium is a medicine more generally to be vsed, & may oftener and with more safty be geauen then Theriacle. Of the age and keeping of Mithridatium.
Wwhere we haue sufficiently de∣clared that compounde medi∣cines must haue a time of fer∣mentatiō before they be brought to vse: this place requireth that we doe declare the tyme, when Mithridatium is sufficiently fermented and come to his per∣fection. Galen in his bookes de Theriaca doth write exactly of the time of fermentation of Theriacle, affirming that it is throughly con∣cocted in xii yeares, not denying but yt it hath concoction in shorter time, as in 5. and in 7. yeares, so that we are to iudge that Theriacle is not sufficiently ripe to bee vsed before fiue yeares, and in 7 yeares is better digested, & in xij yeares hath his full fermentation, and per∣fect concoctiō. Yet Aetius and Paulus Aegine∣ta doe measure the concoction of Theriacle in shorter time. For Aetius sayth that Theriacle is fermented in xij monethes, and that it may be vsed after one moneth in some cases, and so affirmeth that it endureth to thirty yeares. Where Paulus appointeth ye age of Theriacle to be twenty yeares, therein he doth not great∣lye differ from Aetius: for hee making the terme of Theriacle to be 30 yeares, doth also say that then it is good in light diseases. So that by Aetius, Theriacle may be vsed after xij
monethes, and continueth in good perfection to 20. yeares, and after declineth, that at 30. yeares it is aged, yet may it be vsed in deseases which are not very great. Our later writers doe ge∣nerally better allowe of Aetius & Paulus opi∣nion for the age of Theriacle, then of Galens: and some suppose an errour or fault in yt place in Galen: and so they doe affirme yt Theriacle is fully concocted in the space of xij monethes, and then may bee sold of the Apothecary: and that the same being well kepte, will continue in good strength 20. yeares, and after doth de∣cline and waxe weaker, and yet may be vsed when it is 30. yeares olde, but it is then as an old man decayed, and weake of strength. Of Mithridatium the former writers haue set downe no time of concoction, leauing to a wyse man to determyne of yt, which is written accordingly of Theriacle. For bycause these two medicines are confected of many simples, not greatly differring, they haue many things cōmon: so as yt which is of ye one affirmed, may bee applied to the other. Notwithstanding as in the number & nature of ye simples, they doe not in all poynts agree: so no doubt in ye age of these medicines some difference is to be allot∣ted: yet such, as a man exercised in these mat∣ters, may easely supplye. For in that Theria∣cle
hath in it the flesh of vipers, and a greater portion of Opium, then is in Mithridatium, it is certaine that Theriacle requireth a longer time to his concoction: for the flesh of vipers must haue perfect fermentation with the sim∣ples for his correction. In like sorte Opium doth aske a long time of fermentation, & for yt cause Galen. 12. de Method. Medend. saith, yt Philonium is not to bee vsed in a yeare after it is compounded, and that the vse of it after ij. iij. or iiij. yeares, is more without daunger. Whereby hee geueth vs to vnderstande, that medicines which doe receaue Opium, require longe time of fermentation: so that Theria∣cle receauing a greater portion of Opium then Mithridatium, ought to haue a larger space to be concocted, then it. Now if Theria∣cle hath his perfection in one yeare, surely Mithridatium is throughly fermented in sixe monethes, and may be kept in good strength, not only as some haue writen to three, or fours yeares, but to x or xij yeares: and except we shall to such time proroge his olde age, there will be no proportion in ye times. For if The∣riacle being cocted in one yeare, doth last to 20. yeares before it doth waxe olde, suerly by the lyke proportion, Mithridatium not well fer∣mented vnder six monethes, may iustly be said
to cōtinue in good efficacy to 10. or 12. yeares. And as Theriacle after 20. yeares waxeth old & feeble: so Mithridatium after 10. or 12. yeares doth decline, that being 20. yeares old, is then decayed and of litle force. As we may proba∣bly determine these times, so there can be no certainty set to leade vs to the time. For if the simples be not in good perfection, or the same orderly and well according to art compoūded, or otherwayes the medicine not well kept: then it will sooner wax old, & lose his strength. But as Galen writeth, to these great medi∣cines, great care must be had of the choise of ye simples, that they may be had in ye readiest per∣fection. And like diligēce must be gieuen, that the confectioner may in all pointes doe his du∣ty, not in making only, but also in keeping ye medicine. And therefore princes are greatly to bee commended, which doe by theyr authority prouide, that these medicines myght be well ordered. And for that many doe in these dayes procure Mithridatium, to haue it in their houses ready to vse, it is good to know yt it is best kept in vessels of glasse, of siluer, and of gold, and that it is not so good to keepe ye same in Tinne vessels, for that they are often cor∣rupted with ledde, and gather a ceruse matter, as Galen writeth in his first booke de Antid. I
wish therefore that the marchaunts may here∣of be admonished, which doe commonly bryng Theriacle from Venice, in vessels of ledde, wherby no small daūger may grow in so no∣ble a medicine, & so greatly esteemed. So wee must not fill the vessell to the toppe, as we say brime full, but leaue some reasonable space, for the medicine to worke, to exhale, & breath: and for that cause, Galen counsayleth to open the vessell somtymes. Howe to knowe good Mithri∣datium. WEe doe read in ye booke of Ga∣len de Theriaca ad Pisonem, & in his bookes de Antidot. how diligently hee labored to gieue certen notes and rules, how a man might know the goodnes of Theriacle, and when the same was perfit: and so did in those his workes set downe both rules and proofes thereof. So carefull in old time wryters were, that wee might be assured of the goodnes of these noble medicines, ser∣uing in so great affectes, and in such common vse. But such is y• malice of many which seeke gaine, that of the greater price a thinge is, the more sophistication they vse in it: yt if meanes were not declared, to discerne the good from
the bad, the sophisticated from ye true: no man might assure himself of the certaintie of any thing in estimation. It is therefore very ne∣cessary, to shew how men may know when Mi∣thridatium is good and perfite, and when the same is naught & corrupted. And for y• Galen in his foresaid bookes, hath labored to declare this in Theriacle, we will apply the same to ye examination of Mithridatium. For in yt these medicines haue a great affinitie, they doe in most thinges so concurre, that ye same which is said of ye one, may be applyed to ye other. First therefore in consistence of substance, if Mithri∣datium be well and artificially compounded, it ought to haue an equality of substance, not drie nor ouer liquide, and moyste, not to a∣rise in clots and lumpes, but it must be in sub∣stance coherent, equall, and smooth. In smell it must resēble the simples whereof it is made, and yet not to offer to the nose, the smell of any one simple aboue the rest, but to yelde a com∣mon odoure arising by fermentation of all the simples, not peculier to any one, nor vngrate∣full, but answerable to the ingredience, resem∣bling no rottennes, nor mustines. In like sort, the taste must not expresse any one simple, but be as a common sapore, resulting of all the simples: so that if in tasting of Mithri∣datium
you may manifestly discerne or discry any one simple in it, surely that Mithridatium is not well confected. Therefore it may not haue in it any excesse of vngratefull bitternes, which doth sometimes happen, when the con∣fectioner doth either take hony ouerold, or boyle ye same ouermuch. So it may not shew to the taste any sowrenes, which happeneth if the wyne vsed be not well chosen, or not well handled in the compounding. It seemeth that Andromachus in his The∣riacle had a great care of the coloure of it, and for that cause only (as some do write) did adde vitreoll prepared, to yelde to it an exact black∣nesse. But Mithridates attending rather the goodnes, then by coloure to please ye eye, had no such care of the coloure, and so is thought to put nothing into Mithridatium to gieue it any fresher coloure then the simples woulde yeelde. Notwithstanding Mithridatium tru∣ly made, hath his coloure conuenient arising of the simples, which ought to be a little rednes declining to yealownesse, which coloure, after due fermentation, doth appeare with some freshenes, & by time in keeping, the same doth decline to an obscure darknes. Although at ye first it may be thought hard to iudge of Mi∣thridatium by these signes, yet after a man
is exercised in often vewing, tasting, and smel∣ling of Mithridatium, his sauoure, coloure, & taste will be so familiar, that a man shall quick∣ly discerne the true from the mingled, the so∣phisticated from the right compoūded. A man therefore that wil iudge herein, must often see, taste, and smel to Mithridatium, vntil his sen∣ses bee throughly acquainted with the quali∣ties of the medicine, and then hee shall not bee easely deceaued. For better certainty of the perfection and goodnesse of Theriacle, Galen doth mention of certaine experiments to be made for triall thereof: as to gieue the same to such as haue ben either hurt externally by some venimous beaste, or haue taken inwardly some poison. Whereof princes haue made trial in cōdem∣ned persons, casting thē to vipers, or gieuing vnto them some strong poyson, & after cau∣sing them to take of Theriacle the quantity of a nutte: and experience declared, that such as tooke Theriacle escaped the venime of the poyson, and they which tooke it not, dy∣ed. Which proofe experienced in Theriacle, may also be applied to the triall of Mithrida∣tium, and in that by all auncient writers Mi∣thridatium is reputed of greater force then Theriacle, in curing all poysons inwardly ta∣ken:
It followeth, that if it be good and tru∣ly made, it must remedy such as haue ta∣ken poison into the body. And because cōmon persons haue not like oportunity to make this experiment in men cōdemned, as princes haue: therefore we may in other beasts (as in dogs, in cokes and hennes, being domesticall crea∣tures) experience the same, geuing to these beasts some poison, and after Mithridatium: and if the beast doe take no harme by the poi∣son, we may be assured of the goodnesse of the medicine. And ye like is to be expected, if you gieue the remedy before the poyson be taken. For the medicine doth not onely defend the bo∣dy from the venime of the poison, after it is ta∣ken: but also preserue, if it be first vsed: as we read of king Mithridates. In like maner Aeti∣us biddeth vs to gieue to a doue, to a henne, or to a dogge, the quantity of two scruples of Opium, and straight after to minister to the same, Mithridatium, dissolued in some li∣quore, and if it be good and pure, the beaste shall sustaine no harme by the Opium. Galen deliuereth as a certaine signe of the perfect goodnes of Theriacle, to gieue it to one that hath taken a purgatiue medicine. For (saith he) if it be perfect good, the me∣dicine will not purge at all: if after the taking
of Theriacle, ye medicine doth his operation, & purge neuerthelesse: surely then yt Theriacle is vnperfect, & not good. We do not read this signe applied to Mithridatium: yet I see no cause but yt we may proceede in like maner to try ye goodnes of it. For it is certaine yt no one simple is in ye cōposition of Theriacle (which may be sayd to stay ye working of ye purgatiue medicine) which is not in Mitrhridatiū. For where Theriacle doth aboūd with ye flesh of vi∣pers, put as the base of the medicine, no wry∣ter hath attributed to yt parcell any such pro∣perty. The like may be sayd, if you discourse through all the simples added to this confecti∣on of Theriacle, and not in Mithridatium. Therefore it seemeth most agreeable to rea∣son, that the property to stay the working of a purgation, doth proceede from the common forme of Theriacle: and so we may with like reason expect the same effect in Mithridati∣datium, and rather in Mithridatium, because all writers doe confesse that it is of greater force for inwarde poisons, and inward affects, then Theriacle. Therefore I may cōclude, that Mithridatium gieuen after a purgatiue me∣dicine, will better stay or diminish ye working thereof, then Theriacle: and our experience in common practise, doth confirme the same.
For in this our age, who doth after purgatiue medicines (to bridle their ouerworking) so often gieue Theriacle, as Mithridatium? Wherfore no doubt we may make triall of ye perfection and goodnes of Mithridatium, in like sorte as Galen writeth of Theriacle, that is to say, to minister to one a purgatiue medi∣cine, and after to gieue to the same man a rea∣sonable quantity of Mithridatium: and if the medicine doth not worke according to his na∣ture, or that his operation be lesse thē it ought to be, surely that Mithridatium is very per∣fect and good. Otherwyse, if ye medicine doth proceede in his action to purge, and the same appeareth not diminished by the taking of Mithridatium, then we may greatly doubt of the goodnes of the Mithridatium. How we may make good Mithrida∣tium, in these dayes. I am not ignorant that diuers later writers do constantly affirme that in this our time we cannot make either good Theriacle or good Mithridatium, for that they say we do lacke many simples going into their compositions, and must vse others to supply, and so may iust∣ly doubt whether ye supplies doe in all points
aunswere the true simples, and they which we haue are brought from farre coūtryes, long iournies, some by lād, some by sea, especially, to vs in England, whereby they may be thought greatly weakned, and to loose much of their strength and vertues, before we haue them. So they conclude, that we cannot by any di∣ligent meanes, make these medicines in that perfection as the auncient writers did, and so we may not so exactly looke for the effects of these medicines promised by the olde writers. Whereto it may bee sayd, that in parte this allegation is true, and in deede a fewe yeares past, when this fault was found, it was more truer then now it is. For in truth when good learning began to spring after barbarisme, thē in deede great was ye wāt of true simples, not in these two medicines only, but in many o∣ther moe. But now in this our time all things are called to a better examination, and it is cer∣tain that few simples are now sacking, name∣ly to ye making of Mithridatium: and it is al∣so euident yt the care of phisitions and of ye A∣pothecaries (I meane of ye better sort) is so ho∣nest and so great, yt they doe not only diligen∣tly procure from ye places (where the simples which goe to the compositions of these medi∣cines do grow) the very true: but also prouide
that the same may in those coūtries be gathe∣red out of conuenient places, in due times and seasons. And ye help of so many and great naui∣gations into forrain dominions (more in these our dayes vsed, then of longe time before vs) doe gieue so good oportunity to haue true and good simples, yt to say truly what I do thinke of this our age, I doe verily belieue that we haue as true and as good simples, as Galen had in his time: especially such as are re∣quisite to the making of Mithridatium. For we do reade what a dooe Galen made to haue pure and good Cinnamum, and made it an Emperoures worke to procure the same, and in lacke of Cinnamum did sometimes substi∣tute double quātitie of Casia. Whosoeuer wil with diligence examine the sackes of Canella, brought from the new found coūtries in great plenty in these dayes, may easely finde the per∣fect kindes of Cinnamum, agreable to the de∣scription of ye old wryters: & also the true Ca∣sia. We may also vnderstād, how in old time things were sophisticated by the monumēts of old writers. And who doth not now perceaue and acknowledg many errors in Discorides bookes, in deliuering the descriptions of sim∣ples, not so well knowē in his time, as now by these nauigatiōs made manifest? Many things
written by the auncient authors, by hearesay, are now to the eye made euident and knowen. Wherefore it is true yt now in this age things are so exactly examined, & so diligently sought for, and so painfully cared for: that in truth I doe suppose we may make in this time Mithri∣datium, in very good perfection: and the sim∣ples wanting, are few in number: y• substitutes for the same, by learned men so well considered of, & so aptly appointed: that we neede not so greatly to doubt thereof, but may iustly expect th'effects attributed to the medicine, if not in so large manner as the auncient writers haue deliuered, yet in such resonable sorte, yt we may esteeme of the medicine, as of a precious iewel, as of a thing good against some drie-poisons, & diuers internall and pestilentiall diseases. Mithridatium made in England is ra∣ther to bee chosen, then that which is brought from Venice and other countryes beyond the Sea. SOme haue ben of opinion, that Theriacle & Mithridatium may better be made in other countryes, (as namely at Venice, and Con∣stantinople) then in England: affirming that
moe and better simples are growing there, which wee doe lacke: and that such simples which are found neither in these countreys, nor in England, but are procured from ye east and west Indians, do sooner and in better per∣fection come to those places, then to vs. Surely if things be rightly weighed, this allegation is not true. For the partes of Italy, and the territories about Constantinople, haue very few or no simples growing in their soyles, which do not spring in England, required to the composition of Mithridatium, and many are founde in England in better perfection thē there. As namely, who doth not graunt the best saffron to be in England, & all trauelers which come into England, do confesse that our soyle doth produce very good plantes (as namely Scordium) in better kinde than other countreys: and some strangers do send into England often for some of our simples, which do go into the composition of Mithridatium. It is also well knowen, that straunge herbes transplanted hither, and some of seedes sowen, doe very kindely spring in England, which is also confessed of some later writers in theyr Herballes. And where few simples requisite to make Mithridatium are wanting (as not growing in England) it seemeth most true,
that they which doe growe here, are most kindly for vs (for natiue things are best aggre∣able to our constitutions.) So yt whereas the most simples in number required to the com∣position of Mithridatium, are found natural∣ly to spring in England: I see no cause why we should not best allow of it made heere: nei∣ther ought ye paucitie which we do lacke, to draw vs better to esteeme of a forrayne medi∣cine made of all forrain things. And as I dare affirme that in this countrey we do lacke as few simples which go to the making of Mi∣thridatium, as any of the forenamed places: so I may iustly pronounce, that such which are wanting to them, and to vs also, may and are as easily, and in as short time transported to vs, as to them. For in these dayes, the spices and other thinges brought from ye Indians by nauigation to Lishburn, and thence to other coūtreys of Europe, may as soone be transpor∣ted to vs as to Venice. Where in times past such marchandise were caried from the east Indians to Alexandria by land vpon Camels, that trade is now decayed, and for ye most part such drugges are imported by sea, and ye ships doe commonly light in some part of Portin∣gal: so that it is easie to see that our Apothe∣caries in England, may with as good conue∣niency
procure thē from those places, and in as good perfection, as the marchaūts of Venice or of Constantinople. Neuerthelesse if any thing lacking with vs, doe come to Venice: it is soone transported thence to Antuerp (as in the space of 24. dayes) & so to vs. Wherefore I doe not cōceaue, why any man should thinke yt our Apothecaries in England, cānot make Mithri∣datiū in as good perfection as other coūtries doe: but rather we ought to adiudge ye contra∣ry, that it made here, is in as good perfection, and more agreable to our natures & constituti∣ons, then yt which is cōpounded in other coun∣treys, as altogether made of straūge simples, which haue no affinity with our bodies. And if we do with iudgement cōsider how vncertaine wee are of the true confection, when it is done in places so farre from vs: it may make vs greatly to feare, least they which do cōpound ye medicine, hauing more care to gaine, then tru∣ly to dispence ye same, will neither make choise of the best simples, neither vse diligence in the mixture. And if the princes of the countryes with carefull lawes prouide, that the confecti∣oners shall doe their duties truely, in compoū∣ding and obseruing the things needeful to the well handling of so noble a medicine: who can assure himselfe of the truth of the marchaunt▪
in transporting ye same? whose profession is by his marchaundize to gaine, & so no doubt will vse meanes euery way to increase his profite, that we may iustly suspect, that they doe ve∣ry seldome bring into England from Venice or Constantinople, any Theriacle or Mithri∣datium vnmingled: & the better skill they haue in their trade, with more arte they can sophi∣sticate their wares, to deceaue the iudgement of the buyer, that I greatly doe doubt yt litle or none at all of these medicines are brought true and sincere vnmixed: as hath bene tryed when straungers in England haue purposly examined both Theriacle and Mithridatium compounded in London, with other brought from the sayd countryes, & haue gieuen praise to that made in London: as maister Hughe Morgane her Maiesties Apothecary can wit∣nes, whose confections haue bene better com∣mended by strangers, then any of other places. Farther whereas of Mithridatium there are diuers descriptiōs, not all of like goodnes (as I haue before declared) how can we tell what compositions the confectioner followed? here∣of ye marchaūt not hauing care, can not informe vs: so we remaine vncertaine of the true know∣ledge of the medicine, not hauing knowledg of the simples vsed in that wee buy: and as wee know not assuredly what kinde of Mithridati∣um
we doe buy: so we remaine vncertaine of the medicine. And where wee haue declared yt Theriacle & Mithridatium haue their times of fermentation, of their duraunce, and that after a certaine age they decline, waxe old, & feeble: we cannot know the time of that which is forraine made: so we haue vncertaine medi∣cine, and shall be vncertaine how long we may keepe the same. All which circumstances may be easly knowne, in that which is made in En∣gland. Galen in his bookes doth not allowe of Theriacle kept in Tinne vessels, affirming that they are corrupted with ledde, the cerse whereof doth corrupt ye medicine. What shall we then say to our marchauntes, which doe bring Mithridatium & Theriacle from other countryes in vessels of ledde? doe not these medicines take of ye vessels great corruption, and notwithstanding are solde to the great an∣noyance of the Queenes subiects? Wherefore if we doe truely weigh in the ballance of rea∣son, that which I haue here written) and yet much more may in this matter be sayd) surely we shall not onely confesse that none of these medicines, specially Mithridatium, made in forraine places, are, or ought to be so greatly esteemed, as those which are made at home in England. And we may truely confesse that we
are lustly punished in expending our money v∣pon forraine things, when we haue & may haue better at home. And it is very lamentable to consider, yt straungers doe dayly send into En∣gland a false & naughty kinde of Mithridati∣um, & Threacle, in great barrelles, more then a thousand weight in a yeare, and vtter ye same at a lowe price, for iij. d. or iiij. d. a pound, to ye great hurt of Her Maiesties subiects, and no smale gaine to straungers purses. Wherefore to conclude, I do counsell all English men ra∣ther to buy Mithridatium truly made in En∣gland, then that which is brought from other coūtryes. And here it is to be wished, that our most gratious Soueraigne thereof informed, may by Her magistrates doe, as in olde time Emperoures of Rome did, that is, by her e∣dict take order, that our Apothecaries may with care and diligence select the simples which doe go to the making of this medicine, that the true may bee gotten in their best per∣fections, and the same truely chosen may bee rightly dispensed, and in all pointes according to arte well ordered, the time of fermentation duely obserued, the maner of keeping, in good sorte performed: and so all things rightly ad∣ministred by her Maiesties carefull ordinaun∣ces, I doe not doubt, but yt wee shall in this
our countrie haue both Mithridatium & The∣riacle in good perfection, that we may finde the great effects and noble vertues of both, so largely deliuered by the auncient writers in their monuments. Of the vertues and propertyes of Mithridatium. GALEN in his bookes de Antidot. doth not particulerly expresse the properties of this medicine: but ge∣nerally enunceth, that it doth good against all poisons, and is stronge to remedy many inwarde diseases. It doth appeare by sō∣dry places in Galen, that Mithridatium hath all the vertues which Theriacle hath, and is inferior to it only in the curing of the byting of vipers, and such other venemous beastes: in other things it doth excell Theria∣cle. Then where Galen at large displayeth ye faculties & vertues of Theriacle in his bookes De Theriaca ad Pisonem, & ad Pamphilianū, he needed not particularly to set downe ye proper∣ties of Mithridatium. For it doth suffice for vs to looke into ye qualities & powers of The∣riacle to learne the faculties of Mithridatiū. But ye latter writers in all their antidatories
doe expresse ye same at large. In which bookes we do reade thus. Mithridatium is next in qualitye and vertue to Theriacle, and doth little differ from it, saue that Theriacle is in temperament hoat∣ter, and stronger against ye biting of serpents. Concerning other properties of Mithridati∣um confuesly numbred in these bookes, it will not be amysse to reduce them to a methode and order: So we may affirme that the effects and vertues of Mithridatium doe consist in two speciall points. First to pre∣serue from infirmities, then to cure diseases. For as Galen writeth, this medicine doth not onely cure affects which are ingendred, and helpe to remedy poison taken: but vsed before, doth so defend, yt poison gieuen after shall doe no harme, as happened to king Mithridates, when he would haue poisoned himselfe, Who so vseth Mithridatium in health, shall in such sorte make his body strong, yt neither poisō, nor other disease shall easely harme him. And as man consisteth of body and soule, so Mithrida∣tiū doth in both exercise his vertues. His pro∣perties are such, that it quickeneth the senses, cleareth the minde, and sharpeneth the witte. Which actiones it perfourmeth by clensing the instrumentes which doe
serue to these fūctions, from grosse and thick vapours. And where oftentimes many fumes doe ascend, by the which the animal spirits are obscured, the vse of Mithridatium doth dissipate, extenuate, & consume the same: wher∣by these animal facultyes & powers are clea∣red, and so a perfite minde is preserued in a whole body. For Mithridatium maketh strong all parts which doe serue for nutrition, increaseth naturall heate, openeth obstructi∣ons, expelleth superfluity, wherby the naturall faculties of the body doe perfectly performe their functions, the stomacke in good order de∣sireth and digesteth alimentes, the liuer ma∣keth good and perfit bloud, and ech parte put∣teth from him his excrementes in conue∣nient order and time. So the hart receiuing pure bloud, maketh good spirits fit for his ac∣tions, which he orderly sendeth to the animal partes, & to other members of ye body. Wher∣by all the principall partes being in their per∣fections, doe euery way well dispence through the body, that it remayneth in good order to performe all actions. And whereas mā is sub∣iect to many casualties, Mithridatium vsed as is sayd, so defendeth the body, that no poison shall easely harme it. Whereof Mithridates gaue proofe, w by longe vse of this medicine.
so altered the constitution of his body, that no poison could annoye it. In pestilentiall seasons, it preserueth such as do vse it: where of we haue examples, not only in auncient writers, but also in our daily experience. Now concerning ye parte curatiue, though the same may be gathered by that which is already written in preseruatiō: yet it is better for order sake to repeate one thing often, then to be thought insufficient by omitting any thing. Wherfore we may say with the olde au∣thors (which proofe also confirmeth) that Mi∣thridatium remedyeth diseases of the minde, taketh away straunge imaginations, helpeth melancholy phantasies & passions, which drawe men often to desperation. This it per∣formeth by altering the bloud, opening the splene, by chaunging and dissipating the va∣pores arrising of the melancholy humore, and yeelding to the animall spirits pure and good exhalations, and by comforting the hart. And where oftentimes colde and grosse fumes do ascend so plentifully, that the wittes are dulled, the senses and discourse of reason either greatly impaired or cleane taken away, the iudgment and memory hurt or abolished: Mithridatium by his sweete brethings quic∣keneth
the same, reduceth the braine to his temperament, altereth, consumeth, & spendeth those vapoures, and bringeth man to his na∣turall state, and when it is newe, it induceth sleepe, and remedieth the furyousnes of many madmen. No man needeth to doubt of the mighty power of Mithridatium, in curing all kind of poisons either outwardly receaued or in∣wardly taken, being to that purpose chefly de∣vised, and of long time experienced to be ther∣in of great force. Although for the biting and stinging of venemous beastes, it is supposed of lesse might then Theriacle: yet it is of all men confessed much stronger to cure poisons, taken into the body by potion, or otherwayse. So his might is great to heale all pestilent (all and malignante diseases, cureth the plage, feauers which depend of naughty and malignant cau∣ses, helpeth the french pocks, the small pocks, the measels: and in all other inward diseases which are great, and such as other medicines can not remedy, Mithridatium is found to haue a speciall grace to cure them. And in such desperate diseases & cases, when o∣ther remedies will not serue, then we ought to flye to Mithridatium, as Galen writeth of Theriacle.) For being a noble medicine of
great powre, it is not to be vsed in euery af∣fect of little moment. Wherefore it is written that Mithridatium cureth all infermities of the head in men, and women, if the same doe come of a cold cause: namely it helpeth the melancholy madnes, the Falilng sicknes, ye Hemicrane or meagrame, ye paines in the eyelids and browes, the watring of the eyes, the paines of the eares, of the teeth, of the mouth, of the iawes, the squinancy, the appoplexy, the litargie, and such other cold diseases of ye head: in which cases it is inward∣ly dronken, & also outwardly applyed, sprede in the forme of an emplastre: it comforteth ye hart, & doth good in the passions of the same. It helpeth the diseased of the breast, cureth the cough, shortnes of breath, spitting of bloud, the pleurisy and stiches of the side, the phthisike & other inward diseases of the breast and loūgs. In these later causes, especially for stiches, it is applyed outwardly, spred empla∣stre waies, and in the chough and such other diseases, it is inwardly ministred with some conuenient liquor: for so it cutteth the grosnes of the phlegme, and maketh it easy to be auoy∣did, openeth the pipes, and enlargeth all those parts which doe serue for breathing. To proceede to the affects of the stomake, it
prouoketh appetite, remedieth ouer much de∣sire to eat, termed Canina appetentia: for it dri∣eth superfluous, & resolueth & correcteth cor∣rupte humores: it helpeth concoctiō, by increa∣sing of naturall heate, cureth euill belks, & in∣flation of the stomacke: for it breaketh winde, and will not suffer any thing to corrupt in ye stomacke: it stayeth vomiting by strengthe∣ning the stomacke: by keeping the stomacke cleane from winde, superfluous, and euill humores, it taketh away the abhorring of meate. It doth great good in all diseases of the belly, paynes in ye guts, called the Iliaca passio, the bluddy flix, and all other fluxes gieuen with the decoction of the flowers of the pome∣granate called Balaustia. In the colike of the belly it is very good, and to ease the paynes of the belly after a purgatiue medicine, it hath a speciall vertue. For it taketh away the malig∣nitie of the medicine, breaketh winde, and doth strengthen parts wekened by the purga∣tiue medicine. It nourisheth diseases & paynes in the sydes and about the mydriffe, it helpeth the infirmities of ye kidnes, and of the bladder, breaketh the stone, remedieth the passions of the matrix, prouoketh the naturall courses in women, and stoppeth the same if they doe a∣bound.
For it openeth the passages by extenu∣ating that which by grosnes doth stoppe the wayes: and by making nature stronge, staieth fluxes, which commonly do grow immoderate by weaknes. It diminisheth ye swellings & hard∣nes of ye matrix, & of other parts, it doth reme∣dy ye barrennes in women, & maketh them fer∣till. Mithridatiū is accompted a speciall good remedy against the payne of the ioynts, to cure the goute and the Sciatica, for that it drieth su∣perfluous humores, stayeth the reume, & ma∣keth all parts stronge. But it must be gieuen, not at the first, when the payn beginneth, but a∣ter: when the rage of the paine is past, and the body ought first to be purged before you gieue Mithridatium. And it vsed before the fits of the goutes, maketh greatly for preseruation, to keepe one from often accessiōs of ye goute. It helpeth ye diseases of the sineues, ye resolution, yt paulsye, the crampe, ye diseases called Tetanos Ambrostotonos, and Opistetanos: for it aug∣menteth naturall heate, dissolueth, by euapo∣ratiō, humores soken into ye syneues, & restoreth the spirits and strength. It helpeth the sha∣king fits of feauers, & geauen twyse or thrise halfe an houre before the fitte, oftentimes it doth cure the feauer quartan and the quoti∣dian.
Of the vse of Mithridatium. THe better to know the vse of Mithridati∣um, we are to consider the time most con∣uenient to gieue it, the quantity, & the maner of gieuing. For the time, we may with Ga∣len counsaile to minister the same in no wyse vpon a full stomacke, but after concoction is perfit. The vsuall time and best to take it, is in the morning fasting, it is not so good to gieue it when the stomacke and first veines are full of crude and rawe humoures. And before it be gieuen, it is good to procure the belly to be loose, according to Galens counsell in mini∣string of Theriacle, in his booke ad Pamphili∣anum. Of the quantity. AS Galen writeth in his booke de Theria∣ca ad Pisonem, so we may affirme that one quantity of Mithridatium is not to bee gie∣uen to all men, in all times▪ and in all diseases. And the better to finde out the iust quantity, wee are to remember, that Galen in the sayd booke mentioneth of two quantityes gieuen of Theriacle, the one referred to a hasell nut, the other to a beane of Aegypt. And for that he also affirmeth, yt in strong diseases the grea∣ter quantity is to be gieuen, and the lesser in light▪ diseases, and so in great infirmities hee
ministreth the quantity of an hasell nut, and in diseases of lesse force, vseth the portion of the beane of Aegypt: it is euident that the hasell nut importeth the greater quantity, and the beane the lesser. So that by Galen the grea∣test quātity to be gieuen of Theriacle, is mea∣sured by an hasell nut, and the least by a beane of Aegypt. And the forme of speach which Ga∣len vseth to expresse these quantities, in my iudgement doth importe the bignesse, and not the weight of the things. For Galen in euery place writeth ad magnitudinem fabae aegyptiae, & so ad magnitudinem nucis auellanae, to the mi∣chelty or bignes of a beane of Aegypt, the big∣nes of an hasel nut. Which maner of spech hath relation to the bignes & not ye weight. We are therefore to construe Galen, that in great di∣seases Theriacle is to be ministred, that his bulke may bee equall with the bignes of an hasell nut, and in other diseases, of a beane of Aegypt. Massarius in his booke de ponderi∣bus reducing these things to weight, saith that Paba Aegyptia importeth a scruple and a halfe, that is, halfe a drachine: and that nux auellana signifieth a drachine. So if we will by weight measure the quantities, the greatest which is to be giuen of Theriacle is a drachine, and the leaste is halfe a drachine.
In that Mithridatium is like to Theriacl, it may be gieuen in like quantity. And because it is more gentle, and not in quality so whot as Theriacle, and not receiuing the flesh of vi∣pers, nor so great quantity of Opium, it is a more safe medicine▪ & so may be gieuē in grea∣ter quantity, that wee neede not be bounde to an hasell nut, nor to a beane of Aegypt, but may as cause shall require exceede both. For which cause the writers of our antidatory bookes, not without reason doe affirme, that Mithridatium may bee ministred to foure Drachines, that is halfe an ownce. And Dura∣stantes in his cōmentary vpon Luminare Ma∣ius bringing the quantity of a nut, and of a beane to ye weight, saith that an hasell nut sig∣nifieth an ounce, and ye beane of Aegypt halfe a scruple, and because the one proportion is ve∣ry great, the other ouer litle: therefore he put∣teth his sensure, that an hasell nut containeth ij. Drachines, or iiij. Drachines at ye most. And the beane of Aegypt one Drachine, or ij. Dra∣chines at the most. So that by his opinion we may minister Theriacle to ij. or iij. Drachines, when the disease and the case so requireth. Wherefore wee neede not greatly to feare to gieue Mithridatium in so large a quantity as is prescribed in our antidotaryes, that is, to
minister it to halfe an ounce. Neuerthelesse in these dayes wee doe very seldome minister Mithridatium so largely: for most cōmonly we follow the prescript of Galen, and gieue of it the quantity of a beane, or of an hasell nut. In measure wee prescribe the halfe a drachine and two scruples, and in mighty diseases, and vr∣gent causes we offerre one drachine, and ve∣ry seldome doe procede to a greater quantity: which proportions in my iudgement are most vsually to be kept. Yet by this discourse it ap∣pereth, yt we are not so to be restrained to these quantities, but that we may vpon occasions gieue a greater quantity, if the patient, the disease, & other circumstances doe so require. And hereby also it appeareth, that we cannot so determine the quantity of this medicine, nor of any other, that the same may alway be obserued: but the certaine appointment of the same must bee left to the discretion of him which doth minister the medicine, to prescribe the quantity according to the circumstances of the present case. And therefore it shall not be amisse here to consider more particularly of the circumstāces, whereby we may the better attaine to coniecture the iust quantity to bee gieuen in the present case. First therefore wee are to consider the countrey where the party
which is to take the medicine, doth inhabite, & here also the time of yeare. And as Galen wri∣teth of Theriacle, that in the East partes & in hoate coūtryes, in sommer and hoate seasons it is not to be ministred: so we may affirme of Mithridatiū, yt in hoate coūtryes & seasons we ought to refraine frō much geiuing of it. Wherefore when occasion is to gieue in som∣mer, we must prescribe a lesser quantity then in winter, and in the spring time. So we may gieue a bigger quantity in these north parts, then in hoater countreyes. The like respect is to be had of the liquore in which wee gieue it, that in hoate places & seasons it be mingled with a cold liquor, as with water: and in cold countries and times with a whot liquore, as with wyne. The like consideration is to bee had of the temperament of the body, and of the age. In which respect Galen doth forbid cholerike & hoate constitutions to take Theriacle. And such must with more warinesse vse Mithrida∣tium, and in lesser quantity and mingled with some conuenient liquore, moderate the heate of the medicine. Concerning age, Galen doth forbid the gie∣uing of Theriacle to children, for (saith he) the mightines of the medicine doth exceede the
strength of children, and dissolueth their bo∣dies: and telleth an history of a childe destroide by taking of Theriacle. We may therefore ad∣monishe phisitions of these dayes, which doe often & boldly gieue Theriacle to yonge chil∣dren for the wormes: let them consider what warrant they haue so to doe: it is to be feared lest they endaunger thereby so tender bodyes. And we are to be circumspect in gieuing Mi∣thridatium to children, and to be very wary in ye ministring of it, lest we do harme therin. And yet I do thinke we may with more safety minister Mithridatium then Theriacle. To yong men & such as haue much natural heate, we may gieue this medicine: but neither oftē, nor in great quantity, & in water rather then wine. To mē of yeres which are in ye declining age, in greater quantity, and in wyne. In re∣spect of the disease we are so to measure the quantity of the medicine, that in a mighty and a strong disease, we gieue a greater quantity. Therefore as Galen wryteth of Theriacle, so we may determine of Mithridatium. In strōg poyson, and to such as are bitten and stinged with virulent beastes or mad dogs, we gieue a greater quantity: in other diseases the quan∣tity of the medicine ought to be according to the greatnes of the sicknes. So when there is
time to digest the medicine, we may appoynt a greater quantity: when little time is for con∣coction, then lesser quātity serueth. The like consideration is to be made in all these circū∣stances of ye liquore, in which the medicine is to be dissolued, the same to be of a greater or lesser measure, according to ye circumstances: whereof we are to speake more particularly in the maner of gieuing. Of the manner of gieuing of Mithridatium. By that we doe reade in Galen in his bookes de Theriaca and de Antidot. yt appeareth that thauncient phi∣sition did seldom, or not at all gieue either Theriacle or Mithridatium dry, and not dissolued in some liquor▪ and the reason may be, for that they gaue it most commonly before or after poison, or to preserue or cure some pestilentall sicknes, which depended of a malignant cause. In which respect, it see∣meth requisite to minister the medicine in ly∣quid forme, that it might haue the speedy pas∣sage through the body, and come to the heart, that the spirites comforted, might the better exsist and the sooner expell the venyme, and the malignity of the affect. For not only Mithri∣datiū
and Theriacle, but all other medicines taken in a solide and dry consistence, doe stay in the stomacke longe, and sustaine greater al∣teration, than when the same is gieuen in a li∣quid forme. For which cause when we haue in∣tent to comfort the stomacke, to help digestiō, to breake wyne in the stomacke and belly, then it is conuenient to gieue Mithridatium in drie substāce. When intention is to remedy diseases in more inward parts of the body, in all venimous, pestilential and malignant cau∣ses, we gieue the medicine dissolued with some liquore. And as we reade in Galen, that hee v∣sed not alway one liquore, so he maketh menti∣on of these, of water of Mulsa, that is water & hony, which we do cal meade or meath, of mul∣sum, that is wyne and hony mingled, of acetum mulsum, that is wine, hony and vineger, of po∣sca, that is water & vineger, of certaine decoc∣tions made of hearbs, rootes, and seedes. And it is to bee seene by Galens discourse, that hee made choise of the liquores by indication taken of the countrey, of the time of the yeare, of the age and complexion of the patient, and of the nature and disposition of the disease. So that he gaue a hoat liquore, as wine or wine or wine & ho∣ny in cold countryes and times, in aged men, & such as were not of hoate complexions, and
had not much naturall heate, & in diseases not ouer hoate, & in strong poysons. Cōtrariwise in hoate regions, in sommer time, in such as were in the flower of their age, and had cho∣lerike and hoat constitutions, dry bodies, and did abound with naturall heate, in hoate cholerike siknesses, in great feauers, he made choise of a colde liquore hauinge regarde that the liquore might contemper and miti∣gate in some part the quality of the medicine. Which intētions applied to ye gieuing of Mi∣thridatium, it wil be easy to choose a fit li∣quore▪ when we are to minister the same in it. For the same circumstances will soone induce vs to make choise of a conuenient liquore▪ wee may also learne by Galen, that as the circumstnunces are to leade vs to appoyncte the quality of the liquore, as is aforesayde: So the disposition of the disease will teach vs to apt a conuenient liquore in substaunce: for it is agreable to reason, that such a li∣quore bee gieuen, which may not only miti∣gate the quality of the medicine, but with ha∣uing also property to doe good in that disease, may further the action of the medicine. So by good reason in pestilentiall agues, in mali∣gnant diseases, the pockes, ye measels, we doe gieue Mithridatium with the dissolued water
of Dragon, or of Carduus benedictus, or in some like decoction, and we doe in such cases many times mingle with ye syrupe de acetositat citri syrupe acetosus, which things doe not on∣ly mitigate the heate of the medicine, but also help and further his action. In ye cough, and diseases of the breaste and syde, wee may with Galen choose wine and water called mulsum when ye patient is without a feauer: in a feauer with water and hony called mulsa. In such a are shorte breathed, it is best gieuen with vineger compoūded with scilla, to them which spit bloude, at the beginning, with water and hony, which we call meade, after, with water only, but the medicine wil be more effectuall, if you doe boyle the rootes of Comfry in it. In diseases and paine of the belly, with water. In stoppages of the lyuer, they yealew Ieaundes, the Dropsie, with an opening decoctiō, as the decoction of the rootes of Asara bacca. And in respect of the drouth in the Dropsie, it may be gieuen in meade. In diseases of the kidnes and bladder, with the decoction of persley, and in vlcers of the kidnes, with wine and water, in excoriation of the guttes, with a decoction of Sumach: to those which haue the falling sicknes, if they be leaue, with meade, & it were two lōge, and to litle purpose thus perticular∣ly
to runne thorough all diseases. we may ease∣ly appoint a cōuenient liquore, and prescribe ye quantity of ye medicine, & of the liquore, by yt which is written, and thought I haue for ex∣ample sake (for examples doe best teach) di∣scoursed in many diseases, appointing such li∣quores which Galen doth vse and best allowe of, yet I doubt not but an expert man will for the present case, diuise much better, by in∣dication taken of the circumstaunces before mentioned, That a man well weighing these thinges, may quickely knowe the true vse of Mithridatium, and so not erre in the ministra∣tion thereof, but gieue the same to the greate good of those, which shall take it, and to the ho∣nour of God, whose goodnesse gieueth suc∣cesse to al medicines, to worke health where and when it pleaseth his holy wisdome.
