8271 99850769 15995
❀ By the Queene. ¶ A Proclamation for the due obseruation of Fish dayes, suppres∣sing of vnnecessary number of Alehouses, and for the better execution of the late acte for punishment of Rogues, Vaga∣bonds and Beggers. THe Queenes most excellent Maiestie graciously considering, the great and manifold in∣conueniences, which dayly increase within this her Maiesties Realme, for want of due execution of such good and wholsome Statutes, as haue from time to time bene made, forbidding the eating of flesh on dayes and times prohibited, whereby Almightie God is iustly offended, the prices of victuals are greatly enhaunsed and raised, and the whole common wealth of this Realme greatly damnifled, and seafaring men and Mariners greatly diminished: And purposing the redresse and reformation thereof, of her Prince∣ly care for the weale and good of her louing Subiects, willeth and commandeth that all and euery the Noblemen, Knights, Esquires, and others being of the better sort of her Highnesse Subiects, doe from time to time take order that the sayd Statutes be duely obserued and kept, within their owne houses amongst their families, seruants, and followers, whereby others her Highnesse good and louing Sub∣iects, may be drawen and admonished by their good example, to vse and keepe the like orders within their seuerall houses and abidings. And further, her Highnesse straitly chargeth and commandeth, that all and euery Inne keepers, Tauer∣ners, Alehouse keepers, and other persons whatsoeuer, vsing any trade of victualling within this Realme, shall with all conuenient speed enter into Bond with sufficient sureties to her Maiestie, the sureties to be bound in tenne pounds a piece, and the parties in the summe of twentie pounds, That they shall not willingly permit or suffer any kind of flesh to be eaten in their houses by any person, vpon any dayes prohibited by the sayd Statutes. And that the Iustices of Peace, within all and euery the Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Townes, place and places of this Realme, doe with all conue∣nient speede within their seuerall limits, take the said Bonds, of all and euery such persons accordingly. And that the said Iustices of Peace doe from time to time certifie and returne all and euery such Bonds, so by them, or any of them ta∣ken, as is aforesaide, vnto the Barons of her Highnesse Exchequer within the space of three Moneths after the taking thereof, to the ende that the same Bonds may remaine in the custodie of such Officer, as by the said Barons of her High∣nesse Court of Exchequer shall be assigned and appointed to keepe the same. And that the said Iustices of Peace and eue∣ry of them shal from time to time do their best indeuours, to learne and find out whether any of the said persons so bound before them shall not obserue the condition of their bonds. And if they shall find any such Bond to be forfaite, that they doe with all conuenient speede certifie the said forfaiture, and the cause thereof vnto the said Barons, to the end that such course may forthwith be taken for the leuying of the same forfaitures, as to Iustice appertaineth, and is agreeable to the course of our said Court of Exchequer. And her Highnesse further willeth and commandeth, that if any Inne keeper, Tauerner, Alehouse keeper, or other Victualler whatsoeuer, within this her Highnesse Realme, shall refuse to enter in∣to such Bond, as is aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth, all and euery such Inne keeper, Tauerner, Alehouse keeper, and other Victualler, so refusing to enter into Bond, as is aforesaid, shall be debarred and restrained from keeping of any such Inne, Tauerne, Alehouse, or other victualling house, vntill such time as he shall haue entred into such Bond with Sureties, as is before. And further, her Highnesse straitly chargeth and commandeth, that no Butcher bee suffered or licenced to kill any flesh to be spent in the time of Lent, but onely in great Cities, that be Counties of themselues, and in those such onely, as shall be very fit and needfull to serue to make prouision for the sicke and weake, and as shall be lawful∣ly licenced, without giuing any thing for any such licence or sufferance to any person or persons directly or indirectly. And for that the vnnecessary numbers of Alehouses, and victualling houses, since God hath blessed this Realme with a competent store of corne, haue bene suffered greatly to increase, seeing they are the occasions not only of great waste, ryot, and expences, whereby an vnlooked for dearth may eftsoones fall on this Realme, but also of infinite idlenesse, thefts, and other inconueniences and disorders within the same, to the great displeasure of Almightie God, and ruine of the common Weale of this Realme: Therefore her Maiestie straightly chargeth and commandeth, that the sayd vnnecessa∣rie
and superfluous number of Alehouses and victualing houses, be from time to time kept downe and restreined by the Iustices of the Peace, and other her Highnes Officers to whom it shall appertaine. And that no Alehouses nor victu∣alling houses be suffered, but such as shall be very needfull, and the same to be onely in fit and needefull places, and to be kept by such persons as shalbe thought very fit for the same, and which shall be carefull to obserue all such good orders, as are or shall be prescribed vnto them. And where also diuers good Lawes and Statutes haue beene lately made for the suppressing and punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, wandring vp and down this Realme idlely and insolently, to the great offence of Almightie God, and of her Maiestie, and of all honest and well disposed subiects, and to the great preiudice of this whole common weale, which Lawes and Statutes, so long as by the good and faithfull care and diligence of her Highnes Iustices of Peace & other inferior Officers they were duely and carefully pursued and executed, the sayd Rogues and Vagabonds in many places for a while were greatly diminished, and idlenesse, thefts, and other insolencies and disorders very much auoyded, and the wealth and happinesse of this Realme were likely thereby to haue increased and growen more abun∣dant: But when and as soone as, through the negligence and remisnesse of the sayd Iustices and other Officers, the sayde Lawes and Statutes were not put in due execution, many great enormities and disorders began foorthwith to trouble and incumber the happie, quiet and good gouernment of this Realme, which are likely daily more and more to increase and grow if some speedie remedy be not applied to reforme and redresse the same. In consideration whereof her Maiestie doth straightly charge and command all and euery the high Constables, and other the head Officers of euery Hundred, Wapentake, precinct and libertie within this Realme, that they and euery of them, once in euery moneth doe call before them the inferior Officers within the said Hundred, Wapentake, and Libertie, and to inquire, know, and vnderstand, how the same Lawes and Statutes haue bene obserued within their seueral iurisdictions, and in whome any default hath bene that the same haue not bene obserued: And that the Iustices of the Peace of euery limit, once eue∣ry sixe weekes take a like account of the head Constables, and other chiefe Officers within their seueral limits, how the premisses haue bene obserued, and in whom any default or negligence hath bene, and that thereupon they bee admoni∣shed carefully to see to the due and speedy punishment of the offenders therein according to the lawes. And further her Maiesty willeth and requireth all Iustices of peace, to whose trust and care her Highnesse hath, and doth chiefly commit the execution of euery part of this her Proclamation, that they and euery of them doe faithfully, diligently, and effectu∣ally demeane themselues in the due performance therof in euery degree according to the confidence which her Highnes reposeth in them in that behalfe. Otherwise, her Highnesse hath giuen expresse order and commaundement, that the sayd Iustices, through whose negligence, remissenesse, or conniuency the sayde offences shalbe continued, shall be called to answere, and giue an account thereof, & receiue such condigne punishment for the same, as to the quality of such their offence and contempt shall appeare most fit and conuenient. And to the ende that the premises may the better be obser∣ued and kept, her Maiestie hath caused an abstract of such Statutes as are thought fit to be put in execution by force of this Proclamation, to be annexed hereunto: willing and commanding that the sayd abstract be openly read and publi∣shed by the Clerke of the Peace for the time being at euery quarter Sessions to be holden within this Realme, and once euery quarter at the leaft in euery Parish Church by the Parson, Minister or Curate thereof. Giuen at her High∣nesse Mannor of Richmond the xiiii. day of Ianuary, in the two and fourtieth yeere of her Highnesse reigne. God saue the Queene. Anno 5. Reginae. cap. 5. IF any person of what estate or degree soeuer do within this Realme eate any flesh vpon any dayes, vsually obserued as fish dayes, doe forfeit three pound for euery time he shall offend, or els suffer three Moneths close imprisonment without baile or mainprise. And euery person of what estate or degree soeuer, in whose house any such offence shall be done, and being priuie or knowing thereof, and not effectually punishing or disclosing the same to some publique Officer, hauing authority to punish the same, for euery such offence to forfeite fortie shil∣lings, which forfeits are to be deuided into three equal parts, one part to the vse of her Maiestie, the second to the vse of the Informer, the third to the common vse of the Parish where any such offence is committed. No person ought to keepe any common Alehouse, or vse common selling of Ale or Beere, vnlesse such person be admit∣ted thereunto in open Sessions of the Peace, or els by two Iustices of the Peace, whereof the one to bee of the Quorum, and be bound by surety by recognisance, against the vsing of vnlawfull games, and for the maintenance of good order, vpon the penalty contained in that Statute: this Act doth also extend to tippling in Innes by such as are no passengers or wayfaring men, and to common selling of Ale and Beere by Inholders.
Anno 39. Reg. Eliz. cap. 4. THat Iustices of Peace and all other Officers and Ministers to whom it appertaineth, doe see this Act duely and carefully put in execution in all points: for the better effecting whereof, certaine doubts and questions which haue arisen, or may arise vpon the generall words of the same, are here expoun∣ded and resolued. A Rogue affirmeth that he was borne in such a Towne in such a Countie, He ought to bee sent thi∣ther, if it may not otherwise appeare hee was borne else where. And if hee were not borne there in trueth, he is to be sayd an incorrigible Rogue, and to be sent thence to the house of Correction in the Countie to which he is sent. If there be none there, then to the Gaole vntill the next Sessions, there to be dealt with according to the Statute. If the husband or wife haue a house, and the husband or wife rogue about, they ought to be sent to the Towne where that house is, and so of an Inmate. If the Parents be able to worke, and may haue worke, they are to finde their children by their labour, not the Parish. But if they be ouer burthened with children, it shall be a very good way to procure some of them to be placed Apprentices according to the Statute. The same course is to be obserued, if it appeare not where he was borne, if he affirmeth that he was last dwelling in such a Towne in such a Countie by the space of a yeere, and was not. The wife and children vnder seuen yeeres of age being vagrant, must goe and be placed with the husband. If the hus∣band be dead, then with the wife where she was borne or dwelt. And the vagrant children aboue seuen yeeres of age, must be sent to the place of their birth. And if after the vagrant Parents with their children vnder seuen yeeres be pla∣ced at the place of the birth of the Parents, or at their place of last dwelling, as the case shall fall out, If after the Pa∣rents or either of them dye or runne away, yet the children once setled must remaine there still, and not be sent to their place of birth, though after they growe aboue the age of seuen yeeres. The Rogue whose place of birth or dwelling cannot be knowen, hath wife and children vnder seuen yeres of age, they must goe with the husband to the place where they were last wilfully suffered to passe without punishment, where the children must be relieued by the worke of their Parents, though the Parents be committed to the house of Correction. If any trauell with their children through a Towne not being Rogues, and the Father or Mother dye or runne a∣way, the Towne is not bound to keepe them where they dye, nor to send them away but in charitie, except they become wandring beggers. The wife being a vagrant Rogue ought to be sent to the husband, though he be but a seruant in another Towne. Such persons as be of any Parish and haue able bodyes to worke, and bee no wanderers abroad out of the Parish though they refuse to worke at such wages as is taxed or commonly giuen in these parts, are notwithstanding not to be sent to their place of Birth or last dwelling by the space of a yeere, but to the house of correction, vpon consideration had of both the Statutes of the poore and Rogues, But if they haue any lawfull meanes to liue by though they be of able bo∣dies and refuse to worke, yet are they not to be sent to the house of Correction. No man is to be put out of the Towne where he dwelles, nor to be sent to their place of birth or last habitation, but a vagrant Rogue, nor to be found by the Towne except he be impotent, but ought to set himself to labour if he be able: And the Ouerseers must set him to labour, if he can get no labour, And so of them that haue or shall haue houses when their estates be expired, And seruants whose times of seruices are ended though they cannot get houses, for they must prouide themselues houses anew if they be not impotent. Such as will put any out of the Parish that be not to be put out, this is against the Statute concerning the reliefe of the poore, and finable, And if any haue bene so sent, they may be sent backe againe. If any be sent to a towne, whereto he ought to be sent, and is refused being a sturdy, or an impotent Rogue, the per∣sons refusing shal forfeit v. li. And he that is so to be sent, is to be offered to the Church wardens and Ouerseers. To send the Rogues by a generall Pasport, without conueying them from Parish to Parish, is a let to the conuey∣ing of Rogues according to the Statute, and so a forfeiture of v. li. vpon them, And to goe with such a Pasport, is still to continue a Rogue to be punished by whipping. A Towne will not receiue a Rogue, to conuey him to the place where he was borne or dwelt, This is a forfeiture of v. li. in the Officers that should receiue that partie, to conuey him or her ouer. None ought to be suffered to take Reliefe at any mans dore, though within the same Parish, vnlesse it be by the or∣der of the Ouerseers according to the Statute, neither may any be suffered to begge by the high wayes, though in their owne Parish. Parents, within this word is included, a Father, or a Grandfather, Mother, or Grandmother. Children, within this word is included, any Childe, or Grandchilde being able. Parsons, or Vicars, &c. bee bound to the Reliefe of the poore, aswell as others, being inhabiting in the Parish as an Inhabitant. Euery one that hath Tithes impropriate, Cole mines, or Lands in manuell occupation, &c. is chargeable, and so for such as haue salable Woods proportioning the same to an Annuall benefit. If there be but one Churchwarden, he sufficeth with the other foure Ouerseers. ❀ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. 1599.
