A17 11823665 49616
CATAPLUS: OR, Aeneas his Descent to HELL. A MOCK POEM, In imitation of the Sixth Book of Vir∣gil's Aeneis, in English Burlesque. Vidi & crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas, Dum flammas Jovis & sonitus imitatur Olympi. Virgil Aeneis. LONDON, Printed for Maurice Atkins. 1672.
CATAPLUS. SIC fatur lacrymans classique immittit habenas; Et tandem Euboicis Cumarum allabitur oris. THus as he spake weeping like child From thence in piteous dudgeon sail'd, And by the help of wind and tide The vessels toward Cumae ride. Tum dente tenaci Anchora fundabat naves.— Then labour-sweating Seamen got up And into Sea cast prison pot-hook Instead of anchor; to save charges They row'd about in boats and barges. Juvenum manus emicat ardens. Upon a sudden then a rout Of Slubberdegullions lept out: A shoar no sooner had they got, But all the Countrey fell to pot. Quaerit pars semina flammae Abstrusa in venis Silicis.— Some struck fire, some pell mell Down trees with trusty hatchets fell.
Pars densa ferarum Tecta rapit, silvas, inventáque flumina monstrat. Others went to neighbouring village Breaking ope farm-houses for pillage, Plundering yards of Ducks and Geese, And Cupboards too of bread and Cheese. Down from Cobweb roofs were taken Many a tongue and flitch of Bacon; Such was their appetite and hunger They ransackt all the victual hung there. But what a quarter they did keep Can't be exprest in stealing sheep, And Oxen what ere they could get, For all was fish that came to net. Nay these whorson villains fell fierce Upon all butteries and sellars. At pius Aeneas artes, quibus altus Apollo Praesidet, horendaeque procul secreta Sibyllae Antrum immane petit.— Mean while Aeneas went all o're Parish and town from door to door, Enquiring all along the road Where the Sibyl kept abode. Cui mentem animúmque Delius inspirat vates, aperítque futura. This Sibyl was a cunning woman Yielding in her art to no man: By slight of hand she was right able To strike a sixpence through a table. She had the Necromantick tone With a heigh praesto Spirit be gone.
She was at Fortune-telling good, And Physnomy well understood: When any goods miscarried were To her the Countrey did repair. There wa'nt a pocket pickt, or house Broke ope, but she could thief produce. She was as good at divel stradling As Mol-Cutpurse or Mother Maudlin. Jam subeunt Triviae lucos atque aurea tecta. The crew were come unto a place Where trees did grow as thick as grass, Near which a pretty market town With glittering shindle like gold shone. Daedalus (ut fama est) fugiens Minoïa regna This town did get its same and glory (As 'tis recorded in old story) By Daedalus the Carpenter, Who flew his Countrey and came there. (By all report 'tis warrantable He had out-run the Constable.) Insuetum per iter gelidas enavit ad Arctos. Instead of going in foot track He carried was 'pon devils back, Through thicken'd mist and foggy air, The bearer scarce himself knew where. Chalcidicâque levis tandem super astitit arce. At last in view of all the people He hitcht 'pon spire of magick steeple: And truly had not some ran quick And succour'd him just in the nick,
He had broke his neck and life lost there, As sure (poor wretch) as God's in Gloster, Wings with him always he did carry, Of which he was exceeding chary: Now whether he the same did pluck From Woodcock or from water-duck, Or whether from the sides of pidgeon, From pheasant, partridge, teal and widgeon; Some say this and some say that, Authours write I know not what▪ The wings were wings, pluckt from what bird They were, it matters not a— Let' circumstances weighty follow, Tibi Phoebe sacravit Remigium alarum, posultque immania templa. To wit, he offer'd 'em to Apollo. And to shew himself religious Built a Conventicle ridge house. In foribus letum Androgeo— —Tum pendere poenas Cecropidae jussi (miserum) septena quotannis Corpora natorum— Before the gate a Gibbet stood Of hardy weather-beaten wood, Where hung a spacious table, in fine Much like unto a Countrey Inne Sign. There pictured was Androgeo With seven Varlets in a row, In the same posture as they hung When to Athens gallows strung;
For yearly in that roguish town Was tied up many a mothers son. Many a thief and high-way padder Mounted up on fatal Ladder. Contrà elata mari respondet Gnossia tellus. On t'other side a pool a-cross was A piece of pasture-ground call'd Gnossos, Which careful Grasier did stock With hided herd and fleecy flock. And now I'm come (Reader) to tell A story sad that there befell: Hic crudelis amor tauri, suppostáque furto Pasiphäe.— There liv'd a woman near an oak As good as ever did strike stroak, Who shall be nameless (though her name Has not a stranger been to fame) She with her husband not content (For he alas! was impotent; In short, he was another such thing As waggish people call a ridgling) Her self did often prostitute To filthy lust of horned brute. Mistúmque genus prolésque biformis. Her pregnant womb at last was full Part by Husband, part by bull: And when she teem'd she brought forth half A man, and all the rest was calf; Which being grown up big, became A monster which no folk cou'd tame.
This the Cornuted husband cuts To the very heart blood and guts. Therefore having soundly bast her Hic labor ille domûs & inextricabilis error. Into Limbo straight he cast her. But Daedalus taking compassion Magnum Reginae sed enim miseratus amorem.— She should be used in such fashion (Thinking it only forsooth To be a simple trick of youth) Deliver'd her from rack and pain, And set her 'pon her legs again. Ipse dolos tecti ambagésque resolvit.— Breaking with hammer bars of iron Which her body did inviron. This story writ was 'sore the dore, (Of which I gave a hint before.) But hold, for we go further on, This Daedalus had had a son, Who was in depth of water drown'd, Never after to be found: He was as tender of his son Dick, As busie Hen is over one Chick; Tu quoque magnam Partem operis tanti (sineret dolor) Icare haberes. And had in that same place we told on Hung his picture up all Golden, Had he not met that common curse To be poor raskal out of purse.
Quin protinus omnia Perlegerent oculis— Aeneas had taken more pleasure In lingring here, but wanted leasure. Nijam praemissus Achates Afforet, atque unà Phoebi Triviaeque sacerdos. For the true Trojan (his old servant) Achates back return'd from errant. In company of aged hag, Who did on lazy crutches lag. (If old Historians don't baulk us) She was the Succuba of Glaucus. In spell or Hocus Pocus trick She did good service to old Nick. Then with a voice like mouse in cheese fatur quae talia Regi: Non hoc ista sibi tempus spectacula poscit. To Aeneas out these words did squeeze: I wonder here ye loitering lye When you have other fish to fry. Ye must chuse out of herd (that's given Not to vile frisking) heifers seven, That never have at leapfrog been, Nor have above two Summers seen. Talibus afflata Aenaeam: nec sacra morantur Jussa viri: Thus when she had spoke with much ado Butchers about the business go. Teucros vocat alta in templa sacerdos. She then invited in the Trojans To see her underground-laid lodgings, Which much was like unto a cave Which Capouchian Friars have,
Cut out in weather beaten rock Proof'gainst rain and tempest shock. Excisum Euboicae latus rupis in antrum, Quo lati ducunt aditus centum, ostia centum. There were East, West, North, and South, Holes wider than a Canons mouth, And to every one a shutter To keep from hearing noise and clutter. pectus anhelum Et rabie fera corda tument— But when the trap dores were set open, You'd think Hells dungeon loose, and broken. The Sibyl would belch, fart, and stink, As if possest, or in her drink. Assoon's the scoundrels came she hoisted Her bum, and in their faces foisted. Wrigling out nasty grunt and cry, Like farrowing Sow immur'd in Sty. Then lest she should too much a scent give, Thrust into breech finger retentive. But bowel thorow-purging pang Twitcht her with wombling gripe and twang. At last by force it flutter'd out Like pump water stopt up with clout. Flouncing about in such large doses As made the Trojans hold their noses, She lookt o'th' sudden pale as ashes, And smear'd with excremental dashes, As if she had taken a full cup Of Chymick potion, or jallop.
Majórque videri Nec mortale sonans.— With that she swell'd as big as quack Drinking toad in glass of sack. Stomach and belly then she puts out, As if she meant to squirt her guts out. At last she howl'd and gave a squawle, And thus did 'pon Aeneas call. cessas in vota precésque Tios (ait) Aenaea? Quoth she, I mar'l where thou wert bred To see a woman almost dead, And not with helping hand come nigh her, Nor lend so much as simple prayer. Neque enim antè dehiscent Ora domûs. For if thou do'st not come and shake me, Another fitt will straightway take me; Unless I'm stir'd and jumbled soundly My guts will never discharge roundly. Gelidus Teucris per dura cucurrit Offa tremor.— With that for fear of another spatter The Trojans turn'd as weak as water, They trembled so in every joint Many in breeches loos'd a point. Aeneas then with stomach groans Fell down upon his marrow bones; Phoebe graves Trojae semper miserate labores, Dardana qui Paridis direx'ti tela manúsque; O Phoebus that didst ever pitty Troy town, O hearken to my ditty.
O thou that clapst upon the shoulder Paris, and madest him 'gainst foe bolder: If to me now thou art difficile Thou maist for the future go whistle. I hate ingratitude as the divel; I must confess thou hast been civil, And willing wert with all thy heart To serve me more than my desert. Tot maria intravi, duce te, penitùsque repostas Massylum gentes praetentáque Syrtibus arva. Thou when I was founder'd and weary Hast often made me brisk and merry: When candle has been out of socket, Thou hast put money in my pocket. And when I have been put to shift, Thou hast helpt me out at a dead lift. In journey and in tedious travel, When shooes were stockt with filth and gravel. Jam tandem Italiae fugientis prendimus oras. For Italy I am now bound Pray let me come there safe and sound. For I had never hither come Were I not drove from house and home. Wretched I Anchises poor son Am forc'd to range and seek my fortune. Up and down to see me lurk Wou'd move even pitty in a Turk. Diique Deaeque omnes quibus obstitit Ilium & ingens Gloria Dardanidûm.— O therefore all ye ranting Heroes That were to Ilium bugs and scare-crows;
And all ye proud dames that did straddle Scimmington 'pon warlike saddle, I hope you are of that good nature To pitty a distressed Creature. Túque O sanctissima vates Praescia venturi.— And you too mother (whom I guess To be a witch or Prophetess) Pray I may (O beldam hag sage) To Latium come with bag and baggage. Tum Phoebo & Triviae solido de marmore templum Instituam To Phoebus (by th' foot of Priam) And to his simpring sister Dian, I'le dedicate a house (though little) And resign my right and title: I'le do it, there's my hand, believe me, Let me be hang'd if I deceive thee. 'Tis not my nature to be base, In honour I'le not bate an ace. Hîc ego namque tuas sortes arcanáque sata Dicta meae geuti ponam, lectòsque sacrabo Alma viros; foliis tantùm ne carmina manda. But to confirm the bargain well, I'le give thee here my hand and seal; And for more convenient tie Witness all the company. Let not the writings be destroi'd For then you know the case is void, And we shall be but jeer and sport When we come to appear in court.
finem dedit ore loquendi. At this he prudently gave o're And to that purpose said no more. At Phoebi nondum patiens— At which the woman 'gan again To be troubled with her pain. He that had at that time seen her Would think the Devil had been in her; See winst and caper'd as if some Had clapt hot iron to her bum. 'Twas labour much for one of her age To suffer so much belly garbage. tanto magìs ille fatigat Os rabidum, fera corda domans, fingítque premendo. At last with volly loud and full She made in cave another stool: Rat a tat tat the spirit bounst out, And flakes of fierce St. Reverence flounst out. After which crack, from out behind Broke such an impetuous wind (You would have swore her guts were broken) Ostia jámque domûs patuere ingentia— As straight set all the trap doors open. Her pop gun gave as loud report, As Canon charg'd from 'laram'd port. At length having appeas'd tail frothing And cleans'd the filth of inner clothing, She opt her mouth dropping like snowt Of heavy Winter-idling lowt:
O tandem magnis pelagi defuncte perîclis. O thou whom Juno fell with whipcord Has often firkt and claw'd a ship bord, Art now ashoar from water butches, And out at present of her clutches. Yet do'nt thou think thou art secure, Sed terrae graviora manent For thou'lt o'land more stripes endure: The whorson quean before shee'th done Will catch thee again at long run. In regna Lavini Dardanidae venient (mitte hanc de pectore curam) Sed non & venisse volent bella horrida bella. Thou and this thy wretched rabble, With much ado at length shall scrabble Into the borders of Lavinus, (But hold you coxcomb why dost whine thus) And there thou'lt be tormented so, Thou'lt wish thou wert at Jericho, And reason have to curse the hour Thou first didst stir foot out of door. For I foretel there will be scuffles, Many blows, bastings and buffles. Tibrim multo spumantem sanguine cerne. There are a whorson surly tribe there, That live about the river Tiber, From whom you shall have knocks and raps And thumps and dowses in the chops. 'Tis well if after all these crosses You shall come home with bloudy noses.
Nec Dorica castra Defuerint— You'l meet huge raw-bone Sander huffs, As good as Graecian lowts, at cuffs; They'r lusty fellows, and stand to't shall At wrestling, cudgels or at footbal: They'l kick ye up and down with clump foot Until they make your bellies bump out: Unless you caution from me can take, They'l kick thy breech as flat's a pancake. Nec Teucris addita Juno usquam aberit— Juno agen shall make thee smart And vex thee to thy very heart. Nay thou shalt come to such a pass With scarce a rag to hide thy arse, And ramble through high-way and street, With scarce a stockin to thy feet. cùm tu supplex in rebus egenis Heu! quas non gentes, quas non oraveris urbes? Thou shalt be, when thy food grows scant, Ready to eat thy nails for want. Thou'lt begging go from door to door Through Town and Countrey lean and poor. Also thou shalt have scratch and battel Tooth and nail with black-list cattle. Causa mali tanti conjux iterum hospita Teucris. A wench there is given to flickring, Who shall be cause of all this bickring. Tu ne cede malis.— However prithee hap what hap, Don't in anger burn thy cap.
Be bold, and when things go amiss Bid fortune and the slaves go kiss. Via prima salutis Quod minimè reris Graiâ pandetur ab urbe. But to set thy spirits agog Out of Greece thou shalt have prog, Hogs puddings, oat-cakes, milk and butter, Bacon, eggs, poultrey, and a clatter Of pease and beans, with pannier'd baggage Of parsnips, turnips, carrots, cabbage. Talibus ex adyto dictis Cumaea Sibylla Horrendas canit ambages, antróque remugit. These words the Sibyl chopt from cell low And gave (as Author says) cow-bellow. She puzzled him with words and phrases Obscuris vera involvens.— That Janus like had diff'rent faces: On one side was vizard uncouth, On t'other was the naked truth; When in a trice her rage and madness Vt primùm cessit furor.— Was turned into sober sadness. Her breast that was with fury cramb'd, Was now as quiet as a Lamb. Incipit Aeneas heros.— So that Aeneas had his leisure And liberty to speak his pleasure. Mother, quoth he, I speak from heart, I value not these things a fart. I knew before you gave me note, I should have holes pickt in my coat:
Therefore you might have kept your breath To cool your porridge, proverb saith: Vnum oro: I'me come to ask without offence A favour of great consequence. quando hic inferni janua Regis Dicitur.— 'Tis said that hole there that's kept shut too Leads to kitchin of cook Pluto: Where muddy Acheron from sink Casts hogo forth and noysome stink; I have a father there, a wight To whom the Devil ow'd a spight; So I might come to h's sight I'm willing To spend though it were forty shilling. Ire ad conspectum chari genitoris & ora Contingat.— Prethee therefore give me some light How I may strike the way aright. Ille meum comitatus iter maria omnia mecum, Atque omnes pelagi minas coelique ferebat Invalidus, vires ultra sortémque senectae. That Sire of mine as sure's thou'rt sat there I've born (God knows) through fire and water Upon these shoulders and this back, When my neck has been ready crack, And bloody rogues pursued behind us, Damming and sinking they wou'd find us. Well, though I say't (he was my father I must confess) and should not rather) He was as lusty an old shaver As any in this rout I have here.
Where e're I went on Land or water Hee'd make a shift to follow after. Neither had he flincht a foot, had fates Made it rain down dogs and cats; Though old was body and decrepit, Yet heart was whole and nought could break it. Quin ut te supplex peterem, & tua limina adirem, Idem orans mandata dabat— My father (be assur'd no less thing) Gave me a charge upon my blessing To seek you out (if to be found In any corner above ground) Pitty begetter and begotten (One alive, t'other dead and rotten) Potes namque omnia.— I know thou canst do any thing Because thou'rt good at conjuring, Thou keep'st a Mephistophylus To turn thee into Curr or Pusse, So that thou canst delude by barking As well as Reinard pullets sharking, And know'st the dialects of mewing As perfectly as cats a wooing. Thou canst be toss'd and ride securely Upon a windmills hurly burly, And sit upon the wheel or hopper Without falling or hurting crupper. Sometimes thou rig'st with sail and oar An Egg-shel, and put'st out from shoar;
Thus in thy little Sciff thou'lt ride 'Pon Neptunes back, and waves deride. Thou dost in secret baskets bear Parcels of blustring wind and air, And for a Sailer in a calm Thou canst disturb the Sea with qualm; Sending o'th' the sudden Lapland blast To shake the tackle and main Mast. If thou do'st thy commands advance, Joint stools, tables, bedsteads dance. By vertue of thy Spells a dr stick Shall frisk Coranto with a broom-stick. Thou canst in Orchard lay a charm To catch base felon by the Arm. Thou art able by singer clench The running of fundament stench: Thou canst drive folk out of their wits, And rack 'em with convulsion fits: Thou canst provoke man sick or drunk To lie with filthy Turnbold punk. Thou canst make inoffensive sleep Upon the bridegrooms eye-lids creep, Although he has a dainty bride Snugs discontented by his side. If thou canst do these wonders all, Then what I ask is very small. Si potuit manes arcessere conjugis Orpheus. If Scoundrels might to hell go, why By your good favour may not I?
Orpheus a pimp, a meer Jack-straw, Cou'd get his wife from devils claw Only by sum fum scrape of fiddle And windy bagpipes farting twiddle. Si fratrem Pollux alternâ morte redemit. What was Pollux but a rakell? Yet spight of Lucifer he brake hell; And swaggering with his arms a kimbo Freed his brother out of Limbo. Theseus and Hercules were men Of metal 'tis confest, what then? In what I pray were they more fitted Than I am now to be admitted? Et mî genus ab Jove summo. My father was as good as theirs, And I as either for their ears. Talibus orabat dictis.— These words as near as I can hit Aeneas spake with grace and wit. Then she with much ado arises Tunc sic orsa loqui vates— Tros Anchisiade, facilis descensus Averni. Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis. Answering thus (O son of Anchises) Whose pedigree is of no bad fame But is almost as old as Adam; The way to th' Devil is plain and broad, There is no fear you'l miss the road, Night and day always the doors Lie open to comers and goers:
Sed revocare gradum.— But when once foot threshold has got o're Return without toil you cannot more. Pauci quos aequus amavit Juppiter.— Few but whom (what'ere's the matter) Iove loves as the Divel loves holy water: For there you may for ever linger, Hee'l lend you not a helping finger: Besides not one to ten so wise known That once being pent in can break prison, Diis geniti potuere.— Except a brother of the blade Which is known expert at the trade. A wall almost as strong as iron The place doth with fence inviron; With fortified bulwarks, which Are compass'd round with puddle ditch. Quod si tantus amor mentis.— But seeing thou art forward bent With resolution and intent, And whimsey doth thy noddle take To journey to the Stygian Lake, Accipe quae peragenda prius.— Something must be thought upon Before the business can be done. There is a tree that long hath stood In yonder neigh'bring shaggy wood,
Later arbore opacâ Ramus.— Wherein a bough grows hidden inward ureus & foliis.— As bright and glittering as drawn winiard, Which sacred is to infernal Juno Junoni infernae dictus sacer: hunc tegit omnis Lucus, & obscuris claudunt convallibus umbrae. Whose favour by it you will soon know. But though this bough be mickle bright Yet it doth not appear in sight, Because where you must go to seek it Is thorny copse and pricky thicket. For the wood stands in valley humble Where winds for want of freedom grumble. Sed non antè datur telluris operta subire Auricomos quàm quis decerpserit arbore foetus. Hoc sibi pulchra suum ferri Proserpina munus Instituit.— Yet 'tis so order'd by the powers (That lie Antipodes to ours) Without this bough none shall be whurl'd Through gulph into the other world. Proserpine (that in fairy coast Sits paramount and rules the roast) Expects it due unto her honour If any mean to wait upon her: Now therefore thou hast thy commission, Hasten away with expedition: In every brake and briar hunt, Breaking up hedge with crab-tree plunt.
Look about with as close inquest And carefulness as boy for nest. Ritè repertum Carpe manu, namque ipse volens facilisque sequetur, Si te fata vocant— When thou hast found out where 'tis stuck Climb up and gi't a gentle pluck, If 'tis the will of courteous fate, In spight of all the world thou'lt ha't. Ali er non viribus ullis. But if thy fate stand opposite Thou had'st as good go fairly f—. For wert thou as robust as Giant Thy hand cou'd not make one twig pliant, Or shou'dst thou hardy back-sword take, Thou'dst hack in vain till thy heart ake. Praeterea jacet exanimum tibi corpus amici. But hold whilst thou art here advising And projects in thy fancy raising, Since thou cam'st here thou ha'st a friend That is come to a fearful end. Sedibus hunc refer antè suis & conde sepulchro. Duc nigras pecudes, ea prim a piacula sunto. Therefore in charity thou'rt bound To see him lain in wormy ground; And seeing he was an honest tost, Spare at the burial no cost. Upon the altar table put on Good store of beef and kindly mutton;
Sic demum lucos Stygios, regna invia vivis Aspicies. Then thou may'st go with freedom down To dungeon by none living known. —dixit, pressoque obmutuit ore. With that she was as mute's a fish As mute as woman you cou'd wish. Aeneas moesto defixus lumina vultu.— Aeneas at this sad news started, And with sheep-biters face departed. His stomach was as full of sorrow, He could have even roar'd out for wo. Cui fidus Achates It comes & paribus curis.— Achates kept him companie And lookt as pitiful as he. As both they through the high way walkt Multa inter sese vario sermone serebant. They much of this disaster talkt, Admiring who the Divel 'twas Of whom grim death had made an asse. When they were come to quart'ring house Where they kept all their rendevouz, Misenum in littore sicco, Vt venêre, vident indignâ morte peremptum. They found an honest fellow nam'd Misenus, to all fortune damn'd, Who was in filthy pickle laid, Dead as a herring, and beraid. Quo non praestantior alter Aere ciere viros.— This whipster had a plaguy knack At trumpet blowing and horn-crack,
By which he cou'd raise sullen coward And make him for the battel toward. Hectoris hic magni fuerat comes.— He had serv'd Hector all the wars In open and in civil jarrs: And for his merit had come up To be trumpeter of a troop. But when Achilles had in field, The Trojan Captain Hector kill'd, Dardanio Aeneae sese fortissimus heros Addiderat socium.— He made friends to Aeneas for The office that he had before. Aeneas pittying his condition Gave him at first word a commission. Now how he came dead (if you'l know) According to report 'twas so: Sed tum fortè cavâ dum personat aequora conchâ Demens, & cantu vocat in certamina Divos. Close by a River as he sate A playing 'pon a Flagellate, Crying out ever and anon, Come who will I'le yield to none; Aemulus exceptum Triton— Inter saxa virum spumosa immerserat undâ.— One Triton that was a Sowgelder And in a house of rushes dwelt near, Taking it in snuff and dudgeon To hear boasting of vile Curmudgeon, Ran and caught him by the shank And shak't him roughly till he stank;
Then knocking out his brains he slew him And madly into water threw him. Ergo omnes magno circum clamore fremebant. Aeneas therefore and the rout Stood the mangled corps about, Yelling like hounds in a full cry With Irish note, why wouldst thou die? But 'fore they cou'd in solemn plights Duly perform the funeral rights, They put themselves in equipage For work which Sibyl did engage. Itur in antiquam Sylvam, Stabula alta ferarum. Procumbunt piceae, sonat icta securibus ilex Helter skelter every man In among the thickets ran, Where Snakes and Adders without number Did the ground and hedges cumber, Some with Hatchets, some with Chopping- Knives went up and down a lopping, Some with Hand-saws, some with crooks, Axes and wedges, pruning-hooks, Down went Crab-tree and bush of sloe, I marry, Elm, Oak, ground-ash too. Nec non Aeneas opera inter talia primus. Nor was Aeneas idle seen But labour'd with tool sharp and keen, Suggesting in the rest an ample Encouragement by his example. Seeing at last but little hopes To find the bough in spacious copse,
He 'gan to be quite out of heart; Then from his mouth these words did part: Si nunc se nobis ille aureus arbore ramus Ostendat nemore in tanto, quando omnia verè Heu! nimiùm de te vates, Misene, locuta est. If in a wood so wide as this I shall not bough I look for miss, Then I'le be sworn O beldam Nun Thou art a Witch as sure's a gun. Vix ea fatus erat, geminae cùm fortè columbae. No sooner had he spake these words But o're his head he spied two birds, Flying to ground where grain did grow, As swift as arrow out of bow. Maternas agnoscit aves— Grammercy quoth Aeneas to 'em My trusty Pidgeons are ye come? You being Letter-carriers know All the by-places here I trow, My mother Venus has I warrant Sent you to me on an errant. I do beseech you of all love Este duces.—ubi dives opacat Ramus humum.— Lead me directly to the grove Where glitt'ring bough like Sun-burnt apple Doth the twining branches dapple. Túque ô dubiis ne defice rebus Diva parens. And Venus if thou dost forsake me In nick of time, the Devil take thee.
The birds well knowing what he utter'd Into the air with all speed clutter'd. Observans quò signa ferant, quò tendere pergant. He stood stark still and markt their flight Till they were almost out of sight. Inde ubi venêre ad fauces grave olentis Averni Tollunt se celeres.— Where 'twas their aukward luck to hover A stinking house of office over, From whence such fumes and hogo's broke forth Enough in all reason to choke both, Which made them with a murrain fly Something loftier in the sky. Then in a trice (whilst you can say, What's this?) through ayr they cut their way. Sedibus optatis geminâ super arbore sidunt, Discolor unde auri per ramos aura refulget: Quale solet sylvis brumali frigore viscum Fronde virere novâ.— Talis erat species auri frondentis.— And on the tree (concerning which We had discourse before) they pitch, From whence (the place being dark) a cluster Of glow-worms cast a dainty lustre; Or have you seen in Winter-time On hedge a kind of brittle-slime? Or frothy trash which sluggish snail Draws along the ground at tail? Such was the brightness of the bough Of which I gave a hint e'ne now.
Aeneas finds by sign and token It was the same which was fore-spoken: Then up he skips as quick and pat As Squirrel, or mouse-hunting Cat, Corripit Aeneas extemplo avidúsque refringit Cunctantem, & vatis portat sub tecta Sibyllae. And off he snapps it at one grapple, As greedy as boy Orchard apple: With half face-snears and shoulder shrugs He with it to the Sibyl trugs. Nec minus interea Misenum in littore Troës Flebant. But course of story doth confine us To say something more of Misenus. The woful Trojans cryed right out Sniv'ling and casting snot about. Pars calidos latices & ahena undantia flammis Expediunt.— Some of the rabble (men of mettal) Heat water in a copper kettal, Corpúsque lavant frigentis & ungunt. And with purgative soap and wash ball They cleanse away the body's trash all; Then on their shoulders forth they fetch it, And on a knotty deal-board stretch it. His shirt that stood him much in stead Alive, must serve him now he's dead. This for a shrowd must wrap his arse Cause linnen was amongst 'em scarce. Because there was no Joyner near (And Coffins too besides were dear)
They made a shift and thought it best To lay the corpse in gentle chest, Which worms had eaten so all o're There scarce was food for any more. Purpureásque super vestes.— His doublet made of hardy leather Which proof was 'gainst all sorts of weather, And breeches of undaunted freese, Hanging in quirpo down at knees, And jerkin lin'd with skin of dog In which he look't like armed hog, With other rayment (which we may Suppose he wore on holy day) Were advantagiously displaid And woollen blanket overlaid. Thurea dona dapes, fuso crateres olivo. Others very busie were at Preparing diet-bread and burnt claret. Then up the loaded corpse they fix Pars ingenti subiere pheretro. On backs of brawny Porters six, And on to burial place they bore it, With links and wax candles before it: They pil'd up heaps of faggots higher Than usually are at bonfire. And in they cast the carcase whole, Burning it straightway to a coal. Postquam collapsi cineres, & flamma quievit; Relliquias vino, & bibulam lavere savillam. Assoon as e're they saw the fire gone They put reliques in tub of iron,
Pouring in that little bub That lest was, into the said tub. Then (where we all decline to must) It was committed to the dust. Dixitque novissima verba. And many a wish and prayer was given Hoping his soul was gone to heaven. At pius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulchrum Imponit.— Aeneas sent to a stone-cutter To have a tomb-stone fitly put o're, On which an Epitaph in Text Was cut with coat of arms annext, And there if ever you have been The fellows name is to be seen; I know nothing to the contrary But it may there for ever tary. His actis propere exequitur praecepta Sibyllae. Aeneas after this ado Was in a readiness to go Without father stay or quibble As he was order'd by the Sibyl. Spelunca altafui vastóque immanis hiatu. There was a hole broader than what Cou'd cover'd be by buttock fat, Much like unto a privy dungeon For quagging Scut of baud to lunge on; Around which an offensive lake In ropes of excrement did flake, From whence came such a noisome smell Enough to choak the Devil of hell;
Quam super haud ullae poterant impune volantes. 'Twoud kill Kites, Vultures, Ravens, Crows, Bustards, Magpies, and Jack-daws. Indè locum Graii dixerunt nomine Avernum. Wherefore 'tis call'd Avernus by Pedantick Etymologie. Aeneas fearing greatly to make An entrance with a fasting stomach, Quatuor îc primùm nigrantes terga juvencos Constituit.— Good store of Beef he did command To be roasted out of hand, Which (soon as e're 'twas took from spit) He and his men eat every bit, And knuckles with promiscuous clatter Scrap't the clammy fat from platter. No sooner was he risen up From meal, but calls for a grace-cup, Voce vocans Hecaten.— And here, quoth he, ye snaky sisters That raise in men fanatick blisters, And Pluto (be thou Smith or Tinker 'Tis all one to me by this drink here) And Proserpine (of whom go speeches Thou wear'st too much thy husbands breeches) Here's to all your generation A whole one upon reputation. He was a friend to th' pot you'l say Being the sober time o'th' day;
For at this rate he sate and bows'd Ecce autem primi sub lumina solis & ortûs. Till Sun from Thetis lap was rous'd. The Ale being in his head, the ground Sub pedibus mugire solum & juga coepta moveri Sylvarum.— Seem'd on a sudden to turn round. And Mountains that really stood still He thought (cause he himself did) reel. He fancied noises in his scull (No wonder when in't waves did rowl) —Visaeque canes ululare per umbram. Such as Mastiff howl, and screech Of kennel-fraught benighted bitch. The Sibyl too was there as drunk As Windsor wife or Whetstone punk. She cries out in Prophetick rapture (Like Puritan a reading chapter) —Procul, O procul, este profani, Conclamat vates, totóque absistite luco O all that are prophane, and none Of the religious, be gone: Away ye scoundrel Rascals hence Who are of a reprobate sence. Túque invade viam vaginâque eripe ferrum. And now man 'gin to look about Thou must be resolute and stout: Out from eaten scabberd pluck Thy man-slaying unpeaceful tuck, And now or never make a venture And follow me close as I enter.
Tantum effata furens antro se immisit aperto. Then down from brink with care and heed On naked bum she gently slid. What need she fear? for she cou'd fright With Devils face the dreadful'st sprite. Ille ducem haud timidis vadentem passibus aequat. Aeneas very bold and pert Followed and caught her by the skirt. Dii quibus imperium est animarum umbraeque silentes Et Phlegethon.— Sit mihi fas audita sequi— But O ye Devils great and small, Lucifer, Beelzebub, Belial, O all ye fiends and hobgoblins Who plague poor mortals for their sins, O bugbears, Oberon, and Fairies Who pitch uncleanly slats of dairies, O Chaos, Phlegethon, and all Hard words upon which Poets call, Give me a vein that may surpass Homer a la mode, or Hudibras. Give me high and mighty wit, To th' grandeur of my subject fit. Ibant obscuri sola sub nocte per umbras, Quale per incertam lunam sub nocte maligna Est iter in Sylvis.— They both went in vault under ground Unbeaten ways dark and profound; Like travelling a wood a night time When neither Moon nor Stars with light shine,
When people are force grope with hand, Nor what colour 'tis understand. Vestibulum ante ipsum— At last they came unto a gate 'Gainst which Aeneas ran his pate, Stumbling o're a promiscuous heap Of mortals that lay there asleep. Luctus, & ultrices posuere cubilia carae, Pallentésque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus, Et metus, & malesuada fames, et turpis egestas. There were a company of rakels Fetter'd up in jives and shackels, Barretars, and those whose profession Wast o cheat at size and session. There were likewise Misers decrepit Who scrap't money up only to keep it. And husbandmen that hoarded corn When bellies were with famine torn. Another parcel lay of women That had been thorns and thistles to men: Such as wou'd force their honest good Husbands perform more than they cou'd; Such queans as wou'd curse, swear and huff, And their contented cuckolds cuff. Under an Elm old and decai'd A bundle were of idlers laid, Fellows produc't from natures sink Good for nought but to eat and drink, Who slept and dreamt of nothing but Provision for ungodly gut.
The Sibyl having unlockt door (Which we told you of before,) Multáque praeterea variarum monstra ferarum; Centauri in foribus stabulant, scyllaeque biformes, Et centum geminus Briareus.— Within the porch was stable wide Wherein strange monsters did abide: There was a beast the like was none Ever at Bartlemew fair shown; The forepart was exact mad mallion, The hinder shap'd like racing stallion. There also was an overgrown Curr, that had more heads than one: There was a Giant too as high-a As Danish Colborn, or Goliah. Ac bellua Lerne Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata Chimaera, Gorgones harpyiaeque, et forma tricorporis umbra. There was a Lion lookt as sower As any Lion in the Tower. Another strange creature there was Like smug wench in body and face, But claws it had with bristled shag on, Like those of Griffon or fierce Dragon. Besides there was Ens ratiouis Which wou'd young Sophister astonish. Corripit hic subitâ trepidus formidine ferrum Aeneas, strictámque aciem venientibus offert. Aeneas at these sights a while Stunk so you might have smelt a mile;
(For he before, poor harmless Elf Had seen nothing worse than himself) Fear made him skip, curvet and caper, And out he drew his study Rapier; And traversing his ground prepar'd Himself to stand upon his guard. Et ni docta comes— Had not the Sibyl flown upon him And snatcht the brandisht weapon from him; In testy wrath discharg'd he had blows To incorporeal forms and shadows. Hinc via Tartarei quae fert Acherontis ad undas. From thence they came unto a ditch In which was puddle black as pitch, Where sprawling frogs and croaking toads Lay enwrapt in spawny loads. Terribili squalore Charon, cuiplurima mento Canities inculta jacet.— There Charon (much quoted by pitti∣ful Poet in funeral Ditty) With wrizzel'd countenance of hew Wou'd make a dog or Devil spew; And knitty beard of Carret colour, Than rubbing-brush or besome fouler, Or hair 'pon bird-pickt soul of traitour, Pent on pole London bridge-gate o're; Sordidus ex humeris nodo dependet amictus. Whose cloaths hung 'pon him like a fardle Most wretchedly truss'd up with girdle.
This Charon (for convenience I name him twice to bring in sence) Row'd passengers with boat, that lookt About the sides like tub unhoopt, And yet with Scullers or with Oars Et ferrugineâ subvectat corpora cymbâ. He wafted every day o're scores: Huc omnis turba ad ripas effusa ruebat Matres atque viri,— Both men and women of all ranks Waited for passage on the banks. Many a brave fellow crost the ferry To laugh and quaff and drink old Sherry. Many a stripling o're did pass In company of buxome Lass. A good house was on t'other side Which made so many there abide. Quàm multùm sylvis autumni frigore primo Lapsa cadunt folia. Have you not seen in Autumn season, When Zephyr blows out of all reason, The trees shake to and fro and showers Of leaves descend in groves and bowers? Or have you seen in time of frost Quàm multae glomerantur aves.— Wild fowl come from forraign coast, Black-bird, Woodcock, Plover, Quale, Partridge, Lark, Widgeon, and Teil? So many folk (you'l think it strange But faith 'tis true) did thither range.
Stabant orantes primi transmittere cursum Navita sed tristis nunc hos nunc accipit illos. They hoopt and hollow'd 'bout the shoar And at poor Charon curst and swore, But he from wafting never swerv'd, And he that came first was first serv'd. Some that were moniless and poor He drove them with his pole from shoar. Aeneas miratus enim, metúsque tumultu, Dic ait ò virgo, quid tult concursus ad amnem? Aeneas wondring at the clatter Askt, what a Devil was the matter? Tell me, quoth he, O mother Sibyl, What makes this concourse here of people? What a plague ails 'em, are they mad? I ne're saw such a feud i' dad. Olli sic breviter,— Quoth Sibyl I'le declare in short A satisfying reason for't: Cocyti stagna alta vides, stygiámque paludem, Dii cujus jurare timent, et fallere numen. Thou seest the deep pool of Cocytus, And Styx, whose very sight wou'd fright us, By which the Gods do damn and sink When ever they are in their drink. Those that the Churl away doth scare Have got no dust to pay their fare. Those that he receives in boat Pay him for his pains a groat: They had as good even go knock out Their brains, who bring no coin in pocket.
He'l let em sit, call names, and scold Until their arses are a cold. Gallants and Ladies first he'l waft o're Let Tatterdemallions come after. Constitit Anchisâ satus et vestigia pressit, Multa putans, sortém que animo miseratus iniquam. Aeneas shook his head and dampt His breast with fist, whilst foot ground stampt: And 'cause he knew in days of yoar What 'twas to be in want and poor, He seem'd to be the more concern'd, And with meer grief his bowels yern'd. He saw there some that pin'd and fainted With whom he had been well acquainted; But such misery had o'rethrown 'em, He was almost asham'd to own 'em. Leucaspin & Lyciae ductorem classis Orontem. Leucaspis stout who had been Bosen Of a ship, with Orontes whorson, Who both were blown by sudden squeck Of wind into the Sea from deck. Ecce gubernator sese Palinurus agebat. Aeneas also spi'd his dear man Bold Palinurus, quondam Steerman. To whom, quoth he, in midst of rout, How fares it with thee trusty trowt? —Quis te Palinure Deorum Eripuit nobis?— What a crotchet did in noddle take thee, Or what a plague was't thou didst forsake me?
Dic age, namque mihi fallax haud antè repertus Hoc uno responso animum delusit Apollo. In sober sadness prethee give me A true account, and I'l believe thee. The cunning man Apollo, whom We askt concerning future doom, Told me thou shou'd'st come safe and sound To Latium and not be drown'd. —En haec promissa fides est! But there is no trust to be given To any creature under Heaven. Ille autem: nec te Phoebi cortina fefellit Dux Anchisiade. Quoth Palinurus (O thou heir Of Anchises to all his gear) I must confess ingenuously, Apollo to thee told no lye: I fell indeed headlong into Sea (Where fishes of all sizes do play) But'twas as fate wou'd ha't, my luck To have but one good sowsing duck, Which made me stare again, but after I made a shift to keep 'bove water, Namque gubernâclum multâ vi fortè revulsum Praecipitans traxi mecum.— For no wave cou'd me overwhelm Whilst I had in my hand my helm; Which I pluckt with me when in sleep I totter'd from the pocky ship, Making it cut the stream like oar Of Gally, or stiff Battledore.
—Maria aspera juro, Non ullum pro me tantum cepisse timorem Quàm tua ne spoliata armis excussa magistro Deficeret tantis navis surgentibus undis. I swear by foaming spurt of wave, And as I have a soul to save, I thought it was my greatest mischance Thou wert in want of my assistance: For (though I say't my self) you well know I was a very honest fellow. Well, so I floated clear and glib (You'l think I'm telling now a fib) Three Summer days and put to them Three nights, by help of wind and stream. The fourth day was half past before With much ado I got ashoar. Ni gens crudelis,— When suddenly a crew of ruffains (By looks and cloaths meer raggamuffins) Came running and with speech severe Askt me what business I had there? One gave me with his foot a spurn, Another took me at half-turn, And gave me by the nose a twitch, Which made me lamentably screech: Then to make sport they took a Rugg And tost me in it like a Dog: I fell to ground often with squelch, Which made my very entrails belch. When they had us'd me like a Jackanoddy And shak'd my breath out of my body,
Nunc me fluctus habet.— The sons of whores, the Devil rot'em Whurl'd me into th' Oceans bottom. Per genitorem oro.— O therefore Master let me beg With cap in hand, and turn'd-back leg, For your good old fathers sake Upon a servant pitty take. Eripe me his invicte malis— The sum of all that I desire Is, that you wou'd lay down here my hire. For without money surely Charon (And troth I ha'n't a cross) will waft none. Coepit cùm talia vates: Ʋnde haec tam dira tibi Palinure cupido? Quoth the old Beldam, marry come up Mr. Gentleman, will you have a roap? It is in vain curst fate to cark at, But make the best of a bad market. To make complaint (for my own part) I think thou'dst e'en's good let a fart. Sed cape dicta memor duri solatia casûs. Have but a little patience Thou shalt at length be carried hence, Thy mortified Fish-pickt bones (That lye among Sea-shels and stones) Shall be, thou need'st not be a-fear'd, With all solemnity interr'd. His dictis curae emotae.— With that the rogue grew blith and glad As louse or beggar in fresh pad.
Ergo iter inceptum peragunt.— Aeneas with's Companion Jog'd from that place further on. Charon spying 'em approacht near Wondred what a pox made such there, Then making stately step toward 'em Sic prior aggreditur dictis atque increpat ultrò. Thus accosts (of his own accord) 'em. D'ee near you friend you sawcy Jack, And you old Gammer, what d'ee lack? Stand I conjure you, if you stir shall A foot farther, be it to your peril. Fare age, quid venias.— What are you and from whence, speak quickly Or (take it as you will) I'l lick ye: Ʋmbrarum hic locus est, somni noctisque soporae. This is a place for incorporeal Substances (that sleep and snore all) Here is no room for scowtish rakel That comes with earthly tabernacle. Nec verò A'cidem, nec Thesea Perithoúmque Accipere lacu me sum laetatus euntem. Theseus and Perithous stout With Hercules that heavy lowte, Did me and my boat more dammage Than I can get again in an age; Tartareum ille manu custodem in vîncla petivit. The one put 'pon us a shrewd slur, And stole away our houshold Curr; The t'other two I warn't were good, (A couple of pure sticks of wood,)
Hi dominam Ditis thalamo deducere adorti. Who came to have a fellow-feeling With Proserpine, bat she wa'n't willing. Quae contra breviter fata est Amphrysia vates: Nullae hîc insidiae tales.— Quoth munching Beldam, friend of mine, We come not of an ill design, For my part I am near fourscore And can do little harm I'm sure. Nec vim tela ferunt.— And he (though he wears a sword and belt) Yet nothing e're his fury felt. Doth he (lord help him) look as though He had strength to do so and so With Proserpine, or master tripple Headed Cerb'rus, who doth keep hell? No no, this is the long and short That made us hither to resort, Troius Aeneas pietate insignis & armis Ad genitorem imas Erebi descendit ad umbras. To see if any where among The Ghosts and the infernal throng, We can by our enquiry gather Any news of this fellows father. Si te nulla movet tantae pietatis imago, At ramum hunc.— If thou art of a temper evil, And art resolv'd to be uncivil, Tarry a little, here's a bough In butchet, look, what think you now?
With that the courage of the fool Began to be appeas'd and cool. He for a while upon it gaz'd As if knockt on the head amaz'd. Then to the pool like mad man flew Coeruleam advertit puppim.— And close to shoar with chain boat drew, Diving away from banks with pole Every inconsiderable soul: He took Aeneas by the arm, And set him under a tilt warm. Then in with much ado they lag The old unprofitable Hag. Gemuit sub pondere cymba Sutilis, & multam accepit rimosa paludem. The chinky boat was ready break With weight, and forthwith sprang a leak. At length he landed fleshy load, But both up to the knees in mud. Cerberus haec ingens latratu Regna trifauci Personat. And now they hear a fearful howl With barking whine and murm'ring growl Of Cerberus, who yelpt at once From ratling throat three several tones. (No wonder that he still was bawling Having thousands of vermin 'bout him crawling) Melle soporatam, & medicatis frugibus offam Objicit.— The Sibyl did a wheaten scrap take Out of Aeneas victual Snapsack,
Then tampering among it sloppy Opium, and juice of Poppy, She stretcht it to him with colouge Like thief in Fable tempting dog: —Ille fame rabidâ tria guttura pandit, Et rapit objectam, atque immania terga resolvit Fusus humi.— He snapt it 'fore it fell to ground, And swallowed it in gat profound, Which made him in less than half an hour Stretch out in a dead sleep ali four. Occupat Aeneas aditum. Aeneas (you'l think) did not want age Nor wit to lay hold of advantage: The Porter being lain fast and sure He had possession of deaths door, Which whether he unlockt with key Or broke it ope I can't well say, But I suppose, I wo'nt swear to it, He bounst it ope by force of foot, Because no key (you may go look) Is hinted of in Authour's book. Continuo auditae voces, vagitus & ingens, Infantúmque animae flentes.— No sooner were they got within But ears were stun'd with second din. The cry of suckled brats a brawling In louder scream than catterwauling. They saw whole shoals of by-blow babes That had been made away by drabs,
Some squeaking out for Mam (hard hap) Others for teat, and sloppy pap. Hos juxta falso damnati crimine mortis. From thence they came into a Region Where was a Gaol and in't a Legion Of younger brothers, who were glad For want of quodlibets to pad Which were asham'd to beg, yet feel No bite in conscience to steal; But 'twas their fortune, though they'r high-born Sweetly to swing in noose at Tybourne. Quaesitor Minos urnam movet ille silentum Consiliúmque movet, vitásque & crimina discit. In these precincts liv'd Justice of peace That never had palm lickt with grease, (And 'cause our Authour doth confine us To tell his name) his name was Minos: He made a strict examination Of every ones life and conversation: Some he judg'd to whipping-post And some he sent to forraign coast. Some he condemn'd to bastinado, And others to cruel strappado. Many from liberty exempt Were made for ever to beat hemp. And thus he kept in rule and order With punishments all that same border.
Proxima deinde tenent moesti loca qui sibi lethum Insontes peperêre manu, lucémque perosi Projecêre animas. The next place that they came unto Was the meer Barathrum of wo, Where lay a miserable pack Of men that dy'd for honours sake, Some that had drown'd themselves in River, Others thrust Ponyard through Liver, Because forsooth they cou'd not sip Nepenthe from a Mistress lip. Some that had been past worldly hope And ended all their cares with rope; But were become the unhappier (Out of the Frying-pan into the fire,) Fas obstat. tristíque palus inamabilis undâ Alligat.— For here they'r cramb'd up in a hole Which always lies bedung'd and foul. As for with brooms and mops to cleanse it I wonder who in conscience means it, Because like privy or a sink The more 'tis stir'd the more 'twill stink. Nec procul hinc partem fusi monstrantur in omnem Lugentes campi— His quos durus amor crudeli tabe peredit. From thence they came unto a Field Which did many rueful objects yield, Such as at Bedlam may be seen (If Reader thou hast thither been)
One was a gazing like a Sceptick Another mus'd like Dialectick; Some were a lifting up their eyes And catching after moths and flyes; Others were reading with loud babble But understood not a syllable; Some were a plucking hair with claws, And others lay a picking straws; One did nothing else but d'off And put his shoo again on hoof. Others by active fancy led Were at turning arse over head. Some were dancing, singing, laughing, Ranting, swearing, cursing, quaffing, With many such like frantic fits Common to those out of their wits. To speak in short, there wa'nt one there But was as mad as a March hare. His Phaedram Procrínque locis maestámque Eriphylen. There was also a tearing crew Of Dames and young wenches true blue: Joan, Cisly, Margaret, or Peg, And bounsing Rose, as right's my leg. —Et juvenis quondam nunc foemina Caeneus, Rursus & in veterem fato revoluta figuram. Next these were double-member'd creatures Of different and amphibious natures, Such as can play the parts of men And straight be women, and to'tagen.
Inter quas Phoenissa recens è vulnere Dido Errabat syiva in magna.— Near by these folks walkt love-sick Dido Alone within a private Meadow, Whom when Aeneas spied through hedge His teeth for sorrow stood an edge. Dulcíque afflatus amore est Infoelix Dido— Quoth he in soft heart melting phrase With tears a trickling down his face, Ah Dido, Dido, I am sorry And much in grief and anguish for thee, For since I went from Carthage town (Where thou art well trusted and known,) Verus mihi nuncius ergo Venerat extinctam— Funeris heu tibi causa fui.— I heard thou hast a months mind to me And that was the thing did undo thee. But may I ne'r be worth a shilling If I departed not unwilling; Necessity forc't me withdraw, (Which has (as wise men say) no law) Siste gradum, téque aspectu nec subtrahe nostro. But prethee stay and hear me out What now I am to say about; I mean no harm t'yee nor abuse If you wo'nt tarry you may chuse. Illa solo fixos oculos aversa tenebat. But she with choler from within swoln Lookt as the Devil lookt over Lincolne.
She did no more his tatling mind, Than if he had talkt to the wind; Tandem corripuit sese atque inimica refugit In nemus umbriferum, conjux ubi pristinus illi Respondet curis, aequátque Sichaeus amorem. At length to avoid his sensless tongue Into a neighbouring wood she flung, Hooping and hollowing for Sichaeus Her husband, to drive off Aeneas. Prosequitur longè lachrymans.— He follow'd after close to breech Like hot grain'd dog pursuing bitch. But though he did in passion burn She was not at that time for's turn. Therefore he seeing 'twas in vain Turn'd, as he came forth back again. —Jámque arva tenebant Ʋltima quae bello clari secreta frequentant. From thence they trudg'd into a green Where were a troop of Souldiers seen, Men that had been bred up in wars And well skill'd in Martial affairs, That make no more to kill a man, Than I do to take off a Can, Fellows of an undoubted courage, The like can scarce be found in our age. Hîc illi occurrit Tydeus, hîc inclytus armis Parthanopaeus &— There was Orson and Valentine The valiant sons of King Pepin.
There were the seven Champions all, Bevis and Amadis de Gaul, Sir Eglamore, and Guy that slew The dreadful Gyant and Dun Cow. With Robin-hood and Little John And many others of renown. Nec videre semel satis est, juvat usque morari Et conferre gradum & veniendi discere causas. Aeneas question'd 'bout their fights, Their hard adventures and exploits, And what deeds they did undertake For honours and for Ladies sake. Et Danaum Proceres Agamemnoniaeque Phalanges There was a troop of Grecian Dons, Achilles, and his Myrmidons, Ajax that was in battel haughty, And Ʋlysses in counsel crafty, With the Commanders all in chief Who were these I shall name in brief: Agamemnon, Diemedes, And he, by Paris horn'd whose head was. Ʋt vidêre virum— Ingenti trepidare metu pars vertere terga. Assoon's they saw Aeneas coming They took their heels and fell a running Like chaff (as they say) before the wind, Or ship with Don-quixot behind.
Atque hìc Priamiden laniatum corpore toto Deiphobum vidit, lacerum crudeliter ora, Ora, manus ambas, populatáque tempora raptis Auribus— There was one 'mong the hindermost That by a shot both legs had lost, But for supply two wooden ones Were put to succour cripled bones. His nose was off by doubtful hap Whether by dint of sword, or clap, The same uncertainly appears In the sad loss of both his ears, For generally they subject are To Pillory as well's to War. Aeneas in time long past knew This shake-bag as well as I know you. Vix adeò agnovit pavitantem, & dira tegentem Supplicia.— But now was at a stand (although He lookt close) whether 'twas he or no. The fellow in this wretched case Was quite asham'd to shew his face: Deiphobe armipotens— Quis tam crudeles optavit sumere poenas? Then quoth Aeneas, O Deiphob (So was his name) with witty dry bob) What mak'st thou look so like a tench? Come come, I fear thou lov'st a wench. The bridge is down, then (by your leave) I may with ease the cause perceive.
I know thou wert a Souldier, but Venus in Mars his arms is shut, And so by consequence it sounds From Mars and Venus came these wounds. Tunc egomet tumulum Rhoeteo littore inanem I found thy body rent and tore By Rooks and Crows, on Rhoetus shoar, And buried it in Church-yard bustum Calling out thrice as 'twas the Custom. Constitui, & magnâ manes ter voce vocavi. —Nihi tibi amice relictum. Quoth Deiphob, friend thou hast done me As much as cou'd be expected from thee; You may imagine what you please That I have had an ill disease; I must confess, I have had play With women, and who has not I pray? Scelus exitiale Lacenae His mersere malis— But I had throughly sound and well been Had it not been for pocky Hellen, Namqueu supremam falsa inter gaudia noctem Egerimus nosti nimium, & meminisse necesse est, Illa chorum simulans evantes Orgia circum Duceba Phrygias— Tum me confectum cúris somnoque gravatum Infaelix habuit thalamus. For that same night, (and we have reason To remember matters of treason) Wherein the Grecians without force Enter'd the town with wooden Horse,
She danc't about with mirth and glee In jovial mood, and who but she? She and her Comrades drank such swigs They were all of them as drunk as pigs, When on a sudden horse and foot Fell upon us 'fore we knew't, I was at that time in my warm Bed, a dreaming of no harm, Sleeping without all fear and care, no Coach cou'd wake me or wheel-barrow. I had (thinking all safe at home) No sword or pistoll in the room: Intra tecta vocat Menelaum & limina pandit: Irrumpunt thalamo.— When this same base perfidious quean (You know by foregoing speech who I mean) Led in manly sort a File Of Musqueteroes at her tail, Who with bold resolution bore up And rudely broke my Chamber door ope, Then rushing on me fierce and passant Slic'e my nose off left what was on't, And to spite my beloved wife Cut my stones out with a Bread-knife, Plucking me limb-meal besides Dii talia Graiis Instaurate, pio si poenas ore reposco. (A plague consume for it their hides) I wish they may de damn'd as black As Buttermilk, or Oven-cake.
Sed te qui vivum casus age fáre vicissim. But what wind blew thee hither prethee For I am much surpriz'd to see thee? An quae te fortuna fatígat? Vt tristes sine sole domos loca turbida adires. Wert thou by witchcraft driven hither Or by unluckiness of weather? Was it a frolick mov'd thee (speak) To come to the Devils Arse a peake? Hac vice sermonum roseis Aurora quadrigis Jam medium aetherio cursum trajecerat axe. The day was now above half run About three a clock i'th' afternoon, The time that Plowmen hast from fields To see what bever Cupboard yields. Sed comes admonuit, brevitérque affata Sibylla est: Nox ruit Aenaea.— The Sibyl then put in a rub, What d'ee tell us a tale of a tub? 'Tis high time to be gone, quoth she, We have other fish to fry. Then turning to Aeneas, marry, Quoth she, how long d'ee mean to tarry? It draws towards night, if you stay How shall we see to find our way? Hîc locus est partes ubi sevia findit in ambas. Here is a place where four roads meet In form like Crosse of Jesuite,
Dextera quae Ditis magni sub moenia tendit: Hàc iter Elysium nobis— —at loeva malorum Exercet poenas.— The right hand to fools Paradise, The left to Purgatory lyes. Ne saevi magna sacerdos. Quoth Deiphob I pray, good mother, What makes you chatt and keep a pother? But seeing she no leave would give, He doft his Hat and took his leave. Aeneas as he lookt a-thurt Saw ancient Castle near a Fort, With three walls, besides moat and ditch Stronger than Dunkirk or Mastrich. 'Twas built of neither stone nor flint, Neither was brick or timber in't, But all of subtle air, watch well Compacted was by charm and spell: Such fabricks as St. George for glory Invaded (as you read in story) Vis ut nulla virùm, non ipsi exscindere ferro Coelicolae valeant.— But of this if he had made proof, He wou'd have found it much more tuff. David nor Andrew, nor the rest all, Neither the Knight of burning Pestal, Had not been with joint forces able To make it not impregnable. Granadoes, Bullets, Blunderbusses Wou'd do no more than hostile curses.
Instead of Giant or Dragon fell To keep at entrance Sentinel, Tisiphoneque sedens pallâ succincta cruentâ Vestibulum insomnis servat.— Tisiphone (whom Poets use To call upon instead of Muse, When any have a mind to purge The vices of the age with scourge) Stood in a mantle clad as black As that on witch of Endors back, And night and day did watching keep Without so much as a dogs sleep. Hinc exaudiri gemitus— They listen'd and heard from within Strange noises like a Newgate din, Clinking of shackels tyed to shanks Of Malefactours, and whip-clanks, Which were imagin'd to be smarter Than those of Coachman or fierce Carter. Those exercis'd on bums and breeches Made 'em break out in cries and screeches, Louder by far than School-boy howles In Eaton, Westminster, or Powls. Constitit Aeneas strepitúmque exterritus hausit. Aeneas at this fearful clutter 'Gan with weather-end to make butter: Quae scelerum facies, ô virgo, effare; quibúsve Vrgentur poenis, quis tantus plangor ad auras? Mother, quoth he, since I was first born I never heard the like combustion,
What is't a Bridewel or a Gaol, Tell me what means there such a coil? Tunc vates sic orsa loqui: Dux inclyte Teucrûm, Nulli fas casto sceleratum insistere limen. Quoth she (O thou that bear'st command O're Trojans all by Sea and Land) This Castle will not open'd be Thou need'st not fear for I or thee, For 'tis for such as play the rogue And without conscience cheat and cog: But for our parts it is well known We are no bodies foes but our own. Gnossius haec Radamanthus habet saevissima regna. Within this building doth inhabit A Sorcerer in visage crabbed, As sage as Zabarel, and as subtle As Don Scotus, or Aristotle, One, in a word, wiser by half Than Balaams Asse, or Walkams Calf. He for his most judicious learning Has prerogative concerning All Caitiffs that do kill or steal And do mischief to the Common weal: 'Gainst whom he is no less severe Than Countrey Constable or Mayor, Though rogues, as now their common use is, Make cunning shifts and neat excuses, Castigátque audítque dolos subigítque fateri. Yet he can evince quirks and slaws And know the blind side of a cause.
He'l draw confession from each soul Either by fair means or by foul. Some are burnt in the hand, and some Like Souldiers vile the Gauntlet run. Others in little ease are put And others fast'ned head to foot. But more than can be number'd saving For villany in hempen string. —Tum Tartarus ipse Bis patet in praeceps tantum, tenditque sub umbras. To tell you of dungeon without bottom In troth I almost had forgotten. Hic genus an iquum terrae Titania pubes. The Grants that of old wag'd war With Pikes and Gans 'gainst Juppiter (As 'tis in Ovids book, which thus Begins, In nova fert animus) Are here one 'pon the tother rowl'd To teach 'em to be proud and bold. There lye the sons of Gath, and brood Of those that liv'd before the Flood. Vidi & crudeles dantem Salmonea poends, Dum flammas Jovis, & sonitus imitatur olympi. Here is the man to all folks wonder That imitated noise of thunder, Salmoneus nam'd; but for my part I rather think Gilbertus Twart, Who is reported long agone To be the inventor of a Gun, For this Salmoneus was but maker (As I have read) of Squib and Cracker,
For which (according to relation) He got much fame and reputation: You may see in Records of Greece The circumstances if you please, Some here are like dead Horses flead And gi'n to dogs (as you may read) Nec non & Tityon terrae omniparentis alumnum Cernere erat, rostroque immanis vultur adunco Immortale jecur tundens— Quid memorem Lapithas, Ixiona— Quos super atra silex jamjam lapsura.— Vultures and Kites devour as many As they did of old at Cannae. Others are whurl'd upon a wheel, Or crusht 'twixt hoppers of a Mill, Till bones and very guts are torn And ground to particles like corn. Some have their brains dasht out with stones, With iron barrs and tough battoons. Lucent genialibus altis Aurea fulcra toris, epulaeque ante ora paratae. Another trick there is devis'd How wretches may be tantaliz'd, Which by weighing its intent Is none o'th' slightest punishment; A Table spread with Beef and Mutton As delicate as can be put on, With figgy puddings piping hot Newly taken out of pot, With Veal, and Bacon, and green Pease, Besides Pies, Tarts, Plum-cakes and Cheese,
Then down the hungry guests are plac't Only to see, not touch nor tast; If one but snatches up a scrap His fingers have for it a rap. Down must again be put the victual Let it be ne're so vile and little; Wo be to him that puts his claws In dish to slop up sugar'd sawce, —Furiarum maxima juxta Accubat, & manibus prohibet contingere mensas. Alecto for so small a cause Gives him a lick a-cross the jaws. Hîc quibus invisi fratres— Pulsatúsve parens.— The company doth most consist Of such as live i'th' world as they list, Who value not a rush their Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Uncles, or Aunts; And care not if the Kingdom sink So they might have but meat and drink. Quíque arma secuti Impia.— Such also as out of Zeal fell on Their King and Countrey in Rebellion, And for a liberty of Conscience Breed schismes by loud noise and nonsence, (And Hypocrites (as old wives tell) Shall have the hottest place in Hell)
Phlegyas— Discite justitiam moniti & non temnere Divos. Here Phlegyas that was a bad stick Of heresy, and a fanatick, Cries, O friends of self-toleration Let my hap be to you a caution; By Orthodox Laws be advis'd, The gods ought not to be despis'd. Who cou'd expect (without offence) That fiends cou'd speak reason and sence? Vendidit hic aúro patriàm, dominúmque potentem. Here are your Jockyes that came forth From territories of the North, Who stuck not to exchange for pelf Their Countrey and their Prince himself. —Leges fixit pretio arque refixit. Here are men that set out torutim Statutes, but ne're wou'd execute 'em, Who handle wou'd the purse-strings first And then conclude which cause was just. Besides these also there are millions Of other sundry humour'd villains, Pimps, Catchpoles, Hectors, Bully rocks Vally de Chambers (with a pox,) With vagabond unwholsome Varlets That deal with Alehouse trulls, and Harlots▪ Non mihi si linguae centum sint, oráque centum, Ferrea vox.— If I had as many tongues and mouths As I have teeth, fingers, and toes;
If I had voice sounding louder Than Christchurch Tom, or Westminster. I cou'd assoon kiss my own arse As to run through all (by the masse) Therefore because I wou'd not fiddle Give me leave to break off i'th' middle. Having thus concluded fair speech She gave a clawing scratch to bare breech; As if a louse or twitching flea Did 'bout her nut-brown buttocks play. Come come, quoth she (plucking his sleeve) Acceleremus ait, cyclopum educta caminis Moenia conspicio.— Let's hasten and these quarters leave, For not far off I spy a Smiths-forge That doth from Chimney sparkles discharge, 'Tis but a wey bit 'fore we 'gin To get out of the Devils gin. Dixerat, & pariter gressi per opaca viarum Corripiunt spatium medium.— With that she tore away with stride More than the ordinary yard wide, I mean with crutches, for they straddle Whilst sustain'd body between waddle; And he also shuffl'd as much And kept in full pace with her touch. At length they came unto a stile And there they rested for a while.
Corpúsque recenti Spargit aquâ.— Aeneas stript off all his cloaths Unto his very shoes and hose, And washt his sleaky skin throughout In pool, and rub'd it with a clowt: Then putting on his cloaths again He bid to coasts of night good e'en, For now they came to sight of skies Which made 'em twinkle with their eyes, As usual 'tis (if you but mark) To those that have been in the dark. Devenêre locos lactos, & amoena vireta. There was a meadow green and gay As any is in midst of May, The Sun flam'd 'pon it like a torch Yet it did not their faces scorch: A crew here gat together bent To jollity and merriment: Pars in gramineis exercent membra palaestris. The jovial lads were in ring jostling, To make room for appointed wrestling, Showting as at a Wake or Feast, Heigh for the North and heigh for the West. Some at Skittels their time past, Others at rub and a good cast. From Arbours all about the Close Was musick heard like twang of nose, From windpipes that in form and figure Resemble Glysters, though much bigger.
Hundreds a sitting on stools and benches Slobber'd and tows'd the Countrey wenches; Some had a special love for pretty Abigail, and some for Betty; Whilst wags and arch anointed cracks Trol'd ballads full of pleasant knacks. So every one perform'd his part, Or told a tale, or let a fart. In another part of spacious green Pars pedibus plaudunt choreas.— A sort of Revellers were seen In holland Drawers, lac't Crevats, Hair tied with ribbands, but no Hats, Who wearing on their feet light pumps Trac't 'long the path with ambling jumps: One bore a kind of little Drum And fumpt it with finger and thumb, Which made the bells that round it were Sound like those at forehorses ear; Ask what they were, the vulgar answers, They were (as they call 'em) Morrice-dancers. In places distant and remote From scoundrel or inferiour sot Hic genus antiquum Teucri pulcherrima proles. Were many a gallant spark, and Lady As any in Hide park o' May day: Some Capapee a horseback rid Like French Mounsieur or Spanish Cid, With Lances held in warkike fists As just preparing for the lists.
Others in Coaches rid at ease Sleeping, or picking lapdogs fleas. There was also in other places Hunting, Hawking, and Horse-races, With many other such like kind Of sports, as people were inclin'd. Conspicit ecce alios dextrâ laeváque per herbam Vescentes, laetúmque choro Paeana canentes. Close by a purling Rivers side Where streams did with a torrent glide, Sat sage Philosophers discoursing And knotty Syllogisms scorcing With Wits of th'age and men of parts Masters of Sciences and Arts, And Poets (not whose bloodless vein Can produce nothing besides rime, For look in Iter Boreale You'l find much rime, but sence will fail ye; Or have you heard of Poetaster That set a Poem out but last year, That treated of the Kings returning And of the Cities plague and burning? He nurtur'd was (the more's the pitty) In the Oxford Universitty, Read but that Poem, and in it You'l find much fancy, little wit.) I know of more such, but 'tis best To go back from whence we digrest. The Sibyl got among this gang And to 'em made a large harangue.
Musaeus taller was by th' head Than all the rest with tiptoe tread, Standing i'th' midst like a Colosse Or' mong footmen man 'pon a Horse; Quos circumfusos sic est affata Sibylla, Musaeum aute omnes.— Whom she with eye chiefly respected, And to him most her speech directed: Dicite foelices animae, Túque optime vates Quae regio Anchisem, quis habet locus?— O happy Sirs, friends to the Muses, I pray speak where Anchises house is? We are but strangers to this coast And know the way no more than a post. Quoth he in civil manner (Mistriss) Truly here are no Edifices, Nulli certa domus, lucis habitamus apertis. No certain habitation Have we that we can call our own. We live where we can get (god bless us!) In mazes, woods, and wildernesses. But hold let me consider, stay By th' cast o'th' Countrey that's your way Hoc superate jugum.— Over that hill, some two miles off, Look just directly 'gainst my staff. But come seeing you strangers are, I'l bring you on the way so far. Dixit, & ante tulit gressum.— Then on he led the way untill They came on t'other side o'th' hill:
In Valley at the foot of it, At Pater Anchises penitus convalle virenti Inclusas animas superúmque ad lumen ituras Lustrabat studio recolens, omnémque suorum Fortè recensebat numerum.— Anchises did on Mole-bank sit, Musing in melancholly sort With hands to ears, and all a mort, In study deep and meditation, Casting upon his generation, Their fortunes, livings, and estates, And circumstances of the Fates. Isque ubi tendentem adversum per gramina vidit. But when he saw his Son Aeneas Coming towards him through the grass, He rows'd himself from thoughts and dumps And up like one of twenty, jumps, Stretching both arms out for his boy, And wept out like a child for joy. His passion did so crowd his throat A while he cou'd not speak a note. At length recovering his speech By tweak of nose and scratch of breech, Venisti tandem— —Datur oratueri Gnate tua, & notas audire & reddere voces? Quoth he, welcome my lad of gold, Do I thy countenance behold? I'm in a maze, art thou the same I talk to, or am I in a dream?
Not half an hour ago at end Sic equidem ducebam animo rebárque futurum. I had discourses with a friend, Wherein you were the chief concerns; Talk of the Devil and see his horns. Quos ego te terras & quanta per aequora vectum Accipio, quantis jactatum, guate, perîclis. When of thy dangers I did hear It cost me many a sigh and tear, For fear thou shou'dst in passing thorough So many difficulties know sorrow. He having made conclusion, his Son Began with mannerly submission. Had I come of my own head, you'l, Quoth he, (dear Father) call me fool, autem, Tua me genitor tua tristis imago Saepius oc arrens haec limina tendere adegit. Wer't not for your continual haunting, My presence now had here been wanting. But seeing my time's but short, Father, Da jungere dextram da, genitor, téque amplexu ne subtrahe nostro. Come let's for shame shake hands together, 'Tis fit Father and Son shou'd hug: Puh, quoth Anchises, Coxen pug. Then tears began to trickle out As fast as water from a spout. Have you not read of Aesops dog, That instead of substantial prog With greedy snarie at shadow snapt Whilst real flesh in water dapt?
Or rather as Ixion woed With wanton grasps an empty cloud: Ter conatus ibi collo dare brachia circum, Ter frustra comprensa manus effugit imago. Aeneas just in such a sort Did incorporeal Father court, But Ghost was in compliance shy, And like a coy wench put him by. Have you not (in Glamorgan-shire) From mountain high up in the air, Lookt down upon the Countrey under And seen blind houses lie asunder, Houses of turf and thatcht, wherein People do live that card and spin? Hunc circum innumerae gentes, populique volabant. Ac veluti inpratis, ubi apes aestate serenâ Floribus insidunt, strepit omnis murmure campus. Aeneas such a Valley spi'd From ascent where he did abide. And (once again) have you not seen In any place where you have been, In Summer-season swarms of bees, Or Chafers roaming 'bout the trees, Or Grashoppers, or eager Ants A tugging to relive their wants? So many folks he did descry, And if you will believ't you may. And as 'tis the nature of those, So these did also hum and buz.
Or rather like as you may hear In Market or tumultuous Fair. Horrescit visu subito causásque requirit Inscius Aeneas.— Aeneas was at first amaz'd And like one knockt in the head gaz'd. Quoth he, what means that yonder feud? So much disorder can't be good. Lethaei ad fluminis undam Securos latices, & Ionga oblivia potant. Quoth Anchises, these drink a liquour Call'd Lethe, which is by much quicker Than March beer, bottle-ale, or mead, And sooner flyes up to the head: They drink this so long till the Elves Grow sottish and forget themselves, And here they madly drink whole ones Till they put on new flesh and bones. I cou'd tell many pleasant stories Relating to these drunken Tories, Jampridem hancprolem cupio enumerare meorum. But I must tell of noble Heroes That shall be to the world meer scare-crows, Who though we look like fools shall be Dasht from the loins of I and thee. But hold, quoth Aeneas, pray hold, Father (if I may be so bold) Let me (before you proceed on) Propose to you one question:
O pater anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum Sublimes animas, iterúmque ad tarda reverti Corpora.— Why shou'd the staring Jacanoddies Desire to resume new bodies? Quoth Anchises, I'l tell thee all By notions Philosophical, As orderly as Probleme is When Ergo follows premisses. Principio, coeium & terras campósque liquentes Lucentémque globum lunae Titaniáque astra Spiritus intus alit.— The Sun and Moon, Stars, Earth and Ocean Internal Spirits have, and motion, And (as the Stoicks have defin'd) There rules in them a certain mind, Which does material part controul, As body manag'd is by Soul; Inde hominum pecudúmque genus.— These second causes are, whence spring Existency to every thing, To all sorts of beasts, fish, and fowl (Let it be Badger, Dace or Owl) Theres not an individual being, But from these Elements you see spring, (For nothing Nature can create Without earth, water, air, and heat;) These four, as it were, being tried, And in a Limbick rarified,
Igneus est illis vigor & coelestis origo Seminibus.— Turns into life, which leaps and mounts Like quicksilver upon the joints, And as 'tis variously compos'd, So variously it is dispos'd, Hinc metuunt cupiúntque, dolent gaudéntque.— For now in appetite 'tis boil'd, Another time in grief turmoil'd, To day it sneaks and shrinks for fear With jealousie, doubt, and despair, To morrow fits of joy come in Making it ready leap from skin. Quin & supremo cùm lumine vita reliquit, Non tamen omne malum miseris, nec funditus omnes Corporeae excedunt pestes.— Now when this life forsakes the lump Of body by deaths utmost thump, It's tost and tumbled in the air Like smoak or feather here and there, It has no cloaths, no not a smock So much to keep it from a shock: Sometimes it feels the heavy rap Of hail-stones or a thunder-clap: In Sun-beams fryed, in frost benum'd, By showers half-drown'd, and by storms thrumb'd: Thus being naked becomes more Weather-beaten than before. But like a ship that has been banded By waves and winds at length is landed,
So after difficulties have been It shall arrive to quiet haven: Then when time's snake is wreath'd about This life is cleans'd and purg'd throughout, From filthy thoughts with which 'twas tainted When with the lower air acquainted: Exinde per amplum Mittimur Elysium.— 'Tis put into a modish dresse Pester'd with weather, lice or fleas. Dixerat Anchises: gnatúmque unáque Sibyllam Conventus trahit in medios turbámque sonantem, Et tumulum capit.— Anchises had his fair speech ended, Which nothing to the purpose tended. Then down the way he led along Towards the giddy-headed throng: Himself, the Sibyl and his Son Got up upon a tomb of stone, Because they thought it not so good To be at flats with multitude: Besides if there had been no less thing 'Twas cause enough to avoid pressing. Now quoth Anchises fix your eyes And mark what Spirits shall arise, I'l shew you plainly to your face The Chavalieroes of our race; Who shall in Italy bear sway, And from the rest bear bell away;
Ille vides purâ juvenis qui nititur hastâ Proxima sorte tenet lucis loca.— He there that wears his Hat a cockt With Javelin in his clutches lockt, Shall first drop from the womb of night Into the Regions of light, Quem tibi longaevo ferum Lavinia conjux Educet sylvis.— Whom thou shalt get upon thy wife At the latter end of life, So that people of the town Shall say the child is not thy own: One that shall be as stout I'l warrant As any Knight that ere rid errant. The next is Procas of high worth, With Capys, Numitor and so forth. But look what yonder fellows are Qui juvenes quantas ostentant aspice vires. See how they swagger, huff and swear, As if they wou'd drink dry a fountain And swallow at one bit a mountain: These shall convert wild heaths and downs Into Mart and Burrough-towns. Nomentum, Fidenae, and Bola, Pomety, Gabii and Cora, In every one of which a Mayor Shall the sword of Justice bear, With reverend Aldermen assistants To Carbonadoe rogues, and miscreants.
Quin & avo comitem sese Mavortius addes Romulus.— Next Romulus, the Bully Rock, Comes strutting like a Turky-cock; Fame and report in time to come Shall sound as loud as trump and drum, And glory with a golden stamp Shall coin his name as bright as lamp: Have you not seen town full of people Wherein stands a Cathedral steeple, Which for it's bulk and antiquity Is term'd by Geopraphers a City? En hujus, Gnate, auspiciis illa inclyta Roma Imperium terris, animos aequabit olympo, Septémque una sibi muro circundabit arces Foelix prole virum.— Such a Town Romulus shall found And call it Rome for stately sound, With walls and seven Towers lofty To keep it in defence and safety. House-keepers dwelling in this place Shall be very well to passe By the advantages of trade And traffick which shall seldom fade: From Bankers, Scriveners and Drapers To old shoos, boots, and kennel-scrapers, Scarce one but shall have in his purse Enough to buy a score of us.
Huc geminas nunc flecte acies— Romanosque tuos, hîc Caesar & omnis Iuli Progenies.— But bend both eyes hitherward, son, Here are the men when all is done, These are Romans against weather, As true as ever trod shoe-leather, Fierce Julius, sirnamed Caesar, Who domineer shall at his pleasure, With a mighty, high renown'd Augustus, That shall be at the least a Justice. Super & Garamantas & Indos Proferet imperium.— He shall have jurisdiction o're Turk, Tartar, Scythian, Jew and Moor, Extending out his power and sway Farther than Horse can reach a day: Governours of Forts and Castles Shall yield their rights up and be Vassals In future expeditions, cries he, Io, veni, vidi, vici: Nec vero Alcides tantum telluris obivit Fixerit aeripidem cervam licét.— He shall march to remoter coasts Than where Alcides set up posts; Alcides 'tis known well enough Slew monstrous Stag with brazen hoof And by the force of Cudgell basted Wild Bore that Woods and Forrests wasted.
Nec qui pampineis victor juga flectit habenis Liber agens celso Nysae de vertice tygres. Bacchus indeed in wrath and quarrel Bestrid triumphant butt and barrel Drawn by a team of tugging Swine Who rag'd with dreadful grunt and whine: But what of that? Augustus shall come To have the Government of all Rome. Therefore O son, why art thou fearful, Bestir thy stumps and go on chearful, Words are but wind, nothing but action Can give a wise man satisfaction. Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae. But stay, what whipster gay and trim With black Mustachoes on his chin Moves on with slow and gentle pace? Methinks (troth) I should know his face; Gramercy (now I recollect) 'Tis Tullus sage and circumspect, He shall be the man of the age, And guide times in right equipage, Reforming illegitimate Brutes By power of wholsom Laws and Statutes, —Quem juxta sequitur jactantior Anchus Nunc quoque jam nimium gaudens popularibus armis. Next Anchus height that swells as big As Aesops toad or roasted pig, One who ('tis pity) even now is Conceited boaster of his prowesse.
Vis & Tarquinios Reges, animámque superbam Ʋltoris Bruti?— Yonder comes supercilious Tarquin, (He's worth your observation, mark him) Next Brutus with dire threat and frown Follows like snarling Curr at clown, This Brutus shall for freedom barter And stand up stiff for City Charter. He'l not admit or hear of thing That sounds like Emperour or King, He'l be a jot no more at odds With Devils, than with earthly gods. The man will therefore quite cashier 'em And out by root and branches tear 'em, Consulis hic primum imperium, saevásque secures accipiet.— So that by dealing with them fiercely He'l tumble all things arsy versy: As when the head submits to tail, And State dwindles to Common-weal, When Crown is dost in humble rate To a Plebeian new-fumpt Hat, When crafty roundheads booty share Ravisht from honest Cavalier, And those that were subjects before Usurp authority and power, When dame Religion and Zeal From crimes to Justice do appeal, And good deeds are but flams and flaws If not in defence of the cause;
So Brutus Tarquin did out-hector That he himself might be Protectour. His two sons from the very strummel Shall be as loyal as Dick Cromwel, And oft at the barrels head and board Shall drink healths to their fathers Landlord. At length they'l make an insurrection, Gnatósque pater nova bella moventes Ad poenam pulchra pro libertate vocabit. But father brings 'em to correction. First he'l have the wretches stript And by the common hangman whipt, With Cat a nine tails, until blood Shall run down sides in purple flood, And then they shall be packing sent To be on scurvy gibbet pent, Thus they shall be us'd worse than dogs, Hang'd, drawn and cut abroad like hogs, And quarters shall be stuck 'pon hooks To be devour'd by pies and rooks. Quin Decios Drusosque procul.— Next come the Decii sworn brothers By one father but several mothers. —Et referentem signa Camillum. Camillus also, in fleet who Shall be the Admiral of the Blew, With the ill natur'd grim Torquatus Who looks as if he had a mind to 'ate us.
Ille autem paribus quas fulgere cernis in armis Concordes animae nunc, & dum nocte premuntur, Heu! quantum inter se bellum si lumina vitae Attigerin?— Yonder come two who now in love You may perceive are hand and glove, But their society together Seems too great to last for ever. At length they'l alter in a word From all honey into all t— Though in civility 'tis fit Ne Pueri ne tanta animis assuescite bella. The elder shou'd have the more wit, And t'other shou'd have so much grace To know his quality and place. Eruet ille Argos Agamemnoniásque Mycenas. The one shall do more harm in Greece Than he that stole the Golden-fleece He'l bring large bowties and rich Cargo's From Corinth, Mycene, and Argos: Much plate from thence in Carts and Waggons, Tankards, Basons, Bowls, and Flaggons, To Rome in triumph shall be led in (Nay) even their very bed and bedding. Quis te magne Cato tacitum, te Cosse relinquat? Yonder appear Cato and Cossus Who look graver than brewers horses, With Gracchus and bold Scipio, That will to fighting sooner go
Than others to their meat and drink (The Devil's in 'em troth I think.) Next comes Fabricius who shall know well Mysteries of State and Plow-tail, A Husbandman by his profession, And yet a plaguy Politician. —Vel te sulco Serrane serentem? With Serranus, that to a nail Shall not come short of Machivail, And yet he'l be bred but a Yeoman Though afterwards in power some man. Excudent alii spirantia mollius aera— Let some know how to shapen mettal Into porridge-pot and kettal, And others may have special skill In sawing deal-board in a Mill. And some have found out arts and ways To form hard iron how they please, Make grates for Seacoal, Andirons, Jacks, With forty other houshold knacks, Such as Shovel, Tongs and Fork, And hook to fetch out bottle-cork. Vivos ducent de marmore vultus. Others may cut out in a stone The statue of Heroe and Don, And of the same stone make the shape Of Lion, Mongrel, Horse or Ape. Some in the Mathematicks may Have a thousand things to say,
Tell of what figure Rhombus is, Cylindrus, Prisma, Pyramis, Know how the Chapiter agrees With the Conus, Basis, and the Freez. —Coelique meatus Describent radio, & surgentia sidera.— Who by plodding devices can hit The height of such and such a planet, And in a narrow shindle take The compass of the Zodiack. Tu regere imperio populos Romane memento, Parcere subjectis & debellare superbos. But O thou son of Rome let this Be thy only master piece, To have an order and decorum In the affairs of Court and Forum, Be kind to honest bully Sanders But pluck down proud and sawcy panders. Sic Pater Anchises atque haec mirantibus addit: Aspice.— So said Anchises and withall, Quoth he, here comes a General, That shall the Carthaginians slay And flash the French men hip and thigh. Aeneas spied out one that had A good face, but his looks were bad, With folded arms and lover-wise Having his Hat down o're his eyes: O Father, quoth he then, I wonder What may be he there that goes yonder?
Quis strepitus circà comitum.— Lord what a bustle, what a Courtship Is there to attend his worship, By this retinue he seems one sure Of no small quality and honour, Sed nox atra caput tristi circumvolat umbrâ. And yet methinks I spy some mark Denotes him to be a shark. Tum Pater Anchises, lachrymis ingressus obortis. Then, quoth Anchises, weeping sore, This will be a meer son of a whore; A Caterpillar, Rascal, Rogue, A Thief, a Villain, Puppy-dog, One that will be a very moth O'th' Family, the scum and froth, And yet the whelp will be a Souldier None more resolute and bolder, He'l make a venture of his neck on Any exercise and weapon, He'l fight (this of him may be sed) With any man that wears a head. Sic totâ passim regione vagantur Aeris in campis latis, atque omnia lustrant. Thus Father, Son, and the old Woman Walkt along th' Elysian Common, Mingling discourses here and there, And building Castles in the ayr.
Sunt geminae somni portae.— Somnus the lazy god of sleep Two doors to enter in doth keep, The eyes, to wit, which are suppos'd Sometimes open, sometimes clos'd: Aeneas had lain long a napping (These doors being shut) in quiet Cabbin, When on a sudden opening them He found he had been in a dream. FINIS.
