B1467 15236972 103254
Τεσ Ιατρικεσ Καρτοσ: OR A TREATISE DE Morborum CAPITIS Essentiis & Prognosticis. Adorned with above three hundred Choice and Rare Observations: Many of them Se∣lected out of the most Eminent and Re∣nowned Authors now Extant a∣mongst us. BY ROBERT BAYFIELD, Physician. Morborum Medicamina, si à Doctis usurpata, remedia; si verò ab indoctis & inexercitatis, reperientur venena. DEPRESSA RESVRGO LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwel, and are to be sold by Richard Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible in Pie-corner, 1663.
Supremo omnium Capiti, Deo optimo maximo, Et corporis ac animae Beatissimo Patri, & salutari Medico; Ejus{que} secundo, Serenissimo Principi, Augustissimo{que} MONARCHAE CAROLO II. Gratiâ singulari, nocnon minus mirabili Providentiâ Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Regi Potentissimo, Et in hisce terris Capiti Summo, Religionis Fidei{que} Defensori strenuo, Justitiae, Clementiae, Omnigenae{que} virtutis Illustrissimo exemplari: Laborantis Ecclesiae, ruentis{que} Reipublicae Et Reduci, & Redintegratori, Probatissima haec Morborum Caput afficientium & , & (Tanti licèt Numinis nomine indigna) In summo gratitudinis & observantiae Symbolum è subditis, primus, ultimus, alto pectore, Pede imo D. D. Cqu; R. B.
ROBERTUS BAIFIELD, Anagrammata, Bis dote laurifer; Non lauros, neve omnis enim fert omnia tellus; Bis Te Lauriferum, dotibus esse patet. Aliter, Ab sudore fit liber. Ab sudore Liber tibi fit conamine multo; Nec fructus profert, ni bene cultus ager. ROBERT BAYFIELD. Anagrams. O life bred by Art, Be (if tryed) labor. O life crowned with Bayes, since bred by Art. Wherein (if try'd) true Labor bears chief part. R. P.
The Epistle to the Reader. Courteous Reader, THis Tractate which I now present unto thee, is the fruit of my spare hours, it having been my recreation, for some time, to read the best Authors which I could meet with; and for the help of my memory, I have collected the choicest Observations, and the most infallible Prognosticks which did oc∣cur, and reduced them under several Heads, distinguished into several Chapters; which I have found very useful, profitable, and plea∣sing unto me; and presuming they may be so to others also, I have now published them to the World, that so they which neither have mo∣ney to buy, nor leisure to read many Volumnes, may find in this little Epitome the choicest, and chiefest things that are contained in them, touching all those Diseases and Symptoms which affect the Head. I have also inserted many Observations of my own, which were never before in Print. Indeed when I consi∣dered
the paucity of Observations, and espe∣cially how immethodically (for the most part) those extant are digested; I thought it might be worth my pains to run through the whole body of Practical Physick in this Method, which affords not only the Definitions, and Prognosticks of Diseases, with select Obser∣vations upon them, but also their Causes, and Diagnostick signs, as will clearly appear to the Observing Reader. Yet when I had finished this Tractate of the Diseases of the Head, I thought it not convenient to proceed any further, but rather to put a stop to my in∣tended purpose, until I saw how this would be resented. There can be no better means, I am sure, to preserve, further, and assist, the practising of Physick, then is the careful and painful penning of it, especially of Observa∣tions: For as Practice is the best and chiefest part of Physick; so is Observation the surest, and most demonstrating part of Practice: Hence it cometh to pass, through the de∣fect of Observations, that so many Prescrip∣tions we meet with in the Works of most
learned Practitioners, fall often short in per∣forming the Cures they promise, and we took them up for; but Observations are the Touch-stone for the trying of what ever is not good, and what current in Physick. I presume that it will be superfluous for me to tell thee, what great benefit thou mayest reap by acquainting thy self with this Tractate; for as Zeuxis, picturing Helen, drew the Liueaments from five of the fairest Virgins of Croton: So this Book (excluding what is mine) is borrowed from the richest treasu∣ries of the best Physitians: And verily, I judge him of too mean capacity for this Art or Science, that cannot by the light of these things proceed into further Particulars, when need requireth. This I profess, that my care in be∣ginning, continuing, and ending this Work, hath been for the benefit of my Country, that I might help young Students in Physick (as I am one my self) to the attaining of some perfection, not esteeming my pains, but ha∣zarding
my credit: For I am not ignorant, that a large brood of pregnant Wits, fraught∣ed with jeers, (and good ones, as they term them) will snarl, though themselves either cannot, or (be it spoken in the best sence) will not spare time from their pleasures or profits to advantage others. These proud wits and curious heads are so extreamly in love with their own shadows, and do so highly admire their own conceits, that they despise all the understanding and learning of other men. They will whip Homer, as did Zoilus; sift great Hippocrates, as did Thessalus, and lash Seneca, that super-intendent of Wit, Learning, and Judgment, as did Caligula, Agellius, Fabius, and Lipsius himself, his chief Propugner; they have sucked Lami∣a's breasts in Plutarch, who when she sate spinning at home laid her eyes by her in a Basin, but put them into her head when she went abroad: They are as kinde as the Cuckow, which devoureth the Bird that brought her up, and with the male Spider (as Aristotle saith) they eat the prey, but
take no pains. Unwise were I, being empty and barren, if I thought to escape that which Homer, that sweet and sugred Mecaenas of Greece, might in no wise avoid. Simple were I to seek to evade that which the wisest, and Learnedest, Socrates, Architas, and Seneca, could not shun. Zeno the poor Phi∣losopher could resist the violence of the great King Antigonus, and Demosthenes could withstand the force of Philip, and yet neither of them could avoid the snares of those that defamed their Labour, and envied their diligence in Writing, and making of Books. Indeed it is the common doom of all Writers: Scaliger makes Galen fimbri∣am Hippocratis; and Paracelsus will have them both meer Idiots, Infants in Phy∣sick and Philosophie: Yea, Cardan con∣demns them also, for tediousness obscurity, and confusion. If such, and so many fa∣mous men that I could name, have suffered so much, what shall I expect? How shall I that am vix umbra tantae doctrinae, hope to please? For that which is most plea∣sing
to one, is amaracum sui, most harsh to another: Quot homines, tot sententiae, so many men, so many minds; Unusquis{que} abundat sensu suo; and whilst each parti∣cular Party is so affected, how should one give satisfaction to all? How shall I hope to express my self to each mans humor and con∣ceit? Some understand too little, some too much, Qui similiter in legendos libros, atque in salutandos homines irruunt, non cogitantes quales, sed quibus ve∣stibus induti sint, as Austin observes, not regarding what, but who writes. If he be not rich, in great place, polite, and brave, a great Doctor, or full fraught with grand Titles, though never so well qualified, he is a Dunce! but, as Baronius hath it of Cardi∣nal Caraffa's Works; he is a meer Hog that rejects any man pro paupertate suâ▪ Tru∣ly, the malice of men so exceedingly increaseth, that no man, no not the best learned, as you have heard (much less I) can do ought with∣out reproach and slander; yea, and that chief∣ly by men of his own profession: For how
hateful and vile a matter is this, and a plain demonstration of Envie, when one man of Science shall be asked by a stranger, what opi∣nion he hath of another man of Science that he knoweth; he shall answer, he is a good Her∣balist, or he understandeth well the practick part of Physick, I know nothing else of him. They that are perfect in nothing themselves have ever in readiness such disdainful re∣proach to hide their own Ignorance: as though a man being excellent in any one thing, it pro∣ved him to be ignorant in all other. Certainly the remembrance of such disdainful Objecti∣ons (when I had already finished this thing) made me in doubt to put forth this Work; but that my Friends, with whom I conferred my doings, earnestly perswaded me not to regard the rage of Envie, so long as Truth would bear out it self, while Time consumed both Slander and also Envie, the Author of all reproach; And that I should in no case cease to do that should profit many, for the evil of a few; some perhaps will say (to diminish that little honour which I might get by this my Work)
that the Ancients have written the greatest part thereof: But they shall learn from the mouth of this great Oracle, That there is no less wit and understanding required to be able to judge of Sciences formerly written, then to be the first Authors of them. Indeed the An∣cients, whose studious endeavours conspired the subduing of these and other Diseases, have left behinde them most honourable Testimonies of their Labors; yea, and Modern men also have been stirred up to do the like; but some of them with so much tediousness and prolixity, that you may sooner finde your Patient dead, than a remedy in their Writings, which (if my judgment be any thing) are more learned then useful. Besides, though there were many Gi∣ants of old in Physick and Philosophy, yet I say, with Didacus Stella, A Dwarf standing on the shoulders of a Giant may see further then the Giant himself; and it is no greater prejudice for me, to endite after others, then for Aelianus Montaltus, that famous Physiti∣an, to write De Morbis Capitis, after Ja∣son Pratensis, Heurnius, Hildesheim,
&c. Oribasius, Aetius, Avicenna, have all out of Galen, but to their own Method, diverso stilo, non diversâ fide. Yea, I must usurp that of Wecker, è Ter. Nihil dictum quod non fuit dictum prius, Methodus sola artificem ostendit. I gathered my Stones out of many Quarries, but I composed my frame my self: If I have done well, it is that which I desired, but if I have done slenderly, it is that I could attain unto. For my own part, I respect matter, not words; remembring that of Cardanus, Verba pro∣pter res, non res propter verba: and seek∣ing with Seneca, Quid scribam, non quemadmodum, rather what, then how to write: I neglect Phrases, and labour wholly to inform my Readers understanding, not to please his ear; 'tis not my studie, or intent, to compose neatly, which an Orator requires, but to express my self readily and plainly, as it happens: Whether I have attained the mark at which I aimed, or shot wide, I submit my self to thy learned, and favourable Censure: And as for those malicious Calumnies of Rai∣lers,
and Detractors (as the barking of a Dog) I securely contemn them: What thou findest here amiss (except the faults of the Press) I freely confess it mine; yet neither wittingly, nor willingly is it mine; howsoever charge it to mine account, for I was ever of that Fa∣thers minde, which in all his Works and Writings, desired not only pium Lectorem, a courteous Reader of his Labours, but also liberum Correctorem, a free Reprover of his Faults; but so that they do it friend∣ly, to blame in their judgement where it is e∣quity, and not to blaze my faults unto the World, which is a breach of Charity; therefore do thou friendly reckon with me, and I will thankfully satisfie thee, and be sure to remem∣ber, that as it is thy duty to be thankful for the best, so thou oughtest to be charitable in thy censure of the rest. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. Thy Servant in Him, who took upon Him the form of a Servant for us, R. B.
Index Capitum in hoc Tractatu Contentorum. CAp. 1. De Intemperie Cerebri page 1 2. De Meatuum cerebri angustia 5 3 De commotione cerebri 7 4 De Inflammatione cerebri 9 5 De cerebri Sphacelo 10 6 De Hydrocephalo 11 7 De Capitis contusione 13 8 De Vulnere cutis & pericranii 15 9 De Cranii Vulnere, seu fractura 16 10 De Cephalalgia, seu dolore Capitis 18 11 De Cephalaeae 20 12 De Hemicrania 21 13 De Monoplegia, seu Clavo 23 14 De Vigiliis nimiis 24 15 De Comate somnolento, seu Cataphora 26 16 De Vertigine 28 17 De Memoriae laesione 31 18 De Delirio 32 19 De Phrenitide 36 20 De Melancholia 39 21 De Mania, seu insania 42 22 De Rabie, seu Hydrophobia 46 23 De Lupina insania 49 24 De Chorea lasciva 51 25 De Comate vigili 52 26 De Lethargo 53
27 De Lassitudine 55 28 De Inquietudine ibid. 29 De Rigore 56 30 De Tremore 58 31 De Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum. 59 32 De Spasmo, seu Convulsione 61 33 De Incubo 64 34 De Catalepsi, seu Catoche 66 35 De Epilepsia 68 36 De Caro 74 37 De Apoplexia 76 38 De Catarrho. 77 39 De Trachomate, seu paelpebrarum Asperitudine. 81 40 De Psoropthalmia, seu Pruriginosà Scabiosâque Lip∣pitudine 82 41 De Emphysemate, seu palpebrarum Inflatione. 83 42 De Palpebrarum inviscatione. 84 43 De Ectropio, seu palpebrarum inversione. ibid. 44 De Lagophthalmia, seu Leporinâ palpebrâ 85 45 De Hydati ibid. 46 De Xeropthalmia, seu Aridâ Lippitudine 86 47 De Sclerophthalmia, seu Palpebrarum duritie 87 48 De Hordeolo ibid. 49 De Chalazio, seu Grandine 88 50 De Madarosi, seu Glabritie 89 51 De Trichiasi, & Phalangosi 90 52 De Phitiriasi ibid. 53 De Rhyade 91 54 De Encantide 92 55 De Anchilope ibid. 56 De Aegilope, seu Fistula lachrymali 93 57 De Ophthalmia, seu Lippitudine 94 58 De Taraxi seu Conturbatione 99
59 De Chemosi 100 60 De Pterygio, seu Ungue oculorum ibid. 61 De Panno 101 62 De Hyposphagmate, seu Suggillatione 102 63 De Corneae tunicae Crassitie 103 64 De Nebula 104 65 De Albugine 105 66 De Phlyctaenis, seu pustulis corneae 106 67 De Corneae Ruptura 107 68 De Corneae & Adnatae ulceribus 108 69 De Nomis, seu Ulceribus depascentibus ibid. 70 De Canero Corneae 109 71 De Vulneribus Corneae, & Oculorum dolore 110 72 De Hypopyo, seu pure sub cornea 111 73 De Proposi, seu Uveae procidentiâ 112 74 De Mydriasi, seu pupillae dilatatione 113 75 De Myosi, seu pupillae Angustiâ 115 76 De Hypochyma, seu Suffusione 116 77 De Humoris aquei vitiis 119 78 De Humoris Crystallini vitiis ibid. 79 De Humoris vitrei vitiis 121 80 De Oculi Atrophia, & Microphthalmo 122 81 De Oculi procidentia, & Exophthalmo 123 82 De Hippo 124 83 De Paralysi, seu Oculi resolutione 125 84 De Strabismo 126 85 De Amblyopia, seu Hebetudine 127 86 De Epiphora, seu Lachrymis involuntariis 128 87 De Paremptosi, seu Guttâ serenâ 129 88 De Symptosi, seu Concidentia, & Aporrexi 131 89 De Aurium Inflammatione 132 90 De Ʋlceribus aurium, & Vermibus 134 91 De Otalgia, seu Aurium dolore 135 92 De Cophosi, seu Surditate, & Gravi auditu 136
93 De Sonitu, seu Tinnitu aurium 138 94 De Narium Ulcere, & Ozana 139 95 De Sarcomate, & Polypo 140 96 De Narium foetore 141 97 De Hamorhagia narium 142 98 De Olfactus laesione 146 99 De Coryza, seu Gravedine. 147 100 De Sterutatione 148 101 De Linguae Tumore 149 102 De Batracho, seu Ranula sub Lingua 152 103 De Linguae nigritie cum Scabritie, & Scissuris 153 104 De Linguae Balbutie, Paralysi, & Aphoniâ 154 105 De Laesione Gustatus 155 106 De Labiorum Fissuris 156 107 De Labiorum Ulceribus 157 108 De Labiorum tremore, & Perversione 158 109 De Oris Apertione, & Hiatu 159 110 De Oris Oscitatione 160 111 De Oris Tortura, seu distortione. 161 112 De Ptyalismo, seu Crebra Sputatione 162 113 De Oris Ulceribus, & Aphthis 163 114 De Oris Foetore 165 115 De Dentium Corrosione 166 116 De Dentium mobilitate 168 117 De Odontalgia, seu Dentium dolore 169 118 De Dentium Stridore, & Stupore 175 119 De Dentium Nigredine 176 120 De Ginoivarum Excrescentia, & Epulide 177 121 De Parulide, seu Gingivarum inflammatione 178 122 De Gingivarum Erosione, & Exulceratione 179 123 De Fluxu Sanguinis ex gingivis 180 124 De Maxilla inferioris immobilitate 183
125 De Maxillae inferioris luxatione ibid. 126 De Uvulae, seu Columellae relaxatione 185 127 De Columellae inflammatione 186 128 De Tonsillarum, seu Amygdalarum inflammatione 188 129 De Malignis tonsillarum Ulceribus 189
ERRATA. PAge 5. linea 11. read causato. p. 32. l. 23. r. depravation. p. 35. l. ult. r. praec uè p. 63. l. 12. r. she. p. 68. l. 20. r. orta p. 70. l. 21. r. Castore. ℈. p. 71. l. 8. r. ℈ i. l. 22. r. he took p. 72. l. 14. r. carui. p. 74. l. 24. r. Coch. ʒ ss. p. 75. l. 6. r. ʒ i. p. 93. l. 6. r. coaguli leporis. ℥ ss. p. 95. l. 16. r. Croci ℈ i. p. 109. l. 26 dele to be. p. 114. l. 4. r. scattering. p. 117. l. 12. r. couching. l. 16. r. couched. p. 122. l. 21, 22, and 23. dele. because therein, &c. p. 132. l. 9. r. . p. 133. l. 26. r. ℥ i ss. p. 142. l. 10. r. extracted, p. 149. l. 12. r. waterish flegm. p. 147. l. 15. r. concitata. p. 148. l. 19. r. promittit. p. 153. l. ult. r. officè, p. 155. l. 9. add fol. origani, salviae, stae∣chadis, rorismar. ana M. ss. p. 159. l. 16. r. quod, p. 162. l. 12. r. ℈ ss. p. ibid. l. 13. r. ℈ i. p. ibid. l. 20. add Lavendula, p. 167. l. 7. r. ℈ i. p. 171. l. 27. r. mororum, p. 172. l. 25. r. held, p. 174 l. 13. r. ʒ i. ss. p. 178. l. add Nutmeg. p. 185. l. 24. r. ℈ ii. p. 186. l. 6. r. upon a student who had. p. ibid. l. 14. r. not off. Plurima forsan occurrent, sed levinscula mibi raptim perlegenti praeterlapsa, quae Lector Candidus facilè condonabit, intel∣ligens facillimè emendabit.
: SEU Tractatus de Morborum Capitis Essentiis & Prognosticis: Plusquam trecentis selectis Observationibus adornatus. CAPUT I. De Intemperie Cerebri. INtemperies Cerebri, The Distemper of the Brain, is a swerving of the same from its natural and pristine temper, brought upon it, by reason of some external and internal causes. A distemper of the brain with or without mat∣ter, if recent, is a great deal easier to be cured then that which hath continued long, and is al∣most turned into a habit. Intemperies per consen∣sum (quando materia aliunde ad caput transmittitur) ceteris paribus, quàm quae per essentiam, faciliùs cu∣ratur. A distemper of the brain proceeding from bloud, either overthin, or too thick, is not to be made light of, but the cure must forthwith be set
upon and attempted, lest an inflammation follow thereupon. Intemperies cum pituita saepe in stupo∣rem, paralysin, apoplexiam, & soporosos affectus de∣generat. Dominus Sindal, 24 annorum, Intemperie cerebri ab humore melancholico praecipuè procedente labora∣bat. He was of a very timorous and fearful na∣ture, and often complained of a siccity in his no∣strils; at last desiring my advice, I thus set upon the cure. ℞ foliorum senae ʒ i ss. seminis foeniculi contusi ℈ ii. decoctionis communis, ℥ ix. fiat Infusio: in qua dissolve syrupi rosarum sol. ℥ i. Misce, pro duabus do∣sibus, half over night about ten of the clock, and the other half in the morning warm; It wrought very well, and did him much good: the decoction was thus prepar'd. Recipe polypodii quercini contusi ℥ ii. prunorum Da∣mascenorum ℥ vi. foliorū senae ℥ i. ss. Glycyrrhizae ra∣sae & contusae ℥ i. ss. passularum enucleatarum ℥ i ss. seminis foeniculi contusi ʒ ii. Herbarum, Endiviae, Cichoreae, violarum, ana M i. aquae fontanae lb. iii. ss. vel lb iv. Fiat decoctio secundùm artem. I com∣manded him to refrain from wine, strong beer, and salt things; So oft as he was thirsty, he drank of this Julep. Recipe aquae fumariae lb i. syrupi è succo fumariae ℥ iii. Misce. By this he felt much refreshment; I cau∣sed him to boil in his broth Endive, Cichorie, Let∣tice, Bugloss and Borage, and every night to eat
a rosted Pippin. om the Cephalick vein was let out six ounces of blood, which was very adust: and then next I prescrib'd him this potion. Recipe Rhabarbari electi ʒ i. senae ʒ ii. foeniculi dulc. ℈ ii. fiat omnium infusio▪ in sero lactis ℥ v. factá{que} forti expressione, adde syrupi epithymi, fumariae, ana ℥ i. misce. It gave four stools: I also caused the temples of his head to be bathed, and the inside of his nostrils to be touched every night with a little of this Unguent. Recipe Unguenti populeonis cum opio, ʒ i. olei nucis moschatae gut. iii. misce. This procured sleep, by which his brain was humected. And lastly, I di∣rected him to the use of Cassia new drawn with syrup of Roses, one ounce to be taken at a time in posset ale, wherein sweet Fennel seeds have been boyled. With these Remedies at length (through Gods blessing) he was freed from his distemper, and is at this present in very good health. Domina Sugget, aetatis 37 annorum, intemperie ce∣rebri, ab humore pituitoso praecipuè, correptae est. She was very much indisposed to stir, having a heavi∣ness in her head, with a propensity to sleep; she also complained of a pain about the hinder part of her head, which afflicted her commonly from the third hour of the night until the ninth; her face was sometimes red, and as it were painted, but for the most part extraordinary pale; I being sent for, prescribed this Clyster. ℞ Glycyrrhizae contusae ℥ i. passularū ℥ i. ss. cardui
benedicti, staechadis, florum chamomillae, meliloti, be∣tonicae, rorismarini, ana, m ss. Bulliant in sufficien∣ti quantitate aquae, ad lb i. collaturae adde hierae pi∣crae ʒ ii. mellis ℥ i. salis communis ʒ i. Fiat enema. It was often repeated, with good success. ℞ Centaurii, Cardui benedicti, ana, m ss. sarsa∣parillae incisae & contusae ʒ iii. these were boiled in posset ale, and a draught thereof given her hot, at her entrance into bed; it procured sweat very plentifully by the space of one hour: The next day she sate up with less heaviness; after the se∣cond sweating she told me she was well, being able to walk, and to indure the light; neverthe∣less, to strengthen the animal faculty, I gave her this Electuary following. ℞ Conservae rorismarini, betonicae, ana ℥ i. ss. La∣pidis Bezoardici orientalis, gr. iii. Specierum dian∣thos, ℈. ss. Syrupi de stoechade, q. s. Fiat Electuarium: Of this she took the quantity of a small bean eve∣ning and morning and so she was perfectly cured. Domina Collard, 70. annorum, mihi vicina, post diuturni iteritiae laboris curam, intemperie cerebri à vapore per consensum correpta est; & sic curata fuit. ℞ syrupi rosarum sol ℥ ss. Decocti communis ℥ ix. spiritus cinnamomi, gut. ii. misce. she took half last at night, which gave three stools next morning; after which, (the weakness and lightness in her head being removed) she was able to sit up; and soon after the taking of the rest she went abroad,
and the distemper returned no more. I remem∣ber, she had also this mixture, which did her much good. ℞ Rob de ribes ℥ ss. confectionis Alkermes, Syru∣pi infusionis florum caryophillorum, ana, ʒ ii. aquae cinnamomi, aquae menthae, ana, gut. v. folium auri, misce; she took a little often off a knifes point, and that with very much delight. Juvenis quidam melancholico temperamento af∣fectus, Intemperie cerebri à seroso humore, à nimia vini potatione causata, procedente, laborabat; For the removing of which I prescribed the follow∣ing Pils. ℞ pilularum Cochiarum, Extracti Radii, ana ℈ i. Resinae jalapae gr. vii. misce. & f. pil. nu∣mero 7. he took three over night, about ten of the clock, and the rest in the morning about 7. they wrought so effectually, that being again repeated, he became perfectly well. CAP. II. De Meatuum Cerebri angustia. MEatuum Cerebri angustia, the straightness of the passages of the brain then happen∣eth, when the said passages are either obstructed through humors or vapours; or else compressed by reason of some tumor or violence offered to the skul. Angustia à vapore proveniens levior est, & fa∣cilior
curátu, quàm ea quae ab humore procedit. If it proceeds à sanguine è vasis effuso, an inflammati∣on follows from its putrefaction and rottenness: Si verò sanguis adhuc in vasis suis haereat, facilè curatur. If flegm obstruct the passages of the brain, it must be timely and speedily evacuated, lest it unavoidably causeth the Palsie. Angustia à tumore vel defectu suturarum incurabilis est. Robert Lemon of Armingale, being about four and fourty years old, is taken twice in a year with a dolorous heaviness in his head, and his sight is so weak that he is not able to endure the light, but is brought to me by his wife who leads him all the way with a double cloth before his eyes; yet immediatly after bleeding all the symptoms vanish, so that he plucks away his muffler, walks home without any help, and continues very well and sound until the next spring. I have been for∣ced to let him blood at least twelve or thirteen times, and every time I draw away about 14 or 15 ounces; yet so great is the plethory, that he misseth it not: surely in his extremity the passa∣ges of the brain are very much compressed, by rea∣son the vessels thereof are so much distended with blood. We read in Paraeus of two men that were cu∣red of a most dangerous Angustia caused by the malign fume and venemous vapour of charcoal, First, aqua vitae mingled with Triacle was often injected into their mouths. Secondly, Vomitories
of Oxymel in a great quantity was given them. Thirdly, sternutation was excited, by blowing into the nostrils the powder of Euphorbium, thereby to stir up the expulsive faculty of the brain, to the expulsion of that which oppressed it. Fourth∣ly, the chymical oyl of Mints was rubbed on their palates and cheeks. Fifthly, sharp Clysters were administred, and frictions of their arms, legs, and back-bones were not omitted. Thus at length (through Gods blessing) they came to themselves again; after which Cordials were administred un∣to them; not only to generate new spirits, but also to attenuate and purifie those that were cloudy and gross in their bodies. CAP. III. De commotione Cerebri. COmmotio cerebri, The commotion of the Brain, is a removal of the same from its natural place, by reason of some external and vio∣lent causes. Every commotion of the brain is very danger∣ous; because for the most part (beside an Apo∣plexie and Palsie, which doth sometimes happen) there followeth a Fever arising from the matter that becometh putrid and rotten, also a delirium, a sphacelus of the brain, and consequently death. Si materia, in cerebri commotione, è capite ejiciatur,
& ad nervos detrudatur, caecitas ab obstructione ner∣vorum opticorum & convulsiones, sequuntur. A little lad, ten yeers of age, in St. Saviours Parish, receiving a blow on his head, fell into a sudden consternation, insomuch that he became, as it were, altogether dumb, speechless, and likewise altogether deprived of motion, only he opened his eyes; Mr. Crop, an experienced Chirurgion (now deceased) and I, being sent for about two of the clock in the afternoon, we finde him more∣over infested and afflicted with vomiting, by con∣sent of the stomack, and in an acute fever; all which considered, we concluded he would die in a very short time, and so accordingly it fell out; for about the third day following he departed this life. Etiam memini Dominum Hamond, Scarnicensem, violentissima commotione cerebri mortuum fuisse. For falling from an high place, the passages of his brain were so smitten, and the Vessels so broken, that there happened not only an Aphony or loss of Speech, with deprivation of motion, but also a pouring forth of blood by his mouth, ears and nostrils, and that in great abundance. I being sent for some few hours before he died, could feel no motion of any Pulse, save only about the heart, I felt a small pulsation. Half an hour before he died he was taken with Singultus. Plura de Cerebri commotione vide in Paraeo, lib. 10. cap. 9. where many Histories are inserted touching this most perillous disease, of which ve∣ry few escape or recover.
CAP. IV. De inflammatione cerebri. INflammatio cerebri, The inflammation of the brain is a swelling thereof, proceeding from blood poured forth out of the vessels into the void spaces of that part, and there putrifying. As for the Prognosis, or foreknowledge of things, in this disease, if the Urine be white and extraor∣dinary clear, it signifies death, quia bilis ad caput rapitur: If there be a trembling of the tongue, or if they scrape together straws, there is but small hope of cure. If there appear to fall from the nostrils a black drop, sincere or bright, it is desperate, in regard it proceeds from a very vehe∣ment adustion. If a convulsion follow upon an in∣flammation of the brain, death is to be expected. There is very little or no hope of cure, if a deli∣rium being at the first present, there follow there∣upon gnashing and grating together of the teeth: Nam convulsio musculorum in temporibus & maxil∣lis significatur. Ea{que} etiam ad suppurationem tendens lethalis est: quia pus intra cranium & membranam evacuari non potest. Si sudor multus calidus à capi∣te, vel die critico copiosus sanguis naribus effluit, aliqua spes curationis est. My brothers servant, twenty two years old, I remember, was taken with an inflammation of the
brain; he had a perpetual Delirium which began sensibly or gradually, by little and little, a red kind of colour and deformity of his face and eyes, caused through the heat which dried up the membranes; he had a swift and quick pulse, an acute and con∣tinual fever, which from third day to third day was exasperated; also salt and sharp tears did sometimes distill from his eyes. I gave notice to his friends of the danger he was in, and the impos∣sibility of his recovery, for so great an inflammati∣on in so moist and tender a part as the brain, doth quickly produce a sphacelus or mortification; yet his master being very importunate with me to do something for him, I opened a vein, prescribed cooling clysters, gave him gentle Apozems, &c. but all in vain, for on the seventh day he died. CAP. V. De cerebri Sphacelo. SPhacelus cerebri. The mortification of the brain is a suppuration or corruption of the very substance thereof, quae gangraena, vel sydera∣tio etiam nominatur. This disease is most dangerous, and commonly deadly, even in three days space, as Hippocrates sheweth in his 51. Aphorism, Sect. 7. saying, They die within three days whose brain begins to cor∣rupt; but if they live longer, they recover their
health. Galen teacheth that we are not here to understand, by a sphacel, a compleat corruption of the brain, because that is uncurable; but such as is at hand by reason of the great inflammation. In those which recover (quod rarissimè contingit) nulla est praeteritorum memoria: they can neither re∣member their disease, nor any thing concerning it. Dominus Henricus House, è Parochia Sanctae Margaritae, Sphacelo cerebri correptus est. He tossed to and fro, and could not remain in the same place; yet if any man asked him how he did, he would answer, he was well; he never took any meat or drink, but utterly refused all that his keeper en∣deavoured to give him; he would often bring his hand to his head, on which he would sometimes lay hold, being desirous to tear and pluck his hair; but as the disease increased, his body grew faint, which abated his violence: Sometimes he would suddenly rise up and roar out, and then presently lie down; on the third day he died, but a little before, I remember there came forth a filthy green matter out of his nostrils. CAP. VI. De Hydrocephalo. , seu Hydrops capitis, is a swelling of the head, arising from the collection of some serous or wheyish humour in some one part
or other of the members that constitute the head. Affectus curationem recipit, si aqua extra crani∣um contineatur. Si verò intra (inter cranium, piam & duram matrem) collecta sit, plerum{que} incurabilis est Hydrocephalus. If an Apoplexie or a Lethar∣gy seize upon the party, death suddenly follows. Petrus Forestus, in one of his Observations, tells us, how he cured a little Infant newly born with a mighty swelling in his head, by an Ointment which consisted ex pulvere origani, chamo∣millae, absinthii, ana ʒ iii. pulv. myrtil. ros. rub. meliloti, ana, ʒ ii. olei chamomil. q. s. ad incor∣porationem, cum pauco butyro, & cera adjecta fiebat unguentum. After unction there was cast on a pow∣der framed ex myrtillis, ros. cinnamomo, caryophillis, & chamomilla; quibus infans curatus est. Many children have been cured by the use of that Liniment set down in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. pag. 276. Yea Amatus Lusitanus writes, that an Infant taken with the Hydrocephalus was cured therewith in three dayes. Moreover, in the forementioned page of my Enchiridion, there is another excellent Liniment, consisting of oyl of Chamomil and Brimstone in powder; which Placentinus did use with most hap∣py success. Also Forestus declares, how a little in∣fant was cured therewith: The childes head was besmeared twice in a day with the Liniment warm, by the space of a moneth; which being done, warm and dry wool was applied to his head
untill he had recovered his health. Fabricius saith, that in the greatest swelling of the head, the water of quick lime (abjectâ calce) is a most effectual remedy, if a spunge be dipped therein, and applied warm; ac hoc solo remedio se hydrocephalum curasse scribit. CAP. VII. De Capitis Contusione. COntusio capitis, The contusion of the head, is a smiting or knocking together of the same (the external part thereof mean while, for the most part, appearing sound and entire) by some∣thing that is weighty, hard, obtuse and blunt. Si musculi temporales contundantur, delirium, pa∣ralysis, convulsio, & mors inde sequitur. Petrus Pachequus, a famous Physitian, declares that a nephew of his, receiving a bruise on his head, became sad, and complained a little of head∣ach. A moneth after he fell into a Fever, cum somnolentia & capitis dolore: Ever and anon he rose up and cryed out; on the seventh day of his fever, he voided corrupt matter from his nose, and presently died. A maid, twenty years of age, received a blow with a stone a little above her forehead, and went for all that about her usual business. Howbeit three days after she complained of a dull pain in her
head, she became sleepy, and was a little feverish. Upon the seventeenth day certain convulsive mo∣tions appear; upon the twenty an Imposthume breaking, and greenish quittour coming out of her nostrils, she died. A certain Gentleman fell backwards; he re∣mained some days intent upon his business, after∣ward he began to rave, to desire fire, saying that he was cold; to be sleepy. He had a bad night, ever and anon putting his hand unto his head. Up∣on the eleventh day the imposthume broke, and voiding purulent quittour out of his mouth, he suddenly died. A certain young man, twenty eight years old, fell down headlong upon the left Bregma, upon a marble pavement, whence he received a contu∣sed wound, without any fracture of the skull, and being he was of a sanguine temperature; by occa∣sion of this wound a Fever took him on the se∣venth day, with a continual delirium, and a Phleg∣monous tumor, which possessed his whole head and neck; yet was he cured by losing twenty se∣ven saucers of blood, drawn away at five times, within the space of four days.
CAP. VIII. De Vulnere cutis, & pericranii. VUlnus cutis, The wound of the skin (the Cranium mean while remaining unhurt) is, to wit, when the skin alone, the fleshy panicle, the muscles, or even also the Pericranium is wounded. A simple wound of the head by it self is not perillous, neither do any die thereof, if rightly handled: Yet it is well said of Hippocrates, that no wound of the head is to be neglected, because of∣tentimes it brings danger, yea sometimes a fe∣ver. A notable example we have in Schenkius, lib. 1. observ. 35. Concerning Charles the King of Spains son, who by reason of the neglecting of a wound in his head, at first not perillous, was after∣ward brought into danger of his life. We have also another example of one who by reason of a wound in his head not well cured, had the bone of his skull corrupted and vitiated; from whence there arose diuturnus & longus capitis dolor. If the wound shall be simple and supersiciary, it may then be cured alter this manner: First, the hair must be shaven away, and a plaister applied made of the white of an Egg, Bole-armoniack and Aloes. Then, the day following, you must apply Emplastrum de janua, or else de Gratia Dei, untill the wound be perfectly healed. But if it be deeper, and penetrate even to the
Pericranium, then it will be good to apply, at the second dressing, a digestive made of Venice Tur∣pentine, the yelks of Eggs, oil of Roses, and a lit∣tle Saffron; and that must be used so long, until the wound come to maturation; for then you must add Honey of Roses, and Barly flour, to the digestive. The rest of the cure is easily performed, Linimentum Arcei is indeed as a sufficient Balm for new wounds, especially in the head, so that a better can scarce be found out by art It doth all the intentions of healing a wound in the head meerly of it self, the Flux being stayed; for it di∣gesteth, mundifieth, incarneth, and cicatrizeth. CAP. IX. De Cranii vulnere seu fractura. VUlnus seu fractura cranii, The wound or fracture of the skull, is a continual solution, caused by some external violence and force; and yet such as reacheth not, neither attaineth unto, the membranes of the brain. If the wound be in the Sutures, or very nigh un∣to the brain, or happen with a Contusion, or at the full of the moon, it is hard to cure. Si etiam in tem∣poribus accidit; curatu est difficile▪ quia musculi tem∣porales arteriis, venis & nervis abundant. The cure is doubtful, if presently upon the blow, the Pati∣ents strength and spirits fail him. But if the
wound become withered, dry, purulent and black, there is little or no hope of cure. In vulneribus enim magnis, si tumores non superveniant, malum; authore Hippocrate. It is no less dangerous, if af∣ter the seventh day a Fever come to appear: Quia putredinis in cerebro est indicium. Periculosum eti∣am est, si quis in capite post veneris usum vulnere∣tur. It is not without danger, if the head be prone and subject to distillations, and the tumors called Erysipelas's, aut lue venereâ infectum, aut omnino cacochymicum sit, aut hecticâ febre, vel tabe, vel alio morbo consumptum. You must note, that nothing is so hurtful in fractures and wounds of the head, as venery; not only at that time the disease is present, but also long after the cure thereof: For great plenty of Spirits are contained in a small quantity of seed, and the greatest part thereof flows from the brain; hence therefore all the faculties, but chiefly the animal, are resolved; whence we have divers times observed death to ensue in small wounds of the Head, yea, when they have been agglutinated and united. Quò ad vulneris, seu fracturae Cranii, curatio∣nem, vide Paraeum, lib. 10. c. 15, & 16. Hitherto hath been spoken of the Diseases of the Brain; in the next, we shall treat of the Symptomes thereof, and first of those of the ex∣ternal Senses.
CAP. X. De Cephalalgia, seu Dolore Capitis. , The Cephalalgy, is a new, and painful grief, of the whole head, arising ei∣ther from a thick and cold matter, compressing the sensible parts; or else from a thin and hot hu∣mour or vapour, which toucheth the Membranes. An external head-ach is always less dangerous, and easier cured then an internal: Dolore capitis in febre acuta cum urina tenui & alba, periculosus. In a great head-ach it is evil, to have the extream parts cold; for by the vehemency of the pain there is a strong attraction of heat to the part af∣fected, which will cause Inflammation: Dolor capitis post febres acutas perseverans, ostendit na∣turae imbecillitatem in expellendo materiam mor∣bosam: hinc itaque alia insequitur aegritudo, sicuti phrenesis, vel lethargus, vel apoplexia, vel paralysis, vel mania, vel surditas, vel caecitas, secundùm quod materia vel calida, vel frigida, vel simplex, vel composita fuerit: & secundùm quod ad hanc, vel illam partem, inclinabit. A strong pain of the head suddenly seizing, without evacuation fol∣lowing, or mitigation of the disease, is deadly; destructionem enim facultatis animalis significat, which no more feeleth that object which caused the grief. Dolor capitis, qui à principio non fuit, certum est indicium futurae erisis per vomitum, aut
sanguinis è naribus fluxum. To women with child, sleepie, and heavy head-aches are evill: But if pus, water, or blood flow forth by the mouth, ears, or nostrils, the danger is then past. They that recover of a disease in the inferiour parts, and have after a vehement head-ach, (if a manifest evacuation went not before) will have an Impostume in their brain; materiae enim mor∣bisicae translationem ad cerebrum significat. A certain Gentleman tarrying too long in the Sun, was taken with extream head-ach; for the removal of which, there was taken seven ounces of blood from his forehead vein, whereby his head-ach was presently abated, and soon after went quite away. I read of a Spanish Prince, who being grievous∣ly tormented with head-ach, was four times let blood in the arm; but the pain still continuing as strong as before, it was taken away within the space of an hour, by opening the Saphena in his right ancle. A certain Baronet, aged about 44. was alto∣gether freed of a most cruel pain in his head, chiefly, by the applying of Leeches to the He∣morrhoid Veins. Vide mean Scholam Physicam, Rec. 40.
CAP. XI. De Cephalaea. , is a long, continued, contumacious pain, infesting and annoying with most grievous Paroxysms the whole Brain and Head, or at least the greatest part, but especially the Membranes. Cephalea antiqua▪ omnium capitis dolorum est pessima, nam (ut scribit Gordonius) epilepsiam fu∣turam denotat. Also a head-ach continually vex∣ing, and depriving the Patient of rest, is not with∣out danger; for it is the fore-runner of madness, & maximè, si vomitus accedat aeruginosus. A certain Gentlewoman, of a melancholy constitution, being troubled many years toge∣ther with a most grievous head-ach, which held her in a manner perpetually; after a multitude of Medicaments used in vain, was thus helped. ℞ Conservae fol. absynthii, capill. ven. & rad. enulae camp. ana ℥ i. salis absynth. & tamari∣sci, ana ʒ i. cum syrupo capill. ven. fiat opiata. Of which she took two drachms every day, two hours before meat. Every fifth day she took two scruples of Pillulae Catholicae, with which remedies continued ten daies together her grie∣vous and long-lasting pain was cured. A certain Virgin, being tormented with a grie∣vous head-ach, for many moneths together, and
having tryed many remedies in vain; a certain Chirurgion shaved all the hair from her head, and covered the same with a Vesicatory, where∣upon bladders being raised, a great quantity of wheyish blood flowed out, and so she was cured. A certain woman, fifty years old, was trou∣bled with a most cruel and stubborn pain in her head, caused by the malignant quality of Quick∣silver (after the use of Mercurial Unguents and Pills) assailing and molesting the brain: for the removing of which, a piece of gold was wrap∣ped up, and thrust into each nostril, and kept there some hours; also another piece of gold was held five hours in her mouth, they were taken out white, and being put on hot coals, the quicksilver vapoured away; this remedy being often repeated, that most cruel pain of her head was wholly taken away. Another woman, wanting her courses, was afflicted for four months together with a most grievous head-ach; at last, her temporal artery being opened, and five ounces of blood drawn away, she was quite freed from her pain. CAP. XII. De Hemicrania. , Is a painful distemper of one half part of the head onely, which ariseth from those parts that are situated beneath it.
He micrania multo durans tempore, & quae in∣curabilis facta est, ad malas oculorum aegritudines, visus scilicet debilitatem, & caecitatem, perducere solet. A certain Gentleman was troubled with a pain possessing the one half of his head, for many years together; and after many Medicines tryed in vain, he was cured by the smoke of Amber, which he received in at his mouth and nostrils, for half an hour together, when the pain was upon him. Paraeus and Formius highly commend the opening of an artery in the temples, for the cu∣ring of Hemicrania; especially if the cause pro∣ceed from hot, thin, and vaporous blood, which will yield to no Medicines. Zacutus Lusitanus propounds four Remedies, confirmed by experience: Namely, An Issue in the back of the hand, between the thumb and fore finger; opening of the vein in the forehead, and the corner of the eye, and Horse-leeches to the temples. He is not content to apply two or three, as ordinarily is done, but ten or twelve, round about the temples; whence comes a great attraction of blood, which may draw forth the whole matter of the disease. Among the proper Medicines for the Head∣ach, from what cause soever it ariseth, Vervain is the chief; whose water distilled, you may both apply externally, and give of it internally, to the quantity of four ounces, with three drops of the Spirit of Salt.
Green Vervain onely hung about the neck hath cured two Patients, when many other Me∣dicines failed, as Forestus reports. Sweating decoctions are very good in Hemi∣crania; and famous Authors declare that many have been cured thereby. Plura de Hemicrania, & Cephaloea, Vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. c. 16. CAP. XIII. De Monoplegia, seu Clavo. , seu Clavus, is a sharp pain pos∣sessing a small part of the head, most com∣monly the right or left eye-brow, as if a nail were driven in there, caused by a fierce and sub∣til matter shut up with some wind. Forestus, in one of his Observations, declares, how his wife Eva Teylingia, being taken, in the year 1572. in the moneth of January, with the pain of the head called Clavus, and much afflict∣ed with the Cough; after she had used a de∣coction of Hysop, Betony, Maidenhair, Rai∣sins, and such like; was helped with the follow∣ing Pills, which she took after midnight. ℞ Pilul. mastichinarum ℈. i. ss. pilul. cochi∣ar. aurear. de agarico, ana, ℈ ss. cum syr. è stoe∣chade: Fiant pilulae quinque. They gave six stools, and so she was delivered from her pain.
Formius, in his 31 Observation, saith, That the opening of the temporal artery does wonderful∣ly help in Monoplegia, or Clavus, and that he hath safely performed it in many. Concerning the manner of doing of it, vide Riverii observationes, cent. 2. observ. 56. & 89. & Simeonis Jacoz observ. 12. sicut & Paraei, lib. 17. cap. 6. Anno Domini 1642. Memini unum ex cogna∣tis meis circiter annos quinquagenos natum correp∣tum fuisse vehementissimo dolore paulo supra dex∣trum supercilium, quitandem in phrenitidem ipsum ingessit; but escaping that danger, fifteen years after he was taken with the like pain, and fear∣ing the like event, I first prescribed a dose of Cephalick Pills, which wrought very well; and then caused him to chase and bathe the part af∣fected with that incomparable Unguent set down in my Tractate, De tumoribus praeter natu∣ram, sect. 1. cap. 5. p. 21. After twice or thrice using it, the pain was quite taken away, and re∣turned no more. And so much touching the Symptomes of the External senses: Next fol∣low those of the Common sense. CAP. XIV. De Vigiliis nimiis. VIgiliae praeter naturam, Watchings preter∣natural, are; The exercise and wearying
of the common sense, and the external (likewise) beyond a due and fit measure; arising from the continual uninterrupted influx of the Spirits in∣to the Organs. Vigiliae si longo tempore durant, aegrum in pessi∣mas aegritudines deducunt, in maniam, melan∣choliam, phrenitidem, febrem acutam, hecti∣cam, & interdum ad cachexiam: Et si perse∣veraverint, aeger tandem moritur. We finde by experience that much watching hurts the tem∣perature of the brain, weakens the senses, wastes the spirits, breeds crudities, heaviness of the head, falling away of the flesh, and leanness over all the body. In senio, teste Avicenna, & ex pituita salsa, nitrosa, vix curationem recipit. If watchings have their original from internal causes, the cure is difficult. Si à vigiliis nimiis tussis proveniat, malum. Siccitatem enim organis respirationis communicari significat. If watchings bring a con∣vulsion, or delirium, on the Patient, it is evill. Nam vehementem exiccationem, & facultatis ani∣malis debilitatem significant. Corpora vigiliis as∣sueta minus laeduntur. The cure consists, First, in removing of the causes that occasion and produce those watch∣ings. Secondly, In procuring sleep, either by cooling Cephalicks outwardly applied, or in∣wardly given, or else by Narcoticks. I knew a Gentlewoman, that could seldome or never rest well, unless she took over-night, a∣bout
bed-time, the quantity of one drachm and half, or two drachms of Diascordium: Some∣times she would take a spoonful of the syrup of Poppies; and if she rested not in an hour or two, she would then take another, and so a third, if need did require. Many I have cured of this affect, onely with that Apozem and Unguent described in the First Chapter, De intemperie cerebri, in Domini Sindal curatione. CAP. XV. De Comate somnolento, seu Cataphora. COma somnolentum, The somnolent or slee∣py Coma, is a deep and profound kinde of drowsiness, arising from hence, to wit, that the sensus communis, or common sense, is become so dull, sluggish, and stupid, that it permits not the Animal spirits to be diffused unto the external senses, neither doth it know, or is able to judge of those Objects that it receiveth from them. Periculosius coma est quod in continuis febribus accidit. It is desperate, si à morbis calidis & siccis oriatur; for then, by this means, of necessity there must needs be an extraordinary cooling in the brain; if the malady grow to be so sad and grievous, ut sensus motus, & respiratio ipsa tolla∣tur, lethale est. The cure is doubtful if it arise
from some malignant cause, or follow upon the extream imbecillity of the Patients strength; Minùs periculosum est, quod ob consensum sit, sive ventriculi, sive intestinorum, sive uteri; modò caus∣sa tolli possit. Dominus Moss, Paswicensis, 67. annos natus, co∣mate somnolento laborabat. He slept with his low∣er jaw-bone somewhat hanging down; and when I spake aloud to him, he would open his eyes, and answer to a question, but immediatly fall asleep again. I foretold the danger he was in, because it followed upon a malignant and quoti∣dian Fever; yet his friends being very desirous I should do something for him, I first prescribed this Clyster. ℞ Glycyrrhizae rasae & contusae, ℥ i. passula∣rum enucleatarum, ℥ i. ss. Rutae, salviae, ana P. ss. centaurei minor. cardui benedicti, ana M. ss. Flor. betonicae, rorismarini, chamomillae, ana p. i. Seminis foeniculi contusi, ʒ iii. ex quibus fiat decoctum, de quo sumatur, lb i. cui addatur butyri quantit. ovi, mellis, ℥ i. ss. salis com. ʒ ii. F. enema. Next, I sent him these Pills; ℞ pilularum cochiarum, ʒ ss. Extracti Rudii, ℈ ss. Misce, & fiant pil. nu∣mero quinque. They were dissolved in Posset-Ale, wherein Rosemary and Betony had been boiled; yet he scarce tasted their bitterness, so great was the stupidity of the sensus communis; he had four or five stools, after which he came to himself, and within a few days (the former Cly∣ster
being often repeated) he grew perfectly well, and came to my house. And so much of the Symptomes of the Common sense, next follow those of the Imagination. CAP. XVI. De Vertigine. VErtigo, is a false imagination, in which all objects, and the head it self, seem to turn round, ab inordinato & circulari motu spiritus ani∣malis in parte anteriore cerebri exorta. Or, it is a sudden darkning of the eyes and sight, by a va∣porous and hot spirit, which ascendeth to the head by the sleepy arteries, and fills the brain, disturbing the humors and spirits which are there contained, and tossing them unequally, as if one ran round, or had drunk too much wine. A new Vertigo, that comes but seldome, and proceeds only à causis externis, levior est, ac curatu facilior. If in it the head and whole body seem to wheel & to turn round, the cure is very doubtful; and if the sick man falls to the ground, it foretels an Epilepsie, or Apoplexy; especially if the Vertigo hath continued long, and comes very often. In an old man its most dangerous, because his brain is colder and weaker, and flegm doth more abound: A vertigo proceeding from hot humors is sooner dissolved, than that which comes of cold, quia humores calidi faciliùs discutiuntur.
A certain maid, 24 yeers of age, troubled with the Vertigo or giddiness, I thus helped; ℞ Calo∣melanos, gr. xv Scammonii praeparati, gr. viii. Con∣servae rosarum rubrarum, ʒ i. Misce. Towards night it gave her ten or twelve stools; after which she became perfectly well. Another I helped with this, ℞ Mercurii dulcis, gr. xvi. resinae jalapae, gr. viii. consrosarum rubr. ʒ i. misce. It gave nine stools, and so she was cured. A certain young man was a long time troubled with the dark Vertigo, called in Greek , or , in which the eyes are both darkned, as it were, with smoke, or a cloud, and desiring my advice, I thus set upon the cure: ℞ Extracti Rudii, ʒ ss. Calomelanos, gr. vii. Resinae bene∣dictae, gr. iii. misce. & f. pil. numero quin{que} they wrought very well, and did him much good. Next, I commanded him to sneez every third morning, with a little of this pouder: ℞ pulve∣ris sternutatorii (descripti in meo Enchiridio medico, p. 6.) ℈ ss. pulveris castorei, gr. iii. Misce. Every night, for 7 nights together, he drank a draught of Posset-Ale, wherein Holy Thistle, and sweet Fennel seeds were boiled; after which, the Vertigo was quite taken away, and returned no more. Memini me eisdem remediis Dominum Sugget ex periculosa vertigine curasse; only he was twice purged with Pills. Ancilla Dominae Laurence vertigine & tumore su∣pra faciem laborabat; for the removing of which I
prescribed this following Apophlegmatism. Take a quantity of white Wine Vinegar, a quantity of Mustard-seed, and as much Pellitory of Spain; bruise them, and tie them up into little Bags a∣bout the bigness of a Walnut, then put them in∣to the Wine Vinegar, and let them boil a little; then take out one of the Bags, and hold it be∣tween your teeth; when that is cold, take ano∣ther, so continue half an hour: Thus do every day for four or five days together: This drew an incredible quantity of Rheume, and filth from her head; after which, I gave her a dose of Ce∣phalick Pills, which wrought very well; and so she was perfectly cured. Dominus Robertus Hamond gravissimae verti∣gini obnoxius erat; from which he could never be free, until he used this following Electuary. ℞ Absynthii ℥ i. artemisiae, ʒ vi. sacchari al∣bi, ℥ iv. ss. Fiat conserva, deinde adde pulveris stoechados, ʒ ii. conservae florum rorismarini, ℥ ss. cum syrupo de stoechade, fiat Electuarium, Dosis, ʒ ii. singulis noctibus. Vertiginem per consensum ventriculi per vo∣mitum ordinariè sublevo, & eam quae calida in∣temperie accidit, cum infusione senae & foeniculi dulcis, in decoctione communi, removeo. Domina Brogdel, annos circiter 40. nata verti∣gine simplice correpta est, quae à Graecis  no∣minatur, in which the sight remains unhurt: At last, desiring my help, I prescribed these follow∣ing
Pills: ℞ Extracti Rudii, ℈ i. pillularum co∣chiarum ʒ ss. misce & f. pil. num. vi. they gave seven stools, and so she was perfectly cured. Some have been holpen with the dung of a Peacock (one drachm thereof by weight) mace∣rated in wine, strained, and so given: Many I have cured of a dark vertigo, only by opening a vein, especially the Cephalick; which usually appears very full, when the cause ariseth from blood. Quidam Nobilis periculosâ vertigine laborans hoc Clystere (in mea Schola Physica, Rec. 209. de∣scripto) curatus est. Next follows the Symptoms of the Imagination, and the Ratiocination or ra∣tional faculty. CAP. XVII. De Memoriae Laesione. MEmoriae laesio, The hurting of the memo∣ry, is a diminution, or utter abolition of the same, arising from causes that hurt the dry∣ness of the brain, conjoyned with a moderate heat, (very necessary as to the memory) and so by means rendring the Animal spirits either tor∣pid, that is, over-dull and sluggish; or else (which is as bad) inordinately moveable. oblivio quae aetatis ratione accidit, incarabilis est. If the hurting of the memory come on a sudden, and proceed from coldness and moi∣sture,
it is an imminent sign either of the Apo∣plexie, Lethargy, Epilepsie, or Palsie; for it de∣notes much plenty of flegm contained in the head. Oblivio à caliditate & siccitate contracta difficilior curatu est, quàm ea quae à frigidite & humiditate contrahitur. The Anacardine confection is exceedingly commended by all for the strengthening of the memory, weakned by coldness and moisture, the dose is, ʒ ss vel. ℈. ii. in conserva de staechade: For the same purpose, this mixture following hath been often used with most happy success. ℞ Conservae betonicae, rorismarini, ana ℥ i. cons. rosarum rubr. ℥ i. ss. Nucis muschatae, dianthos, Macis, ana ℈ i. Cinnamomi, ʒ i. syrupi betonicae ℥ i. Mix them, and take the quantity of a small Walnut at a time. Plura de hoc affectu vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 9. & etiam in meâ Scholâ Phy∣sicâ, Rec. 87. CAP. XVIII. De Delirio. DElirium, A Deliry or dotage, is a depriva∣tion of the Phantasie, and the ratiocinati∣on, or rational faculty, arising from the bringing and presenting of an absurd and inconvenient Phantasm: Or more briefly, according to Paraeus,
it is a perturbation of the phantasie, and function of the minde, not long induring. An intermitting delirium hath nothing of dan∣ger, if it be light and gentle, if the Fever which causeth it decrease, and there follow an evacua∣tion of blood by the nostrils, vel menstruae pur∣gationes vel haemorrhoides prorumpant. Deliries foreshew certain destruction, if they appear in the beginning of a Fever, or happen without signs of concoction; si delirans non videat, si ocu∣li lucem subterfugiant si aeger obmutescat, & vox fiat clangosa. A certain Gentlewoman, aged about twenty four, being not well purged after birth, fell sud∣denly into a most dangerous Delirium, no other disease preceding: By intervals she was afflicted with an acute Fever, so that a Phrensie was fear∣ed; yet through Gods blessing, a happy success was wrought by the following prescriptions. ℞ Herbarum malvae, violarum, betarum, lactu∣cae, boraginis, ana, M. ii. Hordei mundi, ℥ i. Sem cucurbitae, cucumeris, ana, ℥ ss. fiat decoctio in suf∣ficienti quantitate aquae; ad ℥ xi. colaturae, adde olei violati, ℥ iii. cassiae noviter extractae, diaca∣tholiconis, ana, ℥ i. salis communis, ʒ i. Fiat Ene∣ma. ℞ Diacatholiconis, electuariilenitiv. ana. ʒ iii. syrupi artemisiae ℥ i. rhabarbari, castorei, ana, ℈ ss. aquae betonicae, ℥ iii. misce. She had five stools, it was again repeated. The 22 of May there was
taken away six ounces of blood very black, and aqueous: For watching and restlesness, there was given this following Syrup. ℞ Syrupi de papa∣vere, ℥ i. ss. Syrupi violarum, ℥ ss. Aquae scabio∣sae, ℥ iii. Aquae rosarum, ℥ ss. Olei vitrioli, gut. ii. Misce. To the head was applied a Hen new cut thorow; and to the soles of her feet, Radishes beaten with Salt, and besprinkled with rose Vi∣negar, which was renewed every third or fourth hour, for revulsion: Also Cupping-glasses were applied to the shoulders: On the 25. in the morn∣ing, she received this Potion; ℞ Cassiae noviter extractae, cum aqua betonicae, ℥ i. Syrupi rosarum sol. ℥ ss. aquarum buglossae, boraginis, violarum, ana, ℥ i. misce. Thus in seven days she was hap∣pily cured. Domina Moss, Paswicensis, annos nata circiter 60. levi delirio correpta est, &c. sic juvata fuit. ℞ syrupi rosarum, ℥ i. Decoctionis communis, ℥ ix. Misce. She took half over night, about ten of the clock, and the other half in the morning, warm; it wrought very well, and did her much good: Next, I prescribed this following Cata∣plasm, to be applyed to the soles of her feet: Take Fetherfew, and Sention, of each a like quan∣tity, two penny-worth of Saffron, and six or seven cloves of Garlick; stamp them together with a little gray salt, and apply them. Thus without any other means, through Gods blessing, she was perfectly cured in a very short time.
Memini me, aetatis anno duodecimo, levi quodam delirio affectum fuisse; for the removing of which, there was applied to my feet a Pigeon cut open alive; It drew down the vapors, and cured me. Joannes Cussion, è Parochia Sanctae Mariae, pe∣riculoso delirio correptus est. He having had two fits; to prevent the coming of the third, I opened a vein, on the 27 day of April, which was his best day, (for he was vexed with a Ter∣tian) and drew away about 14 ounces of blood: Next, I prepared this potion: ℞ Diacatholico∣nis, ʒ x. Syrupi rosarum sol. ℥ ss. decocti commu∣nis, q. s. fiat potio. He took three spoonfulls that night about ten of the clock, and the rest next morning, about six hours before the fit: It gave him twelve stools, and so prevented the delirium, which returned no more. In all bleedings which are made in time of a delirium, you must observe this, that the Ori∣fice be not very large, for then it will quickly heal, and you must must binde it up carefully, lest the Patient being unruly, cause it to bleed again; as also it is very good for the sudden cure of it, to lay a Plaister of Aloes, white of an Egg, and the hair of a Hare. If the feet of the Sick man be put into fair water, when it is a little warmed, for three or four hours, it frees him from his delirium, and makes him sleep.
CAP. XIX. De Phrenitide. , A Phrensie, is a perpetual, and con∣tinual deliry, or dotage, arising from the in∣flammation of the membranes, or films of the brain, and afflicting the Patient with a continued Fever. Et dicitur , id est, à mente, nam alienatio mentis est. As to the Prognostick; A Phrensie is for the most part deadly: The greatest hope of reco∣very is, when there is dotage with laughter, a de∣crease of Symptoms, and continuance of strength; as also when after the height of the Phrensie there happeneth some beneficial eva∣cuation. If a drop of black blood flow from the nostrils, death is to be expected. Phrenitis si ver∣tatur in Lethargum, aut Coma, malum est. A great chilness or cold in the beginning of the Phrensie, foreshew the destruction of the sick: Also an Aphony, the Hicket, trembling of the hand, white excrements, & similia, supra, capite de cerebri inflammatione, enumerata, Phrenitidem lethalem significant. Haec enim omnia bilis trans∣lationem à toto corpore in partem affectam deno∣tant. Mr. Denis Pomaret, a skilful Chirurgion of Monpelier, declares, that a certain Husbandman, by reason of a burning Fever, fell into a Phren∣sie,
and continually raving without sleep, he cry∣ed out that he was damned, and that he desired to die: Now he cured him by this Police; he consented, and told him that he would kill him, and divers Horse-leeches being fastned upon his forehead, and blood running down from the wounds which they had made; he shewed him his Razor, wherewith he told him that he would cut his throat; and ever and anon with the haft of the said Razor he scraped his throat very hard; and in the mean while the Razor is all bloodied with the blood that came from his forehead. Whereupon, shewing him the bloody Razor, he told him that he was killed, and pre∣sently he covered his face with, linen clothes, and shut the windows, so that no light could be seen in the Chamber. He supposing himself to be dead, never stirs, and a while after is taken with a deep sleep, and so is freed from his Phrensie. The wise of John Norton, a Husbandman in Porland, by reason of a sharp Fever, sell into a Phrensie; I being sent for, presently opened a vein, and drew away 11 or 12 ounces of blood▪ then I prescribed a cooling Glyster; after which I sent her this Pill. ℞ Laudani opiat. gr. iii. ss. l¦pidis Bezoardici orientalis, gr. i. f. pil. It was gi¦ven in one drachm of the conserve of red Ro¦ses; how they prevailed with her to take it, I know not; but having swallowed it, she fell into
a sound sleep, and so was quite freed from her Phrensie: But I remember also, the Cataplasm described in the Chapter de Delirio, in curatione Dominae Moss Paswicensis, was applied to the soles of her feet, which might help very much. Great Housleek bruised with womans milk, and laid to the forehead, appeaseth a Phrensie, and provokes sleep. But as soon as the Patient begins to sleep, you must take it away, lest he fall into a Coma, or sleeping disease. It is good to wash the feet with an actually hot decoction, made of cold things; for it will soften those parts by its hot moisture, and make the humors descend, and its potential coldness will be communicated to all the body, and to the brain especially, by the Nerves, whereby sleep will be procured: It is thus made; Take of Vio∣lets, Mallows, Willow-leaves, Vine-leaves, Wa∣ter-Lillies, of each two handfuls: the flowers of water-Lillies, and Roses, of each one handful: Poppie heads ten; make a decoction for the use aforesaid. Zacutus Lusitanus tells us, that he cured a most desperate Phrensie, by applying a Cup∣ping glass to the forepart of the head with scari∣fication; but Mercatus adviseth, that this be not used in Phrenzies, that come from other Fevers, but onely in that which beginneth of it self. I have sometimes given four or five grains of Laudanum, in a cooling Clyster, with most hap∣py success.
Vesicatories applied to the shoulders and arms, are very much commended. Plura de Phrenitide vide, in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 4. CAP. XX. De Melancholia. , Melancholy, is a dotage arising from a Melancholy phantasm, with the which whosoever is affected and detained there∣under, becomes wholly, and only, addicted to thoughtfulness, being, as it were, altogether in∣gulphed therein, without either fury or Fever, but yet with pensiveness, and fearfulness; Vel si brevius definire velis; Melancholia est delirium si∣ne febre, cum metu & tristitia. Melancholy, which doth seize upon the essence of the brain, and continues long, making the ef∣fect, as it were, natural, is altogether incurable: A Melancholy humor which comes by adustion, and inclineth to black choler, contemns the force of Medicines, if weak, and opposeth the strong∣est; whence a Melancholly humor is said to be the scourge and disgrace of Physicians. Melan∣cholia quae fit vitio totius corporis, difficillimè cu∣ratur. Si haereditaria, nulla spes curationis est. A new sprung melancholy coming of immediate causes, is easily cured; sometimes by diet alone,
together with the humectation of the whole bo∣die, and sometimes of the head in particular. Haemorrhoides, aut varices, supervenientes Melan∣cholicis, curationem interdum afferunt, si humores ad illas partes inferiores criticè à natura detru∣dantur. If the distemper be with some kinde of laughter, & corpus victu augmentum sumat, faci∣lè curatur. Sometimes it is cured by scabs, itch, or other diseases breaking forth of the skin. A certain Gentlewoman, seventeen yeers of age, miserably afflicted with Melancholy, was thus helped: After the opening of a vein in the lest arm, and Leeches applied to the He∣morrhoids, she was purged with an Hellebora∣ted apple, in quo pomo una drachma corticum el∣lebri nigri tosta erat. Afterward the Hellebor was cast away, and the apple given. Then were the principal parts strengthened with the follow∣ing Electuary. ℞ Conservae rosarum vitriolat. boraginis, bu∣glossae, ana, ℥ i. condit. corticum citrinorum, conservae caryophillorum, ana, ℥ ss. Confectionis de hyacin∣tho, ℈ ii. specierum de gem. laetific. ana, ℈ ii. confe∣ctionis Alkerm. ʒ i. spec. diamarg. frigidi, ʒ i. ss. cum syrupo pomorum fiat Electuarium: The dose was one drachm before meat. For her watching, there was given at bed time a spoonful of Dia∣cedium; This caused rest, and in it she sweat. In Chicken broth there was Tartar often used, by reason of its great force in contemperating
melancholy, and atra bilis. And thus, by the blessing of God, she was delivered from her di∣stemper. Great variety of doting ariseth from the vari∣ous disposition of the Melancholick humor: Hence it is, that some think themselves▪ to be Kings, Princes, Prophets; Others that they are made of Glass, or Potters Clay; or that they are Barly Corns, ready to be devoured by the Hens: Some think they are melting Wax, and dare not approach the fire: Others, that they are Dogs, Cats, Wolves, Cuckows, Nightingals, or Cocks, whose voices they imitate: Others fancy them∣selves dead, and will neither eat nor drink: O∣thers dare not piss, lest they should drown the world by a second deluge Some think they have lost their heads, or some other member; or that they carry the world upon their fingers end; or that they have sparrows in their heads, or ser∣pents, frogs, mice, and other creatures in their bellies. Galen reports, in his third Book, de lec. affect. cap. 7. That he hath often cured a melancholy in the beginning, with only Baths of sweet water. This Clyster following I have sometimes used with good success. ℞ Epithymi, Thymi, florum Staechados, viola∣rum, foliorum Malvae, Mercurialis, ana, m. i. Bul∣liant in sufficienti quantitate aquae, ad lib. 1. cola∣turae adde Cassiae noviter extractae, ℥ i. ss. Olei vi∣olati,
℥ iii. Sacchari rubri, ℥ i. ss. Salis commu∣nis, ʒ i. vitellum unius ovi; misce, & fiat Clyster. For all Diseases of Melancholy, those Reme∣dies will suffice, which are propounded in the cure of Hypochondriack Melancholy. Plura de Melancholia vide, in meo Enchiridio medico, lib. 1. cap. 10. CAP. XXI. De Mania, seu Insania. , seu Insania, Madness, is a continual motion of the minde, with an unwonted boldness, or fierceness (yet without a Fever) ari∣sing from a fiery heat of the Spirits. Et dicitur vel à morbo Graeco , id est, vaticinor; & sic maniaci, vaticinatores appellari possunt: vel à , id est, à luna; unde lunatici nuncupantur. Young men, and those of a middle age, are most subject unto madness: Gravissimus est af∣fectus, & non solùm per menses, sed per annos ali∣quando, & usque ad mortem perseverat, praesertim si haereditaria sit. The Bloody Flux, Diarrhoea, Dropsie, Tertian-ague, or Quartan, happening to a mad-man, cures him. If the Courses and Hemorrhoids flow forth, it is a good sign; as also if there be a plentiful flux of blood by the no∣strils. Mania quae cum risu est faciliùs curatur, quàm quae cum studio ac furore: If the Symptoms be
gentle, and the distemper turn into a kinde of si∣lent desipience, there is good hope of cure. In the year 1649. Robert Harman, of Bere∣street, was taken with madness; his fits were so strong, that I was oftentimes forced to binde him in his bed, which he shook with great violence: He was tall, black, and very fierce to behold, especially in the Paroxysm: He often roared out, making such a hideous noise, that the by-stand∣ers and neighbours were greatly afraid: One night, whilst he lay bound in his fit, the candle (as I was informed by those that were about him) burnt blew by the space of half an hour, and there was heard so strange a deen that the keepers did tremble with fear, not being able to stir from their places. All these things consider∣ed, I earnestly besought the Lord that he would please to give the cure into my hands, and to bless such means as I used for his recovery; and that if he were possessed with any unclean spirit, he would lease to rebuke him, and cast him out: Being then but a fresh-water'd souldier; First, I opened a vein, and drew away 14 ounces of blood; next, I gave him this potion, which wrought ve∣ry well. ℞ Diacatholiconis, ℥ i. Pulveris san∣cti, ℈ ii. Syrupi ros. sol. ℥ ss. decocti communis, q. s. Misce & fiat potio. Every night, and in every Pa∣roxysm, he was fumed with this Pouder, which did not only procure rest, but it did also miti∣gate the force and violence of the fit; even to ad∣miration,
℞ Sulphuris, Bombardic. pulv. Hyperi∣ci, Artemisiae, verbenae, radicis Poeoniae, ana, ℥ i. ss. Fiat pulvis, carbonibus injiciendus. I also gave him this Vomit, which proved very successful. ℞ Infusionis stibii, ʒ xv. Syrupi paupaverini, dram; i. misce. By this the symptomes were very much abated, and therefore it was often repeated, a lit∣tle before the fit. I commanded those about him, that they should keep him from strong Beer, Wine, hot Waters, and Flesh; and to boil in his Broth; Lactuca, Endivia, Cichorea, Borrago, & Portulaca. His drink was very small, some∣times mixed with water; and when he was very faint by reason of the Physicks operation, I com∣manded they should give him a little water-pap, or panada without any Spice, and sometimes a rosted Apple, cum paucis guttis aquae cinnamomi. Every night I caused the temples of his head to be bathed, and the inside of his nostrils to be touched with a little of this Unguent. ℞ Un∣guenti populeonis cum opio, ʒ ii. Olei nucis moscha∣tae, gut. iiii. misce. Thus at last (after the taking away 64 ounces of blood, in the space of two months, or ten weeks) he was perfectly cu∣red. There was a certain young man mad, and for his cure the most effectual Remedies were put in practice, so far as to come to the use of An∣tinomy, the Trepan, and the opening of the Ar∣teries of his temples: And when all did no good,
Formius, an experienced Chirurgion, advised that he should be gelded; which being done, all sym∣ptomes were abated, and his fury quite ceased; yet so as that he continued in a melancholy do∣tage, his madness being changed into melan∣choly. It is reported, that Melampus the son of A∣mythaon the Physician, cured the daughter of Praetus King of Greece with Hellebor'd wine, when by madness they supposed themselves to be Cowes. Brassavola tells a storie, how he cured one Me∣latasta, a mad man, that was thought to be possessed, in the Duke of Ferrara's Court, with one purge of black Hellebor; his excre∣ments were like Inke; yet I would have none venture to give it in substance. Paracelsus is the greatest admirer of this plant, and especially in the extract; he calls it Theriacam, terrestre Balsamum, another Treacle, a terrestrial Balm, instar omnium, all in all, the sole and last remedy to cure this Malady: The Dose is ℈ ss. with one ounce of the syrup of Violets. Dominus Theophilus Barnard, Norvicensis, annos natus circiter 25. gravissima mania à plethora procedente laborans, Phlebotomiâ, purgatione, eme∣ticaque infusione praecipuè juvatus est, quam sic prae∣paro. ℞ Antimonii contusi, ʒ iii. Cinnamomi ele∣cti, ℈ i. Vini albi odoriferi, lb i. Fiat infusio:
Dosis, quam ordinariè cepit, erat ℥ ii. This following fomentation is of wonderful vertue; ℞ Herbarum cephalicarum cum floribus, q. s. decoquantur in aqua fontana. Deinde, ℞ bac∣carum lauri, & rad. hellebori nigri veri, ana, q. s. Beat them grosly, and sew them into a long bag, and then let it boil in the forementioned decocti∣on. Afterwards, for nine days together, Take two pints of the decoction, and foment the head being shaved with double cloaths, for the space of an hour; after apply the bag to the Coronal Suture, binding it about with linnen clothes; let the Patient lie down and rest, if he can: Then will he purge by all the Emunctories of the brain, and also somewhat by stool; so will the filth sticking to his skul, and brain; be wonderfully dissolved, which few other Medicines can per∣form: This following is held for a secret: ℞ Fol. Melissae, m. i. incidantur minutim, & infundantur in spiritus vini ℥ iv. deinde adde margarit. praep. ʒ ss. misc. dos. est cochlear. ii. CAP. XXII. De Rabie, seu Hydrophobia. RAbies, seu Hydrophobia, Raging madness, is a deliry (or doting) produced from some cer∣tain peculiar poison bred in any living creature, and communicated unto a man, with a strong and
vehement abhorring of all things that are liquid, but more especially water. We cannot so easily shun the danger we are incident to by mad Dogs, as that of other Beasts, by reason he is a domestick creature, and housed under the same roof with us. The virulency that resides in his foam or slaver is hot and dry, ma∣lign, venenate and contagious, so that it doth not only hurt, when as it is taken in by a bite, but even applied to the skin, unless it be forth∣with washed away with salt water or urine; now malign symptomes happen sooner or later, as in some, about the fortieth day, in others about six moneths, and in others a year after: If the wound or hurt reacheth not unto any nerve, vein, or ar∣tery, and if it be not very deep, there may be some good hope of cure. Such as fall into a fear of the water, never recover, especially if sigh∣ing or sobbing follow thereupon. Yet Avicen thinks their cause is not desperate, if as yet they can know their face in a glass; for hence you may gather, that all the animal faculties are not yet overthrown, but that they stand in need of strong Purgations. It is a deadly sign, to tum∣ble themselves on the ground, to have an hoarse voice, for that is an argument that the Weazon is become rough, by reason of too excessive driness. Finally, the principal parts being pos∣sessed, there is no recovery, or life to be hoped for.
A certain Lawyer being by chance lightly bit in the lip, by a little dog wherewith he was de∣lighted, not knowing that he was mad, and neg∣lecting the wound by reason of the smalness thereof, after some four months space, he died mad, having in vain assayed all manner of Me∣dicines. There be some who apply to the wound an Onion beaten with the leaves of Rue, & common Salt. Others presently eat Garlick with bread, and then drink after a draught of good Wine; indeed this is highly applauded, for Garlick by its spiritous heat doth mightily defend the noble parts from poison. Many are the Remedies prescribed by Au∣thors to be applied to the wound; but they are all exceeded by Treacle dissolved in aqua vitae, or strong Wine, and rubbed hard upon the part, (so that the blood may follow) laying upon the wound when you have wiped it, clothes dipped in the same Medicine; then presently apply Gar∣lick or Onions beaten with common Salt and Turpentine: By this only remedy Paraeus freed one of the daughters of Madamoiselle de Gron from the symptomes of madness, and healed the wound, when as a mad Dog had bit her grievously in the calf of the right leg. The use of Antimony is exceedingly com∣mended by Paraeus, for the cure of such as fear the water, but yet are able to know themselves
in a glass: Assuredly such, and so great danger, is never overcome without danger; so that it is a part of extream madness to hope to vanquish the cruel malignity of this poison, already ad∣mitted into the bowels, by gentle purging Me∣dicines. Aetius tells, that there was a certain Philoso∣pher, who taken with this disease, and a fear of water, when as he descended with a great courage unto the Bath, and in the water beholding the shape of the dog that bit him, he made a stand; but ashamed thereof, he forthwith cried out, Quid cani cum balneo? what hath a dog to do with a Bath? which words being uttered, he threw him∣self forcibly into the Bath, and fearlesly drank of the water thereof, and so was freed from his dis∣ease, together with his erroneous opinion. CAP. XXIII. De Lupina Insania. seu Lupina insania, Wolf-madness, is a disease, in which men run barking and howling about graves and fields in the night, ly∣ing hid for the most part all day, and will not be perswaded but that they are Wolves, or some such beasts. Donatus ab Altomari saith, they have usually hollow eyes, scabbed legs and thighs, very dry
and pale, and that he saw two of them in his time. Wierus tells a storie of such a one at Padua, 1541. that would not believe to the contrary, but that he was a Wolf: He hath another in∣stance of a Spaniard, who thought himself a Bear▪ Forestus confirms as much by many examples; one amongst the rest, of which he was an eye-wit∣ness, at Alcamer in Holland; a poor Husbandman, that still hunted about graves, and kept in Church∣yards, of a pale, black, ugly, and fearful look. This malady, faith Avicenna, troubleth men most in February, and is now adayes frequent in Bohemia and Hungary, according to Heurnius. A certain young man, in this City, tall, slen∣der, and black of a wild and strange look, was taken with this kinde of malady, for he run bark∣ing and howling about the room where he was, and would make to get out; so that its most like, if he had got abroad, he would have haunted some solitary place: I remember I opened a vein, and drew forth a very large quantity of blood, black like Soot; after which, I gave him this Potion. ℞ Epithymi, ʒ ii. corticum rad. Hellebori ni∣gri praeparati, ℈ i. foliorum senae, ʒ iii. seminis foeniculi contusi, ʒ ii. decoctionis communis, ℥ viii. Fiat infusio: In qua dissolve Diacatholiconis, ʒ vi. syr. rosarum sol. ℥ i. misce. He took four spoon∣fulls last at night, and all the rest in the morning,
warm. It wrought very well, and abated the symptomes: He was often fumed with some of the Pouder set down in the Chapter, De Mania in Roberti Harman curatione; Sorrel, Lettice, Bugloss, and Borage were boiled in his broth: And lastly I gave him this Vomit: ℞ Infusio∣nis stibii, ʒ xiii. syrupi violarum, ʒ ii. This wrought upward and downward; after which, he became perfectly well. CAP. XXIV. De Chorea Lasciva. LAsciva chorea, The Lascivious dance, is a malady, arising from a malign humor, with the which whosoever are taken, can do nothing but dance till they be dead, or cured. This disease hath been very common in Ger∣many, as appears by those relations of Sckenkius, and Paracelsus, in his Book of madness, who brags how many several persons he hath cured of it. 'Tis strange to hear how long they will dance, and in what manner, over stools, forms, tables, even great bellied women sometimes (and yet never hurt their children) will dance so long that they can stir neither hand nor foot, but seem to be quite dead. Felix Platerus, de mentis alienatio∣ne, cap. 3. reports of a woman in Basil, whom he saw, that danced a whole month together.
Such as are taken with this malady cannot a∣bide or indure one in red clothes: But Musick above all things they love, and therefore the Ma∣gistrates in Germany will hire Musicians to play to them, and some lusty, sturdy companions, to dance with them. Next follow the Symptoms of more of the Internal senses. CAP. XXV. De Comate Vigili. COma vigil, The waking Coma, is a propen∣sion to sleep, and yet withal an utter dis∣ability thereunto, arising from Narcotick (or dull, sleepy) vapors, that induce and cause a drowsie, and sleepy disposition, and withal trou∣ble and disquiet the minde. Galen placeth this malady as a mean between a Phrensie and a Lethargie, & Typhomaniam ap∣pellat. Curatio est difficilis, quia facilè in lethargum, vel phrenitidem mutatur. Si humor tenuis, in co∣mate vigili, è naribus distillet, morbum periculosum indicat. It is no less dangerous, if the parties speech be hindered, and while they breathe a mur∣muring noise be heard in the throat; as also if the sick cannot swallow his drink without much ado. Moreover, its accounted desperate, if it come of vapors which arise from the malignant humors
of a pestilent Fever. Deliria vehementiora in Comate vigili plerumque convulsionem praesagi∣unt. Filia Domini Dallisni, annos nata circiter 13. Comate vigili correpta fuit: She lay with her eyes shut, and did seem to sleep, but could not; when I touched her pulse, she presently opened her eyes, tossed and tumbled about the bed, with an inordinate motion of her hands and thighs; this she did for a short time, and then fell asleep a∣gain. After I had left her, concluding it in vain to enterprize the cure, by reason of some deadly symptomes apparent, they sent for one Master Boles; who being wholly ignorant of this kinde of malady, said it was the Scurvey in the joynts, and so deluded the Parents for some time, untill I signified the contrary: She was was taken on the 24th of March, and died on the 29th. CAP. XXVI. De Lethargo. , A Lethargy, is an insatiable pro∣pension to sleep, together with a gentle Fever, forgetfulness, and a dull slothfulness, or laziness; arising from a pituitous kinde of blood, putrifying in the hinder nooks and cells of the Brain: Vel si breviùs definire velis, Lethargus est symptoma in actione animali principe laesa. Et di∣citur
, id est, oblivione, & , id est, inertia: ac si diceres, inertem oblivionem. Men sick of a Lethargy die within seven days, if they live longer, they recover. If an impostu∣mation happen behinde the ears in a Lethargy, vel materia putrefacta per aures, aut nares, evacua∣tur, and the symptoms abate, it is a sign of health; as also, if the animal actions be not great∣ly empaired. Cold sweat about the head, white and thin Urines, and trembling, are sure messen∣gers of great danger. In old men, Lethargies are for the most part deadly. Zacutus Lusitanus being called to visit a sick man, who was for the space of thirty days taken with drousiness, and irresistible sleep, with a small Fever, after many things used in vain, he ap∣plied an actual Cautery, with much benefit; for with a red hot iron he scorched the crown of his head, till it was hard and crustie, as also the hin∣der part, and almost every where about his head; by which means he awaked, and the places bur∣ned beginning to matter, he arose and came to himself. The fume or smoke of white Amber is excel∣lent for the awaking of men in sleepy Diseases; as also the oil of it often applied to the temples and nostrils. Plura de Lethargo vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 6. And so much of the Sym∣ptomes of the Internal Senses; next follow those of the Animal motion.
CAP. XXVII. De Lassitudine. LAssitudo, A Lassitude or Litherness, is a certain unaptness, and unfitness (together with a certain kinde of pain) unto the exercise of the animal motion, which ought to have been performed freely, and in a natural way. , Lassitudines spontaneae morbos praesagiunt. For they shew hu∣mors to abound in the body, either in quality or quantity, or in both hurtful. Post febrem lassitu∣do totius corporis perseverans recidivam significa. The Cure is accomplished by the removing of the causes, and likewise by the cherishing and comforting of the Muscles. Some are cured by venesection, or blood-letting. Others, by fricti∣ons, or rubbings with sweet Oyle, and by baths of sweet Water. Lassitudes, for the most part, arise from a Scorbutick humour, and then the cure is more easie. CAP. XXVIII. De Inquietudine. INquietudo, Restlesness, or unquietness, is a frequent various shaking to and fro of the whole body, and the several members thereof,
arising from matter molesting and disquieting those parts that are capable of suffering. Periculosa est inquietudo, quae ortum habet à malignitate & acrimoniâ materiae febrem excitan∣tis; or from an internal Inflammation, or weak∣ness of the natural strength and powers of the body, which is soon overcome by the malady. A certain Gentleman, being exceeding restless, in a malignant Fever, having a loosness, was cu∣red by the following prescription: ℞ Laudani opi∣at, gr. iii. Lapidis bezoardici orientalis, gr. ii. f pil. I gave it him in a little conserve of red Roses. It procured rest, stayed the Flux, and removed the saintness; insomuch that within a very few days he was able to come to my house: An infinite company of people were cured, the last year, of Malignant distempers, chiefly by the use of that Pill. Vide etiam meam scholam, Physicam, Med. 120, 153, 245, 154, & 155. CAP. XXIX. De Rigore. RIgor, The unnatural vehement stiffness, is a vibration, shaking, and quavering of the Muscles of the whole body, conjoyned with re∣frigeration, and a certain pain, arising from some∣thing that doth molest, by a sudden, and unlookt
for vellication, and pulling of the sensible parts, throughout the whole circumference of the body, and likewise by irritating, and stirring up, the ex∣pulsive facultie. The Symptomatical Rigor (if it cease not up∣on the use of an evacuation) is very evil and dan∣gerous; and so likewise if it be attended and ac∣companied with a consumption and wasting of the whole body. It is an evill sign if upon the appearing of a periodical Rigor, the body wax∣eth not hot, Quod naturam & calorem languidum significat: Many are the Prognosticks touching this Malady, ad doctrinam verò de febribus per∣tinent. Juvenis quidam pituitoso, ac melancholico tem∣peramento affectus, Rigore vexatus est; for the re∣moving of which, I prescribed these following Pills. ℞ Extracti Rudii ʒ ss. resinae benedict. gr. v. misce & f. pil. num. 6. He took one last at night about ten of the clock, and the rest in the morn∣ing, about seven: They gave eight stools; after which, the Rigor was very much abated; there∣fore the Pills were again repeated, and so he was perfectly cured. Some have been helped by bathing the back, (à quo Rigor ixcipit plerumque) cum oleo rata∣ceo, laurino, de castoreo, & juniperino. Others have been freed with Treacle and Mithridate, gi∣ven in decoctione centaurii, & car dui benedicti.
Novi juvenem qui Rigore laborans sic curatus fuit; bibitione unius cheophinae vini Hispanensis. CAP. XXX. De Tremore. , seu Tremor, Trembling is a depravati∣on of the voluntary motion, (by reason of the which the member elevated and lift up can∣not be kept in its own proper scituation) arising from the debility and weakness of the faculty of motion. As for the Prognostick: Trembling of it self is not dangerous; but if it be in old people it con∣tinueth with them till they die, ob spirituum & cerebri magnam imbecillitatem. Per accidens ta∣men lethalis esse potest, in as much as it usually goes before a Lethargy, an Apoplexie, Palsie, or Con∣vulsion. For those Remedies that are taken inwardly, these following are chiefly commended; viz. The Essence of Balm, and Staechas of Arabia; among the medicaments that are to be externally ad∣ministred, these are highly approved of, to wit, the oil of the flowers of Trifoyl, or the three-leafed grass; Ol. Vulpinum, or the oil of a Fox, the oil of Castor, and Pepper. Vide etiam infra, ca∣pite de Paralysi.
CAP. XXXI. De Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum. , The Palsie, is a spontaneous and vo∣luntary abolition of motion in the parts, (without any the least hurt of the Reason) ari∣sing from a defect and want of the animal spirits, through some fault and error in the Nerves. There are many kinds of Palsies; for either it is in all the parts of the body below the Head, and then it is called ; or else it pos∣sesseth only one side of the body, and then it is called ; or it possesseth but one part of the bodie, and then it is called a particular Palsie. Paralysis inveterata, videlieet post annum, in∣curabilis est. An Atrophy or want of nourish∣ment in the Paralytick part, with great paleness, takes away all hope of cure; for it doth not on∣ly signifie spiritus animalis defectum, but also a neer extinction of natural heat: A strong Fever coming upon a Palsie is good: materiam enim morbificam absumere potest. If the part affected hath an actual heat in it, there is hope of health; but if it be always actually cold, it is difficult to be cured: If the eye on that side the Palsie is be hurt, exigua spes curationis est: ponuriam enim spirituum in ea corporis parte significat. In aged people the Palsie is exceeding difficult, and hard
to be cured, ob caloris nativi inopiam. Si ex ner∣vi grandioris aut spinalis medullae incisione accidit, nulla spes curationis est, because there is no hope of a coalition, or closing together again of the incision. A trembling coming upon, or after a Palsie, is healthful, for it signifieth that the passa∣ges of the Nerves are somewhat open, by which some of the Animal spirit beginneth to pass, for to move the muscles. Augustine Aldrid, fifty years old, taken with the Palsie, was thus helped: After frictions on both sides, I prescribed the following Pills: ℞ Pillularum cochiarum, ʒ. ss. Extracti Rudii, ℈ i. spir. succini gut. iii. misc & f. pil. num. 6. But because he could not swallow them, they were dissolved in three ounces of Sage-water, and so given, they gave seven stools: ℞ spir. roris∣marini, olei succini, ana, partes aequales, misce; with which his neck was gently annointed: Every morning sneezing was procured by the help of a little of this pouder. ℞ Pulveris sternutatorii (descripti in meo Enchiridio Medico, p. 6.) ℈. ss. Pulveris castorei, gr. iii. misce. He snuffed up a∣bout a grain and half at a time; this did him much good: I also commanded him to wash his hands often in the decoction of Sage: But that which finished the cure was this: ℞ Staechadis, ℥ ii. Liquiritiae, ℥ ii. Herbarum salviae, betonicae, rorismarini, hyssopi, ana, m. i. aquae fontis, quantum sufficit. Fiat decoctio, dosis ℥ vi.
evening and morning; moreover, Sage, Betonie, Rosemary, and Staechas, were put into his vessel of drink which he used at meals; and every other night he took one drachm of Mithridate, in the foresaid decoction: With these Remedies (through Gods blessing) he in a very short time recovered his health. Much after this manner, I remember, I cured one Fitt of Lakenham, a man fourscore yeers old, of a Hemiplegia; and Camplin of a Palsie of the tongue; only the last had, moreover, a Vesi∣catory applied behinde on his neck; & quia pau∣per erat, imperabam ut linguam succo salviae cum si∣napi saepe confricaret. Excellentissima est Decoctio, qua multi à Para∣lysi curati fuerunt, descripta in meâ Scholâ Physicâ, Med. 118. Vide etiam Med. 29. & 124. CAP. XXXII. De Spasmo, seu Convulsione. seu Convulsio, A Spasm, or Convul∣sion, is an involuntary, perpetual, and pain∣ful retraction (or drawing back) of the Muscles towards the place of their original, and first begin∣ning, arising from the abbreviation and short∣ning of the nervous (or sinewy) parts, which is evermore attended and followed with a Rigor or extream stiffness, and a depravation of the fi∣gure,
shape, and symmetry of the foresaid parts. Spasmus , à trahendo dicitur, deducto nomine ab ipso. symptomate. A Convulsion coming of too much bleeding, or purging, especially with Hellebor, is deadly. Lethalis etiam est, si Convulsio post phrenitidem ex∣oritur: Aetius affirmeth, that he never heard of, or saw, any so taken, that recovered. It is better that a Fever follow a Convulsion, than a Con∣vulsion a Fever; febris enim convulsioni superve∣nions illius causam absumit: But a Convulsion coming upon a Fever shews a malignant matter, quae periculum minatur. Convulsio ex vulnere, ce∣rebri praesertim, lethalis est; by reason of a filthy, stinking, and corrupt matter, vellicating, and pul∣ling the nerves: If those parts only are surprized and seized that are remote from the brain, there is good hope of cure. Convulsio à siccitate con∣firmata lethalis est. A certain young man had a Convulsion, so that he tould not bend his back-bone. By the help of this following Medicament, he could present∣ly walk nimbly. ℞ Butyri rancid. & lardi veteris, ana, ℥ iv. Bdellii, ammoniaci, ana, ℥ i. Myrrhae, castorei, ana, ʒ iii. Flor. staechad. anthos, ana, p. i. nucis mos∣chatae & garyophyl. ana, ʒ i. catum parvum ex∣enteratum, excoriatum, & in frusta concisum. Stop the belly of a Goose with these things, sew it up, and rost it on a spit; and the first li∣quor
that drops, cast away, the next save in a dripping-pan, half full of Vinegar, to annoint the cramped, or convulsed back: Remedium est di∣vinum. A certain Gentlewoman grievously afflicted with the contraction of the Leg, was helped by the use of the following Unguent: ℞ Olei Cha∣momelini, lumbricorum, castorei, ana, ℥ i. pingue∣dinis gallinae, anseris. ana, ℥. ss. unguenti dial∣thaeae, ℥ ii. succ. è fol. cochlear. becabung. nastur. aquat. ana, ℥ i. cerae, q. s. Fiat unguentum. This proved excellent, for in three days space he was able to walk with a staff. Another woman, suddenly taken with a Con∣vulsion of the face and eyes, with loss of speech, was helped by this following mixture. ℞ Casto∣rei, ʒ i. succi rutae cochlearium, aquae salviae, ℥ ii. syrupi artemisiae, ℥ i. misce. She was constrained to take it, within the space of few minutes, she both spake, and stood up. A lusty girl, four years old, taken with Con∣vulsion fits, I thus helped: ℞ Castorei contusi, ℈. ss. rhabarbari electi, ʒ. ss. foeniculi dulc. ℈ i. decocti communis, ℥ i. ss. Fiat infusio: In qua dissolve syrupi de rhabarba∣ro, ℥. ss. She took half at night about ten, and the rest in the morning about 7. It gave five or six stools; the night following she had this: ℞ La∣pidis Bezoardici orientalis, gr. ii. aquae cerasorum nigrorum dulcium cochlearium; misce. She slept
very well all night, and the fits returned no more. A Lad, ten years old, taken with a most dread∣ful Epileptick Convulsion, was helped chiefly by the use of these following prescriptions: ℞ Dia∣carthami, ℥ ss. syrupi rosarum sol. ℥ i. aquae beto∣nicae, ℥ ss. misce. This was given him about the evening, because in the morning he had his fits; he was well purged in the night: Afterwards there was given to him Ol. succini, & spirit. vi∣txioli, ana, gut. v. in aqua betonicae: After this his fits were more light, although somewhat more frequent: Lastly, there was given him this Po∣tion: ℞ Aquarum theriac. Bauderon. Cardui be∣nedicti, Scordii, ana, ℥ i. Salis Cardui benedicti ℈ i. Confectionis Alkerm. ʒ i. misce, & fiat potio: By help whereof all Convulsions were taken away. Next follow those symptomes that hurt the Internal senses, the Reason and Motion, together with the External senses. CAP. XXXIII. De Incubo. , seu Incubus, The Night-mare or Hag, is an interception of the motion, e∣specially that of breathing, and the voice, with a false and erroneous dream of some heavy and weighty thing lying upon the breast, and there∣by causing a suffocation (as it were) and choak∣ing
of the party, by means of the impeding and hindring the free penetration; of the spirit (the passages being obstructed and stopt) unto the Nerves. Vel si brevius definire velis, Ephi∣altes est symptoma facultatis animalis, quo thoracis motus impeditur, sensus hebescit, & phantasia de∣pravatur. Et  nuncupatur, quod in∣vadere & premere significat. If this affect chance to be of long continuance, and frequent, it doth threaten an Apoplexie, or Falling sickness, (especially if it happen unto the party while he is half asleep, and half awake) as also madness, saepius melancholiam hypocondria∣cam, vertiginem, paralysim, spasmum, nervorum distentionem aut subitam mortem. If after the Pa∣tient awake, panting of the heart, and cold sweat∣ing do happen, it is an ill sign; as also, if a Con∣vulsion or a Syncope do follow. The cure is doubtful, if after the awakening, the sick person remaineth stupid and blockish: He that useth a slender diet, and accustometh himself to lye on his side, is seldome troubled with the Night-Mare. Theriaca in aqua Poeoniae exhibita contra incu∣cubum commendatur.
CAP. XXXIV. De Catalepsi, seu Catoche. seu Congelatio, A Con∣gelation, is a sudden surprizal of all the senses, the motion, and the minde, with the which those that are seized upon, and invaded, remain and abide stiff, in the very same state and posture in which they they were taken and surprized, with their eyes open and immoveable, Catalepsis sic dicta est , quòd aeger eodem statu permaneat, quo prehenditur. They that are taken with this malady are in great hazard of life; wherefore present remedy must be sought for: If it be a strong Catalepsis, it will hardly or never be cured. Congelatio levis sanatur, & praesertim in puero, & in juvene. In sene vero semper habet difficultatem. Galen mentioneth a story of a school-fellow of his, who when he had wearied himself with long studie, fell into a Catalepsis or Congelation; he lay (saith he) like a log all along, not to be bent, stiffe, and stretched out, and seemed to behold us with his eyes, but spake not a word: And he said, that he heard us what we said at that time, although not evidently and plainly, and told us some things that he remembred, and said, all that stood by him were seen of him, and could remember and declare some of their ge∣stures
at that time, but could not then speak, or move one part of his body. Cardanus reports of eight Mowers, which sup∣ping under an Oak were struck with thunder, so as they kept the same shape of body, the one seeming to eat, the other to lay hold of the pot, another to drink, when they were all dead. Fernelius relates two stories, which are these; one while he being very studious and writing was so suddenly struck with a Congelation, that sit∣ting and holding his pen, with his eyes open, and looking upon his Book, you would have thought he had been hard at study, till he was by calling, and jogging, found to want all sense and motion. Another I saw like a dead man, lying along, with neither seeing, hearing, nor feeling when he was pinched; but he breathed freely, and whatsoever was put into his mouth he presently swallowed; if he were taken out of his bed, he did stand alone, but being thrust he would fall down; and which way soever his arm, hand, or leg was set, there it stood fixed, and firm; you would have taken him for a Ghost, or some rare Sta∣tue. A certain noble woman, taken with a conti∣nual Fever, called Synochus, had in the nineteenth day a Congelation, which was cured by a large flux of blood from her Nose. Plura de Catalepsi, seu Catoche, vide in meo En∣chiridio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 12.
CAP. XXXV. De Epilepsia. , The Epilepsie, is a Cessation of the animal and principal actions, together with a convulsive motion of the whole body, arising from a sharp matter, which by a peculiar and pro∣per power and quality it hath, that is hurtful and prejudicial to the bain, vellicating and pulling the Nerves where they begin, streightning, and as it were binding them fast together, and irrita∣ting them unto expulsion. Vel si brevius defini∣re velis: Epilepsia est convulsio omnium corporis partium non perpetua, cum mentis ac sensuum lae∣sione. It is likewise called the Puerile, or childish disease, the Herculean, the Comitial disease, (or the Falling-sickness) the Lunatick, Divine, Son∣tick, or noysome and hurtful, and lastly, Caducus, or the Falling evil. As to the Prognostick; An Epilepsie is a mala∣dy of long continuance, and very stubborn and deadly in Infants, especially if it grievously afflict them. An Epilepsie à melancholico humore ori∣unda, turns sometimes into madness, when the hu∣mour is sent from the ventricles of the Brain, in∣to the substance thereof. Quo magis aeger ab ore spumat, eo morbus difficilior, & periculosior. If upon the use of Sternutatories the sick party cannot be made to sneez, whilst he is in a most
grievous Paroxysm, its a thousand to one but he dies in that fit. Epilepsia haereditaria incurabilis est; but that which comes from external causes, and evil diet, is curable: as also, that which hap∣peneth by consent of some inferiour part. A strong Epilepsie often killeth the Patient in the Fit, vel in apoplexiam degenerat. Si mulier praeg∣nans morbo Comitiali corriptur, per foetus emissio∣nem liberatur. But the child of such a woman, for the most part, dies of an Epilepsie: A quar∣tan Ague coming upon an Epilepsie, and conti∣nuing long cureth it, by reason the matter of the disease is by degrees consumed by the heat of the Fever, if it be of flegm. A certain Gentlewoman long labouring of a Scorbutick Epilepsie, was thus helped: ℞ Pil∣lularum cochiarum, foetidarum, aelephanginae, a∣na, ℈ i. Agarici Troch. ℈. ss. Castorei, gr. vi. cum syrupo de staechade, q. s. f. pil. num. 7. She took three of them at night at going to bed, and four in the morning: Next, the following sneezing powder was used. ℞ Nucis moschatae, rad. poeo∣niae, ana, ʒ. ss. Hellebori nigri, ℈. ss. pyrethri, pi∣peris albi, ana, ℈. ss. Misce, & fiat pulvis, a small portion of which was blown into the nostrils: Whilst the time of the fits (which commonly lasted ten hours) was expected, there was given every morning, ʒ ii. of this Opiate. ℞ Conservae betonicae, specierum dianthos, ana, ℥ i. conservae cochleariae, ℥ i. ss. Mithridatii antiqui,
theriacae venetae, ana, ʒ i. visci quercini, cornu cer∣vini, sem. paeoniae, cranii humani pulveriz. ana, ℈ iv. misce. It is to be taken of it self, or with Betony water, to which is added, Oil of Vitriol; by these she was fully delivered from her fits for many years. Another Gentlewoman was vexed many years with an hysterical Epilepsie; she tried many re∣medies, prescribed by many Physicians, but all in vain. At last, by the advice of a woman, she took the flesh of a Wolf reduced to pouder, and wore a piece of the said flesh salted always about her; after which, she was perfectly freed from the aforesaid disease. A certain Gentleman, twenty years of age, troubled with the Falling-sickness, by consent from the stomack; as also with a depravation of both sense and motion of the ring and middle fingers of the right hand, was helped chiefly by the following prescriptions: ℞ Pilularum foeti∣darum, ℈ ii. pil. sine quibus ʒ i. castorei, ʒ i. aq. borag. q. s. f. pil. num. 10. These exhibited on the fifth of June, gave five large stools; at the conclusion of its working, the sense and motion of the fingers returned. Next, at bed-ime was given, pil. succin. num. iii. The day following, being the seventh, he had three stools: In the very instant of the fit the following Fume was used: ℞ Mummiae, benzoin. picis nigr. ana, ℈ i. misce cum succo rutae, f. suffit. The eight day the
following was prescribed, ℞ Castorei, assae foetidae, ana, ʒ. ss. rad. poeoniae, subtilis. pulv. ʒ. i. aro∣mat. rosat. ʒ. ii. misce cum syrupo de mentha, f. pil num. 7. He took one of them, although ve∣ry large, when he entered his bed. Every morn∣ing before the use of an Opiat, prepared against Melancholy, this sneezing pouder was used: ℞ Rad. poeoniae, pyrethri, ana, ʒ. ii. Hellebori ni∣gri, ℈. ss. f. pulvis subtilissimus: By these means he was cured in a very short time. Forestus seni Epilepsia laboranti tria corticis Hellebori nigri praeparati grana in una pilularum dosi foelici successu dedit, sicuti observare potes in lib. x. De morbis cerebri, observ. 54. De Epileptico sexagenario. Dominus Crask, Norvicensis, adhuc adolescens gravissima laborabat Epilepsia, sed observatione hujus sequentis methodi à paroxysmo per multos an∣nos fuit immunis. ℞ Corallii rubri, sem. poeoniae maris, excort. ana, ʒ. ss. pulveris cranii humani, ʒ i. misce & fiat pul∣vis. Of this take as much as will lye on a three-penny piece, twice in a week, or oftner, if he be sensible of the least distemper, in a little black Cherry-water. Sometimes he purged gently with one Pill of Cochiae Mesuae, which usually gave him two or three stools; he also wore continu∣ally about him a piece of the hoof of an Elk, which indeed is famous for its specifical vertue against the Falling-sickness. Moreover, he hath
had an Issue on his left arm these many years, which without doubt doth help very much to preserve him from the Epilepsie. Praeterea Excellentissimum invenies remedium contra Epilepsiam, in mea schola Physica, Med. 212. quo multi ab ea curati fuerunt. A Girl, ten yeers of age, of a Phlegmatick constitution, was troubled five or six months with the Falling-sickness, and also a privation of motion and sense in her right arm: Within twen∣ty days she was perfectly cured, chiefly by the use of this following Opiate. ℞ Radic. poeoniae maris, stoechad, costi, ana, ʒ x. Agaraci, ℥ v. pyrethri, sem. anisi, assae foetidae, & aristolochiae rotundae, ana, ʒ ii. ss. succi scyllae, & mellis electi, ana, lb i. ℥ ii. Coquantur simul scyl∣la & mellento igne, usque ad bonam consistentiam, deinde superadditis speciebus, fiat Electuarium: The dose was, two drachms every morning, two hours before meat. Multos curavi infantes ab Epilepsia solo usu hu∣jus armillae, & ecligmatis descripti in meo Enchiri∣dio Medico, lib. 1. cap. 5. p 9. A little child, six months old, afflicted with the Falling sickness by consent, was thus freed; in the fit there was applied, with a spunge, to the nostrils the juyce of Rue mixt with white Wine Vine∣gar; by the use of which it was presently re∣covered; and falling into the fit again, it was removed in the same manner: To the Region
of the heart was applyed the following: ℞ The∣riacae venetae, ʒ ii. radic. poeoniae pulveriz. ʒ. ss. misce. The hair was poudered cum pulvere rad. poeoniae, collectae luna decrescente; and thus the child was delivered from all its fits. A Boy, three years old, had a fit of the Fal∣ling-sickness, from which he was freed with the smoak of Tobacco; which a servant drew out of a Pipe, aad blew into the open mouth of the boy; the boy fell a vomiting, and the fit ceased. Robert Woodwork was exceedingly troubled with the Epilepsie even from his infancy, and be∣ing by chance at a neighbours house, he fell in∣to a fit, and vomited there; a little dog being in the room licked up the vomit, fell mad, and died; and the young man never had a fit since: A thing wondrous strange, it being five or six yeers since this happened. Forestus, libro decimo de cerebri morbis, observ. 60. pag. 392. Excellentissimum contra Epilepsi∣am habet Electuarium, in quo, duas pulveris hirun∣dinis in furno exsiccati drachmas praescribit. Pul∣vis etiam in capite de mania descriptus, contra mor∣bum comitialem maximè potens est. A maid, that had the Falling sickness, was cu∣red by the use of Oxycratum, a draught where∣of she took every morning, and before the fit she drank pure Vinegar: The disease being cu∣red, she was taken with pains of her limbs, which were cured by the use of hot Baths.
CAP. XXXVI. De Caro. , is a deep, and profound sleep, with the hurt of the sense, and motion (the breathing only excepted) and likewise the ima∣gination, arising from the impeded motion of the Animal Spirits. Et dicitur  quòd caput in eo gravetur, pars enim anterior cerebri potissimum in caro afficitur. Ab Arabibus subeth nucupatur. Carus in declinatione febrium continuarum pro∣veniens, si vires sint debiles, lethalis est. It is e∣vil, if it befall the party after some great evacu∣ation, or if in it the breathing be hurt; the cure is exceeding doubtful, Si cum capitis gravitate carus conjungitur; because that a humor not o∣ver gross and thick, penetrating into the sub∣stance of the Nerves, and extending them, im∣mediatly a Convulsion follows. Peter Whitebread, a Baker, I remember, was taken with a most grievous Caros, insomuch that when I prickt the sole of his foot with a Needle, he stirred not in the least, neither did he taste the bitterness of this Potion which I gave him: ℞ Extracti Rudii (quia melancholico tempera∣mento affectus erat) ℈ i. pillularum cochiarum, ʒ i. Resinae benedict. gr. iii. Aquae betonicae, ℥ ii. misce. It gave him nine or ten stools; after which, he
came to himself, and was able to sit up; yet for fear of a Relapse, I prescribed him Clysters, gave him more Pils to take, one at a time, every second or third day: Also Sneezing pouder with Castoreum was not omitted, and sometimes a draught of Mithridate was given him last at night in Posset ale, wherein the flowers of Rose∣mary and Betony had been boiled: Thus at length he was perfectly cured, and is at this day in very good health. A certain man taken with a profound sleep, having a cold and moist brain, abounding with flegm; after Oxymel sciliticum, & syrup. de stoechade, given to prepare the humor, he took the following Pills, with most happy success; ℞ Pilul. cochiar. ℈ ii. ss. Castorei, ℈ ss. cum sy∣rupo de stachade, fiant pillulae: Next. ʒ i. of Treacle was given; after which he awoke, and returned to his own minde. The daughter of a certain Goldsmith, four years old, was taken with this sleepy evil, for the removing of which, there was given her of the juyce of Onions, and ordinary Oyl, of each one spoonful mixed together, wherewith she vomi∣ted, and was presently cured.
CAP. XXXVII. De Apoplexia. . The Apoplexie, is a sudden abo∣lition of all the Animal functions, the breathing alone remaining, (and this likewise now and then exceedingly afflicted) arising from the streightness and shutting up of the passages, (especially about the Basis of the brain) by the which the Animal spirits are derived unto the members; vel si brevius definire velis; Apoplex∣ia est totius corporis sensus & motus privatio. Et , à percutiendo, nomen habet: quòd qui laborant, veluti de coelo percussi videantur. Men in Apoplexies die▪ in seven days, as Hip∣pocrates teacheth, except a Fever take them. Illa autem febris acuta esse debet, and essentially springing from the inflamation of the humors and spirits, or else it will not discuss the matter which causeth the Apoplexie. It must also come in the beginning of the disease, whiles nature is in some strength, otherwise it is deadly, as Hippocrates in Coacis sheweth. Apoplexia urina rubea mortem significat. Apoplexia vel citò interficit, vel in pa∣ralysi, aut memoriae laesione desinit. A faint sweat in an Apoplexie is evl, magnam enim na∣turae oppressionem denotat. Dominus Crask, Norvicensis, annos circiter 20. natus, levi Apoplexia correptus, sequentibus reme∣diis
praecipuè sublevatus fuit. In the Paroxysm I caused a little sneezing pouder, cum pulvere ca∣storei, to be blown into his nostrils; after which was given him two spoonfuls of the infusion of Castoreum, in aqua Epileptica: The fit going off, I prescribed the following Clyster. ℞ Centaurei, salviae, ana, M. ss. Flor, betoni∣cae, rorismarini, ana, p. i. Radic. poeoniae incisae, ℥ i. Staechados, m. ss. coquantur in s. q. seri lactis ce∣revisiati, ad lib. i. colaturae adde mellis, ℥ i. ss. Dia∣phoeniconis, ℥. ss. Butyri quantit. ovi, salis com∣munis, ʒ i. ss. fiat Enema: It wrought very well, and did him much good, and therefore it was of∣ten repeated; his usual drink between meals, and at bed time, was the Decoction described in mea scholâ physicâ, Med. 194. sic administravi, & De∣us curavit. Quidam nobilis levi Apoplexia laborans hoc Clystere, in meâ Scholâ Physicâ, Med. 208. de∣scripto, curatus est. In the next place, follow the Symptoms of the excrements of the Head. CAP. XXXVIII▪ De Catarrho. , A Catarrh, is nothing else but a defluxion or flowing down of some ex∣crementitious humor (generated by reason of the concoction of the Brain its being hurt) from the
head, upon the parts that are situate underneath it, proceeding from a distemper therein; or else from an over-abundant repletion, irritating and stirring up the expulsive faculty. Vel si brevius definire velis: Catarrhus est humoris excrementi∣tii è capite in subjectas partes, praeternaturalis ef∣fluxus. The Prognostick of this affect, is elegantly laid down by Cornelius Celsus in these words: Si ex capite in nares destillat humor, leve est ma∣lum; si in fauces, pejus; si verò in pulmonem, pes∣simum est: For the Lungs are in danger of be∣ing ulcereted, from whence cometh a Consump∣tion. Hippocrates saith, That a Catarrh is very hard to be concocted in those that are old: In such as are young if the Catarrh be more fre∣quent than ordinary, and withal more grievous, the cure is the more difficult; as also if it rush down with a kinde of impetuousness and vio∣lence; for it may cause suffocation, or some o∣ther grievous accident. A Catarrh accompa∣nied with a continual pain of the head, is hardly to be cured. In the year 1510. there happened a famous Catarrh, with difficuly of breathing, which went almost over all the world, and raged over all the Cities and Towns of France, with great heavi∣ness of the head whereupon the French named it Cuculla) with streightness of the heart and lungs, and a Cough, a continual Fever, and sometimes raving.
A certain Gentlewoman, twenty five yeers old, was grievously troubled with a thin, sharp Rheum, which fell down upon her brest, with a dry, and almost continual cough, leanness, and a slow Fever. On the 15. day of May, in the year 1629. she took a purging potion, Ex senna, rha∣barbaro. manna, & syrupo rosaceo, cum decocto pe∣ctorali. The next day she was let blood; after which she used pectoral and cooling broths for twelve days together, purging between times with the infusion of half an ounce of Senna: Mean while she took every night one spoonful of a syrup, to stay her Rheum and Cough, which was compounded ex syrupo violaceo, jujubino, de rosis siccis, & de papavere, of each a like quanti∣ty: With these Remedies at last she grew per∣fectly well. Domina Sugget, Norvicensis, aetatis 38. anno∣rum, gravissimo Catarrho correpta, juvata & cura∣ta fuit eo solo sequenti remedio. ℞ Calomelanos, gr. xx. Resinae benedict. gr. viii. Conservae rosarum rubrarum, ʒ i. misce. à quo re∣medio septies purgata est, & à fluxione omninò li∣berata, ità ut aliis remediis opus non fuerit. Nothing does more stop a Catarrh or flux of Rheum, then this following Cataplasm of Rulan∣dus: ℞ Fermenti acrioris, ℥ ii. carabes pulveri∣zat. ʒ ii. fiat Cataplasma, and apply it to the crown of the head, after the hair is first shaven away.
Riverius cured himself of a Catarrh, to which he was most subject, with twice taking Laud. opi∣at. the first time three grains, the next time two. Vide etiam Centur. 3. observ. 15. & 44. In the 24. Observation of the same Century, He tells us, that he cured himself of a most grievous Ca∣tarrh, by taking twenty grains of Calomelanos, (qui est Mercur. dul. sexies praeparatus) cum decem jalappae granis; with which remedy he voided, by stool, much flegmatick and cholerick matter, per os autem multam pituitam ejecit, by coughing and spitting, which evacuation continuing two days, the Catarrh ceased, and his cough which accompanied it went quite away, sicque à gravi illo morbo (Dei beneficio) liberatus fuit. These following Troshisques are much com∣mended by Soleander: ℞ Thuris masculi, succi liqui∣ritioe, ana, ʒ i. Opii, croci, myrrhae, ana, ℈ i. cum syrupo papav. forma trochiscos, vel pilulas, to be taken, now and then, two scruples, or half a drachm at a time. Benedictus Faventinus, useth the following pills in a salt Catarrh, with good success. ℞ Succi glycyrrhizae, ʒ ii. aloes lotae, ʒ i. pillul. de cynoglosso, ʒ ss. cum syrupo violac. Fiat massae pilularum, de qua capiat, ℈ i. horâ somni. And thus much shall suffice to have been spoken touching the Symptoms of the brain: We shall now proceed to treat of the diseases of the Eyes; and first of the Affects of the Eye-lids.
CAP. XXXIX. De Trachomate, seu palpebrarum asperitudine. , is an inequality and roughness of the internal part of the eye-lids, with redness, itching, and an hard ruggedness, as if the Seeds of Millet were in them, arising from an adust humour, that is salt, sharp, and biting. If the Malady grow further, and there appear clefts, and little parts standing forth, not unlike the seeds of Figs, it is called Sycosis. And when the disease waxeth old, and the Eye-lid becometh as hard as brawn, it is called Tylosis. in primo gradu curationem suscipit;  rarò;  rarò aut nunquam, & ma∣xima cum difficultate. After emollient things used to qualifie the a∣crimony of the peccant humour, Aloes dissolved in Rosewater, and Myrrh dissolved in a womans brest Milk, is very much commended to cleanse. Some cure this Malady, by rubbing the eye-lid, inverted and turned the inside outward, with Sugar Candy, even until the blood follow.
CAP. XL. De Psorophthalmia, seu Pruriginosâ Scabio∣sa{que} Lippitudine. is, when the eye-lids are red, and salt biting tears issue from them, the cor∣ners of the eyes having ulceration and redness, with much fretting and itching. This is cured (universal and general Remedies, being first premised) by a Liniment of Roses, and adding thereto a very little of Tutty pre∣pared. This Collyrium is much commended, ℞ A∣quae rosarum, plantaginis, ana, ℥ ii. in which boil with a soft fire, Aloes Hepaticae, ʒ. ss. copperass, ℈ ii. of Sugar Candy, ʒ i. This Eye-salve removeth the itching, consumeth and drieth the sharp flegm, and giveth strength to the Eye. In this Affect I have often used these follow∣ing Pills, with most admirable success. ℞ Pillularum cochiarum, ʒ ss. Extracti Rudii, ℈ i. calomelanos, gr. vii. Resinae jalappae, gr. iii. misce, & f. pil. num. vii.
CAP. XLI. De Emphysemate, seu palpebrarum inflatione. is a puffing up of the uppermost Eye-lid, losing his natural colour, without pain, yet with heaviness and hard moving, ari∣sing from External and Internal causes. If this Malady happen by the touch of a Spi∣der, or the stinging of a Wasp, it is taken away by the application of Treacle, and juyce of Plan∣tain mixed together. If by the stinging of a Bee, then a Bee brui∣sed, and imposed upon the place, performeth the cure. If it proceedeth from a hot humour, the Oph∣thalmick of Rhasis, hath its place, and is of sin∣gular use. If from a waterish and wheyish humor, the following is excellent. ℞ Rosarum rubrarum, p. i. flor. anthos, p. ss. chamomillae, meliloti, hysopi, absynthii, pulegii, ori∣gani, ana, m. ss. Seeth them in equal portions of Wine and Water, and apply it with a spunge: Also many have been cured by the use of Un∣guentum Comitissae, and Desiccativum rubrum, mingled together.
CAP. XLII. De Palpebrarum inviscatione , seu palpebrarum in∣viscatio, is, when either the eye-lids grow together one to the other, or else with the white, or the horney, or both those tunicles of the Eye. It is not to be cured without much difficulty, if the Eye-lid wholly grow together; but sel∣dome or never si cum cornea simul concrevit: It is more easily cured, if it stick only unto the eye in the extremity thereof; and if it be only (as it were) agglutinated, or glewed together un∣to the Adnata tunicle. CAP. XLIII. De Ectropio, seu palpebrarum inversione. is, when the lower eye-lid turneth the inside out, and draweth so much back, that it covereth not the white of the eye, nor is joyned to the other eye-lid which is above. There is required in this, and the former Ma∣lady, rather the hand of the Chirurgion, than Me∣dicines.
CAP. XLIV. De Lagopththalmia, seu Leporinâ palpebrâ. is, when the higher eye-lid is so drawn back, that in shutting the eye the whole is not, nor cannot be, covered whol∣ly, but in sleep it is open, as we see Hares do sleep. Unguentum Basilicum, made of Wax, Rosin, Black-pitch, and the suet of an Ox, is much commended for the curing of this Malady; as are also the Mucilages of Quince, Fenugreek, and Lin-seed, if the lid be not too short; otherwise it is impossible to cure it by any kinde of means: As touching manual operation, Vide Paraeum, lib. 10. c. 23. CAP. XLV. De Hydati. , seu Aquula, is an increase of the un∣ctuous substance in the upper eye-lid, pour∣ing forth (continually) a humor, especially in the morning betimes, before the light appear. Those children (saith Albucrasis) which have this malady lie sleeping always upon their face, and at the dawning of the day are greatly tor∣mented with that abundance of humors which
hath been gathered in the night; they are not able to behold the Sun, but their eye trembleth, and sheddeth tears. If this disease be but newly begun, it may be easily helped cum jejuniâ salivâ: But if it be of long continuance, and included in its proper membrane, it requireth the operation of the hands. CAP. XLVI. De Xerophthalmia, seu Aridâ Lippitudine. , is a dry blearedness, wherein the Eyes are neither puffed up, nor send forth tears, but are onely red, and heavy with pain, and in the night the eye-lids stick fast, and are as it were glued together with thick flegm; which disease is of the longer continuance, sith the mat∣ter is tough and heavy. This Remedy is greatly praised of Celsus; to take bread dipped in wine, and apply it to the eye: Also to hinder the eye-lids from sticking together; Unguentum de Tutia is very much commended to be used at bed time.
CAP. XLVII. De Scleropthalmia, seu palpebrarum duritie. is, when the eye-lids are more hard than accustomably they use to be, and also the eye more slow in moving, more red, more painful; especially when one awaketh, the eye lids can hardly be opened, yet no moisture issueth from them, neither is there any itching, and in the corners of the eyes sticketh some flegm, dryed and folded together. Avicen greatly extolleth these Remedies, to apply a fomentation unto the eye, with spunges wet in warm water, and after to put upon the eye the white of an Egg, with oil of Roses: when the humor is thick and salt, he useth the mucilage of Fenu-greek drawn with milk: Un∣guentum rosatum Mesuae hath been oftentimes used with most happy success. Next follow the affects, or things that are amiss in the eye-brows. CAP. XLVIII. De Hordeolo. , seu Hordeolum, is a small, hard, firm, and somewhat long tumor, like unto a Barley corn, especially when it comes to suppu∣ration,
having his matter contained in a little skin, growing in the outmost part of the eye-lid, where the hairs be, arising from a flegmatick humor thick and mingled with blood. This Tumor is taken away by Barley masti∣cated, or chewed, upon an empty stomack, and so applyed; or by the bodie of a Fly (the head thereof being cast away) if it be rubbed there∣with. Galen appointeth a Plaister of white Wax; And Avicen useth the blood of a Pigeon, or Turtle, and this Liniment: ℞ Olibani, myrrhae, ana, ʒ ii. ladani, ʒ ss. boracis, ʒ i. cum oleo lili∣orum, fiat linimentum. CHP. XLIX. De Chalazio, seu Grandine. , is a round little rising, or swelling, in fashion like a hailstone, transparent, and moveable, hither and thither, arising from a matter that is hard, even as hard as a stone. It is to be mollified and suppled cum ammo∣niaco in aceto dissoluto, and mingled together cum adipe gallinae, vel terebinthina & cera.
CAP. L. De Madarosi, seu Glabritie. is onely taken for the falling of hair from the eye-lids, by a flowing, of sharp humors: And where the hairs do simply fall away, and the utmost part, and banks, as it were, of the eye-lids are red like unto lead, the malady is called  But if the edges there∣of grow thick and hard in such manner that the hair cannot there be fastned, or pierce thorow, and that the eye-lids swell, and become shining, it is then called . Ma drosis, for the most part, invadeth the par∣ty after malignant Fevers. Avicen useth the pouder of Mice-dung with Honey for the increasing of Hair: Also the fol∣lowing remedies have been often used with happy success. ℞ Olei lini, ℥ i. sevi hircini, pinguedi∣nis ursi, ana, ℥ ss. stercoris murium, dactylorum com∣bustorum, ana, ʒ i. stercoris hirundinis, ʒ ss. misce. For the Crassitude or thickness of the eye-lids, Avicen commendeth a Cataplasm of Endive, oil of Roses, and the white of an Egg.
CAP. LI. De Trichiasi, & Phalangosi. is, when preternatural hairs grow up under the natural hair, and pointing in∣wardly do prick the Tunicles of the eyes. Some, to cure this malady, pull away the hairs with pincers, and then apply such medicines as may stay them from growing again: Of this sort are Ants eggs, the gall of a Calf, the blood of all sorrs of Frogs: Amongst other, this of Archi∣genes is praised wonderfully, which is made of the blood and gall of an Hedg-hog, with Castoreum in equal proportion. Other sear the hairs to the roots with an iron made for that purpose; but this may be more safely done in the following malady. , is when (the eye-lids turning in∣ward) the hairs appear not unless the eye-lids be lifted up. CAP. LII. De Phthiriasi. , is when a great abundance of small Lice infest the hairs of the eye-brows; by reason of nastiness and filthiness, in those especial∣ly that seldom or never wash, and keep them∣selves
cleanly, and such as use a naughty and cor∣rupt kinde of diet. It is to be timely and seasonably cured, ne acres fluxiones concitet. Ablutio palpebrarum decocto betae & staphisa∣griae laudatur: This Ointment following hath been often tried: ℞ Unguenti rosati Mesues, ℥ i. sulphuris vivi, staphisagriae, ʒ. ss. hydrargyri cum cum jejunâ salivâ extinct. ʒ i. fiat unguentum: Next follow the Affects, or things that are a∣miss in the flesh, that is, in the corners of the eyes. CAP. LIII. De Rhyade. is a consuming, or diminishing, of the Ca∣runcle (viz. the little piece of flesh) that is situate in the greater Angle, or corner of the eye; arising either from sharp humors falling up∣on the part, or from cleansing Medicines for∣merly mis-applied. This disease often followeth the Fistula La∣chrymalis. It is cured by the use of the following Col∣lyrium; ℞ Aloes, thuris, ana, ʒ i. sanguin. dra∣con. ʒ ss. rosarum rubr. & granor. sumach. ana, ℈i. aquae rosarum, l. i. Bulliant ad quartae partis con∣sumptionem. Fiat instar Collyrii.
CAP. LIV. De Encanthide. , is the immoderate increase and swelling of the Caruncle, or little flesh, in the great corner of the Eye, caused through too much blood flowing to the part. Si magnum & antiquum malum est, non nisi Chrurgiâ curatur. Encanthis, at first, is cured by the use of burnt Allum: In the cure great heed must be taken, that no more be eaten away, but that which is superfluous, lest it turn to Rhyas. CAP. LV. De Anchilope. , is a Tumor between the great corner of the eye and the nose, without any pain, inflammation, or solution of unity, arising from a dull and sluggish humor, (some∣what resembling Honey, and a Pultise) that most commonly is shut up in a little skin or bag. This disease is hardly cured, because of the delicateness and tenderness of the bone where∣upon the swelling groweth; and because it is so neer unto the eye, that the medicines may endan∣ger the same.
In the beginning, Emplastrum contra rupturam, or Unguentum de bolo, with a little Opium added, is highly commended, to repel and beat back. In the increase, Aetius appointeth this remedy; ℞ thuris, ℥ i. myrrhae, ℥ i. ladani, ʒ i. cerae ℥ i. alumin. sciss. ℥ ss. spumae nitri, ℥ ss. Beat these together, and with the grossest part of Oleum irinum make them soft, and fit to be used. CAP. LVI. De Aegilope, seu Fistula Lachrymali. is a little Fistula (attended with smart, pain, and an inflammation) in the corner of the eye, neer to the root of the nose, out of which issueth continual flegm, or a thin humor, arising of some former disease, as of Anchilops suppurated, but either not speedily opened, or negligently dressed. A Lachrymal Fistula that is newly begun, & quae orificium habet extrinsecum ac manifestum, medicamentis curabilis est; but that which is deep and old, and hath fouled the bone, is scarcely cu∣red without burning. Sometimes Aegilops turns to a Cancer, which comes with a pricking pain; extention of the veins, hardness and blewness of the skin, and then it is better to let it alone, be∣cause Medicines will inlarge it, doloresque acerbi∣ores excitat,
Hildanus boasteth that he cured a Fistula la∣chrymalis cum ossis carie, in puero tredecim anno∣rum, with Medicines alone, dilating of it with prepared spunges, and after sprinkling Euphor∣bium into it, and that very much and often; and after applying only an Emplaster of gum elemi; having used these things diligently for the space of divers weeks, he perceived a scale of the bone, which he drew forth; and then with half a drop of Tolutan Balsam upon a little lint, once in a day conveyed into the Ulcer, he perfectly consolidated the Fistula in a short time: Next follow the diseases of the Adnata Tunicle. CAP. LVII. De Ophthalmia, seu Lippitudine. , The Ophthalmy, is an inflamma∣tion of the Adnata Tunicle or Membrane in the eye called Conjunctiva, joyned with swel∣ling, extension, pain, redness, and a flowing forth of tears; arising from a sharp blood distending the small veins that belong to the Membrane. Alvi fluxus Ophthalmiae superveniens, bonus, hu∣morum enim abundantia evacuatur, & ad inferiora retrabitur. Curatio est difficilis, si ophthalmia pue∣ros infestat, because that it continually floweth from a tender and a weak head. It is desperate, if it be by consent from the membranes of the
brain, and the parts contained within the skull: An old pain in the eyes is very dangerous; Gau∣sae enim contumaciam arguit; and it is to be feared ne suppuratio aut exulceratio succedat. They who have great eyes are most subject to this dis∣ease. A certain Gentleman, fifty yeers old, having an Ophthalmia, was thus cured: First, there was administred for four nights together, ʒ ss. of Pil∣lulae de Succino Craton. made in three Pills; these gave five or six stools the following days with∣out any griping; outwardly was applied to the forehead the following Plaister: ℞ Mastiches, myrrhae, thuris, ana, ʒ i. ss. sanguinis Draconis, ʒ i. Boli Armeni, farinae fabarum, ana, ℥ ss. Cro∣ci, ʒ i. cum albumine ovorum, oleo rosarum, & mo∣dico aceto, fiat frontale; into the eye was distil∣led the following Collyrium: ℞ Tutiae praepaera∣tae, ʒ i. ss. camphorae, croci, ana, gr. xii. tye them up together in a fine rag, and hang them in Rose∣water, and White-wine, of each half an ounce; of this there was dropt into his eyes, helying on his back, two or three drops, three or four times a day; whilst this was doing, he used the fol∣lowing decoction: ℞ Sarsaparillae incisae & con∣tusae, ℥ ii. ligni Guaiaci incisi, ℥ i. sussafras incis. ʒ ii. Infuse them in 15. pints, of spring-water for 12. hours, then boil them till five pints be wasted, after take it from the fire, adding present∣ly of Cinnamon bruised, ʒ i. let it pass through
an Hyppocras bag: dose ℥ vi. taken hot, being in bed, composing the body to sweat gently; af∣ter sweating, the sweat was rubbed off gently with fine dry warm linnen; an ordinary drink was made of the second decoction, which was used in those dayes he did not sweat: Thus in twenty days he was cured, beyond all expectation. Another Gentleman, being grievously vexed with the same disease, was cured by the following Medicines: ℞ Pillularum Succin ʒ i. pil. aurea∣rum, ʒ ss. troch. agarici, ℈ i. cum syrupo de beto∣nica, f. pil. numero 10. He took five of these when he went to bed, which gave him the next day six stools; the other five he took the fol∣lowing night: To his forehead and temples there was applied an astringent Plaister, and upon his eyes whites of Eggs well beatn with Rosewater and womans milk: Into the eyes was dropt one or two drops, twice or thrice a day, of this Oph∣thalmick Collyrium: ℞ Sarcocollae in lacte asi∣nino lotae, ʒ iii. tutiae praeparatae, ʒ i. aloes ʒ i. sacchari candi, alb. ʒ i. ss. croci, gr. iii. aquae rosa∣rum, ℥ iv. Mix them, letting them stand a day, shaking them before you use it: By these he was cured: A certain Gentlewoman, being miserably af∣flicted with a hot distillation in her eyes, so that she could not open them in the morning, was thus helped: After purging with Pil. de succino Craton, the following remedy was applied to her eyes:
℞ Succi Sempervivi cochlear. i. vini albi, cochle∣ar. ii. misce. Of which there was dropt one or two drops into the eyes, laying upon them all night a double linen rag wet in the same; this mitigated the heat: After, there was some of the Ophthalmick Collyrium, prescribed in the former Observation, distilled into her eyes twice or thrice a day; and so at length she was perfect∣ly cured. A Country man, fiftie yeers of age, being troubled with an old Inflammation of his eyes, by the advice of a Physician, did for a long time observe a cooling diet, and did drink water, but found no ease: At last, another Countryman perswaded him to leave off that cooling diet, and give himself to drink pure wine; after his first cup of Wine he perceived his eyes to be better, and within a few days, continuing the same drink, his eyes became well. Indeed Hippocrates saith, that pains of the eyes are sometimes cured by drinking pure Wine; quando scilicet Ophthalmia fit à sanguine crasso & pituitoso oculorum tunicis impacto, which by the use of pure Wine is melt∣ed, attenuated, and discussed. A Child, new born, was troubled with redness of the eyes, and much filth which came from them like quittor; after the disease had continu∣ed three moneths, by the advice of a certain Physician, Cotton Wool was every night laid upon each eye, being first diligently dryed over
the coals, and well teased and pulled asunder with the fingers, and afterward each eye was covered with a little Cotton, in manner of a Bolster, which was swathed down. In the morning the Cot∣ton Wool was much fouled with the foresaid matter: This Remedy bring continued divers nights together, the Infant was perfectly cured. A Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the head, as Forestus reports, did a wonderful cure upon an old woman with sore eyes. Zacutus Lusitanus cured an old Ophthalmy, which would no otherwise be removed, in a whole year, with a Mercurial Unguent, although there was no apparent sign of the French disease; being perswaded by Mercurialis, who (in his Book de Morbo Gallico) saith. When you see any dis∣ease that wil not be cured by ordinary means, imagine it to be the Lucs Venerėa. Cataplasma ex medulla panis triticei, & pomi assati, cum lacte muliebri, pauxillo croci, & saccha∣ri saturni, plurimùm in Ophthalmiâ laudatur. Plura de hac aegritudine vide in meo Enchiri∣dio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 5. & etiam in meâ Scholâ Physicâ, Med. 51, 53, & 59. A certain old man, by reason of a defluxion of Rheum falling into his eyes, had his sight so far weakned, that he could not go without one to guide him; of which disease he was cured, and his sight restored, by putting into his eyes, every night when he went to bed, five or six of the
seeds of Clary, which drew the Phlegmatick hu∣mors out of his eyes, and cleansed the tunicle or coat called Cornea: Indeed this Observation doth more properly belong to the Chapter de Albugine. Solenander commends highly the decoction of Quince leaves, which are to be gathered, without breaking, in the beginning of the Spring, and kept diligently, that they be neither dusty nor musty, nor otherwise defiled; and when you use them, boil one handful of them in pure wa∣ter, and let the eyes be often washed therewith: It is a wonder (saith he) to see how it doth preserve, cleanse, and stop Rheumes in the eyes. CAP. LVIII. De Taraxi, seu Conturbatione. , is taken for a swift Inflammation of the eye, being red and moist, but less grievous than Ophthalmia, proceeding from ex∣ternal causes. If the heat of the Sun, or the fire, have caused this affect, then the Cataplasm mentioned in the latter end of the preceding Chapter cures it, if applyed thereto; also a Cataplasm of new drawn Cassia, is held by some to be excellent. If winde, smoak, and dust have been the cause,
the eyes are to be washed with Milk blood-warm, and sleep to be taken thereupon. If it happens by a blow or a fall, then blood ought immediatly to be drawn forth by opening a vein. If from the stinging of a Bee, or Wasp, or Hornet; then Repellers ex albumine ovi, lacte mu∣liebri, &c. are to be imposed. CAP. LIX. De Chemosi. is, when the eye-lids are, as it were, inverted, and turned the inside outward, so as the eyes can scarce be covered therewith, and the white of the eye, called Conjunctiva, stands out higher then the black, and the redness doth cover most part of the iris or circle. Chemosis eadem remedia, quae ophthalmia, postu∣lat, sed vehementiora; because of the exceeding great inflammation, accompanied with most ve∣hement pain. CAP. LX. De Pterygio, seu ungue oculorum. , The Haw, nail, or little wing, (as they term it) of the eye, or, as some call it, the
arrow, is a little membrane that is nervous, fi∣brous, and somewhat white, which proceedeth forth from the corners of the eyes, (the greater of them especially) and cleaveth fast unto the Ad∣nata tunicle; and is sometimes drawn forth in length even unto the Cornea tunicle; and very often (if it so much increase) covereth and o∣verspreadeth the Pupilla or ball of the eye, and so hindereth the sight. A new Haw, that is small, may be cured with Medicines; but an old over-grown one, covering the black of the eye, cannot be cured but by Chirurgery. If the eye affected grow smaller, Malum est signum, partis enim debilitatem arguit. A Haw which is thick, hard, and black, cannot be cured, Cancrosam enim naturam obtinet. This pouder is very much commended, and hath been often used with happy success; ℞ Os∣sis sepiae, ℈ sacchari candi, ʒ i. Vitrioli, ℈ ss. tu∣tiae praeparatae, ʒ ss. misce. Fiat pulvis subtilis∣simus, to lay upon the Haw. CAP. LXI. De Panno. PAnnus, The Pin or Web of the Eye, is a certain red substance, like unto a small piece of cloth, arising from the exuberancy and
over-great abounding of blood, in the exterior veins of the eye. Recens haec affectio medicamentis; inveterata tantùm manus operâ curatur. Curatio abstersione, per ea supra-dicta in capite de Encanthide, & de Pterygio, perficitur. Vide eti∣am meam Scholam Physicam, Med. 82. CAP. LXII. De Hyposphagmate, seu Suggillatione. , The Hyposphagm or Sugillation (as they call it) is a blemish or spot, reddish, or black and blew, arising from blood poured forth of the veins being opened, and common to the tunicle Cornea. Sugillatio in adanata tunica salubrior, quàm in Cornea. In curing this malady, blood-letting is most necessary; and of locall Medicines, the blood of a Turtle or Pigeon taken out of its wing is excellent at the beginning, the cure being then most easie. Or a Collyrium composed ex san∣guine columbarum ex alis detracti, ʒ ii. lactis mu∣lieris temper. ℥ ss. thuris, ℈ i. Also the Ca∣taplasm of Hyssop, sodden with Cows milk, is praised of Avicen; or the tops of Hyssop may be boiled in ordinary and common water, and ty∣ed up in a little bag, and so applyed. We may
withstand the Inflammation by the white of an Egg well shaken together; and if there be pre∣sent any pus, or purulent matter, the same may be lessened by a Collyry composed ex mucilag. foenugr. cum aqua foeniculi, & melle rosaceo. Water of Honey does most certainly take a∣way spots of the eyes; but if the eye be pained withal, the pain must first be asswaged, before this water be used: And so much of the diseases of the Adnata Tunicle; next follows those of the Tunicle Cornea. CAP. LXIII. De Corneae tunicae crassitie. CRassities corneae tunicae, The thickness of the Horny-membrane, is an extream drying of the substance thereof, joyned with a certain corrugation or wrinkling; in so much that the Patient sees as through smoak; arising either from the incautelous, and careless application of cold Remedies; or else from gross and thick humors that insinuate themselves. Si , corrugatio, sit ex humoribus cras∣sis impactis, & recens adhuc, curari potest: Si vero diuturnum sit, & ex vehementi frigidorum usu, vix curatur. In curatione laudatur, chelidoniae succus expres∣sus, & oculis guttatim instillatus.
CAP. LXIV. De Nebula. NEbula, or the little cloud, is the colour of the tunicle Cornea, altered and changed by a subtile humor flowing forth. That which is prevalent in this case, is, the pouder of Margarites, prepared in the water of Roses and Fennel: As also Saccharum albissi∣mum (candi dictum) in aqua euphrasiae, chelido∣niae aut foeniculi dissolutum: Vide Forestum, lib. 6. observat. 56. ubi reperies infantem à nebulis hoc saccharo curatum. Amatus Lusitanus reports, that he cured thick clouds in the eye of a girl twelve years of age, post decocti salsaeparillae exhibitionem per viginti dies, sequenti Collyrio. ℞ Mellis in ipso favo, lb. ii. summitatum foe∣niculi, flor. sambuci, euphrasiae, ana, P. ii. sacchari candi, ℥ iv. Destillentur in B. M. & aqua instille∣tur in oculos. Lastly, The yellow colour of the jaundies, which appears most in the eyes, when the jaun∣dies is cured, is easily discussed, by taking the sume of Vinegar into the eyes, si curam accelera∣re velis.
CAP. LXV. De Albugine. , seu Albugo, is a white spot, ren∣dring the Cornea tunicle so thick, that there is denied all manner of passage unto the visible species. As to the Prognostick; An Albugo which comes of flegm, or a thick humor remaining af∣ter an Ophthalmy, is easily cured, praesertim si inveterata non sit; but that which cometh after a wound, or an ulcer, and is a scar, is very hard∣ly cured, especially in those that are ancient. The following decoction is much commended in Albugo. ℞ Rad. althaeae ℥ i. foliorum malvae, euphrasiae, chelidoniae maj. ana, m. i. sem. lini & foenu∣graeci, ana, ʒ iii. florum meliloti, P. i. Fiat deco∣ctio in aqua fontis, cujus vapor recipiatur in ocu∣lum manè & serò. Also the water of Honey, prescribed in the preceding Chapter de Nebula, is very good to take away all blemishes in the eye, si usus illius diu continuetur.
CAP. LXVI. De Phlyctaenis, seu Pustulis corneae. , seu Pustulae, are little risings, com∣mon to the Adnata and Cornea tunicles, like the grain or seeds of Millet, arising from a sharp, serous, or wheyish humor, lifting up the Mem∣branes. Phlyctaenae in Adnata minus periculosae sunt, quàm in Cornea. The more superficial these Pu∣stules be, the less dangerous they are, the more inward, the more desperate; for it is to be fear∣ed, lest the whole thickness of the Cornea be ero∣ded, and so either the watery humour will flow forth, or else the Uvea start out. Saccharum Saturni (or Sugar of Saturn) with the water of Eye-bright, is (here) of all reme∣dies the best and chiefest: You may frame your Medicine thus: ℞ Aquae euphrasiae, ℥ i. aquae rosarum, ℥ i. ss. sacchari saturni, gr. xv. tutiae praeparatae, ℈. ss. misce, & utere. CAP. LXVII. De Corneae Ruptura. RUptura Corneae tunicae, The Rupture of the Horny tunicle happens either from an Ul∣cer or Wound, or else from an afflux of humors,
by which the said Membrane is so distended, that it cracks in the middle, and the humors contain∣ed are let out. Incurabilis est plerum{que} haec affectio, & visus privationem relinquit. Some foment the part with a decoction of red Roses, Solomons seal, Bramble buds, Shepherds purse, and Plantane, boiled in red Wine, if there be no Inflammation; but if there be, in Spring water; and for the perfect consolidation and cure, they use this Collyrium. ℞ Aloes lotae, tutiae praeparatae, & sarcocollae nutritae in lacte muliebri, ana, ℈. ss. croci, gr. v. cum mucilagine gummi tragacanthi, fiat collyri∣rium. CAP. XLVIII. De Corneae & Adnatae Ulceribus. ULcera corneae & adnatae tunicae, Ulcers of the Hon and Adnata tunicle, are wont to a∣rise from sharp corroding humours flowing in∣to the eyes; and sometimes they follow the Phlyctaenae, or little swellings which breed in the Cornea, but not till they break. There are di∣vers sorts of these Ulcers mentioned in Au∣thors: , or Fossula, is a hollow, narrow, and hard Ulcer, without filthy matter.
, is broader, but not so deep. , or Ulcus Coronale, is a round Ulcer in the white of the eye, neer unto the circle na∣med Iris, or the rainbow; it is white, neer to the apple of the eye, and red in the membrane con∣junctiva. is a deep, filthy, and crustie Ulcer. The Ulcers of the eyes are dangerous, and hard to be cured, but more in the Cornea, than in the Adnata; an Ulcer in the Pupilla is more dan∣gerous, because, after it is cured, it will leave a scar, which will hinder the perspicuity of the Cornea, and so the sight will be hurt. The following Collyrium doth moderately dry and cleanse: ℞ Aquar. verbenae, & planta∣ginis, ana, ℥ ii. sacchari candi, ℥ ss. misce pro Col∣lyrio; vel ℞ Aquae mellis in B. M. Destillatae, & aquae rosarum, ana, partes aequales. CAP. LXIX. De Nomis, seu ulceribus depascentibus. , seu ulcera depascentia, are malicious and painful Ulcers, attended with a Fever, which in time doth gnaw and consume the parts, next adjoyning to the eyes, as the muscles and eye-lids, beginning partly at the Corners, partly at the white of the eye, and sometimes at the Horney membrane.
If the veins and Arteries of the temples seem very full, it will be most expedient to let them bleed: To the forehead and temples may be ap∣plied an emplaister made of Emplastrum contra rupturam, Unguentum Comitissae, & desiccativum rubrum mixed together: And for the eye, you may use the Collyrium set down in the former Chapter. I have sometimes used aqua spermatis rana∣rum, which is very powerful to stay and over∣come the evill and spreading nature of the hu∣mour. CAP. LXX. De Cancro Corneae. , corneae tunicae, is a little Ulcer, happening in the black of the eye, which cannot be closed, very painful, replete with swoln vessels, as in the disease called Varix; and some∣times when it seems to be closed up, upon no manifest occasion, it opens again, and becomes ul∣cerous. This disease is accounted incurable, as well in the eye, as in any other part, when it is fixed; except it be taken away by manual operaton. Amongst local medicines, the white of an Egg beaten with womans milk is to be praised by many; also Lintels sodden and steeped in Plan∣tain
water, or juyce, the Mucilages of Quinces, and Lin-seed, often renewed. Moreover the flesh of Chickens is very pow∣erful of asswage pain; and some say that the disease it self hath been cured by it alone. Vide Tractatum meum de Tumoribus praeter naturam, sect. 2. cap. 7. pag. 98, & 99. Some apply the flesh of young Pigeons while it is warm, cut in thin broad pieces. Sic etiam concipio hunc & praecedentem mor∣bum de Nomis (quamvis curatu impossibiles te∣neantur) curari posse Salivatione usu mercurii dul∣cis Antimoniique diaphoretici curiosè administra∣ti, procuratâ, post sufficientem totius corporis sar∣saeparillae, &c. decoctione, praeparationem. Vide dicta Zacuti Lusitani, & Mercurialis, supra posi∣ta, capite, 57. De Ophthalmia versus finem, ea∣que Alexandri Trajani, Petri, infra, capite de Suffu∣sione. CAP. LXXI. De Vulneribus Corneae, & oculorum dolore. VUlnera Corneae, Wounds of the Cornea, are made by the violence of things pricking, cutting, bruising, or otherwise loosing the conti∣nuity thereof. They require first, Evacuation, per venaesectio∣nem praesertim. Secondly, Revulsion, per Cae∣taplasmata
super palpebram duntaxat imposita. Thirdly, Consolidation; and for this purpose the strains of twelve Eggs well-beaten with a little Rose-water, and so put into the eye, are very much commended: It is a remedy held pro se∣creto. Upon the eye-lid may be applyed filie round pleageants of flax or soft tow, as broad as a shillling, dipped in the white of an Egg, beat∣en to Oyl; it must be renewed as it drieth; and this will not only draw away the corrupt or brui∣sed blood, but also cleanse and cool the eye. Dolor oculorum, oculis, praecipuè ob tunicas ex∣ternas, convenit. Mitigatur albumine ovorum; ab opiatis cavendum. Some highly commend this Anodyne medi∣cine for the eyes: ℞ Pomi dulcis assati, ℥ ss. Camphorae, gr. xv. croci gr. v. cum aqua rosarum, & lacte muliebri: Fiat Cataplasma. CAP. LXXII. De Hypopyo, seu pure sub Cornea. , is an heap of corrupt matter possessing about half the black of the eye, or shining through the Horney coat, which covereth the Pu∣pilla, arising most commonly from a stroke or contusion. Galen reports, That there was one Justus, an Oculist in his time, that cured many of this
disease by shaking their heads; for setting them straight upon a seat, and taking hold on both sides of their head, he shaked them till he per∣ceived the mattter to descend. Some highly commend this following Re∣medy; ℞ Aquarum verbenae, rutae, chelidon, rosarum & foeniculi, ana, ℥ ss. aloes opt. tutiae praepara∣tae, ana, ʒ ss. Sacchari candi, ʒ i. Pulverizentur & misceantur, addendo lactis muliebris tantillum; & fiat collyrium; of which drop some into the eyes twice or thrice in the day: But this mixture is excellent. ℞ Croci, aloes, myrrhae, ana, ʒ i. vini, ʒ iii. mellis. ʒ vi. Dissolvatur crocus in vino. Deinde cum aloe & myrrha misceantur. Tandem mel ad∣datur. Hoc remedio oculi illinantur. And thus much touching the diseases of the Cornea tuni∣cle; we proceed next to those of the Uvea. CAP. LXXIII. De Proptosi, seu Uveae procidentiâ , is here taken for a starting, or fal∣ling out of the Membrane named Uvea, when the Horney tunicle is either loosed or bro∣ken by a wound or an ulcer; and as this ma∣lady appeareth greater or less, so there are num∣bred divers kinds thereof, having names given
unto them from the likeness of those things which they do represent. Si enim parva uveae portio procidat  dicitur, quòd formam capitis muscae habeat: But if the greatest part of the Uvea issueth forth, so that it over-reacheth the eye-lid, representing an Apple hanging by the stalk, it is then called  is, when the Uvea being so far thrust out of the eye-lids, becometh hard, and the hornie coat round about being brawnie, presseth it down, as if it were the head of a nail. The cure of this disease is difficult, and the more when the Uvea comes most forth; si verò minor sit, ut in myocephalo, curationem admit∣tit. Proptosis medicamentis astringentibus sine aspe∣ritate (qualia in Corneae ruptura suprà fuere propo∣sita) curatur; and if it be not removed by these, then it is requisite that we make use of the in∣cision knife. CAP. LXXIV. De Mydriasi, seu Pupillae Dilatatione. , is when the Pupilla is enlarged (above, and besides the ordinary course of nature) toward the Iris, or parti-coloured cir∣cle of the eye, whereby the sight is either much empaired, or utterly lost.
They which are troubled with this disease, which some call , do think every thing which they see to be greater than it is; which error cometh by the shattering of the spirits, at the largeness of the hole in the Apple of the eye. Sometimes it is not only enlarged and stretched abroad, but it seemeth to be removed from the middest of the eye, and to have chan∣ged his place, which (in Arnoldus) is called, Pupil∣lae è loco remotio. If the dilatation of the Pupilla happens through siccity or driness, extending the Uvea, (like as we see in skins or Hides that are perfora∣ted) it is not to be cured without some difficul∣ty: But if it arise from humidity or moisture, the cure is much more easie: Quae à percussione ori∣tur incurabilis est, si uvea sit lacerata. Si post vehementem capitis dolorem, magna sequatur pu∣pillae usque ad iridem dilatatio, exigua sanationis spes est, ob immodicam materiae copiam. The cure is varied according to the variety of the cause; if this malady proceed from driness, the best remedy is Goats milk, wherewith you may wash and drench the eye often; if from moi∣sture, then this following Collyrium may safely be used: ℞ Rosarum rubr. siccarum, ℈ ii. croci, spicae-nardi, corticis thuris, ana, ℈ ss. tutiae prae∣paratae, spodii, acaciae, ana, ℈ i. Bring them into a pouder, and put them in a thin linnen cloth, and tie it; then hang it in three ounces of Rose-wa∣ter,
and wash the eyes often with the water, drop∣ping into them, squeezing the cloth as often as you use the water. If it comes from wind (after universal evacuations, which are not to be neg∣lected in oculorum morborum curatione) you may foment the eyes with the decoction of Fennel, Rue, Dill, red Roses, and Myrtles, made in Rose-water, with the fourth part of white Wine. If it come with a stroak, and there be no inflam∣mation, you may apply at the first a Cataplasm, ex farina fabarum, foliis plantaginis, & rosis ru∣bris, cum aqua rosarum paratum: after that, you may often drop therein the blood of a Pigeon, which is a most excellent remedy in all wounds and contusions of the eyes. Si vero adsit inflam∣matio, instar opthalmiae curanda est. CAP. LXXV. De Myosi, seu Pupillae Angustiâ. , seu Angustia pupillae, The streightness or narrowness of the Pupilla is, when it is rendred and made narrower than naturally it ought to be, thereby hindring the sight. As to the Prognostick, A streightness in the Pupilla, which cometh from the loss of the wa∣tery humor in the eye, is incurable, because when that is once lost, it cannot be recruited, especi∣ally in old folks. In pueris tamen aliquando per
vulnus effusus humor aqueus reparatus  re∣generatus est. A Constriction of the Pupilla from driness can scarce or very hardly be cured. Illa verò quae ab humiditate fit, in suo principio, & ad∣huc recens, facilè curari potest, inveterata verò dif∣ficilimè. The cure of this disease differeth not from the former, for they come both from the same cau∣ses, namely, driness or moisture. CAP. LXXVI. De Hypochyma, seu Suffusione. , seu Suffusio, A Suffusion or Cataract, is a heap of superfluous humors made thick, between the horny membrane and the Cry∣stalline humour, directly upon the apple of the eye, swimming above the waterish humour in that place, which Celsus affirmeth to be void and empty, hindering the sight, or (at least) the dis∣cerning and judging of such things as are before the eyes. A Suffusion newly begun, when the Patient can perceive an Object as through a cloud, is cu∣rable, as Galen saith: A Cataract in an old man, whose eyes are naturally of a weak constitution, is altogether uncurable. Si ex febre acuta, pe∣ripneumonia, phrenitide, aut dolore capitis intensi suffusio proveniat, difficillimè curatur. A black
Cataract free from all brightness, can neither be cured by Physick, nor Chirurgery; because the visive spirits are destroyed; but a cleer Cataract that hath some splendor, is curable. Suffusio confirmata, in qua materia jam concreta est, discuti medicamentis non potest, & sola compunctione cu∣rabilis est. That which moveth, and is colour∣ed like Quick-silver is incurable; as also, that which is green, dark, or very yellow. A Cata∣ract which representeth objects full of holes, is not to be tampered with: The Cataract which is fit for touching useth to be sky-coloured, and sea-green, or of the colour of Iron or Lead, not black; also it ought to be like a thin skin, which may be rolled about the needle; for if it be too thick and solid, it cannot be touched, which you may perceive when it is like Chalk, or Hail. Quercetan, in his Dispensatory, doth much commend the Infusion of Crocus metallorum, which is thus prepared: ℞ Aquarum chelidonii maj. ℥ vi. croci metallorum, ℈ i. Infundantur si∣mul, and drop three or four drops of this water warmed into the eyes, three or four times a day for a long continuance. Fonseca saith, That he knew one cured by this water, who was very dim-sighted many moneths: This is the ex∣cellency of it, which few other Medicines have; it cleanseth very powerfully, without any sharp∣ness.
It is good to chew sweet Fennel-seeds in the morning some space of time, and then to fill the mouth with white Wine; and when it is warm, to wash the eyes therewith, till they begin to smart. It is no less profitable to let a child eat sweet Fennel-seeds in a morning, and afterwards breathe into the eyes. You may make bread with the bran in it, with the pouder of Rue, Celandine, Eye-bright, Be∣tony, and Fennel, with a little Honey, which as soon as it drawn, and cut in pieces, must be put between two peuter, or silver dishes; whence will come a water, which Zechius affirmeth, dropped into the eyes doth wonders. Alexander Trajanus Petronus declares, that a certain man, before he had the French disease, being blinde of one eye with a thick Suffusi∣on, was wonderfully freed from his Cataract and Pox both at once hydrargyri inunctione: Neither is it without reason that Cataracts may be dis∣solved with that Unction, when we see by expe∣rience, that very hard tumors of thick and gross flegm are powerfully dissolved by the Unction of Quick-silver. Plura de Suffusione vide in meo Enchiridio Me∣dico, lib. 3. c. 6. Next, of what is amiss in the humors of the eyes.
CAP. LXXVII. De Humoris aquei vitiis. HUmor aqueus, The watery Humor is out of its natural condition when it is distemper∣ed in quantity or quality: When the distemper is in quantity, it is enlarged or diminished, and makes the Pupilla be dilated or contracted; which diseases are mentioned before in their places. When the distemper is in quality, it becomes thicker, and that comes from another humour mixed with it, and that is called Suffusio, which we spake of in the Chapter preceding: Indeed the faults or things amiss in the watery humor, are especially four, Imminutio, Effusio, Crassitie∣do, & Obscuratio. CAP. LXXVIII. De Humoris Crystallini vitiis. HUmor Crystallinus, The Crystalline hu∣mor is the chief instrument of sight, and therefore ought to be kept more pure and per∣spicuous than the rest; those things that are a∣miss in this humor, are especally three. First, , or the changing of the Cry∣stalline humor into a grey, or sky-colour, arising from exsiccation, which causeth the Patient to apprehend all objects as through smoke and lit∣tle clouds.
Secondly, , seu caecitas nocturna, or a nocturnal blindness; with the which such as are affected see indifferently well in the day∣time, but more obscurely and dimly after sun∣set, and in the night time nothing at all. Thirdly, Situs mutatus, or the scituation chan∣ged, qui multipliciter accidere solet. Moreover, although many Authors do not di∣stinguish between a Glaucoma, and a Suffusion, yet they which diligently observe may distinguish them thus: In a Suffusion there is a white in the very Pupilla, and very neer the Membrane cal∣led Cornea; but in Glaucoma it lieth deeper. Incurabilis est hic affectus, praecipuè in senibus, in quibus siccitas partium emendari non potest; but if it be not manifest that the fault is in the Crystalline, and there is suspition of a Suffusi∣on, you may use the Remedies prescribed for it. I read of a certain Physician, who going up a Ladder to take a Book from a shelf, and turning his eyes violently upwards, saw all things after∣wards turned upwards, as though men walked up∣on their heads, which came by the attraction and displacing of the Crystalline. For a quarter of a year after, when again he turned up his eyes vio∣lently, his natural sight returned, and all things ap∣peared in right order. Hence it appears that by a violent motion of the eye, the Crystalline may be displaced, & again by the same motion be set right. The juyce of Chickweed, or Fennel, dropped
into the eye, is very much commended in the cure of Nyctalopia, as also to receive the va∣pour of Rue, Fennel, Eye-bright, Celandine, Ligni-Aloes, and Saffron, sodden together in Wine or water, or else to distill them with Ho∣ney, and so put the water into the eyes. CAP. LXXIX. De Humoris vitrei vitiis. HUmor vitreus, The vitreous or Glassie hu∣mour, is next under the Crystalline, and therefore it is made by nature transparent, that the Species carried to the Optick nerve may be pure and clean: Those things that are amiss in this humour are these: First, The Augmentation thereof, by which not only the Pupilla is more dilated, sed etiam Crystallinus obumbratur, and hath as it were a mist cast before it, and the spirits also much dul∣led and blunted. Secondly, Diminution, from whence the tuni∣cles are wrinkled up together, and the Pupil∣la contracted. Thirdly, Crassities, or the thickness thereof, which ariseth from the admixture of some other humour; and this cannot be perceived by any Signs, but only it is judged so probably by rea∣son; for the vitreous humour cannot be seen, or its condition known; and therefore Practitioners
are constrained to confound it, and to make it one with Gutta serena, quia nullum vitium in ocu∣lis appareat. Moreover, This humour may be out of order in respect of its scituation; namely, when any part of it by a blow or contusion shall be brought before the Crystalline. The vitreous humour being displaced can by no art be reduced to its former condition. But this by nature hath sometimes been done, and therefore the whole business is to be committed unto her. Next follow those diseases that in∣fest and annoy the globe of the eye. CAP. LXXX. De oculi Atrophia, & Microphthalmo. is then, when the parts of the eyes consume and waste away, by reason of some evacuation, and over-great exsiccation. It differeth , that is, the consumption of the eye, because therein is only a diminishing of the Apple, and not of the whole eye, because therein is only a diminishing of the Apple, and not of the whole eye; which in Atrophia is smaller and lesser than naturally it should be, there appearing a hollow deepness, it being sunk down within the circle, and the sight darkned and dimmed in such sort, that the things which
they look upon, do seem much greater then they are. Malum curatu difficile est: Neque enim siccitas in ulla corporis parte facilè euratur; & nisi matu∣rè ei succuratur, causa caecitatis esse solet. It is cured by those medicaments that humect and moisten (and chiefly the brest milk of a wo∣man) laid therein. , that is, the pinking eye, is, when any one hath from his birth so little eyes that they seem scarcely opened, albeit they are not sunk down within the circle, more than they should be; whereunto it is not expedient to ap∣ply any medicine, sith nature cannot be amen∣ded. CAP. LXXXI. De Oculi procidentia, & Exopthalmo. , is when the eye either stands out of its Orb, in an unusual and unbeseeming manner; or otherwise falleth out so (at least) that it cannot be covered with the eye-lids. If it happen through some external cause, as the sounding of an Instrument, or hard labour in child-bearing; It is cured, First, by putting back the eye into its proper seat: Secondly, by retei∣ning and keeping the same in its place, by Fo∣mentations made of Astringents; to wit, Roses,
Pomegranate flowers, and Acacia. Thirdly, and lastly, by blood-letting: If Resolution of the Muscles be the cause thereof, then Apophlegma∣tisms are very available. , The Oxe eye, called of some the goggle eye, is also a standing out, or lifting up, and as it were, a casting forth of the eye, from the hollowness and circle wherein it is set and pla∣ced, as a precious stone within his Collet. But this affection or disposition is meerly natural, as we may see in such as have great eyes, and to them it is not needfull to apply any thing. CAP. LXXXII. De Hippo. , is an affection of the eye, coming at the first framing, and from the birth of the party, wherein the eyes cannot abide in one place, but are always shaking, and continually trembling in such manner, that you may behold the eye going hither and thither without any rest. Although Gorraeus accounteth it no disease, because no Physician hath set down any cure for it, yet in labouring to redress this fault, I would use the Instrument called a Mask, as we hinted, to the end, that he which were molested
therewith might not see but by that little hole, whereby the eye should be compelled to stay in that place in looking, which might cause it af∣terward to remain more stedfast. Some think it best to binde or roll the eyes for a time, and then again to unroll them, which may be profitable in this affection, as also in the squint-eye, called Strabismus. CAP. LXXXIII. De Paralysi, seu oculi resolutione. is here taken for a want of sense and motion in the eye, when it can neither be mo∣ved to the right side nor to the lest, up nor down, because the Muscles are benummed, and if any sharp remedie be laid to, it cannot feel the same. If the whole eye be loosed, it is hardly cured, especially in those that are aged. It is cured, First, by bathing with such herbs as are good for the sinews, having vertue partly to comfort, partly to make thin. Secondly, by applying a Cataplasm made of the same Herbs, putting to it a little Castoreum, carefully provi∣ding that it go not into the eye. Thirdly, by dropping into the eye, in small quantity, the wa∣ter of Fennel, Annis-seeds, Cinnamon and Eye-bright, mingled. Lastly, the blood of a Turtle, or Pigeon, is of singular use.
CAP. LXXXIV. De Strabismo. is then, when the Pupilla or Ball of the eye declineth from the middest, so that it appeareth more in the one part of the eye than in the other. Strabismus à primo ortu, & mala conformatione, non curatur; nec qui à mala assuetudine, vel etiam convulsione aut paralysi, si sit inveteratus, nunquam curatur. Recens verò malum interdum curationem suscipit. This malady is most incident to children pre∣sently after their birth, through the negligence of the nurse, who setteth the cradle in which the Infant lieth on the side of the light, and not di∣rectly contrary unto it, which maketh the chil∣dren looking to the light, to turn the eye on the side to it; and thus by continuance they are ac∣customed to turn their eye awry. I have seen it proceed in some, of having too much company with women, the excess where∣of doth marvellously scatter the spirits. In such a case the sick party ought to be nourished, and to drink Asses milk. Also the blood of a Tur∣tle or Pigeon dropped into the eye doth power∣fully help. Paulus Aegineta appointed a Mask for such as had this disease, to the end they might al∣ways
look straight, which is most fit for young children. CAP. LXXXV. De Amblyopia, seu Hebetudine. , seu Hebetudo, is a continual dim∣ness and hinderance of the sight, which is darkned, and yet no blemish or hurt to be perceived in the eye, nor in its membranes, ari∣sing either from the fault of the brain, that ma∣keth and yieldeth not a sufficient supply of the animal spirits, or else from something amiss in the animal spirits themselves, qui lucidi, tenues, multi, esse debent. Dimness, or weakness of sight, coming after over-much evacuation, or long and lasting dis∣eases, is helped by the restauration of the body, to its former vigor and strength: Debilitas vi∣sus ex senio vix curationem suscipit. To quicken and sharpen the sight, you have plenty of Remedies in many of the foregoing Chapters. Also see the following, De Gutta serena. Moreover, Leonellus Faventinus tells us, how he cured a Hebetudo, by dropping into the eye the juyce of Celandine; also the distilled water of white Honey and Rose flowers is highly com∣mended by many.
Vide meam Scholam Physicam, Med. 68. & 135. CAP. LXXXVI. De Epiphora, seu Lachrymis involuntariis. is here taken for the defluxion of a thin Rheum, which daily flows from the corners of the eyes. Some from their childhood are troubled with this malady, never having dry, but always moist eyes, with a thin piercing humor. New Epiphora's coming from outward causes are easily cured, especially in youth; but old, and in old men very hardly. Quae verò ex aliis mor∣bis procedunt, ut agylope, fistula lachrymali & si∣milibus, ab illorum affectuum curationibus omninò dependent. In a stubborn Epiphora, a Vesicatory applied to the forepart of the head doth wonders; as Forestus sheweth, concerning an old woman who had sore eyes, weeping and mattery, with great pain and itching, and could by no means be cu∣red, that with applying a plaister of Cantharides, with Honey and Leaven to her head being sha∣ven, he perfectly cured her. This following Cataplasm is of singular use, if the defluxion come from a sharp hot humour. ℞ Boli armeni, sanguinis dracon. balaustiorum
& myrtyllorum, ana, ʒ i. ss. acacia & hypocistidos, ana, ʒ i. thuris, mastiches, ana, ℈ ii. rosarum rubr. p. i. Powder them, and mix them with the white of an Egg, and a little vinegar, make a Cata∣plasm, which spread upon a cloth, and apply to the forehead and temples, and renew it as fast as it groweth dry. Some highly commend the opening of the veins and arteries in the head and temples, which draweth out the humor, if it flow inward, and cutteth off the course of it, if it be outward: Moreover, many remedies may be found for this malady, in the Chapter de Ophthalmia. CAP. LXXXVII. De Paremptosi, seu Gutta serena. , most commonly is a hinderance of the whole sight, without any appearance thereof in the eye (unless it be that the Pupilla seemeth blacker and larger) for the Apple of the eye remaineth sound, and unchanged, the sinew of sight onely is obstructed and stopt, by reason of a watery humor flowing down from the brain upon the Optick nerves. Platerus reports, That he saw a blindness which came from a round tumor growing in the brain, and compressing the Optick nerves, which
appeared by opening of the head, after the Pa∣tient was deceased. As to the Prognostick; if this disease be abso∣lute, that is, if there be a totall loss of sight, it is for the most part incurable, especially if the Patient be old. But if the obstruction be im∣perfect, which only causeth a diminution of sight, but not blindness, there is more hope of cure, because then it is supposed that the humour is not fastened within the substance of the nerve, but only gathered together in the brain, about the original of those nerves. Some Practitioners do relate, that some by a wound in the forehead have been cured of blind∣ness: In which it is most probable, that the cause of their blindness was the compression▪ of the optick nerves, by the veins and arteries adjoyn∣ing, and swelling with too much blood, which the wounds aforesaid emptied forth. Whence Spi∣gelius (as Plempius reports in his Book of the eyes) was wont, in gutta serena, with good success, to open the middle vein in the forehead, and let it bleed while it stop of it self. Old Physicians say, that Treacle is of excel∣lent vertue to strengthen the brain and the eyes, which may be taken by a drachm every night, with Fennel, Eye-bright, or Celandine water, twice or thrice in a week: Nutmeg eaten every morning fasting is much commended if it be long chewed, that the vapour maybe carried to the eyes.
Candid Mirabolans taken in the morning are thought to clear the sight exceedingly. The usual Opiate given after purging is thus prepared. ℞ Conservae florum betonicae, & anthos, ana, ℥ ii. myrobalanos conditas, num. ii. theriacae veter. ʒ ii. pulveris foliorum euphrasiae, ʒ iii. sem. foeniculi dulc. ʒ ii. nucis moschatae, cinnamomi, & caryo∣phil. ana, ℈ i. cum syrupo è succis foenic. rutae, thelidon. cum melle confecto, fiat opiata: Let him take thereof the bigness of a Chesnut, drinking after it a little wine mixed with Fennel water. In a desperate case, when all other medicines have been used in vain, a vesicatory applied o∣ver the whole head (being shaven) in form of a cap, hath many times been very successful: If it be twice or thrice used after the drying up of the former blisters, it is more advantagious. CAP. LXXXVIII. De Symptosi, seu Concidentia, & Aporrexi. is, when the sinew of sight is so flat, weak, and pressed down, that there is not any hollowness remaining in it, because the inside of the skins do touch each other, by rea∣son either of abundance of humors which fall not into the hollowness, but upon the substance of this sinew, or else driness, whereby it is
withered, and gathered together. If old age do bring this infirmity, it is to be accounted incurable: If the party be young, and you perceive the disease do proceed from a∣bundance and fulness; It is cured by an univer∣sal evacuation, and by such things as cleanse and sharpen the sight. Vide supra, in capite de Gutta serena. is, when the sinew of sight is utter∣ly broken asunder, and separated from the brain by a stroke or fall, in such sort, that presently upon it doth ensue most desperate blindness, be∣cause the spirit of sight cannot be carried unto the eye. Concerning the cure, the Chirurgion shall have more care to maintain and preserve the beauty of the eye, then to endeavour the resto∣ring of the sight which is utterly lost. And so much touching the diseases of the eyes: Next follow those of the eares. CAP. LXXXIX. De Aurium Inflammatione. INflammatio aurium, The Inflammation of the ears, arises from a thin and cholerick blood, fallen forth of the small veins of the brain, into the membranes of the ear. Curatio est dubia, propter symptomatum magni∣tudinem,
inprimis in juvenibus; for they being of a hot temper, and their blood hot, the inflam∣mation is greater quae nativum calorem cerebri dissolvit; Hence it is that they die for the most part within seven days: But if they live longer they recover. This disease is likewise very dan∣gerous in Infants▪ and little children, which by reason of the quickness of their sence, minùs dolo∣rem sustinere possunt. Zacutus Lusitanus in praxi ad Historias, com∣mends four Hors-leeches applied behinde the ears, which he saith, gave much ease to a young man which had a violent Inflammation in his eares. I have sometimes opened the Cephalica vein, on that side the ear hath been griev'd, with most happy success. Gener Domini Hardy, annos circiter 8. natus, magna sinistrae auris inflammatione correptus est, which caused a most vehement pain, with red∣ness of colour, extending it self even as far as the cheeks and temples: His father desiring my advice, I directed that a healthful nurse should squirt a little of her milk from her brest into the lads ear, twice or thrice a day. I also prescribed these Syrups; ℞ Syrupi rosarum sol. ℥ ss. syrupi de rhabarbaro, ℥ i. misce. He took half over-night, a∣bout ten of the clock, and the rest in the morning, cum succo prunorum Damascenorum: He had four or five stools, and so was freed from the Inflamma∣tion and pain.
CAP. XC. De Ulceribus aurium, & vermibus. ULcera aurium, Ulcers of the ears, arise from those things that either pour forth pus or matter, or else such as by their acrimony and tartness are of a corroding nature. Ulcera in auribus difficilè curantur, quia cere∣brum vicinum ad eas partes excrementa deponit; But those which follow an Imposthume are easier cured, especially if the matter be laudable; but where the matter is virulent, stinking, or the like, it is difficult; especially if the Ulcer be cavous, and the bone foul. For drying and cleansing of an Ulcer in the ear, this Medicine following is excellent, as I have found by experience: ℞ Mellis optimi, & vini albi antiqui, ana, ℥ iii. Bulliant ad despumatio∣nem, & instillentur in aurem, and stop it with Cotton dipt in the same: But if you would not have it so strong, you may boil the Honey with Water and Wine: Or ℞ Decocti hordei, ℥ iv. mellis rosacei, ℥ i. misce. instillentur tepidè in aurem, Vermes, worms, discover themselves by the corroding pain, restlesness, and other such like conjectural Symptoms. Necantur unguento ex axungia capi, & oleo cory∣li, cum gr. ii. Mercurii dulcis misto: This medicine following is highly commended.
℞ Olei amygdal. amar. succi apii, centaurii mi∣nor. ana, ℥ ii. aceti, ʒ ii. Bulliant parum, deinde adde myrrhae, aloes, ana, ℈ i. M. Instillentur in aurem. Also the decoction of Hemp dropt in∣to the ear is very effectual for the killing of Worms. Hitherto of the diseases of the ears: Next follow the symptomes. CAP. XCI. De Otalgia, seu Aurium dolore. , seu aurium dolor, Pain of the ears, ariseth from causes distending the mem∣branes encompassing about the cavity of the ear, and endued with an exquisite sence. Prognosis doloris aurium varia est pro varieta∣te causarum. That which▪ comes from a bare distemper is easily cured: Qui à materia frigida, pituitosa, serosa, vel flatuosa producitur, is not ve∣ry dangerous, but useth to continue long. The cure is somewhat doubtful if it abide in the deep∣er part, or bottome of the ear, sicut etiam si ju∣venes infestat. Aurium dolor acutus cum fe∣bre continua, ac vehementi, curatu est difficilis: periculum enim delirii, convulsionis, mortis{que} im∣minet. This Remedy is greatly praised by many: ℞ Lactis muliebris recenter mulcti, ℥ ii. albumin.
ovi agitati, ut in liquorem abeat, ℥. ss. M. instil∣lentur tepidè in aurem. Sows, called Aselli, infused in oil of Chamo∣mil, Roses, or water-Lillies, and strained, are the best Anodynes; haec enim animalia eximiam ha∣bent vim dolorem sedandi. Plura de aurium dolore vide in meo Enchiridio medico, lib. 3 cap. 13. CAP. XCII. De Cophosi, seu surditate, & gravi auditu. , seu Surditas, Deafness, is when the hearing is totally gone, so that the Pati∣ent either heareth no noise, or if he do, he can∣not distinguish it. Surditas à nativitate non est curabilis. Quae verò inveterata & diuturna, difficillime curatur. A deafness from choler or blood, which hapneth onely in sharp continuing Fevers, cum earum fe∣brium curatione solvi consuevit. Surditas per in∣tervalla crescens & decrescens curabilis est. For it signifieth that it comes from a moveable humor, which sometimes is more, sometimes less in quantity: A deafness coming from a distemper of the brain is more easily cured, than that which comes from a proper disease of the ear. A certain woman of Delf, as Forestus reports, after a long disease fell deaf, which after sufficient
purging abstained from Physick; at length she was perswaded by an old woman to put a grain or two of Musk into her ears with a little Cot∣ton, and so doing she was wonderfully cured. Some Authors commend the water of an Ash, which is made by putting one end of a green Ash into the fire, and taking the water out of the o∣ther end; this is best when deafness comes of a hot cause: Mathiolus mixeth this water with juyces, and commends it highly in these words: We know that the water which comes out of Ash, when it is burnt, mixed with the juyce of Sow-bread, Squils, and Rue, in equal parts warm∣ed together, to be excellent against deafness, if it be dropped into the sound ear when the Patient goeth to bed, and lieth upon that ear which is deaf; but when both ears are deaf, then into that which is least affected. Many I have cured of deafness, only by drop∣ping into the ear the distilled water of Carduus Benedictus, the leaves thereof being twice infu∣sed in the glass vessel. Ants Eggs mixed with the juyce of an Onion, and dropped into the Ear, do cure the oldest deaf∣ness, as Zechius saith. The Gall of a Hare is much commended, if it be used fresh, with an equal portion of the pu∣rest Honey, and warmed in the shell of an Onion. Si affectus contumacissimus propositis remediis non cedat, curari potest salivatione, usu mercurii
dulcis curiosè administrati procuratâ quia Surdi∣tas ex lue venerea contracta ita curari solet. Vi∣de supra, in capite de cancro corneae, versus fi∣nem. , seu gravis auditus, is, when one can∣not hear without much difficulty, nor understand what others say, except they speak very loud. Thick hearing, if it be not speedily cured, end∣eth in a perfect deafness. Plura de Surditate, & gravi auditu, vide in meo Enchiriaio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 15. Et etiam in meâ Scholâ Physicâ, Med. 107. CAP. XCIII. De Sonitu, seu Tinnitu Aurium. TInnitus, or ringing noise, is defined to be a preternatural sound in the ears made and perceived in the instrument of hearing, or else in the cavity of the Head-bone, arising from va∣pours, First shut up therein, and then moved. As to the Prognostick, a new begun noise in the head is easily cured, but an old hardly, and the more si à luë venerea ortum habet. Si in fe∣bribus sonitus aurium fiat ex spiritu vel humore frigido & crasso, sponte sonitus ille, absque medica∣mentorum usu, cessare solet. Pulsationes in capite, & sonitus aurium, haemorrhagiam narium signifi∣cant. Diuturnus aurium tinnitus à materia pitui∣tosa
in aure contenta oriundus, in surditatem dege∣nerat; for when the matter is increased, the pas∣sage of hearing is stopped. A certain Gentlewoman, 36 years of age, troubled with a ringing noise in her head, I thus helped: ℞ Extracti Rudii, ʒ ss. Calomelanos, gr. vi. resinae jalappae, gr. iv. misce, & f. pil. num. vi. they wrought very well, and did her much good: Next I commanded her to sneeze every third morning with a little of this pouder; ℞ Pulveris sternutatorii, (descripti in meo Enchi∣ridio Medico, p. 6.) ℈ ss. pulveris castorei, gr. iii. misce. Every night, for seven nights together, there was dropt into her ear two or three drops of Carduus water, twice distilled; after which, the ringing noise in her head was quite taken a∣way, and returned no more. Plura de hoc affectu vide in meo Enchiridio Me∣dico, lib. 3. cap. 14. Next follow the diseases, and symptomes of the nostrils. CAP. XCIV. De Narium ulcere, & Ozaena. ULcus narium, The Ulcer of the nostrils, is either new or simple, or old and stinking; this last is called Ozaena. The new Ulcer which is simple, either comes of external causes, ut vulnere, aut contusione, or
else from internal, as the sharpness of humors, flowing to the part, ac praecipuè pituitae salsae à cerebro profluentis. cometh from a simple ulcer neglected, or from the malignity and acrimony of the cause by which it becometh putrid and filthy. Ulcers that are new, and come from a gentle humor that hath little malignity, are easily cured: But old Ulcers that are sordid and putrid are hard∣ly cured; but if they turn into a Cancer, never. Si à lue venerea, aut Elephantiasi oriantur, curari non possunt, nisi affectus illi priùs auferantur. Plura de Ozaena vide in meo Enchiridio Medi∣co, lib 3. cap. 17. Et etiam in meâ Scholâ Physicâ, Med. 241. CAP. XCV. De Sarcomate, & Polypo. , is flesh growing in the nostrils with∣out any certain shape, but like the proud flesh of an Ulcer. is a loose and soft excrescency of flesh, growng with small roots and strings, spreading and hanging down to the lower part of the nose, like the fish called Polypus, from whence it hath its name. A Sarcoma is easily cured, for the most part, but but Polypus hardly: But that which is soft, white,
or red, or white and red, facilius curatur; durus verò ac lividus, difficillimè & periculum est, ne in cancrum degeneret: also that Polypus which grow∣eth low, or in the middle of the nostril, is more curable than that which is rooted high, quoniam remedia ad eam partem vix possunt pertingere. Mercury Precipitate, which is red, is account∣ed the best medicine to consume proud flesh without pain, if it be often washed; Ille pulvis cum melle rosaceo permiscendus est, and applyed with a tent. This Plaister following is of the same vertue to consume a Polypus without pain: ℞ Massae Emplastri de Mucilaginibus, ℥ ss. pulve∣ris sabinae, ʒ ii. Incorporate them, and put there∣of into the nostrils, circa lunam decrescentem, for then the tumor is less. Plura de Polypo vide in meo Enchiridio Medi∣co, lib. 3. cap. 19. CAP. XCVI. De Narium Foetore. FOetor narium, The stink of the nostrils, comes of foetid vapors either bred in the nostrils, as in Ozaena, Sarcoma, or Polypus; or sent thither from putrid humors contained in the forepart of the brain; or about the Processus mamillares, or os cribrosum. Foetor narium qui à corruptis humoribus in ce∣rebri
anteriori parte contentis exoritur, si recens fuerit, facile curatur; si inveteratus, incurabilis est: especially if it comes from a depression, and flat∣ness of the nose. It is cured (after universal evacuations) by snuffing up white Wine (in quo centaurium mi∣nus, & calamentum incoctum fuerit) morning and evening from the Palm of the hand: And then by using, in like manner, the juyce of Beers cum aqua majoranae extractus: To oppose the stink the following remedy is good: Cinnamomi, nucis moschatae, caryophillorum, ana. partes aequales; coq. in vino albo odorato, quod naribus excipiatur. CAP. XCVII. De Haemorrhagia narium. , The Haemorrhage, is an immode∣rate excretion of the blood by the veins of the nose, the said veins being divided, rarified, or opened. Drops of blood upon the day of demonstra∣tion, namely, the fourth, or eleventh, shew∣eth that there will be an Haemorrhagy upon the Critical day; namely, the seventh, or fourteenth, because in those days nature begins to transfer the humors to those parts. Sanguis è naribus die critico moderatâ quantitate fluens, salutaris. Haemorrhages that are very
great are the worst, for they tend to a Convulsi∣on. I in bleeding, either doting or Convulsion happen, it is a very bad sign; Spasmus enim ex inanitione mortalis est. An Haemorrhagy in the beginning of a disease is evil, because it is sympto∣matical, and comes from the malignity of the mat∣ter, nature being stirred up to send it forth be∣fore her time. It is also evill, if in the affects of the Liver it flow out of the left nostril, and in the affects of the Spleen, out of the right, quia omnis bona evacuatio  debet fieri) and espe∣cially if it be accompanied with a sweating of the brest or head. A few drops coming from the nose, on the Critical day, are evill, na∣turae enim imbecillitatem, & malignitatem morbi significant. But a drop coming upon the day of indication, and signs of concoction also appear∣ing, it signifies that there will be an Haemorrha∣gy upon the critical day, as I hinted before. If bleeding at the nose have continued long, swoun∣ding, weakness, and too much cooling of the liver, Cachexia or Dropsie is to be feared: To him who hath bled at the nose, in quartan Fevers, it is evil; for, as Avicen saith, bleeding in Melancholy and Flegmatick people is hurtful, because it cool∣eth too much. It is a good sign, if the Patient by bleeding be eased of pain. A young Roman, as Galen reports, had an a∣cute disease, and thought he saw a red serpent about the Chamber seeling; at which being
frighted, he leaped out of his bed: Hence Galen foretold an Haemorrhagy at hand, and hindred the letting of blood, which other Physitians had prescribed. Avicen saith, that blood hath come from the nose to the quantity of four pints by a Crisis, without any decay of strength; this might fall out in some plethorick body, such a one as the young Roman, whom Galen suffered to bleed four pints and a half before he would stop it. Filia mea, tres circiter annos nata, Haemorr∣hagia narium correpta, retenta fuit Bufonis exic∣catae (quam semper mecum retineo) appropinquati∣one ad nasum. Et eodem modo Filium meum cu∣ravi, post sufficientem sanguinis evacuationem. Homo quidam Haemorrhagiâ narium laborans, cùm ad me venisset ut sublevaretur, venam statim atque habuit à me apertam; postque trium aut qua∣tuor unciarum sanguinis evacuationem, in animi deliquium incidit, & statim Haemorrhagia narium penitus cessavit. A certain Gentleman was taken with so vio∣lent a bleeding at the nose, that he was much weakned thereby; for the stoppage whereof ma∣ny Remedies being used, this alone did the cure; Viz. Vinegar and water frequently snuffed up into his nostrils, quo statim cohibitus est sanguinis fluxus. Which Flux breaking out again two days after, he used the Vinegar and Water after the same manner as before, and it was presently stopped.
A Country man being almost dead with bleed∣ing at his nose, a little vinegar of Roses was drop∣ped into that ear which was next the nostril out of which the blood came, and his bleeding pre∣sently ceased. A certain Gentleman, having lost at least twelve pound of blood from both nostrils, had two cup∣ping glasses set upon his feet, without scarificati∣on, which wonderfully stopped the Flux; but af∣ter the cupping glasses had been a while fixed, the Patient fell into a swound; and therefore they took them off, and threw water in his face, by which he recovered; and then being refresh∣ed with the scent of Wine he came to himself, and was restored to his former health, from his bleeding, beyond all expectation. A piece of money bound to the root of the nose (between the eye-brows when the veins or arteries in the forehead or temples do swell) stop∣peth the Flux. And for the better compression, you may lay upon the money a pledget, dipt in the white of an Egg beaten with time. Pereda speaks of an old woman, that was cu∣red of an Haemorrhagy of three days continu∣ance, onely by Mints put into the Nose. Rodericus à Castro, in his Book de morbis Mu∣lierum, saith, that a Physician of seventy years old, given to violent bleeding, carried always Asses dung not quite dry about him in a Box, than which, he confessed, he never knew a better
medicine; especially, if when it was dry, he mix∣ed it with the juyce of a Nettle, or if wet, he put it alone into his Nose. Some use a Cataplasm, ex bolo armena, mixed cum ovi albumine & aceto, with very good suc∣cess. Vinegar alone will stop blood, if the forehead be fomented therewith in a spunge. And so will the Cotton of an Inkhorn, if squeezed a little, and bound to the forehead. Plura de Haemorrhagià narium vide in meo En∣chiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 18. Praeterca in periculosissimo casu (si permaximè debilis non sit aegrotus) cum nulla praevalent reme∣dia, tria aut quatuor grana Laudani, cujus operatio cujuslibet fluxus humorum{que} motionis repressio est, adhibere potes. CAP. XCVIII. De Olfactus laesione. OLfactus laesia, The huting of the sense of smelling, is the abolition, or the diminuti∣on thereof, which differ only in degrees, and in the greatness of their causes. Olfactus laesio recens, & à simplici coryza geni∣ta, facilè curatur; inveterata verò, & à confirmata intemperie proveniens, difficile: That which comes fom the ill shape of the nostrils is incurable.
That that chiefly deserveth commendation in this malady, is the root of Gentian, fitly put up into the nostrils; Oleum Nigellae, rutae, majoranae, succini, & castorei. CAP. XCIX. De Coryza, seu Gravedine. , seu Gravedo, The Pose is a defluxi∣on of the excrements of the brain be∣ing crude and thin like water) unto the nostrils, which is accompanied and attended with a fre∣quent sternutation, or sneezing. Among all kinds of Catarrhs, that which is through the nose, levissima & tutissima est, ac citò curatur, si recens fuerit, & à causa externa concitare. Quae verò diuturna est, à contumaci ce∣rebri intemperie oriunda, difficilè curatur. As al∣so, when it proceeds of a hot distemper of the Liver, which sometimes causeth sharp and hot Catarrhs; by which the nose is often ulcerated, and ill-affected otherways. Authors doe commend, for the removing of a Pose, the vapour of boiled Marjoram taken in∣to the nose: The fume of Vinegar sprinkled up∣on a red hot Iron is good for the same; and the better si in aceto rosae rubrae prius infundantur: If the defluxion be very cold, dry fumigations of Nigella, Frankincense, and the like, thrown
upon Embers are very good: his enim frigida cerebri intemperies corrigitur, & superflua humi∣ditas absumitur. CAP. C. De Sternutatione. STernutatio, Sneezing, is a violent and invo∣luntary expulsion (by the nostrils) of the flatulent windie spirits, and sharp vapours offend∣ing the brain. It is most certain that neezing is sometimes so troublesome, that it requireth a Physician as we may read in Forestus, 127. lib. 10. in his History of a certain maid, which had so grievous a fit of sneezing, from a sharp Catarrh, that she had the advice of many Physicians. Hic affectus in principio Catarrhi, & Coryzae valdè nocet, because it keeps the humor from concoction by its motion. Sternutatio in febri∣bus praecipuè malignis, salutem permittit: Neez∣ing provoked with medicines is good against A∣poplexies, and other great diseases of the brain: And if being provoked they do not sneez, it is a sign of death, for it signifieth that nature leaves to act. The little veins in the greater angle of the eyes, and that is nighest unto the nostrils, being for∣cibly pressed together, do forthwith stay and stop
the frequency thereof: Also it is good to snuff up warm milk into the Nose, by which only reme∣dy Forestus presently cured the maid mentioned formerly: Next follow the diseases and symp∣tomes of the tongue. CAP. CI. De Linguae Tumore. TUmor Linguae, The Tumor or swelling of the tongue, ariseth either from a cholerick blood flowing unto it, (and then for the most part an Inflammation is excited) or from a wate∣rish (and then the tongue waxeth white) or else from a poisonous matter, as in the French dis∣ease. Forestus speaks of a Brewer that had a great Inflammation of his tongue, which came to sup∣puration and brake. Galen maketh mention of a certain man, whose tongue was so swoln by reason of Rheum which fell from his head, that he could not contain it in his mouth. The same Author reports, that he saw a tongue which grew exceeding great, absque ullo sensu do∣loris, neither would it pit, or yield to the sin∣ger, but it was a bare increase of the quantity of the tongue, which came by too much nourish∣ment brought and converted into the substance of it.
Tumors of the tongue, for the most part, do not endanger the life, unless they grow so big that they cause suffocation: Si linguae tumor sit durus, lividus, & ad cancri naturam ferè tendens, incurabilis est. A certain Gentlewoman being grievously af∣flicted with an inflammation of the tongue, in a burning Fever, was thus helped: First, there was taken away from the Cephalick vein four or five ounces of blood, although she had passed fourteen weeks of her time, being with child. The same day the following Gargarism was used. ℞ Aquae fontanae, lb. ii. julepi rosarum, ℥ i. ss. mellis mororum, ℥ vi. aceti rosacei, ℥ i. olei vitri∣oli, q. s. ut acidus sit; with this she washed her mouth, which brought away much flegm: Now and then the dry places were anointed with honey of Roses, and sometimes with Butter, and so she was cured. Galen cured a Patient of sixty years, whose tongue was very much inflamed, only by wash∣ing it with the juyce of Lettice, after purging. Zacutus Lusitanus, in a desperate case, when the tongue of his Patient grew to a wonderful bigness, so that he feared suffocation, after empty∣ing and re-velling medicines used in vain apply∣ed four Hors-leeches to the tongue, and in a short time, after plentiful bleeding, it became thin and small, and the Patient escaped. The same Author declares, that he cured a
child of ten years old, who had a tongue swol∣len by defluxion, so big that it could not be con∣tained in his mouth (after revulsions by bleed∣ing, cupping-glasses with scarification, and sharp Clysters) because the Tumor was soft and loose, only by profound scarification of the tongue; and after he commanded that it should be washed with Salt water, from whence there came such abundance of humors that the child presently recovered. A certain person, by reason of the too frequent use of Mercurial Unguents, had his tongue so swelled (from the violence of the Flux which followed thereupon) that it hung out of his mouth the breadth of four fingers: He continu∣ed in this condition by the space of four months, and his tongue being altered by the air was grown three fingers thick. Mr. Des Grands Prez, a most expert Physician of Greenoble, being sent for after bleeding, washing of the part, and a Seton fastned to the neck, took down the swel∣ling thereof, chiefly by the use of a pouder fra∣med of Pepper, Ginger, Mustard-seed, and parch∣ed Salt.
CAP. CII. De Batracho, seu Ranula sub lingua. , is a swelling, in shape resembling a Frog, which now and then ariseth and groweth out under the tongue, out of that soft flesh on which the tongue lyeth, and unto which it is tied and sastned as with a chain. Ranula recens, & pituitosa, facilè curatur; anti∣qua verò, & ab humore adusto, Chirurgia indiget. This disease in children sometimes threatneth suffocation by reason of the neerness of the La∣rynx to the rough Artery; in men, if they have pain and Fever there is danger, for it may turn to a Squinancy: Ranula sub lingua, si coloris ob∣scuri fuerit, non irritabitur, ne cancerosa fiat. Forestus speaks of a Girl of twelve years of age, that was cured of a Ranula in two days space, with this only Medicine; ℞ Cortic. granat. hys∣sopi sicci, salis communis, ana, ʒ ii. Fiat pulvis sub lingua detinendus, and frequently use it: To men, instead of common Salt, you may use Sal armoniac, quod magis penetrat & potentiùs dissol∣vit. Petrus Forestus used the forementioned pow∣der to a Student; as also a decoction made of equall parts of Galls, Allum, and Pomegranate flowers; and lastly, he commanded the part to be rubbed with parched Salt, and Sal gem. and
the Patient was cured without manual operati∣on, quod rarissimè solet contingere. The same Author cured the like Tumor in a woman, by an Incision made on both sides, and after by washing with Vinegar and Water, mixed with a little Salt. Plura de Ranula sub lingua, vide in meo Enchi∣ridio Medico, lib 3. cap. 29. CAP. CIII. De Linguae nigritie, cum Scabritie & Scissuris. LInguae nigrities cum scabritie & scissuris, Blackness of the tongue with seat bedness and clefts, ariseth, for the most part, from hot and fiery vapors and exhalations, and this especially in burning Fevers. In omni morbo in quo lingua aduritur ferè sem∣per malum praesagium est. Linguae nigrities cum pulsu frequenti, & parvo, mortem propinquam de∣notat. The heat, toughness, and dryness of the tongue in Fevers is to be mitigated by washing of the mouth cum aqua portulacae, rosarum, decocto hor∣dei, cum exigua portione aceti; vel decocto viola∣rum, lactucae, cum syrupo violarum & diamor. Item frustum Cucumeris super linguam applica∣tum commendatur. Ad Fissuras linguae efficit decoctum Hordei, Gly∣cyrrhizae,
Psylii, Sem. Cydoniorum, Passularum, ad spissitudinem, & utere. CAP. CIV. De Linguae Balbutie, Paralysi, & Aphonia. , seu Balbuties, & , seu Blaesi∣tas, Stammering and stuttering infest the party, either from drunkenness, or from an ill composure and frame of the tongue, or from the shortness, and excessive thickness thereof, or else from an immoderate driness, or over-great humi∣dity and moisture. Galen, in his Comments, saith, That they who naturally stammer, have either a moist brain, or tongue, or both. And therefore stammerers are most subject to long Fluxes of the belly, as Hip∣pocrates speaketh. Balbuties à nativitate contracta incurabilis est. But an accidentary stammering coming by rea∣son of some great defluxion of Rheum upon the jaws and tongue may be cured by evacuation, revulsion, and derivation of the humors; as also by drying and strengthening the brain. Indeed the Remedies are the same with those for the Palsie. Paralysis, A Palsie happeneth either unto the whole tongue, or else only unto a part thereof,
(whether the right or the left) either by the de∣fault of the Nerves or the Spirits. If a Palsie of the tongue follow an Apoplexy or Lethargy rarò & difficulter admodum curatur; especially if the Patient be well stricken in years. Ex confirmata Paralysi omnes obmutescunt. This Gargarism following is very much com∣mended ad linguae paralysim. ℞ Rad, ireos Florent. ℥ ss. cubebarum, ʒ iii. liquiritiàe, ℥ i. Coquantur in aequis partibus aquae & vini albi, ad lib. i. In colatura dissolve oxyme∣litis scillitici, ℥ ii. Fiat gargarisma, & saepissimè utatur. If it work not strong enough, you may adde two or three drachms of the decoction of Pelli∣tory of Spain, or of Mustard-seed. Vide supra in capite 31. de Paralysi, seu resolutione nervorum, versus finem. , The Aphony, or speechlesness, ariseth either from a default and error in the natural for∣mation thereof; or elfe from the Palsie when it is consummated. Curatur ut Paralysis. CAP. CV. De Laesione Gustus. GUstus laesio, The hurting of the taste, is then said to be, when it is either diminished, abo∣lisht, or depraved.
The diminution and abolition of the taste hap∣pens by reason of a defect of the Animal spirit in the part, or a distemper of the third pair of nerves which come to the tongue. The taste is depraved when the tongue is in∣fected with an evil humor; ut in febribus saepè contingit. Gustus laesio ab intemperie frigida & sicca dif∣ficiliùs curatur, quàm ab intemperie calida & hu∣mida: The hurting of the taste, if it continues long facultatem naturalem laedit; and in that con∣dition the Patient alimenta discernere nequit. If the disease lie in the brain, or nerves, (which is known when there appears no change in the tongue) you may apply such Remedies as use to be prescribed for the cure of the Palsie. Cum ve∣rò à pravis humoribus gustus depravatur, com∣monly that symptome depends upon other disea∣ses; which being cured, the symptoms also are re∣moved. Moreover, a Radish root pickled in Salt, and chewed before supper, and the mouth afterward washed with Wine, doth help very much. Next follow the diseases and symptomes of the lips. CAP. CVI. De Labiorum Fissuris. FIssurae, Fissures or Clefts, are a solution of the continuity of the lips, by overmuch dryness and extension.
Labiorum fissurae non planè negligendae. Nam si diu durent in ulcera crustosa, aliquando etiam cance∣rosa, degenerant. They are cured by correcting the dryness with those things that humectate and moisten, and by uniting of the dissolved union. For this purpose we prescribe that fat which distilleth out of those wooden spoons used in kitchings, if they be put neer unto the fire: And if the chaps or clefts be somewhat deep, adipe anserino & caponis illiniri debent. Si à frigore externo sit fissara, solo unguento po∣mato albo labia inungere sufsicit. CAP. CVII. De Labiorum Ulceribus. ULcera Labiorum, Ulcers of the lips, proceed from humors that are sharp, cholerick, and serous or wheyish, either from adustion and pu∣tridness, or else from their admixture. Ulcers of the lips which are critically thrust forth in Fevers are a good sign for the most part, and signifies either the perfect solution, or else the diminution of the Fever; and those ulcers are easily cured of themselves, if they appear with signs of concoction. Si verò cum viribus diminutis sint, mortem minantur; as happened in the wife of Hermoptolemus: Difficiliora curatu
sunt & Pejora, quae à morbo Gallico proveniunt. Si sine Febre & morbo Gallico ulcera oriantur, universalibus praemissis tale adhibeatur unguentum; ℞ Unguenti rosati Mesuae, ℥ i. linimenti ex lithar∣gyrio, ℥ ss. misce, in mortario plumbeo, & utere. You must note that Medicaments are most fitly and best of all administred about the time of the Patients sleeping. Permultos hoe sequenti linimento & julepo, cu∣ravi, ℞ Mellis rosati, ℥ i. cerussae, ℈ ii. vel sac∣chari saturni, ℈ i. misce pro linimento, & utere. ℞ Aquae de fumoterrae, lb. i. Syrupi. è succo fuma∣riae, ℥ ii. misce, pro quatuor dosibus, manè & serò sumendis. CAP. CVIII. De Labiorum Tremore, & Perversione. TRemor labiorum, The trembling of the lips, proceeds either from external causes, to wit, cold, (cum dentium stridore,) wrath, or fear; or else from an internal cause, as from the weak∣ning of the nerves in some extraordinary great affect of the brain, or in the nauseousness of the stomack, and propension to vomit; for when the lower lip trembles, unless it be from anger or fear, Vomitum plerumque praesagit, ut Galenus docet, libro de crisibus. Perversio labiorum, The▪ Perversion of the
lips proceedeth from the affect of the Nerves of the third pair, there being then a Convulsion of the Muscles. In continual Fevers it is deadly, if the strength and powers of the body be extreamly weakned: But if they be strong and vigorous, the actions thereof constant and uniform; and when the Me∣tastasis (as they term it) or transferring of the critical matter unto the head be accomplished, it is then void of all danger. Interdum etiam in febribus continuis livida fi∣unt labra; quod signum lethale est, & caloris nati∣vi extinctionem significat. Curatio labiorum tremoris perficienda est secun∣dùm ipsius causas. Quò vero ad labiorum perversionem, vide in∣fra, capite III. de Tortura oris, seu distortione. We proceed next to the diseases and symptoms of the Face. CAP. CIX. De Oris Apertione, & Hiatu. ORis Apertio, The opening of the mouth, is, when that bone that by nature ought to have been shut is not yet shut; either by reason of some tumors arising neer about the conjuncture of the jaw-bone, (ut in inflammationibus maxillae & tonsillarum accidere solet) or else by reason of
some filthy humor gotten into that juncture, and there deeply inserted. Oris Hiatus, The gaping of the mouth, is then when the mouth that by nature (one lip falling down, and resting upon the other) ought to have been shut, gapeth; either from an ill custome, or from the obstruction of the nostrils, that so more store of air may be attracted, vel à luxati∣one inferioris maxillae, vel à laesa in Lethargo me∣moria, or else from the ascending up of extream hot vapors in Fevers; and then, if there be pains of the jaws (without any swelling) that seem as though they would suffocate and strangle the party, the mindes disturbance and alienation is then portended, and threatned. Utriusque curationes pendent à causarum, à qui∣bus haec vitia proveniunt, remotione. CAP. CX. De Oris Oscitatione. OScitatio, Oscitation or yawning is a vehe∣ment distention of the mouth, by halitu∣ous and windie vapours gathered together, in the spaces of the Muscles of the nether-jaw-bone, and of the cheeks, and extimulating or provo∣king the excretive faculty to do its office by ex∣cretion. Oscitation if frequent without occasion, pre∣sageth
diseases, and is in very deed the praeludi∣um of Fevers: If yawning happen to a woman in travel, it is accounted a deadly sign. Avicennas contra oscitationem masticationem acori commendat. Vinum etiam cum pari portione aquae aptissimum est. CAP. CXI. De Oris Tortura, seu Distortione. TOrtura oris, The writhing of the mouth is a distention thereof, proceeding either from the muscles of the face, or the nerves of the third and fift Conjugation, or those which de∣scend from the first and principal vertebrae of the neck. Tortura oris, quae ultra sex menses producitur, aut nunquam, aut difficulter curatur, teste Avicen∣na. If this unseemly affect hath no consent or agreement, the cure is so much the easier. Quae per spasmum sit tortura oris, in morbis acutis, letha∣lis est, teste Rhase. A certain Gentlewoman vexed with the Con∣vulsion of the mouth, was thus helped: ℞ Pil∣lularum aurearum, ℈ i. pil. de succino, ʒ ss. f. pil. num. v. These she took when she went to bed, the same night her neck was annointed with Oil of Sassafras; in the morning she took ʒ ss. of Pil. Ruffi; and again the said Oil was used with
Aqua vitae, the Oil being wanting, the following was used with most happy success: ℞ Unguenti martiat. magn. ℥ i. olei laurini, petrolei, castorei, terebinthinae, ana, ʒ ss. olei de Lateribus, ʒ i. misce. But first, the neck was fomented with Aqua-vitae, in which was infused Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves, Pepper, & theriaca Andromachi; she eat Nutmegs often; to the nostrils and top of the head was used oil of Amber: She chewed on the sound side Pellitory of Spain, and was often pur∣ged with the following Pills: ℞ Pillularum foeti∣darum, ℈ i. castorei pulv. ʒ ss. pil. Ruffi, & de succino, ana, ʒ i. f. pil. num. vi. and thus she was cured beyond all expectation. Another Gentlewoman afflicted with Tortura oris, was helped chiefly by the use of this Un∣guent; Unguenti martiat. ℥ ss. olei sassafr. & succini, ana, gut. v. misce. with which her neck was often annointed. Gaergarismus etiam ex ruta, salvia & stoechade, commendatur. Plura de Tortura oris vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 3. CAP. CXII. De Ptyalismo, seu Crebra sputatione. , A Ptyalism, is a frequent and in∣voluntary spitting and spawling, without any
cough, or retching, proceeding from a superflui∣ty and over-great store of spittle. A Ptyalism sometimes preserves from great diseases, imo magnos morbos tollit. And we have observed that some have been cured of an acute Fever by much spitting. Resina jalappae optimum est remedium, ut multo∣ties experientiâ comprobatum fuit; a dry diet doth also help very much. Quidam decoctione ex foliis plantaginis, myrti, alumine & balaustia composita, utuntur; which is only to be kept and contained in the mouth, and not to be gargarized therewith, lest that there∣by more flegm be attracted, and drawn unto the superfluous spittle. Si tamen critica sit eva∣cuatio, fluxus ille impediendus non est: Next fol∣low the Affects of the mouth. CAP. CXIII. De Oris Ulceribus, & Aphthis. ULcera oris, Ulcers of the mouth, arise from sharp humors, or vapors, à variis partibus in fauces translatis. , The Aphthae, are certain small, but hot and fiery exulcerations in the highest part or su∣perficies of the mouth, arising in children, for the most part, à lactis acrimoniâ quae os exulce∣rat.
Those Ulcers which come of flegm are least dangerous; those that come of blood, or cho∣ler, more; and those that come of melancholy most of all: The mouth ulcerated in a Fever is hard to cure, quia humoris erodentis malitiam in∣dicant. Ulcera nigra & crustosa pessima & le∣thalia sunt, praecipuè in pueris. Mouth-waters made of Plantane, Honey-suckle, and red Roses, cum syrupo de moris, & de rosis siccis, are here chiefly commended, if the ulcerated mouth be inflam'd; but it there be no Inflammation, unicum ac summum remedium est spiritus vitrioli, aut sulphuris, which may be used alone, to men, upon a little Lint at the end of a stick, gently touching the part, by which it will be presently cured, if it be a simple Aphtha, In pueris verò permiscetur dictus spiritus cum melle rosaceo, so that it may be a little sharp, and with a little lint at the end of a Probe often apply it, & citò curantur: But first it will be convenient to wash the childs mouth with Chalybeated milk, mixed with conserve of Roses. A child four years old was cured with one grain of Laudanum, when his jaws and tongue were deeply ulcerated with such an inflammati∣on that he could neither take broth, nor topicks, the humors flowing so fast from his mouth, that he lay night and day complaining without any rest. A certain person after the use of Mercurial
Unguents, had his mouth so inflamed, that he was almost desperate, which inflammation, all other remedies being tried in vain, was healed only with Chicken-broth made without so much as any Herbs in it; the virulency of the Quick-silver being mitigated, as was supposed, by the benign and debonaire substance of the Chic∣ken. Plura de Aphthis vide in meo Enchiridio Me∣dico, lib. 3. cap. 21. Et etiam in meâ Scholâ Physi∣câ, Med. 112. CAP. CXIV. De Oris Foetore. FOetor oris, The stinking of the mouth, is the offensive unsavoriness of the breathing, proceeding and arising from a foetid and stink∣ing vapour passing out of the mouth. Foetor oris ob dentes corrosos, vel gingivas exulceratas, per extractionem dentium, & gingiva∣rum consolidationem removeri solet. Si Anhelitus foeteat in tabidis, ut plurimùm laethale signum est. If the breath stink by reason of corrupt hu∣mors in the stomack, eos humores aloëticis optimè evacuantur. Also Cloves, Nutmeg, the root of Angelica, Cinnamon, seeds of Fennel, &c. are to be held and kept in the mouth. Vide plura de hoc affectu, in meo Enchiridio Me∣dico,
lib. 3. cap. 20. We proceed next to the diseases and symptoms of the Teeth. CAP. CXV. De Dentium Corrosione. COrrosio dentium, The Corrosion of the Teeth, is a diminution of their magnitude, from causes that eat through them, so that they are broken, fall forth by piece meal, the said di∣minution or corrosion, now and then, producing Fistulaes. Now the teeth are corroded or eaten in by an acride and thin humor penetrating by a plen∣teous and frequent defluxion even to their roots, and being there contained, it putrifies; and be∣coming more acrid, it doth not only draw the teeth into the contagion of its putrefaction, but also perforates and corrodes them; the putre∣faction may be corrected, if after general medi∣cines, you put oil of Vitriol into the hole of the eaten tooth; or else, if you burn the tooth it self to the root with a small iron Wier, being red hot; you may thrust this hot Iron through a pipe or cane made for the same purpose, lest it should harm any sound part by the touch there∣of; and thus the putrefaction, the cause of the e∣rosion, may be stayed. Moreover, corruption may be carefully pre∣vented
by cleansing of the teeth (with a pen∣knife) from meats that stick betwixt them; and likewise by washing the mouth with Wine: Also here are commended the little round balls of Trallianus, ex opii Thebaici, ℈ i. myrrhae, styracis calam. ana, ʒ ss. Piperis albi, croci, galbani, ana, ʒ i. cum melle scillitico conformati, & denti inserti. Worms breeding by putrefaction in the roots of the teeth may be killed by the use of Cau∣sticks, by Garglings or Lotions made of Vinegar, wherein either Pellitory of Spain hath been stee∣ped, or Treacle dissolved; for the same purpose Aloes and Garlick are good to be used. A Fistula is hardly to be cured, unless that the tooth be wholly pulled out by the roots: For although the corrupt and rotten filth which insensibly distills by little and little (& qui inter∣dum in os cum foetore influit) may by the use of Medicines seem to be removed, and the Fistula cured, yet it will soon break out again: But now that the tooth may be the better drawn forth, it may be well rubbed with the fat of green Frogs living in trees. Petrus Pachequus was wont to fill hollow teeth with Turpentine, and then to burn them with a red-hot iron, which succeeded very happily.
CAP. CXVI. De Dentium Mobilitate. DEntium Mobilitas, The Mobility of the teeth, is the weak and infirm standing of them, proceeding from the proper causes there∣of; upon which said vacillation or infirmness, the falling forth of them doth oftentimes en∣sue. Loosness of the teeth happening through de∣fect of Aliment (as in old people whose gums decay) can never be cured; Modicè tamen astrin∣gentibus agendum est. If the teeth grow loose by means of the Scurvie, the disease is then the more easily cured. If they become loose by a fall or blow, they must not be taken forth, but restored and fastned to the next that remain firm, for in time they will be confirmed in their sockets, as Paraeus tryed in one Anthony de la Rue a Tailor, who had his jaw broken with the Pummel of a Dagger, and three of his teeth loosned, and almost sha∣ken out of their sockets; the jaw being restored the teeth were also put in their places, and bound to the rest with a double waxed-thread; for the rest he commanded the Patient neither to speak too earnestly, nor to chaw hard things, but to feed on Broths, jellies, and the like; and he made astringent Gargarisms of Cypress nuts, Myrtle-Berries,
and a little Allum boyld in Oxycrate, and wished the Patient to hold it a good while in his mouth; by these means he brought it so to pass, that the Tailor within a while after could chaw as easily upon those teeth, as upon the other. Plura de Dentium mobilitate vide in meo En∣chiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 23. Hitherto of the diseases of the teeth; next of the Symptoms. CAP. CXVII. De Odontalgia, seu Dentium dolore. , is a sad and grievous sence of pain in the teeth, proceeding from the solution of continuity in them by reason of hu∣mors. The Prognostick is divers, according to the variety of causes: For that pain which comes from a hot, thin, watery, sharp, and salt humor, is more violent, but sooner at an end. Qui ve∣ro ab humore frigido & pituitoso excitatur, miti∣or est, sed multo diuturnior. There is good hope of cure if there be a kinde of pus or purulent matter gathered together in the ear. A Tu∣mor also arising in the gums or jaws takes a∣way the pain of the teeth: Dolores dentium in∣tentissimi aliquando ad syncopen, Interdum ad Epilepsiam aegrum deducere solent.
Uxor Domini Lemon, Castoriensis, dolore denti∣um à seroso humore procedente maximè turbata, habuit, remotionis causa, hoc sequens medicamentum: ℞ Calomelanos, gr. xv. resinae jalappae, gr. viii. conservae rosarum rubr. ʒ i. ss. misce. It purged her so effectually that the pain went away in the working, and returned no more: It is a most in∣comparable remedie wherewith I have helped a great number of people of the pain of the teeth, and other diseases arising from serous humors. Indeed the words of Carolus Piso first moved me to make trial of it in pains of the teeth; for he reports, that himself being troubled with the tooth-ach for many days, half an hour after he had taken a purging medicine, vomited up above a pint of cleer water, with such success, that for ten years after he was never troubled with it. By which experience, he always prescribed medi∣cines that purge water to them who were so troubled, and with very good success. More∣over, He striveth to prove that it comes from this cause, by this sign, because they who have the tooth-ach, do continually spet. Domina Thompson, annos circiter 25. nata, vehementi dentium dolore à tenui sed calido hu∣more emanante laborans sic levata fuit. ℞ Lau∣dani opiat, gr. iv. lapidis bezoardici orientalis, gr. i. f. pil. She took it in a little conserve of red Roses at her entrance into bed; it procured rest, quite removed the pain, and so prevented
a Fever, and other symptomes, which I excee∣dingly feared. Samuel Formius, a most experienced Chirur∣gion of Montpelier, declares, that he hath freed an infinite company of people from the tooth∣ach, by putting a little Cotton-Wool wet in oil of Box wood, into their hollow tooth: This oil is drawn in a Retort, with a reverberating heat; first, infusing the dust thereof in white-Wine twenty four hours, and then stilling all together: First, there comes away an acid water, which doth good in the tooth-ach, onely by washing the teeth therewith; after that comes the oil, which is to be diligently preserved. Gabriel Hardvinus reports, that he hath seen the tooth-ach cured with salt of Ash-wood, with which a womans Thimble, or some such imple∣ment is filled, and applied to the artery of the temple where the Pulsation is felt; and within a short time it makes a knot in the Artery, where∣by the Flux is intercepted. A certain Lady cruelly tormented with the tooth-ach, proceeding chiefly from a Scorbu∣tick humor, was helped by the use of the follow∣ing prescription: ℞ Aquae cochleariae, ℥ vi. aquae rosarum rubr. plantaginis, ana, ℥ iii. mellis rosacei, mellis morum, ana, ℥ i. spirit. vitrioli, q. s. ut a∣cidum sit remedium. Of this she took in her mouth, which freed her from the tooth-ach, and took down the swelling of her gums, which were filled with black blood.
A certain Nobleman was cruelly vexed with pain of his teeth, and very much molest∣ed with the swelling of his gums, which was re∣moved by the following Remedies: ℞ Pil. de succino Cratonis, ʒ iii. f. pil. num. 18. Of these he took three every morning and night for three days, which purged very well. This Gar∣garism was used: ℞ Decocti cortic. guaiaci, decocti Hordei, ana, ℥ iv. syrupi mororum, mel∣lis rosacei, ana, ℥ ii. spirit. vitrioli, ut acidus sit, In this also there was often in a day a piece of Spunge wet, and applied to the pained gums: by these medicines he was delivered from all his sym∣ptoms: The second day he could eat meat, and the third day he was perfectly healed. Formius tells us, that he hath happily used this following medicament. ℞ Sem. plantaginis, ʒ ii. tormentillae, ʒ iii. rad. hyoscyami albi, ℈ iv. omnia exsiccata redi∣gantur in pulverem subtillissimum, addendo opii granum unum, includantur in nodulis, qui mace∣rentur in decocto sequenti. ℞ Flor. sambuci, m. i. rosarum rubr. p. ii. Bulliant in aceto ad usum supradictum. These Nodules being steeped in the said decoction are peeled and gently pres∣sed between the teeth, and within a while much moisture flows out of their mouth, and the pain is taken away. Simeon Jacoz, a most expert Physician, ex∣ceedingly tormented with the tooth-ach, and
a troublesome Ptyalism, took eight grains of Resina benedicta, with which being very well and gently purged, he voided in great quantity the superfluous serosity in seven stools, and the day following he found himself free from the foresaid pains and troublesome spittings: But not long after the pain of his teeth, and Pty∣alism returned, which went away within twenty four hours, upon his taking the foresaid Medi∣cine, and so he was perfectly cured. Permultos curavi dentium dolore laborantes u∣su Apophlegmatismi descripti supra capite 16. de Vertigine. A decoction of the roots of the great Net∣tle, with a little Nutmeg and Saffion, made, in equal parts, of Wine and Vinegar, and held warm in the mouth, doth wonderfully draw the humors forth; but, at first, the pain will seem to increase; but afterward it will be mitigated, and cease. A Country man troubled with the tooth-ach was perswaded by another, to rub his tooth with a leaf or two of Elleboraster; he unwittingly rubbed all the teeth on that side, and presently almost all his teeth fell out: Therefore if any will try this medicine, let him first defend the other teeth with soft Wax. In a cold Defluxion, the juyce of Garlick, mixed with Treacle, and dropt warm into the
ear, on the same side, doth wonderfully asswage the pain of the teeth. A Nettle bruised and laid to the jaw, doth quickly asswage the pain, when it is swell'd. Many Topicks made of Narcoticks are in use; but these two following are the best: ℞ Opii, myrrhae, & ladani, ana. ʒ i. Pulverizen∣tur, & cum vino albo decoquantur in formam lini∣menti, which put with Lint into the tooth. The other is, the Emplaister of Riverius, chief Physician to Henry the great; It is thus made: ℞ Nucum cupressi, rosarum rubr. seminis nastur∣tii torrefacti, Mastiches, terrae sigillatae, ana, ℥ i. ss. Macerentur in aceto rosaceo per horas 24. postea siccentur, & adde opii in aqua vitae dissoluti, ʒ iii. picis navalis, colophoniae, ana, ʒ i. cerae flavae in oleis expressis, seminum hyoscyami & papaveris. albi, liquatae, q. s. Fiat Emplastrum; apply it to the Arteries, and the part affected with pain. A certain Gentlewoman of a cholerick Com∣plexion, being seven months gone with child, and recovered newly of an acute disease, was ta∣ken with so fierce a tooth-ach, that all remedies being tried in vain, she lay many days and nights without rest, crying out and weeping▪ At last (when as she was brought almost to de∣speration) there was given her four grains of Laudanum; which having taken with a little Confectio de Hyacintho, after a quarter of an
hour, she fell into a quiet sleep for some hours, and being awaked, and void of pain, she passed the rest of her childing time without any grief. CAP. CXVIII. De Dentium Stridore, & Stupore. STridor dentium, The grinding or crashing noise of the teeth, proceedeth either from Worms, the Brain being affected by consent, or from the imbecillity of the jaw-bone, Mus∣cles produced and caused by cold, vel à vapo∣rum multitudine, ut in paroxysmorum princi∣piis. Grinding of the teeth is wont to threaten the Apoplexie, or Epilesie, and likewise, in Fe∣vers, the deliry or dotage; (in such especially as are not accustomed thereunto) in case this do∣ting went not before the Fever. Hippocrates puts the Stridor or crashing of the teeth, amongst the signs of conception. The cure of it must not be directed to the Stridor it self, but to the causes. , seu stupor dentium, The astonishment of the teeth, happens for the most from the sourness either of meats, or of the humors, or else of the Fumes and Vapours, which fre∣quently befalleth those that are Hypochon∣driacal.
It is cured and taken away by chewing of Wax, hot Bread bitter Almonds, Liquorice-Roots, &c. Rhases etiam dentes sale affricare jubet. Confert & frequens oris collutio cum vino calido vel decocto salviae. CAP. CXIX. De Dentium Nigredine. DEntium Nigredo, Blackness of the teeth, proceedeth from filthy vapours that flie upwards, and are ingendred of evill nourish∣ment, or from the distemper of the stomack, which corrupteth good nutriment. Quò ad dealbationem, mundationem, preserva∣tionemque dentium ab omni sorditie, Spiritus sul∣phuris aut vitrioli maximé ab omnibus commen∣datur. Montanus reports, that he learned that at Rome, of a Woman called Greek Mary: to whom when he came when he was young, and she twenty years old, and after when she was fifty, he found her almost in the same condition, and she confessed that her beauty and strength was preserved by the Spirit of Vitriol, and that her teeth which were very bad in her youth, were by that made very fair and firm, and also her gums; and also that she perceived her self by the use thereof to seem more youthful, and
she used every day one drop or two to rub gent∣ly her teeth and gums. In a great foulness you may use the oyles by themselves, dipping therein a little stick, and rubbing the teeth with the end thereof, and then wiping them with a clout; otherwise you must mix them with Honey of Roses, or fair water, ne usu frequenti gingivas erodat. Cinis Nicotianae ad dentes abstergendos & de-albandos est etiam mirè efficax. It is observable, that those Women which use Mercury to make them fair, have always black and ill-coloured teeth. Next follow the Affects of the Gums. CAP. CXX. De Gingivarum excrescentia, & Epulide. EXcrescentia gingivarum, The Excrescence of the gums, is sometimes so great by reason of their spungy rarity, and loosness, caused by the abundant afflux of blood, that the teeth (and especially the grinders, or Molares) are quite co∣vered over. In the cure we are to use Astringents, to wit, Allum burnt, Sal Ammoniack, Mastick, Frankin∣cense, all of them reduced and made into a ve∣ry fine flour, in case there be no putrefaction pre∣sent;
but if there be, then this that followeth is singularly useful: Take Pouder of the leaves of Celandine, Sage, crisped Mints, of each half an ounce, Allum burnt one ounce, the purest Ho∣ney four ounces: Let the Honey be throughly freed from its scum by the fire, and then when it is scummed, while it is yet hot, let the Pouders be sprinkled thereinto; and make a Liniment, for the annointing of the teeth therewithal. is a little piece of flesh that stands out, and hangs forth of the Gums. Vitriol often sprinkled thereon doth help ve∣ry much. Plura etiam de Epulide vide in meo Enchiridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 24. CAP. CXXI. De Parulide, seu Gingivarum inflammatione. is an inflammation of the Gums, ex∣tending it self inwardly unto the root of the teeth, and outwardly so sticking out, that even the neer neighbouring parts are likewise di∣stended, grow hot, and become red. Inflammatio gingivaram nisi statim reprima∣tur, in Apostema abit: sometimes this evil doth turn into a long lasting ulcer; yea, now and then into a Fistula. Hoc malum etiam saepe in Cancrum incurabilem degenerat, ubi materia me∣lancholica,
sicca, & adusta fuerit. If the inflam∣mation of the Gums do turn into a gangrene, it is for the most part an incurable evill. Quando Apostema est in Gingivarum superficie citiùs rum∣pitur & curatur. The way and method of curing this Inflam∣mation Parulis, is one and the same with that in all the other Inflammations. CAP. CXXII. De Gingivarum erosione, & exulceratione. ERosio gingivarum, & exulceratio, Erosion and exulceration of the gums, happeneth either from Worms, or from the corrupt hu∣mors which cause them, vel ab humoribus acri∣bus. & erodentibus, à eerebro, aut ventriculo, aut liene, ad eas partes confluentibus. Fabricius Hildanus saith, That the Son of a Citizen of Dusseldorp was long troubled with erosion of the gums, and died, after the use of many internal Medicines and Topicks: and when he was opened there was found abundance of Worms which had eaten through his guts, and many in his stomack. This water following is very much commend∣ed in the erosion of the gums: Take of unripe Galls, A corn cups, and Flowers of Pomgranates,
of each an ounce: Red Roses one Pugil, Allum three drachms: Boil them in two parts of Frog-water, and one part of old red Wine, and wash the gums often therewith. The Spirit of Vitriol and Sulphur, as they cleanse and whiten the teeth, so they take away the rottenness of the gums, either alone, vel cum aqua, aut melle rosaceo permixtus, ut supra capite de dentium nigredine dictum est. If the Ulcer be deep and foul, you may an∣noint with this: Myrrhae Elecctae, & sacchari candi, ana, partes aequales. Pulverizentur, iisque impleatur album ovi ad duritiem coctum, & per medium sectum; then tie it with a thred, and hang it in a Wine-Cellar with a glass under it, and there will come forth a Liquor or Balsam, with which anoint often: But if by the use of the aforesaid, the disease be not cured, if the tooth neer the Ulcer be rotten, you must pull it out, and then it will be presently cured. CAP. CXXIII. De Fluxu Sanguinis ex gingivis. FLuxus sanguinis ex gingivis, The Flux of Blood from the gums, is, when it either cri∣tically or symptomatically breaks forth.
Zacutus Lusitanus speaks of a Goldsmith, who when he fell into a Fever by labouring at the Furnace, being of a strong constitution, lost much blood by opening a vein, and amended, so that the seventh day (having had an itching of his gums, and a pain in the lower lip) the blood gushed from the veins of his lower gums for three days in such quantity, that he lost above three pints more; and the more he bled, the more his Fever abated, and when it was gone, the blood stopped. Dodonaeus reports, that a certain Quarrier, ha∣ving the small Pox, had a Flux of Blood from his gums, and being stopt, it made the Urine bloody, which being stopt, it returned again to the gums, and there continued till he reco∣vered. The Gums bleed Symptomatically, when the blood is sharp, and the Liver or Spleen distem∣pered; Sic in Scorbuto familiaris est hujusmodi sanguinis è gingivis effluxus. If it come from a tooth drawn, after revul∣sion by blood-letting, you may apply to the part a Cataplasm of Bole Armoniack, Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, and the like A∣stringents made up with the white of an Egg. If that do not suffice, you may lay the Pa∣tients finger upon the part, and let him hold it there till the blood congeal above the orifice of the Artery.
Zacutus Lusitanus relates a History of one who having a grievous tooth that ached, drew it violently forth, and after had a great Flux of blood, from the Artery torn, which when it could not be stopped by blood-letting, cupping, and Astringents, nor by laying on the finger, nor by burnt Vitriol, at last by his advice the place was filled with Gum Arabick, which stopt it in three hours space, for it hath power to stop, cool glutinate, and dry. A certain strong Souldier, who after great pain violently drew forth a tooth, and bled much from the Artery under the tooth, for two days; the best Physicians use all Astringents to the part, with Revulsives, and burn the Artery with a hot Iron, but all in vain, for he bled still even unto death: Zacutus being called, applied the Plaister of Galen, made of Frankincense, Aloes, the hairs of an Hare poudered, and mix∣ed with the white of an Egg, by which in a few hours the blood stopt, and the Patient re∣covered. Next follows the Affects of the jaw-bones.
CAP. CXXIV. De Maxillae inferioris Immobilitate. MAxillae inferioris Immobilitas, The Immo∣bility, or the unmoveableness of the Ne∣ther jaw-bone happeneth either by reason of some luxation (when it is put out of joynt) or from a Coalition, or growing together of the said Jaw-bone with the head; or else by reason of a Distillation derived from the crown of the head, which floweth into the joynt there∣of at the root of the ear, there following upon the same a pain, and likewise a hard and con∣spicuous swelling: And hitherto appertaineth scorbutical rigidness and stiffness of the Jaw-bones. Curatio pendet à caussarum remotione, à quibus hoc vitium provenit. Vide etiam suprae, capi∣te 109. De oris Apertione & Hiatu. CAP. CXXV. De Maxillae inferioris Luxatione. MAxillae inferioris Luxatio, The Luxation (or dis-joynting) of the jawbone is, the rare but dangerous depulsion, and forcing of the same (either in the one onely part, and then
the mouth is writhed, the Dog-teeth standing directly under the incisorii or cutters; or else in both parts thereof, and then the ranks or rows of the teeth answer, and fall in one with the other, and the lower jaw-bone can by no means be joyned close with the upper, (but this standeth out further then that) unto the foremost parts: from whence proceedeth pain, an Inflammation, an acute Fever, and griping pains of the Stomack. As to the Prognostick; If the luxated jaw-bone be not restored to its place, it then threat∣neth danger of death about the tenth day, with a continual Fever accompanying it, as also an irresistible necessity of sleeping: And there∣fore the Cure is to be taken in hand with all possible speed, lest also that the affected Mus∣cles (which draw upward the jaw-bone, and also the Nerves inserted into the said Muscles) should likewise draw the brain into a consent and agreement with them. Yet the luxation of one side of the jaw-bone is not so dangerous in its restitution, as that which happeneth on both: Practitioners affirm, that the jaw, twelve days after it is set, is free from the danger of re∣lapse. Quo ad curationem vide Paraeum, lib. 16. cap. 8, 9, 10. Et etiam Hippocratem, 2. de arti∣culis, Et Galenum in eundem locum commentan∣tem.
Next follow the Affects of the Columel∣la, or Uvula. CAP. CXXVI. De Uvulae, seu Columellae Relaxatione. UVulae, seu Columellae Relaxatio, The Re∣laxation of the Uvula, or Columella, is the preternatural swelling, or extension thereof, (without any inflammation, redness, or pain) a∣rising for the most part from a Phlegmatick or waterish humor, transmitted from the Brain to that part, and there extending it oft-times into an extraordinary length, even the upper part of the Oesophagus, or Wezand; whence follows a nauseousness and difficulty of swallowing, with a troublesome Titillation or tickling. This disease in the beginning is easily help∣ed; but if it continue long it will hardly be cured, by any other means than Chirurge∣rie. That which is here of singular benefit is, a new laid Egg, boiled unto a hardness, cut through the midst, and for some hours ap∣plied to the crown of the head: Pulvis ex alu∣minis usti, ʒ ii. rosarum rubr. balaust. corticis granat. ana, dr. s. rad. bistortae, tormentillae, gallarum immaturarum, ireos Florent. ana, dr. s.
Compositus, & post adstringentis gargarismi usum insufflatus. As touching manual operation or section, which is the last remedy; We have an example of the good success thereof in Amatus Lusita∣nus, Obs. 65. Cent. 3. who had his Uvula hung down like a thong, long, and without blood in it; which when Medicines could not cure, he cut off, and after touching the part with a lit∣tle Spirit of Vitriol, he cured the Patient. And so you see that if the Uvula be long and white, or, as Hippocrates saith, small at the top, it may then be safely cut off: But take heed you cut cut off too much, for then the voice and breath∣ing will be hurt. Plura de Columella relaxata vide in meo Enchiridio Med. lib. 3. cap. 26. CAP. CXXVII. De Columellae Inflammatione. COlumellae Inflammatio, The Inflammati∣on of the Columella, (or Pin, as some call it) is the rising, or swelling of the same, from a cholerick blood fallen down into it, with a redness, burning heat, pain, danger of suffo∣cation, and sometimes also with a Fever. Galen saith, That an Uvula inflamed is not
to be cut off, or scarified; but after the In∣flammation is gone, and the superiour part les∣sened. So saith Hippocrates, when the Vvula hangs down, and the lower part of it is great∣er then the higher, and round, then it is safe to operate after the administring of a Clyster. But if it be red and swoln it cannot be cut, sca∣rified, or burnt without danger, for a greater Inflammation will follow, as also a Flux of blood; therefore you must endeavour, as he saith, to extenuate these accidents by other means at that time. Paulus Aegineta will not have us to touch the Uvula with an Iron to cut it, when it is livid or blackish, that is, when it hath malig∣nity in it, and inclineth to be a Cancer. Plura de hac aegritudine vide in meo Enchi∣ridio Medico, lib. 3. cap. 25. It is cured af∣ter the same manner as are other Inflammati∣ons. Next follow the Affects of the Ton∣sils, or Almonds.
CAP. CXXVIII. De Tonsillarum, seu Amygdalarum Inflam∣matione. TOnsillarum, seu Amydgdalarum Inflamma∣tio, The Inflammation of the Tonsils, or Almonds, is a rising or swelling up of them, pro∣duced by the afflux of humors. Tonsillarum Inflammatio morbus acutus est, & saepe suffocationis periculum minatur. Ton∣sillae in febribus denigratae & arefactae mortem imminere portendunt. Tonsillarum inflammatio, & tumor, vel resolvitur, vel suppuratur, vel in∣duratur; & si in Scirrhum degenerat rarò aut nunquam sanatur. Curatur ad modum aliarum Inflammationum, Vide plura de hoc affectu, in meo Enchiridio Me∣dico, lib. 3. cap. 28. A certain Gentlewoman was taken with so great an Inflammation of the Almonds, and her tongue was so infected with many small Ulcers arising from a copious defluxion of a very sharp serous matter, that she could not speak, or sip a little broth, without much dif∣ficulty. The Malady continuing after she had been four times let blood, there was given her six grains of Resina jalappae in a soft Egg, whereby she was gently and largely purged,
and the day after, she began to eat and speak freely. CAP. CXXIX. De Malignis Tonsillarum Ulceribus. MAligna tonsillarum Ulcera, The Malig∣nant Ulcers of the Tonsils proceed ei∣ther from some Salt Distillation eating through those parts, or from a Pestilential air, or else from some vaporous exhalation which hap∣peneth in the Venereal or Neapolitan dis∣ease. Amongst the Ulcers of the Tonsils some are familiar and mild, quae sunt exigua, munda, non altè descendentia, nec inflammata, nec dolorem excitantia. Others are malignant and pestilen∣tial, being broad, hollow, nastie and filthie, by reason of some congealed humor, that is either white, or black, or livid: and if those con∣gealed impurities descend deeper, then they pro∣duce an Eschar or crustiness; quod si in pectus per trachaeam penetrant, they then strangle the party the very self-same day. Tonsillarum Ul∣cera sine febre securiora sunt. The Cure may be fetcht from above, ei∣ther
out of the 122 Chapter, De Gingivarum erosione & exulceratione; or else out of the 113th De Oris Ulceribus & Aphthis. Μόνω σοφῶ Θεῶ, σωτῆρι ἡμῶν, δόξα καὶ μεγαλωσύνη, κράτος, και ἐξουσία, καὶ νῦν καὶ εὶς πάντας τοὺς ἀιῶνας. FINIS.
