b2083 12072528 53512
Better Late than Never. IT is melancholly to consider in what a con∣dition these poor Kingdoms are; and that which makes it still more deplorable is, that they have, in a great measure, been brought to this languishing State by those who really wish their Countrey's Good; and that even those are still the men that most endanger the Liberty and Property, about which they have so incessantly strove: For whether King James, or K. William prevails, all our ancient Privileges seem expiring; and we are threatened, on all sides, with Milita∣ry and Arbitrary Government, unless we make a Tender of the Crown upon the Terms of the Constitution, to the King we have hi∣therto Abdicated, and who cannot, in com∣mon Honesty, and according to the genuine signification of the Word, be said to have ab∣dicated his Crown, till he refuses it upon those Terms; which if he should, the Di∣stinction of His and the Williamite Party would soon have an End, and we should all join against Him and France, as common Foes, and fight pro Aris & Focis to the ut∣most Extremity, and with that united Reso∣lution, that Religion and necessity inspire. I do in my Conscience believe, there are not in England so sensible and worthy Men as those who frequent the Rose, and Richard's, and their Friends, and yet notwithstanding their Honesty is not to be corrupted, and their Ʋnderstandings are so acute and remar∣king, their Tempers have been fatally violent, and rather apt to pull down than to build up, and carried away with personal Piques and Prepossession: sometimes they are too refi∣ned Platonists, too Ʋtopian; and at other easons they know no bounds of Law, where a point of Interest requires laying it aside; they, as well as others, can strain the Consti∣tution till it cracks. I have a true value for many of that Company, and could they pa∣tiently in private examine these Subjects, would beg such a Conversation, for I dare trust their Honour; but seeing too much heat remains among them to hope for that, am desirous to offer some things to their Consideration. I will not entertain them with what may be observed from the late Times; but I be∣lieve they will find many true Englishmen opposed the Lengths the Army went. I am sure brave Algernoon Sidney did for one. I would onely offer this one thing here, which they may apply to every part of my Discourse, where it is needfull, and that is, (let it be true or false,) That Succesive Monarchy is the Government of England. So many are of that Belief and Humour, That he that has that Title, will never want a considerable Party, though those very Englishmen will be very sensible when their Religion and Properties are invaded. Give me leave, from hence, to represent the Dangers into which you were formerly driving the Nation, when the Bill of Exclusion was on foot, and what Advantages you might have had, if your hatred to the then Duke of York had not overthrown your Judgment, and perfectly misled you; or, next this late Advantage, no Party could have wished for a fairer Opportunity, than that was to gain their Point, which, but too plainly told us, the Quarrel was more Personal than National, that they had more aversion to him than love to their Country. If that Bill had passed, you know many would not have set down by it, and you had had every Body upon your Back from abroad; and what was yet more than I believe many of you then knew or feared, even this present King too, who of∣fered to serve his Father-in-law against the Duke of Monmouth, and gave him Intelligence, as well as sent him over the Regiments. But, on the other side, if Expedients would have served your Turn, you might have served your selves of the Humour of the Reguant Prince, who though he was wise, yet loved his Pleasure and his Ease, and was of a timo∣rous Nature; so that whatever might be his Inclinations towards his Brother, he was not for such bold steps in Government; yet ra∣ther than hazard a Rebellion, he would have parted with as much of what Flatterers had called Prerogative, as should have made your Li∣berties safe under all succeeding Kings; but you were too warm at that Day to hear of any thing like this. Thus Plato Redivivus was a Popish Author, The present Interest of Eng∣land writ by a Jesuite, and Mr. Sacheverill (that true old English-man, who alters not his Judgment for his own, and less for any
other Man's Passion) scarce regarded, when he spoke, in the House of Commons; and to be for the Bill of Exclusion was the distinc∣tive Badg of an honest Man, as if we were to be preserved by the Religion of our Kings, rather than by the Constitution of our Govern∣ment, an Errour as great as dangerous: since all our Safety would lie upon the Stability of his Opinion, that might be as soon influen∣ced as another Man's; and not upon the Na∣ture and Efficacy of our Laws: I indeed expected more dismal Broils to have been the Consequences of these Heats; and yet what happened deserves to be lamented. The next thing wherein your Passion mis∣led you, was your Tumultuous Opposition to the taking off the Penal Laws and Tests. Li∣berty of Conscience used to be your Inclina∣tion, as well as it was King James his Interest; and when he went about to introduce it irre∣gularly, you should have had the Bravery to have told him, that you were not now more than formerly against Liberty of Conscience; but that you would be against 'it, if it was to undermine the Liberties of your Country, and to shew you meant no more, if he did not, you were ready to joyn Issue and oblige him, and that you were neither Implacable nor Insatiable. You should have had so much Morality and good Sense, as to let the Papists see you would let them have the Priviledges of English-men, if they would be such in∣deed, and not flatter an Interest against the Constitution, but be true to it, and be only upon an equal Ballance, and preferred in pro∣portion to their Numbers. Had he or they slighted, or used you ill for this Offer, you had been justified before all Mankind in all you did before this Revolution; and what you have done since would be easily excused and palliated upon grounds of Polity. But, pray, let me Expostulate with you here; Why were you so zealous to over-look the Prince of Orange his Declaration, and set him up for King? Why would you let the Scotch appear so much a more reasonable and re∣solute People for their Freedoms? Why were you not more Explanatory about your New Original Contract? Why were you more fixed upon changing Persons, than regardful of Things? I believe, at this Day, you wish you had been wiser: I am sure I do. I think it the greatest Advantage lost, that perhaps the Nation ever had, and to tell you true, the only pretence and excuse you could have for what you have done, and the Nation has suffered. Those that were for the Regency were come to their Wits, and did not any longer think Absolute Power Jure Divino, or the best Model, and would have heartily joyned with you in settling the Nation; though I am not sure, and I believe you are as little, that they will to the last Drop and Farthing support what you have done. I thought it an infinite Mercy that the Miscarriages of the late Reigns had at last so opened their Eyes, but you your selves seem to be dimmer sighted in Prosperity. When the Popish-Plot gave you Power to carry the Mobb at your Heels, you were for carrying the World be∣fore you, and nothing would serve your turns, but carrying it too in your own way: But after the Oxford Parliament was Dissolv'd, you found you had been in the wrong; and after the defeat of the Duke of Monmouth were more convinced of it, though had he Succeeded, and his Title been examined and al∣lowed in Parliament, I beleive we should have been more unanimous than we are now; but his Taunton Proclamation deserved and hasten∣ed his Ruine, and would have lessened his Party, if King James his Ministers had made right use of it; and in this Revolution with Captain Tom's Troops, you scorn'd any thing less than Elective Monarchy. The People are not so Nice as to understand the Dispute, but Time will shew their sensibility of Taxes and Poverty, and when they repent too late, You will do so too. If you could take a sedate Account of Things, with respect to the Humours of Men, and the Interests of other Countries, and how they regard us, and we them, in order to a true Judgment, what is fit to be done upon present Accidents, how change of Affairs varies Interests, you would not be so often out in your Reckoning; but your Specula∣tions trust a little too much to the present Strength of your own Country Beef and Beer, and to the Confidence your honest Meaning makes your Country-men place in you. You are admirable in sudden Reflections and Ob∣servations upon home Politicks; but few of you are very general; and if a Man reasons right upon foreign Affairs that regard us, you suspect him scarce true to your Party; and you are never willing to yield either to the necessity of Things, or to better Arguments than you did first think of. You have a little too much of the Modern Italianism, rather than
the greatness of the Old Roman. Thus every little thing you mislike in any man, throws you into extremest Jealousie and Disgust, with∣out examining how uprightly he has acted in that wherein you challenge him; you think a Man wants Principle, who steps in any one thing out of your Road, and the Opinions that are then in Vogue amongst you, and that has any acquaintance that you don't under∣stand, though never so deserving. This is a sort of Popery in Government: For you prefer old Forms and Traditions before In∣quiry and Truth. Interests change and sort themselves afresh; and an Ignorance of that, or a prejudice against them that shew it, will make you miss your Mark, do what you can. It would be happier for you, and your Coun∣trey too, if you were less Captious, and kept a better and freer Correspondence. There are in all Interests those that would serve you Faithfully, and will never serve any Body but upon your Bottom. I am confident if you would have been cool, you might have had Accounts worth your Knowledge, and been able to judge of Futurities. Enquire well into the Lives as well as Characters of Men, and see whether they have justly forfeited your Esteem, and believe not too unchari∣tably; and above all, lose not any Oppor∣tunity of being acquainted with the state of Things abroad: Perhaps you have lost good ones, of having been early informed to Europe, of Princes Courts, of their Inclinations and Motions too. Can't you examine Things, and do afterwards as you your selves think most Advisable? Whilst I write thus to you, perhaps I am too much in the Dark my self; but could I see you growing capable of such Debates, I question not but that you might fall into Methods more likely, and more ra∣tional than those, that only preserve such Men as you lately hated; and to give them an Opportunity to secure themselves at your Hazard. If you will be true to your own Principles, you must mislike Mismanagement as well in one Man as another, and that will prove to the World, that it is not personal Love or Aversion that governs you; and if a Revolution comes, it sets you as fair for Grace and Favour, as the Ministers of State them∣selves, unless they do some very great Thing to deserve more; but, perhaps, their not being so sullen to Jacobites may teach 'em the Compass better. Nay, it will prove to this very King that you are not Asses made for Burthen, nor wholly to be neglected, ei∣ther in your Counsels, or your Persons: He would quickly see the Whiggs made him King, and that their Interest is necessary to support his Throne; and that you denied his Power of Stamping the worst Men, before they were well melted down and refined into Saints. Thus you would have it in your Power to support this Government; or if K. W. contribute to his own Destruction, you will have discharged your selves like Men of Sense, and Lovers of your Country; and be received like Men of Honour, and not destroyed for Persons irrecon∣cilable and ill-natured. To give King James but his Due, he made some Overtures of coming towards your Par∣ty; and is the only King has made any since the Restoration, and long before too: And it can't be strange, that since your Politicks have been so little Alamode of late, he should mistake in his Applications to you: But two things put you and him at vaster distance▪ Some of the Dissenters were so agog with Liberty, and some of them so desirous to re∣venge themselves upon the Church of England, that they thought no Flatteries too great for an Address; and on the other side, you that were the State-Whiggs, instead of appearing at , to direct and govern his Approaches to you, (the thing of the World which would have pleas'd him the best, and which some of you were invited to) and, in a bare-faced manner, publishing your Notions of Govern∣ment, you unfairly betook your selves to Libels; and an avow'd Sullenness, that made that King believe you would be Male-Contents under any Administration; at least, that it was impossible for him to satisfie you: And there were some Church-Favourites about that King, who are not more your Friends a∣bout this, who were ready to give every thing that Turn. Instead of making your Advan∣tage of that Coldness that grew between Him and the High Church, and stepping in between them, and managing that happy Juncture to all those glorious Ends you had long flatter'd your selves with, and which his Necessities, and those of his Party (too inconsiderable to hazard you) would, with a tolerable Address, have brought him to; you most unfortunately danced to their Pipe that had been deaf to all your Charms, hated your Principles, and had washed their Hands, but a little before, in the Blood of your Friends, and with them overthrew that King, in hopes by making to
have got and kept another to your selves, who convinces you every day, he does not love your Persons, and is affraid of your Prin∣ciples. Reflexions on these Errour may be of some use to you now, when Things seem to look as if we were not at an End of our Changes. Be not deceived therefore again, and let not Names fright you. It is a dan∣gerous Civil Superstition you have too long abused your selves with. I should think what you have done and undone, given and paid, suffered, and are like to suffer, by Taxes, Affronts, and Disappointments, should perfectly cure you of Traditional-Hates, and make you examine carefully, f▪ King JAMES has all that real Mischief and Terror in him, by the Insinuations of which you have long govern'd the Mobb against him: If you have not, at last, given away, where it may be too strong for you, when you ed it for your selves, or those from whom ou may have fairer Quarter. Whether we egard his Humour, his Age, his Interest; after what he has seen, suffered, and yet fears, methinks he cannot be so terrible to us. To this add the Minority of his Son, and the Inconsiderableness of his Party, and that he must of necessity, to preserve both, allow us a better Bargain than we  any body else: Think also with your selves, if he desires to be a Tributary Prince, or to be restored to a wasted Country; or if it be possible he should be restored before it be so, unless it be with the Consent of his People; and whether it be not your great Interest to hasten it, before France be at leisure to do it in a way not agreeable to him or you. It is too advent'rous and sanguine, in my Opinion, to put all into the Power of such an Accident. If you think of it quickly you prevent the French King, and oblige him to consent to his Return: but if you are obstinate, perhaps, he has the means of continuing the War till you can no longer resist; and then you are to re∣ceive Terms instead of giving them. And though King James were out of the Question, it is your Interest to prevent this; but he is the next and Infallible Means of doing it, as you may manage the Business. He must be a wise and unskilful Mariner that will never weigh Anchor but when he can said before the Wind. Improve all the Opportunities that offer themselves to you, to the Noble End you aim at; and henceforward overlook none; nor mistake any. Let your Thoughts be as large as your Subject, freed of the Biass, a narrow Education and Home-spun Prejudice, are apt to give them. This must be allowed to be one of the most incurable Distempers our Natures suffer under; but where there is so great a stock of good Sense already, as you are Masters of, our present great Miseries must enlighten you▪ And to be yet freer with you, since our Fears are of France, (and not with∣out Cause, as the matter has been managed) I must cell you that there are things to be ga∣thered out of the knowledg of the present King of France his Temper and Affairs, from which you might draw Conclusions of more Security and Benefit than you are aware of, and all your Obstinacy will give you. But it you will rail on, without considering whether you can have any Remedy against your Fears, and overlook those that offer themselves, you are of an unfortunate Dispo∣sition. If there is no way for you to under∣stand these things, you lie under unhappy Circumstances. If I might advise, you should not mix so much Passion with your Discour∣ses; but should cast about, whether some∣thing, very probable, has not lately appear'd, to let you into juster Observations: And be likewise assur'd, that so long as you continue morose,  and choose to be destroy'd rather than saved against your Prejudices; every Body will be afraid to tell his Tale to you, though it be never so true and good a one: So that you will be the last left to maintain That, which yet will destroy you if it stands, and be marked as the most Inveterate Enemies of Successive Monarchy, though you might have it within your own Bounds; to which that very part of the Church of England that hath been so much your Enemy, and which you ought to value, for being true to its Principle (if that be still a Vertue with you) I am told is far from be∣ing averse, from improving, as well as im∣bracing so fair an Opportunity and Advantage. This is written out of meer good will to you; be not so barbarous as to guess the Author, to his Prejudice; guess his meaning, if you can; he wishes as well to you, as he does to all his dearest Interests upon Earth; and hath, on purpose, avoided all the Beauties of Language, and every specious Ratiocination, that his Stile and his Representations might be as plain as his Heart, which he assures you is Yours,
