B4344 11719837 48334
Licensed, Ro. L'Estrange. August 9. 1679
THE APOLOGY: OR, THE GENUINE Memoires OF Madam Maria Manchini, Consta∣bless of Colonna, eldest Sister to the Duchess of Mazarin. Written in Spanish by her own Hand, and afterwards made into English by a Person of Quality. LONDON, Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel-street, near the Piazza, in Covent-Garden. 1679.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS Pinted for J. Magnes and R. Bently. Quarto BUrnt Child dreads the Fire: or, An Examination of the Merits of the Papists relating to England, mostly from their own Pens; in justification of the late Act of Parliament for preventing Dangers that may happen by Popish Re∣cusants: And further shewing, That whatsoever their Merit have been, none ought not be gratified in Religion, by Toleration therefore, unless we intend to inslave our selves and our Posterity. Romish Doctrines not from the begin∣ing: or, A Reply to what S. C. or Sere∣nus Cressy, hath objected against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, in vindication of our Church against the Novelties of Rome. By Dr. Whitby. Falshood unmasked: or, An Answer to Truth unvailed. An earnest Request to Mr, J Standish. Plays in Quarto. Tartuff: or, The French Puritan. A
Comedy, acted at the Theatre Roy∣al, by their Majesties Servants. Writ∣ten in French by the fam'd Wit of France Monsieur Moliner, made English by Mr. M. Medburn. Plays written by Madam Behne. The Forc'd Marriage: or, the Jea∣lous Bridegroom. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Re∣venge. A Tragedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. The Town-Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. Plays written by Mr, James Howard. All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. The English Monsieur. A Comedy acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Servants. Plays written by Mr. Crown. Andromiacheh, a Tragedy. Calisto: or, The Chast Nymph. A Mausque, acted at Court, by the Lady
Mary, the Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in Eng∣land. The Country-Wit. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theatre. The Destruction of Jerusalem by Ti∣tus Vespasian, in two Parts, acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Ser∣vants. Price 2 s. Plays written by Mr. Lee. The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theatre Royal, by their Majesties Ser∣vants. Sophonisba: or Hannibal overthrown. A Tragedy, acted at the Theatre Roy∣al; by their Majesties Servants. The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Glo∣riana. A Tragedy, acted at the Theatre Royal. The Rival Queens: or, The Death of Alexander the Great. A Tragedy, acted at the Theatre Royal. Mithridates King of Pontus: a Tra∣gedy.
Books in Octavo. A Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that Charge is justified, and the pretended Refutati∣on of Dr. Stilling fleet's Discourse is fully answered. By Dr. Whitby. The natural History of the Passions-By the Lord Clarendon. Price 2. s. Mauger's Letters, French and Eng∣lish, on all Subjects, Moral, Divine, Amo∣rous. Price 2 s. 6 d. Covent-Garden Drollery: or, A Colle∣ction of choice Songs, Poems, Prologues, and Epilogues: Never printed before. The Memoires of Madam Maria Manchini Constabless of Colonna, eldest Sister to the Duchess of Mazarin. Books in Duodecimo Zelinda: A Romance, Translated from the fam'd Mounsieur Scudery. By T. D. Price 12 d. The Happy Slave. A pleasant Novel. in 3 Parts. Written in French by the fam'd Wit of France Monsieur Bromond; and rendred into English by a Person of Quality. Price 1 s. 6 d.
COLONNA's Apology: OR, The Genuine Memoires OF Madam Maria Manchini. THE Actions of Persons of Quality, as they are more ex∣pos'd than any other to pub∣lique view, are also more sub∣ject to censure and obloquy; especially in France, where Libels set forth of meer malice against the reputation of our Sex, are entertain'd with undeserv'd applause, and look'd upon as pieces of Court-Gal∣lantry and Wit. I very well knew Wri∣tings of that kind, spare not the most sa∣cred Persons, yet, I confess, I thought my self priviledged from their Lash by the favour of the Age, and constant Regu∣larity
of my Life, till I was undeceiv'd by News sent me from France of a Hi∣story of my Life published there in Print, of which I was suppos'd the Author: You may believe me (upon receiving this News and the Circumstances that attended it,) not a little curious of see∣ing the Book; but when I had read it, the indignation I was in at the intelli∣gence sent me, was quickly chang'd in∣to that slight and contempt the Author deserv'd: I need not inform those who are acquainted with me, there is not in this pretended History any one inci∣dent but what is fictitious, and as con∣trary to my Humour, as to Truth; there needs but a slight knowledge of my Inclinations and Conduct to per∣swade the Reader 'tis a pure Invention of the Author of it; and that if it con∣tain any adventure of my life, he hath disguis'd and made it quite another thing, by the Circumstances he hath added to it: I pass by the baseness of the Style, than which nothing more ordinary and mean; and (to say all in a Word) nothing more like the Genius of the Author: But because those who
know me not, may give credit to what he hath endeavoured to make them be∣lieve: I thought my self concern'd to vindicate my reputation from the injury offer'd it, by giving you a true and faithful Relation made by my self of all that happened to me from a Child, to which the pressing Instances of several Persons interressed in my concerns, have further oblig'd me. I was born at Rome, and descend of a Family of Illustrious Nobility, and no less considerable for Merit; which needed not the Glories of Cardinal Mazarin my Uncle, to make it appear with Splendor in the Chief City of the World. When I came to seven Years of Age, my Mother not finding in me the Beauty she observ'd in my Sister Horten∣sia, (now Dutchess of Mazarin) dispos'd me to go into a Covent of the Order of St. Benedict, call'd Campo Martio, with design to make me a Nun; and fancy∣ing that an Aunt of mine in the same Covent, who had the tuition of me, would be very instrumental for the pur∣pose. After two Years spent there, my
Mother, though she had not equal tenderness for me, as for my Sister Hor∣tensia, yet pittying the ill health I had there, and attributing it to my being so straitly coop'd up, and to the Air of the Place, which was very ill, she took me home. About two Years after my leaving the Covent, my Uncle, arriv'd almost at the height of his Fortune, was wil∣ling to improve his happiness by com∣municating it. He writ to my Mother and my Aunt Martinozzi to come into France, and bring with them each her eldest Daughter. The order being so strict, seem'd to exclude my Sister as a Cadette; but being my Mothers Fa∣vourite, her Beauty gain'd her in my Mothers Affection a right of Seniority: However, I was made acquainted with my Uncles Orders, and my Mother would doubtless have been very glad to have found me unwilling to obey them. I am sufficiently assured of it by her having put it to my choice to go in∣to France, or stay at Rome with my Aunt to be made a Nun; and her asking me very seriously if I had not made a
Vow to that purpose: I very well re∣member the Answer I made her, was, There were Covents every where, and that if ever I chanc'd to be so pi∣ously dispos'd, I could be a Nun at Paris, as well as at Rome; and that I was not yet of a competent Age for making a choice of that conse∣quence. My Mother undeceived by this An∣swer, resolv'd to take me along; and to ease her self of the trouble she was in for the preference my Uncles orders gave me above my Sister, she took us both with her. We embarqued in a Gally of Genes, sent us by that Republick, whom my Uncle had particularly oblig'd. I shall not take upon me the description of that floating Mansion, that I may not lose time in setting forth the Rich∣ness and Magnificence of its Tackle and Furniture, it shall suffice to acquaint you that during our Voyage, the Pomp we were treated in was no less than Majestick, and that the Tables of Kings are not serv'd with more Splendour, or greater Magnificence than ours was four times a-day.
We landed at Marsellis, where my Aunt (more scrupulous than the Cu∣stome of the place requir'd) made a long time some difficulty to receive the Civilities of the Town, as not able to perswade her self to comply with some formalities that attend them: But at last with much pain she master'd the difficulty, though not without giving just cause of complaint for opposing things so long authoriz'd by Cu∣stome. From Marsellis we pass'd to Aix, where we were lodg'd in the House of the Governour of Provence, being the Duke of Mercoeur, who of all the No∣bility of France had made the first Al∣liance with the Cardinal, by marrying Victoria Manchini my eldest Sister, ha∣ving gone as far as Cologne, to desire her in Marriage, when his Eminence was forc'd to quit the Court. Two Months after our coming to Aix, my Sister arriv'd there to keep us company. And for six Months more that we tarry'd there, all her care was to divert and treat us, at the charge of the Duke her Husband, who regal'dus
every Day with extraordinary Magni∣ficence. These eight Months expired, our Uncle thought us by that time pretty well fitted for appearing at Paris, and sent us order to come to the Court there, whither my Sister Victoria who was big with her first Child would bear us company, notwithstanding the great severity of the Winter; the danger she exposed her self to, and the desire we had to give the Duke her Husband satisfaction, made us wish she would have been perswaded to for∣bear giving us this proof of her kindness, but the tenderness she had for us, over∣rul'd all our Reasons, and prevail'd more than any consideration of danger or inconvenience she might fall into: Those that know her will easily be∣lieve this, and confess that Heaven ne∣ver united a more Noble Soul, with a handsomer Body, nor so much Vertue with so much Beauty. After a Months happy Journey we arriv'd at Paris, where my Uncle saw us in private, and received us with such particular expressions of kindness,
that wanting Words to describe them to the Life, I shall satisfie my self by giving you an Idea of them, in telling you, it was an Enterview like that of Jo∣seph and his Brethren, which was attend∣ed with all possible evidences of a ten∣der Affection. And though my Sister Hortensia had no order to come, as was hinted before, her Beauty excus'd my Mothers bringing her along, and the Cardinal was extreamly pleas'd at the sight of her. Being pretty well recovered of our Journey, we went to kiss their Ma∣jesties Hands, who received us with particular demonstrations of kindness suitable to their Royal Grandeur: But this happiness was very short liv'd, be∣ing soon interrupted by a sudden and sad change, of which I am going to give you account. I was not fully recover'd of the fa∣tigue of our Journey, the liveliness of my humour disorder'd by so much agitation, and my ill observation of dyet (eating indifferently what was bad, as well as what was good for me,) made me look so pitifully, that my Uncle
resolv'd to put me into a Covent, to try, as he said, if that would recover me. Besides, he loo'd upon me as too young and raw, and so great a stranger to the Language of the Country, that he thought me not fit, as yet, to be introduced into so glorious a Court; my Sister in all appearance should by reason of the like inconveniences have run the like fortune; but she was so young, or rather so beautiful, that she was dispens'd with: Thus was I put into the Covent of the Visitation in the Fauxbourgs, St. Jacques, where my Si∣ster came two Months after to bear me company, by order from his Eminence, who at length thought her too young to continue at Court, where her Beau∣ty had introduc'd her, and great pleasure was taken in seeing her, insomuch that Mounsieur, though very young, could not live without her. But that which principally mov'd his Eminence to take this Resolution, was an hu∣morous obstinacy he observ'd in my Sister, which was thought to proceed partly from the liberty they gave her in the Palace; by this means we were
both in a Covent under the direction of Madam La Mere de Mignon, Sister to the Prince President of Paris. She took care of our Education, and taught us French, and all other things necessary for Maids of our age and quality, and ac∣quitted her self of her Charge with great pains and industry: when we had been in that Covent a year and a half, my Uncle sent to us Madam de Venele, Maid of honour to my Sister the Du∣chess of Mercoeur, with order to bring me to Fere a Town in Picardy, where the Court then was. Before this progress, his Eminence desirous of an alliance with the Mar∣shall Milleray had propos'd a Marriage between his Son the Great Master and me, thinking it but just to dispose first of me who was the elder: But the con∣duct of Love and of Reason are so very different, his Eminence found he had to small purpose design'd me for the Great Master, who had already made Choice of another object, and wholly devoted himself to my Sister Hortensia, from the first moment he saw her, with such particular Circumstances, that he
said aloud, he could rather spend his life in a Covent then marry any other. I came to Fere wholly ignorant of the Design of marrying me, but when I arriv'd there, I had some confus'd knowledge of it by flying Reports, which in few days vanish'd with the Treaty then on foot, the Grand Master having by his answer declar'd the con∣stancy of his affection for my Sister: I continued at Court, where by the help of that Light I had attain'd by age, and care of my Instructors, I discover'd some Charmes till then wholly unknown to me, although I had not the full liberty of taking the pleasures of the place: My Mother seeing me lively and brisk, had not the same kindness for me she had for my Sisters; but kept me Lock'd up as long as she could, and watch'd me so narrowly that I stirr'd not abroad but in Company, and was frequently left at home all alone. This was no small mor∣tification to me, and appear'd far the greater, when compar'd with the in∣dulgence us'd to my Sisters, and the li∣berty given Olympia, (now Countess of Soissons) and Hortensia who came
two Months after out of the Covent: I Confess I was vext at the heart to see them allowed to spend their time at Court, when I was mewd up alone in a Camber, and depriv'd of the pleasures they enjoyed. I could not forbear mak∣ing my Complaint to my Mother for her using me so, and told her sharply, that if my Sister Hortensia deserv'd by her beauty the Chief place in her af∣fection, however she could not but know I was her Elder: my Mother at this was touch'd to the quick, and told my Uncle there was no living with me, and that it were better make me a Nun than venture me into the World, where she clearly foresaw I should be very mi¦serable, having neither ingenuity, nor respect for those I was oblig'd most to esteem. The Remonstrances my Uncle made me, after these Complaints, were so harsh and cutting, they would have made impression on any other but me, who minded them so little, that though I remembred very well what he said, I never laid it to heart. The Great melancholly my Mother
soon after fell into, was a certain pre∣sage and fore-runner of her Death; she became of so strange an humour, 'twas impossible to endure it: And I whom she lov'd least was to bear the torment of all her ill conditions, my Sister O∣lympia having a distinct Apartment to her self, and Hortensia was at the Dutchess of Mercoeur's, where her Gover∣ness Madam de Venele brought her up, with extraordinary tenderness and care. The life I led was very sad, and my troubles unparallell'd. And to mend the matter, my Apartment was the worst of all, and no company but an old Cham∣ber-maid call'd Rose, who waited on us when Children. And to compleat my misery, I saw my self on the point of re∣turning into the Covent. This was my condition when my Mo∣ther fell sick. And though at first her sickness did not appear dangerous, His Majesty honoured her every Evening with his presence, and observing I had some wit and briskness, he said to me one thing or other every day by the by, which help'd me a little to bear with comfort the affliction I was in by my Mo∣thers
ill humours: but this was no small addition to my Mothers disease, who could not endure I should enter her Chamber when company was there. My Mother at length grew better, but afterwards relaps'd and dy'd. The Hemettick Wine (which is us'd as a re∣medy in Cases of extremity) was given her in her sickness, and quickly brought her to her Grave. Education is the greatest present Pa∣rents can bestow on their Children af∣ter their being: But 'tis very necessary it should be attended with Gentleness, too much Severity being often a means to root out Natural Affection; so in∣consistent are Love and Fear: I speak it by Experience, the fear my Mother had kept me in, having made such impressi∣on in me, that Two Years after her death, I still dreamt she was alive, and when broad awake, I often fancy'd I saw her, to my very great trouble. Soon after Madam de Mercoeur dy'd suddenly in Child-Bed, to our general affliction; who could not but lament the loss of a Beauty so rare, and so ex∣traordinary Vertue.
My Mother being dead, Madam de Venele was made my Governess, with the like power and charge over my Si∣sters Hortensia and Mariana, who was lately come to us with our Brother Al∣phonso, who dy'd very young and very unfortunately, having been wounded in the Head as he was at play with his Schollers of the College of Clermont, where he boarded. The death of my Mother having made me a little more mistress of my self, and my Sister Olympia being marry'd, I enjoyed the Priviledges of an elder Sister, and was in a fair way to lead a Life full of Tranquility and Pleasure. The condition I found my self in, convinc'd me that the health of the Body depends almost altogether on the satisfaction of the Mind. And in the condition I was then in, I might have said without Vanity, that Fortune had been no less favourable to me in the Gifts and Endowments of mind, she conferr'd on me, than in outward ad∣vantages, and that the Soveraign Fa∣culty of my Soul had a strong influ∣ence over my carriage, and form'd my deportment.
In the mean time my manner of liv∣ing with the King and his Brother, was so familiar and pleasing, that I had li∣berty to speak what I thought, and the good fortune to find what I spoke very well taken. At my return with the Court from Fountainbleau, I was assur'd I was not hated by the King, who though very young, had penetration enough to understand that Eloquence which, without speaking a Syllable, perswades more than all the fine words in the World. And the particular in∣clination I had for the King, (whose merit and Quality I easily discover'd, greater than any Mans in his Kingdom) had perhaps render'd me more skilful in this than in any thing else. I thought the Testimony of my Eyes not sufficient to convince me of so important a truth, till confirm'd by the extraordinary re∣spects and devoires paid me by the Courtiers, who as so many spyes of the Actions of their King, had clearly disco∣ver'd his Majesties Love for me. In the midst of this my ravishing prosperity, a small storm arose, but was quickly over. It was reported the
King would marry the Princess Marga∣ret of Savoy Daughter of Madam Royal, and afterwards Dutchess of Parma, a Lady of extraordinary merit: This oc∣casioned the Court to go to Lyons: I leave it to those who have Wit and Af∣fection to judge, how capable a Pro∣posal of this kind is, to trouble and af∣flict a person in love, and what a tor∣ment it is to fear the loss of what we have an extream passion for, especially a passion grounded on extraordinary me∣rit, and occasion'd by so exalted an Ob∣ject, when reason doth countenance and authorize our affection, and not only inclines, but commands us to love. But this storm was too violent to last, and the marriage was as suddenly broke off as propos'd. I was oblig'd for this to Don Antonio Pimental, who luckily arriving with Proposals of Peace be∣tween Spain and France (whereof he had a Project) their Highnesses pre∣sently return'd for Savoy, and I recover'd my former Tranquility, and found that the pain I had newly endur'd, being short, and follow'd by the happiness I regain'd, had improv'd my taste of the
pleasures I enjoy'd, and heightned their sweetness, and made those sensible ex∣pressions of Love the King honoured me with, more charming than ever: Nor was it a small addition to my hap∣piness that the Queen Mother gave me constant evidences of a particular esteem for me, and that my Uncle was much kinder than before. The Excess of my prosperity made my satisfaction imperfect; and I could have wish'd my self some little misfor∣tune that I might the better relish the happiness I enjoyed. It was not long ere I had my desire, and fortune (with a Witness) granted my Request. Being return'd to Paris, our time was wholly taken up in divertisements, which made this the pleasantest part of my Life. His Majesty to make our de∣lights durable, commanded all those of our Company (being the principal Lords and Ladies of the Court) to treat us by turns, which, though in the Country, was perform'd with the high∣est magnificence. Love is the life of such Entertainments, and there was not one of the Lords of the company but
had his ingagement; the Grand Ma∣ster spar'd no cost to regale my Sister Hortensia, the Marquess Richlieu was no less careful to please Mademoiselle de la Motte Augencourt, Maid of Honour to the Queen. The Marquess d'Alvy was in love with Mademoiselle Touillons, our Confident, who was also Maid of Ho∣nour to the Queen, and afterwards marryed to the Marquess; not to speak of the rest as deeply engag'd. It would take up a Volume to tell you what happen'd in those Gallant Treats, and the Divertisments that attended them. I shall content my self with the Relation of a single adventure, to de∣monstrate the Gallantry of his Majesty, and how well he knew to take his occa∣sion to shew it. It was, as I remember, at Bois le Vicont, where, as I was walking very fast under a row of Trees, His Ma∣jesty would give me His Hand, and hav∣ing hit mine a little with the Pommel of His Sword, He presently drew it out of the Scabbard, and threw it away, in a manner no words are capable to ex∣press. These Pleasures had lasted a pretty while, and 'twas now time I
should taste of ill fortune, who had so long enjoy'd good; but my misfor∣tune was greater than I desir'd, and in a time I least expected it. The Spaniards no less weary of War, than the French, had (as I said before) sent Don Antonio Pimental into France to make an Overture of Peace; and the Treaty of Marriage with the Prin∣cess Margaret, when almost concluded, being broken off at his arrival, France cast her Eyes on the Infanta of Spain, whom the World look'd upon as the only means to make Peace between the two Crowns, and restore Christendom to general repose. It was not likely the King should have Love for a Princess he knew only by Report, but the Picture of that charming Lady being come into France, produc'd in the Affections of that Mo∣narch the effect a sight of the Original would have wrought, and presently in∣spir'd into him an ardent desire to com∣pleat the Allyance propos'd, which the Charms of the Infanta would have made him embrace, though the Queen Mother's perswasions and the Cardinal's,
and even Reasons of State had been wanting to press him to it. Before the Court made ready for that famous Expedition which restor'd Peace to these Puissant Monarchies, His E∣minence began his Journey, and would have us with him, to remove me from the Kings presence, as fearing my stay at Court might obstruct his designs. This part of my Life offers my Pen a large field to enlarge upon, by discovering the favourable inclination his Majesty had for me, answerable to the general Report that hath past of it. But my modesty forbids it, and will not allow me to speak of the trouble that Prince was in at my departure; having retir'd to Chantilly for eight days, whence he incessantly sent Courriers to me, the first whereof was a Musketeer who brought me five Letters from him, all very long. But I cannot pass in silence the grief I had at parting nothing hav∣ing over gone so near me as this sepa∣ration: I thought the most exquisite torments, pleasures, if compar'd with the afflictions of so cruel an absence, that was to put an end to hopes so glo∣rious,
and make all my high and ten∣der Ideas vanish into nothing. I wish'd for Death as the sole Remedy of my Misfortune, and the Condition I was then in, was such as cannot be ex∣prest. There are few so unfortunate to have no hope of relief: All the comfort I had, was my hope the Treaty might be dissolv'd, the Obstacles of Peace ap∣pearing so great, and that the ill suc∣cess of the Treaty might turn to my advantage; but the Ministers of the Crowns surmounted all difficulties, no∣thing remaining invinsible but my mis∣fortune. My Uncle being gone to Burdeaux, to attend the coming of Don Lewis de Haro, chief Minister of Spain, and the Court being shortly after arriv'd there, he sent us to Rochell, with leave to take our pleasure of walking over all the Coun∣try of Aunis: But solitude being more suitable to the sadness of my thoughts; I chose for my residence the Castle of Brouage, a place destitute of divertise∣ment, and where my Sisters and the rest of my Company could not, as at Auris,
go every Day to a Play; as if I had fancy'd all the World obliged to share in my sorrow, and the pleasures of o∣thers to be my Crimes. All my divertisements in this For∣tress, was reading some Letters re∣ceived by the Post, and the kindness of my Sister Hortensia, who often quitted my Sister Mariana to bear me compa∣ny: Then it was the Bishop of Trejus arriv'd there from my Uncle, to pro∣pose to me Marriage with the Constable Colonna, who had for that purpose sent to his Eminence at the Conference, the Marquess Angeleli, a Gentleman of Bo∣logna, to make the Proposal to my Uncle; and at the same time engage Don Lewis de Haro, to obtain from his Catholick Majesty the permission (ne∣cessary for the Constable, being his Sub∣ject) to marry me. The Bishop of Trejus fail'd not to represent it to me as the most advanta∣geous Match in Rome; the Constable being equally illustrious for Nobility and Fortune, and with very great ear∣nestness desiring me in Marriage before any other. Any one but I would have
been comforted with a Proposal of such advantage, but the grief I was in had so fill'd me with disdain, that the pres∣sing Instances of the Bishop did but en∣rage me, and forc'd me to answer him, He might have sav'd himself the trou∣ble of his Journey, if he had nothing else to propose to me but my leaving France; and that my Uncle, before I left Court to go along with him, had given me his word he would never force me to marry against my Inclina∣tion. The Bishop return'd with this An∣swer to my Uncle, who having a great desire to see my Sisters, was already dispos'd to send for them, and had done it, but that the fear I was in of being left alone, and the requests of my Go∣verness prevail'd to the contrary. The Peace being made, and the Kings Marriage concluded, his Emi∣nence sent our Governess orders to bring us to Paris; where we arriv'd some Days before the Court remov'd from Burdeaux; and Prince Charles of Lor∣rain, a Person equally Gallant and Hand∣some, began to make Love to me.
His Passion was as pleasing to me as to my Governess, who very well knew the honesty of his designs. But my Sisters were not pleas'd with his Assi∣duities, and being often oblig'd to follow me to the Tuilleryes, they grew weary of those continual walks; and as we seldom pardon the least defect in those we have no inclination for, the amorous Prince fell often under their Censure, insomuch that the Respects he paid me, and the esteem I could not deny his merit, were usally made the subject of their Raillery. The Duke of Lorrain, having disco∣ver'd his Nephews design, and fearing this Prince, being his lawful Successor, might by the Marriage he intended e∣spouse the Cardinals Interest, and re∣ceive from his Eminence advantages to the prejudice of the Duke, not on∣ly forbad him further address to me, but pretended to me himself, but to very small purpose, being too old to supply the place of a young Prince, or ratio∣nally expect his waiting on me at the Tuilleryes, should have the success the assiduities of his Nephew might have met with.
While this new Lover was making his Court to me, the King arriv'd at Fountainbleau, and the Cardinal sent for us thither from Paris, to kiss the new Queens Hand: I quickly foresaw how dearly I should buy this new Ho∣nour, and must confess I had much a∣do to perswade my self to receive it; expecting my Wounds (for which ab∣sence was the best Remedy) would bleed afresh at sight of the King. I could not imagin the King would have received me with the indifference he did, and I must acknowledge I never took any thing so much to heart, which made me wish every moment I might have leave to return to Paris. 'Tis an ordinary fault of our Sex, not to endure to hear others commend∣ed, though very deserving, if the Prai∣ses be given by one we love, to a Person who robs us of his affection. 'Tis the greatest of torments. And the King frequently put me to it. I was to be pitied the more, that I could not com∣plain of him, or disapprove a proceed∣ing my Reason excus'd. And the or∣ders my Uncle had given me, never to
speak on that Subject, left me no co∣lour of blaming him. Yet all these con∣siderations but augmented my grief, and the impatience I had to find an oc∣casion to tell the King my Mind, who received my Complaints so ill, I re∣solv'd never more to acquaint him with my troubles. But my Disease wanted remedy, and in search of cure, I removed from my sight all Objects capable to foment my Passion, and studied all plausible pre∣tenses to stifle it: I earnestly pray'd my Sister, (in whom I had great Confi∣dence) to speak all the ill she could in∣vent of the King; which was a hard Task for any, much more for one of her age. I shunn'd Company, and quitted the Court then at Vincennes, and came thither as seldom as possible. There it was my Uncle fell ill, and finding himself grow worse and worse daily, he resolv'd to have me marry'd to the Constable, who still desir'd it with much Constancy and Affection. His Emi∣nence finding me willing, writ to the Marquess Angeleli, then at Bruxelles, who had made the first Overture of this
Marriage to my Uncle at the Confe∣rence at Burdeaux: The Marquess came into France, and being a person of Gal∣lant and agreeable deportment, he made so good use of it in favour of the Constable, and the Customes of Italy, that I made it my request to the Bishop of Trejus to solicit my Uncle to con∣clude the Treaty of my Marriage, which his Eminence did some Days be∣fore the conclusion of the Treaty of Marriage of my Sister Hortensia with the Duke Mazarin, and soon after finished the course of his Heroick Life in a death equally illustrious. His Majesty having been pleased to honour him with all possible expressions of e∣steem and affection. Having done right to his memory, the King was so far from lessening the kindness he had for us, it seem'd to increase; not a Night passing but he came into our Apartment, attended with the greatest part of the Court, than which none was ever more rich or more splendid, or had greater Affairs in hand. Amidst the divertisements of the time, my Heart was full of cares and
disquiet, the Articles which the Con∣stable should have sent under his Hand, being not come; 'twas generally be∣lieved this delay proceeded from the change of Affairs by the death of my Uncle, and His Majesty was pleas'd to offer me several Matches among the highest Nobility of his Court. But being as much concern'd to keep my word with the Constable, as I was to see my great hopes all vanish, I answer'd the King, if the Constable had alter'd his Mind, I would spend the rest of my Days in a Covent. A few Days after, the Courrier ar∣riv'd with the Articles expected; in pursuance whereof we began to cele∣brate the Ceremonies of my Marriage in the Kings Chappel, where Mass was said by the Arch-Bishop of A∣masia, now Patriarch of Jerusalem, who made me a Present of very great value, on the part of his Nephew the Constable, in whose Name the Mar∣quess Angeleli took me by the Hand: This Ceremony being over, I was treat∣ed as a Princess Stranger, and as such I had the priviledge of sitting on a Ta∣bourette
in the Queens presence. This was the begining of this affair, which was to end in my departure; I solicited it with a great deal of earnestness, and could not be at rest till I was on my way; I had taken my Resolution, and thought it requisite to execute it speedi∣ly. As I took leave of their Majesties, the King had the goodness to assure me he would always allow me a place in his thoughts, and that he would favour me with his affection where ever I went. With that I went away, accompanied by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Mar∣quess Angeleli, and our Governess, at∣tended with Fifty of the Guards, whom his Eminence had before his death or∣der'd to conduct me safe to Millan, where the Constable was to receive me. I pass by the Accidents of our Jour∣ney, as not worth relating. The Con∣stable came to meet me, accompanied with the Marquess de los Balbaces his Cousin. This Gentleman making as if he were the Constable (who follow'd him to observe how I would receive him) advanc'd to salute me; but appearing very different from the Idea I had of the
Constable, I receiv'd his Complement with a little surprize, and very coldly, and turning on the sudden towards my Maid Hortensia, I told her, if that same were the Husband provided me, he might go look out another Wife, for I would never have him. Hortensia having seen the Constables Picture, knew him, and observing him hide himself behind the Marquess, she, to disabuse me, shew'd me him, who to clear the mistake and put me out of doubt, advanc'd presently, and having saluted me, gave me his Hand to lead me to a House of Pleasure he had hard by, within six Leagues of Millan, where he had provided us a magnificent Entertain∣ment. Having eaten, we embarqued to go lye at Millan, where we were received in very great State: The Marchioness de los Balbaces took me in her Coach, and the Duke Caltano, then Governour of Millan, being come out of the City to receive us, accompanied the Con∣stable, who would consummate the Marriage that very Night, notwithstand∣ing the scruples of my Governess, who would have had it deferr'd till after Mass on the morrow.
I was so tyr'd with my Journey, so displeas'd to see my self at that distance from my Relations, and above all so troubled that I had left France, and so much the more as I compared the way of living there with that of Italy, (though I was then not advanc'd be∣yond Millan to learn the difference) that I was in very ill humour, which was no small affliction to the Constable, who did all he could to divert me, with Balls, and Dancings, and running at the Ring, and other Entertainments of that Nature; wherein I may without flattery or partiality affirm, the Constable deserv'd the applause of all, as having surpassed all others in the dextrous performances of those Exercises. The principal Ladies of the Town feasted me sumptuously in their Houses, particularly the Marchioness de la Fu∣ente, who surpassed the rest both in Qua∣lity and Magnificence; but I was me∣lancholly, and out of order, being newly recover'd of a Fever, and could not relish those Pleasures: At last, after ten Days continuance of these Divertisements, it was resolved, notwithstanding my ill
health, we should set out for Rome, where the Constable was very desirous to be before the hot Weather came. The Governess and Guards that accompa∣nied us took their leave, and re∣turn'd for Paris, and we embarqued on a rich and glorious Vessel for Bologna, where the Marquess de Angeleli received us in his House with extraordinary kindness, and regal'd us very magnifi∣cently; the Ten Days we staid there were spent in several Divertisements, but I grew worse and worse of my Di∣stemper, and could not find any pleasure in them. We continued our Journey by the way of Lorretto, to avoid the Ceremo∣nies of Florence, where, of all the Ci∣ties of Europe, Ceremonies are most in use. When we arriv'd at Pesaro I was so ill, that the Constable was oblig'd to take with him a Physitian to take care of my health, and, travelling pretty hard, we came in two days to Loretto, but I was not able to go further. The trouble the Con∣stable was in for my illness was incre∣dible; and the greater, because it hinder'd his being at the Cavalcade yearly made at
Rome on St. Peters Day, for which he had hasten'd our Journey, and travell'd very hard. But my Malady appearing desperate, and the Symptoms mortal, the Constable sent for all the Eminent Physitians in the Neighbouring Cities, but with very ill success; for of Ten or Twelve that came to me there was not one capable to undertake the Cure; they all agreed it dangerous, but none of them knew what to propose for a Remedy: They had every Day Consul∣tations together, but I receiv'd not the least comfort from their Conferences, which ended still without any resolution. This oblig'd the Constable to dispatch a Courrier to Rome for some of the most famous Physitians there, and the same time he gave the Cardinal Man∣chini, my Uncle, an account of my condition. He came to us almost as soon as the Physitians, and was very much grieved to see me so ill, and took incredible care to comfort me. The violence of my distemper, and the disorder it put me in, was so far from permitting me to make the Con∣stable those great demonstrations of
kindness were due to him, that I must acknowledge he was not a little tor∣mented with the ill humour I was in, which the Cardinal us'd his endeavours to put me out of; and had been more successful, had he apply'd himself also to cure the ill humour of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, whose imprudent inge∣nuity and indiscreet Zeal persecuted me with that violence, that he never en∣tred my Chamber, but he told me there was no hope of life, that it was high time for me to set my House in order, and not think my self a Woman for this World: And although I was not altogether of his Opinion, yet I made some preparation for death, and gave order for a Priest (who could speak French) to be sent for. They brought me a Jesuite, who was an eminent Man, and helped me three or four times to make my General Confession. The Constable more concern'd than I for my Sickness, inform'd himself every moment, by the Physitians who attended me, if there were hopes of my life; and being answered there was, if I were not worse the third day, he
came into my Chamber with a chear∣ful Countenance, and having told me the good News, pray'd me with great tender∣ness not to trouble my self for the Pa∣triarchs impertinent Preachments: The success verify'd the judgment of the Physitians, I grew visibly better, and was in few days out of danger; soon after I went to give God thanks at the Chappel of Lorretto, where I re∣ceived the Communion; and the Con∣stable, to perform a Vow he had made for my health, sent thither one of the fairest and richest Lamps to be seen there, which he consecrated on that ac∣count to our Lady, in whose Treasury it remains. The ill Air and heats of Lorretto be∣ing prejudicial to my recovery, I was carry'd to Recanati, a place not far di∣stant, where I continued six days, in which time by the care taken of me, and the good Air of the place, I re∣cover'd strength enough to pursue my Journey, and satisfie the Constables desires of taking me to Rome. The Feast of St. Peter being over, there was no entring that City, by reason of the
excessive heats, and the manifest hazard of health they run who will venture it. But we, though advis'd to the contra∣ry, slighted the danger, and, having taken a small preservative against ill Airs, escap'd without hurt. The me∣lancholy and weakness I was under af∣ter my late sickness, oblig'd me to keep my Bed for some days, in which time the Cardinal Colonna presented me with some Jewels of very great va∣lue, besides a hundred and fifty pieces of Gold worth two thousand Pistols. Having in few days recover'd my health, (though without any care of my part,) I began to walk abroad for divertisement, and appeared in an Ita∣lian Dress for the Novelty. The Con∣stable one day ask'd me if I would go visit the Nieces of Cardinal Chigi, then Pope, to desire them to bring me to kiss his Holiness Feet; I who was us'd to see every Day a great Monarch come into my Lodgings, innocently ask'd the Constable if his Holiness would not first come and visit me. The Constable and those in company answer'd me, smiling, that the Popes were not us'd to do any body that Honour.
The Customs of Italy were not at all agreeable to my humour, yet the love I had for the Constable made them tolerable, and I bore with them pretty well. As for the Constable, he forgot not any thing that might give me con∣tent, appearing always neat, gallant, and extremely careful of me, with an unexpressible Complaisance: And though he be not naturally very tender and kind, I may truly affirm I was the Person he had most love for, and most constancy: No man ever was more passionately desirous of Children, and I was then in hopes to satisfie his desires; when I told him the News of it, it gave him incredible joy, though it lasted but two Months, at the end of which I miscarry'd; this accident occasioned by trouble and sickness, was attended with a Fever of forty days, which made them report commonly at Rome, that the Constable had marry'd a Lady that was incurable, who had more need of a Physitian than a Husband, and would never have a Child: None more busie than the Patriarch in spread∣ing these Reports, which seem'd to be
justified by the length of my sickness, having lasted all Winter; but being re∣cover'd towards Spring, and having found my self the second time with Child in the Summer, those Reports vanish'd, and People alter'd their Opinions. My former miscarriage accasion'd the grea∣ter care of me now, so that I was not allow'd to stir abroad but in a Chair. As I was in my sixth Month, the Duke of Nevers, my Brother, came to Rome to pass the Carnaval there: 'tis not pos∣sible to express the joy I had to see him after so long absence, and so unexpect∣edly: The Constable was no less glad than I at his coming, and making it his business to find out means at once to regale him, and divert me, he ask'd us if we would go a hunting to Cister∣na, a place belonging to the Prince of Caserta then in Exile, but we found there (in his Room) Monsieur de Gactan, who received us with all possible civi∣lity, and treated us magnificently: We continued there fifteen days, and spent most of our time in hunting: The Con∣stable, who knew that besides the plea∣sures and divertisements of that sport,
some Glory may be gain'd in that inno∣cent War, by clearing the Country of the wild Boars that harrass and in∣fest it, desir'd the assistance of several Gentlemen of the Neighbourhood to help him and his Retinue to destroy those Monsters of the Forrests. He had that success in it, that it was said we left not one alive thereabouts; and we carryed with us to Rome enough to feast half the Town. I was then so big, I durst not ven∣ture hunting on Horse-back; yet I lost not the pleasure of the Chase, the Huntsmen causing several wild Boars to pass near a close Charriot I rid in, which was so large and substan∣tial, that the strongest Boar could not overturn it; so that I had the plea∣sure of seeing the sport without appre∣hension of danger; besides the satis∣faction of my Brothers Company; who, naturally averse from pains and fatigues, sate with me in the Charriot. At our return to Rome, we found all sports and divertisements prohibited by Pope Alexander; who, to express the small inclination he had for entertain∣ments
of pleasure, would not permit a Comedy to be presented: The Consta∣ble to supply this defect, resolv'd to di∣vert us with an Entertainment in Mas∣querade: The Subject was taken from the Fable of Castor and Pollux, whose per∣sons were represented by the Constable and my Brother, attended with a Train of Gentlemen, and usher'd in by a Man in the shape of a Swan; so much to the Life, that had Nature produc'd Swans of that bigness, the most di∣scerning Eye might have mistaken this Man for a Swan. As they march'd a∣long, they threw among the Ladies the following Verses compos'd by a Person of known Ability. Questi d' Amor e fe' dui vivi Lampi Figli d' Aethereo Cigno, Van con genio benigno, Seminando di gioia i Latii Campi, Son la gemina Luce Di Castor & Polluce: Che con accese voglie Accorsi in queste spoglie, Lascian del Aethra i Laminosi Chiostri Sol per Arder, O Belle, agli Occhi vostri.
These two bright living Lamps of faith∣ful Love, Sons of the Coelestial Swan, Who from the place their course began, Fill Italy with Joy still as they move, The admirable Twin-Star Of Castor and Pollux Are: Who from th' Aetherial heights descrying Beauties here with those in Heaven vy∣ing. Quitted their Station in the Starry Skies, T' appear more bright (fair Ladies) in your Eyes. Pleasure and Pain commonly succeed each other, the one usually beginning where the other ends: After the de∣lights of the Carnaval, we had the displeasure of my Brothers departure, but allay'd with his promise to come a∣gain when I should next lye in. Not long after, I had the News of the death of the Marquess Angeleli; who having resolv'd, against the advice of all his Friends, to return to Bolog∣na, was murder'd by the procure∣ment of Count Bovio; who according
to the Custome of the place, took his Revenge upon the Marquess for an In∣jury done by his Cousin and intimate Friend, who was the principal Object of the Counts wrath; but a Person from whom he had not been able to obtain satisfaction. I was extreamly concern'd for the misfortune of the Marquess, who, while he liv'd, made it his business to oblige me, and had occordinly done me many good Offices, being withall a Person of great Merit and excellent Parts. All the time I went with Child, my prayers were it might be a Son; my desires were ac∣complish'd the seventh of April, being the Coronation Day of Pope Alexan∣der: The News of my being brought to Bed of a Boy were received with in∣credible Joy by the Constable, the Pa∣triarch, and all the Family, who as passio∣nately wish'd it as I: And though the weakness of the Child gave small hopes of long Life, yet the Joy at his Birth was extraordinary, and those who brought the first News of it, were richly presented. Cardinal Colonna looking on me as
the principal cause of this Joy, came in Person to congratulate me, and pre∣sented me with a thousand Pistols, and several Jewels: At forty Days end (hav∣ing lain in so long) I was to fit my self for receiving the Visits of the sacred College, and of the Princesses and La∣dies of the Town; to perform this with the formality requisit, I made use of a Bed prepar'd for my first lying in, and never since us'd, being generally admir'd for its Novelty and Magnifi∣cence. It was made in imitation of a Shell-Fish floating in the midst of a Sea, artificially done, and exactly re∣presented; the waves serving as a bot∣tome to the Bed, the Posts whereof stood on four Sea-Horses, mounted with as many Syrens, so excellently cut, and curiously guilt, all that saw them thought them made of Massy-Gold, ten or twelve little Cupids serv'd for Hooks and Claspes to hang the Curtains on, which were of the richest Cloth of Gold, and hung down loosely to hide from sight whatever might be thought ordinary in this sumptuous Bed, which indeed was more for Ornament than use.
My young Son being much better, and I so well as to give the Constable hopes of another Successor, his Joy was so great, that he declared he was never better satisfy'd, never more at ease, and to compleat his happiness, he made it his business to give me cause of equal sa∣tisfaction. I took my advantage of this fa∣vourable disposition, and having a great desire to pass the Carnaval at Venice, I propos'd a Journey thither; he promis'd to go with me, if the Cardinal his Uncle would bear us company. His Eminence at my first motion made some difficulty to consent, but yielded at last, upon my assuring him I was not with Child, the fear of my miscarriage being the Obstacle he objected. We left Rome about the end of April, and had a pleasant Journey, the more to my satisfaction, in that the Constable was not so scrupulously careful of me as formerly, but allow'd me to use my Coach, or ride, and sometimes at full speed, as I pleas'd. Till this occasion, he had always seem'd to love me very well; but was now so far from being angry at my excesses, that he bid me
one day, not discover my condition to any, lest it might come to the Cardi∣nals Ear. Having escaped very well all my Journey, I miscarry'd the second time, soon after my arrival at Venice: this deferr'd for a while the effect of the Constables Vows: but I lay in of this miscarriage a fortnight only, and was perfectly recover'd. While I went with Child, I was always pretty well; and being now the fourth time so, I pass'd the Carnaval with much plea∣sure, in seeing Plays, in feasting, dance∣ing and other Entertainments, playing often at Bassette, a Game I was much taken with, wherein I had the Compa∣ny of the Prince of Brunswick, and the Duke of Mantua, and other Persons of quality, who were come to Venice to enjoy the pleasures of the Season. In the midst of which I was tormented with the fear of leaving a place of so much divertisement, and returning to Rome. Accordingly the Constable told me one day, we must of necessity be gone, and that having gone with Child a pretty while, I was to prevent the like accident as had happened to me at
my coming to Venice. I was much troubled at this order, though expected, and to make me comply with it, he was forc'd to give me his word to come thither the next Carnaval; with that we parted, having taken leave of our Friends, particularly the Prince of Brunswick, who was so pleased with our company, and the Constables civi∣lities, that he promis'd to come to Rome on purpose to see us, and would bring with him thither the Princess his Wife. I was carry'd all the way in a Litter, our Journeys were easie, so that it was the begining of Summer when we got to Rome; where having past the great heats, which were more troublesome for my being so big with Child; I was brought to Bed the begining of Novem∣ber of a second Son, the night before Cardinal Colonna was to take his Jour∣ney for Spain, to bring the Infanta, Margaret of Austria, to the Emperour. His Eminence was extreme glad at the news brought him of a second prop of his Family newly born, and not content to express his Joy in words,
he made me several very fair presents, and no less rich than the former, and presently took his leave, in obedience to his Majesties orders. By the Cardinals absence, the Con∣stable came to have the absolute com∣mand and disposal of all his Estate, the management whereof had been left to his Eminence: A few days after we went to Cisterna, where the Prince of Brunswick with his Lady the Prin∣cess, came from Rome to see us, and stay'd with us three days: The Con∣stable and I exprest our selves very sen∣sible of so extraordinary an Obligation, and I particularly thank'd him for keep∣ing his word so exactly. I will not un∣dertake to speak of the civility and ge∣nerosity of this Prince, being qualities as well known as his name. As soon as I came to Rome, I went to pay the Princess her visit, and found in her carriage, her humour, her wit, and her dress, an Abridgment of all the charming Perfections and exactest Beau∣ty of France: About that time my Brother being come to Venice, writ to us to come to him, which we could
not then do, but respited our Journey till Spring; when we set out for Venice, to be there at the Ascension, to see the solemnity of that Feast, and that fa∣mous Fair, which so many curious Per∣sons from all parts of Europe resort to see. The Circumstances of the one and the other, are too long to be inserted here. I was then with Child, but being more careful of my self than formerly, I escap'd without any ill accident in my Journey, or at Venice; where having seen all the Solemnities of the Feast of Ascension, we went for Mil∣lan, the begining of Summer, which we spent very pleasantly, till the Con∣stable, finding himself obliged the begin∣ing of September to pass over into Spain, left me in much trouble for his absence, which the Marchioness of Balbaces, the Marquess her Husband, and my Brother (who was pleas'd to bear us company) endeavoured to sweeten to me, by the great kindness they exprest for me. While I was afflicting my self for the Constables absence, he was in extream danger by a terrible storm that overtook him in the Mediterranean,
being aboard a Gally of the Squa∣dron of Scicily bound for Spain. But having narrowly escap'd it, he went a∣shore, and (though without equipage) continued his Journey by Land. He took the first Coach he met with, till he might accommodate himself better with necessaries to carry him to Madrid, where he arriv'd at length, three days after the death of King Philip the Fourth. The death of this Monarch having chang'd the face of Affairs, caus'd the Constable to change his design, and made him resolve to return after a fortnights stay in that Court, where the extraor∣dinary solitude on that sad occasion, and his impatience to see me, would not permit him to stay long; to satisfie this desire, and perform his promise to me of being back by that time that I was to lye in; he came by the way of France, and arriv'd at Millan about the end of November: His Sister and I went to meet him out of Town, where I was as joyful to see him, as I had been troubled for his absence, and the very night he arriv'd I brought him a third Son for his welcome-home. But hav∣ing
been in labour of this Child to the apparent danger of my Life, I took a resolution to avoid, for the future, all occasions of exposing my self to the like, by bearing any other. The Constables consent being necessary to make valid a resolution of this nature, I press'd him for it, and obtained it, having e∣ver since found him, in that particular, a Man of his word. Having made this agreement, all my care was to re∣cover my health to go pass another Car∣naval at Venice: As soon as I had ga∣ther'd strength, we set forwards on our Journey, leaving our third Child to the care of the Marchioness de los Balbaces, the second being at Rome, and the eldest with us. I had spent this Carnaval with a great deal of plea∣sure, had it not been for my jealousie of the Constable, who went in search of reparation abroad, for the loss incurr'd at home, by our late agreement. And, I must confess, I was not a little con∣cern'd his keeping his word with me should cost me so dear. There were at Venice many excellent Opera's, particularly that of Titus,
which I saw very often, being extream∣ly pleas'd with the sweetness of the Voices, and excellency of the Actors, especially a Musitian of his Highnesses, call'd Cavagninro, and one of my Maids, who did wonders; not to speak of the Comedy, which was one of the best that ever was acted. The Carnaval being over, the Con∣stable went to Rome with my Brother to dispatch some Affairs. At his re∣turn (which was within three weeks) I spoke to him of going to Millan, where I desir'd to be at the Infanta's arrival. I was more troubled to quit Venice at this time, than formerly, as having more acquaintance there, and being of opinion it was the pleasantest City in the World, and of the choicest divertisements: but the more unwil∣ling I appear'd to leave it, the more did the Constable hasten our departure, so that we set out in the hottest of Sum∣mer. At Millan I did my endeavour to pass my time as pleasantly as possible, to which the Marquess de los Balbaces and his Lady contributed not a little. We spent the day in walking, and sump∣tuous
Collations, and the night in Mu∣sick, prepar'd for us at The Place Marine, the pleasantest of that Town. A while after our company was increas'd by the addition of some persons of quality, which came to us from Venice and Tu∣rin, from whence his Royal Highness had sent us one of the principal Lords of his Court, with several Gentlemen his Friends to complement the Empress, who arriv'd there about the end of Au∣tumn: I kiss'd her hand, having waited on her in a Spanish Dress, and in deep moorning for Cardinal Colonna, who dy'd at Final of a Sickness he fell into, attending this Prince. Her Majesty re∣ceived me with very great kindness, tell∣ing me, I appeared, by my Deportment, and the air of my Countenance, to be what my Habit promis'd. A Com∣plement whereby she intended to give me the advantage over the Ladies of all other Nations; there being no doubt but she look'd upon the fashion her self appear'd in, the most excellent, and preferrable to all others. She continued her Journey for Vienna, but the Con∣stable was not dispos'd to wait on her
thither, though I very much desir'd it. He hath a Soul so generous, I should do him wrong, should I impute his not going, to his fear of expence necessary for such a Journey. The truth is, the Love he had had for me, was very much dimi∣nish'd, and too weak to incline him to so much complaisance. I propos'd to him then, that we should pass another Carnaval at Venice, which I was assur'd he would not deny me, though I was sensible his inclinations for the place, prevail'd with him more, than my re∣quest for going thither. We set for∣wards on our Journey, and though I found in that City the same di∣vertisements as formerly, they did not please me so well, being now very much alter'd, and perpetually torment∣ed with my jealousie of the Constable, which the stories I heard of him did but too clearly justifie. I was so griev∣ed that others took advantage of my politick Barrenness, that I found my self already in a very sorrowful condition. And as if I had not had reason enough to torment my self with jealousies abroad, Fortune provided
me a new occasion at home, by a Mar∣chioness who lodg'd with us. Her Youth, and her Beauty, drew the Eyes of all towards her, and amongst the rest, the Constable was of her admi∣rers. Had I not made that conjecture by his looks, his sighs and assiduities had been sufficient to convince me; I had too much reason to make that In∣terpretation; my resentment, though conceal'd, was great, but that of the President Donaville, whom my Brother had taken with him to Rome, was greater, who look'd upon the Constables ad∣dresses as no small Obstacle to the hap∣py success of his passion, rival'd also by Quaranta Lupuli, a Man of excellent parts, natural and acquired, and a most affectionate Lover, powerful ad∣vantages for obtaining of Love. The Winter, as well as the Carnaval, being over, we went for Rome, by the way of Bologna, where the Cardinal Legat gave us, in his Pallace, a splendid En∣tertainment. The Marchioness travel∣ing with us, found the number of her Lovers increase by the way; but the most passionate, and he who evidenc'd
his fidelity, by a Sacrifice very unusu∣al in our days, was Quaranta, who ex∣tremely concern'd to see his Love slighted, and fancying others more suc∣cessful, abandon'd himself so to jealou∣sie and grief, that within a days Jour∣ney of Bologna (in his way to Rome, whither he intended to bear us compa∣ny) he fell into a violent Fever, which quickly ended his days. We continued our Journey, and at our arrival at Rome, had the news of his death. The Marchioness wept, but many tears were not to be expected from a person surrounded with the flames of so many Lovers. After the death of this Lover succeeded the absence of her Husband, whom she enjoy'd a very short time, a military employment they had bestowed on him at Amona, having call'd him away thither to live in a House of his own, after seven or eight Months time spent in ours; the Pastimes and Feasts we had constantly at home, appear'd to me too dull for the Carnaval, and desiring to spend it with more pleasure, and prevent cen∣sure of the liberty I enjoy'd, I resolv'd
to have a Masquerade, wherein I present∣ed Clorinda, and being attended with thirty or forty Gentlemen in Souldiers habit; I threw about, as the custom was, some Verses, which my Brother and a Gentleman his Friend, call'd Marescotti, made for the occasion. The Carnaval being ended, the Mar∣chioness spoke of returning to Bologna, which the Constable appear'd not con∣cern'd at; the Correspondence, between them, having for some time past been less than formerly. A few days after we went for Millan to receive my Sister Mazarin, who we heard was retir'd from Paris, for some differences be∣tween her Husband and her: The ten∣derness I always had for her, made me undertake this Journey with a great deal of pleasure, and I forgot nothing that might oblige the Constable to come thither also, who did all he could to excuse himself, and divert me, al∣ledging, among other reasons, I was not oblig'd to go so far: Yet he resolved to go upon the arrival of a Courrier, sent by the Marquess de los Balbaces, to inform us my Sister was arriv'd at Al∣toff,
and to invite us to Millan. The Constable having, with some difficul∣ty, answer'd he would go, we set for∣ward. The Marchioness and I in a Caleche, in which we went away Post, and the Constable in another, with the Countess d' Estela, whom I formerly mention'd by the name of Hortensia: Our train was reduced to three or four Valetts, whom we thought most ne∣cessary for a Journey of haste, with whom we arriv'd at Millan in six days; where I found my self extremly disor∣der'd, not only with the fatigue of the Journey, but the perpetual Jars I had with the Constable, who was never better pleas'd, then when he saw things fall out ill in this Journey undertaken against his will, in the worst time of the Year. Being arriv'd, we learnt by the Marquess de los Balbaces, that Ma∣dam Mazarin was at a Country house, six or seven Leagues from Millan, and set out presently for the place, where we found her a-Bed, which she was ob∣lig'd to keep for a hurt she had received in her Knees by a fall from a Horse: the hurt was considerable, though she
said it was nothing, and bore it so well, she appeared not troubled at all with it: Being newly come from France, she had her fancy full of the fashions of that Country, and the humours of the Nation; which, considering only the outside, takes the measures of esteem∣ing others, meerly from the dress they appear in: The Marchioness and I, very defective in that point, found af∣ter a very cold reception, our ill equi∣page had met with the contempt it de∣serv'd. This mortification being over, the passage by water being thought more convenient for my Sister, we em∣barqued for Millan, where we arriv'd that Night, and the Marchioness soon after return'd for Bologna. Every one was desirous to see Madam Mazarin; the greatest things seldom answer the Ideas we conceive of them before-hand, and generally fall in their value with us, when acquainted with them; but 'twas otherwise with my Sister, who exceeded at sight all that had been imagin'd of her, and disco∣ver'd new Graces every day she was seen, which was not so often as was
wish'd, by reason of the great pleasure she took at Millan in being alone, ap∣pearing only to her own People, and locking her self up in the Apartment we had provided for her, where she kept her Bed for the most part, that she might be cur'd the sooner of her hurt; so that if she went sometimes abroad with us (which was not ordinary) yet she went very negligently drest, though she appear'd beautiful as ever; her hurt (which was rare) having added new Graces to her Person, so that in a loose dress, she look'd as charming as in the most exact and compleat the World could afford. Some weeks af∣ter my Brother came to us, and was ravished to see her; but this mighty kindness was quickly broke off on the account of a Gentleman of my Sisters, whom she gave a little too much en∣couragement, it being usual with those of his Character, to forget themselves and abuse the liberty allow'd them; yet I reconcil'd them, though but for a few days; they falling out again upon a difference of which you shall have an account in its proper place. I was
then so weary of so long stay at Millan, that I pray'd the Constables leave to go with my Brother and Sister to Venice: The answer he made my humble request was, he could not go so soon, nor would go thither any more, but that I might go without him. I was so shock'd at the refusal, and especially the manner of it, when I saw him take pleasure in crossing me, that I had left his House that very moment, had not my resentment yielded and submitted to the arguments of the Marchioness his Sister against it. The reason the Constable staid so long at Millan, was only to attend the coming of the Marquess of Mortara, the new Spanish Governour, but find∣ing his coming deferr'd longer than ex∣pected, he resolved to be gone. My Sister and Brother desir'd of him that I could not obtain; not able to deny it them, he gave his consent, on condi∣tion we should not make any long stay at Venice, knowing it a place I was most pleas'd with, and pretending the cause of our short stay to be a promise he had made Cardinal Chigi to meet him
at a hunting match at Sienna: We quitted Millan with the satisfaction of having reconciled my Bother and Si∣ster the second time; my Brother promis'd to come to us before we left Sienna. But having heard by the way the Cardinal was not there, we went to Bologna to attend his coming. The Constable here lodg'd in a House be∣longing to one of his Gentlemen, to a∣avoid the trouble of complements would have been expected from him, had he lodg'd in a greater. The short time we staid there, the Marchioness de los Balbaces was very good company for us: but though we were entertain'd in the Country with great and sumptuous Collations, I was so troubled to see my Sister so sad, that I took no delight in the Entertainments. At last we went for Sienna, upon the news we had of the Cardinals arrival there, where I began to recover my good humour, through the pleasant reception given us by his Eminence, who feasted us for fifteen days, wherein the pleasure of hunting contributed not a little to our divertisement, my Sister being much
taken with that exercise, and doing often as mortal execution on the Game with her Hands, as with her Eyes on the Gamesters. Amidst all this joy, I had the grief to see a new falling out between my Sister and Brother, who came to us ac∣cording to his promise, and presently after this third broyl returned for Ve∣nice. My Brother being gone, we went to Marino, an Estate of the Con∣stables, qualify'd with the Title of a Dukedom, within twelve Leagues of Rome: Having staid there till Allhal∣lantide, we went to Rome, where my Sister, continuing her way of living at Millan, made our House a very Wil∣derness, letting us see her very seldom, avoiding our conversation, and not re∣ceiving any visit: Her retreat extreme∣ly troubled me and my Brother, who in few days came to Rome, where he had new cause of displeasure. Every body look'd upon her retirement as an effect of the ill Counsels of a Gentle∣man of hers, in whom she had great confidence, and I was willing to use all my Endeavours to perswade her to
other courses: And mov'd with a just resentment, to see all my care and pains made the subject of their raillery and laughter, I told that Gentleman (who was call'd Courberville) what I thought fit on that account, looking on him as the sole cause of this misfortune, it was not in my power to remedy. This Fellow (who was brave enough, but a little too presumptuous) thinking it perhaps, beneath him to excuse himself, answer'd me with so much incivility, and spoke of my Brother with that in∣solence, I was forc'd to bid him get out of my Chamber, and threatning him he should find some below who would teach him the respect he ought to pay Persons of my Brothers quality; he went down in a Huff, and my Sister ex∣tremely offended at this business, in∣stantly left my House, and went to my Aunt Martinozzi's, and Courberville to the Cardinal Manchini's, my Uncle; whence in few days he went to Civita Vecchia, where he was taken, and, for his insolence, clapt up in the Castle, but he quickly got out again, by the favour of the Popes Nephews who procur'd him
his liberty at the request of Madam Mazarin; who, not able to endure the subjection she was in at my Aunt Mar∣tinozzi's, resolv'd to go live with a∣nother Aunt we had at Campo Martio, who was very glad to have her there. As for me, who never wanted kindness for my Sister, I visited her often, but being always received very ceremoni∣ally, I could not penetrate her intenti∣ons, or discover her designs. About this time I desir'd leave of the Constable to go to Naples, which was easily obtain'd, for two reasons, the one, that the Journey was not ve∣ry long, the other, that it was a place I did not like so well as Venice. We had for company, the Patriarch, and the Sieurs Marescotti and Acciaioli, the first of Bologna, the other of Sienna, both very good Friends of the Family. We had with us besides them the Con∣stables Brother, then call'd the Abbot Colonna, and my Brother: My compa∣ny was the Countess d' Estella, with one of her Chamber Maids, call'd Constance, whom my Brother had lik'd very well: This which was intended a
Journey of pleasure, was unhappily disturb'd by a quarrel between the Pa∣triarch and the Abbot Colonna, which had like to have proceeded to the ut∣most extremity: But having reconcil'd them, and continued a Fortnight at Naples, we return'd to Rome, where I found my Sister in a deep Melancholly, for the choice she had made of her place of retirement. No Person is more sensible of the troubles of a Re∣lation than I, who have in my nature a generosity, rare in this Age, which puts me upon attempting the difficultest matters for their ease and relief. This made me consult only my own ardent affection, and pass by the coldness my Sister entertaind me with, and propose to her a way how to get out of this Covent, telling her, she might rely on the protection of the Queen of Sweden, and that her Majesty had given me hopes of receiving her into her Palace; she accepted the offer, and I went imme∣diately to take order for puting the design in execution. But when I thought all things in readiness, the very day I had resolv'd to go take out my Sister, I was
told, by some I had employ'd in the business, that it was not in the Queens power to meddle in the Affair, (as she made me hope she would) nor to pro∣tect my Sister. I was not discourag'd by this ill success, but resting assur'd of favour and protection if I could get out my Sister; I went to the Covent, and took my Children with me, that while my Aunt and the Nuns should be playing with them, I might put my design in execution: After a little dis∣course with my Aunt, I took my leave of her, and told her at parting, she should not stir a step further for fear the Air might do her harm, being not ve∣ry well: The same Instant I made signs to my Sister to follow me, which she did on pretence to bring me to the Gate; we went on together, and pre∣tending private discourse, (to give them who follow'd us occasion of coming after at a distance) we were quickly at the Gate, while my Aunt and the Nuns were busie in caressing my Children; I fell a talking to her who was Porter, and so made way for my Sister to get out, with a Maid of hers call'd Anne,
and without taking leave of any, I presently ran after them. We stept into the Coach which waited us hard by, and went directly to Cardinal Chigi's, to beg his favour, or at least his advise: But not finding him within, we went to our Brothers house, where we had been all born and bred, but, unluckily, found it all unfurnished, being newly left by an Aunt of ours, who had lodg'd there: Here we resolv'd to send to Don Juan Baptista Rospigliosi, the Popes Nephew, who presently came to us: Having inform'd him of the Circum∣stances of what we had done, my Sister and I intreated him to bespeak the Car∣dinal Nephew and the Pope in her fa∣vour, lest Cardinal Manchini, our Uncle, should incline him to some vio∣lence against my Sister. Don Juan ac∣quitted himself so obligingly, that we had the success we desir'd; and Car∣dinal Manchini found it out of his power, to prevail with his Holiness, to come to any resolution to the preju∣dice of my Sister. On the contrary, the Pope declar'd, that Madam Mazarin having fled for refuge into his Estate,
it could not be agreable to Civility or Justice, to give her trouble; so that she stay'd at the house I last mentioned, where she was safe, and I visited her every day. Not long after, the Constable and I went into the Country for some days, and at our return perswaded my Sister to take a Lodging at our House, but we had in a short time a little quarrel, and she would stay no longer. The beginning of Spring, the Chevalier de Lorrain, (whom the King had banish'd, as was reported, for ill Language given Mon∣sieur Colbert, about an Abby he pre∣tended to, but could not obtain) after some stay at Genes, had the curiosity to see Rome, where he arriv'd accompa∣ny'd by Count Marsan, his Brother, a Gentleman of excellent parts, and pleasant conversations, with two other Friends, the one named Garcey, the other Moreli; the former discreet, ho∣nest, and faithful; the other dextrous, and of a quick and clear apprehension, but a little too subtle: Subtlety, if mo∣derate, is a necessary quality, but a fault if excessive: A Gentleman is to
make use of it, not as a Weapon to of∣fend, but as a remedy, cure, or arms of defence, to save himself from harm. The Chevalier de Lorrain was much taken with Rome, but that which did the rather oblige him to spend his two years exile there, was the concourse of Persons of the highest quality who fre∣quented our House, which seem'd to be the Center of all the divertisments of the Town, where I may say without hyperbole, that Plays, Discourses, Game∣ing, Musick, Treats, Collations, Feasts, and all divertisements imaginable, suc∣ceeded one another in such a manner, as instead of cloying our taste of the pleasure of them, heightned it by the variety. The Chevalier in his first visits endeavour'd strongly to gain an interest in Madam Mazarins affections, but not meeting with the success he desir'd, he had not the patience to wait longer for it, but all on the sudden broke off his amorous Addresses. In a short time af∣ter, I design'd to entertain the Queen of Sueden at a Consort of Musick, and at the same time to take a little recreation, as necessary for my self, whose Element
was Action; and my greatest delight to set others at work. My Sister and Brother were pretty good Friends then, and though I knew both cold enough towards me, I was so far from resenting it in the least, that I told them, with all sincerity (my humour being unca∣pable of dissimulation) I was not trou∣bled at the care they both took to avoid seeing me: The matter rested not there, but my Musick applauded by every bo∣dy else, was so jeer'd by my Brother, that he told me, the Voices and the Airs were the pityfullest in the World, and the Symphony worse: My Sister, though she said not a word, confirm'd by her looks the censure he had past. This anger'd me so, that I fell out with them both, being unwilling to be made their sport, and their laughing-stock, or to allow my Brother the satisfaction of the pleasure he took in provoking me by his crossness and contradictions. Things being at this pass, they plotted privately to go together into France, and never let me know it till three days before they set out, which they did without bidding me adieu: The greater
love we have for any person, the more we resent an injury done by him. I was both surpriz'd and griev'd at their absence, and willing to know the cause of it, I received a Letter from each of them, wherein they told me with very good words, that they had great busi∣ness in France which call'd them thi∣ther, but that my ill humour made them hasten their Journey, yet they would come back again without fail, if I desir'd to see them, for which Madam Mazarin gave me her word. To satisfie my curosity I expected their return, without giving my self the displeasure of reading out their kind thoughts of me. Soon after my Brothers arrival at Pa∣ris, he marry'd a Kinswoman of Ma∣dam de Montespagne, call'd Mademoiselle de Siange; whose beauty, assisted with the Kings perswasions, brought him un∣der a Yoke he never exprest any incli∣nation for: Madam Mazarin not think∣ing her self safe at Nevers where she staid, and fearing the Duke her Hus∣band might make use of his right, and at∣tempt something against her liberty, she
went to the Abby-Royal within ten Leagues of Paris, where she continued till the King sent for her, to know what she desir'd; having at her arrival an∣swer'd his Majesty, she desir'd only a Pension to live handsomely in Italy, she obtain'd it without difficulty: The Chevalier de Lorrain in her absence ac∣companied us to some houses of Pleasure of the Constables, where we common∣ly went a hunting: Having spent some time in those Country sports, we re∣turn'd to Rome, where the Walks, the Col∣lations and sumptuous Treats given us, sometimes in the Vineyards of the Fa∣mily of Borghese, sometimes at Mon∣talto, and sometimes in other places, contributed not a little to our pleasure; to continue which we resolv'd to treat one another by turns every Sunday, Cardinal Chigi, Prince Savelli, the Chevalier de Lorrain, the Dukes Sforza, and Basanello, who was the Constables Cousin, being of the company, so that we past the Carnaval with more plea∣sure than usual, Pippa Acciaioli hav∣ing obtain'd leave of the Pope to pre∣sent an Opera.
About the end of the Spring, Madam Mazarin performed her promise, and I had the pleasure to see her again after nine Months absence, more beautiful than ever. But this satisfaction had like to have cost me dear, for having taken Physick that day, I got so strange a Collick by going abroad the day I had been purged, that had it lasted a little longer, it had certainly made an end of me. I was so ill the most stony heart would have pitied me, yet the Consta∣ble was not in the least mov'd at it, at least in appearance, having with won∣derful tranquility, and unconcern'd re∣pose, heard me groan frightfully a whole Night: My Sister appear'd as little concern'd as the Constable, while his Brother and all those about me ex∣prest their sorrow for my pain, they only excepted who were my nearest Relations, who never troubled them∣selves for what should become of me. However the violence of my Disease yielded at last to the strength of the Remedies us'd, which effectually cur'd me: Then it was the Chevalier de Lor∣rain presented me from Monsieur a full
hunting Equipage, of the value of a thousand Pistols, garnish'd with an in∣finite deal of Ribbands, the finest and richest in Paris, which his Royal High∣ness had sent him to present me with: Having been pleas'd to accept of a Present I had made his Highness of Gloves and other Toys not worth the speaking of: The Chevalier procur'd me this Present, who had not done him any service, nor lent him any thing as was falsly reported, it being certain he never wanted Money, and was extreamly displeas'd with me for going about to borrow some to pay him my loosings at play. The following Summer intending to take the pleasure of bathing, my Bro∣ther, Madam Mazarin, and I, went to Sebaron, a passage very dangerous, through the rapidity of the stream, where the violence of the Water car∣ry'd me with such force, I had been certainly drown'd, had I not been help'd by a Turkish Maid-servant, that Monsieur Rospigliosi General of the Popes Galleys in Candy had bestowed on me. She was more strong than big, and
with my Brothers assistance drew me out of the danger I was in. This made us chuse a place of more safety in the Tyber, near which we caused a Cabbin to be made to undress us in, from whence we had a Gallery that reach'd just to the bathing place, all made up of Canes, Leaves and Boughs, with ad∣mirable art. The Autumn we spent in the Country, and the Carnaval in seeing Operas, as we us'd to do, though not with equal pleasure; the Constable of a long tme not having the same com∣plaisance, tenderness, and esteem for me as formerly; he seldom spoke to me, and when he did, it was in such Lan∣guage, I could have wish'd rather he had not spoken at all to me. The Count Ser∣mino, his Brother, formerly known by the name of the Abbot Colonna, who had several times compos'd our differ∣ences, and by his prudence hinder'd them from breaking out, is a witness of my sufferings. Not able to endure any longer such sensible displeasures and injuries, I apply'd my thoughts to find out a remedy. My Sister and I in the time of our bathings and walks, had
contracted a stricter amity than ever. I resolv'd to take the advantage of the tenderness she had profest for me, and earnestly pray'd her not to return into France without taking me with her. She faithfully promis'd it, having first repre∣sented to me the inconveniences she lay under, and I was to expect, if I took the course she had done. Nothing be∣ing more true than that, she was so far from inclining me that way, that she did all she could to make me sensible of the ill consequences of an undertaking of that nature, as she hath written in her Memoires. Soon after this, the Chevalier de Lorrain was call'd home from Exile; his Friends were not a little pleas'd at the surprize he put them to at his ar∣rival at Court, so much sooner than they expected. The mean while as the Con∣stables freaks and slights increas'd every day, so did my trouble and vexation: My Brother the better to perswade me to conceal my resentment, told me of∣ten, he fear'd I should not long en∣joy my liberty, adding once in Ma∣dam Mazarin's presence, that when
I least expected it, I should be clapt up in the Palliano, a Castle of the Consta∣bles, standing on the Confines of the Estate of the Church and the Kingdom of Naples. These reasons added to my natural averseness against the customs of Italy, where dissimulation and en∣mity between Families are more in vogue than any where else, hasten'd my putting in execution the design I had of retiring into France, the place of my Education, the residence of most of my Relations, and the Center of my Genius, having a particular incli∣nation for their free and gay humour, still affecting novelty, and for the war∣like Air and gallant Deportment of the brave Men there; and being quite weary of living at ease in a quiet Coun∣try, and under a peaceable Govern∣ment. We left Rome the twenty ninth of May, with a very slender Equipage, all I had about me being seven hundred Pistols, my Pearls, and some Roses of Diamonds, Madam Mazarin having lost all her baggage by leaving it at Rome, when the Constable went to see a breed of Mares he had at one of his
Country Houses, called Trattocchie. As we stept into the Coach, we told the Coachman aloud, he should drive us to Trascati, which we did to deceive a company of our people who stood at the Gate of the Palace Mazarin. At the first turning, a Valet de Chambre of my Sisters, a German born, call'd Pelletier, bid the Coachman drive streight for Civita Vecchia, where a Fe∣luca of Naples waited our coming. The Coachman was threatned if he did not make haste, and obeyed his orders so well, that by night we got within sight of Civita Vecchia. Pelletier had agreed with the Marriners they should take us aboard five Miles from the Town, lest we should be discover'd at the Port: we sent them news of our coming, the rather for that a Lacquey we had dis∣patch'd before to that purpose, and ex∣pected with extreme impatience, was not return'd. Notwithstanding our cares and fears of being taken, Madam Mazarin and I ventur'd into a thick Wood near the Sea, and slept there two hours so quietly and soundly, that a Maid of my Sisters, and Morena one
of mine, who serv'd for a guard for us, were astonish'd to see it: When we awak'd, we discern'd my Sisters Valet de Chambre coming afar of, who told us, he could discover nothing of the Feluca, and that the Lacquey took his rest at an Inn, to sweat out the Wine he had drunk, so that we were upon the point of returning to the Coach, and resolving to go forward by some by-way, for fear of being met with on the Road, but the Horses being tyr'd, my Sister said it was better send them back with the Coach to an Inn near Civita Vecchia, and give the Coachman order to say, if any came in search of us, that he had seen us go aboard, which he promis'd to do for a little Present that was made him. We got the while into the bottom of a Wood near the High-way, having sent Pelletier in search of the Feluca, with order to hire ano∣ther if he could not discover the first. He promis'd to do it whatever came of it. The extreme heat of the Sun hav∣ing scalded my Head five hours toge∣ther, a forc'd fast of twenty four hours, and the trouble I was in for having no
news of the Feluca, made me absolute∣ly despair, and tell my Sister I would go back again, and that I were as good dye of any other death as of hunger. My Sister, who is the best humour'd and patient'dst Lady of the World, qua∣lify'd me a little with her discourse; adding, that if within half an hour we should not receive some good news, we might go back again. I resolv'd to wait the time she had set, and within a quarter of an hour, we heard the noise of a Horse gallopping towards us, which, with the trouble I was under, and the fear I had we should be presently appre∣hended by the Horseman, made me abso∣lutely despond. My Sister arm'd with a pair of Pistols, and resolv'd to kill the first that came up to her, advancing before us, saw it was our Postillion who had been in search of the Feluca, without acquainting us with his intentions: Thus my fears vanish'd, and my sad∣ness was turn'd into joy, upon the Boys telling us our Feluca waited for us with∣in five Miles of the place we were in. Hereupon, having fill'd our Portman∣tles, which were neither great nor heavy,
we set forward in the heat of the day, through a Plain where we could see no∣thing but Locusts. Indesatigable Ma∣dam Mazarin was got so far before me, that to follow her the better, I was forc'd to rest me several times; and at length hunger, thirst, weariness, and heat had reduc'd me to that extre∣mity, I was compell'd to pray a La∣bourer I spy'd there, to carry me about a hundred Paces towards the Sea, tell∣ing him, I had lost my company a hunt∣ing, my Sister and I having chang'd habits in the Coach. The Country Fellow made some difficulty at first, but perswaded at length, by some Pistols I added to my request, he carry'd me in his Arms to the place where my Sister was: Much about the same time Pelletier arriv'd, who told us he had hir'd another Feluca at a thousand Crowns, but that in truth he did not like the Faces of the Master or Marriners, who all look'd like Rascals; we an∣swer'd, that fortune had favour'd us with news, by the Postillion, of the first Feluca, and that he was gone to meet her: Pelletier was no less joyful than
we at so happy an adventure. At last, partly a foot, and partly in the Labou∣rers Arms, I got to the Sea-side, where our Maids arriv'd presently after us; but no Feluca appear'd, and I finding all our hopes frustrated, remain'd sad and disconsolate. My Sister, though e∣qually concern'd, conceal'd her trouble, that she might not increase mine: In this miserable condition we laid us down on a little Straw we found in a Cabbin, and sent Pelletier the second time in search of a Barque, the while I pray'd the Labourer to go fetch me a little Water: In a quarter of an hour Pelletier return'd, who with a sad Coun∣tenance and troubl'd Voice told us, we were undone, and that we were pur∣su'd: I was so weary, that the news made no impression upon me, being in∣sensible of what he said; my Sister pressing him to tell truth, and finding by his manner of expressing himself he spoke not in earnest, she angrily bid him tell her seriously how things were; he answer'd, what he had said was on∣ly to frighten us. My Sister chid him, saying, 'twas no time to jeast. We
went thence to the Barque, and with that which was first hired found the o∣ther, where the Master and Seamen would have perswaded us to come a∣board. But Pelletier having given me a more favourable account of the for∣mer, I stepped in without regarding the other, my Sister and our Maids hav∣ing done the like. The other Marriners began to threaten us, and hinder our putting out to Sea, so that we were oblig'd to buy our peace of them, and get out of their danger. I was scarce out at Sea but I felt the effects of it, yet was more sensible of the new proposi∣tion our Master made us of more Money for our passage than he had agreed for with our Valet: He grounded his demand on the danger he expos'd himself to for serving us. Pelletier (who wanted not Stomach) was inrag'd to find him∣self deceiv'd in the good Opinion he had had of our Master, who, contrary to promise, demanded more than was due, and in great wrath would have made him stand to his Bargain. But the Master had the power on his side, and to his Reasons good or bad added
threats to throw us over-Board, or set us a-shore in some desart Island, so that I commanded Pelletier to be quiet, and with one hundred Pistols, addition to the Rate first bargain'd, silenc'd the Master, assuring of further recompence at his landing us in France, which he promis'd to do. We had the Wind very favourable for the first six hours, after which we were so becalm'd, we made no sail at all. About Evening we discovor'd a Brigan∣tine, and the Master fearing it might be a Turkish Vessel, we drew near some Rocks on the Coast of Tuscany, where he shew'd us a place where we might disembark and be in safety, in case he should be forc'd to fight. Coasting near the Rocks, he at last knew the Vessel, and having ask'd whence she came, and finding her a Genoese, we continued our Voyage to Monace: where the Calm being on the sudden turn'd into a Storm, my Sister grew very Sea-sick, the Tempest being so great that we were in great danger of Shipwrack. The Plague was in the Neighbour∣hood of Civita Vecchia, where we
took Shipping; and having not had the opportunity or liberty to disembark for want of a Certificate (that we came from a place uninfected) till we got to Monaco, we obtain'd a false one there, with the help of some Pistols given for that purpose. Our Master unwilling to land us at Marsellis, by reason of some difference he said he had with some of the Town, it prov'd lucky for us by preventing our falling in a∣mong the Felucas and Gallies the Con∣stable had sent in pursuit of us, which could not have miss'd of us, had not our Master steer'd his course to avoid Marsellis. After nine days sailing, we arriv'd safe at Ciutat, where having rested four hours, we mounted Horses we had hir'd for our Journey; and travel∣ling all night, arriv'd betimes at Marsellis. I enquir'd there for Monsieur Arnous, Master of the Gallies, hoping he had a Pass for me, having desir'd it of his Majesty before we left Rome; being told he was very sick, I thought my self oblig'd to give him a visit; and having told him who I was, and that I was sorry to find him in the condition
he was in, I ask'd him if he had not something from the King to give me. He could scarce answer me, for an Apo∣plex he was fallen into, but gave me a Pacquet seal'd, wherein was a Passe, with a Letter from his Majesty, and ano∣ther from Monsieur de Pompone, for Monsieur Grignan the Kings Lieutenant in Provence, who had a particular charge to receive me at Aix, and assist me with his Authority, and any thing else in his Power. At our return from Monsieur Arnous's, we went to Bed, but had scarce rested an hour, but they awak'd me, to let me know Captain Manchini desir'd to speak with me from the Con∣stable. All my People trembled at the news; and to prevent further incon∣venience, I gave Monsieur Arnous in∣telligence of it. He presently sent me a Guard, and pray'd me very earnestly to take a Lodging in his House, where I might be safer than in any other place. I did so, having first given Manchini au∣dience, who had no proposal to make me, but to return to the Constable, or stay there at least till he could send me a Train more suitable to my Quality,
and such things as were necessary for my continuing my Journey with more decency and splendour. He forgot not to mind me of my Children, judging the tenderness I had for them, might perhaps prevail with me to take the re∣solution he endeavour'd to perswade me to: But though I lov'd my Chil∣dren infinitely, I fear'd more my own danger, and making no doubt but all his good words were only a Cloak for some ill design, I told him I was resolv'd not to return: With that I stept into the Coach Monsieur Arnous had sent me, with a Gentleman in it, and went to his House, where we were so well receiv'd, entertain'd, and lodg'd, that in a short time we were quite recover'd of our Voyage. The day after, news was brought me from Monsieur Grig∣nan, (to whom I had sent Monsieur de Pompones Letter) that he had sent a Gen∣tleman with six of his Guards to attend me, with order to furnish me with whatever I wanted: I accepted the Gentlemans offer, and having eat some∣thing, Madam Mazarin and I went with him into the Coach, and arriv'd
in the Evening at Aix, in company with Monsieur Grignon, who came to meet us a League out of Town with his Coach, where he desir'd us to step in, telling us he was much troubled he could not lodge us in the Governors Palace, who then was the Duke de Vendosm my Nephew, the Son of the Duke Mercoeur, and my elder Sister Victoria de Manchini. Having thank'd him for his care of us, we pray'd him not to give himself further trouble for our Lodging, having given our words to a Gentleman of my Brothers, call'd Mories, that we would lodge in his House, or at Monsieur Casteletts the Pre∣sident, his elder Brother; as we did, and were treated there magnificently fifteen days. My Sister could not go to Paris, by reason of an Arrest of Parliament ob∣tain'd against her by her Husband, which made me dispatch Pellitier with a Lettter to the King, wherein I pray'd him to let me know what House he pleas'd I should live in at Paris; and that my Sister might be permitted to come to Court, without fearing the
pursuit of her Husband; I propos'd the Palace Mazarin, where my Sister desir'd to lodge with me: Pelletiers re∣turn was delay'd by an ill accident he met with by the way, having been robb'd, and in danger of his Life, to my very great trouble. This ill accident was attended with a piece of bad news, which gave me new displeasure, in the assurance I had, that Monsieur St. Simon, who had been at Aix, and made me the same Proposals as Manchini had done, was at Paris; where he solicited for the Constable, and being a Crea∣ture of Cardinal Altieri's the Popes Nephew, he did all he could against me, and, the better to serve his turn, made use of the Popes Authority. To prevent the Storm that threatn'd me, I would have been gone without stay∣ing for Pelletiers return, or regarding my Sisters objections, with whom I went to Mirabeau, where the Gentleman, who was Lord of the place, accompa∣nied us with six of the Guards of my Nephew the Duke of Vandosme, of whose Company this Gentleman was Captain, and treated us very handsomly.
In this Village Madam Mazarin, see∣ing me resolv'd to go forward, pray'd me to stay a while for Pelletiers coming, which, for fear of putting her out of humour, I consented to. But hav∣ing staid six days to no purpose, I told her I would be gone without farther de∣lay, and get near Paris, where I un∣derstood they endeavour'd to hinder my entrance. The Chevalier de Mirabeau seeing me resolv'd to go, accompanied us with the Guards as far as Pont St. Esprit, where we heard that Polastron, Captain of Duke Mazarins Guards, was pass'd by Aix in search of us. This news oblig'd us to quit the Road, and retire into a Country-house. My Sister the same night pursu'd her Journey by the way of Savoy, accompany'd with the Chevalier d' Anne and one half of the Guards, the other half remaining with me. I continued much afflicted at the separation from my Sister, and upon her word she would stay at Cham∣breri (whither she was then bound for) till the King would permit her to live in France, I promis'd her not to go be∣yond Grenoble, that I might be near
her, and hear how she did. I came to that City, and having continued three days in an Inn on the other side the Water, not one knowing who I was, a Gentleman arriv'd, sent by the Queen, to whom his Majesty had left the Government of the Kingdom, while he went in Person to command his Army against the Hollanders: The Gentleman brought me a Letter from her Majesty, wherein she commanded me in very obliging Terms, not to come beyond the place where this Let∣ter should find me; adding, she doubt∣ed not but it was the Kings Inten∣tion it should be so. I answer'd, mine was so too, and to obey her orders with absolute submission. The Duke d'Esdignieres, Governour of that Pro∣vince, had received like orders, and gave me a Visit, and invited me to take a Lodging at his House, or at the Arsenal. Being loath to give him trouble, I ac∣cepted of a Lodging at the Arsenal, where Polastron (whom I believ'd come in pursuit of my Sister) came to see me, and, to the Complements he made me on the the behalf of the Duke
his Master, added the offer of his Pa∣lace, and all that depended on him; protesting he had order to make the like offer to the Duchess his Mistress. Upon this assurance, and the word of the Governour, I gave my Sister no∣tice by an Express, desiring her to come to me: But having gone a great way a∣bout by Turin and the Mountains to∣wards Chamberri, it was a Month ere she got thither; so that my Courrier was there before her. As soon as she received the Letter, she made ready for her Journey, and I to receive her: At our Enterview she gave me an account of the fatigues of her Journey, but thought them well endured to obtain the Honour done her by his Royal Highness of Savoy. Polastron spoke with her, but his Proposals proving ineffectual, he return'd for Paris, and we for Gre∣noble, where we were till the begin∣ing of August, when the King return'd from the Campagne, and Pelletier came to us (having miraculously escap'd the danger I spoke of) with a Letter from his Majesty, wherein he advis'd me to retire into a Covent, to stop the
mouths of those who made ill constru∣ction of my quitting Rome; to which he added as to Madam Mazarin, that the Conditions of separation from her Husband were well known to her, and the same as formerly. I was so far from being satisfy'd with this Letter, that I resolv'd to go di∣rectly to Paris, and throw my self at his Majesties Feet. I acquainted my Sister with my design; she with ex∣traordinary Complaisance answer'd, I was to consider only my own interest in the case, without regarding her con∣cern in it, being very willing to return to Chamberri. We went from Grenoble in a Litter without saying any thing of our intended Journey, for fear of being staid by the Governour; We went to∣gether as far as Lyons, and there parted, my Sister for Chamberri, and I for Paris, with a Courrier belonging to the Kings Cabinet, call'd Marguein, whom I had known at Rome, a Man honest, faithful and witty. I engag'd him to come with me, and intrusted him with the management and care of all the expen∣ces of my Journey, wherein he so
well acquitted himself, that he advan∣ced what Money was necessary: I went post in a Caleche, Morena and he follow∣ing me on Horseback. A Days Jour∣ney beyond Lyons I embarqued, in hopes to pass by Water with more de∣cency and ease; but the Water was so low, and the passage so disagreed with the impatience I was under of getting quickly to Paris, that I went a-shore the first Town we came to. But not finding there any Post-horses, I was forc'd to make use of such as we could borrow in the Neighbourhood of the Carriers; but not one of them would draw in a Caleche without leading, which troubled me extremely, consi∣dering the fate that attended me, who could not rid way by Post or by Water, some Obstacle happening always in the way to stop the design'd swiftness of my course. At last we came to Nevers, where I learnt, undiscover'd, my Bro∣ther and his Wife were at St. Elay, three Leagues from thence, getting Post thither; I met with another trouble I had not foreseen, but very luckily e∣scap'd. When I askt for Post-Horses,
they denied me any, telling me they durst not without first giving notice to a Gentleman, who had forbidden them hiring out any Post-horses without order from him, I was afraid he had given the like order in all the Post-Towns on my Road, and having heard at Lyons the King had dispatch'd a Gentleman from Court, I presently apprehended it might be to meet me, or rather to stay my coming to Paris. To defeat all their preventions, I told Marguein he must by any means get me some Post-horses; he did it so dextrously, that they furnish'd us with as many as we needed for our Journey; while Monsieur de la Gibertrere (the Gentle∣man I mention'd) watch'd my coming on a Bridge, where he thought I must pass, having heard I had taken Water at Roane, and never dreaming my im∣patience had made me disembark to travel by Land. While my Caleche (which wearied me more than the Post-Horses) ran all on the Nayl by the Road, and I endea∣vour'd by travelling all night to repair my loss of time in my Voyage on the
River, and thought my self past all dan∣ger, my Caleche having twice over∣turn'd without hurting me, yet the ill Fate inseparably attending my Pilgri∣mages, to compleat my misfortunes, as I arriv'd about noon at Montargis, afflicted Morena with a grievous Col∣lick, and more to my vexation than his, fill'd Margueins head with fancies of strange considerations and cares, he im∣magin'd himself obliged to have, of those inconveniences his politicks sug∣gested might fall upon him and me, and my Family, upon my arrival at Paris against the Kings order: Adding that Morena being sick, and not able to go a∣long with us, he thought it our best course to stay where we were. Tyr'd and sleepy as I was I submitted to his Reasons, which would not have pre∣vail'd with me on another occasion. Having yielded as much to the necessi∣ty of refreshing my self, as to his per∣swasions, I agreed, that while he went to Paris to carry a Letter to the King, and another to Monsieur de Louvoy, I would take the way of Fountainbleau, whither I travell'd, taking Morena with
me in my Caleche: Marguein went his way, having substituted, to supply his Room with us, a Man of his acquain∣tance, whom he furnish'd with Money to defray our Charges by the way: This man was very faithful and honest, but withall very troublesom; and not knowing me, judg'd of me by my Train, and took me to be a person as inconsiderable as my Equipage was poor. At every Stage he quarrel'd with the Postillion, who was unwilling to carry any more than one Person in a Caleche for fear of tyring his Horses. After all their brangling and noise we arriv'd at Fountainbleau about seven in the Evening, that being the only place Monsieur Gibertiere could have expect∣ed to overtake me in, having rested my self at Montargis. I have been since told he would have punish'd the Post∣master for furnishing me with Horses, but at last he pardon'd him, partly out of Clemency, as a quality becom∣ing a Gentleman, and partly not to lose time, seeing himself oblig'd to make haste after me, who made such haste be∣fore him. Having left Nevers at Rome,
he arriv'd at Fountainbleau two hours after us, and forbid any there should fur∣nish me with Horses. About nine in the Morning I heard of his arrival, by the news he sent me he had business to speak with me; I sent him word he might come when he pleas'd. Having deliver'd me a Letter of Credence from his Majesty, he endeavour'd to per∣swade me to return to the Constable; as the best course I could take: things being not for my advantage in France, where the King was inform'd I pre∣sum'd much upon his favour, and pre∣tended to govern him as I pleas'd. He added, that his Majesty was much trou∣bled he had granted me his protection upon frivolous and Chimerical Pretences of mine, and for Reasons which had no other ground but my humour and caprice. He concluded in case I would return home, I had no more to do but take the way of Grenoble, and go into the Abby of Montfleuri. He had the Heads of his Embassy written under the Letter, and my answer was, that I had not left my House to return thither so soon, that what I had done
was not upon imaginary pretences, but for good and solid reasons, which I nei∣ther would, nor could declare to any but the King; that all I desir'd was to speak with him, in confidence, that having obtained audience of him, I should find him so wise and so just, that he would permit himself to be disabus'd, and lay aside those ill impressions they la∣bour'd so industriously to give him of my conduct. That I was very far from flattering my self with the vanity of the presumptuous power he had mentioned, that I had neither Merit, nor Quality, nor Parts to pretend to a share in the management of his Affairs; that I desir'd leave to retire to Paris, and limit my ambition to the straitness of a Cloister, where I begg'd his Ma∣jesties Permission to live among my Re∣lations, as the great Dutchess of Tus∣cany, the Princess de Chalais, and many more Ladies who were Widows, or se∣parated from their Husbands, had been allow'd to do. As to my returning to Grenoble, I was too weary to be∣begin another Journey; and further, that I waited his Majesties answer,
by which I would govern my self. These were my last words to him, which having spoken, I presently fell a playing on my Guittarre. He took his leave of me, and a while after, by a Letter from Marguein, I had news the Duke de Crequi was coming to see me from the King, with orders to answer my Proposals: He arriv'd, and Mar∣guein also almost together: I pray'd the Duke to come in, who seeing me a-Bed in an ordinary Room in an Inn, and considering the poverty of my Conditi∣on, compar'd with the Grandeur and Pomp he had seen me in at Rome, he told me he was no less astonisht than sorry to see such a change, supplying with his discourse and commiseration my insensibility of the illness of my Fortune; but finding him enlarge too much on that subject, I pray'd him to pass on to what he had to communicate to me of greater importance. He an∣swer'd very clearly, the King was not willing I should either enter Paris, or speak with him, having given the Nun∣cio and the Constable his Royal word he would grant me neither, for reasons I
could not be ignorant of; that my best course was to return for Grenoble, un∣less I would rather chuse to go home, which would certainly be safest and most honourable for me. Mov'd, more than can be imagin'd, at a declaration of this nature, I an∣swer'd, the King might well refuse me the Honour of seeing him, and for∣bid me entrance into Paris, but it would not appear very handsome to oblige me to return for Grenoble in the condition I was in, no less tyr'd with the heat than with haste of my Jour∣ney: That it was a strange piece of se∣verity in a King to deprive me of the Honour of his Royal presence, but since there was such necessity of my o∣bedience, I beg'd his Majesty to per∣mit me to enter into L'ys Abby. Mon∣sieur de Crequi pray'd me to write a Bil∣let to the King for that purpose; and having return'd to Paris with the Billet, he sent, the day following, a Page who brought me the leave I desir'd, with order to the Abbess to receive me, and to Monsieur Gibertiere to accompany me thither. Much about the same time
arriv'd a Gentleman from Monsieur Colbert with two Purses of five hundred Pistols a piece, which his Majesty had order'd should be sent me; being the sum it pleas'd his Royal Grandeur to oblige me with every six Months while I continued under his protection. I went immediately to L'ys, where the Abbess received me with great expres∣sions of Esteem and Affection. Soon after my Sisters came to see me, and brought me many considerable Presents. I cannot express the joy I had to see them, whose Civilities and Caresses to me, for three or four days they were to see me, were no small comfort to me in my afflictions. The Countess of Soi∣sons, of her natural generosity, sent me a very rich Bed with Tapistry and other Furniture of value; and in a word all she thought I stood in need of. The Count of Soisons her Husband who not long after dy'd, by an accident in the Army, not without suspicion of Poison, and the Duke of Bouillon having ob∣tain'd leave of the King, came to see me, none daring to visit me without permission from his Majesty: I liv'd
very quietly in this Monastery, the kindness of the Nuns being such, I have not words to express the complai∣sance and tenderness they us'd me with, by the example of the Abbess. But Fortune, who never permitted me to enjoy long any happy Estate, made use of my self as the surest Instrument to deprive me of this, and to disturb my repose, brought me into great dis∣grace with the King, by means of a Let∣ter I writ to Monsieur Colbert to com∣plain of the small Courtesie I found at his Majesties hands; concluding, that since he denyed me leave to come to Paris, he would permit me to go where else I pleas'd. His Majesty was very ang∣ry at this Letter, which my Enemies laid hold of to incense him the more a∣gainst me, acquainting him I was too near Paris, and that I might come thi∣ther in a moment. This made him order Monsieur Colbert to tell me from him, I had no more to do, but chuse a Covent threescore Leagues distant from Court, and that having written him such a Letter I deserv'd not his protection. By this answer I saw my
fault, and sorry, though too late, for my rashness, I writ to Monsieur Colbert, that in truth I had done ill to write the Letter I had sent him, but that he had not done better in shewing it the King. And that since he was in part, though indirectly, the cause of his anger against me, he was oblig'd to pacifie him, in telling him how sorry I was for my folly, and to solicit my par∣don: Having done what he could to serve me, he sent me word the day after by Letter, that his Majesty had pardon'd me, but persisted in his reso∣lution to send me threescore Leagues from Paris: I answered very submissively, I had not yet been such a wanderer as to be able to make choice of a Covent at that distance, and therefore if there were no possibility of altering his Ma∣jesties mind, I begg'd he would be pleas'd to name a Covent, and I would obey without reply, though I could not but be troubled to go out of a Covent where I was well acquainted, and liv'd with some pleasure: The Answer I receiv'd was four or five days after to see Monsieur Gibertiere coming with a
Coach, and bringing an order to the Abbess to let me go. I obeyed, and going out with four Maids I then had with me, (the Constable having at my request sent me three who had serv'd me at Rome) we travelled to Avenay, an Abby three miles from Rheims, where his Majesty commanded I should be, at half the distance first mentioned from Paris. The Abbess received me with all the honour and kindness I could wish: A month after the Archbishop of Reims, Brother to the Marquess de Louvoy, came to see me; he press'd me very much to tell him what reasons I had given the King for my coming from Rome: I desir'd to be excus'd: he ask'd me, somewhat displeas'd, whether I came with a design to prevail with the King as formerly: I reply'd, that it was a thing he could grant me the least of a∣ny, and I had the least thought of. Every day I received proofs of the generosity and goodness of the Abbess and her Nuns, who were all very civil, and strove who should divert me most for the three months I continued in that Covent: At three months end my
Brother obtained leave to bring me to Nevers; the hopes I had one day to have leave to go to Paris made me take the Journey with a great deal of pleasure, but the success was not an∣swerable; for having engag'd my self to my Brother upon my word, that if he left Nevers I would go into a Covent, he told me about the weeks end he had business call'd him suddenly to Venice, and that he hop'd I would not fail to perform what I had promis'd him. I was very much afflicted at the news of this unexpected Journey, which dissipated all my hopes of returning to Paris, and obliged me to quit a place where I liv'd pleasantly enough, and depriv'd me of the company of the Duchess his Wife, who was one of the most lovely and obliging Ladies in the World, and most did all in her power for my comfort and ease. However resolv'd (as always) to keep my word, though to my dissa∣tisfaction and displeasure, I visited all the Covents in Nevers to see if there were any could please me: but having been us'd to great and famous Abbies, I found not one to my mind there.
But my Brother pressing me more and more every day (though more out of policy than for any business he had at Venice) I told him, to satisfie him, that the best expedient was for us to go to Lyons where I might have choice of Covents: He lik'd my resolution, in hopes it would give him an opportunity to take me further, as it did. We went for Lyons, whence the Coaches of the Marquess de Villeroy, who commanded there in his Fathers absence, came to re∣ceive us two or three Leagues from the Town. Having rested a while I went to view the Covents, particu∣larly that of St. Mary of the Visitation, scituate on a height which overlook'd the City: I had taken up my residence there, had not my ill fate made the Marquess and my Brother disswade me from it, by aggravating my sufferings, and the flight put upon me in France, to that height, that I took a resolution to go into Italy, without acquainting them what place I would chuse for my retirement. The Marquess about that time was call'd home from Exile; so we parted; he for Paris, we for Italy.
I had scarce set foot in that Country but I perceived my Error, and the fault I had commtted in quitting Lyons; to retrieve this miscarriage, I design'd not to pass beyond Turin, hoping his Royal Highness would afford me his assistance. I discover'd the design to none but my Sister, as I pass'd through Chamberi, where I pray'd her to write to his Highness in my favor, to facilitate my putting my design in execution; she did it readily. Having past the Alpes, I acquainted my Brother with my reso∣lution: He was extremely astonisht at it, but durst not oppose it, knowing the time and place inconvenient. Be∣ing with Monsieur Boniel, a learned and honest man I had taken at Gnenoble for my Chaplain, who came to me at Ave∣nay, I dispatch'd him with a Letter I had written to his Royal Highness, beseeching him to give me leave to retire into some Covent in his Do∣minions; and assuring him his most Christian Majesty would not dislike of it. The next day he answer'd me, with much kindness, he would very willingly grant me his protection,
if (as I writ) the King would be pleas∣ed with it: He sent a Gentleman to complement me, with a Coach to bring me to Turin. My Brother took leave of me, and went on his Journey, avoiding to pass by Turin that he might not be oblig'd to see his Highness. This Prince came to receive me a League out of Town, and made me go into his Coach, wherein were some Lords of his Court, and with a great Train of Nobility on Horseback, he ac∣companied me to the Covent of the Visitation, where he had commanded an Apartment to be furnish'd for me, and dispos'd the Abbess to receive me, by the intercession of the Archbishop, who was present at my entrance: The Nuns were kind and obliging as possible during my three Months abode there; about the end of which, being inform'd Madam Mazarin was suddenly for Pa∣ris, partly out of a desire to see her, and partly to endeavour to repair the fault I committed in leaving France, I resolv'd to go to Chamberi; and de∣sir'd his Royal Highness not to permit any Courrier to pass for two days, for
fear of my being pursu'd. His High∣ness very obligingly granted my request, yet forgot not to condemn my resoluti∣on; and express his displeasure at it. Assur'd of his word, I set forward with a thousand Pistols the King had return'd me of his usual bounty. Morena and my Chaplain were all the company I had: With this small train I arriv'd at Chamberi more weary than ever: There to my comfort I found my self frustrated of my hopes to see my Sister; who, prevail'd upon by interest more than by affection, had hid her self from me, for fear of being concern'd in my designs. I slept in the Castle she dwelt in, and asking her People where she was, and when she would be at home, I could not obtain a satisfactory answer: At last not to hazard a certain enjoy∣ment for an expectation, I resolv'd to return to Turin, under the protection of his Royal Highness, with whom I had all the reason in the World to be satisfy'd, his care and bounty having been so great while I was at Turin, and particularly at my last address to him, that I could not desire more. I writ
him a Letter to pray him send me a Coach to the Foot of the Alpes, which he did with his usual exactness: The Marquess Drone and a Gentleman be∣longing to the Constable, call'd Don Mourice de Bologna, who was come to me by the Constables order, came to receive me near Turin. They were no less glad of my return than they had been apprehensive of my executing my former design, which they endeavour'd to prevent by sending Courriers into several parts to hinder my passage: The same time the most Christian King, at the Constables request, sent orders to the Governours of the Fron∣tiers and other Provinces of his King∣dom, not to permit me entrance. When I arriv'd at Turin, I went to the Prince of Carignan's, where I found the Count de Oreux and the Chevalier de Savoy, his Nephews and mine. And fearing he would not receive me, if I gave him notice of my coming, I took possession (without saying a word to him) of an Appartment where I conti∣ed above a Month, till leave was come from Rome for my returning into a Co∣vent,
and that I might go abroad once a-week, which Cardinal Porto Carrero procur'd for me. The mean time I frequented the Court, and went to a House called La Venerie, about which was store of all sorts of Game and Divertisements, so that I never spent my time with more pleasure than there, receiving continually from his Highness Royal, and Madam Royal, all imagina∣ble Expressions of Affection and Ho∣nour. My happiness was too great to last long; Fortune making it her business to persecute me, suggested to his Roy∣al Highness Reasons of State to make me a Proposal of returning whence I came, and to tell me it were better for me to be at my own House than in a Co∣vent: And that if there were no other Obstacle but the present disunion from the Constable, he would undertake to reconcile us. I was so offended at this and some other things he said to me at La Venerie, that, carry'd away by my cholerick humour, I would have gone away that moment in a pet, and re∣turn'd into the Cloyster, and had cer∣tainly
done it, had not Madam Royal hinder'd it, by staying me with them eight days more; at the end of which they accompanied me to the Covent: Our difference increased by the way, through the impatience of my humour, and my unwillingness to pardon him any thing, which put us in a greater heat than ever. Letting go my hand, as I entred the Covent, he told me, af∣ter long silence, that as humoursome and pettish against him as I was, he would be still ready to serve me: This offer, which should have appeased me, anger'd me more than ever; so that I told him, haughtily enough, I made just as much account of his protection as I did of his person: This answer madded him, that he went away with∣out saying a word more to me: My E∣nemies look'd on this as a good occasion to work me out of favor with him, and succeeded in it. About this time I endeavour'd by se∣veral Letters to the Ministers of France, to prevail with the King to revoke the Orders he had given to prohibit my coming into his Kingdom, but I could
not obtain the favour: The mean time his Highness Royal past all the Summer at La Venerie, without as much as send∣ing me one complement: At his return he came to see me with Madam Royal, to comfort me for the death of Count Soisons; he performed this melancholly Complement with a great deal of Ce∣remony, the sadness of his Counte∣nance suiting very well with that of the occasion. Finding my self disti∣tute of hopes from France, and less honour'd than formerly by the Sove∣raign of Savoy, I laid hold on an op∣portunity offer'd me by a Voyage of the Marquess de Bourgamanero to Turin, to intreat him to prevail with the Consta∣ble, his very good Friend, to give me leave to go into France, being assur'd the King would not deny me that fa∣vour if the Constable desir'd it. The Marquess return'd to Millan to serve me on this occasion, and with full purpose to return to me as soon as he should ob∣tain the permission requisite from the Court of Spain, where he said he must write to obtain it, being not dispos'd to ask it of the Duke d' Ossuna, then
Viceroy of Millan, for fear of being deny'd by him, who had already, by his fault, lost the Love and Esteem this Gentleman had once had for him. While matters stood thus, the Consta∣ble flatter'd me with hopes the most Christian King would permit me to re∣turn into France, assuring me he had in∣treated his Majesty to do it. 'Twas no hard matter to make me believe a thing I so much desir'd: I was the more in∣duc'd to believe this, as knowing it for the Constables interest I should leave Turin: The Marquess de Borgamanero, the beginning of Autumn, return'd with the permission (I mention'd) grant∣ed by the Queen Regent of Spain: But finding the Constable writ to me every day he had not receiv'd answer from France, and judging he would be better pleas'd I should retire into Flanders than any other place, I resolv'd to go thither; intending to set out within eight days, I spoke of it to the Marquess who highly approv'd it. About this time I received several visits from the Duke of Savoy, but not with the satisfaction I had formerly from
them, being grown so weary of the uneavenness of his humour, that though he often pray'd me to communicate my resolution he could not prevail: This did so anger him, that Madam Royal took notice of it; and, when I took my leave of her, ask'd me what I had done to the Duke, that he return'd so vex'd and out of humour from the Covent: I answer'd, he must attribute to himself and the inequality of his temper all I had done to him, and that if he had not given me cause to complain of him, I had not given him cause of complaint against me. Yet the Morning before we set out, the Marquess pressing me very much to take my leave of that Prince, I did him that Devoir more out of civility than inclination. The Duke made several Complaints, and told me he was much displeased at the resolution I had taken to be gone, and press'd me very much to let him know whither I went, pro∣testing that wherever I went I should not find a Prince more willing to ob∣lige me. I heard very attentively his complaints and his offers, and as I
took my leave of him, I thank'd him for the latter, which I could not accept, being resolv'd to quit his Dominions. He gave me his hand and brought me to the Coach: We went for Rone in the State of Millan, with design to pass thence into Switzerland; but being a days Journey from Turin, the Mar∣quess, and the Abbot Oliva who was come from Rome, to serve as Chaplain (being in truth a learned Man, but far short of the other in Zeal and Fidelity) be∣gan to disswade me from passing through Millan, telling me, they were well assur'd something would be attempted against my person, and that I was to save my self as long as I could from ambushes laid for me, and that the Duke d' Ossu∣na would certainly order me to be staid. It was a pretty while ere I would yield to their Counsels, but submitting at length to their Eloquence and the strength of their Reasons, I took the Road of St. Bernard, accompanied with the Marquess, the Abbot, Mo∣rena, and a Valet de Chambre call'd Martin, having sent away the rest of my people by Rone: I was soon convinc'd
of the truth of what they said, for the Duke d' Ossuna, being inform'd of my departure from Turin by a Courrier Don Maurice had dispatch'd, and prest by Letters from the Constable to send me to the Castle of Millan, gave order I should be arrested, believing I would pass by Rone, having sent some of my People that way: My Maid Constance receiv'd in the Prison there all Honour imaginable, being taken for me, till Co∣vonago a Knight of Malta sent by the Duke to see me, undeceiv'd them, and at the same time delivered those of my Train out of the pleasantest Prison ima∣ginable, where for eight days they had been splendidly treated, and afterwards enjoyed, as an effect of that Dukes gene∣rosity, all sorts of divertisements. We came far short of that pleasure in our Journey over the Mountain St. Bernard, travelling throw Snow, and over horrible precipices: However we arriv'd safe at Basse, where we had the news of what had happened to my People at Rone, who, a few days after they were at liberty, came to us at Mayence, whence we past to Francfort, to go thence to Cologne,
taking that compass to please the Mar∣quess and the Abbot, who were not wil∣ing to be at the Siege of Bonne, or meet the Spanish or French Troops then on their march: I had the honour to see the Duchess of Lorrain, and to receive of her Highness all the demonstrations of affection I could wish, during our three days stay at Franckfort. Having so long enjoy'd the sweet conversation of that Princess, impatient of longer stay, I set forward on my Journey, wherein is impossible to comprehend, much more to express, what I suffer'd from the suspicious humour, the in∣tolerable flegm, and continual watch∣ing of one of my Fellow Travellers, who still had an Eye upon me, and from the impertinence of the other. This lasted till I came to Cologne, where the former, thinking it neither safe nor civil to continue troubling me, alter'd his course; being well inform'd, the Embassadors of several Crowns had made me offers of their Services, and fearing perhaps the advice I received from some might make me alter my mind; as I had certainly done, if For∣tune,
obstinately bent to persecute me, had not (by hindring me to give cre∣dit to what Monsieur Courtin, and Monsieur Barrellon, foretold me would come to pass, if I went into Flanders) unhappily caus'd me to slight their ad∣vice. But the Marquess and the Abbot, fearing the Discourse and Correspon∣dence I held with these Ambassadors, might not only obstruct, but ruine their designs, made use of all the Credit and Eloquence they had to perswade me for Flanders. The Marquess could not rest till he saw me on my way; letting me know, that Don Manuel de Lyra, the Spanish Envoy, had given him in∣telligence of a Spanish Regiment, which was on their march to convoy Money to the Army, and to return: He made us believe this the most favourable op∣portunity we could wish to guard us into the Camp of the Marquess d' As∣sentar, Camp Master General, afterwards kill'd in the Battel of Sennef, to whom the Marquess Borgamanero had written, as to his intimate Friend, to receive us, and permit us to follow him till we came to Flanders, with the Regiment,
for fear we should meet with some French Troops, who committed great disorders in these Countries. Before we arriv'd into the Camp of the Marquess d' Assentar, Fortune hav∣ing design'd to use Borgamanero as an In∣strument to persecute me, found the means to help us out of a scurvy acci∣dent befallen us by the breaking of our Coach; which happening to be in a place where we had neither time nor materials to mend it, Horses were offer'd us. And the way being very dangerous, the Weather cold, and the Night dark, being not far from the Marquess d' Assentars Camp, I accept∣ed of a very fine Horse offer'd me by the Marquess of Marber, Camp Master to the Regiment, and a Gentleman of one of the best Families in Flanders. Two of my Maids mounted other Horses provided for them, and the rest of my Train went with good Pass∣ports for Holland: Four or Five Days after our arrival in the Camp, we conti∣nued our Journey in a Coach of the Marquess d' Assentars. This Horse so good and so sure was,
though indirectly, the cause of all my future sufferings, and threw me head∣long into misfortunes I had not fore∣seen. The Marquess de Borgamanero having from that time resolv'd my ruine, and executed his designs with so much Art, it was not in my power to defeat: During my Journey, the Principal Officers as well Spaniards, as Hollanders and Flemmings, exprest for me all the care and complaisance imagina∣ble, endeavouring to divert me some∣times at Play and sometimes by dis∣course. As I was thus passing my time, with a great deal of Pleasure, I observ'd the Marquess often out of humour, and in deep meditation: I little dreamt of what he and d' Assentar plotted a∣gainst me, who could not imagin the ill prepared for me, with the help of the Count de Monterey, then Gover∣nour of Flanders, sufficiently possest with reports to my prejudice. We ar∣riv'd at Malines, where the Governour told me, the Count had written to him not to let me pass further, till things were in readiness for my being received into a Covent at Brussells. 'Tis impos∣sible
to express how I was astonish'd at this admirable Complement, and un∣expcted Reception. The Marquess fearing I might attribute this proceed∣ing to him, made as if he had been ex∣tremely surpriz'd, to which he added Oaths and Protestations I thought so sin∣cere, that I instantly pray'd him to go presently to Brussells, and intreat the Count to give me leave to come into that City, and retire into the Covent of Barlemont, to recovr, in some mea∣sure, the liberty taken from me by the Governour of Malines; who, under pretence of doing me honour, plac'd Guards about my House; a civil way to colour my imprisonment, but a dou∣ble offence to hide an injury under the vail of an obliging action: The Mar∣quess promis'd to do me all the good offices in his power with the Count, and I expected his performance; hop∣ing that the protestation he made of sincerity, and my confidence in him, notwithstanding the just cause of su∣spition I had from the order above men∣tioned, would have oblig'd him to lay aside all thoughts of revenge, and serve
me faithfully in this affair, or at least to remain neuter, and not do me harm. But the pleasure of Revenge is a weak∣ness incident to Men as well as Wo∣men, and more criminal in the former. The Marquess and Abbot did all they could to inspire into the Count a hatred against me, and advis'd him to clap me up in the Cittadel of Antwerp, to prevent my going to France or England: So that when I was fully perswaded thse two Gentlemen la∣bour'd my liberty, and, to banish from my mind all umbrage to the contrary, I look'd on the passages at Malines as an illusion of fancy, behold with Bour∣gamanero a Gentleman from the Count who told me, his Excellency being ob∣lig'd to march the next day with the Army to meet the French Troops, de∣sir'd me to stay at Antwerp till his re∣turn: The Marquess to confirm the complement, or (to name it right) the order, told me with a feigned trouble, that there was a necessity of obeying it, but that it should be for few days, and so long only till an answer might be had from the Constable, and leave from
the Pope for my entring a Covent: that he was extremely sorry it had not been in his power to obtain leave from the Count for my coming to Brussells: that the refusal was to be attributed to the ill informations he had received of me; adding, that time must be al∣low'd to take away the ill impressions they had made, and that he would un∣dertake the doing it. I did not yet mi∣strust him, not doubting but he proceed∣ded with the generosity he pretended, but told him I was very sensible of his kind offers, and accepted of them. And, seeing there was then no other course to be taken, I went with the Admiral a board a fine Barque he had brought to take me in. The next day we arriv'd at Antwerp very early; they kept me so long aboard after our arrival, that I began to suspect something in hand a∣gainst me. Yet after three hours wait∣ing, news being come that the Marquess d' Osseyra, Governour of the place, wait∣ed for me in his Coach, I thought all well again, concluding, by all appearan∣ces, it was done for my honour. Having landed, I went into the Coach with
Borgamanero and the Governour, who carried me strait away to the Cittadel, where continuing in my mistake, and thinking my self at liberty, all my care the first day was to recover of my weariness. The second day I pray'd the Governour to let me have a Coach to go abroad in: Borgamanero asto∣nisht at this, told me with some trou∣ble, that the weather was foul, and that I were better rest my self a little longer: Having thank'd him for so ob∣liging a care, I made no further reply: But the next day, Borgamanero being gone to the Count de Monterey at the Army, and the Abbot Oliva to Brussells, under pretence of returning that way to Rone, they plac'd two Guards and an Officer at my door: Then it was I clearly saw my former blindness, and the treachery of my pretended Friends; and that if Borgamanero had kept them from using me thus till after his departure, it was for no other end, but that he might not be thought the Au∣thor of my ill usage: But in the Af∣fairs of this World the blow is often felt when the hand that gave it is not
seen: This was not all, but, as if I had been an offender against the State, they received and opened all the Let∣ters written by me, or addressed to me; they proceeded yet further, for Borga∣manero, not thinking himself suffici∣ently reveng'd of my slights and con∣tempts, which proceeded only from the small obligation I had to him, and knowing I had received a Letter from the Constable, and a Brief from the Pope, wherein he permitted the Arch∣bishop to give me my choice what Co∣vent I would go into; he advis'd the Count Monterey to stay for an answer and an order that was to be sent me from Spain, telling him, he was very well assur'd whatever he had done to me should be very well approv'd; not only by the Constable, but by the Queen Regent. By this artifice he broke the neck of the business, when I thought it almost concluded: The in∣formations he had sent against me into Spain and Italy, had the effect he desir'd. The Queen order'd the Count to make sure of my person, and the Constable commending highly their conduct as to
me, sent me a Letter in justification of it: That upon advice had of my in∣tentions to go into France or England, they were oblig'd to deprive me of li∣berty to execute the design. 'Twas in vain to stand upon my defence, and endeavour to clear my self of the false accusations. I told the Count, when he came to see me in the Cittadel as he return'd from the Army, (as I had by Let∣ter acquainted the Constable) that if I had had the design they spoke of, it would have been an easie matter to have put it in execution at Cologne, where the one and the other very well knew I wanted neither Friends nor Favour. This had been reason enough to any other to have laid aside all suspitions of of this nature: But the artifice of the Marquess prevail'd over my innocence. The second visit the Count made me, upon my complaint of the continu∣ance of my rigorous usage, and intreat∣ing his leave to go to Brussells as I was promis'd, he resolv'd to satifie me, and gave Borgamanero charge to provide for my reception there: He hir'd me an Appartment adjoining close to the
English Covent, wherein he set up more Grates than were in the Covent. This famous habitation being fitted for me, he went to Bourgoigne, and notice was given me of the Lodging provided for me: Two of my Maids, whom I had sent to Brussells, having reported to me the Circumstances of this honou∣rable Prison, and told me I were better stay where I was; I would not believe them, as not able to imagine, though they had depriv'd me of liberty to go abroad and walk the Town, they would also deny me entrance into the Covent. All things now ready, and this plea∣sant habitation in order, the Count sent the Captain of his Guards, with whom I embark'd for Brussells, where I had a great desire to stay: Having in this short Voyage inform'd my self bet∣ter of the particular conveniences of my future habitation, I began in good earnest to be afraid of lying there, and resolv'd to take Sanctuary in a consecra∣ted place near it; so that a very fine Coach of the Counts being sent for my reception, to carry me to this Lodging, without allowing me the liberty of see∣ing
the Countess or Count at the Pal∣lace, I went into the Church, belong∣ing to the Covent, under pretence of saying my Prayers, and the same time declar'd to the Captain of the Guard, who had accompanied me, that I would not stir out of the Church, but to go in∣to the Monastry, as the Count had promis'd I should, in the Cittadel. The Captain carried the news to his Excel∣lency, who came presently to me, and adding threats to his requests, and all to no purpose; my refusing to quit the Church provok'd him so, that he sent to the Nuncio and the Arch-Bishop for leave to take me out by force. After a short conference with them, he came to me the second time, but receiving from me as high and hard words as he gave me, he went his way, leaving several of his Guards to watch me, besides four Sentinels at the Church Door, having before that, in the Queens name, forbidden the Abbess to receive me into her Covent. I was at last resolv'd to sleep in the Church, when Monsieur Bruneau, a Magistrate of Brussells, advis'd me to
come out fairly, assuring me he had good information his Excellency had given the Souldiers order to steal me a∣way as soon as I should be a-sleep. I knew this to be an honest man, and be∣lieved him, and according to his ad∣vice, I went into my stately Lodging, which I found stronger and better guard∣ed than the Tower of Danae. But notwithstanding all my trouble, which were not small, I was so tir'd and slee∣py, that I never had a better Nights rest: But the Grates, and Guards, and Centinels put upon me were not e∣nough, for the Count fearing I would one way or other find a passage into the Covent, sent a Spanish Gentleman call'd de St. Lorenzo to be witness of all my Actions, with order not to permit me to go out of his sight. In this lamen∣table condition, and having not been able to obtain any thing of the Gover∣nour of Flanders with my sighs and my tears, I resolv'd at last to go to Madrid, and retire into a Covent, not doubting but this would be granted me. The Count approv'd of the Pro∣posal, and dispatch'd a Courrier to the
Constable to inform him of it, and ob∣tain his permission, which I press'd for extremely, out of a desire to see that Court, and in hopes to better my con∣dition. While I expected an Answer from the Constable, the Count wanting his Guards, and being oblig'd to go to Ant∣werp to dispatch some affairs, press'd me much to return to the Cittadel, giving me his word I should be better us'd, and allow'd to go sometimes a∣broad, accompanied by the Lieutenant of the place. I found an opportunity to get him sign the conditions of this Treaty, at a visit he made me before he went for Antwerp: I had, to my cost, found it necessary to use all the caution, and obtain the best security I could, a∣gainst my falling under the inconveni∣ences I found there the first time, and the next day set forward for Antwerp, accompanied by Monsieur Bruneau and Don de St. Lorenzo. I had thenceforth more liberty in the Cittadel, and eve∣ry where else, after the arrival of the Abbot Colonna, who was come from the Constable to take care of me, and ac∣company
me in my Voyage. He con∣tributed very much to my better usage, by representing to the Count that I might be guarded with more decency, and my Person sufficiently secur'd, with∣out using such disobliging and rigorous cautions. My Voyage for Spain being resolv'd on, I writ a Letter to the Ad∣miral, wherein I pray'd him to do me the favour, when I came to Madrid, to receive me into his House; and that he would get me leave, from the Queen, to go into a Covent belonging to the Court. All things being ready for my departure, I went to Ostend, where Don Fernando Vallederes, Governour of the Town, treated me magnificent∣ly for eight days I staid there, waiting a convenient opportunity to embarque: At the end of that time I sail'd away, in company of an English Vessel, which, with a favourable Wind, arriv'd in nine days at St. Sebastian: I was scarce landed, but finding no answer from the Admiral, nor consequently from the Queen, I writ him a second Letter to the same effect with the for∣mer. And to see if he would answer
me, I staid eight days at St. Sebastian; during which, the Governour Don Balta∣sar Pantoja us'd me and my People with all imaginable civility. These eight days being over, and vext no answer was come, I resolv'd to pursue my Journey towards Madrid, in hopes to receive answer by the way. Being a days Journey beyond Burges, and seeing no appearance of what I expected, I sent an Express to the Admiral, to to know if I might depend upon the favour I desir'd of him by my Letters from Antwerp, and from St. Sebastian. Continuing my Journey I arriv'd at Alcobendas, a Village three Leagues from Madrid, where the Courrier brought me Letters; one from the Queen, wherein her Majesty did me all the honours I could wish; the other from the Admi∣ral, who very obligingly granted me the house I desir'd, adding he would come in person to receive me, and of∣fer it with his own mouth: The Abbot Vigliani, to whom I had dispatcht a Gen∣tleman to give notice of my coming, arriv'd, as I was eating something, with his Coach, and another from the Nun∣cio,
who had sent with it one of his Gentlemen to wait on me: Tyr'd with heat and with travelling, I ask'd the Abbot Vigliani if it were not possible to get me a little Ice. He was no less asto∣nish'd at the question, than I was asham'd I had ask'd him for so ordinary a thing. He presently sent for all sorts of plea∣sant Liquors for me, who heartily thank'd him for so seasonable a Refreshment. At his request I went in his Coach to our Ladies of Belvedere, about two Leagues from Madrid, where I was re∣ceived by the Duchess d' Albuquerque, and the Admirals Daughter in Law, Wife to the Marquess d' Alcannizas, the Admirals second Son, and by the Duke d' Albuquerque (since dead:) They brought me to a House of pleasure of the Ad∣mirals, on the East-side of Madrid, ve∣ry richly furnish'd, and adorn'd with the most excellent and rarest Painting in Europe; and, in a word, the finest and most pleasant place of all Spain. I was there about two Months, and then, fearing I might be troublesome to the Admiral, (who treated me splendidly enough) and seeing him naturally care∣less,
so that he did not press the Queen for her permission, for my going into a Covent as she had promis'd me, I went my self to speak to her Majesty, and intreated her Order to the Nuns of St. Domingo el Real, to receive me into their Covent, or allow me a House they had hard by, between their Covent and that of our Lady de los Angeles, of the Order of St. Francis. The Queen receiv'd me with great kindness, and granted my request; and the next day sent order to the Nuns to receive me, or give me the House I mention'd: Their answer was, they would obey the order, but intreated her Majesty, with all due re∣spect, she would be pleased to make an Authentick Declaration under her Royal Signature, that the favour they did me should not be drawn into Exam∣ple; which her Majesty granted them, for preserving their Priviledges, and with Circumstances much to my ho∣nour. I entred this Covent the last of August, accompanied by the Nuncio, (now Cardinal Marescotti) the Admi∣ral, and the Marquess d' Alcannizas: That I might neither give, nor receive
trouble in my new habitation, they as∣sign'd me the half of the next house for my Apartment, where they plac'd Grates, and left the rest of it for the Ab∣bot Don Fernand de Colonna, and my Family: I was at first at a great loss for want of the Spanish Tongue, and my ignorance of the Customs of the Na∣tion; and had it not been for Donna Victoria Porcia Oresco, Sister to the Mar∣quess Mortara, then Abbess, who could speak Italian pretty well, and is very ingenious, I had had a very ill time on't. Afterwards I made an acquain∣tance with some of the Nuns, and past my time pleasantly enough among them, till having ask'd leave to go a∣broad once a week (as I had been made to believe I should, and was granted me at Turin) I understood it had been denied me at Rome. Soon after this I had news that the Constable, whom I had pressed with much earnestness to send me my second Son, (and in order thereto, that he would take him along with him into Flanders, where the Queen, at my motion, had honour'd him with a command of two Troops
of Horse) was so far from giving me that satisfaction, that he had written to the Queen and the Admiral, who had desir'd it of him for me, that he had no mind I should stir out of the Covent, and intreated her Majesty not to permit it; that I was safe, and in good hands at Madrid, and that he was loath to hazard the seeing me at liberty elsewhere. Nothing provokes me more than contradiction; 'tis hard to express how highly I resented this usage, especially considering I was con∣tinually watch'd by a number of per∣sons, who were spyes upon my actions, by the appointment of the Abbot Don Fernand, who with a furious rigour ex∣ecuted the Constables orders: Besides, there were several disaffected persons, who made it their business to set my Husband against me, and do me ill of∣fices, writing to him I had a mind to be gone, and would certainly do it, if not carefully watch'd. This made me resolve to quit the Covent, and let them see all the pains they took to keep me up close, could keep me there no longer than I pleas'd. Don Fernand
being abroad, and all my Men with him, I commanded my Maids to throw down those strong, thick, and high Walls, the Author of my life says were the only Obstacle could stop me: I gave the Duke d' Ossuna, the Admi∣ral, and the Prince d' Astillano, notice of what I had done, by a Billet written to every of them, intreating their fa∣vour on this occasion, since it was not my design (as my Enemies gave out) to flye into France or into England, but to be at liberty in the House I was in, it being not just I should be kept up in a place I had freely and voluntarily en∣tered: The Duke of Ossuna, though an honest and a gallant Gentleman, was willing to see the storm over; and having sent on the morrow to comple∣ment me, respited his visit for some days, convincing me on this occasion he was more a Pollititian, than gallant or obliging. It was a whole week ere I could see the Prince d' Astillano, who excus'd himself, saying, the news came to him late. The Nuncio Melini and the Admiral, whom Don Fernand had pray'd to come presently, fail'd not to
do it, not to favour my design, but ex∣ecute their own, which was to oblige me to return into the Cloyster. I did all I could to prevent it, and found no small help from the difficulty the Nuns made to receive me: yet wanting pro∣tection, and having cause to fear the worst from them who had prov'd so contrary to my expectations, I follow'd the advice of returning into the Cloy∣ster, the Nuns having submitted upon the Nuncio's threating to excommuni∣cate them, in case of resistance. The Admiral, after so important an expedi∣tion, proud to see me coop'd up, solicited their Majesties to have me continued in the Cloyster, and strictly confin'd. The Constable was extreme glad at the news of this happy success, and will certainly be still well pleas'd with this Court, while they continue to vex me, his mind being so much alter'd, that he finds matter of joy in the oppression of my liberty. I endur'd some Months, with impa∣tience enough, the violence they us'd to keep me in the Covent. I had lit∣tle hopes of redress under the Queens
Government, who answer'd my petition for liberty, that she would grant it me with all her heart, if the Constable would consent to it. Besides, the Ad∣miral being the main Instrument to execute the resolutions of Don Fernand Valenzuela, was too great a Friend of my Husbands, to admit of any proposal that might give him offence, in crossing the resolutions they had taken against me, what the Constable had given full power to execute. In this lamentable case was I, when Heaven, pittying the distressed State of this Monarchy, and concerned for the preservation of it, inspir'd the Grandees to insinuate to his Majesty, how necessary it was to call home his Highness Don John of Austria, his Ma∣jesties Brother, to attend his Royal Per∣son, as the sole remedy for those mis∣chiefs that threatned the Government: This let in a Beam of hope, and brought into my remembrance the saying of Fa∣ther Ventimilla, a person no less illu∣strious for Virtue than Birth, That I must owe my liberty to that Prince, who at his return, would certainly restore
it me. I resolv'd to make use of so fa∣vourable an occasion, not doubting but it would fall out as had been foretold, the particular esteem I always had for the excellent qualities of that Prince, made me passionately desire to see him in full possession of all the honours due to him. My desires were heightned by the advantage I hop'd to draw thence to my self, who look'd upon my liberty as an infallible consequent of his re∣turn. All I could contribute to his Glory and Interest, was my good wishes, and insinuations in his favour; I addrest my self to the Duke of Ossuna my Kins∣man, and the person I was most oblig'd to. As for the Admiral, and some o∣thers, they had given over visiting me, lest I should imploy them in business inconsistent with the good intelligence they would hold with my Husband. The Duke I found so well dispos'd to un∣dertake this famous negotiation, that he long'd for the happy moment to put it in execution. Matters being in a pretty for∣wardness, and notice given me by Fa∣ther Ventimilla that his Highness was parted from Saragosa, I thought it
time to put my designs in execution, and allowing no longer time than I thought absolutely necessary for the Princes Voyage, though perform'd with all imaginable speed; when, by my computation, I thought his Arrival not far of, I went in open day out of the Covent, not as before, but through the Gate, and the Porters looking on. Having stept into a Coach, with a Lady my Friend, who came on purpose to re∣ceive me, I went directly to the Mar∣chioness Mortara's, who happened to be abroad, but at her return receiv'd me with great kindness, though much surpriz'd to see me. I had given the persons above men∣tioned notice of my second (as of my first) coming out of the Covent; and the Marchioness sent word to the Presi∣dent of Castille, I was at her House; Don Fernand having before-hand given order all about for arresting me, that I might be forc'd to return into the Cloyster, though he knew not where I was, but thought I design'd to leave the Kingdom. The Admiral, at Don Fernands instance, and for reasons he
knows altogether indispos'd to favour me, no sooner knew where I was, but he presently fell to consider how to have me clapt up again into a Co∣vent, or some other place of confine∣ment. The short time I was at liberty I received not a visit from any but the Duke d' Ossuna, whom the Marchio∣ness advertis'd of my being with her; in all the discourse I had with him, there was nothing remarkable but his telling me, it was impossible to make amends for the fault I committed in quitting the Covent, but to retire to a House where I might find the piety and innocence of a Cloyster, without the rigors and austerities in practice there. The Prince d' Astillano neither came nor sent me answer, but had the gallantry to send Don Fernand the Billet received from me, and assure him, by Letter, he would do the Constable all the service he could: The Admiral, willing to ap∣pear as honest a man as the other, came not to see me, being wholly taken up with business that concern'd me; which (if you would know it) was a Coun∣cel
held against me, and he thought fit to defer his visit till the Councel were over. I knew nothing the while of what was plotting against me, no per∣son daring to give me information, till Monsieur de Lindenau, extraordinary Embassador from Denmark, a Man of Honour and Merit, gave me intelli∣gence of all, by a Maid he sent to me. I could not speak with him, and attri∣buting his advice to his Friendship, without taking further care to prevent what might follow, I thought no more of it; though the fears I was continu∣ally in, were so many presages to induce me to believe the truth of his adver∣tisements. The Embassadrice of Den∣mark a Lady of great resolution and wit, and the Duke d' Ossuna had so dis∣sipated my fears, by assuring me posi∣tively they were causeless, that I thought my self very safe. However, two days after, the Nuncio, the Admiral, and Don Garcia de Medrano, one of the Councel and Chamber of Castille, made me an important visit by the Kings or∣der: The business of it was to oblige
me to return into the Covent; telling me, that having entred it by his or∣der, I should not have left it without permission from him: The Admiral spoke first, and told me, he was come only to acquaint me with his Majesties pleasure; to which the Nuncio added, that his business was to facilitate the execution of it, and remove the obsta∣cles might be expected from the Nuns: the third, speaking like a Minister of Justice, told me, with a severe tone, he had order to take me along; and, that in case of resistance, he would not stir from me but watch me very narrowly. Their Remonstrances and Threats would never have prevail'd upon me, had not the Marchioness press'd me on the other side, and told me, it would be a very great displea∣sure to her, to see any violence offer'd me in her House, in case of my refusal to obey the Kings orders; adding, I were better submit, and that when I was in the Covent, I might get out e∣very day with his Majesties leave: With these weak reasons of hers I was
perswaded to return once more into the Covent: She accompanied me thi∣ther: The Nuncio, to surprize the Nuns, went before, and having had the Gate opened, order'd it should not be shut, as if some Gentleman of Quality had been to follow him: At my arrival I found the Duke of Arcos, who being on his way to give me a visit at the Marchioness Mortara's, and having heard I was upon my return to the Cloy∣ster, went after the Nuncio to wait my coming: As soon as he saw me he gave me his hand, and accompanied me to the Covent, where several of the Nuns having known me (by taking up my Manto) fill'd the Air with their Cryes, saying to the Nuncio, what their resentment to see their Priviledges broken suggested unto them; so that he was forc'd to send his Coach for the Provincial who lived at Our Ladies of Attochia, at the Gate of Madrid: He brought them to reason, and made them obey his Majesties Order read by the Nuncio, having appeas'd the noise rais'd by the different opinions and in∣clinations
of a hundred and thirty per∣sons of which that Monastery consist∣ed: Amidst the confusion I took their part who were most against me, and notwithstanding the despair I was in, to see my self us'd with such violence, I took no small delight in the bustle and division I had occasioned among them. The better to foment it, I told them it was a strange and unheard-of proceeding of theirs, to have so little care of their priviledges which they saw not only broken by their being forc'd to receive me at first, but violated a-new by being oblig'd to a second ad∣mission. But this Civil War was quickly at an end, and all Spirits quiet but mine. I was vext to the heart to think with what violence they endeavour'd to keep me confin'd under conditions more rigorous than was promis'd: But the ill success of my two first at∣tempts could not discourage me from a third enterprize to recover my liberty which I, look'd upon as the greatest pleasure of life; to enjoy which, a
noble and generous Soul thinks no∣thing too much to hazard: I con∣sider'd seriously what means to obtain it by, and had been in consultation a whole week with my thoughts, when by the favour of providence, that happy day so much long'd for by the Subjects of this Monarchy, appear'd; The day the famous Duke of Alva desir'd so passionately, and had so zealously labour'd for, when af∣ter the banishment of Valenzuela his Highness, with infinite applause, glori∣ously entred Madrid. The particulars of this Affair, and Circumstances of the Princes entry, I leave to abler Pens, and shall say only, that though I had the least hand of any in the ma∣nagement of the enterprize, yet no Person was more concern'd for the suc∣cess; And I doubt not but my joy would have been far greater for the restitution of the Prince, and that he would have done me right upon the memorial I presented to the Queen soon after my return into the Covent, (which her Majesty referr'd to the Pre∣sident
of Castille, who would do nothing in it before his Highnesses arrival, had not Don Fernand Colonna, to prevent Execution of what the Prince had re∣solv'd in my favour, represented to his Highness that the Constable desir'd no∣thing more than to see me in a Covent; and that he would take it for a Singular favour to have me continued under Confinement. This Declaration Sus∣pended the resolution of the Prince, who saw himself obliged to refer the mater to the President of Castille, who proceeding as slowly as he had formerly done, I pre∣sented a Memorial to his Majesty, and a∣nother to his Highness by the Duke de Medina Sidonia: just as the Prince was re∣solv'd to grant me all I could expect from his Justice, a Letter was receiv'd from the Constable who having heard of my se∣cond leaving the Covent, earnestly begg'd his Majesty to send me into some Castle: his Highness hereupon, to quit himself with his usual prudence of a troublesome Affair, would not come to a resolution, but refer'd my memoriall and the Letter to the Councel of State.
Having Sollicited the Counsellors to fa∣vour my Cause, the Dukes of Alva and Ossuna, and the marquess d' Astor∣gas gave me their words to do me all the service in their power: they per∣form'd their promise, and the matter be∣ing put to the vote of the Council, I had the Majority of voyces, and it was Carryed I should have my liberty and a house to live in with decency and ho∣nour, sutable to my Quality. When I had notice of this favourable vote of the Council, I writ to Don Geronimo D' Eguia, Secretary Of the Universal dispatch, intreating him not to defer acquainting his Majesty with it, that he might do his pleasure in it: the Se∣cretary gave me not an answer in writ∣ing but sent one to tell me very civilly, he would give my business all the dis∣patch in his power. He was as good as his word, having within two dayes obtain'd a Decree which was sent me by Don Bartholomew de Legasa Secreta∣ry of State: the tenor of it was, that the King having seen my Memorial and the Constables Letter, thought fit to
Suspend his resolution till his Majesty writ to him; And that in the mean time if I pleas'd to retire into some place about Madrid, his Majesty gave me leave to do it until a definitive sentence should pass. Don Fernand Colonna having heard how things went, and been Charg'd by the Constable to use all possible diligence to have me put into a Castle if there were no keeping me in a Cloyster, he omitted nothing that might put a stop to my Liberty, inso∣much that he presented a Memorial wherein he insisted at large upon the inconveniences that would attend the granting it me; And that it was necessa∣ry for the Constables satisfaction I should be kept in a Cloyster or a Cas∣tle. I apprehended Don Fernand's opposition might turn to my prejudice, and pro∣duce an alteration in the resolution had been taken: which was not un∣likely, the Remonstrance he had made having already stagger'd some of the Counsellors of State. I thought it my my duty by getting timely out of the
Covent to prevent the mischief that Threatned me: I gave the Nuncio and the Duke D' Ossuna and Dorma Vi∣toria notice of my design: she did not disapprove it, thinking I had obtain'd a full and formal Decree: I got up very early for fear a Nun who lay in my a∣partment should discover my design: I went out by six in the morning, and sent for some Nuns into the Hall to dis∣course them while my Coach came; the Marchioness of Mortca whom I had the day before desir'd to lend me hers, excus'd her self as advis'd by her friends not to meddle further in any bu∣siness. The Coach I had hir'd being come, I went with my mayds to Attocha, where I found the Father Procurator of the Nuns to say Mass at my request. Four days before I left the Covent I in∣form'd Don Bartholomew Legasa of my design to retire to Ballacas, a place be∣longing to the King within a League of Madrid, that he might give his Ma∣jestie notice. I had taken care the Mar∣quess de Camarasa should send me a∣nother Coach under pretence of sending
two of my maids thither, to fit an A∣partment for me in the house of Dona Cecilia de Vera, who had given me the Choice of my Apartment there, except that in the possession of the Prince de Monte Sarctno, who was prisoner there on his Parol. This Coach made no more hast than the other, and I had time in staying for it to hear four masses: Be∣ing come at last with a Gentleman in it who had been formerly recommended to me by the Constable, we went toge∣ther to the house I mentioned, where we found only the Princes people who gave us their Apartment as the best, and provided for us a sumptuous dinner. A∣bout four in the afternoon the Nuncio arriv'd accompani'd by Don Fernando: Having absolv'd me of the Excommu∣nication I had incurr'd by coming out of the Covent without leave from him, he gave me so good reasons that Don Fernando could do no less than present that memorial to the Councel of State, and excus'd him so well for the Decla∣rations and Remonstrances he had made against my liberty, that he prevail'd with
me to pardon him at his request. I lay that night at Ballacas, though without any Sleep having had no rest for a Rhume that troubled me occasion'd by the dampness of the Room, and attended with a fever: this induc'd me to re∣turn to Madrid to live in the house of Don Fernando Colonna: In order to it I dispatch'd a Page to the Duke d' Ossuna, intreating him to send me presently a Coach and six Mules: Don Fernand com∣ing into my chamber I acquainted him with my design, and desir'd him not to oppose it, which he was so far from do∣ing, that he writ to the Nuntio, and having represented to him the poor Condition he found me in, and that it was better I should be at Madrid to wait (at his house) His Majesties orders, he intreated him to send me a Coach assoon as possible; I was glad of this, fearing the Duke of Ossuna being a Minister of state would have excus'd himself from sending any. The Nuncio presently shew'd Don Bartholomew Legasa the Letter receiv'd from Don Fernand, which having been shew'd to some of
the Councel, answer was sent me; It was not thought fit my request should be granted: the Nuncio was not discourag'd at the answer, but having shew'd the same Letter to Don Jeronymo d' Egua, he carried it to his Royal Highness, and receiv'd order from him to tell the Nun∣cio he saw no inconvenience in grant∣ing what Don Fernando desir'd. Upon this the Nuncio presently sent me a Coach with some wagons for my fa∣mily, having in vain expected the Duke of Ossuna's Coach, who sent me word by the Page after eight hours waiting he would come in person to seeme. This was in truth a great honour, but it would have been a greater obligation had he sent me a Coach, when I was under that impatience of returning for Madrid, fearing I might be prevented by an or∣der to prohibit my entrance there, espe∣cially when I had receiv'd a Letter from his Highness wherein she told me I had mis-interpreted his Majesties or∣der, and that before my leaving the Co∣vent several circumstances ought to have been adjudged as well for Choice of the place I should go to, as for my be∣ing
there in that splendor his Majesty thought decent and fit for my person. But my fear was pretty well over, when I consider'd this was not an order, but advice and a gentle admonition let me see the error I committed. While I continued under these trou∣bles the Nuncio's Coach arriv'd: I quickly went into it, still fearing an order to stay where I was: We were scarce got half way to Madrid when we met the Dukes of Ossuna, Veraguas Uzedas, with Father Ventimilla coming to see me, follow'd by four Coaches and a great Trayn on horse-back: I rail∣ed the first for his being so punctual; he answer'd I had no cause to complain of him who instead of sending a Coach was come himself, and for one Coach brought me four, which were all at my Service, if Don Fernand would be my convoy: We travell'd together to the gates of Madrid where we parted. I met the Nuncio walking afoot; He came very civilly to my Coach and gave me some advice for my conduct which I observ'd to very good purpose. This
accidental conference being over, I went to the house of Don Fernando Colona, where I am yet, expecting every day how his Majestie will dispose of me, of which I am hitherto altogether ig∣norant, though I have reason to believe his Majesties Justice and Clemency, and the great prudence of his Royal Highness will put an end to my Trou∣bles, and permit me to enjoy that repose and tranquillity I have so much need o and earnestly long for. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley. Folio. LOrd Bacon's Natural History, in Ten Centuries: Whereunto is newly added, The History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or of the Prolongation of Life. The History of Lapland, wherein is shewed the Original, Manners, Habits, Marriages, Conjurations of that People. Fodinae Regales, or, The History of the Laws and Places of the chief Mines and Mineral Works in England, Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland; as also of the Mint, and Money: With a Cla∣vis, explaining some difficult Words re∣lating to Mines.
