B5939 12683329 65714
A VINDICATION OF THE ORDINATIONS OF THE Church of ENGLAND. IN WHICH It is Demonstrated that all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice of the Primitive and Greek Churches, are still retained in Our Church. IN ANSWER To a Paper written by one of the Church of Rome to prove the Nullity of our Orders; And given to a Person of Quality. By GILBERT BURNET. LONDON: Printed by E. H. and T. H. for R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1677.
IMPRIMATUR Hic Liber, cui Titulus (A Vindication of the Ordinations, &c.) Guil. Iane R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à Sacris Domesticis.
THE PREFACE. THE Agents of the Church of Rome studying to ac∣commodate their Religi∣on to every Man's taste and inclinations, use their endeavours with all persons, in those things wherein they think they may most likely succeed. If they find some that love to live at their ease, and to reconcile their hopes of pardon, and Heaven with a lewd life, then they offer to secure them by slight Confessions, easie Penances, cheap Par∣dons, and Indulgences, and the commu∣nication of the merits of other persons: If they fall on others of a sowrer compo∣sition, the severities of some Religious Orders and unmerciful Penances are laid before them: If they meet with those
that can easily believe every thing that is told them with much assurance, then ma∣ny Miracles and other wonderful Stories are mustered up: If others seem not so tractable and credulous, then they study to shew them there is no certainty at all about Religion; if all their Traditions be not believed: And so they can but shake them from our Church, they car not whither such doubts may drive them, were it headlong to Atheism: If they fin others that are fanciful and Enthusisti∣cal in their Religion, then they tell the of Visions, Raptures, and Ecstasies, with out number: Or if they fall on other that love the order and gravity of th Church, then they think the Game is eas and sure, they tell them of the Antiqu∣ty, Universality, and continued Succe∣sion of their Church, and of the novelt the narrowness and want of Succession i ours. And though the fallaciousness these Objections have been so oft laid pen, that by this time it might have be reasonably expected, men of ingenuity a probity should have been ashamed of co∣tinuing them; yet these Gentlemen  proof against all discoveries. The Reader will easily discern h guilty the Writer of the following Paper  of going in the beaten tract of asserti
things confidently, which, if he be a man of learning, he must needs know they have no strength in them: And if he be not ac∣quainted with Ecclesiastical Learning, (which in Charity to him I am bound to believe) it is very presumptuously done of him to give out Papers of this Importance, in a point that no man ought to engage in but he that has studied Antiquity to some competent degree. For to charge any per∣son, much more a whole Church, with the basest Sacriledg and Forgery, unless one be well assured in his conscience that he is able to make it good, is such a piece of uncharitableness and high presumption, that I know no excuse it can admit of: And if our Church be bringing Souls to Christ in the method proposed in the Go∣spel, how much has the Writer of this Pa∣per, or any other that manages these Ar∣guments to answer for, that study to raise such scruples as tend to cross and defeat so good a design? But this Paper, weak as it is, was thought fit to be copied out, and given about, and was brought to a person of Qua∣lity, that had been educated under a deep sense of the reverence due to the Church and Churchmen; So that they ho∣ped if such a one could be once induced to believe that we had no Orders, nor Church∣men
duly called, among us, it had been easie to have prevailed further. But that Person being sincerely pious and devout, and not easily shaken with every story that was made, and being desirous to be fully satisfied in this matter, conveighed the Paper into my hands, and I was put up∣on the answering it. I quickly saw that the Arguments were so weak and trifling, that they were very easily answered; Yet since I was to en∣gage in such a subject, I resolved to do it with as much care and industry as the importance of the Matters required: And finding that, for all that had been writ∣ten on this Controversie, there remained a great deal to be said, I have so fully considered it, as I hope no scruple will remain with discerning persons, and for the endless doubtings of weaker minds, and the restless endeavours of busie Emissa∣ries, nothing can satisfie or silence those. It may seem too great a presumption in one that is a stranger in this Church to engage in a Question that so much con∣cerns it. But though I had not my Orders in this Church, yet I derive them from it, being Ordained by a Bishop that had his Ordination in this Church; so that I am equally concerned in the issue of the Que∣stion: And I am confident no body shall
have cause to imagine that I engage in it with design to betray or give it up. Among the many unjust and spiteful Calumnies, with which the Clergy of the Roman Communion, study to asperse and disgrace the Reformation, there are none more frequently made use of, than these, That there are no Pastors Lawful∣ly called or Ordained among us, That we have not the Power of making God present on our Altars, as they have, nor the power of Absolving from sins, much less of Redeeming Souls from the mise∣ries they are under in another state. They tell their Credulous followers, that we were all at first no better than a Com∣pany of Tub-Preachers, and that all the disorders we saw of that sort during the late Wars, were as justifiable as the first beginnings of the Reformation. And tho the ridiculous Fable of the Nags-head, be so manifest a Forgery, supported by no good Evidence and overthrown by the Authority of so many publick Records, besides many other clear presumptions from the state of things, and the time in which that was said to be done, that one might very reasonably expect that all so∣ber or discreet persons should be ashamed of so foul an Imposture; yet it serves them still for many a good turn, and so
they will never lay it down: tho I dare boldly say there is no matter of Fact of which there are no surviving witnesses, that can be Demonstrated with clearer Evidences than the Regularity and Cano∣nicalness of the Ordination of Arch Bi∣shop Parker. Others, that are not so lost in impudence, yet say that tho we have a shadow of a Succession among us, yet we shew how little regard we have to Orders, when we acknowledg the Prote∣stant Churches beyond the Seas to be true Churches, tho many of them do not so much as pretend to a continued suc∣cession of Pastors. For the foreign Churches, they are a∣ble to speak for themselves; nor is it need∣ful for me here to shew what grounds there are for our Churches holding Com∣munion with them. But it must be ac∣knowledged to be a high pitch of bold∣ness and injustice to charge us, as if we did not ascribe all due honour to holy Orders and the Succession of Pastors. We know and assert, That no man can take this honor (of Priesthood) to himself, butSee the 23. Art. of our Church. he that is called of God as was Aaron: so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. We reject the ex∣travagant
and bold pretences of hot-head∣ed or factious Enthusiasts, and have learned out of the Gospel, that a publick calling was necessary, even to those who had the most extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost. Our Savionr sent his Disciples as his Father had sent Him; and laid his hands on them and gave them the Power of binding and loosing. And tho God had by his Spirit called Saul and Barna∣bas, to the Apostleship of the Gentiles, yet they did not enter upon the discharge of that Function, till by the direction of the Holy Ghost, (whether by a voice formed in the Air, or by a secret Inspi∣ration, it matters not,) they were sepa∣rated, for the work of the Ministry by Prayer and Imposition of hands. And tho Timothy was by some Prophesies marked out as a Sacred Person, yet he was received into that Function by the Imposition of S. Pauls hands. From these sacred Authorities, backed with the con∣stant Doctrine and practice of the Churches of God, in all Ages, we do hold a visible Vocation and Ordination of Pastors ne∣cessary in the Church. But whether the Roman Pontifical, or our Ordinal comes nearer the Rules and Instances in Scripture, and the forms of the Primitive times, for at least Eight
hundred years, any that will compare them, will easily discern, and it is the chief subject of the following Work, ful∣ly to evince the advantage of our forms beyond theirs. It is true, we do not extol the Office of Priesthood to that height as to say, the Priest can by a few words work the greatest miracle that ever was, and can make God present, (as they love to Phrase it) this we think is the honouring the Crea∣ture more than the Creator. Nor do we exalt the Priest above Gods Vicegerent on Earth our Lawful Soveraign, whom (ac∣cording to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, even when Persecuted by their Emperours,) we honour as next to God and one who is inferiour to God only. And therefore we reject the Seditious com∣paring of the Dignity of the Priestly Office, with the Kingly, which has not satisfied the Ambition of the Romish Clergy since Hildebrands days, but the one must be preferred to the other. Nor do we pre∣tend that our Character gives us an Immu∣nity to commit Crimes, and an Exem∣ption from the Civil Courts, when they are Committed. This were to make the Altar a Sanctuary for the most Criminal, and the house of Prayer a Den of Thieves and Robbers.
It is true Christian Princes granted these Immunities at first that Church∣men might not be disturbed in their Cal∣lings, nor vexed with troublesome sute. But afterwards that would not suffice, but the Doctrine of Ecclestastical Iuris∣diction and Immunity, was set up, as a thing most sacred: and no wonder was it that men durst not presume to lay hands on him, who could bring down not only Legions of Angels, but God himself with a word. And in the beginning of this Century, Italy had almost been imbroiled in a War of the Popes making; for which he pretended this for one cause, that the State of Venice had apprehended two notoriouslyHist. Inter∣dict. Ve∣net. lud and flagitious Priests, and were pro∣ceeding against them according to Law. But he saw other Princes were not very ready to second him, and yet he did not lay down the quarrel till the Frocess of the Priests was discharged, and they were set at liberty. Such Exemptions are ve∣ry profitable for a corrupt Clergy, but if any such be among us, we claim no such Protection, being willing to leave them to the Law. We know as little ground for thinking the Priest, by his saying Mass can bring Souls out of Purgatory, the Scriptures have made no discoveries either of Purga∣tory,
or the ways to escape from it, or get out of it: The Primitive Church continued still as Ignorant as the Holy Pen-men had been; but in the darkest Ages, (the night being a fit time for Dreams,) this other world was discovered, which has brought greater returns of Power and Riches to that Prince, under whose Protection the discovery was made, than the world Columbus dis∣covered, has sent to the Crown of Castile. And tho the trade is not of that advan∣tage that it was, yet in gratitude for past services it must never be neglected, or as when the vein of a Mine fails, they dig on through the hardest Rocks till they find it again, for the works must still go on. But we, poor souls, have nothing to do with that gainful Traffick, and therefore the Glory of the discovery and the Monapoly of the Trade, we freely resign up to them, and acknowledg the profits of new Inven∣tions, by the Rules of all Government, are only due to the Inventors; so that they have no reason to quarrel with us for lea∣ving this entirely to them. For the power of binding and loosing, we do assert that as our Saviour vested his Disciples with it, so it is still in the Church: but if the vigor and exercise of it be much weakened, we have none to blame for it but the Church of Rome: who have now
in a course of many ages, laid down all open and publick penance. So that the world being once delivered from that which to licentious men seemed a heavy Bondage, it is not to be wondred at, if the Primitive strictness could not be easi∣ly retrieved. 'Tis true, this is a defect in our Church, it is confessed by her in the Office of Commination, and she wishes it may be restored; but the decay and dis∣use of it begun in the Church of Rome; and every body knows that what is severe and uneasy to Flesh and Blood, is not soon submitted to, when the practice of it is for any considerable time intermit∣ted. But the Clergy of that Communion, thought they had made a good bargain, when the necessity of Auricular Confes∣sors, and private Absolution was recei∣ved: to which the Laity did more easily submit, that they might be freed from the shame of open penance: and they knew how to deal with their Priests, when the penance was secret, none knew ei∣ther the heinousness of their sins, or the nature of the penance: so it was more safe for the Priest to enjoyn what he li∣sted, and give Absolution on what terms he pleased. And then because it was pain∣ful to have the Absolution delayed, till
the penance was fulfilled, which was the rule of the Primitive Church, Abso∣lutionLib. de Fregn. Comun. was granted immediatly upon Conession, without more ado: as Arnaud has fully discovered to the world. Certainly every body that considers these things must discern what merchandise the Roman Clergy have made of the pow∣er of the Keys, to make themselves Ma∣sters of all mens secrets, and of their Con∣sciences, then was the necessity of secret Confession set up; tho there be nothing in Scripture that favours it: any places that look that way, being only meant of Con∣fessing our Faults to those against whom they are Committed, or of a publick Con∣fession in the Cases of publick Offences. Nor can it be pretended with any Colour of truth or reason, that the Primitive Church did set up or Authorise Confessi∣on, in any other way than as our Church does, recommending it only as an excellent mean, towards the quieting the Consci∣ence and the avoiding of all Scruple and Doubtfulness. Penitence is also a mean for humbling the sinner more, for possessing him with dee∣per apprehensions of the guilt and evil of sin, and of the Iustice of God, and for in∣gaging him to more diligence and watch∣fulness for the future, and by these Rules
all the Primitive Discipline was contrived and managed; that it might be a wholsome Medicine for the reforming the World: and every honest Priest ought to consider these as the end he must drive at in all his dealings with Penitents, and for this end the Absolution is to be withheld till it appears that the person is truely peni∣tent: and that both for the Priests sake that he may not give the Comforts of the Gospel, nor make use of his Ministerial power of loosing sins without good grounds: and also for the sinners sake that he may be kept under the fear of the wrath of God; and be excluded from the comfor∣table Priviledges of the Christian Church, till he had given some convincing proofs, that he is a penitent indeed. For if he be freed from these fears by a hasty absoluti∣on, it is very like he will be slight in his Repentance. There must be also some pro∣portion between the penance and the sin committed; such as fasting for sins of In∣temperance, bodily severities for Inordi∣nate pleasures, Alms-giving for sins of Covetousness, great and frequent Devoti∣ons for sins of Omission, that so the pe∣nance may prove Medicinal indeed, for purging out the ill humours, and recover∣ing the sinner, and to make the sin more Odious to him. Therefore such slight pe∣nances
as saying the Penitential Psalms, and abstaining from some meats, with o∣ther trifling things of that Nature, are a betraying the power of the Keys, which was given for Edification and not for De∣struction, and tend to an exposing of Religion and the Priestly Function to Con∣tempt. These practices are common, and avowed in that Church, and by these and such like have the Iesuites got all the world to make their Confessions to them: of which such discoveries have been made by the Writers of the Port-Royal, that we need say nothing but only look on with Astonishment, and see the Impudent partiality of the Court of Rome, and how obstinately they are re∣solved to reform nothing, For tho the practice of the whole Church in all the Councils that were held for many ages, be clearly of the side of the Iansenists, yet they must be condemned, their Books cen∣sured, and the practices of the Iesuites en∣couraged and supported. After all this of what Undanted Con∣sciences must they be, who charge our Church as opening a Sanctuary for Vice and Impurity: because we retain not the necessity of secret Confession, and Abso∣lution. Which (whatever they may prove if well managed,) are according the pra∣ctices
of that Church, and the Casuistical Divinity that is in greatest Credit there, and by which their Priests are directed, Engines for beating down all Religion and common Honesty. But our Church owns still the power ofArt. 33. the Keys, which is not only Doctrinal, when the Mercies of God are declared, or his Iudgments denounced; but is also Au∣thoritative and Ministerial, by which all Christians are either admitted to, or re∣jected from the Priviledges of Church-Communion, and their sins are bound or loosed. With this we assert the Pastors of the Church are Vested. For the Rites of our Ordinations, we still retain those which are mentioned in the Scriptures, which are Imposition of Hands and Prayer. As for the forms of Prayer, the Catholick Church never agreed on any, nor decreed what were to be used. Every Church had their own forms. And though the Church of Rome did unmercifully enough impose divers things on the Greek Chur∣ches, and because they would not yield to her Tyranny, she left them to be a Prey to the Turk, and did not interpose her Authority with the Princes of the West, over whom she was then Absolute, to arm them for the assistance and defence of the Greeks; yet a∣midst all this desire of Rule, they were
never so unreasonable as to impose their Liturgies, Rituals, or Missals on them, but in these they left them to their own Forms, and so continue to do to this day. Anciently they had no more Iurisdiction over the British Churches than over the Greek Churches. So that by the division of Provinces confirmed by General Coun∣cils, and by a particular decree of theAct. 7. Council of Ephesus, no new Authority o∣ver any other Churches was to be assumed by any See, but all were to be determined by the former practices and customs of the Church. It is certain that before that time the Bishops of Rome had no Patri∣archal Iurisdiction in Britain; so that if the Decrees of General Councils will bind them, they ought not to claim any Authority over us. But if the Popes build new Pretentions on Austin the Monk's being sent hither by Pope Gregory the Great. We are ready to refer this matter to his decision, and will stand to his award, for he being con∣sulted by Austin about some particulars, one of these was. Since there is one Faith, how comes it3. Inter. that the Customs of the Churches are so different, and that one form of Mis∣sals is in the Roman Church, and another is in the Churches of the Gaules or of France.
From this Question it appears that even France, which was undoubtedly within the Patriarchat of Rome, had Forms different from those used in Rome: But let us now hear what Answer is given by Pope Gregory, which may be reasonably believed ex Cathedra, and so of great Authority, with all who acknowledg the Infallibility of that See. You know the custom of the ChurchEpist. 31. l. 12. Ind. 7. of Rome in which you were educated, but my opinion is, that whatever you find either in the Holy Roman, the Gal∣lican, or any other Church that may be more pleasing to Almighty God, you shall diligently choose out that: and infuse in the English Church, which is yet but young in the Faith by careful Instruction, what you can gather from many Chur∣ches; for we ought not to love things for the sake of a place, but places for the sake of good things; therefore choose from all Churches the things that are Pious, Religious and Right, and gather all these in one bundle and leave them with the English, that they may become familiar to them. It will be hard for the Agents of that Church to find out a Reason why Austin Bishop of Canterbury might make such changes in the Liturgies by gathering out
of the several Rituals that were then in the World what he thouhgt fit, and yet to de∣ny the same power to Arch-Bishop Cran∣mer and the Bishops in King Edward's days, why might not they as well as Au∣stin the Monk, compare the Rituals of the Church of Rome with other more ancient Forms, and gather together what they found most Pious, Religious, and Right, not loving things for the sake of a place (whether Rome or Sarum) but loving places rather for the sake of good things. So that in this we have on our side the decision of a Pope who was both more lear∣ned and more pious than any of all his Successors; but this is not the only parti∣cular in which they will decline to be try∣ed by his Iudgment. And in the changes that were made, i is very clear that our Reformers did no design to throw out every thing that was in the Roman Rituals right or wrong; but made all the good use that was possible o the Forms that were then received in th Western Church; and in this our Church followed our Saviours method, who thoug he had the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in him, and was to Antiquate the Jewis Religion, and to substitute his more Di∣vine Precepts to those of Moses; Yet he did accommodate his Institutions as near a
could be, to the Customs of the Jews, not only in lesser matters, but even in those two great Sacraments by which his Church is knit together (as hath been fully made out by many learned Writers.) If then the customs of a Religion that was ready to perish, were made use of, and by new and more sacred Benedictions were consecrated to higher ends; Our Church shewed her Prudence and Moderation, in not destroy∣ing Root and Branch, but reserving such things as were good, and by being clean∣sed from some Excrescencies might prove still of excellent use. This though it has given some colour to many peevish com∣plaints, yet is that in which we have cause still to glory. This care and caution does eminently appear in our Ordinal, the Ceremonies which were invented by the latter Ages we laid aside, the more Ancient and Apo∣stolical are retained. And for the formal words used in the Imposition of Hands, though the saying Receive the Holy Ghost was a latter addition without any Ancient Authority; yet because this comes nearer the practice of our Saviour, it was retained as the form of giving Orders. For since it is consest on all hands that the Form of Orders is in the power of the Church, we had good reason to prefer that which our Blessed
Saviour made use of to any other, and it had been a sullen and childish peevishness to have changed this, because it was used in the Church of Rome. So that I cannot imagine what should move them to shew so much dislike to our Forms, except it be the old Quarrel of hating them, because they are better and their own are worse; and so because their deeds are evil they en∣vy and revile us. In this whole matter we are willing to be tryed both by the Scriptures and the first eight Ages, even of the Roman Church, by the Greek Church to this day, and by the Doctrine that is most commonly received even in their own Church. There is but one Objection that may seem to have any force in it, which can be made from the practices of the Primitive Church against the Ordinations in this Church, which is, that we have not the inferior de∣grees of Subdeacons, Acolyths, Exorcists, Readers and Porters in our Church; and indeed if the Popes Infallibility be well pro∣ved, this will be of force sufficient to in∣validate our Orders. The case of Photius Patriarch of Contantinople, is well known, whom Pope Nicolaus denyed to be lawfully Ordained, because he was sudden∣ly raised up from being a Layman to be made a Patriarch, and though he passed
through the Ecclesiastical Degrees, yet that was not thought sufficient by that Pope, who certainly would have been more severe to us who have none of these Degrees a∣mong us. But these Orders cannot be looked on as either of Divine or Apostolical Institu∣tion, the Scripture mentions them not, St. Clemens, St. Ignatius, and St. Po∣lycarp, say nothing of them, Justin Mar∣tyr, and Irenaeus, are as silent about them; so that, till the third Century we find no footsteps of them, the first men∣tion that is made of them is in the Canons and Constitutions called Apostolical (of whose Antiquity I shall now say nothing)Can. 42. In the Canons mention is oft made of the rest of the Clergy, as distinct from Bi∣shops,Lib. 8. cap. 21. and 23. Priests and Deacons, and parti∣cularly they mention Readers, Subdea∣cons, and Singers. In the Constitutions there are Rules given about th Ordination of Subdeacons and Readers. And though there is mention made of Exorcists, yet itCap. 26. is plainly said there, that they were not Or∣dained, but were believed to have that power over Spirits by a free gift of God, and that they were then Ordained whenInter Epi. Cypr. Ep. 75. they were made Bishops and Priests. Fir∣milian who lived in the midst of the third Century, speaks of Exorcists, but it does
not appear from his words, if they were a distinct or an inferior Order of Church∣men, and they may be well enough under∣stood of such as had an extraordinary pow∣er over Spirits. Yet in the beginning of the fourth Century we find in the GreekCan. 64. Church more inferior Orders for the Coun∣cil of Laodicea reckons up Servants (who it is like were Acolyths) Readers, Sin∣gers, Exorcists, Porters, and , who were it seems, Monks, or some persons that were imployed in servile works, such as the diggers of Craves. And by the Council of Antioch the ChorepiscopiCan. 10. might Ordain Subdeacons, Readers, and Exorcists▪ And if the Epistle to the Church of Antioch, said to be writen by Ignatius, was forged in the same Century, by it it appears that there were then in the Greek Church, Subdeacons, Readers, Singers, Porters, and Exorcists, for all these are saluted in that Epistle, from which it ap∣pears that all these Orders were then in the Church of Antioch. But there is no small difficulty about these Orders in the Greek Churches, for in all their Rituals we find no inferior Or∣ders but Subdeacons, and Readers, to whom in some Churches they have added Singers; upon which it is that Morinus con∣fidently pronounces there were never any
other inferior Orders in the Greek Church, but these two; but it does not appear that he had considered well those Canons of Laodicea and Antioch which mention other Orders. Abraham Ecchellensis,Not. 18. in Can. Nic. Arab. according to his usual way of flattering the Court of Rome in all his Writings, is not a little puzzelled with this, he confesses that in the Greek Church they have no o∣ther inferior Orders but Subdeacons and Readers, but says, some thought those o∣ther lower degrees were included in the Order of Readers, but he thinks they were included in the Subdeacons Orders, and strains all the wit he had to give some co∣lours for this conceit of his. In summ it is clear, Exorcists were an inferior Office in the Greek Church once, and afterwards it was laid aside. It were an impertinent digression here to give an account of their Office: but in a word they were Cate∣chists, who prepared the Catechumens for Baptism; and by the Catechisms in theSee Nazi∣anz. Orat. in Bapt. Cyr. Pref. ad Catech. Balsam. in Schol. in Con. Laod. & Ant. Harmen in Con. Antioch. Church, all that came from Heathenism to be Christians were often adjured to re∣nounce the Devil and all Heathenish Idola∣try. Which Adjurations were call'd Ex∣orcisms, and from these the Catechists were called Exorcists: of which he that desires further satisfaction may be directed to it by what he will find in the Margin.
But when, or upon what occasion this Of∣fice fell in disuse in the Greek Church, does not appear. I shall only suggest that it is reasonable to conclude that upon the general suppression of Heathenism in the Greek Empire, when there were no more Catechumens, there being no further use of Exorcists the Function was no longer continued. It appears likewise from the Name Acolyth, that it was begun in the Greek Church, from whence it is pro∣bable, the Latin Church had that Order. In the Latin Church St. Cyprian is the first that speaks of these Inferior Orders, and we find them frequently mentioned in his Epistles, he speaks of Ep. 24. & 21. Subdeacons, Ep. 28. Acolyths, Ep. 24. 33. & 34. Readers, and Ep. 76. Exorcists, and contemporary with him was Corne∣lius, who Apud. Eus. lib. 6. cap. 43. giving an account of the Clergy of Rome, says there were forty six Priests, seven Deacons, forty two Acolyths, fifty Exorcists, Readers, and Porters. So it seems, there were no Subdeacons then in Rome, nor does St. Cyprian mention the Porters. So that in that Century all these these Orders were not looked on as necessary in the Western Church, much less wasGrat. dist. 77. cap. 1. & 2. there a certain number of years determin∣ed for every one of them, as was after∣wards done by the Popes, who appointed that before any might be made a Priest, he
should be five years a Reader and Exorcist, and fourteen years an Acolyth and Sub∣deacon. In the fourth Council of Carthage we have the full Catalogue of the sacred Functions (as they are called inCan. 14. & 62. the Apostolical Canons) with the rules and forms of Ordaining them, and there Can. 5. Subdeacons, Can. 6. Acolyths, Can. 7. Exorcists, Can. 8. Readers, Can. 9. Porters, and Can. 10. Singers, are set down. But besides these we find another Order of Fossarii, or the diggers of Graves, mentioned by St. Jerome, who calls them the first Order of the Clergy; they are also mentioned in that supposititious Letter of St. Ignatius to the Church of Antioch, and are spoken of by Epiphamus, by which it appears they were reckoned among the Clergy both in the Greek and Latin Chur∣ches. But there is no mention of them in any latter Writers. We find mention ofVit. Pon∣tif. in vita Silvestri. another office in an Author, to whom in∣deed little credit is due, who are called the Keepers of the Martyrs, who had the keeping of the Vault or Burying-place, where the Martyrs bodies were laid up in those Churches that were built to their ho∣nor, but we meet with these no where else. And though the Order of Singers continu∣ed for several Ages in the Western Church, and is mentioned by most of the Writers
on the Roman Rituals in Hittorpius his Collection, and also in the Ordo Roma∣nus, yet is now left out in the Roman Pontifical. From all which it appears, that there was no settled Order agreed on or received in the Catholick Church about these Inferior Degrees; some of them that were received in some Churches were not in other Chur∣ches, and what was generally received in one Age was laid aside in another, and therefore there is no Obligation lying on us to continue those still. But as the number of these Orders was different, so the ways of Ordaining were not the same. In the Eastern Church they were (and are to this day) conferred by Imposition of Hands, which was perhaps taken from the custome of the Jews a∣mong whom all Offices were given with that Rite. But in the Western Church they were conferred by the delivery of a Book, Vessel, or Instrument that related to their Function, which perhaps was ta∣ken from the Roman custom of granting Offices by the Tradition of somewhat that belonged to it, as Trajan made the Pre∣fects by giving them a Sword. The occasion of setting up all these Infe∣rior Offices was certainly very just and good, that there might be taken in them a
long and full probation of all such as were to be admitted to the Offices that were of Di∣vine Institution, and so none might be ad∣mitted to any of them before there had been a full tryal and discovery made of their merit and good behaviour, and were indeed like degrees in Universities. But after that Constantine granted such Immunities and Exemptions to Churchmen, then it is pro∣bable that many who desired to share in these, and yet had no mind to be Initiated in the Offices of Divine Appointment, came and entered in these lower degrees: to regu∣late which, Justinian made a Law that none who had been Souldiers or had any Offices about their Courts (Curiales andNove. 123. cap. 15. Grat. Dist. 53. obstricti curiae) might be Ordained, till they had got their Dimission and had been fifteen years in a Monastery; and perhaps some of these offices were laid aside, because of the complaints the Prefects made of the Interruption of Iustice by the great num∣bers of the Clergy, who pleaded the Ex∣emptions that were granted to them. Upon the whole matter it is clear that all these Orders were only of Ecclesiasti∣cal Institution. So that the want of them cannot be charged on our Church as an essential defect, and our Church had as good Authority to lay all these aside, as other Churches had to lay down sometimes
one, sometimes more of them. And in the Church of Rome, though these are still kept up, yet all except the Subdeacons are meerly for Forms-sake, for Acolyths, Exorcists, Readers, or Porters, never dis∣charge any part of the Service that be∣longs to their Office, and the Exorcisms are quite taken out of the hands of the Exor∣cists, and are made only by Priests. So that this whole Objection comes to no∣thing. But we have much more material Objecti∣ons against the Church of Rome upon this head. For whereas by Divine Institution and the practice of the Primitive Church, all Bishops were equal both in Order and Iu∣risdiction. They have robbed the Bishops of the greatest part of their Iurisdiction; of which I shall give some Instances. Monks by their Original were Laymen and were under the Iurisdiction of the Bishop of the Diocess, this at first was not so much as disputed; but when they grew insolent and factious, it was declared by the General Council of Chalcedon thatCap. 4. they were and ought to be subject to theirCon. A∣gath. can. 37, 38. Con. Au∣rel. can. 19. Bishops; and so it continues in the Greek Church to this day. The same was also de∣creed in some Western Councils, but when the Order of the Benedictines grew ve∣ry considerable, and many persons of
Quality retired into it, and it became a great piece of Religion to build and in∣rich Abbeys; then the Founders moved their Kings to obtain Priviledges for them from their Bishops; for the most ancient of these that I have met with, is the Exemp∣of the Abbey of St. Denis, granted by theAn. 659. An. 664. Bishop of Paris; the next to that is the exemption of the Abbey of Corbie gran∣ted by the Bishop of Amiens, which pre∣sidents were soon followed by a great many others. By these Grants the Bishops did renounce their share of the Revenues of the Abbey, of which, according to the An∣cient Division, the fourth part did belong to the Bishop: and for the further quiet of those Religious Houses, the Bishops did exempt them from all Visitations, and gave up the power they had over them whol∣ly to the Abbot; and these exemptions, which at first were only for the Monaste∣ries, were afterwards extended further to all the Lands and Churches that belonged to the Abbeys, of which some were ex∣empted from the Visitations of the Arch-Deacons, and the Bishops Vicars; others were also exempted from the Bishops visi∣ting in person. But the Popes from the 8th. Century downwards, finding how much Abbeys wese enriched, and it being a grateful
thing in all places, to favour the Monks, they granted them fuller and larger Pri∣viledges, they gave many Abbots a right to a Miter and a Staff, and declared them Prelates. And the truth of it was, the se∣cular Clergy were for the most part both so ignorant and so corrupt, that it was no wonder if all the World favoured the Monks, whose vices being committed with∣in their Cloysters, were not so notorious, and did not occasion so much scandal as the dis∣orders of the Clergy did, which were more publick. And the very name Religious or Regular, which the Monks took to them∣selves, and the name Secular, with which they loaded the Clergy, did them great service; for in ignorant Ages specious Ti∣tles and ill sounding Names affect the Vul∣gar mightily. And the Monks of the Or∣der of St. Austin being also possest of most of the Prebends, from whence they were called Canons Regular, those Chapter had exempted Iurisdictions given them. From hence sprung all the peculiar Ex∣emptions that are among us, for in the suppressing of the Monasteries, the Bishop were not fully restored to their Ancient Iurisdiction; so that those Exemption do still continue, from whence the most scandalous disorders in our Clergy have risen. So much are they mistaken who
complain of the Episcopal Jurisdiction, since the foulest Enormities among us flow from the want of it, and from a Corrup∣tion brought in by the Popes, which is not yet sufficiently purged out. These Monasteries were so many separa∣ted and independent Congregations which did chose their own Pastors, and this only difference in the point of Government, is between our Modern Independents, and them; that these will depend on none in the rules of their Policy, but upon Christ alone, without acknowledging any supe∣rior Iurisdiction or Subordination, and those did depend on Christ's Vicar, with∣out submitting to any other Authority. But the Popes designing to subject the Episcopal Authority wholly to themselves, used another Method toward that end, which was to raise the Dignity of the Abbots ve∣ry high, and whereas by the Primitive Can. . Apost. Con. Nic. can. 4. Con. Arel. 1. can. 21. Arel. 2. can. 5. Carth. 2. Can. 12. See Grat. Dist. 64. Canons three Bishops were to concur in the Consecration of a Bishop, the Pope brought in a custom of allowing two Mi∣tered Abbots to assist a Bishop in those Consecrations, which is acknowledged both by In Can. 1. Apost. Binnius and Bell. de notis Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 8. Bellarmine. And this with the Title Prelate, and the use of the Miter and the Pastoral Staff, raised
them to an equality with the Bishops. This was not all, they were next brought to sit in General Councils. Originally Abbots were but Laymen, but now they must all be Priests; yet it was never be∣fore heard of, that Priests did sit in Oecu∣menical Councils. It is true, the Rural-Bishops (or Chorepiscopi) did subscribe the Canons of the Council of Nice and o∣ther General Councils; but whatever Mo∣rinus and some others have said, to prove that they were no more than Priests, yet if it were not an impertinent Digression,  think it could be easily made appear that they were Bishops; so that it is most cer∣tain that no Priests did subscribe and si in General Councils for many Ages in their own Names, for what they did by Proxy from their Bishops, has no relation to this matter. But when the Popes were setting up their Monarchy in the West, they resolved to ballance the Votes of the Bishops by bringing in Abbots to vote in their General Councils, who were obliged by their Interest to support the Exalta∣tion of the Papal power, and suppressing of Episcopal Iurisdiction. In the first General Council that was held by Calistus the second, in the Latran, Su∣gerius,An. 1123. who was present, says, there were 300 and more Bishops, but Pandulphu
says, there were present 997. partly Bishops,Tom. Con. 10. pag. 893. partly Abbots; so that above 600. of these must have been Abbots. In the third Council of Lateran we hear of none but Bishops, but to make amends for that, theTom. Con. 11. par. 1. pag. 127. Writs that summoned the fourth Council of Lateran, were sent to Abbots as well as to Bishops, and a vast number of them came. The Writs for the second Council of Lions, were issued out, not only to Ab∣bots, but to inferior Prelates by Pope Gre∣grory the Tenth, and Aquinas, and Bo∣naventure, being then in great esteem, were also called to that Council, though they were only Friers. But Pope ClementAn. 1311. the Fifth took care to have a full Assembly,Tom. Con. 11. par. 2. pag. 1550. when he called the General Council at Vi∣enna, for the Writs were not only to Pa∣triarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and Abbots, as had been done before, but to all Priors, Deans, Provosts, Archdeacons, Archpriests, and all other Prelates of Monasteries and Churches exempted, and non-exempted. And thus the Popes were sure to carry things in such Assembles as they pleased. And it is no unpleasant thing to observe what were the Contests between the Popes and the Bi∣shops, which are plainly the same, and have been managed by the same Arts and Intrigues, that the Contests in Political
matters between Prerogative and Privi∣lege have been. For near five Ages the matter was contested by the Prelates, but the power of the Abbots, and the other exemptions of the Deans and Chapters did much weaken the Bishops Authority▪ and the Secular Princes did joyn with the Popes to bear down the Bishops, who ha∣ving great Revenues, did generally joyn with the People for the asserting of pub∣lick Liberty. But the Popes gave them up as Sacrifices to their Princes, till they forced them afterwards to seek to them for shelter from the severity of their Princes, and then the Tables were turned. All this was not a little set forward by the credit which the begging Friers got every where in the 13th. Century, for the Monks were then become as scandalous as the Secular Clergy had ever been, and were generally very ignorant; so that they could not serve the ends of the Papacy any more, but the austere lives of the Franciscans, their poverty and coarse Garments girt a∣boutAn. 1214. with Ropes, their bare Legs and seeming Humility gained them great esteem; and the Zealous Dominicans, whose course of life was not so severe, yet were as poor▪An. 1209. and Preached much; and Aquinas, Sco∣tus, and Bonaventure, brought in among the Friers the learning of the School
which was then in great esteem in the World, all which concurred to dispose the People to receive them with great Venera∣tion. These were also imployed by the Popes every where, and were also exempted from Episcopal Visitation, and had Priviledges to build Churches, and Seminaries, to Preach, hear Confessions, and Administer the Sacraments every where, and by these means the Episcopal Iurisdiction was quite overthrown, and the Papacy became abso∣lute and those Orders of Mendicant Fri∣ers were clearly a Presbytery, they being a company of Priests that acknowledged no Episcopal Iurisdiction over them, and their Great Chapter was their General Assembly, and their Annual, or Triennial Generals and Provincials, who are chosen by them, were like the elected Moderators of Pro∣vincial and National Assemblies. In this only did that Presbytery differ from the Geneva Form, that it was subject only to Christ's pretended Vicar, the other claims to be only subordinate to Christ himself, but both did equally rebel against their Bishops. Yet the Schism of the Papacy had almost overturned all, for the Bishops met in a General Council at Constance (I call all those Councils General, according to the style of the Church of Rome, for I know there was not a Conncil truly General a∣mong
them all) and there they thought to retrieve their Authority, and to be quit with the Popes for bringing in Abbots and other inferior Prelates, they brought in Deputies from Universities, to sit and judg with them, and they thought they had made sure work of all by their Acts, that regulated the Popes Election, restrai∣ned his power, subjected him to the judg∣ment of a General Council, and above all, by their Act for a Decennial General Coun∣cil, with such provisions in it, that one would think the Act for Triennial Parlia∣ments was copyed from that Original: But alas, all this proved to no purpose, for as Aeneas Sylvius wisely said, that since all Preferments were given by the Pope, and none by the Council, he must certainly have the better of it at long run, which as it made himself turn about, so it brought off many more; and at length the Pope be∣came Master of All, and at the Council of Florence the Generals of Orders were brought in to have Votes there. There was another great Engine also made use of, by which all the rules of the Primitive Church was overturned, which was the Popes assuming a power to hear, and judg all causes originally. All that the Popes preten∣ded to for many Ages was to be the highest Tribunal to which the last Appeal did lie.
And this was not only never yielded to by the Eastern Churches, but even the African Churches, though a part of the Latin Church, would never submit to it, and yet the receiving an Appeal had a very fa∣vourable plea, that a person who had been oppressed by a faction, perhaps in his own Countrey, might find relief and protection elsewhere: But after the 8th. Century, and that the forged and now universally ac∣knowledged spurious Decretals were re∣ceived, they set up a new pretension of Iudging Causes Originally, taking mat∣ters out of the hands of the Iudg Ordi∣nary, and bringing the Cognizance of them to Rome, and setting up many re∣served Cases which could only be judg∣ed by the Pope; and the Canonists that were a servile sort of people, who wrote chiefly for Preferment, did upon all oc∣casions find new Distinctions for enlar∣ging the Popes power. But because it was intolerable tedious and expensive to carry all such matters to Rome; therefore that it might not be too heavy a burden to the World, Legantine Courts were every where set up, where all those Tryals were made. By all these ways were the Primitive Rules broken, and such a confusion was brought in upon all Ecclesiastical Offices, that no An∣cient Landmark or Boundary was thought
so sacred, that they did not either leap over or change it. I will not enlarge further on this Subject, and having already trans∣gressed the bounds of a Preface, I will not lay open the other Violations of the Sacred Offices at the full length, but as the value of every thing is no less prejudiced by ex∣alting it too high, than by depressing it too much, for a string over bended must crack; So the Popes did as much wrong these Functions by exalting them out of measure, as they had done by encroaching▪ so far upon them. And this was done by the Croissades, Indulgences, Privileged Places, Iubilees and Redemptions from Purgatory, with other things of that nature, which the Monks and Friers did every where preach and proclaim; these things did savour of Interest so palpably, that it was no wonder if most people were so alie∣nated from them, that the first Reformers found all persons disposed to forsake the Communion of a Church that had so long deceived them by such gross Impostures. Many had groaned long under all these Corruptions, and of such the greater part received the Reformation, others ho∣ping to have got things brought about to a better pass, continued still in that Com∣munion; but how little either Erasmus, , Cssander, or many more such
could prevail, the event shewed; for in the Council of Trent (which was not obtained, but after many years sute; fre∣quent Addresses not without threatnings, at length extorting it) how little could be carried appears even from Cardinal Pallavicini's own History, two grand points, upon which the Bishops that had honest designs, intended to raise the Re∣formation of Discipline and Manners were the declaring the Episcopal Iurisdi∣ction to be of Divine Right; and that the Residence of all Ecclesiastical Incumbents, was also of Divine Right, but these could not be carried. Lainez the General of the Jesuits, and the whole Court Party, appearing with great Vehemence against the first of these, asserting that all Ecclesiasti∣cal Iurisdiction was wholly and only in the Pope. And from this one thing it may appear how little Iustice or Fair-deal∣ing was to be expected from that Council, towards those whom they called Hereticks, when the Bishops themselves being Iudges, in a thing in which they were also parties, I mean about the Divine Right of their own Iurisdiction, they could not carry it, for it was never heard of before, that where  was both Iudg and Party, he was cast. And in the other trifling Reformations that were Enacted there, what care was taken
by Distinctions and Reservations, chiefly that grand and General one of Saving the Dignity of the Apostolical See, to leave a door open by which those very Corruptions which they seemed to condemn and cast out, might be again taken up as most of them have been since. So that the issue of that Assembly was to establish the Papal Authority, to cut off all possible hopes of abating an ace of the errors of that Church (when all controverted points were turned to Articles of Faith, and the contrary Opinions condemned by Anathematisms) to disover how in possible it is to get the Abuses of that Church effectually Reform∣ed; and in fine, to cure all people of their expectations of any great good from such meetings for the future; and this has since appeared very visibly. For as it is not to be expected that the Popes should call any General Councils, ex motu proprio, so no Christian Princes have thought i worth the while to solicite that Court for a new Council. And thus I have hinted at several par∣ticulars from which it may appear how much the Church of Rome has confounded those holy Functions, how she has robbed some of them of the power and Iurisdi∣ction which they have from Christ, and▪ has put a power in the hands of others
which they never had from Christ. And if the vigour of Ecclesiastical Discipline is not set up among us as it ought to be, we owe it for the greatest part to those Cor∣ruptions which they brought in, and being once received, are not easily to be rooted out of the minds of the people. But to a great many all that can be said of the disorders that have been brought in or kept up in that Church by the Popes, will seem sleight and of no force: for they will plainly tell us, that they do not all believe the Pope is Infallible, but are satisfied there are many things done by him that are amiss, and need to be amended: they only adhere to the Catholick Church, to whose definitions and decrees they submit and resign themselves: and yet no body writes more sharply against the Reforma∣tion and the Protestant Churches than these men do, charging them with Heresie and Schism, and every thing that is hate∣ful to mankind. This way of writing was begun in the Sorbon, and never more pompously than at this time, by the Wri∣ters of the Port▪Royal, and has been taken up here by some whom their adversaries call Blackloists, who speak almost with equal indignation of the Court of Rome, and the Reformation. This I know works great effects on some, and has a very spe∣cious
appearance; therefore I hope the Rea∣der will pardon me if I hold him yet a little longer in the Preface, to unmask this pre∣tension of some which otherwise may im∣pose upon him. I shall then make it appear that the maintainers of these principle must either be men of no conscience at all, and suc as stick not at mocking both God and man at perjury and the foulest kind of equivo∣tion; or if they be true to these principles they must on many occasions do the sam things for which they condemn us, an▪ count us Hereticks and Schismaticks. An▪ this I shall instance in three things whic are of the greatest consequence to a Church namely, Doctrine, Worship, and Govern∣ment. For the first of these, When the Po makes a decision in any controverted poin if I do not think him infallible, I retai still my own freedom to judge as I am con▪ vinced, and so I may perchance be of ano∣ther mind; but if the Pope will have  Churchmen, or all Bishops (as was late done in the case of the Five Proposition of Jansenius) to condemn the contrary o∣pinions, or subscribe Formularies about i they must either do what is commanded and so act against their conscience,  quivocate and be perjured: or if they
do it not, they must be proceeded against, first for contempt and contumacy, and next for Heresie; and then they shall be Hereticks as well as we are: And if in one point a man reserves his private senti∣ments, notwithstanding the Popes decision, why not in a great many; and if it be no fault to have different opinions, then, since a mans actions must be governed by his persuasions, it will be no fault to maintain and teach them, if they be of great im∣portance, at least it is a great sin to re∣nounce and deny them. Therefore if Pope Leo the X. was not Infallible, Luther was no Heretick, though condemned by him, especially a great many of the Arti∣cles for which he was condemned, having never been decided by any of their pretended General Councils: nor do these men think that the present practice of the Church is a forcible Argument, for those of the Port-Royal have both complained of it, and studied to change it in the matter of Pennance and Absolution; so that it will not be easie, nay not possible for them to prove that Luther was a Heretick, since he was never condemned by any Infallible power: Therefore it is not the Authority of the condemnation, but the merit of the cause, that makes one a Heretik, which is what we plead for. From which it is
evident, that, let the Pope decree what he will, all of that Communion must either acquiesce in it, or they shall become Here∣ticks. This to such as believe the Pope is Infallible, is no matter of difficulty, for if I be once perswaded of that, all his de∣cisions do captivate my reason, but if I am not, I must either subdue my Conscience to my Interest, or be that Monster which is called an Heretick. It is true, both Civil and Ecclesiastical Government punishes all obstinate and refractory persons, who stand out against publick conclusions, but still the Subject, if these Laws be Injust, has a clear Con∣science amidst his sufferings; therefore this is not parallel to their Doctrine, who make all that comply not with their deci∣sions, Hereticks, which is a matter of great guilt before God. Let them give an Argument that will make a Protestant a Heretick, which will not infer the same against a Jansenist. And if they go to the merits of the cause, it is a tryal we have never declined▪ So till these men learn to trie all their reasonings together, there is no great account to be made of them. The second particular in which I shall shew the fallaciousness of these mens Rea∣sonings, is in the matter of Divine Wor∣ship, which of how great consequence it is,
needs not be made out, it must be a sin of a high nature, either to prophane the name of God by any piece of Worship which I judg sinful, or to use any Devotions about which I am not at all or at least not fully perswaded. Now the whole Worship of their Church coming Originally and onely from the Popes, who have given authority to what Offices they will, have made Saints and added devotions to them as they plea∣sed; All persons in that Communion must either by a blind resignation accept of every thing in their Worship which the Pope imposes, believing him infallible; or if they are not of that perswasion, but give themselves leave to examine the Offices whe∣ther they do it by the Scriptures, the Fa∣thers and Tradition, or by the Rules of Reason, they must needs see there are ma∣ny injustifiable things in their Offices, many Saints are in the Breviary, about whose Canonisation they are not at all as∣sured: And in a word, one shall not speak with one of these Principles, but they will acknowledg there is great need of Reforming their Offices; Yet they must worship God according to them, as they are, otherwise they are Schismaticks, and fall under that same condemnation, for which they are so severe upon us. Therefore it must either be the merits of
the Cause that makes a Schismatick, or if a Condemnation for separating from Au∣thorised Offices does it, then they must resolve to be guilty of it, or worship God, contrary to their Consciences: They have no rules for their Offices, but the Popes pleasure, for Councils never made any; and indeed it is the most unreasonable thing that can be, to put the direction of the whole worship of God in one Man, or a succes∣sion of Mens power, unless they be belie∣ved Infallible. The last thing I shall mention to shew how unreasonable they are, who deny the Popes Infallibility, and yet condemn the Reformation so severely, is in the point of Government, which though it be not of so high, nor so universal a Nature as the two former are; yet it must be acknow∣ledged to be of great Importance. And that the Prelates of that Church are fast tied to the Pope, without any Reserves or Exceptions, unless it be that (of savingSee pag. 176. my Order) the sense whereof is not fully understood, will appear from the Oath they make to the Pope before they are Or∣dained: From the consideration of which it was that King Henry the 8th. laid itHall fol. 205. out to his Parliament that they were but half his Subjects, and by the Oath then taken by the Bishops of England, as is set
down by Hall; it appears that since that time there are very considerable Additions made to that Oath, which any that will compare them together, will easily dis∣cern. If men make Conscience of an Oath, they must be in a very hard condition that believe the Pope to be Infallible, and yet are so bound to him by such a Bond. If the Superior be Infallible, the Subject may without any trouble in his Conscience, swear Obedience in any terms that can be conceived. But when the Superior is be∣lieved subject to error and mistake, then their swallow must be very large that can swear to preserve, defend, increase, and promote the Rights, Honours, Privi∣ledges, and Authority of the Holy Ro∣man Church of our Lord the Pope, and his Successors foresaid.—The Decrees, Orders, or Appointments, Reserva∣tions, Provisions, or Mandates Aposto∣lical; I shall observe with all my strength, and make them to be observed by o∣thers.—And I shall according to my power, persecute and oppose all Here∣ticks, Schismaticks, and Rebells, against the said our Lord and his Successors.—And I shall humbly receive, and diligent∣ly execute the Apostolical Commands. Which words being full, and without
those necessary and just reserves of the O∣bedience promised to Ecclesiastical Supe∣riors, in all things Lawful and Honest all the Prelates of the Roman Communion are as fast tied to the Pope, as if they be∣lieved him Infallible; for if they belie∣ved him such, they could be tied to no∣thing more than absolute and unlimited Obedience. Therefore they are in so much a worse estate than others be, which hold that opinion, because they have the sa▪ Obligation bound upon them by Oath. And let the Pope command what he will, the must either obey him, or confess themselve guilty of breach of Oath and Perjur▪ And I hope the Reader will observe wh mercy, all, whom they account Here∣ticks, Schismaticks, and Rebels, again their Lord the Pope, are to expect at their hands, who make their Bishops swear  persecute all such according to their power; so that we may by this be abun∣dantly satisfied of their good Intention and Inclinations, when ever it shall be i their power to fulfil the Contents of thi Oath; for let any of them speak ever  softly or gently, if he comes to be Conse∣crated a Bishop, he must either be Perjured▪ or turn a persecuter of all Protestants, wh are in their opinion the worst sort of He∣reticks and Schismaticks.
And certainly it is much more reason∣ble to calculate what in reason we ought to expect from the Prelates of that Church, if ever our sins provoke God to deliver us over to their Tyranny, from the Oath they swear at their Consecration, than from all the meek and good natured words with which they now study to abuse some among us, which is so common an Artifice of all who aspire to Power and Government, that one might think the trick should be tried no more; but some love to be cheated a hundred times over. From these Instances it is apparent, that the Pope has every whit as much Authori∣ty in that Church, and over all in it, as if he were believed Infallible, since both the Do∣ctrine, Worship, and Government of their Church are determined by him, to whose award all must not only submit, but be con∣cluded by it in their Subscriptions, Wor∣ship, and other practices. So that the opinion of the Popes being fallible, gives such persons no ease nor free∣dom (except it be to their secret thoughts) but brings them under endless scruples and perplexities by the Obligations and Oaths that are imposed upon them▪ which bind them to a further obedience and compliance than is consistent with a falli∣ble Authority.
And therefore their Principles being so Incoherent that they cannot maintain both their charge against us of Heresie and Schism, and their opinion of the Pope Fallibility, and keep a good Conscience withal: There is one of three things to be expected from men of that Principle, ei∣ther that they shall quite throw off th Popes tyrannical Yoke, and assert their own liberty, reserving still their other Opinions, as was done in the days of King Henry the Eighth, or that they shall joyn in Communion with us, or that they shall continue as they are, complying with eve∣ry thing imposed on them by the Court o Rome, preferring Policy to a good Con∣science, studying by frivolous Distincti∣ons to reconcile these Compliances with their Principles, which any man easily see are Inconsistent. That those of the Port-Royal have done the last, is laid to their charge, both by Calvinists and Jesuits; and as I am cre∣dibly informed by some of their own number, who do complain of their subscri∣bing Formularies, and every thing else sent from Rome, which they have opposed as long as they could; but when the Court o Rome gets their Conquering King on their side, so that they can withstand no longer unless they will suffer for their Conscience,
then they subscribe as formally and fully as others do. And this Compliance is to be looked for from all the men of those Principles, if they do not prefer their Con∣science to their Interest; and God knows there be many such, for either they must comply, though against their Conscience, or retire themselves from that Communi∣on; and if they do this last, then all that they accuse us for, and all those com∣mon Topicks, with which they ply the Vulgar, against separating from the Ca∣tholick Church, the setting up of private Iudgments against publick, the multi∣plying new Errors by appealing to Scrip∣tures, or other Books, which is the way of all Hereticks: These I say, with many more of the like nature, will all fall as heavily upon themselves. Nor is there any reason to think they will throw off the Pope, as was done under King Henry the 8th. for though a great and high spirited King was able to bring that about; yet is it possible that a few Priests, though they had the honesty and boldness to design such a thing, could ever compass it: Their followers would look upon them, if they should but set about it, as Hereticks, and hate them no less (if not more) than they do us; So that it seems a weak and too sanguine an Imagination, to think
such a design can ever come to any thing▪ Therefore these persons must either turn▪ over quite to the Intrigues of the Court o Rome (with what Conscience let them se to it) or joyn themselves to us. And of this last there is no great cause to have any hope, since we see none write more bitterly against us than they do, as if they would thereby redeem their credit▪ either with the Court of Rome, or with their party here, who being possest withsome suspitions of them, they to clear these▪ use the common shift of railing foully  those, with whom it is insinuated they have some correspondence. This style Mr. Arnaud has thought fit to write in more than any body, which was the more unseemly in him, considering both his Noble Education, and his other excellent and gentile Qualities; and indeed I am hear∣tily glad to find the grows ashamed and out of love with that way of writing, in which none has more grosly exceeded all the bounds of Moderation than he has done. They having declared themselves so fully and formally concerning the Reformation, there is no reason to expect they should ever joyn with us, and they are neither so numerous nor so considerable, as to be able o form themselves into a Society distinct
from Rome. Therefore what is it o be looked for from them, but that for the most part shall herd in with the rest, and com∣ply even against their Consciences, with all the corruptions of the Papacy. And as a Noble and Ingenious person said, the long Whip of Rome must bring in all these Strag∣lers; and if two or three will stand out and lie under their Censures, they shall have little credit, and small interest with their own party. So that there is no∣thing to be expected from any thing they can do or signifie. And therefore all the noise some make of the difference between the Court and Church of Rome, is only a pretty Notion, by which such as are speculative, and consider not the World, may be taken a little, but when they examine it further, they must see that it will be nothing in practice. The Interest, Favour, and Preferments, lie wholly the other way, and the greatest part is led by these; and such honest men as despise these, are either thought Fools or Knaves; some further design being sus∣pected, as the reason of why they pursue not present Advantages. But Preferments be∣ing bountifully given by the Court of Rome to their creatures; others who are loaded with their Censures, can never be imagined so considerable, as either to have
great Interest at home with their party (which being generally made up of Igno∣rance, and Zeal, hates those moderate men a Tamperers, and love none so much as the thorough-paced Papist.) much less can they ever have any power in the Semi∣naries and Nurseries beyond Sea: So that all that come over in the Mission shall be well leavened before they come among us, with the high Principles of the Court of Rome. Therefore I cannot apprehend any Advantage that can be reasonably look∣ed fr from the cherishing the men of those Principles, though I am very well satisfi∣ed some of them are honest men; but as they be very few who will openly own and stick to them, so I doubt not but if the owning these Maxims turned to a matter of Advantage, and ease, abundance that are not honest would pretend to be of the same perswasion. We see that generally (a few Instnces only excepted) they joyn together in the same Intrigues and De∣signs, and why we should think it possible to draw off any considerable party from the rest, I see no reason; for as it were undoubtedly both wise and good to cherish any motions that might disjoynt them one from another; so a few individual Per∣sons, how deserving soever they may be, cannot be of that Importance, that for
their sakes a Settlement should be altered, and colour given for a great many to deceive and abuse us. And I freely acknowledg that the plain dealing Papists, who owns the Popes In∣fallibility and absolute Authority, as he speaks, and acts most sutably to the other Principles of their Church, so is less to be suspected and feared, since he goes round∣ly to work, than others who speak more softly, and yet are in the same designs, and so may more safely and cunningly catch unwary persons, who either are not much on their guard, or are not well ac∣quainted with their Artisices; but the other are more open and less dange∣rous. It is now high time for me to quit this Digression, and to wind up a Preface that is already too long. I shall only, before I make an end, lay before the Reader, a few of the Arts of the Missionaries among us, in the dispersing their Papers and Books. They write them with great confidence, and swell up the Arguments they offer, with the biggest words and severest ex∣pressions that are possible, which works mightily upon the Gentle Reader, for tho modesty in Writing has great art in it to work upon an ingenuous mind; yet that to the weak and credulous, is a feeble and
dispirited thing, and they are never so apt to believe any thing as when it is confi∣dently averred with great Pomp and much Vehemence. If their Books be well written, they want not Printing Presses neither beyond Sea nor in England, and we shall soon hear of them; if they find themselves so baffled (as they have been of late by some great Writers in this Church) that they cannot answer with any tolerable shew of Learning and Honesty, then they spread it about that there is an Answer ready, but the Visitors of the Press are so careful, that nothing can escape their diligence. But if either their Papers be too barefaced to be owned, or if they know them to be so weak that they dare not put them to a try∣al, then instead of Printing them, they Copy them out and give them about. Of the former sort, the World has gotJesuits Loyalty. a good Evidence in the Discourses lately published about the Oath of Allegeance, which they intended to whisper in corners, but are now Proclaimed openly. And of the latter sort is the following Paper, which begins and ends with the highest confidence that is possible, but is so extreamly defective in the point of Ar∣gument, that they did very wisely, not to adventure on publishing it. But they must
write and do somwhat to keep Spirit in their party; and since the defending their own Church, has succeeded so ill with them, they do wisely to change the Scene, and carry in the War to our own Church, and make her the Scene of it, but they are as ill at attacquing, as defending; and if we be but safe from their Mines, we need not fear their Batteries, but their under∣ground work is a better game, and if they cannot wast us with Destruction atPsal. 92. 5, 6. Noontide, nor make their Arrows fly by day, then they study to infect us with a Pestilence that walketh in darkness, and by secret Contrivances and Conceal∣ed Papers, to compass that which they know can never be brought about by fair∣dealings and avowed practices. But truth is great (and the God of truth is greater) and will prevail over the fraud of the Ser∣pent, as well as the force of the Lion. And if we study to adorn our Profession, and walk worthy of our Holy Calling, we need not fear our Cause, nor all the endea∣vours of those that study to defame us. Without this the most laboured Apolo∣gies will not signifie much to support our Credit; for the World is more affected with lively Instances and great Examples, than with the most Learned Composures. Every Man's Understanding is wrought
on by the one, the other only prevail on considering and judicious persons. And any charge that is put in against the Pa∣stors or Orders of a Church, will be but little regarded, when those that bear Of∣fice in it, chiefly in the highest degrees, are burning and shining Lights, few will then stumble or be shaken with any thing that can be said to Eclipse their bright∣ness. 'Tis for the most part want of Merit in Churchmen, that recommends any Argu∣ments that are levelled at their persons or functions, to the World. And though Ma∣lice, and Spite ferments with the more rage, the worthier the persons are against whom it works; yet all attempts must needs be, not only unsuccessful, but fall back with shame on the Authors, when all the World sees the Unjustice of them.
The Contents. ARguments to prove the Invalidi∣ty of the Orders of the Church of England, page 2. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England, in Answer to the former Paper, p. 19. An Appendix about the Forms of Or∣daining Priests and Bishops in the Latin Church, p. 107.
Errata. The first Paper is printed exactly according to the Copy that was sent me, but these that follow seem to be the errors  the Transcriber. PAge 3. line 24. for such a Form, Read to such a Powe, p. 8. l. 27. for 1662. r. 1558. Page 28. l. 19. dele and, p. 29. l. 26. for of r. for, p. 38. l. 4. for are r. were, p. 87. l. 15. for too soon r. too late, p. 105▪ l. 25. after ground r. for, p. 112. l. 19. for leges r. legis, l. 22. for divum r. Deum, p. 123. l. 12. for Sanctifica r. Sanctificat▪ p. 126. l. 8. for novis r. novei, p. 133. l. 26. dele as.
ARGUMENTS To prove the Invalidity of the ORDERS OF THE Church of England. FIRST then I prove that the Mini∣sters of the Church of England are no Priests, through the defect of the Form of Ordination, which was this, pronounced to every one of them when they came to be Or∣dained: Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou forgivest they are forgiven, whose sins thou retainest, they are retained; and be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and his Holy Sacraments, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. After which the Bishop delivers a Bible to him, saying, Take thou authority to Preach the Word, and Minister the Holy Sacraments, in the
Congregation where thou shalt be so ap∣pointed. And my first Reason is, Because this Form wants one essential part of Priesthood, which is to Consecrate the most Holy Sacrament of Christs Body and Blood, giving only power to Administer this Sacrament, which any Dea∣con may do. That to Consecrate and make present Christs Body and Blood is necessary, Dr. Bramhal the Bishop of Derry, one of the chief Abettors of the Protestant Ordinati∣on, grants, in his Book of the Consecration and Succession of Protestant Bishops, say∣ing, The Form of words whereby men are made Priests, must express Power to Con∣secrate or make present Christs Body and Blood: And a little after, They who are Ordained Priests ought to have Power to Consecrate Christs Body and Blood, that is, to make it present, page 226. which it is evi∣dent by the very terms themselves that this Form expresses, nor gives not, having not one word expressing that Power which it cannot give without expressing it. Secondly, Because it wants another essential part, which is, to offer Sacrifice, which the Apostle requires, Heb. 5. 1. saying, Every High Priest taken from among men is Or∣dained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifice for sins. Even according to the Protestant
Bible, and which cannot be meant only of Christ, as some Protestants would have it; for in the 3. verse he says, And by reason here∣of he ought as for the people, so also for himself to offer for sins: whereas Christ had no sins of his own to offer for. Thirdly, Because those words, Whose sins, &c. at most gave Power to forgive sins, and not to Consecrate and offer Sacrifice, ha∣ving nothing to signifie that which is the chief Office of Priesthood. Fourthly, Because none could Institute the Form of a Sacrament to give Grace and Pow∣er to make present the Body and Blood of Christ, but the Author of Grace, and who had power over that Sacred Body and Blood: But those that Instituted this Form, were neither Authors of Grace, nor had power over the Sacred Body and Blood: therefore they could not Institute such a Form. That they who In∣stituted this Protestant Form had no such Power is proved by the Act of Parliament, the 3. 4. of Edward the VI. Cap. 12. (which could not pretend such a ) in these words, Forasmuch as to Concord and Unity to be had within the Kings Majesties Domini∣ons, it is requisite to have one Uniform fashion and manner for making and Conse∣crating Bishops, Priests, &c. Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Highness, with the Assents of the Lords Spiritual and Tempo∣ral,
and the Commons of this present Par∣liament assembled, and by the Authority of the same (mark by which Authority they are made) that such Form and manner of ma∣king and Consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, &c. as by six Prelates and six other men of this Realm, learned in Gods Law by the Kings Majesty (who was but a Child) to be appointed and assign∣ed, or by the most number of them shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth un∣der the Great Seal of England, before the first day of April next coming, and shall by vertue of this present Act (see what ver∣tues) be lawfully exercised, and used, and none other, any Statute, Law, or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. By Authority whereof those Prelates, and me learned in the Law invented and made th Form before mentioned, never heard of before either in Scripture or Church of God. From which I thus argue and prove my Mi∣nor. They that instituted the Form were th King and Parliament, 3. 4. Edward VI. Bu that King and Parliament were neither Au∣thors of Grace, not had power over the Body and Blood of Christ: therefore they that In∣stituted this Form, were neither Authors o Grace, nor had power over the Body and Blood of Christ, nor consequently could make it present.
Fifthly, They are no true Priests, because the Bishops that made them were no true Bi∣shops, nor so much as Priests; and no man can give power to another which he hath not himself. That they were no true Bishops nor Priests who pretended to make these Priests (which shall be the second part of my Dis∣course) I prove thus. PROTESTANT BI∣SHOPS NO BISHOPS, NOR SO MUCH AS PRIESTS. First, They are no Priests, because made by the same Form which other English Ministers were, which I have clearly proved to be null. That they are no true Bishops, I prove, first out of this very Principle already laid; be∣cause they are no true Priests; for as Master Mason, a chief Champion of theirs says, Epist. Ded. ad Episcop. Paris. Seeing he cannot be a Bishop who is not a Priest, if it can be proved we are no Priests, there's an end to our English Church. And the great Doctor of the Church St. Jerom, Dial. cum Lucifero, cap. 8. says. Ecclesia non est quae non habet Sacerdotem, It is no Church that hath no Priests. The Protestant Bishops therefore being no Priests can be no true Bi∣shops, nor their Church a Church at all. Secondly, They are no Bishops, because their Form of Ordination is essentially invalid and null, seeing it cannot be valid, (no more than that of Priesthood) unless it be in fit words,
which signifies the Order given; as Mr. Ma∣son says in his Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae lib. 1. c. 16. n. 6. in these terms, Not any words can serve for this Institution, but such as are fit to express the power of the Order given. And the reason is evident, because Ordination being a Sacrament (as the same Author says, lib. 1. n. 8. and Doctor Bramhal, page 96. of the Consecration of Protestant Bishops) that is a visible sign of invisible Grace given by it. There must be some visible sign or words in the Form of it, to signifie the Power given, and to determine the matter (which is the Imposition of hands of it self a dumb sign, and common to Priests and Deacons, Confirming, Curing, &c.) to the Grace of Episcopal Order; otherwise it were sufficient to say at the Imposition of hands Be thou a Constable, or God make thee an honest man. But there is no such visible sign or words in the Protestant Form, expressing this Episcopal Power given; therefore no such power is given. That there is no such sign or words in the Protestant Form, I prove out of the Form it self, which is this (made in King Edward the VI. time, and continued till the happy Restauration of his Majesty that now is) Take the Holy Ghost, and remem∣ber that thou stir up the Grace of God that is in thee by Imposition of hands; for God hath not given us the Spirit of Fear, but
of Power, and of Love, and Soberness. In which is not any word signifying Episcopal Power or Ordination; and therefore for this defect in their Form they are no true Bishops. Against what has been said you will object first, That I prove them to be no Priests, because they are no Bishops that made them: and on the other side I prove them no Bishops, because they are no Priests; which is a vicious Circle. But I easily answer this, because I first prove à priori, that is, from the essential which ought to give being to each of them tat they are severally null; and each of them be∣ing null for that reason, it is evident, that it is a cause of Invalidity in the other: for as he can be no Bishop who is proved to be no Priest, so he can make no Priest, who is proved to be no Bishop. Secondly, You will object and salve up all the Defects afore-mentioned in one word, to wit, That although the Form used in the Church of England were invalid in King Edward's, Queen Elizabeth's, King James's, and King Charles the First's time, for want of a valid Form of Ordination, yet now it is valid in our Sovereign King Charles the Second's, with whom the Parliament now sitting hath appointed a true Form: Enacting, that for the future, to wit, after St. Bartholomew's Day, 1662. the Form of Ordaining a Priest should be, Receive the Holy Ghost for the
Office of a Priest: and of a Bishop, Re∣ceive the Holy Ghost for the Office and work of a Bishop. But to this I'le answer you in another word, That the salve is worse than the sore; because by this change of the Form before established, they acknowledge it to be null; for why else need they change it. Secondly, By it they in effect acknowledge all their Bishops and Priests till that time to be null, because Ordained by a Form that was null, and could not give Power it had not, nor signified. Thirdly, Because being no Bishops already, they cannot Ordain validly by any Form whatsoever; for no man can give what he has not, as has been said be∣fore. Lastly, Whatsoever Power this Act gives to Ordain, is from the Parliament, and not from Christ; which is what I first undertook to show, and destroys their Orders root and branch. Now although the Bishops of the Church of England, and their Ministers grant this change of their Form of Ordination, yet if any one should deny it, you need only look upon the Form of making Bishops, and Priests, made . and which was only used in the Church of England for an hundred years, to be found in every Booksellers Shop, authori∣zed and commanded in the Act of Uniformi∣ty, made 1662. to be only used to St. Bartho∣lomew's
Day of that Year; and that other Enacted to be only used from thenceforward, and Printed in the Common-Prayer-Books of Cathedral Churches, out of which I have found it hard to be got; the Bishops, as most think, suppressing it for shame, and leaving it only in those places where it was neces∣sary to be made use of, and not permitting it to be otherwise dispersed abroad, although the Act of Uniformity which made it, commands upon forfeiture of 3 l. for every Month after St. Bartholomew's Day, 1662. that every Church, Chappel, Collegiate Church, College, and Hall should have a true printed Copy of it. Thus I hope I have fully proved that the Church of England has no true Priest or Bi∣shop for want of Ordination. Now I shall also show that they have no Iurisdiction or Authority to Teach, Preach, exact Tythes, in∣flict Censures, to be Pastors, or to exercise any Ecclesiastical Function whatsoever from Christ, but only from the Parliament: and my third Conclusion is, That Protestant Ministers and Bishops have no Power to Preach, &c. from Christ, but only from the Parliament. This I prove, because they have no more Power than the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker had, who was the Chief, and from whom (as it were the Con∣duit
of all) Iurisdiction was derived to the rest. That he had no such Power or Iurisdiction I prove, first▪ because they that Confirmed and Consecrated him had no such Power to confer upon him of themselves, to wit. William Barlow, late Bishop of Bath and Wells, now Elect of Chichester, John Scory, late of Chichester, now Elect of He∣reford; Miles Coverdale, late of Exeter, and John Hodgskins Bishop Suffragan, who were none of them actual Bishops of any See, but two Elect only, and another quondam only, and so had no actual Iurisdiction at all, the fourth only Suffragan to Canterbury, and who had no Iurisdiction, but what he had from the Arshbishop of Canterbury, much less Authority to give him Iurisdiction over him∣self, and all the Bishops in the Land, as the other three had no Power at all to give him, much less so transcendent an one, because none can give what he has not. Secondly, Because they had their sole Power from the Queen, and she (besides the incapacity of her Sex) had no Power of her self, but on∣ly according to the Statutes in that case provided, as appears by her Letters Patent yet extant, and to be seen in the Rolls in these words, Elizabetha Regina, &c. Elizabeth Queen, &c. To the Reverend Father in Christ, William, &c. Whereas the Archi∣episcopal
See of Canterbury, being lately void by the natural death of my Lord Re∣ginal Pool Cardinal, the late and immedi∣ate Archbishop and Pastor of it, at the hum∣ble Petition of the Dean and Chapter of our Cathedral and Metropolitan Church in Canterbury, called Christs Church, we did by our Letters Patents grant Licence to them to choose to themselves another for Archbishop and Pastor of the See aforesaid, and they have chosen Matthew Parker, &c. We have given our Royal assent and favour to the said Election; and we signifie this to you by the tenor of these presents, requi∣ring, and by the fidelity and love wherein you are bound to us, firmly enjoyning, com∣manding you, that you, or four of you ef∣fectually Confirm the said Matthew Par∣ker, Archbishop and Pastor Elect of the said Church, and Confirm the said Election, and Consecrate him Archbishop and Pastor of the said Church, and do all other things which in this behalf are incumbent on your Pastoral Office, according to the Form of the Statutes in this case made and provided. Out of which words, first, I note that the Queen here, and all the Clergy with her, ac∣knowledge Cardinal Pool the true and right∣ful Archbishop of Canterbury, by which they own Catholic Ordination and Iurisdiction to be valid, lawful, and good.
Secondly, I note (and confirm the main assertion) That the Queen knowing the Com∣mon Law, and ancient Laws of the King∣dom, required the Authority, Consent, and Commission (or Bull) of the Pope, to empow∣er the Confirmers and Consecrators of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury as the only Superior of that See; and withal that he would not grant and give it to make a Protestant Archbishop; she by her Supreme Authority as Head of the Church of England not only authorized them that were to Confirm and Consecrate him, but also (Pope-like) supplied all defects, whether in Quality, faculty, or any other thing wanting and necessary in the Consecrators for that per∣formance by the Laws of the Church or King∣dom: for so it followed in the same Patent, Supplying nevertheless by our Supreme Regal Authority, if any thing in you, or any of you, or in your condition, state, or faculty, to the performance of the Premis∣ses is wanting of these things, that by the Statutes of our Realm, or the Ecclesiastical Laws in this behalf are requisite or necessa∣ry (which she therefore supposed and knew well enough to be necessary and wanting, for otherwise it had been in vain for her to supply them) the condition of the time and neces∣sity of things requiring it. By which you see they could do neither of these Acts of Confirming or Consecrating him
Archbishop of Canterbury without her Com∣mission, which was not only necessary to em∣power them, but also to dispense with them, and make their Acts valid non obstante, not∣withstanding the Laws of the Land. That these Letters Patents Authorized them is clear out of the Instrument of his Confir∣mation, to be seen in the Records at Lam∣beth in their own words following. In the name of the Lord, Amen. We William Barlow, Iohn, Miles, &c. by the Queens Commissional Letters specially and lawfully deputed Commissioners, &c. by the Supreme Authority of the Queen to us in this behalf committed, confirm the said Election of Matthew Parker, &c. sup∣plying by the Supreme Authority of the Queen to us delegated, if any thing be wanting in us, or any of us, or in our Con∣dition, State, or Faculty to the perfor∣mance of the Premisses of these things, that by the Statutes of the Realm, or the Ecclesiastical Laws in this behalf are requi∣site or necessary, &c. as above. And whereas the Popes Commission (or Bull) used to be produced, by authority of which all Archbishops of Canterbury were Consecrated, and their Election confirmed. Now in place of that, says the Act of it upon Parker's Records, Proferebatur Regium Mandatum pro ejus Consecratione. The
Queens Mandate or Commission for Con∣secrating him, was produc'd as the Authori∣ty for what they did. Lastly, I prove that the Queen had her Authority from the Parliament. First, from the Statute 25. Henry 8. cap. 20. where the Parliament repeats out of another Act made that present Parliament, That if any Elected by the King, and presented to the See of Rome to be Archbishop or Bishop should be delayed, then he should be Consecrated by two Bishops appointed by the King: and then in the same Statute grants further, that all re∣course be forbidden to Rome, and Archbi∣shops and Bishops be Confirmed and Consecra∣ted by Bishops to be assigned by the King. Secondly, Out of the Act of 8. Eliz. 1. made purposely to set forth the Authority next under God, by which Matthew Parker and the other first Protestant Bishops in the beginning of the Queens Reign were made, by reciting how they were made by the Authority of her Majesty, and how she was authorized to that end by the aforesaid Statute of Henry VIII. and the Statute of 1. Eliz. 1. in these words, First, It is well known to all the degrees of this Realm, that the late King Henry the Eighth was as well by all the Clergy then of this Realm in their several Convocati∣ons, as also by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in divers of his
Parliaments justly and rightfully recogni∣zed and acknowledged to have the Su∣preme Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority over the Ecclesiastical State of the same, and that the said King did in the twenty fifth year of his Reign set forth a certain order of the Manner and Form, how Arch∣bishops and Bishops should be made, &c. And although in the Reign of the late Queen the said Act was repealed, yet ne∣vertheless at the Parliament 1. Eliz. the said Act was revived, and by another Act they made all Jurisdiction, Priviledges, &c. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spi∣ritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority hath hitherto been, or lawfully may be used over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm is fully and absolutely by Authority of the same Parliament (mark by what Au∣thority) united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm (mark here how she is made Pope) and by the same Statute there is also given to the Queen (mark Given) Power and Authority by Letters Patents to Assign and Authorize such Persons as she shall think fit (whether Clergy-men, Law∣yers, Merchants, Coblers, or any other, so they be naturally born Subjects of the Realm, for the Statute requires no more) to exercise under her all manner of Jurisdiction in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual
Jurisdiction in this Realm. Whereupon the Queen having in her order and disposition all the said Jurisdictions, &c. hath by her Supreme Authority caused divers to be du∣ly made and consecrated Archbishops and Bishops, according to such Order and Form, and with such Ceremonies in and about their Consecration, as were allowed and set out by the said Acts, &c. And further, her Highness hath in her Letters Patents used divers special words whereby, by her Supreme Authority she hath dispensed with all causes and doubts of imperfections or disability, &c. as is to be seen more a large in the same Act. In which you see declared by the Queen, Matthew Parker himself, and the whole Par∣liament: That Matthew Parker the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury was made Archbishop (as all the other Protestant Bishops in her time were) by Authority of the Queen, and that she had her Authority for it from the Statutes, 25. Henry 8. 20. and 1. Eliz. 1. from whom all our Protestant Bi∣shops since spring and descend, and derive all the Power and Authority that they have. From which you see clearly that Protestant Bishops have no Authority to teach, Preach, or to be Bishops, but what originally they have from the Parliament. Which is still more evidently confirmed by this Parliament now
in being, which in the year 1662. by the Act of Uniformity, annulled the forementioned Forms of Ordination of Priests and Bishops (as being deficient) and appointed new ones by their own Authority. So from the first to the last, all the Protestant Priests and Bi∣shops both heretofore and at this present, are only Parliamentary Priests and Bishops, and not so from Christ and his Church, but only from their Kings, Queen, and Parliaments. I must confess this present Parliament may easily answer the Parliaments of Edward the VI. and Queen Elizabeth, why it hath lately altered the Form of Ordination, instituted and used by them; to wit, because their Forms were null and invalid, but what Authority either of them had to make, alter, or use any Form of Ordination, or to give Power to Teach, Preach, Minister Sacraments, or the like, of themselves, without Authority from Christ our Saviour, there I must leave them to answer him. From the Premisses I infer, First, That they being no Priests nor Bi∣shops, theirs is no Church; as Mr. Mason and St. Jerom grant. Secondly, If no Church, no part of the Ca∣tholic Church, out of which, and without whose Faith kept entire and inviolate, no man can be saved; as their own Common-Prayer-Book affirms.
Thirdly, They can never eat the Flesh of Christ our Lord, nor drink his Blood, without which they cannot have life in them, John 6. 54. Fourthly, They commit a most hainous Sa∣criledge as often as they attempt to Consecrate or Minister the most Holy Sacrament, having no such Power. Fifthly, They commit the like Sacriledge in presuming to hear Confessions, or forgive Sins. Sixthly, All that Communicate with them, and follow the same Religion, are involved in the same sins, so that the blind leading the blind they must necessarily both fall into the ditch of eternal perdition, foretold by our Saviour, Matth. 15. 14. Lastly, It is to be noted, that although I conceive I have clearly proved the Ordination and Iurisdiction of their Priests and Bishops to be invalid by every argument I have used to those ends, yet to my purpose it is sufficient to have proved it by any one: For as to prove a man to be a Thief or Forger, it is sufficient to prove he has stoln one Horse, or forged one Deed, to hang him for the one, or set him on the Pillory for the other; so to prove by one ar∣gument alone that they are no Priests, nor Bi∣shops, nor have any Iurisdiction, is sufficient to prove them guilty of Sacramental Forgery, and by that means of deluding and stealing away innumerable souls.
A VINDICATION OF THE ORDINATIONS OF THE Church of ENGLAND, In answer to the former Paper. THis Paper which you sent me being only a Repetition of those Objections which were long ago refuted by Master Mason, with great learning and judgment, and more lately by the most Ingenious Lord Primate of Ireland, D. Bramhall, there needs no∣thing else be said to it, but only to refer the Reader to those learned and so∣lid Writings on this Subject. The same Plea was again taken up by the Writers of two little Books published since his Majesties Restauration, entitled Erastus Senior and Erastus Iunior; which was thought so unreasonable even to some of
that Communion, that one of the learnedst Priests they had in England did answer them; and though he did not adventure on saying our Ordination was good and valid, knowing how ingrateful that would have been to his Party, yet he did overthrow all those Arguments a∣gainst it that are brought in this Paper, and shew'd they were of no force. This Writing of his has not been yet Printed, but I have perused it in the Manuscript. Yet that this may not seem to be a decli∣ning of the task you have invited me to, and because the Books I have mentioned are not perhaps in your hands, I shall say as much in answer to it as I hope may ful∣ly satisfy you or any impartial Reader. The Substance of the first argument to prove that our Ministers are not Priests, is, That by the form of our Ordination the Power of Consecrating the Sacrament of Christs most holy body and blood, is not given: the words only importing a Power to dispense the Sacraments which any Deacon may do: Therefore the power of consecrating or making Christ's Body and Blood present, being essential to the Priesthood and our form not ex∣pressing it, and by consequence not gi∣ving it, it wants one essential requisite to the Priesthood, and therefore those that
are ordained by it, are not true Priests. To which I answer, 1. If our Form be the same in which Christ ordained his Apostles, we may be very well satisfied that it is good and suf∣ficient. Now when our Saviour Or∣dained them, S. Iohn tells us that he said,S. Ioh. 20. 22. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted to them, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained: this being that Mission which he gave them (as the preceding words do clearly import; As the Father hath sent me, so send I you) we can think no Form so good and so full as that he made use of. It is true, we do not judg any Form so essential as to annul all Ordinations that have been made by any other, for then we should condemn both the Ordinati∣ons of the Primitive Churches, and of the Eastern Churches at this day. And this is the reason why even ac∣cording to the ancient and most general∣ly received Maxims of the Schools, Or∣ders can be no Sacrament (tho in the ge∣neral sense of the word Sacrament, it be∣ing no term used in Scripture, but brought into the Church, we shall not much dispute against its being called so) for by their Doctrin both Matter and Form of the Sacrament must be institu∣ted
by Christ, and are not in the power of the Church Vasques in 3. parte, D. 129. c. 5. n. 71, 72. Says it is the con∣stant opi∣nion of the Catholicks, that the Sa∣craments consist of some things and words In∣stituted by God, which men can∣not alter or change, and that Christ de∣livered both the words and things of which the Sacraments consist. Which he says are necessary in all Churches, and rejects the Opi∣nion of Pope Innocent the 4th. and others who pretend that some things are necessary to the Sacraments in some Churches, which are not necessary in other Churches, and Disp. 239. in 3. p. c. 4. n. 36. He again resumes the same thing, and refutes Tapperus who thought that in some Sacraments in which Christ did not determine the Mat∣ter and Form, he left the power of assigning these with his Church. Which he denies, and says, no Power about the determination of the Matter and Form was left with the Church; but the assignation of those is believed, done by Christ, for since the institution of the Sacrament is by Divine right, the matter and form must be assigned by the same right; for proving which, he cites the Council of rent.. Now they cannot but acknowledg that the Form of giving Or∣ders in their Church, was not instituted by Christ, nor received in the Church for divers Ages, which made Pope Inno∣cent say that the Forms of Ordination were ordered and invented by the Church, and were therefore to be observed, otherwise it was sufficient in giving Orders, to say, Be thou a Bishop, or be thou a Priest; there∣fore though we do not annul Orders gi∣ven by any other Form, yet we have all reason to conclude that used by our Sa∣viour, to be not only sufficient, but abso∣lutely the best and fittest. It is without all colour of reason, that the writers of that Church will have the words our Saviour pronounced, after he
had instituted the Eucharist, This do in re∣membrance of me, to be the form by which he ordained them Priests; for This do, must relate to the whole action of the Sacrament, the Receiving and Eat∣ing, as well as the Blessing and Conse∣crating; therefore these words are only a Command to the Church to continue the use of the Holy Sacrament in Re∣membrance of Christ. Nor do those of the Church of Rome think these were the words by which Christ ordained them Priests, otherwise they would use them and think them sufficient; but they use them not, but instead of them, say, Re∣ceive thou Power to offer Sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Mass both for the Living and the Dead. 2. If this be ane essential defect in our Ordination, then there were no true Priests in the Primitive Church for divers Ages, and there are no true Priests at this day in the Greek Church; and yet neither of these can be acknowledg∣ed by the Church of Rome, for if they annul the Ordinations of the Primitive Church, they likewise annul their own which are derived from them. They do also own the Orders of the Greek Church to be valid, as appears by their receiving them into their Communion at
the Council of Florence, and by their practice ever since; which Morinus hath in the first part of his Work so fully pro∣ved from the decrees of Popes and Coun∣cils, that the thing can no more be doubt∣ed; and at this day there are Greek Churches at Rome, maintain'd at the Popes charge, in which Orders are gi∣ven according to the Greek Pontificals, as he informs us. That in the Primitive Forms there were no express words of giving power to consecrate the Sacrament; I appeal to the Collection of the most Antient Forms of Ordination, that Morinus a PriestDe ord. Sac. of that Church, and a Penitentiary in great esteem at Rome, has made, where it will be found that for many Ages this power was not given expresly, or in so many words. The most ancient Rubrick about this, is in the 4th. Council of Car∣thage, if those Canons be genuine, WhenCan. 3. a Priest is ordained, the Bishop blessing him and laying his hand on his head, all the Priests that are present shall likewise lay their hands on his head about the Bi∣shops hand: Where we see that the Impo∣sition of hands and the Bishop's blessing, was all the matter and form of these Or∣ders. Denis (called the Areopagite) tellsDe Eccles. Hierar. us that the Priest that was to be Ordain∣ed,
kneeled before the Bishop, who laid his hand on his head and did Conse∣crate him with a holy Prayer, and then marked him with the sign of the Cross; and the Bishop and the rest of the Clergy that were present, gave him the Kiss of Peace. Here we find nothing but impo∣sition of Hands and Prayer. Now there being no general Liturgies nor Ordinals then in the World, but every Countrey (or perhaps every Diocess) having their own Forms, it was never defined in what form of words this Prayer and Be∣nediction should be used; but was left in∣different, so the substance of the Blessing were preserved. It is true, the Author of those Constitutions that are ascribed to the Apostles, sets down the Prayer of Ordination, for which he vouches Saint Iohn Author; which is, That the PriestLib. 8. Cap. 16. might be filled with the spirit of Grace and Wisdom to help and govern the Flocks with a pure heart, that he might meekly teach the people, being full of healing Ope∣rations and instructive Discourses, and might serve God sincerely with a pure mind and willing soul, and might through Christ perfect the sacred Services for the people, in which there is nothing that gives in express words, the power of Conse∣cration.
In the most ancient Ritual that Mori∣nus could find, which belonged to the Church of Poictiers, and has been com∣posed about the middle of the 6th. Cen∣tury; there is no mention in the Prayer of Consecration of any such power. The same Prayer of Consecration is also in another Ritual which he believes 900 years old: and also in another, that he believes 800 years old. It is true, in these Rituals there is a Blessing added, in which among other things the Conse∣crator Prayes, that by the obedience of the people the Priest may transform the Body and Blood of thy Son by an un∣defiled Benediction; but here is no pow∣er given, nor is this Prayer essential to the Orders so given, but a subsequent Benediction: Therefore the want of it cannot annul Orders. And in another MSS. Ritual belonging to the Abbey of Corbey, written about the middle of the 9th. Century, there is nothing but the Prayer of the Consecration of a Priest, which is the same with what is in the other Rituals, but the blessing which mentions the transforming of the Body of Christ, is not in it, by which it appears that it was not looked on as essential to Orders. And in another Ritual com∣piled for the Church of England, now
lying in the Church of Roüen, belie∣ved to be about 800 years old, the Form of Consecration is the same that it is in the other Rituals. The ancient Ri∣tual of the Church of Rhemes, about the same age, and divers other ancient Rituals agree with these. But the first mention of this power of saying Mass, given in the Consecration of Priests, is in a Ritual believed to be 700 years old, compiled by some near Rome, in which the Rite of delivering the Vessels, with these words, Receive power to offer Sa∣crifice to God, and to celebrate Masses, &c. is first set down; yet that is want∣ing in a Ritual of Bellay, written about the Thousandth year, so that it was not universally received for near an Age af∣ter it was first brought in. Now in all these Rituals the Prayer of Consecra∣tion is that which is now in the Pontifical only one of the Prayers of the Office *,Ds San∣ctification. but is not the Prayer of Consecration, from which two things clearly follow; First, that no Form of Ordination is so essential, but that the Church may change it and put another in its room, and if the other be apposite and fit, there is no fault committed by the Change, much less such a one as invalidates the Orders so given. Secondly, It is clearly made out,
that in the Ordinations of the Primitive Church for 900 years after Christ, there was no power of consecrating Christ's Body and Blood expresly given in the forms and words of Ordination. So that if the want of such words annuls our Or∣dinations, it will do the same to theirs; the consequence of which, will be; that there were no true Orders in the Church of God till the latter Rites in the Roman Pontifical were invented; and if that be true, then the Orders of the Roman Church which have descended from them, are not true, since they flow from men not truly ordained. And at this day the Greek Church (as is set down byDiscourse sur les Or∣dres Sacres. the Learned and Pious Bishop of Vence treating of the matter and form of Orders) when they ordain  give no such power, but the Bishop lays on his right hand on the Priest's head, and says, The grace of God that always heals the things that are weak, and perfects things that are imperfect, pro∣motes this very Reverend Deacon to be a Priest: Let us therefore pray for him that the grace of the most Holy Spirit come upon him. Then those that assist, say thrice for him, Kyrie Eleison. Then the Bishop makes the Sign of the Cross, and prays for the grace of God on the Priest thus ordained, holding his hand all the while over his
head; then he puts the Priestly Vesti∣ments on him, and gives him the Kiss of Peace, which is also done by the rest of the Clergy there present. And Habert a Doctor of Sorbonne, who has published the Greek Pontifical with learned Observations on it, gives us this same account of their Ordinations which Morinus has confirmed by the several an∣cient Greek MSS. which he has published one of them being 800 years old, which a∣grees with it; and neither in the first Pray∣er, nor second (during both which the Bi∣shop holds his hands over the head of him that is to be Consecrated) is there any mention made of this power of consecra∣ting Christ's Body and Blood. And in the Rituals of the Maronites, Nestorians, and Copthites (all which Morinus proves are held good and valid by the Church of Rome) there is no such Power given in the words of Consecration: their Forms being almost the same with those used in the Greek Church: so that we generally find Imposition of hands with a Prayer of Grace, and a Blessing, were looked on as sufficient for Ordination: and this was taken from the practices of the Apostles, who ordained by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, as appears from the places ci∣ted in the Margent; and that these Pray∣ers
were, that God might pour out theActs 6. 6. Whom they see before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. Acts 13. 3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away▪ Acts 14. 23. And when they had Ordained (or literally imposed Hands) them Elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting. 1 Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presby∣tery. 1 Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be thou partaker of other mens sins. 2 Tim. 1. 6. 7. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. For God hath not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, and of Love, and of a sound mind. gifts and graces of his Spirit on them: both the nature of the thing and some of the cited places do fully prove. From all which it appears, that either our Ordi∣nations are valid, or there are no true Orders in the whole Christian Church; no not in the Church of Rome it self. 3. The very Doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome shews, that the es∣sentials of Ordination remain still with us. By the Maxims of the Schools there must be matter and form in every Sacra∣ment; the Matter is some outward sensible action or thing; the Form are the words applyed to that action or thing which hallow it, and give the Character, when (as they say) the indelible Character is im∣pressed (which they believe is done by
Orders) The imposition of hands is held to be the Matter by almost all their Doctors, as is acknowledged by Bellar∣mine,Bellarm. de Sac. Ord. cap. 9. Vasques, and most of the School∣men are of this mind. It is true, Eugenius in his Instruction to the Armenians, set down in the Council of Florence, declares that the giving the Sacred Vessels, is the Matter in Orders; but the Council of Trent (which was a far more learned and cautious Assembly than the other was, in which there was nothing but Ignorance and Deceit) determined that Priests have their Orders by the Imposition of hands; for treating of extream Unction, they decreed that the Minister of it was ei∣therCap. de extr. Unct. the Bishop or Priests lawfully ordained by them, by the Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. And Bellarmine both from the Scriptures and the Fathers, proves that the Imposition of hands must be the Matter of this Sacrament, since they speak of it, and of it only. Now if this be the Matter of this Sacrament, then the Form of it must be the words joyned with it in their Pontifical, Receive theDe Sacr. Ord. Can. 4. Holy Ghost. And the Council of Trent does clearly insinuate, that this is the form of Orders in these words; If any man say that in Ordination, the H. Ghost is not given; and therefore that the Bi∣shop
says in vain, Receive the H. Ghost, or by it a Character is not impressed—Let him be an Anathema. It is true, their Doctors to reconcile the disagreement of those two Councils, have devised the distinction of the power of Sacrificing and of the power of Jurisdiction in a Priest: The last they confess, is given by the Imposition of hands; the former, they say, is given by the delivering of the Sa∣cred Vessels. And indeed, as Morinus doth often observe, the School-men being very ig∣norant both of the more Ancient Rites of the Church, and of the practice of the Eastern Churches, and looking only on the Rituals then received in the Latin Church, have made strange work about the matter and form of Ordination; but now that they begin to see a little further than they did, then they are of a far different opinion; so Vasques, whom the School-men of this Age, look on a an Oracle, treating of Episcopal Orders,Tom. 3. m. 3. Disp. 24. c. 3. says in express words, That the Imposition of hands is the Matter, and the words ut∣tered with it, are the Form of Orders, and that the Sacramental Grace is conferred in and by the application of the Matter and Form. It is true, He joyns in with the com∣monly
received Doctrine of the Schools about the two powers given to Priests by a double matter and form, yet he citesDisp. 239. Cap. 2. n. 5. Lib. de Iu. Sacer. Lect. 5. de Sacr. Bonaventure; and In 4. Disp. 24. pract. quaest. 4. Petrus Sotus, for this opinion that the Imposition of hands, and the words joyned with it, were the matter and form of Priestly Orders; and though Vasques himself undertakes to prove the other Opinion, as that which agrees best with the principles of their Church, yet it is visible he thought the o∣ther Opinion truer; for when he provesDisp. 235. c. 3. Orders to be a Sacrament, he lays down for a Maxim, that the outward Rite and Ce∣remony, the promise of Grace, and the command for the continuance, must be all found in Scripture before any thing is to be acknowledged a Sacrament: and when pursuant to this, he proves that the Rite of Orders is in Scripture, he assigns no other but the Imposition of hands: so that according to his own Doctrine, that is the only Sacramental Rite or the matter Orders. And Cardinal de Lugo says, The givingDisp. de Sacr. 5. n. 87. the Bread and the Wine we know is not de∣terminately required by any divine Institu∣tion, since the Greeks are ordained with∣out it; therefore it is to be confessed that Christ only intended there should be some proportioned Sign for the matter of Or∣ders,
either this or that. And it is now the most commonly received Oponion, even amongst the School-men; that Christ neither determined the Matter nor the Form of Orders, but left both to the Church. And Habert proves that the Greek form of Ordination is sufficient toObserv. 1. & 2. de ord. Pres. express the grace of God then prayed for, which is the chief thing in Ordina∣tion; and though the Greek Fathers do not mention these words that are now used as the Form in their days, yet he cites many places out of their writings, by which they seem to allude to those words, though the custom then received of speaking mystically and darkly of all the Rites of the Church, made that they did not deliver themselves more plainly about it; but he concludes his second Observation in these words: In thoseTit. 8. de Cons. Pres. Sacraments where the Matter and Form are not expressed in Scripture, it must be supposed that Christ did only in general institute both to his Apostles, leaving a power with the Church to design, consti∣tute, and determine these in several ways; so that the chief Substance, Intention, and Scope of the Institution, were retained with some general fitness and analogy for signifying the effect of this Sacrament. And if both the Eastern and Western
Churches have made Rituals, which though they differ one from another, yet are good and valid; it seems very unrea∣sonable to deny the Church of England, which is as free and independent a Church as any of them, the same right; for it is to be observed that the Catholick Church did never agree on one Uniform Ritual, or Book of Ordination, but that was still left to the freedom of particular Chur∣ches; and so this Church has as much power to make or alter Rituals, as any other has: Therefore the substantials of Ordination being still retained, which are Imposition of hands with fit Prayers and Blessings. It is most unreasonable to except against our Forms of Ordina∣tion. Let it be also considered, that it is in∣deed true, that the last Imposition of hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost appointed in the Pontifical, is not above 400 years old, nor can any An∣cienter MSS be shewed in which it is found; yet that is now most commonly received in the Church of Rome, to be the matter and form of Ordination; for all their Doctors hold, that either the de∣livering the Vessels, and saying, Receive Power to offer Sacrifice, &c. or the Im∣position of hands, with the words,
Receive the Holy Ghost, &c. is the Mat∣ter and Form of Orders. Agains the former, Morinus has said so muchExerc. 7. cap. 1. that I need add nothing; for by unan∣swerable Arguments, he proves that i not essential to Orders, since neither th Primitive Church, the Eastern Churche▪ nor the Roman Rituals; or the Writers o the Roman Offices, ever mention it ti within these 700 years, and at first i was only done in the Consecration o Bishops, and afterwards (by custom, no decree of Council or Pope being to b found about it) it was used in the Or∣dination of Priests. The same Author doth also study toExerc. 7. cap. 2. prove, that the Imposition of the Bishop hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, is not essential to Ordination, bu is only a Benediction superadded to it▪ and shews that it was not used in the Pri∣mitive Church, nor mentioned by any ancient Writer; and therefore he is o opinion that the first Imposition of hands gives the Orders in which both Bishop and Priests lay on their hands, and pray that God would multiply his Gifts o those whom he had chosen to the sunction o a Priest, that what they received by hi savour, they might attain by his help▪ through Christ our Lord. If this b
true, then two things are to be well obser∣ved. First, That the Prayer, which according to his opinion, is the Prayer of Consecration, was not esteemed so by the Ancient Rituals, in which it is only called a Prayer for the Priests that were to be Ordained; after which, the Prayer of Consecration followed; from which it appears that there was no constant rule in giving Orders; and that what the Church once held to be but a preparatory Prayer, was afterwards made the Prayer of Consecration; and that which they esteemed the Prayer of Consecration, was afterwards held but a Prayer of Be∣nediction. Secondly, That in the for∣mal words of Consecration (if his Opi∣nion be true) there is no power given of consecrating the Sacraments. But Morinus is alone in this opinion, and it is certain that the general Doctrine of the Church of Rome, is, that the last Imposition of hands is the Matter of these Orders, and parallel to this is the Im∣position of hands in the consecration of a Bishop, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, which is undoubtedly the matter of Episcopal Orders: Therefore that same Rite with these words, is also the matter of the Priestly Orders. And it is a foolish and groundless Conceit, to
pretend there are two distinct power essential to the Priesthood to be confer∣red by two several Rites; for then a who  ordained by one of these Rite without the other (as were all th Priests of the Christian World, till with∣in these 700 years) had not the Priestly Office entire and compleat. And fur∣ther, according to their own Principles▪ the Character is an Indivisible thing, an inseparably joyned to the Sacrament; Therefore that which gives the Cha∣racter, gives the Sacrament. Now ac∣cording to their Doctrine, the Cha∣racter is given by the Imposition o hands: Therefore the Sacrament con∣sists in that. And all the other Rites are only Ceremonies added to it, which are not of the essence of it; from which i follows that we who use Imposition o hands, with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, &c. use all that according to the Doctrine of that Church is necessary to it; and therefore they have no reason to except against the validity of our Orders, even according to their own Principles. Fourthly, If by consecrating, o making present Christ's blessed Body, they understand the incredible Mystery of Transubstantiation, we very freely confess there is no such power given to
our Priests by their Orders: But I shall not digress from this Subject to another; therefore I may confine my Discourse to it; I acknowledg that we do receive by our Orders, all the power of conse∣crating the Sacraments which Christ has left with his Church. First, When we are ordained to be Priests, there is given us all that which our Church declares, inseparable to the Priesthood; and such is the Consecrating the Eucharist: Therefore it being de∣clared and acknowledged on all sides; what Functions are proper to the Priest∣hood if we be ordained Priests, though there were no further Declaration made in the form of Ordination, yet the other concomitant actions and offices, shewing that we are made Priests, all that belongs to that function is therein given tous; this made Pope Innocent define that, Be thou a Priest, was a sufficient Form in it self. Secondly, The great end of all the Priestly Functions, being to make recon∣ciliation between God and Man; for which cause Saint Paul calls it the Mini∣stery of Reconciliation; whatever gives the power for that, must needs give also the means necessary for it; therefore the Sacrament being a Mean instituted by our Saviour for the Remission of Sins,
which he intimated in these words. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood for the Remission of Sins; and the death of Christ being also the great Mean in or∣der to that end the power of forgiving sins Ministerially, must carry with it the power of doing all that is instituted for attaining that end. Thirdly, The power of consecrating the Sacraments, is very fully and formal∣ly given in our Ordination, in these words. Be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word of God, and of his Holy Sacra∣ments; where they bewray great incon∣sideration, that think Dispensing is bare∣ly the distributing the Sacrament, which a Deacon may do; the word is taken from the Latin, and is the same by which they render those words of Saint Paul, Stewards of the Mysteries of God; or ac∣cording1 Cor. 4. 1. to the Style of the Church of Rome, which translates Mystery Sacra∣ment; Dispensers of the Sacraments of God; Therefore this being a phrase wherein St. Paul expressed the Apostolical Function, one might think it could serve to express the office of a Priest well e∣nough, so that Dispensing is more than Distributing; and is such a power as a Steward hath, who knows and consi∣ders every ones condition, and prepares
what is fit and proper for them; therefore the blessing of the Sacraments being a ne∣cessary part of the Dispensing of them, they being Blessed for that end and the Dispen∣sing them, including the whole Office in which the Church appoints the Sacraments to be dispensed, of which Consecration is a main part; these words do clearly give and manifestly import the power of con∣secrating the Sacraments. Now the Question comes to this? what is meant by the word Dispensing; they say it is only to distribute the Ele∣ments; we say it is to administer the Sa∣crament according to the Office. If what we say be the true signification of it; then the power of consecrating the Elements, is formally given with our Orders. And that this is the true mean∣ing of it, appears both from common use; which makes it more than barely to Di∣stribute; and from the declared meaning of those who use it, which is the only rule to judg of all doubtful expressions: Now the declared meaning of our Church in the use of this word being so express and positive; from thence it follows, that by Dispense must be understood, to give the Sacrament according to the whole office of the Church. The same is also to be said of the
words, Take thou Authority to preach the Word of God, and to minister the Holy Sacraments; for tho Minister and Serve in the Greek Tongue, be the same; yet Minister in our common acceptation, is all one with Administer, only Minister is more usual when the thing Ministred is Sacred or Holy; therefore this takes al∣so in it the whole Office of the Sacra∣ment: And as in the former words the Power is given; so in these words it is applyed and restrained in its exercise to a due vocation, to cut off idle it inerant and for the most part, scandalous Priests. And thus far I have considered this first Argument at great length, both because it is that of which they make most use to raise Scruples in the thoughts of unlearned persons; and the clearing of it will make way for answering the rest. Therefore leaving this, I go to the second Argument; which is, That the offering of Sacrifice is an essential part of Priesthood. So Heb. 5. 1. and 3. therefore we having no such pow∣er conferred on us, cannot be true Priests. To this I Answer. First, It is strange Inconsideration to argue from the Epistle to the Hebrews, that the Pastors of the Christian Church
ought to be Priests in the sense that is mentioned in that Epistle; the scope of which is to prove, That Christ is the only Priest of this New Dispensation: And the notion of a Priest in that Epi∣stle, is a person called and consecrated to offer some living Sacrifice, and to slay it, and by the shedding of the blood of the Sa∣crifice slain, to make reconciliation: This being the sense in which the Iews under∣stood it; the Apostle among other Ar∣guments to prove the death of Christ to be the true Sacrifice, brings this for one, that there was to be another Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck. For pro∣ving this, he lays down in the first four Verses of the 5th. Chapter, the Jewish notion of a Priest; then he goes on to prove that Christ was such a Priest called of God and Consecrated; this he prose∣cutes more fully in the 7th. Chapter, where he asserts that Christ was that other Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck, and v. 15. he calls him another Priest, and v. 23. and 24. makes this plainer in these words; And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death; but this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood: From which it is apparent that the Apostles design in these places,
is to prove that there is but one Priest in that sense mentioned chap. 5. v. 1. under the New Testament. And had the Wri∣ter of this paper read over that Epistle, he must needs have seen this, but this is one of the effects of their not reading the Scriptures carefully, that they make use of places of Scripture, never con∣sidering any thing more than the general sound of some words, without exami∣ning what goes along with them. But as it is clear from that Epistle, that there is but one Priest in the strict no∣tion of it; so it is no less clear that there is but one propitiatory Sacrifice among Christians in its strict notion, for having mentioned the frequent Oblations to take away sins under the Mosaical Law, chap. 5. v. 3. he makes the opposition clear, chap. 7. v. 27. in these words. Who needeth not daily as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins and then for the people; for this he did once when he offered up himself. And chap. 9. v. 7. having mentioned the High Priest's annual entring into the most Ho∣ly place; he sets in opposition to it v. 12. Christ's entring in once to the Holy place, having made Redemption for us by his own Blood. And v. 22. he says, Without shedding of Blood there was no Remission;
by which he does clearly put down all unbloody Sacrifices that are propitiatory: And v. 28. he says, Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many. And chap. 10. v. 2. he says, That when the worship∣pers are once purged, then would not Sa∣crifices cease to be offered? To prove that the Sacrifices of the Law had not that vertue: Therefore we being purged by the Blood of Christ, must offer no more propitiatory Sacrifices; and all this is made yet clearer, v. 11. and 12. And every Priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same Sacri∣fices which can never take away sins. But this man after he had offered up one Sacri∣fice for sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God. From all which you may see it is as plain as can be, that there is but one Priest and one propitiatory Sacrifice under the New Testament, for the places I have cited, are not some am∣biguous or dark Expressions, but full and formal Proofs, by which in a long Series of Discourse and Argument, the thing is put out of doubt. Therefore those of that Church do very unwisely ever to mention that Epistle, or to say any thing that may oblige people to look upon it; So that, except to such as they are sure will read no more of it than they will
shew them or cite to them, they had best speak of it to no body else. Secondly, Though we deny all pro∣pitiatory Sacrifices, but that which our Blessed Saviour offered for us once on the Cross; yet we acknowledg that we have Sacrifices in the true strict and Scrip∣tural notion of that word; for propitia∣tory ones are but one sort of Sacrifice, which in its general notion stands for any Holy Oblations made to God; and in this sense, Thank-Offerings, Peace-Of∣ferings, and Free-will Offerings, were Sacrifices under the Law; so were also their Commemorative Sacrifices of the Paschal Lamb, which were all Sacrifices, though not Propitiatory. And in this sense Psal. 142. 2. Let my Prayer be set forth beforethee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the Evening Sacrifice. Psal. 52. 27. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God thou wilt not despise. Hebr. 13. 15. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving Thanks to his Name. Rom. 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, accepta∣ble unto God, which is your reasonable service. Philip. 4. 18. But I have all, and abound; I am full, having re∣ceived of Epaphroditus, the things which were sent from you, an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. our prayers and praises; a broken heart, and the dedicating our lives to the service of God, are Sacrifices, and are so called in Scripture; so also is the gi∣ving
of Alms. And in this sense we deny not but the Holy Eucharist is a Sa∣crifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; and it is so called in one of the Collects. It is also a Commemoration of that one Sacri∣fice which it represents, and by which the worthy receivers have the vertue of that applyed to them. The Oblation of the Elements of Bread and Wine to be Sanctified, is also a kind of Sacrifice; and in all these Senses we acknowledg the Sacrament to be a true Sacrifice, as the Primitive Church did. But as we do not allow it to be a propi∣tiatory Sacrifice for the living, much less can we believe it such for the dead; or that the Priests consecrating and consuming of it, is a Sacrifice for the people; it being a Sacrifice as it is a Sacrament, which is only to those who receive it. And in these three points; First, That it is no propitiatory Sacrifice: 2. That the dead receive no good from it: 3. That the Priests ta∣king it alone, does no good to the peo∣ple who receive it not: We are sure we have all Antiquity of our side. But to digress upon that, were to go too far out of the way; and the Writers of Con∣troversies have done it fully. Therefore the power of Dispensing the Word of God and of his Holy Sacraments gives all the
Authority that is in the Christian Church for offering of Sacrifices. And if they deny this, they must deny the validity of all the ancient Ordinations, for they can shew no such Form in any of their Ordinals. Thirdly, What was said before of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome about the matter and form of Orders, as they are a Sacrament, shews that the power they give in the Ordination of Priests, of offering Sacrifices, is not essential to it, but only a Rite they have added to it; the want whereof can be no essential defect, and so can never annual our Orders: What was said before in Answer to the first Argument, is again to be remem∣bred here, that in all the Ancient Ri∣tuals there is no power of offering pro∣pitiatory Sacrifices given in the form of Ordination. It is true in the M SS. which lies in the Monastery of St. Ger∣man; there is a new Rite set down of delivering the Priestly Vestments, in which among other words these are ad∣ded: And Do thou offer Propitiatory Sacri∣fices for the Sins and Offences of the People, to Almighty God. Which words are now omitted in that part of the Roman Ponti∣fical, and made a part of the final Blessing given at the end of the Office, but this
at most is but 800 years old; and there∣fore cannot be essential to Orders since there were true Priests in the Christian Church 800 years before this was used. And to this day in the Greek Church there is no power given by the Consecra∣tion to offer propitiatory Sacrifices; for though in the second Prayer said in Or∣dinations in which God's Holy Spirit is prayed for upon the Priest, That he may be worthy to stand before the Altar of God without blame, and may preach the Go∣spel of his Kingdom, and holily admini∣ster the Word of his Truth: It is added, And may offer to thee Gifts and Spiritual Sacrifices, but there is no reason to gather from these words that they give power for offering Propitiatory Sacrifices. We acknowledg that we offer Gifts and Sacrifices in the Holy Eucharist; but we reject Propitiatory ones, and these words do not at all import them. And the truth of it is when the Writers of the Roman Church are pressed with the Ar∣guments before mentioned, that the Eu∣charist can be no Propitiatory Sacrifice: Since 1. there no Blood shed in it: 2. No Destruction is made of the Sacrifice; for it is only the Accidents and not the Blessed Body of Christ that the Priest consumes: 3. That Christ's Cross is called one Sa∣crifice
once offered: 4. That his being now exalted at the Father's right hand, shews his Body can no more be subject to be Sacrificed or mangled; When these with many Authorities from the Father's are brought, they are forced to fly to some Distinctions by which their Do∣ctrine comes to differ little from ours; but still those high and indecent Expres∣sions remain in their Rituals and Missals, which they are forced to mollifie, as they do those Prayers in which the same things, and in the same manner and words are asked of the Blessed Virgin and the other Saints, which we ask of God. And though they would stretch them to a bare Intercession, which the genuine sense of the words will not bear, yet they will never change them, for it is the standing Maxim of that Church ne∣ver to confess an error, nor make any change to the better. The third Reason against our Orders of Priesthood, is a Repetition of the first, and is already answered. The fourth Argument is, That none can Institute the Form of a Sacrament, to give Grace and make present Christ's Body and Blood, but the Authors of Grace, and those that had power over his Body and Blood; but they that In∣stituted
this Form, had only their Au∣thority from the Parliament; as appears by the Act it self, by which some Pre∣lates and other Learned men being im∣powered, did Invent the Form before mentioned, never before heard of ei∣ther in Scripture or the Church of God. To this I Answer. First, It is certain the Writer of this Paper did never think it would have been seen by any body that could examine it, but intended only to impose on some Il∣literate persons; otherwise he would ne∣ver have said that a Form which Christ himself used when he ordained his Apo∣stles, and which is used in their own Church as the proper Form of Ordina∣tion, was never before heard of in the Scripture or the Church of God. Secondly, Those who compiled the Liturgy and Ordinal, had no other Au∣thority from the Parliament than Holy and Christian Princes did before give in the like cases. It is a common place and has been handled by many Writers; How far the Civil Magistrate may make Laws and give Commands about Sacred things? 'Tis known what Orders David and Solomon, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah and Iosiah, gave in such cases, They divided
the Priests into several Courses, gav1 Chro. 23. 6. 1 Chro. 24. 19.  Kings 2. 27. 2 Chro. 17. 7, 8, 9. 2 Chro. 29. 4. 5. 15. & 27. Vers. 30. 2 Chro. 30. 2. Rules for their attendance, turned out  High Priest and put another in his stead▪ sent the Priests over the Cities to teach the People; gathered the Priests and comman∣ded them to Sanctifie themselves, and the house of the Lord, and offer Sacrifices o the Altar. And gave orders about the Forms of their Worship, that they should praise God in the words of David and Asaph: and gave orders about the time  observing the Passover, that in a case o Necessity it might be observed on the se∣cond Month; though by their Law it w to be kept the first Month. And for the Christian Emperors, let the Code or the Novels, or the Capitulars of Charles the Great, be read, and in them many Law will be found about the Qualification▪ Elections, and Consecrations of Church-men made by the best of all the Roman Emperors, such as Constantine, Theod▪ sius, &c. They called Councils to jud of the greatest points of Faith, which met and sate on their Writ, whose de∣terminations they confirmed, and added the Civil Sanction to them. And even Pope Leo, though a higher spiriteEp. 43. Pope than any of his Predecessors were did intreat the Emperor Martian to an∣nul the second Council of Ephesus, an
to give order that the Ancient Decrees of the Council of Nice should remain in Force. Now it were a great Scandal on those Councils to say, that they had no Authority for what they did, but what they derived from the Civil Powers; So it is no less unjust to say, because the Parliament Impowered some Persons to draw Forms for the more pure Admini∣stration of the Sacraments; and Enacted that these only should be lawfully exer∣cised in this Realm, which is the Civil Sanction; that therefore these persons had no other Authority for what they did: Let those men declare upon their Consciences if there be any thing they desire more earnestly than such an Act for Authorizing their own Forms and would they make any Scruple to accept of it, if they might have it: Was it ever heard of that the Civil Sanction which only makes any constitution to have the force of a Law, gives it another Autho∣rity than a Civil one; and such Authori∣ty the Church of Rome thinks fit to ac∣cept of in all States and Kingdoms of that Religion. Thirdly, The Prelates and other Divines that compiled our Forms of Or∣dination, did it by vertue of the autho∣rity they had from Christ, as Pastors of
his Church which did empower them to teach the people the pure Word of God, and to administer the Sacraments and perform all other holy Functions accor∣ding to the Scripture; the practice of the Primitive Church, and the rules of Ex∣pediency and Reason; and this they ought to have done though the Civil Powers had opposed it; in which case their duty had been to have submitted to whatever severities or persecutions they might have been put to for the Name of Christ, and the Truth of his Gospel. But on the other hand, when it pleased God to turn the hearts of those that had the chief Power, to set forward this good Work, then they did (as they ought) with all Thankfulness, acknow∣ledg so great a Blessing, and accept and improve the Authority of the Civil Powers for adding the Sanction of a Law to the Reformation, in all the parts and branches of it. So by the authority they derived from Christ, and the War∣rant they had from Scripture and the Primitive Church, these Prelates and Divines, made those Alterations and Changes in the Ordinal; and the King and the Parliament, who are vested with the Supream Legislative Power, added their Authority to them to make
them Obligatory on the Subjects. Which is all that is imported by the word Lawful in the Act of Parliament; the ordinary use whereof among Lawyers, is, A thing according to Law. The th. Argument against the Va∣lidity of our Priestly Orders, is, That we have them from those that are not Bishops; which carries him to the next Conclusion, that our Bishops are not Bishops. But before I follow him to that, I must desire you would consider with how much disingenuity this Paper is framed, that would impose on the easy Reader the belief of our first Refor∣mers not being true Bishops, when the Writer cannot but know that Arch Bi∣shop Cranmer was a Bishop as truly Con∣secrated and Invested, as any of the Ro∣man Church were, and was confirmed by the Pope, who sent him the Pall, and to satisfy you that they knew him to be such, they degraded him with the usu∣all Ceremonies before his Martyrdom. So that he being the Fountain of our Clergy that succeeded him, and be∣ing truly Consecrated himself, all those he Ordained, are by the doctrine of the Church of Rome, Bishops or Priests, since Orders according to their Doctrine
leave an Indelible Character, which can never be taken away. So that by their Principles no following sentence could deprive him of the power of Ordaining. It is true, there were many disorderly practices of some Popes in the latter Ages, in annulling Orders and re-ordain∣ing those ordained by others; for Pope Urban the second appointed those who were ordained Simoniacally, to be re-or∣dained. And Stephen the 4th. in a Sy∣nod, Decreed that all the Ordinations his predecessor Pope Constantine had made, were null and void, because he from a Layman was chosen a Pope, and though he passed through the Intermedial degrees of Priest and Deacon, yet he stopt not so long in them, as was appoin∣ty by the Canons, and upon the same ac∣count it was also judged, that Photius (the Learned Patriarch of Constantino∣ple, who in six days went through all the Ecclesiastical Decrees, from a Layman to a Patriarch) had no power of Ordain∣ing lawfully, and all the Orders he gave, were annulled by Pope Nicolaus. And to mention no more, the Orders given by Pope Formosus, were annulled by his Successor Pope Stephen the 6th. upon the pretence of some Crimes and Irregu∣larities with which he was charged; these
practices as they gave great Scandal, so they gave occasion to much disputing about the Legality and Canonicalness of these proceedings, for the Canonists and Schoolmen being generally very igno∣rant, and prepossessed with an opinion of the Popes Infallibility, studied to flatter the Court of Rome, all that was possible. Yet on the other hand there was so much to be said against these proceedings, that as appears by Petrus Damiani, Auxilius, and other Writers of that time, there was great perplexity and many different Opinions about them. But the ignorance and pas∣sion of those Ages appears evidently in this particular, for there is nothing more manifest than that the Ancient Church was of another opinion; and as in the debate between Pope Stephen and Saint Cyprian about the re-baptizing of Here∣tiques, the constant opinion and pra∣ctice of the following Ages, was against re-baptizing such as were baptized by those Heretiques who retained the essen∣tials of Baptism: So by the same parity of reason, and upon the same Arguments they held the Ordinations of Heretiques valid, that retained the essentials of Or∣dination. In the case of Heretiques we have these
Instances, Faelix was consecrated BishopAth. Ep. ad Solit. Bar. ad An. 355. n. 56, 57. Bar. ad An. 357. n. 63, 64. of Rome by the Arians in the room of Liberius, whose banishment they had procured, and yet he was acknowledged a righteous Pope, and his Ordinations were accounted valid. In the General Council of Ephesus the Priests of the Messalian Heresie were appointed to be received into the Church, and continue Priests upon renouncing their Heresie. The same was also granted to Nestorians, Pelagians, Eutychians, Monothelites, and divers other Heretiques, as MorinusCap. 10, 11. Exerc. 5. proves at length. And at this day though the Greek Church is condemned by the Roman, as Heretical in the point of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, yet they are received according to their Orders into their Communion when they re∣nounce their Heresie. And their greatDisp. 141. cap. 1. Vasques says, that all the Schoolmen and Summists agree, that an heretical Excom∣municate or suspended Bishop has still the power of giving Orders, for which he cites many Schoolmen; and he like∣wiseN. 8. proves, that a Bishop after degra∣dation retains the same power: And the case of Schismaticks is no less clear, for to wave the Decision of the Council of Nice (which seems somewhat dubious) in the case of the Novatian Ordinations
we find frequently in St. Austins Trea∣tises and Conferences with the Donatists,Collat. 2. cum Donat. & Ep. 50. that they offered to them, if they would return to the Unity of the Church, to receive them according to their Orders. So that they did not think Schism did take away the power of giving Orders. And in the case of that long and scanda∣lous Schism of the Papacy for fifty years together, when the one sat at Rome and the other at Avignon, though beside their Schism, Depositions, Excommunica∣tions and Censures of all sorts passed on both sides by each of those Popes against the other, and it must be confessed that one of them was the Schismatick, and by consequence the Censures fell justly on him; Yet both their Ordinations were held valid, and when the matter was setled at the Council of Constance, the Ordinations on no side were annulled or renewed. And though Petrus de Lu∣nay who was called Benedict the 13th. refused to submit to them and lay down his pretensions as the others did, yet when Sect. 3. they gave sentence against him, there is not a word in it of annulling Or∣ders given by him. From all which it fol∣lows, that neither the pretence of Heresie, Schism, nor Censures will according to the practice either of the Primitive
Church, or of the Church of Rome even in these latter Ages, be of any force to invalidate our Orders. Which was well seen by Morinus; and though he does not write upon this head with so much ingenuity, as he does on other points; yet he lays this down as a Maxim, That all the Ordinations of a He∣retiquesCap. 8. Exer. 5. num. 7. and Schismatiques made ac∣cording the forms of the Church, and where the Heretiques that gave them were also rightly Ordained according to the forms of the Church, are valid as to their Substance, and are not to be repeated though they be unlawful; and both he that gave, and he that received them, sinned grievously; nor is it in any case lawful for a Catholick to receive Orders from Here∣tiques or Schismatiques; Therefore in those Ordinations, if all other things be done according to the form of the Church, and only the Crime of Heresie be charged on the Orders given, the substance of it is not thereby vitiated, but there is a perfect and entire Character begotten, on∣ly the use of it is forbidden; yet he that neglects that Interdict, though he becomes very guilty, begets a new Character on the person Ordained by him: Therefore Here∣tiques or Schismatiques so Ordained, need no new Ordination, but only a Reconcilia∣tion;
and what is said of Heretiques and Schismatiques, does hold much more of those who are Ordained by persons that are Excommunicated, deposed or degraded. And for those things that are essential to Ordination, enough has been said al∣ready to demonstrate what they be; to which I shall only add what that Author the most learned of all that ever treated of this Subject, says in the beginning of the next Chapter. In the Rite of Holy Ordination, there are some things of Di∣vine Institution and Tradition, which do always and in all places belong to holy Or∣ders; such as Imposition of hands, and a convenient Prayer which the Scripture has delivered, and the universal practice of the Church has confirmed. Now these our Church has retained; and therefore from all that has been said, I may with good reason conclude that all the Ordi∣nations that were derived from Arch∣Bishop Cranmer, having (as has been already shewed) the essentials of Ordi∣nation; and being done with the due numbers of Ordainers (as can be pro∣ved Authentically from the publick Re∣gisters) must be good and valid. And though we have separated from many er∣rors and corruptions of the Church of Rome, and in particular have thrown
out many superstitious Rites out of the Forms of Ordination, that we might re∣duce these to a primitive simplicity; yet as we acknowledg the Church of Rome holds still the fundamentals of the Chri∣stian Religion; so we confess she retains the essentials of Ordination, which are the separating of persons for sacred em∣ployments, and the authorizing them with an Imposition of hands, and a Prayer for the effusion of the Holy Ghost; therefore we do not annul their Orders, but receive such as come from that Church, and look on them as true Priests by the Ordination they got among them, and such were our first Refor∣mers, from whom we have derived our Ordination. Having followed this Paper through the first Conclusion, and the Arguments brought to confirm it; I come now to the second; which is, That our Bishops are not true Bishops. For which his first Argument is, That our Bishops being no Priests, they can be no Bishops. This he thinks he has already proved, therefore he sets himself to prove that none can be a Bishop till he be first a Priest: About this I shall not dispute much; for we acknowledg that Regularly and Canonically it must be
so, and assert that ours were truly such; therefore we need not contend further about this; though he must be very ig∣norant of Antiquity if he does not know that there are divers instances in Church History of Laymen, nay, and Catechu∣mens chosen Bishops; and we do not find those Intermedial steps were made of ordaining them first Deacons and then Priests, but by what appears to us, they at once made them Bishops. But I shall wave this, only I must put this Author in mind of a great Oversight he is guilty of, when he goes about to prove our Bishops not to be true Bishops, because they were not true Priests: Does he not know that Bishop Ridley, and the o∣ther Bishops of King Edward's days, were Ordained Priests by the Rites of the Church of Rome. And this was acknow∣ledged by themselves, when they degrad∣ed them at Oxford, before they suffered; if those then were Priests, this is no Argument why they might not be Bishops: For in this matter, that which we ought to en∣quire into most carefully, is what they were; for if they were both Priests and Bishops, and if the Forms by which they ordained others, retained all the essen∣tial Requisites, then we who are derived from them, are also true Priests and Bi∣shops.
His second Argument is, No Ordina∣tion is valid, unless there be fit words used to determine the outward Rites, to signifie the Order given, which he says our own Writers (Mr. Mason and Dr. Bramhall) do acknowledg. But the words of Consecration do not ex∣press this, they being only, Take the Holy Ghost, and remember that thou stir up the Grace, &c. which do not express the office of a Bishop; and having proposed these Arguments, that the unlearned Reader may think he deals fairly, he goes on to set down our Objections, and answer them. First, It has been already made out that the Form, Receive the Holy Ghost, was that which our Saviour made use of when he ordained the Apostles, without adding, To the office of an Apo∣stle. For which it is to be considered, that all Ecclesiastical Orders being from the influence and operation of the Holy Ghost, which being one, yet hath dif∣ferent1 Cor. 12. 5, 6. Operations for the different Admi∣nistrations; therefore the concomitant Actions, Words and Circumstances must shew, for which Administration the Holy Ghost is prayed for, since that general Prayer is made for all; but the Functions being different, the same Holy
Ghost works differently in them all. Therefore it is plain from the practice of our Saviour, that there is no need of ex∣pressing in the very words of Ordina∣tion, what power is thereby given since our Saviour did not express it, but what he had said both before and after, did determine the sense of those general words to the Apostolical Function. Secondly, The whole Office of Con∣secrating Bishops, shews very formally and expresly what power is given in these words. Now though the Writers of the Church of Rome, would place the Form of Consecration in some Imperative words; yet we see no reason for that, but the complex of the whole Office is that which is to be chiefly considered, and must determine the sense of those words; So that a Priest being presented to be made a Bishop, the King's Mandate being read for that effect, he swearing Cano∣nical obedience as Bishop Elect, Prayers being put up for him as such, together with other circumstances which make it plain what they are about; those general words are by these qualified and restrain∣ed to that sense. We do not fly here to a secret and un∣known Intention of the Consecrators, as the Church of Rome does, but to the
open and declared intention of the Church appearing in this: So that it is clear that the sense of those general words is so well explained, that they do sufficiently express and give the power and office of a Bishop. Thirdly, In the Church of Rome the Consecration of a Bishop is made with these words, Receive the Holy Ghost. This being all that is said at the Imposi∣tion of hands, which as has been already proved, is the matter or sensible sign of Orders. And in the Prayer that follows these words, there is no mention made of the Episcopal Dignity or Function, and all the other Ceremonies used in the Consecration of a Bishop, are but Rites that are added for the more Solemnity, but are not of the essence of Ordination according to what is now most generally received, even in their own Church. And Vasques does set down this very ObjectionDisp. 240. c. 5. n. 60. against the form of their Episcopal Ordi∣nation, as not sufficient, because it does not specify the Episcopal power; to which he answers, that though the words express it not, yet the other circumstances that accompany them do it sufficiently; by which it appears that this Argument is as strong against their Ordination as ours; and that they must make use of
the same Answers that we give to it. Fourthly, The ancient Forms of Con∣secrating Bishops, differing so much one from another, and indeed agreeing in no∣thing but in an Imposition of hands, with a convenient Prayer; it has been already made out that there is no particular Form so necessary, that the want of it annuls Orders, and that the Church has often changed the words of these Prayers upon several occasions, and it was ever thought that if the words do sufficiently express the mind of the Church, there was no more scruple to be made of the validity of the Orders so given; for if the Episcopal Character were begotten by any of those Rites which the Church of Rome has ad∣ded of late such as the Chrism, the giving the Gospels, the Ring, the Staff, or any other set down in the Pontifical, then there were no true Bishops in the Church for many Ages. In the most Ancient Latin Ritual now to be found, there is nothing in the Consecration of a Bishop, but the Prayer which is now marked for the Anthem after the Consecration in the Pontifical. In a Ritual believed to beDeus Hono∣rum omni∣um 7. 800 year old, the anointing is first to be found, but there is no other Rite with it in another Ritual somwhat later than the former; the giving the Ring and the
Staff, were used, which at first were the Ci∣vil Ceremonies of Investiture, and in the Greek Church, none of those Rites were ever▪ used, they having only an Impositi∣on of hands, and saying with it, The Divine Grace that heals the things that are weak and perfects the things that imperfect; pro∣motes this very Reverend Priest to be  Bishop: Let us therefore pray that the grace of the Holy Ghost may come upon him, then all that are assisting, say thrice, Kyrie Eleison. Then the Consecrato lays the Gospels on the head and neck of him that is Consecrated, having before Signed his head thrice with the sign of the Cross; and all the other Bishop touch the Gospels, and there is a Prayer said. And thus it is clear, that if those Rites in the Pontifical be essential to Epi∣scopal Orders, neither the Primitive Church nor the Greek Churches gave them truly, which are things they can∣not admit: Therefore it is most dising∣nuously done of them to insinuate  unlearned persons, that our Orders an not good, when in their Conscience they know that they have all those Re∣quisites in them, which by the Principle of the most Learned men of their ow Church, are essentially and absolutely necessary to make them good and valid.
But I go next to see what Ingenuity there is in the Objections which he sets down in our Name against the former Arguments. There is nothing in which any man that writes of Controversie, shews his candor and fair dealing more, than in proposing the Arguments of the adverse party with their full and just weight in them: And it is a piece of Ju∣stice and Moral honesty, to which men are obliged, for to pretend that one brings what may be objected against his Opinion, and then not to set down any strong and material Arguments; but on the contrary, to bring some trifling and ridiculous things that no Learned persons did ever make use of, is to Lye: and really I cannot think the Writer of this Paper has common honesty in him, that will pre∣tend to set down our Objections, and yet passes them over every one. Our Arguments are drawn, 1. From Christ's own practices. 2. From the practice of the Apostles and the Primitive Church. 3. From the practice of the Greek Church at this day. 4. From the Doctrine and the practice of the Church of Rome. These are the Arguments on which our Cause does rest, and upon these Authorities we are ready to put the thing to an Issue. But he was wiser than to mention any of
those, for he knew he could not get of them so well; and therefore that he might deceive those that are ready to take any thing off his hands upon trust, he brings Objections which he knows none of us will make. To the first I need say nothing, having▪ I presume, said enough already, to shew that both our Priestly and Episcopal Or∣ders are good and valid. But his second, is such a piece of fo dealing, that really he deserves to be very sharply reproved for it. In it he makes us object, That though the form of our Ordination since King Edward the 6th▪ his days, till his Majesties happy Restauration was invalid; yet that is sl∣ved by the Parliament that now sits, that appointed the words of Ordination to be, Receive the Holy Ghost, for the Office of a Priest or for the office of a Bishop. And having set up this Man of Straw, he runs unmercifully at him, he stabs him in at the heart, he shoots him through the head, and then to make sure work of him, he cuts him all to pieces that he shall never live nor speak again; and all this out of pure Chivalry to shew his valour. He tells us the Salve is worse than the Sore, that by the change, the Form used before is confessed to be in∣valid,
else why did they change it? He tells us, Secondly, By this we acknow∣ledg all our Bishops and Priests till that time to be null. Thirdly, That they not being true Bishops, cannot Ordain validly, for no man can give what he has not. And fourthly, The power that Act gives, is only from the Parliament and not from Christ; and this destroys our Orders, Root and Branch. So there is an end of us, we are all killed upon the spot, never to live more. Yet there is no harm done, nor blood spilt, all is safe and sound. But to satisfie any per∣son whom such a scruple may trouble. Let it be considered, First, That we pretend not that there is any greater validity in our Orders since the last Act of Uniformity, than was before; for those words that are added are not essential to the Ordination, but only further and clearer Explanations of what was clear enough by the other parts of these Offices before: There∣fore there is no change made of any thing that was essential to our Ordina∣tions, an Explanation is not a change; for did the Fathers of the Councils of Nice and Constantinople change or an∣nul the Faith and Creeds that the Church used before, when they added Expla∣nations
to the Creed. Therefore the adding of some explanatory words for cutting off the occasions of Cavilling, is neither a change nor an annulling our for∣mer Orders. Secondly, The change of the Form of Consecration does not infer an annul∣ling of Orders given another way, for then all the Ordinations used in the Pri∣mitive Church, are annulled by the Ro∣man Church at this day, since the forms of Ordination used by them now, were not used in the former Ages; and the Forms used in the former ages are not looked on by them now to be the Forms of Consecration, but are only made parts of the Office, and used as Collects or Anthems; and yet here is a real change, which by their own Principles cannot infer a nullity of Orders given before the Change made. Thirdly, If the addition of a few ex∣planatory words invalidates former Or∣ders, then the adding many new Rites, which were neither used by Christ nor his Apostles, nor the Primitive nor Eastern Churches, will much more in∣validate former Orders, especially when these are believed to be so essential as that they confer the power of consecra∣ting Christ's Body and Blood, and of
offering Sacrifices, and were for divers Ages universally looked on in that Church to be the Matter and Form of Orders, as was already observed of the Rite of giving the Sacred Vessels with the words joyned to it, which Pope Eu∣genius in express words, calls the matter of Priestly Orders, and the words joyned to them the Form (in his Decree for the Armenians in the Council of Florence) and even the Form he mentions is also al∣tered now, for the celebrating Masses are not in the Form he mentions, but are now added to that part of the Office in the Roman Church. Let the Pontifical be considered, in the Ordination of Priests; we find the Priestly Vestiments given, both the Stole and the Casula, then their hands are anointed, then the Vessels of the Sacrament are delivered to them, with words pronounced in every of those Rites, besides many other lesser Rites that are in the Rubrick. In the Con∣secration of a Bishop, his head is Anoin∣ted, then his hands, then his Pastoral Staff is blessed and put in his hands; next the Ring is blessed, and put on his singer, then the Gospels are put in his hands, then the Mitre is blessed, and put on his head; next the Gloves are blessed, and put on his hands, and then they se
him on his Throne: Besides many lesser Rites to be seen in the Rubrick. Now with what face can they pretend that our adding a few explanatory words, can infer the annulling all Orders given before that addition, when they have added so many material Ceremonies in which they place great significancy and vertue. Is not this to swallow a Camel and to strain at a Gnat, and to object to us a Mote in our eye, when there is a Beam in their own eye. Fourthly, This Addition was indeed confirmed by the authority of Parlia∣ment, and there was good reason to de∣sire that, to give it the force of a Law, but the authority of these changes is wholly to be derived from the Convoca∣tion, who only consulted about them and made them and the Parliament did take that care in the Enacting them, that might shew they did only add the force of a Law to them; for in passing them, it was Ordered that the Book of Common-Prayer and Ordination should only be read over (and even that was carried upon some debate, for many as I have been told, moved that the Book should be added to the Act, as it was sent to the Parliament from the Convocation without ever reading it; but that seemed
indecent and too implicite to others) and there was no change made in a Tittle by the Parliament. So that they only Enacted by a Law what the Convoca∣tion had done. As for what he adds that the Book of Ordination, is not to found in every Edition of the Common-Prayer-Book, with his gloss upon it, that most think the Bishops for shame suppress it. Really the Writer of this Paper must pardon me, to say, it seems he has no shame, that can set down in writing such a disinge∣nious Allegation: Pray who are these most that think so? [Most] in our Lan∣guage stands for the [greater part] now how many can he find that agree with him in this Gloss? I doubt, very few; for I am sure, not all his own Party, and not one of ours. So that upon a Cal∣culation those Most think will be found to be no more but himself and a very few ignorant persons on whom he has imposed this conceit. Every body knows that when a Book is once printed by publick Authority, and universally sold in the Shops, those in Authority cannot out of shame study to suppress it. But the use of the Book of Ordi∣nation not being so universal as are the other Offices of the Church; the Sta∣tioners
and Printers, who do chiefly con∣sider their Interest in the ready sale and vent of Books, do not print so many of them as of the other, there being at least 500 that use the Common-Prayer, for one that needs the other, and a Com∣mon-Prayer-Book without it, will sell cheaper than with it; therefore a great many Copies have it not. This is not as Most think, but as every body knows, the true reason why in many Copies of the Common-Prayer-Book, the Ordi∣nal is wanting. Let him name one Bi∣shop that would not permit it to be dis∣persed abroad or let him be looked on as a bold and impudent Slanderer. Thus far I have followed this Paper in the two first Conclusions; and now I come to the Third; which is, That Protestant Ministers and Bishops have no power to Preach, &c. from Christ, but only from the Parliament. And this he proves, because they have no more power than the first Protestant Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker had, from whom all Jurisdiction was derived to the rest; Now he had no power from Christ; for first, They that Consecrated him had no such Ju∣risdiction, being no actual Bishops, two of them were only Elect and not actual
Bishops, and a third only a quondam Bi∣shop, but had no actual Jurisdiction, and a fourth was a Suffragan Bishop to Can∣terbury, who had no Jurisdiction but what he had from the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, much less Authority to give him Jurisdiction over himself and all the other Bishops of the Land, because none can give what he has not. This I must confess is such a piece, that no man can read it but he must con∣clude the Writer of it has no sort of Ecclesiastical Learning, or else has very little Moral honesty. I need not tell him that Matthew Parker was not the first Protestant Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; he knows Arch-Bishop Cranmer was both a Protestant and Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury; but this may be easily passed over, there being more material Errors in this period. And First, Does he believe himself, when he says that none can instal a Bishop in a Jurisdiction above himself? Pray then who invests the Popes with their Jurisdiction? Do not the Cardinals do it, and are not they as much the Popes Suf∣fragans as Hodgskins was Canterburi. So that if inferiors cannot invest one with a superior Jurisdiction, then the Popes can have none legally, since they
have theirs from the Cardinals that are inferior in Jurisdiction. This also holds in all the Patriarchal Consecrations. For Instance, when Iohn commonly called Chrysostome, a Priest of Antioch, was cho∣sen Patriarch of Constantinople, and Con∣secrated by the Bishops of that Province according to the Canons, if there be any force in this Argument, it will annul his Orders as well as Arch-Bishop Parker's, for the Writer must needs see the case is parallel. Secondly, Or if he insists upon their being Elect to others Sees, and that one of them had no See at all. Let me ask him, if when St. Athanase was banished out of Alexandria, and others thrust in his place; or when Liberius was banished out of Rome, and Felix (whom they acknowledg a righteous Bishop) put in his place, they had ordained Priests and Bishops had these Orders been null, be∣cause they were violently thrust out of their Sees? Certainly Persecution and Violence rather makes the glory of Ec∣clesiastical Functions shine more brightly, but cannot be imagined to strip them of their Character, and to disable them for exercising the Offices of their function. Thirdly, There are two things to be considered in the consecration of a Pri∣mate,
the one is the giving him the Or∣der of a Bishop, the other is the investing him with the Jurisdiction of a Metropo∣litan, for the former, all Bishops are equal in Order, none has more or less than another: therefore any Bishop duly Con∣secrated, how mean soever his Diocess be, is no less a Bishop than the greatest; the Bishop of Man is a Bishop as well as the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; so that the Consecrators of Matthew Parker be∣ing Bishops by their Order, they had sufficient power and authority to Con∣secrate him. By which it appears there can be no question made of his being tru∣ly a Bishop. And as for his Jurisdi∣ction: Two things are also to be con∣sidered; the one is, The Jurisdiction annexed to that See. The other is his being rightly cloathed and invested with it. For the former it cannot be denied but the Jurisdiction of Metropo∣litans, Primates, and Patriarchs, has no Divine Institution: for all that any Bi∣shop has by divine Institution, is to seed the flock of his own Diocess, but the Ca∣nons and practice of the Church and the Civil Laws, have introduced a further Jurisdiction over the Bishops of a District or Province; this did rise by Custom upon the division of the Provinces of
the Roman Empire, and was settled over the World before any general Council did meet to make Decrees about it: And therefore the Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, only approved what they found practi∣sed, and confirmed some new Divi∣sions of Provinces, that were made by the Emperors; and so the Kings in the Western Church did first give those Pre∣heminences to some Towns and Sees; for the original Dignity of Sees rose out of the Dignity of the Towns, which appears clearly in all the Patriarchats, chiefly in that of Rome and Constantinople. This is a thing so fully inquired into by many, but chiefly by the most Learned Petrus de Marca Arch-Bishop of Paris,De Concor. Imp. & Sa∣cer. that I need say no more of it. And the Dignity of the See of Canterbury was from King Ethelbert, who first Erected that See. It is true, the Popes did af∣terwards usurp a new Jurisdiction over all Churches; they took upon them to Judg of the Dignity of all Sees, to send the Pall, to have reserved Cases, to grant Exemptions to the Regulars, with many other Encroachments on the Epi∣scopal Jurisdiction, which has been very fully inquired into, not only by Prote∣stant Writers, but by many of the Ro∣man
Communion, chiefly those of the Gallicane Church, and many of the Bi∣shops at the Council of Trent, studied to recover their Liberties that were troden under foot by the Court of Rome, but the Intrigues and cunning of that Court were too hard for them. The other thing in Episcopal Institu∣tion, is the Installing or Inthroning the Metropolitan, that this was always done by the Bishops of the Province, is a thing so clear in Antiquity, that I am sure no man ever questioned it. Was not the famous Decision of the Council of Ephesus in the case of the Cypriotic Bishops a full proof of this, when uponAction.  the pretension of the Patriarch of An∣tioch, the thing was examined, and it was found that he had never used to Ordain Bishops there; and therefore the Rites of the Bishop of Constantia the Metropolitan were confirmed to him by that General Council: nor can one Instance be shewed in the first three Ages of a Me∣tropolitan coming to be Ordained by a Patriarch, as was afterwards for Orders sake appointed. And this appears moreCan.  evidently by a Canon of the Council of Orleans, where it was decreed, That in the Ordination of Metropolitans the An∣cient Custom should be renewed, which
was generally neglected and lost, that a Metropolitan being Elected by the Bishops of the Province with the Clergy, and the People, should be Ordained by all the Bishops of the Province met together; This was Anno 538. By which we see they thought not of any Bull or Confirmation from Rome, but that Bishops, though subject to the Metropolitan's Jurisdiction, might Ordain him. It is true, afterwards the Patriarchs chose the Metropolitans, but the Pa∣triarchs were either chosen, or at least confirmed by the Emperor; and though they sent Circulatory Letters to the Pope and the other Patriarchs to confirm their Elections (which the Bishops of Rome did likewise to them) this was only for keeping up the Unity of the Church, and for a more friendly and brotherly Cor∣respondence, but was not of necessity or as an homage which they owed the Pope; much less did they delay their Consecra∣tions till they obtained his Mandate, or abstain from any Act of Jurisdiction till they had his Confirmation, as is now appointed by the Pontifical, till they gete Pallio. the Pall. I have not given you the trouble of enlarging on many Proofs for making these things out, for they are so clear and uncontested, that I am con∣fident
no man is so disingenuous as to deny them under his hand, whatever some may whisper among illiterate persons who cannot contradict them. And though there has been so much already written to make those particulars out, that more needs not, and indeed cannot be said; yet if these things be questioned by any body, I shall make them out fully. And now I come to his Second Argu∣ment; which is, That Matthew Parker (and all the other Protestant Bishops since his days) had his power of Juris∣diction only from the Queen, as appears by the Queens Letters Patents, and the Form of his Ordination, which was done upon the Queens Mandate without any Bull from the Pope (in which she acknowledges Cardinal Pool to have been a righteous Arch-Bishop; and so confesses Catholick Ordination and Ju∣risdiction to be lawful, valid, and good) which was necessary by the Laws of England; as appears from her Mandate in which she supplies any Defects they might have been under. Now all the Autho∣rity the Queen had, flowed from the Parliament, which annexed all Juris∣diction Spiritual or Temporal over the Ecclesiastical State of this Realm to the Crown, by which they made her Pope:
So that by the very words of the Act, Matthew Parker had his Jurisdiction from the Queen, and she hers from the Parlia∣ment: Therefore the Protestant Priests and Bishops are only Parliamentary Priests and Bishops, and are not from Christ and his Church, but from their Kings, Queen, and Parliaments. Here is such a heap of things so un∣justly and weakly said, that it must needs grieve all honest men to see a com∣pany of Priests going up and down the Kingdom studying to abuse weak and unlearned persons with such disingenuous Stories or Writings. Which I hope will appear more fully if you consider the fol∣lowing particulars. First, It is certain that King and Par∣liament have the Supream Legislative Au∣thority in this Realm; and this they have from the Laws of God, Nature, and Society, confirmed by the Gospel which commands us to be subject to the Higher Powers. Therefore whatever they En∣act that is within the Limits of their Ju∣risdiction, is Law; and if it be not sin∣ful, is to be obeyed; if it be sinful, it is to be submitted to. For instance, if they set up a false Religion by Law, it does not make it a true Religion, but adds the sanction of Law, and is the civil
Warrant and Security for the Subject, therefore the Civil Power cannot change the nature of things to make Good Evil, or Evil Good; but only gives Authority and Security; and in this they are restrained in things Civil as well as Spiritual, for if they make unjust Laws in Civil things, the case is the same with their unjust Laws about Spirituals. Therefore it is to be concluded as the Fundamental Maxim of Civil Govern∣ment, that whatever may be done lawfully and without Sin, ought to be done when the Supream Civil Au∣thority commands it, and that the Sub∣jects ought to obey. Secondly, Whosoever is empower∣ed by the King and Parliament to exe∣cute this their Supream Authority, has a full Right and Title to apply that Power so given or committed to him, having the execution of that Law put in his hands; and if any shall with∣out their Warrant or Authority from them usurp, or assume any sort of Power or Jurisdiction within this King∣dom, they are Intruders and Usurpers, and the success they have in it does no more justifie that Force than a Robber's does his Title to Goods un∣justly taken. And although some weak
Princes in hard times did yield it up to the Pope; yet both the Clergy them∣selves and the Parliaments, did of∣ten assert their own Authority, which was most eminently done by King Ed∣ward the First, and King Edward the Third; So that the Popes power here had no just Title but was a violent Invasion; for that they neither had it from Christ nor Saint Peter, nor by any Decree of General Councils; and that for 800 years after Christ it was never allowed them: that they never had it in the Eastern Churches, and that what they had in the Western Churches was only extorted by force and fraud from the Princes and States of Europe, and that they had no Law for it in England, are things so certain, that for proof of this, I shall refer my self to the Writers of their own Church, De Marca, Launoy, and Balusius, with many others. And at this very day the Pope has neither more nor less pow∣er in the other Kingdoms of Europe, than the Connivence of Princes or the Laws give him: Therefore the Pope had no power in England but what was unjustly usurped from the King and Parliament. Thirdly, When the Supream Au∣thority
the King and Parliament have long endured an Encroachment upon them, that gives no just Title to it, nor hin∣ders them from asserting their own Rights when they find a fit opportunity for it, and neither devests them of their Authority nor the Subjects of their due Rights and Freedoms: Therefore the Government of the Kingdom and all the exercise of coercive Jurisdiction being inseparably annexed to the Su∣pream Authority; it was incumbent on them to shake off all Forrein Juris∣dict: they should have done it sooner but could never do it too soon. Fourthly, The King and Parliament asserting their Authority in this Parti∣cular, and condemning the Popes Usur∣pations, they might commit the execution of it to whom they would: There∣fore they putting it into the Queens hands and her Successors, she had a good Right to exercise it, having a Law for it. This then being annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm by the Supream Authority of King and Par∣liament, the King hath the power of exercising it fully and only in his hands, and is to be obeyed in all his Injun∣ctions (that are not sinful) by the Laws of the Supream Authority in this
Kingdom which comes from God, and is confirmed by the Gospel. Fifthly, Though the power of the Ministers of the Gospel comes only from Christ, yet the exercise of that Power and this or that person being put in this or that Living or Prefer∣ment, and having the right to the Tythes, and all the Jurisdiction of the Spiritual and Prerogative Courts, be∣ing things not appointed in the Go∣spel, the King having the Supremacy over the Ecclesiastical State, does not exceed his Limits when he reserves to himself such power that no person shall be vested with the Legal Autho∣rity for those things, but by his know∣ledg or upon his Order. It is true, he cannot make a man a Bishop or a Priest, nor can he take away Orders, for if Bishops should Ordain or Con∣secrate without or against his plea∣sure, he may proceed against both the Ordainers and Ordained, and can hin∣der their exercising any Function in his Dominions by Banishing or Im∣prisoning them, but he cannot de∣stroy or annul their Orders. So that the power of Ordination comes from Christ, and has a Spiritual Effect, what∣ever opposition the King may make,
but the exercise of that power must be had from him. If the King com∣mands an Heretick or a Scandalous person to be Elected or Ordained, Churchmen may well demur and offer their reasons why they cannot give O∣bedience, not for the want of Autho∣rity in the King, but because the mat∣ter is Morally evil: As they must also do, if the King should command them, to commit Theft or Murther. So that all Consecrations in this Land are made by Bishops, by the power that is inherent in them, only the King gives orders for the execution of that their power: Therefore all that the Queen did in the Case of Matthew Parker, and the Kings do since, was to command so many Bishops to exercise a power they had from Christ in such or such instances, which command was just and good, if the persons to be Ordained were so qualified as they ought to have been according to the Scrip∣tures. Sixthly, Though the Command were unjust, yet that cannot be imagined a sufficient ground to annul the Ordina∣tion, for otherwise all the Ordinations appointed by the Anti-Popes of Avignon were null, since done upon Mandates
from a false Pope who had not power, which will annul all the Ordinations of the Gallicane Church which did sub∣mit to these Popes. And yet this can∣not be admitted by the Church of Rome. unless they also annul all the Eastern Bi∣shops; for the Patriarch of Constantinople is made by order from the Grand Signi∣or, and is upon that installed. If this therefore invalidates our Ordinations, it will do theirs much more, except they will allow a greater power to the Turk than to the King. So that this at most might prove the Church to be under an unjust violence, but cannot infer an in∣validating of Acts so done: therefore if Matthew Parker was duely consecrated, though it was done upon the Queens Mandate, he was a true and lawful Bi∣shop. For let me suppose another case parallel to this: if the Clergy should resolve they will no more administer the Sacraments upon the pretence perhaps of Interdicts, Censures, or some such thing. And the Prince or State commands them to administer the Sacraments (as was done by the Venetians in the time of the Interdict, and by many Kings in the like cases) can it be pretended that the Sacra∣ments they administer upon such Com∣mands are not the Sacraments of Christ,
but only of the King. So in like manner Orders given upon the Kings Mandate by persons empowered to it by Christ and the Church, are true Orders, even though the Mandate for them were unjust, tyrannical, and illegal. Seventhly, Besides all that has been said, it is to be considered, that the power of choosing Bishops was in all Ages thought at most a mixed thing in which Laymen as well as Church∣men, had a share. It is well enough known, that for the first three Centu∣ries, the Elections were made by the people, and the Bishops that came to assist in those Elections did confirm their Choice and Consecrate the per∣son by them Elected. Now whatever is a Right of the people they can by Law transfer it on another. So in our case the people of this Realm, having in Parlia∣ment annexed the power of choosing Bi∣shops to the Crown, by which their Right is now in the King's person; Consecrations upon his Nomination must either be good and valid, or all the Consecrations of the first ages of the Church shall likewise be annulled, since he has now as good a Right to name the persons that are to be Consecrated, as the people then had. It is true, the Tumults and other dis∣scandal
orders in those Elections, brought great scandal on the Church, and so they were taken away and Synodical Ele∣ctions were set up; but as the former Ordinations were good before these were set up, so it cannot be said that these are indispensibly necessary, other∣wise there are no good Ordinations at at this day in the Church of Rome; these being all now put down, the Pope having among his other Usurpa∣tions taken that into his own hands. Eighthly, It is also known how much Christian Princes, Emperors and Kings, in all ages and places, have medled in the Election of Bishops; I need not tell how a Synod desired Valentinian to choose a Bishop at Millan when Saint Ambrose was chosen, nor how Theodosius chose Nectarius to be Pa∣triarch of Constantinople, even when the second General Council was sitting. Nor need I tell the Law Iustinian made, that there should be Three pre∣sented to the Emperor in the Elections of the Patriarch, and he should choose one of them. These things are gene∣rally known, and I need not insist on them. It is true, as there followed great confusions in the Greek Empire till it was quite over-run and destroyed; so there
was scarce any one thing in which there was more doing and undoing than in the Election of the Patriarchs, the Em∣perors often did it by their own Au∣thority; Synodal Elections were also often set up, at length the Emperors brought it to that, that they delivered the Pastoral Staff to the Bishop by which he was invested in his Patriar∣chat; but it was never pretended nei∣ther by the Latin Church nor by the contrary Factions in the Greek Church that Orders so given were Null. And yet the Emperors giving the Investi∣ture with his own hand, is a far grea∣ter thing than our King's granting a Mandate for Consecrating and investingTit. 17. Rit. Elec. Patr. them. For proof of this about the Greek Church, I refer it to Habert who has given a full Deduction of the E∣lections in that Church, from the days of the Apostles to the last Age. For the Latin Church, the Matter has been so oft examined, that it is to no purpose to spend much time aboutIn vita Silverii▪ it. It is known and confessed by Pla∣tina, that the Emperors Authority in∣terveened when the Popes were crea∣ted. And Onuphrius tells, that by a De∣creeIn Plat. in Pelag. 2. of Vigilius the Custom had got in, that the Elected Pope should not
be Consecrated till the Emperor had confirmed it, and had by his Letters Patents given the Elect Pope leave to be Ordained, and that Licence was ei∣ther granted by the Emperors them∣selves or by their Lieutenants [or Ex∣archs] at Ravenna: And One and twenty Popes were thus Consecrated, Pelagius the second only excepted, who being chosen during the Siege of Rome, did not stay for it, but he sent Gregory (afterwards Pope) to excuse it to the Emperor, who was offended with it: it continued thus till the days of Constantine, called Pogonatus, who first remitted it to Benedict the second, and the truth of it was, the power of the Greek Emperors was then fallen so low in Italy, that no wonder he parted with it. But so soon as the Em∣pire was again set up in the West by Charles the Great, Pope Adrian with a Synod, gave him the power of crea∣tingDist. 63. the Pope (as is set down in the very Canon Law it self) and of inve∣sting all other Arch-Bishops and Bishops and an Anathema was pronounced a∣gainst any that should Consecrate a Bi∣shop that was not named and invested by him. This is likewise told by Pla∣tinaIn Pasch. 1. out of Anastasius. It is true,
though some Popes were thus chosen, yet the weakness of Charles the Great's Son, and the divisions of his Children, with the degeneracy of that whole Race served the ends of the growing power of the Papacy. Yet Lewis laid it down not as an Usurpation, but as a Right of which he devested himself, but his Son Lothaire re-assumed it, and did confirm divers Popes, and Anastasius tells that they durst not Con∣secrateIn Leo. 4. the Pope without the Imperial Authority, and the thing was still kept up at least in a shadow till Hadrian the Third, who appointed that the Em∣perors Concurrence or Licence should not be thought necessary in the creating of a Pope. And from Hadrian the First, who dyed Anno 795. till Hadrian the Third, there were 89 years; and from Vigilius his days, who dyed Anno 555. there were 330 years. So long were the Popes made upon the Emperors Mandates. Nor did the Em∣perors part easily with this Right, but after that the Otho's and the Henry's kept up their Pretension, and came oft to Rome and made many Popes, and though most of the Popes so made were generally reckoned Anti-Popes and Schis∣maticks, yet some of them, as Clement
the Second, are put in the Catalogue of the Popes by Baronius and Binnius, and by the late publishers of the Coun∣cils Labbee and Cossartius: There was in∣deed great Opposition made to this at Rome; but let even their own Histo∣rians be appealed to, what a Series of Monsters and not Men, those Popes were; how infamously they were E∣lected, often by the Whores of Rome, and how flagitious they were, we refer it to Barronius himself, who could not deny this for all his partiality in his great Work. But in the end Pope Gre∣gory the Seventh got the better of the Emperors in this particular. And now let the ingenuity of those Men be considered, who endeavour to Invalidate our Orders, and call our Priests and Bishops Parliamentary Priests and Bishops, because they are made up∣on the King's Mandate according to the Act of Parliament. When it is clear that for near 500 years together, their own Popes were Consecrated for the most part upon the Emperors Mandate. And it is certain the Kings of England have as much power to do the same here, as the Emperors had to do it at Rome. The Emperors were wont also to
grant the Investitures into all the Bi∣shopricks by giving the Ring and the Staff, which were the Ceremonies of the Investiture, and so they both named and invested all the Bishops and Abbots. This Pope Gregory the Seventh thought was no more to be suffered than their creating the Popes, both being done by the same Authority: Therefore he re∣solved to wring them out of the Em∣perors hands, and take them into his own; and it was no wonder he had a great mind to bring this about, for the Bishopricks and Abbeys were then so richly endowed, that it was the Con∣quest of almost the third part of the Em∣pire, to draw the giving of them into his own hands. Therefore he first disgra∣ced these Laical Investitures by an ill name to make them sound odiously, and called all so Ordained, Simoniacks, as he also called the Married Clergy, Ni∣colaitans. Now every body knows how much any thing suffers by a scurvy Nick∣name raised on it. But he went more roundly to work, and deposed the Em∣peror, and absolved his Subjects from their obedience. What bloody Wars and unnatural Rebellions of the Children against the Father, followed by the Popes instigation, is well enough known.
In the end, his Son that succeeded him was forced to yield up the matter to the Pope. In Spain it appears both from theCan. 6. Can. 12. 12th. and 16th. Councils of Toledo, that the Kings there did choose the Bishops,Ad Anno 681. numb. 60. which Baronius does freely confess. And Gregory of Tours through his whole History, gives so many Instances of the Kings of France of the Merovini∣an Race, choosing and naming the Bishops, that it cannot be questioned; all the Writers of the Gallicane Church do also assert that their Kings gave the Investitures from the days of Charles the Great. But the Popes were still making inroads upon their Authority, for securing which Charles the Seventh caused the Pragmatic Sanction to be made. It is true, afterwards, Pope Leo the Tenth got Francis the First to set up the Concor∣date in its place, against which the As∣sembly of the Clergy at Paris did com∣plain and appealed to a General Council, and yet by the Concordate the King retains still the power of naming the Bishops. In England there are some Instances of the Saxon Kings choosing Bishops, and though so little remains of the Re∣cords or Histories of that time, that it
is no wonder if we meet but few. Yet it is clear that King William the Con∣queror and both his Sons, did give the Investitures to the Bishops, and though upon a Contest between King Henry the First and Anselm about them, the King did yield them to him; yet upon Anselm's death he did re-assume that power: I need not say more to shew what were the Rights of the Crown in this matter, nor how oft they were asserted in Par∣liament, nor how many Laws were made against the Incroachments and tyrannical Exactions of the Court of Rome; these are now so commonly known, and have been so oft printed of late, that I need add nothing about them. Only from all I have said I suppose it is indisputably clear; That if Ordinations or Conse∣crations upon the Kings Mandate, be in∣valid, which this Paper drives at; then all the Ordinations of the Christian Church are also annulled, since for ma∣ny Ages they were all made upon the Mandates of Emperors and Kings. By all which you may see the great weakness of this Argument. I shall to this add some Remarks on a few particulars of less weight that are insinuated in this Argument. First, The Writer of it would in∣fer
from the Queens, calling Cardinal Pool the late and immediate Arch-Bishop and Pastor of Canterbury, that we ac∣knowledg Catholick Ordination valid, lawful, and good. If by Valid, Lawful, and Good, be understood that which retained the Essentials of Ordination, and was according to the then Law, there is no doubt to be made of it, but if he mean that all the Forms and Ceremonies of their Ordination are acknowledged to be Good, he will never draw that inference from these words. Secondly, From the Clause of the Patents, that is for supplying all defects, considering the necessity of the times, he would infer, there was somwhat wanting in them, which was thereby supplyed. If by that [Want] he means an essen∣tial Defect, there was none such, for they were true Bishops. If he means only that some things were not accor∣ding to what the Law required, it is of no Force, for whoever makes a Law, can also dispense with it: Therefore the execution of these Laws being put in the Queens hands, she might well di∣spense with some particulars; all which the Parliament did afterwards confirm, and any defect in the point of Law might make them liable to the Civil powers,
but it can by no means be pretended that this should annul the Ordinations, though illegally gone about. Thirdly, He would infer from the Act of Parliament, that the Queen is made Pope, when he knows that both by one of the Articles of the Church and another Act of Parliament, it is declared otherwise ex∣press words as follows, where we attri∣buteArticle 37. of the Civil Magist. to the Queens Majesty, the chief Government, by which Titles we under∣stand the minds of some slandrous folks to be offended; we give not to our Prin∣ces the Ministry either of God's Word or of the Sacraments; the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Eliza∣beth our Queen, do most plainly testifie: But that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God him∣self; that is, that they should Rule all E∣states and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Eccle∣siastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. So that there is nothing of the Spi∣ritual, much less of the Papal and Tyran∣nical Power given to the King by the Law. Fourthly, From the power given to the Queen to Authorize such persons as she shall think fit to exercise that Juris∣diction,
he infers, they may be either Clergymen, Lawyers, Merchants, or Coblers, since the Statute requires no more but that they be born Subjects of the Realm. But this is as well grounded as all the rest, for though that Statute does not name the qualification of the persons, yet the other Statutes that En∣acted the Book of Common-Prayer and the Ordinal, do fully specifie what sort of persons these must be, and it is not necessary that all things be in every Sta∣tute. Fifthly, He in the end of this Paper pretends that the reason why this pre∣sent Parliament altered the Ancient Forms; was, because they were null and invalid. The weakness and in∣justice of which was before shewed; so that nothing needs to be repeated. And in fine, it has been also proved, that as both the Greek and Latin Churches have made many alterations in their Ri∣tuals, so the Church of England which made these Alterations, had as good an Authority to do it by, as they had: To which I shall only add the words of the Council of Trent concerning the power of the Church for making such Changes when they give the reason for taking a∣wayess. 21. cap. 2. the Chalice. The Church has power
in the Sacraments, retaining the sub∣stance of them to change or appoint such things which she shall judg more expedient both for the profit of the Receivers, and for the Reverence due to the Sacraments, according to the variety of things, times, and places. Where, by their own con∣fession it is acknowledged, the Church may make alterations in the Sacraments See what Vasques has said of Changes in the forms of the Sa∣craments.: So that it is a strange confidence in them to charge on us an annulling of former Orders, because of a small addition of a few explanatory words. And so much for his Paper. Now having sufficiently answered eve∣ry thing in it; I hope I may be allowed to draw a few conclusions in opposition to his. And First, We having true Priests and true Bishops, are a true Church, since we be∣lieve all that Christ and his Apostles de∣livered to the World. Secondly, We being thus a part of the Catholick Church, every one that lives according to the Doctrine professed a mong us, mayand shall be saved. Thirdly, We do truly eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, having the Blessed Sacrament administred among us according to our Saviour's Institu∣tion.
Fourthly, We have as much power to Consecrate the Holy Sacrament as any that were Ordained in the Church for near a thousand years together. Fifthly, We have the Ministerial pow∣er of giving Absolution, and the Mini∣stry of Reconciliation, and of forgiving Sins, given us by our Orders. Sixthly, All men may (and ought to) joyn with us in the profession of the Faith we believe, and in the use of the Sacraments we administer, which are still preserved among us according to Christ's Institution; and that whosoever repents and believes the Gospel, shall be Saved. Seventhly, All and every of the Ar∣guments he has used, are found to be weak and frivolous, and to have no force in them. And thus far I have complied with your desires of answering the Paper you sent me, in as short and clear terms as I could. But I must add, that this ransacking of Records about a succes∣sion of Orders, though it adds much to the lustre and beauty of the Church; yet is not a thing incumbent on every bo∣dy to look much into, nor indeed, possible for any to be satisfied about: for a great many Ages, all those Instruments are lost;
So that how Ordinations were made in the Primitive Church, we cannot certainly, know, it is a piece of History and very hard to be perfectly known. Therefore it cannot be a fit Study for any, much less for one that has not much leisure. The condition of Christians were very hard, if private persons must certainly know how all Ministers have been Ordained since the Apostles days; for if we will raise scruples in this matter, it is impossible to satisfie them, unless the Authentick Re∣gisters of all the ages of the Church could be shewed, which is impossible; for tho we were satisfied that all the Priests of this Age were duly Ordained; yet if we be not as sure that all who Ordained them had Orders rightly given them, and so upward, till the days of the Apostles, the doubt will still remain. Therefore it is an unjust and unreasonable thing to raise difficulties in this matter. And in∣deed if we go to such nice scruples with it; there is one thing in the Church of Rome that gives a much juster ground these, than any thing that can be pretend∣ed in ours does; which is, the Doctrine of the Intention of the Minister being necessary to make a Sacrament. Se∣cret Intentions are only known to God, and not possible to be known by any man:
Therefore since they make Orders a Sa∣crament, there remains still ground to entertain a scruple whether Orders be truly given. And this cannever becleared, since none can know other mens thought or intentions. Therefore the pursuing nice scruples a∣bout this, cannot be a thing indispensably necessary otherwise all people must be per plext with endless disquiet and doubtings. But the true touchstone of a Church must be the Purity of her Doctrine and the Con∣formity of her Faith with that which Christ and his Apostles taught. In this the Scriptures are clear and plain to every one that will read and consider them sin∣cerely and without prejudice, which that you may do, and by these may be led and guided into all Truth, shall be my con∣stant prayer to God for you.
AN APPENDIX. About the forms of Ordaining Priests and Bishops in the Latin Church. BEcause the decision of all the questions that can be made, by those of the Church of Rome, about the validity of our Or∣ders must be taken from the Ancient Forms of Ordination, as hath been fully made out in the foregoing Papers, therefore I hope it will not be unpleasant to the Reader, to see what the Forms of Ordinations were in the Latin Church, for many Ages, which he will more clearly understand, when he sees them at their full Length; then he can do by any Quotations out of them. Morinus has published sixteen of the most Ancient Latin Rituals he could find, composed from the end of the Fifth Century; at which time he judges the most Ancient of them was written, till within those last Four hun∣dred years, so that he gives us a clear
view of the Ordinations of seven suc∣ceeding Ages of the Western Church. His Book is scarce to be had, and therefore I shall draw out of it, what re∣lates to the Ordination of Priests and Bi∣shops, Only as he has Printed these Forms Strictly as the Manuscripts were written, without altering some things that are manifestly the Faults of the Transcri∣bers; so I shall set them down exactly, as He has published them, with the Emendations on the Margin from o∣ther Manuscripts, and adde a Transla∣tion of them in English. But I shall begin with the three first Canons of the Fourth Council of Carthage, in which we have the ful∣lest and earliest Account of the Ordi∣dinations of Bishops and Priests, in the Latin Church: and from the Simplicity of these and the many pompous Rites that are added in the latter Rituals, the Reader will both perceive how the Spirit of Superstition grew from Age to Age; and will be able to judge, whe∣ther the Church of England; or the Church of Rome, comes nearest the most Primitive Forms. These I set down according to the MSS. published by Morinus, and Collationed on the Mar∣gin, with a MSS. belonging to the
Church of Salisbury, that is judged to be six hundred year old, and also with that Published by Labbée in the Tomes of the Councils. Sacrarum Ordinationum Ritus. Ex Concilio Carthaginensi quarto de∣promptus. CANON I. QUI Episcopus Ordinandus est, antea examinetur, si natura sit prudens, si docibilis, si moribus temperatus, si vita ca∣sts, si sobrius, si semper suis negotiis Vacans. cavens, Si omni∣bus affa∣bilis. si humilis, si affabilis, si misericors, si literatus, si in lege domini instructus, si in scripturam sensibus ca∣tus, si in dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis ex∣ercitatus; & ante omnia, si fidei do∣cumenta verbis simplicibus asserat Deest. id est, Patrem, & Filium, & Spiritum San∣ctum unum Deum esse confirmans, totam{que} In Tri∣nitate. Trinitatis Deitatem coessentialem, & consubstantialem, & coaeternalem, & coomnipotentem praedicans: si Singu∣lam. singu∣larem quamque in Trinitate personam ple∣num deum, Desunt haec in Labbee. & totas tres personas U∣num deum. Si incarnationem divinam non in Patre, neque in Spiritu Sancto
factam, sed in Filio tantum credat, ut qui erat in Divinitate Dei Patris, ipse fieret in homine hominis Matris filius: Deus verus ex Patre, homo verus ex Ma∣tre, carnem ex matris visceribus habens, & animam humanam rationalem; siml in eo Utraque natura. ambae naturae, id est, Deus & Homo, una persona, unus filius, unus Christus, unus Dominus, Creator om∣nium quae sunt & autor, & Deest. Dominus, & Rector cum Patre & Spiritu San∣cto, Deest. omnium creaturaram Qui passus sit vera carnis Passione; mortuus vera corporis sui morte, resurrexit vera carnis suae Recepti∣one. resurrectinoe, & vera ani∣mae resumptione, in qua veniet judicar vivos & mortuos. Quaerendum etiam ab eo, si Novi & Veteris Testamenti, id est, leges & Prophetarum, & Aposto∣lorum unum eundemque credat auto∣rem & evm. Si Diabolus non per conditionem, sed per Arbitrium, Hab. Lab. Factus. & Cod. Saris. sit malus. Quaerendum etiam ab eo si credat hujus quam gestamus, & non alterius, carnis resurrectionem. Si credat judicium futurum, & recepturo singulos pro his, quae in Hac vita. carne gesse∣runt, vel poenas vel Proemia▪ gloriam. Si nu∣ptias non improbat; si secunda Matri∣monia non damnet; si carnium pere∣ptionem non culpet; si poenitentibus re∣conciliatis
communicet; si in Baptismo omnia peccata, id est, tam illud origi∣nale contractum, quam illa quae volun∣tate admissa sunt, dimittantur; si ex∣tra Ecclesiam Catholicam nullus salve∣tur. Cum in his omnibus examinatus, in∣ventus fuerit plene instructus, tunc cum consensu Clericorum, & Laicorum, & conventu totius provinciae Episcoporum, maximéque Metropolitani vel Authori∣tate vel praesentia, ordinetur Episcopus. Suscepto in Nomini Christi Episcopatu non suae delectationi, nec suis motibus, sed his Patrum definitionibus acquiescat. [In cujus Ordinatione etiam aetas requi∣ritur,* Desunt haec in [] in MSS. Cod. Saris. quam Sancti Patres in praeeli∣gendis Episcopis constituerunt.] De∣hinc disponitur, qualiter Ecclesiastica Of∣ficia Ordinantur. CAN. II. EPiscopus cum Ordinatur, duo Epi∣scopi ponant, & teneant Evange∣liorum Codicem supra Caput, & cervi∣cem ejus; & uno super eum sundente be∣nedictionem, reliqui omnes Episcopi qui adsunt, manibus suis caput ejus tan∣gant.
CAN. III. PResbyter cum Ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente, & manum super caput ejus tenente, etiam omnes Pres∣byteri qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius teneat. In English thus. CAN. I. LET Him that is to be Ordained a Bishop; be first Examined if he be naturally prudent, and teachable, if in his Manners he be temperate, if chast in his life, if sober, if he looks to his own Affairs, be humble, affable, merciful and learned, if he be instructed in the Law of the Lord; and skilful in the sense of the Scriptures; and ac∣quainted with Ecclesiastical Doctrines: and above all things, if he assert the Articles of Faith in simple Words: that is to say, affirms that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God: and teaches that the whole Deity of the Trinity, is Coessential, Consub∣stantial, Coaeternal, and Coomnipo∣tent:
and that every Person of the Trinity, is fully God: and all the Three Persons are one God. If He believes that the Holy Incarnation, was neither of the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; but of the Son only: that He who was the Son of God the Father by the Godhead, becoming a Man, was the Son of his Mother, very God of His Father, and very Man of His Mo∣ther who had Flesh of the Bowels of His Mother, and a human reasonable Soul. And both Natures God and Man, were in Him one Person, one Son, one Christ, one Lord the Creator of all things that are, and the Author, Lord and Governour of all Creatures with the Father, and the Holy Ghost. Who suffered a true Passion in His Flesh, and was dead by a true death of His Body, and rose again with a true Resurrection of His Flesh, and a true Re-assumption of His Soul, in which He shall come to judge the quick and the dead. It must like∣wise be asked if He believes, that one and the same God, was the Author of the Old and New Testament; of the Books of the Law, the Prophets and the Apostles. If the Devil be not wicked by his will and not by his Na∣ture.
And if he believes the Resur∣rection of this Flesh, which we now carry and not of any other, and the Judgment to come, and that every one shall receive either punishment or glo∣ry, for what they have done in the Flesh. If he does disapprove Mar∣riage, or condemn second Marriage, or blames the Eating of Flesh. If He Communicates with Penitents, being reconciled. If he believes that in Ba∣ptism all Sins, both that which is Ori∣ginally contracted and those which are willingly committed are pardoned, and that none is saved out of the Catho∣lick Church. When being examined in all these things, he is found fully Instructed, then let him be Ordained Bishop, with the Consent of the Clergy, and Laity, and the meeting of the Bishops of the whole Province; and chiefly in the presence or by the Authority of the Metropoli∣tan. And he having undertaken the Bishoprick in the name of Christ, must acquiesce in the Definitions of the Fathers, and not in his own pleasure or inclinations. And in Ordaining him, that Age is necessary which the Holy Fathers appointed in the choosing of Bishops. After this it is appointed
how all Ecclesiastical Offices are Or∣dained. CAN. II. WHEN a Bishop is Ordained, two Bishops shall lay and hold the Book of the Gospel, upon his Head, and Neck; and one saying the Blessing over Him, all the other Bishops that are Present, shall touch his Head with their Hands. CAN. III. WHEN a Presbyter is Ordained, the Bishop blessing Him, and holding his hand upon his Head, all the Presbyters that are present, shall hold their hands beside the Bishops hand upon his Head. The most Ancient of the Rituals Morinus proves was written some time between the year 511. and 560. in which the Ordi∣nation of the Priests is in this Fashion: It begins with an Exhortation to the People, to tell what they know of the Person to be Ordained, and to make a publick Election of Him. Then follows the Collect with this Rubrick.
Oratio ad Presbyteros Ordinandos. ORemus, Dilectissimi, Deum Patrem omnipotentem, ut super hunc famu∣lum suum quem ad Presbyterii munus eli∣git, coelestia dona multiplicet, & quae ejus dignatione suscipiunt, ejus exequan∣tur auxilio; per Dominum. Item alia. Exaudi nos, Deus salutaris noster, In aliis Cod. Et. ut super hunc famulum tuum be∣nedictionem Spiritus Sancti & gratiae Sa∣cerdotalis effunde virtutem, ut quem tuae pietatis suspectibus offerimus Consecran∣dum, perpetua muneristui largitate perse∣quaris; per Dominum. In English thus, A Prayer for the Priests that are to be Ordained. LEt us pray Beloved to God, the Fa∣ther Almighty, that he may multi∣ply heavenly Gifts on this his Servant, whom he has chosen to the Office of Priesthood, that what they receive by his favour, they may execute through his help; Through our Lord.
And another. HEar us, O God our Saviour, and pour upon this thy Servant the blessing of the Holy Ghost and the vertue of Priestly Grace, that thou maist fol∣low▪ him with a perpetual largeness of thy gift, whom we offer up to thy holy eyes to be Consecrated; Through our Lord. CONSECRATIO. DOmine Sancte Pater Omnipotens ae∣terne Deus, honorum omnium dig∣nitatum quae tibi militant, distributor, per quem cuncta firmantur, amplificatis semper in melius naturae rationalis in∣crementis per ordinem In aliis MSS. Congrua ratione. congruam ratio∣nem dispositum, unde Sacerdotalis gradus & Officia Levitarum Sacramentis Mysticis. Mysti∣ci instituta▪ creverunt, ut cum Pontifi∣ces. Pontifice summos regendis populis praefecisses ad eorum Societatis & operis adjumentum Sequen∣tis ordinis. sequentes ordines viros, & secundae dig∣nitatis elegeris, sic in eremo per Septuagin∣ta virorum prudentium, Mentem. mentis Moysi Spiritum propagasti, quibus ille adjutori∣bus usus in populo, innumeras multitudi∣nes facilè gubernavit. Sic & Eleazaro & Ithamar filiis Aaron paternae plenitu∣dinis
abundantiam transfudisti, Ut ad hostias sa∣lutares & frequen∣tioris Of∣ficii Sacra∣menta Mi∣nisterium sufficeret sacerdo∣tum. & ad hostias salutaris, & frequentiores of∣ficii Sacramenta sufficeret merétum Sa∣cerdotum. Hac providentia Domine, Apostolis filii tui Doctores fidei Comites addedisti quibus illi orbem totum secundis praedicatoribus impleverunt. Quaprop∣ter infirmitati quoque nostrae, Domine, quaesumus haec adjumenta largire, qui quanto magis fragiliores sumus, tanto his Pluribus. plurius indigemus. Da quaesumus, Omnipotens Pater, in hoc Hunc fa∣mulum tu∣um. famulo tuo ill Presbyterii dignitatem: Innova in visce∣ribus ejus Spiritum Sanctitatis: acceptum à te, Deus, secundi meriti munus obtineat, censuramque morum exemplo suae conver∣sationis insinuet. Sit Probus. providus coope∣rator Ordinis nostri, eluceat in Eo. eum to∣tius forma justitiae, ut bonam rationem dispensationis sibi creditae redditurus, aeternae beatitudinis praemia consequatur. The Consecration. O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and Eternal God, the distributer of all Honors and Dignities that fight for thee, by whom all things are strengthned, the improvements of the rational nature being always enlarged by Thee to the better, through a settled Order and
congruous Reason, from whence the Priestly Degrees and the Offices of the Levites, which were instituted by My∣stical Sacraments did grow up; so that when thou set the High-Priests to go∣vern the people, thou didst choose for the help of their Society and work, men of an inferiour Order and a second Dignity: So also in the Wilderness thou didst propagate the Spirit that was in Moses into seventy prudent men, whom he using as helpers with him over the people, did easily govern innume∣rable multitudes. So thou didst trans∣fuse into Eleazar and Ithamar the Sons of Aaron, abundance of the fulness that was in their Father, that the Ministry of the Priests might be sufficient for the expiatory Sacrifices, and the Sacraments that were more frequent. By the same providence thou, O Lord, didst add companions to the Apostles of thy Son, who were Teachers of the Faith, with which Preachers of a second rank they filled the whole World. Wherefore, O Lord, we beseech thee grant like∣wise those helps to our Infirmity, who by so much the weaker as we are, do need these the more. Grant we be∣seech thee, Almighty Father, to this thy Servant, the dignity of Priesthood.
Renew in his inward parts the Spirit of Holiness, and let him obtain the Of∣fice of the Second Merit received from thee, O God, and make him Insinuate by the example of his Conversation a censure of Manners. Let him be a pro∣vident Fellow-labourer with our Order, and let the form of all Righteousness shine forth in him, that when he shall ren∣der a good account of the Dispensation trusted to, he may obtain the rewards of Eternal Blessedness. Consummatio Presbyteri. SIt nobis, Fratres, Communis Cratio, ut Hic. his qui in adjutorium & utilitatem vestrae Salutis eligetur, Presbyteratus Be∣nedictionem divini indulgentia muneris consequatur, & S. Spiritus Sacerdotalia dona privilegio virtutum, ne impar loco deprehendatur, obtineat per suum. Per. The Consummation of a Priest. BRethren, Let us joyn in one Prayer, that he who is chosen for the help and profit of your Salvation, may ob∣tain the Blessing of the Office of Priesthood by the Divine Indulgence, and the Priestly gifts of the Holy Ghost,
by the priviledg of his Vertue, lest he be found unfit for his Place. Item Benedictio. SAnctificationum omnium Autor, cujus vera Consecratio, plena Benedictio est, Tu Domine, super hunc samulum ill. quem Ad Pres∣byterii ho∣norem. Prebyterii honore dedicamus, Gratiam tuae Bene∣dictionis infunde. ma∣num tuae Benedictionis eum insunde ut gra∣vitate actuum, & censura vivendi probet se esse Omni∣um. seniorem, his institutus discipli∣nis quas Tito & Timotheo Paulus expo∣suit, ut in lege tua die ac nocte, omnipotens, meditans, quodLegerit. elegerit, credat▪ quod credi∣derit, doceat; quod docuerit Imite∣tur. meditetur: justitiam, constantiam, miscricordiam, for∣titudinem in se ostendat, Deest. exemplum pro∣bet, Admoni∣tione. admonitionem confirmet, ut pu∣rum atque immaculatum Myste∣rii. ministerii tui domum custodiat, & per obsequium plebis tuae Corpore & sanguine filii tui im∣maculata benedi∣ctione transfor∣metur ad inviolabi∣lem cari∣tatem. corpus & sanguinem filii tui imma culata Benedictione transformet, & invio∣labili caritate in virum perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi, in die justitiae aeterni judicii, conscientia pura, side plena, Spiritu Sancto plenus persolvat. Per Dominum.
The Benediction. THou the Author of all Sanctifica∣tions, whose true Consecration is a full Benediction; Thou, O Lord, lay the hand of thy Blessing upon this thy Servant, whom we have dedicated to the honor of Priesthood, that by the gravity of his actions and the rule of li∣ving, he may prove himself to be an Elder instructed in those Disciplines which Saint Paul delivered to Titus and Timothy: that meditating in thy Law, O Almighty God, day and night, he may believe what he reads, and teach what he believes, and follow what he tea∣ches: and may shew forth Righteous∣ness, Constancy, Mercy, and Courage in himself, and approve himself a Pat∣tern, and confirm his Admonitions, and may preserve the gift of thy Ministry undefiled; and through the obedience of thy people, may transform the Body and Blood of thy Son with an unde∣filed Blessing, and may finish all by an inviolable Charity in a perfect man; in the measure of the Statute of the ful∣ness of Christ in the day of the justice of Eternal Judgment, with a pure Con∣science and a full Faith, being full of the Holy Ghost.
The follows the Consecration of their Hands in these words. Consecratio Manus. COnsecrentur Manus istae, & sanctifi∣centur per istam Unctionem & no∣stram Benedictionem, ut quaecunque bene∣dixerint, benedicta sint, & quaecunque san∣ctificaverint, sanctificentur. Per Dominum. Item Alia. UNgantur Manus istae de Oleo San∣ctifica; & Chrismate Sanctifica∣tionis, sicut unxit Samuel David in Regem & Prophetam, ita unguentur & consummentur in nomine Dei Patris & Filii & Spiritus Sancti, sacientes Ima∣ginem Sanctae Crucis Salvatoris Domini nostri Iesu Christi, qui nos à morte rede∣mit & ad regna coelorum perducit. Ex∣audi nos, Pie Pater Omnipotens Aeterne Deus & praesta quod t Rogamus & Ora∣mes. Per Dominum. In English thus. LEt these hands be Consecrated and Sanctified by this Unction and our Blessing, that whatsoever they Bless,
be Blessed, and whatsoever they San∣ctifie be Sanctified through our Lord. And Another. LET these hands be annointed with the Sanctified Oyl; and the Chrism of Sanctification, as Samuel annointed David to be both King and Prophet; So let them be annointed and perfe∣cted in the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, making the Image of the Holy Cross of our Saviour the Lord Iesus Christ, who re∣deemed us from Death, and brings us to the Kingdome of Heaven. Hear us O Holy Father, Almighty and E∣ternal God, and grant what we de∣sire and Pray for, Through our Lord. There is neither more nor less in that Ritual about the Ordination of a Priest. For this last of the Annointing the Priests with Oyl, it cannot be called es∣sential to the Priesthood, for the Greek Church never used it, and tho Nazi∣anzenOrat. 20. 4. & 5. tells us that his Father had a∣nointed St. Basil, and that himself was also Annointed, yet neither the Apo∣stolick Constitutions, nor Dionystus the Areopagite, nor Simeon of Thessalonica, nor Cabasilas, tho they have delivered
to us the Rites of Ordination in the Greek Church, ever mention it. And it is in no Greek Ritual; So that what ever places are found in any Greek Author of Annointing in Or∣dination must be understood Allego∣rically and Mystically, of the effusion of the Holy Ghost. So both Elias Cre∣tensis and Nicetas the Scholiasts on Na∣zianzen expound his words, and there are some Passages near the end of his Fourth Oration, that shew these o∣ther places of his are to be understood Metaphorically. This Rite is not men∣tioned by the Council of Carthage, and it seems was not received in Spain a great while after the Age of this Ritu∣al, for Isidor tho very particular in o∣therLib. 2. de Eccles. Offic. cap. 5. things (as the Staff and Ring) does not mention it, neither when He speaks of the Ordination of Priests, nor Bishops. Nor do the Councils in Spain mention it; and Alcuine speaks nothing of it, but it was only as seems used in the Gallicane Church, and the first thatLib. 2. c. 3. I find clearly mention it, is Amalarius, but Gildas intimates it, for he speak ofIn Eccles. Ord. the benediction, qua initiantur Sacerdo∣tum manus, by which the Priests hands are initiated. Pope Nicolas the first expresly says,
that at Rome neither Priests nor Deacons were annointed. His words are; PraetereaEpist. 19. ad Radol. Bitur. c. 3. Which is also in the Canon Law. Dist. 23. c. 12. sciscitaris utrum solis Presbyteris, an & Diaconibus debeant cum Ordinantur, ma∣nus Chrismatis liquore perungi, quod in Sancta hac Romana cui, Deo auctore, de∣servimus Ecclesia, neutris agitur. Sed & quia sit à novis legis ministris a∣ctum, nusquam nisi nos fallat oblivio, le∣gimus. You ask me further if only the Priests or the Deacons likewise, when they are Ordained should have their hands anointed with the Chrism, this is done to neither of them, in this Ho∣ly Roman Church; where by Gods ap∣pointment we serve, and if our me∣mory fails us not, we no where read that this was done by the Mini∣sters of the new Law. The Second Ritual published by the same Author, is as he believes, Nine hundred year Old, and has been com∣piled for the Church of Rome; being that which is commonly called Sacra∣mentarium Gelasianum, in which the Rubricks and Prayers are the same with the Former, only the Annointing is not mentioned in that part of it that re∣lates to the Ordination of Priests, but the Transcriber after the Office of the
Ordination of the Subdeacon adds the Rite and Collects for the Annointing the Priests, which Morinus believes he did to accommodate it to the French Rites. The third Ritual is as Morinus believes, antienter than Eight hundred years, in which the Rites and Collects are the same with the Former, only the Con∣summation and Blessing is wanting, and a new Rite is added of giving the Vesti∣ments, with these words which are in stead of the Blessing. Hic vestis & Casulam. BEnedictio Patris, & Filii, & Spi∣ritus Sancti descendat super te, ut sis benedictus in Ordine Sacerdotali, & offeras placabiles hostias pro peccatis at∣que offensionibus populi Omnipotenti Deo. Cui sit honor & gloria in saecula sae∣culorum. In English thus. THE Blessing of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, descend upon Thee, that thou maist be blessed in the Priestly Order, and may offer acceptable (or expiatory▪) Sacrifices, for the Sins and offences of the people,
to Almighty God. To whom be ho∣nour and Glory for ever and ever. The Fourth Ritual, is the same with that which Angelus Rocca Published a∣mongTom. 5. Gregory the Great's Works, where are the two first Collects and Prayer of Consecration; as in the first: with the Annointing of the hands, as is there: and the giving the Vestments, with the words in the Third Ritual. The Fifth Ritual, which he sets down has nothing relating to the Ordination of Priests; but the two first Collects and the Prayer of Consecration before set down, which upon that account he Judges defective. The Sixth Ritual, about Eight hun∣dred year Old, composed for the Church of England, has all that is in the First Ritual, with these additions. It begins with the Canon of the Coun∣cil of Carthage, about the Ordination of a Priest. Then follow the Collects and Prayer before set down. Then there is added this Blessing, before the Annointing of the hands.
Benedictio vel Consecratio manuum Sa∣cerdotis ante Unctionem Chrismatis. BEnedic, Domine, & sanctifica has ma∣nus sacerdotis tui ill. ad Consecran∣das hostias quae pro delictis atque negli∣gentiis populi offeruntur, & ad caetera Benedicenda quae ad usus populi necessa∣ria sunt, & praesta, quaesumus, ut quae∣cunque benedixerint, benedicantur, & quaecunque sacraverint sacrentur, Sal∣vator mundi qui vivis & regnas. BLess, O God, and sanctifie these hands of thy Priest, for conse∣crating the Sacrifices which are offered for the sins and negligences of the peo∣ple, and for blessing of all other things, that are necessary for the use of the people, and Grant we beseech Thee, O Saviour of the world, who livest and reignest, that whatsoever they Bless may be blessed, and whatever they Consecrate may be Consecra∣ted. Then follows the Annointing of the hands as before. Then is added the Annointing of the head, with this Prayer:
Consecratio Capitis cum oleo. UNgatur & Consecretur Caput tuum coelesti Benedictione in Ordine Sacerdotali, in nomine Patris, & Fi∣lii, & spiritus sancti. LET thy head be Annointed, and Consecrated with a Heavenly Be∣nediction in the Priestly Order, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Then the Vestments are given as in the Third Ritual, with a little variati∣on in the Collect, and then follows the Consummation and Blessing; as was in the first Ritual before set down. The Seventh Ritual, which Morinus reckons likewise Eight hundred years Old, has the same Collects, Consecra∣tion, and Benediction with the First, with the delivery of the Vestment and Prayer, as is in the Third Ritual, and the Annointing of the hands, as in the First, without any further Rite. The Eight Ritual, is near the same Age with the Former, the two first Collects and Prayer of Consecration, are in it as in the First, and the Gi∣ving the Vestment, as in the Third, and
the Consecrating of the hands as in the First, and there is no more in that Ri∣tual. The Ninth Ritual, which He believes is Seven hundred years Old, has the First Collects and the Prayer of Con∣secration as in the First. There is a little inconsiderable variation in the Giving of the Vestments, from what is in the Third. The hands are annointed as in the First. The head is Annointed as in the Sixth, and the Hands are bless'd as in the Sixth, the Consumma∣tion and Benediction are according to the First. Then some Collects and Bles∣sings are added, relating to their Fasting and Abstinence. The Tenth Ritual, about the same age has the two First Collects, and the Pray∣er of Consecration according to the First, then follows the giving the Vest∣ments according to the Third. Then is the Annointing of the hands according to the First, and the Blessing of them according to the Sixth. There is no more in that Ritual. The Eleventh Ritual, about the same Age, has the Exhortation to the peo∣ple, and the two First Collects, with the Prayer of Consecration as in the First. Then these Additions follow. He puts
one of the Vestments called Orarium on him and says, Accipe jugum Dei, jugum enim e∣jus suave est & onus ejus leve. Take the Yoke of God, for his Yoke is sweet, and his burden is Light. Then the Casula is put on him with these words. Stola Innocentiae induat te Domi∣nus. Let the Lord cloath thee with the Robe of Innocence. Then follows the Blessing as in the First, and the Annointing the Hands, with a small Variation in the Collect from the words of the First. This being done, the Paten with the Hosties, and the Chalice, with the Wine, is given with these words. Accipe Potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo Missamque Celebrare tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis, in Nomine Domini. Receive thou Power to offer Sa∣crifice and to Celebrate the Mass; as well for the Living as for the Dead, in the Name of the Lord. Then follows the Blessing as is in the Third Ritual. The Twelfth and Thirteenth Ritu∣als,
the one being about Six hundred and Fifty year Old, the other a Hun∣dred years later have the First Collects, and Prayer of Consecration as the First had. And the Blessing that is in the Third, with the Consecration of the Hands that is in the First. The Fourteenth Ritual, about five hundred year Old has the two Collects and Prayer of Consecration as in the first. Then the Orarium is given as in the Eleventh, with an Addition in Giving the Casula. Accipe vestem Sacerdotalem per quam Charitas intelligitur; Potens est enim Deus ut augeat tibi Charitatem, qui vi∣vit. Receive the Priestly Vestment by which Charity is understood, for God is able to increase thy Charity, who lives. Then follows the Consummation, and Benediction as in the first, Then the Bishop makes a Cross in their hands with the Oyl and Chrism; and uses the words as in the Eleventh Ritual, then he gives the Sacred Vessels as in that same Ritual. Then follows the Blessing in the Third Ritual, and then the Bishop is to kiss them. The fifteenth Ritual, is about four
hundred and fifty years Old, and has very near the same Rubricks that are in the former, only upon the Margin, where the words are to be pronounced in the delivering the Sacred Vessels, is written, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum; quo∣rum remiseritis peccata, &c. Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye re∣mit, &c. The Sixteenth Ritual, about Three hundred years Old, agrees with the former, in the forementioned Rites and Collects; but has this Addition that the Bishop lays on his hands on the Priests and says, Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, they are remitted to them, and whose sins you retain they are retained. But in two other Pontificals which Morinus believes are of the same Age▪ these words and that Rite are wanting. In the Ordo Roma∣nus, which some believe is a work of the Ninth Century, others that it is of the Eleventh Century, there are set down first some Questions and Answers to the Priests to be Ordained, then the two Collects with the Prayer of Consecration follow, as in the Rituals before set down, only it is marked in the Rubrick that the Bishop and Priests lay on their hands at the first Collect,
then follow all the other Rites of Gi∣ving the Vestments, annointing and de∣livering the sacred Vessels; but the last Imposition of hands with the words, Receive the Holy Ghost, are not in it. From all which it clearly appears what must be Essential to Ordination, and what not; none of those Rites that are only found in Later Rituals are essenti∣al: for the Ordinations were good and valid before these were added. But that in which all these Rituals agree must be acknowledged of greatest weight and chief Importance, and that is the Prayer of Consecration with the two Collects that go before it. For in those they all agree, but vary in every thing else; and therefore Morinus thinks the former of these Collects, is now the form of Priestly Orders, for which He has another strong Argument, which is, that as he proves both by the ancient Canons, and even by the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; the Imposition of the Priests hands with the Bishop is ne∣cessary in these Ordinations, and they only lay on hands with the Bishop when that Collect is pronounced, from which he infers that then the Priests Orders are conferred. But it is clear from all those Rituals that these Collects were
Preparatory to the Prayer of Conse∣cration which only is the form of these Orders according to those Rituals. And thus far of the office of Or∣daining Priests, I shall next set down from those Rituals the Office, Rubricks, Rites, and Prayers used in the Conse∣cration of a Bishop. The Office begins with an Exhorta∣tion to the people, declaring the Ne∣cessity of substituting one Pastor to ano∣ther, and that therefore upon the for∣mer Bishops Death, there is another chosen by the Priests and the whole Clergy, with the advice of the Citi∣zens and people, who is well qualified for it; therefore they are desired to ap∣prove of the Choice by their Voices and to declare him worthy of it. Then follows, Oratio & Preces. Precis de Ordinandis Epi∣scopis. ORemus, Dilectissimi nobis, ut his viris ad utilitatem Ecclesiae Provi∣dendam vel provi∣dens▪ pro∣videndis, benignitas omnipotentis Dei, gratiae suae tribuat largitatem; per do∣minum nostrum Iesum Christum.
Alia: Benedictio Episcoporum.In other Rituals thus. Adesto supplica∣tionibus nostris, omnipo∣tens Deus, & quod humilitatis nostrae gerendum est Ministerio, virtutis impleatur effectu. Per. EXaudi, Domine, supplicum Preces, ut quod nostrum gerendum est ministe∣rium tua potius virtute firmetur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Alia. PRopitiare, Domine, supplicationibus nostris: & Inclina∣to. inclinatus super hos famulos tuos cornu gratiae Sacerdotalis, Benedictionis tuae in eos effunde virtutem. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Coll. sequitur. DEum totius Sanctificationis ac Pieta∣tis actorem, qui placationem suam & sacrificia & sacra constituit, Fratres Dilectissimi, deprecemur, ut hunc fa∣mulum suum quem ex altari in Ecclesia, & seniorum Cathedra concordibus sua inspiratione judiciis, & effusis super ple∣bem suam votis fidelibus, ac vocum testi∣moniis voluit imponi, collocans eum, cum principibus populi sui, ad eorum nunc precim universam eundem summum sacer∣dotium
debita honoris plenitudine Charis∣matum gratia, sanctificationum ubertate hac, praecipue humilitatis virtute locu∣pletet, ut Rector potius non extollatur, sed in omnibus se quantum est major hu∣milians, sit in ipsis quasi unus ex illis, om∣nia judicii Domini nostri non pro se tan∣tum, sed & pro omni populo qui solici∣tudinis suae creditur contremiscens, ut qui meminerit de speculatorum manibus omnium animas requirendas pro omnium salute pervigilet, pastorali erga creditas si∣bi oves Domini diligentiae ejus semper se flagrantissimum adprobans. Te dilecto∣rum adigitur praefuturus ex omnibus e∣lectus, ex quibus universis sacris, sacran∣disque idoneus fiat sub hac quae est homi∣ni per hominem postrima benedictio con∣firmata atque perfecta suae consecrationis nostrae supplecationis adtentissime concor∣dissimisque omnium precibus adjovemur, omnium pro ipso oratio incumbat, cui ex∣orandi pro omnibus pondus imponitur. Impetret ei affectus totius ecclesiae virtu∣tem, pietate sanctificationem, & caeteras summi Sacerdotii sacras dotes universae ecclesiae profuturas, Domino Deo nostro qui Sacrorum numerum profluus fons est, qui dat omnibus affluenter quod Sacerdoti pro affectu poscitur, ad exundandam in omni∣bus sanctificationem suorum omnium
promptissimè ac plenissimè conferentem. Per Dominum nostrum. A Collect and Prayers for the Bishops to be Ordained. BEloved, let us pray that the bounty of Almighty God may give of the fulness of his Grace to those men who are to be provided for the use of the Church, Through our Lord. HEar, O Lord, the Prayers of thy Supplicants, that the Ministry which we are to bear may be confirmed by thy power, Through our Lord Iesus Christ. BE favourable to our Supplications, O Lord, and put upon these thy Servants the horn of thy Priestly Grace, and pour upon them the vertue of thy blessing, Through our Lord Iesus Christ. BEloved Brethren, let us pray to God who is the Author of all Holiness and Piety, who appointed Sacrifices and holy Offices, by which he is plea∣sed, that he would, upon the Prayer of all his people, enrich this his Ser∣vant whom he has appointed by the a∣greeing
voices according to his Inspira∣tion and the faithful desires which he has infused in the people, and the testimo∣ny of their voices, to be raised from the Altar in the Church, and the seat of the Elders placing him with the Princes of his people: with the fulness of the ho∣nour of the High-Priesthood, and the Grace of sanctifying Gifts in great mea∣sure, and chiefly with the vertue of Humility, that being a Governour, he be not lifted up, but that in all things he humble himself the greater he grows, and be among others, as one of them: trembling at all the judgments of God, not only for himself, but for all the people trusted to his care, remembring that all their souls shall be required at the hands of the Watchmen: and therefore may watch for all their safety, approving himself always most infla∣med with Pastoral diligence about the Lord's Sheep trusted to him. I cannot make sense of the rest, for this Collect is in no other Ritual, and the Copy out of which it is printed, as it is very Ancient, so it has been most un∣correctly written.
CONSECRATIO. DEus honorum omnium, Deus omni∣um dignitatum, quae gloriae tuae Sacratis. sacris samulantur honoribus: Deus qui Moysen samulum tuum secreti samiliaris Affatu. affectu inter caetera coelestis documenta culturae, de habitu quoque indumenti Sacerdotalis instituens, Electum Aaron Mystico amictu vestire inter Sacra jussisti, ut intelligentiae sensum de exemplis pri∣orum caperet secutura Posteritas, ne eru∣ditio Doctrinae tuae ulli deesset aetati, cum & apud veteres reverentiam ipsam signi∣ficationum species obtineret, & apud nos certiora essent experimenta rerum quam aenigmata figurarum. Illius namque Sa∣cerdotii anterioris habitus nostrae mentis ornatus est, & Pontificalis Gloriae non jam nobis Honor. honorem commendat ve∣strum sed Splen∣dor. splendorem animarum. Quia & illa quae tunc carnalibus blandieban∣tur obtutibus, ea potius quae ipsis erant in∣telligenda poscebant. Et idcirco famulis tuis, quaesumus, quos ad summi Sacer∣dotii Ministe∣rium. sacerdotium elegisti, hanc quae∣sumus, Domine gratiam largiaris, ut quidquid illa velamina in fulgore auri, in nitore gemmarum, & multimodi operis varitate signabant, hoc in horum moribus
claresoat. *** Comple, Domine, in Sa∣cerdotibus*** tuis mysterii tui summam, & ornamentis totius glorificationis Instru∣ctos eos. instru∣ctum coelestis unguenti flore Sanctifica. *** Hoc, Domine, copiosè in eorum caput*** influat, hoc in oris subjecta decurrat, hoc in totius corporis extrema, descendat, ut tui Spiritus virtus & Interio∣ra eorum. interiorum ora repleat, & exteriora circumtegat. Abundet in his constantia fidei, puritas Dilectionis, sinceritas pacis. [Sint spe∣ciosi[ munere tuo pedes horum ad Evange∣lizandum pacem, ad Evangelizandum bona tua. Da eis, Domine, mysterium re∣conciliationis in verbo, & in virtute & Signis & prodi∣giis. signorum, & prodigiorum. Sit sermo eorum & praedicatio non in persuasibili∣bus humanae sapientiae verbis, sed in osten∣sione Spiritus & Virtute. virtutis. Da eis, Do∣mine, claves Regni coelorum: Utantur ne glorientur Potestate quam tribuis in aedi∣ficationem, non in destructionem. Quod∣cunque Ligave∣rint. legaverint super terram sit Liga∣tum. lega∣tum & in coelis, Et quodqunque solve∣rint super terram sit solutum & in coelis. Quorum detinuerint peccata, detenta sint, & quorum Dimise∣rint. demiserint, tu Dimit∣tas▪ demittas. Quibenedixerit eis sit benedictus, & qui maledixerit eis, maledictionibus repleatur. Sint servi fideles & prudentes quos con∣stituas tu, Domine, super samiliam tuam,
ut dent illis cibum in tempore necessario, ut exhibeant omnem hominem perfectum. Sint solicitudine impigri, sint spiritu serventes, oderint superbiam, diligant veritatem, nec eam unquam deserant aut lassitudine aut timore superati. Non po∣nant lucem ad tenebras, nec tenebris lucem; non dicant malum bonum, nec bo∣num malum. Sint sapientibus & insipi∣entibus debitores, & sructum de pro∣sectu omnium consequantur.] Tribuas] eis, Domine, Cathedram Episcopalem adDesunt haec in [] in pluri∣mis MSS. regendam Ecclesiam tuam, & plebem u∣niversam. Sis eis autoritas, sis eis Po∣testas, sis eis firmitas. Multiplices su∣per eos benedictionem, & gratiam tuam, ut ad exorandam semper misericordiam tuam munere idonei, tua gratia possint esse devoti; per Dominum nostrum, &c. The CONSECRATION. O God of all the Honours, O God of all the Dignities, that serve in the Holy offices to thy glory, O God who when thou instructedst Moses thy servant with a secret and familiar af∣fection, among other Instructions of the heavenly Ornaments, didst teach him the Priestly Garments and commandedst him to cloath Aaron thy Chosen, when
he did officiate, that the following ages might be instructed by those who went before them, that the knowledge of thy Doctrine might be wanting in no age, the appearance of the things sig∣nified being Reverenced among the Ancients, but among us the real Ex∣periments are more certain than the riddles of figures. For the habit of the former Priesthood in us is the Or∣nament of our minds, and it is not the shining of our Cloaths, but of our Souls that commends in us the honour of the Priestly Glory; because they did more desire those things that pleased their carnal eyes than the things they should have understood by them. And therefore we beseech thee, O Lord, grant this grace to those thy Servants whom thou hast chosen to the Mini∣stry of the High Priesthood, that whatever those garments signified in the shining of the Gold, in the bright∣ness of the Gems, and in the curi∣ousness of the Workmanship, all that may appear in their Manners. **Ac∣complish,** O Lord, in thy Priests the fullness of thy Mystery, and having adorned him with all the Ornaments of Glory: Sanctifie him with the flow∣er** of the heavenly Oyntment. **Let
that, O Lord, fall plentifully on their head, and run down the rest of their face and descend to the extremities of their body, that the vertue of thy Spirit may fill them inwardly, and compass them about outwardly. Let the Constancy of Faith, the Purity of Love, and the sincerity of peace a∣bound in them. [Let their feet through[ All this be∣twe [] is wting in many Rituals. thy favour be beautiful to preach peace and to preach thy good things. Give them, O Lord, the ministry of Recon∣ciliation, in word and in power, in signs and wonders. Let their Discours and Preaching be not in the perswading words of human Wisdom, but in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Give them, O Lord, the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Let them use, but not glory in their Power which thou givest them, to Edification and not to Destruction: Whatsoever they shall bind on earth, let it be bound in heaven, and what they shall loose on earth, let it be loosed in heaven; whose sins they retain, let them be re∣tained, and whose they remit, do thou remit. Who blesses them, let him be blessed, and who curses them, let him be filled with Curses; and let them be faithful and wise Servants, whom thou
shalt appoint over thy houshold to give them meat in due season, that they may present every man perfect. Make them diligent in business and fervent in Spirit. Make them hate pride and love truth, and let them never forsake it either through weariness or fear. Let them not put light for darkness, nor darkness for light, nor call evil good nor good evil. Let them be debtors both to the wise and unwise, that they may gather fruit from the profiting of all men.] Give them, O Lord, an Epi∣scopal[ Chair for the Governing of thy Church and whole people. Be thou to them Authority, Power, and Strength. Multiply upon them thy Blessing and grace, that being fitted by thy gift al∣ways to implore thy mercy they may be devout by thy Grace: Through our Lord Iesus Christ. There follow some Collects that are called in the Rubrick Super Oblata, which belong to the Office of the Com∣munion, and are Prayers for the Bi∣shop; and this is all in that Ritual, that relates to the Ordination of a Bi∣shop. The Second Ritual, in all things a∣grees with the former. The Third Ritual, begins that Office
with the second Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, about the Conse∣cration of Bishops then follow the Col∣lects, Oremus, Adesto, and Propitiare, as in the first; then the Prayer of Con∣secration, Deus Honorum omnium. And at the word Comple the Bishop takes the Chrism, and at the words Hoc Domine he pours it on the head of the person to be Consecrated, but all from Sin∣ceritas Pacis, to Tribuas ei Domine, is left out, then follow the Collects Super oblata, there is no more in that Ritual. For the Annointing of Bishops, tho it was neither used in the Eastern nor A∣frican Churches, yet both Pope Srm. 8. de pass. Dom. Leo and Gregory the Great mention it as a Rite then received in the Roman Church. in 1 Reg. cap. 10. Amalarius gives an accout of it, but cites no ancienter Author for it than Lib. c. 14. Lib. 3. de Tab. cap. 9. See Morin. Ex. 6. c. 2. Beda, for some other Authorities that are brought to prove the greater An∣tiquity of this Rite, are either Allego∣rical or relate to the Chrism, with which all were annointed at their Con∣firmation. The Fourth Ritual, has first the Que∣stions that are put to the Bishop that is to be Ordained, which has begun, it seems, from the time of the fourth Coun∣cil of Carthage, where by the first Ca∣non
the Bishop was to be examined, both about his Faith and Manners. I shall only set down two of these, the one is. Vis ea quae ex Divinis scripturis intelli∣gis, plebem cui Ordinandus es & ver∣bis docere & exemplis? Wilt thou both by the words and example instruct the people, for whom thou art to be Or∣dained, in those things which thou dost understand out of the Holy Scriptures? To which he answers, I will. And this alone were there no more, may serve to justify those Bishops, who got Orders in the Church of Rome, and afterwards received the Reformation; since by the very Sponsions given in their Ordinati∣on, they had engaged themselves to in∣struct their Flocks according to the Scri∣ptures. Another Question is, Vis esse subditus huic nostrae Sedi atque Obedi∣ens? Wilt thou be subject and obedient to this our See. Which was no other than what every Metropolitan demanded of all the Bishops under him, and yet this is all the obedience then promised to the Pope; far different from the Oaths which were afterwards exacted. But I go on to give an account of the rest of the Office according to this Ritual. in the Rubrick, the Second Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage is set
down, to which is added. Hoc facto accipiat patinam cum Oblatis & Calicem cum vino, & det ei, dicens, Accipe Po∣testatem offerre Sacrificium, &c. Which being done he shall take the Paten, with the Hosties and the Chalice with the Wine, and shall give him, saying, Re∣ceive Power to offer Sacrifice, &c. So that this was used in the Consecra∣tion of Bishops, long before it was in the making of Priests, then follow O∣remus, Adesto, and Propitiare as they are before set down, then two new Rites are set down, the Rubrick is. Ad Annulum dandum. MEmor sponsionis & desponsatio∣nis Ecclesiasticae, & Dilectionis domini Dei tui in die, qua assecutus es hunc honorem, cave ne obliviscaris il∣lius. Accipe ergo annulum discretionis, & honoris fidei signum, ut quae signn∣da sunt, signes: Et quae aperienda sunt prodas: Quae liganda sunt, liges: quae solvenda sunt, solvas: utque credenti∣bus per fidem baptismatis, lapsis autem sed poenitentibus, per mysterium recon∣ciliationis januas regni coelestis aperias: Cunctis verò de thesauro dominico nova & vetera proferas, ut ad aeternam sa∣lutem
omnibus consulas, gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi, cui cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto est honor & gloria in saecula saeculorum, Amen. For giving the Ring. BEing mindful of the sponsion and Ec∣clesiastical wedding, and of the Love of the Lord God, in the day in which thou hast attained this honour, beware least thou forget it: Receive therefore the Ring the Seal of discre∣tion, and of the honour of Faith, that thon maist seal the things that are to be sealed, and maist open the things that are to be opened, and maist bind the things that are to be bound, and maist loose the things that are to be loosed, and maist open the Gates of the heavenly Kingdom to the believers, by the Faith of Baptism: and to those that have fallen, but are Penitent, by the mysterie of Reconciliation, and that thou maist bring forth to all Men out of the treasure of the Lord, things new and old, and that thou maist take care of all their Eternal Salvation, Through the Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom, &c.
Ad Baculum dandum. ACcipe Baculum sacri Regiminis si∣gnum, ut imbecilles consolides, ti∣tubantes confirmes, praves corrigas in viam salutis aeternae, habeasque potesta∣tem atrahendi dignos, & corrigendi indignos, cooperante Domino nostro Ie∣su Christo, cui cum patre in unitate Spi∣ritus Sancti est virtus & imperium, per omnia saecula saeculorum. Amen. For giving the Staff. REceive the Staff, the sign of the sacred Government; that thou maist strengthen the weak, confirme them that stagger, correct the wicked in the way of Eternal salvation, and may have power to attract the worthy and correct the unworthy, through the assistance of our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom, &c. Then follows the Prayer of Conse∣cration, and at the words Hoc Domine, the Rubrick appoints the Chrism to be put on his head, and what is left out in the former Ritual, is also left out in this, after that Prayer follows the Col∣lect Super Oblata. and there is no more in that Ritual.
For these rites of the Ring and Staff, the first I find that mentions them is De ▪ offi. li. 2. ca. 5. dore, who both speaks of them and  sets down some of the words used in the former Ritual. Yet Lib. d i. offic. ap. Qaliter Eopus oretur in Eccles. Romana. Alcuinus speaks not a word of it, tho he entitles his Chaper; The manner in which a Bi∣shop is Ordained in the Roman Church. But i seems he has only lookt on some more Antient Rituals, in which there was no such Rite; for it is most certain that it was used in his time. Lib. 2. de Eccles. offic. cap. 14. Amalari∣us tho he does at a great length insist on the annointing of the Bishop; yet speaks not a word of the Staff or Ring. But Lib. de In∣stit. Cler. cap. 4. Rabanus Maurus who lived in that time does mention it, or rather sets down Isidores words without citing him, but whether these were foisted in or not, I cannot judge. Now these Rites were afterwards a ball of Contention; for the Emperours and Kings did give the Investiture by them which had they been given with our such words, they might have more easily kept upSee Pet. de Marca, Con∣cor. Sac. & Imp. l. 8. c. 19. n. 9. their pretension; but the words joyned with them, relating wholly to Spiritual things, were no doubt made a great Ar∣gument for taking them out of their hands: Since it seemed very incongru∣ous for a Secular and Lay person, to pro∣nounce
them or perform a Rite to which such words were added. The Fifth Ritual has only the Col∣lects, Adesto, and Propitiare, and the Prayer of Consecration, (without the Rubrick for giving the Chrism,) and the Collects Super Oblata; leaving out in the Prayer of Consecration what is left out in the two former Rituals. The Sixth Ritual has the Collects A∣desto and Propitiare with the Prayer of Consecration, as in the first (in which the Rubrick about putting the Chrism on the head is also) then fol∣lows a new Prayer, that is in no other Ritual, for the Bishop thus Ordained, after which there is a Blessing called De septiformi Spiritu, For the sevenfold Grace of the Holy Ghost, then are the hands of the Bishop Consecrated with holy Oyl, and the Chrism, with these words. Consecratio manuum Episcopi ab Ar∣chiepiscopo, Oleo sancto & Chris∣mate. UNgantur manus istae & sanctificen∣tur & in te Deo Deorum ordi∣nentur. Ungo has manus oleo sanctifi∣cato & Chrismate unctionis purificato,
sicut unxit Moyses verbo oris sui Manus S. Aaron Germani sui, & sicut unxit Spiritus Sanctus per suos flatus, manus suorum Apostolorum, ita ungantur ma∣nus istae & sanctificentur, & consecren∣tur, ut in omnibus sint perfectae, in no∣mine tuo, Pater, Filiique tui atque ae∣terni Spiritus S. qui es unus ac summus Dominus omnium vivorum & mortuo∣rum, manens in Saecula Saeculorum. LET these hands be annointed and Sanctified and Ordained for the God of Gods. I annoint these hands with Sanctified Oyl, and the puri∣fied Chrism of annointing; as Moses by the word of his mouth annointed holy Aaron his brother, and as the Holy Ghost by his breathings did annoint the hands of his Apostles, so let these hands be Annointed, Sanctified and Consecrated, that they may be per∣fect in all things in thy name, O Father, and in thy Sons, and thy Holy Spirit's, who art the only and great God of the quick and of the dead for ever and ever. Amen. Then his head is annointed with the following words.
Hic mittatur oleum super ejus. UNgatur & Consecretur caput tuum coelesti benedictione in Ordinem Pontificalem, in nomine Patris & Filii & Spiritus Sancti. LET thy head be annointed and Consecrated with a heavenly Bles∣sing for the Pontifical Order, in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. Then the Staff is Blessed in these words in Verse: Tu Baculus nostrae, & Rector per saecula vitae. Istum sanctifica pietatis jure Bacillum, Quo mala sternantur, quo semper recta regantur. Thou who art the Staff of our Life, and our guide, for ever sanctify this Staff, by which ill things may be beaten down and right things always guided. Then the Staff is given and after that the Ring, almost with the same words that are in the Fourth Ritual, then fol∣lows a Prayer that he may ascend the Episcopal Chair, then he is put in the Chair and a Prayer is made for him that he may resemble the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles and Saints, and in the end he is Blessed in these words. Benedictio ejusdem Sacerdotis. POpulus te Honoret, adjuvet te Domi∣nus, quidquid petieris praestet tibi Deus, cum honore, cum castitate, cum sci∣entia, cum largitate, cum Charitate, cum Nobilitate. Dignus sis, Iustus sis, Humilis sis, Sincerus sis, Apostolus Christi sis. Accipe Benedictionem & Apostola∣tum qui permaneat in die ista & in die sutura. Angeli sint ad dexteram tuam, Apostoli Coronati ad sinistram: Eccle∣sia sit mater tua & altare, sit Deus Pa∣ter tuus, sint Angeli amici tui, sint A∣postoli sratres tui & Apostolatus tui gra∣dum custodiant. Confirmet te Deus in Iustitia, in Sanctitate, in Ecclesia San∣cta. Angeli recipiant te, & pax tecum indiscrepabilis, per Redemptorem Domi∣num nostrum Iesum Christum, qui cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto vivit & regnat in saecula saeculorum. Amen. MAY the people Honour thee, may God assist thee and grant thee whatsoever thou shalt ask of Him, with Honour, Chastity, Knowledg, Boun∣ty, Charity, and Nobility. Be thou
Worthy, Just, Humble, Sincere, and an Apostle of Christ. Receive a Bles∣sing and an Apostleship which shall con∣tinue for this time and that which is to come. Let Angels be at thy right hand and crowned Apostles at thy left. Let the Church and the Altar be thy Mother, and God thy Father. Let the Angels be thy Friends, and the Apostles thy Brethren, and guard the degree of thy Apostleship. May God strengthen thee in Justice▪ in Holiness, and in the Holy Church, and may Angels receive thee, and inseparable Peace be with thee, Through our Lord Iesus Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit reigns and lives for ever and ever. Amen. The Seventh Ritual has first the se∣cond Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, then the Exhortation to the people, then the Collects, Oremus, Ad∣esto and Propitiare, then the Prayer of Consecration, and then the annointing of the hands, then follows the Commu∣nion Service. The Eighth Ritual, begins the Office of Consecrating a Bishop with the Col∣lect Adesto. Then follows a new Rite of giving the Gospel with these words:
ACcipe hoc Evangelium, & ito, doce om∣nes Gentes. REceive this Gospel, and go, and teach all Nations. Then follows the Propitiare, and the Prayer of Consecration, and the Gi∣ving the Staff, and Ring without any more. This Rite of delivering the Gospels, it seems was never generally received, for it is in none of the other Rituals pub∣lished by Morinus, but is now in the Roman Pontifical. The Ninth Ritual begins this Office with the Form in which the Kings of France did then choose their Bishops, then follows an Oath of Obedience to the Patriarchal See (no mention being made of the Pope or See of Rome,) then the Ring is Blessed with a particular Benediction, and it is given with the words in the Fourth Ritual. The Staff is next Blessed as in the Sixth Ritual, and given as in the Fourth Ritual. Then follow the Collects Oremus, Adesto, and Propitiare, then the Prayer of Conse∣cration as in the First Ritual, then fol∣lows another long Prayer, after which follows the Annointing of the hands and
head, and the Blessing for the sevenfold Grace of the Holy Ghost. Then fol∣lows the Communion Service. The Tenth Ritual, has only the Col∣lects Adesto, and Propitiare, and the prayer of Consecration with the Collects Super Oblata. And on the Margin, the giving of the Ring and Staff is set down, but with a very different and much la∣ter hand. The Eleventh Ritual, begins with some rites that are not in the Roman Pontifical, tho by it all is to be done in the Popes name, by a Bishop Commis∣sioned, by him called Dominus Apostolicus, or perhaps the Pope himself, that being the common way of designing the Pope in those Ages; the Dean or Arch-presbyter and the Clergy of the See, ask the Pope or his Delegate their Blessing three times, then they are asked some questions a∣bout the Elect Bishop, among which those are considerable. It is asked, if he be of that Church? to which it is answered, Yes. Then, what Function he is of? Answ. Of the Priestly. Quest. How many years has he been a Priest? Ans. Ten. Quest. Was he ever Married? Answer, Not. After these Questions are put, then the Decree of Electing him, which is addressed to the Pope, is
read, by which they desire he may be Ordained their Bishop. This must be signed by them all. Then it is asked, if any Simoniacal promises be made? they answer, No. Then the Bishop Elect is brought to the Popes Delegate, who first puts the same Questions to him that were before put to the Dean, and he answers them in the same manner. Then the Introitus is sung, after which fol∣lows the Collect Adesto, then the Que∣stions that are in the Pontifical are put to him, and whereas in the former Ri∣tuals there was only a general promise of Obedience to the Metropolitan, put to the Elect Bishop, instead of that the two following Questions are put to him. Wilt thou reverently Receive, Teach, and Keep the Traditions of the Orthodox Fathers, and the Decretal Constitutions of the Holy and Aposto∣lick See? Answer, I will. Wilt thou bear Faith and Subjection to St. Peter, (to whom the Lord gave the Power of binding and loosing,) and to his Vi∣cars and Successors? Answer, I will. But these words not being thought full e∣nough, they have since added (to Faith and Subjection,) and Obedience in all things, according to the Authority of the Canons, then the Elect Bishop is ex∣amined
about his Faith, the Questions being taken out of the three Creeds. After which he is blessed and cloathed with the Episcopal Vestments, and the Epistle is read, 1 Tim. 3. Cap. Then his Sandals and Gloves are put on with Pray∣ers at each of these Rites, then the Bi∣shops laying the Gospels on his head and shoulders, and their hands on his head▪ the Ordainer says the Collects Adesto, Oremus and Propitiare, then follows the Prayer that in former Rituals is called the Consecration, but has no such Ru∣brick here, it has all that is in the first Ritual, only after the words Coelestis Unguenti Flore Sanctifica, the Rite of Annointing the head with the words joyned to it in the Sixth Ritual, is in∣serted, after which follows the rest of that Prayer: Next the hands are an∣nointed, and words somewhat different from those in the Sixth Ritual are pro∣nounced. Then follows a new Rite of putting the Chrism on his Thumb, with a Blessing joyned to it, then the Ring is blessed and given, and so is also the Staff; then the Kiss of Peace is given, and he is set down among the Bishops, and the Ordainer, sits down and washes his hands and puts Incense in the Censer, and gives the Blessing, then follows the Service of the Communion.
To this Ritual Morinus had added an ancient piece of a Ritual which he found in a MSS. at Tholose about the Election, Examination, and Ordina∣tion of Bishops in the Roman Church, which in all things agrees with the former except in an Addition which is also men∣tioned by Alcuinus. I shall set it downLi. De Div. Offi. See inter opera Bernar. Con. ad Clerum. rope inem. in Latin without a Translation, which in modesty I ought not to give: By it the Reader will see what the Roman Church gained by pressing the Celibate of the Clergy so much since they were suspect∣ed of such horrid Crimes, and were to be tryed about them. The words are: Inquirat illum de quatuor Capitulis secundum Canones, id est, de Ar∣senoquita, quod est Coitus cum Masculo: pro Ancilla Deo sacrata quae à Francis Nonna dicitur, pro quadrupedibus & mu∣liere alio viro conjuncta, aut si conjugem habuit ex alio viro, quae à Graecis dicitur Deuterogamia: & dum nihil eorum ipse vir conscius suerit, Evangeliis ad medium deductis jurat ipse Electus Archidiacono & posthaec traditur Subdiacono & per∣git cum praesato Electo ad Aulam Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae, ibique supra ejus sacra∣tissimum Corpus confirmet, quod non cog∣novisset superius nominata capitula. And thus, if they were free of these
Crimes which are not to be named, no other act of uncleanness was to be inqui∣red after or stood upon: only the Pha∣risaical Spirit of that Age is to be observed, in that they reckon a Church∣mans having been married to another mans wife, which is forbidden by no Law of God or Nature, in the same Predi∣cament with those Abominations which God punished with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. The Twelfth and Thirteenth Rituals have not the office of Consecrating Bi∣shops in them. The Fourteenth Ritual begins with the Decree of Election, directed to the Metropolitan without that previous examination that is in the Eleventh; then follows the examination of the Faith and manners of the Bishop Elect, then the people pray he may be Or∣dained, after which two Bishops begin the Litany (this is in no ancienter Ri∣tual,) then the Hymn Veni Creator is begun (which is also new being in no other Ritual,) after which they lay the Gospels on his head and lay on their hands, and the Metropolitan says the Collect Oremus; then follows the Propitiare, which is called the Be∣nediction, then follows the Prayer Deus
honorum, after which there is another long Prayer that is in no other Ritual, for a blessing in the Function to which he is Ordained, then follows the blessing of the Sevenfold Grace, then the Conse∣cration of the Bishops hands with the Oyl and the Chrism, then the Chrism is put on his head, (as the Oyl was by other Rituals put on his head in the midst of the Prayer Deus honorum om∣nium) then follows a new Rite of put∣ting the Miter on his head, but no words are pronounced with it, then the Ring is blessed and given; so also is the Staff blessed and given; then there is a Prayer about the putting him in his Chair; after which he is put in his Chair and a new Prayer is used, and all ends with the Blessing that is at the end of the Sixth Ritual. The Fifteenth Ritual has no consi∣derable variation from the former, only in the beginning the Bishop that presents the Bishop Elect says, Reverende Pater, po∣stulat sancta Mater Ecclesia ut hunc prae∣sentem Presbyterum ad onus Episcopatus sublevetis. Reverend Father, the Holy Church our Mother desires that you may raise this Priest to the burden of a Bishoprick. Then the Consecration is made with the Collects Adesto, Ore∣mus
and Propitiare said with a middle voice. Then follows the other Prayer in which his head is annointed, which in this Ritual is called a Preface, tho in most of the former it be called the Consecration, then follows the blessing of the Staff; in the end the Blessing is given to the Bishop. The Last Ritual agrees in all things with the Pontifical as it now is, only the words Receive the Holy Ghost are in none of these Antient Rituals which Mo∣rinus saw, tho the latest of those be not above three hundred years old. To these I shall add an account of the Consecration of a Bishop, as it is in the Ordo Romanus. The Office begins with the Decree bearing the Election of the Bishop, with a desire that he be Ordained as soon as may be, directed to the Bishops of the Province, then follows the First Canon of the Fourth Council of Carthage, af∣ter which is the Metropolitans letter ap∣proving the Election, and desiring the Bishop Elect to be brought to him; when he is brought he is blessed in Or∣der to his Consecration, then the An∣tiphona and the Introitus are said, af∣ter this follows the examination of his Faith and Manners: as in the Eleventh
Ritual. Then the Epistle is read, after which his Gloves and Sandals, and his Dalmatica (a Vestment in the fashion of a Cross, first used in Dalmatia,) are put on, and Collects are used in every one of these; then follows the Exhor∣tation that is in the antientest of Mo∣rinus his Rituals: after which two Bi∣shops lay the Gospels on his neck and Shoulders, and all the Bishops lay on their hands on his head, and the Or∣dainer says the Prayer Adesto, then the Oremus which in the Rubrick is called Praesatio, then the Propitiare which the Rubrick calls Oratio, then follows the Prayer called in other Rituals the Con∣secration, but in this it is called Praesa∣tio, which is the same that was set down in the antientest Ritual; after Sancti∣fica the Chrism is poured on the Bishops head, in the Form of a Cross with the words in the sixth Ritual. Then fol∣lows the annointing of his hands, after that the putting the Chrism on his Thumb, then the Blessing and giving the Ring and Staff, then follows the Blessing and Communion, then follow the Letters that testify the Bishops Con∣secration, called Literae Formatae, then the Popes Edict to the Bishop Ordained, containing very wholesome admoniti∣ons;
then there is a Sermon and an Ex∣hortation, which contain many excel∣lent Instructions and Directions which de∣serve to be often read and well consi∣dered. From all the Premisses it clearly ap∣pears, that the Church of Rome did ne∣ver tye these Offices to any constant un∣alterable Forms, but that in all Ages there very great alterations were made. And what was more antiently the Prayer of Consecration, was of later times called [Praesatio] a Preface, and what was in the antient Rituals only a Prayer for the Bi∣shops that were to be Ordained, is now the Prayer of Consecration; for now in the Roman Pontifical, all that is said in the Consecration of a Bishop when they lay hands on his head, is Receive the Holy Ghost, and then follows the Col∣lect Propitiare. So that it is very un∣reasonable and an impudent thing, in the Emissaries of that Church, to raise scruples about our Ordinations, because we have changed the Forms, since they have made many more and greater Al∣terations of the more Primitive and an∣tient Forms. With this I should end this Appendix, which already grows too big, but I will only add one Particular more about the
Oath that is in the Pontifical, to be sworn by all Bishops. It is in none of all these antient Rituals, nor ever mention∣ed by Morinus, so that it seems though it was at first made by Pope Gregory the seventh, yet it was long before it was generally received or put into the Ri∣tuals. For the Readers further satisfa∣ction, I shall here set down all I can find about Oaths made to Popes. At first there was nothing exacted but a Promise of obedience, such as all Infe∣riours gave to Superiours. Then there was a particular vow made by such as the Popes sent in Missions. The first in∣stance of this is an Oath which Boniface Bishop of Mentz, (who is called the A∣postleHe died  Anno 755. of the Germans,) swore to Pope Gregory the second, about the beginning of the Eighth Century, which follows as it is among his Epistles. In nomine Domini Dei & Salvatoris no∣stri Jesu Christi, Imperante Domino Leone à Deo coronato magno Impe∣ratore, Anno sexto, post Consulatum ejus Anno sexto, sed & Constantino Magno Imperatore ejus Filio, Anno quarto, Indictione sexta. PRomitto Ego Bonifacius, Gratia DeiPost Epist. 11. Episcopus, vobis Beato Petro Apo∣stolorum
Principi, vicarioque tuo beato Papae Gregorio, successoribusque ejus, perL. 1. vit. e. 19. Mo∣gunt. p. 343. Patrem & Filium & Spiritum Sanctum. Trinitateminseparabilem, & hoc sacratissi∣mum Corpus tuum, Me omnem fidem & pu∣ritatem sanctae fidei Catholicae exhibere: & in Unitate ejusdem fidei, Deo cooperan∣te, persistere: in qua omnis Christiano∣rum salus, sine dubio esse comprobatur: nullo modo me contra Unitatem Commu∣nis & Universalis Ecclesiae, suadente quopiam, consentire: sed ut dixi, fidem & puritatem meam atque concursum ti∣bi & utilitatibus tuae Ecclesiae, cui àMat. 16. Joh. 21.  Domino Deo Potestas ligandi solvendi∣que data est, & praedicto vicario tuo, atque successoribus ejus, per omnia exhi∣bere. Sed & si cognovero Antistites con∣tra Instituta antiqua sanctorum Patrum conversari, cum eis nullam habere com∣munionem aut conjunctionem: Sed ma∣gis, si valuero prohibere, prohibeam: si minus vero fideliter statim Domino meo Apostolico renunciabo. Quod si, quod absit, contra hujus promissionis meae se∣riem aliquid facere quolibet modo, seu ingenio, vel occasione tentavero, reus in∣veniar in aeterno judicio; Ultionem A∣naniaeAct. 1. 5. & Saphirae incurram, qui vobis, etiam de rebus propriis, fraudem sacere, vel salsum dicere praesumpserunt. Ho
autem Indiculum Sacramenti Ego Boni∣sacius exiguus Episcopus, manu propria scripsi, atque positum supra sacratissi∣mum corpus tuum, ut superius leguntur, Deo teste & judice, praestiti Sacramen∣tum, quod & conservare promitto. In the name of God and our Saviour Ie∣sus Christ, in the sixth year of Leo the Great, crowned by God Emperour, the sixth year after his Consulat, and the Fourth year of Constantine the Great, Emperour, his Son, the Sixth Indi∣ction. I Boniface, by the Grace of God Bi∣shop, promise to you St. Peter, Princ of the Apostles, and to thy blessed Vi∣car Pope Gregory, and his Successors, by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the Inseparable Trinity, and by this thy most Sacred Body, That I shall shew forth all the Faith and purity of the Holy Catholick Faith, and that God assisting me, I shall persist in the Unity of the same Faith, in which the Salvation of all Christians does with∣out all doubt consist: and that I shall in no sort, and upon no persuasion, concur against the Unity of the com∣mon and Universal Church: but that as I
have said, I shall shew forth my Faith and Purity and give my concurrence in all things to thee, and the advan∣tages of thy Church, (to whom the power of binding and loosing is given by the Lord God) and to thy Vi∣car and his Successors. And if I shall know the Bishops carry themselves contrary to the antient appointments of the Holy Fathers, I shall have no communion nor conjunction with them; but rather if I can, I shall hinder it, and if I cannot, I shall presently give notice of it faithfully to My Apostoli∣cal Lord. And if (which God for∣bid) I shall endeavour to do any thing against the Contents of this my Promise, any manner of way, either on design or by accident, let me be found guilty in the Eternal judgment, and let me incur the punishment of A∣nanias, and Sapphira who presumed to lie and deal fraudulently, (even about their own goods) to thee. This Breviate of an Oath, I Boniface, a small Bishop, have written with my own hand, and having laid it on thy most blessed Body, as is before men∣tioned, I have made my Oath, God being witness and Judge, which I pro∣mise to keep.
But it appears from another letter written in the 26. year of the Reign of Constantine the Emperour, two and twenty years after the taking the former Oath, which was in the Fourth year of Constantine, that he had taken ano∣ther Oath Eight years before that, for he begins that Epistle written to Pope Zacharias with these words. POstquam me ante Annos prope trigin∣taEpist. 135. sub familiaritate & servitio A∣postolicae sedis, annuente & jubente vene∣randae memoriae antistite Apostolico Gre∣gorio anteriore voto constrinxi, &c. ALmost Thirty years ago I bound my self by a former vow under the Ob∣servance and service of the Apostolical See, by the Consent and Command of Pope Gregory of venerable Memo∣ry, &c. This is all I can find before Pope Gre∣gory the seventh, But he pretending to a higher Title, not only over Bishops, but secular Princes made some Princes swear Allegiance to him, (it ought to be cal∣led by no other name,) for the first part of the Oath in the Pontifical, of
Being faithful and obedient to the Pope, being in no. Council against him, and as∣sisting him to defend the Papacy, and the Royalties of St. Peter, &c. Was swornLib. 1. Ep. Greg. post. Ep. 21. lib. 8. post. Ep. 1. both by Richard Prince of Capua, and Robert Prince of Calabria and Sicily, when they received Investiture from that Pope in those Dominions. But the Oath which the Bishops swore, is almost the same with that which is in the Pontifical, as we find it taken by the Bishop of Aquileia, after the sixth Roman Council, in which Berengarius was condemned under that same Pope. Afterwards the Council of Lateran,Ann. 1079. under Pope Paschal the second, appointed a more modest Oath in the form of an Anathematism, in these words. ANathematizo omnem haeresin & prae∣cipueAnn. 1002. eam quae statum praesentis Ecclesiae perturbat, quae docet & astruit Anathema contemnendum & Ecclesiae ligamenta spernenda esse: Promitto autem Obedientiam Apostolicae sedis Pontifici Domino Paschali, ejusque successoribus, sub testimonio Christi & Ecclesiae: Affir∣mans quod affirmat, damnans quod dam∣nat sancta Universalis Ecclesia.
I Anathematize every Heresie, and in particular that which disturbs the State of the present Church, which teaches and asserts that an Anathema is to be contemned, and the Censures of the Church to be despised, And I promise obedience to the Apostolick See, and to our Lord Pope Paschal and his successors, under the Testimony (or in the sight) of Christ and the Church, affirming all that the Holy U∣niversal Church affirms, and condemn∣ing all that she condemns. This Oath (if the References which Labbe and Cossartius make to the fifth and sixth Epistles of Pope Paschal, be well grounded,) was all that was im∣posed by that Pope, and that not on all Bishops, but only on Archbishops, to whom he sent the Pall, and yet from the first words of these Epistles, it appears that the Princes and the States of Christendom looked on it with a∣mazement, as a new and unheard of thing, the one is to the Arch-bishop of Palermo in Sicily, and the other is dire∣cted to the Arch-bishop of Poland, (I suppose it was of Gnesna) and they both are almost the same, only the later has a great deal more than
the former. They begin with these words. SIgnificasti Regem, & Regni MajoresEp. 5. & 6. Pasch. 2. admiratione permotos, quod palli∣um tibi ab Apocrisariis nostris tali con∣ditione oblatum fuerit, si Sacramentum quod à nobis scriptum detulerant ju∣rares. THou hast signified to me, that the King and the chief of the King∣dom are amazed that the Pall was of∣fered to thee by our Legates on this condition, that thou shouldst swear the Oath which they brought to thee written by us. And if any Body desire to be satisfied about the excellent Reasonings with which the infallible Chair directed his Pen, he may read the rest of those Epistles. The next Step made in this Oath, wasLib. 2. De∣cret. Greg. Tit. 24. c. 4. set out by him, Anno 1236. by Pope Gregory the Ninth, which is in the Canon Law, where the Oath is set down to be taken by all Bishops, which differs from that in the Pontifical in these heads. The Royalties of St. Peter are not mentioned in it, nor those clauses of every Bishops sending one in his name to Rome, in case he could not go in per∣son,
nor is that of not alienating the Bishops lands without the Popes con∣sent in it. But when these additions were made, I do not find. The Im∣portance of that Oath is little Consider∣ed, since few among us read the Roman Pontifical carefully, therefore I shall set it down with a translation of it, from which it may be easily inferred, what all Princes may, or ought to expect from persons so tyed to the Pope, since a fuller and more formal allegeance, can be sworn by no Subjects to their Prince than is sworn in it to the Pope. Forma Juramenti. EGo N. Elect us ecclesiae N. ab hac hora in antea fidelis & obediens ero Beato Petro Apostolo, sanctaeque Romanae Eccle∣siae, & Domino nostro, Domino Papae N. suisque successoribus canonice intrantibus. Non ero in consilio, aut consensu vel facto, ut vitam perdant, aut membrum; seu capiantur mala captione, aut in eos violenter ma∣nus quomodolibet ingerantur; vel inju∣riae aliquae inferantur quovis quaesito co∣lore. Consilium vero, quod mihi credi∣turi sunt, per se, aut nuntios suos, seu literas, ad eorum damnum, me sciente, nemini pandam. Papatum Romanum, & Regalia Sancti Petri, adjutor eis ero ad
retinendum & defendendum, salvo meo ordine, contra omnem hominem. Lega∣tum Apostolicae sedis in eundo & redeun∣do honorificè tractabo, & in suis necessi∣tatibus adjuvabo. Iura, honores, pri∣vilegia, & auctoritatem Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae, & Suc∣cessorum praedictorum, conservare, de∣fendere, augere, promovere curabo, neque ero in consilio, vel sacto, seu tractatu in quibus contra ipsum Dominum nostrum, vel eamdem Romanam ecclesiam, aliqua sinistra, vel praejudicialia personarum, juris, honoris, status, & potestatis eo∣rum machinentur. Et, si talia à quibus∣cunque tractari, vel procurari novero, impediam hoc pro posse; & quanto citius potero, significabo eidem Domino nostro, vel alteri, per quem possit ad ipsius noti∣tiam pervenire. Regulas Sanctorum Pa∣trum, decreta, Ordinationes seu dispo∣sitiones, reservationes, provisiones, & mandata Apostolica, totis viribus obser∣vabo, & saciam ab aliis observari. Hae-reticos, Schismaticos, & Rebelles eidem, Domino nostro, vel successoribus praedi∣ctis, pro posse persequar, & impugnabo▪ Vocatus ad Synodum, veniam, nisi prae∣peditus suero canonica praepeditione. A∣postolorum limina singulis trienniis perso∣naliter per me ipsum visitabo; & Domino
nostro, ac successoribus praesatis, ratio∣nem reddam de toto meo pastorali officio, ac de rebus omnibus ad me Ecclesiae statum, ad Cleri & populi disciplinam, animarum denique quae meae fidei traditae sunt, salutem, quovis modo pertinenti∣bus: Et vicissim mandata Apostolica hu∣militer recipiam, & quam diligentissime exequar. Quod si legitimo impedimen∣to detentus suero, praefata omnia adim∣plebo per certum nuntiam ad hoc speciale mandatum habentem, de gremio mei Ca∣pituli, aut alium in dignitate Ecclesiastica constitutum, seu alias personatum haben∣tem, aut, his mihi desicientibus, per diae∣cesanum sacerdotem; & clero deficiente omnino, per aliquem alium Presbyterum saecularem, vel Regularem spectatae pro∣bitatis & Religionis, de supradictis om∣nibus plenè instructum. De hujusmodi autem impedimento docebo per legitimas probationes, ad sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalem proponentem in Congregatio∣ne sacri Concilii, per supradictum Nun∣tium transmittendas. Possessiones vero ad mensam meam per∣tinentes non vendam, nec donabo, neque impignorabo; nec de novo ineudabo, vel aliquo modo alienabo, etiam cum consen∣su Capituli Ecclesiae meae, inconsulo Ro∣mano Pontifice; & si ad aliquam aliena∣tionem
devenero; paenas in quadam super hoc edita Constitutione contentas, eo ipso incurrere volo. IN. Elect of the Church N. from this hour forward, shall be faithful and obedient to St. Peter the Apostle and the Holy Ro∣man Church, and our Lord the Pope N. and his Successors that shall enter canoni∣cally. I shall be in no Council, Consent, or Fact, that they lose life or member, or be taken with any ill taking, or that violent hands be any way laid on them: or any injuries be done them on any pre∣tended colour. And whatever Council they shall trust me with, either by them∣selves, their Nuntio's, or Letters; I shall knowingly reveal to none to their hurt. I shall help them to retain and defend the Roman Papacy and the Roy∣alties of Saint Peter against all men, sa∣ving my own Order. I shall treat the Legate of the Apostolick See honorably, both in his going and coming, and shall help him in his necessities. I shall take care to preserve, defend, increase and promote the Rights, Honors, Privi∣ledges, and Authority of the Holy Roman Church of our Lord the Pope, and his Successors foresaid. I shall nei∣ther be in Council, Fact, or Treaty,
in which any thing shall be contrived against the said our Lord or the same Roman Church, or any thing that may be prejudicial to their Persons, Right, Honor, State, or Power. And if I know such things to be treated or pro∣cured by any body, I shall hinder it all I can, and as soon as is possible shall signifie it to the said our Lord, or any other by whom it may come to his knowledg. The Rules of the Holy Fathers, and the Decrees, Orders, or Ap∣pointments, Reservations, Provisions, or Mandates Apostolical; I shall observe with all my strength, and make them to be observed by others, and I shall according to my power, persecute and oppose all Hereticks, Schismaticks, and Rebells, against the said our Lord, and his Successors. I shall come to a Coun∣cil when called, if I be not hindred by some Canonical Impediment; I shall personally visit the thresholds of the A∣postles every third year, and shall give an account to our Lord and his said Successors of my whole pastoral charge, and of all things that shall any way belong to the State of my Church, and the Discipline of my Clergy and People, and the salvation of the Souls committed to my trust. And I shall
on the other hand humbly receive and diligently execute the Apostolical Com∣mand. And if I be detained by any lawful Impediment, I shall perform the foresaid things by a special Messenger that shall have my particular Mandate be∣ing either of my Chapter or in some Ec∣clesiastical Dignity, or in some Parsonage or these failing, by any Priest of my Dio∣cess, or failing any of these, by any Priest secular or regular, of signal Probity and Religion, who shall be fully instructed in all things aforesaid. And I shall give lawful proofs of the foresaid Impedi∣ment which I shall send by the fore∣said Messenger to the Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church that is Proponent in the Congregation of the Holy Coun∣cil. I shall neither sell, give, Mortage, nor invest of new, nor any way alienate the possessions that belong to my Table, notwithstanding the consent of the Chapter of my Church without con∣sulting the Pope of Rome. And if I make any such Alienation, I am willing to incur the penalties contained in a Constitution thereupon set forth. The Inferences that may be drawn from this Oath are so obvious, that I shall not trouble the Reader with any, know∣ing that every one will easily make them. FINIS.
