c4180a 99828947 33380
A FORM OF Thanksgiving To be Used In all Churches in and near about London, immediately upon His Majesties Return, and to be con∣tinued till the Day of Publick Thanksgiving. By Her Majesties special Command. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1691.
Whitehall October 17. 1691. IT is Her Majesties Pleasure, That this Prayer be Printed and used. Nottingham.
Instead of The Prayer for the King, while His Majesty was abroad in the Wars, This fol∣lowing Thanksgiving shall be used in all Churches in and near about, London, immediately upon His Majesties Return, and be continued till the Day of Publick Thanksgiving, which will shortly be appointed. ALmighty and most graci∣ous God, we bless and magnifie thy great and glorious Name, for thy late Mercies to us of these Kingdoms, in raising up thy Servant King WILLIAM to be a Deliverer to us in the day of our Distress, and to rescue us from Po∣pish Tyranny and Superstition and all those Miseries and Calamities which were ready to break in upon us. We also acknowledge with all thank∣fulness the wonderful Success which thou hast been pleased to give to their Majesties Forces in Ireland, even to th
entire Reducing of that Kingdom. More especially, we bless thee for thy merciful preservation of the King from the great and manifold Dangers to which his Royal Person was exposed during his late Expedition; and that of thy great goodness thou hast beén pleased to restore him to us in safety, to the great Comfort and Ioy of thy People: Humbly beseeching thee still to continue their Majesties under the watchful Care of thy Providence; and to protect their Sacred Persons from all secret Practices and open Violence, that no Weapon, no Design formed against them may prosper: And to make them at last the happy Instru∣ments of Establishing that great De∣liverance which thy Providence by them hath wrought for us in so visible a man∣ner, that all the World may see that Thou art our Saviour and mighty Deliverer: Which we humbly beg for thy Mercies sake in Iesus Christ, our Blessed Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. FINIS.
