C4121 R162 12952423 95967
A FORM OF COMMON PRAYER, VVITH THANKSGIVING, FOR THE Late Victory By His Majesties Naval Forces: Appointed to be used in and about London, On Tuesday the 14th of August; And Through all ENGLAND, On Thursday the 23d of August. Set forth by His Majesties Authority. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1666.
The Order for Morning Prayer. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture; and then say the Exhortation that followeth. I Exhort, that first of all suppli∣cations, 1 Tim. 2. 1. prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; For Kings, and for all that are 2. in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 3. God our Saviour. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknowledge and con∣fess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to renderthanks for the great
benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole congrega∣tion after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost shéep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, ac∣cording to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord; and grant, O most merci∣ful Father, for his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness
and live, and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remis∣sion of their sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly be∣lieve his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beséech him to grant us true repentance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶ The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen. ¶ Then shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also repeating it with him. OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespas∣ses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. ¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord open thou our lips. Answ. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God, make speed to save us,
Answer. O Lord make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ In stead of Venite exultemus shall be sung or said this Hymn following; one Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and people. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto Ps. 115. 1. thy Name be the praise. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: yea unto Ps. 75. 1 thee do we give thanks. For great things are they, that thou hast done: Ps. 71. 17. O God, who is like unto thée? Thou art the God, that doeth wonders: Who is Ps. 77. 14, 13. so great a God as our God? The Lord hath done great things for us: yea the Ps. 126. 3, 4 Lord hath done great things for us, for which we rejoyce. Thou art our King, O God: the Help that is done Ps. 44. 5. Ps. 74. 13. upon earth, thou do'st it thy self. Through thee have we overthrown our enemies: Ps. 44. 6. and in thy Name have we trod them under, that rise up against us.
For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword 7. that shall help me. But it is thou, that savest us from our enemies: 8. and puttest them to confusion, that hate us. We gat not the Victory through our own sword: 3. neither was it our own arm, that helped us; But thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light 4. of thy countenance: because thou hadst a favour unto us. If the Lord had not been on our side (now may Ps. 124. 1. we say:) if the Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up against us; They had swallowed us up quick: when they 2. were so wrathfully displeased at us. Yea, the waters had drowned us: the deep waters 3, 4. of the proud had gone even over our souls. But praised be the Lord: who hath not given 5. us over as a prey unto their téeth. Our help standeth in the Name of the Lord: who 7. hath made heaven and earth. God hath shewed us his goodness plenteously: Ps. 59, 10. and God hath let us sée our desire upon our enemies. Therefore will we offer in his dwelling an oblati∣on with great gladness: we will sing praises unto Ps. 27. 7. the Lord. Let Heaven and Earth praise him: the Sea, Ps. 69. 35. and All that moveth therein. Sing unto God, O ye Kingdoms of the earth: O Ps. 68. 32. sing praises unto the Lord. Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the peo∣ple: Ps. 96. 7. ascrive unto the Lord worship and power. Ascribe unto the Lord the honour due unto his 8. Name: bring presents, and come into his courts.
O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord Ps. 31. 26. preserveth them that are faithful, and plenteously rewardeth the proud doer. Blessed be the Lord our God from everlasting, Ps. 106. 46. and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: And to the holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. Asserte Domino. Psal. xxix. BRing unto the Lord, O ye mighty, bring young rams unto the Lord: ascribe unto the Lord worship, and strength. Give the Lord the honour due unto his Name: worship the Lord with holy worship. It is the Lord, that commandeth the waters: it is the glorious God, that maketh the thunder. It is the Lord, that ruleth the Sea; the voice of the Lord is mighty in operation: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice. The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedar-trées: yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Libanus. He maketh them also to skip like a calf: Liba∣nus also, and Sirion like a young unicorn. The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness: yea, the Lord shaketh the wilderness of Cades. The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to bring forth young, and discovereth the thick bushes: in his temple doth every man speak of his honour.
The Lord fitteth above the water-Iloud: and the Lord remaineth a King for ever. The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord shall give his people the blessing of peace. Exultate, justi. Psal. xxxiii. REjoyce in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it be∣cometh well the just to be thankful. Praise the Lord with harp: sing praises unto him with the lute, and instrument of ten strings. Ssing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustily unto him with a good courage. For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithful. He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is ful of the goodness of the Lord. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. He gathereth the waters of the sea together, as it were upon an heap: and layeth up the deep, as in a treasure-house. Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him, all ye that dwell in the world; For he spake, and it was done: he commanded and it stood fast. The Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: and maketh the devices of the people to be of none effect, and casteth out the counsels of Princes. The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever:
and the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation. Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord Iehovah: and blessed are the folk, that he hath chosen to him to be his inheritance. The Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld all the children of men; from the habitation of his dwelling he considereth all them that dwell on the earth. He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and un∣derstandeth all their works. There is no king, that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength. A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man: neither shall he deliver any man by his great strength. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that put their trust in his mercy. To deliver their soul from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth. Our soul hath patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our shield. For our heart shall rejoyce in him: because we have hoped in his holy Name. Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us: like as we do put our trust in thee. Deus noster refugium. Psal. xlvi. GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.
Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved: and though the hills be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof rage, and swell: and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. The rivers of the floud thereof shall make glad the city of God: the holy place of the taber∣nacle of the most Highest. God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help her, and that right early. The heathen make much ado, and the kingdoms are moved: but God hath shewed his voice, and the earth shall melt away. The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Ia∣cob is our refuge. O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he hath brought upon the earth. He maketh wars to cease in all the world: he breaketh the bowe, and knappeth the spear in sun∣der, and burneth the chariots in the fire. Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, and I will be exalt∣ed in the earth. The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Ia∣cob is our refuge. The first Lesson is part of the 16. Chap. of the first book of Chronicles, beginning at the 7. verse to the end of the 36. THen on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the Lord, into the hand of
Asaph and his brethren. Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name, make known his deeds among the people. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk you of all his wondrous works. Glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart of them rejoyce that seek the Lord. Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually. Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders, and the judgements of his mouth. O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye chil∣dren of Iacob his chosen ones. He is the Lord our God, his judgements are in all the earth. Be ye mindful always of his covenant: the word which he commanded to a thousand generations; Even of the covenant which he made with Abra∣ham, and of his oath unto Isaac: And hath con∣firmed the same to Iacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant, Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your in∣heritance. When ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it: And when they went from na∣tion to nation, and from one kingdom to another people: He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. Sing unto the Lord all the earth: shew forth from day to day his salvation. Declare his glory among the heathen, his marvellous works among all nations. For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above all gods. For all the gods of the people are idols: but the Lord made the heavens. Glory and honour are in his presence: strength and gladness are in his place. Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the
people: give unto the Lord glory and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name: bring an offering, and come before him, worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable, that it be not moved. Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoyce: and let men say among the nati∣ons, The Lord reigneth. Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields rejoyce, and all that is therein. Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the Lord, because he cometh to judge the earth. O give thanks to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and ga∣ther us together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy Name, and glory in thy praise. Blessed be the Lord God of Is∣rael for ever and ever: and all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord. ¶ After the first Lesson shall follow Te Deum Lauda∣mus in English. WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All the earth doth worship thee: the Father ever∣lasting. To thee all angels cry aloud: the heavens, and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually no cry, Holy, holy, holy: Lord God, of Sabaoth. Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory. The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee,
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee. The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee. The noble Church throughout all the world: doth acknowledge thee. The Father: of an infinite Majesty. Thine honourable: true, and onely Son. Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter. Thou art the King of glory: O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father. When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou didst not abhor the Virgins womb. When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death: thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to all believers. Thou fittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father. We believe that thou shalt come: to be our Iudge. We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious bloud. Make them to be numbred with thy saints: in glory everlasting. O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heri∣tage. Govern them: and lift them up for ever. Day by day: We magnifie thee. And we worship thy Name: ever world without end. Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin. O Lord have mercy upon us: habe mercy upon us.
O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee. O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never he confounded. For the second Lesson, 1 Pet. II. WHerefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and enbies, & all evil speakings; As new-born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: To whom coming as unto a living stone, disal∣lowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and pre∣cious, Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiri∣tual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ. Wherefore it is contained in the scripture; Be∣hold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, pre∣cious. And he that believeth on him shall not be confounded. Vnto you therefore which believe, he is precious; but unto them which be disobedi∣ent, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should shew forth the praise of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light: Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy,
but now have obtained mercy. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; Having your conversation honest among the Gen∣tiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorifie God in the day of disitation. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme, Or unto governours, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. As frée, and not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honour all men; love the brotherhood: Fear God; Honour the King. Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not onely to the good and gentle, but also to the fro∣ward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffer∣ed for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. Who when he was re∣viled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatned not, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he hath visited and redéemed his people. And hath raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant David. As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets: which have been since the world began. That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate us. To perform the mercy promised to our fore-fa∣thers: an to remember his holy covenant. To perform the oath which he sware to our fore∣father Abraham: that he would give us; That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies: might serve him without fear; In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life. And thou Child shalt be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways. To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their sins. Through the tender mercy of our God: where∣by the day-spring from on high hath visited us. To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to guide our feet into the way of peace. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c.
¶ Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered un∣der Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buri∣ed; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholick Church, the Communi∣on of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resur∣rection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. ¶ And after that, these prayers following, all de∣voutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy spirit. Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud voice. OUr Father which art in heaven: Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will
be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing up, shall say, O Lord shew thy mercy upon us. Answer. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord save the King. Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thée. Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord save thy people. Answer. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answer. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but onely thou, O God. Priest. O God make clean our hearts within us. Answer. And take not thy holy Spirit from us.
¶ In stead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer shall these two be used. O Almighty God, the soveraign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnifie thy great and glorious Name for this happy victory the whole glory whereof we do ascribe to thee, who art the only giver of victo∣ry. And we beseech thée, give us grace to im∣prove this great mercy to thy glory, the advance∣ment of thy Gospel, the honour of our Soveraign, and as much as in us lieth, to the good of all man∣kind. And, we beséech thée, give us such a sense of this great mercy, as may engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an humble, Ioy, and obedient walking before thée all our days, through Iesus Christ our Lord. To whom with thée and the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies, so in particular for this victory and deliverance, be all glory and honour world with∣out end. Amen. O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of de∣fence unto thy servants against the face of their enemies; We yield thée praise and thanks∣giving for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers where with we were compassed. We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto them; beséeching thée still to continue such thy mercies towards us, that all the world may know that thou art our
Saviour and mighty deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ The second Collect for Peace. O God, who art the authour of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is perfect fréedom; defend us thy humble servants in all assaults of our Enemies, that we surely trusting in thy de∣fence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ The third Collect for Grace. O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do always that is righte∣ous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Here followeth the Litany. O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy up∣on us miserable sinners. O God the Sun, Redéemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.
O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Fa∣ther and the Son: have mercy upon us misera∣ble sinners. O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Fa∣ther and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sin∣ners. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, thrée Persons and one God: have mercy upon us mi∣serable sinners. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three per∣sons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. Remember not Lord our offences, nor the of∣fences of our forefathers, neither take thou ven∣geance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redéemed with thy most precious bloud, and be not angry with us for ever. Spare us good Lord. From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord deliver us. From all blindness of heart, from pride, vain∣glory, and hypocrisie, from envy, hatred and ma∣lice, and all uncharitableness, Good Lord deliver us. From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh and the devil, Good Lord deliver us.
From lightning and tempest, from plague, pesti∣lence and famine, from battel and murder, and from sudden death, Good Lord deliver us. From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebel∣lion, from all false doctrine, heresie, and schism, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandment, Good Lord deliver us. By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Qativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation, Good Lord deliver us. By thine Agony and bloudy Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascen∣sion, and by the coming of the holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us. In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of Iudgement, Good Lord deliver us. We sinners do beseech thée to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee to rule and go∣vern thy holy Church universal in the right way. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thée to kéep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thée, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles, our most gracious King and Governour. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thée to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and that he may evermore
have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honour and glory. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory over all his ene∣mies. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Quéen Catherine, Mary the Queen Mother, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bi∣shops, Priests and Deacons, with true know∣ledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and shew it accordingly. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with grace, wis∣dom and understanding. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to execute Iustice, and to maintain Truth. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all Nations Vnity, Peace and Concord. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us an heart to
love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy Commandments. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord: That it may please thée to give to all thy peo∣ple increase of grace, to hear meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to succour, help, and comfort all that are in danger, necessity, and tri∣bulation. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all women labour∣ing of child, all sick persons and young children, and to shew thy pity upon all prisoners and cap∣tives. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thée to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thée to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thée to give us true repen∣tance, to forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. Son of God, we beséech thée to hear us. Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us. O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, Grant us thy peace. O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, Have mercy upon us. O Christ hear us. O Christ hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which art in heaven, &c. Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.
Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities. Let us pray. O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whensoever they oppress us: and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the devil or man worketh against us, be brought to nought, and by the pro∣vidence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no persecuti∣ons, may evermore give thanks unto thée in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake. O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the noble works that thou didst in their days, and in the old time before them. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honour. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. From our enemies defend us, O Christ. Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.
Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people. Favourably with mercy hear our prayers. O Son of David, have mercy upon us. Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ. Graciously hear us, O Christ; Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ. Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be shewed upon us, Answer. As we do put our trust in thée. Let us pray. WE humbly beséech thée, O Father, merci∣fully to look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and ever∣more serve thée in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our onely Me∣diatour and Advocate Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Most gracious and glorious Lord God, who by thy great power hast made, and by thine infinite wisdom dost dispose and order all things, the Protectour of those that trust in thée, and their Deliverer in time of their distress: Our Enemies compassed us about on every side, but thou hast delivered us by thy mercy. They were many, and did rage horribly, but thou, O Lord, who dwellest on high art mightier; They intended that mischief, which through thy goodness
to us they were not able to perform; And when they had marked us out for ruine, thou didst then bring upon them swift destruction. Out of the déep of the Sea we cried unto thée, O Lord, and thou didst hear us. We acknowledge and confess, O our God, that it is not our own strength that hath helped us, not the number of our Ships, nor the courage of our Souldiers, nor yet the conduct of our Commanders, but thy alone wisdom and power that hath defeated the counsels & broken the strength of our Adversaries. It is thine own right hand that purchased us this Victory. We want words to express our thankfulness, and thoughts to conceive the greatness of thy manifold Deliver∣ances; yet be thou pleased to accept the best praises that we can give, which we desire now to render unto thee from the bottom of our souls; and grant, O Lord, that we may never forget this thy won∣derful blessing, which thou hast vouchasafed not onely to us, but to all our succéeding generations, that it may still prove an incitement unto us to obey and serve thée in holiness of life; and that im∣proving this Victory to thy glory and our own good, we may obtain the like happy success in all our future Enterprises, to the glory of thy Name, through Iesus Christ our onely Saviour and Deliverer. Amen.
¶ Then shall follow this Prayer; which shall be used continually as long as the Navy is abroad. O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone hast spread out the heavens, and com∣passed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; at whose command the winds blow and who rulest the raging of the sea; Thou art terrible in all thy works of wonder, the great God to be feared above all. We therefore adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy goodness. Be pleased to receive in∣to thine Almighty and most gracious protection the persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and Qavies in which they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and from the violence of the enemy, and from every sad ac∣cident: that they may be a safeguard to our most gracious Soveraign, and his Kingdoms, and a security for such as pass on the seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them for thy mercies sake; that they may return in safe∣ty, with honour and victory, and good success, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the fruit of their labours; and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blest with plenty and prospe∣rity, peace and quietness, may serve thée our God in righteousness, and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever praise and glorifie thy holy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
¶ A Prayer of Saint Chrysostom. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplications unto thée, and dost promise, that when two or thrée are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen. 2 Cor. 13. 14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. The Communion-Service. ¶ The Priest standing at the North-side of the Lords Table, shall say, OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that we may per∣fectly love thee, and worthily magnifie thy holy name, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Minister. GOd spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: thou shalt have none other gods but me. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven I∣mage, nor the likenese of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fa∣thers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guilt∣less that take th his Name in vain. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shalt thou labour, and do all that thou hast to do; but the seventh day is the Sab∣bath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daugh∣ter, thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, thy cattel, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the se∣venth day: wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our heart; to keep this law. Minister. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt do no murder. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not commit adultery. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.
Minister. Thou shalt not steal. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts, we beseech thee. Let us pray. ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite; have mercy upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles our King and Governour, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy honour and glory: And that we and all his subjects (duly considering whose au∣thority he hath) may faithfully serve, honour, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord, who with thee & the holy Ghost,
liveth and reigneth ever one God, world without end. Amen. O Almighty God, the soveraign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnifie thy great and glorious Name for this happy victory, the whole glory whereof we do ascribe to thee, who art the onely giver of victory. And, we beséech thée, give us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy Gospel, the honour of our Soveraign, and as much as in us lieth, to the good of all mankind. And, we beséech thée, give us such a sense of this great mercy, as may engage us to a true thank∣fulness, such as may appear in our lives by an humble, holy, and obedient walking before thée all our days, through Iesus Christ our Lord: To whom with thée, and the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies, so in particular for this victory and deliverance, be all glory and honour world with∣out end. Amen. O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of de∣fence unto thy servants against the face of their enemies; We yield thée praise and thanksgiving for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed. We ac∣knowledge it thy goodness that we were not deli∣vered over as a pray unto them; beséeching thée still to contiuue such thy mercies towards us, that
all the world may know that thou art our Savi∣our and mighty deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Epistle, Phil. 4. 4. REjoyce in the Lord alway: and again I say, Re∣joyce. Let your moderation be known unto all men: The Lord is at hand. Be careful for no∣thing: but in every thing by prayer and supplicati∣on with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. And the peace of God which pas∣seth all understanding, shall kéep your hearts and minds through Christ Iesus. Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any vertue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. The Gospel. S. Matth. v. 43. YE have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine ene∣my: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you: That ye may be the chil∣dren of your Father which is in heaven; for he ma∣keth his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the Publicanes the same? And if ye salute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? do not even the Publicanes so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. I Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, ma∣ker of heaven and earth, and of all things visi∣ble and invisible: And in one Lord Iesus Christ, the onely begot∣ten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things were made: who for us men, and for our salva∣tion, came down from heaven, and was incar∣nate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made in an, and was crucified also for us un∣der Pontius Pilate; He suffered, and was buried, and the third day he rose again, according to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sit∣teth on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead: whose kingdom shall have no end. And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son toge∣ther is worshipped and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholick and Apostolick Church. I acknowledge one Baptism
for the remission of sins. And I look for the re∣surrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen. ¶ Then followeth the Sermon; and after that shall be said. LEt your light so shine before men, that they S. Mat. 5. 16. may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to S. Matt. 7. 12. you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. Let us pray for the whole state of Christs Church militant here on earth. ALmighty and everliving God, who by thy holy Apostle hast taught us to make prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men; We humbly beseech thee most mercifully (to ac∣cept our alms and oblations, and) to receive these If there be no alms or oblations, then shall the words (of accept∣ing our alms and oblations) be left out unsaid. our prayers, which we offer unto thy Divine Ma∣jesty, beséeching thee to inspire continually the uni∣versal Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love. We be∣seech thee also to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governours, and especially thy servant CHARLES our King, that under him we may be godly and quietly governed. And grant unto his whole Council, and to all that are put in Authority under him, that they may truly and in∣differently minister justice, to the punishment of
wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of thy true Religion and Vertue. Give grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops, and Curates, that they may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duely administer thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace, and e∣specially to this Congregation here present, that with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy good∣ness, O Lord, to comfort and succour all them who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity. And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy servants departed this life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their good examples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom. Grant this, O Father, for Iesus Christs sake, our onely Mediatour and Advocate. Amen. ¶ Then shall be added this Prayer following. O Lord God our strength and our salvation; We thy unworthy Servants, the sinful Peo∣ple of these three Nations, (whom by thy mira∣culous Providence thou didst lately rescue from the Miseries of a civil War at home, and bast now crowned with victory against a potent Ene∣my abroad) in grateful acknowledgement of the
so great, and often repeated Mercies, are here now before thee with humble, yet inflamed hearts, de∣sirous to offer up unto thée our Sacrifice of praise and thanks; calling Heaven and Earth to wit∣ness with us, that as it was the Miracle of thy meer Mercy, which raised us out of the depth of those miserable Confusions, in which we lay; So it is thy Power alone, O our God, by which we stand; thy good Providence, by which we prosper. More particularly, with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts we magnifie thy great and glorious Name, O Lord our God, for that remark∣able Victory, wherewith thou hast lately blest the Naval Forces of our gracious Soveraign. O con∣tinue forth thy loving kindness towards him: Let thy tender Mercies prevent, and follow him all the days of his life: Let his Reign be prosperous, and his Arms victorious; and let the blessings of safety and happy success attend all those that fight his Battels. Subdue more and more unto him the People that is under him, and the nations under his feet. Preserve him from the gathering toge∣ther of the froward, and from the Insurrection of the evil doers. Let no weapon that is form'd against Him prosper; but make Him and His al∣ways to return with Honour and Victory, and Ioy, and Triumph. O let all the Blessings of Hea∣ven and Earth be poured out upon the sacred Head of thine Anointed, and from thence flow down even to the skirts of the meanest of His people, in Peace and Plenty, and Prosperity: That so both Prince and people may with one mind, and with
one mouth glorifie thee, O God most gracious, for this thy unspeakable goodness; not onely present∣ing thée (as this day) the fruit of the lips, giving thanks unto thy Name, but also through the en∣tire course of a holy life ever offering up unto thée souls and bodies, which thou hast created, redéem∣ed and preserved, to be a living and holy Sacri∣fice acceptable unto thée through Iesus Christ: To whom with thée, O Father Almighty, in the uni∣ty of the holy Ghost, be glory in the Church throughout all ages world without end. Amen. ALmighty God, who hast promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy Sons Name; We beséech thée mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have made now our prayers and suppli∣cations unto thée; and grant that those things which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest shall let them depart with this blessing. THe peace of God which passeth all understand∣ing, keep your hearts and minds in the know∣ledge and love of God, and of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God Almigh∣ty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen.
The Order for Evening Prayer. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture; and then say the Exhortation that followeth. I Exhort, that first of all suppli∣cations, 2 Tim. 2. 1. prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a 2. quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of 3. God our Saviour. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknowledge and con∣fess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to render thanks for the great
benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole congrega∣tion after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost shéep, We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts, We have offended against thy holy laws, We have left undone those things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us miserable offenders; Sspare thou them, O God, which confess their faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, ac∣cording to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord; and grant, O most merci∣ful Father, for his sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone standing; the people still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness
and live, and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remis∣sion of their sins: He pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly be∣lieve his holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beséech him to grant us true repentance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶ The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen. ¶ Then shall the Minister kneel, and begin the Lords Prayer; the people also repeating it with him: OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespas∣ses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. ¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord open thou our lips. Answ. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God, make speed to save us.
Answer. O Lord make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ Then shall be sung or said this Hymn follow∣ing; one Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and people. NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto Ps. 115. thy Name be the praise. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: yea unto Ps. 75. 1 thee do we give thanks. For great things are they, that thou hast done: Ps. 71. 17. O God, who is like unto thée? Thou art the God, that doeth wonders: Who is Ps. 77. 14. 13 so great a God as our God? The Lord hath done great things for us: yea the Ps. 126. 3 Lord hath done great things for us, for which we rejoyce. Thou art our King, O God: the Help that is done Ps. 44 5. Ps. 74. 13 upon earth, thou do'st it thy self. Through thee have we overthrown our enemies: Ps. 44. 6. and in thy Name have we trod them under, that rise up against us.
For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword 7. that shall help me. But it is thou, that savest us from our enemies: 8. and puttest them to confusion, that hate us. We gat not the Victory through our own sword: 3. neither was it our own arm, that helped us; But thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light 4. of thy countenance: because thou hadst a favour unto us. If the Lord had not been on our side (now may Ps. 124. 1. we say:) if the Lord himself had not been on our side, when men rose up against us; They had swallowed us up quick: when they 2. were so wrathfully displeased at us. Yea, the waters had drowned us: the deep waters 3, 4. of the proud had gone even over our souls. But praised be the Lord: who hath not given 5. us over as a prey unto their téeth. Our help standeth in the Name of the Lord: who 7. hath made heaven and earth. God hath shewed us his goodness plenteously: Ps. 59, 10. and God hath let us sée our desire upon our enemies. Therefore will we offer in his dwelling an oblati∣on Ps. 27. 7. with great gladness: we will sing praises unto the Lord. Let Heaven and Earth praise him: the Sea, Ps. 69. 35. and All that moveth therein. Sing unto God, O ye Kingdoms of the earth: O Ps. 68. 32. sing praises unto the Lord. Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the peo∣ple: Ps. 96. 7. ascribe unto the Lord worship and power. Ascribe unto the Lord the honour due unto his . Name: bring presents, and come into his courts.
O love the Lord, all ye his Saints: for the Lord Ps. 31. 26. preserveth them that are faithful, and plenteously rewardeth the proud doer. Blessed be the Lord our God from everlasting, Ps. 106. 46. and world without end: and let all the people say, Amen. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: And to the holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall bei: world without end. Amen. Jubilate Deo. Psal. LXVI. O Be joyful in God, all ye lands: sing praises unto the honour of his Name, make his praise to be glorious. Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies be found liars unto thee. For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy Name. O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his doing toward the chil∣dren of men. He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on foot; there did we rejoyce thereof. He ruleth with his power for ever, his eyes be∣hold the people: and such, as will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves. O praise our God, ye people: and make the voice of his praise to be heard; Who holdeth our soul in life: and suffereth not our feet to slip. For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou also hast, tried us, like as silver is tried.
Thou broughtest us into the snare: and laidst trouble upon our loins. Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. I will go into thine house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows, which I promised with my lips, and spake with my mouth, when I was in trouble. I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I will offer bullocks and goats. O come hither, and hearken, all ye, that fear God: and I will tell you, what he hath done for my soul. I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue. If I incline unto wickedness with mine heart: the Lord will not hear me. But God hath heard me, and considered the voice of my prayer. Praised be God, who hath not cast out my pray∣er: nor turned his mercy from me. Bonum est confiteri. Psal. xcii. IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most Highest; To tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning: and of thy truth in the night-season; Vpon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon a loud instrument, and upon the harp.
For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoyce in giving praise for the operations of thy hands. O Lord, how glorious are thy works: thy thoughts are very deep. An unwise man doth not well consider this: and a fool doth not understand it. When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of wickedness do flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever; but thou Lord, art the most Highest for evermore. For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, lo, thine ene∣mies shall perish: and all the workers of wicked∣ness shall be destroyed. But mine horn shall be exalted like the horn of an unicorn: for I am anointed with fresh oyl. Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine ene∣mies: and mine ear shall hear his desire of the wicked, that arise up against me. The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree: and shall spread abroad like a Cedar in Libanus. Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God. They also shall bring forth more fruit in their age: and shall be fat and well liking. That they may shew how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no unrighteousness in him. Laudate Dominum. Psal. cxlvii. O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a joyful and a pleasant thing it is to be thankful.
The Lord doth build up Ierusalem: and gather together the out-casts of Israel. He healeth those that are broken in heart: and giveth medicine to heal their sickness. He telleth the number of the stars: and calleth them all by their names. Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite. The Lord setteth up the meek: and bringeth the ungodly down to the ground. O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our God. Who covereth the heaven with clouds, and pre∣pareth rain for the earth: and maketh the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of men. Who giveth fodder unto the cattel: and feed∣eth the young ravens that call upon him. He hath no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delighteth he in any mans legs. But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his mercy. Praise the Lord, O Ierusalem: praise thy God, O Sion. For he hath made fast the bars of thy gates: and hath blessed thy children within thee. He maketh peace in thy borders: and filleth thee with the flower of wheat. He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runneth very swiftly. He giveth snow like wooll: and scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes. He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost?
He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he bloweth with his wind, and the waters flow. He sheweth his word unto Iacoh: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel. He hath not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge of his laws. The first Lesson is 1 Sam. 2. to 11. ANd Hannah prayed and said, My heart re∣joyceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine ene∣mies: because I rejoyce in thy salvation. There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thée: neither is there any rock like our God. Talk no more so excéeding proudly, let not arrogancie come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with strength. They that were full, have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were hungry, ceased: so that the barren hath born seven, and she that hath many children is waxed feeble. The Lord killeth, and maketh alive, he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up. The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bring∣eth low, and lifteth up. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the begger from the dunghil, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he hath set the world upon them. He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail. The adversaries
of the Lord shall be broken to pieces: out of hea∣ven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed. Magnificat. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord: and my spi∣rit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour. For he hath regarded: the lowliness of his hand∣maiden. For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath magnified me: and holy is his Name. And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations. He hath shewed strength with his arm: he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty from their seat: and hath exalted the humble and méek. He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he hath sent empty away. He remembring his mercy hath holpen his ser∣vant Israel: as he promised to our forefathers, Abraham and his séed for ever. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen. The second Lesson is, 1 Thess. 5. BUt of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no néed that I write unto you. For your
selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destru∣ction cometh upon them, as travail upon a wo∣man with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as do others: but let us watch and be sover. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night. But let us who are of the day, be so∣ver, putting on the breast-plate of faith, and love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. For God hath not appointed us to wrath; but to obtain salvation by our Lord Iesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we wake or sléep, we should live together with him. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edifie one another, even as also ye do. And we beséech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to estéem them very highly in love for their works sake. And be at peace among your selves. Now we ex∣hort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the féeble-minded, support the weak, be pa∣tient toward all men. Sée that none render evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that which is gold, both among your selves, and to all men. Rejoyce evermore. Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Iesus concerning you. Quench not
the spirit. Despise not prophesnings. Prove all things: hold fast that which is good. Abstain from all appearance of evil. And the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it. Brethren, pray for us. Gréet all the brethren with an holy kiss. I charge you by the Lord, that this epistle be read unto all the holy bre∣thren. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you. Amen. Cantate Domino. Psal. xcviii. O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he hath done marvellous things. With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: hath he gotten himself the victory. The Lord declared his salvation: his righte∣ousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen. He hath remembred his mercy and truth to∣ward the house of Israel: and all the ends of the world have séen the salvation of our God. Shew your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoyce and give thanks. Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalm of thanksgiving. With trumpets also and shawms: O shew your selves joyful before the Lord the King. Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they that dwell therein.
Let the flouds clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth. With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered un∣der Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buri∣ed; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholick Church, the Communi∣on of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resur∣rection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen. ¶ And after that; these prayers following, all de∣voutly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy spirit. Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords prayer with a loud voice. OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespas∣ses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing up, shall say, O Lord shew thy mercy upon us. Answer. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord save the King. Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thée. Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord save thy people. Answer. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answer. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but onely thou, O God.
Priest. O God make clean our hearts within us. Answer. And take not thy holy Spirit from us. ¶ Instead of the first Collect shall these two be used. O Almighty God, the soveraign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnifie thy great and glorious Name for this happy Victory, the whole glory whereof we do ascribe to thee, who art the onely giver of Victory. And, we beseech thee, give us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy Gospel, the honour of our Soveraign, and, as much as in us lieth, to the good of all mankind. And, we beseech thee, give us such a sense of this great mercy, as may engage us to a true thank∣fulness, such as may appear in our lives by an humble, holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Iesus Christ our Lord: To whom with thee, and the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies, so in particular for this Victory and Deliverance, be all glory and honour world with∣out end. Amen. O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of defence unto thy servants against the face of their Enemies; We yield thee praise and thanks∣giving for our deliverance from those great and apparent Dangers wherewith we were compas∣sed. We acknowledge it thy goodness that we
were not delivered over as a prey unto them; be∣seeching thee still to continue such thy mercies to∣wards us, that all the world may know that thou art our Saviour and mighty Deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world can∣not give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness, through the me∣rits of Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thée, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy onely Son, our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Kings Majesty. O Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the onely Ruler of Princes, who dost from thy Throne behold all the dwellers upon earth; most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our most gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spi∣rit, that he may alway incline to thy Will, and walk in thy way; endue him plenteously with hea∣venly gifts; grant him in health and wealth long to live; strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and finally after this
life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A prayer for the Royal Family. Almighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless our gracious Queen Catherine, Mary the Q. Mother, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Family; Endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy hea∣venly grace, prosper them with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Clergy and People. ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; send down upon our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honour of our Advo∣cate and Mediatour Iesus Christ. Amen. O Lord God our strength and our salvation; We thy unworthy Servants, the sinful People of these three Nations, (whom by thy miraculous Providence thou didst lately rescue from the mise∣ries of a Civil War at home, and hast now crown∣ed with Victory against a potent Enemy abroad) in grateful acknowledgement of thy so great, and often-repeated Mercies, are here now before thee with humble, yet inflamed hearts, desirous to oster up unto thee our Sacrifice of praise and
thanks: calling Heaven and Earth to witness with us, that as it was the Miracle of thy meer Mercy, which raised us out of the depth of those miserable Confusions, in which we lay; so it is thy Power alone, O our God, by which we stand; thy good Providence, by which we prosper. More particularly, with the highest expressions of our devoutest hearts we magnifie thy great and glorious Name, O Lord our God, for that re∣markable Victory, wherewith thou hast lately blest the Naval Forces of our gracious Soveraign. O continue forth thy loving kindness towards him: Let thy tender mercies prevent, and follow him all the days of his life: Let his Reign be pro∣sperous, and his arms victorious; and let the blessings of safety, and happy success attend all those that fight his Battels. Subdue more and more unto him the People that is under him, and the Nations under his feet. Preserve him from the gathering together of the froward, and from the insurrection of the evil doers. Let no weapon that is form'd against him prosper; but make him and his always to return with Honour, and Vi∣ctory, and Ioy, and Triumph. O let all the Bles∣sings of Heaven and Earth be poured out upon the sacred Head of thine Anointed, and from thence flow down even to the skirts of the meanest of his People, in Peace, and Plenty, and Prosperity; That so both Prince and People may with one mind, and with one mouth glorifie thee, O God most gracious, for this thy unspeakable goodness; not onely presenting thee (as this day) the fruit of the lips, giving thanks unto thy Name, but also
through the entire course of a holy life ever offer∣ing up unto thee Souls and Bodies, which thou hast created, redeemed and preserved, to be a li∣ving and holy Sacrifice acceptable unto thee through Iesus Christ: To whom with thee, O Father Almighty, in the unity of the holy Ghost, be glory in the Church throughout all ages world without end. Amen. ¶ Then shall follow this Prayer, which shall be used continually so long as the Navy is abroad. O Most glorious, and powerful Lord God, who alone hast spread out the heavens, and com∣passed the waters with bounds, until night and day come to an end; at whose command the winds blow, and who rulest the raging of the sea; Thou art terrible in all thy works of wonder, the great God to be feared above all. We therefore adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy power, and imploring thy goodness. Be pleased to receive into thine Almighty and most gracious protection the persons of thy servants that fight for us, and the Ships and Navies in which they serve: preserve them all from the dangers of the sea, and from the violence of the enemy, and from every sad accident; that they may be a safeguard to our most gracious Soveraign, and his King∣doms, and a security for such as pass on the Seas upon their lawful occasions. Help, Lord, and save them for thy mercies sake; that they may return in safety, with Honour and Victory, and good suc∣cess, to enjoy the blessings of the land, and the
fruit of their labours; and that all the inhabitants of these Islands, being blest with plenty & prospe∣rity, peace and quietness, may serve thee our God in righteousness, and true holiness, and with a thankful remembrance of all thy mercies may ever praise and glorifie thy holy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer of Saint Chrysostom. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplications unto thée, and dost promise, that when two or thrée are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt grant their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy ser∣vants, as may be most expedient for them, grant∣ing us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen. 2 Corinth. 13. 14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1666.
