C4133 99826402 30805
A FORM OF PRAYER AND Thanksgiving To Almighty GOD, To be Used throughout the Cities of London and Westmin∣ster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of Mortali∣ty, on Sunday the Eighth Day of this Instant September: And in all other Places throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, on Sunday the Twenty second Day of the same Month: For Granting to the Forces of His Majesty, and His Allies, so great Success in taking the Town and Castle of NAMƲR; And for Protecting His Maje∣sties Sacred Person from the many Dangers to which He was so frequently Exposed during that Siege. By Order of the Lords Iustices. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. MDCXCV.
A FORM of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING to Almighty God, to be Used throughout the Cities of London and Westminster, and elsewhere within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, on Sunday the Eighth day of this Instant Sep∣tember: And in all other Places through∣out this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed on Sunday the Twenty Second Day of the same Month. The Service for that Day upon which the Thanksgiving shall be Observed, must be used, except where it is here otherwise ordered. ❧ The Prayers shall begin with these Sentences. NOt unto usPsal. 11..1., O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise, for thy loving mercy, and for thy truths sake. The Lord hath done great things for us; yeaPsal. ..4., the Lord hath done great things for us already, whereof we rejoyce.
❧ Instead of the Venite, this Hymn shall be used. SIng we merrily unto God our strength: make cheerful noise unto the God of IacobPsal. 81.1.. We will rejoyce in thy salvation: and triumph in the name of the Lord our God20. 5.. Lord thou art become gracious unto thy land: th hast turned away the captivity of Iacob 5. 1.. Thou hast forgiven the offence of thy people ver. 2.: and cove∣ed all their sins. Thou hast given victory unto Kings: and hast d∣livered David thy servant from the peril of t sword 144. 10.. Thou hast mightily delivered thy people: even the sons Jacob and Joseph. 15.. The King shall rejoyce in thy strength21. 1., O Lor exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation. The Lord will give strength unto his people: the L will bless his people with peace 29. 11.. Some put their trust in chariots 20. 7., and some horses: but we will remember the name of the L our God. Be thou exalted 21. 13., Lord, in thine own strength: so will sing and praise thy power. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ❧ Proper Psalms. XXXIII. XLVII. LXII. ❧ Proper Lessons. The first, Isai. 26. to ver. 13. Te Deum. ❧ Proper Lessons. The second, Heb. 11. ver 24. to . Jubilate Deo. ❧ After the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer. the  shall be as followeth. Priest. O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answ. And grant us thy salvation.
Priest. O Lord, save the King. Answ. Who utteth his trust in thee. Priest. Send him help from thy holy place. Answ. God vermore mightily defend him. Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him. Answ. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him. Priest. Ene y Ministers with righteousness. Answ. An make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. Give  o our time, O Lord. Answ. Because  is none other that fighteth for us, and only thou, O God. ❧ Instead of the first Collect, the following Prayer shall be used. O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art the only giver of  Victory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and thanksgiving for the late signal Deliverance, and glorious Success thou hast vouchsafed to our Sove∣reign Lord the King, and his Allies. We adore and bless thy Divine Goodness, that thou didst not give them over as a Prey to Cruel and Blond-thirs∣ty Men; but hast taught their Hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight, and hast shewed them a mar∣vellous great kindness in a strong City. We hum∣bly pray that these, and all other thy Benefits, may raise in us, and in the whole Church of God, a spi∣rit of Holy Ioy, and Christian Charity, a spirit of fervent zeal for thy Name and Glory, and a stedfast Faith and Perseverance in thy Pure and Vndefiled Religion, through Iesus Christ our only Lord and Saviour. Amen.
❧ A Prayer for the King, to be constantly Used while His Ma∣jesty is Abroad in the Wars. ALmighty and most gracious God, who hast been our Deliverer in the day of our distress, and hast Raised up thy servant King William to be the happy Instrument of our Deliverance: And hast al∣so wonderfully Preserved him in those great Dan∣gers to which he hath been so often exposed both by Sea and Land: We humbly beseech thee still to con∣tinue him under the merciful care and protection of thy good Providence; to preserve him from all se∣cret and treacherous Practices and Attempts; to stand by him, and to cover his Head in the day of Danger; to bless him with good Success; and to bring him back in safety to our comfort: And like∣wise to give us grace to live worthy of these Mer∣cies, in all thankful obedience to thee, and in du∣tiful subjection to his Majesty, whom thou hast set over us, and whom we beseech thee long to pre∣serve and continue to us for thy Mercies sake, in Ie∣sus Christ our blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen. ❧ The Collect for Peace. O God who art the Author of peace and loer of concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy humble servants, in all assaults of our ene∣mies, that we surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
❧ The Collect for Grace. O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and ever∣lasting God, who hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day; defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy gover∣nance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ❧ Here solloweth the Litany. O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us misera∣ble sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Fa∣ther and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three per∣sons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: Spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious ou, and be not angry with us for ever. Spare us, good Lord.
From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord, deliver us. From all blindness of heart; from pride, vain-glo∣ry, and hypocrisie; from envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness, Good Lord, deliver us. From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh, and the devil, Good Lord, deliver us. From lightning and tempest; from plague, pesti∣lence and famine; from battel, and murder, and from sudden death, Good Lord, deliver us. From all sedition, privy conspiracy and rebellion; from all false doctrine, heresie and schism; from ha∣ness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and Com∣mandment, Good Lord, deliver us. By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by the holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy Baptis, Fasting and Temptation, Good Lord, deliver us. By thine Agony and bloudy Sweat; by thy  and Passion; by thy precious Death and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming of the holy Ghost, Good Lord, deliver us. In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of death, and in the day of Iudg∣ment, Good Lord, deliver us. We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee to rule and govern
thy holy Church universal in the right way; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in  true worshipping of thee, in righteousness and mess of life, thy servant William, our most gra∣cious King and Governour; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love; and that he may evermore  affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honour and glory; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to be his defender and per, giving him the victory over all his enemies; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and preserve Ca∣ the Queen Damager, her Royal Highness  Princess Ann of Denmark, and all the Royal family; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, blests and Deacons, with true knowledge and un∣derstanding of thy Word, and that both by their ching and , they may set it forth, and shew  accordingly; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom  understanding; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep the Ma∣ates, giving them grace to execute Iustice, and maintain Truth; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may  thee to  and keep all thy . We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy com∣mandments; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all thy people in∣crease of grace, to hear meekly thy word, and to re∣ceive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bring into the w of truth, all such as have erred and are re∣ceived; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to strengthen such as dstand, and to comfort and help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down Satan under our feet; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to succour, help, and com∣fort all that are in danger, necessity, and tribula∣tion; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to preserve all that tra by land or by water, all women labouring of t all sick persons and young children, and to shewe pity upon all prisoners and captives; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to defend and provide  the fatherless children and widows, and all that a desolate and oppressed; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to have mercy upon a men; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give and preserve to our se the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time  may enjoy them; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us true repen∣nce, to forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy  Word; We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. Son of God: We beseech thee to hear us. Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us. O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Grant us thy peace. O Lamb of God: that takest away the sins of the world; Have mercy upon us. O Christ, hear us. O Christ, hear us. Lord, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. Lord, have mercy upon us. OVr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be ne in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.
Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins. Answ. Neither reward us after our iniquities. ¶ Let us pray. O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sigh∣ing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful; mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee, in all our troubles and adversi∣ties, whensoever they oppress us; and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the devil or man worketh against us be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness then may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Chirst our Lord. O Lord, arise, help us, deliver us for thy names sake. O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fa∣thers have declared unto us, the noble works that thou didst in their days, and in the old time before them. O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honour. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost; Answer. As it was in the begining, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. From our enemies defend us, O Christ. Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifulty behold the sorrows of our hearts. Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people. Favourably with mercy hear our prayers. O Son of David, have mercy upon us. Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ. Graciously hear us, O Christ; graciously hear us, O Lord Christ. Priest. O Lord. let thy mercy be shewed upon us. Answer. As we do put our trust in thee.
Let us pray, We humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and for the glo∣ of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that  most righteously have deserved; and grant that  all our troubles we may put our whole trust and fidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in ess and pureness of living, to thy honour and , through our only Mediatour and Advocate,  Christ our Lord. Amen. In the end of the Litany, after the Collect [We humbly beseech thee, O Father, &c.] shall be said these following Prayers. O Lord God of our salvation, without whose Aid and Influence all our Strength is weakness,  Courage rashness, and our Counsel folly; We  unworthy servants do magnifie thy great and ous Name for this and many other most gra∣s Preservations thou hast vouchsafed His Ma∣ Royal Person, and for that eminent, and  remarkable Victory, wherewith thou hast late∣ wonderfully blest the Arms of our Sovereign  and his Allies. O continue forth thy loving  is towards him: Let thy tender mercies pre∣ and follow him all the days of his Life:  his Reign be Prosperous, and his Arms Vi∣s; and let the blessings of Safety and happy ess attend all those that Fight his Battels. rve him from the gathering together of the , and from the Insurrection of the evil doers.  Weapon that is formed against him prosper,  make him always to return with Honour and . O Let all the Blessings of Heaven and  poured out upon the sacred Head of thine
Anointed, and from thence flow down even to the skirts of the meanest of his People, in Peace, and Plenty, and Prosperty: That so both Prce  People may with one mind, and with one month glofie thee, O God most gracious; for this thy unspeakable goodness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ALmighty God, who art a strong Towre of De∣fence unto thy Servants against the face  their Enemies; We yield thee praise and Thanks∣giving for our Deliverance from those great an apparent Dangers wherewith we were compass. We acknowledge it thy goodness, that we were  delivered over as a Prey unto them; beseechin thee still to continue such thy mercies towards  that all the World may know that thou our Sa∣viour and mighty Deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ❧ The General Thanksgiving. ALmighty God, Father of all mercies, we th unworthy servants o give thee most humbl and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and  kindness to us and to all  [This to be said when any that have been prayed for, desire to re∣turn praise.particularly to those who desire  offer up their praises and thanksgivings thy late mercies vouchsafed unto ] We bless thee for our creations ∣servation, and all the blessings  life, but above all for thine ∣mable love in the redemption of the world by Lord Iesus Christ; for the means of grace, and the hope of glory. And we beseech thee gi that due sence of all thy mercies, that our
be unfeignedly thankful, and that we may  forth thy praise, not only with our lips, but in , by giving up our selves to thy service,  walking before thee in holiness and righteous∣ness  our days, through Iesus Chrilst our Lord;  whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honour  glory, world without end. Amen. ❧ A Prayer of S. Chrysostom. Almighty God, who host given us grace at this time with one accord, to make our common lications unto thee, and dost promise, that when  or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou  grant their requests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the  and petitions of thy servants, as may be  expedient for them; granting us in this world ledge of thy truth, and in the world to come  everlasting. Amen. 2 Cor. 13.14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be  us all evermore. Amen. the Communion-Service, between the Commandments and the Epistle, shall this Collect be used, instead of the Collect for the King, and of the Collect for the day. O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art the only giver of ory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and thanksgiving for the late Signal Deliverance, and rious Success thou hast vouchsafed to our Sove∣reign Lord the King and his Allies. We adore
and bless thy Divine Goodness, that thou didst not give them over as a prey to cruel and bloud-thirsty men; but hast taught their Hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight, and hast shewed them a marvel∣lous great kindness in a strong City. We humbly pray that these, and all other thy Benefits, may raise in us, and in the whole Church of God, a Spi∣rit of Holy Ioy, and Christian Charity, a Spirit of fervent zeal for thy Name and Glory, and a stedfast Faith and Perseverance in thy pure and undefiled Religion, through Iesus Christ our only Lord and Saviour. Amen. ❧ Then shall follow the Epistle. Phil. 4.4. to v. 10. REjoyce in the Lord alway; and again I say r∣joyce. Let your moderation be known unto  men. The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing but in every thing by prayer and supplication wi thanksgiving, let your requests be made known  to God. And the peace of God which passeth all  standing, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Iesus. Finally, brethren, whatsoever thin are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatso∣ever things are just, whatsoever things are pur, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things ar of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and hear and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. ❧ The Gospel. S. Mark 8.34. to the end. ANd when he had called the people unto him, with his disciples also, he said unto them, who∣soever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. For whosoever
save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall  his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall  it. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain  whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what  a man give in exchange for his soul? Whosoever refore shall be ashamed of me, and of my wors,  adulterous and sinful generation, of him al∣ all the Son of man he ashamed, when e cometh  glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. ❧ Then the Nicene Creed. After that the Sermon. After the Prayer [For the whole State of Christs Church, &c.] this Collect shall be used. O Almighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is power and might,  none is able to withstand; We bless and mag∣  ame for this eminent Success, the whole  whereof we do ascribe to thy most wise and gra∣ Providence. Grant, O Lord, that we may  ove this great Blessing to the advancement of  Gospel, the honour of our Sovereign, and as  as in us lieth, to the good of all mankind. And  beseech thee give us all such a sense of this thy , as may engage us to a true thankfulness,  as may appear in our lives, by an humble, holy,  obedient walking before thee all our days, ugh Iesus Christ our Lord; To whom with thee  the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies, so in ticular for this happy Advantage thou hast given  ever the common Enemy, he all glory and honour  without end. Amen.
❧ A Prayer for all Mankind, especially for the Reformed Churches. MOst gracious and merciful God, who art the Sa∣viour of all men, especially of those that believe, and vast commanded us to make prayers and inte∣sions for all men, desiring that all may be saved,  come to the knowledge of the Truth: We hum beseech thee to extend thy mercy and compassion to all Mankind; more particularly to the Reformed Churches, and especially to those who are still under Persecution for Truth and Righteousness . Relieve them according to their several necessities; be a shelter and defence to them from the fury of the Oppressour: Let the sighing of the Prisoners  before thee, and according to the greatness of  power preserve them that are appointed to  not the poor always be forgotten; let not the ∣ent abiding of the meek perish for ever.  mercy them that are banished for the Testimony  thy Truth: Gather thy dispersed together, and  store the outcasts of thy People; and in thy  time bring them home to worship thee in  own Land: And whatsoever they have lost for  sake, return it to them, according to thy gra Promise, in the manifold Blessings of this and a ∣ter Life: Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his T∣bles. And we beseech thee to enlighten all those  are in Darkness and Eerour, and to give them ∣pentance to the acknowledgment of the truth;  all the ends of the Earth may remember themsel and be turned unto the Lord: And we may all  come one Flock under the great Shepherd and ∣shop of our Souls, Iesus Christ, our Blessed S∣our and Redeemer. Amen.
ALmighty God, who hast promised to hear the Pe∣titions of them that ask in thy Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears , that have made now our Prayers and Suppli∣cations unto thee, and grant that those things which  hae faithfully asked according to thy Will, may tually be obtained, to the relief of our necessity,  to the setting forth of thy glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ❧ Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) shall let them depart with this Blessing. THe Peace of God which passeth all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge  love of God, and of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord: and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen. FINIS.
