c460 12121894 54461
Canterburies Potion: WHEREIN Is shewed the great Art of his Doctor in finding out the nature of his Disease: TOGETHER With the Medicines hee applied, and the strange effects they wrought in him, To the great ease of his surcharged Body, Collected from the Doctors owne hand. portrait of William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury Printed in the yeare 1641.
CANTERBƲRIES POTION. Canterbury. GOod Mr. Doctor you are welcome. Doct. I understand by your Gentleman, your Grace was pleased to send for me. Cant. Yes, good Mr. Doctor, and not before I had occasion: for I finde my selfe diseased in all parts; in∣somuch, that without some speedy remedy, I cannot long continue. I have a great desire to take Physicke, me thinkes, Mr. Doctor, in case the time of the yeare be seasonable. Doct. Yes (if it please your grace) the time of the yeare may be seasonable; but we must have a due care to the constitution of your Lordships body, the na∣ture of the Malady, and the quality of the Medicine. Our cordiall potions, Electuaries, Pills, Losinges, Oyles, Unguents, Emplasters, Seare cloathes, Cly∣sters, Vomits, Supposiores, and such like, must bee applied according to the state of the Patients body; and withall, we must bee circumspect what Planet is predominant. Cant. Now by St. Augustine, Mr. Doctor, I approve your learned skill, in having respect to the constella∣tions: for I am opinion (though the brethren forsooth call it superstition) that when the signe is in Taurus, if I bee let bloud in the head, I shall bleed to the death.
Doct. That's without question, my Lord, unlesse your Graces Chyrurgians have a more saving skill then the Lord Deputies had. But I beseech your Grace that I may see your water: for by it I shall ea∣sily see the state of your body, and my Physicke ac∣cordingly. Cant. Reach Mr. Doctor that Urinall; looke Sir, this water I made after my first sleepe the last night; what doe you thinke of it? Faith, my Lord, your water is very grosse, heavie, blacke, dense, solid, and a most impure, putrified and rotten urine. In my opinion (my Lord) your Grace hath kept a very bad diet: There are severall raw hu∣mours, and unwholesome things, that lye heavie and indigested upon your stomacke; and if they be not re∣moved, and that speedily, they will daily offnd untill they stifle and suffocate your Grace. Cant. Good Mr. Doctor, I beseech you, make ex∣perience of your approved Art. For although I owe a death, I have no minde to pay it before it be due. If in your power it lieth to prolong my life, let not any cost be spared for the effecting of it. Doct. My Lord, it is within the power of my Art to prolong your life, if it happen not to be cut off un∣timely: Wherefore I doubt not but to remove these crudities from your stomacke; to which purpose I have here a costly vomit, which will undoubtedly re∣move all the grosse matter that is uncocted. Cant. When shall I take it, Mr. Doctor? Doct. Out of hand my Lord: for your Grace is fa∣sting.
Cant. First, swallow these three Pills, and then drinke this potion, I doubt not but it will worke im∣mediatly. Well done, my Lord, your grace shall feele the operation of it instantly. Cant. Oh Mr. Doctor, your Physicke workes most violently, I must vomit already. Doct. Into this Bason, my Lord, up with it: Well done my Lord; see what's here! A great peece of Parchment, and a great Seale to it, I cannot read it. What's this that comes next? A great Roll of To∣bacco, pure Spanish. I protest, now I know what the writing was! it was the Patent for it. Had your Grace ever a hand in the Tobacco Patent? Cant. Yes, Master Doctor, I had, but I could never digest it, it hath stucke in my stomack almost this foure yeares, I am glad I am so rid of it, but stay, hold the bason. Doct. What's here, a booke? let me see, those that have been at Church, may have liberty to exercise lawfull Recreations upon the Sunday, what's the mea∣ning of this my Lord? Cant. Tis a booke I made to tolerate pastimes on that day, I am glad tis off my stomacke, for me thinkes I am much eased. Doct I protest another booke, the Title is Sunday is no Sabbath, did your Grace cause this booke to bee made? for tis something like the other in matter. Cant. I licenc'd it, but Doctor Pocklington made it. Doct. What? he that lookes so like a Negromancer, he that for his paines was preferr'd besides his bene∣fices?
up with it my Lord, what is that? a paper, O tis a Starchamber order against Mr. Prinne. Mr. Burton, and Doctor Bastweek, what's the meaning of this, my Lord? Cant. Why, I had a great hand in their businesse, which is sufficiently apparant to all England, I need not mention it. O here's some other indigested sub∣stance which makes my very backe ake, if it were up once I should be at great ease. Doct. Here tis my Lord, I doe not blame you to be troubled, what a bundle of Papers are here, what are these my Lord? Cant. Severall papers, as presentations, institutions, inductions, licences, suspensions, degradations, and such like. Doct. I understand you my Lord, these were the in∣struments wherewith you created your tongue, had Doctors that preacht twice a yeare at least, and in their places hired journey men Curates, who would read a Sermon in the forenoone, and be drunke with their neighbours after dinner, for company, and with some of them, you silenced the long winded Ministers, as you called them, who would preach twice on a Sun∣day, & may chance at Thursday and Friday Lectures, and hoysed into New England. But what in the name of wonder is this, that stickes so strong in your sto∣mack, you labour extreamely, heavens send it choake not your Grace. O tis up, as I live the new Canons themselves, with that ill favoured monster, and I am heartily glad this is come up, how doth your Grace finde your selfe? me thinkes you looke pretty well.
Cant. Truely Mr. Doctor, thanks to your great Art I am something better; but stay, here is a greater thing then all the rest, what is it Mr. Doctor? it is up. Doct. As I am here a Drum: I believe this is the Drum that was beaten by the Apprentices in Saint Georges fields. Cant. The very same, but I pray Mr. Doctor what was this vomit made of. Doct. There were three scruples of Pillory powder, halfe a scruple of his braines that lookes over London Bridge, three handfulls of the hearbes that were ga∣thered by the said Apprentices, wrapped up in a High Commission Roll, and boiled in a Pottle of Holy∣water to the third part, and then strained through a paire of Lawne sleeves. Cant. Well, if this be your physicke Mr. Doctor, I will no more of it; I feare it will make me vomit my heart up, O something comes against my stomacke, O it is a Miter, I had rather have vomitted out my heart. Doct. Nay I must be gone if the Miter come, the Divell is not farre off. Farewell. FINIS.
