C6711 12241232 56778
Acteon & Diana; WITH A Pastoral Storie of the Nimph OENONE: FOLLOWED By the several Conceited Humours Of Bumpkin the Huntsman. Hobbinal the Shepherd. Singing Simpkin, and Iohn Swabber the Seaman. By ROB. COX. Acted at the Red Bull with great applause. The second Edition, with the Addition of Simpleton the Smith, not before extant. LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve, in Little Britain, 1656.
To all the Worthy-minded GENTRY. Gentlemen, and Ladies! IF your serious occasions will permit me so much honour, that this sleight Book may bee accepted and perused, I shall justly ac∣knowledge the favour to be far above either my hopes or merit. And if you ever vouch∣safed your Presence when it was presented on the Stage, I am confident, your (no-way er∣ring-) Iudgments will now allow it, as it then was intended, which was, rather to provoke a laughter, then occasion a contemplation. It will likewise engage my grateful service, if I be not (in your worthie opinions) taxt of Ar∣rogance, to present my unpolished lines, when daily those of excellence are offered to your Eies and Ears: But in the confidence of your cle∣mencie, I submit to the verdict of my grand Iury. And how soever you are pleased to cen∣sure, will remain (as I ought) the humblest of your servants, ROBERT COX.
Simpleton the Smith. Enter Old Simpleton solus. Sim. IF ever Dog was weary of a day, then have I cause to bee weary of my life; I am a Blacksmith by my Trade, and (though I say it) I have bin accounted a good Workman, but I could never yet forge, or hammer out means enough to satisfie the insatiate gut of my son Simple∣ton. He will not work, and yet no sooner is his nose out of the Alehouse, but his head is in the Cupboard: His insatiate stomach may well defie a Giant, or the great Eater of Kent; but I have thought upon a way which he shall either take in hand, or graze with Hobb my horse; Sirrah Simpleton, where are you? Young Simp. Within. Here, here, Father. Old Simp. Where, where, Sirrah? Y. Sim. At the Cupboard Father, at the Cup∣board. O. Sim. I thought as much; but come you hither sirrah, or I shall make your ears sing prick song for you.
Enter Young Simpleton with a great piece of bread and butter. Y. Sim. 'Tis a miserable condition that a man cannot eat a little bit for his afternoons Lunchins, but he must be disturbed in the best of his stomach. O. Sim. A bit do'st thou call it, O my conscience this devouring rascal, old as I am, would eat me if he found me in the Cupboard. Y. Sim. I do not think there is such a genteel Smith in the town, that has such an old niggardly Coxcombe to his father as I, he knows I have no better a stomach then a young green-sicknesse girle, and yet he grutches me every bit I eat. O. Sim. Leave off your muttering, and lend me an ear a while. Y. Sim. Truly I cannot spare one father; yet now I think on't, you have great occasion for one ever since the last pillory day, but since you are my father, I will vouchsafe to listen a while. O. Sim. You know that I am old. Y. Sim. The More's the pity, that you were not hang'd while you were young. O. Sim. Thou hast drunk most of my means away. Y. Sim. I'le eat out the rest. O. Sim. Leave your ill breeding, and give me sen∣sibly a reason why you will not work? Y. Sim. Because I am lazy father. O. Sim. Nay that's true. Y. Sim. True; why do you think I would be so unmannerly, to tell you a lie father. O. Sim. How I shall maintein that coming sto∣mach of yours, unlesse your self endeavour for it: I
know not, but if thou wilt be ruled, I'le make thee a man. Y. Sim. A man! why what am I now, a mouse what would you make of me? O. Sim. An Asse, an Asse, a grosse Asse. Y. Sim. You may well make me a grosse Asse, you have so good a pattern. O. Sim. Listen to me; you know the widowes daughter at the corner, sweet Mistris Dorothy, shee's both young and handsom, and has money too. Y. Sim. I, and that will help to buy victuals. O. Sim. Go and woo her, and I dare lay my life thou carriest her. Y. Sim. I carrie her, father; alas, I have but a weak back, and besides I am somwhat lazily given, as you say, it were a great deal better that she would carrie me. O. Sim. Thou hast no more wit then my hammer head has, and no more brains then an Anvil, which every one may strike on, but never move it; go take your Fidle, at that they say you are excellent, and when she thanks thee from her Chamber win∣dow, say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about the thing she wotes of. Y. Sim. O must I bumfiddle her under her Cham∣ber window; well, I will go wash my hands, and starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly about my businesse. Exeunt. Enter the first Gentleman. 1. Gent. A pox of fortune, she was never my friend yet; the money that I got with so much trouble, I lost with one unlucky chance at dice. I
have no meanes nor hopes left to supply me, but what my sweet-heart Dorothy affords me, she has and must again take pity of me, this is her window, I hope her mother will not hear. Hem Doll. Doll. above. Who's that calls so boldly; speake, what are you? 1. Gent. Oh Doll thou knowest my fortunes, and my love last night hath broke me, and by thee my fortunes must be splintered; one halfe piece does the businesse. Doll. How often have I peec'd you, and still you breake; and I shall do the same if you continue thus; you know my mother keep's a look over my will, yet once again Ile venture, come in the morning a∣bout five of the clock, and Ile be ready for thee. 1. Gent. Oh my sweet Doll, thou never didst de∣ceive me. Exit Enter Yo. Sim. with a Violl. Y. Sim. Now must I go play an Alampadoe. under Mistris Dorothy's Chamber window, and all that time perhaps she is a snorting, for to say the truth my musick will hardly have the virtue to waken her, and if she should wake, I could not tell what to say to her unless it were to desire her to go to bed again. And because I will be sure to be acceptable to her, I will joine my nightingale voyce thereunto. Enter the first Gent. 1. Gent. What slave is this presumes to court my Mistris, could I but see him, I would satisfie my anger with the ruine of his limbs, but he is gone, and I loose time in seeking Exit. Y. Sim. That was a roaring Rogue, he has made
my heart jumpe upright into my mouth, and if I had not held it fast with my teeth, without doubt it had forsaken my body; but he is gone, and now I wil ven∣ture forward. Enter the second Gent. 2. Gent. I heard some musick at my sweet-hearts window, could I but find him, I would cut him, and flash him til his whole body were anoatmized; but he is gone, and it was his wisest course. Exit. Y. Sim. That Roaring Rouge was far worse then the tother, he has almost frighted my song out of my head. Oh! we true and faithfull lovers, what perils and dangers must we undergoe, to gain the wils and affections of our dearest deares; but now to my mu∣sick, and because she shall take a great pleasure to think on it, I will sing a song of a young wench that had a great mind to be married before her time. Sings. Oh! mother let me have a husband kind, with toitre loytre loitre. That day and night I may comfort find of a toitre, &c. I care not whether honest man or knave, so that he keep me sine and brave, And that none else but I may have his toitre &c. Oh daughter you are not old enough for a toitre &c. And husbands often prove rough with a toitre &c.
Your tender heart no griefe can carry as they must do somtimes that marry You yet may wel a twelve-month tarry for a toitre &c. Oh! mother I am in my teens for a toytre &c. And younger wifes are often seene with a toitre &c. I pray let not me so Idle stand, for I can do as well as any can. I have had a proofe with Iohn our man of his toitre &c. Well if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity she should have musick under her window, as long as she lives again. Mistris Dorothy above. Doll. What owle is that shreikes so at my window, if he meant musick sure he was mistaken, I was about to have eaten my breake-fast, but this fool has turn'd my stomack. What art thou that art so troublesome. Y. Sim. Good Mistris Dorothy, it is I, your none sweet-swotterkin, and if you please to throw your eyes out of the window upon me, you shall behold one of the faithfullest lovers that ever took hammer in hand. I love you better and deare, then a Bear does honey, and I hope you will affect me as much as a Sow does a bunch of Carrots. Doll. Oh is it you? I thought none but a puppy like your self, would have disturbed the neighbours with your gridiron-musick, a Saw were far mor pleasing.
Y. Sim. Forsooth I am very sorry that you have no better skill in musick, in my opinion I sung most melodiously, but if you will be pleased to look with eyes of judgment upon me, you will expresse your love in a better manner to me. Doll. I shal expresse my love if you continue here, in a far Worser manner then you think for; do you see this chamber-pott, it longs to be acquainted with that trainless head of yours; therefore be gone, and save your self a washing. Y. Sim. If you should wash me, I thinke it would be but labour in vain; yet if you please to distill any of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be smelt out by you. Doll. You asse, you puppy; must you needs force a drowning. Exit Y. Sim. Is this the begining of love? it is almost as bad as the proverbe to me: stay, it may be it is rose∣water. Voh, it is as ranke urine as ever any Doctor cast. I'le call this same old Simpleton my father, that set me about this businesse. Oh! Father Simpleton, where are you. O. Sim. Oh mine Son, how hast thou sped boy? Y. Sim. O! I have sped most abominably, father, I got a great deal more then I expected. O. Sim. Oh my own naturall boy! Y. Sim. I naturall, to be sure; I had nere come here else. O. Sim. But how did she relish thee. Y. Sim. Why she relish'd me with a whole cham∣ber pot full of water. O. Sim. Why thou asse, thou puppy, thou fool, thou coxcombe.
Y. Sim. Why? how can I help it▪ why you  me so like a foole▪ O. Sim. Come shew me to her, and you shall see how I will handle her. Y. Sim. Nay father, I should be loath to marry her, after you have had the handling of her. O. Sim. This is her Chamber, is it not? Y. Sim. Yes▪ I know it by a good token, for here she opened the sluce, and let the floodgates out upon me. O. Sim. Mistris Dorothy, Mistris Dorothy, pray come to the window. Y. Sim. Sirrah, hold your tongue. Doll. What again? sure this whole morning is no∣thing but my trouble▪ what wise-aker is that now? Y. Sim. She cals you wise-aker▪ speak now. O. Sim. I am your neighbour, Old Simpleton the Smith. Y. Sim. And I young Simpleton the Smith. Doll. Oh neighbour is it you▪ here was your son but now, and he kept a worse noyse then a Bear∣baiting▪ but you are civill, I will come down to you. O. Sim. Looke you there sirrah, she will come downe tome, she sayes. Y. Sim. I by that time I have been a courtier as long as you have been, one woman or other may come down to me too. Enter Doll. Doll. Good morrow nieghbour, what is your business pray. O. Sim. Why it is this: this is my son. Nay it is my son, I'le assure you. Y. Sim. Yes forsooth, he is sure I am his son; my
mother told him so. Doll. Now I looke better on him, he seems to me more handsome then before▪ your company seasons him with discretion▪ but what's your business pray Sir▪ O. Sim. Why, if you please forsooth, I would fain Joyn you two together in the way of Matrimony. Y. Sim. Yes forsooth, to mock a mariage▪ Doll. But hold Sir, two words to a bargain▪ what profession is your son of. Y. Sim. Forsooth I am a Blacksmith, and though I say it, I have as good working geare as any smith in the parish▪ all my neighbours wives shal be my witness. O. Sim. Sirrah, hold your tongue. Y. Sim. Why, shall I come a wooing, and say no∣thing for my self▪ Doll. But what estate I pray has your son in posse Y. Sim. Father, what estate have I in a posset. O Sim. Forsooth, two Cowes you shal have with him. Y. Sim. With a calfe to my knowledge. O. Sim. Four ewes and lambs, and a horse to ride to market on. Y. Sim. Yes, and a  no, now I think on it, you may keep your asse your selfe. O. Sim. Four marke in money. Y. Sim. Doo you marke that. O. Sim. With a bed and blankets. Y. Sim. And then we may daunce the shaking of the sheets when we can. Doll. These promises are faire, and if performed, I hope I shall not need repent my bargain.
Y. Sim. Nor I neither, come let's to bed pre∣sentlie, and afterwards wee'l talk on it. Doll. No, no, first to Church, and then to bed. Y. Sim. Oh then you won't follow the fashion of our countrey, we commonly go to bed first, and to Church when we can, but come I am contented. Exeūt Musick. Enter the First Gent. and second, meeting. 1. Gent. How now friend, what make you here∣abouts? 2. Gent. My business is the same, I thinke, with yours; is it not for Dorothy? 2. Gent. I do confesse it, and have known what love you long have born her; let us go together. Enter Old Sim. Young Sim. and Doll. 1. Gent. Stand close, what meanes this? Here comes the bride and bridegroome on so stately, That were but maid and batchelour so lately. And now let all the Blacksmithes be invited, Cause Vulcan and his Venus are united. 1. Gent. What should this mean, Doll has a hat on? She did not use to weare one. Enter Doll. Doll. Oh gentlemen! though I desire your com∣pany, yet now I heartily could wish your absence. 1. Gent. Why, what's the matter Doll? Doll. I am married. 2. Gent. To whom? Doll. Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the Smith. 1. Gent. That fool, that Coxcombe; I'le break
his hammer with his own jolt-head. Doll. Stand close, I hear him coming. Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Sim. Sweet-heart now we are married, things ought to be well carried. And the first thing we should take care for, is how to get victuals, what's that? They whistle. Doll. Nothing but the Rats and Mice. Y. Sim. As sure as I live, I'le lay a trap for those Rats. But what's the matter now? They hem. Doll. Nothing but the Neighbours Dogs. Y. Sim. 'Tis a thousand pities but such Currs were hang'd up presently. Exit Sim. Doll. Oh Gentlemen! I would you were out of the house, for I am afraid hee will return again ere I can handsomly shut the door. Y. Sim: within. Why Doll, Doll. Doll. Come yee behinde me presently, I pray dis∣patch. Enter Young Simpleton. Y. Sim. Doll: I have considered, that to set up my trade is the way to get victuals, and I wont no∣thing of my tools but onely a pair of Bellows. Doll. Fear not husband, I have a little mony that you know not of, and if I can but hear of a good bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows. Y. Sim. Oh thou prettie loving kinde pigsnie, but what makes thee wear thy coats of She spreads her coats. that fashion. Doll. Do not you know husband, it is the fashion
for new-married wives. Y. Sim. Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the Summer time; but I'le go out and return presently. Exit Y. Sim. Doll. What will you do? 'tis ten to one he spies you, and then my reputation runs a hazard. 1. Gent. Appoint what way you will, we are con∣tented. Doll. I see him coming back; and truth to say, the course I shall advise will seem a strange one, yet it must be: you know he did appoint that I should buie for him a pair of Bellows; now if you two can bear it lustily, and blow it strongly, this visit may be kept off from his knowledge. 1. Gent. Nay any thing good Doll, we cannot now be choosers. Doll. So, lie down: I'le fetch a Chafingdish of Charcoal hither, and practice you a while before he come. Exit Doll. 1. Gent. I have plaid many a mad prank in my life, yet ne're till now acted a pair of Bellows. Enter Doll. She practi∣ses them. Doll. So, so, blow lustily and fear not. Enter Young Simpl. Y. Sim. Wife: I have considered with my self, that if we lay out all the money in a pair of Bellows, we should have little or nothing left to buy victu∣alls. Doll. Oh husband! you are deceived; for I have bought you a pair of Bellows, the whole town shews not a neater.
Y. Sim. Is this a pair of Bellows, let me see? this is an alamoda pair of Bellows, but look you Doll; when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop this hole here, for the winde comes out abominably. I'le call my Father Simpleton to see this pair of Bel∣lows. Father, father, come hither. Enter Old Simpl. Y. Sim. Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows as my wife has bought. O. Sim. A pair of Bellows, Son! me thinks this would serve better for an Anvill: Let's trie how it will bear our stroaks. Y. Sim. Well, a match. FINIS.
ACTAEON AND DIANA▪ WITH A Pastorall Story of the Nymph OENONE; Followed By the several conceited humors Of Bumpkin, the Huntsman. Hobbinall, the Shepheard. Singing Simpkin. And Iohn Swabber, the Sea-man. Printed at London by T. Newcomb, for the use of the Author ROBERT COX.
To all the Worthy-minded GENTRY. Gentlemen, and Ladies, IF your serious occasions will permit me so much honour, that this slight Book may be accepted and perused, I shall justly ac∣knowledge the favour to be farre above either my hopes or merit. And if you ever vouchsafed your Presence when it was pre∣sented on the Stage, I am confident, your (no way erring) judgements will now allow it as it then was intended, which was, rather to pro∣voke a laughter, then occasion a contemplation. It will likewise engage my gratefull service if I be not (in your worthy opinions) taxt of Arrogance to present my unpolished lines, when daily those of excellence are offered to your Eyes and Ears: But in the confidence of your clemency, I submit to the verdict of my grand Iury. And howsoever you are pleased to cen∣sure, will remain (as I ought) the humblest of your servants, ROBERT COX▪
ACTAEON and DIANA. The names of the Persons. Actaeon. Three Huntsmen. Bumpkin, an inferior. Diana. Five Nymphs. Three Countrey Wenches.
ACTEON & DIANA. Enter the first Huntsman, and Bumpkin very Melancholy. 1. Hunt. BUt tell me fellow Bumpkin, what's the matter? Thou that hast formerly been heard to sing As merily and sweetly as the Cuckowe, But by the posture thou dost now appear in, Strangers will sooner take thee for an Asse, Then for a man of mettle. Bumpkin. It may be so. And for my owne part, I am not such a fool, to think the contrary; nay, I would change condition with an Asse, and thank him too: never was any man (of parts) so tumbled, Jumbled and Rumbled, as poor Bumpkin is. 1. Hunt. Why what's the matter? Bumpkin. Nay, I know not, but every day my great guts and my small guts makes such a combustion in my belly as passes, and my puddings (like Lances) runs a tilt at my heart, and makes me as queasie stomackt as a young Green-sickness girl newly come to a big belly. 1. Hunt. Canst thou not guess the reason of this trouble. Bump. Yes, I think I can, and Ile be judged by thee,
if my case bee not desperate: I have a horrible minde to be in Love. 1. Hunt. With whom. Bump. With any body, but I cannot find out the way how to be in Love. 1. Hunt. Why? Ile instruct thee: canst thou be Melancholly? Bump. Yes, as a dog, or a hoglouse, I could even finde in my heart, to cry presently. 1. Hunt. Canst thou sleep well? Bump. I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep. 1. Hunt. Is't possible, that thou who hast so long Been an attendant on my Lord Acteon. Shouldst be to learn the way to be in Love. Bump. I would it were not possible, on the condition thou wert hanged and quartered. 1. Hunt. I thank you Sir, but Bumpkin list to me, This day thou knowest the maids and youngmen meet To sport, and revell it about the May-pole; Present thy self there, tell thy cause of grief, And I dare warrant thee a sweet-heart presently. Hump. If thou canst do that, Ile marry her first, and learn to love her afterwards. 1. Hunt. Hast thither Bumpkin, Ile go on before. Exit. Bump. And I will follow there a dog trot. Is it not pitty, that a man of Authority as I am, having been chief dog-keeper to my Lord Acteon this five years, being a man so comely of person, and having such a pure complexion, that all fair Ladyes may be ashamed to look on me, and that I should be distressed for a sweet-heart: Maypole I com, & if the wenches there increas my pains And scorn to Love, Ile beat out all their braines. Exit.
Enter the Huntsmen, with three Country Wenches, as they come in, they sing this song. SONG. 1. Country Wench. COme you youngmen, come along. With your Musique, dance and song; Bring your Lasses in your hands, For 'tis that which Love commands: Then to the Maypole come away, For it is now a Holiday. It is the choice time of the year, For the Vi'lets now appear; Now the Rose receives its birth, And prettie Primrose decks the earth: Then to the Maypole come away, For it is now a Holiday. Here each Batchelor may chuse One that will not saith abuse, Nor repay with coy disdain, Love, that should be lov'd again: Then to the Maypole, &c. And when you well reckoned have, What kisses you your sweethearts gave, Take them all again, and more, It will never make them poor: Then to the Maypole, &c.
When you thus have spent the time, Till the day be past its prime, To your beds repaire at night, And dream there of your dayes delight: Then to the Maypole come away, For it is now a Holiday. 2. Co. Wench. It is possible, would Bumpkin be in Love? 1. Hunt. Yes, if he knew but how, and for that sicknes I have undertaken to become his doctor; For, at the Maypole meeting 'tis decreed A sweet heart must be purchast, come what will on't. 3. Co. Wench. Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one he may find charitable persons there. 1. Co. Wench. What Lasse to such a writhled fac'd companion; One that by's looks, shewes that his fathers orchard Could yield no fruit, but Crabs or Apple-Johns: Should he be granted a prevailing suitor, I should not think it requisite or fitting Women hereafter should enjoy their eyes; Their very tongues too should be put to silence, Onely allowed to rail at that vile person, Who by her choice of him, sham'd the whole sex. 2. Co. Nay, I would lay a heavier curse upon her, She should not sleep without a wanton dream, And waking find no hopes of what she dream'd. 2. Hunt. That was a heavie curse and well con∣sider'd, But could you find our fellow Bumpkins parts. 3. Co. Wench. He can loose none, and who can finde them then. 3. Hunt. Do you beleeve him foolish.
1. Co. Wench. It is a faith that needs no confirmation. 1. Hunt. Laugh at him then, and wee'l assist you in't; but do't with Consideration. 2. Co. Wench. So we will,—hark Lasses. They whisper. 2. Hunt. Now if they be not hatching Eggs of mischief, let me be counted addle, what think you sirs? Country Wenches Laugh, Ha ha ha, 1. Co. Wench. And if he have not love enough, good Cupid, Let me want Love when look't for. 2. Co. Wench. In the mean time Let us not starve our pastimes, pray sirs, Being the Maypole revels. 3. Hunt. So we will; Come strike up a farewell to misfortune. Enter Bumpkin. Bump. Thats a dance that I could never hit off, Pray desist a while and hear my dolefull tale. 1. Co. Wench. Hee'l make us cry sure. Bump. Be it known unto all men by these presents 2. Co. Wench. An obligation; wee'l be no witnesses. Bump. Why then ile hang my self? 3. Co. Wench. We will be witness then. Bump. What to my hanging? O my conscience! If I should woo my heart out, I should never be the fatter, for it.—where's your promise now? 1. Hunt. You have not yet exprest your self, be plain, Tell them your grief, a remedy will follow. Bump. If that be all, 'tis but an easie matter, pray take notice that I am in Love—with somebody. 2. Co. Wench. Would I were she! Bump. Why? so you are, if you have a minde to't 2. Co. Wench. Why then you are my own?
3. Co. W. Pardon me, sister, I They all hang about him. bespake him yesterday. goes to her Bump Yes marry did she. 1. Co. Wench. But I was she that won him at the Maypole. 2. Co. Wench. Was that the cause you strove so for the Garland. Bump. What's that to you? Goes to her. Would I had any one of them in quietness. 3. Co. Wench. But yet I must have share. 1. Co. Wench. So must I too. All put him. 2. Co. Wench. I will not part without the better half. Bump. Then who shall have me whole, what are you mad? 3. Co. Wench. There's reason for a madness in this case. 1. Co. Wench. I will not lose my right. Let go I say. 2. Co. Wen. He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing. Bumpkin. Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me? Now by this hand, if nothing can perswade you Ile drown my self for spight that you may perish. (Horn.) 1. Hunt. Hark, hark, my Lord Acteons warning piece, That Horne gives us intelligence he does intend To spend this day in hunting, Bumpkin, why stay you? The hounds will quarrell with you, wee'l come after. 1. Co. Wench. Will you not stay my Love. Bump. Ile see you hang'd first, and by this hand ere I will be in love again, Ile feed my hounds with my own proper carcase. Exit. 2. Co. Wench. Now he is gon, our dancing may go forward.
2. Hunt. My Lord Acteon stayes, be quick, I pray. 3. Co. Wench. Quick as you will, the doing of it quick makes it shew better. A Country dance, Then Exeunt. Enter Acteon and Bumpkin. Acteon▪ ARe all the hounds uncoupled, let the woods, Vallies, and hils, be fild with their sweet musick: Till the thick Aire pierc't by their harmony, Return a willing Ecchoe; Let your cunning And care in this dayes hunting be exprest, To make the world know that Acteons pleasure, Is honoured and obeyed, be nimble sirrah. Bump. Nimble? yes, as a Bear that hath been lug'd to purpose: if Love be such a troublesome Companion, I will intreat him to keep out of my company. Acteon. Where are your fellows? we consume the day That should be spent in sport, with idleness. Go find them out, and tell them of my purpose. Enter the three Huntsmen. Bump. They have sav'd me a labour. Acteon. Fie! what mean you? The glory of this day calls us to action: The wild inhabitans of these fair woods, Are to be instructed, they must fear our Javelins, Our sloath will make them careless. 1. Hunt. Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight I lodg'd a Boar within the neighbouring Forrest. Bump. Yes Sir, and I lodg'd a Fox at a house hard by.
Hunt. His foamy tushes did proclaim defiance To all that would oppose him, his vast length And breadth of wonder, caus'd me to beleeve These woods nere bred his equall. Acteon. He's then a worthy subject for my javelin, Whose glittering head Ile bath so long within him, Till I have dy'd it Crimson with his blood; Nor shall Diana's self, who every day Honours these woods with her fair train of Nymphs, Have power to ravish from my resolute arm, The glory of this conquest: in the mean time, Let musicks sweet tunes in our breasts create Desire of Acteon, whilst our active Feet, Nimbly beguiles our duller thoughts of power To contradict our pleasures: in the fall Of this wild Boar, lies honour for us all. A dance with Acteon and his Huntsmen. Exeunt. A dance of Diana and her Nymphs, in the later end of which Acteon and his Huntsmen joyn with them, upon which Diana sayes, Diana. This boldness ruines thee. Exit▪ Act. Ile follow though my ruine do attend me, Exeunt. Enter Diana and her Nymphs. Diana. The unbridled boldness of Acteons youth, Merits a punishment to equalize The nature of his crime; sawcy young man, Too much presuming of thy known deserts, Be witness you that have vowd chastitie, How much he hath endeavoured to eclipse
The glory of our puritie; for to me And those that are my Votaries, honors precepts Must strictly be observed; no Balm can cure The wound of Reputation when 'tis made Upon those bosoms that are vowd to vertue. Shall she resolve his ruine? 1. Nymph. Gracious Madam, Mercy with chastity and beauty joyn'd, Are both with Gods and Men in estimation, And though his fault beyond expression great, Cries lowdly on your wrath to execute, Yet let his youth find pardon. 2. Nymph. It will prove your charity unequalled. Diana. Your goodness shall Become example to my willing pitie: Therefore if young Acteon from this time, Consider his own safety and my honor, My vengeance shall be silent; but if agen He shall presume to tempt his most sad fate, Ruine as quick as lightning shal demolish What Nature did erect in him for wonder, That so from men this truth may not be hid, No one must covet what the Gods forbid: Undress you now, for by this fountain side. Our garments from our bodies wee'l divide. Enter Acteon. Acteon. What wonders do I gaze on? Might I thus Be feasted at my eyes till time grow old, I would not wish a satisfaction Of any other sense:—Unkind Diana, To be so much a miser of thy beauties.
Loves laws can not be perfect, till they part Rebellion from the confines of thy heart. Diana. We are betraid! Oh Chastity defend us. Acteon. Twas but a flattring bliss that did me cherish. Fly, fly, Acteon, lest thy life do perish. Exit. Di. Fool! thinkst thou to escape? Know that my will Has power to reach, though thou bestrid'st a wind, And as by hunting thy offence grew high, So by the hands of Hunters thou shalt die. My will prevails, his head is circled round, The largest Hart ere beat the Forrest ground. And now forbear this fountain from henceforth, Let my dishonour dwell upon the Spring, The waters be corrupted, choakt with mud, Foul and infectious, like to Lethes flood. Exeunt. A Dance. Where Acteon comes transformed into the shape of a Hart, his Huntsmen pursue him, and in the conclusion kill him, and bear him away.
Singing Simpkin. The Names of the Persons. Simpkin, a Clown. Bluster, a Roarer. An old Man. His Wife. A Servant. Enter the wife, Simpking following. Wife. BLind Cupid hath made my heart for to bleed, Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la. Simp. But I know a man can help you at need, With a fa la, la, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, la. Wife. My husband he often a hunting goes out, Fa la, la, &c. Simp. And brings home a great pair of horns there's no doubt; with a fa la, la, la, &c.
VVife. How is't Monsieur Simkin, why are you so sad? Fa la, la, la, &c. Simp. I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me stark mad, with a fa la, la, la, &c. I am vext, I am tortur'd, and troubled at heart, Fa la, la, &c. VVife. But Ile try my skill to take off your smart, With a fa la, la, &c. And on that condition I give you a kiss, Fa la, la, &c. Simp. But what says your husband when he hears of this? with a fa la, la, &c. VVife. You know my affection, & no one knows more, With a fa la, la, &c. Knock within. Simp. 'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door? with a fa la, la, &c. Enter Servant. The tune alters. Serv. There is a Royster at the door, he seems a Fel∣low stout. Sim. I beseech you worthy friend, which is the back way out? Serv. He swears and tears he will come in, And nothing shal him hinder. Exit Servant. Simp. I fear hee'l strip me out my skin. And burn it into tinder. VVife. I have consider'd of a way, and twill be sure the best. Simp. What may it be my dearest Dear? VVife. Creep into this same Chest. A chest set out. And though he roar, speak you no word, If you'l preserve my favour. Simp. Shut to the chest, I pray, with speed, For something has some savour. Enter Bluster.
Blust. I never shal be quiet if she use me in this fashion. Wife. I am here to bid you welcom; what mean you by this passion? Blust. With some young sweet-fac'd fellow I thought gone out you were. Simp. in the chest. No sooth, the sweet-fac'd fellow is kept a prisoner here. Blust. Where is the foole thy husband? Say, whither is he gone? Wife. The Wittall is a hunting. Blust. Then we two are alone: But should he come And find me here, what might the Cuckold think? Perhaps hee'd call the neighbours in, Simp. And beat you till you stink. Blust. Yet in the bloody war full oft, My courage I did try. Wife. I know you have kild many a man. Simp. You lie, you slut, you lie. Blust. I never came before a foe, By night nor yet by day, But that I stoutly rouz'd my self, Simp. And nimbly ran away. Blust. Within this chest Ile hide my self, If it chance he should come. Wife. O no my love, that cannot be, Simp. I have bespoke the room. Wife. I have a place behind here, Which yet is known to no man. Simp. She has a place before too, But that is all to common. Old man within. Old man. Wife, wherefore is the door thus bar'd? what mean you pray by this? Wife. Alas! it is my husband.
Sim. I laugh now till I piss. Blust. Open the chest, Ile into it, My life else it may cost. Wife▪ Alas I cannot open it. Simp. I beleeve the key is lost. Wife. I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick. Blust. What may it be my dearest love? I prethee now be quick. Wife. You must say that your enemy Into this house is fled, And that your heart can take no rest, Untill that he be dead. Draw quickly out your furious blade, And seem to make a strife. Swear all th'excuses can be made, Shall not preserve his life. Say that the Rogue is fled in here, That stole away your coin, And if Ile not deliver him, You'l have as much of mine. Blust. Here's no man but my self, On whom shall I complain? Wife. This great fool does not understand, This thing you must but faign. My husband thus must be deceiv'd, and afterwards wee'l laugh. Enter old man. Old man. Wife, since you will not ope the door, Ile break't ope with my staff. Blust. Good woman shew me to the slave, His limbs I strait wil tear. Wife. By all the honestly I have, Theres no man came in here. Blust. When I have fought to purchase wealth,
And with my blood did win it, This Rogue has got my purse by stealth. Simp. But never a peny in it. Old man. She's big with child, therefore take heed you do not fright my wife. Blust. But know you who the Father is? Simp. The Roarer on my life. Old man. She knows not of your enemy, then get you gone you were best. Wife. Peace husband, peace, I tell you true, I have hid him in the chest. Old man. I am glad on't at my heart, but doe not tell him so. VVife. I would not for a thousand pound the Roa∣rer should it know. Blust. When next we meet his life is gone, no other must he hope; Ile kill him whatsoere comes on't, Simp. Pray think upon a rope. Old man. What kind of person is it that in the chest does lie? VVife. A goodly hansome sweet young man, as ere was seen with eye. Old man. Then let us both entreat of him—Pray put us not in fear: we do beseech you go from hence. Blust. But to morrow Ile be here. Exit Blust. Old man. Wife, run with all the speed you can, and quickly shut the dore, I would not that the roaring man should come in any more. Mean time I wil release the youth, and tell him how we have sped.—Be comforted my honest friend. Simpkin comes forth. Simp. Alas I am almost dead, my heart is tortur'd in my breast with sorrow, fear and pain. Old man. Ile fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you a∣gain.
Simp. And cause I will requite you, VVhose love doth so excell, Ile graft a pair of horns on your head, That may defend it well. VVife. Good husband, let the man stay here, 'Tis dang'rous in the street. Old man. I would not for a crown of gold, The Roarer should him meet. For should he come by any harm, They'd say the fault were mine. VVife to Simpkin. There's half a crown, pray send him out to fetch a quart of wine. Simp. There's money for you Sir,—Pray fetch a quart of Sack. Old man. 'Tis well, 'tis well, my honest friend, Ile see you shall not lack. VVife. But if he should dishonest me, For there are such slipp'ry men. Old man. Then he gets not of his half crown One peny back agen. Exit. Simp. Thy husband being gone my love, VVee'l sing, wee'l dance, and laugh, I am sure he is a good fellow, And takes delight to quaff. VVife. I'le fold thee in my arms my love, No matter for his listning. The Old man and his servant listen. Simp. Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence You may come to a Christning. Old man. O sirrah, have I caught you, Now do the best you can, Your Schoolmaster nere taught you To wrong an honest man.
Sim. Good sir, I never went to Schole, Then why am I abused? The truth is, I am but a foole, And like a fool am used. Old man. Yet sirrah you had wit enough to think to Cuckold me. VVife. I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see. Simp. But now you talk of knaverie, I pray where is my Sack? Old man. You shall want it in your belly, Sir, And have it on your back. They beat him off. Exeunt. Here follow the Rurall sports on the Birth-day of the Nymph Oenone. The Names of the Persons. Two Shepheards in love with Oenone. Amintas Dorilas Two other Shepheards. Strephon Dorus A Rustick Swain, conceited that Oenone is enamored of him. Hobbinall God Pan. Satyres. Oenonee. Amarillis. Cloris▪ Phillis. Enter Dorilas, as coming to the place where Oenones Birth-day is to be celebrated. Dorilas. THis is the place, the way me thought was long, And my slow pace did my affection wrong.
For who is he that would not wing his hast, When by Oenone's eys he shall be grac'd. Most potent Shepherdess who hast power t'enthrall Not only my poor heart alone, but all. For every one that reigns here, strives to be Rather her captive, then at liberty. Her eys do perfectly two Suns present, And yet but one graces the Firmament, The colour of her lips doth justly show Like that of Cheries when they kindly grow And such a form they have, they may entice To think such only grew in Paradice. The Lambs are fatter that by her do feed, And all her Ewes more frequently do breed Then any Shepherds, and do yeild each year A larger fleece then any others bear; As if she brought a miracle to pass, And fed them with her looks more then the grass. If then she will (when other Shepherds stand To beg a favour from her eys or hand) Esteem me most, my poor heart then will be Taught the true sense of a felicitie. But soft,—me thinks from yonder grove I hear Voyces that are familiar to my ear, Ile not go to them; for Love says my duty Is to attend none but Oenone's beauty. Exit. A Dialogue sung between Dorus the Shepherd, and Cloris the Shepherdess. Cloris. YOu have forgot then (Dorus) your protest. Dor. No, I have not my Cloris, 'tis confest. Clor. But yet I saw you slide, a Garland neatly ty'd
Into Uranias' hand; let it suffice, Though Love be blind, Lovers have many eys. Dor. Will you appear so strangely full of passion? Clor. I have cause to fear dissembled love's in fashion. Dor. Then why did you, I pray, With Strephon sport and play? You kist and danc'd, till day was past its prime, And all the while my heart did beat the time. Clor. May I not dance, or harmlesly be kist? Dor. So I may chance give garlands if I list. Clor. But when you are so free, Me thinks you steal from me. For every Lover will this Text approve, There's charity in all things but in love. Dor. That day the storm fell to be true you swore, Clo. When the sun shin'd agen, you vowd much more. Dor. Those faithfull vows I made, were by yourself betraid: For I have learn'd to know it is my due, To be no constanter in love then you. Chorus. Then jealousies be gone, and keep my sheep, Lest that the Wolf should make their number small, But of my love nothing command shall keep But Cloris will, and Cloris will is all. Enter Amintas and Dorilas. Amint. Shepheard, thy love is most unnatural: For Nature does command friendships observance, But by the fond desires thy heart is fild with, Thou prov'st thy self ungratefull. Dor. That Character was never coveted, Nor must I wrong my innocence so much,
Not to demand a reason of this slander. Amin. I will produce the truth thou wouldst profess, A witness 'gainst thy self: How oft have I With care and industry preserv'd thy flock? And when thy tender Lambs have been in danger, How many times have I opos'd the wolf, And made my strength defender of their weakness? And when thy self hast follow'd idle pastimes, Thy Flocks and mine have still been twin'd together, Till by my vigilance I have instructed The enemies to Shepherds and their Flocks. They were to fear me, as thy sheep did them. Nor have I had a thought (except those dear ones That have been busied by Oenone's vertues) Which has not stil paid tribute to thy friendship. Dor. You then would have prerogative in love, And leave no priviledge to me but friendship, If you allow Oenone vertuous., And that her eys have power to pierce all hearts, Why should the man which you will call a friend, Be banisht from the blest socitie Of those who are her servants? 'Twere a crime Against her beautie to beleeve she should Merit but one mans service; he which reigns here, I know must love, and that necessitie Makes rivals necessarie. Streph. Tis a truth I must acknowledg, pardon me my friend, I find the Nymph Oenone is too worthy; Yet her perfections (were they centupled) Shall not dissolve, nor in the least diminish What has bin formerly esteem'd a triumph, Which is, a perfect frindship.
Dor. In that confidence Thus we unite agen—But who comes here? Entr Hobbinall with a paper in his hand. Streph. 'Tis Hobbinall, One that beleeves 'tis but Oenone's dutie Directly to confess her selfe beholding To him for his affection: he supposes That his deserts are greater then her beauties, And is as confident the fair Nymph loves him, As we are that she does not; yet his fortune Is more to be commeded then our fate; For she is pleas'd to smile at his rude actions, The best of our endeavours are not valued. Dor. What paper's that he ruminates upon? Let us observe a little. Hob. 'Tis a strange thing I find my self out everie day more then other, to be one of the understandingst, sweetest, neatest, and compleatest Shepherds that ever took hook in hand. Tother day I saw my face in a pail of water, and I had much adoe to forbear drowning of my self: 'tis no wonder then, that the beauteous Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the other Shepherds shake their ears like Asses; And the truth is, if I can find never a handsomer she shall serve the turn. This was her birth-day, she being born in the year—one thousand six hundred,—nay hold a little; but on this day of the month it was, Winter or Summer, in the honour of which we all keep holiday; and therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honor of my own Poetry, have made such a Copie of Verses on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer then ever she was in her life.—
I will peruse them now with the eys of understan∣ding. He reads. OEnone fair, whose Beauty does enrich us, Tell me the cause why thou dost so bewitch us. On this day thou wert born, though not begotten, This day Ile think on when th' art dead & rotten. And though thy coyness and thy pretty scorn Makes many wish that thou hadst nere been born. Yet for my own part this Ile swear and say, I wish thy time of Birth were every day. If she do not run mad for love of me now, 'tis pitie she should have Verses made on her as long as she lives. Streph. Let's interrupt him—Hobbinall well met. Hob. It may be so. Dor. But why so strange man? I hope you will re∣member we are your fellow Shepherds. Hob. You were once, but now I command you to know, I am a Master Shepherd; for the fair Nymph Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with wa∣ter, does acknowledge me to be both Master and Mi∣stresse. Streph. In part 'tis true, yet if you well consider, she makes you but her sport, no otherwise. If she make me her sport, 'tis more then ever she can make of thee: for thou art one of the sowrest lookt fellows that ever crept out of a vineger-bottle. Enter Oenone. Dor. Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourisht. Hob. I will accost her. Streph. Forbear a while good Hobbinall. Oenone. It was my fault.
To be so credulous; but 'twas his sin To be so lavish of his protestations. Oh Paris, Paris, thy inconstant nature Argues the fickleness which Poets fansie In women, but a Fiction. I that have formerly acknowledg'd thee The onely person meriting respect, Must now produce this thy particular falshood, As one to dare example; let no more The Shepherds be at strife to please Oenone, Let every Maypole-meeting every feast, Be honor'd by a happier Nymph then I, To be the Mistress of those harmless pastimes. Dor. Hail to the Nymph that graces Idaes vale, Accept my service at this dayes solemnity. Streph. And if the same from me can be accepted, nothing so pleasing is as to present it. Hob. I, you may talk as finely as you wil, but when I come to speak once, I'm sure you will be kickt off. Oen. What you profess may wel claim an acceptance. Hob. Now wil I see who is the most deserving Shep∣herd in all the vale of Idae—little rogue, howdost thou? Oenone. O Hobbinall, you are welcome, I thought you had forgot me, you are my sport, and should be ever neer me. Hob. Look you there, I am her sport she says; when will she give any of you such an honorable title: but Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or a Witch, or a Divell at least; for thou hast infused such a combustion of Poetry in my head, that I fear I shall never be my own man agen, nor my Masters neither.— There's a Copie of verses, read 'um; nay, they are my own, as sure as my name's Hobbinall.
Oenone. I thank you Sport, Ile study a requitall. Enter Amintas, Dorus, Amarillis, Cloris, and Phillis. Amintas. Fair one, we come to celebrate this day With other Shepherds who admire and joy, To know so fair acreature as your self At this time of the year made the world happy. Phil. And we as bound to honour you (the fairest) that ever grac't our sex, are come to attend upon your recreations. Oenone. Your expressions, (As they cause blushes) do exact a thanks. Dor. Honour me With your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead The way to all those pastimes which will follow. Oenone. The honor is to me, and I accept it. Hob. Id'e laugh at that, no Sport, Ile dance with thee my self. Oenone. Some other time, By chance I may be at leasure. Hob. Will you not? well, by this hand then Ile stand out and laugh at every thing you do, right or wrong. A dance. Pshaw waw, this dancing is like my mothers Mares trot, Sport, shall I shew thee a dance of my own fashion? Oenone. It cannot but content. Hob. Nay, I know that, hark hither, Lads. Ex. Hob. Str. Oenone. Thus I beguile my passion, shadowing over With a false vail of mirth, my reall sorrows; For when time takes an end, not all the stories Which ever did lament forsaken Lovers, Shall shew a parallell to my misfortune.
My griefs shall stay, when all my joys depart, And nothing but sad thoughts shall fill my heart. Hobbinall and the Shepherds dance a Morris. Hob. How like you this Sport: Oenone. Beyond Expression, Sport, I see your Vertues were conceal'd too long▪ Hob. I so they were, but I mean to shew them every day as fast as I can. But sirrah, Sport, yonder's God Pan, with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever wore horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let's go make them drunk, and saw off all their horns. Exit. Enter Pan. Pan. Hail to that Nymph that graces Idaes Vale, VVhose beauty adds a Lustre to all those That doe acknowledge Pan as their chief Patron. Not any Satyr henceforth for thy sake, Shall own the nature he was bred withall. But all their actions shall be like thy beautie, Smooth and delightful, and when thou commandst, Sweet Philomel shall quite forget her Rape, And overcome with joy that thou art present, Joyn with the other birds in cheerfull notes. The very trees shall entertain no whisper From the rude winds, but what shall please thy ear, And when thou speak'st the beasts shall dance more nimbly, Then when the Thracian Orpheus charm'd their senses. And every object that can yeeld delight, Shall be Oenones vassall: in the mean time, I, and those Satyrs that attend my person,
Will move in dance, to let Oenone find, She can make gentle a rough Satyrs mind. Oenone. Since my weak fortune knows no retribution, But my weak thanks, accept them, being presented. Pan. Approach then Satyrs, and let each one strive To express the service due unto Oenone. A dance of Satyrs. Oenone. Now honor me to grace my Bower a while, Where I will strive to let my Patron prove, How fain I would be gratefull to his love. Exeunt. Here followes the Humor of Iohn Swabber. The Names of the Persons: Two Gentlemen. Francisco, Gerard, Iohn Swabber, a Seaman. Cutbeard, a Barber. Parnell, John Swabbers wife. Two or three neighbours wives. Enter Francisco, Gerard, severally. Ger. FRancisco, well met; whither in such hast? Fran. I am going to a feast; where, if you please, you shall be welcom too.
Ger. I am willing to believe you, and will wait on you. Fran. Ile promise you a dish of mirth, that's all, and if my hopes delude me not, well drest too, so quaintly relisht, that it will provoke a laughter farre above thy spleen to suffer. Ger. How can these times afford such entertain∣ment? Fran. Why, Ile inform you: 'Twas yesterday my luck to be incountred by a rustick Sea-man, (or one at leastwise of as course condition.) This fellow, like a perfect son of folly, began to rail extreamly at his for∣tune, and needs would make me Judge of his abuse.— I have (sayes he) about some two years since, married a wife, (wo worth the time I saw her) and in my ab∣sence she hath got a trick to make me Cuckold whe∣ther I will or no; a barbarous Barber makes a beast of me, Cutbeard his name, whom I do vow to be the cut-throat of. Ger. I know the fellow well, he lives close by; but on I pray. Fran. I finding that his humor might produce some∣thing worth laughing at, encouraged him; he like a bladder that is sweld with blowing, was straight puft up into a desperate humor, so that he vowed this day for a revenge: And hereabout I am to meet this Her∣cules. Ger. It cannot chuse but produce excellent mirth, which Ile assist with all my best endeavours. Enter John Swabber, armed with a sword, a gun, a spit, a pair of tongs, and other ridiculous weapons. Fran. See, he is come loden with several instruments
of death; he means to play a prize with him, I think,—Well Iohn, I see you are prepared for murder; have mercy on the Barber, I say. Swab. No, I scorn it, I wil have no mercy, he has made a whore of a wondrous honest woman, and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a Cour∣tier. For which abominable deed I scorn to shew my self a Christian; for I do mean to use him worse then a Jew would. Fran. Nay, but consider, he's a man how-ere, and you can boast your self to be no more, although you have the spirit of a Giant; you have brought weapons here as if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth tis too much. Swab. If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Cox∣comb, I will draw his teeth one by one, with an instru∣ment called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in the right vein, and bid the Divell take him at his own perill. Fran. Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this Gentleman a worthy friend of mine. Swab. Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir? Ger. By any means, Sir. Swab. Tis granted then; Ile toss a Can or a Pot with you, as soon as I have dispatch't this bawdy Bar∣ber; would he were dead that my business might be over. Ger. What's your profession Sir? and how may I call you? Swab. I am a Seaman, Sir, my name's Iohn Swab∣ber —an Officer of the ship, sir.
Ger. I cry you mercie, sir. Swab. Nay, never cry for the matter,—But I had forgot this Barber all this while: Barber come forth, or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I will so shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbinado thee, that thou shalt look like a gallimafry all the days of thy life. Come forth I say, Cutbeard within. Why neighbour Swabber, who pro∣vokes you thus? what do you mean? who has offen∣ded you? Swab. Oh slave of all slaves, who has offended me? why thou base, beastly, boisterous, Babylonian, bawdy∣fac'd Barber, thou hast, thou hast made me fit to chew the cud with oxen, climb the mountains with wild goats, and keep company with none but Ram-headed people, for which I will tie thee up on the next sign-post, and there thou shalt hang a twelve month and a day a∣live, for an example to all such notable shavers; but if thou comest and submitst to my mercy, I will do thee the favour to let thee hang till thou be dead. Ger. Fransisco hark—Ile pawn my life this fel∣low's a rank coward, keep you his furie up, and Ile per∣swade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere was practised by a suburb blade, Ile make him at the least seem valiant, fear not. Exit Fran. Do if it be possible, Ile hold him in discourse. —But, Mr Swabber, what think you if he does com∣pound with you, wil you be won to take an arm or two, or both his leggs, and save his other members? Swab. Pish, tell not me, tis neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon, he has caus'd me to go in dan∣ger of my life: for t'other day I had an occasion to
pass by a worshipfull Gentlemans pack of hounds, they no sooner looked upon my forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had been a Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been presented to some great man for Venison, and my hanches had been bak'd by this time. Fran. You were in danger there I must confess. Swab. And the Butchers Doggs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses at me; and all this the Bar∣ber is the cause of. Fran. I would revenge it, were I as you he should not have a tool left him to work with. Swab. No nor to play with neither, Ile have an inch of everie tool he has.—Barber come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms, or else I will enter thy house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an errand headlong. And if thou dost submit to my mercie, I will shave thee to death with thy own ra∣zor, therefore take heed.—So, now let him come if he dare. Enter Gerard. Ger. Wel, now I see there is no hope to appease him, blood must ensue, and death wil take its course. Swab. With whom? what's the matter? Ger. The Barber is preparing for the combat, he has took his pole to serve him for a lance, and one of his basons for a buckler, and vows to make you the wind∣mill, whilest he plays Don Quixot against you furiously. Swab. A windmil!—Ile begone. Fran. You wil not offer that sure. Who afraid? Swab. Would it not make any one tremble with the
thought on't, first to be made a Cuckold, then a wind∣mill? No, Ile begone, and come agen to kill him when I can find him in a better humour. Franc. Consider what you do; he'l call you coward, proclaim you Cuckold stil in everie Alehouse, and what disgrace wil that be? Swab. I care not, tis better be a Cuckold then a wind∣mil; if he had meant to make a fool, a puppie, or an ass of me, or any such Christian like creature, 'twere another matter: but to be made a windmill of, and never to be respected but when the wind blows, is not to be endur'd, therefore let him make windmils of my weapons, if he will, for my own part Ile defend my self with my heels. Throws down his weapons. Ger. Come, I have brought him to a better temper, he will come armed with nothing but a Razor, with which if he does slit your wezand-pipe, it will not be a∣miss to take it patiently. Swab. Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not; but hark you, if you should let him hurt me, I should be as angrie as a Tiger. Enter Cutbeard with a razor. Cut. Where is this slave that has provok't my rage to his destruction, I wil swinge this Boore, then hang him up for Bacon in my chimney, and send him to be broyled for Pluto's breakfast. Swab. VVhy This is wors then to be made a wind mil. Do you hear sir, if ever you had the fit of an ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a man troubled in conscience, that would be loth to die till he had made even with all the world, consider me; alas, sir I have my rent to pay yet, and if I should be sent to hell of an errand, they'l like my company so well, I should never
come back agen; pray perswade him to send me to Ie∣rusalem, or Ierico, or any those places neerer hand. Fran. Why canst not thou excuse thy selfe? where's thy brains? Swab. Alas, my brains are fallen intomy breeches; but if you'l stand between me and harm, Ile venture to re∣concile my self to him,—Cut—honest Cutbeard, didst not thou think I was in earnest all this while. Cut. What ere thou wert, thou shalt be nothing pre∣sently, death waits for thee, come quickly I command thee. Swab. Sir, pray perswade Mr Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50 years more; for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet. Cut. Shal I be dallied with, let me approach him, for all the intreaties of the world shal not preserve him past six minutes. Swab. One minut's past alreadie,—and theres two. Fran. Nay, prithee Cutbeard, be more merciful. Swab. Three—four—five. Ger. Wil no intreatie serve? Then take your course. Swab. Six, O now I am gone. Cut. If he submit he may live, let him know it—dost thou acknowledge thy own cowardize and my heroick valor? Cut O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I wil never think otherwise while I live; these Gentle∣men be my witnesses. Ger. VVhy then all's wel agen.—Remember Cutbeard, Cut. Ile spice him fear not—give me thy hand Iack, Thus do I grasp thy friendship. Swab. He grasps my hand divelish hard tho. Cut. I hear pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.
Swab. O rare! Is my wife a Venus? That's more then ever I knew before; why then I will be her husband Cupid. Fran. No, Cupid was her son. Swab. 'Tis no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once, and we two wil get such abundance of young Cupids, that we'l make all the world in love with one a∣nother. Cut. Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I wil make the whole world dote on thee, Ile wash thy face, and powder thee to'th purpose, and shave thee if thou wilt too. Swab. No, by no means, I dare not venture my throat under thy fingers; but for washing and powdring, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content. Cut. Sit down then in this chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to it, 'twill create such a complexi∣on on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the proudest Lady. Swab. But hark you Cutbeard, how shall I do to satis∣fie all the women that will follow me for kisses, if you make me too beautifull, my lips will be worn threed∣bare before I can get home; and then Parnell my own dear wife, will have the least share of her own sweet husband. Cut. For that we'l take a course,—wink, wink, good Iack, my Ball will search your eyes else. Swab. My eyes are honest, and fear no searching Changes the powder, and blacks his face all over. Cut. Now I begin to sprucifie thy phisnomie,—This powder was extracted from the Phoenix, when she last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintescence of odors. Swab. Nay, 'tis as odious as ever I smelt, that's cer∣tain,
good Cutbeard let me have enough I prithee. Cut. Nay, Ile spare no cost,—Judg Gentlemen, is he not strangely alterd? Ger. Past belief; I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would soon be cool'd then. Swab. I think so, but I would have you to take no∣tice, I will have nothing to do but with great persona∣ges, for I must not make my self common. Fran. What this fellow wil com to no man knows yet, his fame no doubt wil travel ore all countries, and I am full resolved in my opinion, the Queen of Mauritania wil run mad for him. Swab. If she run as mad as a March Hare, she gets not a bit; no, Parnell and my neighbours shal have all. Cut. Now if the Painters wil draw Adonis out, let them come here for copies. So I have done. Swab. Prithee Cutbeard lend me a Looking-glass. Cut. By no means; what did you never hear of one Narcissus how he pined away for love of his own sha∣dow: No, go home, your house is hard by, let Parnell see you, and bless her self with wonder. Swab. Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine, prithee bestow some of the same powder upon his face. Fran. No, no, you shal be beautiful alone, tis best. Swab. Parnell I come, and if thou beest not stupid, Thou'lt say Iack Swabber is a kin to Cupid. Exit. Ger. Well Cutbeard, thou hast drest him hand∣somly, I'de give a Crown that I were by when first he finds what beauty hee's adorn'd withal. Cut. This day I am to meet with pretty Parnell, pray Heaven the Fool be absent when I come, some two hours hence if you wil meet me, Gentlemen, Ile
tel you how he takes his transmigration. Fran. We wil not fail. Farewel. Exeunt. Enter Parnell. Parn. I wonder that my Barber stays thus long, can he neglect me thus? Wel, I wil fit him; for if he use me once agen thus basely, I wil cashiere him, and bestow my love upon some one more constant: forty to one but Swabber comes before him, and spoils all. Enter Swabber very stately. Who's this in the name of blackness? the clothes and walk of my dear husband, and Ile lay my life he has got a vizard on.—Nay pray now, indeed you'l fright me presently, take heed. Swab. She does not know me that's excellent,— Parnell beleeve it, I am flesh and blood, I would not have thee take me for a Goddess. Pan. A Goddess quotha, a black one if you be one; what hast thou got upon thy face I prithee? Swab. Do not look too wistly upon me, Parnell, my beauty wil put your eyes out if you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bel for you. Pan. A Dog and a fools head; pul off your vizard. Swab. Do not touch me unless you make forty curt∣sies first. Come kiss me, and thou wilt be out out of thy wits presently. Parn. Nay, then I see tis a trick put upon him; Ile fetch you a glass, you shal behold your beauty. Exit. Swab. Do, and I wil venture to be in love with my self for once. How shal I requite honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shal have the honor to be Barber to all my wenches. Enter Parnell with a glass. Parn. Are you not wondrous fair? Look and ad∣mire your self.
Swab. O Parnell, Parnell, I am gul'd most basely, I have not half so much beautie as a Chimney-sweeper: Ile kil the Barber the first thing I do. Parn. Was it the Barber used thee thus? Swab. I Parnell, 'twas he: Ile go fetch a company of my Fellow-Saylors, drag him out, and hang him up at the main Yard presently. Parnell farewel: if I be appre∣hended for the death of Cutbeard, what ever thou dost, send me a clean shirt; for I shal have need on't. Exit. Parn. VVell Cutbeard, I commend thee for this pro∣ject, thou hast drest him handsomly; would thou wer't here, I would kiss thee for the jests sake. Enter Cut. Oh are you come, Sir? Cutb. I watcht the time my Parnell, and have found it; How does the gul become his feathers? Ha! Parn. As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this kiss, and this, for the device. Cut. VVhere is he, Parnell? Parn. VVhy gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Saylors, who he vows shal hang thee up at the main Yard, and shal use thee worse then the Prentices a Suburb-Bawd on a Shrove-tuesday. Cut. And those same water-rats are Divellish things; what a slave was I to use him so? Parn. VVhat canst thou fear when I am in thy pre∣sence? Away you milksop, hence from me, avant. Cut. Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand Ile fight with a whole Army, if thou sayst the word: prithee be recon∣ciled. Swab. within. VVhy Parnell, Parnell, here's thy own sweet husband; open the door dear wife. Parn. O me, my husband's come, what shal I do? Cut. Let me into the well▪ if thou thinkst good, or
hang me in the chimney stead of Bacon. Parn. Alas, that's full of hazard.—No device! Swab. within. Why huswife, huswise, must I wait halfe a day? Parn. My peticotes faln off, but I come presently—Oh I have thought, come hither, put on this biggin, I made it for my child that is at Nurse, and cram thy self into this cradle here: there is no other way, there∣fore dispatch. Cut. O me, thou never thinkst upon my beard, that wil betray all presently. A cradle set forth. Parn. Take you no care, Ile make him to beleeve you were born with it; be quick, I say. Cut. Necessitie compels me, send me off of this brunt once, Ile hunt the smock no more—Cover me close good Parnell. Parn. So, keep you close, and when he prattles to you, sneere in his face, and call him Dad; do you hear? Parnell lets him in. Enter Swabber. Swab. Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry Parnell, why did you make me stay so long? Parn. I made what hast I could, but the child cri'd so. Swab. The child! what child? have you got bastards here? Parn. Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the boy I had a twelvemonth since by you, he was born when you were at sea. Swab. Is he brought home? As I'm an honest man I'm glad on't. Let me see him Parnell. Parn. Look here he is, the goodliest boy, and even as like thee Iohn, as if thou hadst begot him all thy self. Swab. Whoop, heres a boy of a twelvemonth old: if he grow but thus much this next year, he'l be able to
fight with a Giant presentl. But Parnely, he has got a great beard too, how comes that? Parn. Why he was born with it; many children are so, and 'tis a sign he wil be a man betimes, a wise discreet one too. Cut. Dad dad, dad. Swab. Nay, 'tis a wise child, I perceive that; for he cals me dad at first sight. Good Parnel fetch me some milk for him, Ile see him eat. Parn. He had milk but just now; prithee Iohn be pa∣tient. Swab. You are a fool, he has been starv'd at Nurse, and we must make him fat. Fetch some, I say. Par. I wil not truly Iohn, you'l spoil the child. Swab. I saw some stand in the next room, Ile fetch it my self so I wil. Exit. Par. What wil you do? You must endure with pa∣tience; I mingled batter but just now for pancakes and that he'l bring, as certain as I live. Cut. I shal be cram'd to death; mercie upon me. Par. He comes, lie close agen. Enter Swabber, with a great bowl of batter and a ladle. Cut. Dad, dad, dad. Swab. I mine own boy, here's milk for thee, Simon. Throws it in by ladles full. Look Parnel look, how greedily he eats it. Par. Now fie upon you Iohn, you'l choak the child. Swab. I mean to make him grow as high as Pauls, and shew him for a wonder in Bartholmew fair. Fetch me some more milk, this is all gone. Parn. What, do you think Ile murder the poor infant? Swab. By this hand Ile go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon. Exit,
Parn. Up quickly and be gone; for when he comes he'l choak you without fail. Cut. A pox upon him, never was child fed thus. But what wil you do now? Par. Do not you fear; Ile fetch my own child; 'tis at a neighbours house, & say the Fairies have exchang'd it. Cut. Send thee good luck; farewel sweet Parnel. Ex. Parnel fetches in a little child, and layes it in the cradle. Parn. So, if this child wil serve him for a Simon, all will be wel agen. Enter Swabber, with more milk. He comes,—Oh Iohn. Swab. Come, give me Simon on my lap, Ile feed him til his guts crack agen. Parn. Alas, I went but i'th next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in's place. Swab. Ile have none on't; go fetch me Simon, and tel the Fairies Ile indite them at the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what's become of thee? Parn. Nay, prithee take not on so. Swab. The goodliest boy of his age, that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has ner 'a beard, Ile ha' none on't. Enter Francisco, Gerard, Cutbeard, neighbours wives. Fran. Why how no Iack, what in a passion? ha! twas that blackt thy face to day for mirth sake, and thou didst think 'twas Cutbeard. Swab. I care not for my face, Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as Cutbeards here, the Fairies have ex∣changed him; and look what a chitty-face they have left in's room, a thing of nothing for him. Ger. Come, you must use this they have left with courtesie; for they wil whip Simon every day i'th week else. I know the nature of them. Swab. Wil they so? Nay then I must make much on't.
Fran. And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too. Swab. With all my heart, for I am angry with none but the Fairies now. Ger. We have brought musick, and some neighbours with us, and mean to have a dance. Come Iohn. Swab. I can dance nothing but a melancholy dance. For I am in a grievous dump for Simon still Ger. I warrant thee. Strike up there. A Dance. Fra. Why that's well done; no time is counted lost, Where civil mirth is gain'd with such small cost? FINIS.
