D362 R24876 8630322 41503
The Power of Congregational Churches Assertd and Vindicated, In Answer to a TREATISE OF Mr. J. PAGET, INTITULED The Defence of Church-Government exercised in Classes and Synods. By JOHN DAVENPORT; B. of D. and Pastor to the Church in Newhaven in New-England. Isa. 1.26. I will restore thy Judges, as at the first, and thy Counsellors, as at the beginning: after∣wards thou shalt be called, The City of Righ∣teousness, the faithful City. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Chiswell, and to be sold by John Ʋsher of Boston in New-England, 1672.
TO THE READER. TEe disposals of GOD in his Provi∣dence with reference to the travels of Truth, and bringing forth of Light, are much to be observed, and have much to be read in them. There  t been a great and over-ruling hand ted, and that very conspicuously, about  present Treatise. The Reverend and earned and eminently accomplish'd Author rst finished a Tractate with this Title, and  his Subject, near thirty years ago: But od's time was not yet come for its publish∣ng: it perished therefore in the rude Waves of the vast Ocean, with some other excel∣ent Manuscripts and precious Christians.
Nevertheless, some seven years aft, God se him about it again, and then he finished what is now (after twenty years more) thus made publick. Thus comes this short an nervous Treatise to have had a double, and so a more thorow digestion in the heart o so judicious and holy a Servant of Christ Nor are the principles and grounds her proceeded on such as our Author suddenly or lately took up. He was of too serious  weighty, and advised a spirit, lightly to take up, or suddenly to vent any singular apprehensions in the things of God. It would be too long to relate, (though I could from his own hand) how he was first staggered in his conformity, and after∣wards fully taken off by set Conferences and Debates, with himself and sundry o∣ther Ministers obtained with Mr. John Cot∣ton then driven from Boston on account of Nonconformity. Nor am I willin t revive the Memory of what Afflictions  Author afterwards underwent, because  could not be satisfied in Conscience in tho two Points; viz. a particular Churches be∣ing subjected to a Classis, & Baptizing in that latitude which was then practised, and i still in that Church, to which he had an earn∣est Call, and with which the Lord gave him a very general and great acceptance. But
certain it is, the Principles held forth in this Treatise, cost the Reverend Author, not only many sufferings, but also many, very many sad searchings, and much reading, and study on set purpose, accompanied with manifold prayers and cryes to the Father of Lights for light therein. After all which he was more and more confirmed in them, and attained to such comfortable clearness therein, as hore him up with much inward peace and satisfaction under all his afflicti∣ons on the account of his perswasion in these Points. And so perswaded, lived, and so died this grave and serious spirited man. The Reader will find in it (which is a rare conjunction) much succinctness, with much Scripture clearness. Light contracted, like the Sun-beams in a Burning-glass, is the stronger, and would be the more grateful too, if it could possibly meet with an Eye able to receive it. There are that think, and as they conceive from Scripture grounds too, that the glory of the Saints in Heaven receives additions, and increases daily, as their holy walk, and faithful service when here on Earth, doth after they are gone, bring forth Fruit to the praise of God a∣mongst those that are left behind them. If so, they that ever had any value and affe∣ction for this Eminent Servant of Christ,
(and there were, yea yet are many in whose hearts a precious remembrance of him lives, and will live for ever) are engaged to read and improve this Excellent Work of his for their instruction, and establishment in the Truths of Christ. It was for several Moneths since sent over from New-England, with desire that it might be Printed. The wise and all-disposing Providence of God allotted this as the season for it, and in his season all things have a peculiar beauty; and it may be presumed that the hearts of God's pople are more generally prepared for a rea∣dy entertainment of light held out to them, and that the Lord will please to fulfil that good word of Promise upon all his faithful and humbled people, Ezek. 43.11. [And if they be ashamed of all they have done, &c.] There are two things run through this whole discourse, and are ligible even in every line of it. 1. That the power of Churches is con∣fined to their Res Propria, their own pro∣per matters. 2. That there is not any Spiritual Church-power, to which they are by any In∣stitution of Christ subjected. Two grand and Pillar-Principles of the Congregational-way, both of them abundantly cleared
from mistakes, and established upon Scrip∣ture-foundations. Now the blessing of Heaven go with it, to lead the Reader into the truth of Christ in these Points, and to take off from the minds of such of our Rulers, into whose hands this Book may fall, all those prejudices a∣gainst the Congregational-way, which it may have been unjustly mis represented un∣der. For as in all the main matters of Faith and Doctrine we differ not from the established publick Profession of the King∣dom, yea are much more tenacious thereof than many of our zealous adversaries, so in those things, which seem to be our most singu∣lar Opinions (and wherein we differ most from the publick Profession, and for which we have suffered, and are ready by the grace of Christ still to suffer even worser matters, if the will of God be so concern∣ing us) this Book, after many others, which speak the same Language, may ren∣der it plain and evident to impartial and understanding Readers, the Principles and practices of the Congregational-way, are not in truth so incompatible with the power of the Supream Magistrate in matters of Religion, as some would represent, nor such as may render them suspected to Civil
powers, and that therefore we may not for these our Principles be accounted unworthy to enjoy a peaceable dwelling in our native Land, the weal whereof is more dear to us than our lives, or all our private earthly enjoyments in it. M. N. May 28. 1672.
Tertull de praescr. adv. Haeret. Cap. 21. COnstat omnem Doctrinam, quae cum Ecclesiis Apostolicis matri∣cibus & originalibus fidei conspiret, veritati deputandam, id sine dubio tenentem quod Ecclesia ab Aposto∣lis, Apostoli à Christo, Christus à Deo suscepit: reliquam veró om∣nem Doctinam de mendacio prae∣judicandam, quae sapiat contra ve∣ritatem Ecclesiarum, & Apostolo∣rum, & Christi, & Dei. Aug. de venit. Eccl. Cap. 3. Tom. 7. Sunt certè libri Dominici, quo∣rum
Authoritati utri{que} consentimus, utri{que} credimus, utri{que} servimus: ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discu∣tiamus causam nostram. Hieron. Epist. ad Minerium & Alexandrum. Omnia probate, quod bonum est tenete—estote probati nummularij, ut si quis nummus adulter est, & figu∣ram Caesaris non habet, nec signatus est moneta publica, reprobetur, qui autem Christi faciem claro praefert Iumine, in cordis nostri marsupium recondatur.
The Churches Charter. Containing Two Parts, 1. The Constitution of particular visi∣ble Churches. 2. The Priviledges and Power given to such Churches. BEfore I proceed to examine Mr. Pagets arguing for the Ecclesi∣stical Juridical Power of Classes, I shall positively declare what power is given by Christ to particular Churches, after I have described their con∣stitution according to Christ his appoint∣ment. In every of which particulars I shall principally insist in the metaphor of a Corporation or body politick, such as that of the chiefest and most perfect Cities is: because I find, that it pleaseth the Holy Ghost in Scripture, frequently to express this matter under this similitude.Ps. 48.1 2. & 87.3. Isa. 26.1. & 60.14. Ezek. 40.2. & 4.35 Rev. 3. & 0. 21.  22.  Luc. 1 . But I shall not venture to apply it any further than the light of Truth in Scripture will
direct and warrant: There we finde the grand Charter it self, and the ancient Pre∣sidents of the first Christian Churches planted by the Apostles. According to these Records I shall endeavour to declare the mind of Christ, whom God the Fa∣ther commands us to hear,Mat. 3.17 & 17.5. in all things whatsoever he saith unto us, and that un∣der a dreadful penalty,Acts 3.22, 23. Cypr. ad Coecil. lib. 2. ep. 3. Si solus Christus audiendus est, non de∣bemus at∣tendere quid ali∣quis ante nos faci∣endum putaverit, sed quid, qui ante omnis est, Christus prior fece∣rit, & fa∣ciendum statuerit. Neque e∣nim homi∣nis con∣suetudi∣nem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem, cùm per Isaiam Prophe∣tam Deus loquatur & dicat, &c. Whence Cyprian doth wel infer, If only Christ is to be heard, we ought not to attend what any before us thought should be done, but what Christ, who is before all, hath done, and appointed to be done. For we ought not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God, seeing the Lord saith by the Prophet Isaiah, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandements of men. The Charter, ac∣cording to which particular Churches are to be constituted, and their power, in re propriâ, is to be stated; we find in Mat. 16.18, 19. In the opening and explaining whereof, I purpose, with Christ's assist∣ance, to proceed in this method; 1st, hand∣ling the constitution of a particular visible Church; 2ly, clearing the power of it. The words in Mat. 16.18, hold forth a perfect Rule for the constituting of a visible Church, of its causes, of which we shall speak severally, and distinctly; and
the more largely, that the strength of such objections as occurr, in each particular, may be duly weighed; and in handling them, I shall observe this order. 1. I shall propound, what I conceive to be the truth, in certain doctrinal Con∣clusions. 2. Explicate and confirm them. 3. Deduce thence such Consectaries or In∣ferences as freely flow from them. CHAP. I. 1. THe principal efficient cause is noted in this clause, I will build my Church.] I? who is that? even he, whom Peter had confessed in these words, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. That is, Jesus our Mediator. 1. He speaks in the first Person, not in the se∣cond: For though he useth men as his in∣struments, yet himself, by his Spirit, build∣eth his Church, Zach. 4.6. Therefore it is called, his Building, 1 Cor. 3.9. 2. He speaks not in the preter, or present tense, but in the future [I will build.] For though Christ was yesterday, is to day, and shall be ever, the builder of his Church; yet he thus speaketh in a particular respect to the Christian Churches under the New-Testament,
which should be built (after his Ascension) of Jews and Gentiles joyned into one body, upon the foundati∣on of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the Corner-Stone, &c. Ephes. 2.20, 21, 22. The Conclusion hence is, That Jesus Christ our Mediatour is the only immediate Authour and Institutor of particular visible Churches.] That he speaketh here of a particular visible Church, and not of the Catholick Church, appeareth, by his giving to it the Keyes; Which, we shall prove hereafter, are gi∣ven only to particular Churches. 2. That Christ himself is the only immediate In∣stitutor of such Churches, may be evin∣ced; 1. Generally, from Heb. 3.3, 4, 5. 2. Particularly, by Induction, thus; 1. He is the Door, by whom they that are orderly admitted, must enter, Joh. 10.9. 2. He sets the Members, every one of them, in that place and rank which they have in the Bo∣dy, 1 Cor. 12.18. and gifteth them ac∣cordingly, Ephes. 4.7. 3. He compacteth the whole Body, Ephes. 4.16. and firmly knits the materials together in this Spiri∣tual building, 1 Pet. 2.5. 4. He gives the several Offices and Officers, Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephes. 4.8, 11. 5. He ap∣pointeth
the visible Seals, Baptism, Col. 2.10, 11, 12. and the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11, 23, &c. 6. He is the Law-giver to his Church, Jam. 4.12. 7. He is the Lord of all Church-Admininistrations, 1 Cor. 12.3. 8. The Censures have their power and efficacy from him, Rev. 3.7. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 9. The blessing of all the Ordinances is from his Institution of them, and effectual presence with his Church and Ministers dispensing them, Matth. 28.19, 20. Thus he is by a three-fold right. 1. From the Decree and Donation of the Father, Psal. 2.7, 8. John 3.35. and 5.22, 23. 2. From the Redemption of his Church, Act. 20.28. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Matth. 28.18, 19, 20. 3. From his conquest over the powers of darkness, from whence he hath delivered them, and translated them into his Kingdom, Col. 1.13. In all these respects, and many more, Jesus Christ, our Mediatour, hath right to institute particular Christian Churches, and to cast them into what mould he plea∣seth. From this Conclusion, thus proved, I infer, as followeth. 1. Consect. Then Jesus Christ is the only Lord, and Head of such Churches as
himself hath instituted. Thus from Christ's building his House, followeth his being over the House, Hebrews 3.3, 6. And he is over it, as the Lord of it, Acts 2.36. And as the only Political Head of it, in three respects, 1. Of Prehemi∣nence, as having the Spirit in a greater measure than all his Members, Col. 1.18. John 3.34. 2. In respect of Govern∣ment, Ephes. 5.22, 23, 24. 3. In respect of Influence, Joh. 15.5. and that, not only in respect of common Gifts, whereof Hy∣pocrites partake, which, if they be joyn∣ed to Christ's visible Body, the Church, are but dead Members, whom, as dead Branches in the Vine, God will take a∣way, and cast forth, Joh. 15.2, 6. but also in resect of quickning Grace, whence they are called, , 1. Pet. 2.5. Hence they grow up in all things into him which is the Head, Christ; and are edify∣ing and edified Members in the Body, Eph. 4.15, 16. Nor is Christ the Head only of the Ca∣tholick Church, but also of every particu∣lar Church instituted by him, which is therefore frequently by Christ himself cal∣led, the Kingdom of God, and of Heaven, the King whereof is Christ; his Subjects are visible Believers, professing their Faith
in him, and their subjection to his Laws, and Ordinances, 2 Cor. 9.13. This Sove∣raign power is so properly Christs, that it is not communicable to any Creature; nor can any man be his Substitute or Vicar herein. For neither doth Christ, or his Church need such a Vicar, or visible Head of the Church, seeing the Church is com∣pleat in Christ alone, Col. 2.10. Nor is any Creature capable of discharging the Office of an Head unto the Church, Ephes. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. 2. Consect. Then it is not in the pow∣er of Earthly Kings or States, or Civil Courts, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, or to invent and impose any Rites or Forms of Worship upon Churches, according to Principles of State-Policy, or Humane Prudence. Though Moses was, as well a great Prophet, as a great Prince, yet God left no part of the building of the Taber∣nacle to his prudence, but limited him in all things to the pattern in the Mount, Exod. 25.40. Nor might Solomon, though the wisest of meer men, act by his own wisdom in building the Temple, Chon. 28.11, 12, 13. but he was guided therein by the perfect pat∣tern, which David gave him from the Spirit. So concerning Christian Churches, Christ hath given his People a perfect pat∣tern,
which he requireth the Ministers to hold forth distinctly in every point of it, to his people; according to that Prophe∣sie in Ezek. 43.10, 11. That they may keep the whole Form thereof, and all the Ordinan∣ces thereof, and do them; which also Christ expresly requireth in Matth. 28.19, 20. 3. Consect. Then every particular vi∣sible Church must exalt Christ and his In∣stitutions alone, in their whole Church-Order, and in all their Admistrations. This is their visible receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, and walking in him, Col. 2.5, 6. The Church is Christ's House; and it's e∣qual, according to Natural light, and ci∣vil prudence, that every man should bear Rule in his own House, Esth. 1.22. Much more Christ, who is God and Man. Ar∣taxerxes shall rise up in judgment with all such as incroach upon Christ's Right, in ordering Churches by their policies, and condemn them; for he, fearing the jea∣lousy and wrath of God, if men should take such liberty to themselves, provided against it, by a strict Decree, saying, What∣soever is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for the House of the God of Heaven; for why should there be wrath against the Realm? &c. Esth. 7.23. Nor is the wrath of Christ less formi∣dable
to us, or his jealousie less incensed against those, that, either add to, or take from, or alter his Institutions now, than in times past; but rather more, Hebr. 12.25. to the end. So much shall serve touching the Effi∣cient Cause and Institutor of parti∣cular visible Churches. CHAP. II. Concerning the Material Cause. THe Materials whereof this Spiritual Building must consist, are implyed, when Christ saith, Ʋpon this Rock will I build, &c. together with Peters confessi∣on, in ver. 16. and Christ's approbation of it, ver. 17. which gave occasion to this Speech of Christ, Ʋpon this Rock, &c. For the Rock is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. But how considered? not simply, and in an abstract sense; but, 1. As Preached by the Ministry of the Gospel, Ephes. 2.20. 2. As believed on with a Faith made vi∣sible by publick confession, according to Rom. 10.9, 10. Christ believed on, is the Foundation, or Rock, of the Catho∣lick invisible Church: But Christ believed
on and confessed, is the Rock whereupon a particular visible Church is built. In this Exposition, sundry of the Ancient Writers,Basil. Tract. de poenit. Gre. Naz. de Comp. dis∣serendi ra∣tione. The∣od. in Psal. 47. Ambr. in Eph. 2.20. Aug. in lib. 1. Re∣tract. c. 21. and the Orthodox Modern, generally consent. The Doctrinal conclusion, which these words of the Charter afford us, concern∣ing the materials of particular visible Churches, is, that, 2. Conclusion. It is the will and ap∣pointment of Christ, that all and only such grown persons be admitted Members of particular Churches, who make such a publick profession of their Faith, as the Church may, in charitable discretion, con∣ceive, hath blessedness annexed to it, and is such as flesh and blood hath not revealed to a man, but our Heavenly Father.] 1. That Christ here meant a particular visible Church, and not only the Catho∣lick Church, we have partly evinced alrea∣dy, and shall more fully hereafter. 2. That persons meant by Christ here, are adulti, grown persons, appeareth by his questions to the Apostles, Whom do men say? and, whom do ye say, that I am? and, by Peter's answer. As for Infants, they are indeed Members of the Church, and, as such, Bap∣tized; yet it is so, only as they are inclu∣ded in their Parents, by vertue of the Co∣venant,
wherein they are wrapped with their Parents, Gen. 17.7. Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.14. 3. That such adulti, or grown persons, must make a publick con∣fession of Faith before the Lord and his people.] So Christ required Peter to do here, and, when he had so done, said Christ, Ʋpon this Rock I will build my Church, viz. in after times. For no par∣ticular Christian Church was actually con∣stituted, at this time, nor till after the As∣cension of Christ, in Act. 1. q. d. Then take this course, and ever after, all the World over, if you will have a particu∣lar Church to be acknowledged by me to be my building. 4. That their Confessi∣on of Faith must be so made, as that the Church may, in charitable discretion con∣ceive it to have blessedness annexed, &c. For seeing it pleaseth Christ to use Men as his Instruments in building his Church, Zach. 6.15. Ephes. 4.11, 12. He is content that they improve the judgement which they have. Christs judgement concern∣ing Peter was infallible; for he knew what was in man, John 2.25. But the Offi∣cers and Members of the Church are but men, who judge by the outward appearance, 1 Sam. 16.7. Therefore their judgment is fallible, and hath been deceived; as we
see in the judgement of the Apostles and the Church at Jerusalem concerning Ana∣nias and Sapphira; and in that of Philip, and the Church in Samaria concerning Simon Magus, &c. Their duty is to pro∣ceed as far as men may, by Rule, with due moderation and gentleness, to try them, who offer themselves to fellowship, whe∣ther they be Believers, or not; refusing known Hypocrites; though when they have done all they can, close Hypocrites will creep in. 5. That all they who hold forth such a profession of Faith, as the Church may, in charitable discretion, con∣ceive to be true, are to be receiv'd.] Though some of them have been formerly scanda∣lous, yet now holding forth repentance, they are to be received, 1 Cor. 6.11. and though some are at present, weak in Faith, yet, if we may conceive that the Lord hath received them, the Church must re∣ceive them, Rom. 14.1, 3. For Christ ap∣prod this confession of Peter, though he was at present but weak in Faith, as the following Story in this Chapter, v. 22, 23. clearly sheweth. 6. That none but such be admitted into Church-fellowship. For this Chapter limits the Church, to accept only such. Ʋpon this Rock will I build my Church. i. e. Christ believed on, and
publickly confessed. A meer verbal con∣fession is not that Rock. For the Devils made such a confession of Christ, yet were not built on him, Luke 4.34. But this con∣fession of Peter was such as held forth his Faith in him; as appears by Christ's three-fold Elogy, or praise of it. 1. From its effect. Blessed art thou, &c, as, Joh. 17.3. 2. From the procreant cause of it: Not flesh and blood, but my Father hath revealed it, as Mat. 11.25, 26. 3. From the title , or Peter, before promised, John 1.42. and now confirmed to him, signi∣fying a Stone; whereby Christ, not only acknowledgeth his faith, and that he was thereby a living Stone, and fit to have a principal place in this Spiritual Building, (in which sense, Peter applyeth a like title to other Believers, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. who yet were inferiour in degree to himself) but also giveth him this Prerogative and Ho∣nour, that he should be the first Planter of the Christian Church, both amongst the Jews, Act. 2. and the Gentiles, Act. 15.7. The Conclusion may be confirmed by two Arguments in the Text. 1. From the name whereby he calleth this holy Society,  () a Church; i. e. a company called out. Whence? see Joh. 15.19. To what?
See 1 Cor. 1.2. How? Not only by active vocation, by mans ministry, exhorting them to repent and believe: So sundry are called, who are not, in the least, wrought upon to answer that call, but put it off (as they who were invited to the great Supper, Luk. 14.18.) with excuse. Such are called, but no Church. Therefore more is required to qualifie for membership of a visible Church, viz. passive vocation, whereby they are wrought upon to an∣swer Gods call, by submission thereunto, at least, in outward profession, though some do it but feinedly, Ps. 18.44. Saints, by internal and invisible calling, are such, as answer Gods call inwardly and spiri∣tually. Saints, by external and visible cal∣ling, are subdued to yeeld obedience to the Word in visible profession. Thus, all that were called into the Vineyard, had so much efficacy of the Spirit in them, that they all came into the Vineyard, and laboured in it, though not with like sin∣cerity. Mat. 20. According to this clause of the Chapter, the Churches planted by the Apostles, were constituted, for the materials of them; else the Apostles could not have given both the1 Cor. 1.2. Eph. 1.2. members and1 Thes. 1.1 1 Cor. 12.27 2 Cor. 11.2 & 6.16. 1 Tim. 3.15 Churches such high titles, as they did. Nor did they by these titles describe the
invisible Church only, but visible Chur∣ches. For to such, Paul wrote his Epistles: and the like expressions are applyed, in other texts, manifestly to visible Churches. Nor do these titles describe particular Churches only according to the better sort of members, but such they did, in the judgement of christian charity, conceive all their members to be, as Paul told the Philippians, Phil. 1.6, 7. which he could not have said if he had not known the care of the Church, in admitting per∣sons into membership with them, to be according to the conclusion noted by us. From Christ's appropriating such a particular Church to himself, owning it for his [my Church] q. d. I own any Church thus built by my self to be my Church; according to that in Act. 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. The Lord added them. How? Not only by giving them saving faith, and so adding them to the invisible Church, but also by his inclining their hearts to offer themselves unto the fel∣lowship of the visible Church, and to profess their faith before them: and by bowing the hearts of the Apostles  Brethren to receive them into visible ∣munion
of visible Ordinances; as appear∣eth, v. 41, 42. Thus he added them, daily to the Church; which cleares it to be an act of the Lords ordinary dispensation, and therefore presidential to the Churches in their ordinary practice. They, who were thus added, are said to be such as should be saved. That is; they were such, either in the judgment of the Lord, which is infallible; or in the judgment of the Church, which is fallible. The Church looked at them, according to their fruits, viz. their profession of faith, and their Christian conversation, observing so much in both, that they saw reason, in charity guided by rule, to conceive them to be in a state of Salvation. Such were the three thousand spoken of in v. 41. as appeared by their affectionate and submissive inqui∣ring of the Apostles, whom they mocked before, what they should do to be saved, being pricked in their hearts. v. 37. and af∣terwards, by their gladly receiving the Word; both of promise, for themselves and their Children, with faith; and of precept, to repent and be baptized, and to save themselves from that froward generati∣on, with obedience. True it is, that they could not in one day make so large ac∣counts of Gods work upon them, as are
commonly held forth in our Churches: nor do we effect too large narrations, but wish such passages, as are superfluous, left out: And at that time, less was needful to be expressed, than necessity calls for a∣mong us, ordinarily. For the Apostles had a more quick Spiritual discerning, than ordinary Officers and Churches have. And concerning the three thousand, Act. 2. the manner of their offering them∣selves to Church-fellowship, visibly at such a time, when such visible confession of Christ was with manifest hazzard to their lives, gave good ground to the Apostles and the Brethren, of conceiving charitably, that they were all of them in a state of Salvation, and such as the Lord himself added to the Church. In these places and times, where Church-fellowship is an honour, and drawes after it sundry out∣ward and worldly advantages, it will be necessary, that the Church be satisfied, as by sufficient testimony concerning their good conversation, so by their holding forth their confession of faith, both quae creditur, and quâ creditur, of the Doctrine of Faith, and of the Gift of Faith, how it was wrought, and how it works in them. As Mr. Rogers, in his Treatise of Faith, saith it may be known of men by those
tryals. And this care suits the nature of Church-power, which is delegate and stewardly. For, as the faithfulness of a Steward bindeth him to receive none in∣to his Lords family, but according to his Lords mind and appointment; so the faithfulness of the Church unto Christ ob∣ligeth them to receive such into this ho∣ly fellowship, as they may, in charitable discretion, conceive, the Lord receiveth and addeth thereunto. Against what hath been said, two ob∣jections are made, Obj. Christ received Judas, whom he knew to be a hypocrite, into fellowship of the twelve. Answ. 1. Not into a particular visible Church; for no such was then gathered. 2. Christ had a peculiar reason for it, wch doth not concern Churches, Joh. 13.18. Obj. 2. Christ himself compareth visible Churches, to a Field, wherein are Tares; to a Draw-Nt, which gathers good and bad Fishes; to ten Virgins, of which five were foolish; and the Churches planted by the Apostles had in them sundry Hypocrites, and scandalous persons. Answ. Such places shew, 1. That in visible Churches sometimes Hypocrites are mixed, either by the sleepiness, and fault of those that should vent it:
Thence the Tares: or by the wyliness of Hypocrites, who creep in unawares, Jude 4. as the bad Fish came into the net under water: or they pretend saving gifts, as the five foolish Virgins; so, false Bre∣thren, Gal. 2.4. 2. The purest Churches may be blemished with scandals, till they can orderly proceed against them; but then they must be cast out. Therfore they knew not that they were such before. From this 2d conclusion, thus explained and confirmed, we may infer as followeth. If this be so; then more is required, as the essential property of Church-mem∣bers, as visible, than that they profess before men the Faith, crave fellowship with the visible Church, and desire the visible seals of the Covenant. For men may have all these three properties, who are notoriously scandalous in their lives, Drunkards, Adulterers, prophane Swear∣ers and Cursers; in a word, such as are described, 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. Who have a form of Godliness, denying the power of it, concerning whom the Apostle's charge is, from such turn away, v. 5. If in ordi∣nary converse, the People of God must not exercise needless familiarity with such: much less may they receive them into spiritual fellowship and fraternity.
If such, being Members, must be cast out, certainly, being out of Church-fellowship, they may not be received in, whilest they continue such. If Christ will build his Church upon this Rock; then it is the bounden duty of Churches to see, so far as they can ac∣cording to rule, that all whom they re∣ceive into Church-fellowship, be visible Believers, such as have been described in the Conclusion above propounded, ex∣plained, and proved; lest otherwise they build without a foundation. Particularly; 1. They are to see, so far as in charity they may discern, that they are Beleivers in Christ; Else, they cannot answer the titles given them in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. nor the praises given unto Peter so confessing Christ, that Christ said, Ʋpon this Rock I will build my Church. 2. They are to see, that they profess their Faith and Holiness in a good conversation, Phil. 1.27. Jam. 3.12, 13. For they that profess they know God, but in their works deny him, are abo∣minable, Tit. 1.16. 3. And in a publick confession of their faith before the Church, as Peter did here before Christ and the Apostles, &c. Only, because the Church cannot see the heart immediately, as Christ did Peter's, the confession of faith made
to men must hold forth the gift of faith, as well as the doctrine of faith. So Cal∣vin understood those words, Sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready al∣wayes to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1 Pet. 3.15. Calvin's note upon it, is this;Ejus, quae in vobis est, spei.] Spes hîc, per synech∣dochen, pro fide capi∣tur. Expen∣di debet se∣duló quod dicit. Sig∣nificat n. eam dem confession probari Deo, quae ex corde emanat; quia, nisi intus resi∣deat fides, frà gar∣ gua. Ergo radi∣ces in no∣bis agat, ut deinde pro∣ferat Con∣fssionis fructum. Calv. in 1 Pet. 3.15. Hope, here, is, by a Synechdoche, put for faith. What he saith, ought to be diligently weigh∣ed. For it signifieth, that God approveth only that confession, which proceeds out of the heart: because unless faith reside within, the tongue will babble in vain. Therefore faith must be rooted in us, that afterward it may bring forth the fruit of confession. And, when all this is done, the Brethren are to consent in receiving them, and herein to shew forth the gentleness of Christ (who will not break a bruised reed, nor quench smoking flax) in giving due encourage∣ment to the weak in faith, if they see cause to conceive, by rightly ordered charity, that the root of the matter is in them. But, if they see just cause to doubt of that, they have warrant to suspend their accep∣tance, till better satisfaction be given, from the primitive pattern, in Act. 9.26. However, the Officers must propound it to the Brethren, to declare, whether they are so far satisfied with what they have
heard, that they do consent that such shall be received into their fellowship; as Peter put a like question to the Brethren that went with him from Joppa, concerning the Baptizing of Cornelius and those with him, upon whom the Holy Ghost fell visibly, Act. 10.44, 45, 46. &c. 3. Cons. If upon this Rock [Christ be∣lieved on, and publickly confessed, by grown persons] the Church of Christ is to be built; then the Children of the Church, who were Baptized in their in∣fancy, when they come to be of ripe age, must hold forth publickly their personal confession of Faith, that they may be ad∣mitted to the Lords Table, and fellow∣ship in Voting and in Elections and Cen∣sures, in their own personal right. But, if they be found grosly ignorant, or pro∣phane, or professing a false faith, or deny∣ing the true Faith, or contemners of Church-fellowship, and the Ordinances of Christ, or do not, according to this clause of the Charter, publickly profess their faith, and crave Church-fellowship, they may not be owned for Members, by their admission unto the Lord's Table, and unto other priviledges of Church-com∣munion, in their own right, but are to be declared non-members. In Jacobs po∣sterity,
when the Lord brought them to Canaan, that standing Ordinance of pre∣senting unto the Lord, before the Priest, their first fruits, every year, with such a solemn confession made by all grown Is∣raelites, as is appointed in Deut. 26.2 to 16. was a visible profession of their Faith and Obedience, suited to the condition of that Church and time, in performance whereof, they avouched the Lord to be their God, and to walk in his wayes, and keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken unto his Voice: and the Lord avouched them to be his peculiar People, &c. v. 16, 17, 18. And the like, if not greater, care was had of the profession and conversation of the Sons of strangers, the Children of such Prose∣lytes, as were admitted into the Church of Israel, Isa. 56.6, 7. John Baptist also requi∣red of all, whom he admitted unto his Baptisme, a repenting-confession of their sins, and that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus, Act. 19.4. warning them, not to rest in this, that Abraham was their Father, Mat. 3.9. Answerably, the Primitive Churches required of all grown persons, 1. Visible Repentance, in case of open scandals, Act. 19.18. 2. to joyn there∣with
a publick profession of their Faith in Christ, Act. 2.39. 3. A profession of their subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. And after the Apostles dayes, the ancient Churches, they had their Poeniten∣tes, such as held forth their Repentance publickly; and their Catechumeni, who were of two sorts, 1. Such as had been Pagans, and were instructed by being catechized in the Christian Faith, that they might crave Baptisme when they should be found fit, and then were called Competentes: In the interim, they were called Audientes, or, Auditores.Tertull. l. de poe∣nit. c. 6. & praescr. ad∣vers. Hae∣ret. c. 4. Cypr. l. 3. ep. 17. 2. Such as having been Baptized in their Infancy, when they did nonnihil adolescere, were Catechized, and being found to be Be∣lievers, were confirmed by imposition of Hands, and admitted unto the Lords Ta∣ble, and unto the full fruition of all Church-priviledges. These, Clemens cal∣leth Incipientes & Novitios, and so do o∣thers, from 1 Tim. 3.6. As the Mystery of Iniquity wrought higher and more effe∣ctually to advace Papal usurpation, by the spoils of Churches, this custom, in the right use of it, ceased; and Popery retained only the name of Confirmation, but cor∣rupted the thing, and turned it into a Sacrament, limiting the Administration
of it to Diocesan Praelats. This corrupt custom was continued in England, after they renounced the Pope. But, as Luther in Germany, sought to introduce the right use of it into the Churches there; So did Cranmer, under that Godly King Edward the 6th, endeavour in England, and committed the perusal and censure of the Common-Prayer-Book, to that godly, learned and moderate Theologue, Bucer; who examining the Book, found, among sundry other things, That those which were to be confirmed,Censura M. Buceri super lib. Ordinat. Eccles. cap. 17. must say the Apo∣stles Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and answer the Questi∣ons of the short Catechism. Bucer's cen∣sure upon it is thus: This requires di∣ligent ponderation. If they think it suf∣ficient, that the words of this Confession be recited, God abhorreth such as con∣fess him in words, and their heart is far from him. Nor is Catechizing instituted to this end, that they should answer in words only, That they believe in God, and will keep his Commandments. The Lord saith, Teach them to observe and do, and not only to speak; and he requi∣reth such Worshippers, as worship him in spirit and in truth. But, if a true Con∣fession of Faith, and profession of Obedi∣ence,
such as should be required of adulti, grown persons, unto Baptism, be meant; such a Confession of Faith must be re∣quired, as may be judged, not to be born in the mouth, or gotten only by humane teaching, but also it must have those signes in the life and manners, that it ought to be received of the Churches, as coming from an heart truly believing the Gospel, and the Doctrine of the holy Spi∣rit. For though the Church cannot look into the hearts of men, yet they ought to judge of trees by their fruits: which fruits, afterwards, he declares at large. But I hasten to the next point, having been the larger in this, because it is a sub∣ject of no less importance than dispute, in reference to the question under so much agitation. CHAP. III. Concerning the formal Cause. THe formall cause, or that which gives essential being to this Church, is here held forth in a Metaphor, taken from houses. For, , properly signifies, to build an house of materials,
fitly joyned and compacted together: but Christ doth not here speak of the structure of a material house, but of the constitut∣ing of that holy Society, which he calleth his Church, under the metaphor of build∣ing an house, which every way suits the matter he speaks of. For, as a material house (suppose, of stones) is built by or∣derly placing and strongly cementing them together, which before were either scattered stones, or a confused and loose heape, but not an house, till they were thus framed and compacted together: so this holy Society, the Church of Christ, ariseth from the coadunition, or knitting together of many Saints into one, by an holy Covenant, whereby they, as lively Stones, are built up a spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. And as the natural body of a man is built, by an orderly joyning and firmly knitting the parts together: So is the Church of Christ built by the mutual Co∣venanting of the Saints, the Members of the Church, which is called the Body of Christ, where the Members of it are thus orderly and firmly knit to the Head, and one to another. Eph. 4.15, 16. The same holds in Cities and Families, which are thus built also; and therefore the Apostle speaketh of this matter, under the same
matephor, in Ephes. 2.19, 20, 21. The con∣clusion from hence is, that It is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, our Lord, that his Churches, un∣der the New Testament, be constituted, in respect of their essential form, by the publick mutual covenanting of the Saints, with the Lord, and one with another. Though all men seem to grant, that every Church of Christ hath its being from a Covenant (for which cause, they that want an explicite Covenant, do yet plead their implicite Covenant to maintain the truth of their Church-state) yet such di∣sputes are raised against the Church Cove∣nant, that I am compelled to handle this point also the more largely, that the truth concerning it, may be the better cleared and setled. I shall therefore, with the help of Christ, shew, 1. To what end it serveth; 2. what it imports; 3. prove it to be the Ordinance of Christ; 4. draw some consectaries from the Conclusion. 1. The next end of their confederating is, to engage themselves to submit one to another in the Lord, & to cleave to Christ and his Rules, and to one another in him, mutually, and to walk together, accord∣ingly, in the use of all means sanctified and appointed by him for attaining the ends of Church-communion.
2. The Covenant it self imports two things, 1. On the Lords part, it implyeth, (1.) the Lords giving them his Covenant for themselves and their seed, Gen. 17.7. (2.) His giving them hearts to take hold of his Covenant, accordingly, Isa. 56.4, 5, 6, 7. where you see, the Eunuch's and the son of the stranger's taking hold of the Covenant, is fore-told, as that which should be previous to the Lord's giving them a place in his house, and bringing them into his holy Mountain (that is, joyning them to his visible Churches under the New Testament) when the Church shall be called, an house of prayer to all Nations, v. 7. 2. On the Saints part; their cove∣nanting for themselves, and for their seed, to be the Lord's People, and to walk in his waies, Deut. 29.10, 11, 12. and to cleave firmly one to another, viz. to their Offi∣cers and Brethren, Deut. 12.19. Neh. 10.29. with mutual watchfulness one over another, Lev. 19.17. Deut. 29.18. with Heb. 12.15, 16. and with mutual submissi∣on to Christ, and to one another, in him. 2 Cor. 9.13. 3. Such Covenanting is Christ's Or∣dinance unto the Churches under the New Testament; this is proved, From the parity of reason between the
Churches before the coming of Christ and since, in all essentials of a Church. For in the essential state and form of a Church, there is par ratio omnium Ecclesiarum. Be∣fore the coming of Christ, the People of God were joined together into Church-fellowship by confederation; Psal. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me; those that have made a Covenant with me by sa∣crifice. So did Adam, and all the holy Pa∣triarchs, unto Abraham: and so did the posterity of Jacob, at Mount Sinai, Exod. 19.5, 6. and 24.8. and from thence were called, the Church in the Wilderness, with which Moses was joyned. Act. 7.38. And so, the Lord there tells them, it should be in point of the Covenant, though not of Sacrifices, with the Church under the New Testament, v. 14, 15, 16. In Abrahams fa∣mily, God built his Church by a Cove∣nant, without sacrifice; but first, the Lord changed his name, and called him Abraham, to shew, that he now treated with him, not as a single person, but as a Father of many nations, and as a multi∣tude vertually, Gen. 17.5. Then he gave him his Covenant, to be a God to him, and his seed, Gen. 17.7. and, to shew that it was a Church-Covenant, he gave him Circumcision for the visible signe and seal
of it. Gen. 17.10-15. Thus far went the Covenant on God's part. 2. On Abraham's part; he first accepted both the Covenant and the confirmation of it, with Faith and holy reverence, declared by his rejoycing, John. 8.56. and humble prostration of himself before the Lord, v. 17. and by real performance of it, after, both in his own person, being circumcised when he was ninty nine years old, v. 24. and, as a Pro∣phet and Ruler, instructing his family, concerning the Covenant and Circumcisi∣on, and their duty to accept the one, and submit to the other, which they did ac∣cordingly, v. 23, 27. and thereby professed their subjection to the Lord and to his Ordinances. Hence the posterity of Abra∣ham, by Isaac and Jacob, became the Lord's People, Exod. 3.7. yea his first born, Exod. 4.22, 23. and had Circumcision as a seal of this Covenant, whereby they were distinguished from all other People, Deut. 7.6, 7, 8. But they, like men, transgressed and broke the Covenant, both in Egpyt, and in the Wilderness: yet the Lord, be∣ing faithful in his Covenant unto their forefathers, did not cast them off, but cal∣led them to repentance, and renewed his Covenant, in a more Evangelical man∣ner, in the plains of Moab, that he might
establish them to be his People, and their little ones, and the strangers, Deut. 29.10-14. which Covenant they took hold of, for themselves and their seed, and for them that were not there with them, that day, v. 15. that they would admit none unto Church-fellowship with them, but such as should separate themselves from the polutions of the Heathen, and enter into the common engagement with them, to cleave to the Lord, and to one another, with member-like love, watchfulness and submission mutually. Hence it was, that the sin of one Achan became the sin and punishment of all Israel, Josh. 7.11, 12. From the Apostles manner of planting Christian Churches, after the Death, Re∣surrection, and Ascension of Christ. Their custom it was, when they had con∣verted many to Christ, to joyn them to∣gether into one Congregation, by cove∣nanting with the Lord and his People, for themselves and their Children. Against this assertion, some object, that in the planting of the Church at Samaria, in Cornelius his house, at Phillippi, Co∣rinth, Ephesus, Thessalonica, &c. they find no mention of such a Covenant as the Doctrine intendeth, only that they believed, professed, and were Baptised, but no men∣tion
of an express vocal Covenant. 1. Though it be not mentioned in those Texts, yet it may be in others. 2. We need not be solicitous about the words, if the thing be found there. 3. And that the thing is to be found there, it may be evinced three wayes: 1. From their being bapti∣sed. 2. From the phrases. 3. From the simi∣litudes, which import their covenanting together. 1. From their being baptized, which presupposeth, that they were first made Disciples, because their Commission required that, Mat. 28.19. where, to make Disciples, is as much as to gather and plant Churches, by visible bringing men into Christs school, with engagement, by those of years, for themselves and their seed, to submit unto Christs teaching and government therein. This school of Christ is the Church of God, whence the mem∣bers of Christian Churches are called, Dis∣ciples, in Act. 15.10. So then, they were in Church-fellowship, before they were baptised. 2. From the Phrases, which imply covenanting to be that, whereby they be∣came visible members of the Church. I shall instance in two. The first is used in Act. 2.41. , were added; and v. 47. , the Lord added: and
chap. 5.14. , were the more added. The word imports such an adding as did visibly and firmly knit them toge∣ther.Calvin in Act 2.41. adjuncti Christi di∣scipulis, vel in i∣dem corpus insiti. Calvin saith, they were joyned to Christs Disciples, or ingrafted into the same body. That which thus visibly ingrafted them, was not Gods working Faith in their hearts, or their visible profession of it: for it is said, Believers, were added. v. 14. which is of the same import with, those that gladly received the Word, in Act. 2.41. Therefore this adding was by some∣thing else; and what could that be, but their visible taking hold of the Covenant with that particular Christian Congrega∣tion, whereunto they now joyned them∣selves notwithstanding their former state in the National Church of the Jewes? And that they were thus added to the Church, Luke confirmeth two wayes. 1. by the effect of this ingagement, in Act. 2.42. , they were strongly and constantly knit together (viz. by vertue of their former mutual ingage∣ment) in the Apostles Doctrine, Hearing, Believing, Professing, Obeying it constant∣ly; and in fellowship, i. e. in Church Com∣munion, into which they were combined and compacted before, having solemnly given up themselves, first to the Lord, and
then to the Apostles and Church, by the will of God, as Paul expoundeth it, in 2 Cor. 8.5. 2. Luke confirmeth the same sense of their being added to the Church, by expres∣sing the manner of it to be so, as of the rest durst no man joyn himself to them, in Act. 5.13. yet they did magnifie them, i. e. they approved their doctrine and way, and confessed the truth and goodness of it. All which was not sufficient to add them so to the Church, as believers were added, viz. by publick voluntary engagement with the Church, mutually. And this to be the meaning, Luke confirmeth, by using another word, synonomous with this, which more plainly expresseth the man∣ner of their being added to the Church, , to be glewed: which word, though it sometimes signifieth joyning, in a more common and lax sense, yet not in matters of this nature. Therefore, ac∣cording to Tertullian's rule, Deligendus est sensus è materiâ dicti: and then we know, that all joyning unto a Corporation, must be done by Covenant, as it is in Marriage, and voluntary services, to both which re∣lations the same Verb is applied; to Mar∣riage, in Mat. 19.5. to voluntary service, in Luk. 15.15. both which are by voluntary covenant. This is the strong knitting glew
whereby persons are joyned together in all such voluntary relations. So much may serve for explication of the phrase. 3. The third proof is from the simili∣tudes used in the New Testament, to ex∣press their covenanting together. The Church is compar'd to a House, to the Bo∣dy-natural, to a Body-corporate, to a Wife. 1. To an House, 1 Tim. 3.15. the whole society is called, the houshold of Faith, Gal. 6.10. every member of it is said to be, of the Houshold of God, Eph. 2.19. Whether you speak of an House, in an Architecto∣nical sense, the materials must be cemented together; now, in the Church, that ce∣ment is the Covenant; or, in an oeconomi∣cal sense, the Members that are voluntarily added, as voluntary Servants to the Fami∣ly, are joyned with the rest by Covenant; so it must be in the Church, Eph. 2.21. 2. To the Natural-body, in man; the Head of it is Jesus Christ, the Members are Beleivers, the whole is made up essen∣tially, when they are harmonically joyn∣ed, and strongly compacted together by mutual engagement to submit one to an∣other in the Lord, whereby they fall, as it were into joynts; as the Thigh falleth into the Knee, and the Shoulder into the Shoulder-blade, by shooting it self into the
hollow of it, and is firmly knit to it, Ephes. 4.15, 16. 3. To a Body-Corporate. Hence the Church is called the holy City, Rev. 11.2. and Church-members, Citizens with the Saints, Ephes. 2.19. That whereby the Church is as a City compacted together, is the Covenant. For as all Citizens are ad∣mitted into jus Civitatis, and become free Denizens, by voluntary entering into the common engagement and covenant, wher∣by they become a Political-body; so it is in the Church. 4. To a Wife, whether espoused or married. All espousals and marriages, are by a voluntary mutual Covenant, Prov. 2.17. Mal. 2.14. So it is in the Church of God, Isa. 62.5. Hence Paul stileth the par∣ticular Church at Corinth, a Virgin espous∣ed, 2 Cor. 11.2. To shew that all the mem∣bers were joyned, as one Virgin, into one body, and that Virgin-Church, into a Co∣venant of espousals with Jesus Christ, as their Head and Husband, in all his Offi∣ces, and one with another, in him, mutu∣ally. Thus, we see, the phrases and si∣militudes, in the New Testament, do strongly confirm this truth, That the first Christian Churches planted by the Apo∣stles, were constituted, in respect of their
essential form, in one body among them∣selves severally and respectively, by an ho∣ly Covenant. If any demand, why the Apostles did not expresly mention the word, Covenant. Two reasons are given for that; 1. That it was not necessary; se∣ing it had been so clearly and fully expres∣sed in the old Testament, as that which gives essential being to the Church. And it is usual in Scripture, that duties, which are grounded upon a natural, or moral, and common reason and equity, and have been largely expressed in the old Testa∣ment, are but briefly and implicitely point∣ed at in the New: as the Baptizing of Infants, the Christian Sabbath, and the manner of sanctifying it; so this of the Church-Covenant. Yet concerning all these, sufficient light is held forth in the New Testament, for manifesting the mind of God unto his People. 2. That it was not seasonable and safe for the Churches, then living under Hea∣then Princes and Rulers, enemies to Christ, unto whose jealousies the name of Cove∣nant, and Covenanters might render them obnoxious, and might seem dangerous to the civil peace. Therefore Christ and his Apostles chose rather to forbear mention∣ing the name, yet established the thing
under such similitudes and parables, as might hide it from others, and yet reveal it to the Saints. From the voluntary relation, which is between the Members of the Church, together with their mutual interest one in another, and their mutual power one over another; all which do necessarily imply their mutual covenanting one with another. 1. Their relation is voluntary: and all voluntary relations are by cove∣nant; as, between a Society or Corpora∣tion, and the Members of it; between Husbands and Wives; between Masters and voluntary Servants: So, between a Church and the Members of it; both par∣ties, before, were free, the one, to offer himself into fellowship, or not; the other, to admit him, or not. If such joyn toge∣ther it is by their free consent, and must be by mutual engagement. Hence ariseth their special and particular relation to this Church, and among themselves mu∣tually, as a body distinct from other Churches. 2. Their interest one in ano∣ther, and power one over another mutu∣ally, ariseth from their mutual engage∣ment by covenant. No Church can judge any inhabitant among them, unless he first give up himself to the Lord and them, in a
professed subjectiō to the Gospel of Christ. Nor can any inhabitant expect member∣like watchfulness and helpfulness from the Church, unless, upon his offering himself to enter into the common ingagement, they receive him, and take upon them that care over him. 3. Their constant fellowship in Church-priviledges, ariseth from this mutual ingagement by Cove∣nant. For none can be admitted unto them, without consent of the body: nor can the body admit them thereunto, with∣out their taking hold of the Covenant: for, till then, they are not under the po∣wer of the whole; as it hath been prov∣ed. There seems to be no need of Church-Cove∣nants, seeing the Covenant of Grace con∣veigheth to Beleivers all Spiritual blessings, and bindeth them to all Christian duties. The Spiritual blessings communicated by Christ unto Believers, through the Co∣venant of Grace, are of two sorts. 1. In∣ternal, viz. Adoption, Justification, San∣ctification, &c. together with the blessed right unto all the outward good things of this life, 1 Tim. 4.8. and a remote or medi∣ate right unto Church-priviledges. These, all Believers have from Christ by the Co∣venant of Grace, as they are Believers in
sincerity and truth, in the sight of God. 2. External, viz. Church-fellowship, and power of the Keys, &c. These, visible Be∣lievers have from Christ, through the Co∣venant of Grace, as they are confederates, and joyned with the Church by taking hold of the Covenant. This difference is between them; The former are limited to the persons of true Believers in the sight of God, Hab. 2.4. The latter are given to a society of true Believers, in the ac∣count of the Church, and are extended to their seed also, Exod. 20.6. 2. Though the Covenant of Grace re∣ceived by us, binds us to all Christian du∣ties required in the Gospel, yet it bindes us also to do them in the due order: for God is the God of rder, and not of con∣fusion. Therefore such duties as issue from voluntary relations, must be done only by those who stand in such relations. Will any Man or Woman infer from his or her being in the Covenant of Grace, that therefore there is no need or use of a conjugal Covenant, but that he hath right to all Women, and she to all Men, to per∣form conjugal duties with them, where ever they come, though they are not joyn∣ed to any of them by a conjugal Cove∣nant? The like reason is of all other du∣ties
which are founded in other volun∣tary relations; as between Masters and Servants, Pastor and People, Corporati∣ons and the Members of them, particular Churches and their Members. Therefore the Covenant of Grace binds all Believers to such mutual covenanting together, as is necessary for the orderly discharge of the several duties that are to be performed by vertue of such a state and relation. Thus the conclusion is proved. Hence it will follow, that it is not suffi∣cient to make one a visible member of this or that Church, that he is joyned to it in hearty affection, or in neighbourhood of habitation, or in ordinary hearing the Word preached among them. For, 1. the members of several Churches may be so joyned; yea, 2. they that are members of no particular Church, may so joyn with Church assemblies. All these might be af∣firmed of those who durst not joyn as members, to the Church at Jerusalem, Act. 5.13. And of that Heathen Corinthian, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 3. All these may be found in an excommunicate. Then Baptism and profession of the doctrine of Faith, with freedom from pub∣lick scandal, do not formally constitute a Church, nor make one a visible member of
the Church. 1. Not Baptism; 1. because the form must be before the formatum, not after it: but the Congregational-Church is before Baptism. For, 1. Baptism can∣not ordinarily be orderly administred, but by a Minister called unto Office by the Church. 2. Because Baptism sealeth the Covenant, and incorporation of a Belie∣ver and his seed into the visible Church. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Therefore Baptism is not before, but after the Church: Because where the form is, there the formatum must be also. But visible Church-mem∣bership may cease by excommunication or desertion, or by the dissolution of a Church; yet Baptism remaineth. 2. Not profession of the Doctrine of Faith, though accompanied with free∣dom from scandalous sins. For general profession cannot appropriate a man par∣ticularly to any one Church, without particular ingagement to that particular body. 2. Nor doth it bring any one under the power of this or that Church, which it hath over its own Members, and other Churches have not. 3. If that were suffi∣cient; a man should become a member of any particular Church whether it will or no. Then a Member of one particular Con∣gregation,
is not, thereby, a Member of all visible Congregations on earth. For, though a Church-covenant be common to all Churches, in its general nature; yet there is a speciall combination, which gives a peculiar being to one Congregati∣onal-Church and its members, distinct from all others. Else, how could one Church have that power over its own Members, which another hath not? And in all voluntary covenants, the only diffe∣rence between them is, the peculiar interest which one hath in another, by a particular ingagement that passeth between party and party. Covenants of Corporations, of Marriages, of Service, and the like, are, in general, common to all that are in those and the like relations; Yet, in particular appropriation, bind them only to this or that individual. No man can claim a memberlike right in all Corporations, be∣cause he is in covenant with one, upon this plea, that Corporation-covenants are common to all Societies: nor can an Hus∣band plead, that he hath a conjugal right in all Wives, because conjugal-covenant is common to all married persons. The same holds in Churches, which are distin∣guished one from another by their respe∣ctive Covenants. Other absurdities that
proceed from this Tenet, I shall preter∣mit. Then the Children of the Church, not∣withstanding their membership, which they had, during their menority, by their Parents covenant; yet they must, when they are grown up, joyn themselves to the Church by their voluntary taking hold of the Covenant publickly with the Church, in their own personal right, before they may be admitted to exercise all acts of Church-communion, and to partake of all Church-priviledges for themselves, and before their Children may be Baptized. 1. I say, before they may be admitted to exercise all acts of Church-communion, and to partake of all Church-priviledges, for themselves.] For, in their minority, they were Members in their Parents, and were Baptized, to seal the Covenant made with them in their Parents, or, with the Parents, for themselves and their chil∣dren. But when they come to years, they must take hold of the Covenant with the Church, for themselves, because now they are capable of Church-priviledges, in that way which they were not before. If any oppose against this, that Church-member∣ship non recipit magis et minus; that argu∣eth only, that one of the confederates is
no more engaged to the other, than the o∣ther to him: But otherwise, in Confede∣racies, some are allowed greater liberties than others be, according to the diversity of the subjects, and their capacities. So it is in Civil Societies and Corporations; the Child of the free-man of London, hath all the benefit of a free-mans Child, under age; he may trade for himself with and under his Father, in his Fathers right: But being of years, he may not set up shop, nor trade in his own right, till he first take up his freedom, and, by oath, voluntarily submit himself to all the orders of that Society, and duty of a Citizen. Some think, that the Children of Confe∣derates are so compleat members, that they should be excommunicated, in case of demerit. I cannot easily assent there∣unto: for that would imply, that they have an immediate right in all Church-priviledges, which I do not grant, nor believe; but that, as the Church looks up∣on them tanquam in lumbis parentum; so also, if the grown Members of the Church observe vicious qualities and practises in them, they do not deal with them imme∣diately in those steps of proceeding, re∣quired in Mat. 18. to bring matters to the Church, but they deal with their Parents
to discharge their duty, in educating their Children according to the rule, in Ephes. 6.4. To this sense Dr. Ames applyeth that text, in 1 Cor. 7.14.Ames. me∣dulla The∣olog. lib. 1. cap. 32. art. 12, 13. Infantes tamen non adeò perfecta sunt membra Ecclesiae, ut possint actus Communionis exercere, aut ad∣mitti ad omnia ejus privilegia participanda, nisi priùs incrementum fidei appareat: ab iis vero, quae pertinent ad initium fidei, et in∣gressum in Ecclesiam, non sunt excludendi. 2. Nor may their Children be baptized, till themselves have taken hold of the Co∣venant with the Church, in their own right. For, the Children of Church-members, when they come to age, for not taking hold of the Covenant with the Church, do become non-members, and are to be so looked at by the Church, if they desert Church-fellowship (either departing from them in place, as Esau in∣to mount Seir, or withdrawing from their communion;) or if the Church with∣draw from them. In such cases, they are not so much as implicitely members. Therefore their Children may not be bap∣tized. For the right that Infants have un∣to Baptism, is in their next and immedi∣ate Parents. 1. Because the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 7.14. doth so limit it. 2. Because the Apostacy of the next Parents takes off the
federal holiness of their Seed; as we see in the posterity of Ismael and Esau. 3. Be∣cause if Infants should have this right in their Grand-fathers, where shall we stop? shall it be extended to a thousand Genera∣tions, as some mis-apply that promise in Exod. 20.6. That cannot be true: for then the Children of the Jews; and Turks, and Heathen, all the world over, have a right to Bapism, in some of their An∣cestors within that time, contrary to Rom. 11.17. Then Church-covenant is no formida∣ble matter, but desirable. Is it a yoke? 1. It is Christs yoke, which is easie, Mat. 11.29, 30. he will make it easie. Depend upon his faithfulness, as Surety of the Co∣venant of Grace, for ability to be faithful in your discharge of your Covenant with the Church. 2. It is not a yoke of bondage, but of precious liberties; whereby you have right in all the outward priviledges of the Gospel. 3. Nor is Church-fellow∣ship a prison, but, if God call, they must consent to your remove from them, and follow you with their prayers. It is, in∣deed, a strong but sweet ingagement of all upright-hearted Christians to please Christ, and to be to his honour, in that state. So doth the Marriage-covenant oblige those
that are in that state, 1 Cor. 7.34. & 11.7. From whence, the Apostle argueth for the like care in particular Churches, and the Members of them, Ephes. 5.24. 2 Cor. 8.23. which also was a special end and use of the Covenant, wherein Abraham and the Church of the Jews stood bound unto God, Gen. 17.1, 2. and 2 Chron. 34.31, 32. and the contrary discovered the insincerity and hypocrisie of others, Psal. 78.37. In like manner it bindeth the Members of the Church to all the duties of their Church-relation mutually, both Officers and Peo∣ple, and quickneth them thereunto, through the influence and assistance of Christ the head of the Church, by his Spirit in them all; Ephes. 4.15, 16. 1 Cor. 12. to 28. And therefore I cannot but wonder, that some, who do approve and plead for all other Covenants, viz. Nati∣onal, Conjugal, Social Covenants, should yet dislike, and oppose Church-Cove∣nants. From the premises we may see when the Church-Covenant is broken, and how great their sin is, who do scandalously and contumaciously persist therein.
CHAP. IV. Concerning the quantity and com∣pass of a Christian Church. THE Church, which Christ calls his Church, he telleth Peter, that he will build it; Ʋpon this Rock (Mat. 16.18.) I will build my Church. Where, the verb is in the first person, and in the future tense. 1. He speaketh in the first Person, not in the second, to shew, that though he will use men, as his instruments, in this work, yet it is his presence and blessing that causeth the work to prosper in their hands, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 3.9. It is by the Spirit of the Lord that Church-work is carried on succesfully, Zech. 4.6. 2.See Mr. Bradf. Answ. to the Arch. B. of York in Mr. Fox his Act & Mon. in a Conference between them and the Bishop of Chichester in the Compter in Breadstreet. He speaketh in the future tense, not in the praeter, or present; for, though Christ was in all ages the builder of the Church, yet he thus speaketh of the Church under the New Testament, because it was to be constituted after his Death, Resurrecti∣on
and Ascension, when the Gospel should shine forth so clearly, that it should ob∣scure the light of former ages, as the Sun rising in its strength, doth the light of the Stars: and it should appear,Tit. 2.11. bringing Salvation to all men, even to the Gentiles, and they should be gathered and joyned unto Christ, that one Head,. Eph. 1.10. . E∣phes. 3.6. & 2.13, 14 and become Members of his Body, together with the be∣lieving Jews, in Church-communion visi∣bly, the partition Wall being broken down. And, because all Nations could not be joyned together in one visible Church (as the Nation of the Jews might be, and was) to have their solemn set meetings together, to worship God thrice a year, or once in an age; the Lord Jesus institut∣ed a Congregational-Church among Chri∣stians, and invested every such Church with sufficient Church-power within it self, for attainment of all the ends of Church-communion. This is the Church, which Christ saith, he will build, and ap∣propriates it to himself, My Church, 1. Be∣cause it is his Institution. 2. Because his Name is called and put upon it. The Mem∣bers of it are, not Moses his disciples, but Christs, and therefore were, of old, called Christians, Act. 11.26. This title of Church, though it be gi∣ven
some times to a civil Assembly, Act. 19.41. yet so it is not taken in this place. For Christ no where calleth a civil Assem∣bly, his Church. Therefore it must sig∣nifie an holy Society. And in that sense, the Scripture applieth this title sundry wayes. 1. To Godly Families, Rom. 16.5. Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. where the Church, in such an house, is distinguished from the Congregational Church. For Paul wri∣teth to the Congregational Assembly to salute Aquila and Priscilla, and the Church in their house. Their house, it seemeth, consisted (all) of Godly persons, in Pauls judgement; else, he would have said, Sa∣lute them of such an house, who are in the Lord: and it was an exemplary Fa∣mily, and a seminary of the Church, yet not such a Church as was capable of all Church Officers, and power, as this, meant in the text, hath by the gift of Christ. 2. Sometimes it signifieth the Catholick visible Church, Heb, 12.23. but that hath been from the beginning, and doth not, nor can meet in one place, on earth to worship God. Therefore it is not meant here. 3. Most commonly, it signifieth a Congregational Church, or, an holy So∣ciety joyned together by an holy Cove∣nant, in one Congregation, to walk toge∣ther
according to all the Ordinances and Lawes given by Christ to his Church. And so sometimes it signifieth a definite particular Congregation, meeting toge∣ther in one place, for the publick wor∣ship of God, and their mutual edification: as that at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.18, 20. and 14.23. And in that acceptation, it notes, sometimes the Brethren, as distinguished from the Elders; Act. 15.22. Sometimes the Elders and Brethren assembled toge∣ther, as in 1 Cor. 11.20. but never, the Elders meeting apart from the Brethren. But, in this place it doth not signifie a particular definite Church. For there is no particular Christian Church built by Christ more, or rather, than other. It re∣maineth, that Christ speaks of a parti∣cular Congregational Church here, in an indefinite sense. And so, the word Church is applyed in the New Testament, when Paul saith, he persecuted the Church, Phil. 3.6. Not, that at Jerusalem only, or Damascus, but all the Churches in Judea, Gal.. 1.22, 23. In this sense, Christ calls every Christian Congregational Church, thus built, his Church. From the words thus opened, this doctrinal conclusion is to be collectd viz. That it is the will and appointment
of Jesus Christ, that the Christian Church, under the New Testament, be, in respect of its quantity and compass, Congrega∣tional. This we shall endeavour to prove, both by Scripture and Reason. 1. The Scrip∣ture, in the writings of the Apostles, clearly sheweth, that they so understood this branch of the Church-Charter, and therefore they speak of Christian-Chur∣ches, as several and distinct from one another, 1 Cor. 11.16. and 14.33. Yea, in one and the same Country, as Galatia, Gal, 1.2. Judea, v. 22. Macedonia. 2 Cor. 8.1. Yea in Corinth, where God had much people, Act. 18.10. yet the Church there was but one Congregation, 1 Cor. 14. and, though Cenchrea was a Port near unto Corinth, yet it had a Church distinct from Corinth; Rom. 16.1. The Church also in Jerusalem, though a greater number of Believers was declared to be there, than we read of in other Cities, yet it was but one Congregation; Act. 2.41, 44, 47. and 6.2, 15. The same holdeth concerning o∣ther great Cities; the Church, in every one of them, was Congregational: and, if the number of Believers grew too great for one Congregation, doubtless more Churches were gathered in such a place
and case: & if several parts of the Church met in times of Persecution, now and then, here and there, as they might; yet they continued one Congregation, having the same Officers, in common, for any thing appears in Scripture to the contrary. Now let us see, why the Christian Church must be Congregational. The first Reason is from the end of Church-fellowship, which is mutual edi∣fication, in the use of the means instituted by Christ thereunto. Let all things be done unto edification, 1. Cor. 14.26. but how can this be attained, unless they so meet together, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. v. 13? Hence all the Members of the Church are exhorted, not to forsake their assembling together, Heb. 10.25. which was the praise of the primitive Church in Jerusalem, Act. 2.42, 44. Therefore a particular visible Church is compared to a flock, which are fed together, Act. 20.28; and to an House or Family, the mem∣bers whereof injoy the same Family-pri∣viledges in common, under the same fami∣ly-order; 1 Tim. 3.15. The second Reason is, from their duty to take up offences among Brethren, which cannot be ended privately, Mat. 18.17, 18. which implyeth two things. 1. That the
Church must consist of more than two or three: for though two or three may watch over one another, admonish one another; and, in case of obstinancy, withdraw from a convicted delinquent: and, though two or three praying together, may expect the presence and blessing of Christ, as v. 19, 20. upon their admonition; yet two or three cannot issue the matter compleatly, in way of Church-censure, but must tell the Church: Therefore the Church must necessarily consist of a greater number. Again, how can two or three choose the four sorts of Officers amongst them∣selves, which are described by four living creatures, in Rev. 4.6, 7. viz. Pastor, Teacher, Ruling Elder, and Deacon? 2. That they must not exceed the quanti∣ty and compass of one Congregation. For the Church must meet ordinarily together with their Officers, for these purposes. Therefore the Scripture sheweth that the whole Church did meet together to chuse and ordain Officers, as Deacons, Act. 6.2, 3, 5. Elders; Act. 14.23. to receive and admit Members, Act. 9.26. for Prophesy∣ing, 1 Cor. 14.23. for the Seals, 1 Cor. 11.20. and for Censures, 1 Cor. 5.4. and to release from censures. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7. So much for proof of the point. The Con∣ctaries are these.
Then the Congregational frame of a Christian Church is no humane inventi∣on, or constitution. True it is, that the Parish frame, as it was wont to joyn all the inhabitants within such a praecinct, into one Church, injoyning them all to communicate at the Lords Table, at least at Easter, is meerly humane, not being measured by the Golden Reed, which is the Church-measure, but by the Court-measure, Rev. 11.1, 2. But that Members so qualified as Christ requireth, and so confederating, should ordinarily meet to∣gather in one Congregation, for the solemn worship of God, and their mutu∣al edification, is the Ordinance of Christ, and according to the measure of the gol∣den Reed, whereby the City and Gates, and the dimensions of the New-Jerusa∣lem are measured, Rev. 21.15. that they shall not be so few, as to cut off Church-jurisdiction within themselves; nor so many, but that all may hear and be edifi∣ed, and be governed by the Power, which Christ hath given to the Church to preserve the purity of his Worship, and of their fellowship within them∣selves. Then, when a People grow to be so numerous in any Church, that they can∣not
ordinarily meet together, to Church-ends; it is the mind of Christ, that they should be distributed into sundry Congre∣gational Churches. For, though many thousands of Israel met together in the court of the Temple at Jerusalem to offer Sacrifice; because they might stand in so large a place together and see the Sacri∣fices burnt; yet that will not prove, that such multitudes should be Members of a Christian Church, where more communi∣on is required, then in seeing some one Ordinance performed. Then, it is not arbitrary, but a duty for every Christian, to endeavour to joyn himself in Membership with a Congrega∣tional instituted Church of Christ: who∣soever have opportunity, and neglect so to do, they greatly sin against God, and break the second Commandment, in not worshiping him according to his institu∣tion: and also against their own souls, in depriving themselves of the blessing, which he hath annexed unto his Institution; Exod. 20.24. Mat. 28.20. and if they per∣sist in that neglect, they can hardly be ac∣counted Believers truly seeking the King∣dom of God, what profession of Religion soever they make otherwise, Mat. 6.33. and they sin against their posterity also,
to whom God promiseth mercy, upon their parents worshipping him according to his Institutions: If the Lord doth good to the posterity of such, it is meer∣ly from his own good pleasure, but not from their Parents Covenant, Ezek. 16.61. CHAP. V. Concerning the Churches impreg∣nable stability. TO the Church built by Christ upon this Rock, he hath promised and given this great priviledge, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.] , in the Scripture, signifieth, not Hell, but the state of the dead, or the Grave,  are enemies van∣quished by Christ for his Church, 1 Cor. 15.26, 55. and shalbe cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20.14.  are the gates of Death, in Job. 38.17. Psal. 107.18. and the gates of the Grave, Isa. 38.10. i. e. the po∣wer of Death and the Grave, which sei∣zeth on them, as a Serjeant, Psal. 116.3. The sum is; Let the Church be brought to the lowest, that it seems to be dead,
as those two Witnesses, Rev. 11.8, 9. and buried, as Christ's natural body was, for a time; yet neither Death, nor the Grave shall prevail agaist it. Yet we must not limit the sense of these words, only to the power of Death and the Grave, but it must be extended to all Satans plots and assaults against the Church, against which if Christ did not help them, Death and the Grave would prevail against them, to their eternal destruction. We conclude therefore, that, in this Text, by the gates of Hell, are meant, all the machinations of Satan, and temptations whatsoever, whereby he laboureth to hinder the build∣ing of Christs Church, to draw those from Christ, who are built upon him. The pre∣vailing of them signifies their effectual working unto the attainment of those ends. The sum is, a promise that the De∣vil, with all his policies and powers, shall neither hinder the building of Christs Church, nor cause the Church thus built to apostatize from Christ. And that this is the true sense and meaning of the words, whatsoever Socinians, or Armini∣ans say to the contrary, may thus be evin∣ced: 1. Because the thing promised, is the disabling of what ever opposeth the building of the Church upon this Rock,
or its constant adhering to Christ, from prevailing to those ends: but so do Sa∣tan's temptations; Therefore they are meant by the gates of Hell. 2. Because whatsoever goeth forth out of the gates of Hell, or hath its beginning from thence, is meant in this phrase: but the Temp∣tations and Machinations of Satan, by himself and his instruments, Hereticks and Tyrants, go forth thence; There∣fore they are meant in this phraise. 3. Be∣cause Peter, to whom Christ spake these words, describes unbelievers, the adversa∣ries of this building, as belonging to the gates of Hell; 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. 4. Because the proportion, which Christ implyes, in these words, requireth that they be so under∣stood. The proportion is between two Ci∣ties, that of Heaven, which hath its gates, and keyes, in v. 19. and the other of Hell, which hath its gates; whence it endeavors the ruine and overthrow of that, but shall not prevail. Seeing therefore City is op∣posed to City, and Gates to Gates, and one (viz. the Church) is considered in the state of present building; it is most suta∣ble that the other be also looked at, as it opposeth that, in the present, whilst it is militant upon earth. But from hence, that Christ promiseth that the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against his Church thus built, some infer, that Christ meaneth only the invisible Catholick Church: For that only, say they, is bulilt on this Rock, and only that shall not fail. Answ. 1. It is true, that the Catholick invisible Church is built upon Christ, by effectual and unfeigned Faith, and that shall not fail: For that is the general Assembly, and Church of the fist-born, which are enrolled in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. And all the gates of Hell cannot prevail against those that are written in Heaven. 2. But it is not true, that these only are built on this Rock. The Apostle Paul tells us, that a particular visible Church, rightly constitu∣ted, as that at Corinth, is built upon this Rock, or Rocky-foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. and being so built, is under the special protection of God in Christ; in respect whereof the Lord promiseth any such Church, as well among the Gentiles, as the Jews, Whosoever shall gather himself against thee, shall fall, Isa. 54.15. and all the weapons that are made against thee shall not prosper, vers. 17. And it is clear, that Christ, in this place, speaks of such a Church as is built upon the confession of Faith, such as Peter made, visibly and publickly; whereupon, not the invisible
Catholick Church, but visible particular Churches are built: Therefore these on∣ly are meant here. The Church of Christ, built by himself upon this Rock, in using the means which he hath appointed for their safety, is im∣pregnable. The Church of Christ is here indefinitely taken, for a particular Con∣gregational-Church instituted by Christ, according to the sense of the former con∣clusions, not, for this or that, defi∣nitely. Therefore if any object, that the gates of Hell have prevailed against the Greek-Churches, those golden Candlesticks in Asia, and against Rome, whose Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World, and against sundry other particular Churches? I Answer, 1. Though it be true, that the gates of Hell have prevailed against this or that particular Church; yet not a∣gainst a particular Church, indefinitly con∣sidered, or (which is the same) against the Church, in general, existing in its particulars. In this sense, the visible Church doth not fail. For, (1.) Christ ever had, and will have some or other visible Church on Earth, wherein the general nature of a visible Church is preserved, as the Genus is in its Species, and the nature
of man in this or that individual; as when the Lord preserved Noah and his Family, in the Ark, mankind was preser∣ved in them, though multitudes of men were destroyed in the Deluge. (2.) Christ will shew, that he makes a difference be∣tween Churches, wherein are some true Believers mixed with many Hypocrites, and other Societies. Therefore he will not suffer such visible Churches to be to∣tally destroyed, as he doth his open ene∣mies, Hos. 11.8, 9. Isa. 1.8, 9. & 6.13. 2. Though it be true, that the Churches of Asia and Rome have been prevailed a∣gainst by the gates of Hell, yet not, as they were built by Christ, or planted by the Apolstes, but their degenerate Poste∣rity and Successours, who were not built on this Rock, but on an outward Form, and neglected the means appointed by Christ for their safety. The Apostle Paul forewarned the Romans to beware of Apo∣stacy, by the example of the Jews, Rom. 11.12. They, nevertheless, in succeed∣ing generations, did degenerate from the Faith and Profession of their Predecessors, and so fell into the gulf of Antichristian Apostacy. But, as when God took his visible Kingdom from the Jews, for their obstinacy in unbelief, he did not destroy
his visible Kingdom totally from the face of the Earth, but gave it to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 21.43. So, though, in his righteous judge∣ment against Apostates, he may destroy this, or that particular Congregational Church; yet the gates of Hell shall not prevail wholly against the Church-state, but it shall be preserved. He doth but translate the Candlestick, not break it all to pieces; he doth but remove it out of one place into another, Rev. 2.5. and still pre∣serveth it, in some particular Congrega∣tion, or other. 3. Though the gates of Hell have sometime, and in some degree, prevailed against this or that particular visible Church, holding fast the profession of their Faith without wavering; yet they have not prevailed according to the mean∣ing of these words. They have prevailed , only in some respect; as, 1. in Temporals, to impoverish them, Heb. 10.34. to bring them under bondage, as Pha∣raoh did the Israelites; to establish a decree for their destruction, as Haman did against the Jews; to put multitudes of them to death, as the ten persecuting Emperors did the Christians, and as the high Priest and the Jews dealt with Christ. 2. In Spiri∣tuals, 1. to scatter the Members of the
Church; so far the gates of Hell prevail∣ed against them, upon occasion of Stephen, Act. 8.1. and to cause the Wo∣man to flye into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. 2. To assault them with temptations; as Christ told Peter, that Satan had desired to winnow him like Wheat. But they could not prevail against the Church, absolutely and totally. 1. Not against all of them in Smyrna, by outward calamities, Rev. 2.10. Nor against all in Sardis, by temptation, Rev. 3.4. 2. Nor totally against the whole Church. For God did raise up unexpected helps; for the Woman fled into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.6, 14, 16. to that part of them, which remains on earth; and, for the other part of them, God will receive his people, when outward subsistence fails, into everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. And, when the gates of Hell prevail, to the dispersion of a particular Church built on this Rock, yet that is not to their destruction, but tend∣eth to the multiplication, and inlarge∣ment of particular Churches. The di∣spersion of the Church at Jerusalem, was like the dispersion of Seed into the Field, which bringeth forth a more plentiful Harvest; so, their dispersion prevailed against the gates of Hell, to the propa∣gating
of sundry Churches, Act. 11.19, 21. Thus the Lord turned the Policies of the gates of Hell against themselves, accord∣ing to that promise, Zach. 12.3. Thus we see the impregnable stability of Christ his Church built upon this Rock. We shall now prove by Reason, that it must be so. From Christ, who is the Head of the visible Church, as well as of the invisible, 1 Cor. 12.27. And he will not suffer the sound Members of his Body to be plucked and torn from it by the gates of Hell. He is the builder of his Chuch, Heb. 3.3, 4. and therefore will establish it. When the Ark was built by Noah, as Gods Instru∣ment, according to God's appointment, it stood against all the power of the De∣luge. He is the Foundation, as he is be∣lived, and publickly confessed, whereup∣on he buildeth his Church. Against an House so built, the Winds and Waves cannot prevail, Matth. 7.24, 25. From the Promises given to such a Church, which are of two sorts. 1. For protection, Isa. 4.5, 6. where be pro∣phesieth concerning the Church of Christ under the New Testament, and describes Gods protection over them, by a twofold allusion; 1. By the Pillar of Cloud and
Fire that protected the people of Israel, at the Red Sea, from Pharaoh and his Host. 2. By the covering of the Tabernacle, and the holy things in it from all injuries of weather, Exod. 26.14. Rev. 7.16. And his power is ingaged to perform his pro∣mise, Joh. 10.28, 29. And his Providence will order all issues and events thereunto, Isa. 54.16, 17. Mat. 28.18, 20. 2ly. For vi∣ctory, Rom. 16.20. If the Lord will tread Satan under their feet, he will see to it that Satan shall not tread them under his feet. From the titles given to particular vi∣sible Churches. They are frequently, in the New Testament, called the Kingdom of Heaven; and Hell cannot prevail a∣gainst Heaven. They are called the King∣dom of Christ, and God the Father hath established his Kingdom by an oath, Psal. 89.35, 36. To confirm our Faith herein, he calls the Sun and Moon to be witnes∣ses, vers. 37. The Sun may be clouded sometimes, and Moon is sometimes in the Full, sometimes in the Wane, but still it is in the Heaven: So it is with the Church on Earth.Dr. Whitt. ad Rat. Camp. Resp. p. 56. Semper & fuisse in ter∣ris, & futuram deinceps Ecclesiam, non du∣bitamus: quanquam ejus aspectum aliquan∣do illustrem ut conspici ab omnibus possit,
aliquando tantâ caligine, ut vix agnoscas, obscuratam esse fateamur. And it belongs to Christ, to break the Serpent's Head; who can proceed no further than to bruise his hel, Gen. 3.15. He is that little stone that brake the Image to pieces, which represented the Monar∣chies and Powers, whereby the gates of Hell sought to prevail against Christ and his Church, Dan. 2.45. Christs Church is called an House of prayer to all Nations, Isa. 56.7. The Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. in allusion to the change of Jacobs name, who by prayer obtained victory and pro∣tection against Esau, Gen. 32.28. Hos. 12.2, 3. So shall the Church of Christ, by pra∣yer, obtain deliverance from the gates of Hell, that they shall not prevail against them. From the state of the Devils themselves, and all their instruments. 1. They are cursed. Gen. 12.3. I will curse them that curse thee, therefore they shall not prosper in their interprizes against the Church of Christ. 2. They were conquered, and cap∣tivated, and triumphed over by Christ, before he did build his Church, Ephes. 4.8, 12. Therefore shall not hinder the buil∣ding of it, nor destroy it being built. 3. They are enemies unto Christs King∣dom:
Therefore shall not prevail. Ps. 2.2, 3, 4. and, 110.1, 2. Let us briefly note some Corollaries hence. Then in vain boasteth that Roman Sy∣nagogue, of the infallibility of their Popes, as Peter's successors, and of the indefici∣ency of their Church, as built upon Peter; when as, neither had Peter himself any such priviledge, as to be infallible. The next story in this 16th of Matthew evin∣ceth the contrary, v. 23. Nor, by the Rock, whereupon Christ builds his Church, is meant the person of Peter, or Peter's con∣fession personally, as it had relation to him, but as it is considered really in it self, and is common to all the Disciples, and to all visible Believers, which may be thus con∣firmed: 1. Because Peters confession must have relation to the matter which he confessed. But Peter confessed not him∣self, but Christ, saying, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God; Therefore his confession had relation to Christ, not to himself. 2. Because Peter confessed no more than that which he knew the other Di∣sciples believed before he speake: For Christ's question being general, What say ye? Peter answered, as the mouth of the rest: but the Apostles, before he speak, believed Christ confessed, and not Peter con∣fessing.
3. Because, this Rock, is that con∣fession whereupon Christ saith he will build his Church: But whosoever shall truly believe that which Peter confessed, viz. Christ the Son of the living God, and confess or profess it, in due order, is ac∣cordingly built on this Rock, though he had never heard of Peter's name. There∣fore the confession, rightly understood, had relation unto Christ, and not to the person of Peter. 4. Because the Rock sig∣nifieth that which is immoveable and impregnable, such as is Christ and his truth: But Peter's confession was mov∣able and shaken, at one time, thrice deny∣ing this confession of his Lord. There∣fore this confession, which Christ calls the Rock, had not relation to Peter, but only to Christ. Then they that would have a particu∣lar Church to be impregnable, stable, and firm against the prevailing of the gates of Hell, must see that it be built upon this Rock, and not upon humane formes. 1. That Christ himself be the builder of it, according to his own institutions, not the policies or customs of men. 2.Ex quo patet, quòd Ecclesia, non consistit in ho∣minibus, ratione potestatis vel dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, vel saecularis &c. sed in illis personis, in quibus est notitia vera, & confessio fidei & veritatis. Lyra in loc. That the
materials, of which it consists, be such, as believe and profess their Faith in Christ publickly before the Lord, and his Peo∣ple. 3. That they be firmly joyned toge∣ther, in one Congregation, by an holy Covenant of subjection and submission to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to one another in him, and accordingly walk together in obedience to Christ, and his Rules, resist∣ing Satan in all his Temptations and Ma∣chinations, through Christ strengthning them, without whom they can do no∣thing, Joh. 15.5. and that they improve carefully and faithfully the power, which Christ hath given them, viz. the Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven, in opening and shutting, binding and loosing, according to Christ his appointment, for the preser∣ving of his Church safe in the purity of their Faith and Order, against the gates of Hell, which is the next thing to be han∣dled.
The Second Part. CHAP. VI. Concerning the power given of Christ unto such a Church, as the first and proper subject of it. THe second branch or part of the Char∣ter, is, concerning the Power given by Christ unto such Churches, to have and use all the means appointed by him for their establishment against the the gates of Hell, Mat. 16.19. And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. These words contain, 1. A grant of Pow∣er. 2. A ratification of that Grant. We shall speak to them distinctly. 1. To Christ his grant of Power; and therein, 1. Explicate the terms, by shewing, what is meant, 1 by the Kingdom of Heaven; 2. by the Keys of it. 3 What this appro∣priation,
or application of them imports, To thee I will give. 1. By the Kingdom of Heaven] is meant, both the Kingdom of Grace & Glory; and that the Kingdom of Glory is also meant, the following words shew, when he saith, What you bind on Earth, is bound in Hea∣ven, &c. 2. By the Keys (which are a sign of Power, and are put, by a Metoni∣my, for the Subject, the Power it self) is meant, Church-power; which is either Supreme, and Soveraign, in Christ only, as Lord and Head of his Church, who alone hath the Key of David, which openeth, and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth; in Rev. 3.7. or subordinate and delegate, such as is in Christ's Stewards. This is noted, by Keys, in the Plural num∣ber, in this place, which signifie all pow∣er delegated from Christ, to dispense and administer all the holy things of his House, according to Christ's will, and in the order prescribed by him to that end. For all power, wherewith the Lord Je∣sus betrusteth his Church, aims at this which is here expressed, to open, and shut, to bind, and loose. 3. To thee I will give] The Application of this Grant is to Peter, in the name of the Church, which Christ promised to build upon himself, believed
on, and publickly professed, as Peter did before him, and his fellow-Disciples in Christs School, at this time. And the promise is more fitly given to Peter, in the name of the Church, than to the Church by name, because it was not the Church that made this confession, but Peter in the name of the Church. But here we must make a little stand, to examine the sun∣dry claims which have been made to this Right, upon several pretences from this Text. 1. Some, looking at Peter, as re∣presenting the Catholick visible-Church, conceive that a general Council (which, they say, is the Catholick Church, repre∣sentatively) is the Church here meant, to which Christ gives the Keys of the King∣dom of Heaven. But that cannot be. For particular visible Churches, in the Apo∣stles dayes, had, and exercised, the Keyes compleatly within themselves; yet was there no general Council, till the time of Constantine, which was three hundred years after Christ. 2. Others look at this Grant, as peculiar to Peter, considered, as the Prince and chief of the Apostles, and to the Popes of Rome, as his successors. But this Papal usurpation, the Councils of Constance and Basil strongly and justly opposed, shewing, that the Keys, which
are here given to Peter, are, in Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. given to all the Apostles, and that Peter himself is enjoyned in Mat. 18. to tell the Church. 3. Others think, that the Ca∣tholick Church, considered, not representa∣tively, but in it self, is the first subject of the Keys: Yet these differ among themselves. For some affirm it of the invisible, others of the visible Catholick Church. As for the terms; we know, that visible & invisible, do not note distinct species or kindes of Chur∣ches, but are only several adjuncts of the same Church, which is called invisible, in respect of the inward and invisible union, which Members have with Christ the Head, by the Spirit and Faith; and vi∣sible, in respect of their outward Profes∣sion of their Faith, which is visible to men. But in neither of these senses, is the Catho∣lick Church the first subject of the Keys. 1. Not as invisible; for that is not built by a visible profession, such as Peter's was; nor are the Ordinances dispensed or ad∣ministred visibly in it, to, or by men in vi∣sible fellowship. Add hereunto, that the Keys here given to Peter, can shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, even the same persons, to whom they have opened the door before; which cannot befal Believers in the visible Church.
2. Not as visible. For the Scripture doth not acknowledge a Catholick visible Church. The Catholick Church is not visible, as a Church, and the Church that is visible is not Catholick. Though the Catholick Church may be visible in its singular Members; yet so, they are not a Church: or, though it may be visible in particular Congregations;See Mr. Cott. De∣fence of the way of Congreg. Churches, par. 2. p. 56 yet none of them is Catholick: or, though all of them, if they could meet together, may be called a Catholick Church, or general Assembly; yet so, it cannot be the first subject of the Keys, i. e. of all Ecclesiasti∣cal power: for such Assemblies,See Mr. Hooker' Survey, part 1. ch. 14 & 15. if possi∣ble, are extraordinary: and extraordina∣ry Assemblies are not fit Judicatories, to hear and censure ordinary offences, or to administer the ordinary acts of Church-power. 2. If the visible Catholick Church be considered, as totum integrale, which is such a whole as ariseth out of the ag∣gregation of all particular Churches (as an Army is made up of all the several Regiments and Troops, or a Kingdom of all the Cities and Counties within it) it cannot be the first subject of the Keyes, i. e. of all Church-power. For, 1. parti∣cular Churches are the Members, which give the essential causes, whence the in∣tegrity of this whole is made up; and
therefore, in nature, before it, as the cause is before its effect. 2. Church-Officers, with their Offices, are set ordinarily, by Christs Institution, only in such a Church, where they are called the Chosen; but that is a particular Church; Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. For that choice and calling is the foundation of the relation between Pa∣stors and People, and of the duties both of the Rulers, and of the Ruled, mutu∣ally, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17. 3. If a Catholick integral Church ariseth from all particular Churches, as Members of it, joyned together; then it must be distinct from them all, as the whole Bo∣dy is a thing distinct from its several Members, then also there must be some Officer, and Ordinance, and Act be∣longing to it, which doth not apper∣tain to particular Churches; as there is a General over an Army, besides the Captains and Officers of the several Re∣giments; and a Supreme Monarch in a Kingdom, besides the Governors in the several Corporations, and Counties: But no such Catholick-Church, distinct from all particular Churches, can be shewen, nor Officers, or acts of it, besides those which are exercised in particular Chur∣ches. 4. Diocesan Bishops look at these words, as giving the Keys to them, as the
Successors of the Apostles, whence they assume the power of Ordinathon and Ju∣risdiction, as belonging to them, jure divi∣no. A claim, which King James, whe∣ther out of his policy (which he called his King-craft) or out of his insight into the Scripture, would not suffer them to pretend, in his time. Nor indeed is there any warrant for it in Scripture, as it hath been abundantly proved by sundry wit∣nesses against that usurpation. We read of Bishops in the New-Testament, but what? Not one Bishop over many Chur∣ches, but many Bishops over one Church; not Diocesan, but Congregational Bi∣shops. Phil. 1.1. Those whom Luke calls Elders, in Act. 20.17. Paul calleth Bishops, in v. 28. The Bishops which the Apostles acknowledge to be Christs Ordinance, to continue in the Christian Church, are Congregational Elders, 1 Tim. 3.1-8. Tit. 1.5, 7. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and all the Teaching-Elders are , fellow-Elders, coequal in authority, above whom Paul acknowledgeth no Rulers in the Church, but rather sets these above all, 1 Tim. 5.17.Euseb. Ec∣cles. hist. l. 6. c. 43. Cypr. Ep. l. 3. Ep. 10 & l. 1. ep. 3. And, when, after the Apostles time, one of the Pastors was called Bishop, by way of eminency, for orders sake; yet, for many years, he did no act of power, but, 1. with
consent of the Presbytery; 2. with con∣sent,Dr. Cudw. on the Postscript to Galat. and in the presence, of the People. What is pleaded from Titus his ordaining, Tit. 1.5. helps not their cause: for he did it, as an Evangelist, not as a Diocesan Prelate; and the Office of Evangelists, together with the Apostles, ceaseth. The Postscript of the second Epistle to Timo∣thy, where he is called, the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians; and of that to Titus, where he is called, the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, are Apocry∣phal (as the rest are) and the first con∣sisteth not with 2 Tim. 4.5. where Timo∣thy is called an Evangelist, and therefore, not tyed to personal residence, to abide in one place (as Bishops and Pastors are) but the Evangelists were to go from place to place, to set things in order, and con∣firm the Churches planted by the Apostles. The same may be said of Titus. Nor is the Postscript of that Epistle of more credit than the former, where the Scribe saith, it was written from Nicopolis. Hiperius just∣ly disliketh the ground of that opinion in the Scribe, which, he saith, was from Tit. 3.12. Because Paul bade Titus come to him to Nicopolis, for he determined to winter there: whereas, if he were there at that time, he would have said, I purpose to
winter here, not there; as Beza noteth. 5. Others conclude from this Text, that the power of the Keys. i. e. the po∣wer of Ordination and Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction, is given in Peter, to Church-Officers only, especially to Pastors and Teachers. And that such only, or prin∣cipally, are meant in this Grant, they en∣deavour to prove by five reasons, especi∣ally. We will examine them severally, and briefly. 1. Reas. Because the Keys are given to Stewards by Office. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 4.5. 1 Tim. 3.15. Isa. 22.12.] Answ. 1. The three former Texts speak of the Apostles and Evangelists Office, and in them, of Pastors and Teachers, not of Ruling-Elders. But, I suppose they will not deny the Ruling-Elders to have a Key of Office also. The last Text proveth on∣ly, that the Key sometimes signifies Office-power given to a Steward, which none deny. But this toucheth not this Text, Mat. 16. which means not only Office-Power, but all Power, which serves to shut and open the House or City of God; not power of the Steward only, but the power of the Spouse and Wife of this great King, to whom the Lord Christ, as her Husband, being gone into a far Country,
even to Heaven, hath given power to ad∣mit into the Family, and reject, as occa∣sion shall require, and for those ends, to judge also; because such acts require judg∣ment, and to call the Steward to his place, and to put him into it, and to put a Key of Office, by Election, into his hand: and therfore, though all power be not formally in her, yet it cometh originally from her. Reas. 2. Because, Christ here giveth the Keys only to those, to whom he giveth Official Warrant and Authority, for the actual ex∣ercise thereof, in opening and shutting, bind∣ing and loosing, i. e. only to Teachers and Elders.] Answ. 1. Though it is true, that Official Warrant and Authority is given only to Teachers & Elders, only Teaching and Ruling Elders have that formally; Yet, 2. The power of the Keys is far larger than Office-power, viz. to admit, reject, &c. 3. They have their Office from the Church, and their Office-power, by the Church, originally: Therefore there was power in the Church, before Office-po∣wer, which did communicate and con∣veigh Office-power to its Officers. 3. Reas. To bind and loose, are acts of the Office-power of Pastors, Rulers, Feeders by publick and pastoral preaching, which doth not belong to Believers.]
Answ. Binding and loosing, taken in the largest sense, as in this Text, compre∣hend the exercise of all the acts of the Keys, or Church-power: and these acts are not only by publick and pastoral preaching (for then, the Ruling-Elder should have no Key to bind or loose); but also by Admonitions, Excommunicati∣ons, Admissions, which issue from a po∣wer of judging, not proper to the Pastors only, but common to the People with them. 2. Though the Keys be given to the Church; yet she may not exercise any act proper to Office-Power, without Of∣ficers, whom she doth and must call to that end, and submit to them in the due ex∣ercise thereof. 4. Reas. If this place give not warrant and authority to Officers, what warrant have they for their Office-Power?] Answ. 1. This place gives warrant for the People to choose their Officers, ac∣cording to Christ's appointment, and the Church doth accordingly call them to that place, and invest them with Office, with voluntary professed subjection to them, in the right exercise of that power of Office, which belongs unto them in the Lord. 2. The several acts of Office-power to be exercised by them, are abun∣dantly
warranted in other places of Scrip∣ture. 5. Reas. They to whom the Keys are here given, doe authoritatively forgive and re∣tain sins, and their Acts are valid in Hea∣ven: but the Church of Believers, wanting Officers, cannot by any warrant of Scripture, authoritatively forgive and retain sins.] Answ. The word, Authority, sometimes is taken more generally, for Power, some∣times more strictly and properly, for Ru∣ling and Office-Power. In the first sense, the Church hath power to foregive judi∣cially, in 2 Cor. 2.10. in reference to their former censure. The Officers forgive au∣thoritatively, in the second sense. We proceed to the last interpretation. 6. Others look at the Keys as given to Peter here, in the name of a particular visible Church, indefinitely taken; not of this or that particular definite Church, that all other Churches should receive the Keys from them, or be subject to the po∣wer of the Keyes in their hands: For that will not stand with the parity of Churches among themselves: for, par in parem non habet imperium. Therefore the Church, here intended, must be taken generally, and indefinitely, as comprehending in it any particular visible Church, one as well
as another, or the general Church as exist∣ing its particulars. If it be objected a∣gainst this, that Peter was not a Member of such a Christian Congregation, when Christ spake these words unto him. I an∣swer, It is true: for no such Church was then constituted. No more was there a Presbytery then constituted, when Christ directed Peter and the rest, in case of pri∣vate offence obstinatly persisted in, after proceeding in the first and second step, to tell the Church, in Mat. 18. which yet they hold, but not truly, to be the Presbytery, as we shall evince hereafter, with the as∣sistance of Christ. But, in the mean time, all grant that that Rule serveth to order Members, how to proceed in such cases, when particular Churches should be con∣stituted. And the same reason is of force in this Text also. Some have thought that Christ giveth the Keys in this Text, not to the Church of Believers, of which he spake in the former verse, but to the Elders; because he altereth the form of his speech: for, having spoken, in the former verse, of the Church, in the third person, saying, Ʋpon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; he saith not, in this verse, and I will give unto it the Keys, but
varying the person, he turneth his speech to Peter, saying, and unto thee I will give the Keyes of the Kingdom of Heaven: but this is a mistake. Here is no changing of person, nor turning of speech, in Christ's giving the promise of the Keys; but, as Christ began, so he continueth his speech to Peter, upon occasion of his confession. In v. 17. Christ pronounceth Peter blessed, from the cause of his confession. In v. 18. he giveth a promise of reward to Peters confession, that, upon this, as upon a Rock, he will build his Church, and establish it, as impregnable against the gates of Hell. In v. 19. he giveth unto Peter, upon occasi∣on of his publick confession in the name of the Church, a promise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore this pro∣mise is given to the Church, in Peter, in such sort, as, though the use of the Keys be various, according to the variety of cal∣lings in the Church, yet the power it self of the Keys, is here originally and primarily cōmitted to theToti Ec∣clesiae dedit Christus claves, sed ita, ut in Ecclesiâ certi essent qui clavi∣bus utan∣tur ad sa∣lutem Ec∣clesiae, ho∣noremque Dei. Zanc. in praec. 4. quaest. 3. Vid. Park. de Polit. Eccles. l. 3 c. 3. Church in general, existing in particular Churches. I might produce sundry Writers, both ancient and modern, of other Countries, and our own, if need required, to confirm this Exposition (yea, of the Authors quoted by Mr. P. not a few consenting herein;) but I shall only
mention Cyprian and Augustine, who, in sundry places, speak the same with us. And these two I the rather name, because I find in approved Histories, that sundry Martyrs, being confirmed in this Truth, by their Testimonies, have sealed it with their blood. Hieronimus Savanarola, a Godly learned Preacher in Florence, a man endued with a Prophetical Spirit,Illyr. Ca∣tal. Test. verit. cont. Papam. p. 565. was there burnt, for denying the primacy of the Pope, teaching, that the Keys were given, Ecclesiae toti, non uni Petro, to the whole Church; and that the Communion should be administred sub utrâque specie, and against humane Traditions, and the Popes indulgencies, and the wicked lives of the Cardinals and Priests; and for preaching free Justification by Faith in Christ, and that the Pope is Antichrist. This was about the year, 1499. In our own Land, John Lambert, in the year,Fox Mar∣tyrol. i'th Reign of Hen. 8th. 1538, was burnt to death, by the sen∣tence of King Henry the 8th, himself sit∣ting in judgement upon him, with all his Nobles and Bishops, by the wicked counsel of Stephen Gardiner, upon 45 Ar∣ticles, whereof this was the 43d Article, Whether he believed the Pope was Christs Vicar, and had power on earth to bind and loose? He denyed that the Pope was
Christs Vicar, and affirmed, that the Keys were given to Peter, not for himself alone, but in the name of the Church, and prov∣ed it out of Cyprian,Idem, ibid. de simplicitate Cleri∣corum, and Aug. de Agone Christiano. Also Sir John Borthwick, a Scottish Knight, in the year 1540, was condemned by the Arch Bishop of St. Andrews, then Cardi∣nal of Scotland, and the Popes Legate, with sundry Popish Bishops, upon ten Articles, of which this was the first, touch∣ing the Popes Supremacy, grounded up∣on Mat. 16. To thee will I give the Keys: which he, from that place, confuted, af∣firming that the Keys were given to the Church in Peter, which name was given him upon his confession of Christ, in the name of the whole Church; and confirm∣ed his assertion, out of Cyprian and Au∣gustine. So that this is no new, nor singu∣lar exposition of these words, or practice taken up by some few of late. Not new; for Cyprian wrote about the year 250 af∣ter Christ; and Augustine, about the year 410; the last of them about 1200 years since, and the first above 1400 years past. I shall add hereunto, that, before Cyprian, Tertullian, about the year 200, shews us, that Church-censures were then perform∣ed by one particular Church within it
self, and not in any combination of Chur∣ches; Tertull. Apolog. Cap. 39. Nor singu∣lar; for sundry sorts of Writers, in seve∣ral Ages and Countries, have consented therein. I will not enter into that questi∣on, (about which there seems to be some difference in apprehensions between some Godly learned Brethren) Whether the Keys are given to Peter under several con∣siderations, as an Apostle, and as an El∣der, and as a professing Believer, all being taken joyntly together? or to a single So∣ciety, or condition of men, under some special Relation, which share alike in the equality of this Power promised unto them? For in the substance of the matter they agree, 1. That the Keys are promi∣sed to Peter, in the name of a Congrega∣tional-Church. 2. That this power of the Keys cannot be given to one single Society formally, in all the kinds of it; because it requires several sorts of subjects for∣mally different, viz. some Ruling, some Ruled, some Teaching, &c. 3. That, til a Congregational-Church be organized, and compleated with all its Officers, it cannot compleatly exercise the Keys com∣mited to it. 4. That, nevertheless, before it be compleated, it hath power of the Keys, and is the first subject of them,
either formally, or virtually, whereby all the Ordinances are administred, or ad∣ministrable among them. I shall issue this point into one Doctrinal Conclusion. 6. Concl.The subordinate ordinary Power of acting Church-affairs, in the Order ap∣pointed by Jesus Christ, for attainment of the ends of Church-Communion, is given by Christ to a visible Congregation of confederate Believers, as the first and proper subject of it. In the handling of this point, I shall note somethings, 1. For Explication. 2. Confirmation of it. 3. Draw some Con∣sectaries. 1. For explication of it, I shall endea∣vour to clear five particulars. 1. What I mean by Subordinate Po∣wer.] Subordinate Power is that which wholly dependeth on Christs Ordinance and Institution, who is the Supreme and only Monarch and Head of the Church; and therefore his revealed Will must be attended in all Church-Administations, as the only Rule, from which they may not swerve to the right hand, or to the left, for any humane policies, or pretences whatsoever, by adding ought thereto, or taking any thing therefrom. To this Christ limited his Apostles, who were the
highest Officers in the Church, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And, accordingly, Paul strictly charged Timothy, and, in him, all the Churches and Church-Officers, to keep this Commandment, without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. 1 Tim. 6.13, 14, 15. They must assume to themselves only that power, which he hath allotted them, and not exercise it any otherwise than he hath allowed them. 2. Why I add ordinary, to subordinate.] It is added, to difference that Power, which resideth in the Church for conti∣nual use in ordinary dispensations, from that which was in the Apostles for a time, by the gift of Christ. Both Apostolical-Power, and Church-Power agree in this, that they are received immediately from Christ. For, as he said to the Apostles, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, &c. Joh. 20.23. So he said to the Church, both here, in Peter, and in Mat. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall bind, or loose on earth, &c. So that, neither did the Apostles re∣ceive their Power from the Church, nor doth the Church receive its power from the Apostles, but both immediatly from Christ: and therefore, as the Apostles had their Power, before visible Christian-Churches were constituted; so such Chur∣ches
have and hold their Power, when Apostles cease to be on earth. But herein these two Powers differ; 1. That Apo∣stolical Power was centred in one single Person, and extended it self to the circum∣ference of all Churches. Each Apostle had the Power of the whole Church, and of all the Officers of the Church; when he was absent from the Churches, he could administer Seals and Censures, as if he had the presence and concurrence of the Church: and, if he was present in any Church that wanted Officers, an Apostle had power to execute every Office, for the Church. And this their Power ex∣tended it self as much to all Churches, as to any one. Their Line went out into all the World, Psal. 19.4. with Rom. 10.18. Mat. 28.19. For as the Father sent Christ the Mediator, with fulness of Soveragin Po∣wer; so Christ sent his Apostles with ful∣ness of Ministerial Power, Joh. 20.21. But Church-Power is not in one man, but in a Society, and to be exercised vari∣ously by several persons in that society, according to variety of callings. Are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 12.29. Hence, 2. That was extraordinary, and to last but for a time: but this is ordinary, and to conti∣nue to the end. Rev. 4.1.
3. What the Church-Affairs are, and what the acting them imports.] The Church-affairs are the Ordinances of Christ, called here the Keys, in a large-sense, the word of the Covenant, and the seals of the Covenant, and the Censures. These the Church may be said to act, by opening and shutting. 1. They open the doors of the Church subordinately, when they ad∣mit only such, and all such, to fellowship, whom Christ receiveth, Rom. 14.1, 3. 2. The doors of office in the Church they do open in the Church subordinately, when they elect and ordain such unto Offices, as Christ hath prepared and called thereunto, according to the rule in 1 Tim. 3.1-14. and then only to such Offices as Christ hath set in his Church: which are only four, Rev. 4.6, 7, 8. For Widows are included in Deacons. These are re∣duced to two general heads, in Phil. 1.1. and so are their functions, in Rom. 12.6, 7. and yeeld unto them all, and only that power which Christ hath annexed to their Office, and particularly unto Teach∣ing and Ruling Officers, that subjection and honour which the word calls for, Heb. 13.17. 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. 3. They shut the Doores of the Church, and binde men from Church—Ordinances,
and Priviledges; 1. By not admitting those to Church-fellowship, against whom they have just exceptions, Act. 9.26. 2. By judging and censuring scandlaous mem∣bers, whether Brethren or Officers, ac∣cording to Christs Rules, Mat. 18.17, 18. and 1 Cor. 5. 3. By holding them under censure, without release, till their repen∣tance be to satisfaction, according to Christ's Rules, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7. 4. What the order is, wherein Christ will have these Church-affairs to be act∣ed?] The order is this. First, a company of Believers, being satisfied concerning the spiritual state of one another, and their fitness for Church-fellowship, and there∣upon confederating together, to walk together in all the Ordinances of Christ, with mutual watchfulness and submission one to another in the Lord, become a Congregational-Church. They have now the essentials of a Church. 2. Being such, they must look out from among them∣selves for such Officers as Christ hath gi∣ven to his Church; these they must chuse and ordain, professing their voluntary sub∣mission to their Office-Rule, and Autho∣rity, in the Lord. Till this be done, they cannot compleatly act all Church-affairs, in due order. Till they have Teaching-Elders,
though there be gifted-Brethren among them that may Prophesie, 1 Cor. 14. yet they have none to give themselves continually to Prayer (according to the necessities and occasions of the Church) and to the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6.4. Such attendance being proper to Officers; Rom. 12.7. Nor, 3. to preach the word with authority, as an Officer must. Tit. 2.15. Nor, 4. to administer the Seals, which Christ hath annexed to the official preaching of the Word, Mat. 28.19, 20. Without Ruling-Elders, who shall call the Church together, as the Apostles did, on speciall weighty occasions, Act. 6.2? Who shall prepare matters for the Church, 1. By examining Officers or Members, before they be received of the Church, Rev. 2.2. 2. By stating and clearing the question and proofs, and trying, whether matters have been carried according to Rule, privatly, in the first and second step, before any offence be presented to the Church, which was secret at first, ac∣cording to Mat. 18.17. 3. By directing those that are to give satisfaction to the Church, in case of offence conceiv'd against them, how to carry themselves, accord∣ing to rule, to remove it, as the Apostles and Elders, being met at the House of
James, did to Paul, Act. 21.18. To these heads, other like cases are to be referred. Who shall moderate debates in the Church Assembly, and order speaking and silence in the Church, according to Rules of or∣der, and edification? 1 Cor. 14.26, 40. Who shall hold forth light from the Rule, to guide the apprehensions and judgment of the Brethren, in difficult cases? accord∣ing to Ezek. 44.23, 24. Lastly, who shall dismiss the Church Authoritatively, with a Blessing, in the name of the Lord? Numb. 6.23-26. and Heb. 7.7. And who shall take care of the humane affairs of the Church, if Deacons be not chosen and ordained? This Office-Power the Church indeed hath not formally in it self; yet it hath it virtually, and originally. As the stock of a Tree hath not immediate po∣wer to bring forth fruit, yet it hath po∣wer to produce branches which do bring forth fruit; so the Church of Believers, though it hath not immediate power to act an Office, in the things proper there∣unto, yet it hath power to make such Officers as may perform the same in Christ's order. 5. Why this Power is said to be given to a visible Congregation of confederate Believers, as the first and proper subject
of it?] This expression serveth to shew three particulars. 1. That I speak of a Congregational-Church, indefinitely, or the Church in its general nature, as it exists in particular Congregations, to each of which it communicates its whole na∣ture, and with it all its priviledges and power to them all, being species of it, firstly and equally; so that each particu∣lar Church hath all Church-Power, that is seated in the general nature of the Church, as compleatly conveyed to it, as any other: as this particular man, John, or Peter, or James hath all the nature of man equally communicated to them, and can put forth the operations of that na∣ture, fully of themselves, and without the help of any other. 2. That this Po∣wer is given to the Church to be acted, in Admissions, Elections, and Censures, only by such in whose name Peter made this confession, viz. a Community of Dis∣ciples walking in the profession of the Faith, with consent; that is, to a Society of believ∣ing men: for Women, though Believers, are excepted by the Rule, 1 Tim. 2.12-14. 2. Professing Believers; therefore Children and distracted persons are not capable of this power, being unfit to judge, 1 Cor. 5.12. and so are they that are Deaf and
Dumb. 3. Such as walk in the profession of the Faith, with consent. Therefore such as are under publick censure for scandals in Life or Doctrine, are disabled, as ha∣ving, for the time, lost their priviledge and power. Lastly, if the Church it self be generally corrupted or divided among themselves, as it were into two equal parts, it cannot act this power, nor claim an interest in this promise, which is gi∣ven to a Church assembly in Christs Name, with competent agreement among themselves. Mat. 18.17, 18, 19, 20. 3. That this Power is given to such a Church, not only objectively for their good, but subjectively and firstly, so that the Church is the first recipient subject of it. For Officers are given to the Church, Ephes. 4.8, 11. not as meer adjuncts are given to a subject, but as integral parts, for compleating the integrity and per∣fection of the whole body of the Church: and, if they be so given to the Church, the Church is the recipient subject of them: and though the Church cannot by it self exercise the Teaching and Ruling-Elders Office; yet they may by their Of∣ficers; as the body, though it cannot see by it self, yet it may by the eyes which are given to it for that end.
2. The Confirmation, or proof, that such a Church is the first and proper sub∣ject of this power; shall be double. 1. By Scripture. 2. By Reasons. 1. By Scripture, it may be proved from sundry Texts. 1. This in hand clearly confirmeth it, if that good ancient rule of expounding Scripture be received, Dictorum intelligentia ex causis dictorum sumenda est. For Christ's question to the Disciples, which was the cause of Peter's confession here, was only concerning the Faith common to the Church. Whom say ye that I am? Hereupon Peter, in the name of the Disciples, made this confession of Faith.Quia Christus Petra, Pe∣trus popu∣lus Chri∣stianus. August. in Matth. de verbis Do∣mini, Ser. 13. Christ testified his approbation of it, by calling him Peter, not so much in respect of his Office, as of his Faith thus publickly professed, whence also visible Believers are called lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. and Christ added to this praise of Pe∣ter a twofold promise. 1. Of edifying and stablishing the Church, upon this Rock. 2. Of affording it sufficient means for the attainment of those ends, viz. the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, &c. Where the Kingdom of Heaven, or visible Church of Christ on earth, is compared to a City, or House, the Door or Gate whereof is Christ; the Keys are all instituted means,
whereby an entrance into Christ and his Kingdom, visibly, is opened and shut, the subordinate power whereof is here given to the Church immediately. The second Text is in Mat. 18.17, 18. Tell the Church, &, if he hear not the Church, let him be as an Heathen and a Publican. For what you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, &c. This cannot be meant of Elders assembling together, and acting apart from the Brethren. For no such assembly is called the Church, in the New Testament, much less is this power given to them: for, in case of scandal given by them, they are under the power of the whole Church, as well as other Members, to be censured by them; though, when they keep the Rule, they are as El∣ders, Rulers in the Church. It must there∣fore be meant of a Congregational-Church. The third Text is in 1 Cor. 5. where Paul exhorted the Church at Co∣rinth, to exercise this their power, which he calls the power of the Lord Jesus, v. 4. whereby they were to deliver unto Satan that incestuous person; v. 5. and were to purge out the old leaven; v. 7. and were to judge those that are within; v. 12. and to put away that wicked person from among them; v. 13. and this Paul calls a punish∣ment
inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. Thus he establisheth their power to bind, and teacheth them how to use it; and, in like manner, he exhorteth them, upon the mans repentance, to turn the Key, and to open the Door of Christian liber∣ties to him, and to loose him from the former censure, by forgiving him, in a legal or judicial sense, 2 Cor. 2.7, 10. And that this Church at Corinth was a meer Congregational-Church, it may be evin∣ced from hence, that the whole Church was no larger, then was wont to meet together in one place, 1 Cor. 14.23. for the ordinary worship of God. 2. By Reasons. 1. Because in such a Congregational-Church are all the causes of this power. 1. Efficient; the Institution and Ordi∣nance of Christ, who delegateth this sub∣ordinate power, to whom it pleaseth him, by his own appointment. 2. The mate∣rial cause; visible Believers. 3. The for∣mal cause; Covenanting together to walk in all the Ordinances of Christ, and to submit mutually one to another in the Lord; to be reclaimed, if they err from the rules; or to be censured by the power of the whole, if they be found obsti∣nate.
2. Because there is no former subject of this power, from whence a Congrega∣tional-Church might derive it, but it is communicated, by means of the Church, to all that partake of it, and it remaineth in the Church, when others are removed. They choose their own Elders: there∣fore they had this power virtually in them before they had Elders, and so could not derive it from them. 2. All particular Churches are of equal power within themselves, not one of them subor∣dinate to another. Therefore they derive it not from other particular Churches. 3. Synods, both lesser and larger, are made up of the Elders and Messengers sent from particular Churches, and have their being from them; nor do they send them to them, to borrow any Church-power, but only light from them; as the Church at Antioch did from the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 15. Therefore they derive no Church-power from them. Again, when the Elders of particular Churches are dead, or censured, or reject∣ed by the power of the whole for obsti∣nacy in scandalous evils, the Church still retaineth its power to choose others; as a Corporation hath its full power still, though the Magistrates be dead, or cast
out. The same holds in Churches in Islands, by their own confession, when they cannot have the help of Synods. Thus we prove Fire to be the first subject of heat, because, if it be in other things, as in Water, or Wood; it is there by the means of Fire, and, when they are remo∣ved, yet still it remains in Fire. The like reason holds in this, as you see, to prove such a Church, as this of which we speak, to be the first subject of Church-Power, or of the Keys. 3. Because all the acts done immediatly by the Church, in opening and shutting, in binding and loosing, flow from this power of the Keys given them by Christ, and hold it forth. 1. Their admitting Members is an act of this Power, and holds it forth: for, till the Brethren be satisfied, and approve ones fitness, he cannot be received into their fellowship; Act. 9.26. and 10.47. 2. Their choosing Officers is an act of this Power, which the Apostles would not vi∣olate, in adding Deacons, Act. 6.3, 5. and Ruling-Elders to the Church, Act. 14.23. and the same holds much more con∣cerning Pastors and Teachers. This po∣wer Cyprian acknowledged to be in the
Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis & Deum metuens, ipsa maxi∣mè habet potestatem vel eligen∣di dignos sacerdotes vel indig∣nos recu∣sandi. Quod & ipsum vi∣demus de Divinâ authoritate descendere. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 4. People principally, to accept or refuse Ministers, as they judged them worthy or unworthy. 3. Their Ordination of Officers, by de∣puting some chosen out of their own Body thereunto (in the want of Officers) is an act of this Power of the Keys residing in them. For, though the Offices of Elders in ge∣neral, and the Authority of their Office, as they are Rulers, is from Christ imme∣diately; yet the investing of this or that elect person with this Office & Authority, in relation to this or that Church, by ap∣plication of it to him in particular, ra∣ther than to another, this is by the Church. Ubi est ve∣ra Eccle∣sia, ibi esse necesse est jus eligen∣di, et ordi∣ndi Mi∣nistros. Melanct. de potest. Episcop. Arg. 2.4. Their Expostulating with any Mem∣ber, in case of supposed offence, is an act of this Power, whereunto Peter submitted, though an Apostle, in the Church at Je∣rusalem. Act. 11.2, 3, 4. 5. Their publick Admonishing offenders, is an act of this Power, whether they be offending Brethren, or offending Officers, Mat. 18.18. Col. 4.17. Let him hear the Church, &c. Say to Archippus, Fulfil, &c. 6. Their Excommunicating obstinate and scandalous sinners, whether a Brother, Mat. 18.18. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. or an Officer, Gal. 5.12▪
is an act of this power in the Church. 7. Their receiving again, or releasing from censure, those that have been under censure, upon their repentance, according to the Rule, 2 Cor. 2.7, 10. is an act of this ower. This also Cyprian acknowledged to be in theVix plebi persuadeo, imò extor∣queo, ut tales pati∣antur ad∣mitti. Et justior fa∣ctus est fraternita∣tis dolor, exeo, quod unus atque alius, obnitente plebe & con∣tradicente, meâ tamen facilitate suscepti, priores extiterunt, quàm priùs fuerant, nec fidem poenitentiae servare potuerunt, quia nec cum verâ poenitentiâ venerant. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. People, or fraternity, who, though they gladly received such as returned with re∣pentance, yet he could hardly perswade them, yea, extort it from them, to re∣ceive such, in whom pride and obstinacy appeared, and he justified them herein, blaming himself for too much facility. 1. Corollarie. Then the Church is before its Officers, that is, it is a true Church, essentially, and hath all Church-Power, either for∣mally, or virtually, before it hath Officers, and when the Officers are removed from it, by Death or Censure. For, 1. as a man is a true man, who is a living creature endued with a reasonable soul, because the definition of a man agreeth to him, though he wanteth some bodily Members; so a Church is a true Church, which consists of a Soc of visible Believers confederated
together in one Congregation, to walk toge∣ther in all the Ordinances of Christ, with mutual submission one to another, in the Lord; because the definition of a Church agreeth to it, though it wants Officers. 2. Such a Church can call their Officers, and thereby make them Officers to them∣selves: Therefore it must be before them, as the cause is before its effect. A Cor∣poration hath its being and power of a Corporation within it self, before it hath Magistrates; because it can chuse Magistrates, and, when they are dead, or put out, can put others into their stead and place. So it is with the Church. 2. Corollary. Then though the Church hath its essen∣tial being and power, without Officers; yet it is defective two wayes. 1. In re∣spect of Members, it hath not its compleat integrity of Members, without them. Bartimeus was a true man, without his eyes, but not perfect, with the integrity of his parts and members: so is the Church defective and mained without Officers. 2. As it is defective in its members, so also, in its operations, if it want Officers. For some Ordinances cannot be at all administred in the Churches, without Pastors or Teachers as the out∣ward
Seals, or Sacraments, which are an∣nexed, by the Ordinance of Christ, to the Word of the Covenant, and the admi∣nistration of them is by him limited unto Preachers of the Word by Office, Mat. 28.19. and some acts of Rule, as, in order∣ing speech in publick, in Church-debates, according to rules of order and edificati∣on, and the like, cannot be done with∣out Ruling-Elders. The same may be said of Official watching, to prevent or remove private disorders in conversation among the Members. 3. Some cannot be so done by others, as by Officers. 1. Not with that attendance to them, as the need and good of the Church requireth. He that hath an Office is bound to wait on it, Rom. 12.7. to give himself to the duties of it continually, Act. 6.4. to be in it, 1 Tim. 4.15. and therefore must be freed by the Church from other distracting cares, which would disable him to it, 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. 2. Not with Authority, which belongeth to Ruling Officers in the Church, as in preaching the Word with Authority, Heb. 13.17. so in other acts, which be properly Official and Authori∣tative. Hence ariseth a difference between Officers and private Members, in their seve manner of acting in things com∣mon
to both. A Church wanting Offi∣cers, may appoint some of their Members to declare the mind of the Church, touch∣ing the admission of such into the fellow∣ship of the Covenant, and Membership with the Church, in whose fitness there∣unto the Church is satisfied; and in or∣daining Officers, chosen by the Church, by imposition of hands and Prayer; and in gathering the suffrages of the fraterni∣ty; and in declaring the judgment of the Church in Censures: but these things they do, only at the appointment of the Church, pro hâc vel illâ vice. The same things are done by Teaching and Ruling-Elders in another manner, viz. by virtue of their Office, without particular leave of the Church: for, it belongs to them, as Officers, to attend unto their Work, not only to hold forth the Covenant, and to receive into Fellowship, in the name of the Church, those whom the Church appro∣veth, but also to try the fitness of those that offer themselves unto Fellowship, be∣fore they propound them to the Church. The same holds in Officers to be called; and when the Church hath chosen them, and agreed to ordain them, the Eldership impose hands upon them, in the presence of the Church, by virtue of the Office.
When offences are brought to the Church in the third step, as the Elders do pro∣pound the case, so it must first be notified to them, that they may try whether the Rule hath been attended in the two for∣mer steps, and that they may clear all dif∣ficulties, and then propound the case, when it is found to be fit for publick cog∣nizance, according to Rule. And being so, if they neglect to bring it to the Church, or assume any undue power to themselves, they that are offended may complain to the Church; and, as need may require, they are to hold forth light from Scrip∣ture, to guide the Church in judging: and, in the close, to propound the sentence (wherein the Church consenteth, and they concur with them) authoritatively. 3. Corollary. Then the proper acts of Church-power, and of ordinary Office-power, are limited, by the Ordinance of Christ, to be put forth by the Church, and Officers respectively, within that Body, or particular Congre∣gation, to which they have a particular memberly or official Relation. The mem∣bers of one Church cannot act in admit∣ting the Members, choosing the Officers, nor censuring Offenders of another Churc▪ Nor may the Officers of one
Church, administer the Seals, or ordain Officers, or perform other proper Acts of official Authority, out of their own bo∣dy, in another Church. The Church may, by communion of Churches, upon orderly, recommendation, receive the members of other Churches unto fellow∣ship of such Ordinances, as are for the comfort and strengthning of the Saints, as the Seals are, and the Officers may admi∣nister them to such, being accepted by the body: for we have a warrant for so much, from the Rule, Rom. 16.1. 3 Joh. 9. but not to act in judgement. For, the Church hath this priviledge proper to be judged by, and to judg, only those that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12. whereas I alledged this Text against Mr. Paget, to prove, that Church-Ordinances belong only to the Members of some particular Church, Mr. Rutterf. meeting with that expressi∣on, saith, Mr. D. will have Pastors so far strangers to all Congregations, save their own, that (he saith) other Churches are without, and have nothing to do to judge them, and alledgeth for this, 1 Cor. 5.12. But by those that are without, Paul meaneth, not those that were not of the Congregation, but he meaneth In∣fidels and Heathen, as in other Scrip∣tures.
For Paul judged and excommu∣nicated Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Tim. 1.20. who were without the Church at Corinth.] Had Mr. Rutt. been pleased to cast his eye upon my own defence of that passage,In my A∣polog. Re∣ply, pag. 312, 313. printed sundry years before he put pen to paper in these disputes about Church affairs, he might have found that written by me, touching the sense, and my application of that Text, which might have prevented his exagitating that mat∣ter. Nor doth he with any congruity argue from Pauls Excommunicating Hy∣meneus and Alexander, who, he saith, were without the Church at Corinth, to prove that Pastors have any thing to do, to judge judicially, or excommunicate the mem∣bers of other Congregations. For Paul was an Apostle, an extraordinary Officer, had an illimited commission, and a fulness of delegated power both in every Church, and to administer Church-Ordinances, without the fellowship of a particular Church, when it could not be had; and to execute all Offices in any Church, where Officers were wanting: But Pastors are ordinary Officers, have a limited com∣mission, to do only the acts of the Pastoral Office, and those only to that particular Church by which they are called unto
Office; Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. Therefore, though Paul might excommunicate one that was not of that particular Church at Corinth, yet the Pastor to the Church at Corinth might not. Yet Paul could not excommunicate one that was no member of any Church, but without, as Infidels and Heathen are: For that implies a con∣tradiction. To conclude. The Apostle doth so appropriate Church-judgment, to those that are within that particular Church, 1 Cor. 5.12. Ye judge them that are within; that he exempts from it in a due proportion, all that are not members of that Congregation; though there are degrees of being without, some being totally without all Church-communion, as Infidels and Heathen: others, though in Church-communion else-where, yet not in communion of membership of that Church, to whom he wrote to put away from them; not one that was a member of another Church, but him that was a mem∣ber of that Church. And, in this sense, Mr. Rutt. saith, Hymeneus and Alexander were without the Church at Corinth, though members of some other Church: for which cause, the Church at Corinth could not excommunicate them, yet Paul might, and did, by his Apostolical Power Thus,
by his own confession, some are without a particular Church, who yet are not Hea∣then or Infidels. To conclude, one may be said to be without this or that parti∣cular Church, two ways. 1. Simply and absolutely; so, Infidels and Heathen that are of no Church. 2. Comparatively, so the Members of other Churches, compared with those that are of this Body. 4. Corollary. Then Churches gathered, and Officers ordained, in these days, without Apostles, are true Churches, and true Church-Offi∣cers, according to Christ; and Churches thus Organized, according to the Rules of the Word, are true, and intire Chur∣ches, and the first subject of all Church-power, as well as those Primitive Chur∣ches planted by the Apostles. For the concurrence of the Apostles is not put into this Charter, whereof we speak, as a con∣ditional Clause; which might not have been omitted, if Christ had intend∣ed, that it should be always necessa∣ry. He doth not say, upon this Rock my Apostles shall build my Church, and to my Church built by them I will give the Keys of the Kingdom; but, up∣on this Rock I will build my Church (viz. by such Instruments as Christ will raise,
and use, and bless in that work, in every Age;) and to this Church, thus built, he gives the Keys of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. Object. But Christ gave the Com∣mission of gathering Churches to his A∣postles, in Matth. 28.18, 19. And, when he ascended up on high, he gave some A∣postles, and some Prophets, and some Evan∣gelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephes. 4.8, 11, 12. Answ. Those and the like Texts of Scripture do indeed shew, that God used Apostles prin∣cipally in this work, but not only: For as to Teach and Baptize is common to other Teaching-Officers, as well as A∣postles; so the gathering of Churches, by making men Disciples of Christ, was done by others, besides Apostles, even in the Apostles days, Act. 11.20, 21. The dispersed Disciples planted the Church at Antioch, the Members whereof were first called Christians, a Church whose plant∣ing Barnabas approved, ver. 23. 2. They shew, that God would use Apostles here∣in, for a time, but not alwayes; which I prove, 1. From the proper work com∣mitted, to them, which was to make the first Models and Patterns of planting and
gathering Churches, which ordinary In∣strumentts are bound to attend in the ga∣thering and constituting of Churches, 1 Cor. 3.6, 10. and, in that sense, their work continues to the end of the World, though their manner of working. viz. from an immediate Call, Inspiration, and Infallible assistance, proper to Apostles, in making those Patterns, was extraordina∣ry, and ended with their Office, in the first Age, since when, there never have been Apostles in the World. For, though Matthias succeeded in the place of Judas, by Gods Election, Act. 1.26. yet after James was beheaded, no Apostle was chosen to succeed him, though the Apostles lived long after. 2. The Apostle John, who lived longest of the Apostles, descri∣beth, by Revelation from Christ, all the Officers that should be, by Gods Ordi∣nance, in Christian Churches, after that Age, under four sorts of living Crea∣tures, which note the four sorts of ordi∣nary Officers to continue in the Church after that Age, viz. Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons, Revel. 4.1, 6, 7.
Vers. 19. And whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: Whatsoever thou shalt loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. THese words hold forth the Ratificati∣on of Christ's grant of the Keys unto a Congregational-Church, with the chiefty of power, under Christ, to manage the same within themselves, for the at∣tainment of the ends of Church-Commu∣nion; And that this is spoken to Peter, in the name of such a Church, and, that Christ intended to establish, by this pro∣mise, the compleat exercise of this power in such a Church, being compleated with all it Officers, is clear from Matth. 18.18. where the same promise is given, by name to such a Church. The words therefore, in summe, hold forth a grant from Christ to his Church of an indispensable power of Church-censures, within themselves: which may be thus evinced. The censure that is established in Heaven cannot be dispen∣sed with, nor reversed by any power on Earth: But the censure, that is admini∣stred by a Congregational-Church, is esta∣blished in Heaven: Therefore it cannot be dispensed withall, nor reversed by any
power on Earth. The Proposition, a man would think might pass without opposi∣tion, but I find this Objection made a∣gainst it. Obj. The sentence of an inferiour Judge or Court proceeding rightly, is esta∣blished in Heaven; yet we may appeal from it; Why will not the same hold in Church-censures also? Answ. 1. Because the promise of binding in Heaven, is not given by Christ to the censures of Civil Courts: For it is not a Civil, but a Spiri∣tual binding that is here meant. 2. Be∣cause there is not par ratio between them. The reason why appeals may be made from the sentence of inferiour Civil Courts and Judges, is, because there is a Supreme Court in being, to which the appeal may be brought, and there prose∣cuted, and thereby determined (as the inferiour Courts in Israel stood under the highest Synedrion;) but there is no such Supreme Court ordained by Christ over particular Churches. The Assumption, That the censure that is administred by a Congregational-Church is established in Heaven, is expresly in the Text, as it hath been expounded. True, say some, what a particular Church binds on Earth, clave non errante, is bound in Heaven, but the Church may err in Judgement, there∣fore
appeal may be made, and then their binding power is gone. Answ. 1. If pos∣sibility of erring in Judgment be a war∣rantable ground of appealing from parti∣cular Churches; then the appeal must be made to such a Tribunal and Judge, as cannot err, which is to be found only in Heaven. 2. On this ground, the univer∣sal Church represented in a general Coun∣cil (much more, inferiour Synods and Classes) should not have power to bind, without appeals. For a general Council may err, and hath erred; not seldom, but often; not in small matters only, but in those of the greatest moment; yea they may be as much inclined to err, as parti∣cular Churches: For the greatest part of visible Churches in the World are for the most part corrupt. If it be said, There are more eyes, & plus vident oculi quam oculus? I answer; True, caeteris paribus, viz. if they are equally near the mark; but their sight is hindred more than par∣ticular Churches are in their proper con∣cernments, as they are further from the mark, in such cases, than particular Churches. And if particular Chur∣ches have not full power of Excom∣munication, because they may err, be cor∣rupt, be partial, be divided; upon the same
ground, neither Classical, National, not Oecumenical Assemblies have any such power; for they may err, be corrupt, be partial, be divided also. 3. Christ, who well knew what is in man, and what is best for the good of his people, hath gi∣ven unto his particular Churches, not∣withstanding their possibility of erring, an indispensable power of judgment, in their own matters, within themselves. The Doctrinal Conclusion to be insisted upon, is this: A Congregational Church of Christ,7. Conclu. being compleated with Officers, hath, by the gift of Christ, within it self, compleat subordinate Church-power in all Church-affairs proper to it self. When I say, 1. It hath compleat, or sufficient Church-power] Thereby I mean, 1. That it needeth not the influence of the Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction of any other Church or Churches, or Classes, or Synods, to sup∣ply unto it any power that it wanteth, in its own matters; and 2. That it stand∣eth not in subjection under any other Su∣perior Ecclesiastical Judicatory, so as that thereby the judicial Acts of a particular Church may be hindered, or made void. In a word, Potestas uniuscujus{que} particula∣ris Ecclesiae, in re propria, summa est. The
power of such a Church is Chief, in things proper to it self. 2. I add, that this chief∣ty of power, in a particular Church, is sub∣ordinate] To shew, that the absolute Su∣premacy of power is in Christ; that which the Church hath, is only delegated from Christ. When a particular Church is compleated with all its Officers, the Go∣vernment of it, in respect of Christ the Head, is perfectly Monarchical; in re∣spect of the Elders, acting their Authori∣rity, or Office-power, it is Aristocratical; and in respect of the Fraternity, acting its Chuch-power in Judgment, it is De∣mocratical; and, in the concurrence of all the Members, both Officers and Bre∣thren, acting according to their several interests, it is Aristocratico-Democratical; above which, Christ hath not set any higher Ecclesiastical Judicatory on Earth, subjecting particular Churches thereunto, in re propriâ. A clear proof of such pow∣er, as that which hath been described, you may see in the Church at Corinth ex∣communicating that incestuous person, in 1 Cor. 5.1-5. Say not, as some do, That was not an act of Judicial power in that Church, but of subjection to the Apostle who decreed it, and judged him before, and committed no more to the Church,
but the publishing of the sentence; for,, 1 Cor. 5.3. though Paul, as an Apostle, judged that he should be excommunicated, yet he so judged only dogmatically, by teaching the Church what they ought to do in that case, not judicially, by his own sen∣tence, delivering him to Sathan; and ac∣ordingly the Church cast him out, by their own sufficiency of Church-power, with∣in themselves, though in a way of sub∣jection to the command of Christ deli∣vered by Paul. For, 1. They delivered him to Satan, in the Name, and with the Power of the Lord Jesus, v. 4. and that is the highest Power. 2. The end and use of it was, for the destruction of the flesh, that his Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, v. 5. which argueth, that it proceedeth from a power of binding in Heaven, as well as on Earth. 3. When God blessed this sentence, by making it effectual to work Repentance in him, Paul exhorteth the whole Church to release and forgive him, 2 Cor. 2.6-10. and doth not claim the Power over them of a Su∣periour Judge, to absolve him by his own sentence, without them: Nor did he write to the Elders of sundry Churches, but only to that particular Church, both Elders and Brethren, and thereby ac∣knowledgeth
the Power of Ecclesiastical Judgment to be so fully in them, that, As their not putting it into act retarded the sentence before, and their putting of it into act was a Judicial Act in them all, ye judge them that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12. So, their forgiving him would be a Legal and Judicial acquitting him from tha sentence, 2 Cor. 2. This Church is our pattern, and its practice in this is pre∣sidential to all particular Churches of Christ. From the guilt which lyeth upon every such Church, when any scandal given by their Members remaineth uncensured and unremoved. Therefore Paul applyed this Reproof to the whole Church, Brethren as well as Officers, for their slowness to excommunicate that man, 1 Cor. 5.2. And in like manner, Christ reproveth the An∣gel, and Church, both of Pergamus, Rev. 2.14, 15. and of Thyatira, ver. 20. If these Churches had not sufficient power within themselves to purge out such Leaven, why are they blamed for tolerating the same? And why are not other Churches, or the Classes, blamed for neglect of exer∣cising their power of Ecclesiastical Judica∣ture over them, if they stood under any such? And what the Spirit speaketh to
them, he saith to other Churches also, to beware of the like Remisness. Which Admonition all particular Churches are bound to attend; lest else the gates of Hell prevail against them, through their neg∣lect of exercising that power which Christ hath given them, severally, and respe∣ctively, to preserve their Members and whole fellowship in Spiritual purity and safety, Heb. 12.15. From the Analogy and agreement that is between the Spiritual power of a Con∣gregational Church of Christ, and the ci∣vil power of the most free and perfect Ci∣ties, which Thucidides saith have three priviledges, viz. to use, 1. Their own Laws. 2. Magistrates. 3. Judgments, (whence he cals every such City, ) other Cities were not account∣ed intire and perfect Cities of themselves, but less worthy Members of those great and perfect Cities,Grot. de jure bel & pac. l. 1. c. 3. p. 4, 5, 7. under whose Jurisdi∣ction they were. The summa potestas of those great and perfect Cities, is that, cujus actus alterius juri non subsunt, ita ut alteri∣us voluntatis humanae arbitrio irriti possunt reddi. Now every particular Church of Christ, being compleated with its Officers, is a most perfect and free City, the City of God, Psal. 48.1. The City of the great King,
ver. 2. the visible Kingdom of the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.15. and there∣fore it must necessarily have sufficient and compleat power within it self to manage the Keys, without dependence on Classes, &c. in its own concernments. Yet herein is a difference between such perfect Cities and the Churches of Christ, That such Cities may part with their Liberty, in some cases,Liv. Dec. 1. l. 1. Idem. Ibid. l. 7. Populum Campa∣num, ur∣bem{que} de∣lubra De∣ûm, divi∣na, huma∣na{que} omnia in vestrā, P.C. ditio∣em dedi∣mus. as being overmatched by a Po∣tent Enemy. In this case, the Collatives yielded up themselves, and their City and Liberties to Tarquinius Priscus King of the Romans; or when they are in extream danger by an Enemy, whom they would not have to rule over them, and cannot defend themselves by any other means, which was the case of Campani distressed by the Samnites, which forced them to yield up themselves, and all they had, with all their Liberties, unto the Romans; which when they had done, they were said to be facti alienae potestatis. Yet it was presupposed that they had power in them∣selves thus to do, as appears by that question, Estne populus Collatinus in suâ potestate? But Churches have not power to alienate from themselves their Church-Liberties, which Christ hath purchased
for them with his Blood, and command∣ed them to stand fast in them, Gal. 5.1. and, to whom they must give an account, how they have kept and managed the same, Luke 16.2. From the Concession of those that op∣pose this Truth.The pow∣er of Clas∣ses, and Syn. p. 33. ad Calcem. Mr. Pag. acknow∣ledgeth that if a particular Church of God should sojourn among the Indians, or among Hereticks, where it could not obtain fellowship with other Churches out of it self: Or, if by violence, or o∣ther unavoidable inconveniences, any Church should be hindred from enjoy∣ing this benefit of combination with o∣ther Churches in Classical Government, yet notwithstanding this want, this Church should subsist still, and be repu∣ted a true Church.] Others say the same of a Church in an Island, and add,Mr. Herle Indep. p. 2 that, in such cases a single Congregation must not be denyed intireness of Jurisdi∣ction. Mr. Rutterf. adds, that when Churches cannot injoy the society of neighbouring Churches with that com∣fort and conveniency as their occasi∣ons may require, among them Ordina∣tion, and so Excommunication, may be performed by the Congregation.] From this Concession it will follow, that,
1. A Congregational Church of Christ, quà talis, hath a lawful right in an intire∣ness of Church-Government, within it self, by the gift of Christ, yea, that the Church-power, Natively and Naturally, lyes in the Congregation, for such cases are ordinary; and the first Synod, which is looked at as presidential to all Synods, was a concurrence of two Churches, which were two hundred miles di∣stant. 2. The other Churches, or Classes, or Synods, have no right to take away this power from it. For none may put asunder what God hath joyned, as well in this case, as in that noted in Mat. 19.7. God hath joyned intireness of Jurisdiction, in re pro∣priâ, to a particular Church, who then shall sunder it from such a Church, to place it in Classes, as Superior Judica∣tories, where God never put it? 3. If the first Church in a Continent had this compleat power within it self, before other Churches were gathered, and the rising up of other Churches there long after, should deprive them of it, by setting up a Classis, as a Superior Judica∣tory, over them; then the neighbour∣hood of Churches should not be a benefit, but a disadvantage to them, and would
give them cause to complain unto God, Thou hast multiplyed the Nation,Pow. of Class. & Syn. p. 33. Idem. p 34. but not increased our joy. But they hold, that every Church is bound to seek this de∣pendency and union with other Chur∣ches, as God shall give opportunity and means, and cannot, without sin, neglect the same. And, lest we should think it but a matter Arbitrary, at best; they tell us, it is of the same necessity, for a Church to combine unto Classe, and Synods, for their Spiritual Govern∣ment, if they have opportunity, as to joyn a mans self, as a Member, to a par∣ticular Church, if he hath means and opportunity to do it; and conclude, all that neglect to do it, sin against the Communion of Saints, and walk not as becometh the Body of Christ, Rom. 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.15. Ephes. 4.16. Answ. 1. The Proofs alleadged do shew, that the Communion of Saints ought to be preserved and exercised in Church-Communion by Believers, joyn∣ing to a particular Congregation, and walking in a Memberlike affection and fellowship with their Brethren, unto mutual edification; but they speak no∣thing for the subjection of particular Churches to Classes and Synods, in re
propriâ, but rather intimate the contrary: For the Apostle, by comparing a Congre∣gational-Church compleated with its Offi∣cers, unto the Body of a man intire in all its Members, sheweth, that as the Body of a man, being intire and sound, hath compleat power within it self, for all bo∣dily actions; so a particular Church, be∣ing organized, and governed by Christ, the Head, from whom the whole Body fitly joyned and compacted together, by Joynts of supply, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh in∣crease of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephes. 4.15, 16. without the influ∣ence of any Jurisdiction out of it self, to supply a Superior Church-power, which was wanting in this Body of Chirist, a Congregational-Church; and as the Bo∣dy Natural, being sound and of a good constitution, hath sufficient ability in it self, to purge out of it self Malignant Humors; so such a Church hath suffici∣ent power in it self, to cast out vicious and hurtful Members, without the inter∣vention of Classical Jurisdiction over them. 2. It is a sin against the second Com∣mandment in such, as having means and opportunity, neglect to joyn, as Mem∣bers
in a particular Congregation, be∣cause it is God's Ordinance, and revealed Will, 2 Cor. 8.5. But Classical Jurisdi∣ction over particular Churches, and their subjection thereunto, is no Ordinance of Christ, and therefore it is so far from be∣ing necessary, that it is not lawful; but against the second Commandment, which forbiddeth mens inventions in God's wor∣ship, that it may establish only God's Or∣dinances therein. Others argue thus: As, though a Town or Family, being alone, may govern, as a compleat Body; yet, when it stands in a Common-wealth, it may not be so independent, but must sub∣mit to Combinations: So, though when a particular Congregation is alone, it may govern as compleat, yet not so, when it is among other Churches. Answ. 1. There is not a like reason of Churches, and of Towns or Families in this respect. For civil Societies are more left to Rules of Humane prudence, by the great Ru of the World, than Churches are. Therefore civil Societies may be of several constitutions, have dif∣ferent Laws and Priviledges, and admit various forms of Government; provided that they be not against Moral Rules and the good of the People. But in this Spi∣ritual
Kingdom of Christ, men may not alter the kind or Form of Church, which Christ hath Instituted, but must preserve inviolate the Laws, Administrations, Pri∣viledges, and Church-Government or∣dained by him, without Addition, Dimi∣nution, or alteration. Hence a particular Church may not alienate from it self, in whole, or part, any Right, Power or Pri∣viledge given it by Christ. 2. If such a Town or Family hath compleat power and Officers within it self, it is not bound to submit to such Combinations in a Common-wealth, except it be under a Superiour Power that can command the same. A∣braham, having a compleat Family, was not bound to combine with the Govern∣ments he dwelt amongst, nor did he; though he joyned in a League of amity, and for mutual help, with Aner, Eschol, and Mamre, yet not to submit to their Government: So neither is a particular Organical Church bound to submit to such Classical Combinations, till it can be proved by Scripture, that a Superior Power of other Churches can command the same. 3. Though several Families, not ha∣ving compleat Government within them∣selves,
must combine in a Common-wealth, yet not to yield up their Family-Government over their Wives, Children, and Servants, respectively, to rule them in common with other Masters of Fami∣lies. Much less may several Congrega∣tional-Churches give up the Govern∣ment of themselves to Pastors of sundry Churches, combined in a Classis, to go∣vern them in their proper Affairs, such as Admission of Members, Election and Or∣dination of Officers, Administration of Seals and Censures. 1. Corollary. Then the censure of Excommunication is not a light matter, but to be looked at, as very weighty and formidable. You see, 1. That it is the Soveraign Remedy prescribde by Christ against the many Dis∣eases, whereunto the Body is subject; the great preservative of the Churches peace, and safety against the gates of Hell. 2. That it is such a Power given by Christ to his Church, as proveth Church-Societies to be the visible Suburbs of Hea∣ven, yea, the Kingdom of Heaven be∣gun on Earth, seeing such an Heavenly Power is committed to them. This is a greater work than Elijah did, when he
shut up Heaven, that it rained not, Jam. 5.17. For that was but an outward and temporal Judgment, for three years and six moneths: But this is Spiritual, and for ever, upon impenitent persons. It is greater than Earthly Kings and Magi∣strates can do; they can bind a Malefactor hand and foot, and deliver him to the Jaylor, and sentence him to banishment out of their Dominions: but this Censure binds the Soul and Conscience, delivers them to Satan, and excludes obstinate impenitent sinners from the Kingdom of God; that when this Censure is applyed by the Church according to Scripture-Rules, Jesus Christ is with them, to rati∣fie his Censure according to this Promise, What you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and to bless it to the attain∣ment of its end, the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved. This is a singular Priviledge of Church-Members. If they that are out of Church-fel∣lowship, bless themselves in their Liberty, because they cannot be touched with Church-censures, they shew their ex∣tream folly therein; for they are left to the Sword of the Magistrate, or to the immediate judgment of God, as forlorn Creatures, excluded from Spiritual helps
suitable to their needs. They are as Sheep whom no man taketh up, or careth for, in a Spiritual way, Isa. 3.13, 14. It is therefore a special priviledge of Church-Members, and much for the furtherance of their eternal Salvation, if they improve it aright, to the mortifying of those corruptions in them which could not be purged out and healed by easier means. And this is the proper end of it, that, seeing themselves, as Adam, driven from the Tree of Life, by the flaming Sword of a Cherubim; or, as Cain, cast out from Gods face; or, as the Leper, shut out from the fellowship of God's people; or, as that Incestuous Corinthian, delivered up to Satan, they may be ashamed, hum∣bled, and effectually brought to Repen∣tance, and to hold it forth according to God's Rules. If it work not this effect, the fault is their own: Yet it will not be without effect. For as the Gospel is the savour of Death unto Death, when it is not the savour of Life unto Life; so this Gospel-Ordinance shall not be in vain, but shall work, one way, or t'other, either the destruction of the impenitent, or the salvation of those that repent. That therefore it may be effectual for their e∣ternal good, it is their duty, when the
sentence proceeds, either according to the eighteenth of Matthew, upon their not hearing the Church, in less hainous of∣fences; or, according to 1 Cor. 5. and Rev. 22.15. upon the hainous nature of scandals given by them against common light, to humble themselves under the migh∣ty hand of God, that he may exalt them in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6. and to cry mighti∣ly to him, to add efficacy to his Ordi∣nance, by his Spirit, that their spirits may be duly and truly humbled, their corruptions powerfully mortified, and their souls eternally saved. Be sure, that you take not part with your sin against the Ordinance, but take part with the Ordinance against your sin; and account it your honour, to honour God, and ex∣alt his Rules; and let others learn here∣by to fear, not joyning with the Church, but persisting obstinately in sin. 2. Corollary. Then a Congregational Church (such as hath been described) is the highest Ecclesi∣astical Tribunal, under Christ, in its own matters. This was revealed to John, as that frame of Church-Government which should continue, from the Apostles time, unto the end of the World; when he saw a Throne set in Heaven, the Trinity
sitting upon it, and the four living Crea∣tures between it, and the four and twenty Elders who sate round about the Throne, Rev. 4.1,-9. Thither appeals must be made according to Christ his Ordi∣nance, by an offended Brother, after the first and second step; or by any Member that finds himself over-rigorously deal with by his Brethren in these steps; Matth. 18.17, 18. that there the Cause may be scanned, and Sentence proceed accord∣ing to Christ. If the Church want suf∣ficient light, or consent, for the sentence, they are to seek help from others by their Light and Counsel, but still preserving the power of Censure intirely in the Church, where Christ hath placed it. The wisdom of Christ, the good of the Church, and of every Member, and the na∣ture of the thing require, that there be some chief Tribunal in the exerci of Church-Government, unto which Ap∣peals must be last made, Juridically, and from which no Appeal may be granted and expected. 2. That this chief Tri∣bunal must have no Ecclesiastical Power above it; and 3. That it may not be ju∣dially censured by any Power of the same kind. All the question is, which is the chief Tribunal? That, say some, must be
the Classes, under which such Churches stand, and the Synods under which the Classes are subordinate; and they give this Reason: Because the end, for which the Keys are given to the Church, is, that all offences may be removed, Mat. 18.15, 16, &c. Which, they say, cannot be done, if you put the chief Power of Judgment into a Congregational Church. For, what if an Elder? what if the whole Edership? yea, what if the whole Church offend? The Church cannot censure their Elders; for that were to rule their Ru∣lers, and to judge their Judges; nor will they censure themselves. But a Classis or Synod of many Elders may, and will, re∣form all, by judicially censuring all. Answ. 1. This Argument is built up∣on a mistake or error in the foundation of it. For the Rule prescribed in Matth. 18. is t for removal of all offences, but of such private and less hainous offences as grow publick and notorious, only by the obstinacy of the Delinquent. For, if of∣fences be publick and heinous in them∣selves, the Apostle doth not direct Chur∣ches to proceed by those steps, 1 Cor. 5.11. Rev. 22.15. 2. Nor doth it make the People Rulers of their Rulers, or Judges of their Judges,
when we say, that the Church hath a pow∣er over them, in case of Delinquency. For Excommunication is not an act of the highest Rule, or Authority, but of the highest Judgment; and therefore the Power of it may well be in the whole Church, as their Priviledge, without any intrenchment upon the Rule and Autho∣rity of Elders, wherein, as Officers, they are above the Brethren, whilst they act accord∣ing to Rule: But, if they become Delin∣quents, then as Members, they are under the Power of the whole. The Church must submit to them, as Rulers, whil'st they rightly exercise the Authority of their Office, in Preaching, Administring the Seals, holding forth light from Scripture to guide them in censure, ordering Speech and Silence according to Rules of Order and Edification, and in other Official Acts: But they must submit to the Church, questioning, or proceeding to censure them with good advice of Neigh∣bour-Churches and Elders; (who as they concurred in giving them the right hand of fellowship in their Ordination, so they should concur in approving this Censure, as justly inflicted by the Church, from parity of reason.) The Mayor in a free City, or Corporation, is, in the right Ad∣ministration
of his Office, above the Court, none but he can perform the Acts pecu∣liar to his place; yet, if he corrupt the People, pervert Justice, or be, any way, grosly and scandalously delinquent, the Court can censure and despose him. For the whole hath Power over any Member, to preserve its purity, and peace, and safe∣ty against any in the Body, that would corrupt, disturb or destroy the same. And the Covenant binds every Member, to be subject to the Power of the whole, either to be reformed, or removed from commu∣nion of it thereby. 3. Their Plaister is not suitable to heal the Sores of the Church, but it is either too broad, when offences of Bre∣thren may be healed by Church-censure, within themselves, or, it is too narrow. For, 1. Those Assemblies are too sel∣dom, and cannot sit together long enough to remove the many offences that fall out frequently in Churches. 2. Non can they Excommunicate a Church, nor any Officer or Member of a particular Chuch by warrant from Christ. 3. Classes, and Synods, and general Councils may be under just offences, as well as Churches; and who shall censure them?
4. This Plaister hinders the healing of the Sores of Churches. For,Appella∣tio est jus, per quod prima sen∣tentia tan∣tisper ex∣tinguitur, donec de causae cog∣nitione ad superio∣rem devo∣lutâ, fuerit pronunci∣atum. if a Delin∣quent, disliking the Churches proceeding, appeals from the sentence of the Church to the Classis, and, for the same reason, from the sentence of the Classis to a Pro∣vincial Synod, then, to a National Synod, then to an Oecumenical Council, which may not assemble in an Age; while the Appeal depends, he shall stand as uncensu∣red. For this is the Law of Appeals. Now, how can that heal which is cross to the prescription of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only wise Physician? He saith, Tell the Church; and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen & Publican. But he who appeals from the Church, doth not hear the Church. Therefore he that so doth, deserves to be cut off, by the sentence of Christ, which this Tradition of Appeals from Churches, in re propriâ, to Superiour Ecclesiastical Judicatories, contradicteth, and so, maketh the Commandment of Christ void, and of none effect. It remaineth there∣fore, that the Church of a particular Con∣gregation is the highest Tribunal under Christ, in such things as are proper to it self.
3. Corollary. Then intireness of Church-Govern∣ment, in a particular Church compleated with its Officers, in re propriâ, will well consist with that communion of Chur∣ches which the Scripture establisheth. The reason is, because both are the Or∣dinances of Christ, and Christs Ordinances do not interfere. As the Communion of Neighbour-Families doth not cross the compleat Government of several Families within themselves, respectively, in things properly Domestical. And as communi∣on among Kingdoms and Common∣wealths, hindreth not the intireness of Jurisdiction in each Kingdom and Com∣monwealth within it self, in its proper concernments; So it is in the commu∣nion of Churches. Therefore Church-communion must be only, in a way of Brotherly association, for mutual helpful∣ness, in matters of this nature, but not in way of subordination, or subjection of one Church to the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment, whether of another Church, or of the Elders of several Churches assembled in Classes or Synods. The Communion of Churches, in the former way, is exercised according to Rule, in sundry cases, as
1. In mutual care. 2. In recommenda∣tion of Members. 3. In participation of such Ordinances as are for comfort and strengthning the Members of other Chur∣ches occasionally. 4. In relieving and succouring one another. 5. In counte∣nancing, by giving the right hand of fel∣lowship unto a Church in its first gather∣ing, and unto Elders at their Ordinati∣on. 6. In consulting one with another, when we have occasion to require the Judgment and Counsel of other Churches, concerning any Person or Cause,See these particulars proved, in the Plat∣form of Church-Discipline published-by the Sy∣nod at Cambridge in New-England, Anno. 1649. the eighth moneth, Chap. 15. & 16. where∣with they may be better acquainted than our selves. 7. In admonishing one an∣other, in case of publick scandal. All these (and if withdrawing fellowship up∣on just causes, be added to them) are no more than one Apostle may do to another, without exercising Church-Government over them. Communion of Churches in the latter way, of subordination or subjection to other Churches or Synods, in re propriâ, the Scripture no where approveth. Not of one Church to ano∣ther; for there is a parity among Churches, and par in parem non habet imperium. Nor of one Church to a Synod made up of the Elders of sundry Neighbour-Churches. The Assembly in Act. 15. Is a pattern
they say of such a Synod. Let us see how their Classical Assemblies answer it. 1. That was no set meeting, moneth∣ly, or quarterly, but meerly occasional, Act. 15.1, 2. 2. If was not an Assembly of Elders meeting apart from the Brethren of the Church where they assembled, Vers. 22, 23. 3. It was but a meeting of two Chur∣ches, that of Antioch sending their Mes∣sengers, with Paul and Barnabas, and that at Jerusalem, the Apostles (whose resi∣dence, for the present, was there) joyn∣ing with them, Vers. 4, 6. 4. That assembly gave their judgment, both of the Doctrine taught at Antioch, & of the persons that taught it, as trouble∣some and subverters, Vers. 24. but did nei∣ther Excommunicate them, nor com∣mand the Church to Excommunicate them. 5. They directed and charged the Church from the Word, what they should do, Vers. 28, 29. but they did not do their Acts of Power for them. 6. Nor did this Assembly exercise Church-government over that Church at Antioch, or any other Church or Chur∣ches, in admission of their Members, or
in Ordination of their Officers, or in Ad∣ministration of the Seals, or in Excom∣municating, or in reversing or nullifying the censure inflicted by the Church. For these were res propria to every particular Church within it self. Yet, because I study peace, and consent with godly Bre∣thren, so far as it may stand with Truth, I willingly grant, that other Churches, and Synods rightly gathered and order∣ed, have so much Power and Authority, even in these matters, as I can find any warrant for in Scripture; being willing also to yield further if it can be cleared from Scripture, that more is due unto them. There are two Cases, wherein the res propria of a particular Church, may fall under the cognizance and determina∣tion of other Churches or Synods. 1. When they want sufficient light, or competent consent among themselves, which was the case of the Church at Anti∣och; provided, that they have liberty to choose such a Church or Churches, for this purpose, as themselves approve to be fittest for attainment of their end, in seek∣ing light, as the Church at Antioch agreed to send to that at Jerusalem, though two hundred miles distant from them. But, if they have sufficient light within them∣selves,
and hold it forth convictingly from Scripture, the Elders and Princi∣pal Members of the Church, and major part of the Brethren by far consenting therein, no Rule requireth or alloweth, that, for the wilfulness of a Delinquent, who will not hear the Church, or of two or three Brethren, who side with him, and refuse to joyn with the Church in censuring him, the Church should be hin∣dred from proceeding, till other Chur∣ches or Elders have been consulted. For if this be granted, 1. It will disturb all Church-Proceedings. 2. And if it be brought to a Classis, it must issue there by the Vote of the major part, if as many Elders in that Assembly dissent, as Bre∣thren did before in the Church-meeting, so that nothing is gained thereby. And if the Delinquent, for the same reason, appeal to a Synod, there may be the same issue, and so appeals may be drawn fur∣ther, till a Delinquent wrest himself at last from all power of censure. The se∣cond Case is, when that which is res pro∣pria, in the thing done, simply considered, becomes res communis in the Cause or ground of proceeding. For though re∣ceiving of Members, Election, and Ordi∣nation of Officers, and Administration of
Seals and Censures, be Acts of the power given by Christ to particular Churches; yet it never was the mind of Christ, to esta∣blish, by that Grant, an absolute power in such Churches, to corrupt the Faith and Worship of God, in themselves, and in other Churches. If therefore a Church, that was planted a noble Vine, wholly a a right Seed, shall turn into the degenerate Plants of a strange Vine unto God, and be∣come Heretical, or Schismatical, or scan∣dalously corrupt, and therefore receive into their fellowship known Hereticks, and Schismaticks, and choose such into Office, and refuse to admit into fellow∣ship or Office, such as are sound in the Faith, because they are sound in the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and cast out from their fellowship such as testifie, according to Rule, against these evils, and refuse to consent with them therein; &c. the Neighbour Church, or Churches, or Elders, and Brethren Assembled in a Synod (if the evil spread to the disturb∣ing, corrupting, or scandalizing of many Churches) have power, and it is their duty, 1. To consider of this Matter, Act. 15.6. 2. To argue, debate, and determine according to the Word, Vers. 7.-23. 3. To publish the same to
the Church or Churches whom it con∣cerneth, vers. 23. to bear witness against their corruptions in Doctrine or Man∣ners, and to give directions from the Word, for the Reformation thereof, vers. 24, 28, 29. 4. Such Determinations, and Directions being found consonant to the Word of God in Scripture, the Church to whom they are sent, are to receive them with due reverence and submission, as to the Ordinance of God. Or, 5. In case of obstinate persistance of such a Church or Churches in their scandalous evils against light convictingly held forth, the Churches so offended, or scandalized by them, are to withdraw from them the right hand of fellowship and Church-Communion, till they repent and reform. This follows, in proportion, from the contrary, Gal. 2.9. and à pari, 2 Thes. 3.6, 14. there being a like reason of Churches and Persons, in this respect. Yet such offended Churches and Synods, are not to exercise Church-censures, in way of Discipline, nor any other Act of Church-Government, as neither did that Assembly, in Act. 15.29. Here I shall crave leave to joyn with my Brethren in adding some caution touching the Communion and Consoci∣ation
of Churches, To see that this Con∣sociation of Churches be not perverted,Mr. Cotton of the Keys, p. 57. either to the oppression, or diminution of the just Liberty and Authority of each particular Church within it self, who being well supplyed with a faith∣ful and expert Presbytery of their own, do walk in their integrity, according to the Truth and Peace of the Gospel. Let Synods have their just Authority in all Churches, how pure soever, in de∣termining such , as are requi∣site for the edification of all Churches, acording to God: but in the Election and Ordination of Officers, and censure of offenders, let it suffice the Churches Consociate to assist one another with their Counsel, and right hand of fel∣lowship, when they see a particular Church to use their Liberty and Power aright. But let them not put forth the Power of their Community, either to take such Church Acts out of their hands, or to hinder them in their law∣ful course, unless they see them thro ignorance or weakness, to abuse their Liberty and Authority in the Gospel. All the Liberties of the Churches were purchased to them by the precious Blood of the Lord Jesus, and therefore may
not the Churches give them away, nor many Churches take them out of the hands of one.Mr. Shep∣heard's & Mr. Allen's Defense of the 9 Posi∣tions, in answ. to Mr. Ball. Others express their apprehensions, in way of Caution, touching this mat∣ter, thus. Association of divers particular Chur∣ches, we hold needful, as well as the combination of Members into one Church; yet so, as there be no Schism of one from another, nor usurpation of one over another; that either one should deprive the rest of peace, by Schism, or many should deprive any one of its power by usurpation. Hence a Fraternal Consociation we acknow∣ledge. Consociation; for mutual Coun∣sel and help, to prevent, or remove, Sin, or Schism: Yet Fraternal only, to to preserve each others Power. Conso∣ciation of Churches we would have cu∣mulativè (not in words, but in deed) to strengthen the power of particular Churches: Not privativè, to take away any power, which they had from the gift of Christ before. For, as on the one side, it may seem strange, that one Church offending should have no means of Cure by the conceived power of many; so, on the other side, the danger may
appear as great, and frequently falls out, that, when many Churches are scanda∣lous, one innocent Church may be hurt by the Usurpation of all. And hence we see not, but that Fraternal Consocia∣tion is the best Medicine to heal the Wounds of both. Hereunto I shall add, that, as these god∣ly Learned Brethren speak nothing for the Classical Power of Elders, for which the Presbyterians contend, tanquam pro aris & focis; so in that Communion of Churches, which I with them look at as the Ordinance of Christ, due moderati∣on must be exercised by Neighbour Chur∣ches, that their exercising brotherly Com∣munion in testifying against such Acts in a particular Church, as they conceive to be aberrations from the Rule, be ac∣cording to Scripture-Light, with Hu∣mility; and that, 1. Held forth by them, they looking at themselves, though as Elders, yet not as Apostles, nor as infallibly assisted, or carried by the Spirit, above all possibility of erring, in their Determinations and Counsels, and therefore do not in a Ma∣sterly way impose their Determinations and Counsels upon others, but propound them in the fear of God, to be examined
by the Scripture, and received only so far, as they shall be found to agree there∣with. And, if that Church hold forth Reasons of their contrary apprehensions, let them be duly weighed, and answered convictingly; or let that Church be left at liberty, to walk according to their own light, in re propriâ, without offense, or disturbance. 2. Godly Wisdom is to be exercised in such proceedings, in making difference between Cause and Cause; which will not suffer Churches to connive at gros∣ser scandals, nor to withdraw the right∣hand of fellowship from any Church up∣on small differences in Judgement or Practice, much less, for Censuring, and holding under Censure impenitent per∣sons, when the scandalous obstinacy of delinquents is res propriâ to that Church, though some other Churches (being mis-led by their Guides, who possibly may side, more than they ought, with the delinquent, out of some secret grutch against the Elders of that Church) declare it to be their Judgment, that the party should not have been layed under that Censure, or should now be released from it. To withdraw the right-hand of fel∣lowship from a Church for such a cause,
is contrary to Rules of true Wisdom. If a Church be found in the Faith and Or∣der of the Gospel, greater matters than this will cause no breach of Communion between Churches, where brotherly Communion is exercised with true Hu∣mility and godly Wisdom. See the mo∣deration of that Affrican Synod, whereof Cyprian wrote thus to Stephanus. Caete∣rum scimus quosdam, quod semel imbiberint,Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 1. nolle deponere, nec propositum suum facilè mutare, sed salvo inter collegas pacis & con∣cordiae vinculo, quaedam propria, quae apud se semel sint usurpata, retinere. Quâ in re, nec nos cuiquam facimus aut legem damus, cum habeat in Ecclesiae administratione vo∣luntatis suae arbitrium liberum unusquis{que} praepositus, rationem actus sui Domino red∣diturus. Yet these proper practices of some Churches, differed from the Decree of that Synod, which was established, as he saith, Consensu & authoritate commu∣ni. Nor will there ever be end of brea∣ches among Churches, unless due mo∣deration, in such Cases, be exercised, that love among Churches may be main∣tained. 3. Unto these let it be added, that as the Foundation of the Communion of Churches is brotherly love, so all the
Churches should shew to any one Church, and before other Churches, the proof of their love, in not easily receiving suggesti∣ons against the proceedings of it, though from some Elder or Pastor, or Teacher of another Church, who may possibly speak against them out of envy, or ill will; much more, in not countenancing a cen∣sured Delinquent, complaining against the Church and Elders, by whom he was censured, in a disorderly tumultuous manner, as desirous to beget reproach and trouble to that Church, and Con∣tentions and Divisions among the Chur∣ches and Elders,Cyprian. lib. 1. Ep. 3. from an evil spirit of re∣venge. The Affrican Pastors were care∣ful hereof, as Cyprian notes. Cum statu∣tum sit omnibus nobis, & aequum sit pariter ac justum, ut uniuscujus{que} causa illic audia∣tur, ubi est crimen admissum, & singulis pastoribus portio egregis sit ascripta; quam regat unusquis{que} & gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino rediturus, oportet uti{que} eos quibus praesumus, non circumcurdare, nec Episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem suâ sub∣dolâ & fallaci temeritate, collidere, sed agere illic causam suam, ubi, & accusatores habere, & testes sui criminis, possint. Lastly, If the Elders and Messengers of Churches assembled in a Synod, shall
determine any thing contrary to the Rule, and prejudicial to the intireness of the Churches Power, within it self, the Church may, and ought, to refuse such Sanctions, as not being sancited by the Lord. The Communion of Churches being rightly ordered, according to what hath been said, is a sufficient Spiritual Remedy against all those inconveniences, which some think cannot be redressed, unless Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over par∣ticular Churches be established in Classes and Synods: As, if a Church fall into two Factions & Oppositions within it self, or, if there be scandalous contention be∣tween two Churches, or between the El∣dership and Brother-hood of the same Church; or, if a whole Church be under scandalous Delinquencies: I say, these and the like inconveniencies will be bet∣ter redressed, in this way, than in that of Classical Government. For, this way is grounded upon Divine Institution, so is not that: And the blessing of Christ fol∣lows and accompanies his own Instituti∣ons, not mens devices. If Ʋzzah put forth his hand to stay the Ark, his good intention could not justifie his action, but his not acting according to Gods order was his death. The Prelates had as plau∣sible
a plea for their Jurisdiction over Churches, and taking the Keyes out of their hands, viz. for Unity, Peace, and Conformity; yet the vanity of it is now manifested unto all men. Lastly, The same inconveniences may befall Classical and Synodal Assemblies, yea, and Oecu∣menical Councils, and what remedy is there for them? Not so much, as this way of Communion of Churches afford∣eth to particular Churches. Corollary 4. Then intireness of Church-Govern∣ment in a particular Congregation, in re propriâ, ought to be thankfully received, rightly improved, and faithfully preser∣ved, without violation of it, both by the Members of particular Churches, and by other Churches, and their Officers. 1. It must be thankfully received, as a blessing promised of God unto his people, whose hearts are ingaged to approach unto him, Jer. 30.21. The grant by Charter, of intireness of Government within them∣selves, unto Cities and Corporations, hath ever been highly esteemed, as an Act of special grace from the Soveraign Pow∣er. It was for the injoyment of this Pri∣viledge, with the consequents of it, that the chief Captain, in Acts 22.25,
26, 28. purchased his freedom in Rome with a great summe of money. This grant to particular Churches is advantagious to the Members of them, sundry wayes. 1. For their ease, in having their Causes heard, examined and issued, at home, without chargeable, tiresome journeys to the Classical or Synodal Assembly, to have their matters determined there. 2. For incouragement and liberty of the spirit and speech of him that is to answer before his Brethen and the Elders, who have a Member-like and Pastoral care and respect of him, whereas the presence of sundry strange faces of persons of superi∣our Rank and Quality, would not a little daunt him, which might occasion his falling in his Cause. 3. For their satis∣faction concerning the Churches proceed∣ing, where, as all circumstances can be best cleared, so more moderation may ra∣tionally be expected from their own Of∣ficers and Brethren, than from strangers, comparatively, and from such as are sub∣ject to the same censures, and the same either hath been, or may be, their own case, they know not how soon, (which are strong inducements to moderation, Exod. 23.9. Gal. 6.1.) than from a Judi∣catory of constant Judges, who think
themselves out of that danger. 4. For common edification in the Congregatio∣nal way, all may hear and be edified by their presence in Church-proceedings, Acts 5.11. This they loose, in the Pres∣byterial way, Classicall Assemblies con∣sisting only of Elders meeting and acting apart. 2. It must be rightly improved, which is then done, when Church-proceedings are orderly carried according to Christs Rules, both by the Eldership and Frater∣nity, acting the Power which Christ hath delegated to them, respectively, ac∣cording to their several interests, in the due order, and with mutual consent, ac∣cording to God. 3. It must be faithfully preserved without violation. 1. By the Members of particular Churches, submitting to the Ordinance of Christ, whereby the Church, acting according to Rule, is made under Christ, the highest Ecclesiastical Tribunal, in its own matters, 2 Cor. 8.5. without ap∣pealing to other Ecclesiastical Judicato∣ries, who have no power from Christ to dispense Church-censures, or to release men from them, Matth. 18.18. Object. What if the Brother be not sa∣tisfied in the equity of the Churches pro∣ceeding?
Ans. The Elders having declared the mind of Christ from Scripture to guide their proceedings, and the Brethren ether , or the major part, by far, judging accordingly, let him suspect his own apprehensions, fearing that Satans temptations, and his own corruptions, Pride, and self-flattery may darken and harden him, Prov. 28.14. 2. Let him attend seriously to the light held forth from Scripture, for his conviction, 2 Cor. 2.6. praying the Lord to make it effectu∣al in him. 3. Let him thankfully close with the light that doth shine unto him, and answerably judge and condemn in him∣self the evil, which that light reproveth, and follow on to know the whole mind of Christ concerning the nature and compass of his guilt, seeking unto the Elders for further help, with a self-deny∣ing spirit, that he may come up fully to the Rule. 4. If he cannot shew convict∣ingly to the Church some errours in the Elders expounding or applying the Rule to the Case, whereupon the Cen∣sure proceeded, let him fall under the Rule, or look at it as his great sin, and violation of his Covenant, which bound him to submit unto the judgement of the Church, if he finde that, through
sinful prejudice, he cannot receive the light held forth, when he hath no obje∣ction of weight against it. 2. Other Churches and the Elders of them ought to preserve the intireness of Power of every particular Church, in re propriâ, inviolate. The Law of Love and Righteousness binds every man here∣unto. One Corporation must uphold the just Rights, Liberties, and Power of another. If a man see his brothers Ox or Sheep go astray, he must in any case bring them again unto his brother, Deut. 22.1. much more if he see a Sheep of Christ go astray by sinful prejudice against the Church, he must in any case convince him of his errour, and bring him again to the Church, as the Angel returned Hagar to Sarah her Mistress, Gen. 16.8, 9. For this purpose, 1. They must not re∣ceive an accusation against an Elder (much less, against the Church and Eldership) under two or three witnesses, 1 Tim. 5.19. therefore much less, from a Delinquent under publick censure, and that in his one cause. 2. If more joyn with him attesting what he saith; they must see, 1 Whether they do it, in a way of facti∣on, siding with a censured Delinquent against the Church, or no. If yea; they
must testifie against their way, as contra∣ry to Rule, and avoid them, as disturbers of the peace of the Church, Rom. 16.17. If not; they must inquire, 1, whether they have pleaded with the Church it self, Hos. 2.2. in such manner as be∣cometh such as would approve themselves to love the Truth and Peace, Zach. 8.21. before they become accusers of the Bre∣thren unto others. 2 Whether they pro∣ceed peaceably, or tumultuously? and tu∣multuosly they do act, if they seek nor Light in the use of Means, first, at home, but refuse help that way, when it is offered them, that they may make trouble and disturbance to the Church, by spreading their complaints abroad, and those, not to some one Church, without whose help the question cannot be ended, as the Church at Antioch sent to the Church at Jerusalem, but to eight or nine Chur∣ches, some nearer, some far distant from the Church, some 40, 50, 100, 150 miles off, and that without giving notice of their purpose to the Church, or having their consent thereunto, or so much as to the stating of the question. If so, they may clearly see an evil spirit working in the business, with which, others should have no fellowship, 2 Cor. 12.20. 3 Whe∣ther
they do positively justifie the Delin∣quent in that, for which he was censured, and upon what grounds; or only declare their good Opinion of the Delinquent in some respects, and that they are not clear concerning the equity of the censure. If the latter, it is the duty of those to whom they thus speak, to convince them of the error of their way. 4 Whether they come only in a back-biting way, or are willing to speak the same things publickly before the Church, which they accuse privately. If not, they must be convinced of their sinning against common equity, Act. 25.16. 5 What the end is which they propound unto themselves in ta∣king this course? whether it be for light only? or, for the nullifying of the cen∣sure by the power of others? If the for∣mer; they cannot safely conclude any thing, alterâ parte inauditâ, remem∣bring what Solomon saith, Prov. 18.17. If the latter, they must profess, that they have no such Power, but all that they can do, is, to inform themselves from the Church, whether their report be true, or not, and to give such ad∣vise from Scripture, as the case requires, according to their judgement, exhort∣ing them in the mean space, to at∣tend
the Rule in Memberlike submissi∣on to the Power of their Church, accord∣ing to God. Quest. But suppose that the party cen∣sured think he can prove that he is wronged; is there no course to be taken for the freeing of him from a sentence that is unjust in his apprehension? Answ. If he hath held forth convin∣cing light (as he conceiveth) to the Church, to prove that he is wronged, and hath waited patiently for redress, but can find none, and therefore desireth to joyn with some other Church; he may remove his dwelling, if no other Church be in the same place, or, without that, if there be, and he may offer him∣self to their fellowship, making known to them his case. If, in other respects, they approve him, as one, whose fellow∣ship with them would be helpful, or com∣fortable to them; they will acquaint the Church, whence he came, with his de∣sire, and crave their advice, which will draw from that Church a full Narrative of his Case: Upon examination whereof these, who desire his fellowship, will labour with him, to further his repent∣ance, and his holding it forth to the
satisfaction of that offended Church, according to Rule; which being done, the Church that was offended will be reconciled to him, and forgive him, and confirm their love to him, in the Lord, and recommend him to that fellowship where he desires to settle. But, if they will not; the Church that hath thus far laboured in the business, will acquaint other neighbour-Churches with the mat∣ter, and crave their advice, who find∣ing, either that the Church did err in judgement, or that the Delinquent hath satisfied the Rule of Repentance, will signifie their apprehensions to both the Churches, and accordingly the party is, either released by the one, or received by the other, each of them preserving its Church-power in re propriâ, accord∣ing to their light, maintaining still Church-Communion, notwithstanding their different apprehensions touching this matter. 2. If the case be reducible to what is noted in the third Corollary, there you may find a sufficient Remedy prescribed, according to Congregational Principles, without his remove. 3. In some Cases, a mischief is to be
chosen, before an inconvenience, as Law∣yers speak. Better it is that the Church want a Remedy for a Case that may not happen in a mans life, than to be under the continual droppings of Classical Ju∣risdiction over them in all Cases. 4. We have formerly proved, that Classical Jurisdiction is so far from being helpful to Churches, that it frustrates Christs grant of Power to particular Churches in re propriâ. FINIS.
