D958 R29348 11077066 46274
A most Delightful HISTORY Of the famous Clothier of England, CALLED, ACK of NEWBERY. n the days of King Henry the Eeight; how e was beloved of his Mistriss above all her wealthier Sutors: what great and valiant things he did for England: and the great number of poor he daily cherished. d how (when the King sent for him) he refused (with his company) to leave the Hill of Ants to go to the King: and therefore the King went to him: which he wittily excused: with many other very pleasant passages. Written by W. S. F. C. Printed by H. B. for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane. 1684.
The most delightful Hi∣story of JACK of Newberry. IN the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, one John Winch∣comb, being an Apprentice to a rich Clothier in the town of Newberry in Barkshire, a pretty handsome Youth, his Master dyed, and left his Mistriss a widow; ho perceiving Jack to be a faithful, careful, nd trusty Servant, she put him in great trust n the House; who as carefully performed the rust reposed in him. His Mistriss having many Sutors com∣ng to her, could not fancy any: for her man ohn had stoln away her Heart. The Par∣on of Spinhome-land woo'd her, and often so∣licited with her to make her his wife, but ould not obtain her love, because he was a Clergy-man; too much (she thought) de∣oted to his Study. A rich Tanner was a econd wooer, but could not speed; for
though he was rich, yet was he too old for her young and lusty desires. A Talor was a third man, who was almost confident of her love; but all in vain, for her man John, oh! he was the man that had so wounded her heart that she could love no other man. She seeing the backwardness of John, her man (after many occasions which she gave him to wooe her) came at last, and told him plainly that she loved him, which secret she did earnestly desire him not to impart to any: but he very modestly blushing with a Rosie colour in his cheeks, not knowing how to express himself as he desired, being astonished her eat; answered: Sweet Mistriss (quoth he) I am but a Child to undertake so great a thing! it is a charge, the discharge whereof me thinks I fear to undertake: At which answer, she was something discouraged in her sute for the pre∣sent; and kissing of him, brake off discourse for that time; and night approaching, she went to Bed; but took but little rest: but either slumbering, (at the best;) or dreaming of her pretty man John. She was so trou∣bled, as if she had been wounded in a Pri∣son, and with many cogitations of her Beloved, fetched many deep sighs in that
dolesom and dark night: thinking it long e're orning came: rejoycing to see the light ap∣ar: more to embrace her dear servant, or ra∣her Master, John. She going to see Bartholomew Fair, as Women use to do, to see and be seen, took her n Jon with her: who whilst she was talk∣g with a friend, espyed him saluting a pretty aid, which made her own mouth water: and ting her lips, she left discoursing with her eighbor to go to John, to prevent his further miliarity with the maid. Afterwards she met with the Taylor her weet-heart, so neat as could be, in the air: who desiring her to drink a Cup of ine with him, was denied again and again, at by importunity she was perswaded: and  espying the Tanner, called him into the avern to them, to help to bear Charges: ttle imagining that he was a Sutor to the ame VVidow: and both of them espying he Parson go by, called him in, expecting  make him their solliciter: thus were they ll meerly drawn into Cupid's Paradice: ut when each had discovered their intents  other, they were all exceedingly perplexed, ot knowing how this Division migt e ended: At last, it was desired of te
Widow which of them she loved best: and she answered, that she loved them all; and gave them thanks for their charges; but (quoth the Parson) can you find in your heart to marry me? It is your Office to marry, quoth she, and not mine. Then (quoth the Tanner) will you make me your Husband? Truly Neighbour, quoth she, me thinks you might better be my Father, you are of great Years to marry such a young VVidow as I am. Then (quoth the Taylor) widow, it is I that must enjoy you; shall you and I be married? Yes, I hope so (quoth the widow) when we and our sweet-hearts are agreed: So desiring to take her leave of them, giving them thanks for their costs they spent on her, she arose up to go away; but they desiring a full answer from her, de∣sired her to give them better satisfaction to their Requests. If (quoth she) you will come to my House on Thursday, I will give you full satisfaction: at which time they all came; and she told them all then plainly, that she would marry none of them, for she had one nearer home, whom she loved so well, that she could not marry any other man; so they went all away very sad and discontented. Night approaching, she talked private∣ly
with her man John, wooing him to marry r; which he still through bashfulness fused: And when night approached, she cau∣d a special bed to be made for her man John  lie in; which bed was onely for special rangers to lie in, or for her husband when  was not well: and she lay her self in the xt Chamber to him, which she locked up, & pt the Key thereof her self. But when she had lain in bed an hour or wo, she began to think it very long to lye one; so she arose out of her bed, and went to  man John, shivering and shaking, and ting up his bed-cloths, he started; Who is ere, quoth he? It is I my sweet Iohn, quoth e, I am your Mistress; it is an extreme cold ight, and I, lying alone, am almost starved in  Bed: Good Iohn afford me the favour of he Nights lodging by thy side, my Iohn, I ay thee. Alas poor Mistriss, quoth he, come me lie close: Yea, yea, quoth she, ah! poor eet Iohn; oh! sweet, sweet Iohn: oh! sweet d good Iohn; but here I leave them till the ext morning. She got up very early in the morning, and ing for John her man to go abroad with er, she took him to the Church of Saint Bar∣tholomews;
and casting for the Priest of the place, she, with him perswaded Iohn that they might then be married together; which with small intreaty he was perswaded to; and s they returned home; and when they went to dinner, she made him to sit in her old husbands Chair by her self at the end of the Table; at which his old fellow-servants began to e  and before Dinner was ended, she took him about the neck and kissed him, and told her Servants that he was her Husband, and com∣manded them to give him the respects due to a Master. He also spake lovingly to them, and told them, that he would not forget that he was once their Fellow-Servant, but would deserve their respects to the uttermost of his indeavour. Thus they spent the day in loving ioyings, only some over-sight of the Workmen withal, and at night they went to Bed. This new-married Bride was the next morning visited by divers Gossips of her acquaintance, that heard of the Wedding; who spent each of them their verdict, what the event of this her hasty match would be: which Gossips did exceedingly discourage her. Oh! but (quoth she) I will take an Order
for that; for I will curb him at the first, that will make sure that he shall never crow over e. I warrant you. And indeed e began to grow as great a Gossip as any was in Newberry, and would sometimes come home very late at night; in∣much, that at last her Husband John went o bed, and locked her out; and took the Key  into his own chamber: and when the good ife saw that she was shut out of doors, she nocked very hard, ll at last her Husband looked ou at the window and bad her to go look er lodging at night, where she had been sitting ll day: Su Gossips (quoth he) as you, the age is the fite Lodging for, go to the Con∣stable and bespeak a ed of him. Oh! dear Husband, quoth she, be not so gry, I pray yo give me leave to come into my Bed, good sweet Hsband, I pray you, nd let me ot stand us in the cold, lest I ose my life thereby: After many fine words wherewith she ad intreated her Hus∣band to come down and oen the door, he came down to her, and t her in: to whom she dissemblingly pnded to have lost her Wedding Ring from off her Hand, who lo∣vingly going foth with the Candle in his hand (in his shi) looked up and down upon
the ground for it: and she the mean time step∣ping in, clapped to the door, and shut him out; whereat he was much perplexed, and knocked a long time in the cold before she would an∣swer, who at last opening the window, ha him go look a Lodging with his Constable's Wife; and asked him whether he thought it good to lye in the cold in the street: Now (qd. she) she who was even now at your mercy, hath gotten you at hers. Oh sweet Wife, quoth he, be not angry, but let me come in; I swear unto thee, that I will never shut thee forth of doors again, but thou shalt do what thou wilt and I will never meddle nor make with you whatsoever you do hereafter: where∣upon she came down and opened the door, and let him in; and there they made great pro∣testations each to other, never to affront or fall out one with the other after; and with a good Sack-posset the Covenant was agreed between them. Shortly after the King was to raise an Army of Souldiers against the Scots, who was risen against the English; and Iack of Newberry raised at his own charges an hun∣dred and fifty men; and allowed white Coats red Caps, and yellow Feathers; and led
them himself: fifty of them were valiant semen; fifty Pikes, and fifty Musque∣s; all brave Steeds, good Arms, and va∣nt men; who marching by before the ueen, Queen Katherine; she called for him,  understanding what he was, after she had  forth her hand for him to kiss, she promi∣ to acquaint the King's Majesty with his e and great service. A Song used by Jack of Newberry and his Souldiers. KIng Jamie of Scots hath raised an Army against England: t let him come, we'l thunder him back, he cannot us withstand. ck of Newbery com's, proud Scots take heed with valiant Souldiers stout; 'ho for brave England will sight with you, and never will give out. ur milk-white Coats, red Caps, and yellow Feathers declare, ur Resolution's stout and good, there Scots we will not spare.
Shortly after Jack of Newberry heard tha the King was to ride by Newberry: so he with his Servants went out into the field and finding an hill of Pismires, drew his Sword and guarded it: And the King co∣ming by, sent for him to know the reason why he guarded that place with his sword drawn, the King in person being to pass by there: wha returned answer. That he was busie▪ and could not speak with him: and the King is on Horse-back, and I am on foot, therefore (quoth he) he may the better come to me. Tell the King, that I stand here to guard the la∣borious Ants from their Eneis: which Message being brought to the King, he went to Jac of Newberry, expecting that it was done to make some jest for his pleasure: and when the King came, Jack, with ll his mn, fell on their knées, and cried, God save the King: your Sacred Majesty (quoth he) hath vanquished all mine Enemies. Now trust me, quoth the King, you are tout Souldiers to fight against Butterflies, and withstand such mighty Gyants. My dread Soveraign, quoth Jack of New∣berry, not long ago, in my conceit, I saw the most provident nation of the Ants, sum∣ned
their chief Peers to a Parliament, ich was held in the famous City of Drie∣stie, the one and thirtieth day of September: ereas by their Wisdoms I was chosen ir King: at what time also many Bills of mplaint were brought in against divers ll mbers in the Common-wealth, among om the Mole was attained of High-treason  their State, and therefore was banished for er from their quiet Kingdom: so was the ashopper and the Caterpiller: because they re not only idle, but also lived upon the la∣rs of other men: Amongst the rest the utterflie was very much misliked, but few st say any thing to him, because of his gol∣n Aparel: who, through sufference, grew  ambitious and malapert, that the poor Ant uld no sooner get an Egg into her Nest, but  would have it away, especially against Easter hich at length was misliked. This painted Ass took snuff in the nose, and embled a great many other of his own Coat,  windy Wars to root these painful peo∣e out of the Land, that he himself might  above them These were proud But∣flies, quoth the King. Whereupon I, with my men, quoth Iack, pared our selves to withstand them, till such
time as your Majesties Royal presence pu them to flight. The Song which Jack sung with his men before the King. I Have taken upon me a charge to govern these poor Ants, That they may walk at large, to gather in their wants. That they may walk mo safe, to bring home their relief: And keep that which they have from every idle Thief. But now my King is here, I bow down low my knee, For we that vaunted here are Subjects unto thee. God bless thee Royal King, and send thee long to Reign, And joy in every thing, and freedom from all pain. I, and my men, and mine, my Ants, and all we have;
ommand us, we are thine, and so the King God save. Now to return again to Jack and his ife, it fell out that she fell sick and dyed;  being buried Jack fell in love with one  his maids: and sending for her Father, know what he would give with his Daugh∣: he came to Newberry, and seeing the alth of his Daughters sweet-heart, and ister, he was astonished: for Iack had, z. one Room two hundred Looms all going. wo hundred Boys making Quills. hundred Women Carding. wo hundred Maids in another Room spin∣ning. hundred and fifty Boys picking of Wool ty Shiermen. ght Rowers. urty Dyers in the Dy-house. wenty men in a Fulling-Mill. en fat Oxen he spent every week in his house, besides, Butter, Cheese, Fish, &c. Butcher for his own house. Baker for his own house. Brewer for his own house.
Five Cooks. Six Scullion-Boys. Divers Turn-spits, &c. Sir, (quoth the old man) I wis the zee you be bominable Rich, and cham content you shall have my Daughter, and God's Blessing and mine light on you both. I vaith cham but a poor man, but I thong God cham of good exclamation among my Neighbours and they will as zoon take my vice for any thing as a richer mans: thik I will bestow you shall have with a very good will, because che hear very good commendation of you in every place; therefore thick give you twen∣ty Nobles, and a weanling Calf, and when I dye, and my Wise, you shall have the Re∣velation of my Goods. But Iack made more reckoning of the wo∣man's modestie, and virtues, than of his Fa∣thers proffer; and he married her, and made a great Wedding: and instead of receiving the old mans dowrie, he gave him twenty pounds in money; besides other good gifts. Oh my good Zon! quoth the old man, Christs benizon be with thee evermore. For to tell thee true, we had zold all our
Kine to make money for my Daughters mar∣age, and this zeven year we should not ave been able to buy any more. Notwith∣tanding we should have zold all that ever we ad, before my poor wench should have lost er marriage: I should have zold my coat from my back, and my bed from under me, before my Daughter should have gone with∣out you. I thank you good Father and Mo∣ther (quoth the Bride) and I pray God long to keep you in health: then the Bride knee∣ing down, did her duty to her Parents; who weeping for very joy, departed. Now there was one Randal Pert a Dra∣er, dwelling in Watling-street, who owed to Jack of Newberry five hundred pounds. And it happened that Jack came up to London; and as he went to his Customers, he met in the street this Randal Pert in a frock, carrying a Porter's Basket, and an old ragged Doublet, and a torn pair of Breeches, with his Hose out at Heels, and a pair of old broken slip-shooes on his feer, a Rope about his middle, and a greasie Cap on his Head, and newly come out of Prison. Now was his Wife, who before for dain∣tiness would not soul her fingers, nor turn her head aside for fear of rumpling her nem∣kinger,
yet now glad to go about and wash Bucks at the Thames side, and to be a chare∣woman; her sot hand was now hardened with scouring, and instead of Gold Kings up∣on her Lilly white fingers, her hands and fin∣gers were now filled with chaps. But when her husband espyed Jack of New∣berry his Creditor, he ran away as fast as he could, for fear of being arrested: but he sent his man after him: who seeing one pursue him, he ran the faster; and in running, here he lost one of his flip-shooes, and there ano∣ther, ever looking behind him with great fear: At last his Breeches being tyed but with one point, that with the haste he made, and the oldness thereof, brake, and his Breeches fell about his heels: and did so shackle him, that he fell down all along in the street with his Arse bare, and an old ragged shirt, he lay sweating and blowing, being quite worn out of breach: to whom the fellow came, and brought him to his Master: who took him to a Scrivener, to give him Bond for the pay∣ment of the money: and the time of the payment of the money was to be paid when the said Pert was Sheriff of London, a thing very unlikely. Well, the Scrivener made the Bond, to
be paid when Randal Pert was Sheriff of ondon, and thereunto set his hand for a Witness, and twenty persons more that ood by. And Jack of Newberry sent for a new suit Apparel for him out of Birchen-Lane, and a w shirt, and band; hat, hose, shooes, and all ings necessary, Merchant like; then he ok for him a shop in Canwick-street, and fur∣ished the same shop with a thousand pounds orth of Cloth, by which means, and other avours which he did for him, he grew in good redit again, and became very provident: and is wife turned to be the best Housewife in te Parish: and he soon got good custom, and as very provident: and increased in wealth o that he in short time became one of the best men for wealth in the Parish: and there was o much notice taken of him, that he was ¦sen Sheriff of London, and p e e undred pounds every penny: and  House in his Shrevalty: and afterwards b¦ng an Alderman of Lono, died before  me to be Lod Mayor: and left his wfe a gre Estate. Jack of Newberry, otherwise called Mast John Winchcomb, being gon very old fell sick, and after few dayes
his VVife buried him in great Pomp: and he left his VVife a great Estate, and many Legacies to Friends, and to many poor people were left by him: and to his Burial came the greatest part of the Country all thereabouts, to see the good old man laid in his Grave, where we will leave him with this Epitaph.
EPITAPH. F Newberry here lies valiant Jack, Shrouded in white, come to his end death that now hath broken his back: ho to his Country was a friend, n aid t those that labour lov'd; n help to poor, both blind, and lame, en, Women, Children, all have prov'd he succour sweet that from him came. Winchcomb adieu! God hath thy Soul, hy body lies inclosed in earth, hy works brave Histories do enroul, hy, life, thy fame, ev'n from thy birth. FINIS.
These Books following are to be Sold by William Thackeray, in Duck-Lane, neer West Smithfield. THe famous History of the Gentle-Craft The Book of Knowledge, of things un∣known: the old, and best sort. The History of Thomas of Reding. The History of the Golden Eagle. The History of the Jews, a small one. The Book of merry Riddles. Variety of Riddles and Songs. Corydons Complements. Robin the Cobler. With all sorts of Histories New or Old. There is also to be had these Books of Di∣vinity. FEnner's Sermon of Repentance A Sermon of Dives and Lazarus.
A warning piece for the slothful. These three are not above three pence a piece. The Godly Mans Gain, and Wicked Mans Woe. inners sobs, The Christians Guide. These three last are but two pence a piece. There is also two excellent Tables: One called, Christus natus est, of the Birth of Christ. The other, A Watch for a wife Mans Ob∣servation: very good, pretty, and delight∣ful things. FINIS.
