E2894 09818625 44171
I2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms At the Court at Whitehall, The Sixteenth of February, 1684. Present The Kings Most Excellent Majesty, His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark Lord Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury Lord Keeper Lord President Lord Privy-Seal Duke of Beaufort Earl of Oxford Earl of Huntingdon Earl of Bridgwater Earl of Peterborow Earl of Chesterfield Earl of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Craven Earl of Ailesbury Earl of Middleton Lord Bishop of London Lord Dartmouth Lord Godolphin Mr. Drummond Mr. Chancellor of the Exche∣quer Mr. Chancellor of the Dutchy Lord Chief Justice Jeffreys Sir Leoline Jenkins. WHereas by the late Act of Uniformity, which Establisheth the Liturgy, and Enacts, That no Form or Order of Common Prayer be openly used, other than what is prescribed, and appointed to be used in and by the said Book; It is not∣withstanding provided, That in all those Prayers, Litanies, and Collects, which do any way Relate to the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be altered and changed from time to time, and fitted to the present Occasion, according to the Direction of Lawful Authority: His Majesty was pleased this day in Council to Declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, That in all Prayers for the King, the Word CHARLES be changed into JAMES; And, that in all Prayers for the Royal Family, the Persons particularly to be Prayed for be thus Named, and Expressed; Our Gracious Queen MARY, CATHERINE the Queen Dowager, Their ROYAL HIGHNESSES, MARY Princess of Orange, and the Princess ANNE of Denmark, and all the Royal Family. And His Ma∣jesty doth straitly Charge and Command, That no Edition of the Book of Common-Prayer, be from henceforth Printed, but with these Amendments; And, that in the mean time, till Copies of such Editions may be had, all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates within this Realm, do (for the preventing of Mistakes) with the Pen, Correct and Amend all such Prayers in their Church Books, according to the foregoing Directions. And for the better Notice hereof, that this Order be forthwith Printed and Published, and sent to the several Parishes, and that the Bishops take Care, that Obedience be paid to the same accordingly within their Respective Diocesses. PHI. LLOYD. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Execellent Majesty, 1684.
