E3601 15618789 104182
An Exact and Particular ACCOUNT Of the Defeat given to the Rebels in the County of Cork, by the Lord Justice Cox, and Coll. Hastings, with 2000 of the Army and Militia? And of the Lord Lisburn's cutting off a Party of the French and Irish Horse, near Lanesborough Pass. 2. July. 1691. In a Letter from Dublin, June the 25. Licensed, July the 1st. 1691.  J. F. ACcording to my promise in my last, of the 23d, I herewith send you the Perticulars of the late Actions of the Lord Justice Cox, and Coll. Hastings, in the County of Cork; with the late Action of Dean Synge, and what other Material Actions has happened since the taking the Forts of the English Town of Athlone. Cork June 21st. Mr Justice Cox, Gover∣nour of the County of Cork, went to Inni∣kean on Wednesday last, and carried with him one of their Majesties Engineers, by whose advice he caused part of the Town to be Fortified, and placed a Garrison of the Mili∣tia, as well in the Town, as in the Castle, which being done, he went to view Dunma∣naway., which he found totally Demollished; and from thence detatcht a party of 250 of the Militia, under the command of Collonel Townsend to Bantry, where on Sunday last, they took a considerable prey of Cattle, and abundance of Plunder, Kill'd above 100 of the Rebels, and took several Armes, without any loss, except 4 Horses, which were Shot.—Collonel Hastings Governour of Cork, has Siezed upon Drumanneen a very consider∣able Post, near the Black-Water, which is now Garrisoned by a good number, both of the Army and Militia, and is about a Mile distant from Ballyelough. The Garrison at Fermoy on the 18th. made an Incursipn into the Borders of the County of Lymerick, took 120 large Cows, and some Armes, and Kill'd some of the Re∣bels.—Yesterday Collonel Hastings, with 200 of the Army, Horse and Dragoons, and 500 Militia Dragoons went to Ballynagooly with intent to joyn 3 or 400 more of the Army and Militia that were there abouts, and at Drumaneenn, and together to make an In∣cursion into the Enemies Quarters, and it happned so, that Major Culliford with 120 of Collonel Mathews's Dragoons, and 500 Militia went the Euening before to New-Market; in pursuit of 2 Troopes of Carrolls Dragoons, which he overtook, cut in pieces, took 30 of their Horses, and a prey of 200 Cows, which Encouraged him to go 67 Miles further to Slevelogher. But the Rebels having lald an Ambush of 6 or 700 Men, at his re∣turn fell upon him, and though he had the goog luck to kill an Officer and 60 of the Enemy, yet being overpowered by their numbers he was forced to retreat, and upon Examination, we find about 70 Men mis∣sing, whereof we since find 13 are Prisoners, 43 got to the Castle of Drumagh, near Glanturk (which they maintain and have there the 30 Horses, which they took from the Enemy,)  we hope the other 14 Men are safe, and will speedily return.—Coll. Hastings, upon the News thereof, Marcht to favour their Re∣treat, and cme time enough to kill an Offi∣cer, and 50 of the Rebels.—This Morning Collonel Hastings Marched from Ballinagooly, to relieve the aforesaid Castle, he had with him 1003 Men: So we doubt not to have a good account of the Enemy before he returns. Kildare, June 23d. Dr. Synge, our Dean, marched the other day at the Head of Capt. Baggot's Doons, and joyn'd with Capt. White, and Capt.  near the Bogg, at Edenaerry whe  Partys of Rebels, the Horse being posted, the Foot fom the News, went into the Bogg on the side, those of Kil∣mege from theirs  Ka∣thangan, by agreement they were all at their Posts by the Break of Day: The Wicklow Men, commanded by Lieut. Hamiltn, and Ensign Hawkshead, happened first to fall upon them, in number about 60, whom they attackt and made fly, in their flight they divided into se∣veral Parties, and Hamilton having before put his Men into three Divisions, each of them met with a Party of the Rogues. Hamilton at first firing kill'd 13 on the spot, and then in the Pursuit, drove them on Capt. Chabe∣nor's Horse, who gave them a warm reception, and beat them back into the Bogg, killing 3, where Hamilton receiv'd them again, and kill'd 5 more, they then scoured to that side of the Bogg where Dean Synge, and Capt. Baggot's Dragoons were, thinking it open, but the Dragoons soon dismounted, which caused the Rebels to make off again into the Bogg, but met with one Corporal Howard, and 20 of Hamilton's Party, who soon killed 8 more, (4 of them with his own hand) the Rebels made all possible haste to get from these warm Salutations, and the Corporal still pursued them towards Clonbullock, where they met with one Mr. James Purefoy, with half a do∣zen Horse from Ballylaoken, who killed 3 more. The remainder of the Party thus broke, and shattered, got into the thick Woods, into which our Men followed them, but could not find them: In all these Actions, every Man shewed his diligence and readi∣ness, especially Dean Synge, Lieutenant Ha∣milton, and his Ensign Hawkshead. From the Camp at Athlone, on the Brinks of the Shannon. The Lord Lisburn, being ordered by the Gener for Lanes∣borough; he marched from the Camp on Tuesday Night, with 2000 detatched Foot, and 500 Horse and Dragoons; and in the way, near that place, his advanc'd Parties met with a de∣tach'd Party of the Enemy, consisting of above 100 of their best Horse, Commanded by a French Lieutenant Collonel. Our Men attack'd them, but on the first Firing they fled, and, not∣withstanding all that the French Officer could do, they could not be perswaded to ralley, our Men being well Hors'd, pursuing them close, many of them, for haste, rode into the River, and were Drown'd; several others our Men kill'd in the pursuit as well as at their first Firing. London, Printed by W. Bonny, in Little-Britain, 1691.
