F427 12131049 54712
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL, From the first Ages of the World, to the late great REVOLUTION, un∣der King JOHN IV. in the Year MDCXL. Written in Spanish, By Emanuel de Faria y Sousa, Knight of the Order of CHRIST. Translated, and Continued down to this present Year, 1698. By Capt. JOHN STEVENS. LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers and Abel Roper, in Fleet-street; J. Harris and J. Nicholson, in Little-Britain; T. Newborough, in St. Paul's Church-Yard; and T▪ Cockerill, in Pater-Noster-Row, MDCXCVIII.
TO RICHARD MINSHULL, OF BOURTON, In the COUNTY of BUCKS, Esq SIR, AMidst that great Variety of Read∣ing, wherewith Learned Men have furnished the World, to the end that each Person may be provided of a Subject suitable to his Genius, there is none so universally pleasing, or, indeed,
more profitable than History. It is a ge∣neral sort of Learning, fitted for all Ca∣pacities; the Meanest are-not below, nor the Greatest above it, because it contains nothing so abstruse, that may not be easi∣ly comprehended; nor any thing so tri∣vial, that may not be worth observing. All Arts and Sciences are purchased by much Study and Labour; and, even so, they are not attained in any Perfection, but by those whom Nature has particu∣larly moulded to receive such an Impres∣sion. History alone delights at once, and instructs; it informs, without perplexing the Understanding; it improves, without burthening the Memory; it rectifies, with∣out thwarting the Will; and, in short, it leads away our Affections, without mis∣guiding them. The Advantages we reap by it are inestimable, in regard we re∣ceive a perfect Knowledge of what was before us; and are thereby enabled to make a Judgment of what will be after us: For, as the Wise Man, so many Ages since, said, There was nothing new under the Sun; so may we believe there neither is in our Times, nor will be in those to come: For the Lives and Actions of Men are only a continued Repetition of those that preceded them; because all this
inferiour World is but a perpetual Conca∣tenation of the self-same Revolutions, how∣ever surprizingly disguized in the Dress and Methods. Now, to know what pas∣sed since the Creation, and thence judi∣ciously to inferr what is likely to ensue till the final Consummation; and this not only in one City or Kingdom, but through∣out the vast Circumference of the Uni∣verse, is a sort of Knowledge that appears to be somewhat more than Humane; or rather, not far removed from Divine. It is a Knowledge so important, that God himself did not disdain, for our Benefit, to fill up the greatest part of his Sacred Volume with History, whereof he himself was the Compiler. God himself it was, that, through the Mouths of the Prophets, transmitted down to us the History of the Creation, and Restauration of Mankind, the Genealogy of the first Patriarchs, the Acts of the Children of Israel, the Lives of their Judges and Kings, and all that is Historical in Holy Writ. Nay, to come nearer; What are the Four Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles, but the History of our Blessed Saviour, and those his glorious Followers. Thus the Prophets and Evangelists seem to authorize and recommend History, they themselves be∣ing
Sacred Historians. Nor is it only on this Religious Foundation, that its Credit is supported: To omit many things that might be urged to testifie its great Va∣lue, let us only consider whence it is that we have the Knowledge of our Ori∣ginal, and what it is that has eternized the Memory of Great and Worthy Per∣sons; and we shall find, it is all due to History alone. To this also must those who now live, and are ambitious of per∣petuating their Memory, owe the Trans∣mitting of their Names and Merits to Posterity. To this Kings and Princes are beholding, for the rare Examples it fur∣nishes them with of their Illustrious Pre∣decessors; thereby stirring up their Minds to imitate their Heroick Actions, and be∣come Partakers of their lasting Praises. To this, States-men are obliged, for the politick Presidents it affords them to go∣vern themselves by in all extraordinary Exigencies of State. To this, all accom∣plished Persons stand indebted for the Or∣nament of their Discourse, and for the perfecting them in the true Knowledge of the World. And, to conclude, From this, the Generality of Mankind is furnished with Variety of Instances exciting to Ver∣tue, and deterring from Vice. But, though
too much cannot be said upon so deser∣ving a Subject, let this suffice, since it is not to inform, but to obtain a favourable Acceptance, that so much has been said. If then, Sir, the Dignity and Value of History be such as I have represent∣ed, well may it merit an Honourable Pa∣tronage from Persons of Worth. Empty Titles are not the Worth I mean; those too often are bestowed upon the vilest of Men, and even for submitting to the most infamous of Crimes. That is true Worth, which, being derived from Ho∣nourable Ancestors, though without the Addition of gaudy Epithets, is preserved unblemished, and without Stain. To ascend to those the World calls Honours, such as Lordships, Earldoms and Dukedoms, by in∣direct, scandalous and unjust Means, is ra∣her to descend: To embrace them, offered under those Circumstances, is the Act of an abject, rather than a noble Spirit; and to aim at, and aspire to them through those Means, rather betokens a sordid Pride, than a generous Ambition. Such Patrons are neither capable of Receiving or Communicating Honour; their Names,
in History, are branded with Infamy, not to be covered by all the Sycophant Addresses and Flatteries of a Dedication: And even the Work which seeks Shelter under them, sucks in the Infection of their poysonous Shadow. Malice may, perhaps, endeavour so to pervert my Words, as if they implied a Reflection up∣on Great and Honourable Persons; but it is plain, only Malice can so mis-inter∣pret my Meaning, as to force it to such an invidious Sense. Those who are tru∣ly Noble, cannot suffer in the Character of such as only mimick their Grandeur; and they alone will find themselves af∣fected, whose Consciences shall accuse them of having aspired to a Counter∣feit Nobility, through mean and sordid Practices. These, Sir, are the Men, whose Names I most abhor to prefix to my Labours; from them I fly to your Protection, as to one whom Envy it self cannot asperse with Want of real Honour, or with af∣fecting that which is not such. If Illu∣strious Birth and Parentage be Honour, yours is too well known, to be capable of receiving any Addition by any thing my Pen can express in its behalf. If a
plentiful Fortune be the Support and Or∣nament of Honour, you have received it from your Ancestors, by a Legal Inheri∣tance; when others, to raise their Fami∣lies, found Estates upon Extortion, Fraud and Oppression. But, above all, If Generous Actions and Vertuous Principles be true Honour, none that knows you, is igno∣rant, how great a Share you possess. Nor would I pass by this so material a Point, without enlarging upon it, but that it will not suit with your Mode∣sty, to hear your own, though just, Commendations: Nor will the Malice and Virulency of our Times bear with the Mention of solid and real Praises. What you are, and what you merit, nei∣ther is, nor will be unknown; it may prove the Subject of an abler Pen, when those who know, shall see a fit Time to recommend your Memory to Poste∣rity. All that remains, Sir, is, to beg a fa∣vourable Acceptance of the Tender I make. It is the entire History of a King∣dom, from its first Plantation, to this present Time. The Original was dedica∣ted to a King: The Translation has not, I hope, so much degenerated, but it may
be worthy of you. If you think it so, I have gained my Point; and shall reap a singular Satisfaction, if it gives you any. I am, SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, JOHN STEVENS.
THE PREFACE▪ POrtugal, though a Kingdom of but a small Extent, and which for these latter Years, has not furnished us with any great sub∣ject of History; yet in past Ages, it did so largely extend its Dominions, and raised such admiration throughout Europe, by its wonder∣ful Discoveries and stupendious Conquests, that it is much to be admired, all its past Glories should be Buried under its present obscurity. Nor is it less to be wondred at, that England, which so lately received from thence a Queen, yet living, should know so little either of her Country, or Progenitors: This, I say, in re∣gard, that till now there has not appeared abroad in the English Tongue any History of that once so famous Kingdom, unless we will reckon as such some small fragments which at several times have crept into the World, and which seem ra∣ther to stir up our curiosity to know, who those
People were, than any ways to satisfy our desire of Knowledge. This fault I conceive must be chiefly imputed to the Portuguese themselves, whose care it ought to have been to deliver to Posterity and Foreigners their own honourable Actions, so methodized, that they might de∣light in seeing them together reduced into the form of a compleat History. But they, though furnishing so much matter for Authors to em∣ploy their Pens, were yet supinely negligent in duly recording and publishing of it. It is true, they had many Writers, who snatched their Actions from utter oblivion, by leaving that piece-meal which ought to have been reduced in∣to one Work; but this was a labour most Men were averse to, as believing it above their strength, because those Writings were partly so voluminous, that it required almost a Man's Age to reduce them to a less compass, and part∣ly so scattered abroad in sundry parts of the Kingdom, that they despaired of ever being a∣ble to bring them together. Emanuel de Faria y Sousa, our Author, was the first that I can find ever undertook to digest and publish to the World, the compleat History of his Country, and give a perfect ac∣count of the Actions of his Countrymen in all parts of the World. He not only undertook, but performed it with general applause, not only of the Portuguese who are the subject of his great Enterprize, but even of the Spaniards, in whose Language he Wrote. This his labour
was not finished till the Year 1640. and appear∣ed not in publick till many Years after. He has observed a strict method of History, without running out into endless Digressions, which only serve to swell Volumes, and are no way material to the subject in hand. Being a Portuguese, I cannot affirm him to be altogether impartial, for there is no Man whom the love of his Na∣tive Country does not a little sway, yet this can be no exception against him, because, if such, all History would be lyable to the same censure; and besides he was a Man that pro∣posed to himself no interest in flattering the great ones, living always a private retired life, which will plainly appear in that he spares not often to expose the Vices and Enormities of no∣table Persons for the sake of their Posterity, and no where extols any, though never so migh∣ty for the hope of pleasing their descendants. But to be short, let the History speak for it self, for my commendation, as being a party too much concerned in it, cannot add much to its Reputation, and yet this I must say, that I can∣not at all doubt of its meeting applause, because having run through the Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, with a general esteem in its original Language, I cannot be perswaded that the Transla∣tion can have so much detracted from its first value, as to render it unacceptable to the judi∣cious lovers of this sort of Learning. Thus much may suffice as to the History in General, but to descend to particulars, The
first Book contains all that hapned in Portugal, from the time it was first peopled by Tubal, the Grandson of Noah, till the time of the fa∣mous Viriatus. The second begins with Viriatus, and ends at the Birth of Saviour. The third reaches from the Birth of our Saviour till the Conquest of Spain by the Moors▪ The fourth from the Moorish Conquest, till the erecting of Portugal into a particular Kingdom, under its first King, Alonso the First, or rather his Fa∣ther Count Henry. The fifth from the said Count Henry, till King Sancho the second. The sixth from him till King Ferdinand inclu∣sive. The seventh from King John the First, to King John the Second. The eighth from King Emanuel, till Henry the King and Car∣dinal, and the Governours left by him at his Death. The ninth Book has the lives of the three Philips Kings of Spain and Portugal, till the Year 1640. where the Author concludes, and the Supplement begins. Having given this short account of the main History, and named the Supplement, I must not omit to say somewhat in relation to it. Ema∣nual de Faria having concluded, as has been said, just at the Year 1640. there ensued that very Year the great Revolution, in which the Portuguese cast off the Dominion of the Spa∣niards, and set up a King of their own. This mighty work was in a manner done in a day, all places submitting to the new King, and expell∣ing the Spaniards with such success as is scarce
credible, but that the thing is still fresh in the memory of many persons▪ living. However, though the Portuguese in so short a time had asserted their Liberty, and cast off the Foreign Yoak; yet the consequences of so great an En∣terprise, were a continual War for the space of almost Twenty Eight Years. Now this War is the principal subject of the Supplement, and indeed a matter well worthy to be known, as a most material Transaction of this Age. Being a thing so remarkable and near our times, I have been very particular in it, and therefore given an exact account of the Transactions of every Year apart. I have not been sparing of any labour in perusing such Authors as have writ of it, and extracting from them as much as my intended Brevity would permit, and tho' I designed to have been much shorter, the va∣riety of accidents is such, that it has obliged me to run it out to a much greater bulk than at first I designed. Neither have I wanted infor∣mation in many particulars touched in this Sup∣plement, from Persons who were present and Eye∣witnesses, to the Actions therein related. Nay one of my Authors, viz. the Count de Ericeyra, who has handled this subject very largely, was not only a Commander in the Army, but also a Councellor of State, and therefore a most fit Man to give an account as well of the Warlike Exploits in the Field, as of the private Trans∣actions at Court. But now to come to the last part of all, which I call the Conclusion of the History, it is so distinguished from the rest of
the Supplement, in regard that therein we look back into several Years before treated of. This, as is there said, was so ordered to avoid in∣terrupting the series of the War, with the re∣lation of Factions and Animosities at Court. And the Councels and Practises which tended to that extraordinary change, which was made in the Government, in the imprisoning and con∣fining a King for many Years, being matters meriting a special observation, I thought it better to lay the whole series of them together, so that they may appear at one view, than to interrupt them with other Narrations. Monarchies as all other wordly things have their rise and fall, and consequently those which have once been glorious, ought to merit our e∣steem for what they were, no less than those which are now great, are admired for what they are. It is no disgrace to a famous General, that he is grown old and worn out with labours; nor ought it to lessen our esteem for a Kingdom, because we see it sunk under the too great Bur∣then of its undertakings. This has hapned to Portugal, which being of its self but a small spot of Ground, yet adventured, and that with success, to spread its Conquests into the four parts of the World, to build Cities and Forts among People before unknown to the Europeans, to traffick among Rude and Barbarous Nations, to engage Multitudes, not of naked Indians, but such as had the use of all sorts of Fire-arms, to Preach the Gospel to inhuman Infidels, who
had never heard the sacred Name of Christ, and in fine, to People the vast Ocean, if I may so call it, with their Fleets, to pierce through dangers of unknown Seas, and to discover to us the course of the Sun, by tracing his Carrier round this Terrestrial Globe. These are the mighty Actions, which gained Portugal that renown it stood possessed of, and these very ex∣ploits have helped to sink it into that obscuri∣ty, which now in a manner hides it from us. The greatness of the attempts gained them re∣nown, but their own and their Neighbours boundless avarice proved the bane of all their Glories. Their own, because being but so small a People, they yet set no limits to their desires, but rather stretched forth their greedy hands to catch at all the Riches of the East, and turn them to their peculiar use, without considering how much easier it has always been found to ac∣quire much, than to preserve what is so unrea∣sonably acquired. It was their Neighbours a∣varice, as I said, that hastned their ruin, be∣cause there was scarce a nation of any considera∣tion in Europe, which did not strive to pluck a Feather from them, and to gain footing, where such mighty prospect of profit appeared; and a∣bove all, the Dutch have been the Cormorants that have devoured their Lands, their Metals, and their Spice. Such was the downfall of the Portuguese Nation, raised by their Ambition and Valour to the highest pitch of Honour, and cast down by the Covetousness and Envy of their Neighbours. Nor has the late War, which in∣volved
the greatest part of Europe, contribu∣ted less to the obscuring of their Name, for all Mankind being wholly taken up with the thoughts of those that were active, had not l'easure to cast an Eye upon a People, that lay happily obscu∣red under the Blessed cloud of Peace. Yet tho' the calm they have of late enjoyed, may have put them by the Honour of any fresh martial Atchievments, an Honour it is their greatest felicity to want; nevertheless their more glori∣ous former Exploits are not worthy to be buried in Oblivion. The Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, have long since perished, and still we read their Actions with Delight and Admiration. The Kingdoms of the Parthians, the Goths, the Huns, and o∣ther barbarous Nations, are now no more, and still the remembrance of their Valour, their Victories, and their success is the subject of ma∣ny Volumes. Portugal still stands an indepen∣dent Monarchy, and though but the skeleton of what it was, still its former Glories merit to be Recorded, either for what that Kingdom then was, or for what it may possibly be a∣gain. But it is high time I look about for fear of transgressing in too long a Preface. Hitherto something has been said concerning the Author, concerning his Works, and concerning the King∣dom he treats of. What now remains is to re∣move some objections which may be raised by such as would have all Histories as infallible
as the Holy Scripture, both as to Time and Actions: This is what all Men may wish, but none ever yet could attain to. He that would read no History, in which there is a fault, may resolve to spare his Eyes, or apply them to some other study. The first thing I find in this Book, which may be carped at, is the account of the first planting this Kingdom, and the succeeding race of Kings, till the coming in of the Cartha∣ginians. Nothing more can be said in defence hereof, but that all Antiquity at such a distance is obscure, every Nation has laboured to de∣duce it self from the nearest time to the Flood it could; and what is most; even the Ancient Jo∣sephus writes, that Jobel or Tubal, the Grandson of Noah, came into Spain, and other Greek and Latin Authors make mention of Spa∣nish Kings here named; therefore in such a mist of Antiquity, it may be reckoned a great Happiness, that such lights as these can be found to lead us to any part of it that we may rely upon. The next objection will be against many passages of somewhat a latter date; as for example, the strange life of Abidis, the coming of Nebuchadnezer into Spain, and several o∣ther things very incredible to those who have not heard of them before. The answer is, That these things, though strange to us are not at all impossible, that they are left to us upon credit of very Authentick Authors, and that if in them there be any thing fabulous, yet that must not blast the Reputation of this History, no more than the English Chronicle ought to be
wholly condemned for the far fetcht History of Brutus and his Trojans, or Livy for his Poe∣tical Noursery of Romulus and Remus by a Wolf. What follows till the Birth of our Sa∣viour, and some time after, will not be liable to much censure, by reason there is little in it, but what has been delivered by Roman Wri∣ters, who have for the most part passed current in the World; or, if any of them have not, it is no way the Business of this work to vindicate them. After the first Preaching of the Gospel, we shall here and there meet with some account of Miracles wrought, which perhaps, may not sute with all Palates. Most Christians do al∣low, that the first spreading of Christianity, was wrought with the help of stupendious Wonders, God so ordaining it for the convincing of the hard∣ned Painyms, who being carnally Educated, could never be brought to comprehend the sacred Doctrine of Christ, unless they had been convin∣ced by the working of some supernatural Opera∣tions. Most Christians, I say, do allow of this at least in the Infancy of Christianity, and these I believe will not much reflect upon the credit of such as they shall here meet withal; and for those pretended Christians, who cry down all that is not suitable to their own Enthusiastick Notions, it is not material whether they give credit to these things or not, since many of them have had the prophane Impudence with sacrile∣gious Tongues and Pens, to endeavour to abo∣lish the use of the Lord's Prayer and Creed; and it is no discredit for a Christian Author to be
disesteemed by those who made so little account of Christ himself, and his Apostles. However, I do not urge this to oblige the believing of all such miraculous Relations, as shall occur in this History; it will appear, I am not over-fond of them my self. Doubtless in all parts of the World, God permitted Miracles to be wrought for his own Glory, and for the Salvation of Souls, but whether the same, or in the same manner, as they are here related, is left to e∣very one to believe or dis-believe at his plea∣sure. To proceed, there follows for some hun∣dreds of years, after the Redemption of Man, a most obscure and uncertain account of what hapned not only in Portugal, but throughout all Spain. From the total Conquest made by Augustus, till the coming of the Barbarous Goths, Suevians, Vandals, Alans, and the rest, there was for the most part a continual Peace throughout Spain, which being, during that time, a Province subject to the Empire, either yielded no matter worth the Writing, or else wanted Writers to transmit it to Posteri∣ty. The barbarous Nations above mentioned, were so far from the thoughts of recording their own Acts, that their greatest care was to root out and destroy all Learning and Civility; for which reason, their History is transmitted to us so interrupted and imperfect, that scarce any Connection can be found in it. But when these Savage People by the receiving of Chri∣stianity had been somewhat Civilized, and it might have been hoped the Clouds of ignorance
would have been dispersed, then their griev∣ous Sins called upon them a heavy Judgment from Africk, which was an inundation of Moors, who in the space of eight Months, o∣verran all Spain, destroying not only Books, but all Monuments of Antiquity that were then remaining, and driving the miserable Christians into Dens and Caves upon the Moun∣tains; whence afterwards issuing out, they had so much continual employment for the Sword, that none had time to perpetuate with the Pen, what the Sword performed. Hence followed such a profound ignorance in this King∣dom of Portugal, the perpetual Wars ta∣king away all thoughts of Learning, that for many Years after it had Kings of its own, yet it wanted Writers to perpetuate their Me∣mory. These are in short the defects of this Hi∣story, if they may be termed such, since as we have said before, there is none perfect in the World, and those I think are sufficiently an∣swered to satisfy such reasonable persons as will not expect impossibilities. Of the Supplement it will be needless to add more than has been already said, unless it be a word touching the conclusion of it, and in relation to the account there given, of the hard usage of the unfor∣tunate King Alphonso. Yet because I think, as much has been said there, as is requisite to justify what I have Written, I will not tire the Reader's patience, only once for all, assure
him, that nothing has been there Writ by me for Favour or Affection, since I may rather ex∣pect to be condemned than rewarded for any thing that seems to vindicate that unhapy Prince. I must confess, I could not without Concern, read a Book published here in the Year 1677. and Entituled, The Portugal History: Or, a Relation of the Troubles that hapned in the Court of Portugal in the Years 1667. and 1668. For in that Treatise, I find King Alphonso treated in so cruel a manner, that it would afflict the hardest Heart that has any remorse or consideration for the Majesty of Kings. It was not the im∣prisoning and dethroning of that poor Prince, which was the hardest part of his Misfortunes; this Book I mentioned, and others like it, have yet gone farther, by blasting his Memory to po∣sterity, and representing of him as a Monster, rather than a Man. These enormities I have laboured the best I could, to rectify by giving the truest Character of that Prince I could, and the most impartial account of his Misfor∣tunes. In this part I have made use of o∣ther impartial Authors, and also of authen∣tick informations, from such persons as knew that King, and were Witnesses to the whole contrivance of his Deposition and Imprison∣ment. Thus much may suffice to inform, not to pre∣possess the Reader. All Books that appear in publick are exposed to Censure, and few or
none escape it, even the best are not exempted, and therefore I cannot hope this should. But let it take its Chance, there are sundry sorts of tasts among Men, what one likes, another loaths; and even so it falls out in Books, some Men extoll, and others cry them down; this cannot be so unfortunate, as not to please some body. Those who like it, will have their re∣ward in pleasing themselves, and such as are disgusted with it, will have no recompence for their Dissatisfaction.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. The First BOOK. CHAP. I. Of the Dispersion of the People after the Deluge. The Coming of Tubal into Spain: His Life, Death and Burial. The Succession of Iberus, Jubalda, Brigus, Tagus, Gerion, and his Sons. AFter the World had suffered the just Punish∣ment of its Guilt in the Universal Deluge,Noah's Flood. the Wrath of Heaven being appeased, and the Elements restored to their first Harmony, the Ark that for the space of a Year had preserved in its Boels the Hopes of the Propagation of Human Kind vast Ocean of the over-flowed Earth, at length on the top of the famous Mount Ararat, in Arme∣ni Noah coming out, offered Sacrifice to GOD, to in∣clie him to bestow new Bounties and Mercies upon him. Hving received a Promise, he descended from that Heighth, to a Plain called Sennaar, at that time
covered with Carcases; in horrid Scene of Humane Vanity. Those few Restorers of Mankind, and small Remnant of that wonderful Desolation, cleansed the Place, and laid the Foundation of the first City in the World, after its Destruction. That it was called Saga Albina (as the Rabbies will have it, whom some learn∣ed Authors follow) is very uncertain, as are all other Things depending on Humane Faith, which is very fallible, though depending on the Credit of that very Age; much more, when delivered so long after. The Infallible, as being Divine, Historian clears this Doubt, when he calls it Babel; for this Name belonged to the City before the Erecting of the Tower, which was no more than a part of the other. It is no less uncertain that Araxa, a Daughter of Noah, (according to the same Authors) remained as Sovereign of that City; when the Inhabitants, being grown too numerous, were ob∣liged to divide, and spread themselves farther about the Earth. 2. It was not so much their Multitude that obliged them to separate,W the Of- of Noah dispersed. as the Discord that began to grow among them; and even their Vices; for they all ra∣ther chose to follow the Example of their wicked An∣cestors, who had suffered, than to take Warning by their Punishment. Even the Memory of that Chastise∣ment, instead of reclaiming, served only to make them the more guilty: For, after having begged and obtain∣ed Mercy from God, they proudly attempted to raise Works against Heaven, and brave his Omnipotence. They had the Presumption to believe they could secure themselves against another Deluge, without the Assis∣tance of God: And whereas the surest Fence Mortals have against the just Indignation of the Almighty, is, his Mercy, when humbly sued for; yet they began that so famous Tower; which, as it was a Work prodigious for Men in that Infancy of their Reparation, so it ro∣ved so meer a Nothing to GOD, that He made  of no other Engines to destroy it, but the Tongues o the Builders. Hence, many Ages after, sprang that Greek Fable, Of the Giants destroyed with Lightning, for mpt∣ing to climb up to Heaven by laying Mountains upon Moun∣tains. Thus the most favoured Part of the Creation in Heaven and on Earth, both Men and Angels, gave themselves up to Pride and Rebellion.
3. Nimrod,The Tower of Babel built. Grandson to the wicked Cham, was the Founder of this fond Structure, which perished before it could be finished. Wherefore, finding now, that GOD needed no other Power against the Machinations of Men, but themselves; and Discord still increasing more than the People, which yet multiplied to Excess, Life being granted for so long a Term of Years; they con∣cluded there was no Way to escape the Hand of GOD, without they could find out Means to avoid one ano∣ther; the greatest Grievance being then, to tolerate themselves. This made them resolve to spread them∣selves farther than the narrow Bounds of the adjacent Provinces, to seek the remote Parts of the Earth, and commit themselves to the Sea, in Vessels made after the Pattern of the Ark. So they marched into distant Coun∣tries, and touched remote Shores; still stretching far∣ther and farther, till they had filled the Circumference of this Terrestrial Globe. The Heads of this first Trans∣migration were, the Sons of our Second Father, Sem, Cham and Japhet. Some say, Asia, Africk and Europe were their three Portions, which were called the Three Parts of the World, till Experience taught us they were but one of the two Continents which divide this Lower World, and may seem to have been divided into three Parts, in respect to them three. 4. After these three first Universal Planters had sepa∣rated themselves, and inhabited the nearer Regions, the Multitude still increasing, their Children thought of sub-dividing, and travelling to find out some remoter Habitations, where every Head of a Family might erect himself a Sovereignty.Tubal lands in Portugal. Among these, Tubal, the fifth Son of Japhet, sailing the Mediterranean, passed out of the Mouth of the Streight; and leaving the Cape formerly called Promontorium Sacrum, now Cape St. Vincent, behind, landed in the most Western Part of Europe; and being invited by the Pleasantness of the Soil, and Sereneness of the Air, founded on the Edge of the Sea, not far from the Mouth of Tagus, the City Setubal. Other Countries pretend he first built Cities among them; I will not dispute it with them, so I be allowed he came hither. This happen'd about the Year of the World (not to be too precise in such dark Anti∣uities) 1800, about 150 Years after the Deluge, and 070 before Christ; and, till the time that the Divine
WORD was made Flesh, we will reckon thus, dimi∣nishing still the Years. 5. These first Antiquities to most Men seem fabu∣lous, and therefore I will lightly run them over, till those Times that afford us more Light of History; there being no solid Grounds to fix the Credit of what passed before the Time of the Romans and Carthagi∣nians. Only, as for the first Peopling of Spain, by Tu∣bal, we have the Authority of Josephus; who says, That of Jobel came the Jobeli, afterwards called Iberi, Celtiberi and Spaniards. 6. The first Form of Government, as the most per∣fect, was Monarchical; and that not confined, or re∣strained, as, since, the Insolence of Subjects has made it; but absolute. There were no Laws to bind the So∣vereign, or People; the Will of the Monarch was po∣sitive Law. Princes at first studied rather how to main∣tain,Tubal the first King of Spain. than enlarge their Dominions. In this manner Tubal governed Spain the Term of an Hundred Years, and then gave them a Form of Law, or rather Advice, in Verse, to be transmitted to Posterity. He also settled a Form of Divine Worship; as knowing, that The Fear of GOD is the Beginning of Wisdom. Tubal having reigned 155 Years,2009. died, and was buried in that farther Part of Spain, which, in respect to his Ashes, was called Promontorium Sacrum; and which, for many Ages, the Natives thought it profane to tread: And this Name continued, till the first King of Portugul, Don Alfonso Enriquez, changed it to that of Cape St. Vincent. 7. By the Death of Tubal,Iberus the second King the Monarchy of Spain devolved upon his Son Iberus; of whom, some say, the River Ebro took Name; and Spain, that of Iberia. He invented the Art of Fishing, reigned 37 Years, and died in the Year 1972.1972. before Christ. Observe al∣ways, that the Year one died, the other commenced his Reign. 8. Jubelus,Jubelus the third King. Jubalda, or Idubeda, Son and Successor to Iberus, spent most of his time in the Study of Astrology, or Natural Magick, and ended his Days, having reign∣ed 64 Years. 9. Upon the Death of his Father,1907. Brigus took upon him the Sovereignty,Brigus the fourth King who built many Towns and For∣tresses which still preserve his Name, as appears in Laco∣briga, Conimbriga, Medobriga, Brigancia, and others.
From his erecting so many Castles, it is supposed Castile still retains a Castle for its Arms.1875. He reigned 32 Years. 10. Tagus succeeded his Father Brigus,Tagus the fifth King. and bent all his Cares to the extending and improving his Domini∣ons. Hence he was Sirnamed Orma, which signifies a Building, or Monument. From him the River Tagus took its Name, and in his time the Portuguese began to stretch themselves through the yet uninhabited Coun∣try, and to People and till many at that time waste Moun∣tains and Valleys. His Reign lasted 29, or 30 Years. 11. His Successor was Betus,Betus the sixth King. which signifies Happy or Fortunate. Of him Spain was called Betica, which Name is still continued to the Province of Andaluzia, and in the famous River Betis. The Multitude being now greater than Portugal could bear, they spread them∣selves into Andaluzia, where Betus founded several Towns, the Inhabitants whereof were called Betuli, or Bastuli. Till this time the Portuguese acknowledged one only God, without worshiping Idols, or following other Superstitions, which then were rife in other parts of the World. 12. This was the happy Estate of Lusitania,Gerion cms into Portugal. when a wicked and vicious Man came out of Africk into Spain, his Name was Gerion, which, in the Chaldean Tongue, signifies a Stranger; and with him came o∣thers.1830. He durst not at first enter Lusitania, but fix'd his Abode near it in the Island Erithrea, Ernea, or Junonia, lying in the Western Sea, which in the Year of Grace 580. overflowed it. The Piece of Land called Erithrea (which Name fell afterwards to the Island of Cadiz) af∣forded such rank Pasture, that the People were obliged at certain times to bleed the Cattle, lest they should die being overflowed with Blood. Gerion passing over from, thence to the Continent, began to commit Violences, carrying away some Cattle, which the Portuguese, un∣skilled in Arms, had no way to prevent, but by remo∣ving their Habitations. He growing bolder, commit∣ted so many Robberies, till he was forced to enlarge his Territory to contain his Flocks, which, in the Infancy of the World, was the greatest Treasure. But being taken with the Delightfulness of the Island, he only watched the Death of Betus, which happened the 31th Year of his Reign.
13. Gerion lost not the Opportunity he had wished for,Gerion be∣comes K. of Portugal. but immediately, upon the Death of Betus, passing over into Portugal, and bountifully bestowing upon the Natives what he had got by his Robberies, so far gained upon them, that they suffered him to assume the Title of King.He introdu∣ces Idola∣try. He, to establish his Sovereignty, introduced a new Superstition and Sacrifice never before known to the People; and they, looking upon him as more than Man, took him for their Legislator. All other parts of Spain followed the Example of the Portuguese, and received him as their Sovereign. Of him it is thought the City Girena took its Name. But he having usurped the Crown, held it like a Tyrant; and the People, feel∣ing the Oppression, wished, but knew not how, to get rid of their unsupportable new Lord. 14. The People of Andaluzia meditating how to deli∣ver themselves from this Oppression of the Usurper,1794. and hearing that Osiris victoriously ranged the World, ma∣king it his business to assist the distressed, gave him an Account of their miserable Condition, worse in the Ap∣prehension of what was like to follow, than even in their present Sufferings; for the Dread of what a known Tyrant may do, is a greater Calamity than what he does really act. Osiris soon accepted the Invitation, and flew with Diligence to the Relief of that Distressed People. Gerion understanding the Danger that threat∣ned him,Osiris comes into Spain, kills Gerion, and gives the Crown to his three Sons. sent before his three Sons, with some chosen Troops, to give a Check to Osiris, while he came up with the main Body of his Army. The two Hosts met upon the Banks of the River Guadiana, where they char∣ged one another with such Fury, that Osiris was near losing the Honour he had before gained by so many no∣table Victories. For Gerion and his Sons were brave, and the Lusitanians, though not then used to handle Weapons, were strong of Body, and bore the Brunt with Resolution. But the Fortune of Osiris never fail∣ing, and Gerion being slain, his Men despairing of Suc∣cess, placed all their Hope of Safety in Flight. Osiris used this Victory with such Clemency, (a Quality in∣herent to such as fight for Justice, and do not conquer to tyranize▪) that he appeared to the Conquered, rather as a mercifull Judge of their Differences, than an haughty and successful Commander; and therefore yielded the Crown of Spain to the three Sons of the Deceased Gerion, who were called Lominii.
15. This was the End of Gerion, such will that of all Tyrants be. Some Authors are of Opinion he was slain by Hercules the Grecian; and the reason of this Mistake is, that then the Name of Hercules was rather titular to all Heroes, than peculiar to any one. Gerion was the first in Spain that made Account of any Trea∣sure besides Cattle, discovered Mines of Gold, and taught the Value of it. From the Riches he thus ga∣thered he got the Name of Chryseus or Deabus, which, in the Lybian Language signifies a Man of Gold, or Lord of great Riches. This Humanity of Osiris, in restoring the Sons of Gerion to the Crown, so far gained upon the Portuguese, that in return they gave up their very Souls, receiving the new VVorship which the Idolatrous Osiris brought among them. Of him they learnt to make their Year but of Four Months, after the manner of the Egyptians; which Custom continued in Spain, till the Romans, having subdued it, reduced the Account to their own Form. Osiris is allowed to have taught the People an easier way of Tilling and Sowing than they used before. Gerion reigned 34 years, and was the first that oppressed and fleeced the People, the Property of Usurpers, who when they do best, treat their Subjects with more Cruelty than Lawful Princes do at worst. Osiris returned to Egypt,Osiris re∣turns into Egypt. leaving behind him some of his Companions, who were Ar of those called Sce∣nitae, and took their Seats near the Mouth of the River Guadiana. From them Cape St. Vincent was also cal∣led Promontorium Scenicum. This Battle fought between Osiris and Gerion near the place where Tarifa now stands, was the first that ever happened in Spain. Gerion was buried by his Sons in the Island Erithrea, in the same manner as is used at present, and was the first so interred in Spain. Some will have the Family of Osorios to be de∣scended from Osiris; but that is hard to prove, and no Task of mine.
CHAP. II. Of the Lominii, Hispalus, Hispanus, Hercu∣les, Italus, Sic-Orus, Sic-Anus, Sic-Ce∣leus, Lusus, Sic-Ulus, Lisias, Licinius, Palatuus, Gargoris, Abidis, Argentorius, and Baucius Capetus, Kings of Lusitania. 1. THE three Gerions,1780. or Lominii, began their Go∣vernment with such Brotherly Love,The Lomi∣nii, three Sons of Ge∣rion, reign. and such perfect Union, that they gave occasion to the Fable, That Spain was ruled by a King with three Heads. Such was the Entrance of their Sway, that it seemed they were resolved to preserve with Justice, what their Father had gained with Violence: But it was not long before it appeared they had rather be thought Sons of such a Father, than Fathers of their Subjects. They were good no longer, than till they had the Power to be wicked; which was, till Osiris was removed. Then remembring the People of Andaluzia, Aragon and Va∣lencia had been the Cause of their Father's Death, by calling in Osiris, they removed towards those parts, on pretence of Affection, but in reality to wreak their Re∣venge. 2. Osiris, being basely Murdered by his Brother Ty∣phon, his Son Orus Lybicus succeeded him, having slain the Murderer. The People of Andaluzia, now again oppressed by the Tyranny of the Lominii, who upon the departure of Osiris, were exercising their revenge on those their Subjects,Orus Ly∣bicus, or Hercules, comes into Spain,  the Lomi∣nii,  makes his Son Hispa∣lus King. sent for and to Orus Lybicus, called also Hercules, who speedily came to their relief, as his Father had done out of Africk, where he had killed the Giant Anteus, and marched after the Enemy who were retired to the Fastnesses of Lusitania, and there resolutely waited his approach. The Lominii had posted them∣selves in a secure place, called formerly Saltus Terceno∣rum: Hercules, seeing them in place almost inaccessible, resolved to save his Men, and avoid the hazard of a Bat∣tle, by challenging the three Brothers to fight him hand to hand, which he did, and they accepting of it, were
all three slain successively.1718. The Portuguese seeing their Princes slain, began to move to revenge their Death; but Orus making use of perswasions, rather than force, appeased them, and calling the Nobles to him, he made a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. This done, he ad∣vanced as far as the Promontorium Sacrum, where he built a magnificent Temple, wherein the Aegyptian Ce∣remonies taught by the Founder were for many Ages af∣ter Religiously observed. The People in acknowledg∣ment for the Benefits, received by Hercules, or rather swayed by fear, joyfully received his Son Hispalus for their King, who continued in Lusitania with many of his Aegyptians. 3. Hispalus was installed 42 Years after the Gerions had begun to Reign, and being peaceably seated on the Throne, his Father Orus Lybicus marched away for Italy. The gentle Government of Hispalus, was the reviving of the hearts of that People after so many Ca∣lamities, but Prosperities are not durable, for he died the 17th Year of his Reign: Among the memorable Cu∣stoms introduced by him, were those of Burying the Dead, and wearing Mourning for them; what sort of Mourn∣ing it was appears not, but that which many Ages af∣ter was used till the time of King Emanuel of Portugal, and Ferdinand of Castile was on the lightest occasions rough Canvass, and the deep used for Kings and such like occasions, of the coursest Sack-cloth, and that al∣ways White, as is still used in China. 4. Hispanus succeeded his Father Hispalus; and was Proclaimed in the Temple of Hercules with great Cere∣mony. The Spaniards in those days held it a crime to look upon the setting Sun, therefore those that lived up∣on the Coast, used to turn their backs towards it; those who lived near the Promontorium Sacrum, retreated at Night far off from it, believing the Gods spent the Night there in Sport and Pastimes, not to be seen by Mor∣tal Eyes: Only the Priests and the King on the Night of his inauguration, were permitted to stay on that point of Land, and look towards the West, but as soon as the Sun quite disappeared, they prostrated them∣selves on the Ground▪ and then retired to the Temple, where they continued till break of day, when the King returned to the same place, and continued there till the Sun again spread its Beams over all that part of the
Country. Then he returned joyfully to the People, offered Sacrifice, and was thence forward esteemed wiser than all others, as being one that had seen Di∣vine Secrets and Hidden Mysteries. It is a common Opinion among the vulgar, that Hispalis now Sevil, was built by Hispalus, and that the Name Hispania came from Hispanus,1169. who died when he had Reigned 32 Years, leaving no Issue. 5. Hercules,Hercules Governs Spain, and leaves the Crown to Hesperus after the Death of his Grandson Hispa∣nus returned to Spain, which he Governed Nineteen Years in Peace with singular Wisdom and Goodness, and finding his end draw on, he appointed Hesperus, one of his Officers, his Successor. The Funeral Obsequies being performed,1650. Hesperus took upon him the Sove∣reignty, but the giddy People being dissatisfied with his Government, revolted from him to his Brother Atlas Italus, who came out of Italy, pretending a right as being the Elder Brother, though neither had any other Title, but the choice of Hercules which was of the Younger.Hesperus deposed, and Atlas set up in his place. By this desertion of the Subjects, Hesperus was easily deprived of the Crown, and flying into Italy, outlived not long his Misfortune. Italus having Reign∣ed in Portugal the space of Ten Years, returned into Italy,1618. leaving the Dominion of Spain to his Son Sic-Orus,He leaves the Crown to his Son Sicorus. during whose Reign the Noise of Arms was not heard; he left his Name to that River of Catalonia, that washes the Walls of Lerida, and is now called Segre, but formerly Sicoris, and a great part of that Country was of him long after called Sicoria, he Reigned 55 Years. 6. Sicanus the Son of Sicorus succeeded his Father;Sicanus Succeeds them, and Sicceleus him. he is reported to have waged War in Italy, and thence to have passed over and conquered Sicily; which, of him, our Author will have to take the Name of Sica∣nia, and he to have Reigned 31 Years. His Son Sicceleus immediately entred upon the Government, and of him also is continued that Romantick Story of going in∣to Italy with an Army, where also he is said to have died in the 44th Year of his Reign, 2453 from the Creation; 797 from the Flood; and 1509 before the Birth of Christ.1509. 7. After the Death of Sic-Celeus his Son Lusus was proclaimed King,Lusus as∣cends the Throne. and for the singular Affection he shewed to the Western part of Spain, where he spent the most of his life, that Country took his Name,
being afterwards called Lusitania. Under this Name was comprehended all the Country between the Rivers Guadiana and Duero; the main Ocean bounded it on the West, and its limits on the East were formed by an imaginary line drawn almost straight from the turning of the River Duero near Castrominho, down to Guadiana, which River divided it from the Province Betica. No∣thing else is recorded of Lusus, but that he reigned 33 Years,Siculus the next King. and dying, left the Kingdom to Siculus, who being born in Lusitania, preserved the same Affection his Father had done for that Province and People. He also is supposed to have passed over into Italy, and to have overthrown the Aborigines, whence sailing into Si∣cily,1416. he subdued that Island, and left his Name to it, where he ended his Days, having reigned 61 Years. 8. The Death of Siculus was so much resented by the Spaniards, and particularly the Lusitanians, that, he leaving no Heir,An inter∣regnum for 100 Years. they resolved not to submit themselves to another King. Above an Hundred Years they lived at their Liberty, referring all Controversies to the anci∣entest Men,Bacchus in Spain. and standing to their Decision, till Bacchus the Son of Semele, with a numerous Army of sundry Nations came into Spain. The Fame of so mighty an Army terrified the Spaniards, but they were no less de∣lighted with their Luxurious manner of living, all their Martial Exercises being intermixed with Pleasures and Delights. Hence the Sports used to this day in Portu∣gal, called Folias, are supposed to have deduced their Original, which consists of Dancing. Taboring, and Singing: The Word is either derived from the Latin, Folia, or leaves, because the Bacchanals were so Crown∣ed, or from the Italian, signifying Madness, which is proper enough to such Divertisements, and to the Feasts of the Bacchanals. 9. Bacchus finding the Lusitanians, opposed his Com∣mand, and cut off many of his Army, retiring to the Mountains after doing the Mischief, employed his Tu∣tor Silenus to work upon them by fair means, which he did so effectually, that they submitted themselves to him, only upon condition he should not use the Name of King, which they would allow to none since the Death of their beloved King Lusus. However, Bac∣chus finding them an Ignorant and Credulous People, perswaded them that the Soul of Lusus was transmi∣grated
unto his Son Lisias,Lisias made King. who for the Love they bore him, was returned to Reign over them. This Fiction so took with the People, that they put themselves whol∣ly into his Power, congratulating with themselves the Happiness of having recovered their admired King. Bacchus returned into Italy, and his Son remained pos∣sessed of this great part of Europe, which he enjoyed not full Three Years:1299. He dying, the Lusitanians would not admit any other King, but chose for their Com∣mander,Cacus chose Gene∣ral. one Cacus a bold Fellow, and one of Lisias his Companions; he raising a powerful Army, marched against Palatuus King of Andaluzia, whom in a Bloody Battle he overthrew, and by that means remained possessed of the greatest part of all Spain; puffed up with this Success, he became Insolent and Cruel, which rendred him Odious to the People. 10. Palatuus, who lay lurking in the Mountains, laid hold of this opportunity, sent some to sound the affections of the Multitude, and finding them well in∣clined towards him, adventured to raise Forces and march towards Lusitania.Hercules the The∣ban in Spain o∣verthrows Cacus. At the same time, Hercules the Theban, with the rest of the Argonauts, being by stress of Weather cast ashore in Spain, near the mouth of Guadalquivir, was lovingly received and entertained by Palatuus; this Courtesie obliged him to espouse his Quarrel, and so joyning their Forces, they overthrew the Tyrant Cacus, or Licinius, who fled into Italy, whi∣ther presently after Hercules returned. Still the Lucita∣nians preserved their Liberty as before, as they did whilst Erithreus, whom some call the Son, others the Cousin of Palatuus reigned in the other parts of Spain. Palatuus seems to have Reigned 67 Years, and Gargoris is said to have been his Son, but for this there is no man∣ner of Authority. 11. The Tyranny of Cacus or Licinius, lasted Thir∣ty Six Years, which are to be included in the 70 of Palatuus his Reign, and many more Lusitania remained free from any subjection, being governed only by the Rules of Reason,1158. and some of Tubal's Laws which re∣mained in Verse.Gargoris finds the use of Ho∣ney and its making. It fell out accidentally, that a Man called Gargoris (which formerly signified a burning Coal or Flame) found a Swarm of Bees in a hollow Oak, and discovering their Honey, taught the use of it to the People. This sweet Discovery was worth a
Crown; which the Multitude, i Requital for that Benefit, freely bestowed upon him. He was after∣wards, by the Latins, called Melicola, for discovering to the Spaniards the Use of Honey. Whilst Gargoris reigned, he had a Daughter got with Child by some Gallant, or, as some thought, by her own Father; for as soon as the Child was born,Abidis ex∣posed; Brought to Court; Teaches the People to yoke Oxen, plow and sow. he caused it to be expo∣sed to the Wild Beasts: But they, instead of destroy∣ing, nourished the Infant; of which he being inform∣ed, caused him to be cast into the Sea; and that Ele∣ment, milder than the Grandfather, carried it up the River Tagus, as far as Santarem, formerly called Scala∣bis, where it was suckled by a Doe. Of her, being grown up, he took to a natural Swiftness; so that they that hunted in the Mountains admired to see in him the Figure of a Man, and the Wildness of a Beast. Gargoris hearing hereof, and not imagining it was his Grandson, caused him to be taken in a Gin; and be∣ing brought before him, he, by known Signs, perceiv∣ed it was the same he had exposed. His Hatred now turned into Love; he called him Abidis, causing him to be carefully instructed: And he was so great a Pro∣ficient, that it was he who first civilized that barba∣rous Multitude: He also taught them to yoke Oxen, to plow and sow. 11. Troy being reduced to Ashes,1130. Ʋlysses, with a part of the Grecian Fleet, driven by Storms out of the Mouth of the Streights, arrived at length at the Mouth of the River Tagus;Ulysses in Portugal. and entring, landed; where he found, already built, a City on the Hill; to which he left his Name, which remains to this Day, being called Ʋlys∣sippo, which is the famous City Lisbon. Here, in Me∣mory of the Favours received of the Goddess Minerva, he built a stately Temple, and dedicated it to her. Gargoris, upon the News of his Arrival, marched to∣wards him with an Army; but they both meeting, and conferring together, parted Friends: And not so con∣tent, Gargoris gave to Ʋlysses his Daughter, the Mother of Abidis, in Marriage. However, the Greeks commit∣ting several Insolences in the Country, they became odious to the People, who rising up in Arms against them, Ʋlysses stole away to Sea, leaving his new Wife behind. How long Gargoris reigned, cannot positively be set down; the best Guess that can be given, is, Se∣venty
seven Years.1105. At the same time that Ʋlysses sail∣ed out of Tagus, Diomedes enter'd the River Mino, in the North of Portugal: There he founded a City, which, after the Name of his Father Tideus, he called Tide; and in process of Time, by Corruption, is now called Tuy. 12. The wonderful Abidis succeeded his fortunate Father Gargoris,Abidis reigns. in the Kingdom of Spain; and, in Gra∣titude to the Mountains, where he was bred, built the City Santarem; and reigned 35 Years, much beloved of his Subjects.1038. About this time happen'd that won∣derful Dearth in Spain,A wonder∣ful Dearth. which lasted 26 Months; du∣ring which time it never rained. Some there are, who extend this to 40 Years; others, to 30. Such it was, that all the Country became Desart, the Inhabitants ei∣ther perishing for Want, or fleeing to other Places. Long after this,952. a Multitude of the Celtae, the ancient Inhabitants of France, came into the Southern Parts of Portugal, where they built several Towns, and re-edi∣fied others, before ruined. They, being mixed, and well united with the Natives, stood them in good stead when the Phoenicians possessed themselves of the Island of Cadiz.Sidonians in Spain. Not content with settling themselves there, they began to incroach upon the People of Andaluzia, and fortified themselves at Sidon, now Medina Sidonia; whence they were expelled by the united Forces of the ancient Natives,752. and intruding Celtae. Which done, the Lusitanians chose Argantonius for their King▪ who governed them many Years, with general Applause; some Authors stretching his Life to 140 Years; others, only to 120. 13. The Celtae inhabiting Lusitania,The Celtae settle in Portugal. being vastly in∣creased, so that the Country they possessed could not contain them, passed over the River Tagus, with their Flocks and Families, with a Design to settle along the Sea-Coast, beyond the Promontory of the Moon, now called the Rock of Sintra. Those People fearing their intruding Guests, marched out to oppose them; but be∣ing overthrown, were forced to submit to those that came with Intention only to be their Companions. The Turduli, for so those People were called, joining with the Inhabitants of Lisbon, formed another Army; and joining Battel with the Celtae, gained the Field, but with such Loss, that they had no reason to boast of
their Victory. Both Parties considering the Loss sus∣tained, came to an Agreement, and divided the Pro∣vince betwixt them. 14. The Turduli thought themselves secure after this War with the Celtae, when a more dangerous Enemy assaulted them.The Moun∣tainous Peo∣ple descend into the Plain. These were a savage Mountainous Peo∣ple, who having, till then, lived upon the Milk of their Goats, and Wild Fruit, came down to seek a bet∣ter Country to inhabit; but being defeated, they passed the River Tagus: There the Celtae cut off a good Num∣ber of them; which obliged the rest to march along the River Tagus, to the Sea-side, where, finding no Bo∣dy to oppose them, they settled themselves: And from them, that Cape near Setuval was called Promontorium Barbaricum, now Cabode Espichel. 15. Nabuchadonosor having taken Hierusalem,Nabucho∣donozor in Spain. and sub∣dued a great part of the then known World, came at last into Spain with his mighty Army, composed of all Nations. Having besieged the Island of Cadiz, where the Phoenicians inhabited, by Sea and Land, he was dri∣ven thence by the united Forces of Spain; and so, with his whole Army, put to Sea again. He had before over-run the greatest part of Spain; and now departing, left behind him the greatest Plague that ever infested it. Thus was a great Number of Jews, dispersed in se∣veral Parts of it; who fixing then, could never since be rooted out. The Phoenicians delivered of the Danger of Nabuchodonosor, refused to pay the Lusitanians, whom they had called to their Aid; who offended thereat, demanded more than was their Due. The Controver∣sie came to be decided by Blows, wherein the Lusita∣nians were worsted, yet not so discouraged, but that, ga∣thering fresh Forces, they came on again so furiously, that having vanquished their Enemies, they put them all to the Sword, without Mercy. By this Victory they became Masters of the greatest part of Andaluzia; so that great Numbers of them went over, to inhabit there, calling it Turdetania; where they built many Cities. 16. In the mean while,The Car∣thagini∣ans come to relieve the Phoenici∣ans. the Phoenicians, shut up in the Island of Cadiz, craved Aid of the Carthaginians, their ancient Allies, against the Lusitanians, who Lorded it over all Andaluzia. The Carthaginians were not back∣ward to undertake this Expedition, but Rigging a migh∣ty
Fleet, sent it to their Relief, under the Command of Mezerbal, a valiant and wise Captain. At their first Landing, in some Skirmishes, our Men found their Valour would not avail against the Africans, without some Martial Discipline: Therefore they made Choice of one Baucius Capetus, (or, as others call him, Bachius Carupus,) a Man of a Gigantick Stature, and great Con∣duct, for their General. He observing the manner of the Carthaginian Warfare, instructed his Men accordingly. About Break of Day the two Armies joined Battel, with terrible Out-cries, and no less Effusion of Blood. Mezerbal observing his Troops disordered, and giving way, with some chosen Bands renewed the Fight, and made the Victory more bloody than it would have been, had not so great a General commanded: Yet, at last,The Car∣thagini∣ans defeat∣ed. he was forced to give way, and save his Life by Flight. Baucius having pursued the Enemy, and taken the Spoil of the Field, returned Victorious, and erect∣ed lasting Trophies in the Temples of his Idols. The future Actions of Mezerbal, being the Beginning of the Carthaginian Dominion in Spain, require a new Chap∣ter. These Things were done about the Year of the World, 3403; after the Deluge, 1747; which is 559 Years before the Birth of Christ. CHAP. III. The Actions of the Carthaginian Governors, Mezerbal, Sappho, Hanno the First, Hi∣milco, Gisgo, Hannibal the First, Hanno the Second, Boodes, Maherbal, Hamilcar Barcinus, Asdrubal, and Hannibal the Se∣cond: The Planting of many Colonies; and Beginning of the Roman War. 1. MEzerbal and Carthaginian, though overthrown, quitted not his Pretensions; but contrived, by Policy to compass what he had failed of by open Force. He began to treat amicably with the Lusitanian
Turduli;559. and sped so well, that they intrusted him with several Places of Consequence;Mezerbal subdues Portugal. whereof being once possessed, he began to Lord it over them. This was the Beginning of the African Dominion in Spain. Mean while, that barbarous People who inhabited along the Coast of Setuval, invented a new and bloody Sacrifice, which continued for many Years:550. The Sea cast up a Whale, of a wonderful Bigness; whereat that ignorant People being terrified, and thinking it had been some Sea-God,A barba∣rous Sacri∣fice. they killed a Young Man and a Maid, and left them by the Whale: The Tide rising, it carried away the dead Bodies, which they looked upon as an Acceptance of their Sacrifice, and therefore they eve∣ry Year after repeated it, even after the Coming of Christ. 2. About the same time 15000 of the Turduli, seek∣ing new Lands to inhabit, passed into the Territories between Cerolico and Trancoso; but finding it difficult to settle in that wild Country and among  People so rude,Seral People plan new Colonies. that they scarce understood one another's Lan∣guage at two Miles distance, they waded over the Ri∣ver Coa, and there Peopled all that Country, building several Towns The Barbarians of the Coast of Setu∣val understanding that the Turduli wander'd to find new Seats, they passed-over the Tagus, to possess their Lands. Those who were left behind endeavoured to oppose them, but in vain; and finding they looked not after Towns, but lived in the open Fields, they desisted. But the Barbarians, with the same Ease, passed on; and crossing the River Mondego, settled about Viseo, stretch∣ing by Degrees to the River Duero. The Greeks also, that inhabited Galicia, attempted to pass the River Minho; but they were repulsed by the People of the Province, with a great Slaughter on both sides. It will not be amiss to give an Hint of the Customs of those People. 3. Their Idols were,Customs of the Inhabi∣tants. Mars and Minerva, for the ob∣taining of Valour and Wisdom. To them they offer'd the Right Hands, and sometimes the Bodies, of their Enemies, taken in War. In the Entrails of the Sacri∣fices they made their Observations of future Events. In their Feasts, an He-Goat was a great Dainty; and they did eat upon Round Tables. Whilst the Dinner lasted, some played upon Noisy Instruments; and any Guest
might rise, and dance. Their Sports were, Wrestling, Running, and Pitching the Bar. The Young Men sung the Praises of those that died in Battel. Their Weapons were Swords and Daggers; and they gave Battel drawn up in close Battalions. Their Apparel, in Times of Peace, was long and wide; and their Hair long▪ The Women wore Gowns down to the Ground, and Mantles on their Shoulders, which served them for Beds. Their manner of Dancing, was, in a Ring. Marriages were made to please the Bridegroom, not the Father, or Friends: The Portion was, a few Goats: And the Chastity of the Women was such, that Adulte∣ry was scarce to be heard of. There were no Physicians among them; But the Sick were set in a publick Place, and all that passed by advised what they thought best for them. Criminals were stoned to Death: And all Passengers were obliged to cast a Stone, to compleat the Burial of the dead Body. No Money was used; but all dealt by way of Barter. They passed Rivers, and fish∣ed, in Boats made of one Tree, hollowed, like the In∣dian Canoes. 4. The People inhabiting between the Rivers Duero and Minno,480. passed over into Gallicia; and having, in a bloody Fight, wherein the Women, as well as the Men, shewed exceeding Valour, vanquished the Greeks who possessed that Country, they setled amongst them. Twelve Thousand Spaniards were entertained by the Carthaginians, in their Expedition against Gelon, King of Sicily; but they, and all that Fleet, perished. The Carthaginians then bent their Thoughts upon the Con∣quest of Spain,Sappho the Car∣thaginian gathers Gold in Spain. whither they sent Sappho General; who gathering much Gold in the Mines, enriched his Coun∣try; but was forced to return against those Africans who demanded a certain Tribute, which, they said, Queen Dido paid at the Foundation of the City. He carried with him 7000 Spanish Foot, and 400 Horse, who did him good Service, and returned home victorious. Sap∣pho being called away, the Carthaginians sent in his Place Hanno and Himilco. Hanno coasting along Spain, landed at Cape St. Vincent, where he shewed great Re∣verence to the Place, to win the Hearts of the People; and having discovered the Country, and traded with the Inhabitants, returned home. Himilco sailed forward to Cape Espichel, where some of his Men landing, to
get fresh Provisions, were, for the most part, cut off by the savage People. Thence they continued their Voyage, and ran up the River Tagus; where being well received, and furnished with Pilots, they made Cape Cascais, and the Berlings. The Carthaginians had some Commerce with the Turduli, living between the Rivers Tagus and Duero; and of them had some Information about the Inland Parts. Hamilco continued his Course to the River Mondego, and by Stress of Weather was forced to put into the Vouga, on whose Banks he found a Co∣lony of Greeks; and so continued his Discovery to the River Minho. After sounding all the Coast of Lusita∣nia, many of his Ships perished in a Storm; the rest were put into the Port Gaya, so shatter'd, that several of them sunk there, but the Men were saved. Part of them put to Sea again with Himilco, who went away to his Brother Gisgo, in Andaluzia: The rest staid among the Natives,The City Braga founded by the Cartha∣ginians. and afterwards founded the City Brag in Memory of the River Bragada, in Africk, running through their Country. Some will have this City to be first built, and take its Name of the Gaules, called Braccasi. Hannibal the Elder succeeded Himilco, in the Government of the Affairs of Spain. He hear∣ing of the new Carthaginian Colony, resolved himself to visit the utmost Point of Europe, or Cape St. Vincent; and there founded a City, upon a convenient Bay, which was called Hannibal's Port. 5. After this,420▪ the Lusitanians and Andaluzians fell at Variance;Several great Bat∣tels for those Turdtani who had settled in that part of the Country, endeavouring to extend their Li∣mits to those Plains, which afterwards took Name of the Vandals, were opposed by the ancient Inhabitants, and, after much Blood spilt, put to Flight, leaving be∣hind them a rich Booty. But they seeking Revenge, gathered a Multitude of the bordering Lusitanians. And the Andaluzians, to oppose them, called Hanibal, with his Carthaginians, to their Aid. These powerful Ar∣mies encountring, fought most obstinately the whole Day, till Night parted them; leaving the Field co∣ver'd with 80000 dead Bodies, among which was Han∣nibal himself. This so weaken'd the Lusitanians, that those barbarous People living along the Sea-Coast, durst take Arms against them, and overthrew the Celtae, who first offered to withstand them. The Turdetani re∣tiring
out of Andaluzia, and joining with the Celtae, they fell upon the victorious Barbarians; of whom they made such Havock, that few returned home to carry the News of their Defeat. 6. The Carthaginians,403. in their Wars with the Agri∣gentines, among other Spaniards, used the Aid of 3000 Lusitanians; by whose Valour they destroyed that City. With the like Number they overthrew Dionysius, the Tyrant of Sicily: But Sickness did what the Sword had not done, for none of those Men returned home. In the mean while,Great Dearth and Storms. Spain suffered by the Indignation of Hea∣ven; for the Storms and Dearth were so excessive, that the Wild Beasts came out of the Desarts, to the Towns, to look for Shelter and Provender. Hanno the Second came from Carthage, to govern Andaluzia; and landing at Hannibal's Port, in Lusitania, raised 7000 Lusitanians, to subdue the Andaluzians, who had revolted, provoked thereto by the Avarice of their late Governor. Soon after,400. the Celtae of the Province of Alentejo, their Terri∣tories being thronged by the Turdetani who came out of Andaluzia, resolved to move farther into the Country; and to that purpose made a solemn Sacrifice, and swore ever to continue Friends. Whilst they were busie in that Solemnity, they descried four Sail, which made towards the Shoar; and understood they came from Laconica, in Peloponnesus, seeking some Place to settle in: The Celtae received them into their Society; and they together pas∣sing the Tagus, and coming to the River Mondego, left there a Company of the Lusitanian Turdetani, called Co∣limbrii, or Columbri, who there settled a Colony, which, of them, was called Colimbria, now known by the Name of Condeixa the Old: the Ruins which still are to be seen about it, being a Testimony of its former Grandeur. Yet some will have that City to have been built by Her∣cules Lybicus;Several Towns foun∣ded. others, by the Carthaginians. The Lusi∣tanians and Greeks going on▪ they founded Eminium, now Ageuda, a great City, and a Bishop's See in the time of the Romans and Goths. They also were the Founders of Talabrica, now Aveyro; of Lavara, of La∣meca, or Laconia, now Lamego; and some other Places, whereof there is now no Memory. The last Place named was built by the Greeks and the Celtae, who con∣tinuing their Progress, fell at Variance (forgetting the Oath made at their Setting out) in such manner, that
in cruel Battle among themselves the greatest part of them perished. Such as remained spread themselves a∣bout that Country, and some of them are supposed to be the Founders of Araduca, now Guimaraens. 7. The Lusitanians and Africans about the Port of Ha∣nibal were at Peace,359. when Boodes came to succeed Han∣no the Carthaginian, Commander in Spain. He intro∣duced himself politickly by fair means into the Affecti∣ons of the People,The Pro∣gress of the Carthagi∣nians in Spain. and they together sacrificed to Her∣cules. Having thus setled Friendship, Boodes, with the Consent of the Natives, built a Town called Lacobriga in Algarve, now Lagos. After Boodes came Maherbal, who so managed the People, that he became ab∣solute over all that part, which is now the Kingdom of Algarve; and hearing of the Greatness of the City Elvas, marched thither with a good Body of Men, and by Kindness so won the Hearts of the Inhabitants, that they wholly submitted themselves unto him. Maherbal falling sick here, was told by the Diviners, that there was no way to recover his Health, but building a Tem∣ple to the God Cupid, which he did, and recovered. This Temple was famo many Ages after, and the Idol called Endovellicus. T Image had its Eyes shut, a Heart in its Mouth, and Wings on its Feet. The Priest when he sacrificed to this God stripped himself na∣ked, and then put on a loose Garment which traied on the Ground, his Back and Left Arm remaining na∣ked; then with the Right Hand he ripped up a Lamb, and took out his Heart, which, with the Left Hand, he cast into the Fire. 8. The City Tyre being destroyed by Alexander the Great,318. 15000 of the Inhabitants were saved by the Si∣donians who served in his Army. Some of them by means of the Carthaginians came into Lusitania,The City Mirtiri built by the Tyrians. where they founded a Town which they called Mirtiri, that is, New Tyre, now Mertola. This same Year Gatelus sailing from Egypt with his whole Family, is reported to have landed in Portugal, and it is supposed it was at the City Porto. He had two Sons Iberus and Humecus, the first of them some will have to have sailed into Ire∣land, and given the Name Hibernia to it; these are meer Suppositions. Some Years after the Greeks between the Rivers Duero and Minho,310▪ encreased by the coming of the Celtae and Turdetani, finding their Multitude too
great for that Province, by common Consent sent their Sons to find new Seats. Some of them settled in the Mountains of Asturias, and others along the Banks of the Rivers Erla.303. The Carthaginians being at War with Pyrrhus Prince of the Epirots, who was possessed of Si∣ciy, drove him thence by the Assistance of the Spa∣nish Auxiliaries, among whom were 2000 Lusitanian Celtae. 9. Hamilcar Barcinus, a Man extraordinary well qua∣lified, was sent from Carthage to promote the Interest of that Commonwealth in Spain. His mighty Zeal in the Worship of their Idols endeared him to the People, and the more to oblige them, he resolved to marry a Wo∣man of the Country by her he had Hannibal the Se∣cond by Name, but far the greatest in Renown. His Project of marrying a Lusitanian to gain the Affection of the Natives,Hamilcar subdues all Spain. was so highly approved of by the Cartha∣ginians, that returning home he was sent back to finish what he had so well begun. He brought with him his Wife, by whom he had Five Children, Hannibal, As∣drubal, Mag, Hanno, and a Daughter. After he had settled the Affairs of Andaluzia, he passed thence into Lusitania, intending to make  he Seminary of Soldi∣ers. Having gathered a might Army, he set forward so fortunate, that he subdued all the Country from the Streights of Gibraltar to the Pyrenean Mountains. Ha∣nibal, then a Youth, was present at these Exploits, and then learnt his first Military Rudiments. In the mean while the Vectones, who lived betwixt the Rivers Duero and Coa, down as far as Tagus, and were ancient Enemies to the Celtae of the Province of Alentejo, and to the Turdetani, considering that the Flower of these Peo∣ple was drawn out under Hamilcar Barcinus, laid hold of this Opportunity, and invaded their Territories. The Celtae asked leave of their General to return Home to defend their Country; and he careful of their good Fortune, marched back with them. The Vectones being strengthened with Supplies, waited his coming in a convenient place, with a great number of Carts loaded with Wood before them, as if they had been upon the March. Hamilcar admired their Resolution, but under∣stood not the Stratagem. He caused the Celtae to give the Charge; but neither their Courage nor Martial Discipline availed them; for the Vectones setting Fire to
the Wood, the Oxen being frighted, ran so furiously with the Flaming Carts into the midst of them that they were put into Confusion, notwithstanding their Gene∣ral did all that was possible to restore the Battle. In the heat of the Action he was killed, leaving a bloody Vi∣ctory to the Vectones. Asdrubal his Son-in-law and Han∣nibal gathering the Relicks of the Army, fell upon the Phocentians, who had assisted the Vectones; but these co∣ming to their Relief, the two Generals were obliged to raise a greater Power, with which they not only sub∣dued the Phocentians, but put all to the Sword that were able to bear Arms. This done, he marched towards the Vectones, who continued to insult the Celtae, and suf∣ficiently revenged their Wrongs. But the Celtae not so satisfied, ceased not to destroy the Enemies Country. This obliged the Vectones to choose one Tagus for their General, under whose Conduct, for some time, they put Asdrubal to his Shifts, till in one Battle he cut off most of their Horse. Thus Tagus was constrained to make Overtures of Peace, which being admitted and sworn to, Asdrubal, contrary to his Oath, made Tagus, and many of his principal Men, Prisoners. They, re∣solving to sell their Lives at a dear rate, put many of the Carthaginians to the Sword; but, in Conclusion, were all foully murdered by Asdrubal. He remained Governour in Spain, and Hanibal went over into A∣frick. 10. The Romans, envying the Fortune of the Car∣thaginians in Spain, by the Mediation of the People of Marseilles, joined in League with the Sanguntines, and other Cities. This made Hanibal haste back into Spain, where he found his Brother-in-law Asdrubal was dead,Hannibal settles in Spain. as he had deserved. For a Slave to that Tagus, whom he perfidiously slew, stabbed him as he was sacrificing, in revenge of his Masters Death. Nor did he afterwards endeavour to escape; but, being put upon the Wrack, bore all his Torments with a Countenance unmoved, Hanibal made it his Business to gain the Good Will not only of the Africans, but of the Natives. To this in∣tent he contracted Friendship with one Viriatus (not he that held War so many Years against the Romans) who was a principal Man, or little Prince among the Celtae, of the Province of Alentejo. Next to bind the Andalu∣zians faster, he married a Wife among them, called Hi∣milce,
born at Castulon, now a poor Village, known by the Name of Carlona. By her he had his Son Aspar. Having thus secured his Interest, and gathered a mighty Army from all parts, his next Thought was to break the Peace made some Years before with the Romans. In order to it he resolved to invade Saguntum, a City in League with them. By the way he subdued the Vocei, and other Nations. From them he marched against the Vectones, who had killed his Father, and laying Siege to Salamanca, so distressed it, that the Inhabitants were forced to buy their Peace. This Accord was broke by the Lusitanians, who getting into the City, violated the Conditions; whereupon the Siege was again continu∣ed. At length the Besieged capitulated to depart with only their Apparel, and unarmed. They marched out, but the Women carrying the Weapons under their Gar∣ments, and delivering them to the Men, they made such use of them, that had not Hanibal's Army been so numerous, it had been dubious which side should have been victorious; but the Multitude overcame Valour, and most of the Vectones perished. All things succeed∣ing prosperously, Hanibal sets down before. Saguntum with 150000 Foot and 20000 Horses.Sagun∣tum de∣stroy'd. After a Siege of Eight Months he took and destroy'd that City, which made the War between Rome and Carthage to be no more doubted of▪ Hanibal gathered supplies from all parts, and many out of Lusitania; Viriatus, that little King, going in Person with a good Body to accompany him. Asdru∣bal, Hanibal's Brother, drew together considerable num∣bers of those rude People between the Rivers Duero and Minho. Nor were the Vectones, with whom his Father and Brother-in-law had such cruel Wars, backwards, being most willingly entertained by him for their extra∣ordinary Valour. Balarus a Lusitanian commanded a brave Body of Light Horse.
CHAP. IV. Hanibal's Actions in Italy, the Romans come into Spain, the Carthaginians expelled thence. The Wars between the Romans and Lusita∣nians from the Expiration of the Cartha∣ginian Command, till Viriatus began to Sway. 1. HAnibal having subdued Spain,Hanibal marches▪ to Italy. leaves his Bro∣ther Asdrubal there with 12000 African Foot and 2500 Horse; he sends 15000 Spanish Foot and 1200 Horse to Carthage, and marches himself over the Pyreneans with 102000 Fighting Men. Five Months he spent, in his long and tiresome march through France, and over the Alps, with the loss of 36000 Men: With the rest he enters Lombardy, forces the Consul Cornelius Scipio, who came to oppose him, to retire to Plansen∣cia, and overthrows him, being joyned by T. Sempro∣nius, at the River Trebia, killing 30000 Romans. This done, he passes the Apennine, where with watching and labour, he lost an Eye, and coming to the Lake Thrasim again Defeats the Roman Army under the Consuls C. Servilius, and C. Flaminius. Qnintus Fabius sent against him with a fresh Army, tired him without Fighting, next came the Consuls Emilius Paulus, and erentius Varro, who through the rashness of the latter, adventuring to give Battle,216. were totally discomfited with the loss of 50000 of their Men. 2. Whilst Hanibal victoriously traversed the best part of Italy, Gneyus Scipio was sent from Rome into Spain, with him Asdrubal Hanibal's Brother had several Conflicts, and after some fortunate Successes, was forsaken by For∣tune,The Ro∣mans come into Spain. and forced to retire into Lusitania to raise new Forces▪ there he joyned in League with a King called Mandonius, with whose assistance he checked the Pro∣gress of Scipio. Yet Asdrubal marching with an Army towards Italy, was overthrown by him, and returning again to Lusitania, gathered fresh Forces, with this Power he not only curbed the Romans, but having kil∣led the two Scipio's, Cornelius and Gneius, took most of
the Roman Garrisons in Catalonia and Andaluzia. Be∣sides, the Calamities of the War, Spain laboured under the Miseries of Plague and Famine, which principal∣ly raged in Lusitania: After which ensued a general Earth-quake throughout Europe, on the same day the Battle at the Lake Thrasimenus was fought, which tho' so violent, that it ruined many Towns, was not felt by the two Armies that were engaged. 3. Such was the posture of Affairs in Spain,The Car∣thagini∣ans expel∣led by the Romans. when Claudius Nero was sent thither from Rome, and after him Publius Cornelius Sipio, who was very successful against the Carthaginians. Asdrubal marched with a great pow∣er out of Portugal, to retreive those losses at such time as Massinissa landed with a number of Numidian Horse, and some Elephants to joyn him; all this mighty Mul∣titude was overthrown by the Fortune and Valour of Scipio. Asdrubal thus broke, resolved to march into Italy, to the assistance of his Brother Hanibal, leaving the Command in Spain to the other Asdrubal, the Son of Gisgo, who as he was directed, retired with the Cartha∣ginian Forces into Lusitania, and having made up a body, he broke into Andaluzia, but was there discomfitted by Marcus Sillanus Scipio's Lieutenant. Mago understand∣ing that Asdrubal his Brother, with the whole Army he led into Italy, had been cut off by the Consuls Claudi∣us Nero, and Livius Salinator, and despairing of main∣taining the War in Spain, shipped himself with his Forces at Cadiz, and having done much harm along the Ligurian shore, returned to Carthage: Scipio now in Africk, threatning the City Carthage, Hanibal was call∣ed home to defend his Country; there having in vain treated of Peace, he was in Battle overthrown, and flying to Prusias King of Bithinia, there Poisoned him∣self, fearing to be delivered up to the Romans. 4. When the Africans had for 300 Years lorded it in Spain,196. they were at length expelled thence and out of Italy by the Romans.Spain di∣vided by the Ro∣mans. The Senate divided Spain in∣to two Provinces under as many Pretors, calling them Citerior and Ʋlterior; the first lying between the River Ebro and the Pyrenaean Mountains, the latter extending from that River to the Ocean. Several of these Pretors being unsuccessful, the Consul Marcus Porcius Cato was sent over with a Consular Army; he gained much a∣mong the Lusitanians by his Valour and Conduct, as
still appears by several Inscriptions on Stone, bearing his Name.192. Scipio Nasica succeeded him in the Com∣mand, and had it prolonged to him after the Expira∣tion of his time, with the Title of Propretor: In his time the Celtiberi entring into Arms, perswaded the Lusitanians to give the Romans a Diversion in Invading their Province, and by that means forcing them to di∣vide their Forces. Nasica marched first against the Lu∣sitanians, whom overtaking loaded with Booty,190. and ti∣red with long Marches, after a most bloody Fight, he Discomfitted, taking 134 of their Colours: The next year came into Spain, Marcus Fulvius as Pretor, who twice Defeated the Lusitanian Vectones; Encouraged with these Victories, he laid Siege to Toledo, where the Vectones assailing him, were again after a doubtful Fight overthrown. Lucius Emilius Paulus being come Propretor into Spain, the Noise of Arms began to be heard in Portugal; Paulus marching against the Bassetani on a sudden, found the Lusitanians upon him; the Battle was furious, insomuch, that had the Day lasted, none of the Romans had escaped to carry the News. But Paulus retiring in the Night, was again the next day assaulted by the victorious Enemy, who pursued him in great disorder, which proved his good Fortune; for he slew of them 20000, and by this Action, hum∣bled the Lusitanians, so that they stirred not in two Years. After which time, on a sudden, they broke out, bearing down all that owned the Roman Government, particularly in Andaiuzia, where the City Asta Regia, for fear of their power, joyned with them. Here Caius Catinius gave the Lusitanians Battle and routed them, but attempting to Scale the Walls of Asta, was him∣self killed, and the Lusitanians joyning with the Celtibe∣ri, appeared again stronger in the Field than before. 5. Caius Culpurnius Piso,The Ro∣mans de∣feated by the Spani∣ards. the Pretor, hearing of this great Power, sent to the other Pretor Lucius Quincius Crispinus, with all possible speed to joyn him, which he accordingly performed. Being joyned▪ they march∣ed into the Province of Carpentania, which is about Toledo, where after several Skirmishes, the Spaniards cut off certain Roman Forragers, which the Pretors perceiv∣ing, sent speedy succour to them, and by this means, both parties still increasing, at last both Armies joyned Battle, wherein the Romans were put to Flight and lost
5000 Men. Had the Spaniards known how to make use of their Victory, as well as how to obtain it, the Romans might have been expelled Spain; but they, proud of their Success, spent the time in Sports: In the mean while the Pretors gathered their dispersed Forces, and enga∣ged the Spaniards near the River Tagus, gave them such a fatal Overthrow, that 30000 of them were put to the Sword; the Pretors returning to Rome, Triumphed over Lusitania.180. The Pretorships of Aulus Terentius Var∣ro, and Publius Sempronius Longus, and of Publius Man∣lius, and Quintus Fulvius Flaccus were not very remark∣able; at length Lucius Postumius, and Tiberius Sempro∣nius Longus came into Spain. The first spent two years in War with the Lusitanians, sometimes Victorious, and sometimes Worsted: He understanding that the Vauci joined in League with the Interamnenses, to equal the Romans, with wonderful celerity, entred Lusitania, where finding the Enemy ready to march, he Entrench∣ed: Then he sent out a Squadron of Horse to Skirmish with the Enemy, who received them so hotly, that the Pretor himself coming out to their relief, he was glad to secure himself in his Camp, making a disorderly re∣treat.174. Night coming on hindred any further Action, but with the day, Postumius assailing the Lusitanians, put them to flight, 35000 of them being killed this and the day before. 6. The Fortune of Rome and Lusitania continued various, till Marcus Manilius came Praetor; and the Lusitanians,153. chiefly stirred up by the Bracarenses, be∣gan again to make head. These chose for their Ge∣neral one of their Citizens, whom one Author calls Africanus; and another, Apimanus. Under his Conduct they gathered, to a mighty Number; and breaking in∣to the Roman Provinces, they carried all before them. Manilius advanced out of Andaluzia, to meet the Ene∣my, then loaded with Booty; which Apamanus consi∣dering would be a great Obstacle towards obtaining the Victory, he caused it to be burnt; reserving no∣thing but the Arms of his Soldiers, and Provision for four Days. The Lusitanians enraged at this Loss of their Plunder,152. so desperately charged Manilius,The Ro∣mans twice defeated. that they put him to flight, with the Loss of the greatest part of his Army. Calfurnius Piso being sent from Rome, to retrieve this Disgrace, he increased it with his own
Defeat, and the Loss of 6000 Romans. This Victory made the Lusitanians so absolute Masters of the Field, that they wasted all the Country, from the River Gua∣diana, to the Streights of Gibraltar; and they perswa∣ded the Vectones of Estremadura to join in League with them. Having subdued all the open Country, they next applied themselves to the Taking of Strong Holds, and leaving Garrisons in them, in Imitation of the Romans. Apimanus assaulting the Town of Blasto∣fenizes, was killed; and the Army wanting such a Ge∣neral, broke up; each Company taking its own Way home. 7. Apimanus being slain, as is before said, the Lusita∣nians chose for their General one Caesaro, a Man capable of so great a Trust. He acquitted himself well of it, re∣cruiting the Army with which his Predecessor had been so often victorious, and invading the Roman Territo∣ries; where he raised such an Alarm, that the Senate of Rome, in great Haste, sent away the Consul, Quin∣tus Fulvius Nobilior,Quintus Fulvius overthrows the Spa∣niards. with a great Army, to subdue the Celtiberi, and particularly the Numantians, whom they began to grow jealous of. With Fulvius, came Lucius Mummius, as Praetor of Hispania Ʋlterior. In his Ar∣my were 15000 Romans, with whom he marched, thinking to oppress Caesaro, loaded with the Booty of Andaluzia. Caesaro, to save his Prey, retired towards Lusitania. Mummius, who was still at his Heels, at length overtook him at the Ford of Guadiana; and he ordering the Prey, with some Troops of Light-Horse, to be conducted over the River, advanced with another Body to Villaviciosa, and there kept the Praetor in play till they that had carried off the Booty returned: Then he drew out into the Plain, and there began a bloody Battel, but the Lusitanians, not able to bear the Force of the Romans, were put to flight; Mummius pursuing them with a mighty bloody Slaughter. Caesaro played all the Part of a bold Soldier, and a prudent General; sometimes facing his Enemy, and at other times calling upon his Men:The Spa∣niards re∣turn and rout the Consul. At length, what with Intreaties, and what with Threats, having formed a Body, he char∣ged the Romans, then dispersed, and out of Order, with such Gallantry that they were drove back to their Camp, with the Loss of 5000 Men. The Lusitanians taking Heart, and again gathering Strength, assaulted
their Trenches, and beat them thence, killing 5000 more of them, but not without the Loss of 10000 of their own Men. Caesaro returned to Lusitania, victori∣ous; and Mummius, with 5000 Men, retired to an Eminence, strong by Nature. Thence his Men came down, and defeated some Parties of Lusitanians, who dragged the Colours they had taken in their sight; and several Colours, and part of the Booty was recovered. Caesaro returned, and though he met with great Oppo∣sition, obliged the Enemy to ascend the Mountain for Safety. Then Mummius vowed, if he were victorious, to build a Temple in that Place to Proserpina; and charging the Lusitanians, discomfited them, killing their General Caesaro. In pursuance of his Vow, he there built a Temple to Proserpina, which is supposed to have stood near the new Church of St. James the Apostle, by Villaviciosa, if it be not the same. 8. Whilst Mummius was busie in building his Tem∣ple,151. the Lusitanians, nothing dismayed, chose for their General a Citizen of Lisbon, called Canchenus. He im∣mediately marched to the City Cunesturgi, (situate near the Place where the Town of Niebla now stands) where was a Roman Garrison; and in a few Days he made himself Master of it, putting many to the Sword, and exercising great Cruelty. Proud with this Success, Canchenus marched to the River Guadalquivir, without meeting any Opposition; and thence, in like manner, to Gibraltar, plundering all the Country. Here the Ar∣my was divided into two Parts, one designed to make a Conquest in Mauritania; the other, to expel the Ro∣mans out of Andaluzia. Whilst the Former were em∣ployed in building Vessels to carry them over the Streights, the Latter marched into the Province: And being come to the City Oraelis, (suppos to be Origu∣ela, among the Bastetani, they found the Enemy en∣camped, and well fortified, before the Town. The Army being sate down before them, many of the For∣ces marched out to plunder the neighbouring Villages. Mummius laying hold of this Opportunity,ifteen Thousand Spaniards in by Mum∣mius. fell upon them, laden with Booty, and killed about 15000 of them; the rest fled into Lusitania, robbing the open Towns as they went. The Lusitanians, who inhabited that part of Estremadura where the Tagus runs into Por∣tugal, ravaged all the Lands of Cstite: But Mummius,
with his usual Celerity, coming upon them, and find∣ing them dispersed, made a mighty Slaughter of them, and so ended his Praetorship with Honour.150. Marcus Atilius came from Rome, to command in Lusitania, which he found in Arms, and the neighbouring Provinces cruelly invaded.Atilius a∣gain over∣throws them. Atilius gave them Battel, and, though they behaved themselves with much Bravery, the Romans had the Victory. Atilius then laid Siege to the City Ostraze; and taking it by Assault, left no Creature alive that was in it: Nay, the very Stones he so dispersed, that nothing remains of that City, but the Name. This Desolation brought the Lusitanians to treat of Peace; and, upon tolerable Conditions, they submitted them∣selves to the Romans. Many others also followed their Example. 9. This Peace was not lasting; for the Vectones per∣ceiving that Atilius was far from them, they so managed the Affair, that they prevailed with the Lusitanians who lived about Ostraze to violate the League so lately made. Winter hinder'd Atilius from putting a Stop to their Proceedings; and Sergius Galba, his Successor, was now come into Spain: He, jealous of the Power of the Lusi∣tanians, resolved upon a piece of Treachery, which laid an Eternal Blot upon the Honour of Rome.Actios of the Lusita∣nians in Africk. But whilst the Winter passes, let us see what was done by the other half of Canchenus's Army, left at Gibraltar, to pass over into Africk. Their first Work was, to pil∣lage and ransack all the open Country; then laying Siege to Tangier, they soon became Masters of it; but finding little to satisfie their Avarice, they embarked again, and returned over into Spain. At that time the Consul Lucullus was, with his Army, among the Turde∣tani, who inhabited along the Coast of the Ocean, from Guadiana to Sill. He immediately marched against them, and killing some, the rest retired to a strong Hill; which the Consul finding to be inaccessible, he laid Siege to them, and they began to be pinched with Hunger: Therefore, in Despair, they came down with such Fury, that they broke through the Roman Army, but left many Prisoners behind. Lucullus, after this, pierced into Lusitania, without meeting any Opposition, it being then Winter, when the Romans used not to wage War.
10. Sergius Galba,Galba go∣verns the Province. the Praetor, having taken a rich Booty, returned to Andaluzia. No sooner did the Spring begin to appear, but the Lusitanians, desirous of Revenge, broke into the Roman Province, obliging the Praetor to take the Field sooner than he had design∣ed. He thought to have surprized them, but they re∣ceived him in good Order, and a bloody Battel ensued, in which the Lusitanians was put to the Rout; Galba pursuing them with more Fury than Discretion: They that fled, observing his Army disordered, taking the Advantage, faced about with such Courage and Forti∣tude, that the victorious Romans were cut down, only the Praetor, with a few Horse, escaping. Galba ga∣thering 2000 Men, and perceiving the Enemy fol∣lowed their Husbandry in great Security, he passed the River Guadiana, near Ayamonte, and brought his Army amongst the Turdetani of Algarve, burning all before him. The People being unprovided sued for Peace; which Galba, with a treacherous Design, seemed to ap∣prove of; promising to admit of them as Friends, and to make an equal Distribution of Lands among them: To which purpose they were all appointed three seve∣ral Places where to meet him, that each Man might receive his Proportion. Accordingly they met in three Valleys, not far distant from one another, but covered by the Mountains that encompassed them. Here Gal∣ba, with fair Speeches, perswaded them first to lay down their Arms; which done as was directed, and his Army divided into three parts also, he caused each of them to fall upon one of those Parties of Lusita∣nians; who being before disarmed, were slaughter'd like Sheep, to the Number of 9000. Amongst the few that escaped was Viriatus, afterwards the Terrour of the Romans; in killing whom, Galba had done his Country more Service, than in the Slaughter of all the rest.
CHAP. V. The Exploits of the Great Viriatus, his seve∣ral Victories over the Romans, with his last Actions, Death, and place of Burial. 1. THE Renowned Viriatus, who as has been said, escap'd from the Massacre, committed by Galba in the three Vallies, was a Lusitanian without the mixture of any other Nation. Some Authors say, he was a common Robber,Viriatus his Origi∣nal. others will have him a Car∣rier, others a Sheperd, and lastly, others say, he went through all these mean Employments. Whatsoever he was before, at the time that Galba offered Peace to the Lusitanians, and Murdered so many in Cold Blood, he was one of them that were willing to hearken to his Proposals, and made his escape from the Slaughter. His mind burning with desire of Revenge, as soon as he heard that Galba was departed, he returned to the place of the Massacre, where causing his Companions to thrust their Hands into the yet fresh wounds of some Maidens, they swore by their Souls, not to desist from seeking Revenge as long as they were able to bear Arms. This done, Viriatus ranging throughout Lusi∣tania, stirred up the People, raised a good Body of Men, and breaking into Carpertania destroy'd all as he went, and returned home with a rich Booty. Then he caused his followers to reiterate the Oath they had taken, Sa∣crificing one of their Prisoners, and a Horse; and so every Man passing by, thrust his Hand into the Belly of each Sacrifice, vowing to do the like to the Roman Army. 2. It was now the beginning of the Year, 148 be∣fore the coming of Christ, 3114 from the Creation, and 2281 from the Deluge, when the Pretor Marcus Vetilius, a Man of known Valour, came to suppress the Tumults in Lusitania. Viriatus with 10000 Fighting Men was entring Andaluzia rather as every Mans Com∣panion, than Commander, as not daring to chastise them; with his Example and good Words, endeavour∣ed to draw back those that scattered to Plunder; but his Men not subject to Command, could not be con∣tained
within Bounds, which the Pretor perceiving, he he fell upon them,He is wor∣sted by M. Vetilius. and having killed a great number, easily put the rest to flight. Viriatus gathering the re∣mains of his scattered Forces, fled to a City near, and there provided to oppose the Enemy: It was not long before the Romans came and assaulted the City, but finding they had sustained great loss, the Pretor resolved to carry it by a long Siege: So far had he prevailed, that some principal Men among the Besieged began to treat of a Surrender, without consulting Viriatus, for as yet, they owned him not for their Superiour. Viri∣atus understanding there was such a design, but not who were the Managers of it, having in a raging Po∣sture ran about, and in that manner gathered the Mul∣titude to him, so efficaciously perswaded them to stand upon their Defence, and to have no Faith in the Romans, that they lifted him upon their Shoulders, and carrying him about the Walls, with loud crys, Proclaimed him their General. 3. The next day after he was proclaimed General, Viriatus drew out 1000 Horse, which was all he had, and facing the Romans made show as if he designed to break through them, which Vetilius the Pretor per∣ceiving, he kept his Men in a readiness to receive him. But Viriatus's design being only to amuze the Enemy, whilst his Foot escaped out of the City, he continued in the same Posture the greatest part of the day. At length understanding there was no Man left in the City, all his Foot being got into the Mountains, he stood the Enemies Charge, and kept them in play till Night, when through by-ways he hasted to the City Tribola, whether he had sent his Foot. This Ci∣ty stood upon the Coast between the Mouth of Guadi∣ana and Gibraltar, whence may be inferred that the other whence he came, was not far off. Vetilius in the Morning followed Viriatus, who having by the way increased his Forces, lay in wait on the Mountains that hung over a Valley, into which there were two nar∣row Passes, capable of only three Horsemen go∣ing in abreast: Into this place the Romans entred without fear, and turning their Horses to grass, took themselves to their rest. Viriatus giving the Sign to his Men to fall on, the Romans on a sud∣den found themselves beset on all sides, and being un∣armed
armed,Vetilius Routed and Slain. were put to the Sword without Mercy. A∣mong them dyed the Pretor; his Questor with such as escaped the Slaughter, and some Andaluzians, thinking to Revenge this Disgrace, engaging with Viriatus, lost 10000 Men. The next Year, Viriatus with Fire and Sword ranged all Carpentania as far as Toledo,147. without meeting any Opposition. Thus was he employed when Caius Plaucius the Roman General, who came to Command in Lusitania with 10000 Foot, and 1300 Horse, thought to have surprized him and his Men, being now mostly dispersed about in burning the Country. Viriatus tho weak, kept the Romans in play still retiring till getting into the Mountains, on a sud∣den they had lost him. Plaucius sent 4000 Men to pur∣sue and impede his March till he could come up with the rest of the Army; but he turning upon them, cut them all off before the Pretor could Relieve them, and having gained the Ford of Tagus, speedily passed over it, and returned into Lusitania. Viriatus having ga∣thered Strength, encamped in a strong place, now cal∣led Pomares, near Evora, whither Plaucius followed him, and was so received, that his whole Army turn∣ed their Backs.Viriatus defeats Plaucius. The Pretor fought with much Brave∣ry, and with his Example brought back his Men, but all in vain, for they were again put to flight, and Plau∣cius himself, with difficulty escaped. 4. Now was Viriatus master of the Field, ranging about Spain,146. and the Romans shut up in their Garisons, when Claudius Ʋnimanus, a most expert Captain, was sent by the Senate to command in Lusitania:He Over∣throws Cl. Unima∣nus. Viriatus Marching with a strong Body of Lusitanians, the Pre∣tor with a mighty Army met him, but soon found how little confidence was to be placed in a Heartless Multitude, for in the Field of Ourique he was over∣thrown, scarce any of his Army escaping Death or Bondage. This done, Viriatus returned Victorious in∣to Lusitania. In the mean while Ʋnimanus sent to Cajus Nigidius, the Pretor of the other Province, to give the Enemy a diversion. He entred the Territory of Riba de Coa, and marched along the River destroying all be∣fore him. Viriatus with all speed made towards him, and overtook him near to the City Viseo; where Nigi∣dius in a plain, strongly intrenched himself. There Viriatus kept him besieged till Hunger forcing him to
break out,Nigidius escapes from him▪ with Loss. he with Difficulty escaped, having lost the best part of his Army, and all his Ensigns. About 1000 of those that fled, gathering together, began to plunder the Villages, as they passed; and meeting 300 Lusitanians, laden with Booty, fell upon them; But they were so hotly received, that having lost 300 of their Men, and killed but 70 of the Enemy, they were glad to suffer the rest to march off with their Plunder. Another Body of the Romans, having taken a rich Boo∣ty, led 500 Captives away, the one half whereof were Women, who observing that no great Regard was had of them, only their Hands bound behind, in the dead time of the Night they unbound one another, and af∣terwards the Men; then seizing the Arms of the Ro∣mans, buried in Sleep, put most of them to the Sword before they waked; only a few escaped by the Favour of the Night. Next Morning the Victors put the Armour of the Romans upon their Women. Ormia, a modest Lusitanian Woman, being taken by another Party, and long courted by her Keeper to consent to his Lust, she at length seemingly complied; wherewith being delighted, he put himself into her Power; so that she waiting her Opportunity, when he slept, with his own Sword cut off his Head, and carried away both to her Husband, as a Token that she had preserved her Chastity: Which done, not so content, she killed her self before his Face. 5. Caius Lelius,145. a Man of great Valour, came Prae∣tor into Spain; but Authors do not mention any Suc∣cess he had against Viriatus: Perhaps it was thought enough that he lost nothing.143. Two Years after, Fabius Emilianus was sent, with a Consular Army of 18000 Men, to put an End to the War. Viriatus, hearing of his coming into Andaluzia, broke into the Roman Pro∣vince, doing greater Harm than before, and took two Cities, into which he put Garrisons. Fabius, that the Gods might be favourable to his Undertakings, went to offer Sacrifice in the Temple of Hercules, at Cadiz; strictly charging his Officers, upon no Account to stir out of the Camp before his Return. The next Day Viriatus appeared before the Roman Army, at such time as certain Foragers were returning, with a Guard; of whom he cut off the greatest part: A good Body of Horse issuing out of the Camp, to relieve their Compa∣nions,
drove back the Lusitanians to their Main Body; but they were there so fiercely charged, that few of them returned back. Fabius coming from his Sacrifice, stormed that his Orders had been disobeyed.Fabius E∣milianus obliges Vi∣riatus to retire. Some Days after, about Midnight, he marched, in great Silence, two Miles forwards, and surprizing the Lusitanian Camp, obliged Viriatus confusedly to retire to Vecor, a strong Place; where not thinking it safe to attack him, he marched away to recover the two Cities lately gar∣rison'd by the Lusitanians. The Inhabitants of the Pro∣vince between Duero and Minho took up Arms against those of Galicia:Hostilius Mancinus overthrows 30000 Spaniards▪ Lucius Hostilius Mancinus, the Consul, Emilianus's Colleague, fearing lest they should invade the Vaccei and Celtiberi, came so suddenly upon them, that he, without any Difficulty, overthrew 30000 of them, killing many, and putting the rest to flight. Popilius succeeded Emilianus in the Government of Lu∣sitania, when Viriatus finding himself weak, made some Overtures of Peace deceitfully, for at the same time he stirred up the People about Numantia to make War; and he, in the Territories of Riba de Coa, committed all manner of Cruelties upon the Romans, even upon those that submitted themselves to him.Popilius routed. Popilius hast∣ing to their Relief, was in a pitch'd Battel shamefully put to flight, with the Loss of the best of his Army. 6. Viriatus was far enter'd into Castile; but under∣standing that the new Praetor,141. Quintus Pompeius, was marching towards Lusitania, he turned back to defend his own Country.Viriatus put to  by Pom∣pey. The two Armies met near Evora, where a bloody Battel was fought; Pompey obtained the Victory, and Viriatus fled to the Mountain of Venus: Here he gathered new Strength; and encouraging the Ticii, Vaccei and Beli, who followed him, he marched again to meet the Romans, whom he forced to take Shelter in their Trenches, leaving behind them 27 En∣signs, and 4000 Men slain, whereof 500 were Horse. The Praetor thus shut up within his Works, Viriatus enter'd Andaluzia, and summoned Ʋtica, which was kept by a strong Roman Garrison, who answered him with Scorn, calling him Robber. He, the better to compass his Revenge, marched away in great haste, as if he had fled, certain Troops of Horse, sent from the City, pursuing him in the Rear; whom he, without halting, repulsed; and so they returned to their Garri∣son:
But in the Dead of the Night he marched back; and croing several Valleys, distant from the City, he left his Foot in an Ambuscade, himself, with the Horse, appearing before the City, so that many Morasses lay betwixt him and the Walls, which were impassable to any that knew them not as well as he. At Break of Day his Party being decried from the Walls, they were supposed to be some Straglers of the Lusitanian Army, and therefore the Garrison sallied out upon them: Viriatus at first withdrawing, as if he had fled, drew them into the Marshes, where, when they were fast stuck, he faced about, and put them all to the Sword. Those of Ʋtica, after this Action, expelled the Roman Garrison, and received one of the Lusita∣nians. Viriatus moving thence, towards the Streights of Gibraltar, wasted the Territories of the Bastetani, Pom∣pey not offering to oppose him. 7. The Consul,140. Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus, was sent from Rome, with an Army of 20000 Men, to pro∣secute this War; and Micipsa, the African King, came to his Aid, with 10 Elephants, and 300 Numidian Horse. With this Force he marched to Ʋtica, where Viriatus lay; who, after some Skirmishes, his Provision failing, retired into Lusitania, to secure the Harvest, In the mean while, a good Body of his Men, com∣manded by two noted Captains, called Curius and Apu∣leyus, broke into Andaluzia. The Consul, with his whole Army, marched towards them; and for the more Expedition, left his Baggage behind him, with a small Guard.Fabius Maximus defeats the Spanish Am, and kills Cu∣rius, their General. The Lusitanians informed thereof, took another Way; and with a Compass, deceiving the Consul, plunder'd his Baggage. He turning suddenly upon them, whilst they were busie in robbing a Con∣voy of Provisions, put them to flight, killing Curius, their Captain, and recovering the Booty. Thence the Consul moving, he took five Towns, Garrison'd by the Lusitanians, upon Articles, which he performed not, turning them over to the Fury of his Soldiers. Vi∣riatus hasted to revenge this Breach of Faith; and be∣ing come in sight of the Consul, he drew up his Foot in a Square Battel▪ with his Horse on both Wings, but far advanced before the Foot, whom he ordered not to stir till they saw how the Horse behaved themselves against the Elephants. They charged the Roman Horse,
forcing them to retire to their Elephants;139. at the sight of which,Another Defeat of the Ro∣mans. the Spanish Horse disorderly fled, the Ene∣my fiercely pursuing: The Foot drew back in good Order; and Viriatus perceiving the Enemy's Battel broke in the Pursuit, rallying his Cavalry, he gave such a Charge, that Servilianus, with his Elephants, fled, leaving 6000 Men dead. Soon after this, Servilianus pursuing a Lusitanian Robber, called Corroba, besieged him in a strong Place, where Hunger forced him to surrender, upon Promise not only of Life, but that his Men should march off with their Arms; yet so, as to swear, never more to employ them against the Romans. But the Consul, unmindful of his Promise, when he had all the Troop of Robbers, consisting of 500 Men, in his Power, cut off all their Right Hands, except the Captain's. 8. Spring coming on, all Lusitania was full of War∣like Preparations. Viriatus marched against the Con∣sul, who had besieged the City of Erissana; and with wonderful Cunning, made his Way into it; where ha∣ving well encouraged the Defendants, he sallied out so furiously, that Servilianus was glad to retire to a Place of Advantage.Viriatus makes Peace with the Ro∣mans. Here he was so straiten'd, that he made Proposals of Peace, which were agreed upon, and Vi∣riatus allowed a Friend of the People of Rome. This done, the Armies parted, one into Andaluzia, the other into Lusitania. One of those who approved of the Peace concluded, was Quintus Servilius Cepio, the Con∣sul's Brother; yet afterwards considering how disho∣nourable it was to Rome, he openly blamed his Brother, and by that Means obtained the Consulship, and a numerous Army, to better the Affairs of the Romans in Lusitania.The Peace broken. Cepio kept his Designs so private, that the Lusitanians thought of nothing but their Country-Af∣fairs. They were awaken'd by the News brought, that the Consul had, by Storm, taken the City of Arsa not far from Sevil. Viriatus was then at Valencia, who im∣mediately marched with some Troops towards Lusita∣nia. By the Way he reduced Segorbe, which had re∣volted; when Cepio appeared with a mighty Army: He finding himself too weak for so powerful an Army, with his Horse amused them, till his Foot were got into the Mountains. Cepio pursued him, to cut off his Retreat into Portugal. He, as he fled into the Heart of
Spain, used excessive Cruelty to all that bore the Ro∣man Name: But finding this turned not to Account, he sent an Ambassador to Cepio, to put him in mind of the Peace, so solemnly, and so lately concluded. The Consul having heard the Ambassadors, and sounded their Dispositions, with mighty Promises prevailed up∣on them to murder Viriatus. Their Names were, Di∣ctalcon, Minurus and Aulaus; all three Captains of Note among the Lusitanians.Viriatus killed by Treachery. These three having underta∣ken this base Action, returned, and for some time kept Viriatus in hand with the Hopes of Peace, till, waiting their Opportunity, in the Dead of the Night, they en∣ter'd his Tent, and slew him as he lay asleep. Thence they fled, to give the Consul an Account of what they had done, whose Countenance they found altered; as it generally happens to Traytors, after they have com∣mitted the Treason. 9. In the Morning, the Lusitanians missing their Ge∣neral, they went into his Tent, where finding him dead, the whole Camp was filled with Lamentation; and in Revenge of his Death, they put all the Roman Prisoners to the Sword.His Fune∣ral-Pomp. To perform his Funeral-Rites with all imaginable Pomp, in the midst of the Field, they raised a vast Pile of Timber, leaving a Place for the Body. The Top of the Pile was adorned with Ensigns, and other Trophies of Arms. Then their Idolatrous Priest going up to the Top, called upon the Ghost of Viria∣tus; and killing some Captives, with their Blood sprinkled the Arms; which done, he came down, and set fire to the Pile, which in a Moment consumed the Body. The Funeral-Rites thus performed, the Army chose one Tantalus for their General; but he wanting the Fortune and Conduct of Viriatus, could not so much as lead back his People into their own Country. Servilius, to gain the Reputation of a merciful Conque∣ror, was content that the Lusitanians, delivering up their Arms, should be dispersed into several Parts. Vi∣riatus, as to his Person, was of a large Stature, strong Limbs, curled Hair, large Eyes broad Eye-brows, a stern Countenance, and a large hooked Nose. As to his Qualities, he was modest, liberal, prudent, of a rea∣dy Wit, and quick of Invention. Some of Viriatus's Soldiers gathering up his Ashes, brought them back in∣to his own Country, and buried them, together with
his Sword. In the time of King John the III. who reign∣ed from the Year 1521 till 1557. in the Territory of Belas, two Leagues from Lisbon, and in the Lands of Peter Machado Carregueyro, in turning up certain old Ruins, was found a Stone Chest with this Inscription; Hic Jacet Viriatus Lusitanus Dux. In it was found a Sword, on which certain Characters were Engraven: The Prince and many other persons of Note saw it, and Machado offering to sell the Sword, they would give no∣thing for it, so he gave it to a Friend of his of the Island Madera, and by that means it was lost. The Chest was broke in pieces, and no part of it remains. CHAP. VI. The Actions of the Lusitanians after the Death of Viriatus, from the Year 133. before Christ till the Year 80. when Sertorius takes upon him the Command, with his Exploits till the Year 70. 1. THE Lusitanians not loosing their Courage,130. though they had lost their General,Tantalus Commands the Lusi∣tanians. broke out again under their new Commander Tantalus, but not with the same Fortune as before, being easily suppres∣sed by the Consul Decius Junius Brutus, who reduced then to sue for Peace. It was granted upon tolerable Conditions, one whereof was, that he should assign them Lands to live upon: These Lands were along the delightful Southern Coast, upon the River Turia, now Guadalaviar, where they built the most famous City Valencia; the foundation whereof is therefore as∣signed to Brutus the Consul. This Army thus Disban∣ded, Brutus entred Lusitania, without meeting any op∣position, till he came to Eburobricium, a City seated on the Sea-coast near to which now stands the Town of Alfazeyran; the Inhabitants of this place adventured to come out a League from their Walls, and give the Consul Battle. He in the heat of the Fight, vowed he would there build a Temple to Neptune, if he obtain∣ed
the Victory; and having without much difficulty overthrown his Enemy, performed his Vow: He laid Siege to the City, and soon was Master of it. 2. The next Year, Brutus with his victorious Army, passed over the rapid River Duero, and coming unex∣pectedly upon the People that inhabited between that River and Minho, made a great slaughter of them, which obliged such as could escape to fly to the Moun∣tains. Thence in Parties they came down, and cut off many of his Men, nay, the very Women showed such Valour, that the Consul was obliged to kill a great number of them; but perceiving the harm was done him from the Mountains, he fell to Burning all the plain Country, with such Fury, that People were glad to beg a Peace, which was easily granted: Thus the Consul was at leasure to Besiege the City Labrica,Brutus the Roman Consul takes the City La∣brica. the Inhabitants whereof immediately submitted, but no sooner had he turned his back, than they began to fortify themselves, and falling upon such Romans, as were left in their Neighbourhood, cut them in pieces. This News being carried to Brutus, he turned back, and encompassing the City, forced the Inhabitants to come out without Arms into the open Field; there taking them into the middle of his Army, and having severe∣ly reproved them for their Perfidiousness, when they expected nothing but present Death, he ordered them to return again to their City, and be more faithful for the future. From that time forward they continued in Subjection, but could not be brought to serve against their own Country. 3. The Roman Army advanced to Braga plundering the Country,125. but the Citizens sallying out in a good Body, surprized and carried away a Convoy of Provi∣sions that was going to the Camp. Brutus, in revenge, destroyed all before him, and the Bracarenses more of∣fended then terrified, marched six Miles out of the Ci∣ty to give him Battle; the Women here played the part of most valiant Soldiers, and after the Fight had long stood doubtful▪ the Romans were put to flight: The Bracarenses over-secure in their Victory, lay a∣bout the Fields without any Watch,He destroys the Country about Bra∣ga. which Brutus ima∣gining, having rally'd his Forces, he came upon them, and having well revenged his Disgrace with the Death of many, the rest fled to the Shelter of their Walls. He
assaults the City which the Inhabitants disdaining, the Men sallied out, leaving the Women to guard the Walls; but they resolving not to be out-done by the Men, rushed out after them, and so together repulsed the Romans to their Trenches. This made the Consul give over the Attack, and changing his manner of proceeding, wa∣sted all the Country about; in this manner the Con∣sul came to the River Lina, formerly called Lethe. It was the common Opinion, that those who passed it, for∣got their Countries; for which reason, Brutus his Sol∣diers could not be perswaded to enter the Ford. He to undeceive them, snatching an Ensign from the Bearer, set Spurs to his Horse and passed over; then calling to his Soldiers, told them many things of Rome, to con∣vince them he had not forgot it, and by this means he perswaded them to venture over the River. The Cam∣poneses who inhabited on the other side, came to hinder their passage, but were repulsed, and the whole Army gained the farther Bank.Nar 60000 Ga∣licians de∣stroyed. The People of Galicia, to the number of 60000, coming to the relief of their Neigh∣bours, were by Brutus in their passage over the River Minho so intirely overthrown, that the greatest part was either Drowned, put to the Sword, or made Captives. The loss of this powerful succour so discouraged the Lu∣sitanians, that they suffered the victorious Army to range about at pleasure, taking many Towns without the least opposition. 4. The City Cinania stood resolutely upon its De∣fence, and Brutus offered them Peace if they would buy it. Their Answer was, That their Ancestors had left them their Swords and Valour to maintain their Liberty, not Gold to purchase it: Certain it is, this City was many Years after destroyed by another Power. Brutus, spent two Years in those parts,122. his Command being still prolong∣ed to him, because he was Fortunate: He now stiling himself Conqueror of Galicia and Lusitania, marched against the Inhabitants of the Province of Beira,Brutus Conquers Lusitania and Gali∣cia, and triumphs at Rome. who be∣ing a fierce Barbarous People, put him to much trouble in passing Rivers, and piercing the uncouth Mountains, till at last coming to a Battle, he was worsted; yet re∣covering again, he obtained a Victory, but at so dear a rate, that he would gladly have been without it, rather than have sustained such loss. After this, he again pas∣sed over Tagus, and resided three Years in the City Mo∣rus,
then standing where now the Castle of Almourol is; he ended his Government with such Reputation, that the Roman Senate unanimously voted he should triumph over the Lusitanians and Gallicians. 5. Whilst the Proconsul Decius Junius Brutus trium∣phed, and Rome wasted with Civil Wars, could not carry on its Foreign Expeditions, the Senate sent Go∣vernours, who might supply their want of strength by policy and obliging the Natives. The project proved ineffectual, for a powerful Army broke out of Lusitania, consuming all that stood in its way belonging to the Romans;120. Caius Marius the Proconsul,The Lusi∣tanians re∣volt, and are reduced who had gained Reputation at Numantia, put a stop to this Torrent. He brought not numerous but choice Forces from Rome, and joyning them to those he found in Spain, marched to repress the fury of the Lusitanians; he worsted them, but they assembling a greater power again, gave him a considerable Defeat: Nevertheless, the Proconsul no∣thing terrifyed, as being well used to the various For∣tunes of War, calling together the Celtiberi, and draw∣ing his old Soldiers out of the Garrisons, in several ren∣counters, overthrew the Lusitanians in such manner; that for some Years, we have no account of them. Af∣ter that time of silence, they again began to disturb the Province of Hispania Viterior,109. so that Calfurnius Piso was sent from Rome against them; it is natural to guess he had no great success, because very soon after Servius Sulpicius Galba was sent to succeed him; neither is it likely that Galba sped much better, for in the Town of Condeixa, there is still an antient Inscription which denotes some hot piece of service, in which Galba lost many Men of Note.107. His Successor was Quintus Servi∣lius Cepio, Son to him that dishonourably contrived the Death of Viriatus; the particulars of what he did are not known,104. but sure it was much, since he was allow∣ed to triumph at Rome. A powerful Roman Army ran∣ged in Lusitania, but with such ill success, that not a Man escaped to carry home the News of their loss.99. This fatal stroke produced a quiet Peace for four Years, which ended in a great Victory obtained over the Lusi∣tanians by Decius Junius Silanus.97. Yet the vanquished gathering new Forces,L. Corn. Dolabella again sub∣dues them. made a mighty havock in all the Province of Hispania Ʋlterior. Lucius Cornelius Do∣labella was sent in hast Proconsul from Rome, to reme∣dy
this growing Evil. He behaved himself so prudent∣ly, that the Lusitanians were obliged to lay down their Arms, and keep within their own Borders, for which it was granted him to triumph at Rome. 6. All these Calamities were not enough to subdue the Lusitanians, and therefore the Romans designing ut∣terly to extirpate them, sent the Consul Publius Lici∣nius Crassus against them. He behaved himself so well, that he was continued in that Government four Years, doing incredible harm in the Country, and at last tri∣umphed at Rome:90. The chief service that acquired him that Honour, was the War with the People between the Rivers Duero and Minho. There he had first know∣ledge of the Islands called Cassiterides, which some im∣agine to be those of Bayona in Galicia,The Islands of Bayona in Galicia. and other be∣lieve they were swallowed by the Sea; they were ten in Number, one of them only inhabited; the Natives of a swarthy Complexion, their cloathing a long Gown down to the Feet, girt upon the Breast, all of them car∣ried Staves in their hands.87. They traded with other Nations, particularly the Carthaginians, for Hides, and Lead, and Tin, whereof they had great Plenty; still the Proconsul Licinius Crassus, by fair means, drew them to the Roman Friendship. The cruel Wars be∣tween Marius and Sylla, hindred the Romans from send∣ing Supplies into Spain;85. the Lusitanians took hold of that opportunity, and with a numerous Body breaking into the Roman Provinces, exercised the utmost Cruel∣ty, sparing neither Sex nor Age, and this made the Roman Commanders quit the weaker places, and retire to those of more safety. But in the height of this their prosperity,83. came Caius Annius, (sent by Sylla after Ser∣torius) who in two great Battles, though with much difficulty, overthrew the Lusitanians; This made them sensible, that they only wanted a General, and there∣fore pitched upon Sertorius, who was then in Mau∣ritania. 7. Sertorius was well known in Spain for the share he had in the War of Numantia;Sertorius his Origin. he was born in Italy a∣mong the Sabini, of an indifferent Family, neither Great nor Despicable: His first Years he spent in the Schools, the best and last in the Army. Being ill treated at Rome, he fled into Spain, and then into Africk, where in the City of Tangier, he found the body of the Gyant
Antus, and other pieces of Antiquity: Here Ambassa∣dors sent from Lusitania found him, and in the Name of the People, invited him to come and Command them, which he immediately accepted, and came over with the Ambassadors. At his first Arrival, he gained the good will of all Men,He comes into Lusi∣tania. by his Affability and Bounty, and chose Evora for a place of Arms; when he had taken an Oath of Fidelity of the Lusitanians, he visited the Province, accompanied with 700 Horse and 4000 Foot, and with all possible Diligence, provided all Ne∣cessaries for War: The Neighbouring People perceiv∣ing it, offered him their Service, as did others farther off, moved by their Example. Among them the City Osca, which Tradition will have to be that in Aragon, a strong Place, where Sertorius settled an University: This he did for his own Security rather than the In∣struction of the People, that he might there have the principal Youth of the Country together as Hostages;His Pra∣ctises. for the fixing of this University Professors of all Sciences, came from several Countries. To strenghten his En∣terest the more, he made use of another practice, which is, that having a Hind brought him, he made her so tame, that she followed him in the Army, amidst the Noise of Arms, and the People admiring thereat, he gave out, it was sent him by the Goddess Diana, to give him advice how to behave himself in the War. When he understood that any of his Captains had gain∣ed a Victory, he caused the Hind to be Crown'd with Flowers by him, he entrusted with the Secret, and as soon as let loose, she would run to him, and he putting his Ear to her Mouth, would discover what he had been told before, saying, Diana gave him that intelli∣gence by the Mouth of the Hind: This Fraud made the People follow him, as if he were somewhat more than Man. 8. Sertorius having thus gained the Affections of the Lusitanians,His War∣like Ex∣ploits. and secured their Children, as Hostages, at Osca, ventured to take the Field, against the Romans, with only 8000 Men, whereof 5000 were Lusitanians, the rest Italians and Africans. Nine Years he maintain∣ed War against Rome, and against four of its best Gene∣rals, who brought over 7000 Horse, and 122000 Foot, besides the Spanish Auxiliaries. His first Exploit, was, the subduing most part of the Province of Carpen∣tania;
where he found little or no Resistance. Next, he defeated Cota, the Roman Admiral, who kept the Streights of Gibraltar, and hinder'd Supplies from com∣ing to him out of Mauritania. Sailing victorious up the River Guadalquiver, he surprized, at Break of Day, the Roman Army, under the Command of Didius, who lay encamped upon the Banks of the River, and put the greatest part of it to the Sword. Herculeus, one of his Captains, was sent out by him, against Lucius Do∣mitius, who, by Order of the Consul, Quintus Metellus Pius, destroyed all the Country between Andaluzia and the Pyrenean Mountains. Herculeus pursuing, overtook him in Aragon, where he overthrew his Army, and kil∣led him. The Fame of this Defeat moved Manilius, Proconsul of Gallia Norbonensis, to pass the Mountains with a mighty Army of Romans and Gauls, in hopes to gather together the few scatter'd Remnants of Domitius's Army. But the Victor, flushed with his late Success, met him near Lerida, where a most bloody Battel was fought, and Manilius routed, with a terrible Slaughter of the Roman Legions; but, above all, of the French Horse. In the mean while, Sertorius stuck close to Me∣tellus; who perceiving himself to be still upon the Lo∣sing Hand, resolved to alter his Method of Carrying on the War, and laid Seige to Lacobriga, now called Lagos, in the Kingdom of Algarve. Want of Water pressed the Besieged; but Sertorius, with great Rewards, pre∣vailed with 2000 Soldiers to break through the Roman Camp, with each of them a Skin-full of Water. This Supply encouraged the Lacobrigenses, till Sertorius could come to raise the Seige: But Metellus, hearing of his Preparations, marched away, and left it. Want of Provisions forced him to depart; for Sertorius had cut off a Legion that was coming to him, with a Convoy. Metellus marched into Andaluzia, Sertorius keeping close at his Heels, and came to Osca, where the Lusitanian Youths were, designing to take that Place; but it was well provided: Besides, the Lusitanian Army being up∣on his Back, he marched away to Cartagena; and Ser∣torius returned to Evora. Thus it appears, that Osca, where the University was erected, was not in Arragon, as some will have it; but in Andaluzia. At Evora, Ser∣torius received Ambassadors from Mithridates, King of Pontus: He proposed to settle Amity, for the subduing
of Italy; offered Ships, and asked some Lusitanian Sol∣diers: Besides, he offered to Sertorius the whole Domi∣nion of Asia. Sertorius received the Ambassadors with Majesty, promised the Supply of Soldiers, and after∣wards sent it. The Ambassadors being dismissed, Ser∣torius employed himself in making Provision for the next Campaign, and exercising his Men; knowing he could not expect long to enjoy Peace. 9. In the mean time came Pompey the Great, from Rome, and was joined by Metellus. Marcus Perpenna came also from Sardinia, with 30 Veterane Troops, to the Assistance of Sertorius. The Lusitanians, encoura∣ged with this Aid, and lying now in sight of the Ro∣mans, pressed their General to lead them out to Battel: But he weighing the mighty Power of the Enemy, me∣ditated how to gain some Advantage by Policy. Part of his Army, carried away with Heat, and forgetful of good Discipline, adventured, contrary to his Orders, to charge the Romans, but came off with Dishonour; which nothing displeased Sertorius. Here it was, that he convinced his Men, by the Example of two Horses; One, very lean and poor, he gave to a lusty Young Man, ordering him to pull out the Hair of his Main and Tail; which he attempting to draw out by Hand∣fulls, laboured much, but profited little. The other, being a beautiful, strong Horse, he gave to an ancient Man, for the same purpose; and he plucking Hair by Hair, did that with Ease, which the other could not do with great Pains. Thus, he said, they were to pro∣ceed against the Romans, whom it was impossible at one Stroke to overthrow; but easie to compass at many. Sertorius laid Seige to Laurona, (now Leiria,) 4 Leagues from Valencia, on the Banks of the River Xucar. Pom∣pey and Metellus came to raise the Seige, but lost 10000 Men in the Attempt; and endeavouring to gain a Ri∣sing Ground, which lay opportunely for putting of sup∣plies in the Town, they found Sertorius had prevented them. Next Pompey designed to besiege the Lusitanian Army, hemming it in between his own and the Town, but Sertorius having left 6000 Men in Ambush, they attacked him in his approach; so that he was glad to return to his Camp, and look on whilst the City was taken and Burnt. The Roman Army consisted of 1000 Horse and 30000 Foot, but the Lusitanians were 70000 strong.
This done, Sertorius returned victorious to Evora, which Place he fortified with strong Walls, and brought Wa∣ter to it from several Springs, through a stately Aque∣duct. His whole Family, at this time, consisted of an old Nurse, and three Slaves: And though he was So∣vereign in Portugal for some Years, he had no House of his own. Now it was, he built one so small, that it would not contain an ordinary Gentleman of our Times. He married at Evora the Daughter of a Noble Citizen, called Firmius Liberius; by whom he had no Children. 10. Spring coming on,72. Pompey and Metellus drew out of their Winter-Quarters; and marching through Andaluzia, separately strove to recover those Places which Sertorius had Garrison'd. But he, losing no Time, advanced against Pompey, and met him on the Banks of the River Xucar. Pompey resolved to fight, that Metellus might have no Share in the Honour of the Action: And Sertorius thought best to have to do with them apart.Sertorius worsted by Pompey and Me∣tellus. Thus agreed, they drew out; Sertorius facing Afranius, and Perpenna, Pompey. The Charge being given, Sertorius began to gain upon Afranius; when understanding that Perpenna gave way to Pompey, he hasted thither, and presently put the Enemy to flight. In the mean while, Afranius, encouraging his Men, had almost routed that Wing which Sertorius left near possessed of Victory; but he returning thither, soon restored the Battel. Now had Pompey's Army been entirely cut off, but that Metellus appearing, Ser∣torius stayed his Soldiers from the Pursuit, and said, Halt, halt; for I would have sent this Boy to Rome, well scourged, had not that old Woman snatched him out of my Hands. However, Metellus did not attempt any thing upon the Victors; contenting himself to have saved the flying Army. Sertorius returning to his Camp, missed his Hind, lost in the Hurrey of the Battel, which made him extreamly melancholy: But some time after, certain Country-men bringing him Tidings of her, he ordered them to conceal the Matter; and, at a certain Time appointed, to turn her loose: Then cal∣ling together his Chief Officers, he told them, The God∣dess of the Woods had appeared to him, assuring him, that the Hind should return, with Instructions how he should be∣have himself. Whilst he was yet talking, the Hind, set
loose, came running to him; and laying her Head be∣twixt his Knees, licked his Hands. 11. It is incredible, how much the whole Army rejoiced at the Return of the Hind: And Sertorius, to make use of that Heat, marched towards Valencia, where Metellus was, wasting the Country. He so hem∣med him up in a Plain, that he must either perish, or fight. However, he sent Mummius, with a Party of Horse, to conduct a Convoy of Provisions to him. Sertorius having Notice thereof, marched out by Night; and in the Morning, putting the Guard to the Sword, he took the whole Convoy. Metellus contemn∣ing Sertorius, marched to seek him; and Perpenna, af∣ter him. Thus they were soon engaged, with such ill Success on the Romans side, that they began to fly. The old Metellus, disdaining to be thus disgraced, did Wonders exceeding his Age, till he fell wounded with a Dart:Sertorius routed by Metellus. And the Shame of losing their General bring∣ing back his Men, they so fiercely charged the Lusita∣nians, disorder'd in the Pursuit, that they recovered the Day; putting them to the Rout, with great Slaugh∣ter. Sertorius did all that Metellus had done before, to stay his Men; but could only stop the victorious Romans, till his Army escaped: Which done, he fol∣lowed after, to a strong City, standing on an Hill. Metellus encompassed the Place, thinking to starve it; but Sertorius had before laid in sufficient Stores. A few Days after, with a Party of Light Horse, he made his Escape, deceiving the Roman Guards, and returned safe into Lusitania, where he was received with unexpres∣sible Joy.
CHAP. VII. The remaining Actions of Sertorius, from the Year 70, before the Birth of Christ, till his Death, which was in the Year 68. What else happen'd in Lusitania, till the Coming of Julius Caesar; and his Exploits, till the Year 57, before Christ. 1. THE following Year Sertorius put to Sea with a Fleet,70. resolving to destroy all the Ships he found in the Roman Harbours;The Ro∣mans sus∣tain great Losses by Sertorius. and in a short time, scouring the Mediterranean, he did great Harm. This was a great Loss to Pompey and Metellus; but a greater they sustained by the Means of Herculeius, a Lusitanian Captain, who cut off six Troops of Horse and a Le∣gion, which, under the Command of Probus Emilia∣nus, were conducting a great Convoy of Provisions. This put the Roman Generals upon taking new Me∣thods; Pompey went away to Navarre, whilst Metellus gave an Account of his Losses to the Senate of Rome, and pressed for considerable Supplies.69. They came ac∣cordingly; and the two Generals took the Field again. Metellus marching apart from Pompey, near Italica, (which was not far from Sevil,) was met by Herculeius, and so pressed, that he betook himself to a Mountain. The Lusitanian Army lay at the Foot of the Hill, da∣ring the Romans to give Battel. Metellus waiting an Opportunity, took it so aptly, that he killed and made Prisoners 20000 of Herculeius's Army, driving the rest out of the Field; and was so delighted with this great Success, that he caused Images of Victory, as he came into every Town, to be let down artificially, with Garlands of Flowers to crown himself; as also, his Praises to be publickly sung. Sertorius immediately marched to seek the Victor, who was on his Way to Catalonia: He did not overtake him, but cut off a Par∣ty of Horse that was carrying the News of the Victory, and some of the Prisoners, to Pompey. Herculeius was so much ashamed of his Defeat, that he absconded, and
would not be seen; but Sertorius comforted him, and, with much Difficulty, prevailed with him to appear again. 2. Sertorius leading a mighty Army against Metellus, who was in the Kingdom of Murcia, by the Way de∣stroyed all the Province of Andaluzia; Metellus retiring to Valencia, where Pompey then was; who sent a Par∣ty of Light-Horse, to discover the Strength of Serto∣rius, and found his Army numerous, and in good Or∣der. He passed the River Guadalaviar, near whose Banks the two Roman Generals lay encamped, on an advantageous high Ground. Both Armies being re∣solved to give Battel, and being drawn out in order to it, they stopped to see the Event of a single Combat between two Soldiers, who had challenged one ano∣ther: Pompey's Soldier having killed him of Sertorius, taking off his Helmet to cut off his Head, he found it was his own Brother; whereupon, he immediately kil∣led himself. This strange Accident put off the Battel for that Day; but the next Day after, they engaged with great Resolution;Metellus and Pom∣pey again overthrow Sertorius. when, in the Heat of the Action, a Soldier telling Sertorius that the General of the Horse was killed, he struck him through the Body, that he might not terrifie others with that News: Yet neither this, nor all he could do, was enough to prevent his being put to the Rout, with the Loss of 6000 of his Men. It was no less Grief to Sertorius, than the Loss of the Battel, that the City Valencia submitted to the victo∣rious Romans; and much more, when other Places fol∣lowed the Example of it; amongst which was Guada∣laxara. Hither he marched with Speed; but the In∣habitants being fled to a Place almost inaccessible, full of many great Caves, they scoffed at him, asking whe∣ther he had Wings to come at them. He tried all Stra∣tagems to reduce them, but nothing succeeded. At length he raised great Heaps of Sand and Dust oppo∣site to the Mouths of the Caves; and waiting till a strong North Wind blew directly in upon them, caus∣ed his Men, with Shovels, to cast up the Sand; which being so shaken, was by the Wind carried into the Caves so violently, that those within, being almost sti∣fled, were glad to cry for Mercy. Sertorius forgave them all, and took nothing from them, but some ne∣cessary Provisions for his Army.
3. This last Action gained Sertorius great Reputa∣tion, as well of Policy to overcome, as of Clemency towards the vanquished; but his Forces being very much broken, some of the principal Romans that fol∣lowed him, proposed to come to an accommodati∣on with Pompey. Sertorius utterly rejected their Advice, saying, Since the Romans would not treat with him in his Prosperity, he would never condescend to fue to them in his Ad∣versity. And that his Actions might sute with his Words, tho' then weak and lately overthrown, hearing that Pompey had distressed Palencia, he hasted to the relief of the Besieged, and without loosing time, he Assaults the Romans, and his Men being much disordered in the Confusion, he was got so far among his Enemies, that his Horse being killed, he had inevitably perished, had not a Body of Lusitanians offered to Sacrifice their own lives for the defence of his. They desperately forced their way to the place where he was Fighting, and ta∣king him into the midst of them, carried him off in safety. He thus brought back to his Men, so encou∣raged them with his presence,He recovers and worsts the Ro∣mans. that they obliged Pompey to quit his Camp, and with it his Tents and Engines: Had not the Night been so near, few Romans had esca∣ped, but they under the shelter of it, got away to places of safety. In the mean while Metellus laid hard Siege to Calahorra, but the victorious Sertorius drove him thence by main force, with the Slaughter of 3000 of his Men, and entring the Town, Commended the Fidelity of the Inhabitants. Here he was informed, that Metellus and Pompey joyning their Forces, lay before Osca or Huesca his University; thither he hasted and Encamped at a small distance from them, so carelesly, that Metel∣lus forced him to take shelter in the Besieged City in great Confusion, leaving behind him many Armes and Horses, and much Ammunition: This frown of For∣tune moved the Romans, who had hitherto followed Sertorius, to conspire against him. Here by the way, it is to be observed, That doubtless there were two Os∣ca's, since we Read, that before this time, they Fought in Andaluzia near Osca, and now again being in the Territories of Aragon, Sertorius fled to Osca. 4. Perpenna, that Roman who had hitherto so faith∣fully served Sertorius, now tempted by the promised rewards, undertook to kill him: Sertorius himself in
some measure forwarded his Design, by putting to death the Sons of many Spaniards, who had revolted from him to the Romans, which rendred him odious to the People, and ministred an opportunity to Perpenna to compass his intended Treachery. Sertorius understan∣ding there was a Conspiracy against him,Sertorius Murthered. gave an ac∣count thereof to the Lusitanians, who were his Guard, and they immediately put to Death Ten of the Con∣spirators. None seemed more to commend this Exe∣cution, than Perpenna, who as it were, to divert Serto∣rius, invited him to a Supper, whither he, suspecting nothing, went; and; in the height of his Mirth, was killed with 21 Wounds. The first that struck him was a Roman, called Antony: There was no less mourn∣ing at his Death among the Lusitanians, than had been for Viriatus, and many killed themselves at his Funeral. The Hind that had always followed Sertorius, seeing him Dead, smelling to him, and heavily Groaning, at length forbearing all Sustenance, fell down Dead by his side. The Lusitanians gathering his Ashes into an Urne, returned to Evora, where they were Honourably En∣tombed. The Magistrates of Evora, then the chief Go∣vernment of Lusitania, consulting how to secure the Common-wealth, resolved not to alter any thing, till they saw what was done by Perpenna, with whom was the greatest part of Sertorius his Army, tho' many had forsaken him, seeing Pompey pressing upon them with a mighty Power. 5. Perpenna failing of the promised Reward of his Treachery from Metellus,68. was not content to have Murdered his General, unless he also usurped his Com∣mand. Therefore calling together the Heads of the Army, after inveighing against the Cruelty and Perfi∣diousness of Sertorius, he offered himself for their Lea∣der: Many of them before bribed by him, easily con∣sented, and others seeing Pompey so near, complied with necessity least they should want a Head in that time of Danger. Pompey resolving the first thing he did to make an end of Perpenna,Perpenna chosen Ge∣neral of the Lusitani∣ans. accordingly marched hastily to∣wards him, and he nothing Daunted, advanced to meet him: Both Armies being in sight of one another, fell to Fortifying their Camps. The Work ended, they spent the time in Skirmishes before they would ha∣zard a pitched Battle; but Perpenna's Forces decreased
much, many by night Deserting, which obliged him to offer the Enemy Battle before he was quite forsaken: Tho' Pompey doubted not of the Victory, yet to make it secure, he laid an Ambush, and retiring, drew Per∣penna into the Danger of it. Thus when he thought himself Victorious, he was fallen into the Snare, and immediately put to the Rout; he himself fled, and was as much afraid of his own Men,He is va∣qushed by Pompey, and put to Death. as of the Enemy. The Romans followed the Chace without giving any Quar∣ter; certain Horsemen carried on with this heat, found Perpenna among the Shrubs and Bryars. He falling down, begged his Life, assuring them, He would make great Discoveries of principal Men in Rome, who kept Correspondence with Sertorius, which he could prove under their hands. The Captain of those Horse acquainted Pompey therewith, who ordered his Head to be immediately struck off, and those Papers to be brought to him: The being accordingly performed, Men of Note, whom their Conscience accused, were in a great Consternation in Pompey's Army, for that they had secretly favoured Sertorius; But, he fearing the ill consequence of such a Discovery, publickly Burnt all those Papers, and so quieted their Apprehen∣sions. 6. Afranius, a most Valiant Captain, by Pompey's Order, entred Lusitania; but finding the Camponeses were fled to the Mountains, and left all the plain Coun∣try Desart, he suspected rather Policy than Fear, had carried them;Pompey subdus many pla∣ces. wherefore he returned to inform Pompey, and both of them came before the City Caucia, which offered to embrace the Friendship of the Romans, but refused to admit a Garrison. Pompey requested, that whilst they could agree upon Articles, his sick Men might be admitted into the City, which being granted, he sent in a Number of his best Soldiers privately Arm∣ed, who being let in, possessed themselves of the Walls, and so the Town was obliged to receive a Gar∣rison, and pay a Sum of Money: With such like Arts, Pompey gained admittance into many Towns of Lusita∣nia: Both Pompey and Afranius laid Siege to Oxama (now Osma) where no fair means prevailing, the place was furiously Battered, then Undermined, and a sufficient Breach being made, it was pertinaciously defended as long as any of the Inhabitants were left alive. They all
died to the last Man, and Pompey having none left to kill, vented his passion upon the Buildings, leaving the place in a confused heap of Rubbish; then the Ar∣my marched to Calahorra, but whilst they lay before it, Metellus sent to Advise Pompey, it concerned him more to return to Rome, than linger the time there: He lea∣ving Afranius to continue the Siege, in his way, laid the Foundation of Pamplona, in Navar, and so went away to Rome, where it was allowed him to Triumph, as he had well deserved. Afranius left at Calahorra, tho' he suffe∣red much by the Weather, it being then Winter, and also for want of Provisions, yet he reduced the Besieg∣ed to that extremity, that having eaten all the Leather and Hides in the City, they killed and eat their Wives and Children. Nevertheless, Afranius broke in upon them, and found many Inhabitants looking ra∣ther like Ghosts than Men, and many quarters of Wo∣men and Children hanging up for Food. 7. The Roman Senate thought the Victories of Pom∣pey and Metellus,67. had sufficiently secured Spain; therefore they sent thether Publius Piso Pretor, a Man more addicted to Peace than War. He found all things quiet, but after a while, understanding that Warlike preparations were making in several parts of Spain, he sent his Questor Lucius Flaccus, to visit and put all Gar∣risons into a posture of Defence; in the mean while he gathered an Army of Romans and Andaluzians, and ta∣king the Field in several places, Defeated the Spaniards; but Authors do not mention the particulars.000 Lu∣sitanians slain by Pub. Piso. Certain it is, he vanquished a Body of Lusitanians, that had been plundering the Country and killed 5000 of them. His success was doubtless more considerable, since it ap∣pears he triumphed at Rome.63. Cneus Piso succeeded Pub∣lius, he by his ill Government lost the Affections, not only of the Natives, but of the Romans, and marching into Lusitania, had his Legate cut off by some Light Horse of the Country, none of his Army stirring to res∣cue him. The next Pretor was Quintus Calidius, who defeated several Parties of Lusitanians,61. that Plundered the Country; after him came Tubero, who brought with him as his Questor Julius Caesar, to whom his future Fortune was foretold at Cadiz; For visiting the Temple of Hercules, and falling asleep in it, he Dream∣ed that he lay with his Mother. This the South-sayers
interpreted to Denote his becoming Sovereign of Rome, his Mother-Country, which he should deprive of its An∣tient Liberty. There also seeing the Picture of Alexander the Great, he wept considering that mighty King had subdued so considerable a part of the World, at that Age which he then was of, and had yet done nothing worthy of Fame.60. These considerations made him quit his Employment and return to Rome to aim at greater.A great Earth∣quake. About this time hapned on the Coast of Galicia and Portugal, so terrible an Earthquake, that many Build∣ings being overthrown, the People fled to the Moun∣tains for Safety. The Sea also broke in and drowned several places. At Cape St. Vincent, a Mare brought forth a Monster with the Head, Breast, and Fore-feet of a Bull, the Body of a Horse, and the Hind-feet like a Man's: This Monster was thought to foreshew the Calamities that afterwards befell Lusitania. 8. Some Years passed, that the Romans sent no Com∣mander of Note into Spain, which the Lusitanians ob∣serving, they broke into Castile with a great Power, putting all the Country to Fire and Sword. The chief among these People were the Herminii, inhabi∣ting the deep Valley and high tops of the Mountain Herminius, now called Serra de Estrella, which crosseth the greatest part of the Kindom of Portugal.Julius Cae∣sar comes into Lusi∣tania. The next great Man that came was Julius Caesar; he to spread a Terror spared none of the Lusitanians that ranged in Castile and Andaluzia, but put all to the Sword, which made those that escaped home, give the Alarm to pre∣pare the People for the Storm that threatned them. Caesar over-running all the Province of Alenteio, with his Victorious Army, used the utmost severity; the Andaluzians that followed him, revenging the wrongs before done to them by the Lusitanians; only the in∣habitants of the Mountain Herminius perplexed Caesar. Tho' this Mountain, as was said, runs almost through the Kingdom, the chief habitation of those People was about the place where now stands Haramenha, which is near Portalegre and Marvan. The place of it self was inaccessible, and the People resolute, therefore Caesar sent Ambassadors to perswade them to come down and inhabit the plain: they kept these Ambassadors till they had shown them their Weapons, the strength of the Place, and number of the Defendants, and then
dismissed them, with assurance that they would trust only to their Weapons and Courage. Caesar disdaining to be Braved by those Mountaineers, to appease the o∣ther Lusitanians, much offended for that his Soldiers had plundered the Temple of the God Endovelicus, caused all that had been taken thence to be restored. 9. This done, he marched against the Herminii, who were in a readiness to receive him, and found the place much more difficult than it had been represented to him.He subdues the Hermi∣nii. Understanding that the Herminii had placed their Wives, Children and weak People in a remote place of safety, he with great Gifts perswaded certain Lusitanians Ene∣mies to the Herminii, to lead a number of Men thro' a private path to that place. Whilst they upon Hands and feet climbed the rough Rocks, he drew out his Ar∣my, and began to ascend so as to divert the Defendants from minding those that were sent about. An advan∣ced party was so hotly received by the Mountaineers, that they were forced to quit the attempt, and fly dis∣orderly back to the Camp, Caesar never offering to re∣lieve them for fear of running more Men into the Dan∣ger. The Mountaineers, proud of this success, braved the Romans; but Caesar trusting to those he had sent a∣bout, regarded them not: The third Night after they set forward, the Party that was sent to climb the Hill, fell in upon the Old Men, Women and Children, putting many to the Sword. But day appearing, and discover∣ing how few had done that harm, the Women fell up∣on them, and their Husbands taking the Alarm, quit∣ted the Pass they defended to protect their Wives and Children. Caesar seeing the Pass clear, mounted the Hill till he came to a plain on the side of it, whilst the Herminii put all those Romans that had climbed the other side to the Sword. When they thought to re∣turn to the place they had quitted, they found Caesar possessed of it, wherewith they were so terrified, that tho' they were above him, and might well have defen∣ded themselves, they sued for Peace; thereupon he commanded them to go down and inhabit the Plain, keeping 200 of their Women as Hostages. 10. The Fame of this unexpected Conquest made many of the Neighbouring People resolve to quit their Dwellings,And routs a vast Multitude. and passing the River Duero, seek out new places to inhabit, if not more fruitful than their own,
at least more remote from the Enemy. This they did in such numbers, that the Province was almost unpeo∣pled; they marched in great Order, fearing the pur∣suit of the victorious Army, which soon oertook them, at such time as they had passed over the River most of their Old Men, Women, Children and Baggage, on Planks, Skins blown full of Wind, Mares and Oxen. Caesar gave them not leasure to follow their Families, but falling upon them, was so hotly received, that his Army began to give way, till a Veteran Legion coming up, the Battle a long time stood doubtful. Caesar who could not be satisfied to part upon equal Terms, broke himself into the midst of his Enemies with such Reso∣lution, that his Forces following the Example given, soon made him Master of an absolute Victory. CHAP. VIII. The remaining Actions of Julius Caesar, the Coming and Attempts of Cneus and Sextus, the Sons of Pompey the Great, and other Occurrences from the Year 57. before the Birth of Christ, till the Year 27. 1. CAesar concluded his late Victory, had wholly put an end to the Toiles of War in that Pro∣vince,57. when he was given to understand that the Her∣minii, or Mountaineers revolted again, had put to the Sword the Romans that Quartered about them, and stir∣ring up their Neighbours to do the like, were now as∣sembled in an infinite Number.The re∣maining Actions of Caesar in Spain. He instantly marched towards them, and escaped all their Ambushes, being forewarned of them: The Lusitanians divided them∣selves into two Bodies, each numerous enough to maintain a long and dangerous War against a greater Power than that of the Enemy. The lesser of those Armies was sent towards the Ocean, with all the Wo∣men and Children as their Guard. The Roman and Lusitanian Armies meeting, stood a while looking upon one another, till Caesar who never knew what fear was,
gave the Signal of Battle, and both sides gave the Charge with extraordinary Fury. Caesar, tho' hard pressed a while, remained Master of the Field, but by reason of the approaching Night, could not do so much Execution as might otherwise have been. The Lusi∣tanians knowing all the Passes of the Country, made their way, and soon joyned those that marched to∣wards the Ocean. Thus the 4th Day they discovered a Peninsula (now called Peniche) into which they all passed; so that when Caesar came, there was none be∣hind on the shoar. The distance between the Island and the shoar, is at present above 500 Paces, which at low Water can be forded; Caesar waiting the Ebb, sent an Officer with a choice party to gain a Post from those in the Island, who bravely defended themselves: The Tide returning, the Romans fought up to the mid∣dle in Water, and Caesar stood on the Shoar calling up∣on them. When they would have returned, the Water was so high, that they were forced to land in the Island, where they were all cut off to one Soldier, who tho' Wounded, swam over to the other side. A Spanish Author calls him Sceva, but Dio, names him Publius Scevius: It was hard to gain the Island, without bring∣ing Ships from Cadiz, but hunger began to prick the Multitude who had made no Provision, when they re∣tired into that place. This and the sight of the Ships made them deliver themselves to Caesar, barely upon Discretion: He not only forbid any Wrong to be done them in their Persons or Goods, but supplied them with all they wanted, and so dismissed them wholly devoted to him, for this unexpected Clemency. At this time was found that wonderful Horse, which having his Feet like a Man, would afterwards suffer no body but Caesar to mount him, and when he died, Caesar cau∣sed him to be Buried, as if it had been a Man, and his Statue in Brass to be set before the Temple of Venus. 2. Caesar having thus with Courtesy, as well as Force subdued Lusitania, departed to Rome to make interest for the Consulship,56. where we will leave him. Tubero left to Govern the Province,Pub. Cin∣cinnatus succeeds Caesar. as Propraetor, kept it in Peace till the coming of the Proconsul Publius Cincinnatus, in whose time the Lusitanians began a∣gain to raise Arms, but Authors do not give us any
particular Relation of the Event of those Commotions, till the Time of the Praetor, Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinter. About the same time there marched a mighty Army out of Spain, whereof a considerable part were Lusitanians:Crassus de∣stroys near 40000▪ Spaniards The Gauls, oppressed by Julius Caesar, had called them to their Assistance. Publius Crassus, Caesar's Legate, overthrew them, killing and taking Prisoners almost 40000. Whilst this was done in France, Quintus Cecilius Dentatus, the Praetor in Lusita∣nia, raised a dangerous War, by endeavouring to car∣ry a great Quantity of Corn out of the Country, which moved the People to take up Arms; but having forced him to retire, and fortifie himself in the Mountain of Venus, (now called Pomares,) near Evora, they came to a Composition, he promising not to carry away the Corn.52. Quintus Cecilius Metellus was Successor to Denta∣tus, and governed both Provinces of Spain. The Vec∣tones of Estremadura, and the Vaccei of Old Castile, re∣volting, he overthrew them; but with so little Loss on their side, that being recruited, they came upon him, then besieging Clunia, (now Corunna,) and drove him from the Siege:51. He, in like manner, making up his Forces, returned, and gave them a second Rout. Tu∣bero succeeded Metellus,30. as Proconsul. He continued the War against the Vectones and Vaccei, and was by them, in Battel overthrown. The Tumults raised by the Vaccei and Vectones, moved the Senate to send Pom∣pey to pacifie the Province: But whilst he prepared to set forwards with the Grandeur becoming him, three Legates came; one of them was Petreius, whose Pro∣vince was Lusitania, and the Care of quelling the Vac∣cei and Vectones: With him joined the People of Beyra, and, together, they forced their Enemies to sue for Peace. After which, Petreius went to the Assistance of those of the Province of Beyra,47. against a great Number of the People that came from between the Rivers Duero and Minho, who were going over to settle among them; and (though with considerable Loss) he secured the Pass, and drove them back. 3. Julius Caesar having drove Pompey out of Rme, was now coming again into Spain: The Legates ha∣ving Notice thereof, prepared to oppose him; and Pe∣treius joining Afranius, they together made up near 60000 Men, as well Romans as Spaniards. Caesar sent
his Legate Caius Fabius, to gain the Passes of the Pyre∣nean Mountains; which he performed so successfully, that Pompey's Party lying about Leida, saw Cesar's Co∣lours before they had heard of the approach of his Ar∣my.Caesar re∣turns, and expels Pompey's Party. Soon after came Caesar himself, who reduced the two Legates to that Necessity, that they surrender'd themselves into his Power; he using no other Severity towards them, than to order them to lay down their Arms, and depart Spain: And they accordingly went away to Pompey, then raising Forces in the East. This done,44. Caesar returned to Rome, leaving the Govern∣ment of Portugal and Andaluzia, with the Title of Pro-Praetor, to Quintus Cassius Longinus, a Man naturally cruel, and an Enemy to the Spaniards. He according∣ly exercised his Hatred and Avarice, and at last laid Seige to the City Mirobriga, which offered to buy its Liberty; but he set it at so high a Rate, that they ha∣ving 11 Days granted them to resolve in, chose rather privately to fly away to the Mountains. The Pro-Praetor finding the City empty, followed the Inhabi∣tants, where he took from them all they had before sa∣ved. The Herminii thus plunder'd, their Number in∣creasing, resolved to possess themselves of the Plains along the River Tagus, turning out the ancient Pro∣prietors. A great Number of them were cut off by the Citizens of Lisbon, as they endeavoured to pass that Ri∣ver: Then the Mountaineers desisting from their first Purpose, encamped about Lisbon; but being there sur∣prized in the Night, by their Enemies, almost all of them perished. 4. Cneus and Sextus,43. the Sons of Pompey the Great, came into Spain,Cneus and Sextus, the two Sons of Pompey, in Spain. invited by the general Consent of the People. The Eldest was declared General at Cartage∣na, and set out thence with a good Army, Garrisoning all the strong Towns. Sextus Pompeius was left at Cor∣dova. Julius Caesar's two Legates, Pedius and Fabius Maximus, observed the Motions of the two Pompeys, and gave Caesar an Account of all that passed; and he travelled with all possible Speed into Spain. In the mean time, Philo, a Lusitanian, raised Men, and join∣ed himself to Cneus. The Celerity of Caesar was incre∣dible; yet came he not so soon, but that his Legates were before defeated by Cneus Pompeius, with a mighty Slaughter. The Legates fled to their Camp, where
Pompey assaulted them three times, and was as often re∣pulsed: At last he understood they stole away by Night, but in such good Order, that he durst not pursue them; especially, hearing that Caesar▪ was come to Sa∣guntum, and that Andaluzia began to mutiny. Understand∣ing that Caesar marched towards Cordova, he directed his Course thither; and to march the lighter, he left all his Sick at Capara. By the Way he laid Siege to Ʋlia, (now Montemayor;) but it being relieved by Caesar, he removed towards Cordova, 15 Miles distant; where he found his Enemy, expecting that the Towns-People would have delivered the Place to him; but the Vigi∣lancy of Sextus, and the Arrival of Cneus, prevented the Design. Caesar thus disappointed, removed, and laid Siege to a strong Place, which Pompey had made his Magazin: It was then called Ategua; and now, Te∣ba the Old. Pompey marched to relieve it; but finding the Besiegers too strong, returned with Speed to Cordo∣va; yet, being sent for by the Besieged, he returned again to Ategua, and sent in some Succour, and Muna∣cius Flaccus, to govern in the City: He, seeing no Hopes to hold out, surrender'd himself and the City to Caesar upon Discretion. This so enraged Pompey, that upon light Surmizes he put to Death almost 80 Men of Note; and by this Means made himself odious to all that followed him; whereof, many deserted. 5. In this manner their Affairs went on,Caesar o∣verthrows Pompey at Munda till Caesar and Pompey met at Munda, (now a little Town, called Monda,) five Leagues distant from Malaga. This Ci∣ty was Garrison'd by Pompey, and in it consisted all his Hopes; wherefore he lay to secure it with 60000 Men. Hither Caesar came, to engage Pompey; and the Battel began most furiously: Pompey behaved himself so gallantly, that Caesar was once in doubt whether he should not kill himself, as despairing of the Victory: But considering better, he lighted off his Horse; and, snatching a Buckler from a Soldier, ran desperately in∣to the thickest of his Enemies; saying to his own Men, This Day will I end my Life; and you, the War: Thus lay your Arms across, since you have lost all Sense of Shame, and leave me in the hands of two Boys, after you had been victorious over all the Power of Spain. In this manner he broke into the Body of his Enemies, where he had pe∣rished, but that his Horse coming in, rescued him,
wounding Pompey on the Shoulder. Yet had not Caesar gained any Advantage, till Rogud, an African King, who followed him with his Troops, assaulted Pompey's Camp. Titus Labienus, a brave Captain, drawing out of the Battel, to oppose Rogud, the whole Army of Pompey thought he had fled, and they immediately took to their Heels; some fled to Munda, others to the Camp, 30000 were slain, whereof 7000 were Lusitanians. Pompey wounded, and overthrown, fled with 150 Lu∣sitanians of his Guard, that were left. Being come to Algezira, Publius Calvicius sent him in an Horse-Litter to Cortega; the Inhabitants of which Place would have delivered him to his Enemies, but he escaped in a Gal∣ley. Didius, Caesar's Admiral, pursued him so close, that he was forced to fly to Land; where he was hard chased by Cesonius Lento, till, not being able to go farther, he hid himself in a Cave, where he was be∣trayed by a Servant of his own. Cesonius carried his Head to Caesar, then at Sevil, who caused it to be ho∣nourably buried. 6. Many Lusitanians who had escaped the Hands of Cesonius, in the Pursuit of Pompey, not knowing what had happen'd, as soon as they perceived the Romans were gone, returned to the Cave to look for him; and finding only the Trunk of the Body, resolved to re∣venge his Death. Didius the Admiral having left Ceso∣nius, was then Careening his Vessels on the Shoar, without suspecting any Danger; but one Night the Lu∣sitanians came down upon him in three several Bodies, and firing his Ships, put the Men to the Sword, and the Head of Didius they sent to Philo, their General. As soon as Sextus Pompeius, at Cordova, understood the Death of his Brother, he marched out of the City with all his Forces; and joining with the Lusitanians that were dispersed thereabouts, he met Cesonius, who be∣headed Cneus, and put him to flight. In the mean while, Caesar went to take Possession of Cordova; and returning to Sevil, he found Philo, with the Lusitanians. in it; who was forced to fly, after massacring many of the Citizens. He fled into Lusitania, to raise Forces; where, in the City Lenius, he found Cecilius Niger, with a good Body: Both together got into Sevil, sur∣prizing the Roman Army; but paid for it with the Loss of all their Men. This done, Caesar peirced in∣to
to Portugal;Caesar con∣quers the Lusitani∣ans; and settling Peace at Beja, calls that City Pax Julia. and with his Clemency towards the con∣quered People, won their Hearts. At Beja he granted Peace to the Lusitanians; whence that City was after∣wards called Pax Julia. Thence, he went to Evora, which, of his Bounty towards it, took the Name of Liberalitas Julia. In like manner, he left his Name to other Places: Mertola was called Julia Mirtilis; San∣tarem, before Scalabis, Julium Praesidium; and Lisbon, Faelicitas Julia. 7. Asinius Pollio,42. a valiant and wise Man, was left Governor of the Provinces of Andaluzia and Lusitania, in Caesar's Absence. He soon quelled some Troops that ravaged the Country about the Mountains of Algarve. About the same time Sextus Pompeius came out from among the Lacetani, where he had been hid after his Defeat, and was by Niconius Saxo conducted to Hanni∣bal's Port, now Vill-nova de Portemao, in Algarve; where he continued in a miserable Condition, till a Ship of Pyrates came into that Place:Sextus Pompeius appears a∣gain, an makes great Com∣motions. They, at the In∣stance of Saxo, received him for their Captain; and un∣derstanding who he was, set out joyfully, and took some Prizes, plundering the Coast, he gathered Strength; till coming to Cartagena, a whole Roman Le∣gion joined him, besides many Companies of Spaniards. Caesar hearing hereof, sent Cartina to crush Pompey; but he was himself overthrown. Pompey hearing of the Death of Caesar, gathered all the Power he could, and defeated the Praetor, Asinius Pollio: But being now al∣most Master of all Spain, he was called away to Rome by the Senate. After some Success at Sea, he was rout∣ed by the Triumviri; and flying into Asia, had his Head cut off by Ticius, one of Mark Antony's Comman∣ders.36. Whilst these Things were doing in the East, all Spain,Great Floods, Storms and Sicknss in Spain. but particularly Lusitania, suffered much by Floods, Storms, Sickness, and several other Calami∣ties. Many that lived near the Coast, thinking to fly from these Miseries, ran headlong into greater; for, breaking in upon the Vaei of Old Castile, they were repulsed with great Slaughter, by Cneus Domicius, Le∣gate to Lepidus. Near this same time, one Bllas, who had been Quaestor to , fearing to be called to Account for his Extortion,Pogud the African . fled into Africk, and perswaded King Bogud to invade Spain. He took the advice; and having plunder'd the Coast of Andaluzia,
retired with a great Booty, upon the News that the Ro∣mans and Spaniards had assembled a great Power against him.33. Three Years after he returned, but was repulsed with Loss, and retired to Tarifa; where having re∣cruited himself, he set Sail for Hannibal's Port, in Lusi∣tania; which being abandoned, he plunder'd, with the Country about it. Not content with this, he turned to Cape St. Vincent; and coming to Setuval, without the least Opposition, ransacked it, putting all he found in the Place to the Sword, and then setting fire to it. Some that fled to the Mountains, gathering more Strength, came down to revenge their Losses on the Mauritanians; but he was then sailing up the River of Alcazar, where he robbed and rased a Temple of the Goddess Salacia. Scarce was he returned to his Ships, when a violent Storm arising, destroyed the greatest part of his Fleet; those few Wretches that escaped the Fury of the Sea by swimming, being cut in pieces up∣on the Shoar. 8. The Inhabitants of the City and Territories of Tuy,28. in Galicia,The Gali∣cians over∣run the most part of Lu∣sitania. passing the River Minho on a sudden, thought to have made themselves Masters of the Lands then possessed by the Bracarenses, and other People, be∣tween Duero and Minho. These, though surprized with the unexpected Invasion, gathered in a great Body, and went out to meet the uninvited Guests. Between them passed many Skirmishes; but at last, coming to a Battel, the Interamnenses were overthrown, with great Slaughter. The Victors pursuing their Fortune, with∣out Resistance, passed on to the Banks of the River Duero. The Inhabitants of the City of Porto, terrified at the Fame of their Success, sent Ambassadors to sue for Peace, and Friendship; putting them in Mind, they were all originally Greeks. This took so well with the conquering Galicians, that they allowed of the Kindred, and so exempted the City of Porto from being plunder'd and burnt, as all others they came at were. But a violent Pestilence raging among the Gali∣cians, so wasted them, that they were obliged to return home, carrying the Contagion with them; so that the Harm they did at home was greater than the Profit of their Expedition. 9. The Bracarenses delivered from the Fear of two terrible Enemies, the Plague, and the Galicians, resol∣ved
to be revenged on the People of Porto,War be∣twixt the People of Baga and Porto. for having joined with those of Galicia, only for their own Preser∣vation. War being declared, the Aggressors had the better; till in one Battel, those of Porto took some Pri∣soners, on whom they exercised their Cruelty. Many of them they tied to Stakes upon their Walls, and in the sight of their Enemies, shot them for Sport. Mo∣ved at this Sight, the Bracarenses sent certain Troops to take Revenge on them; but they being either killed or taken Prisoners, served only to revive their Sorrow. Among these were a Son and a Father-in-Law, whose Death so troubled the Wife of the one, and Daughter of the other, that associating her self with some despe∣rate Women, and a good Number of Soldiers, she, in the Night, laid an Ambush, not far from the City; and scaling the Walls, silently stole thence the two Bo∣dies: But being discovered by the Sentinels, she was pursued by the Towns-men, whom she led to the Place of the Ambush, where most of them were kil∣led, or made Prisoners: The Prisoners she carried in Triumph to Braga, and there, on the Walls, made them suffer the same Death which their Country-men had inflicted on her Friends. This done, she ho∣nourably buried her Father and Husband, and then killed her self. Now the Citizens of Porto, finding themselves hard beset by the Bracarenses, prayed Aid of Norbanus Calvius, Legate to Augustus, in Lusitania; with whose Assistance they twice overthrew their Ene∣mies. Many Cities, seeing that of Porto victorious, sent to congratulate and curry Favour with them. One of the Cities that followed this Counsel was Cina∣nia, lying nearer to Braga than Porto; but they had af∣terwards Occasion enough to repent.
CHAP. IX. The total Conquest of all Spain, by Augustus Caesar: With all other Occurrences, from the Year 27, before the Birth of Christ, till his Blessed Nativity. 1. MOre were the Bracarenses grieved to see their Neighbours slighted them, than at the Loss they had sustained; and therefore, gathering again their Forces, they marched towards Porto: An Hun∣dred and fifteen Women and 200 Men, made up a Party of Light-Horse, which, leaving the rest of their Army in Ambush, went to draw the Enemy out. Nor∣banus Calvius▪ marched out with all his Force, that Bo∣dy of Horse before-mentioned sometimes flying, and sometimes fighting, till they drew the Romans to the Place of Ambush, where a mighty Slaugh∣ter was made of the Romans, and the People of Porte. Norbanus was killed by a Woman, who retur∣ed to Braga with his Head and Right Hand; as did se∣veral others, with those of several Men of Note. The Bracarenses used their Victory with Insolency,The People of Braga subdue Porto. oppres∣sing the City of Porto in the heavy Conditions of Peace they prescribed to them. Being delivered of that Ene∣my, they bent their Force against Cinania, in Revenge for their having joined with those of Porto; and laid Siege to the City. The Besieged were not unprovided, nor did they want Resolution; so that many brave At∣tempts were made on both sides. At length, Hunger beginning to pinch the Besieged, and the Besiegers be∣ing sensible thereof, the Case grew desperate: When the Cinanians had devoured all that was to be found in the City, rather than submit themselves to the Cruelty o their Enemies, they set open their Gates; and rushing out like hungry Lions, failed but little of obtaining the Victory; but at length, oppressed with the Multitude they were all put to the Sword, without Distinction o Sex or Age. Nor was this all, for the Victors executed their Rage upon the very Stones, overthrowing the Walls, and rasing all the Buildings to the Ground.
2. Octavius Caesar having now brought all the Roman Empire under his Subjection, found that only three Na∣tions in Spain opposed his Authority; and those were, the Biscainers, Galicians, and Lusitanians, who inhabited between the Rivers Duero and Minho.Augustus Caesar comes into Spain. To the subduing of these, he came in Person, with a mighty Power; but being taken in Biscay with a violent Hypochondriack Distemper, he left there two Legates to continue the War, and went away to take the delightful Air of An∣daluzia, where he gave himself up to the Care of his Physician, Anthony Musa; who effecting a great Cure upon him, was magnificently rewarded. Whilst he was under Cure, his Legates overthrew the Biscainers, be∣trayed to them by the Tragicini. Such as escaped, fled to Lancia, a City near Oviedo in Asturias, where they made some Opposition, but at last were forced to submit. Thence the Victors advanced, bearing down all before them, quite through Galicia. We have no particular Account, how the People between the Rivers Ducro and Minho were subdued; whether they submitted, ter∣rified with the Example of the others; or else were in∣cluded in the Conquest of Galicia. 3. Augustus,Emerita Augusta (now Me∣rida) foun∣ded by Au∣gustus. thus become Lord of the World, to re∣ward his old Soldiers, who had served him so many Years, he assigned them Lands, and founded a City, which he called Emerita Augusta, (now Merida,) which he made the Metropolis of Lusitania, and gave it migh∣ty Privileges. Some will not have Augustus to be the Founder, but rather Repairer of Merida. In Gratitude for this his Bounty, they raised Temples to him, and dedicated Priests to his Service. All the Cities in Spain followed their Example. That of Porto used all man∣ner of Flattery, to oblige him to their Assistance, in or∣der to cut off the heavy Yoke imposed upon them by their Enemies, the Bracarenses. Their Ambassadors were favourably heard, and brought back an Answer, such as they could have wished, that Caius Antistius and Marcus Agrippa were upon their March, to their Assistance. This so encouraged the Inhabitants of Porto, that before the Roman Forces could join them, they not only rava∣ged the open Country, but entred the City of Braga, with great Slaughter; those Citizens suspecting no such thing: Yet, laying hold of their Weapons, they pur∣sued them to the very Walls of Porto. Scarce had they
encamped about the City, when they perceived the Ro∣mans upon them, so numerous, that they were forced to fly with all speed, and take the Shelter of their own Walls, providing for a dangerous Siege. Before the Ro∣mans could take their Posts about the City, the Bracaren∣ses sallied out, and much Harm was done on both sides. Among the Prisoners taken by the Romans, was a young Maid, who had acted like a Virago: She was taken by a Trooper; and the Roman General, by her Beauty; who would have set her at liberty, promising to pay her Ransom: The Trooper pressed, he might either have the Money, or Liberty to make use of his Cap∣tive: She snatching a Ponyard out of his Hand, ran to kill him; but missing her Stroke, stab'd her self. The Bracarenses retiring, the Romans took their Posts; and many Skirmishes passing between them, it happen'd that Antistius, one of the Roman Generals, was taken, and fell into the Hands of the Father of that Maid above-mentioned; who, for that he had honourably buried his Daughter, sent him away free, and honour∣ably presented. Agrippa, to requite the Kindness shewn to his Colleague, raised the Siege, and obtained many Favours of Augustus, for the City; perswading him, that those of Porto were in the wrong. Thenceforth it was called Augusta Bracara; and had the Privilege of a Roman Colony. 4. The Emperor Augustus being at Tarragona,Augustus acknow∣ledged Em∣pror of the World, and Temples e∣rected to him. received there Ambassadors from all Parts of the then known World, congratulating his happy Accession to so great an Empire. Then it was, he concluded himself an ab∣solute Monarch, being complemented, flattered and fawned upon by all Nations; in so much that they beg∣ged Leave to erect Temples to him, and give him Di∣vine Honours. He granted their Request; and, among that Multitude, to the Ambassadors of Lusitania. At Santarem a Temple was built, in the manner of a Fort; which was afterwards thought to denote a greater Incli∣nation to War, than to Devotion. On this Account, Ac∣cidius Cestius, Augustus's Legate, obstructed the building of another at Lisbon. The People, to remove his Suspi∣cion, erected it on the Rock of Sintra, upon the Ocean. No less than for these stately Structures, Augustus was re∣nowned for the Computation of Time begun from him, and commonly called Aera▪ The Reason of this Name,
is not our Affair to decide: Certain it is, it continued in Arragon till the Year of Christ, 1358; when K. Pe∣ter IV. ordered the Computation of Time, for the fu∣ture, to be from the Birth of our Saviour. K. John I, of Castile, followed his Example, in the Year of Grace, 1383. And King John I, of Portugal, imitated them both, in 1415. 5. It was two Years before the Birth of Christ, when all Portugal,Portugal, how divi∣ded by Au∣gustus. entirely subdued, enjoyed perfect Peace. Augustus had divided the Kingdom into four Provinces, subject to as many Courts of Judicature: These were, Merida, Santarem, Braga and Beja: In each of these was a Praetor, and other Officers of Justice. Augustus was still at Tarragona, when he published that memorable Decree for numbering of all the People in his Empire, and imposing on every Head a Tribute, or Poll-Tax; which, as some compute it, was, to the value of about 4d. according to others, 4d. half Penny; or, as others say, 9d. The first Court in Lusitania, where the Edict was published, was Santarem. By the Lists it appeared, that in Lusitania there were 5068000 Heads of Families; a wonderful Number, if true; but much to be doubted. 6. About this time,Corocota, a famous Robber. in the Province between the Ri∣vers Duero and Minho, there started up a Lusitanian, cal∣led Corocota; who gathering a parcel of Outlaws toge∣ther, after committing several Outrages, durst venture to give the Romans Battel in open Field: But being de∣feated, they fled to Biscay, where they, in Warlike man∣ner, followed the Trade of Robbing. Octavius the Em∣peror promised 3000 Crowns, and a Pardon for all Crimes whatsoever, to any that should apprehend him. He fearing there could not be wanting Criminals desirous of Pardon, nor covetous Persons who would attempt any thing for Interest, resolved to gain the Reward and Par∣don by a magnanimous, though dangerous Action: He presented himself to the Emperor, demanding both the Reward, and promised Pardon, since he delivered into his Hands Corocota, whom, perhaps, no Man else could have put into his Power. With which that generous Prince was so taken, that he proved much better than his Word; for he not only pardoned him, and gave him the Money,The Birth of or Sa∣viour. but admitted him into his Guards. 7. It was now the Year of the World 3952, according to Bede, and the Hebrews; according to Eusebius, 5199;
according to Orosius, 5200; according to Isidorus, 5219; according to the Astronomers, 5328; accor∣ding to King Alphonso, 6980; according to John Lu∣cidus, 3960, (such is the Variety of Computations;) and according to others, 3962. This last being, in my Opinion, the best Account, and followed in this Hi∣story, it must then be 2432 Years after the Flood, when, on the 25th of December, about Midnight, the RE∣DEEMER of Mankind was born in the Stable at Be∣thlehem; wonderful Signs preceding his Birth. The Angels descended, singing, Glory to GOD on high, and on Earth, Peace unto Men of Good Will: They spread abroad the News of that wonderful Birth; and awaked the Shepherds, to behold the LAMB of GOD. In the mean while, the Three Kings of the East travelled, con∣ducted by a miraculous STAR, to pay their Adorati∣on to the KING of Kings.Signs of our Savi∣our's Birth in Spain. 8. Spain wanted not its particular Signs of the Bles∣sing communicated to Mankind that happy Night. That very Night was enlighten'd with a glorious bright-shi∣ning Cloud, which not only diffused a Light equal to the Noon-day-Sun, but also an Heat nothing inferiour to it. This Cloud drove away to the West, and set in the O∣cean; at such time as the Morning-Beams appearing, no Distinction could be made between Day and Night. And that Portugal might not want some singular Tokens of the Coming of the GOD of Peace, the Idol of the false God Endovelicus, whose Temple was near Villavi∣ciosa, fell from the Altar, to the Ground; and though of Massy Silver, it was broke into several Pieces, which, for the Rarity, were sent to Rome, where many other Idols had been destroyed at the same Hour. Besides this, an extraordinary Light appeared (like that which was seen all over Spain) upon the Promontory called Barba∣ricus, now Serra da Arabida. The End of the First BOOK. ☞ Note, That hitherto we have diminished the Years, from the Flood, till the Coming of CHRIST; hence∣forward we shall increase them, from his Birth, to the End of the History.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. The Second BOOK. CHAP. I. All that hapned remarkable in Lusitania un∣der the Roman Emperors, from the Birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ, till the Year of Grace 260. 1. THE whole Universe being restored to Peace by the Birth of the King of Peace,Peace af∣ter the Birth of Christ. Augustus Caesar caused the Gates of the Tem∣ple of Janus to be shut. This was the third and last time those Gates were closed, and Augu∣stus the remaining part of his Life, enjoyed a wonder∣ful Felicity. Our Lusitania had its share in this Tran∣quility, having entirely submitted it self to the Roman Yoak, and now reaping the Fruits of Peace under its Government. Quadratus, and Titus Flavius Caudianus were Legates or Pretors at this time, as appears by se∣veral Ancient Inscriptions found upon Stones. Not
far from this time the Lusitanians inhabiting Vouga, or Vacca, made an expedition as far as the Cities Assota, and Lacedemona, in whose Territory they founded a Town, which of the Name of their own Country they called Vacca. and being delighted with the pleasantness of the Place, they added the word Chara, whereby it came to be called Charavacca. The News of the Death of the Emperor Augustus, being brought into Lusitania, his Funeral Honours were performed with no less Grandeur than they had been at Rome. Hispania Ʋlte∣rior which includes Portugal, was at this time Govern∣ed by the Proconsul Vibius Serenus, whose unlimitted Avarice was the cause he exercised many Cruelties to∣wards the People; nor were the Spanish Mines and Ri∣vers, yielding Yearly three Millions of Crowns in Gold, sufficient to satisfy his unmeasurable Covetousness. 2. Tiberius having succeeded Augustus in the Empire,Tiberius succeeds Augustus in the Em∣pire. appeared no less insatiable than his Lieutenant. The Lusitanians by their Ambassadors, asked leave to Erect a Temple to him and his Mother Drusilla, which he, pretending Modesty, refused: But in Reality was more desirous of their Gold, than of their Adoration. To shew that Learning was then esteemed here, several Lasitanians went into Italy, only to see the famous Hi∣storian Titus Livius; with them went Ambassadors from Lisbon, to give an Account of a Prodigy there seen. It was a perfect Man coming out of the Sea, who sitting upon the Rocks, sounded a great Shell as if it had been a Horn, so loud and shrill, that it drew the People thither to see who it was. Admiring the sight of that Creature, they sent that Embassage, which is a token no such Creature had been seen before; tho' Authors affirm that several have appeared since. The Roman Emperors were Lords of our Kingdom of Lusitania for some Ages, but for Brevity sake, I will not mention them all as they succeeded one another, but only speak of those, who left something memorable among us. 3. After Tiberius,Caius Ca∣ligula. the Imperial Crown was put upon the Head of Caius Caligula, whose horrid course of Life made the wickedness of his Predecessor be looked upon as innocence. Caligula in the 4th. Year of his Reign was Murthered,St. James the Apostle in Spain. as had been his Predecessor: During his Reign, St. James the Apostle came into Spain, where he Preached the Gospel, and converted many by vir∣tue
of the mighty Miracles he Wrought. Among the rest, he is said to have raised to life a Citizen of Braga by extraction, a Jew called Samuel the Younger, or Malachias the Elder Son, to the Prophet Ʋrias, who had been Buried near 600 Years; him he called Peter, and constituted the first Bishop of Braga, and the first in all Spain:44. This Bishop suffered Martyrdom at Rates, four Leagues from Braga, and is therefore called St. Pe∣ter of Rates. Another of his Disciples St. James left in the Church of Cinania, once a populous City, now a poor place scarce the shaddow of what it was, be∣tween Braga and Guimaraens upon the River Ave. In this same place he was Martyred by the Neighbouring People, in memory whereof, they to this day as it were acknowledging the crime, resort to his Church bare-footed, and with Cords about them. The Martyrs name was Torquatus, now corruptly called Torcade; St. James embarking at Corunna, sailed into England, in whose absence Peter the Archbishop of Braga, having spread the Faith made several Bishops.46. As the Nupti∣als of a little King's Son were Celebrating on the shoar of Bouzas, not far from Porto, the Bride-groom being on Horse-back among many others, suddenly there ap∣peared a Ship at Sea; When it drew near, the Bride-groom was carried away by his Horse through the Wa∣ter, and suddenly appeared upon the Ship covered with Crosses and Shells: Wondring what this should mean, he asked of those in the Ship, who told him, They brought the Body of St. James the Apostle, who had wrought that Miracle to convert him and the Neigh∣bouring People; and a voice from Heaven said, it was the Will of God, that all those who went to visit the Apostle's Sepulcher, should be so adorned with Crosses. The Bridegroom returned ashoar, his Horse treading the Water, as if it had been firm Land, whereupon he and all present were Baptized: Thus much may suf∣fice as to the Preaching of St. James the Apostle, and the bringing of his Body after his Death into Spain. 4. After Caligula Reigned,56. Claudius, a Prince as foolish as his Predecessor was wicked;The Empe∣rors Clau∣dius and Nero. no Memory of him remains in Portugal, it had been well if there were none in the World. Of Nero, his Successor, there are still many Monuments in Lusitania, and also of his Mo∣ther gippina, for to her they Erected Statues. In
the time of Nero, Silvius Otho Governed Portugal, the Emperor conferred that Honour upon him, the more freely in his absence to enjoy his Wife Popea, whose incontinency gave occasion for him to fall in love with her Beauty. Ten Years did Otho Govern this Province, with so great Equity and Moderation, that he obliged the People afterwards to assist him to∣wards obtaining the Empire. A great number of Mar∣tyrs suffered under this cruel Emperor, as well in Spain, as in other parts:Galba. Next to Nero, Galba ascended the Imperial Throne, rather for the hatred all Men bore his Predecessor, than for any Merit of his own. Otho then Governor of Lusitania, in Revenge of the wrong done him in the Person of his Wife Popea, assisted him: Nevertheless, once possessed of the Government, he grew as odious as he had been before desirable, and therefore having held it but Eight Months was Mur∣thered.Otho. His Death opened the way for Otho, who had won the hearts of all Men, with much Bounty and Clemency, to aim at the Crown. Otho, to gratifie the Affections of the Lusitanians, granted great Privi∣ledges to many Towns, but particularly to Merida, then the Metropolis of the Province; only three Months lasted the Sovereignty of Otho, for understand∣ing that Vitellius with the German Army, by which he was saluted Emperor, was marching against him, he in despair Slew himself;Vitellius. nor did Vitellius hold it above Eight Months. 5. Vespasian succeeded Vitellius,Vespasian and by his Prudence and Moderation, cheared the hearts of all his People: Lusitania was particularly favoured by him, for he a∣dorned it with noble Works; one of them was the great Road he made from Braga to Orense the space of Fif∣teen Leagues, which breaking through many rough and uncooth places, runs so smooth, there is not the least Ascent or Descent in it. Near to the Town of Chaves (of him called Aquae Flaviae) he built a Bridge over the River Tamaga,80. with a large Inscription on it: Vespasi∣an died, having Reigned Nine Years and a half, and left the Empire to his two Sons,Titus and Domitian Titus the Good, and Domitian the Wicked. During their sway, Lusitania was divided into three Districts, whose heads were Merida, Beja and Santarem. In the three were Forty Six Towns of Note, five of them were Roman Colo∣nies,
to wit, Merida, Medellia, Norba Cesarea near Alcan∣tara, Braga and Santarem, besides others that had the Liberties of Rome or Latium, under the Name of Mu∣nicipia. The Limits of Lusitania were along the Sea Coast from the Mouth of the River Guadiana, to that of Duero, and thence to the River Minho: Towards the inland, it ran from Guadiana to Medina del Campo, in∣cluding the City Salamanca with all Estremadura, bor∣dered by the River Duero.Nerva. Nerva, the succeeding Empe∣ror, much mended the state of Rome and the whole Em∣pire, but chiefly by adopting Trajan the Spaniard, so that still a better Emperor followed a good one. Portu∣gal retains no Monument of Nerva; only it appears by a Stone found in the Ruins of Atilia, which was between Genoa and Tortona, that several Troops of Lusitanians served under the Imperial Banners. 6. Tho' Trajan began his Reign with great mode∣ration,Trajan. yet as is usual in great Empires, many places Rebelled, which were afterwards subdued by his Ge∣nerals. He adorned this Kingdom with many Publick and Majestick Structures, not laying the Burden of the Expence upon the People, but defraying it out of his own Revenue; among these Works is still famous the Bridge he Built over Tagus, called the Bridge of Tra∣jan, till the Moores gave it the Name of the Bridge of Alcantara. It consists of six Arches, the two middlemost whereof being the largest reach over the River, when there are no Floods: The length of it is 670 Foot, the Breadth 28, and the height above 200; the Stones are all of one Bigness, four Foot in length, and two in Breadth. Between the two middle Arches on both sides, is an Inscription in Marble, to this Effect: To the Em∣peror Caesar Augustus Nerva Trajanus, Son to the Di∣vine Nerva, Conqueror of Germany and Dacia, high Priest, Father of his Country, who was Eight times Tribune, and Six times Consul: On both sides of this Inscription, were the Names of the Towns that contri∣buted towards the Fabrick; near to the Bridge is a Church, tho' little in it self, yet considerable in the Workmanship: It is but twenty Foot in length, and ten in breadth, but being cut out of the Rock, consists of only one Stone. It is now Dedicated to St. Julian, for∣merly to all the Gods as the Rotunda at Rme; in it is a Roman Inscription containing these Words▪ Conecra∣ted
to the Emperor Nerva Trajanus, Caesar Augustus, Germanicus, Dacicus. Another Bridge, begun by Ve∣spatian, at Chaves, was also finished by Trajan; as ap∣pears by the Inscriptions upon it. 7. The Lusitanians,The Lusi∣tanians re∣volt, and are reduced by Trajan. under the usual Pretence of Op∣pression, broke out into open Rebellion, and commit∣ted many Insolencies. For the suppressing of whom, Trajan sent 14 Legions, which utterly destroyed many populous Towns and Cities. One of these Cities was Lamego, which now stands not far from its antient Seat, on the South side of the River Duero; and is one of the best Bishopricks in the Kingdom. In the 14 Legions were many Lusitanians, who, in that common Calami∣ty, helped much to the preserving their Country from utter Extirpation. Trajan died a natural Death; which was then looked upon as no small Rarity. His Fleets had before sailed down the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates, into the Persian Gulph, and thence into the Indian O∣cean; where taking some Vessels that came from Ben∣gale, he got much Information concerning those Coun∣tries: Age, and other Cares, hinder'd him from ma∣king a farther Progress in those Discoveries. 8. Adrian next ascended the Imperial Throne;Adrian. who thinking it impossible to maintain all the Conquests of the Empire, he wholly abandoned them. To secure the rest of that vast Monarchy, he placed Foreign Go∣vernors over all the Provinces. Over the Lusitanians, he placed Andaluzians; and over them, Lusitanians: These governed so well, that two of them had Statues erected to their Memory. Quintus Pontius Severus, one of the two, was born at Braga: And Caius Caretius Fu∣sius, the other, at Chaves. Other Monuments there are of Adrian, in Portugal, but not material to History. He reigned almost 21 Years.140. Antoninus Pius, his Suc∣cessor,Antoni∣nus Pius. held the Empire 22 Years, but left no Memo∣rial in Portugal. About these Times was laid the first Foundation of the City Basto, (afterwards Basta,) among the Bastetani: As also Basto, between the Rivers Duero and Minho; whereof only the Name is now preserved, in a miserable poor Village. Then also, or soon after, an Heretick, called Mark, laboured to infect the Peo∣ple of Valencia, in the same Province, between Duero and Minho; and though driven thence, failed not of some Followers among the Women, but those of the
meanest sort;162. for the others abhorred him. Great Troubles happen'd in Spain,Marcus Aurelius. but most in the Province of Lusitania, during the Reign of Marcus Aurelius. A vast Multitude of Mauritanians,The Mau∣ritanians ravage Spain. being in Rebellion against the Emperor, came over into Spain; and ha∣ving robbed the Sea-port Towns, they boldly pierced into the In-land. Portugal was so involved in this Cala∣mity, that it came near to utter Desolation: All that lay along the Coast, from the Cape of St. Vincent, to the Mouth of the River Duero, was consumed with Fire and Sword: Lisbon held out several furious Assaults, by the Strength of its Situation: Porto, after a vigorous Resistance, was forced to Article. After having com∣mitted all manner of Outrages, the Africans put to Sea, for fear of the Roman Legions, and Lusitanian Forces, which were upon their March towards them. For above 70 Years, in which 13 Emperors reigned, till Maximin, we are in Darkness as to the Affairs of Portu∣gal: For, though there are some old Inscriptions extant, they only serve to prove there were such Emperors; which is not to our purpose, since our Subject is only what relates to Portugal. 9. The Memory of Maximin,239. the Successor of Ale∣xander Severus,Maximin is preserved in the City Braga, in a Street and Gate of his Name. He also made several Ways and Bridges in that Country, as appears by In∣scriptions upon Stones. Some other Reigns passed, without any thing remarkable.269. In that of the careless Galienus,Galienus. a Plague came out of the East, bearing down all to the West; and raged so violently in Lusitania, that the Cities were almost left desolate, and the Fields untilled. Galienus, awaken'd at this Scourge, ordered the Persecution against the Christians, which had been continued ever since the Time of Decius, to cease. This Persecution had filled Heaven with Martyrs;Persecution under him. and also terrified others in such a manner, that they renounced the Faith. Among the latter, were, Marcialis, Bishop of Merida; and Basilides, of Astorga. Elianus, or Le∣lius, Deacon of Merida, a Man of great Learning and Vertue, assembled a National Council in that City; where the two Idolatrous Bishops were deposed. They, to recover their Honour, feigned Repentance: And St. Stephen, then Pope, believing the Fiction, ordered them to be restored; but his Command was not obey∣ed
by the Council, who therein took the Advice of St. Cyprian, then Bishop of Carthage. Another Coun∣cil was held at Braga, to decide whether the Baptism of Hereticks, done with an Intention, was valid: And it passed in the Affirmative. After the Plague, fol∣lowed a no less Evil; which was, an Inundation of Germans, over all the Provinces of the Empire. Most Places now known in Portugal only by their Ruins, were by them overthrown, and not by the Goths: For, the Germans designing to return home, spoiled all they could not carry away; whereas the Goths, coming to settle, spared much, for their own Use. Thus ended the Empire of Galienus. CHAP. II. The Heresie of Priscilian. The Coming into Spain of the Vandals, Alans, Suevians and Goths. The Kingdom of the Suevians set∣led in Portugal. And all other Passages of Note, from the Year 271, to the Year 448. 1. Claudius II. and Aurelianus were Successors to Ga∣lienus,271. in the Empire.Claudius and Aure∣lianus. The latter was he that overcame the most Warlike Zenobia, Queen of Pal∣mira. Under these Emperors suffered Martyrdom nine Sisters, the Daughters of Lucius Catelius, or Caius Ati∣lius, Governor of Galicia and Lusitania; as some Au∣thors have it, born at Braga; but others say, he was a German. These things are very obscure, and uncer∣tain; as are all the Affairs of Lusitania, till the Time of Constantine the Great. Only this is certain, That a a great Number of Martyrs suffered under the Heathen Emperors,311. throughout all Spain; and consequently, Portugal had a great Share in them.Constan∣tine the Great. The Emperor Constan∣tine, after quieting the Troubles of Spain, the better to settle the Spiritual Government, assembled a National Council at Toledo:The Church settled. In it the Metropolitan Churches were settled; which were, Braga and Merida, for Lusi∣tania;
Toledo, Sevil and Cordova, for the rest of Spain. Another Council was afterwards held at Iliberi, which was near Granada, for settling many Things relating to the Affairs of the Church. There met at it 19 Bishops, 3 whereof went out of Portugal; which were, Vincentius, of Ossonoba, in Algarve; Januarius, of Alca∣zar de Sal; and Quincianus, of Evora. Constantine re∣gulated the Government of the Empire, reducing it to a better Form than any of his Predecessors had done. He employed Spanish Forces in remote Parts: In Egypt was a Body of Spanish Horse, and another of Lusita∣nian Foot: Also Spanish Horse, in Arabia; and others, in other Places. Constantine favoured Lusitania, be∣stowing great Privileges on it and eased it of heavy Taxes. These are all the Memorials that remain of him, in this Kingdom: Nor is there any of five of his Successors. 2. In this Age,Priscilian the Here∣tick con∣demned. the Heresie of Priscilian was con∣demned at Rome, in France, and Spain; he having be∣fore suffered Death for it. This Heresie was first broached in Egypt, and thence brought into Spain, by one Mark, who soon gained the Affections of some. La∣dies, because he allowed (among his other Tenets) that Married People might be divorced, only upon Dislike of one another. A certain Lady, called Ag∣pe, was the great Favourer of this new Doctrine, and in her House it was taught; one Helpidius, a Gramma∣rian, being the chief Professor. Priscilianus, born in Galicia, with some Smattering he had of Rhetorick and Philosophy, and a little Skill in Magick, of a Disciple, in a few Days became so absolute a Master of this He∣resie▪ that it ever after took Name of him. A Synod, assembled at Zaragoza, condemned all the Professors of this Heresie; yet they prevailed so far against this Decree, that Priscilian was made Bishop of Avila: Upon Complaint made to the Emperor Gracian, he ordered that Priscilian, and the other Heretical Bi∣shops, should not only be expelled their Sees, but all Spain. After this, Priscilian, with Bribes, obtained an Order from one of the Emperor's Secretaries, to be himself restored to his Bishoprick; and the same for one of his Companions, the other being dead. The Catholick Bishops flying to the Emperor for Redress, Priscilian was▪ not only deposed, but beheaded for his
Contumacy. The other Bishop, called Instancius, re∣canted. Some of Priscilian's Disciples brought his Carcase into Spain, where he was reverenced as a Saint; and their most solemn Oaths were made by him. The Emperor Maximin would have put them all to the Sword, but St. Martin opposed it, being ve∣ry angry that the Spanish Bishops had prosecuted Prisci∣lian to Death: Nevertheless, Maximus defended the Bishops, and was offended at St. Martin for opposing them.391. A second Constantine filled the Imperial Throne, in the Person of Theodosius; so equal was their Justice, Clemency and Religion. About this time there is some Account, that the Lusitanians of Ambracia built Placensia, in the Province of Cantabria. There is still a Town there of this Name, and we find one Protasius Bishop thereof, mentioned in the Fifth Council of To∣ledo. But let us come out of this Obscurity, though not into full Light, yet to somewhat more Clearness, and speak of the Coming of the Goths into Spain. 3. The Goths were descended of Magog,Goths, who they were. one of the Sons of Japhet, and Brother to Tubal, who first plant∣ed in Scandinavia, that vast Northern Tract of Land which, in the manner of a Peninsula, contains Sweden, Norway and Gothland: Out of the last came the Goths, well known in the World, no less for their many Vi∣ctories, than for their beastly Barbarities: After this, broke out the Suevians,The Suevi∣ans, Van∣dals, A∣lans, Bur∣gundians and Selin∣gi. driven out of Sweden, by the Goths: And lastly, came that Inundation of Vandals, Alans, Burgundians, Selingi, and other Northern Na∣tions, out of the Countries about the River Tanais and the Palus Maeotis. Whilst these Nations were yet em∣ployed in Germany and France, the Roman Army in Great Britain saluted two of their Generals, Marcus, and Gracianus, Emperors, successively; and then kil∣ling them both, promoted Constantius; who fearing the like End as the others had met with, passed over into France; where joining with the greatest Men, he made himself Master of most of that Country. Encouraged with this Success, he sent out several Commanders of Note to possess themselves of Spain, expelling those that govern'd there for the Emperor Honorius. There had been no Difficulty in compassing his Design, but for Didimus and Verinianus; who being then in Lusi∣tania, hasted with a good Power, to secure the Passes
of the Pyraenean Hills. However, Constans, the Son of Constantius, with certain▪ Veterane Legions, and some Troops of Alans and Suevians, all in Rebellion a∣gainst the Empire, forced their Way: The two Bro∣thers pursued; and overtaking him, they came to a Battel, in which the Imperialists were overthrown, and Constans obtained a compleat Victory. Thus the Spaniards were forced to submit themselves to Con∣stans. The Guard of the Pyraenean Hills was commit∣ted to the Suvians and Alans that they might keep out the other Barbarous Nations, dispersed throughout France. Thus flushed with the rich Booty they had got in Spain, they invited the Vandals, Alans, Suevians and Selingi, whom they were to have kept out, into Spain.416. Those People, though under several Comman∣ders, unanimous in the same purpose, passed the Moun∣tains: Guadericus was King of the Vandals▪ Hermeneri∣cus, of the Suevians; and Resplandianus, of the Alans. They over-ran all the Country, gaining several Victo∣rie; so that the Roman Authority was wholly abo∣lished, and Spain entirely brought under that barba∣rous Tyranny: All the Civility and Policy learnt of the Romans, reduced to a Brutal Disorder; and most of the antient Natives destroyed by Sword, Pestilence and Famine. 4. The Vandals and Silingi planted themselves in the Province of Betica:Alans and Suevians in Lusita∣nia. The Alans and Suevians, in Galiciae and Lusitania. In this universal Desolation, the Relicks of the Saints being destroyed, together with the Churches, Panoracius, Archbishop of Braga, ga∣thered a Synod of some Bishops, and ordered them to hide the Bodies of the Saints, so that some Memory of the Places might be preserved to better Times. This was the First Council of Braga.First Coun∣cil of Bra∣ga. In the mean while, the Invaders took Lisbon, Coimbra, Idanha, Me∣rida, Astorga, and afterwards the rest. Having divi∣ded the Lands,Kings of the Alans and Suevians. and Resplandianus, King of the Alans, dying, Attaces succeeded him in the Kingdom of Lusi∣tania, and settled his Court in the City Merida. Her∣menericus, King of the Suevians, Rept Lisbon, and all as far as Algarve, with a part of Galicia. Both these Nations, in process of Time, became more tractable, and joined with the Natives. Attaces now grown powerful, became terrible to his Neighbours; some∣times
breaking into Celtiberia, and sometimes into Car∣pentania: Lastly, he fell upon Hermenericus, King of the Suevians, residing at Lisbon: From him besides other Lands, he took the City Colimbria, seated then where now is Conderia the Old. To ennoble this his Conquest, he laid the Foundation of another City, on the Banks of the River Mondego, which is now the University of Coimbra. This Prince, being an Arian Heretick, obliged the Catholicks, and even the Pre∣lates before taken, to work at this Building. Whilst he was busie at this Structure, Hermenericus having gathered Forces, and joined with Gundericus, came as far as Porto,Porto re-built. then an Heap of Ruins: But fearing lest Attaces should there encounter him, he fortified him∣self, and that so effectually, that People flocking thi∣ther, the City was re-built, and called New Portucale, and Fistavole, which, in the Suevian Language, signi∣fied, the New Shoar▪ This was the second Foundation of Porto. Hermenericus perceiving that Attaces came not to molest him in his new Work, marched to dis∣turb him; but being overthrown, he was glad to sue for Peace. The Conditions were such as pleased the Alans; but particularly, that which contained his marrying Cindasunda, the Daughter of the Suevian King, a Lady of incomparable Beauty and Vertue. Hermenericus carried the Bride to the new City Coim∣bra, where the Nuptials were solemnized with the greatest Magnificence that had been seen among the Barbarians. 5. Attaces, to express to his Father-in-Law how firmly he intended to observe the new-settled Friend∣ship, caused Cindasunda to be painted on his Colours, standing upon a Pedestal; with a Green Dragon on the one side, and a Red Lion on the other. By those two Creatures, were signified, the two Kings, before Competitors, now united by her: The Work-men, to flatter their King, carved the same upon many Stones; which have been so preserved,Arms of Porto. that it is now the Coat of Arms of that City. Cindasunda, who was a Ca∣tholick, privately favoured those that the King forced to labour at his Structures: But particularly, she took Compassion on the Priests and Bishops; and among them, the Bishop Elipanidus, and the Priest Esenus. She, with her Beauty and Intreaties, so mollified the
King, that many Catholicks were delivered from that Slavery. They lived some Time together very una∣nimously: He employed himself in endeavouring to subdue such Provinces as yet remained subject to the Roman Empire; but the Romans, joining with the Goths, defended themselves; as will appear by the Se∣quel. 6. The Emperor Honorius,417. then at Ravenna, seeing the mighty Decay of the Empire, for Constantius was possessed of a great part of France; while, Ataulfus, the Goth, held Gallia Narbonensis; and the Vandals, Suevians and Alans, Spain. Against all these Enemies, he made choice of Constantius, a Noble Roman; who besieged Constantine in Arles, and drove him, for fear, to enter into Orders: Yet this availed him not, for he was put to Death. Constantius designed next to turn his victorious Arms against Constans, but under∣stood that he was killed by Geronicus, who rebelling, had proclaimed Emperor a Friend of his own, cal∣led Maximus. This Geronicus passed over into France: And hearing that Constantius, having slain Constantine, was coming upon him, he returned into Spain, and, in Scorn, was murder'd by the Roman Legions. Ma∣ximus fearing the like Death, fled, and ended his Days in Misery. In the mean time, Honorius having, by his General Constantius, reduced France and Great Britain, he employed him against Ataulfus, King of the Goths,The Goths enter Spain in Gallia Narbonensis. The Goth hard pres∣sed, by the Way of Roussillon, broke into Spain, com∣mitting greater Outrages than the Alans, Vandals, Sue∣vians or Silingi had done.418. After many Events which appertain not to our History, the Goths came to Com∣position with Honorius. But it was not so with the Alans, who possessed the greatest part of Portugal, and continued their Conquests; treating the Vandals and Suevians, not as their Fellows in Arms, but as their Vassals. This put all Spain into a Flame, every one standing up for his Liberty, as Attaces lifted up him∣self, to Lord it over all. That each Nation might be the more at leisure to follow their desperate De∣signs, they all writ to the Emperor, to this Effect: Preserve the Peace, Sir, with us all; Take Hostages from us all: Let us fight; for if we kill one another, the Loss is our own, and yours the Fruit of the Victory, whoever
has the better: Your greatest Advantage, is, to see us all consumed. The War was accordingly begun, the A∣lans commencing it against the Vandals and Silingi. Constantius came to th War, bringing with him Wa∣lia King of the Goths, whose Residence was in Gatalo∣nia: And Attaces, not able to withstand that Power, fled into Portugal. 7. The Victors pursued, and Attaces giving them Battel, was overthrown, though joined by the Native Lusitanians: Those that escaped out of the Battel, fled; some into Galicia, to Gundericus; others to Lis∣bon, to the Suevians; seeking the Protection of those they had before prosecuted as Enemies. Thus they rested a while, without any King: But Constanti∣us being called away, to appease other Troubles in Italy, the Alans and Lusitanians, before dispersed, be∣gan to take heart, and recover what they had lost; founding also many new Towns. Among these, were, Albuquerque and Terabrica; which last was ra∣ther repaired, being called Alankerken, which signifies, The Church of the Alans; and now, corruptly, Alan∣quer. Whilst the Alans, thus without any King, on∣ly following their Generals, paid Tribute to the Em∣peror;The Sue∣vians in∣corporate with the antient Lu∣sitanians. Hermenericus, the Suevian King, at Lisbon, ap∣plied himself to the repairing of the Towns that had been destroyed; treating the Native Lusitanians no otherwise than his own Country-men. The Lusita∣nians having the free Liberty of their Religion, and being equally admitted to all Honours with the Sue∣vians, the two Nations joined Marriage; and by that Means became so entirely one, that there was no know∣ing the Suevian from the Lusitanian, or the contrary. Being thus joined into one Body, they could after∣wards never be parted; but notwithstanding the Inva∣sion of the Goths, the Inhabitants of Portugal were af∣terwards called Suevians. Thus the Portugueses are de∣scended from the Suevians, no less Noble than the Goths, if either of those Barbarous Nations deserve to be esteemed Honourable: And thus the Province of Lusitania lost that Name, and was long after called Suevia. 8. The Alans enjoyed Tranquility,419. without any King; as did the Suevians, or Portugueses, under their Sovereign Hermenericus; till Gundericus, King of the
Vandals, thinking it easie to subdue the Alans in Lusita∣nia, and the Silingi in Andaluzia, if Hermenericus were once oppressed, he broke the Peace with the Suevians; and rushing suddenly, with Fire and Sword, into their Territories; Hermenericus, though surprized at this unexpected Invasion, gathering his Forces together, received the Enemy so successfully, that he sent him to seek new Seats in the Islands of Majorca and Mi∣norca; where we will leave him, to be spoken of by those Historians to whom it belongs.420. Gensericus, the Brother of Gundericus,The Suevi∣ans, Alans and Silin∣gi join in League a∣gainst the Romans. succeeded him: Who under∣standing that Etius, Honorius's General, was coming into Spain, to revenge the Wrongs done by his Bro∣ther, he joined in League with Hermenericus King of the Suevians, and with the Alans and Silingi; believing none would dare to oppose their United Power. At Merida they Mustered their Forces, Etius dreading their Multitude; but much more surprized at the death of the Emperor,423. attempted nothing upon them. Thus Gensericus was left at leasure to pass over into Africk, where he utterly abolished the Name of the Roman Em∣pire, and Hermenericus,427. whilst the Vandals were employ∣ed in Africk, enlarged the Borders of his Kingdom to almost the same extent it now bears. 9. Valentinian the Emperor,Wars be∣twixt the Romans and Sue∣vians. who succeeded Honorius, understanding the Vandals were gone over into Africk, Commanded his General Sebastian to invade the Alans left in Lusitania. Merida and all that Territory was easily taken from them, as was Lisbon and Estremadura from the Suevians. Sebastian now Victorious, forget∣ting his Duty, caused himself to be Proclaimed King of what part he had recovered of Lusitania; yet his Friends failing him, he was soon killed, and by his Death the Alans and Suevians had an opportunity of re∣covering Merida and Lisbon. Hermenericus grown Old and Infirm, caused his Son Richila to be Proclaimed King, who proved one of the most fortunate Princes of the Suevians; whilst Hermenericus rejoyced in the hopes of surviving in the Person of his Son, Andebalus the Im∣perial General was on his march to recover what Seba∣stian had lost. Richila to begin his Reign honourably, gathered a mighty Power, and meeting Andebalus on the Banks of the River Xenil, then called Silingus, slew him and the greatest part of his Army.
10. All Andaluzia easily submitted to the Victorious King,Richila makes him∣self Master of Lusita∣nia and Andalu∣zia. as did also Merida, where there had been an Im∣perial Garrison ever since Sebastian took it. All Lusita∣nia in like manner was brought under, and Richila be∣came absolute in Andaluzia and Lusitania. Old Herme∣nericus died contentedly, leaving such an Heir, in the Town of Britonium near Viana de Caminha on the mouth of the River Minho.440. Another Author who calls him Monarch of Spain, says, he was drowned in the River Guadiana near unto Merida. Richila being sensi∣ble how much more easie it is to gain, than to preserve▪ too large a Dominion, voluntarily resigned up Carta∣gena and Carpentania to the Romans, and entring into League with them, by that means established a large and peaceable Kingdom.448. He died Eight Years after his Father, and left his Son Ricciarius to succeed him, being equal to him in valour, but more fortunate in the true knowledge of the Evangelical Law, which he pro∣fessed living, and adhered to at his death. CHAP. III. The Kingdom of the Suevians subdued by the Goths, two Kings set up by their consent, all again reduced under one with the other re∣markable occurrences between the Years of Grace 448 and 560. 1. RIcciarius succeeded his Father Richila,448. not only in the Kingdom of Portugal,Ricciari∣us his Reign. but the greatest part of Spain. The beginning of his Reign was di∣sturbed with some Conspiracies of the Great Men, but he privately took off many of them, and by that means secured his Life and Kingdom. He Married a Daugh∣ter of Theodoredus, King of the Goths; her Name is not known: Ricciarius after his Marriage, raising a great Army, made War upon those parts of Navarre, which were yet subject to the Roman Jurisdiction, and through them he forced his way into France, to see his Father-in-law Theodoredus. The old Man perceiving his aspi∣ring
Spirit, gave him considerable supplies for the car∣rying on of his Designs. In his return, he conquered the Province of Tarragona and Carpentania, which his Father had abandoned to the Romans. In Aragon, he took Zaragoza, and Lerida in Catalonia; after plunder∣ing the Province of Cartagena, he returned loaded with Booty and Honour into Lusitania. Ricciarius being now at rest,451. his Father-in-law Theodoredus died, and Theodoricus his Son succeeded him: Him Ricciarius thought to have been no less forward toward his As∣sistance, than the Father had been, and upon this con∣ceit, he resolved to conquer the other Lands of the Em∣pire. The Goth who was in League with the Romans, and feared the Ambition of his Brother-in-law might involve him in his own Ruin, advised him to mode∣rate his extravagant desires. Ricciarius offended at this wholesome advice, marched against his Brother-in-law with a powerful Army; Theodoricus was not back∣ward to meet him, being strengthned with Succours from the Kings of France and Burgundy.He is over∣thrown by Theodo∣ricus King of the Goths. The two Ar∣mies furiously ingaged in the Plains about Astorga, both Kings were present in all places, where the great∣est Danger was, Encouraging their Soldiers, and the Men fought as those who had their Kings to be Spe∣ctators of their Valour. At last Ricciarius was utter∣ly overthrown with the Slaughter of all the flower of the Suevians. 2. Ricciarius after this rout fled to the Sea-side,Ricciari∣us his end. and Embarking, thought to have got over into Africk, to call the Vandals and Alans to his assistance, but by a vi∣olent Storm was drove to the River of Porto. Those People to gain the Favour of the Conqueror, who was now subduing the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, secured and delivered him up to Theo∣doricus. He Governed by Passion, cut off his Head, and in him perished the Glory of the Suevian Kingdom, so that it never after rose to any Grandeur: His Death was the more lamented, for that he was a Prince zea∣lous of the true Religion. Accordingly in his life-time, he assembled a National Synod at Aquae Celenae, a Town in Galicia, now called St. George of Codesda; here several Heresies were Condemned, and particular∣ly that of Priscilian. The Victorious Theodoricus laid Siege to Braga, which was soon Surrendred to him:
Here he left one Aliulfus Governour, whilst he crossing the River Duero, went on to conquer all that had been subject to the Suevian King; all yielded to him with∣out any opposition, except the City Merida, the Gar∣rison and Inhabitants of which place were so hardy, as to meet the Goths in the Feild, which Theodoricus so highly resented, that he promised to rase the City, but the Virgin St. Eulalia is said to have appeared to him in a Dream, and deterred him from putting his design in Execution. 3. Theodoricus was upon his return to France,Theodo∣ricus ha∣ving con∣quered Spain, puts it under Go∣vernours. when he had intelligence, that Aliulfus whom he had made Go∣vernour of Braga, had assumed the Title of King, and raised a considerable Army to maintain it. But giving Battle to Nepocianus Theodoricus his General lost his life: From that time the Suevians remained subject to the Goths. All things being thus quieted, Theodoricus went away to France, leaving Governours over all his Con∣quests. The People considering the oppression they lay under, by the ill Administration of these Govern∣ours, and wanting the power to Revolt, had recourse to the Bishops and Clergy, praying them to intercede with Theodoricus, that he would appoint a King over them, whom they might obey, and who yet might be subordinate to him. The Bishops undertook the Bu∣siness, and Idacius Prelate of Lamego, having proposed the matter of the Embassy to Theodoricus in France, he tho' an Arrian, respecting the Character of the Em∣bassadors, not only granted their request, but allowed the People to choose a King among themselves, to Go∣vern them according to their Ancient Laws, only pay∣ing some small acknowledgment to the Kings of the Goths.Two Kings set up in Lusitania. As soon as the Bishops returned to Braga, joyn∣ing with the Laity, they chose for their King one Masdra the Son of Masila. This, which was inten∣ded for the peace of the Country, proved its greatest Confusion, for some of the Nobility who were not pre∣sent at the Election, set up for their King one Franta, who presently possessed himself of all the Lands along the Coast of Galicia, with the Cities of Astorga, Orense and Iria Flavia. Masdra held all Lusitania, and was accounted King of the Suevians; he thought by his sub∣mission and paying the Tribute, to gain the favour of Theodoricus, and obtain Aid against his Competitor:
But, the Goth politickly thinking it better the King∣dom should be divided, as being thereby the less ca∣pable of Rebelling against him, accepted of the sub∣mission of them both; for Franta had sent to pay his o∣bedience with no less speed than the other. 4. The Kingdom of the Suevians thus divided,457. fell into those Calamities which commonly attend States that depend between Competitors. Two Years the Wars continued very furious, during which time so many Towns about the Frontiers were subverted, as might well have contented either party; but at last both of them grown weary,460. gave over the strife. Masdra who had the better Title died, and left a Son called Remismundus his Successor; he considering how little had been gained on either side by the War, not only made Peace, but entred into League with his Compe∣titor. Thus with their united Forces, they conquered several parts of Lusitania, which owned neither of them, but either followed their own Captains, or had again put themselves under the Roman Empire. Thus done, they both returned home satisfied, having enlarged their Dominions, which they would have wasted by waging War upon one another.A prodigi∣ous Birth. Two Years Franta enjoyed Peace, at the end whereof he died, leaving the Crown to his Brother Frumarius: At this time hapned a Prodi∣gy in the Territory of Braga, which was the Birth of two Children, each of them having two heads like one another, and of two several Sexes. Remismundus and Frumarius falling at variance about Precedency, took up Arms by force, whereof the lattergained of the o∣ther the City Flavia, now Chaves, in which and all its Territory, he spared not even the Stones, all the Coun∣try was consumed with Fire and Sword. Remismundus was satisfied with doing as much harm in his Enemies Country, as he received in his own; he took by open force the Cities of Orense and Lugo, in which he exer∣cised the utmost Efforts of his Fury. 5. This Desolation continued for the space of two Years,464. when Death put a stop to it by taking away Frumarius,The Suevi∣an King∣dom again united un∣der Remi∣smundus. and his subjects having left him, for whom before they had forfeited their quiet, submitted them∣selves to Remismundus, who thus became absolute and sole King of the Suevians. He presently thought of re∣covering all that remained of Lusitania, and passing o∣ver
the River Duero with his Army, marched to the Ancient Coimbra, now Condeixa, which the Romans had Rebuilt and Fortified. It was then a place impregna∣ble, and accordingly put a stop for a while to Remis∣mundus; but he persisting before it, had it at last surren∣dred upon Honourable Conditions; though, contrary to his Faith given, he broke the Conditions, robbing the Garrison, and rasing the City. Lisbon made such a vigorous Defence, that he began to despair of carrying it; but a Citizen called Lusidius privately, gave him Entrance into it, so that he was within before the Towns∣men could put themselves in order to oppose him. Re∣mismundus thus possessed of all those Dominions before divided, fearing least Theodoricus the Goth might grow jealous of his great power, sent him an account of his Victories with the best of the spoiles,He Mar∣ries the Daughter of Theo∣doricus. assuring him of the continuance of his Fidelity to the Gothish Kings. Theodoricus overcome with this Generosity, sent him his Daughter for Wife, with a great Mass of Treasure, un∣der the charge of his Ambassador Salanus. 6. This was an unhappy Match for Lusitania,The Arian Heresie first spread in Lusitania. for the Suevians being before true Sons of the Catholick Church, were now infected with the Arian Heresie, taught them by one Ajax a Galatian, whom the Queen being her self an Arian brought with her. The love of the Queen, and the perswasions of Ajax, wrought up∣on the King so effectually, that he not only gave his Subjects the Example of embracing that Heresie, but persecuted those that continued firm in the Faith. All the care of the Prelates for repressing of this current was fruitless, for it spread it self during the space of 100 Years, in which time the Catholicks suffered Oppressi∣on, Banishment, and cruel Deaths. There is no fur∣ther memory of the Actions of Remismundus, after his Marriage till his Death; nor much of his Successors, Theodulus, Varamundus, Mirus, Faramirus and others, till Theodomirus, during the 100 Years that the Arian Heresie continued.490. In the Year 490, some Fishes were taken in the River Minho, which on their Scales had certain Characters, expressing that same number of Years.497. Not long after came into Spain, Euricus King of the Goths, with a design to subdue all the Country, and began with Lusitania, where having made great ha∣vock, he returned Victorious into France and died at Ar∣les.
Amalaricus,530. Grandson to Theodoricus, succeeded Euricus, he being Married to Crosilda he Daughter of Clouis, and Sister to hildebert, Clotarius, and Clodomi∣rus Kings of France, treated her ill, because she was a Catholick, he being an Arian. She complained her Brothers by the means of Ausbertus Archbishop of Braga;531. Childebert hereupon came into Lusitania, and having overthrown and slain his Brother-in-law, return∣ed into France laden with Booty, and carrying away his Sister, who died by the Way: 7. In the Year 549,549. Agila was Proclaimed King of the Goths, he being overthrown at Cordova, retired into Lusitania. There he raised new Forces to withstand A∣thanagildus, a valiant ambitious Captain, who being possessed of Sevil, stiled himself King of Spain: He was supported by Roman Forces, under the Command of Patricius Liberius, a General in esteem with the Em∣peror Justinian.554. Near to Sevil they came to a Battle, wherein Agila was otherthrown, and afterwards Mur∣thered by his own Subjects at Merida.555. Athanagildus thus became Sovereign of all that part of the Kingdom of the Goths, which lies between the Mouth of Tagus and Cape St. Vincent. The greatest part of this Domi∣nion was again recovered by the Romans, notwithstand∣ing that Athanagildus did all he could to oppose them, till he died at Toledo in the Year 567.567. In these times were famous for Piety and Learning,Men fa∣mous for Learning. the Bishops St. Julian of Evora, Lucenius of Coimbra, Aprigius of Beja, Idacius of Lamego and Ausbertus of Braga, a Fleming by Birth: Also the famous Orosius born at Tarragona in Ca∣talonia, flourished at Braga. The Prelates of Spain find∣ing it not only convenient, but necessary to consult with St. Augustin then Bishop of Hippo in Africk, for the better settling and adjusting of matters of Religion, then much perplexed with Doubts, and Controversies; Bale∣onius at that time, Bishop of Braga, made choice of O∣rosius to be sent to him with this Message. The chief point given him in charge, was about the means of ex∣tirpating the Heresies then spread about Spain; St. Au∣gustin having therein given his own Opinion, ordered Oresius to pass over into the Holy Land, there to take the advice also of the other Pillar of the Church St. Hierome, who resided there at that time. There Orosius found the Priest Avitus a Lusitanian, who for the love he
bore his Country, sent by Orosius at his return some re∣licks of the Protomartyr St. Stephen, whose body had been about that time miraculous ound out. This may be supposed to be the same that was held in Venera∣tion at Ossel, which Town some will have to be in the Territory of Beja and others of Bajadoz. CHAP. IV. The Reigns of the Tributary Suevian Kings, from the Year 560, till 585, when Lusita∣nia was again subdued by Leovigildus, the Goth. And the Government of the Gothish Kings, till the Year 672. 1. WE are now come to the End of the 100 Years, which Historians pass over, without any con∣siderable Mention of our Portuguese, or Suevian Kings. In Theodemirus,560. the Memory of our Princes is happily renewed,Conversion of the Lu∣sitanians from Aria∣nism. since through his Means most of the Subjects returned to the true Faith. At the Beginning of his Reign he was an Arrian, but miraculously converted. He removed his Court to the City Braga, where his Son being desperately sick, and no Medicines availing, he asked, one Day, which had been the Religion of St. Gregory of Tours; this Saint being then famous for Miracles: It was told him, he had been a Catholick. Immediately four Gentlemen were sent, with as much Gold and Silver as the sick Person weighed, besides other Gifts, to offer at the Shrine; with a Promise, That if the Prince recovered, he should embrace the Catholick Religion. The Sickness hereupon decreased, yet the Prince recovered not perfect Health: Where∣upon, the King begged some Relick of the Saint; pro∣mising to renounce his Heresie. The Relick was refu∣sed the Ambassadors; and they, at Night, spreading a thin Veil over the Sepulchre, said, They would reverence it as a Reliok, if in the Morning its Weight were consider∣ably increased. Accordingly, the next Morning they
found it as heavy as if it had been made of some weigh∣ty Metal. This Veil the Ambassadors brought with them; and the same Day they landed, the Prince per∣fectly recovered. The King performed his Promise, embracing the Faith; and by his Example, and the Preaching of another St. Martin, who then came out of France, according to some Authors; or, as others will have it, out of Greece, most of the People were converted. Theodemirus had before erected a Church, in Honour of St. Martin of Tours: Of this Church he made the other Martin Abbot first, and then Bishop; whence he was preferred to the Archiepiscopal See of Braga. 2. Two Years were spent in the Embassages, and other pious Works of the King,Several Sy∣nods. for his Son's Health; and all things being now in Peace, he ordered Lucrecius, Archbishop of Braga, to assemble a Synod, for the bet∣ter regulating the Affairs of the Church.563. Eight Bishops being met, they again condemned the Heresie of Priscilianus; and took Order for the propagating of the Faith.569. Another Synod met after that, at Lugo, to ap∣point the Limits of every Diocess; which were after∣wards confirmed, in the general Distribution made throughout Spain,570. by King Wamba. Theodemirus dy∣ing, the Crown came to his Son Ariamirus; who, with the Approbation of St. Martin, now Archbishop of Braga, ordered another Synod to meet in that City; which was accordingly done two Years after:572. Twelve Prelates assembled there; and one of the principal Mat∣ters handled, was, the fixing the due Time of Observ∣ing of Easter. After settling the Affairs of the Faith, the King raised Forces;577. and invading the People cal∣led Rucones, now Rieja, subdued them. Luiva was now King of the Goths, and took for his Companion, and Successor, his Brother Leovigildus: Which done, he re∣turned into France, leaving Leovigildus in Spain, to se∣cure his former Conquests, and add others to them. He victoriously traversed the greatest part of Spain, and at last enter'd Galicia, Ariamirus in vain striving to put a Stop to his Progress; who now perceiving how inef∣fectual Force proved, thought better to try if Fair Means would prevail: Therefore he sent Ambassadors to Leovigildus, to put him in mind of the Peace and Al∣liance established betwixt their Predecessors, and to de∣sire
the Renewing thereof. Leovigildus, content with this Submission, curbed his aspiring Thoughts, conclu∣ded a Peace, and retired. 3. Leovigildus had now two Sons, Hermenegildus and Recaredus. The first was married to Ingunda, Daughter of Sigebert King of France, and his Wife Brunechilde. Upon this Marriage, he lived apart from his Father, and had the Stile of a King given him at Merida. There, by the Means of his Wife, who was a Catho∣lick, and of his Uncle St. Leander, Archbishop of Sevil he embraced the Catholick Faith; and, in Baptism, was, called John.Leovigil∣dus the Goth Wars upon his Son Her∣menegil∣dus, on Ac∣count of Re∣ligion. His Father being an obstinate Arian, was so offended at his Conversion, that he deprived him of the Regal Dignity. The Prince fled into Portugal, and was there protected by King Ariamirus, who was a Ca∣tholick. Hermenegildus raised Forces; but his Father coming speedily upon him, he fled, with 3000 Men, to Ossela, a Place thought impregnable: But Leovigil∣dus, for all that, enter'd it by Force, put all to the Sword, burnt the Town, and carried away his Son Prisoner to Toledo. From thence he made his Escape to Sevil, where he fortified himself. King Leovigildus laid Siege to that City, being assisted by King Ariamirus of Portugal; and having forced his Way into it, carried away Hermenegildus to Tarragona, where he was put to Death, in the Year 586. Which Passage is here rela∣ted, to avoid interrupting the Narration. 4. Our King Ariamirus died at that Siege,583. and his Son Eburicus, then very young, succeeded him in the Crown of Portugal, under the Protection of Leovigildus the Goth.Endeca u∣surps the Crown of Portugal. Endeca, a Noble-man in great Power at the Portuguese Court, taking Advantage of the King's ten∣der Years, married Sisegunda the Queen-Dowager; and with the Help of his Friends, possessed himself of the Government, upon pretence of managing it for the young King. But having, in Process of Time, secured his Interest, he usurped the Regal Title, and put Ebu∣rious into Prison at first, and soon after obliged him to take the Habit of a Monk, that so he might forfeit his Pretensions to the Crown. The Tyrant Endeca fearing Leovigildus the Goth, who was Protector to the deposed King, joined in League with Gunteranus the French King. But the Goth, whose Courage was not to be shocked, sent his Son Recaredus against the French, and
himself invaded the usurping Suevian.He is depo∣sed, and shorn a Monk, by Leovigil∣dus the Goth, He soon took him Prisoner, and obliged him to take the same Habit he had before forced upon the Rightful King, and to enter into Holy Orders, banishing him to the City Be∣ja, then possessed by the Goths. Yet Leovigildus, though he was thought to have conquered that Kingdom for Eluricus, kept it for himself; adding it to his other Do∣minions. Thus ended the Kingdom of the Suevians, after it had, with various Turns of Fortune, lasted about 180 Years:585. It expired in the Year 585. The People, dissatisfied with Leovigildus, rose up in Arms, and proclaimed a Noble-man, called Malaricus, King; but he being soon overthrown, and taken Prisoner by the Forces of the Goth, the Kingdom of the Lusitanians, or Suevians, was entirely brought under the Dominion of the Goths.He perse∣cutes the Catholicks, but dies one himself. The Lusitanians at this time continued firm in the Faith, and Leovigildus ceased not to perse∣cute the Professors thereof; deposing the Catholick Pre∣lates, and filling their Places with Arians, who pervert∣ed many of the People. Leovigildus having raigned 18 Years, died at Toledo, a Catholick, though he had lived an Arian. His first Wife was Theodora, Daughter of Severianus, Governor of Cartagena, and his Wife Theo∣dora, Daughter to Theodoricus, King of the Ostrogoths, in Italy; and Sister to Isidorus and Leander, Archbishops of Sevil; and of Fulgentius, of Cartagena. By her he had Hermenegildus, whom he put to death; and Flavius Recaredus, who succeeded him. 5. Recaredus,586. born at Sevil, in the Year 566, now, in the 20th of his Age,Recare∣dus suc∣ceeds. inherited his Father's Throne. He proved an excellent Prince; and having embra∣ced the Catholick Faith, restored all those that his Fa∣ther had expelled.He becomes a Catho∣lick. His pious Intention of Assembling a National Synod, was, for some time, obstructed by the Treasonable Conspiracies of the Hereticks. The first Council was held at Merida, under the Direction of Claudius, who governed the small Remainder of the Roman Empire along the Sea-Coast of Lusitania. Suna the Arian Archbishop, being now compelled to resign that See to Mansona the Catholick, before expelled by Leovigildus, conspired with other Hereticks, to mur∣der him and Claudius. Witericus, who was afterwards King, now one of the Conspirators, laying his Hand upon his Sword, to execute his Purpose, he could not
draw it; whereat being moved he discovered the Trea∣chery, and was therefore pardon'd. Suna, the Hereti∣cal Archbishop, was banished, as were the other Ac∣complices, and their Estates confiscated. Amidst this Confusion, Gunteranus King of France made War upon Recaredus; sending against him an Army, under the Command of his General Bossus. Claudius, a Man for∣tunate in War, marched to oppose him, and overthrew him near Carcassonne, with a great Slaughter. Some will have it, that Claudius, with only 300 Men, de∣feated Bossus, who had 60000: But let every one judge thereof as he pleases. 6. Recaredus having thus subdued his Enemies, both at home and abroad, was at leisure to assemble the Council he had before designed at Toledo.589. Seventy two Prelates met together there,A Syno at Toledo. St. Leander, Archbishop of Sevil, presiding. The King himself made an Oration at the Opening of the Council. Now the Arian Here∣sie was totally extinguished, the Catholick Faith trium∣phed, and Recaredus, for his singular Piety, had the Title of Catholick, or Most Christian King conferred up∣on him.601. After triumphing over his, which were the Enemies of Christ,Recare∣dus dies. our Religious King Recaredus died at Toledo. He was born at Sevil, in the Year 565; reigned 16, and lived 37. His Coin has been seen in our Age, at several Places: Some at Lisbon, with this Inscription on the one side, RECAREDUS REX; and on the Reverse, OLISIBONA PIUS. Others at Evora, with RECAREDUS REX; and on the Back, ELBORA JUSTUS. Recaredus had two Wives; The first, before he came to the Crown, was Balda, Daughter to the famous King Arthur, or to Fonto, a Gothish Lord. The Second was Clodosinda, Sister to Ingunda, the Wife of his Brother, Prince Hermenegildus. Her chiefest Portion was, the Peace established between Spain and France, then at War. By his first Wife (though some will have him to be Illegitimate) he had Liuva, who succeeded him in the Throne; and was of such excellent Beauty of Person, and such amiable Behaviour, that all his Sub∣jects rather adored than obeyed him; except Witericus, whom the late King had pardoned for discovering the Conspiracy at Merida. This Man, before enured to Treachery, now compassed his wicked Designs, appre∣hending
his natural Lord, cutting off his Right Hand, and depriving him of his Crown and Life, in the Se∣cond Year of his Reign. 7. Witericus thus Tyrannically possessed of the Go∣vernment and Regal Throne of all Spain,603. held it seven Years;Weteri∣cus usurps. which ended in an ignominious Death, yet such as he deserved: He died, miserably dragged about the Streets of Toledo,610. by the People. Flavius Gundema∣rus, of the Blood of Recaredus,Flavius Gunde∣marus reigns. in that Right ascended the Throne, and proved no way inferiour to him for Valour, Moderation and Piety. He desiring to ho∣nour the Church of Toledo,611. made it the Metropolitan of all the Province of Cartagena: To which purpose, a Synod was held at Toledo, in which it was ordained, that Criminals should have the Benefit of Sanctuary. In this City Death cut him off so early, that it is doubt∣ed whether he reigned full two Years.612. Our Lusitania, then subject to the Gothish Kings,Lusitania governed by Lieute∣nants. was governed by their Lieutenants, whereof there was one in every Pro∣vince, and some Comites, or Counts; for then this Ti∣tle began to be honoured for being rare, as now it is little regarded for being so common. It is to be ob∣served, that at this time the Name of Comites was not Titular, as now; but denoted a Power and Jurisdiction over Lands of the Crown. In Spain there is no Title given by the Kings, that is of 400 Years standing. Gundemarus,Sisebutus chosen King though married to Hilduara, leaving no Heirs, Sisebutus was chosen his Successor, by the Pre∣lates and Nobility.616. He immediately, upon his Acces∣sion to the Crown, commanded all the Jews to embrace the Christian Religion: Almost 100000 were bapti∣zed; and as many chose rather to be banished Spain. Sisebutus, though absent from Portugal, adorned it with many Structures: Two Towers, with his Name on them, remain still at Evora, of the Walls then by him built. Some of his Coin is also extant, on the Reverse whereof is a Cross, and about it. CIVITAS EBO∣RA DEUS ADJUTOR MEUS. He ordered Ships to be built upon the Coast of Lusitania; and ha∣ving obtained some Victories, which appertain not to our History,621. died when he had reigned 8 Years and an half, much lamented, as extraordinarily beloved of his Subjects.
8. Sisebutus left a young Son, called Recaredus; who dying soon after his Accession to the Crown,622. left it to Flavius Suintila,Flavius Suintila's Reign. Son to the Holy King Recaredus; so worthy a Man, that Silebutus always committed to him the Command of his Armies. No sooner had he grasp∣ed the Sceptre,He utterly expels the Romans. but he changed it for the Sword, and soon drove out of Portugal the small Remains of the Ro∣man Empire, which still, in much Variety of Fortune, had retained some small Hold there. During the first five Years of his Reign, he behaved himself with that Justice and Piety, that, among other honourable Ti∣tles, he obtained that of Father of the Poor. Some of his Coin, in Gold, I have seen; whereof, one Piece had this Inscription, SUINTILA REX EBORA VICTOR: Another, SUINTILA REX EME∣RITA PIUS. This King stained the Honour of the first five Years of his Reign, by the Lewdness of the en∣suing five; which so incensed his Subjects, that he was forced to fly, and end his Days in Misery, in Lusitania, as some will have it; or in Toledo, according to others: Yet other Authors say, he and his Son Richimirus were killed by Sisenandus, their Successor. Some Writers af∣firm, that Sisenandus was Brother to Suintila. Certain it is,631. he obtained the Crown by Election, with the As∣sistance of Dagobert King of France,Sisenan∣dus suc∣ceeds in the Throne. whose Favour he had purchased with a great Summ of Money. At the Beginning of his Reign he made himself loved, and feared. He assembled a National Synod at Toledo, at which 72 Prelates met: Here, in regard of what Sise∣butus had done with the Jews, it was ordained, That none should be forcibly constrained to embrace the Ca∣tholick Faith.635. Sisenandus died at Toledo, having reigned four Years. 9. It is doubtful whether Sisenandus was Father or Brother to Chintila,King Chin∣tila holds two Synods. his Heir. Two Synods were held in his Days. He reigned three Years and an half, and died at Toledo, much lamented of all Men. His Son Tulga succeeded him;638. who holding the Crown but two Years,His Son Tulga succeeds. could not do so much as was expected from his Justice, Prudence and Valour. He departed this Life at Toledo, leaving no Issue. Chindasuindus, by Force of Arms,640. possessed himself of the Kingdom. At Toledo he gathered a Synod of 40 Prelates.Chinda∣suindus possesses himself of the Kingdom by Force. Rensiberga, Daughter to
Evancius, the Brother of St. Eugenius Archbishop of Toledo, was Wife to this King: By her he had three Sons, viz. Recesuindus,650. Theodofredus and Favila. Having reigned 10 Years, he died at Toledo, and was buried in the Monastery of St. Romanus, founded by himself, between Toro and Tordesilas.655. Two Synods were assembled at Toledo during the Reign of Recesuindus,Two Synods held by Re∣cesuindus the eldest Son of the late King: In the First were 52 Bishops, from all Parts of Spain. In the Second Council were first heard Debates and Disputes concerning the Primacy of all Spain: Braga pretended a Right to that Honour: It was decreed, that the Archbishop of Braga should be Metropolitan of all Galicia only. Another Council was assembled at Merida, to the same effect; but the Church of Braga still went down. About this same time the Gascoigns invaded Spain, but were overthrown, and ex∣pelled, though no Particulars of the Action are to be found in History, nor of any thing that happen'd in the Space of almost 20 Years, which end with the Life of Recesuindus.672. He was buried in the Church of St. Leo∣cadia, at Toledo. Some of his Coin is still to be seen. His only Son Theodofredus was left so young, that he was thought incapable of inheriting so great a Monar∣chy, as will appear in the Sequel. It is here very re∣markable, that Pontamius, Archbishop of Braga, not content that he had done 9 Months private Penance, accused himself openly, in the Synod, of committing Incontinency; wherefore he was deposed from his Dig∣nity, with extraordinary Horrour of all the Prelates who heard the Accusation, though from the Mouth of one so penitent. So rare was it then to see a Prelate guilty of any Crime; So rare now to see them endued with any Vertue.
CHAP. V. The Succession of the other Gothish Kings in the Monarchy of Spain, till Roderick the last of them, from the Year of Grace 672 till 711. 1. NOw was the Monarchy of Spain in a dange∣rous Condition, Theodofredus the Son of Rece∣suindus (if there were any such, for it is dubious) be∣ing left so Young, that he was wholly incapable of managing the Government; the Nobility consul∣ting what was to be done, asked advice of the Pope, who by Divine Revelation, answered: It was the Will of God that Wamba should be preferred to the Crown.Wamba his strange advanc∣ment to the Crown. He being a Man not known, many went out in search of him, and at last found him near Idanha, then a famous City in Portugal: he was then busie at Plow with a pair of Oxen. They told him what they came about, and he taking it for Jest, or believing it impossible, answer∣ed: That when the Goad he held in his hand Blossomed, Wamba would be a King. The Goad accordingly shoot∣ing out Flowers, he was immediately carried away and Crown'd at Toledo. At the time of Anointing his Head, a Vapour like a Cloud was seen to rise from it, and in the midst thereof, a Bee which ascending into the Air, at last vanished: This is in short, what some Authors relate, as to the Election of Wamba. Others wholly rejecting all that is miraculous therein, say, He was a Great Man at Court, and others, That he was Son to the late King Recesuindus, and proclaimed the 3d. day after his Death, so that there could not be time to repair to the Pope, and the working of the Miracles. These latter are the most suitable Opinions to Reason, and there is no∣thing certain in these Antiquities; every Man may be∣lieve as he pleases. 2. Wamba (howsoever it was) being placed on the Throne,His Wars in France and Spain. the People of Navarre, and other their Neigh∣bours, took up Arms to shake off the Gothish Yoak; but the New King taking the Field against them, soon quelled that Rebellion. In the mean while, the Count
Hilpericus revolted in the City of Nismes, which is in Gal∣lia Narbonensis, then subject to the Dominion of Spain; which made Wamba raise new Forces against that Re∣bell, and gave the Command of them to Paul a Vali∣ant Grecian. He being Master of the Field, instead of punishing the Count, rebelled himself, and with him Ranosindus Governour of Tarragona and Hildigisius the Civil Magistrate. By these he was Proclaimed King of Spain, and Crowned at Narbonne with a rich Crown, offered by the Holy King Recaredus at the shrine of St. Felix Martyr of Gironne. Hilpericus the first Rebel, and all Gallia Norbonensis joned with the others; the same did Catalonia and Navarre. Paul strengthned with the ac∣cession of so many Provinces, had the boldness to send a Challange in most insolent Terms to King Wamba. He at that time was in War with the People of Navar∣re and Biscay, and having caused the Challenge to be Read in an Assembly of his chief Commanders, tho' most of them advised to the contrary, he resolved to march with speed against the rebellious Enemy; none hesita∣ted to follow the resolute Prince. They entred Na∣varre, which they entirely subdued in seven days, and being come into Catalonia, the King divided his victo∣rious Army into three parts; one took the way of Per∣pignan, another that of Ausetania, and the third kept a∣long the Sea Coast. The King himself stayed behind with certain choice bands to be ready to repair to the place where most Danger was. He took Barcelona by Force, and was peaceably received into Gironne, for the Tyrant believing that Wamba would not have the Cou∣rage to come to meet him, and that he should soon be there himself, had sent to order Amador the Bishop, That he should acknowledge as his Prince the first that came to the Walls. Wamba being the first, the Prelate did as he was ordered, and the King said to him, Paul has prophesied my coming hither. Immediately he advanced to the Pyrenean Hills, and at the foot of them took Co∣libre and other strong places. 3. Whilst Wamba reduced the Rebels,The Rebells in France subdued by him. Paul retired to Nismes, leaving all he had provided for his Defence behind him at Narbonne. All that was not sufficient to secure that City to Witimerus, whom he had left there as his Lieutenant, for Wamba to avoid the Effusion of Blood, having offered him some good Terms, and he
obstinately refusing, an Assault was given, which last∣ed three hours, at the end whereof the City was taken, and in it Witimerus with others of his Associates. The same hapned at Magalona, Agate and other strong holds, all taken by force and with much Slaughter. Nismes held out longer despair fighting for Paul, but at last it sub∣mitted to Wamba. The French in the Town thinking they were betrayed by the Spaniards in hope of Par∣don, fell upon them, and so they slaughtered one ano∣ther, whilst the Besiegers breaking in, put them all in∣differently to the Sword.673. Paul quitting the Royal Robes, retired to an Amphitheater, a strong Roman Work, where he stayed two days, the Victors only keeping Guard least he should escape thence. The King coming to the City, Argebatus, Archbishop of Nar∣bonne, one of the followers of Paul, came out to meet him in his Pontifical Robes, and casting himself at his Feet, begged Pardon for himself and all the rest. This action somewhat appeaseth Wamba, who Pardoned him and promised to moderate his anger towards the rest. He entred the City in Triumph, where Paul was brought Prisoner and fell down prostrate before him, as others did; their lives were granted, but they were committed to custody till it were resolved what punish∣ment to inflict upon them; all the French were set free, and the City ordered to be repaired. It was voted, that Paul and his Associates should have their Eyes put out, their lives being before granted them, but Wamba was content they should only remain perpetual Pri∣soners. When he entred Toledo in Triumph, they were all carried before him upon Camels, and Paul in the midst of them barefooted, with a Crown of black Lea∣ther on his Head, instead of that of Gold he had aspi∣red to; all their Beards long, and their Heads shaved; Penalties usually inflicted on Traitors at that time, and thus Peace was restored. 4. After this he assembled a National Council,675. where∣in the bounds of all the Bishopricks of Spain were de∣termined,The Afri∣cans inva∣ding Spain destroyed. which continued in the same form, till the Moores conquered Spain. The same Year another Sy∣nod was held at Braga to reform Abuses; much about this time the Africans with a great Fleet scouring along the Coast of Spain, did much harm: The King sent his Forces against them, by whom they were overthrown,
their Fleet burnt, and all their power both by Sea and Land consumed. It is thought that one Count Ervigi∣us a Grecian, banished by the Emperor of Constantino∣ple, was the cause of their coming; he aspiring to the Crown, thought that the Goths thus invaded, would easily have submitted themselves to him, because he had married a Niece of King Recesinudus, and that Wam∣ba was then very Aged. Failing of his design, he gave Wamba a sort of Poison that disturbed his Brain, and at the same time prevailed with him to appoint him his Successor. Besides these his Contrivances, Wam∣ba desirous of himself to lay down the burden of a Crown to him grown unsupportable, voluntarily quitted the regal Authority, and took the habit of a Monk in the Monastery of Pampliega, betwixt Burgos and Valladolid, on the Banks of the River Pisuerga, where he appro∣ved himself as good a Religious Man, as he had been a King. Eight or more Years he Reigned, and lived Se∣ven in the Monastery; it is not known that he had any Children, nor so much as a Wife, he was Buried at Pampliega. King Ferdinand the Saint, designed to Translate him to Toledo, and his Son D. Alonso the Wife, put it in Execution. There are two Tombs now in the Chappel of St. Leocadia, in the Cathedral of that City, one supposed to be Wamba,'s, and the other of King Recesiundus. King Philip the II. causing them to be opened in the Year 1575, one of the Bodies was found cloathed in the habit of St. Benedict, which was therefore concluded to be that of Wamba, because he wearing that Habit whilst living, was doubtless Buried in it. Some Authors will have him to be Buried at Cinanium, or Citania, a City in the Mid-way betwixt Braga and Guimaraens. 5. Ervigius Successor to Wamba,681. was Son to Arde∣bastus,Ervigius  Wamba. whom Ancient Records call Count, who was married to the Daughter of King Chindasuindus. Tho' he deserved not the Crown as being an unjust Usurper, he afterwards seemed worthy of it for his good Govern∣ment, his ensuing Virtues attoned for his former Crimes. One of his first Actions was the assembling of a national Counsel,682. the chief intent whereof was to secure the Crown he had wrongfully got.684. Two Years after he called together another Council, which confirmed all the Acts of the former. A third also met the follow∣ing
Year to receive the Decrees of the sixth General Council of Constantinople against the Heresy of Apolli∣narus.His Actions Ervigius though well settled in the Throne, the better to secure himself, married his Daughter Cixilona to Egica Wamba's Nephew, being the Son of his Sister Ariberga. A great part of Portugal was at this time Go∣verned by Sala, a Noble and Valiant Commander: He repaired the Walls and Bridge of Merida, and other publick Structures. King Ervigius himself Built al∣most from the Ground the Walls of Idaria; Ervigius Reigned Seven Years, and died at Toledo the same Year as did King Wamba at Pampliega. 6. Egica the Nephew of King Wamba,687. the more to express his Aversion to Ervigius,King Egica whom he succeeded in the Throne, put away his Daughter, whom, as was said, he had Married; whereupon her Children were as ill treated, as were those of her Father. All the Brethren felt the want of right in their Father, be∣ing cast out and not respected so much as Noble Men. However, Egica gave them some ease till such time as a Council could be assembled to order what ought to be done with them.689. This Counsel at length meeting, Decreed the King might lawfully prosecute all that were guilty of the Treason, whereby Ervigius ascended the Throne; Several were punished in different manners. Hereup∣on ensued a Conspiracy against the King, in which Se∣gibertus Archbishop of Toledo was the principal Actor. This design being discovered, Egica called together another Counsel to be the better able to proceed against the Archbishop. Sixty Bishops met, among whom were Ten Portuguese, who gave Sentence against the Archbishop, Excommunicating, Banishing, and De∣posing him from his Dignity.693. Some dangerous Com∣motions happened in Gallia Narbonensis, then subject to the Spanish Monarchs, fortune therein favouring the Rebels. These troubles were followed by Plague and Famine:The Jews conspire a∣gainst the King, and are punish∣ed. The Jews who were then numerous in Spain, took occasion herefrom to conspire against the King, and for the carrying on their Designs, held correspon∣dence with others that lived in Africk, and other Fo∣reign parts. The King informed thereof, called ano∣ther Counsel at Toledo,694. to punish the Guilty, except∣ing those of Narbonne, because of the Plague and Fa∣mine that consumed them. The Plot being proved,
the Criminals were Condemned to serve as Slaves throughout all Spain, and to have their Children taken from them at Seven Years of Age, to be instructed in the Christian Faith. 7. About this time,Witisa Son to Egi∣ca Reigns in Portu∣gal. one Count Vitulus rebelled in that part of Galicia, that joyns to Portugal: His design was to usurp the Monarchy of the Goths, but his Pow∣er being too small, he soon suffered the penalty of his Rashness. To prevent the like Practices for the future, the King gave the Kingdoms of Portugal and Galicia to his Son Witisa, the Grandson of Ervigius, being then of Age to Govern. To himself he kept the rest of Spain and Gallia Narbonensis; Witisa went into Portu∣gal, and kept his Court in the City Braga, where by his unjust Actions, he raised many Troubles and much Blood was spilt, his Father having sent him thither to prevent Discord, which he seemed rather to sow. This Country was eased by his absence, for he remo∣ved to Tuy in Galicia, where he lived till the Death of his Father. It is no new thing for a vertuous Father to have wicked Children; King Egica, besides Witisa, had Opas Archbishop of Toledo, famous for assisting to the Destruction of Spain; he was also Father of Fandi∣na, Wife to the unfamous Count Julian, and Mother to Florinda, the only cause of that lamentable Tragedy. 8. Witisa being possessed of the Government of all Spain,701. became so insolent,After  Death, he is Monarch of all Spain. that giving way to all man∣ner of Vice, discouraging Vertue, and laying open all places of strength in the Kingdom, he may well be sti∣led the Spanish Nero. I will not go about to relate all his Cruelties and leud Practices, but must not omit to say, he cast off all Obedience to the Pope, and gave great Priviledges to the Jews, so that they returned to Spain, and erected Synagogues: The Inhabitants of Braga sent Felix their Archbishop to Toledo, to Petition the King that the Walls of their City might not be De∣molished, as he had ordered. He was not admitted to speak with the King, but only with Count Julian, then the great Favourite, of whom he obtained what he went about. This lascivious King, killed Favila, the Father of Pelayus, and Duke of Cantabria, thinking by that means the better to enjoy his Wife D. Luz;His Cruel∣ties. he put out the Eyes of Theodofredus, Father to King Rode∣rick and D. Luz, thereby to make him incapable of in∣heriting
the Crown; but, Roderick did the same by him,711. so that he died Blind, having Reigned Ten Years. There is no Account who was his Wife, but it appears he had two Sons, which were Evan and Sisebutus, who being Banished by King Roderick into Africk, fled to the Protection of Requila, Commander of Tangier their Fa∣ther's Friend; and thence came over a Commander a∣mong the Moores that destroyed Spain, and so died: Those Calamities require another Chapter. CHAP. VI. The Reign of King Roderick from the Year 711, till the coming of the Moores in 714; all Spain subdued by them in Eight Months; the Restauration began by Pelagius and his Suc∣cessors till the Year 783. 1. SOme Writers who have obtained no small Credit,711. name Acosta or Aconsta, as Successor to Witisa; yet others there are who absolutely exclude him as fabu∣lous. If any such was, he was Eldest Son to Theodofre∣dus, and Brother to King Roderick; however it is, we have no account of his Actions, and if any were, being so dubious,Roderick last King of the Goths. they are scarce worth relating. Roderick then may be allowed immediate Successor to Witisa; he was Granson to King Chindasuindus, and Son to Theo∣dofredus Duke of Cordova, by his Wife Recilona: Favila Duke of Cantabria was Brother to Theodofredus, and had Pelagus or Pelagius by his Wife, and Niece to the Lady Luz. Thus the Subversion and Restauration of Spain, had their Authors proceeding from the same stock; for as Roderick was cause of the Destruction, so Pelagus was the first that laid his Hand to the Reparation of it. Ro∣derick ascended the Throne with no small hopes, con∣ceived by his Subjects, of a better Government than had been before,Count Ju∣lian Favo∣rite to Ro∣derick. but the event made him more odious than his Predecessor had been. Count Julian the great Fa∣vorite and prime Master to Witisa, continued in the same Post under King Roderick: Julian was Father to
her, whom the vulgar calls Cava, and our Historians Florinda; of her, Roderick became enamoured, that so the greatest Desolution might not happen without the help of a Woman. Having chosen her for his Wife, it fortuned that Egilona or Eilata an African Princess, or according to others, a Goth was droven by Tempest in∣to a Port of Spain; she being brought to the King, her Beauty so captivated him, that forgetting Florinda, he took her to Wife: Thus she who thought to have been Queen, continued at Court as one of the Queen's La∣dies. Julian her Father enraged beyond measure, im∣mediately contrived how to be Revenged, and in or∣der to it, perswaded the King to Dismantle all the strong places left standing by Witisa, and disarm his Subjects, which was accordingly done. 2. Soon after the King sent Julian Ambassador to Muza in Africk,Julian sent Am∣bassador into A∣frick. to request of him not to protect Evan and Sisebutus, the Sons of Witisa: The more to move Muza, he thought it proper to send him some conside∣rable Present, and being informed, that in a Tower near Toledo, great Treasures were of Antient time re∣ported to be hid, the Doors having many locks upon them, because it was a received Opinion, that when they were opened, great Calamities would ensue, the King resolved to enter this place. In it was found no∣thing but a Chest, containing only a Picture represen∣ting Men a Horse-back in Moorish Apparel, with seve∣ral sorts of Weapons, and an Inscription denoting, that when those Gates were opened, Spain would be Inva∣ded and Conquered by that sort of Men. The King thought the Prediction would be Averted by locking up the place again with what it contained, but it proved otherwise. Julian being gone upon his Embassage, King Roderick relapsed into the love of Florinda, and courted her, but without receiving any Favour, Fran∣dina her Mother perceiving it, and desiring to be her self the Mistress of a King, caused one Bigamota, an at∣tendant of hers, to deliver some Messages to the King as from Florinda,Roderick ravishes Florinda Daughter to Julian. tending to meet him in some conve∣nient place, where shrowded with Darkness, she might supply the place of her Daughter; the King encoura∣ged by those false invitations, watched his opportunity, and finding Florinda alone, ravished her.
3. Florinda now doubly wronged first of the Throne, and then of her Honour, was touched with the highest Resentment; her Mother soon discovered the effect, being sensible of the cause and changing her love to the King into hatred, perswades Florinda to acquaint her Father by Writing with the loss of her Honour.712. Juli∣an hereupon hasts back into Spain,Julian me∣ditates Re∣venge. dissembling his Rage, and appearing joyful before the King, having succeed∣ed in his Embassy, obtained fresh Favours: He begged the Government of the Towns held in Africk, and thi∣ther he went with his Wife, leaving his Daughter at Court to prevent all suspicion. Julian treated with Muza about betraying the Kingdom of the Goths unto the Caliphs, and he having received instructions from his Prince, agreed upon the Conditions without much difficulty; the Traitor not only encouraging the Bar∣barian to pass over into Spain, but drawing over many great Men in his Government to take part with them. Having settled these Affairs at Malaga, he came to Court and obtained leave to carry away his Daughter with him,He brings the Moors into Spain. the King nothing mistrusting any Treason. Mu∣za in pursuance of what was agreed upon, sent over 6000 Arabs under the Command of Tarif Abenzarca, to make the first incursion into Spain;713. these being joyn∣ed by the like number of the Rebels, broke through Andaluzia into Lusitania, where nothing being less thought of than War, Men, Women and Children were seen in droves flying to the Mountains. King Roderick alarmed with this invasion, sent his Nephew D. Inhigo Sanchez with some number of Men armed on∣ly with Staves and Stones; yet such as they were, they had several rencounters with the Enemy, but at last their Commander being slain, and they overpowered, were put to flight. The Victorious Arabs returned into Africk with Booty and many Captives; this was the first Scene of the wicked Count's Revenge, and of the overthrow of the Spanish Monarchy. 4. Whilst Count Julian and the Caliph prepared for a more powerful Expedition, King Roderick now awake, raised the greatest number of Men he could, and with all possible speed provided Arms and Fortified his Towns. He thought the Barbarians would have given him more time, but they immediately passed over the streights of Gibraltar with a wonderful Fleet;
200000 Foot and 40000 Horse of them incamped on the Spanish Coast.200000 Foot and 40000 Horse of the Moors land in Spain. The King's Army consisted of 120000 Foot and 10000 Horse, a sufficient num∣ber had they been well Armed, and Disciplined Men; he Encamped betwixt Xeres and Medina Sidonia, lea∣ving the Sea open at the Enemies backs, whereby they received Succours: Upon Saturday the 1st. of September in the fatal Year 714. the two Armies came in sight of one another.The King's Army con∣sisted of 120000 Foot and 10000 Horse. That day was spent in taking up their Lodgments along the River Guadalete; on Sunday with the day began the Battle, which continued very Bloody till Night parted them; all the Week the fight continued, still renewed with the Day as it was broke off by the Night.714. King Roderick appeared in all parts in his Royal Robes;A great and bloody Battle. over his Armour he wore a rich Garment, a Crown on his Head, a Scepter in his Hand, on his Feet Golden Buskins set with Pearl and precious Stones; he was carried in a high Ivory Chariot as was the manner of the Gothish Kings in Battle, and thence en∣couraged his Men, who the 2d. Sunday began to faint. The King perceiving them give way, left his Chariot, and mounting upon a Horse, he called Orelia, rushed couragiously into the thickest of his Enemies, making them give way to his Valour.The Spa∣niards o∣verthrown▪ The Spaniards encou∣raged at this sight, came on so vigorously, that the Battle for some time continued doubtful; but at Sun∣setting, the Vigour of our Men quite failing, Victory appeared on the Enemies side, and the Darkness gave the Christians an opportunity to fly. 5. I cannot forbear remarking how fatal the number Eight has appeared upon this occasion;A remark upon the number Eight. Eight days the fight lasted, Eight months the Barbarians spent in sub∣duing all Spain, and 800 Years it cost the Spaniards to recover it. The King seeing he laboured in vain, fled to a Mountain, where he changed his Apparel with a Shepherd: In this condition he came to the Monastery of Cauliniana, two Leagues from Merida, on the Banks of the River Guadiana. Here overcome with Trouble and Sorrow for his Sins, he fell into a Swoun, and was brought to himself by one Romanus a Holy Monk. With him he fled into Portugal, where they took up their Habitation on a Rock upon the Sea Coast, near the Town of Pederneira. They took two different Cells about a Mile from one another, where both of them
ended their Days. Here, as is said, was found an Image of our Blessed Lady, in the Time of Alonso, our first King; and a Tomb, with this Inscription, HIC REQUIESCIT RUDERICUS ULTIMUS REX GOTHORUM; that is, Here reposes Rode∣rick, the last King of the Goths. Thus far our Au∣thor, Emanuel de Faria, setting down this as an ap∣proved and undoubted Opinion: But many others, and those of good Note, reject this, as fabulous; most Men agreeing, that King Roderick was drowned in the River Gundalete, where most of his Royal Appa∣rel was found; he being never after heard of. Many more strange Stories have been spread abroad, as it commonly happens in such Cases, where the Bodies of Princes, in such Universal Calamities, are not found; but they are rather Romantick, than Historical, and therefore not fit for any, but least of all for the Brevi∣ty of this History. After the Victory,The Moors over-run all Spain. the Moores spread themselves over all the Province, committing inhumane Barbarities; not without losing, in several Rencounters during the eight Months of their Conquest, 80000 Men, besides 20000 before slain in the great Battel. The chief Re∣sistance was made at Merida: The Defendants, where∣of many were Portugueses, that being then the supream Tribunal of Lusitania, were commanded by Sacaru, a Noble Goth. Many brave Actions passed at the Siege; but at length, there being no Hopes of Relief, and Provisions failing, the Town was surrender'd upon Ar∣ticles. The Commander of the Lusitanians, with such as would follow him, traversing Portugal, came to a Sea-port Town; where gathering a good Number of Ships, he put to Sea; but to what part of the World they were carried, does not appear. There is an an∣tient Fable of an Island, called Antilia, in the Western Ocean, inhabited by Portugueses, which could never yet be found; and therefore we will leave it, till such time as it is discovered; but to this Place our Author supposes these Portugueses to have been driven. For∣tune having now wholly forsaken Spain, the Moores ea∣sily over-ran all that remained, as far as the River Min∣ho, under the Command of Abdalaziz, Son to Muza: Yet the Andaluzians and Lusitanians, Muza being ab∣sent, rose up in Arms, and put to the Sword the Moorish
Garrisons of Sevil, Beja and Ilipula; which done, be∣ing assembled to a great Number, they took Merida by Force, killing all they found therein. Muza, who was then at Zaragosa, hasted to quell this Commotion; which was easily done. Merida he spared; Sevil suf∣fered much; at Ilipula there was not one Stone left upon another; but what he did at Beja, is not known, though it may be supposed not to have escaped, ha∣ving been the Place of Rendesvouz for the People of Sevil. 7. The famous Actions of D. Pelayo,Pelagius the first that oppo∣sed the Moors. or Pelagius, and the miserable Ends of Count Julian, his Wife, and Daughter, the principal Actors in this Tragedy, are treated of in the Chronicles of those Kingdoms to which they appertain. Pelagius, during the 19 Years he reigned, had no Command in Portugal, where the Moors were so predominant, that there were as many Kings as Cities. But because the Actions of Pelagius were so great in themselves, and in the Consequence of them, we will give some Hints of what others write at large. Pelagius was in the great Battel, with his Cou∣sin-German King Roderick: After which, he fled, with 1000 Christians, to Asturias de Oviedo, where he took Shelter in a vast Cave, now called Covadonga, among the Mountains of Auseva; and was, in that miserable Condition, by his Men proclaimed King of Spain; a mighty Title, for so poor a Beginning; and yet here began those Victories, which, in the Space of 800 Years, recovered all Spain. Pelagius had a Sister, whose Name is not known; but Muza, Governor of Gijon, in Asturias, being taken with her Beauty, enjoy'd her, upon Promise of Marriage. The Desire of Re∣venging this Wrong first moved Pelagius to appear in Arms: Thus it fell out, that as one Lady was the Cause of the Destruction of Spain, so another was the Motive of its Restauration. Pelagius was the Son of Favila Duke of Cantabria, Third Son of King Chinda∣suindus, and of his Wife D. Luz, the Daughter of Theo∣dofredus Duke of Cordova, and Brother to Favila. He was born at Toledo, and bred at Alcantara, by Grafes, Brother to the Lady Luz, his Mother. This was the first King that we find had the Title of Don annexed to his Name. His Wife was, Gaudiosa, of Cantabria; Fourth Grandchild to Ofilon, Brother to Stephen, the
happy Father of the Archbishop St. Ildefonsus. By her he had Favila and Ermesenda, who succeeded him in the Regal Dignity.722. He took Leon in the Year 722: And hence came the Title of Kings of Leon, and the Bearing of a Lion for their Arms.737. He died at Cangas, at the Foot of the Mountain Auseva, in September, 737; and lies buried in the Church of Covadonga, built by himself, and his Wife, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary. 8. Favila,Favila succeeds Pelagius. who succeeded his Father Pelagius, had not Time to perform any great Actions, being killed in the Second Year of his Reign, by a Bear, as he was hunting. He lies buried in the Church of the Holy Cross, founded by himself, at Cangas. He married Froi∣livua, and either had no Sons, or, at least, they came not to the Crown; for his Sister Ermesenda succeeded him, and took to Husband, and King, D. Alonso, Son to D. Peter, Duke of Cantabria, descended from Reca∣redus J. During the foregoing Years, the Christians in Portugal enjoyed full Liberty of Conscience. Several Moorish Great Men ruled over them: Aliboacen, Grand∣son to the General Tarif, was Lord of the City Coim∣bra, and all the Territories betwixt the Rivers Alva-Mondego and Agueda; governing with Tyrannical Power. Thus the Portuguese lived in Subjection, when Heaven gave them Hopes of recovering their Liberty. Happy was the Kingdom in falling to Erme∣senda, for that she was the Mother of the Victorious and Religious King Alonso, who conquer'd a great part of Castile,King A∣lonso suc∣cessful a∣gainst the Infidels. Galicia and Portugal. He enter'd Galicia with a powerful Army, and took the Cities of Lug and Tuy: Then passing over the River Minho, he over∣ran all the Country, as far as Duero; entring the Cities and Towns of Braga, Porto, Agueda, Viseo, and Chaves; besides other Places of Importance: No Quarter was given to the Moors; and the Christians were carried away to Asturias, he not designing to keep all he gain∣ed. This was the first King, after the Destruction of Spain, that had any Jurisdiction in Portugal. Thus he reigned,757. with great Honour, 17 Years; and died at the Age of 64. His and his Wife's Bodies were buried in the Church of Covadonga. He had Issue, Fruela, who succeeded him; Wimaranus, Aurelius, and Adosinda. By a Slave he had Mauregatus, who proved more like
the Mother, than the Father, as will appear in the Sequel. 9. Fruela,K. Fruela kills 60000 Moors. who inherited his Father's Valour, as well as his Kingdom, marched to meet a mighty Ar∣my, sent against him by Abderramen King of Cordova, (the first that, in Spain, durst cast off the Authority of the African Calyph,) under the Command of Omar, to revenge the Harm done by the late King Alonso, in Por∣tugal and Galicia. He met with no Opposition in Por∣tugal: But in Galicia, King Fruela discomfitted his migh∣ty Army, killing him, and 60000 of his Men. This done, crossing Portugal, to besiege Setuval, he over∣threw Aliaben Talib, who came to put a Stop to his Pro∣ceedings▪ with 1500 Horse, and 14000 Foot: Of the Moors, 8000 were slain in the Fight; and of the Chri∣stians, 2300. This Victory laid that Country open; and the King, after an hard Siege, had Setuval surren∣der'd to him. This is his last Action, we know of, in Portugal: In other Places he performed many great Ex∣ploits. He forbid Priests to marry, which had been allowed since the Time of King Witiza; and was the Founder of the City Oviedo. All his Vertues and Tro∣phies were obscured by his putting his Brother Wima∣ranus to death, upon bare Suspition that he intended to rebel, because he was exceedingly beloved by the Peo∣ple, for his extraordinary Endowments. Most Authors agree, that this Wimaranus was Father to Bermudo the Monk, afterwards King. Fruela was married to Moni∣na, the Daughter of Eudo Duke of Guienne, in France. Their Children were, D. Alonso, and the Lady Ximena. This King had also a Bastard-Son, called Raimund. He prospered no more after the Death of his Brother Wimaranus; for Abderramen, King of Cordova, recover∣ed all that Part of Portugal which lies betwixt Cape St. Vincent and the River Tagus.768. After this Loss, he was murder'd at Cangas, by his Brother Aurelius. His Bo∣dy, and that of his Wife, were buried in the great Church of Oviedo, founded by himself. He reigned 11 Years in great Esteem with his People; and two more after the Death of his Brother, no less hated than he had been beloved. 10. We have no Account of any thing remarkable,Particular Affairs of Portugal done by Aurelius, the Successor of Fruela, in Portugal. But about this time, Marvan Ibenzorat reigned in Coim∣bra:
And Theodus, a Noble-man, descended of the Gothish Kings, was Governor of the Christians in these Parts, with the Title of Count. Aurelius reigned six Years, died at Cangas, and was buried in the Church of St. Michael.774. He leaving no Children, Adosinda, the Daughter of King Alonso and Queen Ermesenda, and his Sister, succeeded him. She married Silo, whose Pa∣rents are not known; but so he came to be King. He enter'd Portugal, to make War upon the Moors; and took from them the City Merida, in Estremadura. Thence he marched against the People of Galicia, who were in Rebellion; and finding great Opposition, af∣ter the Victory, he treated them with much Severity. Having obtained these Victories, the King gave him∣self up so entirely to his Ease, that the Queen managed all the Government. They had one Son, called Alde∣gastus; who, with his Wife Brunilda, built the Mona∣stery of St. Mary d' Ovanna, in the Territory of Tineo, for their Burying-place.783. The King died when he had reigned Nine Years, and was buried in the Church of St. John de Pravia, founded by himself. His Epitaph is thus: H. S. E. S. S. S. T. L. Each Letter stands for a Word; and are, HIC SITUS EST SILO SIT SIBI TERRA LEVIS. CHAP. VII. The succeeding Kings, from the Year 783, till 924. The Battels they fought, and their Conquests upon the Moors; but more parti∣cularly, in Portugal. 1. QUeen Adosinda considering the good Qualities of her Nephew D. Alonso, the Son of Alonso the Ca∣tholick King,783. she appointed him her Successor. Mau∣regatus, the Bastard Son of the same Alonso, begotten on a Slave,Maurega∣tus the Ba∣stard u∣surps the Crown. soon deprived him of the Crown. To compass his Design, he enter'd into a League with the Moors, and became Tributary to them, the Tribute consisting of 100 Noble Maids, to be deliver'd to them
yearly: In case he gave not the Maids, in lieu of eve∣ry one, he was to pay 500 Pieces of Money, supposed to answer to as many Crowns in our Days. This Tri∣bute was conveyed to Cordova, and gathered and secu∣red in several Parts of Asturias, Galicia and Portugal. Now some Authors affirm, this Tribute was paid in the Year 770; and if so, it must be in the Reign of Aure∣lius, who governed from the Year 768, till 774; and then Mauregatus did not institute, but only continued to pay it. Whensoever it began, certain it is, it conti∣nued till the Year 788, which was the last of Maure∣gatus's Reign.788. He died without Issue, and was buried at Pravia. 2. Bermudo,Bermudo, advanced to the Throne, o∣verthrows the Moors. then in Deacon's Orders, Grandson to the Catholick Alonso, being Son either to Wimaranus, or Fruela, his Brother, was promoted to the Crown after Mauregatus. The first Action of this King was very honourable; for Abderramen, King of Cordova, sending to demand of him the Tribute of the Maids, he not only refused to pay it; but, with a small Number, en∣countring an Army of his, of 60000 Men, under the Command of Muza, overthrew it, and so recovered the Honour of Spain, delivering it from that heavy Im∣position. Bermudo, though a Deacon, was married to Ousenda, or Ʋsenda; by whom he had Ramiro, after∣wards King; and a Daughter, named Christina: He had also a Bastard-Son, called D. Nunho. Though the Action we have spoken of was great,793. his last was in∣comparably beyond it;He resigns the Crown. for he not only resigned the Crown, but, having Children of his own, gave it up to D. Alonso, Son to King Fruela; from whom it had been wrongfully taken by Mauregatus.795. This done, he took the Habit of a Monk, in the Monastery of Saha∣gun; where he died, and was buried, but afterwards translated to Oviedo. 3. D. Alonso, who was restored to the Crown by Ber∣mudo,Alonso▪ the Chaste. was born in the Year 758. Though married to the French Lady Berta, he had no issue, having lived continently with her; and therefore he was called, The Chaste, a Name rare among Princes. This Name of Alonso, as it was fortunate to Spain in general, so was it also to Lisbon in particular,798. for its Recovery, Restaura∣tion and Defence.His Con∣quests. This King took it from the Moors, killing a great Number of them in the Assault, and in
several Battels he fought to come to it. Some Authors will have it, that Charlemaigne came over out of France, in Person, to his Assistance: Others deny his Personal Presence: But all agree, his Army was so great, that the Infidels could never make Head against it. The following Year,799. the King took the Cities of Viseo, La∣mego, Coimbra, Braga, and other Places about Porto. Omar King of Merida, with a great Power, laid Siege to Benavente; but he and the greatest part of his Army were put to the Sword by Bernard del Carpio, command∣ing the Forces of King Alonso. In the mean while, Alia∣tan, by the Way of Estremadura, enter'd Portugal, put∣ting all to Fire and Sword, with such Success, that he took Lisbon the 8th Year after it had been gained by King Alonso. Many other Places submitted to the Bar∣barian; and he left Alchama, King of Badajoz, or Beja, to command there. This Alchama afterwards making an Expedition out of his Province, was killed by Ber∣nard del Carpio,812. at the City Zamora. Aliatan, to re∣venge this Loss, raised great Forces in Barbary, which he divided into two Bodies; whereof, the one enter'd Castile; the other, Portugal; making great Havock in both Places: Both these Armies were cut in pieces; one, in which Alahaban commanded, by the King, near the River Cefa; the other, conducted by Melich, by Bernard,813. in the Plain of Narnon. Abdalla, Governor of Valencia, and Mahomet, of Merida, rebelled at once against King Aliatan: He marched against Abdalla; but whilst he was there engaged, Mahomet joined in League with King Alonso; whereby he became power∣ful enough to conquer a good part of Portugal and Estremadura. Aliatan returning with a mighty Ar∣my, overthrew the Rebel, and possessed himself of all which he had conquered betwixt Merida and Lisbon. Mahomet thus expelled his Dominion, fled with such as would follow him to King Alonso, submitting him∣self to him as his Vassal. The King sent him with one Raymund, to subdue certain places then in Rebellion in Gallicia; they easily overcame the Mutiniers, and the King ordered Mahomet to reside in those parts, ho∣ping to make his advantage of him against the King of Cordova,814. as he did for some time: But Mahomet finding himself powerful, thought to recover what he had lost,
and therefore privately conspiring with Raymond, they both Rebelled, usurping great part of Galicia: The King hasted thither with a considerable Army, Ray∣mond presently submitted himself, and was not only Pardoned, but Married the King's Kinswoman. Ma∣homet though he had then 60000 Men, durst not give Battle in open Field, but retired to the strong Castle of St. Christina, two Leagues from Lugo. There the King Besieged, and Hunger forced him to come out and give Battle, in which his Army was entirely rou∣ted and he Slain. About this time was found the Se∣pulcher of St. James the Apostle, and Patron of Spain, which had been hid almost 800 Years; it was discove∣red by Theodemirus Bishop of Iria. King Alonso remo∣ved it to Compostela, which he made a Bishoprick, e∣recting there a Church capable of so great a Relick. Thus Crowned with Victories, and loaded with Years, for he lived Eighty Five,843. and Reigned Fifty Two; he died at Oviedo,Tryal by Ordeal in use. and lies Buried in the Church of St. Mary de Recasto, his own Foundation. At this time the old Gothish Law of trying People by Fire was in use in Portugal, as appears by the Tryal of Elosinda, accused of Adultery by her Husband Ariovigildus, she after this manner clearing her self, and he being Con∣demned to be Burnt, as she should have been if Con∣victed. Pope Honorius the III. abolished this Custom, yet afterwards, another worse started up, which was, that the Woman accused, should assign a Champion to fight the Accuser, and that party which had the Vi∣ctory was held innocent. 5. King Bermudo by an incomparable Act of Justice, had taken the Crown from his own Children, to give it to Alonso, to whom of right it appertained; and God to reward this rare Equity, ordained that Alonso should live Chast,King Ra∣miro his Actions. and restore it to Ramiro, the Son of the same Bermudo. Scarce was he seated on the Throne, when Count Nepocianus rebelled in Austurias, and usurped the regal Title: The New King with all the speed he could, marched against him, and having defeated and ta∣ken him Prisoner, put out his Eyes and thrust him into a Monastery. Soon after he overthrew the Normans, who destroyed the Coast of Galicia, and the English who had laid Siege to Lisbon: Returning to the River Duero, he vanquished Mahomet Cid Atauf, Lord of the
Fort and Town of Gaya, and also Muley Achim of A∣gueda more to the Southward. Zuleyma Ibon Muza, the tributary King of Lamego, and Tarif Iben Rages of Viseo were admitted to grace upon their submission. Alha∣mar King of Coimbra, boldly standing upon his Defence, was overthrown, and all the Country reduced, which done, Ramiro leaving good Garrisons in his Conquests, returned to Oviedo; in his way, he visited John the Ab∣bot of the Monastery of Lorvan, and bestowed Lands upon the Monastery. The principal part of the Gift was the Town of Montemayor the Old, a strong place, the Garrison whereof the Abbot was obliged to main∣tain. In this Town was one Garcia Yannez, a foundling brought up by the Abbot, and by him preferred for his Valour. This Fellow envying the Honour of D. Ber∣mudo the Abbot's Nephew, and Governour of that Ter∣ritory, fled to Abderramen King of Cordova, offering not only to renounce the Faith, but also to put into his hands Montemayor, and the other Conquests of King Ramiro. 6. Whilst Garcia Yannez was with the Moorish King, the Abbot and his Nephew Bermudo, took the two Re∣bel Counts Alderedus, whose Eyes he put out, and Pinelus whom with his Seven Sons, he put to Death, as being more obstinate in their Crime. Knowing that Rages of Viseo was joyning in League with other Moorish Com∣manders, he assaulted his City, and rased it to the Ground. Sebastian Bishop of Salamanca, with the Ab∣bot's Consent, afterwards repairing of it, is said to have found there the Tomb of Roderick, the last King of the Goths. Garcia Yannez having renounced the Faith, and calling himself Zulema, had the Command of an Army given him to execute what he had proposed. He entred Portugal, committing greater Barbarites than the Infidels, and laid Siege to Montemayor which was bravely defended by the Abbot and his Men. Hunger beginning to pinch, they thought of an Expe∣dient more to be wondered at than imitated, which was, that they slew all their Women and Children, the Abbot beginning with his Sister and Nephews. This done, they sallied out upon the Enemy with such Fury, that they soon put them to flight: The Rebel Zulema was killed by the Abbot, many of his Men were drown∣ed in the River Mondego, and most of them perished by
several means, so that few returned Home; 76000 were destroyed, and Night stopped the pursuit of the Victors. Morning discovered the Fields covered not only with dead Carcasses, but with plenty of rich Booty: This was a small comfort to them that had imbrued their hands in the Blood of their Wives,An incredi∣ble relation Children and Relations, but some that had hasted to the Town after the Victory, brought back the News, that all those they had killed, were miraculously restored to life, and so all returned joyful with the Victory and Recovery of their Friends. The Abbot stayed in the place where he obtained the Victory, and there Built a small Her∣mitage, and ended his days in Sanctity. His Monks endeavoured it, but could not remove his Body, and our first King D. Alonso Enriquez Founded a Monastery in that place, which was finished by his Son and Suc∣cessor D. Sancho, and given to the Cistercian Order. This is what related to Portugal in the Reign of King Ramiro; he obtained many other Victories, particular∣ly the memorable one, called of Clavijo, in which St. James the Apostle is said to have been seen fighting for the Christians, and was thence called the Patron of Spain.850. The King Married Paterna, whose extraction is not known; he left the Crown to his Son Ordonno, and died at Oviedo, where he lies Buried. 7. D. Ordono was no way inferior to his Father for Valour,King Or∣dono Re∣builds ma∣ny Towns. and being at full Age when he died, was very acceptable to all the States. His first care was to re∣people the Cities of Leon, Astorga, Tuy, Amaya and o∣thers,855. almost left desolate in the late Invasions; this done, he obtained two notable Victories, one over the rebellious Vascones, and the other over Muza by extra∣ction a Goth, but turned Mahometan. This Muza had possessed himself of the greatest part of Spain, but was entirely defeated by our King in the Plains of Alvelda or Albayda,857. two Leagues from Logronno. Many Moors upon this Defeat sent to Congratulate the Victor,He is over∣thrown by the Moores. and others stood to see the Consequences of it. Mahomet King of Cordova, alarmed at this success of the Christi∣ans, drew mighty succours out of Africk, and with a formidable Army began to conquer the Christian Ter∣ritories. Ordonno met him in Estremadura, near the Ri∣ver Tagus, and though he killed double the number that he lost, was forced to leave the Victory to the
Barbarian, who recovered much of what the Christians had before taken. He took Santarem, Irena and Rotas; then returning towards Cordova, he took and Fortified many Towns betwixt the Rivers Guadiana and Tagus; the next Year was not so favourable to him, for the best part of his Fleet was cast away on the Coast of Galicia, and his Army was overthrown on the Borders of Na∣varre,859. by the King thereof D. Inigo Ximenez Arista. Ire∣na is supposed to be the Town now called Leyria and Rotos Roda near Redina. Many Christians at this time ob∣tained the Crown of Martyrdom, under the power of the Moors, but especially at Cordova. King Ordonno was Married to the Lady Munia, by whom he had D. A∣lonso his Successor, D. Bermudo, D. Nunno, Odvarius and Fruela, whose Eyes the King their Brother caused to be put out for conspiring against him. He had also a Daughter called Aragonta, Wife to Sancho Abarca, King of Navarre. King Ordono was troubled with the Gout, and died of it at Oviedo,863. having Reigned Twelve Years, his Body was Buried in the Chappel of King Alonso the Chast. 8. Authors do not agree upon the Age of King Alon∣so the III.King A∣lonso III. called the Great. when he came to the Crown; some say Nine, some Fourteen, and some Seventeen Years. The most is too little for the great Actions performed by him im∣mediately after his Accession to the Crown; his Valour and other Vertues purchased him the Sir-name of the Great, only attributed to him among all the Kings of Castile and Leon. Fruela Bermudez a great Man in Ga∣licia rebelled and came down so suddenly to Oviedo, that the young King was forced to fly to Alava, where ha∣ing gathered his Forces, the Rebels put to death their Leader, and submitted themselves to him: Then he repaired the Cities of Oviedo and Leon, and built many Castles. In the mean while Count Eylon rebelled in Alava, but was oppressed by the King's Celerity: During this time he was at peace with the Infidels, Mahomet King of Cordova, and Lot or Lope the Son of Muza King of Toledo, being at War among themselves. They two being agreed, the King of Cordova sent Albuca∣zen and Alemandarin his Generals, the one into Biscay, the other into Galicia, where they made great havock, the People flying before them from the Plains to the Mountains. But King Alonso marched with such ex∣pedition,
that he oppressed them both, before they thought he had been moving towards them; this suc∣cess produced Peace, which he employed in rebuilding ruined places, among which were Braga, Porto, Chaves and Viseo, all in Portugal. The King of Cordova com∣ing down suddenly with an Army, took Viseo first, and then Salamanca, and so returned to Cordova, refusing to give our King Battel, who thereupon wasted all the Country of Toledo: Then turning into Portugal, he re∣took Viseo, and had Coimbra yielded to him. 9. It appears, by a Grant of his to Sisenandus Bishop of Compostela, that the Territories betwixt Duero and Minho, and that called Tras os Montes, or Beyond the Mountains, were Desart, from the first coming of the Moors till his time, when he Peopled and made them fit to with stand the Enemy. At this sametime the King continued the Structure of the stately Church of St. James the Apostle.The Church of St. James the Apostle in Galicia Dedicated. Seventeen Bishops were present at the Dedication of it, above half of them were Portu∣guese. Next by Order of Pope John the VIII. the King held a National Council at Oviedo, to provide for the Bishops that were Expelled from their Diocesses, and erect the Bishoprick of Oviedo into an Archbishoprick; after which the King again applied himself to Peo∣pling of the Country,903. and was come as far as the River Tagus, when he understood his own Sons conspired to depose him, being encouraged by their Mother and some of the Nobility. He voluntarily performed what they intended to extort from him;The Chri∣stian Do∣minions di∣vided be∣twixt the two Sons of King Alonso. to D. Garcia he gave Oviedo, Leon and Castile, to D. Ordono, Gallicia and Por∣tugal. Having resigned his Kingdoms, he went in Pilgrimage to Santiago, and at his return, asked of his Son Garcia, some Forces to make an incursion into the Moorish Territories, which he performed successfully. He entred into League with the Kings of France and Navarre; to the latter he gave his Sister Ʋrraca in Mar∣riage, and married himself Ximena, Daughter either of France or of D. Ynigo Ximenez Arista of Navarre. His Sons were Garcia, Fruela, Ordonno, Ramiro and Gonzalo, who was Archdeacon of Oviedo. He Reigned 48 Years, died at Zamora,914 and was Buried at Astorga, where his Tomb is still to be seen, tho' the Body was translated to the Chappel of King Alonso the Chast in Oviedo, where also lies his Wife Ximena.
10. D. Garcia having wrested the Scepter out of his Father's hand,Garcia has for his part Gali∣cia and the North of Portugal. enjoyed it but three Years: Tho' he got the Crown by unlawful means, he Governed well, o∣vercame Ayola Lord of Talavera, and is said to have ob∣tained other Victories; he died at Zamora, was Buried at Recasto of Oviedo, and had been Married to the Lady Nunna,His Brother Ordonno Succeeds him. Daughter to the Count D. Nunno Fernandez de A∣maya, but left no-Issue. His Brother Ordonno in his time Governed so much to the satisfaction of the People, that after his Death, he was unanimously allowed his Heir. He had not only preserved the Conquests on this side Tagus, but passing that River, took the City Beja, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, which so terrified the Neighbouring People, that they aban∣doned the Towns before he came near them. Having received his Brother's Kingdom, after some other ex∣ploits, he returned into Lusitania and wasted all the Country along the River Guadiana. Among other places, he took the Castle called Alhaje, where all the Treasure of the Moorish Kings lay as in a place inpreg∣nable, whereby he so humbled all the Infidels through∣out Estremadura, and as far as Algarve, that they sub∣mitted themselves as tributaries to him; after which he returned to Leon. No sooner was he gone, but they en∣couraged by Abderramen King of Cordova revolted, but King Ordonno speedily returning and ravaging the Coun∣try, they as soon submitted themselves, begging Par∣don. The chief of these were the People of Merida, Badajoz and the Territories adjacent then so fruitful and plentiful of all things, that thence came the name of Badajoz,He twice overthrows the Moors being a corruption of Beled Aiz, two Arabick words, signifying, The Land of Life. King Ordonno hear∣ing that Abderramen was marching towards him, ad∣vanced to meet him, and in a Battle near Talavera slew 25000 of his Men. This done, he returned to Leon, and applied the spoiles of the War to Building the great Church there. Mean while Abderramen having drawn vast supplies out of Africk, laid Siege to Santi∣stevan de Gormaz; but the King surprising him in the Night, forced him with great Slaughter to fly back to Cordova. Still the Moore recruits his broken Army, and having wasted all the Country, sits-down before the City Porto, which was bravely defended by Count Hermenegildus. Our King came to his relief, and
made a great Slaughter among the Besiegers,920. yet so, that he was not assured of the Victory, till the next day he found the Enemy had quitted the Field, leaving their Tents, Baggage, and warlike Engines behind them. Having obtained this Victory, the King returned to Leon. 11. Early the next Year,921. Ambassadors came to Or∣donno from the King of Navarre,Ordonno vanquished by the In∣fidels, re∣covers and spoiles their Coun∣try. to crave aid against a great power of the Infidels. He thought not enough to send, but went himself in Person, and Fortune here forsaking him, was overthrown near Valdejunquera, many Captives were taken by the Infidels, among whom were the Bishops of Salamanca and Tuy, and the Kings themselves escaped narrowly. Our King grieved at this loss, the following Year broke into the Moorish Ter∣ritories, driving all before him even to the Walls of the City Cordova, which it was feared he would Besiege. Having struck an universal Terror into his Enemies, he returned to Zamora. He had a Daughter called Ximena, who falling in Love with a Courtier, ran away with him, carrying all her Jewels along with her, and he left her on a Mountain, having fulfilled his desires. She travelled on, and took up with a Farmer as his Servant, from which he raised her to be his Wife. The King long after, Hunting that way lost himself, and fell into this Cottage, where he was entertained, his Daugh∣ter making a sort of Puff-past she knew he loved, and putting a Ring well known to him into it; the Ring caused him to suspect somewhat, and examining the matter, he found that was his Daughter, whom he for∣gave, and preferred her Husband, whose Name was Tello, and the place of his aboad called Meneses. Hence some will have the Family of Meneses to proceed; o∣thers Write that this passage hapned to the Lady Teresa Sanchez, bastard Daughter to King Sancho the First, and Wife to D. Alonso Tellez de Meneses, whom they esteem the Progenitor of this Family. King Ordonno had three Wives, the first Elvira, whose Parentage is unknown; by her he had D. Sancho, D. Alonso, D. Ramiro, D. Gar∣cia and D. Ximena. The second was Aragonta of Gali∣cia, whom he is said to have put away, suspecting she knew of the flight of his Daughter Ximena. The third was Sancha Daughter to the King of Navarre, by these two he had no Children.923. The last Action of his life
darkn'd all the Glory of his former Triumphs: He sent for four Counts who governed Castile, upon safe Conduct, to Carrion, and there cut off their Heads: Which so incensed the People of Castile, that they only wanted an Opportunity to rebell, and take Revenge: But Death prevented their Designs,924. taking him away at Zamora. His Body was buried in the great Church of Leon; which City he had so entirely loved, that he took its Name for the Title of his Kingdom, leaving that of King of Oviedo and Galicia. CHAP. VIII. The Succession of the Kings of Castile and Leon, from the Year 924, till 985: With the Re∣volt of Count Fernan Gonzalez: And the Desolation made in Portugal, by Alcoraxis and Almanzor, the Moors. 1. D. Fruela II. was Successor to his Brother Ordonno;Fruela II. usurps the Crown. usurping the Crown from his Children, who were then very young. He was nothing like to his Brother in Valour, for he ceased the Prosecution of the War against the Infidels; but was not unlike to him in the last Action of his Life; for, as Ordonno unjustly put to death the fore-mentioned Counts, so Fruela wrongfully executed certain Gentlemen, called Olmu∣des. He became so odious to the Castilians, that the Nobility,Castile se∣parates from Leon. and creates a Govern∣ment under Judges. joining together, rebelled, and separated themselves from the Crown of Leon. To this purpose, they chose two Judges to rule them: The two first were, Nunno Rasura, and Lain Calvo. They were of the Middle Sort of People, neither of the Greatest, nor Meanest; that so they might neither be too power∣ful, nor become contemptible: Yet, from them are the Kings of Spain descended. At the same time that this Government was instituted in Castile, we find Counts governing in some Parts of Portugal; as, D. Gutierre Arias, at Porto; and Hufo Hufez, at Viseo. A Leprosie
consumed King Fruela so fast,925. that he died at Leon, ha∣ving reigned scarce a Year; and was buried in the Ca∣thedral. He had two Wives, D. Munia, and D. Ʋr∣raca: By them he had Issue Ordonno, Alonso and Ramiro. King Ramiro II. put out all their Eyes, and thrust them into the Monastery of St. Julian, either upon Suspi∣cion, or Proof, that they conspired against him. He had also a fourth Son, called Fruela. 2. Alonso IV,Alonso IV. resigns the Govern∣ment to his Brother Ra∣miro. Eldest Son of King Ordonno II, after the Death of Fruela, recovered his Right, and King∣dom. He was not wicked, as his Predecessor; but as unprofitable to his Kingdom as he. His best Quality was, That he was sensible of his own Insufficiency; and therefore, first sent his Brother Ramiro to govern Portugal, and afterwards resigned the Kingdom to him, and became himself a Monk. Ramiro had chosen the City Viseo for his Residence in Portugal, whence he made Inroads into the Frontiers of the Moors; and by his gentle Government, gained the Affections of the People. Here he received Letters from the King, his Brother, calling him to Court, in order to resign the Crown to him; for that his Son, Prince Ordonno, was but an Infant. D. Ramiro fearing his Brother's Incon∣stancy, hasted to Zamora, that he might not have Time to repent. The King immediately put the Crown up∣on his Head, and was the first that did him Homage, as his Subject: Which done, he took the Habit of a Benedictine Monk, in the Monastery of Sahagun; and is therefore called, Alonso the Monk. He was married to Ximena, the Daughter of King Sancho Abarca, of Navarre; and had by her, Ordonno, who came to be King; and D. Alonso, who died young. He died in the Monastery of St. Julian, and lies there buried: But we shall see him repent, and disturb his Brother's Reign. 3. King Alonso being become a Monk,928. and repent∣ing,Alonso repents, and raises a Civil War. his Brother Ramiro, now possessed of the Crown, resolved not to part with it: and thus began a Civil War, which was the Cause of much Mischief. The Moors making their Advantage thereof, recovered the Cities of Lamgo, Braganza and Porto, with all the Country lying between the Rivers Tagus and Duero. The Castilians also made use of this Opportunity, (their Judges, Nunno and Lain, being dead,) to raise
up in their stead the Count Ferran Gonzalez. King Ramiro politickly winking at this Affront,932. which he could not revenge upon the Authors, invaded the Kingdom of Toledo, destroying all before him with Fire and Sword. King Alonso the Monk, held out two Years in Leon, against his Brother Ramiro: But then, despairing of Success, he stirred up Alonso, Ordonno and Ramiro, the Sons of his Predecessor Fruela, to raise a Rebellion in Asturias and Biscay, believing that would draw away the King, his Brother, from attending up∣on him. Nevertheless, the King continued the Siege, obliged him to surrender, and afterwards put him into Prison. This done, he found Means to apprehend the three Brothers; and to prevent future Designs, put out theirs, and his Brother the Monk's Eyes. Two Years Alonso lived blind: But the King repenting of this Cruel∣ty used towards his Brother, to testifie his Repentance, built the Monastery of St. Julian. 4. Two Months are said to have passed in the Year 934,934. in which Time the Light of the Sun was scarce seen;Prodigies in the Sky. at the End whereof a Breach or Yawning ap∣peared in the Sky, along which great Flames of Fire were seen to run; and the Stars seemed to wander in the Region of the Air. Many Judgments were made upon these Prodigies; but most agreed, they portend∣ed, the End of the World to be at hand. At last the Sun shined out; and whilst the Christians appeased God with Prayers, the Moors consulted their Wizards. Al∣farani, of Meca, affirmed to King Abderramen, that this Prodigy threaten'd the Downfall of Christian Princes, if he would take in hand to pull them down. Divi∣ners fore-tell what, they know, is pleasing to Princes; and Princes believe that which pleases them. Abderra∣men declares War, and makes mighty Preparations for it, drawing great Succours out of Africk, under the Command of Almanzor. With an Army almost innu∣merable, he broke into Portugal, bearing down all be∣fore him, and putting the Christians to most cruel Deaths. King Ramiro having gathered the greatest Power he could, set forward to meet the Enemy, whose Multitude obliged him to retire to the Moun∣tains of Clavijo.Ramiro destroys a great Army of Infidels Here the Apostle St. James is said to have appeared to him, promising, he should obtain a wonderful Victory in that Place. In the Fight, the
Apostle was seen on Horseback, making great Slaugh∣ter among the . This Victory, some will have, to be the Cause of his being taken for Patron of Spain; though others say, it was that in the Time of King A∣lonso I. as was before observed. 5. There is a very strange Story about this King,A Roman∣tick Story of King Ramiro. which, because it looks rather Romantick, than Histo∣rical, I will lightly pass over: It is as follows; King Ramiro was married to the Lady Ʋrraca; but under∣standing that Alboazar, a powerful Moor, had a most beautiful Sister, called Zara, he fell in Love with her by Hear-say. He demanded her of Alboazar; but be∣ing denied, had her betrayed to him for Money; then putting away his Queen, he married her. Alboazar, to revenge this Wrong, surprized and carried away Queen Ʋrraca, who was left at Millor, on the other side the River Duero. Ramiro hearing hereof, filled his Galleys with the choicest of his Men; and running up a River, near which she was kept, he planted the Gal∣leys, all covered with Green, close under certain Trees that over-shaded the River: Then having laid an Am∣bush, and ordered them to lie close till he sounded a Cornet he carried with him, he in Disguize approach∣ed the Castle where the Queen was kept: There he met a Maid belonging to the Queen, carrying a Pitcher of Water for her; whereof, with the Maid's Consent, he drank, and dropped a Jewel into it well known to the Queen. She seeing the Jewel, caused him to be brought up to her; and having yielded her self up be∣fore to the Lust of Alboazar, she now betrayed the King into his Hands. Ramiro seeing himself taken, begged Leave only to sound his Cornet; which being granted, his Men that lay in Ambush broke into the Castle, kil∣led Alboazar, and carried away the Queen, whom the King caused to be cast into the Sea, with a Stone about her Neck; because, asking of her why she looked so melancholy; she answered, It was for the Death of the Moor, who was a better Man than he. To this Rela∣tion, let every Man give the Credit he thinks it may deserve. This King Ramiro had two Wives, besides the Moor we have now spoke of: The First was, the Lady Ʋrraca; and by her he had Ordonno, his Succes∣sor, Sancho and Bermudo. The Second was, Teresa, Daughter to Sancho Abarca, King of Navarre: Her Issue
were, Sancho, Audonio and Elvira. By Artida the Moor, he had Alboazar Ramirez, and Artiga Ramirez. King Ra∣miro reigned 19 Years;950. he died at Leon, and lies in the Monastery of Our Holy Saviour, founded by himself and his two Wives, Ʋrraca and Teresa. 6. King Ordonno III. was Successor to Ramiro II.King Or∣donno III. disturbed by Rebels, subdues them. The Beginning of his Reign was blessed with Peace, which lasted not long; for he was soon disturbed by his Bro∣ther Sancho, who aimed to usurp the Crown, assisted by the Count Fernan Gonzalez, who took part with him through Malice, and contrary to Right, and the Tyes of Affinity, for Ordonno had married his Daughter Ʋr∣raca. The Count was guilty of many Enormities be∣sides this, notwithstanding the vulgar. Opinion of his extraordinary Vertues and Merit. D. Garcia Sanchez, King of Navarre, and Uncle to Sancho, as well as Bro∣ther to his Mother, favoured his Designs. With these Aids Sancho presumed to assume the Regal Stile, and enter'd the Kingdom of Leon, wasting that very Coun∣try where he intended to reign. King Ordonno soon re∣pulsed the Invaders; and the better to be revenged of the Count, he was divorced from his Daughter, and sent her back to him. Some Towns in Galicia had also rebelled; but the King reduced them, with a great Slaughter of the Rebels. No sooner had he quelled the Rebels, but he marched through Portugal, as far as Lis∣bon, whither no Christian King had reached, since D. Alonso the Chaste.He takes Lisbon. After a fierce Assault, he took the City by Storm, and gave the Plunder thereof to his Ar∣my: Which done, he returned to his Court, laden with Spoils, and bestowed them in rewarding those that had deserved best, and in Religious Works. Conve∣niency made the King and Count Fernan Gonzalez, who had been long at Variance, agree, and unite their For∣ces against the King of Cordova. They came to a Battel near Gormaz, where the Christians obtained a glorious Victory; which brought Peace to their Frontiers, be∣fore subject to continual Incursions. This was the Po∣sture of Affairs,955. when Ordonno died at Zamora. He lies buried in the Church of Our Blessed Saviour, at Leon, by his Father, with his two Wives, Ʋrraca, from whom he was divorced; and Elvira, whose Parentage is un∣known: By her he had D. Bermudo, and Teresa, a Nun in the Monastery of St. Julian, in Leon.
7. Sancho,Sancho,  Usurper, called The Fat. the Brother of King Ordonno, usurped the Crown from Bermudo, the late King's Son, then a Child. This Sancho was excessively swelled with the Dropsie; and thence, though improperly, called, The Fat. He had not long enjoyed the Crown, when those very Rebels who had unjustly set it upon his Head,957. took it thence,Ordonno, Surnamed the Wic∣ked, ad∣vanced to the Crown. to bestow it upon D. Ordonno, Surna∣med The Wicked, Son to King Alonso the Monk. The Rebel Count Fernan Gonzalez was the chief Actor in promoting him to the Throne, and therefore gave him to Wife his Daughter Ʋrraca, before put away by the other King Ordonno. King Sancho fled to Navarre, and thence to Cordova,Sancho re∣turns, and expels him. where there were famous Physicians, who cured him of his Dropsie. Being recovered of his Indisposition, he gathered an Army; and was so for∣tunate, as to take the Count Fernan Gonzalez, and his Son-in-Law Ordonno. Though he had them Prisoners, he would not presently put them to Death, but kept the Count in Custody. D. Sancha, his Wife, coming to see him in Prison, changed Clothes with him, and by that Means he escaped, leaving her in his stead. A great Rebellion was raised by the Counts that go∣verned Portugal; but the Presence of the King soon re∣duced them. Only Count Gonzalo, who governed be∣yond Duero, durst march with an Army, to meet his Sovereign; yet finding him too strong, he made a feign∣ed Submission, and was pardoned. It was not long before he compassed by Poyson what he had failed of by the Sword. The Portuguese Counts being accused of this Treason, to clear themselves, challenged D. Gonza∣lo; and Count Fruela Vermuiz, their Champion, over∣came him at the Town of Salas, near the City of Perto. King Sancho perceiving his Death draw near, ordered himself to be carried to Leon,96 but died by the Way, at the Monastery of Castrillo, where he was buried, but was afterwards translated to Leon, where his Queen was also interred. Queen Teresa was Daughter to Assur Fer∣nandez, Count of Monzon. By her the King had Issue, D. Ramiro III, his Successor; Ʋrraca, married to Count Nepociano Diaz; and Ermesenda, by whom the King, her Brother, is said to have had D. Sancho the Hairy. About this time Castile revolted from the Crown of Leon. Authors write, that the Cause was, because the King could not pay Count Fernan Gonzalez for an Horse
and an Hawk he had sold to him upon Credit: But it appears very fabulous, that a King should part with a Kingdom upon so slender an Account. The true Reason was, the Rebellion of the People, headed by the wicked Count. 8. King Ramiro III.Ramiro III succeeds, under the Tuition of his Mother and Aunt. succeeded his Father, when he was but six Years of Age; his Mother, Queen Teresa, and his Aunt Elvira, the Nun, managing the Govern∣ment with such Prudence, during his Minority, that there was no Want of him to be perceived. Besides, there was then a Truce with Hiscen King of Cordova, then but 11 Years of Age, and under the Tuition of the famous Ahagis, Surnamed Almanzor, a most cruel Enemy to the Christians.The Nor∣mans in∣vade Ga∣licia, and are cut in pieces. This Tranquility was dis∣turbed, by the Normans invading Galicia: But the Count Gonzalo Sanchez, falling upon them with a great Force, left not one of them to carry the News of the Defeat. At this time the City Coimbra was subject to the Kings of Leon; and the Christians about it, possessed their Lands in Peace. After all things had thus remained quiet 7 or 8 Years,975. Alcoracis (supposed to be King of Sevil) broke into Lusitania with such a Power, that the Christian Counts, not able to withstand him, fled from the Plains, to the inaccessible Mountains. The Barba∣rians, destroying all the Country as they went, passed even the River Minho, and laid Siege to Compostela, where the Plague so violently raged in their Army, that few of them returned home.978. King Ramiro being come to Age, he shewed himself so incapable of the Govern∣ment,Civil Broils. that the Counts of Portugal and Galicia took Oc∣casion to proclaim another King, which was, Bermudo, Son to King Ordonno III, by his Second Wife Elvira. The King awaking at the News of this Rebellion, met the Rebels,981. and a Battel was fought between them, which lasted the whole Day: Night parted the Armies, and each returned home, neither victorious, nor over∣thrown. In this Fight perished the Flower of the Spa∣nish Cavalry, that used to withstand the Moors. Coim∣bra was not concerned in this Rebellion; it then enjoy∣ed Peace, under Portuguese Governors: The Chief, who commanded all the rest, was, Count Gonzalo Moniz. 9. The Civil Broils we have spoken of,983. encouraged the Moorish General Almanzor, spurred on by the Fugi∣tive
Count D. Vela, who had been expelled his Lands, to break the Truce.Many Pla∣ces in Por∣tugal ta∣ken and destroyed by the Moors. Many notable Places in Portugal were again brought under, by the Infidels; and among them, Coimbra, Porto, Braga, and Britonium, which was laid level with the Ground, so that only the Memory of its Name remains. The same Fate attended Lame∣go, and Viseo, in the Province of Beira. The King adventuring to give the Moors Battel, was overthrown, and forced to retire to the Mountains, being almost re∣duced to the miserable Condition that Pelayus, or Pela∣gius, had been, when first Spain was over-run. Count Garcia Fernandez, Lord of Castile, being persecuted by D. Vela, and his Adherents, always kept the Field, against the Moores; but being forsaken by the People of Leon, was not able to prevent the Loss of many Places. In Portugal only, the small Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, and the Mountain-Country of Beira, now adhered to D. Bermudo, who still called himself King in Galicia. To these Parts, many great Men, who before lived in the Territories of Coimbra, withdrew themselves. The unfortunate King thus thrust into a Corner by D. Bermudo on the one side,985. and by the Moors on the other, died at Leon, in the 33th Year of his Age, and 28th of his Reign, was buried in the Monastery of St. Michael of Distriana, founded by his Grandfather, King Rami∣ro II; and 200 Years after, translated thence, by King Ferdinand, to the Cathedral of Astorga. He was mar∣ried to the Lady Ʋrraca, of whose Parentage we have no Account; nor did she leave any Issue. By his own Sister, Ermesenda, he had, incestuously, a Son, called D. Sancho el Velloso, or The Hairy.
CHAP. IX. The Succeeding Kings from the Year 985. till 1037. with the coming of the Gascons into Portugal, and their exploits against the Moores; many places recovered by them, and others from the Infidels. 1. KIng Ramiro dying,985. D. Bermudo was left sole Posses∣sor of the Crown.Bermudo  many places, and  by Almanzor At the beginning of his Reign, he wholly applied himself to the Government, but soon after he became so entirely given up to his Vices, and especially to incontinency, that he was slighted by his Subjects,989. and became contemptible to his Enemies. Almanzor laying hold of this opportunity, and promp∣ted by the fugitive D. Vela, invaded again the Christian Territories, and without any considerable opposition, subdued all the Towns between the Rivers Due and Ezla. Here King Bermudo came upon him so unexpe∣ctedly, that he put his vast Army to the rout; but Al∣manzor perceiving how disordered the Christians pursu∣ed, rallying some of his scattered Forces, changed the fortune of the Day, and drove those that before were victorious, to the Gates of Leon. That City had im∣mediately fallen into the hands of the Infidels, had not the matchless valour of Count William Gonzalez, a Portu∣guese, placed there Governour by the King, defended it against the fury of the Infidels, tho' the King then lying at Oviedo took no care to relieve the place. In the year 996.996 Almanzor again incamped before the same City, resolving not to depart thence, till he were Master of it. Above a Year the Count held out against all the fury of Almanzor's Assaults and Batteries, in so much, that the Moore was about quitting the Siege, and had certainly done it, had the King either come or sent any Succour to the Besieged. At length a great part of the Wall shaken with a continual Battery, fell down, and the Moores gave a furious Assault, which obliged the Count, tho' then sick in Bed, to cause himself to be carried, as he was, to the Breach, to give the necessary Orders, and encourage his Soldiers. Three whole days
did he make good the Breach with great Slaughter of the Assailants, till another Breach being made, the In∣fidels broke in overpowering the Defendants. All the Inhabitants were put to the Sword, the City Plundered and laid level with the Ground. The same fate atten∣ded Astorga, which done, Almanzor with his Army loaded with Booty, returned to Cordova to Winder. 2. Ataulphus Archbishop of Compostel,A strange trial of an  Archbishop. being wrong∣fully accused before the King, he ordered him to be exposed to the fury of a wild Bull, who coming to him, instead of Tossing him upon his Horns, left them both in his Hand, which was a sufficient Testimony of that Prelates innocence. Almanzor again broke out like a Torrent, overturning all that the Christians had re∣paired of the former Ruins, and destroying what was before untouched. Montemayor the Old, Viseo, Lamego, Porto and Braga, were rased down to the Ground: The Barbarian entring Galicia,Almanzor again makes great spoil. made a Font in the Church of St. James the Apostle serve for a Manger, and sent away the Gates and the Bells of the Church upon the shoulders of Christians to Cordova; but pre∣suming to prophane the Sepulcher of the Apostle, he was drove back by flames which issued out of it. Al∣manzor returning through Protugal heavy with Plunder, was overtaken with vengeance from Heaven for profa∣ning the Church of the Apostle. A mortal Flux de∣stroying great part of his Army; the rest marched lea∣surely in several Bodies: King Bermudo sent some light Troops, who made such havock among them, that not the 20th. part of that great Army returned to Cor∣dova, all the Country the way they went being covered with dead Carcasses. Count Fruela Vermuiz (who, as has been said, overcame Count Gonzalo that Poisoned King Sancho) fell upon Almanzor himself, who led the choice of the Army, and put him to flight with great Slaughter of his People. King Bermudo at length a∣waking out of his dead Sleep, joyned his Forces with the King of Navarre and Count Garci Fernandez. They expected the coming of the Enemy near Aleantaroz,999. four Leagues from Osma; here they fought from Morn∣ing till Night, and then at length victory inclined to the Christians, who slew of their Enemies 70000 Foot and 40000 Horse. Almanzor flying towards Toledo, died of Grief near Berlanga; soon after, his Son Abdel
Melich, to revenge him, invaded the Christian Territo∣ries, but being met by Count Garci Fernandez, was de∣feated and fled back to Cordova. King Bermudo had two Wives, the first called Velasquita, by whom he had no issue; the second Elvira, her Children were A∣lonso, Successor to his Father; Teresa married to Ab∣dala, King of Toledo, and afterwards a Nun, and San∣cha a Nun also. The King gave great Scandal by keep∣ing two Sisters at the same time publickly as his Mi∣streses, one of them was Mother to Elvira, the other to Ordonno. By Velasquita, a Peasant, the King had a Daughter called Christina; he died in the Year 999. at Villabuena in Galicia, very penitent for his sins. There he lay Buried till his Son King Alonso translated him to Leon, where he lies with his Wife in the Church of St. Isidorus. 3. Let us look a little back to see the coming of the first Strangers,The Gas∣cons come into Portu∣gal and as∣sist the Christians that assisted the Natives of Portu∣gal in expelling the Moores. These were the Gascons who came in a mighty Fleet, and were Commanded by D. Moninno Viegas. There is a great dispute among Authors, whether this D. Moninno was a Gascon or a Portuguese, and whether he came with those People, or only headed them after their coming, he being by some supposed to be then a great Man in Portugal. All that is said on either part, being rather Suppositions, than Proofs, we will pass by this Dispute, leaving it free to every one to believe as he shall be inclined. This Fleet cast Anchor in the River Duero, on the one side where∣of was the Castle of Gaya, Demolished by King Rami∣ro II. when he killed Alboazar, and on the other, the City Porto destroyed long before by the Moores. Here they landed, and their first care was to repair the City, then only a heap of Rubbish; in the highest part of it they built a Castle, supposed to be the same that is now the Bishop's Pallace. The compass of the Walls was but small, and they weak for our times, but then con∣siderable; some part of them is still to be seen in the midst of the City, which being increased, has hemmed them in. Two of these Ancient Gates are still stand∣ing; the one called St. Ann's Gate, the other our Bles∣sed Ladies, over which is an Image of the Blessed Vir∣gin, with our Saviour in her Arms, which Image be∣tween two Towers is the Arms of that City. Having
Repaired and Fortified this place, the Natives and Strangers began joyntly to conquer the Neighbouring Country. Men remarkable among them were, Sise∣nandns, Brother to D. Moninno, and D. Nonego of Ven∣dosme. The first that felt their fury were the Moors, who possessed the Territories of Resende, and Bienviver, and all up the River Duero; this done, thinking their Conquest secure, they chose Sisenandus Bishop of the City, and yet he ceased not to appear in Arms till he died at Bienviver, and was Buried in the Monastery of Villaboa. D. Nonego of Vendosme, also a Bishop, carried on his Conquests on the other side, and four Leagues from Porto in the Mountain, built a Castle which he called Vendosme, and so streightned the Moores, that they were forced to abandon all that Neighbourhood. The Castle is ruined by time, but the name of Vendosme still continues in the Mountain. In this exercise he continu∣ed till his Death, and was Buried in the Monastery of Aviaos. The conquered Lands were equally divided, as well among the Auxiliary strangers, as among the native Portuguese. 4. King Alonso V. succeeded his Father Bermudo;999. he is the first of the Alonsos that appears without some Sir∣name;King A∣lonso V. for the First was called the Catholick, the Se∣cond the Chast, the Third the Great, the Fourth the Monk. Not that this deserved less Titles, for he might have been called the Brave for his Valour; the Legi∣slator for giving good Laws to his People; the Restorer for repairing Leon, and in fine, the Desired as being one who left the greatest desire of himself, and was most lamented by his People. He was Six Years of Age when he began his Reign,Under Tui∣tion. under the Tuition of Count Mendo Gonzalez and his Wife the Lady Mayor, who had great possessions in Galicia, and some in Portugal, and Governed so well, that the King's minority was no prejudice to his Kingdom. The Christians in Portugal began to be so powerful, that under the conduct of some notable Commanders, they repaired many places before ruined, and conquered others possessed by the Moores.1000. D. Alboazar Ramirez Son to King Ramiro II. by Zara or Artida,Many pla∣ces recove∣red from the Moors whom he stole from the Lord of Gaya, as was said before, wih many Gentlemen and Forces maintained at his own Charge, entred Portugal and drove the Moores out of all the Province betwixt the
Rivers Duero and Minho. He took St. Roman, Gastro de Avioso, and Castro de Gondomar: Beyond the River Duero he forced them to retire as far as St. Martin de Moras and Lamego, making room for the Christians to dilate themselves. The lands of Arouca and that Neigh∣bourhood were again Peopled; the Year following, he overthrew the Moores in many places,1001 took the City Braganza and other considerable Towns in those Moun∣tains, and so extended the Christian Dominions, that he deserves to be accounted one of the principal Restorers of Portugal. His two Sons D. Trastamiro and D. Her∣migio, or Hermiron Alboazar accompanied him in these Conquests, of whom are descended some Honourable Families in Spain. 5. The tranquility the King's Tutors endeavoured to preserve in the Kingdom,Count Froila a Portugues Rebels. during his Minority, was disturbed by the Portuguese Count Froila Vermuiz, who took up Arms against the King. They came to a Bat∣tle in the Territory of Mafra, betwixt Villanueva and Betancos, where Froila got the Victory. The King now grown bigger, was much incensed against Count Froila, and his anger was increased by the insinuations of Q. Elvira, his Wife and Daughter to Count Mendo Gon∣zalez. Froila being in disgrace, had again recourse to Arms, which not a little troubled the King, and the more for that at the same time, he received the News, that another had rebelled in the City Oviedo. Thi∣ther the King hasted, leaving Froila till he was more at leasure: But he marched directly after the King, and overtook him at such time as he was ready to Assault the City. The King was advised to forbear the As∣sault, least in the heat of it, Froila should fall upon him behind,His Sub∣mission. but he Answered, Let the Assault be carried on, for the Count is so much a Gentleman, that he will not fall upon the backs of his Enemies. As he said, it fell out, for Froila overcome by that Generosity, joyned his Forces to the King's, and so forwarded the attack that the City was immediately carried. In this Action the Count behaved himself so bravely, that he lost both his Eyes, at which the King was exceedingly grieved, and bestowed large possessions on him, in some measure to recompense his loss: About this time, Count Garcia Fer∣nandez of Castile, was killed in a Battle betwixt Alcozar and Langra, having behaved himself with great Bra∣very,
he being one of the most notable Commanders of that Age. His Son Sancho succeeded him as well in his Courage, as Dominions, and often revenged his Death upon the Moores. There being several preten∣ders to the Kingdom of Cordova, he seemingly sided with each of them to have the better opportunity to ruin them all. The fugitive Count Vela, who used to stir up the Moores against the Christians was now dead, and his Sons Roderick, James and Innigo were restored to their Estates, and served the Count as their natural Lord. He the more to Honour them, made the El∣dest God-father to his own Eldest Son D. Garcia, and yet he afterwards behaved himself like a Traitor, as his Father had done before. 6. The Divisions among the Moores at Cordova, were very advantagious to the Christians of Leon, Castile and Portugal. Those that had escaped the desolation made by Almanzor about Coimbra, dealt with the Infidels, and bought Lands of them at a very low rate; it appears by the original Deeds still extant, that Oborez a Moore, sold the Town of Botam to Arias Prior of the Convent of Botam for a Mare and her Fole;1012. either the Mare was worth much, or the Town very little. Till the Year 1020,1020. we have no account of any thing remarkable in Portugal. Out of it the King repaired the City Leon, and gave it a Charter, and great Priviledges to all that would come and inhabit there.1026. Six years after was Born the renowned Captain Roderick de Bivar,Roderick de Bivar, commonly called Cid, his Birth. com∣monly called Cid, which in Arabick signifies Lord, of whom mention will be made hereafter. The Christian affairs throughout Spain were in a flourishing condition; the King entred Portugal, recovering many Towns in the Province of Beira, till he came and incamped be∣fore Viseo.1027. The City was obstinately defended, and the King going out in the Evening unarmed, to view the Enemies Works, was shot through the Body with an Arrow from the Walls.King A∣lonso slain. Some write that he died there presently, others that he was carried to Porto. His death we shall hereafter see revenged as far as it could be. His body was laid in a stately Tomb at Leon; he lived Thirty Two Years, and Reigned Twenty Eight; being bred in Galicia by Count Mendo Gonzalez, Lord of Vierzo, he married his Daughter: By her he had Bermudo his Successor, and Sancha who afterwards came
to be Queen; he had also a Bastard Son, called Nunno Alvarez de Amaya, or Roderick Anzures, Lieutenant of Asturias, and Lord of Gijon. 7. Bermudo III.Bermudo III. Suc∣ceeds. of the Name, succeeded his Father Alonso V. but so young, it was much feared his tender Years might produce some notable Disorders in the Go∣vernment. His extraordinary Abilities far above his Years, soon dried up the Tears his subjects shed for his Father, and made them rejoice in so unexpected a Blessing. He was extreamly Religious and Devout, and therefore applied himself to the re-establishing of many ruined Churches. Being of Age to Marry, he took to Wife the Lady Ximena or Teresa, younger Daughter to Count Sancho, Lord of Castile, by whom he had D. Alonso, who lived but a few days. He con∣cluded a match between his Sister the Lady Sancha and D. Garcia,An inhu∣man Mur∣ther. the Son of Count Sancho of Castile. King Sancho of Navarre, who was Brother-in-law to D. Gar∣cia, bore him Company to Leon to honour his Marri∣age. The next day after their Arrival, the Bride∣groom went out with the Bishop to hear Mass; in the way, he was assaulted by the Sons of the traitor D. Vela, before spoke of, and by them stabbed in several places, his own God-father being the first that wounded him. This News being carried to Court, the Bride forgetting her Grandeur, ran out to the place, and pittifully la∣menting her loss, it was thought she would have given up the Ghost upon the dead Body. She railed at the Murderers, which Count Fernan Flavino hearing, had the impudence to strike her on the Face. The Mur∣derers for the present escaped, but Sancho King of Na∣varre, afterwards getting them into his power, burnt them alive, declaring all their progeny for ever infamous. 8. D. Garcia thus murder'd, and no Heir Male re∣maining to the Earldom of Castile, Sancho King of Na∣varre possessed himself thereof in the Right of his Wife, the Lady Elvira,Wars be∣twixt the Christian Kings of Spain. Sister to the late Count. Grown Great with this Accession of Power, he made War up∣on King Bermudo, about the Limits of Castile and Leon; and conquered much of the Country, betwixt the Ri∣vers Pisuerga and Cea. More had been won by him, but that Sancha,1034. only Sister to King Bermudo, was gi∣ven in Marriage to Ferdinand, Second Son to King Sancho. This Lady swore she would never consent to
the Match, unless Count Fernan Flaminio, who struck her on the Face as she lay upon the Body of the dead Count Garcia, was delivered up to her. This was ac∣cordingly done; and she, with her own Hands, put him to a cruel Death,1035. but well deserved by him. The King of Navarre dying,Ferdi∣nand of Navarre kills King Bermudo and be∣comes sole Monarch of Castile, Leon, Portugal, Galicia and Na∣varre. and his Son Ferdinand succeed∣ing him, King Bermudo was in hopes to recover what Ferdinand's Father had taken from him. They came to a Battel in the Valley of Tamara, near Fromista, where, after a bloody Fight, King Bermudo was killed, and his Army overthrown. Ferdinand, now victorious, immediately laid Siege to Leon; and having made him∣self Master thereof, he was there Crowned King of Le∣on, Galicia and Portugal, in the Right of his Wife San∣cha, the lawful Heiress of those Kingdoms. Thus, for want of Issue Male to the Kings of Leon, and Earls of Castile, those two Dominions fell to the House of Na∣varre,1037. by the Female Line. 9. What I am about to relate, happen'd in the Reign of King Bermudo; but in what Year, is not certain: Two Grandsons of Prince Alboazar Ramirez, Son to King Ramiro III, called Tedon and Rosendo, with a Body of resolute Men, broke into that part of the Country that lies betwixt the Rivers Tavora and Duero. Having drove the Moors thence,A Strata∣gem of the Christians against the Moors. they began to Till the Land; and knowing well that the Infidels would not suffer them quietly to rest there, they fortified themselves on a Rock, over the River Tavora; which running round great part of it, makes it a sort of Peninsula; which, with the Steepness of the Rock it self, renders it inacces∣sible any Way but one. Here they built their Habita∣tion, and hence infested the Country of the Moors. At length, on Midsummer-Day, which is much reverenced even by those Infidels, in Honour of St. John the Baptist, the Moors of the Town of Paredes resorted, in great Numbers, to sport and divert themselves on the Banks of the River, and to bathe themselves in it. D. Rosendo cloathing his Men in Moorish Apparel, passed the Ri∣ver, out of sight, and lay close in Ambush till he saw all the Banks covered with the Barbarians: Then, by degrees, coming out, as if he had been some of their own Company, he suffered his Men to mix with the Enemy, who took them for Friends. Being all mixed, the Christians fell upon them, and turned their Pleasure
into Sorrow: However, many stood, and made a good Defence; and others coming to their Aid, the Success was doubtful, till D. Tedon, fording the River, with his Men, ended the Dispute, with the Slaughter of most of the Moors. This, and other Victories, put the two Brothers in Possession of many Lands in that Country: And in Memory of the Action, they took to themselves the Name of the River, which still continues in the Family of the Tavora's. 10. The Fame of the Exploits of D. Tedon, parti∣cularly that upon the River, together with that of the Comliness of his Person, reaching the Ears of Ardinga, the beautiful Daughter of Aliboazen King of Lamego, she fell in Love with him by Hear-say.The Effects of Love. Love perswa∣ded her to quit her Father's Palace, and, disguised in the Habit of a Man, through bye Ways, she found out the Abbot Gelasius, a solitary Hermit. She told him who she was, and the Cause of her Coming; and he baptized her, promising to perswade D. Tedon to take her to Wife. This took not effect, for her Father closely pursuing her, overtook, and put her to death. Tedon hearing of her Love, had promised to marry her, and she being dead, would take no other Wife; but was afterwards killed by the Moors, near a small Brook, which, of him, was called Tedo: So he took his Sur∣name from one River, and gave his Name to another. There being nothing else remarkable, recorded in Por∣tugal, during the Reign of King Bermudo, and he being the last King thereof of that Name, I must not omit to remark, that Bermudo is the same Name with Veremun∣dus, which the Spaniards call Veremundo; so that, to make it Bermudo, there is, corruptly, an e and an n omitted; and to use B for V, is common in Spanish. Thus Bermudo and Veremundus appear to be the same Name.
CHAP. X. The remaining Kings, from the Year 1037, till the Year 1108, and till the Establishment of Count Henry of Burgundy in the Sovereign∣ty of Portugal, where begins the Line of the Portuguese Kings, and ends the Second Book. 1. FErdinand Prince of Navarre inherited the Crown of Leon,King Fer∣dinand called The Great. in the Right of his Wife, the Lady Sancha, Daughter to King Alonso V, and Sister to King Bermudo III, who died without Issue. The Earldom of Castile fell to him by his Mother, the Lady Nunna; and the Crown of Navarre he inherited, from his Fa∣ther: Three Crowns were united in him, and he was well worthy thereof; purchasing, by his Piety, Valour and Bounty, the Title of The Great. The Moors be∣lieving King Ferdinand was wholly employed in recon∣ciling his new Subjects in Castile, Leon, Galicia and Portugal, broke into Lustainia; but hearing he was pro∣vided to receive them, they retired hastily. He, once provoked, would not put up his Sword without doing Execution.His Con∣quests over the Infi∣dels. He took the Town of Sea, and the Cities Merida, Badajoz, Beja and Evora, without any Resistance. Viseo, guilty of the Death of King Alonso, and fearing a Revenge, was strongly fortified, and governed by Cid Alafun, a notable Commander. The King sate down before it, resolving not to stir thence, till he were Ma∣ster of it. Eighteen Days the City was battered, and bravely defended; at the End whereof, being the Eve of the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, it was enter'd by Force, and never after returned under the Yoak of the Infidels. The Man that shot King Alonso being taken in the City, had his Eyes put out, and both his Hands and one Foot cut off; which done, he was shot to Death. The Governor Alafun had, in Consideration of his Va∣lour, Lands given him to live upon, paying a certain Tribute. His Name is still preserved in those Parts, in the Mountain called Alafun, the Council of Alaf, and other Places.
2. The City Lamego held out no less obstinately, du∣ring Twenty Five Days, at the end whereof it was surrendred upon Articles the 22th Day of July. It was not then used to expel the Moors, but to bring them to pay a moderate tribute. After these Conquests, the King crossed the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho into Galicia, to visit the Sepulcher of the Apo∣stle St. James,1039. and make his Offerings there: The fol∣lowing Year he conquered many places in the Province of Tras os Montes, and pierced down even to the River Tagus. King Ferdinand made glorious Conquests the ensuing Years; but they being out of Portugal, do not appertain to us.Coimbra taken by the Advice and Assis∣tance of the Monks of Lorvan. Two Monks of the Monastery of Lor∣van advertised the King, that the City Coimbra was ill provided, and worse fortified, and therefore it would be easie to gain it. King Ferdinand marched in Decem∣ber, 1063, and laid Siege to it, where he continued till July following; so that 7 Months were spent in the Siege:1064. And it may be supposed, the Moors, before un∣provided, upon Notice of his Coming, had prepared to receive him. Provisions grew so scarce in the Army towards the latter end of the Siege, that the King was about raising it, and departing: But the Monks of the aforesaid Monastery of Lorvan supplied him plentifully, and the City was taken the 8th Day after. The King offered the Monks to take what they pleased, in requi∣tal for their Intelligence and Supplies; but they mo∣destly begged only a Church in the City: However, he gave them many rich Gifts, and confirmed all the former Grants made by his Ancestors. In token of Gra∣titude, the Monks presented the King with a Golden Crown, which Count Gonzalo Moniz, Governor of the Province between Duero and Minho, had offered to their Church: The King restored it, with 10 Marks of Sil∣ver, to make a Cross. Roderick de Bivar, Surnamed Cid, that famous Captain, was at this Siege, and Knighted by the King, in this City. Here was also the renowned Portuguese, Roderick Frojas, Contemporary, and not much inferiour to the other for Warlike Exploits. 3. The King returning to Leon, left Sisnandus, a no∣ble and valiant Man, Governor of Coimbra. He made War upon Abudad, a resolute and powerful Moor, who had much disturbed the King at the Siege; but being subdued, became a most loyal Subject. Soon after, the
Moors,1065. under the Command of Benalfagi, a great Lord in Estremadura, repaired the Fortifications of Monte∣mayor the Old, that it might be a Check upon Coimbra. This Place was so obnoxious to it, that King Ferdinand was forced to come with a powerful Army, wherewith he laid Siege to it for many Days.1066. Here Roderick de Bi∣var took great Pains to supply the Camp with Forage, all the Country about being kept by great Multitudes of Moors.Monte∣mayor ta∣ken, and demolished. At length the Besieged surrender'd, upon Pro∣mise of their Lives; and the King, offended at the Re∣sistance he had found there, demolished the Walls. The Governor Sisnandus repaired them again, in the Reign of King Alonso VI. King Ferdinand was born in the Year 1007; and in 1030, married the Lady San∣cha, by whom he had the following Children, in Or∣der as named, Ʋrraca, Ela, Sancho, Alonso and Gar∣cia. By a Daughter of Raymund, Lord of Savoy, he had Ferdinand, who was a Cardinal; and D. Mininno Fer∣nandez of Toro.Ferdi∣nand dy∣ing, di∣vides his Dominions. The King finding his End draw near, divided his Kingdoms among his Sons: To Sancho he gave Castile; to Alonso, Leon; and to Garcia, Galicia and Portugal: To the Lady Ʋrraca he left the City Za∣mora, with half the Principality of Leon; to the Lady Elvira,Garcia is King of Ga∣licia and Portugal. the other half, d the City Toro. Having thus settled his Affairs, King Ferdinand died, in the 60th Year of his Age, and the 30th of his Reign; and was buried in the Church of St. Isidorus,1067. where, a Year after, his Wife Sancha was also laid. 4. King Ferdinand foreseeing, that the Division of his Kingdoms could not but produce Discord among his Sons, bound them by Oath to stand to this Distribu∣tion; leaving his Curse upon him that should attempt to alter it. But, of what Force are Oaths, against Am∣bition?The three Brothers fall at Va∣riance. None of them was satisfied. Sancho, the El∣dest, thought himself wronged, as having a Right to all. Garcia was grieved that the Cities of Toro and Za∣mora were given to his Sisters. Alonso was offended that Sancho should think he had Right to his Dominions. Garcia was the youngest, and therefore the last in the Distribution: But he proved the first that took up Arms against his Sisters, and invaded the Lands of Toro, and others along the River Duero, which he would have to belong to Portugal. D. Sancho soon followed his Exam∣ple in taking the Field, not to defend his Sisters, but
to strip them all. King Sancho, before he undertook this Enterprize, asked the Advice of all his Noble∣men; who unanimously disswaded him from the Un∣dertaking, for fear of incurring his Father's Curses. However, finding him not to be moved, they counsel∣led him to continue in Amity with King Alonso, and ask Leave of him to pass through the Kingdom of Leon, into Portugal. To this purpose he met his Brother A∣lonso, at the Monastery of Sahagun; but could not pre∣vail to have Passage granted him: Nevertheless, upon second Thoughts, they both agreed to conquer Portu∣gal.1069. Our King Garcia, taken up with his own ambi∣tious Designs, had no Leisure to look into the Practices of his Brothers. What was yet worse, his Subjects were discontented, for that he made Account of none but his Favourite Verna, by whose Advice he began the War of Toro unsuccessfully. 5. The Portuguese Nobility and Gentry consulted together,The Portu∣guese No∣bility in∣sult their King, on ac∣count of his Favourite. how they might remove this mighty Favou∣rite; and it was resolved, that D. Roderick Frojas, a migh∣ty Man in those Days, should discourse the King upon that Matter. When he had made a long Harangue upon the Subject, all the Answer the King made, was, to turn his Back upon him, and go away. D. Roderick seeing how little his Words had prevailed, soon after killed Verna in the Palace. The Death of Verna troubled not the King so much, as the News that King Sancho was marching against him, and the small Confidence he had in his Subjects, especially for the Brothers of that D. Roderick conspired together to oppose his punishing the said D. Roderick. Necessity obliged the King to wink at Offences, and send for D. Roderick, who was fled into Navarre, designing for France. He immediate∣ly returned, and came to Coimbra, then the Court of Portugal, at such time as King Sancho's Forces began to range in Galicia, and in the Province of Beira, without meeting with any Opposition.1071. The two Earls, D. Nunho de Lara, and D. Garcia de Cabra, advanced to the Walls of Coimbra, with some Troops of Horse. The King would have gone out to fight them,The Forces of Castile overthrown by those of Portugal. but D. Roderick Frojas said, It was not fit for him to hazard himself, where there was no King against him. D. Roderick went out, with his two Brothers, Peter and Vermui, to meet the Enemy; and in the Field called Agua de Mayas, over∣threw
them, killing 600, among whom were many of Note: 200 Portuguese were slain; and Frojas him∣self received many Wounds. 6. King Garcia was gone to Santarem, when King Sancho, to revenge the former Loss, pierced through Portugal, with a numerous Army. Some advised to pro∣tract the War, and not hazard a Battel; but D. Rode∣rick Frojaz, now recovered of his Wounds, was posi∣tive for Fighting. A Plain, not far from Santarem, was chose for that Purpose; where was fought as bloody a Battel as has been seen in any Age. The greatest Fu∣ry was,King San∣cho over∣throws his Brother Garcia and takes him Prisoner. when the Portuguese strove to gain the Standard of the Castilians. King Sancho came thither in Person, to defend it; and being unhorsed by D. Egas Gomez de Sousa, was taken Prisoner by D. Roderick Frojaz, who delivered him up to King Garcia. No sooner had he delivered his Prisoner, but he fell down dead of the Wounds he had before received. King Garcia put his Brother into the Custody of certain Gentlemen, whilst he pursued the flying Enemy: But King Sancho making his Escape from them, made his Way to join Roderick Diaz de Bivar, called Cid, who was then coming up with fresh Troops, that had not been engaged: These charging the Portuguese, before tired, and now dispers∣ed in the Pursuit, changed the Fortune of the Day: However, the Fight, thus renewed, lasted till Night. D. Peter and D. Vermui, Brothers to D. Roderick Frojas, were killed, and King Garcia was taken by his Brother, who not long before had been his Prisoner, and who now knew better how to secure him than he had been kept himself. Thus the Castilians recovered the Day, and the Portuguese, before victorious, were put to the Rout. King Garcia continued in Prison 10 Years, when he was released by Death. There are Authors who write, that King Sancho enlarged his Brother Gar∣cia, contenting himself that he should be Tributary to him; and that D. Alonso, Brother to both, returned him to Prison, in the Castle of Luna, where he died, with Irons on his Legs: With those very Fetters, at his own Request, he was buried in the Church of St. Isido∣rus, at Leon. 7. King Sancho having obtained the Victory over his Brother Garcia, all the Kingdom of Portugal and Galicia submitted to him. This Kingdom being sub∣dued,
he turned his victorious Arms against King Alon∣so of Leon,Sancho, after sub∣duing Por∣tugal, on∣quers Le∣on, and be∣comes sole Monarch. who well deserved it for consenting to the Destruction of his Brother. The War continued bloo∣dy for some time, with various Success, till at length King Alonso, overthrown, was taken Prisoner. To deliver himself from that Misery, he retired to Sahagun, pretending to become a Religious Man. Soon after, finding a fit Opportunity,1072. by the Advice of Count Pe∣ter Anzures,King A∣lonso of Leon flies to the Pro∣tection of the Moors. he fled to Toledo, where the Moorish King Alimaimon entertained him with Royal Magnificence. Nothing now remained to disturb King Sancho's ambi∣tious Thoughts, but his Sister Ʋrraca's possessing Za∣mora. He laid Siege to that City, and had now redu∣ced it to Extremity; but here, in this last Act, God permitted the Curses of his Father to reach him; for, in the Height of his Confidence, a Traytor, called Vellido Dolphes, coming out of the City, upon pretence of revealing some Secret to him, took his Opportuni∣ty to strike him through the Body with a Spear, where∣of he fell down dead. King Sancho reigned six Years, and was murder'd in 1073.1073. He was called The Brave, and was married to the Lady Blanch, Daughter to his Uncle Garcia Sanchez, King of Navarre; or, according to others, to Alberta of France. His Body lies in the Church of our Blessed Saviour at Onna. 8. King Alonso being generously protected by the Moor, Alimaimon King of Toledo, lived in hopes of bet∣ter Fortune; when Advice was brought him from Za∣mora, by Order of his Sister Ʋrraca, of the Death of his Brother,Alonso, after his Brother's Death, re∣turne, and is received by the Peo∣ple a their King. King Sancho. He immediately came to take Possession of his Kingdoms, and was received with general Applause: Only Roderick Diaz de Bivar, called Cid, would not take the Oath of Allegiance to him, till he swore he had no Hand in the Death of King San∣cho. It is strange, amidst the universal Satisfaction, the King should have need of one Man: But he resented this Affront so heinously, that he afterwards banished him; in which Exile, Roderick gained much Honour. King Alonso, the 6th of that Name, being settled in quiet Possession of his Kingdoms, approved himself worthy of greater Dominions, being one of the most victorious Princes of Spain, and that farthest extended his Conquests. He seemed rather to have fled to Toledo as a Spy, than for Protection; for he took that City
from the Infidels, and valued himself so much upon it, that from thenceforwards he stiled himself Emperor;1085. and was the Honour of the Spanish Monarchy. 9. King Alonso had six Wives:Alonso's Wves, and Issue. The First was, Ag∣nes, her Parentage unknown, and she left no Issue. The Second was, Constance, Daughter to Duke Robert II. of Burgundy: She had a Daughter, called Ʋrraca, af∣terwards married to Count Raymund of Burgundy; and her Portion was, the Kinom of Galicia: Her Hus∣band came to Spain, with her Mother; and they had Issue, Sancha, and Alonso the Emperor. King Alonso's Third Wife was, Berta, Daughter to Philip I, King of France: By her he had the Ladies, Sancha and Elvira; the First married to Count Roderick Gonzalez Giron; the Latter, to Roger I, King of Naples and Sicily. The Fourth Wife was, Elizabeth, Daughter to the Empe∣ror. The Fifth, Beatrix, a French Lady: Neither of them had any Children. The Sixth was, Zaida, her Christian-Name Elizabeth, Daughter of Almucamuz A∣ben Hamet, King of Sevil: She bore him a Son, called Sancho, killed at Twelve Years of Age, in the Battel of Velez, in the Year 1100. The King, in his Youth, had to do with the Lady Ximena Nunez de Gusman, Daughter to King Garcia VI, of Navarre: By her he had three Daughters; The First, Elvira, married to Count Raymund of Toulouse; her Portion was, a great Summ of Money, with which he returned to France. The Second Daughter was, Teresa, Wife to Count Hen∣ry, the Progenitor of the Kings of Portugal, Grandson to Robert I. Duke of Burgundy, being the Fourth Son to Henry, Eldest Son to the Duke. Of the Third Daugh∣ter we have no Account, unless it was one that was married to Ferdinand Mendez the Elder, Son to Mm Alao, Lord of Braganza. Some Authors would make the Lady Ximena to be lawful Wife to King Alonso; but there are undeniable Proofs to the contrary in old Re∣cords, specifying the Time when each Wife was mar∣ried to the King, wherein none is left for this Lady, who, doubtless, was no other than a Mistress. 10. Count Henry,Count Hen∣ry marries the Bastard Daughter of King A∣lonso. after he had married the Bastard-Daughter of King Alonso, served the King in his Wars, and was some Times sent Governor into Portugal; as were several others, from the Year 1072, till 1098. For, tho' the Count was married in the Year 1072, the
Kingdom of Portugal was not absolutely assigned over to him till after the Birth of his Son Alonso, which was in the Year 1094: And we find, that from the Year 1099, the Count continued settled in Portugal, as abso∣lute Lord and Proprietor thereof; whereas before, be∣ing only Governor, at certain Times he used to follow and serve King Alonso in his Wars. This King Alonso was born in Galicia, in the Year 1035; was married the first time in 1076; died at Toledo in 1108, having reigned 35 Years, and lived 73. His Body lies in the Monastery of Sahagun, with that of his Son Prince San∣cho: There also lie four of his Wives, Agnes, Constance, Beatrix and Zayda; the other two, Elizabeth and Berta, in the Church of St. Isidorus, at Leon. Now we shall be almost 500 Years without returning to Castile, for now begins to bud the Tree of the most August Kings of Por∣tugal; a Tree which has shaded much of the World. The End of the Second BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. The Third BOOK. CHAP. I. The Country, Extraction, Life and Death of Henry first Earl of Portugal, and proge∣nitor of all the Kings thereof,Opinions concerning Henry the Progenitor of the Por∣tuguese Kings. from the Year 1067 till 1112. 1. HEnry the first Founder of the Portuguese Monar∣chy, is by all Men allowed to have been of noble Extraction; but others very much differ both as to his Country and Family. As to his Family, the Bi∣shops D. Roderick Sanchez, and D. Alonso de Cartagena say, he was of the House of Lorrain, but do not name his Parents. Duarte Galvan, our Antient Chronologer, affirms, He was second Son to a King of Hungary, which Opinion the famous Poet Camoens, in his Lusi∣ads follows: Damianus de Goes, in the life of King Ema∣nuel, says, he was Son to William Baron of Joinville, and Duke of Lorrain, and Abida of Champagne. James de Valera, and Antony Beuter, bring him from Constan∣tinople,
grounding their Opinion upon the History of Spain, writ by King Alonso, mistaking a Quotation of the Archbishop D. Roderick, who Writes that he was of the Bisontine Province, meaning Besancon, the Ca∣pital of the Dukedom of Burgundy, which they take for Bisantium or Constantinople. Wolfangus Lazius writes he was of Limburg; Duarte Nunnez de Leon endeavours to prove he was Grandson to Reginald Earl of Burgundy, by his Son Guido Earl of Verneuille in Normandy. Lewis Gollut in his History of that Earldom, says, he was Bro∣ther to Raimund, both Sons to Earl William: All these doubts are cleared by the Antient Manuscript of Fleury, which being a fragment of French History, was writ in the time of our Count Henry, for the Author of it brings himself as an Eye Witness of the three Suns that were seen at the Town of Scyrs, on the Banks of the River Garonne, in the Year 1108. It was writ by a famous Benedictin Monk of that Convent, and reaches from the Year 897, till the Year 1110. Petrus Piteus a learned Man, published it with other like Manuscripts, and it was Printed at Francfort in the Year 1596. By this Antient Manuscript it appears, that Robert the first Duke of Burgundy, younger Brother to King Henry I. of France, had by his Wife Hermengarda, one onely Son called Henry, who died before his Father, leaving five Sons by his Wife Sibila, Daughter to Reginald Earl of Burgundy: These were Hugo, who was heir to his Grand∣father, but being left a Widdower without Children, became a Monk of Cluni, and so died in the Year 1092. Eudo or Odoa, who succeeded his Elder Bro∣ther, Robert Bishop of Langres, Henry our Earl, and Reginald an Abbot; many other Authors too long to insert, have hinted that he was of the House of Burgun∣gy, tho' perhaps none specified it so particularly. His Family once allowed to be that of Burgundy, it will need no further proofs to shew his Country; besides, that it is more likely he should come out of France, which joyns with Spain, than from Hungary or Constantinople so remote. It is also a sufficient proof of his Country, that all his followers were French, which could not have been, were he a stranger to them. 2. The Portuguese strive to clear two points for their Honour,A remark upon some Conceits of the Portuguese Authors. in which there is great difficulty, or rather
an imposibility, for that all arguments are against them; the one is to make out, that the Sovereignty of Portugal was granted to Count Henry without any ac∣knowledgment to Castile; the other that Teresa was lawful Daughter to King Alonso. The Arguments for the first, are, That no Records are to be found in Ca∣stile or Leon, to prove the Title to such acknowledg∣ment, and that their King Alonso the first, was anoin∣ted King by Christ himself, and therefore owed his Crown to him. These proofs are meerly Suppositi∣ous; for as to the first, whether such Record remains or not, it is not credible that a King would alienate a Kingdom to a Bastard Daughter, so as to reserve no Sovereignty to himself, nor if he had, is it in the pow∣er of a Prince to give away the right of a Legitimate Successor to one Illegitimate? The second instance a∣bout Christ giving a right to the Crown, seems so ex∣travagant a Notion, that as it carries no proof, it needs no Confutation. The other point insisted up∣on, is the Legitimacy of Teresa the Counts Wife, but that has been spoke of already; no Author of Note has named her otherwise than an unlawfully begotten, and the computation of the time her Father was mar∣ried to, and lived with his six Wives, makes it im∣possible to allow of a Seventh. There is another doubt about Earl Henry's going to the Holy Land, which some Pertuguese Authors insist upon without any sufficient Grounds, or rather without any probability; but whether he did or not, is not easy to decide, nor worth the discussing; let us go on to his Life, or ra∣ther to the small fragments that remain of it, as of all other things before his time, but we begin now by de∣grees to come into days of more light. 3. By what has been said,Count Hen∣ry of Bur∣gundy. it appears that Earl Hen∣ry was a Burgundian, the Son of Henry, Son to Robert the first Duke of that Country, and Hermengarda Daughter to Count Reinald of Burgundy. There he was Born in the Year 1035. being descended by the Fathers side of the Royal Family of Hugh Capet, and by his Mother from the Earls of Burgundy. The cause that moved Henry to pass over into Spain, was the desire of Glory to be purchased in the continual Wars, betwixt the Christians and the Moors. Authors do not agree about the time of his coming, but it appears by Ancient Re∣cords,
that he Governed Portugal in the Year 1073,His com∣ing into Portugal. so that he must have been in Castile when King Ferdi∣nand died, and when the fame of Roderick de Bivar's ex∣ploits,1067. incited strangers to come from Foreign Parts to imitate his Actions. Roderick was then near Fifty Years of Age, and Henry about Forty: The Author of the Manuscript above mentioned, says, That succours were sent out of France to King Alonso, at his request to King Philip I. being then pressed with the War made by the Almoravides. It is likely that Henry came with the Command of these Troops, and having gained esteem, had the Government of the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho committed to him, other great Men governing the others at the same time. Af∣ter the death of King Ferdinand, who divided his King∣doms among his three Sons, Sancho King of Castile ha∣ving taken Portugal from his Brother Garcia, and Leon from Alonso his other Brother, obliged him to fly for safety to the Moors.1071. Henry accompanied him in all misfortunes, till Sancho being killed, Alonso was not on∣ly restored to his own, but seated in the Thrones of Ca∣stile and Portugal.1073. King Alonso considering, that he who follows a Prince,Gains the Affection of King Alon∣so. deposed in his misfortunes, does some∣thing more than Man, concluded that Henry was a pro∣digy among mortals, and therefore from that time, re∣solved to suit his reward to his Fidelity. 4. Beatrix the second Wife of King Alonso dying,1076. a match was agreed for him with the Lady Constance,Alonso marries his Aunt. Aunt to Earl Henry, and he was sent to France to con∣duct her into Spain. With him went Raymund Earl of Toulouse, and with them both came Raymund Earl of Burgundy, which is the reason some Authors write they came all together; whereas the other two had been long before in Spain. Thus Henry became great at Court, the King being his Friend, and the Queen his Aunt, which his power he used with such moderation, that he was beloved by all Men.1081. He accompanied King A∣lonso at the memorable Seige, and taking of Toledo, as also at the Battle of Sagulias near Badajoz,1087. where the King was overthrown.1090. To reward all these Services, the King at last gave him to Wife his Bastard Daughter Teresa,He takes to Wife Te∣resa Ba∣stard Daughter to Alonso, and has in Dower the City Porto and its Territory. whom he had by the Lady Ximena Nunnez de Gusman. Her Dower was the City Porto with its Ter∣ritory,
then the best part of what was gained in Portu∣gal, giving him leave to retire thither, and live with his Wife: His Age was the cause that he died, lea∣ving Teresa young to marry a second Husband, which much disturbed the publick Peace. Soon after the Christian Princes joining in League to conquer the Holy Land, Earl Henry was chosen General of the Forces sent by King Alonso, in which employ he gained great Honour. He returned from this Expedition to Toledo, where the Court of Castile was then kept in the Year 1099. King Alonso at this time being of a great Age, sent his Son Prince Sancho, being but Twelve Years of Age, under the direction of D. Garcia Count of Cabra, with an Army to oppose Almanzor the Moor. With them went many Persons of Quality, among which the chief was Earl Henry; they came to a Battle in the Plains of Veles, where the Prince was unhorsed and killed,1100. though Henry and Garcia exposed themselves to save him.Overthrows the Infidels and takes Almanzor prisoner. Earl Henry meditating Revenge, met Al∣manzor again in the Field, whom he dismounted and took Prisoner, delivering him to James Ordonnez for to carry him to the King; this done, Henry broke through the Infidels, putting them to flight, with a mighty slaughter. 5. As it is doubtful whether Henry went to Hierusa∣lem with the other Christian Princes, so is it also, whe∣ther he was present at the taking of Lisbon, Santarem, Sintra, and other strong places by King Alonso, but that he was at these latter Expeditions as most properly ap∣pertaining to him is most likely.For his good services he receives o∣ther Terri∣tories of King A∣lonso. But his great Age re∣quiring some rest, the King at last gave him leave to retire to Portugal, giving to him for himself and his Heirs, all that was conquered there, which was the Cities Coimbra and Viseo, and the three Provinces; that betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, Beira, and Tras os Montes, with that part of Galicia as far as the Castle Lobeira, and leave to conquer as far as Algarve. Earl Henry settled his residence at Guimaraens, taking the Ti∣tle of Earl of Portugal; The Portuguese encouraged by the presence of a Prince of their own, did much upon the borders of the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, till then not entirely subdued, but we have no particular account of their Actions. Hecha Martin King of Lamego, being a tributary to Henry rebelled;
and drawing together a powerful Army, did much hurt in the Christian Territories. The Earl with Egas Moniz, a Gentleman then famous, and afterward Tu∣tor to King Alonso, marched to recover the Booty he had taken, and overtook him in a Valley near the Monastery of Arouca. The Moor for greater security, in case of any misfortune, placed his Wife Queen Axa Anzures, and all the Prey on the top of a Mountain he thought unaccessible, called Sierra Seca. The Chri∣stian Army encamped along the River Alarda and Egas Moniz, seeing the Enemy advantagiously posted, un∣dertook with a good party by Night, to go about the Mountains, and at break of Day, to be ready to fall upon them on the top,Another o∣verthrow given by him to the to the Moors. whilst the Christian Army charged the Enemy below. This was accordingly put in Execution, and after a bloody Fight, the Queen was taken above and the King below; they becoming Christians, the Earl bestowed the City Lamego upon them, they paying tribute for the same. 6. The Moores rebelling against their King for chang∣ing his Religion,1103. he fled to Guimaraens to crave aid of Earl Henry,A Moor∣ish King restored by him. who by force took the City Lamego, and restored him: He fearing in the Earl's absence his Sub∣jects would again revolt, desired of him to leave some Portuguese Gentlemen to secure those Lands, which was accordingly done, and the Country People with In∣habitants brought from the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho.He per∣forms o∣ther great Actions. This year some Writers will have it, that Earl Henry went to the Holy Land with Guy of Lu∣signan and other Princes; all the likelihood there is there∣of, is, That we have no account of him in Portugal from the Year 1103. till the Year 1109. King Ali Haben Joseph, with a numerous Army, laid Siege to Coimbra, which he furiously battered during a Month. Earl Henry marched to their relief, and coming to a Battle, overthrew the Infidels with a great Slaughter. Cintra and other places revolted and were overcome, but rising again, they could not easily be subdued: Whilst our Earl was diverted in the Wars of Galicia and Leon, where he took some Towns, Cyrus King of the Arabs taking the opportunity, laid Siege to Santarem, whither our Forces hasting to relieve the place, were by him overthrown, and so the Town being distressed, Surrendred. The Earl took several places in Leon, so
that King Alonso was glad to abandon that City upon promise to relieve it in four Months. He overthrew King Alonso of Navarre in defence of Queen Ʋrraca, and about the Government of Prince Alonso; soon af∣ter Henry being dissatisfied with the said Queen, took part with the King against her, and defeated Count Gomes who espoused her Quarrel. 7. Whilst he was absent from Astorga, those People of the Kingdom of Leon that he had subdued revolted,1112. and he returning,His Death and Cha∣racter. laid Siege to Astorga. In the heat of the Siege, he died, and his Son Alonso rising with his Army, went away to Bury him at Braga. Thus Astor∣ga with all its Territory was lost: The death of Earl Henry was much lamented of his Subjects, for that he was a Prince of extraordinary Piety, Valour, and Ge∣nerosity. He overthrew the Moors in Seventeen seve∣ral Battles, and took from them many Cities and places of Strength. He lived Seventy Seven Years, Govern∣ed Portugal with the Title of Earl above Twenty, and was Governour of part thereof almost as many more. He was of a middle Stature, a beautiful and awful Pre∣sence, his Complection fair, his Eyes blew, and his Hair yellow, inclining to red: In his antient Pictures, he is represented with his Sword in his hand; his Body lies in the Cathedral of Braga, with a modern Inscrip∣tion on his Tomb, which mistakes his Country and Parentage. The Countess Dowager governed this Do∣minion for some years, as being her Dower, and her Son being under Age. She might have ruled longer, had she not Married, or proposed to Marry the Earl of Trastamara D. Ferdinand de Trava; this or some other cause, produced Civils Wars betwixt the Mother and Son, which ended in her overthrow, her Son without regard to the duty he owed to a Mother, when she was made Prisoner, keeping her in the Castle of Lannoso, with Fetters on her Feet, till she died in the Year 1130. and was Buried by her Husband. 8. The Issue of Earl Henry was,His Issue. First, Alonso Enriquez, taking his Name and Sir-Name from his Father and Grand-Father. This being his Heir, is named before the Sisters, though they preceded him as to Birth. Se∣condly, the Lady Ʋrraca Wife to D Bermudo Pz. Earl of Trastamara. Thirdly, the Lady Sancha, Wife to D. Ferdinand Nunnez, a great Man in the Kingdom
of Galicia; they left no Children. Fourthly, the La∣dy Teresa Married to D. Sancho Nunnez, Son to Count Nunno de Celanova. Fifthly, he had a Bastard Son by a Woman of Quality, his Name was Peter Alonso, of whose brave Actions we shall hear in the life of his Brother. Earl Henry for some Years wore a plain white Shield, till after he had obtained renown by his Sword, he added to it a plain blew Cross. CHAP. II. The Birth of Alonso first King of Portugal, he takes upon him the Government, is pro∣claimed King by the Army, his wonderful Victory over the Moors at Ourique, he takes Lisbon, Santarem, and many other places, all from the Year 1094. till the Year 1148. 1. IN July,1094. or according to others on the 15th. of August 1094. was Born D. Alonso Enriquez only Son to Earl Henry,The Birth of Alonso Enriquez Son to Count Hen∣ry. and his Lady Teresa, at the Town of Guimaraens. He is said to have been Born with both his Legs cleaving together from the Knees down, and that his Governour Egas Muniz having devoutly beg∣ged of Heaven to loosen his Feet, the Blessed Virgin ap∣peared to him, bidding him carry the Child to an old ruined Church at Carquere near Lamego, and that re∣storing the place, and setting the Infant upon the Altar, he should recover his Limbs. Egas for the space of five Years did as he had been ordered, and the Child reco∣vered:1105. This Prince was but Fourteen Years of Age, when he began to follow the Wars under his Father, and was with him when he died at the Siege of Astrga, as has been said before.1112. Having paid the last Honours to his Father, to express his great respect towards his Mother, he committed the Government to her, though then of Age to undertake it himself. St. Bernard ha∣ng at his Convent of Claraval in France, had a vision
of St. John Bapist,Mnks of Claraval came into Portugal. directing him to send some of his Monks to found a Monastery in Portugal, in the place that should be shown to them by one John Cerita, whom they should find there, he accordingly sent seven of his Monks. They found Cerita who lived an Austere Eremi∣tical life, and conducted them to Prince Alonso, by whom they were honourably received, and encoura∣ged in their Foundation.1120. Being dismissed, they settled in a deep Valley, encompassed with high Mountains near the River Barosa, almost two Leagues from Lame∣go, where they built a Chappel Dedicated to our Sa∣viour, which is still in being in the Village called Pine∣gro.1121. The following Year, they built in a place where they had seen cert Lights, during Nine Nights, as had been foretold by St. John Baptist to St. Bernard. Here Prince Alonso visiting them, enlarged the Stru∣cture at his own cost; John Cerita took the order here, and reduced several who lived an Eremitical Life in the Mountains to follow his Example. The number of Monks thus increasing, he founded another Monastery called St. Christopher de Lafoens. Both these Churches were afterwards Consecrated, and great Gifts offered in them at the Solemnity. 2. Prince Alonso having now weilded a Sword long enough to gain Renown,1125. thought it requisite to be Knighted according to the Custom of those days,Alonso Knights himself. and thinking there was none about him great enough to Confer that Honour on him, by putting on his Armour, and girding on his Sword, as was then the Custom; he laid the Arms upon an Altar, and taking them thence, put them on himself, so taking the Honour at his own hands. Prince Alonso's Mother being about to marry the second time, it bred such Animosities betwixt them, that they finally came to Battle near the Town of Gui∣maraens;1128. the Mother overthrown, fled to the Castle of Lannoso,He besieges his Mother, takes and puts her into Irons. which is hard by, and was there Besieged by her Son. Alonso VII. King of Castile and Leon, came to her relief with a powerful Army. The Portuguese Alonso was not unprovided, but meeting him in the plains of Valdevez, put to the Sword the greatest part of his Forces, took seven Earls Prisoners, and the King him∣self hardly escaped, having received two Wounds. This done, the young Prince returns to the Siege of the Castle, which being yielded to him, he put his Mother
into Irons. She provoked at this dis-respect, as her Bolts were put on, prayed to God that his Legs might be broke, and her Prayers were heard as will appear hereafter. 3. Alonso now grown absolute,Being him∣self besieg∣ed by King Alonso of Castile, he Articles for his delive∣rance, and breaks his Faith. and having provoked the King of Castile by the late overthrow given him, to revenge the Affront, that King marched with a Power∣ful Army, and besieged Prince Alonso in the Town of Guimaraens. There being no hope of relief, nor pos∣sibility of holding out, Egas Muniz was sent out by the Prince to treat of some accommodation with the King, which Business he managed so Dexterously, that the King upon Promise and Articles, that Prince Alonso should hold that Country of him▪ and do him homage for the same in a certain time prefixed, raised his Siege and departed. Prince Alonso delivered of that danger, thought of nothing less than performing the Articles agreed upon. Porteguese Authors will have it, that Egas Muniz, who managed this Treaty, because it was not performed, presented himself to the King of Castile, with a Halter about his Neck, for him to punish that breach of Faith, and was pardoned by the King. But this is as Romantick as what our Authors writes, that the whole treaty was concluded without the privity of Prince Alonso, as if the King could be so infatuated to treat with a private Man stolen out of a Town, where his Prince was closely Besieged, without seeing his Commission, or to conclude Articles, and depart upon his bare word without the Ratification of the principal Points. These Chimerical Notions are better passed by than to interrupt the course of History with them; however I would not wholly omit this wild imaginati∣on of the Author. 4. Albucazan King of Badajoz did great harm in the Province of Beira,1131. and took the Town of Trancoso be∣fore Prince Alonso could come to relieve it.War with the Moors However, our Prince soon retook it, and repulsed the Moor who came to have hindred him from fortifying of it. In his return from this place, Alonso was worsted by the Moors, but recovering himself near the Town of Guimaraens, he overthrew a great multitude of them, and so entred that Town victorious,1135. where he hunged up the Colours taken in the Church.Thn with Castile. The War broke out again be∣twixt Castile and Portugal, in the Reign of Alonso VII.
of Castile called the Emperor, and much harm was done on both sides, though with no great advantage to either.1136. At last our Prince broke into Galicia, where King Alonso meeting him, was in Battle overthrown, and the Earl D. Roderick Vela made Prisoner: After this our Alonso valiantly defended Coimbra, besieged by the Moor Eujuni, so powerful a Prince, that he is said to have covered all the plains about the City, with an Ar∣my of 300000 fighting Men: But a violent Plague raging among his Troops, forced him to break up and depart much weaker than he came. Our Prince thus delivered, entred the Territory of Leyria, which place, tho' strong, he took by Escalade, putting most of the Defendants to the Sword. This being the first of his notable Conquests, he offered it up to God, delivering it to Theotonius, Prior of the Monastery of Santa Cruz, whether after the taking of Torres Novas, he returned to repose himself in order to prosecute greater Designs. 5. Ismar or Ismael,1139. a powerful Moor, was Sovereign of all the Country beyond the River Tagus,A Fabuous Relation. called Alen∣tejo. Our Prince passed that River, and made great Havock in the Territories of those Infidels; Ismael as∣sembled twenty petty Princes, subject to five little Kings who were all under his Dominion. Each of those Kings led 80000 Men, wherewith they covered all the plains. With our Authors leave it is wholly incredible, That such inconsiderable Princes, as they must be, whose Dominions extended not to above half the limits of Portugal, should raise so prodigious a Multitude, for it amounts to no less than 480000. This may per∣haps be added to gain the greater Reputation to those strange miracles he talks of in the Sequel. The Chri∣stians were not above 13000, and those wholly dis∣mayed (as well they might) at the sight of such an Army as they could not be capable to number. How∣ever, Prince Alonso reposing his confidence in God, ceased not to encourage and animate his fainting Forces. They encouraged with his undaunted Contenance, and resolute Expressions, took heart and offered their ready service: It was then Night when the Prince retiring to rest, read the History of Gideon and fell asleep▪ in a Dream there appeared to him a venerable Old Man, promising him Victory, and being awakened, was told there was such an one pressed to speak with him; being
admitted, he found it was the same Man he saw in his Dream, and that he came to give him the same assur∣ances. At break of day he went out of his Tent, and looking towards the East, saw a mighty Brightness, in the midst of which appeared our Saviour on the Cross surrounded with Angels, who promised him Victory over the Infidels, and commanded him to accept the Title of King, if offered to him by his Army. Soon after the Portuguese flocked about him,Alonso saluted King. demanding the signal of Battle, and unanimously saluted him King. He at first seemed to refuse that Title, but it being the consequence of the Vision he had seen, soon admitted it: Let every one give that credit to this strange relation he shall think fit, I have briefly set it down, that I might not wholly cut off so extraordinary a passage in my Author; yet would I not extend it to that length as he has done, because I believe most Men will give as little credit to it as I do. 6. Alonso thus encouraged, drew up his Army into four Bodies, the Enemy making twelve: The charge was seconded by a most hideous cry raised by both Armies,The Battle of Ouri∣que. an incredible clattering of Weapons, and such showers of Darts and Arrows, as seemed to darken the light of the Sun. No Christian sought to save himself, all their study was to kill; the King encouraged all Men by his example, and every Man sought to out-do another. Six hours the fight lasted, in which time the plain of Ourique, where they engaged was all covered with dead Bodies, which almost floated in a Pool of Blood. At length the Victory fell to the Christians, and was one of the greatest ever obtained against Infidels.Reflections vpon this Battle. It is very hard to reconcile the account of this Battle to any thing of probability; for whereas the Author says but a little before, there were five lesser Kings and one So∣vereign of them all, with each 80000 Men▪ which a∣mounts to 480000; now he says, they were above 600000. Doubtless there must be willful mistakes in these Numbers to magnifie the Action, which would seem great if not rendred incredible; Besides he rec∣kons six Kings which are those of Silves, Merida, Se∣vil, Badajoz, Lisbon, and Algezira, whereas all other Authors agree they were but five, and give that for the reason that the Portuguese Arms contain five small Scutcheons within the great one; nor is it any excuse
to say, there were five Kings subject to one that was supream over them, for the principal could not be omit∣ted in the Number, and if he was not, than the others must be but four. Another reason makes me incline not to credit this Story, which is, that we see the King's of Castile, Aragon, and Navarre have often joyned their Forces to oppose a much less power than is here spoke of, and it is not credible that such a Multitude could be now amassed on a sudden without their know∣ledge, or much less that they knowing of it, should make no provision to oppose that Torrent. Nor was there ever such a number of Moors in one body heard of from their first invading Spain, till their last ex∣pulsion. In fine, I cannot be reconciled to this mon∣strous Story, and could show many other reasons a∣gainst it, but look upon it as needless, this being on∣ly a project to gain credit to the Miracles pretended for the founding of that Kingdom, which serve only to cover its revolt at that time from the Crown of Castile and Leon. I will insist no more upon it, but re∣turn to the course of the History. 7. Ismael provoked with this loss, and desiring revenge, battered the City Leyria, which he took, putting all the Defendants to the Sword, except D. Pelayo Guter∣rez the Governor, whom he kept Prisoner. He for∣tified this place to strongly, that King Alonso found much difficulty to recover it, but at length drove the Moors out of all that Territory. King Alonso VII. of Castile seeing that erected into a Monarchy, which but a little before was only the Portion of his predecessors Bastard Daughter, thought it convenient in time to pull down that rising greatness before it was too powerfully cemented together. Thus breaking into Portugal by the way of Galicia, he came to the plains of Valdvez, where the Castilians had been before overthrown,1140. and where our King now again gave him Battle.Alonso  the King of Castile. The King of Castile was defeated, and several Persons of Note taken Prisoners. A French Fleet consisting of 70 Sail, arrived in the Harbour of the City Porto. The King invited them to assist him in the taking of the City of Lisbon,1141. which having some years before been made tri∣butary,A  of French at Porto. was again revolted: This united power of Christians attempted to scale it, but without any success, being forced to desist for that time.1142. The Moors obtain∣ed
a Victory at Soure over the Knights Templers, and among the Prisoners carried away to Santarem Martin Vicar of Soure esteemed a Holy Man, whose Father Aires Manuel, when his Wife died, led an Eremitical Life. 8. Ansciri a valiant Moor Governour of the Town of Santarem,1144. with his often Excursions, had highly pro∣voked King Alonso, who long meditated how to surprize that place. At length being at Coimbra, he took only four men of Quality with him into a Field, where ha∣ving consulted with them of the method of putting their design in Execution,The taking of Santa∣rem. he charged them upon pain of death, not to reveal to any Man what they had dis∣coursed about. As they returned home along the Banks of the River Mondego, an Old Woman said to others that were with her so loud, that the King and his company heard it; Do you know what the King and Noblemen have been about? They are consulting how to take Santarem; the King hearing this, said to those Gentlemen, if any one of you had gone a step from me before I heard that Old Woman, I would have cut of his head. So hard a matter is it for a Secret to be con∣cealed. The King being resolved to gain that strong Town,1145. made a vow if he succeeded to build a stately Monastery at Alcobaza, and endow it with all the Land he could see at the time of making the Vow. At the minute he made this Vow, St. Bernard who was then at Caravallis in France, by Revelation from God, sent two Monks to begin that Monastery. Five days the King spent marching from Coimbra to Santarem, and made himself Master of it in an hour; some of his Men had Scaled the Walls before they were discovered, and then in the confusion had time to break open a Gate, at which the King entred. The Booty was very consi∣derable, and the Town remained in the power of the Christians; several lesser places followed the fortune of Santarem, but the King now bent his thoughts upon greater Conquests. 9. Our King being at the Rock of Sintra with an ardent design to possess himself of the City of Lisbon, discovered a mighty Fleet at Sea,A Fleet of English, French, and Flemings, in the River of Lisbon. which made towards the mouth of the River Tagus. This Fleet appearing▪ he understood was composed of English, French and
Flemings, under the Command of William Long Espe, nd other inferior Captains. Some Authors report, that Henry King of Denmark, a Duke of Burgundy, and Theodoricus Earl of Flanders were also in it. After strug∣ing with a Storm, they were coming to Water and re∣cruit themselves at the foot of that Mountain; the number of Vessels was 180 sail containing 14000 men designed for the Holy War; the King made proposals to them for conquering the City of Lisbon; they ac∣cepted, and the Siege was formed. The strangers en∣camped on that side,Alonso joins his strength to theirs and takes Lis∣bon. where now the Church of St. Francis stands, and the King where is at present the Church of St. Vincent. For five Months the City was valiantly attacked, and no less resolutely defended. On St. Ʋrsula's Day, being the 21st. of October, a most fu∣rious and bloody Assault was given to the City on all sides, with such mighty Resolution, that above 200000 Infidels are said to have fallen that day. But it is im∣possible the place then could contain near that number of all Sexes and Ages, and yet my Author seems to speak only of Men. On the 25th. following, being the Feast of St. Crispin and Crispinian, the King entred the City in Triumph over the dead Bodies of his E∣nemies. 10. The particulars of this famous Action would doubtless have been delightful,Some par∣ticulars of the Siege. as they were great, but time and the want of Writers have Buried them in Ob∣livion. It will not therefore be just to omit one glori∣ous exploit, whereof the memory still remains. Martin Moniz entring a Gate▪ found such opposition from the Moors, that they were forcing him back and shutting to the Gate: to prevent which, being himself not able to oppose their Force, he let himself fall a cross the en∣trance, and so lying in the way, the Gate could not speedily be put too, and his Men coming on, beat off the Infidels▪ making their way over his dead Body; nor must the Strangers be robbed of their part of the Glory▪ Many of them ended their days in this exploit, among them was one Henry of Bonneville near  at whose Tomb in the Church of St. Vincent, many Miracles are reported to have been wrought; many others were bu∣ried, where now is the Church called that of the Martyrs from those that were buried there. The King according what had been before agreed, offered to the Strangers
half the City, but they satisfied with the Booty and some other rewards, departed to prosecute their holy designs, or to their own Countries. Such as would stay, had Lands assigned them; many other strong places were taken soon after in this current of the King's good Fortune,1148. the chief of them were, Mafra, Almada, Pal∣mela, Cintra, Obidos, Trancoso, Alenquer, Serpa, Beja, Elvas, Coruche and Cezimbra. Thus the Pride of the Mahometans began to be humbled, and this Christian Kingdom to lift up its head. CHAP. III. Continues the mighty Actions of the victorious King Alfonso, the Kingdom confirmed to him by the Pope, his Death, issue and descripti∣on, all from the Year 1148. till 1185. 1. SInce we cannot give the particulars of all the He∣roical Actions of this King,Alonso overthrows the Moors with a handfull of Men. let us at least in two of them represent somewhat of the grandeur of the rest. He sat down before Aleazar do Sal, with a small handful of Men; 500 Moorish Horse and 10000 Foot came to raise the Siege, whom he went out to meet with only 60 Horse, and a proportionable number of Foot. With this small Body, he put his Enemies to flight, but was himself wounded in the Leg, most mis∣fortunes always lighting upon his Legs ever since his Mother laid that Curse on him, as was said before. Af∣ter this Victory, returning to the Siege, he took it at the end of two Monhs; this done, he went with 60 Lances and a few Cross-bow-men to take a view of the Fortress on the Rock of Palmela. Being before the place, he discovered the King of Badajoz coming down a Hill with 400 Horse and 60000 Foot,Another like exploit but without any order. Our King lay a while betwixt certain Rocks out of sight, considering their disorderly march, whilst his Company meditated on their Numbers. At length breaking out suddenly with that handful, he soon co∣vered the Hill with dead Bodies, and the Infidels be∣lieving
a greater Army had followed, fled in confusion, leaving all their Baggage to a few above 60 Conquerors. Palmela upon the News of this defeat, immediatly sur∣rendred upon only promise of Life.1160. The City Tuy left him by his Father, and now revolted, he reduced to his Obedience, and at the same time, concluded a match for his Daughter Mafalda, then 12 Years of Age, with Raymund Prince of Catalonia. 2. Some time before, he had subdued the City Beja, after a tedious Siege, but the Moors who are faithful no longer than compelled by necessity, finding now a fit opportunity,1162. rebelled. Certain valiant Commanders, imitating the example of their King, assaulted this place by Night with such resolution, and so unex∣pectedly, that they carried it making great slaughter among the Inhabitants. A Gentleman of Quality call∣ed Giraldus, living like an outlaw on account of cer∣tain crimes he had committed,A number of Christi∣an Out-laws  Evora. entred into hopes of regaining the King's Favour, by some extraordinary action. Considering therefore that the City Evora was not guarded by the Infidels with that circumspection that was requisite at such a time, he resolved to surprize it. There was a Watch-tower, where the Centinel was kept by a Moor and his Daughter by turns; Giraldus knowing this, Scales the Tower alone, and killing both Father and Daughter, who were asleep, returns with their heads to his Men, being 500 Horse and a good number of Foot. They encouraged by this success, scaled the Walls then unguarded, and breaking open one of the Gates, let in their Companions: Thus with a mighty slaughter made of the Inhabitants, the City was gained. The King not only Pardoned, but Rewarded all those Out-laws, and made their Captain Governour of the City. 3, King Alonso thus become terrible to the Moors, fell at variance with his Son-in-law Ferdinand the Second King of Leon,1168. and thereupon entred Galici in the 75th. year of his Age.War with Leon. Here he took the Towns of Lima and Turon, and putting Portuguese Garrisons into them, turned his Forces against Badajoz, then a tributary City to the King of Leon. This City he assaulted and en∣tred, but not the Castle: Mean while King Ferdinand came to defend that place which fell within the limits of his Conquest. The Portuguese Army encountring
him in the Field,King A∣lonso put to flight, breaks his Leg, ful∣filling his Mothers curse when he put Fet∣ters upon her. was overthrown, and King Alonso forced to fly into the City, whence thinking to make his escape, he struck his Leg against a bolt of the Gate so violently, that he broke it, and here his Mothers Curse reached him fully. Nor was that all, for in that condition, he was taken by the King of Leon, who treated him with extraordinary courtesy, and was con∣tent that he should restore to him only such places as he had wrongfully taken in Galicia and Leon, tho' he of∣fered others in Portugal. Our Author will not allow that King Alonso promised any acknowledgment to the Crown of Leon for his Dominions, but all Spanish Authors are positive he did. Certain it is, that from henceforward he remained lame, so that he never after could ride a Horseback, but was carried in a Chariot. 4. The King had some time since taken the City Be∣ja, but it was soon after lost. Gonzalo Mendez de Maya, called the Combatant,1170. about this time made a Road into the territory of Beja, where was a great body of Moors, under the Command of Almomar, a Soldier of Repu∣tation. These two Bodies encountred, and Maya re∣mained Master of the Field; scarce had he vanquished this Enemy, when he was met by Alboazem King of Tangier, who was coming to the assistance of the van∣quished. The fight was renewed on the same spot of Ground, and a second Victory added to the former. Maya was 95 Years of Age when he obtained these two Victories, but died immediately of the Wounds he had received▪ which made his Army return home in morn∣ful manner. Albaraque King of Sevil made bold by the King's lameness, Santarem by the Moors,  drawing a vast multitude out of An∣daluzia, presumed not only to wast the Country beyond Tagus, but to set down before Santarem, where the King then in the 88th. Year of his Age reposed himself; he caused himself to be carried out in his Chariot to give the Besiegers Battle. The fight was so obstinate, he was forced to quit his Chariot, and appear at the head of his Men with his Sword in Hand. Hereat his Soldi∣ers took so much Courage, that they soon put their E∣nemies to the rout with a great slaughter; St. Michael the Archangel is said to have been seen by his side, hew∣ing down the Infidels. Hence he went to the Monaste∣ry of Alcobaca, to return thinks to God for this success, and staying there a Month, is said to have instituted a
new order of Knighthood, called that of the Wing, for that in the Battle he saw a winged Arm near him fight∣ing against the Moors, which the King supposing to be St. Michael, or his Guardian Angel, he dedicated the order to them both. The chief Rules were, that the Knights should wear a red Wing embroidered with Gold; that none but Gentlemen of Note should be ad∣mitted to the Order; that in fight they should carry the Royal Standard; that they should take the Oath of Allegiance administred by the Prior of Alcobaca, who was to be superior of the Order; that they should eve∣ry day say the same Prayers, as did the Converts of that Monastery; that their Feast should be observed on Mi∣chaelmass Day. The King and principal Men were en∣rolled in this Order, but it was not lasting. 5. At this time there was in the Portuguese Court,Gonzalo Hermi∣guez his actions. a Gentleman called Gonzalo Hermiguez, much esteemed of the Ladies for his Eloquence and Art in Poetry, and no less envied of the Men, as well for those Qualities, as for that his extraordinary Actions had purchased him the Title of Moor Swallower. This Gentleman with a party that used to follow him, passed over the River Tagus, before it was light on Midsummer Day from Lis∣bon to Almada, and there lay in Ambush. The Moors according to their Custom coming out that Morning with their Women to be merry upon the Banks of the River; he suddenly rushed out upon them, expecting no such Entertainment, and made a great slaughter of them. The Infidels strove to defend themselves, but in vain, for he carried off a rich Booty to his Boats. Being ready to put off, he espied a Moor carrying a∣way a beautiful Woman, and leaping again ashore, he forced her from him, and so made over to Santarem with his Prey. Of all the booty he took nothing to himself, but the fair Captive, whom Baptized, he made his Wife: She soon after dying, he was so afflicted that leaving the World, he took upon him the habit of St. Bernard, in the Monastery of Alcobaca, and out of his own Patrimony, having no Children, founded the Mo∣nastery of St. Mary de Tumaray near Ourem. Much a∣bout this time it is recorded, that the King being near the mouth of the River Mondego, found a small Chappel with the Image of our B. Lady, which restored to life one of his Servants killed with a fall from his Horse. An
old Hermit told him it was the same that had preserved all the Women and Children, killed by John the Ab∣bot (as was said in its place) when he sallied out of Montemayor, and unexpectedly overthrew a multitude of Infidels. This moved the King to erect a Monaste∣ry there; called at present St. Mary de Seica, and the Image being several times removed from the poor Chap∣pel, to the magnificent Church of this Monastery, is said always of it self to have returned to its own place. Peter the King's Bastard Brother ranging abroad, met a party of Moors conducting a Beautiful Lady with much Treasure, all which, having routed them, he took. Cide Achim a Moor of Silves, who courted this Lady, begged her of the King, or else desired him to keep him also for his slave. The King referred him to his Brother Peter, who not only restored to him the Lady, but all the Treasure taken with her upon condition he should send no succours to Lisbon, which it seems was not then taken. 6. Peter,of Peter, Bastard Brother to Alonso. Bastard Brother to King Alonso was sent in∣to France, to prevail with St. Bernard, to use his interest with the Pope for to obtain his investiture and confir∣mation of the new Kingdom of Portugal. To omit what is too Romantick concerning this Peter, he is said for his extraordinary valour to have been admitted in∣to the number of the 12 Peers of France, and that pre∣paring to accompany that King to Hierusalem, he was diswaded by St. Bernard, who advised him, rather to act against the Moors in Spain. He followed his ad∣vice, and was at the taking of Santarem, Lisbon, Tran∣coso, Badajoz, and other great Actions: After this he was chosen Master of the new instituted order of Knight-hood, called that of Avis, which Honour he obtained of the King, that he might not be obliged by him to Marry. Returning one day with a party from an En∣gagement with the Moors, he laid down in a Field and fell a Sleep, at which time St. Bernard appeared to him in a Dream, perswading him to take upon him the Habit of his Order, which he accordingly performed, and lived 13 Years in the Monastery of Alcobaca, with an extraordinary opinion of Sanctity. 7. The Dominions of Portugal being now enlarged from a small Dower, given by the King of Leon, with his Bastard Daughter to the proportion of a considera∣ble
Kingdom, King Alonso sued to Pope Alexander III. for his invessiture in the same, offering to pay to the See of Rome for ever, two pound of Gold yearly, as an acknowledgment of his holding that Crown of the Pope. His Holiness granted his request, and accordingly ex∣pedited his Bulls to that effect in the Year 1172.1172. Here∣upon the Cortes or Parliament was assembled at Lame∣go,Pope Alex∣ander grants the Investiture of the King∣dom of Portugal to Alonso under a Tribute. in which pursuant to these Bulls, the King was crowned with a Crown of Gold by the Archbishop of Braga, and all the States there assembled, unanimously voted their Kingdom independent of the Crown of Le∣on. For the better regulating of the succession, it was enacted, That the King's Sons should inherit, and for want of them his Brothers, whose Sons should not suc∣ceed them, without consent of the People. That Daughters might Inherit, provided they Married not out of the Kingdom; that their Husband should not be called King, till the Queen had a Son; that he should not wear the Crown on his Head in Parliament; that if she Married a Forreign Prince, she should not inherit, least the Crown should be transferred to Strangers. 8. About this time the King made an incursion into Algarve,The body of St. Vin∣cent tran∣slated to Lisbon. as far as the Promontorium Sacrum, or Cape St. Vincent, desiring to translate the Body of that Saint which he understood to be there, but he could not per∣form it, and retired: Afterwards the Council of Lis∣bon sent People to discover it, who brought it away to that City, where it is kept with great Veneration, a number of Crows following the Body, from the Moun∣tain to the great Church where it lies, and there they also continue to this Day. Abenjacob Son to the Mira∣mamolin, or Emperor of Morocco, with a mighty Ar∣my, besieged and much streightned the Town of A∣brantes, but certain Portuguese Gentlemen raising the greatest Power they were able, gave him Battle and put him to flight. D. Fuas Roupinno commanded in the Castle of Puerto de Mos, at such time as Gami King of Merida came to attack it. D. Fuas hearing of his ap∣proach with a small body, went out and lay close in Ambush. The Moor giving an Assault to the Castle, he fell upon him so unexpected and furiously, that most of the Moors being slain, Gami and many others were made Prisoners. Gami and his Brother were sent for a
present to old King Alonso, who then reposed himself at Coimbra. This same D. Fuas being Admiral at Sea, destroyed the Gallies of Mauritania the first time near Cape Espichel,1182. and brought nine of them to Lisbon; others he burnt in the Sea of Ceuta.Engage∣ments by Sea. Returning thither afterwards with 21 Galleys, he fought 54 of the Ene∣my, but was totally destroyed, and found a Grave where before he had raised Tropheys. Joseph Aben, Ja∣cob Miramamolin of Morocco, Andaluzia, Murcia and Va∣lencia, with 13 Kings, and the mightiest Army that till then had been seen, to revenge the harms suffered from the Portuguese, passed the River Tagus, and having de∣stroyed Torres Vedras,1184. and whatever else stood in his way, laid Siege to Santarem, where Prince Sancho then was. During 6 or 7 days, he incessantly Battered the Town, and gave several assaults to it, so that many of the Defendants were killed, the Prince wounded, and the Walls shaken. At this time King Alonso being 91 years of Age, came to relieve the Town, but scarce had the occasion to draw his Sword, the Infidels flying precipitously at the very sight of him. Both the Fa∣ther and Son pursued the flying Enemy with such Exe∣cution, that the River was dyed with their Blood. The Miramamolin ended his days, in the very River, being first wounded by the Prince. 9. The most glorious King Alonso having Governed 17 Years without the Title of King, and 46 with it, and having lived 93, at length departed this life in the month of December,1185. and year of our Lord 1185. In his life time he is said to have overthrown 30 Kings,The Death of King A∣lonso. besides a number of lesser Princes and inferior Com∣manders. It must be observed, that most of these were Kings of particular Cities. His Piety appears in the great number of Churches he Erected, reported to a∣mount to 150. He instituted two Military Orders, that of the Wing before spoken of, which for want of Revenues died with the first Knights. And that of Avis (as our Author will have it, tho' I find no other to con∣firm this Antiquity) which continues to this day. To the Knights Templers and Hospitallers, he assigned considerable Revenues. As to his Person, he was 11 Spans High, a Gigantick Stature, his Hair Red, a large Mouth, long Visage, and large sparkling Eyes. He lay in the Church of the Holy Cross at Coimbra in a
wooden Tomb, till King Emanuel erected one more Majestick for him. His Sword and Buckler are there still to be seen;His Arms the Arms he bore on his Sheild were Argent, 19 Scutcheons Ar∣zure, 10 of them in the nature of an Orle, the other nine in Cross and in Saltire, all joined together with twists of Silk, running from one to the other; each Escutcheon charged with Thir∣teen Bezants. 10. King Alonso was 53 Years of Age when he Mar∣ried Mafalda,His Wife and Issue. the most Beautiful Lady of those times, and second Daughter to Amadee, 5th. Earl of Marien∣ne, and first of Savoy. This Queen followed the exam∣ple of her Husband in erecting several Churches and Monasteries. By her, the King had Issue, Henry who died young: Sancho who inherited the Crown, John, Malfalda Wife to Alonso the second King of Aragon, Ʋrraca Wife to King Ferdinand the second of Leon, from whom she was divorced on account of Consanguinity after she had by him Alonso who inherited that Crown. Teresa, second Wife to Philip the first Earl of Flanders, and Sancha; his Bastard Children were Peter Alonso, Teresa married to Sancho Nunnez, from whom her Fa∣ther took her, and married her to Ferdinand Martinez, the brave Lord of Braganza, and the Lady Ʋrraca mar∣ried to Peter Alonson Viegas, the Grandson to Egas Mo∣niz the King's Tutor. CHAP. IV. The life and Reign of King Sancho I. from the Year 1154. till 1212, all his Actions in Peace and War, his Arms and Issue. 1. KIng Alonso had enjoyed the regal Title 15 Years when his Wife Queen Mafalda bore him his second Son and Successor Sancho.1154. He was Born at Coimbra the 11th. of December,Sancho succeeds his Father A∣lonso. which being St. Mar∣tin's Day, he had that Name given him, together with
the other. From his very Infancy, he was bred in the Field amidst the noise of Arms, and surrounded with Dangers.His Acti∣ons under his Father. At the Age of 13 he engaged with the King of Leon, in the Plains of Arganal, and tho' not Victo∣rious, came off with Honour: He was the first Chri∣stian Prince, after the Conquest of Spain by the Moors, that advanced to the Walls of Sevil. His Father King Alonso had ordered him to pass the River Tagus, to de∣fend that plentiful Country. The Moors suffered him to pass undisturbed by Evora and Beja, but having pas∣sed Sierra Morena, he was met by the King of Sevil with a numerous Army in the plain of Axarafe; here they came to a Battle, which was obstinately fought on both sides till the valour of the Christians overcame the multitude of their Enemies, whom they pursued to the Gates of Sevil, making that River run Red with the blood of Infidels. In his return to Portugal, the Prince wasted all the Country carrying a vast Booty, without meeting any opposition. By the way he laid Siege to Niebla, and had now reduced it to great extremity, when advice was brought him that the City Beja was distressed by the Moors. Thither he hasted, and charg∣ing the Besiegers, put them to the rout, and relieved the City. The King of Bajadoz had sent Ravadan, a fa∣mous Commander, with an Army to spoil that part of Portugal, which he performed as was expected from him; being on his return, he was overtaken by the Prince, and forced to quit the Country, and his Booty with more hast than he came. This Prince valiantly defended Santarem against the Miramamolin, till his Fa∣ther came to raise the Siege, and they both entred the place in Triumph. These were his principal Exploits till his Accession to the Crown, which was in the Year 1185.1185. 2. The third day after his Father's Death, in the 30th. Year of his Age, and the 10th. after he was mar∣ried, Prince Sancho was Proclaimed King in the same place where he was Born. Since this is the first King that died in Portugal, we will set down the manner of publick lamentation made for his Death which conti∣nues to this day,The man∣ner of la∣menting the death  a King. leaving the Formalities of the inau∣guration of the new King for another place. The Judges and their Officers walk a foot from the Town∣house, with long mourning Cloaks, with Hoods to
them on their head. After them the Town Standard Bearer on a Horse with mourning trappings, with black colours on his Shoulder, the end whereof trails upon the Ground. Then follows the Sheriff with two others in Mourning like the others, each of them carrying a Buc∣ler over his head. Next to them come the Aldermen, followed by a multitude of People; in this manner they proceed to the great Church, where the Sheriff having made a short Speech, declaring the King's death, and their great loss, he lets fall the Buckler from his head upon the Stones, and breaks it to pieces, at which the People raise a hideous lamentation. Then they go to the Mint, and so to the great Hospital, at both which places they perform the same Ceremony, which done, they return to the great Church and hear Mass. The third day after, is performed the Ceremony of inaugu∣ration, which shall be spoke of in another place. This Ceremony was now performed at Coimbra, where Mar∣tin then Bishop crowned King Sancho and his Queen Dulcis according to the custom of those times. 3. The first action of the new King was paying his Obedience to Pope Ʋrban III.1186. after which he so much addicted himself to repairing of Towns and Castles and building others anew,He repairs and builds many Towns as also to encouraging of Tilling, that he was called the Peopler, and the Farmer or Til∣ler. To the Military order of Santiago, he gave the Towns of Alcazar, Palmela, Almada and Arruda; to that of Avis, Alpedriz and Alcanede; to the Templars Idanha. He repaired the great Town of Covillam, to whose jurisdiction 300 Villages are subject, and gave a Charter to it, as he did to Gouvea, Viseo and Braganza. Ferdinand King of Leon entred into Portugal,1187. with grea∣ter force than success; for after several repulses, he was defeated in the Country of Cerolico Bebado, now called la Vera: The Governour of Villota, a Town on a Hill near the City Guardia, observing the King of Leon's Ar∣my dispersed about the Villages for Plunder, gatherered all the Forces near him, and marching from Trancoso, recovered all the Booty, killing many, and putting the rest to flight. A Fleet of English, Flemings and Danes consisting of 53 sail,1188. Commanded by Jaques Lord of Avesnes, entred the Mouth of the River Tagus, being designed for the Holy Land. The King supplied them with all they wanted, and designing the Conquest of
the City Silves the Metropolis of Algarve,Silves in Algarve taken with the help of a Foreign Fleet. and refuge of all the Moorish Pyrates, he proposed advantagious terms to these Strangers if they would assist him in that Expedition. They consented, Articling for the Plunder of the City, if taken: Forty Portuguese Gallies were joined to the Foreign Fleet, besides Tenders carrying Provision and warlike Munitions. The King march∣ed with his Army by Land, whilst the Fleet made the best of its way at Sea. Both being come before the City, they furiously Battered, and gave several Assaults to it for the space of two Months, meeting a vigorous resistance in the Defendants. At the end of that time the Moors pressed with Hunger, and the continual at∣tacks of the Christians delivered up the City, capitula∣ting only for their lives. 4. This City of Silves taken,1189. as has been said, was again lost the ensuing Year:Algarve subdued, King San∣cho adds that Title to Portu∣gal. King Sancho soon returned into Algarve, and not only recovered it, but took also the Town of Albor and Castle of Abenabacci, besides o∣ther places. This Country thus conquered, King San∣cho stiled himself King of Algarve, and to the Royal Arms of Portugal, added an Orle of Castles. Some of his Coin has been seen, which in the Orle has 7 Ca∣stles, which number is still used in the Armes of Algar∣ve, when separated from those of Portugal. King Alon∣so III. added more, making the Number uncertain; but King John II. long after fixed the Number again at se∣ven. Betwixt this Year and that of 1200 were repeo∣pled the Towns of Penamacor, Pinel, Torres Novas, Azambuja, Penucova, Gondomar, Ermelo, Covellinas, Soto de Panoyas and Povos. Mntemayor the New was now first Built, as also the City Guarda on the side of the Mountain formerly called Herminius, now Serra da Estrella.1190. King Sancho entred Andaluzia a second time, laid Siege to the Town of Serpa, overthrew the Moors that came to relieve it, and yet was forced to rise with∣out taking it. Soon after it was taken by the Knights of the Order of Avis; Peter Fernandez de Castro, that famous Castilian, who taking offence at his King, of∣ten led the Moors against him, being now General for the King of Morocco, did great harm in Portugal. All the territory of Tomar was wasted, and Abrantes plun∣dered: As he was retiring loaded with rich Plunder, Martin Lopez a famous Commander encountred him,
and after a most sharp dispute, recovered all the Prey and took him Prisoner. 5. The Miramamolin again overwhelmed this King∣dom with an Army of 400000 Horse and 500000 Foot (I could wish a Cipher were cut off from each Number, and it would appear more credible.) He took Torres Novas without opposition, but Tomar was bravely defended by Galdin Paez, Master of the Tem∣plers, who had done notable service in the Holy Land. The Moor offered to exchange the places he had taken for the City Silves, but this proposition being rejected by King Sancho, he in a fury laid Siege to Santarem, where the Plague raging in his Army,Robert Labril and Richard Cambil Englishmen with a fleet of 63 Ships arrive at Lisbon, and assist the Portu∣guese a∣gainst the Moors. he was forced to break it up and depart; 63 Men of War from the Northern parts arrived at Lisbon, commanded by two English Men of Note, called Robert Labril▪ and Richard Cambil. The first ten that came in, aided the King at Santarem against the Miramamolin; the others being joined to them, there arose such contention betwixt them and the Portuguese, as might have been the cause of much Bloodshed, had not the King prudently prevented it, and sent the Strangers away well contented. A most terrible Plague and devouring Famine followed all these great successes, and not only destroyed Men in their Houses, but even the wild Beasts in the Woods, or else they ran to the Towns for Prey whilst Men fled to the Mountains for Shelter.1191. The Monks of Alcobaca per∣ceiving they must of necessity Perish,Great Fa∣mine. hid an Image of our Lady in the Mountain, which being afterwards found,A total E∣clipse of the Sun. a Church was built there, and called Our Lady of Help. To be brief, a great part of the Kingdom was altogether unpeopled; all this was foreshown by a to∣tal Solar Eclipse. 6. As if all these Calamities had not been sufficient to humble so small a number of People and so narrow a Country, the Miramamolin Abenjoseph, Brother to him that besieged Santarem, assisted by the Kings of Cordova and Sevil, entred Portugal with 400000 Men.The Moors ravage the Country. All the open Country was by him miserably wasted, and the Towns of Alcazar, Almada and Palmela taken with all that the Christians had before gained in Algarve. Our King not able oppose so puissant an Enemy, conclud∣ed a Truce with him for five Years, which ended in a wonderful Eclipse of the Sun. This was followed by
Earthquakes,Earth∣quakes, in∣undations, and Storms for 8 Years Floods, Storms at Sea, and many other Calamities for the space of 8 Years. Men laboured under a horrid Distemper, for their Entrails consuming they died raving. A considerable body of Portuguese was at the famous Battle of Alarcos in Castile against the Moors,1195. commanded by D. Ganzalo Viegas Master of Avis, who died honourably in that glorious Action. A multitude of Arabs after the Expiration of the Truce, o∣verran a great part of Portugal,1196. consuming all that was not before spoiled, and putting to the Sword all the Monks of the Monastery of Alcobaza.1197. King Sancho at last provoked by these losses, marched out with his Forces, took Roca de Palmela and recovered Elvas, not long before taken from him. Next he made War on the King of Leon his Son-in-law, having obtained of Pope Celestin III.1200. the Croisade for all that fought against him, as a favourer of Infidels against Christians. He took from him the City Tuy, and Towns of Pontevedr and St. Payo de Lombeo and recovered Contrasta, now called Valencia, before taken by the King of Leon. At length these two Kings were reconciled through the me∣diation of the King of Aragon, who to that effect came to Coimbra,1208. then the Court of Portugal. Some time af∣ter there ensued Civil Wars in Portugal betwixt certain great Men; the most considerable betwixt Peter Rodri∣guez de Pereyre and his Cousin Peter Mendez de Poyares, who coming to a Battle near Valongo, two Leagues from Porto, the latter was there slain with many other Men of Note. 7. The Holy City of Hierusalem being taken by Sa∣ladin, the Christian Princes made preparations for re∣covery of it, and our King Sancho designed to have gone thither himself; but being disswaded, sent sup∣plies and encouraged the knights Templers and Hos∣pitallers to proceed vigorously in that religious Enter∣prize In this King's time was used in Portugal the weight called a Talent,A Talent used in Portugal. but less than the Roman, Greek, or Hebrew, being worth but four Ducats. I have seen silver Coin of this King's with his Image a Horse∣back on the one side, his Sword held up a cross on his Reines, and about it these Words: In nomine Patris & filij & spiritus Sancti; On the reverse, the Arms of the Kingdom and this Inscription, Sanctius Dei Gratia Rex Portugaliae. King Sancho fixed not his abode in any one
place, but often removed, that so all might equally enjoy his presence. He was a great Patron to the reli∣gious and Military Orders, careful of rewarding Me∣rit, a Friend to the Poor, an Enemy to Idleness, and true Father of his Country. The misfortunes during his Reign, and his own bounty might well have ex∣hausted the Treasure; yet so well did he manage it, that at his death he distributed 78000 Crowns and 1400 Marks of Plate, and 100 of Gold. His Lega∣cies extended to Rome and Hierusalem;The death of King Sancho. he was of a mid∣dle Stature, and strongly set; he Reigned 26 Years and lived 57, died in March, and lies Buried in the Church of the Holy Cross at Coimbra, opposite to his Father, whose Tomb is on the right side of the Altar. His Tomb being opened by King Emanuel to put him in∣to a new one 400 Years after his Decease, the body was found uncorrupted. 8. Some Years before the death of his Father,His Issue. he married Dulcis or Aldonza, Daughter to Raymund Be∣rengarius Earl of Barcelona, by whom he had issue, Alon∣so his Successor. Ferdinand married to Joanna, Coun∣tess of Flanders, Daughter and Heiress to Baldwin, Em∣peror of Constantinople. Peter who married the Daugh∣ter and Heiress of Earl Armengaud, in whose right he had the Earldoms of Ʋrgel and Segorbe, and Island of Majorca. Henry that died young, and Raymund that lived a short time. His Daughters were Teresa, married to the King of Leon, and parted from him on account of Consanguinity, when she had three Children by him, she is esteemed a Saint. Mafalda married to Hen∣ry I. King of Castile, and divorced as well as her Sister on the same account of Consanguinity; she lies buried in the Monastery of Arouca, and is Worshiped as a Saint. Sancha who converted her own Pallace at Alenquer into a Franciscan Monastery, which was the first in Portugal, that holy Man being then alive. She also built the Monastery of Celas near Coimbra, and lies Buried at Lorvan with the same esteem as her Sisters. Blanch La∣dy of Gaudalajara in Castile where she died, but was translated to the Church of the Holy Cross at Coimbra among her Parents. Berengaria died young at Loran, and lies there. His illegitimate Children were Martin Sanchez Earl of Trastamara, Ʋrraca Sanchez Wife to Laurence Suarez. Teresa Sanchez, second Wife to Alonso
Tello the Elder. Giles Sanchez, who became a Priest▪ Constance Sanchez finished the Monastery of St. Francis at Coimbra. Ruy Sanchez killed in Battle, as will ap∣pear in the year 1245. Nunno Sanchez, and Mayor San∣chez; All these the King had before he was Married, by a Lady of Quality, called Mary Paez. 9. King Sancho left out all the small Scutcheons u∣sed by his Father in his Arms,His Armes. only retain∣ing the five principal in form of a Cross, with the strings that bind them together. In his time the Orders of St. Dominick and St. Francis first founded in Portugal, and those of the Holy Trinity and Carmelites were then also admitted. CHAP. V. The Life and Reign of King Alonso II. of the Name and third King of Portugal, his acti∣ons and death, from the Year 1183. till 1223. 1. ALonso Eldest Son to King Sancho,1185. and his Wife Queen Dulcis,The Birth of King A∣lonso II. who was the third King of Por∣tugal, and second of the Name, was Born the 25th. of April, in the famous City Coimbra: He falling despe∣rately sick, and being given over by the Physitians, his Father had recourse to Heaven for his Health, which was obtained through the Prayers of the Holy Nun Sennorina, then living in the Mountains of Basto, of the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, as an ac∣knowledgment for which benefit received, the King bestowed Lands and Possessions on that Church, as did some of his Successors. Soon after his miraculous re∣covery, his Father sent him General against Torres Novas, whence the Infidels used to make Excursions, and Ravage all the Neighbouring Country. The young Prince gave good proof of his Valour at this Siege, and became Master of the place by plain force.
King Sancho perceiving his Son to be worthy to con∣tinue the race of Portuguese Kings, gave him to Wife Ʋrraca, Daughter to Alonso VIII. of Castile. The Bride and Bridegroom could not lawfully be Married without a Dispensation, being Cousins in the fourth degree of Consanguinity; yet without any, they had a Son the following Year 1208.1208. King Sancho lived but four Years after, and our Prince succeeded him, being then Twenty Six Years of Age. The first thing he did, was to give the Town of Avis to the Military Order of that Name; Ferdinand Ynez being the Ma∣ster of it, who removed thence from Evora, where he had resided till then. 2. King Sancho perceiving that his Son Alonso did not well agree with his Brothers and Sisters, as he left him the Crown, so he provided for them, giving the Brothers Money and Jewels, and to their Sisters the Towns of Alenquer and Aveiras.King A∣lonso at∣tacks the Towns gi∣ven by his Father to his Sisters. King Alonso not satisfyed with the Crown, pretended his Father could not alienate any Towns from it, to give to his Sisters. The Brothers fearing his Power, fled, Ferdinand to Ca∣stile, and Peter to Leon, and then to Morocco. The Sisters Fortifying the Towns, left them by their Fa∣ther, provoked their Brother, who by force of Armes, took the Town of Aveiras. This done, he sent Forces to Besiege Alenquer, and sat down himself before Mon∣temayor: These Sieges lasted four Months, the King of Leon who had Married Teresa, Sister to our King, forced him to quit that Enterprize. He marched with Prince Peter, through the Province between Duero and Minho, wasting all that Country, and besieged King Alonso as he lay before Montemayor.He is rout∣ted by the King of Leon. Much Blood was shed, and all the Country ruined, but at last coming to a Battle, our King was Worsted, and the victorious Army in their return took the Towns of Valencia. Mel∣gazo, Fulgoso and Freixa, with other places of less Note, which they Plundered, and Burnt what they could not carry away. The Portuguese in the absence of the King of Leon, again provoked him to send his Forces. Martin Sanchez, Brother to our King, but offended at him, commanded the Army of Leon, be∣ing that King's Lieutenant. All things being in rea∣diness to give Battle, he refused to Fight against his natural Prince in Person, who being informed thereof,
with-drew himself to the City Porto: The Army left to Engage Martin Sanchez, was commanded by Mendo Gonzalez de Soufa, John Perez de Maya, and Giles Vas∣quez de Soverosa. The King being gone, the Fight be∣gan, in which singular acts of valour were performed. D. John Perez de Maya with his Lance overthrew se∣ven Horsemen;Recovering defeats the Army of Leon. in short, the Portuguese obtained the Victory in the Plain called Vareza, betwixt Duero and Minho. The second day they Engaged near Bra∣ga, and the third hard by Guimaraens, with the like success; so that the Enemy retired into Galicia. These and the like misfortunes, moved the Sisters to sollicite Pope Innocent III. to interpose his Apostolical Autho∣rity, to oblige the King to do them Justice. Neverthe∣less the Power of the Sword prevailed beyond Equity, or Spiritual Weapons. 3. Ten Years were spent in these Domestick Broiles,He is re∣conciled to his Bre∣thren. at the end of which the King was in some measure re∣conciled to his Brethren, and had leasure to attend other Enterprizes, from which Civil Discord had di∣verted him. Though he could not go in Person to the famous Battle of Navas in Castile against the Infi∣dels, he sent some Forces under the Command of Ge∣mez Ramires. Our King being now disposed to advance his Conquests on the Infidels, Heaven ordered it so, that a Fleet of 100 Sail from the North, under the Command of Walter de Avesnes, was drove by stress of Weather into the River Tagus. The King ordered the Bishop to relieve and cherish them, and then both perswaded them to give their helping hand towards the gaining of Alcazar do Sal. The King being hindred by Sickness, sent the Bishop General of 20000 Por∣tuguese, who marched by Land whilst the Strangers steered the same course at Sea. At the first attacks, ma∣ny fell on both sides, but the Besieged fearing so great Power, sent advice of their distress to the Kings of Ba∣dajoz, Jaen, Sevil and Cordova, who came to their re∣lief with 15000 Horse and 40000 Foot, besides 10 Gallies well provided. Providence ordered it so, that at the same time, Thirty Sail of French and Flemings arrived at Setuval; these immediately moved to aid the Christians, who gave the Enemy Battle whilst a∣nother part attacked the Town. All the first day the Christians had the worst, but the next renewing their
strength and courage, they obtained an absolute Vi∣ctory with the slaughter of 30000 Infidels and two of the Kings, supposed to be those of Badajoz and Cordo∣va, because the other two soon after appeared before Elvas. A bright Cross carried like the Standard of a Troop of Angels, with White Garments crossed with Red, is said to have been seen this day in the Air, not only by the Christians, but by the Infidels themselves, several of them confessing it after the Battle. The Victors prosecuted the Siege, and carried on a Mine, which being discovered by the Defendants, much Blood was shed under Ground; at length the Town was taken on St. Luke's Day, and the Governour ha∣ving seen the strange signs mentioned, in the Sky, be∣came a Christian. 4. The Kings of Sevil and Jaen,The Moors vanquished at Elvas. with a numerous Army, Encamped before the City Elvas, confiding they should carry it by their Multitude. Our King disappointed their expectation, giving them Battle, and overthrowing them in open Field, after which he en∣tred Andaluzia victorious, overruning that Province with Fire and Sword. This done, he returned home in Triumph, and his Army laden with Plunder; this Action so daunted the Infidels, that they never after in∣vaded that part of the Country. Nevertheless, Moura and Serpa were soon after Besieged by the Moors, but they were forced from both places with great loss by the King in Person. Out of the last Engagement, he was drawn almost stifled, being very corpulent and oppres∣sed with the heat of the Weather, and weight of his Armour. Afterwards he overthrew the King of Bada∣joz near Alcozer, killing 30000 of his Men. He et a Fleet to Sea, for the War in the Holy Land. To be short, in all his undertakings, he came off with Honour, as became the Son and Grandson of such a Father and Grand-father. Many other his Warlike Exploits are Buried in Oblivion. 5. Of the excellency of his politick Government, there are sufficient Testimonies. Till his time, this Kingdom was Governed according to the private Laws of every Town.Laws are enacted by him. He was the first that instituted gene∣ral Laws, in the first Year of his Reign, holding a Parliament for that purpose at Coimbra. In these Laws great regard was had to the Church-Men, the prices of
all things necessary for the support of life were settled, so that the meanest might buy as cheap as the greatest; the Extortions of publick Ministers were retrenched; Plaintiffs if cast, were ordered to pay a Fine; Sen∣tence of Death passed by him, was appointed not to be Executed till 20 days after, to prevent the Effects of Passion. This King used extraordinary severity to∣wards the Church-men,1221. for which being reproved by Stephen Suarez de Silva Archbishop of Braga, instead of amending, he set Officers to destroy all the Posses∣sions of that See. He persisted so obstinately in this fury, that Honorius the third wrote a Letter to him full of most severe Expressions, calling him Tyrant: In fine, the King died before he was reconciled to the Clergy,His Death. or his own Sisters, the Kingdom at that time lying un∣der an interdict. He lived 48 Years, and Reigned 21: His Body lies Buried with the Queen his Wife, in the Royal Monastery of Alcobaca, in a plain Tomb with∣out any Epitaph or Inscription, as were all the first Kings of this Nation. Of Body he was extraordinary gross, and therefore called the Fat; yet his Gigantick Stature carried it off, his Countenance was Comly, his Forehead High,1223. his Eyes Chearful, and his Hair Yel∣low, which he always wore long. 5. King Alonso Married Ʋrraca,His Wife and Issue. the Daughter of Alonso VIII. of Castile, called the Noble and Good, a most vertuous and beautiful Princess. His Issue by her was Sancho, who succeeded in the Throne; Alonso Earl of Bolen, in right of his Wife Maud, whence he was called to Govern the Kingdom by reason of the insuf∣ficiency of his Brother, whom he succeeded: Ferdinand called de Serpa, married to Sancha Fernandez, Daughter to Ferdinand Earl of Lara. Lastly, Elenor who was Queen of Dacia. The King had one Bastard Son, called John Alonso, of whom there is no other memory, but that he lies Buried in the Church of Alcobaca. Tho' it be said before at the end of the last King's Reign, that then the orders of St. Dominick, St. Francis, the Blessed Trinity and the Carmelites came into Portugal; our Author repeats it again in the Reign of this King, which is the most likely.
CHAP. VI. The Life and Reign of King Sancho II. he is deposed by his Brother, flies to Toledo, and there ends his days, all betwixt the Years 1207 and 1246. 1. SAncho II. of the Name,1203. and Fourth King of Por∣tugal,Sancho II. ascends the Throne. Eldest Son to King Alonso, was Born on the Eighth of September at Coimbra. He was called Capelo, because being sickly in his Child-hood, his Mother confiding to obtain his Health, through the intercession of the Holy Father St. Augustin, caused him to wear that Habit. His Weakness rather than want of Years, must be the cause that he appeared not in any Military Action with his Father, for we have no account of him till he ascended the Throne, which was about the 20th.1223. or 21st. Year of his Age. His first Action was a Reconciliation with the Clergy, who had suffered much under his Father, but he soon fol∣lowed his Example. After this agreement with the Church, the Ecclesiastical Censures were taken off, and those who died during the interdict, were now Buried in hallowed Ground. The controversies also between the late King and his Sisters ceased, they now swearing fealty to the King for the places they possessed. His next care was to visit his Kingdom, which he did taking a Progress through it leasurely, doing justice to all Men, and giving prudent Orders in all places. Then laying aside for a while the Civil Affairs, he ap∣plied him to the Military, making several incursions upon the Moors, whence he returned with Honour. Our King, and Ferdinand of Castile met at Sabugal to adjust certain Differences, which they amicably put an end to; King Ferdinand delivering up the Town of Chaves which had been engaged to him.
2. Still the Arabs ranged about the territory of El∣vas,He entirely defeats the Moors at Elvas. wasting the Country and destroying the Villages. King Sancho assembling his Forces, soon drove them thence, but no sooner was his back turned then they came again, laid Siege to Elvas, and carried it by As∣sault. Our King returning with speed, utterly discom∣fitted those Barbarians, so that they never again at∣tempted any thing there. Nor did he desist till he had Juremenha,1226. Serpa, and other Castles, which had often been gained, and again fallen into the Enemies hands. For four Years there was nothing of Action, but in the Year 1230,1230. he made War on the Moors, in the Province of Alentejo. The following year he ad∣vanced into Algarve, to recover what his Grand-father had conquered there, and was now again fallen into the hands of the Infidels.1232. Some places he re-took, conse∣crated the Churches, and placed therein Evangelical Pastors.1235. After this, by his Commanders, the chief whereof was Payo Perez Correa, he took Aljustrel which he gave to the Military Order of Santiago;1239. then the Towns of Mergola, and Alfajar de Penna, which also he bestowed on the same Order. Of late Years the insolencies of Favourites were grown insupportable, they abusing the King and their Kindred and friends them.Common complaints when sub∣jects will rebell. The Subjects were treated worse than con∣quered Moors, their Persons Imprisoned, their Estates Wasted, their Children Murdered, unless redeemed for Money, and their Wives and Daughters openly Ravished. Nor was the Sanctuary of the Church any refuge, for even in those Holy Places, all Vil∣lanies were committed: The King knew nothing, but what his Favourites told him, and it was their study to keep him in ignorance, and hence proceeded the ruin of this unhappy Prince. 3. In the Year 1240. Cacela and Ayamonte were taken by Assault,1240. in which Actions D. Payo Perez Cor∣rea particularly signalized himself,Complaints made to the Pope and all things adjusted. wherefore the King gave those places to the Military Order of Santiago, whereof he was Commendary. During this current of Affairs, the King was highly commended, and re∣ceived Spiritual Favours from Pope Gregory IX. The Spiritual Graces were for such as died in the War, and for the King himself, who lay under Ecclesiasti∣cal Censures, for having proceeded unjustly against
Peter Bishop of Porto, who carried his complaints to Rome. Besides, he seized the Ecclesiastical revenues on pretence of urgent necessities, and of punishing Clergy Men who kept Women in their Houses. Sil∣vester, Archbishop of Braga, had hereupon made ap∣plication to the Pope, who therefore wrote to the King, and recommended the charge of reducing him to certain Bishops. But he prevented them by submit∣ting himself, and so all differences were adjusted. The King considering the great merit of D. Payo Correa, be∣fore spoken of, made him General for the conquest of Algarve. He acted therein with the success that was hoped of his conduct taking several strong holds, a∣mong which were Estombar and Alvor. Garcia Rodri∣gues who had travelled that Country as a Merchant, was his principal Guide, having forsaken the pursuit after Riches, to purchase Honour with his Sword. Paderne was also taken, but cost dear, the success re∣maining a long time dubious. The Enemy having proposed a Cessation of Arms it was granted, because our forces fatigued with so many expeditions required some time of refreshment. During this Truce, the Commendary Peter Perez with five Gentlemen went out to hunt in the Mountains of the Village of Antas. In their passage by Tavira, a City belonging to the Moors, they were set upon by a greater number of In∣fidels. Garcia Rodriguez, the Merchant above mention∣ed, passing that way, hasted to their succour, and af∣ter a brave resistance, they were all killed upon the place. D. Payo Correa could not come time enough to save their lives, though upon the first advice of the accident he hasted thither. Seeing his Friends could not be saved, he fell upon the Enemy for revenge, and they flying to the City, he entred it together with them, and though he met with a vigorous resistance, made himself Master of it. King Sancho hearing of the taking of Tavira, gave it to the Knights of San∣tiago. 4. The conquest of Silves only was wanting to com∣pleat our General's Glory.Silves a∣gain reco∣vered. His Policy and Celerity brought it about, the Enemy offering him a favourable opportunity: The Inhabitants of that place went out to assist King Aben Afan at the Siege of Estombar, D. Payo instead of relieving the Besieged, attacked Silves
then forsaken of its Defendants, and easily made him∣self Master of it. The Moorish King hasting to suc∣cour the City, came late for his design, but in time for D. Payo, who rushing out of the City, put him to flight, so precipitately, that he was drowned on the Coast, which in memory of him is to this day called the Sea of Abenafan. Thus all Algarve was brought under the power of King Sancho: The Pope about this time having invited all Christian Princes to joyn their Forces against the Tartars,1244. King Sancho provided a Gallant Army for that Expedition, but all his Pre∣parations were disappointed, for he went not as he had designed. Roderick Sanchez, Son to King Sancho I. having been long at variance with Giles de Soverosa, a powerful Man in those days, they met with armed Troops near the City Porto, and after a sharp En∣gagement, the dispute ended with the life of Roderick Sanchez, who was there slain. In this Encounter, Ro∣derick Fafes, a Man of Note, having lost his Horse, asked Gonzalo Rodriguez de Abreu to give him his; he gave it upon condition the other should give him his Daughter Mencia in Marriage, which according to pro∣mise, Fafes afterwards performed. 5. The King continued to bestow liberally most rich Possessions on the Church.The subjects ripe for re∣bellion, tho' the King was blame∣less. His goodly Actions deserved no less love of his Subjects, than any of his Predecessors, but it is not always Merit that gains e∣steem among Men. Envy towards his Favourites pro∣duced Malice against him, nor was the fault in his Government, or in choosing such Ministers, but that all who aspired to it, could not be Favourites. There never is wanting a pretence to subjects disposed to re∣bell. The King easing himself on his Favourites, the Portuguese gave out he was uncapable to Govern, and therefore proposed to erect a Lieutenant to man∣age affairs for him, and made application to the Pope hereupon, having fixed upon the King's Brother A∣lonso to fill that place and succeed him. It was want of Loyalty in them, and not of capacity in him that produced this Resolution. One objection raised a∣gainst King Sancho by his Enemies,They cavil at all his Actions. was, That he had married a Wife below his Quality, and was too fond of her. Weak motives to a Rebellion, especially con∣sidering his Queen was the Daughter of D. Lope Diaz
de Haro Lord of Biscay and of Ʋrraca, bastard Daugh∣ter to Alonso IX. King of Leon, so that she was equal to him either as being both the Off-spring of the same King's Bastards, or as to grandeur, her Father want∣ing nothing but the usurped Title of King, to make him as great as he of Portugal. It is true, the Queen favouring those who had been instrumental in advancing her to the Crown, hid some miscarri∣ages from the King, which gave occasion to the multitude to commit several insolencies, and the King not punishing them whilst he could, had not after∣wards the power to do it when he would. Some would have it that the Queen had given her Hus∣band a Potion, the more to secure his love to her, and to divert him wholly from the care of the Go∣vernment. 6. The tumultuous Cryes of the People not pre∣vailing,The Clergy joins in the Rebellion with the Laity. the Clergy took upon them to espouse their Quarel, and had recourse to Pope Gregory IX. who thundered out Ecclesiastical Censures against the King on account of his being Married to Queen Mencia, who was his Kinswoman within the prohi∣bited degree. The King making no account of the Spiritual Weapons, the People mutinied, being headed by Raymund Viegas Portocarreo, a Man of quality,The Rebels seize the Queen. and breaking into the Palace at Coimbra, took away the Queen and put her into the Castle of Ourem. This exasperated the King to that height, that gathering what force he could, he endeavoured to recover her, but all in vain, for the Rebels con∣veyed her into Castile.The King betrayed by all his Mi∣nisters. Now it plainly appeared, that King Sancho was rather Unfortunate, than unfit to Govern, for even the Ambassadors he employed abroad, betrayed him. He sent John Egas Archbi∣shop of Braga, and Peter and Tiburicus Bishops of Porto and Coimbra to Rome, and they forgetting they were sent by their Prince, became Sollicitors for the Rebels, who held correspondence there. Hereupon a Council was held at Lions in France, assembled by Pope Innocent IV. and King Sancho having sent thi∣ther his Ambassadors Ruy Gomez de Briteiros, Gomez Vie∣gas, Peter Alonso, a Franciscan and Dominick de Bra∣ga, a Dominican, they joyned with the mutinous
Prelates,Alonso Brother to King San∣cho, made Vicar of the King∣dom by the Rebels. and thereupon Count Alonso, Brother to King Sancho, then Married in France to Maud Coun∣tess of Bolen, was at Paris Sworn Vicar of the King∣dom, and as such, confirmed by the Pope, yet so that King Sancho should still retain the Title and Preheminence of King, and his Sons if he had any, should inherit. This new Substitute brought more harm than good to the Kingdom, for his followers treated him as a King, and he assumed that respect which did not belong to him, whilst others acknow∣ledged the true King, so that this difference came to be decided by the Sword. 7. The Dominicans and Franciscans were appoin∣ted to put in Execution this unjust decree, and one Giles a Dominican durst notify it to the King.King San∣cho flies into Ca∣stile. He seeing himself deprived of his Wife and Government, and the People in Rebellion fled to Toledo, then the Court of Ferdinand the Holy King of Castile. By the way, King Sancho reposing himself at Moreira, certain Gentlemen came to him, offering to stand by him, and support his cause, provided he would put away his Favourite. The King disapproving of this conditional Loyalty, no better then open Re∣bellion, continued his Journey. At Toledo he spent the remainder of his life in works of Grandeur and Piety. He expended a great Treasure in Alms, and Building the Royal Chappel in the Cathedral: having done extraordinary Pennance for his Sins, and given singular marks of great Piety,His Death. he departed this life the Thirty Ninth Year of his Age, and the Thir∣teenth of his Reign, reckoning in those that his Bro∣ther Governed for him. He is said to have had a special Devotion to S. Lazarus, and also that he ap∣peared twice to him in his life-time, and was pre∣sent at his Death. In the beginning of his Reign, he peopled the City Idanha, which had been de∣stroyed by his Grand-father King Sancho when he took it from the Moors. He maintained the City Aleazer against the Infidels who Besieged it, who after much loss sustained, begged a Truce. He not only preserved his Kingdom, but recovered many places that had been lost, and may be accounted a∣mongst the best of our Princes.
8. In this King ended the direct line of the Kings of Portugal,His Person described. he being the Fourth King, and Second of the Name. His Countenance was Beau∣tiful, his Hair fair and long, his Forehead high, his Eyes green and cheerful, his Nose large, and his Complexion inclined to pale. In his Anti∣ent Pictures, he is represented in Scarlet Robes, a Crown on his Head, a Book in one Hand, and in the other, a Scepter with a Pigeon on the top of it, as the commonalty would have it, or else it might be a Stork as many Antient Kings used, denoting by the care that Bird has of its young ones, the love of a Prince towards his Subjects. He built from the ground the Mona∣steries of St. Dominick, in the Cities of Lisbon and Porto. Some say his Queen accompanied him at Toledo, and others affirm, she was never heard of more after being taken from him. He had no Is∣sue, and consequently his Brother suceeded him.
CHAP. VII. The Life and Reign of Alonso the third of the Name, and Fifth King of Portugal; his Actions and Death, from the Year 1210. till 1279. 1. D. Alonso the Third of the Name,Alonso III. his Birth and Actions till his assump∣tion to the Crown. and Fifth King, was Brother to King Sancho, whose lot it was to have a Crown without the power of the Government, and a Wife without Issue. He was Born in the City of Coimbra, on the 5th. of May, was the second Son of King Alonso II. and Married Maud Countess of Bolen in France,1210. then Widdow of Phillip the curled Son of Philip Augustus King of France, and Grand-son to the Duke of Maravia, whose Daughter Queen Mary was.1245. His thoughts were employed upon the Holy War, when he was called to the Crown of Portugal. The Kingdom be∣ing in confusion, the Nobles made suite to Pope In∣nocent the III. that Alonso might ascend the Throne instead of his Brother Sancho. The Pope not to deprive the King of his right, and being informed he was not of Ability to Govern, consented that A∣lonso should have the Authority of Regent, but San∣cho should still have the regal stile and preheminence, and his Children if he had any should inherit. At Paris, Alonso took Solemn Oath as Regent, which was to this Effect: That he would preserve the Pri∣viledges of the Clergy, Nobility and Commonalty; That he would constitute upright Judges, without Favour or Affection; That such as had committed Crimes against Priests, should be punished; That their Estates should be restored; That all Buildings erected to the prejudice of Prelates should be Demo∣lished, and nothing for the future should be taken from them. This was the promise made, and con∣sequently such were the miscarriages then in the Go∣vernment, so that the King suffered for some miscar∣riages in his Ministers.
2. Alonso having taken upon him the Title of Re∣gent,Alonso received as Regent. set out from Paris, and returned to his Coun∣try, where he was received by most places; yet several having more regard to their Loyalty, than the present Danger, held out long after, and some till King Sancho died at Toledo. Alonso possessed of the Kingdom,He puts a∣way his Wife, and Marries another. like an ungrateful Man, put away his Wife Maud, the Countess, who Married him when he had nothing, and took in her place Bea∣trix, Bastard Daughter to King Alonso the Tenth of Castile. Some Authors say, the Countess was contrary to all Human and Divine Laws put a∣way on account of Barrenness, but that is a mi∣stake, for it will appear she had Children. Pope Alexander the Fourth thundered out Censures a∣gainst this second Marriage as unlawful, but all to no purpose, the King continuing obstinate till the Death of Maud, put an end to the dispute. Alonso with the ambition of rule, pressed all Go∣vernours to deliver up their Forts into his hands, and yet they that did so, were accounted no bet∣ter than Traitors, and such as held out against him, were afterwards most esteemed even by him. O∣bidos was the first Town Besieged by Alonso, but what the event was,1247. is not known. Ferdinand Ro∣driguez Pacheco, valiantly defended Cerolico de los Bebados, or Bebado, and being reduced to great want one Morning, a Bird of Pray dropped a large Trout before him taken out of the River Mondego. The Governour sent it as a present to Alonso, who judging thereby there was plenty in the Town, raised the Siege and departed. Thus the Besieged were left at liberty to look abroad for Sustenance, so that the Trout may be said to have fed them all. 3. The Regent removed to Coimbra,A notable example of Loyalty. where he met with no better success, being opposed by the invincible Loyalty of D. Martin de Freitas. Both Parties resolved not to give way to one another. The Siege lasted long, and the Defendants waver∣ing, their noble Governour performed more than Man to retain them in their Duty, insomuch that one day he brought out to the Parade his Daugh∣ter,
telling the Soldiers, That if want of Women obliged them to think of a Surrender, they might make use of that one. This act wholly confirm∣ed the minds of the Garrison to him, insomuch, that they resolved to live and die with him. Such was the posture of affairs when News was brought of the Death of King Sancho at Toledo. The great Freitas demanded a Truce, whilst he went to Tole∣do, to be assured of the Truth. There he caused the King's Grave to be opened, and seeing him Dead, delivered to him the Keys of the City he had entrusted him with, and asking leave to deliver them to his Brother,1248. took them again: Being come to Coimbra, he opened the Gates to King Alonso, who admiring so unparallelled a Gallantry, resto∣red to him the Command, without demanding Ho∣mage of him for it, which favour he extended to his Heirs; but he knowing how hard it was to make a return suitable to such a favour, refused to accept of it, and layed his Curse even to the fourth Generation, upon such as should admit of it. 4. Alonso now become absolute King by the Death of his Brother, resolved to imitate his Pre∣decessors, or if it might be to out-doe them, by ad∣ding to his Dominions the Kingdom of Algarve, and not suffering it to be lost again as had hap∣pened to them. D. Payo Correa with the Forces under his Command, had already taken several places in that Kingdom, the King joyned him, and both together layed Siege to the Town of Faro.1249. The King observing the place might be relieved by Sea,King A∣lonso con∣quers Al∣garve. placed some Vessels at the Mouth of the River to guard the Passage, and then began to batter the place on all sides. The Besieged perceiving no hope to hold out, began privately to treat of a Surrender with the King; he taking only Ten Gentlemen that were privy to the Treaty, ventu∣red into the Town so secretly, that none of his Army knew it. D. Payo Correa missing the King, and hearing no account of him, furiously assaulted the place, the Portuguese fighting like Lions instead of being discouraged at the absence of their Sove∣reign. Many were killed, and more had perish∣ed,
but that the King appeared on the Walls, holding out the Keys of the Town. Thus this place was reduced, submitting to pay the same tri∣bute it had before payed to the Miramamolin. The Government of it was given to Stephen Perez de Ta∣vares. D. Payo Correa was sent before to invest the Town of Albufiera, and had signalized his Valour when the King came to second him. Both toge∣ther finished the Conquest of the place, which was given to D. Payo for his good Service. I guess the motive of the King's staying behind, was the Beauty of the Governour of Faro's Daughter, with whom he fell in Love when he received the Keys of the Town; for by his Lady he had D. Mar∣tin Alonso Chichorro, from whom is Descended the Family of Sousa of that Name. Fortune now bent upon favouring our King, caused other places to submit to him, before he could appear before them.1250. Loule surrendred, but not without some Bloodshed; Algezar, Perches, and other places were all reduced. The King before his departure pla∣ced trusty Governours in all the Towns with sufficient Garrisons, so as to secure that new con∣quered Kingdom, which never after offered to re∣volt from him. King Alonso having nothing now to employ his Arms within his own limits, entred Andaluzia and took the Towns of Arouche and Arana.1251. This Action moved King Alonso, the Wife of Castile and Leon, to invade the Kingdom of Algarve which he conquered.1252. After much contention betwixt the Crowns of Castile and Portugal,Differences betwixt Castile and Portugal,  to Pope. Pope Innocent the Fourth composed all Differences, so that the King of Castile was to hold Algarve during his Life, and he of Portugal to marry his Bastard Daughter. Both Kings were so willing to embrace this accommoda∣tion, that they never considered the Bride was not Twelve Years of Age, and the Bridegroom above Forty, nor that the Countess of Bolen was still a∣live. It is true, Pope Innocent approved of this Match, and yet afterwards Pope Alexander would not allow of it. All Military Employment now ceasing, the King applied himself to the Civil Af∣fairs,
and held a Parliament at Leiria. Next he took a Progress through the Kingdom,1255. repairing the Forts, Towns and Churches that had been ru∣ined during the War, He spared neither cost nor labour in those publick Works; he built from the Ground the Monastery of Santarem, the Towns of Estremoz,1258. Odemira, Monforte, Valencia del Minho, then called Contrasta,1259. and Viana de Lima. His whole study was bent upon the good of the Govern∣ment, and knowing how necessary Trade is to sup∣port it, ordered many Fairs, and cleared the Roads of Robbers to secure Commerce. 6. In the midst of these Employments came to him two Gentlemen to Freilas,The King's cruelty to∣wards his lawful Wife. where he then was, sent by Maud the Countess his first and lawfull Wife, to advertise him, that she perceiving he did not send for her to his Kingdom, and hearing he was Married again, was come of her self to find him out, and lay then at Cascais. The King who had for the sake of his new Wife, regarded nei∣ther Divine nor Human Laws, sent her such an Answer, that she was forced to return to Bolen, leaving a Letter for him, wherein, she taxed himwith Ingra∣titude and False-hood, threatning him with the cen∣sures of the Church, the Power of Christian Princes, and the revenging hand of God. Authors add, that she brought with her two Children she had by him, whom in revenge she left exposed upon the Rocks, which are ever since called Cachopos, that word in Portuguese signifying Boys. That the Coun∣tess had Children by him is proved by the autho∣rity of Antient Authors, and there is no proof, but bare surmises to the contrary; besides, that a Tomb has been seen with an Inscription, denoting, it con∣tained a Son of theirs that followed him into Por∣tugal, and was entirely beloved by him. King Alonso of Castile,1260. Father-in-law to our King, ha∣ving composed the difference about Algarve, march∣ed into Andaluzia, his Son-in-law assisting him both by Sea and Land. In return for this kind∣ness, the Castillian resigned up to him all his Title to Algarve, and delivered the Towns to D. John de Aboin, and his Son D. Peter Anes de Portel, up∣on
condition the Portuguese, should during his life, be obliged to assist him with Fifty Lances when∣soever he should demand them. This obligation was also taken off when his Grandson Prince Denis be∣ing Seven Years of Age visited him at Sevil, and desired to be knighted by him.1263. Before this time to prevent Broils and Animosites, the bounds of the Kingdoms of Leon and Portugal were marked out. 7. About this time hapned an unparallelled won∣der,A strange action of a jealous Wo∣man. a Woman perceiving she was not beloved by her Husband, acquainted a Jewish Woman there∣with, desiring her assistance. The Jew per∣swaded her, that when she received the Blessed Sacrament, she should keep the Host and bring it to her, wherewith she would work her relief. She tied the Host in the end of her Head-cloaths, and going home, the Blood trickled down, and she not observing it, was told of it by those that met her. Being come home, she locked the Bloody Hood with the Host in a Closet. In the dead of the Night, her Husband awaking, saw a great light upon the Chest, and calling upon his Wife, asked whether she saw it not? She then declared the truth to him, and he rising, ran to the Parish Church, and to the Dominicans. The Friers still preserve the White Hood or Vaile bloody in a Glass Case; the Parish keeps the Host and Blood gathered on a Ball of Wax. Some Years after the Prior of that Church, which is Dedicated to St. Stephen, going to show that Relick to the People, found it shut up in a Cristalline Pyramidal Case, with a hole so small, that neither the Host nor Ball could be put in unless it were miracu∣lously. The Ball is still to be seen round with drops of Blood on it, the Host is bent and Bloody. Many Persons of Credit, have affirmed, That they have there seen our Saviour in several Postures of his Passion. Another Miracle is Re∣corded of a Christian, who was slave to a Moor, and daily recommended himself to St. Dominick of Sovereira. His Master every Night loaded him with Irons, and laid him in a Chest upon which he
made his own Bed. One Night this Chest with the slave in it, and the Master upon it, was brought to the Door of the Chappel of that Saint in the Town of Penamacor. This Miracle so wrought upon the Moor, that he imbraced the Faith, and the Slave and he lived there as Hermits all the re∣sidue of their lives. The Chest and Chains are still kept in that little Church. 8. No sooner was the King seated on the Throne,Alonso re∣sumes his former gifts, and opposes the Clergy. but he made it appear, that what he had before bountifully bestowed, was only to secure himself, and not to reward those that promoted him. He took from the Military Orders what he had before given them; neither did he make account of what he swore at Paris in order to be Regent for his Brother;1268. for he so treated the Clergy, that several of them had recourse to Rome for Redress, of which were the Bishops of Braga, Coimbra, Guarda, Porto and Viseo. Pope Clement the Fourth, and after him Gregory the Tenth,1272. reproved his oppressing the Clergy, and forbidding the Jews and Moors under severe Penalties not to turn Christians. The King at first shunned the Pope's Commissioners, but when he could no longer do so, appointed to hear them before the Cortes or Parliament summoned to meet at Santarem, where he shewed some dis∣position to obey them, though at the same time he designed nothing less. The Pope offended at his proceedings,1274. issued out Bulls, containing the highest Censures, and in case the King was not re∣claimed within three Months, absolving his Sub∣jects from their Allegiance. The King continued obstinate, and the Nuncio went away leaving him Excommunicated,1175. and the Kingdom under an in∣terdict. The Pope died, and the King no way relen∣ted.1276. Pope John the 20th. or 21st. Born at Lis∣bon, was promoted to St. Peter's Chair. He sent a Spaniard his Nuncio to perswade the King by fair means to comply. The Nuncio accompanied by Dominican and Franciscan Fryars, of which latter order he was, attended the King, and found him as obdurate as ever.1277. Sickness made the King begin to relent, and Death surmounted all difficul∣ties.
At his Death the King ordered his Son to per∣form all he had refused to do. 9. During this King's Reign, certain devout Wo∣men went from Evora to Rome, to obtain of the Pope the confirmation of a Monastery of Bernar∣din Nuns in that City.A battle betwixt private Men and their forces There wanted not Civil Broils among the Subjects; for Peter Estevas de Ta∣vares, and Ferdinand Alonso de Cambra, fought a Bat∣tle in the Plain of Gouvea, in which much Blood was shed and many Persons of note killed; the latter obtained the Victory. The Holy Laurence Mendez, a Dominican of the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, walking in a Field, an Angel appeared to him, and gave him a small Box, which he said, contained many Relicks brought from a City then fallen into the hands of Infidels. Which Relicks are still preserved in the Monaste∣ry of Guimaraens, where the said Laurence placed them. 10. King Alonso was of such extraordinary Stature,King A∣lonso de∣scribed. that all Men admired when King Sebasti∣an caused his Tomb to be opened. His Counte∣nance was Majestick, his Eyes little, but Sparkling, his Hair black, his Complexion fair. He died at Lisbon on the 20th. of March 1279.1279. being 64 Years of Age,His Death. and having Reigned and Governed 34. Ten Years after his Death, King Denis his Son translated him to the Monastery of Alcobaza, near to his Father, and opposite to his second Wife Queen Beatrix, whose Tomb being afterwards opened, she appeared as Beautiful as if she had been a live. His Issue,His Issue. by the first Wife most Authors a∣gree he had two Sons, as they do in calling the se∣cond Robert, who they say, succeeded his Mother in the Country of Bologne. About the Elder they vary, some calling him Ferdinand, others Peter, and lastly, others say, he is the same with Alonso Denis, counted among the illegitimate. By his second Wife, he had Denis, who succeeded in the Throne. Secondly, D. Alonso Lord of Portale∣gre, who lies buried in the Monastery of St. Domi∣nick at Lisbon. Thirdly, Sancha; Fourthly, Mary; Fifthly, Vincent who died young, Sixthly, Ferdinand
who died also in his Infancy, all these Buried at Alco∣baza; Seventhly, Blanch Abbess of Lorvan first, and then of Huelgas at Burgos; Eighthly, Constance Buried at Al∣cobaza; Illegimate he had Ferdinand, a Knight Tem∣plar; Giles Alonso, Alonso Denis, Martin Alonso got∣ten on the Governour of Faro's Daughter, as was said before; Ellenor Alonso, Ʋrraca Alonso, Elenor for whom her Father built the Monastery of St. Clare at Santarem, where she was famous for Sanctity, and Roderick Alonso who died Young. 11. The Arms of the Kingdom of Algarve,His Arms. gi∣ven by this King, were Sanguine Semee of Castles Or. Over these he placed the Arms of Portugal, so that the Castles of the former made an Orbe to the latter. He also made an alteration in the number of Bezants, in each Escutcheon of the Portuguese Arms, leaving but Eleven in each, whereas before there were Thirteen. He was the first that stiled himself King of Portugal and Algarve.Men fa∣mous in his time. Men famous for San∣ctity in his time were St. Gonzalo, St. Laurence Men∣dez, and St. Giles, all three Dominicans, at least the two latter without dispute. Also St. Walter of the Order of S. Francis; Pope John the 21st. famous for his Learning and Dignity, was Born at Lisbon. Many Men were famous for Military Exploits, the chief whereof was D. Payo Perez Correa, Master of the Military Order of Santiago.
CHAP. VIII. The Life and Reign of Denis the first of that Name, and sixth King of Portugal, his Acti∣ons and Death, from the Year 1261. till 1325. 1. KIng Denis,King De∣nis his Birth and Succession to the Crown. Eldest Son to Alonso III. and Queen Beatrix, was born at Lisbon on the 9th. of Octo∣ber, 1261. and was so called from the Saint whose Day that was. From his Infancy he was educated in all those Vertues and Accomplishments that make an Excellent Prince. In Truth, Justice, and Liberality, he exceeded most of them that had been before him. His Father dying when he was but Eighteen Years of Age, though he honoured his Mother in all other Respects, he would allow her no share in the Government. She resenting this as an Affront, went away into Castile, pretending her Journey was only to pay a Visit to her Father. That King, desiring to please her, took a Journey to Badajoz, and sent to desire King Denis to come as far as Elvas. Thither the Princes Peter, Sancho, Jayne, and his Brother Emanuel repaired to him, by whom the King of Castile desired they might meet at Badajoz. King Denis having entertained them magnificently for the space of three Days, sent them back, saying, He would soon be after them, but suddenly returned to Lisbon, thinking it a better Expedient not to meet his Grand-father, than to deny his Request. The Queen thus disappointed, went away with her Father to Sevil, where she continued, being convinced her Son would admit no Partner in the Throne. 2. The King being Twenty Years of Age,He Marries Elizabeth, the Daugh∣ter of King Peter of Aragon. sent his Embassadors to Peter III. King of Aragon, to ask his Daughter Elizabeth, then but Eleven Years old, in Mar∣riage. His Request was easily granted, and the Bride conducted to Braganza, where she was received by Alonso the King's Brother, who conveyed her to Trancoso, where the best King of Portugal, and one of the best Queens in the World were marryed. His next Care was, o compleat what his Father had begun, which was to dear the Kingdom of Robbers and Out-laws, and to
Protect the meaner sort against the Insolencies of Great Men, and particularly the Country People, whom he called the Sinews of the Commonwealth. For this Reason, and because he built many Castles, he was cal∣led the Husbandman and Father of his Country. Ha∣ving at his Entrance into the Government passed many extravagant Grants, when he came to the Age of 22, he recalled them all.1283. He had some Difference with his Brother Alonso, who refused to make any Acknowledg∣ment for the Towns left him by his Father,Has Diffe∣rences with his Brother Alonso. and had some Pretensions to the Crown, pleading that Denis was Born before the Death of the Countess of Bologne, and consequently must be Illegitimate, whereas he was Born after her Death, when the Pope had ratified the Match. They both took Arms, and Alonso was besieged by his Brother in Portalegre, yet at last they agreed. The chief Articles were, That Alonso should be allowed 30000 Crowns a Year out of the King's Revenue, and instead of the Towns he possessed, should have Sintra and Ourem, for that the others were more dangerous to the King, as lying on the Borders of Castile. Thus ended those Civil Broils. 3. A War broke out with King Sancho the Third of Castile,War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. called the Fierce, for that he performed not the Covenants about the Marriages of the Princes, for Secu∣rity whereof he had put into Portuguese Hands the Cities of Badajoz and Truxillo, as also the Towns of Moura, Serpa, Caceres, Allariz, and Aguiar de Neiva. All these Places he again suddenly surprized, and made several inroads into Algarve, and into Portugal, by the way of Leon, destroying all the Country before him. King Denis being then wholly unprovided for War, sent Em∣bassadors to adjust Affairs, but to no effect. King Denis now moved to Wrath, challenged King Sancho, and at the same time caused his Forces to do much harm in the Enemy's Country. Sancho designed to answer the Chal∣lenge, but was prevented by Death, at which time he ordered all that had been before stipulated, should be performed. Ferdinand the Fourth, his Successor, not answering what was expected from him, King Denis sent his Embassadors to demand the Restitution of the Towns taken by his Predecessor, and in case of Refusal, to fix the Challenge upon him. Restitution being de∣nied, the Challenge was accordingly given, and the
Embassadors withdrew. This done, King Denis with a Puissant Army marched from the City Guarda, and entred Castile, committing all manner of Hostilities. Prince Henry, who was Governour to the young King Ferdinand, put a stop to our King's further Progress, making him advantageous Proposals, and referring the Conclusion to Cuidad Rodrigo, where the two Kings met with the Queen-Mother of Castile, and concluded all Articles; the Towns demanded by the Portuguese being put into the Hands of Ferdinand Longominh, as a Pledge for performing all other parts. But this Compliance on the part of Castile being the Product of Fear, and not of any Friendly Intention, nothing of what had been promised, was performed. 4. King Denis draws together his Forces again,Denis en∣ters Castile the second time. and furiously enters Castile, and with him Prince John, who stiled himself King of Leon, as Son to King Alonso the Tenth, and John Nunnez de Lara, who was in Rebel∣lion against his Prince. Our Army being in the Pro∣vince of Beira, near the Frontiers of Castile, there came to the King, Margaret, Daughter to the Earl of Nar∣bonne, Wife to Prince Peter, the Son of King Alonso, and with her, her Son Sancho de Ledesma, who offered to serve our King, being disgusted with his own. Yet, tho he was much honoured, and received great Bounties from King Denis, he soon returned to his own Master, and served against him of whom he had received such Favours. King Ferdinand understanding that King Denis had invaded his Dominions, sent his Fleet from Sevil, under the Command of that Sancho we last spoke of, to Lisbon, where he surprized some Portuguese Vessels. Our Admiral having gathered what Force he could, pursued and overtook the Fleet of Castile without the Bar.The Fleet of Castile worsted by the Portu∣gueses. There was fought a most obstinate Battle, till the Castillians were worsted, and their Commander, D. Sancho, brought back Prisoner. In the mean while K. Denis, with∣out Opposition, ranged about the Territories of Cuidad Rodrigo and Ledesma, where he took the Castle of Torres, putting all the Defendants to the Sword. He passed by Simancas, where King Ferdinand was, and laid Siege to Possaldes, where neither Sex nor Age was spared, nor was any Reverence paid to the Churches, where the Altars were stained with Blood, nor did their Sacrilegi∣ous Hands abstain from Plundering those Holy Places.
The Castilians were not idle,1296. for many great Men laid waste our Borders. Alonso Perez de Guzman, who Commanded on the Frontiers about Guadiana, with a good Body of Andaluzians, shed much of our Blood, and carried away great Spoils. The Master of Avis, met him with some Portuguese Forces, but was over∣thrown, and almost One Thousand Prisoners carried a∣way, who were ransomed at an easie rate, not to re∣tard the course of their Victory. He also recovered the Castle of Torres, where he spared no Portuguese, and thus Fire and Sword raged in all Parts. King Denis un∣derstanding hereof, committed the greater Cruelties in the Villages, about Salamanca, where he then was. The Inhabitants fled to the Mountains, and to the Churches, but neither Churches nor Mountains could protect them, rage bore down all Divine, as well as humane Considerations. 5. The Moorish King of Granada laying hold of this advantage,Peace con∣cluded be∣twixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal. broke into Andaluzia, took Fifteen Castles, and retired with a mighty Booty. Mary the Queen-Mother, and Prince Henry, Governours to King Ferdi∣nand, now sensible of their Danger, offered King Denis all manner of Satisfaction, as to the Points before pro∣mised, which were, That King Ferdinand should marry his Daughter Constance, and Prince Alonso, Beatrix Sister to Ferdinand, and for performance they gave him sufficient Hostages. King Danis in his return, to be in some sort revenged on D. Sancho de Ledesma, took from him all the Towns he possessed in the Province of Riba de Coa. The King of Castile sent Alonso Perez de Guzman to the Portuguese,1297. to sollicite that they might meet at Alcanizes, where this Discord was to have an end. There both Kings accordingly met honourably attended. A Peace was Concluded for For∣ty Years, and it was Stipulated, that whosoever did in∣fringe it, should be delivered up to the Party aggrei∣ved. The Towns of Olivenza, Campo-Mayor, and S. Felices, were delivered up to the Portuguese in lieu of Aroche and Aracena. That King Denis should still hold all the Towns of the Province of Riba de Coa, and for the Title the King of Castile might claim to them, he resigned up to him Valencia, Ferreyra, Esparragal, Ayamonte, and other Places in Leon, and Gallicia.
6. Articles being signed,The Peace confirmed with mutu∣al Allian∣ces. King Ferdinand presently Married the Portuguese Princess Constance, and delivered his Sister Beatrix to her Father-in-Law, as Wife to Prince Alonso, who expected the event of this inter∣view at Trancoso. The Portuguese Princess being left in Castile, King Denis, with the Castilian, returned to Coimbra, then the Seat of the Portuguese's Court. Till the Princess came to Age. for Marriage, the King assigned her a competent Revenue, and appointed Mar∣tin, Archbishop of Braga, and Count Martin de Sousa, his Standard-bearer, her Governours. The Day she was delivered to the Prince, the King added to what he had before given her, the Towns of Viana, Terena, Ourem, and Armamar. King Ferdinand of Castile, made this Accomodation in good time, being then pres∣sed by the neighbouring Princes, in favour of D. A∣lonso de la Cerda, Grand-son to King Alonso, X. from whom Sancho, Father to Ferdinand, and Uncle to the said Alonso, had Usurped the Crown, so that Alonso de la Cerda was the rightful Prince, and Ferdinand then in possession, and Usurper. The dispossessed Prince gave the Kingdom of Leon, to his Unkle John, and that of Murcia, to Jayme or James, King of Aragon, upon Condition they should assist him to recover his right. Both those Princes endeavoured to possess themselves of what was allotted them, before the Injured Prince could be Re-inthroned. King Ferdinand, overwhelmed with these Enemies, craved Aid of our King Denis, and that they might meet at Fuente Guinaldo, and Ba∣dajoz. There having declared his wants, our King pre∣sented him with a great Summ of Money, a Cap made of an Emerald of inestimable Value, and sent him such supplies of Men, as gained him a Superiority over his Enemies. 7. Pope Benedict XI. sent his Legate to compose these Differences,King De∣nis chosen Mediator betwixt th of Castile, and the lawful Heir, then Banished. and with the general Consent of all Par∣ties concerned; our King Denis was appointed Media∣tor between them. It was agreed that all Parties should stand by his Determination, to which purpose a solemn Instrument was signed, and Cautionary Towns given on all sides. King Denis set forward towards the Plain, where the Conference was to be held, with an Honour∣able Retinue, to the number of One thousand Persons, and to avoid all disorders that might happen in Towns,
lay all the way in Tents,1304. in the open Field. King Fer∣dinand met him at Cuellar, they travelled together to Soria, and there parted; our King proceeding to Tor∣rellas, in the Kingdom of Aragon, where Jamye or James, King of Aragon, and Blanch his Queen received him. Here King Denis entertained them with such Magnifi∣cence, as had scarce been seen in Spain. The Arbitra∣tors and Parties, being come to Taracona, the Kingdom of Murcia,An unjust Sentence given by King De∣nis, against the right∣ful Heir. was by them divided betwixt the Kings of Castile, and Aragon, and several Towns were assigned to D. Alonso de la Cerda, and he ordered to forbear stiling himself King of Castile. This Sentence of King Denis, our Author admires for its equity, as if it could be any justice to deprive the rightful Prince of Three Kingdoms, and give him the Revenue of a few Towns in lieu of them, and those Towns to be held of that same Usurper who kept him out of his right. Judgment being given, they went away to Agreda, where King Ferdinand was with his Mother. There Kings dined at one Table, and Three Queens at another, which were those of Castile, Ara∣gon, and Portugal. Hence King Denis went to Vallado∣lid, to see his Daughter, Queen Constance, and so retur∣ned to his Kingdom. 8. King Ferdinand now at Peace with the Christians, resolved to employ his Arms against the Moors of Gra∣nada; To this effect he craved Succours of King Denis, who sent him Seven hundred Horse,1305. Commanded by D. Martin Gil de Sousa, his Standard-bearer, and lent him Seventeen thousand Marks of Silver, for which Ba∣dajoz, Alconchel, and Burguillos, were given in pawn. This expedition was well begun by the taking of Gi∣braltar, but its Progress was stopped; First, by want of Provisions, and next, by the Death of King Ferdinand. Phillip the Fair King of France, placed Clement V. (be∣fore Archbishop of Bourdeaux) in St. Peters Chair,1309. up∣on Condition he should remove the Papal Seat to Lions, that he should publickly burn the bones of his Pre∣decessor Boniface VIII. give him the rents of the Church Revenues,The cruel suppression of the Knights Templars. for Five Years, and suppress the Order of the Knights Templars, that he might seize their Revenues. This Pope not willing to perform that part touching the burning of his Predecessor, thought to make the King amends, by falling the heavier on the
Knights Templars. To this purpose, at the instigation of the King, those Knights were charged with most heinous Crimes, and their great Master with Sixty Knights were publickly burnt at Paris, to the astonish∣ment of all the World. The Pope had sent Orders to all Parts, that these Knights should every where be ap∣prehended on the same Day, but the Kings of Castile, Aragon, and Portugal obeyed not, esteeming the merits of that Noble Order, above the unjust Commands of a Byassed Pope. Yet after much Debate, the Order was wholly suppressed, their greatest Crime being their Riches, which nevertheless, in Spain were for the most part bestowed on the Knights Hospitallers of St. John, now called the Knights of Malta. But King Denis, begged of the Pope that the Revenues of the Knights Templars in Portugal, might be given to a new Order of Knighthood, he then instituted to serve against the bordering Moors. His suit being granted, this Year 1310. was erected the Order of Knights of our Saviour Jesus Christ,131. the King besides the possessions of the Templars, bestowing on it several Towns and Churches, that were in his gift. This from time to time, has been so increased that at present, the Order enjoys a Reve∣nue of about 500000 Duccats, divided into 500 Com∣mendaries, to Encourage Gentlemen with this reward, to the Conquest of Africk At present, those thoughts are quite laid aside, and those Revenues are almost be∣come Hereditary: Many of the Knights Templars be∣ing found innocent were admitted to this New Order; and a Master of it created. At first these Knights were obliged not to Marry, but that vow was abolished in the time of King Emanuel, by Pope Alexander VI. 9. King Denis,King De∣nis at  with his Son. in his latter Days, had much Conten∣tion with his Son Prince Alonso. This Prince took for the occasion of his Disgust, the great Favour that Duke Alonso Sanchez, and Count John Alonso, the King's Ba∣stard Sons were in with him. Having drawn Peter, a∣nother Bastard Brother to his Party, the Prince pre∣sumed to ask of the King, to resign to him the Power of the Administration of Justice. Being justly denied so unreasonable a Demand, he drew over his Mother-in-Law, Queen Mary, to assist him towards obtaining his desires by Force, to which purpose she asked leave of his Father for him, to come to her into Castile, and
being refused, the Prince went to her, to Cuidad Ro∣drigo, against his Fathers Consent. Being returned to Portugal, the Queen sent to demand of the King, what he had before refused to his Son; and now again denied to her. This Project failing, the Prince contri∣ved by his Servants, an Information to be drawn, as if left by a Man that died at Magaula: containing a De∣sign of the Elder Bastard, the King's chiefest Favourite, to Poyson the Prince. A Copy of the false Informati∣on he sent to the King, who having examined the mat∣ter, found it was a piece of Forgery. Being again dis∣appointed, he perswaded some of his Followers to Mur∣der Alonso Sanchez, saying his Father negotiated with the Pope, to exclude him the lawful Heir, and leave the Crown to a Bastard; but he in this did not succeed nei∣ther. All these practices failing, the Prince betook himself to open Hostility, robbing the King's Loyal Subjects, ra∣vishing Women, sacrilegiously ransacking Monasteries, killing Giraldus, Bishop of Evora, and committing ma∣ny other Enormities, without the reach of Justice, as acted under the Heir of the Crown.The Prince proceeds in his Disobe∣dience. 10. The King advertised Pope John XX. of his Son's Disobedience, and he dispatched his Bulls, admonish∣ing him to desist from force, and submit to his Father; but all to no effect. For he gathering a number of Cri∣minals, and Out-laws, pretended to go in Pilgrimage to the Church of St. Vincent without Lisbon, designing to surprize that City. The King having timely Advice of it, hasted thither to prevent him, and the Queen after him to Mediate betwixt the Father and the Son. The Prince thus prevented, turned away towards Sintra, and his Father after him. Both Bodies stood as if they design∣ed to give Battle, but on a sudden the Son marched off; and tho' the King might have overtaken him, he per∣sued not. Being come to Coimbra, the Prince sent a∣way his Princess to Alcanizes in Castile, and then gave out that his Father intended to kill him. After disa∣busing the World of the falsehood of that Report, his Father declared all such as should adhere to the Son, Traitors; and knowing that the Inhabitants of Leyria had entertained him, he hasted thither, where Nine of the chief, as Rebels, had their Hands and Feet cut off, and were afterwards burnt. The Prince went away to Santarem, and flying thence before his Angry Father,
possessed himself of the Castle of Coimbra, of Monte-Mayor the Old, of Feira, Gaga, and Porto, whither came to him his Bastard-Brother Peter, out of Castile. Guimaraens was defended against him, by Mem Rodriguez de Vasconcelos. In the mean while the King laid Siege to Coimbra, which obliged the Prince to quit Guimaraens, and return to relieve that City. Here were to be seen all the usual dire effects of Civil Wars. The Holy Queen Elizabeth ceased not to pass betwixt the Two Armies, mediating for a Reconciliation,1323. which at last she compassed, the King giving to the Prince, the Cities of Porto, and Coimbra, and the Old Town of Monte-Mayor, with some additional Revenue. Par∣don was given on both sides, and the Prince took an Oath to be Obedient to his Father for the future. But notwithstanding this reconciliation, the Prince pressed his Father to call the Cortes, or Parliament, and yet would not be present at it, but went from Santarem, towards Lisbon, with armed Troops. The King came out in the like manner, commanding him to return, which he refusing,1324. the Trumpets sounded, and both Parties Engaged. Yet the Queen rushing through all dangers came to her Son, and upbraiding him with breach of Faith, and Obstinacy, at length the Battle was parted, and the Father and Son once more were Reconciled. That this agreement might be the more lasting, D. Alonso Sanchez, the King's Bastard-Son, was sent out of the Kingdom, and went to the Town of Albuquerque, which he possessed in Castile, by that means becoming a Subject to that Crown. 11. King Denis fortified many Towns and Cities,King De∣nis his Structures, and other Works. en∣compassing them with beautiful Walls, as is to be seen at Porto, Braga, Guimaraens, Miranda, and other Pla∣ces. He Built from the Ground, above Fifty Castles, and some Towns, besides those he new Peopled. Nei∣ther did he forget pious Work, and therefore he endow∣ed many Churches. Pope John XXII. granted him the Tenths of Church Revenues for 3 Years, to the end he should keep his Gallies in the Streights of Gibraltar, to hinder the Moors from passing into the Kingdom of Gra∣nada. He was addicted to Learning, especially to Poetry, and it was he that first erected the University at Coimbra. His Liberality was such that it became a Proverb, As liberal as Denis. The Presents he made to Kings,
Queens, and Nobility, when he went to compose Af∣fairs betwixt the King of Castile, and Duke Alonso de la Cerda, were inestimable, and cannot be reckoned. After that, a Gentleman of Castile telling him that none but himself had fallen short of his Bounty, he gave him the Silver Table whereon he dined. To reckon up the particular acts of his Generosity were too tedious, it may suffice to say, this above the rest was his peculiar Vertue, in which he exceeded most Princes. He knew all the Product of his Kingdom, and valued it so much, that he never desired to be supplied from abroad, with any thing that he could have at home. Of the Gold gathered in Tagus, he made a rich Crown and Scepter. But notwithstanding his prodigious Liberality he never oppressed his Subjects with heavy Taxes. He was of a middle Stature, his Hair black, full Faced, not so Beautiful as Majestick. He died at Santarem, the 7th. of January, 1325. at the Age of 64 Years,1325. having Reigned 46. It became a Proverb, That Denis could do all he would. His stately Tomb, built by himself, is in the Monastery of Odivelas, of Benedictine Nuns, near Lisbon, of the Invocation of St. Denis. 12. Elizabeth,His Wife, and Issue. Daughter to King Peter III. of Ara∣gon, and his Queen Constance the Daughter of Man∣fredus King of Naples, and Sicily, was the only Wife of King Denis. He being extreamly addicted to Women, she bred up all the Children he had by them, as if they had been her own; by which her patience she made him afterwards forbear that Vice, and punish it severely in others. To be short, she was a most holy Woman, and an excellent Queen, and was Canonized in the Reign of Phillip IV. of Spain. By her the King had, Alonso his Successor, and Constance, Wife to King Ferdinand IV. of Castile. His illegitimate Issue were, by Aldonza Rodriguez, Alonso Sanchez, created Earl of Albuquerque. By the Lady Grace, Peter, Earl of Barcelos, the first Title of that kind given by the Kings of Portugal; a∣nother Peter, called also Earl. By other Women, John Alonso, Ferdinand Sanchez, the Lady Mary, Married to Duke John de la Cerda; another Mary, a Nun at Odivelas.
CHAP. IX. Yhe Life and Reign of Alonso the Fourth of the Name, and the Seventh King of Portugal, his Actions and Death, from the Year, 1290. till 1357. 1. THE Favour that King Denis shewed to Learn∣ing made him reside where he had caused it to flourish.King A∣lonso the 4th. wholly addicted to his Plea∣sure. Having therefore resettled the Court at Co∣imbra, on the Eighth of February, 1290. was Born to him in that City, of his Wife the holy Queen Eliza∣beth, his Son Alonso 4th. of the Name, and the Seventh King of Portugal,1290. who for his forward and fiery spirit, was called the Fierce. He, who as we have seen, was so eager to Rule whilst his Father lived, after his Death cast off all the care of Government; giving him∣self wholly up to his Pleasure, and particularly to Hunting. Upon his Accession to the Crown, instead of settling the Affairs of the Kingdom, he went away to the Forrest of Sintra,1325. where he spent a whole Month among the wild Beasts. Returning to Court, and ap∣pearing at the Council-Board, instead of the Business of that Place, he gave them an Account of his Sport. Hereupon, one of the Counsellors took the Boldness to reprove him with threatning Expressions, which the King being offended at, all the Council stood up and said they would choose another King, if he did not alter his Course of Life. The King, tho he then went out in a Passion, being grown cool, thought good to curb his Inclination. Our Author here extols the Bravery of those Counsellors. I find nothing to admire in the matter, but the Insolency of wicked and haughty Subjects, and the want of Resolution in him, he stiles a Magnanimous Prince. The King, not satis∣fied with having, during his Father's Life, unjustly Persecuted his Bastard-Brother, and Expelled him the Kingdom,At Vari∣ance with his Ba∣stard-Bro∣ther. still persisting in his ill grounded Malice to∣wards him, laid many things to his Charge, and by for∣mal, tho' unjust Process, Condemned him to forfeit all his Possessions in Portugal, at once endeavouring to de∣prive
him of his Fortune and Honour. D. Alonso Sanchez, modestly sued for Redress, but none was to be had from a byassed Judge. He was now powerful, and beloved in Castile, and Leon, and therefore raising a good Force, entred the Territory of Bragança, with Fire and Sword, whilst others of his Troops did the like from Medellin, and Albuquerque, in the Country about Guadiana.1326. This done, he returned to his Town of Al∣buquerque, where he Fortified himself, and made prepa∣rations for open War. D. Gonzalo Vaz, Master of the Knights of Avis, being sent against him by the King, was put to the rout; and Duke Alonso, falling Sick re∣turned to Medellin. In the mean time the King Be∣sieged the Castle of Codesseyra, near Albuquerque, which being basely delivered to him by the Governour, was rased to the Ground. 2. The King proposed a Match betwixt his Son Prince Peter,1327. and Constance the Daughter of D. John Ema∣nuel, who was of the Blood Royal of Castile, and his Wife of that of Aragon. King Alonso IX. of Castile, broke off this Match, contracting himself to her, for she was under age, and yet afterwards he contemned her, and was Married to Mary,Marries his Daughter to the King of Castile. Daughter to King Alonso of Portugal. To that effect he came into Portugal, and re∣ceived the Princess at the Town of Alfayates, whither her Father had Conducted her. At this Place a Match was concluded betwixt Henry,1328. Prince of Portugal, and the Princess Blanch,Henry Prince of Portugal, marries Blanch, Aunt to the King of Castile. Aunt to the King of Castile. The following Year, the Portuguese received her at Fuente∣grinaldo, where he again met with her Father Prince Peter, about some alterations to be made in the Hosta∣ges given for exchange of the Ratifications. Two Years after the King of Castile was Married to our Princess, he became so intangled in the Love of the Lady Ellenor Nunnez de Guzman,1330. that he treated her as Queen; and the Queen as if she had been but a Concubine. Our holy Queen Elizabeth met him at Xerez de Badajoz, to endeavour to reclaim him, but could obtain no∣thing but promises; for he continued obstinate in his Amours.1332. D. John Emanuel desiring to be revenged of the King of Portugal, for that giving his Daughter to the King of Castile in Marriage, he had caused his Daughter Constance to be put by, made his interest with the Lady Ellenor the King of Castile's Mistress, per∣swading
her to prevail with the King to marry her; for his Marriage with the Princess of Portugal was void, by reason of Consanguinity. But that Lady considering the danger of aspiring, to rise from a Mistress to a Queen, slighted his Advice. 3. It was now found in Portugal,Blanch di∣vorced from the Prince. that the Princess Blanch, by reason of the Tissick, was unfit for Matri∣mony; and the King of Castile having sent his Phy∣sitians to examine into it, they agreed in the Point. This Prince being on this score disengaged from that Bride,1334. it was proposed he should marry the Lady Con∣stance,He Con∣tracts with the Lady Constance Daughter to D. John Emanuel. Daughter to D. John Emanuel, whom the King of Castile had before put away. This King was con∣sulted with thereupon, but he advised the contrary, yet seemed to allow of whatsoever ours should do. The Portuguese took this for Consent, whilst the Castilian used all possible means to obstruct the Match; telling her Father he designed her for the Prince of Navarre. Both seemed to mean as they spoke, and each designed to deceive the other. D. Gonzalo Vaz, Master of the Order of Avis, and Embassador from Portugal, came to D. John, to conclude the Match. The King of Ca∣stile, sent D. John Orders, to apprehend the Embassador, as coming without his leave with armed Men, and ha∣ving committed Extortion on his way. D. John doubt∣ing, the Embassador advised him to conclude their Af∣fair, and he would go deliver up himself to the King at Burgos. They agreed, D. John offered with his Daug∣ter, 300000 Doubles. The Articles were, That the Lady Constance should be absolute over the Lands assigned her in Dower: That the Prince should keep no Mistress whilst his Wife was of Age to bear Children, or did not appear to be Barren: That there should be a League Defensive betwixt the Father, and Son-in-Law, that he might go visit his Daughter, whensoever he pleased, and that the Second Son should inherit D. John's Possessions in Castile, or else the First should inherit, in case she had but one. 4. The Embassador went immediately away to Bur∣gos,1335. and presenting himself before the King, was satis∣fied with feigned excuses. At this time came one Mar∣tin Catina, craving leave of the King,A single Combat. to Combat with Gonzalo Rodriguez Ribeiro, one who followeth the Em∣bassador, and had killed his Brother. The King would
have made them Friends, but Ribeiro opposing it, they were allowed to enter the Lists according to the Custome of those Days; where Catina had his Head clove asun∣der by his Adversary. Many other notable Acts were performed by this Ribeiro, and Two of his Companions, in a solemn Tilting, wherein they gained much Repu∣tation to the Portuguese Nation. But the King of Ca∣stile, ceased not all this while, underhand, to endea∣vour to break off the Match, writing to the King of Portugal by way of Advice, That he should not be too hasty herein;The King of Castile obstructs the Marri∣age of the Lady Con∣stance. for that D. John was rich, and would increase the Portion if he was backward. At the same time, he blamed D. John for offering so much, and last∣ly, with his own Hand he wrote a Letter to the Lady Constance, assuring her of his sincere Affection to her, and declaring he had been ill advised in marrying the Princess of Portugal, but that by Reason of Consangui∣nity, that Marriage was void, and he would not fail to be always hers. The Lady sent the Letter to her Fa∣ther, who dictated an Answer, to this effect. That he had much wronged her Innocence, having by false in∣sinuations gained her Love. That his ill Inclinations, did appear by his unjust proceedings towards Queen Mary, his present Wife. That she had so often found him false, that she could now find no Reason to give any Credit to his Words; and that she gave Thanks to Almighty God, who had delivered her from being his Wife, that she might not suffer as the Queen did, by his inordinate Affection, to the Lady Elenor Nunez de Guzman, who had entertained other Lovers before him. 5. It was agreed betwixt the King of Portugal, and D. John Emanuel, that the Lady Constance should be brought into Portugal, in June, and the Bride and Bride∣groom were contracted by Proxy. Embassadors were sent to Valladolid, where the King of Castile was to be acquainted with the Conclusion of the Match. He, tho much Displeased, expressed great Satisfaction, sent Presents to the Embassadors, and ordered publick De∣monstrations of Joy to be made. The Portuguese sent Martin Lopez Machado, his Embassador, to return thanks for those Courtesies; But still the Castilian re∣solved to hinder the Bride's Journey into Portugal, and to that purpose guarded the Roads, always pretending
other Reasons for so doing. The King of Portugal, to remove this Obstacle, sent another Embassador, who being killed about Play at Valladolid, his Tutor, for he was a Young Man, continued his Journey to the Court of Castile, where he delivered to that King his Master's Letter, containing how evidently he was convinced of his ill Intentions, and made great Threats, in case he persisted to obstruct the Lady Constance's Journey into Portugal. The Castilian shewed that Letter to the Lady Ellinor his Mistress, who, with that Liberty that is Na∣tural to such Women, spared not to blame his unjust Proceedings in that Particular; yet he forbore not to stop the Princess, tho' he excused himself to the Portu∣guese. Our King, already disgusted at this ill Usage, was yet farther provoked, for his Admiral, Stephen Vaz de Barbuda, pursuing certain Pirates with five Ships, and three Galleys, was driven by stress of Weather to Cadiz, where, instead of a kind Reception, his Vessels were ta∣ken by the Fleet of Castile, under the Command of Peter Ponce de Marchena. Our King gave Advice hereof to D. John Emanuel, and he making suit to his King, that he would suffer his Daughter to depart, received no An∣swer, whereupon he openly declared against his Sove∣raign. The Portuguese demanded of the Governours of the Cautionary Towns, for Performance of Articles, that they should deliver them up to him, since the fault lay on the side of Castile. They consulting together, sent one of their number to the King, to represent to him how unjustly he dealt with the Portuguese. He an∣swered, That if they delivered the Towns, they would incur an infamous breach of Fealty, and that he would not depart from the Siege he had laid to D. John Nunnez de Lara's Garrison, till he had his Head. Yet consider∣ing the Difficulty of that Design, he intimated he would desist, if the King of Portugal should request it of him. Queen Mary advertised her Father hereof, and he im∣mediately wrote to the Castilian, desiring him to raise the Siege, and promising to make D. John Nunnez sub∣mit himself as soon as the Princess was sent into Por∣tugal. The Queen her self carried the Letter to the King, and he answered angrily, that he would raise the Siege for no Man. Which made her return disconsolate to Burgos. But tho some of the Nobles contrived that D. John might escape, yet the King was so watchful, they were disappointed.
6. The King of Portugal,War be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. impatient of longer Disap∣pointments, sent a Challenge to him of Castile, ground∣ed upon these Reasons: That he treated ill the Queen his Wife, that he gave out, he would be divorced from her, and Marry the Lady Ellenor de Guzman, that he designed to declare Peter her Son his Heir, and that he hindred the Princess Constance from going into Portugal. While his Embassador executed his Commission, he made all manner of Warlike Preparations both by Sea and Land. He laid Siege to Badajoz, and at the same time his Parties ravaged all the Country about Arauna, Aroncha, and Cortegana. The Siege being tedious, the King left sufficient Forces to continue it, and he with the rest of the Army over-ran a great part of Anda∣luzia as far as Sevil, which done, he returned to the Siege. His Brother, Count Peter, did the like in Ga∣licia, the Archbishop, and other Commanders in vain endeavouring to oppose him. Numerous Forces were raising in Castile to relieve Badajoz, when the King, considering the difficulty of the Enterprize, and that Peter Alonso, one of his Officers, had been defeated, raised the Siege, and returned dissatisfied to Portugal. But whilst he prepared to return thither stronger than before, the Queen, without his knowledge, went away to Badajoz, where the King of Castile, her Son-in-law, then was, thinking her Prayers might prevail with him to desist from War, and comply with her Husband. The King received her with Respect, but demanded such Conditions as he knew could not be granted. Scarce was she gone from Badajoz, when the Castilian followed as far as Elvas, ravaging all the Country. Two days he spent Plundering that Territory, and then laid Siege to Aronchez, but understanding that the Portuguese Par∣ties infested the Neighbourhood of Xerez, Badajoz, Bur∣guillos, and Alconchel, he removed to meet them. Not meeting with them, he besieged Olivenca, and being ta∣ken with an Ague, was forced to depart, and return to Sevil, leaving his Forces to do all the harm they could. Some Troops, under the Command of the Brothers, Ferdinand, and John Roiz de Castro, pillaged all the Country betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, till be∣ing met by the Archbishop of Braga with 1400 Portu∣gueses, D. John de Castro was killed, with 300 of his Men, and a great Booty recovered. At Sea, 20 Galleys,
carrying 2000 Men, put into Lepte in Andaluzia, where they landed, Plundering the Country, and being met by D. Nunno Portocarrero, there ensued a hot Fight be∣tween them, in which 26 Portugueses and 80 Castilians were killed. Camello, the Portuguese General, was taken; and by the Portugueses, two Castilian Commanders, for whom he was exchanged. The Castilians set out 40 Sail to Revenge this Affront, but a Storm dispersed and wrecked both Fleets. Another Portuguese Squadron, commanded by Misser Emanuel Pissano, a Genoese, had spoiled the Coast of Galicia, and was now again sent against the Spanish Fleet, that did no less harm in the Kingdom of Algarve. They met about Cape S. Vincent, and fought with extraordinary Resolution, till the Por∣tuguese Admiral, and many more, were taken, and the Castilian returned Victorious to Sevil. At the same time, Ferdinand Arraez lying in Ambush, took 70 Portu∣gueses, and killed 180. 7. Our King,King A∣lonso en∣ters Ca∣stile with an Army. leaving an Army to Besiege Salvaterra, pierced as far as Orense, destroying all before him, whilst Peter Fernandez de Castro, who commanded on those Frontiers for the King of Castile, refused to oppose him, on pretence of the Favours he had received from him and his Father. The Castilian, always ready to take Revenge, with 10000 Horse, and a number of Foot broke into Algarve, and having in vain besieged Castro Marin, laid waste without Mercy all the Country along that Coast.1337. Pope Benedict XII. sent Bernard, Bishop of Rhodes, his Nuncio, to endeavour to bring these two Kings to some Accommodation. Philip the Fourth, King of France sent the Archbishop of Rheims upon the same Errand. The Castilian turned them over to Portugal, and the Portuguese to Castile. Both were de∣sirous of Peace, but neither would ask it. The Portu∣guese carried himself highest with the Nuncio. At length a Truce was concluded for a Year.A Truce for a Year. After much Debate, the Pope was chosen Arbitrator betwixt them, but the Castilian fearing the Revolt of his Nobles, and an Inva∣sion from Africk, required of the Portuguese to send his Embassadors to him, and they would agree, without going so far as Rome,1340. or Avignon. Hereupon three Embas∣sadors were sent from Portugal, who meeting with the Commissioners of Castile, concluded a Peace upon these Conditions. That all Places taken since the War, and
Prisoners on both sides, should be restored; That neither, without consent of the other, should make Peace with the Moorish King Banarin; That the Princess Constance should be permitted to go into Portugal; That the Prin∣cess Blanch, being unfit for Wedlock, should return in∣to Castile; That all former Articles should continue in force; That the King of Castile should restore all due State to his Queen, and put away the Lady Ellenor Nunnez. The Castilian performed all Points, except putting away the Lady Ellenor, yet he behaved himself better towards the Queen. 8. Aliboacem,Alonso in Person aids the Castili∣an against the Moors King of Morocco, being about to pass into Spain, as being sent for by the Moorish King of Gra∣nada, the Castilian sent his Queen to ask Succours of her Father the King of Portugal, who immediately marched thither in Person with a better disciplined than numerous Army. The King of Castile having notice hereof, visited him at Jurumenna in Portugal. Our King was received at Sevil by the Clergy, singing Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini. Here a Council of War was held, to consult whether it were fit to fight the Moors, who be∣sieged Tarifa, and were an innumerable Multitude, or no. While some were of Opinion to yield Tarifa to them, our King's Opinion prevailed, that the Place should be relieved. All the Mountains and Plains about Tarifa were covered with multitudes of Infidels, yet the King of Castile was overjoyed to understand they had resolved to give the Mahometan Battle. Both the Christian Kings advanced, and passed the River Guadalete. Being there joyned by some Troops that were not before come up, on Sunday, the 27th. of October, they marched to Penna de Cuervo, where they first discovered the Barbarians, cover∣ing all the Land as far as they could see. It was agreed the Castilian should attack the King of Morocco, who lay along the Shoar, and the Portuguese him of Granada, that was at the Foot of the Mountain. On Monday, the 28th. at break of Day the Army heard Mass, many received the Sacrament, and the Archbishop of Toledo exhorted them to expose their Lives in Defence of the Faith. Being come before their Enemies, both Kings made short Speeches to their Men. This done, the Ar∣mies engaged with such terrible shouts, that the Moun∣tains seemed to shake. Nor was the noise of clattering of Arms less hideous. Vast numbers of Dead were soon
trod under foot, and the wounded, in that Confusion, were scarce sensible of their hurts.The two Christian Kings over∣throw the Infidels. Our King, rushing into the midst of the Enemies, made such havock, that the Moors soon turned their backs, and fled to Algezira, the Portugueses making a greater slaughter in the Pur∣suit, than they had done in the Fight. The King of Castile, with no less Bravery, thrust himself into the midst of his Enemies, till stopp'd in his rash Carreer by the Archbishop of Toledo. Yet so did he press Ali∣boacem, that despairing of Success, he fled to Algezira, and not thinking himself safe there, passed the Streights over into Africk. Both the Christian Princes followed the Chace as far as the Rivers Britabotellas and Guada∣micil, which they dyed with the Blood of Infidels. 9. Queen Fatima, with many other Moorish Ladies, were killed by the Soldiers in their Tents. Some Princes also died, and two were taken. The quantity and va∣lue of the Booty is not to be expressed,The number of the In∣fidels, and greatness of the Booty. for they came to divide Spain among them, and brought over above 100000 Families, besides their innumerable Army, all which was so great, that they spent five Months in pas∣sing the Streights, sixty Galleys being continually em∣ploy'd in Transporting them, and twelve Galleys were fifteen days in carrying back the Remnants of this Over∣throw. 450000 Infidels are said to have died in this Battle. Of the Christians so few were missing, that it will be scarce credited, if the Number were reported. The Victorious Kings entred Sevil in Triumph, the chiefest of the Captives dragging the Colours that were taken. Many Carts followed laden with Spoil, and then a multitude of Moorish Horses with all their Accoutre∣ments. Several Colours and Horses were sent for a Pre∣sent to Pope Benedict. The seventh day after the Vi∣ctory, the Portuguese being obliged to return home, the Castilian laid all the Booty before him, to take what he liked best; whereof he only took some Arms, one of the Captive Princes,1347. and five Colours. The Prince he released without Ransom,Elenor, second Daughter to K. Alon∣so marry'd to Peter, King of Aragon. and hung up the Colours in the Cathedral of Lisbon. 10. King Peter the Fourth of Aragon, by his Embas∣sadors, demanded of our King his Second Daughter Elle∣nor in Marriage. His Request was granted, and her Por∣tion settled at 50000 Doubloons. The King of Castile endeavoured to hinder this Marriage, but failing of his
Design, the Princess was carryed to Valencia, and there marryed with great Solemnity.1348. The three following Years Portugal was infested with that Universal Pesti∣lence,A great Plague. which began by the opening of the Earth after a terrible Earthquake in the Eastern Countries, whence issued such a destructive stench, as infected those Parts, and thence diffused it self into these. The Princess Con∣stance dying after she had brought forth three Children, our King found that Discord at home, which had before drawn him thence. He thought to Marry the Prince, to strengthen the Succession to the Crown, but found he was in Love with the Lady Agnes de Castro, a Kins∣woman, and one of the Ladies to the late Princess, and that enjoying her Person, he refused a second Wife; and enquiring farther into it,K. Alonso his Eldest Son pri∣vately Marries the Lady Agnes de Castro. he was informed they were privately marryed by Giles, Bishop of Guarda, and yet the Prince, fearing his Father's Displeasure, denyed it, tho' he promised, if it were really so, to treat her as Princess. The Nobility envying the Lady Agnes her Happiness, perswaded the King to oblige his Son to Marry another Wife, or else to kill her; alledging, that if she came to be Queen, her Brothers, Ferdinand, and Alvaro, would destroy the Princes Son Ferdinand, that one of their Nephews might Inherit the Crown. They also said, the Lady Agnes was not of sufficient Quality to be a Queen; but in this they wronged her, for she was of Royal Blood, and her Sister came to be Queen of Castile. Upon these Pretences her Death was con∣trived, and tho' the Prince had notice given him hereof by the Queen his Mother, and the Archbishop of Braga, yet he thought none durst attempt such an Action whilst he was in the way. The King, overcome by Perswa∣sions, set out from Monte-Mayor, and went to Coimbra with a great number of armed Men, at such time as the Prince was gone out a Hunting. The Lady Agnes was in the Palace called S. Clare,The Lady Agnes cruelly murdered. and understanding the King came to kill her, went out to receive him, and falling at his Feet with the three Children she had, bathed them with her Tears. This sad Spectacle moved the King, and he turned back to depart. But those who had perswaded him to this Action, the chief whereof were Alvaro Gonçalez, James Lopez Pacheco, and Peter Coello, blamed the King's Remissness, and so earnestly pressed him to give them leave to execute what they came about,
that he condescended, and they immediately, with more than barbarous Inhumanity, struck off her Head. 11. The Prince returning from Hunting,The Prince begins his Revenge. for some time was almost distracted with Rage. Being come to himself, he began to execute his Revenge, destroying all the Country betwixt Duero and Minho, where those Cruel Executioners had their Estates, with Fire and Sword. The City Porto he spared, for the sake of the Archbishop, who had given him notice of the Design. Thus King Alonso's Disobedience towards his Father, was now with more Reason punished by his own Son. The Prince marched to the Town of Canaveses, where the Queen his Mother, and the Archbishop met, and reduced him to submit to his Father, and disband his Followers, conditioning that both Parties should Par∣don all Offences, and that in all Places where the Prince was, all Acts of Justice should be performed in his Name. It was visible enough, that the Prince would some time or other be revenged on the Murderers of the Lady,The Murde∣rers fly in∣to Castile. therefore the King, being near his End, advised them before his Death to shift for themselves. They there∣upon fled to Castile, and we shall hereafter see what be∣came of them. This was the end of King Alonso, an Unnatural Son towards his Father,The Death of King Alonso. and a Barbarous Fa∣ther towards his Son. Yet he was an excellent King, either for Peace or War. He coined a new sort of Mo∣ney, called Alfonsines, worth, in English Money, about Three Shillings. Many wholesom Laws were instituted by him, and his Government was equitable and just. He had a large Forehead, but with wrinkles in it; his Visage long, a proportionable Nose, a large Mouth, his Hair reddish, and curled, his Beard forked and long, his Limbs gross, and his Presence Majestick. He died at Lisbon in May 1357. being 67 Years of Age,1357. and having Reigned 31 Years and a half. His and his Queen's Tombs are to be seen in the Quire of the Cathedral of Lis∣bon. 12. Queen Beatrix, Wife to King Alonso, was Daugh∣ter to King Sancho the Fierce, of Castile, and of Queen Mary, the Daughter of Prince Alonso de Molina By her the King had Issue, 1. Alonso, who died Young, 2. Denis, died much at the same Age. 3. John, died in his Infancy. 4. Mary, who was Queen of Castile, Wife to King Alonso XI. and Mother to King Peter. 5. Peter▪
who Succeeded his Father; 6. Elenor, Queen of Ara∣gon, Second Wife to King Peter IV. This King reduced the number of Castles in the Orle being the Arms of Algarve,His Arms. to 8. and the Bezants in each Escutcheon, to 10. CHAP. X. The Life and Reign of Peter the First of the Name, and the Eighth King of Portugal, with his Actions and Death, from the Year, 1320, till 1367. 1. KING Alonso,King Peter the first his Earth. and his Queen Beatrix, were Un∣fortunate in their Children, who all died Young, But Peter the 5th. who was Born at Coimbra, on the 19th. of April, 1320. He was by some called the Cruel, by others,1320. Executor of Justice, and this last Title most properly appertained to him. His Accession to the Crown was in the 37th.1358. Year of his Age, being twice a Widdower by the Death of his two Wives; Constance, and Agnes. His First care was to secure Peace with his Neighbour,1357. the King of Castile, which was accordingly Ratified. The following Year, it was farther Con∣firmed,Peace con∣cluded with Ca∣stile. and it was agreed that Ferdinand, Prince of Por∣tugal, should marry Beatrix, Eldest Daughter to King Peter of Castile; and the Princesses Constance, and Eli∣zabeth, should marry John, and Denis, Sons to the La∣dy Agnes de Castro; That both Kings should Aid each other by Sea and Land; That the Portuguese should not joyn with the Aragonian, or any other Prince, without acquainting the Castilian; That he should assist him a∣gainst the Aragonian, with whom he was then at War. King Peter having now the Power in his Hands,He punish∣eth the Murderers of his Wife the Lady Agnes de Castro. and be∣ing at leasure to meditate his Revenge, for the Death of his beloved Agnes, was grieved at nothing more, than that he thought the Lives of the Three Murderers, too small an Expiation for the Death of her, in whom he had lived. Yet for some farther Satisfaction, he resol∣ved to make up in Torments, what was wanting of Life
in them. We saw in his Fathers Life time, how far he proceeded in his Revenge, so as to raise a Civil War; But scarce was he now seated on the Throne, when the Three Murderers, Peter Coello, James Lopez, and Alvaro Gonzalez, were Attainted of Treason, and their Estates Confiscated. Next he contrived how to get them out of Castile, and soon found the means to effect it; for Peter Nunnez de Guzman, Lieutenant of Leon, Mem Roiz Tenorio, Ferdinand Gudiel de Toledo, and Fortun Sanchez Calderon, being fed from Castile, were then in Portugal: He knew that King was no less desirous to reach them, than he was to have the other Three; Therefore he agre∣ed with the Castilian, that both should at the same time secure the Fugitives of the other, which was accordingly put in Execution. 2. James Lopez Pacheco, had the good Fortune to be abroad a Hunting, the Day the others were taken. He being missed, Guards were set upon the Gates, that none might give him Notice; but a Beggar got through unregarded, and not only informed him of what had happened,The Mur∣derers Racked. but changing Cloaths with him, he got away with a Carrier to Aragon; and thence into France. Al∣varo Gonzalez, and Peter Coello, were carried to Portu∣gal; as were the Four Castilians taken there, conveyed to Sevil. King Peter was at Santarem when the two Prisoners were brought to him: He instantly put them to the Rack, to force them to, discover their Accomplices: But they continued silent or else answered far from the purpose; which caused the King to lash Coello on the Face; to which he returned nothing but reproachful Language. The King smiling hereat, said to the stan∣ders by, Bring me Vinegar and Onion for this Rabbet; for Coello in Portuguese, signifies a Rabbet, and that was the Sauce then used, giving them thereby to understand he should be Burnt. Whilst they were yet Living, their Hearts were cut out, one at his Breast, and the other at his Back. Lastly, he caused them to be Burnt, and the Table he dined at to be set in sight of the Fire. Nor did King Peter's Amorous Flame expire here. But before we shew what farther Effects it had▪ we must observe in this Place, that the Kings of Castile, and Aragon being ready to break into War, our King sent his Embassadors to the latter,1360. to Mediate a Peace. That Prince com∣plained to them, that their Master should take part with
Castile against him, yet offered, in regard of the Ancient Friendships betwixt the two Crowns, and in respect to the Pope, to give ear to Conditions of Peace. 3. This was the posture of Affairs when our King dis∣covered the Love he still entertained for the Lady Agnes,The Funeral Pomp, for the Lady Agnes de Castro. by performing her Funeral Obsequies. Being in the Town of Cantannede, in the Presence of several Persons of Note, he solemnly Swore, That he had taken to Wife the Lady Agnes de Castro, at Bragança, Six Years before that time. Then he caused the Witnesses of the Marri∣age, which were Giles Bishop of Guarda, and Stephen Lobato Master of the Robes, to be Examined. This done, the Bishops of Lisbon, Porto, and Visco, the Prior of Sancta Cruz, and other Persons of Note, meeting to∣gether published the said Marriage, and the Causes why it was concealed; as also, the Dispensation granted by Pope John the 22th. in regard that they were within the forbidden Degrees of Consanguinity. An authentick In∣strument to this purpose being formed, several Copies were dispersed, and the Original is still preserved among the Records at Lisbon. Not content herewith, he cau∣sed two Tombs of the whitest Marble, and most exqui∣site Workmanship, to be erected; One of them for himself, and the other for the Lady Agnes, whose Image stood on the Top, with a Crown on her Head, that she might appear like a Queen after her Death. These Tombs were placed in the famous Church of Al∣cobaça. Then entring the Church of S. Clare at Coim∣bra, he caused the Body to be taken up, and being Crowned, and Cloathed in Royal Robes, placed it on a Chair, where his Subjects kissed those Bones that were once beautiful Hands, as being the remains of their law∣ful Queen. After this Ceremony, being put into a Herse, the Corps was conducted to Alcobaça, to be pla∣ced in that rich Urn, with the noblest Attendance, and greatest Grandeur, that has been seen; vast numbers of Noblemen, and Gentlemen, in long Mourning Cloaks, and Ladies in White Mourning Vailes, attended the Fu∣neral. From Coimbra to Alcobaça, it is 17 Leagues, and yet all that Distance was filled with many Thousands of Men, in two Rows, making a continued Lane, with lighted Flambeaus in their Hands. 4. The Unfortunate King Peter of Castile, being drove out of his Kingdom by his Bastard-Brother Henry, as∣sisted
by the French,King Pe∣ter of Ca∣stile, flying from his Rebellious Subjects, is refused Protection in Portu∣gal. and flying from Sevil, after loosing all the Treasure he had amassed, arrived at the Town of Coruche in Portugal, with his two Daughters, Constance and Elizabeth, and thence sent to Advertise our King, then at Coimbra, of his Arrival: That King's Daughter Beatrix, was Travelling another way, to be Married to the Portuguese Prince, her Father not having any fore∣thought of what hapned to him. This Accident much surprized the Portuguese; some were for protecting a rightful King, their Neighbour and Confederate; others were for more safe than honourable Courses, not to em∣broil themselves in the Quarrels of others. This Ad∣vice was followed, and our King made the best Excuse he could, for not entertaining that Unhappy Prince. He failing of this Refuge, withdrew to Albuquerque; but neither was he to be admitted there. He sent to ask a Pass of our King, to Travel through his Dominions into Ga∣licia, and the Earl of Barcelos, and Alvaro Perez de Ca∣stro, were sent to Conduct him: But they not only for∣sook him by the way, but stole from him Elenor, the Daughter of his Bastard-Brother Henry, whom he car∣ried with him. From Galicia he passed over into Eng∣land, where he so grievously Complained to the Prince of Wales against the King of Portugal, that he was forced to send Embassadors to Vindicate himself. In the mean while, the New King, or rather Usurper, Henry, Solici∣ted the Friendship of Portugal; and Embassadors meet∣ting to that Effect, betwixt Badajoz and Elvas, a Treaty was Concluded; And it was Stipulated, That the Casti∣lian should solicite an Accommodation betwixt Aragon and Portugal; and also, That the Aragonian should suf∣fer the Portuguese Princess Mary, Widow of Prince Ferdinand, to return to her Country, if she thought good. 5. About the end of October,Prodigi seen in the Sky. almost Three Months before the Death of our King, was seen a prodigious Al∣teration, or rather Confusion in the heavenly Lumina∣ries. On the 27th. Day at Midnight, all the Stars in a Body began to run from East to West; then suddenly dispersing, they wandred through several parts of the Sphere; next, falling nearer to the Region of the Air, the nearness made them appear like vast Globes of Fire; so that the whole Heaven seemed to be in a Flame, and the Earth threatned to be reduced to Ashes. The Sky
in many places seemed to gape, the Stars being removed. This Spectacle lasting a considerable time, Men stood amazed, expecting the Dissolution of the Universe. Three Months after this Prodigy,King Pe∣ter's Death our King died. It will not be amiss, to give some Instances of his Justice and Magnificence.His Justice and Mag∣nificence. He was not, as some have called him, Cruel; but a zealous lover of Justice, punishing Crimes with the utmost Severity, and rewarding Vertue with Liberality. The Punishments he inflicted, tho' in appearance terrible, were necessary, and well applyed. A Young Man having struck his supposed Father, and the King hearing thereof, called the Mother, and pressed her to tell him who was the Youth's Father; for it was impossible it should be her Husband. She confessed, in some time, a Fryar had got him. Thereupon the King went in Person to the Monastery, and putting the Fryar into a Case of Cork, sawed him in two. One of his Favourites lived in Adultery with a Judge's Wife, for which the King caused his Privities to be cut off. A Priest being suspended for killing a Man, he caused him to be put to Death by a Mason; saying, That the Eccle∣siastical Judges condemned a Priest, for killing a Man, to be suspended from his Office; but he, in his Tribu∣nal, would suspend the Mason from Working, for kil∣ling the Priest. The Bishop of Porto he scourged, for having to do with a Citizen's Wife. He caused a Gentle∣man to be beheaded, for staving a Country-man's Cask, that was full. A Clerk of the Treasury was hanged, for receiving a small Bribe. Hearing a Woman upbraid another with being forced, he asked the cause; and be∣ing told, her Husband ravished her before they were marryed, he caused him to be hanged. Knowing that a Merchant's Wife cuckolded him, one day, when the Merchant was at some Publick Feast, he surprized his Wife, with her Gallant, and burnt them, and then congratulated the Merchant, that he was revenged. A Bawd having procured a Young Woman for the Admi∣ral, Lancelote Pessana, the Bawd was burnt, and the Admiral hardly obtained Pardon, after several Years absence. A Country-man complaining, that a Gentle∣man, to whom he had lent certain Silver Cups, would not restore them; the King kept him in hand a Year, and then caused the Gentleman to pay him Nine times the value, which was then the Penalty of Thieves; and
farther told him, he should be always answerable for the Country-man's Life. A Pursivant complaining, that in the Execution of his Office, a Gentleman had struck him, and torn his Beard, the Gentleman was immedi∣ately beheaded. 6. The Laws he instituted,Laws esta∣blished by him. were religiously observed. One of them condemned Judges, who received Bribes, to Death. To avoid delays in Suits, he established, there should be no Counsellors, Sollicitors, nor Attorneys. He went about the Kingdom in Person, to administer Justice impartially to all Men. Tho' so much subdued himself by the Love of the Lady Agnes de Castro, he suffered no Crime of Incontinency to pass unpunished. Several new Pieces were coined by him, on the one side whereof, was his Effigies sitting in a Chair, holding a naked Sword; on the reverse, the Royal Arms, with these Inscriptions, Peter, King of Portugal and Algarve. God assist me, and make me Victorious over my Enemies. He was so Bountiful, that, like the Emperor Titus, he thought himself not a King the day he gave nothing: To this purpose, he kept always much Plate. He was much addicted to Musick, and used to go abroad at Nights, and dance to the sound of Trumpets. Notwith∣standing his great Liberality, he left a considerable Trea∣sure to his Successor, which he gathered without the least dissatisfaction to his Subjects. In fine, such was his Life, that his Death was generally lamented; and it was in all mens Mouths, That such Ten Years Government never were, nor would again be seen in this Kingdom. Others said, That either he should never have been born, or never have died. 7. This King was of great Stature,His Person, and Inter∣ment. a Majestick Pre∣sence, his Forehead large, his Eyes black and beautiful, his Hair reddish, which he wore long, his Mouth small, his Visage long. He somewhat stammered in his Speech, was addicted to Poetry, and some Verses of his are still extant. He Reigned Ten Years, wanting Two Months, and died in January, 1367.1367. He is buryed by the Lady Agnes de Castro, and his Picture, to the Life, on the Tomb. The Lady Constance, his first Wife, lies in the Church of S. Francis at Santarem. By her he had Issue▪ 1. Lewis, who died an Infant. 2. Ferdinand, who suc∣ceeded in the Throne. 3. Mary, marryed to Ferdinand Prince of Aragon, Son to King Alonso the Fourth.
His Children by the Lady Agnes de Castro were 1. Alonso,His Issue. who died a Child. 2. Denis, who refusing to kiss the Hand of Queen Ellenor, Wife to King Ferdinand, went away to Castile, where he marryed Joanna, Bastard-Daughter to King Henry. 3. John, who by the Advice of Queen Ellenor, killed the Lady Mary Tellez de Me∣neses, his own Wife, and the Queen's Sister. He should have succeeded King Ferdinand, but that King John of Castile kept him Prisoner, and in the mean while his Bastard Brother, called also John, usurped the Crown. In Castile he marryed Constance, Bastard Daughter to King Henry. 4. Beatrix, Wife to D. Sancho, Earl of Albuquerque, Bastard Son to King Alonso XI. of Castile. King Peter had one Bastard Son, called John, Master of the Military Order of Avis; who, after the Death of King Ferdinand, usurped the Crown. CHAP. XI. The First Part of the Life and Reign of Fer∣dinand the first of the Name, and ninth King of Portugal, from the Year 1340. till 1373. 1. FErdinand was the Second Son of King Peter,King Fer∣dinand his Birth. and his Wife Constance. He was Born in the City Coimbra, and succeeded his Father at 27 Years of Age. The Peace and Treasures King Ferdinand inherited,1340. were not at all lasting;1367. for he engaged himself in a War against Castile,He engages in a War against Castile. pretending a Right to that Crown, after the Death of King Peter, as Great Grandson to King Sancho, Henry, the present Possessor, being a Bastard and Regicide. Many Persons of Note, who fled out of Castile, encouraged him in this Enterprize, and many Towns not admitting Henry, offered themselves to Fer∣dinand. He bestowed vast Possessions on several of the Castilians that came over to him, as particularly to Fer∣dinand, Earl of Castro Xeres, and Brother-in-law to King Henry, he gave Fifteen Towns, to D. Alvaro Perez de Castro, his Brother, Eight Towns, the Earldom of
Arroyolos, and the Office of Constable; to Ferdinand Alonso de Zamora, Nineteen Towns, and so to many others, too long to recount, besides Gifts in Money and Jewels, which exhausted the Treasures left by his three Predecessors. Many Cities and Towns also of Castile declared for our King, where he immediately coined Money, bearing the Arms and Titles of both Kingdoms. Our King, in outward appearance, pretended more Zeal to Revenge the Murder of King Peter, than Ambition to joyn that Kingdom to his own. To inculcate this Opinion, he sent Embassadors to the Pope, the King of England, and other Princes, laying before them the hei∣nousness of the Crime, as committed by a Brother a∣gainst his Brother, and by a Subject against his Sove∣raign. 2. Whilst the Embassadors were on their way,Enters into League with the Moorish King of Granada. the King concluded a League with the Moorish King of Gra∣nada for Fifty Years, during which time they were to assist one another, and neither was to pretend any Right to whatsoever Places of Castile were taken by the other; nor was either of them, if assisted with any Troops by his Confederate, to allow them any Pay. For farther Security, King Ferdinand asked of King Peter, the A∣ragonian, his Daughter Ellenor in Marriage, and Em∣bassadors were sent on both sides to agree the Articles, tho' that Lady was before betrothed to John, the Eldest Son of King Henry. The Princess was marryed by Proxy to our King at Lisbon, the Aragonian Embassador repre∣senting her Person. The Articles of Marriage were, That she should bring 100000 Florins Portion; That her Father should make War on Castile two Years; That the Husband should give three Months Pay to 3000 Horse in his Father-in-law's Service. Some Places in Castile were also allotted to the Aragonian, for every Man gives freely of what he has not. Soon after, the Bridegroom that was to have been, but never was, sent a Rich Pre∣sent to Barcelona for the Bride, without expecting the Payment of the 100000 Florins. He also sent Eighteen hundred weight of Gold to be coined, to defray Charges there. To Convoy the Bride, seven beautiful Galleys were fitted out, whereof that which was to carry her, had her Sails of Silk, wrought with Gold, and all that was above Water was gilt. The Rowers were cloathed in the King's Livery, and many gallant Gentlemen went
as Volunteers. Among other things of value there was car∣ried a Crown of inestimable price for the Bride. D. John Alonso Tello, Earl of Barcelos, attended by the Bishops of Evora and Silves, and the Abbot of Alcobaça went Em∣bassadors, and performed the Ceremony of marrying the Princess in his Masters Name. But her Father put off the delivering of her till the Pope's Dispensation was ob∣tained, and times altering, all came to nothing. 3. King Ferdinand began the Wars in Galicia with a small Power; Coruna, and other Places, voluntarily submitted to him. Monterrey was taken by Force, af∣ter it had made a vigorous Defence. But understand∣ing that King Henry drew near with numerous Forces, Ferdinand went away by Sea, to Porto, leaving D. Nun∣no Freyre, Master of the Military Order of Christ, with 400 Horse in Coruna, Alonso Gomez de Lira at Tuy, and others in other Places.1369. Henry to bring our King to Peace,Henry of Castile, in∣vades Por∣tugal. left them and entered Portugal, burning all the Country as far as Braga, where Lope Gomez de Lira made a vigorous Defence, but was forced to abandon the Place, after loosing 48 Men, because he was not re∣leived, and the Town was not Walled nor Garisoned; having Articled to Surrender, if not releived by a cer∣tain time. Henry finding the Place was not Tenable, Burnt it, and removed to Guemaraens, which being bet∣ter Fortified held out against him: Seing he prevailed little by Force, he thought to take it by Stratagem, and to that purpose James Gonzalez de Castro, got into the Place disguished like a Country-Man, but being discover∣ed was put to Death, and his Body exposed to the Dogs. Now it was that Count Ferdinand de Castro, Brother-in-Law to King Henry carried about by him as a Prisoner, made his Escape into the Town with his Keeper Rami∣ro Nunez, and both went into the Portuguese's Service. King Ferdinand, who was then at Coimbra with a nume∣rous Army, with all speed made towards the Castilian, sending before a Herauld to Challenge him, but he drew off by the way of Bragança, Vinaes, and Outeyro, which Places he took. Miranda was Surprized by certain Ca∣stillians, who in Carriers Habit were admitted in: Ceda∣vin after a vigorous resistance was Betrayed by Vasco Estevez, but his Treason tho' not discovered in time to prevent the Loss of the Place, was so soon found that he was Hanged for it. Henry having secured Bragança,
hasted to Castile, for that the King of Granada was now acting with a great Power in Andaluzia. 4. Ferdinand having missed of his Enemy,Several Military Expediti∣ons. divided his Army under several Commanders, Garrisoning all Pla∣ces he was suspicious of. He had recovered most of what was lost, but the People not satisfied with his Proceed∣ings, complained he only knew the way betwixt Lisbon, and Santarem, because he often went from the one Place to the other, whence it became a Proverb, That the Fool goes and comes betwixt Lisbon, and Santarem; when they would express a Man often does the same thing to no purpose. Giles Fernandez with 60 Horse, and 400 Foot, made an Incursion towards Medellin, where he took so great a Booty, that fearing to loose it if pursued, he cau∣sed his Uncle Martin Yannez, to feign himself to be Prince John, and as such to discharge several Prisoners, who reporting his being there with a greater Force than really was, deterred the Enemy from following him. Gon∣zalo Mendez being General, took this Giles Fernandez with him to make an Inroad to Badajoz. The Garrison issued out upon them, and both sides fought with great Resolution. In this Action a Butcher of Lisbon, called Laurence, killed several Castilians. In the mean while Prince John forcing his way into the Suburbs of Badajoz, Burnt them. Gomez Lorenço de Avelar, on the side of Cuidad Rodrigo, took S. Felices, Inojosa, and Cerralvo. Here John Roiz Portocarrero, with only 23 Horse, killed or took almost 80 of the Enemy from Ledesma. This Year ended with a Fire at Lisbon, which Burnt down all the then Smiths Street, it is now the Confectioners. 5. As the Last Year ended in Fire,1370. so this began with storms of Rain and Wind,Great Storms. which were so Violent, that the Gate of the Cathedral, tho' fastned with Iron Locks and Bolts, was carried into the middle of the Church; the Ships in the Harbour being drove from their Anchors were dashed into pieces; but the Gallies escaped better by lying in the Mouth of the River Guadalquiir. The great Rains, and also the Moors who infested his Fron∣tiers, obliged King Henry to quit the Siege of Cuidad Rodrigo. The Queen his Wife in Person had distressed Alonso Lopez de Tejada, in Carmona, so that he agreed to Surrender the Place it not releived by a Day prefixed, and gave up his Two Sons as Hostages. Misser Gregorio a Campomoro, with only 60 Men, made his way through
the Camp into the Town, at the Day prefixed, the Queen threatned to execute his Sons; he bid her do so, for he was able to get others; and so he persisting Obsti∣nate, they were beheaded; all Men calling that Barba∣rity, which he thought would be accounted Magnanimi∣ty; but it could not be such, being a breach of Promise. Thirty two Portuguese Galleys had been a Year upon the Coast, under the Command of the Admiral Lancelot Pes∣sano, a Genoese. The Castilians, when this Fleet appear∣ed before Barrameda, scoffed at our Men, for that having refused Aid to King Peter,The Portu∣guese Fleet, wastes the Island of Cadiz. whilst living, they now pre∣tended to Defend him after he was Dead. But they in Revenge, destroyed the Island of Cadiz, and the Shores of the Continent, till the severity of the Winter and Diseases almost consumed them. The Fleet of Castile coming out of Sevil, took a Portuguese Ship that had Money and Provisions on Board, and then shut up our Admiral Pessano in the River, to oblige him to Fight in that narrow Place. He fitted out Two Fireships which dispersed the Enemy, and in that time he escaped, ha∣ving lost one Galley. 6. Carmona still held out,1371. but fearing the Power of King Henry, sent a Gentlemen to our King Ferdinand for Succour, according to his promise. This being refused, the Town was obliged to Surrender. There was in it a considerable Treasure of King Peter's, and Two of his Bastard-Sons who were cast into Prison. Pope Gregory the 11th. sent Two Nuncio's to Mediate a Peace betwixt the Two Kings, which was concluded at Alcoutin in Al∣garve, upon these Conditions,Peace con∣cluded at the in∣stance of the Pope. That they should be obli∣ged to assist one another; That the Portuguese should be a Friend to Charles King of France, that he should take to Wife Ellenor, Henry's Daughter; That he should have with her Cuidad Rodrigo, Valencia de Alcantara, Monte-Mayor, Alhariz, and a Summ of Money; That a general Pardon should be granted on both sides. Thus our King broke his Word with him of Aragon, who in revenge kept all the Treasure that had been sent to his Daughter. King Ferdinand finding his Treasures exha∣sted, called in the Old Money, and enhanced the Value of the New, which did great Harm, and much more when he endeavoured afterwards to rectifie that Error. The Five Months allowed for the Princess Ellenor to come out of Castile were now expiring, when the King
falling in Love with the Lady Ellenor Tellez de Meneses, forgot his Bride. This Lady Ellenor Tellez was Wife to John Lorenço de Cunha Lord of Pombeyro. He fell in Love with her at his Sister's, the Princess Beatrix, where he was always so assiduous, as gave occasion to suspect him guilty of a more than Brotherly Affection. This Lady being about to return into the Country, whence she came, the King ordered her Sister who attended the Princess, to stay her in Town, for he would marry no other Woman. The Sister objected, that he was enga∣ged to the Princess of Castile, and her Sister Married. The First, he replyed, might be easily put by; and as for the latter, he said, she being Married to a Kinsman without Dispensation, the Marriage was void. All which gave the Lady Ellenor to understand the King's Affection was not at all Nice. 7. Scarce had she consented when her Marriage being called in question,The Lady Ellenor being di∣vorced from her First Hus∣band, the King mar∣ries her. and the Husband not opposing it, Judgment was easily obtained for the K. Hereupon her Husband went away to Castile and there publickly wore a pair of Golden Horns. In fine, Ferdinand Married the Lady Ellenor. The whole Kingdom was astonished at this Action, but Lisbon shewed it self above all other Places. Here a Taylor, called Ferdinand Vasquez, a bold well-spoken Fellow, gathered 3000 of the People, and with them went to the Pallace, nothing being heard but Reproaches against the New Queen.A great meeting at Lisbon on account of the Marri∣age. To appease them, the King protested he was not Married to her, and promised the next Day to hear them, when they were Calmer, at the Church of S. Dominick. By Day, the Multitude was in the broad Place before that Church; but the King fearing the popular Fury, was already gone away to Santarem. When the People understood it, they vented their Malice in Reproaches, and this made the Queen stir up the King to Revenge. The Taylor was apprehended, and many of his Followers; some where∣of had their Hands, others their Feet cut off; many more fled, now too late understanding, that Subjects ought to have no other Redress against the Miscarrages of their Sovereigns, than by their Prayers to God. In the mean while, the King traversed the Kingdom with his beloved Consort, till being come to the pleasant Mon∣astery of Leça, Two Leagues from Porto, he then decla∣red, what he denied at Lisbon; to wit, That he was
Married to the Lady Ellenor, and assigned her a greater Joynture than any Queen before her ever had. 8. All the Nobility kissing the Queen's Hand, only Prince Denis Son to the late King, by the Lady Agnes de Castro refused it, for which the King offered to Stab him, but was prevented, and the Prince fled to Coimbra. Tho many of the Multitude were punished, the clamours of the People against the King's Marriage ceased not, nor were they continued without reason, for that Mar∣riage was in reality unlawful; she being the true Wife of John Lorenço. Ferdinand at last remembring he was contracted to the Princess of Castile, sent to inform her Father, That tho he could not perform that Article, he would fulfil all the rest. That Prince did not seem at all to be concerned, but Embassadors were sent on both sides to Ratifie the Peace.The New Queen gains Friends by her Genero∣sity. The New Queen having gained a Crown by her Beauty, sought now to gain the Affections of the Nobility by her Bounty, and she at∣tained her end in a great Measure, for many who before railed, having tasted of her Favours, began to extol her Generosity. Besides, the more to bend them to her, she married all her Relations among the Nobility. 9. King Ferdinand still pursuing his inconstant Hu∣mour,King Fer∣dinand joyns in League with John of Ghent against Castile. began again to break with Castile, taking some Ships of that Crown in the River of Lisbon, and enter∣ing into a Confederacy with John Duke of Lancaster, Third Son to Edward the Third King of England, and married to Constance the Eldest Daughter of King Peter of Castile, in whose right he stiled himself King. It was agreed, they should joyntly make War upon the Kings of Castile and Aragon; That they should bear an equal part in the expence of the War, and that King Fer∣dinand should have all he could take in Castile, except∣ing Towns and Castles; That each should have what he could gain in Aragon. King Henry sent an Embassador to Protugal, to protest against these proceedings, but to no effect. Hereupon, Henry marched with his Army to∣wards Lisbon, his Admiral Misser Ambrosio Bocanegra at the same time entring the River Tagus with 12 Galleys. About the middle of September he set forward from Zamora,Henry of Castile in∣vades Por∣tugal and by the way took Almeyda, Pinnel, Linnares, Cerolico, and Viseo, where Prince Denis offended at King Ferdinand, offered his Service to him. They marched to Coimbra, from whence Ferdinand was newly gone to
Santarem, and here Henry quartered in the Suburbs. Our King being less forward to Fight than he had been to give the Occasion;1373. Henry marched without observing much order,He Quar∣ters in the Suburbs of Lisbon. towards Lisbon, about the end of February. The King, and those that were with him, could from the Walls of Santarem discover the Enemy marching to∣wards Lisbon, yet had not the Courage to attack them. Lisbon being surprized, Henry entred at S. Antony's Gate, and took up his Quarters in the Monastery of S. Francis; the People retired to the stronger parts of the Town. Our Fleet had been sent to hinder the Castilian Squadron from entring the Port, but our Ships were taken by them, and only 4 of our Galleys escaped, saving themselves in the Creeks. The People of Lisbon understanding there was a design to betray the City; dragged one of the Con∣spirators about the Streets, and then cut him in pieces; a∣nother was exposed to the sails of a Mill, which cast him into the River. The Franciscan Friars, where the King quartered, thought to have expelled him thence; but their design being discovered, he put them into Boats, without Sails or Oars, and exposed them to the mercy of the Sea; yet they got a Shoar. The Castilians posses∣sed the Skirts of the Town, and many Skirmished dayly hapned. In the mean while, the Earl of Gijon, King Henry's Son, took Cascaes at the Mouth of Tagus, whilst several Parties wasted the Country.Most of the City Burnt The Lisbonians not able to expel the Enemy out of the Suburbs, fired the Houses; and they, in requital, set Fire to the Rua-nova, or New Street, and so the greatest part of the City was Burnt. The Country betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, was no less infested by the Forces of Galicia, which routed a Portuguese Body that came to oppose them. 10. Such was the posture of Affairs,Peace con∣cluded. when in the Month of March, Guido of Bononia, a Cardinal, was sent by the Pope to compose these Differences; and towards the latter end of that Month the Peace was concluded, upon these Conditions. That both the Kings should joyn with him of France, against the King of England, and Duke of Lancaster; That the Portuguese should fur∣nish a Fleet, for Three Years, to be maintained by the Castilians; That the English should not be supplied with Ammunition from Portugal; That the Portuguese should expel the Castilians that followed him; That a general Pardon should be granted on both sides; That the Prin∣cess
Beatrix, Sister to King Ferdinand, should be mar∣ried to Sancho Lord of Albuquerque, Brother to King Henry,The Two Kings meet in friendly manner. The two Kings met upon the Banks of the Ri∣ver Tagus, and parted in Friendly manner. In pursu∣ance of the Treaty of Peace, Count Sancho married the Lady Beatrix, and the Wedding was kept with great So∣lemnity. A Match was also agreed betwixt Elizabeth, Bastard-Daughter to our King, and Alonso Earl of Gijon, Bastard-Son to King Henry. Thus ended the War, to the Satisfaction of both Kings; but with the Desolation of their Kingdoms. CHAP. XII. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of Ferdinand the First of the Name, and Ninth King of Portugal, from the Year 1373. till 1383. 1. KIng Ferdinand had not yet forgot the Treasure de∣tained from him by the King of Aragon,1374. in re∣turn of his Mutability.Ferdi∣nand en∣ters into a League with the King of Castile, a∣gainst the King of A∣ragon. He thereupon meditated Re∣venge, but it was hard to compass. It happened the King of Castile fell at Variance with the Aragonian, and our King joyned in League with the former against the other. But the Castilian knowing the inconstancy of Ferdinand, soon came to agreement with the Aragonian. The more to bind the Portuguese to him, he proposed a Match be∣twixt our Princess Beatrix, and his own Bastard-Son Fre∣derick.1375. This Match being approved of by the Cortes at Leyria; they were married by Proxy, and the King of Castile Swore to perform the Articles of the Treaty,1376. on the 19th. of January.1377. Our King being forsaken by the Castilian,Prince John pri∣vately marries Mary, Si∣ster to Queen El∣lenor. concluded a League against Aragon, with Lewis Duke of Anjou, Son to the King of France. Prince John of Portugal, falling in Love with the Lady Mary, Sister to the then Queen Ellenor, raised also by her Beau∣ty to the Throne, he was privately married to her. But Queen Ellenor, instead of rejoycing at the Advancement of her Sister, fearing that the King dying without Issue,
she might come to be Queen, contrived her Death; and to compass her ends, she perswaded the Prince she would Marry him to the Princess Beatrix, the King's only Daughter, and by that means secure him the Succession of the Crown. At the same time she accused her Sister of defiling his Bed.He Murders her. The Prince, moved with Hope and Revenge, hasted to Coimbra, and breaking in upon the Innocent Lady, murdered her as she leaped naked out of Bed, and taking Horse, fled to secure himself and his followers. As soon as the News of this Action came to Court,1378. the Queen went into deep Mourning. The Prince easily obtained his Pardon, and coming to Court, began to sollicit the Conclusion of the Match before pro∣posed to him by the Queen, with the Lady Beatrix; but finding nothing in her but Deceit, he retired to the Province that lies betwixt Duero and Minho, and thence fled to Castile, where he was kept from the Crown of Portugal, which would have fallen to him, as we shall see in the next Reign, had he not fled for killing his Wife. 2. A mighty Solar Eclipse preceded the Death of Henry,A great Eclips of the Sun. King of Castile, which happened on the 30th. of May. Embassadors went immediately from Portu∣gal, to propose to John, the new King, a Match betwixt his Eldest Son Ferdinand, then a Year old, and Beatrix, Princess of Portugal, tho' she was before contracted to Frederick,1380. King Henry's Bastard Son. The Castilian approving of this Proposal, sent his Embassadors to Portugal, who concluded upon the Articles of Marriage. But notwithstanding this so late Capitulation,King Fer∣dinand underhand treats with the Dukes of Lanca∣ster and York a∣bout sub∣dung of Castile King Fer∣dinand, hoping to gain some Advantage over the Young King, resolved upon War. John Fernandez Andeyro, one of them expelled Portugal, upon the Pacification with King Henry, was at this time in England, to whom private Instructions were sent, to treat with the Duke of Lancaster, and Edmund, Duke of York, for Succours. They espoused the Cause, and Andeyro came away with the News to Portugal, where the King being at Estremoz, kept him up in a Tower, that the Design might not take Air, nor he seem to Entertain any of the Fugitives. It fell out the Queen spoke sometimes with Andeyro in this Retirement; and as Queens are but Women, their Familiarity became scandalous; for she who had for∣saken her Lawful Husband for a King, now abandoned
that King for a Private Man, whom she raised to the honour of an Earl. After some time, the King ordered him to appear publickly at Leyria, as if newly come from England, and there, as had been agreed, he was apprehended for coming into Portugal without leave. Within a few days he was again set at Liberty, and it was given out, he should lose his Head if he stay'd in the Kingdom. Under this Pretence he returned to England, to sollicite the execution of the Treaty concluded. 3. King John understanding that Edmund, Duke of York, raised Forces in England, to Conquer Castile for his Brother the Duke of Lancaster, who had a Right to it by his Wife, the Daughter of King Peter, and that he intended to assist the King of Portugal; marched now as far as Zamora, fitted out his Fleet at Sevil, and sent Ferdinand Osores, Master of the Knights of Santiago, to secure Badajoz. The King of Portugal had already fitted out 22 Galleys at Lisbon, and sent Commanders to all the Frontiers. The first Action of King Ferdinand was the demolishing the Walls of his own City of Evora, which were so strong, that three Years were spent in that Work. The Portuguese Fleet, commanded by the Earl John Alonso Tello, the Queen's Brother, set out from Lisbon, and in the Sea of Algarve met with the Fleet of Castile, consisting of 17 Galleys, under the Command of Ferdinand Sanchez de Toar. He being inferiour in number, endeavoured to shun coming to an Engage∣ment: But our Admiral pursues and comes up with him off of Saltes,All the Portu∣guese Fleet, ex∣cept one Galley, ta∣ken by the Castilians. having left behind 8 Galleys, that went to take in some Fisher-Boats. Toar seeing our Galleys dispersed, bravely boards and takes 12 of the first that came up, and afterwards, Seven of the Eight that were behind. Only one of our Galleys escaped, to bring the News to Lisbon, the rest were carryed in Tri∣umph to Sevil. Few were killed in this Engagement, but the Prisoners amounted to 6000. In the mean time, the Master Ferdinand Osores, infested the Frontiers with frequent Excursions from Badajoz. Peter Alvarez Pe∣reyra, Prior of Crato, marched with 1000 Lances, and 4000 Cross-bow-Men in quest of him, but came too late, for he was retired to Badajoz. King John streightly besieged the Town of Almeyda, thither came to him Prince John, who was fled from Portugal on account of killing his Wife, and offered, with the assistance of some
banished Portugueses, to cause Lisbon to be delivered up to the King. Upon this, he appeared before Lisbon with six Galleys, but being disappointed of his Design, re∣turned back to Sevil. 4. King Ferdinand sent his Chancellor, Laurence Yannez Fogaça, into England, to hasten the promised Succours. The Duke of York set Sail from Plymouth with 3000 Men,1381. and entred the River of Lisbon on the 19th. of July.The Duke of York arrives at Lisbon with 3000 Men With him came the Princess his Wife, and many Ladies, as also his Son Edward, and some of the ba∣nished Portugueses, among whom was Andeyro, who came not so much to serve the King in his Wars, as the Queen in her Amours, the King's Sickness administring a favourable Opportunity. The King went aboard to receive the new Guests, who were lodged in the Mona∣stery of S. Dominick, where Rich Presents were bestowed upon them, and they were sumptuously entertained. The King was by the Treaty obliged to furnish the Eng∣lish with Horses, and he gave them more Mules than Horses, for there were scarce any in the Kingdom, and he gave such as could be had. The Duke of York ad∣vised our King to adhere to Pope Ʋrban, and disown the Anti-Pope Glement, which the King willingly com∣plyed with;A Schism in the Church. The Duke of York's Son con∣tracted to the Princess Beatrix. for there being then a Schism in the Church, the English would not hear the Masses said by Portuguese Priests, because they acknowledged the Anti-Pope. Ed∣ward, the Duke's Son, was solemnly contracted to the Princess Beatrix, they being both about six Years of Age. Elvas was at that time besieged by the Castilians, who hearing of the Arrival of the English, raised the Siege, and departed. The English committed many Outrages in Lisbon, and being ordered to March against Castile, did no less harm in the Country as they went, which was the cause that many of them were cut off by the Pertugueses. D. John Alonso, Earl of Ourem, and the Queen's Brother, dying, the Queen gave his Title and Honours to her Gallant, John Fernandez Andeyro. He was a marryed Man, and his Wife in Galicia. The King, to take him from the Queen, caused his Wife to come to Court, and the Queen endeavoured to gain her with Gifts, which she received, yet at the same time openly spoke of the Queen whatsoever her Jealousie dictated. 5. This Year another Powerful Fleet of Castile from Biscay entred the River Tagus,1382. and meeting no Opposi∣tion,
destroyed some Vessels;The Fleet of Castile again ra∣vages the Coast. then Landing, they burnt three Royal Palaces, and ravaged all that Coast. At lengh, Peter Alvarez Pereyra, Prior of Crato, with 200 Horse, cut off almost all the Party of the Enemy, and recovered the Booty they carryed away, which was some check to them for the future. Nunno Alvarez Pereyra lay in Ambush with 24 Horse, and 30 Foot, near the Bridge of Alcantara, there he put to flight 20 of the Enemy, who fled to the Shoar. The Enemy increasing to about 250, his Men refused to Engage at such odds, and he, to draw them on, run upon them alone, where his Horse fell upon him, but his Men coming to his Rescue, brought him off, the Castilians at the same time retiring to their Vessels. The Queen having in Publick rent a Veil in two, and given one half to her Gallant, John Fernandez Andeyro, and the other to Count Gonçalo, for that they were sweaty, and had no Handkerchiefs to wipe their Faces, for it seems they were not then used in Portugal; Gonzalo Vasquez de Azevedo, her Cousin, re∣proached her with it; and she, in Revenge, accused him, and John, Bastard Son to the late King, of holding In∣telligence with the Spaniards. Hereupon they were both committed to Prison. She contrived to put them to Death, but failing in her Projects, set them at Liberty, and shewed extraordinary Kindness to them both, the better to disguise her Practices against them, as also since she had failed to destroy them, to bind them to her In∣terest. 6. The Master of the Knights of Avis being now at Liberty,The Eng∣lish and Portu∣guese take Towns in Castile. joyned with some English, and making toge∣ther 200 Horse, and 4000 Foot, they marched to Castile, and laid Siege to Lobo, which they took, the English being the first that entred. Cortijo fell into their hands, and was more hardly used; for tho the Priests appeared on the Walls with the Blessed Sacrament, the English put all to the Sword, in Revenge of one of theirs that was killed. The Kings of Castile and Portugal were now at the Head of their Armies, the former at Badajoz, the latter at Elvas, ready to decide their Quarrel by Battle. King Ferdinand Knighted 24 of his own Peo∣ple and the English; but being told, he could not, tho' a King, confer that Honour, because he had not received it himself, he caused the Duke of York to Knight him, and then repeated the Ceremony to those 24 Knights.
The whole Day was spent by both Armies looking upon each other, and at last, the one drew back to Badajoz, and the other to Elvas. What the cause of parting so should be▪ cannot certainly be assigned; but some said, The Castilian feared the English, who had been before victorious in Castile, to which the Duke of Lancaster had a good Title, and had been once proclaimed by part of the Army. Whatever it was, a Treaty of Peace was immediately set a foot, none knowing who had first mo∣ved for it. Embassadors being sent on both Sides, the Articles were at length agreed upon, without the Know∣ledge of the English;Peace con∣cluded without the Know∣ledge of the Eng∣lish. and were, first, That the Princess Beatrix, lately contracted to Edward, Son to the Duke of York, should marry Prince Ferdinand, King John's second Son, having before been promised to the eldest. But this Match was better liked, to prevent the Union of the Two Crowns. Secondly, That the Twenty two Gal∣leys, taken by the Castilians, should be restored. Third∣ly, That a general Pardon should be granted on both sides. Fourthly, That the King of Castile should fur∣nish Ships to carry the English Home, as if he had sent for them. When these Articles were to have been rati∣fied, the Castilian demurred, as to restoring the Gallies, and sending Home the English: The Embassadors here∣upon challenged him, in their Master's Name; and he scornfully answered, I did not think he had so much Cou∣rage. Nevertheless, through the Perswasion of the Ma∣ster of the Knights of Santiago, he ratify'd the Peace. 7. The Peace was proclaimed at Elvas, which made the English rail,After the Peace, King Ferdi∣nand a∣gain sub∣mits to the Anti∣pope. for that it was concluded without their Knowledge; and the King put them off the best he could. At this time came to the Court Cardinal Peter de Luna, an Aragonian, sent by the Anti-Pope Clement, requiring King Ferdinand to acknowledge him again, for he had cast him off at the Request of the English. The King assembled some learned Men, and the worst Advice was followed, for he again submitted himself to the Schismatical Pope.1383. In the mean while died Ellenor Queen of Castile;The King of Castile marries the Daugh∣ter of King Ferdi∣nand. and King Ferdinand forgetting he refus'd his Daughter to the eldest Son of Castile, to pre∣vent Disputes about the Succession▪ now offered her to the Father. His Offer was accepted, and this Princess at last found a Husband, the fifth time she had been con∣tracted: For she was first promised to Dke Frederick;
secondly, to Henry Prince of Castile; thirdly, to Ferdi∣nand his Brother; fourthly, to the Duke of York; and now lastly to King John. She proved a Pattern of Cha∣stity, for her Husband dying whilst she was yet very young, and being courted by several Princes, she an∣swered, That Women of Honour did not marry twice. The Archbishop of Santiago came to Portugal to receive the Bride, the King being then at Salvatierra, upon the River Tagus. It was agreed, That in case King Ferdi∣nand died without Heirs, his Daughter should inherit, and after her her Issue; but if she had none, then King John should succeed; and that if King John, his new Queen, and the Princess Ellenor, Wife to the Prince of Navar, died without Heirs, before King Ferdinand, then he should inherit the Crown of Castile. That till the new Queen of Castile had a Son Fourteen Years of Age, Queen Ellenor her Mother should govern Portugal. Thus it appears, the future Pretensions of the King of Castile to the Crown of Portugal, were just, as were Queen El∣lenor's to the Government; and that the succeeding King John was an Usurper, having no lawful Title to the Crown. 8. King Ferdinand being Sick,King Fer∣dinand falls sick. his Queen Ellenor con∣ducted the Princess, then not full Thirteen Years of Age, to Elvas. When both Parties had sworn the Per∣formance of Articles, the King and his Bride met, in Tents near that City. Such was Queen Ellenor's Beauty, that the Castilians seeing her said, King Ferdinand were much to blame, had he not loved her, having seen her; or if, having loved her, he had not made her a Queen. Here the Cardinal of Luna produced a Dispensation for them to marry, they being within the prohibited Degrees of Consanguinity; after which there was a most splendid Entertainment. Then they returned to Elvas, where the nuptial Rites were solemnly performed with extraordina∣ry Pomp; and after all publick Testimonies of Joy, and Demonstrations of Grandeur were over, the King of Castile gave rich Presents to all the Portuguese Gentry. Queen Ellenor returning to Almada, where King Ferdi∣nand lay sick, and intimating, That she liked not the King of Castile; The Master of the Order of Avis, commended his Sense and Modesty; to which she an∣swered, That is true, but I would have a Man be more a Man. At last, King Ferdinand being convinc'd of the extravagant Familiarity that was betwixt the Queen, and
Count John Fernandez Andeyro, and being unwilling by punishing to expose her Weakness, or to lose her he so passionately loved, he ordered the Master of the Knights of Avis to make him away privately. But though he performed not at this time what was enjoyned him, yet afterwards he murdered him in the Revolution that happened when the Order was void. 9. The King now spent with Sickness, removed from Almada to Lisbon,1383. where he died very Penitent, on the 24th. of October, 1383.Ferdi∣nand dies▪ He was almost Forty four Years of Age, reigned Seventeen, and was buried with Pomp, in the Quire of the Monastery of S. Francis, at Santarem. His Presence was so Graceful and Majestick, that through any Disguise he appeared to be a King, his Visage was long, his Complexion fair, as was his Hair, and his Eyes sparkling.His Cha∣racter▪ The great Expence of his Wars obliged him to enhance the price of the Money, where∣of he coined several Sorts; but after his Wars ceased, all the Coin was restor'd to its intrinsick Value. He remo∣ved the University, erected by King Denis at Coimbra, to Lisbon, but it afterwards returned to the same Place from whence he brought it. He was rather Prodigal than Liberal, which may appear by the many Towns we have mentioned he gave to the Castilians that came over to him. As to his other Gifts, one Instance will serve to demonstrate the rest. To John Alonso de Moxi∣ca, one of the Castilian Gentlemen that came over to Portugal, besides Towns and Lands, he gave, in one Day, 50 Horses, 30 Mules, 3 Suits of Armour, 30000 Marks of Plate, and 4 Sumptures loaded with rich Tapistry. He pulled down the Roman Walls of Ebora, to build New. And thus, though unfortunate in all his Under∣takings, he secured to himself the Love of all Men. 10. His lawful Issue was,His Issue. first, Beatrix, married to King John the first of Castile; they wronged her who said she was Daughter to Count Fernandez Andeyro, for she was Eight Years of Age when he begun to be fami∣liar with the Queen. Secondly, A Son, who died in his Infancy. Thirdly, Another in the same nature. One Bastard Daughter he had, married to Alonso, Earl of Gijon, Bastard Son to King Henry the second of Castile, from whom sprung the Family of the Noronhas. The END of THE THIRD BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PORTUGAL. The Fourth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Birth, Education, and Actions of John, Bastard Son to King Peter of Portugal: His Promotion to be Protector of the King∣dom; and Wars with Castile; from the Year 1357. till the end of 1384. 1. JOHN, Bastard Son to King Peter, by Teresa Alonso of Galicia, was born at Lisbon, on the 22d. of April, 1357.1357. In his Infancy he was kept by Laurence de Lyria,John, Ba∣stard Son to King Pe∣ter, aspires to the Crown. a noted Citizen; then deli∣vered to Nunho Freyre de Andrade, Master of the Or∣der of Christ, who presented him to the King at the Age of Seven Years, asking for him the Mastership of the Order of Avis, then vacant, by the Death of D. Mar∣tin de Avelar. This was the first time his Father saw him, and having Knighted him, gave him that Honour.
He was sent to receive it at Avis, a Convent of that Or∣der, and was there educated, till of Age to bear Arms. His Actions till the Death of King Ferdinand, have been related; it now remains to recount what he did af∣terwards. The late King, in his Will, left the Admini∣stration of the Government to his Wife Queen Ellenor, in pursuance of what had been Stipulated with King John of Castile, upon his marrying the Lady Beatrix, lawful Daughter to King Ferdinand; tho the unbridled Malice of the Multitude Defamed her with the Name of Count John Fernandez Andeyro his Daughter. Queen Ellenor entred upon the Government with Extraordi∣nary tokens of Grief for the Death of the King her Hus∣band. The Council of the City of Lisbon advised her not to be so negligent in the Government as her Hus∣band had been; and she answered them so graciously, that they went away well satisfied. The King of Ca∣stile immediately sent Embassadors to condole her Loss, and at the same time to require himself to be proclaimed King in the Right of his Wife, and in pursuance of the late Capitulations. Scarce was this mentioned throughout the Kingdom, when a general reluctancy appeared in the Countenances of all Men. D. Henry Manuel de Villena, Earl of Sea, and Unkle to the King Castile, was ordered to Proclaim him in Lisbon, but was opposed by D. Al∣vare Perez de Castro, in behalf of King Peter's lawful Issue by the Lady Agnes de Castro. The same happened at Santarem, Elvas, and in most Places of the Kingdom. King John proposed his Title, by his Embassador, to the City of Lisbon, but it was not favourably received. 2. The First contrivance of the Master of Avis,Before his Assuming the Crown, he Murders Count John Fernan∣dez An∣deyro. with some others, was to Murder the Count John Fernandez, the Queen's Favourite; and the said Master being ap∣pointed General of the Country, betwixt the Rivers Ta∣gus and Guadiana, he marched Three Leagues from Lis∣bon, whence suddenly returning with armed Men, he rushed into the Place, and there Murdered the Un∣happy Count. The Queen, when she heard it, said, He has died a Martyr, and I will to Morrow, in proof of it, undergo the Trial of Ordeal. Next, she went to know of the Master, whether she also must die; and a civil An∣swer was returned, to quiet her. The Rabble, raised by the clamours of one of the Master's Pages, who cryed he would be killed in the Palace, flocked thither, and
would certainly have destroyed the Queen, had not D. John, the Master of Avis, looked out at the Window. He seeing the Multitude on his side, went away, follow∣ed by them to the great Market, called Recio, to Dine with the Queen's Brother, the Earl of Barcelos, who was consenting to the Murder. The Bishop of Lisbon was then also at Dinner at his House, and with him the Prior of Guimaraens, and a Notary of Silves. They hearing the Tumult, got up into the Belfrey, where the People seeing them, called out to have the Bells ring. They not regarding to obey these Tumultuary Shouts, the Rabble broke in, and cast them headlong from the Tower, then dragged them to the Market called Recio, where they lay naked and exposed to the Dogs, till the next Day. D. John, after Dinner, went to Court, to beg the Queen's Pardon for murdering the Count. She took little Notice of him, but threatned the Kingdom with the Power of Castile; yet fearing the Rabble, she went away from Lisbon to Alenquer, praying to God, at her departure, that she might see the City burnt. 3. Don John fearing the Power of the Queen, resol∣ved to go away into England; but the more this was rumoured, the more the Multitude pressed him to stay, and protect them against Castile. He made some seem∣ing opposition, but was soon brought to comply. A Council was named, where it was resolved that D. John should marry Queen Ellenor, for defence of the King∣dom; and that if the King of Castile had ever a Son by Queen Beatrix, the Government should continue in D. Jn and the Queen, till that Son came to Age. Here ceased all the Reproaches that had been cast upon the Queen, who when this Overture was made to her, re∣jected it with Scorn. Nevertheless he was declared Pro∣tector of the Kingdom,He is de∣clared Pro∣tector of the King∣dom. by the Commonalty, in the Church of S. Dominick; and because most of the Nobi∣lity were absent then, they were summoned to meet in the Town-House, where the chief of them being dubious what to do, one Alonso Jannez, a Cooper, stept into the midst of them, and laying his Hand on his Sword, threatned such as should refuse their Consent; and they fearing the Multitude, consented to what had been done in the Church of S. Dominick. Thus was D. John, Ma∣ster of Avis, entrusted with the Government and De∣fence of the Kingdom. His First Action that gained
him Reputation, was the Prudent Choice he made of Counsellors, not according to Men's Quality, but their Ability. Next, to secure many of his Party, he distri∣buted a considerable Treasure belonging to those that followed the Queen, or sided with Castile, amongst them, and promised a general Pardon for all Crimes but Trea∣son; not considering that the only Treason was to sup∣port him. 4. The Queen began to think herself in Danger at Alenquer,The Castle of Lisbon taken by the Pro∣tector▪ and therefore leaving Vasco Perez de Camoens Governour there, she went away to Santarem. Here Nun∣no Alvarez Pereyra who had been Educated by her, for∣sook her and went away to Lisbon, where he was admit∣ted into the Council of State. D. John Alonso the Queen's Brother was Governour of the Castle of Lisbon, and Martin Alonso Valente was within as his Lieutenant. Alonso Yannez Nogueira got in with some Men, sent by the Queen to Re-inforce the Garrison. These refusing to deliver up their Trust to the New Protector, they were Besieged, and the Assailants threatning to Sacrifice their Wives and Children, before their Faces, if they held out; they surrendred the Place. The Nobility who op∣posed D. John, called the Commonalty, that followed him, The People of the Messiah; because they seemed to Adore him. And the Rabble termed them Schismaticks and Traitors. Several Places then in the Hands of the Nobility, were easily wrested from them by the Com∣monalty, as Beja, Portalegre, Evora, and others. Now the Rabble being uppermost, began throughout the Kingdom to commit the most execrable Villanies,Barbari∣ties of the rebelliou Rabble. un∣der the Pretence of defending their Country. It was an unpardonable Offence, even to name Castile; And the Lady Joanna Perez Ferreyrim, Abbess of the Monastery of Castres, seeing a Man ill used for that pretended Crime modestly reproved their Cruelty, but such was their Rage, that tho' she fled into the great Church, and embraced the Sanctuary, in which the Holy Sacrament is kept, there they gave her several Wounds, then drag∣ging her from the Altar, tore off her Vail; next they cut off her Coats so high, as modesty forbids to utter, which done she was dragged into the Market, and there hewed in pieces; Lastly, the Body was dragged to the Place where they shut up the Cattle, and left there; till some Charitable Body buried it by Night. To compleat this
Sacrilege they returned to the Monastery, designing to Murder all the Nuns, but they withdrew themselves from their Fury. 5. Queen Ellenor seeing her self in manifest Danger,Queen E∣lenor flies to Castile. fled to her Son-in-Law the King of Castile, who espous∣ed his own Quarrel in her. The First thing he did was to secure Prince John, Son to the Lady Agnes de Castro; by that means to cut off the Hopes the Portuguese might have of a lawful Successor. But the Portuguese ceased not to Encourage D. John to proceed in the Defence of the Kingdom, and he the more to try them seemed doubtful, and spread some Reports, as if he would de∣part the Countrey. But finding an inclination in the Multitude towards Prince John, the more to exasperate them against Castile, he caused a Standard to be made, in which that Prince was drawn to the Life, loaded with Chains;The Pro∣tector his contri∣vances to Usurp the Crown. which being carried about the City, enraged the People against the King of Castile. Thus pretending to Revenge the Wrong, done to the Prince, he gained the means of Establishing himself in the Throne; and stirred up all the Kingdom to defend it self, against Ca∣stile. The Commonalty every where took his Part, but not the Nobility. Yet he believing he could not prevail without Forreign Aid, asked it of Richard King of Eng∣land, at the same time perswading the Duke of Lanca∣ster, to assert the Right he had to the Crown of Castile, by his Wife. The Embassador's Proposals were admit∣ted, and much Money advanced to them for the Expence of the War, with which, and some good Troops they returned. The Earl of Gijon, Bastard-Brother to the King of Castile, and Elizabeth his Wife, Bastard-Daugh∣ter to the late King of Portugal, were both secured in Castile, on Account of holding Correspondence in Por∣tugal. The King and Queen of Castile, removed from Puebla de Montalvan, to Toledo, where against their be∣ing proclaimed, Standards were made with the Arms of both Kingdoms. And now it was debated in Council, whether Portugal ought presently to be invaded. The wiser sort were for trying all obliging Methods First, but the hotter Youths, allowed of nothing but force of Arms; and this Advice as followed. 6. The King marched to the City Guarda, which was delivered to him by the Bishop, but Alvaro Gil, Gover∣nour of the Castle would not Surrender. The Towns
of Cerolico,The King of Castile in∣vades Por∣tugal. Bedado, and Linhares, were also put into his Hands. Some other Places submitted conditionally, that the King should fulfil the Articles of Marriage. Queen Ellenor sent to perswade the King to proceed, and meet her at Santarem. Several Places submitted them∣selves to him in his way, and being come to Santarem, the First Resolution of Queen Ellenor was, to request he would revenge the  done to her. The K. answer∣ed, he could not  quarrel, unless she would resign up the ; which she accord∣ingly did, and then they  Town. Here the King took . On the right side of the Royal , were the Arms of Castile and Le∣on, and on the left, those of Portugal. The Royal Seal ran thus, John King of Castile and Leon, of Portugal, of Toledo, &c. Money was also coyned after that manner. Many of the Nobility adheared to the King of Castile, and he was possest of the best Part of the Kingdom; but the Multitude generally was inclined to the Bastard, D. John, Master of the Order of Avis. The King of Castile sent D. Peter Fernandez Cabeça de Vaca, with 1000 chosen Horse, and a proportionable number of Foot, to invest Lisbon. These Troops being advanced as far as Lumiar, John Fernandez Moreyra engaged them with a small Party, but was himself Killed with some others; many Prisoners were taken, and the rest fled. And now D. John the Protector, marched out to meet the Enemy; but they not expecting his coming, fled in great disorder to Alenquer, and Trres Vedras, leaving all behind them. 7. At First the Castilians behaved themselves modest∣ly at Santarem, but after a few Days, they turned the Inhabitants out of their Houses, pillaged them, and a∣bused their Wives and Daughters; and there being no re∣dress, the Town began to be abandoned. The Office or chief Rabbi among the Jews being vacant, Queen Elle∣nor begged it of the King for one Man, and he gave it to another, recommended by his Wife, Queen Beatrix. This repulse, and their different Humours, set Queen Ellenor at Variance with the King;The King of Castile and Queen Ellenor at Varia. and she now repented her calling him in, and resigning the Government into his Hands, in so much that she advised many of her Follow∣ers to go over to the Master of Avis, telling them he was their Natural Lord. The King and Queen went away
to Coimbra, which City had promised to receive them; yet when the King was Quartered in a Monastery with∣out the City,A Conspi∣racy a∣gainst the King of Ca∣stile, disco∣vered. they refused to admit him. Here a Con∣spiracy was laid to Convey Queen Ellenor into the City, and Murder the King. This Design was betrayed by a Jew; some of the Conspirators fled, and Queen Ellenor was sent Prisoner to the Monastery of Tordesillas near Val∣ladolid. As soon as the News of Queen Ellenor's impri∣sonment was brought, the Town of Alenquer revolted to the Protector; but the King being Re-inforced, marched to Besiege Lisbon. At Aruda 40 Portuguese hid themselves in a great Cave, and Fire being applied to it, most of them died. Two hid themselves in the House where the King Quartered, designing to Murder him, but being discovered, were Hanged. Many Places in the Province of Alentejo, held for the Protector, and sent to him for one to Command over them; he sent Nnho Alvarez Pereyra, with an absolute Power, who having visited some Places of his Charge, and hearing that a great Body of Castilians was upon their March to Be∣siege the Town of Frontera, he hasted with a much smal∣ler number to releive that Place. His Men knowing how much more numerous the Enemy was, at First refused to follow him; but being encouraged by his Resolution, they gave the Charge, and put the Castilians to the Rout, killing many, and among them several Persons of Note. This done, he took Aronches by Force, and Ale∣grete was surrendred to him. 8. The Protector understanding that a mighty Fleet was coming from Castile, ordered the Archbishop of Bra∣ga to over-see the Equipping of his Vessels;Lisbon Be∣sieged by Sea and Land▪ which performed with great industry, so that Twelve Galleys, some Galliots, and Seven Ships, were fitted out. The King of Castile spread his Army about Lisbon, where one of his Parties approaching to S. Augustin's Gate, was defeated by 200 Horse that Sallied out of the City. About the end of May, 13 Galleys, and 40 Ships of Ca∣stile appeared in the River of Lisbon. The King drew nearer to the City, and encamping at the Foot of Mount Olivet, wasted the Country; then encompassing it on all sides, resolved to Starve it. In the mean while, a consi∣derable Fleet was setting out at Porto, for the relief of Lisbon; and the King having notice thereof, with the Advice of his Commanders, resolved to give the Enemy
Battle in the River. The Portuguese Fleet consisted of 17 Galleys, and as many Ships, which entred the River in this order: First 5 Ships, then the 17 Galleys, and af∣ter them the other 12 Ships.The Portuguese Fleet, stops up the Ri∣ver to Lis∣bon. The Castilians furiously assailed the 5 Ships, where they met with a most vigo∣rous Opposition, yet they took 3 of them; but whilst they were intent upon them, the rest of the Portuguese slipped by, and got safe up the Harbour. Soon after, the King's Fleet was re-inforced by several Vessels; so that now it consisted of 60 Ships, and 17 Galleys, be∣sides Carracks, which made the Protector lay aside all thoughts of engaging. 9. The Fort of Almada opposite to Lisbon, after en∣during great extremities for want of Water, was at length Surrendred to the King, who entred into that Place on the 1st of August.1384. At this time, Ruy Freyre, and others discovered to the Protector a Design of be∣traying the City to the Castilians, carried on by D. Peter de Castro, Son to Count Alvaro Perez, and his Accom∣plices, who were all apprehended. Many also deserted to the King, and among them, D. Alonso Enriquez, who at Coimbra had plotted to convey away Queen Ellenor. Hunger now began to pinch in Lisbon, and was hard to be remedied, but that at the same time the Plague raged in the Castilian Army.Overtur of Peace rejed. Overtures of Peace were also made by the King to the Protector; but he would hear∣ken to none. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra having ventured to pass the River in a Boat, through the midst of the Fleet of Castile, returned thence to Ebora, and had the Town of Portel betrayed to him by 3 Citizens. Twice he attempted Villaviciosa, but was both times repulsed with Loss. The Protector lay before Torres Vedras▪ and Nunho Alvarez understanding that several Parties of the Enemy provided to fall upon him, he hasted to his Suc∣cour, which the Castilians understanding, they gave o∣ver that Design; however the Protector was forced to quit the Siege. Nunho returning to his Chrge, took Monzaraz, defeated a Castilian Party near Badajz another before Almada, and made himself Master of Roca de Palmela, and Couna. 10. The Scarcity was now so great at Lisbon, that they turned out the Poor, and unserviceable People to the Enemy, who sent them back well lashed. No hopes now remained; but that the Plague raged so violently
among the Castilians,The Siege of Lisbon raised, when it had la∣sted five Months. that Two hundred died in a Day, and of them very many of Quality. But the King no way moved hereat, continued the Siege, till the Infecti∣on touched the Queen and then he raised it, having lain Five Months before the City. Being come to Santarem, he sent Troops to re-inforce the Garrisons of such Places as still held for him; but passing by Torres Novas, he was not admitted into the Town by Gonçalo Vasquez de Azevedo, who before kept that Place for him. His Wife went out to visit the Queen, and there promised to re∣duce her Husband; and not prevailing, she returned to the Camp, and the King sent to bid him Farewell, for that his Wife was going to Castile. He fearing to lose his Wife, delivered himself and the Town; but the King carried him and his Son away Prisoners, leaving their Wives behind, and a New Governour in the Place. Whilst the King marched home, the Protector granted large Immunities to the City of Lisbon, in recompence of its Fidelity to him. Next, he contrived how to re∣cover some places out of the Hands of the Castilians. He marched by night, to surprize Sintra, but was disap∣pointed by a violent Storm, and Floods that swelled the Rivers above their Bridges. Soon after, Almada was surrendred to him; notwithstanding that the King had carried away the Children of the principal Inhabitants as Hostages. Alcnquer summitted to him also, after ha∣ving made some Defence; But Torres Novas held out a∣gainst all his Attemps, and to add to his Grief, he under∣stood that Nunho Alvarez had been also repulsed at Vil∣aviiosa, that the Master of the Order of Christ, the Prior of Crato, and Alvaro Gonzalez Camello, were taken Prisoners at Torres Novas; and that Two Galleys of Castile, stealing into the Port of Lisbon by night, had urnt Three Vessels there.
CHAP. II. John the Bastard-Son of King Peter, of Pro¦tector is declared King; he continues the War with Castile successfully, from the Year 1384. till 1393. 1. ABout the beginning of the New Year was disco∣vered a Conspiracy against the Protector.138. Peter Earl of Trastamara,A Conspi∣racy a∣gainst the Protector discover was stirred up by the King of Ca∣stile to kill him, as he lay at the Siege of Torres Vedras. The Count communicated this Affair to D. Peter de Ca∣stro, John Duque Governour of Torres Vedras, John A∣lonso de Baeza, Garcia Gonzales de Valdez, and several o∣thers, of whom only 3 Men were apprehended, and one of them burnt. In Revenge whereof John Duque sent out six Portuguese he had in Torres Vedras, with their Hands and Noses cut off. The Protector raised the Siege of Tr∣res Vedras, in order to go to Coimbra, to meet the Cortes or Parliament he had caused to be thither Assembled, and most of the Inhabitants about Torres Vedras went away with him. In his way, Leyria refused to admit him; but he was well received at Monte-mayor, and Coimbra. In this City, a∣bout pro∣claiming the Pro∣tector King. some were for proclaiming the Protector King, and others for the Princes, John and Denis, lawful Sons to King Peter; but all agreed the present Protector should continue as long as Prince John should be Priso∣ner; and in case neither he nor his Brother could come to Portugal, then the Protector was to be received as King. Dr. John de Regas, a famous Civilian, made two Harangues on behalf of the Protector, casting scandalous Reflections upon Queen Elenor, to incapacitate her Daughter. Queen Beatrix, from succeeding in the Throne; the same he did on the Lady Agnes de Castro, Wife to king Peter, with an intent to exclude her Sons, the Princes John, and Denis. Some little Opposition was made at first, by se∣veral of the Nobility; but at length they all consented the Protector should be proclaimed King; the so much celebrated Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, having offered to Mur∣der Martin Vasquez, chief of the adverse Party, only be∣cause he stood up for the lawful Heirs.
2. The Protector with a counterfeit Modesty seemed to excuse himself from accepting of their Offers, but it was only to heighten their Zeal; and so on the 6th. of April he complyed with them. He immediately shewed great Favour towards the Cities of Lisbon and Porto, for having so constantly adhered to him. Thus it appears how little hopes of Salvation there can be left for Law∣yers, who by false Interpretations invert Justice, as it appears in the case of this John de Reglas before-men∣tioned, who standered the Queens, Beatrix and Ellenor, and the Princess Agnes de Castro, and excluded the Law∣ful Heirs, the Princes John and Denis, only for his own private Interest, in promoting the Bastard Protector, who could have no Title to the Crown. I think it were bet∣ter to breed up Children Thieves than Lawyers, for the former will at least Repent at the Gallows, but the latter are never permitted by Worldly Interest to Repent. All Parties thus agreed,The  the Protector was solemnly Pro∣claimed King of Portugal, and accordingly chose all his Officers of State, and of the Houshold. Marching in∣to the Field, he mustered 6000 Men, a small number, but resolute and unanimous; and Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, now made Constable of Portugal, was ordered to Sea with a Squadron from Porto, to engage the Castisian Fleet before Lisbon. Missing of that Enemy, he sailed back to the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, to recover part of that Country, then holding for Castile. Here he took Neyva and Ponte de Lima by force; Villa Nova de Cerveyra, and Monçon opened their Gates to him. 3. The new-made King went from Coimbra to Porto, where he was received with great Joy. the new King. Here he consul∣ted with Alonso Lorenzo de Carvallo, a Man then Power∣ful at Guimaraens, about betraying that Place to him, which was accordingly performed. The Castle held out some time, but there being no hopes of Relief, at last, it surrendred. The City Braga mutinying, drove their Governour into the Castle, and sending to the new King, offered to receive him. He ordered Nunho Alvarez the Constable, to take Possession of the City, and force the Castle, which was accordingly performed. The same happened at Ponte de Lima. The King of Castile, now at Cordova, having twice sent his Fleet against Lisbon, ordered a strong Party to enter Portugal by the way of
Cuidad Rodrigo. They plundered all the Territory of Trancoso, and the City of Viseu; but as they returned laden with a Rich Booty, they were charged by a Por∣tuguese Body, much inferiour to them in Number, yet with such Resolution, that of all the Castilians, only 200 escaped, not one Portuguese being lost in the Action (if Credit may be given to such a Relation, after affirm∣ing the Fight was obstinately maintained.) In the mean while, the Fleet of Castile, consisting of Forty Ships, Ten Galeons,The Casti∣lians enter Portugal some Galleys, Twelve Barks and other small Vessels, rode in the Harbour of Lisbon. That King also marched from Cordova with a numerous Army, and appeared before Elvas, which was resolutely de∣fended; and now finding the general Aversion of the Portuguese to him, it was debated, whether Portugal ought to be invaded at all, but at last it was resolved to enter it by the way of the Province of Beyra. 4. The new Portuguese King understanding the ap∣proach of the Castilians, marched out of Guimaraens to give them Battle, having drawn together his Forces from Coimbra, Porto, and other Places. On the 14th. of August in the Morning he entred the Plain of Aljubar∣rota, where he Knighted several Gentlemen. The Ca∣stilians designed not to fight, intending to march directly to Lisbon,T Fam B  Ajubar yet after some Consultation, they resolved to Engage. There was a great disproportion in Numbers, for the Castilians are reported to have been 33000 strong, and the Portuguese but 6500; besides which Disadvan∣tage, they had the Sun and Dust in their Eyes. The Sun was going down when these two unequal Armies engaged. The Castilians at the first Charge broke through our Vanguard, but the new King then coming up, not only with Words, but with his Example, so animated his Men, that in less than an hour that multitude of Enemies was put to the rout. The King of Castile, who began the Fight on a Mule, being then troubled with an Ague, was forced to take a Horse to save himself. Most of the Portuguese who sided with Castile, and were in the Front of the Army, were put to the Sword, for no Quarter was given to them. The Royal Standard of Castile was taken, but many pretending to the Honour, it could not be decided by whom. The full Number of the slain is not known, but it was very great on the part of Castile, of whom about 3000 Horse are reckoned to
have perished, and very many Men of great Account. This is the Famous Battle of Aljubarrota, so called, for that it was fought near the Village of that Name. The Booty was vastly Rich. 5. The Victorious King continued three days in the Field of Battle, erecting Trophies, it being then the Custom so long to expect the return of the Enemy. The King of Castile fled with speed from Aljubarrota to Santarem, which is Twelve Leagues, and having rested there a short time, went down the River to his Fleet, then Riding before Lisbon, where he continued two days, and on the 17th. of August left that Port, attended by Seventeen Galleys. He arrived at Sevil, and tired there with the Clamours of the People, went away to Car∣mona. Now we have heard what the Portuguese Au∣thors write of this Battle,The Ac∣count given of this Battle by the Spa∣nish Histo∣rians. which seems altogether in∣credible; but let us give an hint of what those of Ca∣stile write, which is much more probable. They say, the King of Castile advancing towards his Enemy, found him posted in an Advantageous Ground betwixt two Morasses, out of which Place he could not be drawn, because much inferiour in Number; That he was above 12000 strong, and before the Engagement made Overtures of Peace: That the Castilians would not be disswaded from giving Battle in that Place, so disadvantageous to them, because they exceeded their Enemies in Number; and in fine, that they lost the Day through their own Pride and Rashness, in assail∣ing an Enemy so well posted, when they might have ranged all the Country at their own pleasure. This, I believe, to all Impartial Men, will appear nearer to the Truth, for we must allow all Authors to magnifie the Exploits of their own Country, and so let us re∣turn to our History. The new King coming to San∣tarem, had it delivered to him, and finding there many Ladies, whose Husbands were in the Service of Castile, he gave them all Liberty to go to them, which they gladly embraced. 6. The Portuguese King's next care was to Reward those who had signalized themselves in the Battle,The Consta∣ble of Por∣tugal upon the Fron∣tiers of Castile. the chief whereof was the Constable, to whom he gave large Possessions, and the Title of Count of Ourem. He, encouraged by this Honour, resolved to invade Ca∣stile. Having gathered 4000 Men, he met and defeated
the Master of Calatrava, D. Martin Yanez de Barbuda, who had entred Portugal with a strong Party; and pur∣suing his Success, took the strong Town of Villa Garcia. Thence he marched to the Plain betwixt Magaçela and Villa Nueva de la Serena, where he had a terrible and long, as well as doubtful Battle with D. Peter Moniz, Master of the Order of Santiago. Three several times the Fight was renewed, and lasted almost two days with incredible Obstinacy, but in the Conclusion, the Portuguese ob∣tained a most Glorious Victory. This done, he went away to aid the King, then lying at the Siege of Chaves, which was surrendred to him. Moving thence, they laid Siege to Coria, but after having battered it some days with great Fury, were forced to rise and depart, the Constable to the Province of Alentejo, and the King on foot in Pilgrimage to Our Lady's Church at Guima∣raens, as he had promised before the Battle of Aljubar∣rota. Most of them that held any Fortresses for Castile, surrendred themselves now to the new King. He laid Siege to the Town of Chaves, whereof Martin Gonzalez de Atayde was Governour, who held it out till he had no Water left,1386. and then articled to Surrender in Forty days, if not relieved from Castile; and by consent of that King he at length delivered up the Place. 7. The Portuguese Embassadors in England stirred up the Duke of Lancaster to lay hold of this Opportunity to assert his Right to the Crown of Castile,The Duke of Lanca∣ster, invi∣ted by the Portu∣guese, Lands in Galicia with 2000 Horse, and 3000 Ar∣chers. to which he had a most Legal Title by his Wife, the Lady Constance, Daughter to King Peter, from whom Henry the Bastard had usurped that Kingdom. The Duke having this Right to the Crown of Castile, set Sail from Plymouth with a numerous Fleet, and arrived at Coruna in Galicia on the 25th. of July, where he landed 2000 Horse, and 3000 Archers, besides some other Forces, and several Persons of Note. The Duke was Sixty Years of Age, without any grey hairs, was tall and well shaped, affa∣ble, modest in Discourse, of an excellent Deportment, and in all respects answerable to his Royal Extraction. With him came his Wife Constance, and his two Daugh∣ters, Philippa by his first Wife, and Katherine by the second. Scarce was he landed at Coruna, when that Place owned him for its Lawful Sovereign, as did the City Santiago, and the greatest part of this Kingdom of Galicia. Our King was at Lamego when the Duke
landed in Spain.The New King John and Duke of Lanca∣ster meet. Thence he removed to Porto, and having agreed to meet the Duke at Ponte-Mauro, set forward with a numerous Retinue. They met upon the First of November, in a Plain near Melgazo. There it was a∣greed, That if the Duke succeeded, he should give the Towns of Ledesma, Montilla, Melgazo, Plazenzia, Gri∣mal, Canaveral, Caceres, Mendao, Fuente del Maestre, Zafra, Torres de-Medina, Fegenal, and other Places with their Territories to the King of Portugal; as Dower with his Daughter Philippa. The Pope's Dispensation being come, whereby the King was loosed from his Vow of Chastity, made as Master of the Military Order of Avis; and the Princess Philippa, being conducted to him they were solemnly married upon Candlemas-Day. Immedi∣ately the Queen's Household was settled, and a plentiful Revenue assigned her;1387. which afterwards some other Queens of Portugal enjoyed. 8. The King having spent Two Months with his Queen at Porto, went with her to see her Father at Bragança, and thence sent her back to Coimbra. Many of the English were dead of Diseases. With the King, were 3000 Lan∣ces, 2000 Cross-Bow Men, and 5000 Foot. They en∣tred the Dominions of Castile, and took Castro Calvo, Mtila, Rsales, Valderas, and Villalobos. Tho' Gali∣cia had received the Duke as lawful King, yet no Place in Castile admitted him, but by Constraint. Hereupon the King told him, That to make an absolute Conquest, it was requisite he should return to England for greater Forces. The Duke approved of his Advice, and they re∣turned to Cuidad Rodrigo. By the way, they defeated a Party of the Enemies, consisting of 500 Horse, and some Foot. Another Skirmish happened near the City, upon the Passage of a Brook, with the same Success. The Duke being now in Portugal, Embassadors came to him from the King of Castile,Prince Henry of Castile, marries the Daugh∣ter of the Duke of Lancaster. Peace is concluded. offering, that Prince Henry, Heir to the Crown, should marry Katherine the Duke's Daugh∣ter, that so all Pretensions to the Kingdom might cease. The Duke assented, and Articles being agreed upon and performed, the War betwixt him and Castile ended. He being with the King at Coimbra, a Castilian was there burnt, for contriving to Poyson him. Soon after, he re∣turned to England. 9. The King having held the Cortes or Parliament at Braga,1388. set out to recover some Places which still held
for Castile. Melgazo having held out to the last; was then delivered up, the Defendants having only leave to depart without Arms. It was remarkable at this Siege, that Two Women,A combat betwixt two Wo∣men. one of the Town, and the other of the Camp, challenged each other, and fought; the lat∣ter was Victorious. Hence the King marched to Lisbon, and in September, to the Province of Alentejo; where a∣bout the middle of October, after a stout Defence, the Town and Castle of Campo-Major were taken by force. At the beginning of the following Year,1389. the King being at Lisbon, one of the Queens Ladies, called Beatrix, was found to have admitted Ferdinand Alonso, one of the King's Bed-Chamber, and his Favourite, to her Bed. Here∣upon he was apprehended, and having made his Escape from the Officer, took Sanctuary in the Church. Thence the King himself went to drag him, and tho' he urged he was married, caused him to be burnt. The Lady went away to Castile to her Mother. Embassadors came to the King, being then in the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho, proposing a Truce for some Months, and so Commissioners were appointed to treat with him; and in the mean while, the King, to lose no time, Be∣sieged and took the City Tuy in Galicia.139. At length a Cessation was concluded for Three Years,A Cessation of Arms, betwixt Spain and Portugal, for three Years. and some Pla∣ces restored on both sides, but more to the Portuguese. Nevertheless, the King of Castile ceased not to make mighty preparations for War; but his Designs were pre∣vented by Death, which happened to him by a fall from his Horse. After the expiration of the Three Years, the Nobles of Castile,1393. and the Governours to King Henry, Son to the late King John, by his First Wife, the Lady Ellenor, advised him to desist from his Pretensions to Por∣tugal, since he was not Born of Queen Beatrix, on whom that Title was grounded. Embassadors were sent to this Effect to Portugal, where a Peace was concluded for Fif∣teen Years; all Prisoners on both sides to be released, and all Dammages done, during the late Cessation, to be made good; and then Hostages for performance, were given on both sides. 10. But these Articles were not faithfully performed on the Part of Castile,The Truce not duly observed. neither as to restitution of Dam∣mages, nor releasement of Prisoners; wherefore the Por∣tuguese resolved to do himself Justice, by taking some Towns; and accordingly surprized Badajoz, and Albu∣querque
Embassadors sent from Castile, promised per∣formance of Articles upon Restitution of those Places; and it was only done to amuse the King, for at the same time Vessels were fitting out in Biscay against Portugal, and two Portuguese Ships laden with Warlike Stores, were taken off of Cape S. Vincent. At the same time, the Ca∣stilians made Incursions, wasting all the open Country; But the Constable defeated a Party of 400 of them that was returning home with a rich Booty. Campo-Mayor was soon after taken by the King. Having thus secured themselves against their Enemy, the King and Constable gave themselves some Repose. The latter distributed most of what the King had bestowed on him for his Ser∣vices, on such Gentlemen as had always adhered to him. On the contrary, the King now established on the Throne, took back to himself much of what he had be∣stowed on many great Men for their good Service in the War. As the Constable had received most, this fell heaviest upon him; and therefore he resolved to depart the Kingdom; but the King returning part of what he had taken from him, with difficulty perswaded him to stay. The taking of Badajoz, and Albuquerque before mentioned, had renewed the War, and the Country was now again in Hostile manner wasted on both sides, where∣in many notable Skirmishes happened. CHAP. III. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King John, the First of the Name, and Tenth King of Portugal, from the Year 1393. till 1433. 1. MAny great Men disgusted for that the King, as was before said, Had since his establishment recalled part of the Grants made to them during his Necessi∣ty, went over to Castile; where settling themselves, they became the Heads of Noble Families. The King having taken Salvatierra, layed Siege to Tuy, which after a vi∣gorous Defence, was surrendred to him. In the mean
while,Denis, Son to King Pe∣ter, enters Portugal with an Army. Prince Denis, Son to King Peter, by Lady Agnes de Castro; was by the King of Castile sent into Portugal with an Army, and the Title of King. At the same time, the Castilian Admiral, James Hurtado de Mendoza, en∣tred the River Tagus with a Fleet of Forty Ships, and Fifteen Galleys. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, with all the Forces he could make, marched to oppose Prince Denis, who upon the News of his approach returned to Castile. The King had given to the Constable the sole Govern∣ment of the Province of Alentejo, and Algarve, which he for some time held, but soon after resigned, and went away to the King to assist him at the Siege of Tuy; but it was taken before he arrived there.1398. Misser Ambrosio Ma∣rines, a Genoese, was sent Embassador from Castile to set∣tle a Peace; in order to which a Cessation was agreed upon for Nine Months.1401. This Term expired, and nothing was concluded. Hereupon the King, about the middle of May, layed Siege to Alcantara; but was forced, after some Days, to desist from that Enterprize. 2. A Treaty of Peace was again set on Foot at Sego∣via,Peace con∣cluded be∣twixt the Two Crowns. where, after long Debates, it was concluded upon the following Conditions: That no Money should be demanded of Castile, on account of former Breach of Articles; That Towns and Prisoners should be ex∣changed on both sides; That the Castilian Hostages should be restored; That the Portugueses who fled to Castile should return to their Estates. On these Terms a Truce was concluded for Ten Years,Nt obser∣ved. and Hostages were given on both sides for Performance. But this Cessation produced no more quiet than the former; continual Hostilities were exercised, tho' the Actions seem not ve∣ry considerable; for there is no particular Account of them; but the 4th. Year after the conclusion of the last Truce, a perpetual Peace began to be discoursed of. King Henry of Castile was then dead, and Queen Katherine, Sister to the Queen of Portugal, had the tuition of King John the Second, not yet a Year Old. In her Husband's Life time, she had always advised Peace, and she now moved, That Embassadors from both sides might meet on the Frontiers of the Two Kingdoms; who did so ac∣cordingly, but came to no conclusion, because the Casti∣lians Demands ran high. After many Messages had pas∣sed on both sides, and much time spent, the Treaty was again set a Foot, and now Embassadors employed to manage it, who at length agreed upon Articles, whereof
the chiefest was,1411. That the Subjects of both Crowns, who had served against their Princes, should be restored to their Countries and Estates. Peace now established, and the Crown secured,Peace at length esta∣blished. application was made to the Pope for Absolution of the Censures laid on the Kingdom, upon Account of promoting King John to the Throne, he being a Bastard, and having professed in the Order of Avis. Pope Boniface the 9th. granted his Request, and Absolved the Kingdom. The King had a Bastard-Son called Alonso; whom he loved no less than his lawful Is∣sue, and therefore gave him to Wife Beatrix, the only Daughter of the Constable Nunho Alvarez Pereyra. They had a Daughter called Elizabeth, who was Wife to Prince John, Son to King John the First; and two Sons, which were Alonso, afterwards Earl of Ourem; and Ferdinand, Earl of Arroyolos, and First Duke of the House of Bra∣gança. 3. The King now fixed in his Throne,The King bent upon publick re∣joycings for the Peace. had bent his thoughts upon solemn entertainments, and publick re∣joycings, designing to Knight his Five Sons with all ima∣ginable Solemnity. But they advised him to expend that Money on some Forreign enterprize, since all was quiet at home, and it would be more honourable for them to be Knighted in the Field,1412. than in the Court. The Design they fixed upon, was the taking of Ceuta on the Coast of Africk, which they acquainted the King withal, and he approving thereof, enjoyned them to keep it secret. To this end, Two Gallyes were sent to view the Place, and sound the Port, and to conceal what they went a∣bout they continued their Voyage to Sicily, as had been at First given out. Great industry was used in fit∣ting out Vessels at Lisbon; and many more of Galicia, Biscay, England, and the Low-Countries, were hired. The Young Princes at the same time, raised Forces in all Parts of the Kingdom. Various judgments were made of the Intent of these Preparations, Castile began to grow jealous; the Aragonian was not well satisfyed and the Moorish King of Granada feared all the Storm would fall upon him. The Rumour of these preparati∣ons drew many Martial Men from Forreign Parts, to gain Honour in this Enterprize.The Plague in Lisbon, the Queen dies of it. At this time the Plage had spread it self throughout Lisbon, and having entred the Pallace, Queen Philippa died of it. Her Body was found Fifteen Months after not only uncorrupted, but
yielding a most Fragant smell. Her Life was a Pattern of Piety and Vertue; her happy Death was on the 18th. of July 1415,1415. in the 64th. Year of her Age. Many look∣ed upon her Death as an ill Omen to the Enterprize in Hand, and therefore advised to desist from it; but the King and Princes could not be moved. 4. On the last Day of July,1415. the Fleet sailed from Lis∣bon,A great Fleet sails from Lis∣bon, for the Con∣quest of Ceuta. the 7th. of August it came to Faro, and the 14th. the City Ceuta was taken, to the Wonder of all Europe, and Terror of the Enemies of Portugal. The particulars of this Action, which are not many, the Place being ta∣ken in Four Hours, are to be found in the Portuguese Af∣frick. The King returning home, created his Second Son Peter, Duke of Coimbra; and his Third Henry Duke of Viseo. This done, he went to Ebora, and was there received in Triumph by the Princes John and▪ Ferdinand, and the Princess Elizabeth. The Ratification of the per∣petual Peace with Castile, had been delayed till that King came to the Age of Fourteen, and took the Government upon himself.1419. He being at that Age, this Year 1419, Embassadors passed to and fro, and after much Debate, concluded a Truce for Eleven Years; conditionally, That both Kings should be obliged, if they designed to make War at the expiration thereof, to notify the same to the other Party Eighteen Months before. Several discoveries had been of late Years attempted through the industry of Prince Henry;1420. and now this Year 1420, the Islands of Puerto Santo, and Madera, were First found; such were the beginnings that gave Encouragment to the Discovery of India and America. But of these Discove∣ries we have writ particular Books.1422. In the Year 1422, the King changed the computation of time till then used in Portugal, which was from the Reign of Augustus, to that of the Year of our Lord, in imitation of King John the First of Castile, who had made the like Reformati∣on there before. 5. This same Year, the Constable Nunho Alvarez Pe∣reyra, being 62 Years of Age, took upon him the religi∣ous Order of the Carmelites,1423. in the Monastery of Lisbon, built by himself.Peace rati∣fied be∣twixt Ca∣stile and Portugal. There he lived a very exemplary Life the space of 9 Years, and died aged 71 Years. To secure the Peace with Castile, the King sent his Embassadors thither; but one of them being overthrown, and almost killed at the exercise of Tilting, the Castilian sent an Em∣bassador
to Portugal, who exchanged the Ratifications. War now ceasing,1424. Prince Peter, the Kings Second Son, resolved to Travel; and setting out with a Train sutable to his Quality, he ran through a great Part of Europe, Asia and Africk. Four Years he spent in this imployment, having been nobly entertained in the Courts of all Prin∣ces. These Travels being then rare, especially in such Persons, gave occasion to many fabulous Relations there∣of, afterwards spread abroad, which rendred the Truth it self suspected. The King in the mean while applying himself to the Civil Government, Enacted many good Laws.1428. Prince Edward was now 26 Years of Age, and yet unmarried;Prince Ed∣ward con∣tracted to Ellenor, Sister to Alonso King of Aragon. therefore a Match was at this time con∣cluded for him with the Princess Ellenor, Sister to Alon∣so King of Aragon, and Naples. Her Dower was 200000 Florins. At the same time also, the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to the Earl of Ʋrgel, and Grand-Child to Pe∣ter the Fourth, King of Aragon, was contracted to Prince Peter, coming home after his Travels, and the following Year she was Conducted to Portugal. This same Year, Philip of Burgundy,1429. Earl of Flanders, being the second time a Widower, sent to ask the Princess Elizabeth in Marriage; which was granted, and she sent into Flan∣ders, with a Portion of 150000 Crowns. 6. The King sent two Embassadors to mediate a Peace betwixt the Crowns of Castile,1430. Arragon, and Navarre, the two latter whereof were hard pressed by the other. The Castilian also, that he might not seem to proceed up∣on unjust Grounds, dispatched an Embassador to the Por∣tuguese, to acquaint him with the righteousness of his Proceedings.1431. Now at last came the final Conclusion of the long-desired perpetual Peace with Castile; for the ratifying whereof, Peter Gonzalez Malafaya being sent thither, he accompanied that King in his Expedition against the Moors of Granada. At their return from that War, the Peace was proclaimed in Castile, and an Em∣bassador came thence into Portugal, to see the same per∣formed there. This was the end of those Pretensions which had alarmed these two Kingdoms for the space of almost Fifty Years. The victorious King John at length, overcome with Age,King John falls sick. fell sick of his last Malady. He was removed to Alcouchete, to try whether the Air would do him good, but perceiving his Death draw on, he caused himself to be carried back to Lisbon. There on the
Fourteenth of August, 1433.1433. having performed all the Parts of a good Christian,His Death. he gave up his Ghost. (Yet with the Authors leave, I cannot conceive with what Piety an Usurper can die, not having made Restituti∣on.) The News of his Death being spread through the City, it is impossible to express the Sorrow the City was filled with. His Body was carried to the Cathedral, on the Shoulders of his Sons, the Nobility, the whole Mul∣titude of both Sexes, and all Ages, following. 7. He had a pleasing Aspect;His Cha∣racter. his Stature large, and his Strength proportionable; for his Helmet, kept to this Day, is too large for any Head, and his Battle-Ax too weighty for any Arm. Prosperity and Adversity he bore equally; was Constant, Magnanimous, Merciful, Bountiful and Religious. His Buildings were fair and sumptuous, as appears by the Monasteries of Pelonga and Carnota, and the Palaces of Lisbon and Santarem, and above all, the prodigious Structure of the Church of our Blessed Lady of Batalla, or of the Battle, erect∣ed in Memory of the famous Victory obtained at Alju∣barrota. To describe this wonderful Pile would take up too much room in the small compass of this short Histo∣ry, therefore we shall pas it by. To this Place was the deceased King, with mighty Pomp, translated by his Son King Edward, just the Day 12 Months after his Death, that is on the 14th. of August, 1434. 8. King John had Eight Children by his Wife Phi∣lippa,His Wife, and Issue Daughter to John Duke of Lancaster: 1st. Blanch, who died in her Infancy. 2dly, Alonso, Born at Santa∣rem, and lived but 10 Years. 3dly, Edward, who suc∣ceeded him in the Throne. 4thly, Peter Duke of Coim∣bra, a Man so learned, that he wrote several Books; he also travelled a great Part of the then known World, as was said before, and married Elizabeth the Daughter of the Earl of Ʋrgel, which also has been above intima∣ted. Being Governour of the Kingdom during the Mi∣nority of his Nephew King Alonso, he gained many Enemies, and was at their instigation put to Death by that King. 5thly, Henry Duke of Viseo and Master of the Order of Christ, who being studious in the Mathe∣maticks, fitted out Ships at his own cost, to discover the Coasts of Africk, wherein he made a great Progress, and occasioned the Discovery of India. To the end he might wholly addict himself to these Affairs, he settled his abode
at Sagres, near Cpe S. Vincent, in the Kingdom of Al∣garve, where he died. 6thly, John, Master of the Order of Santiago in Portugal, and Constable. 7thly, Ferdi∣nand, Master of the Order of Avis, accounted a Martyr for his great Sufferings, and Death in slavery among the Moors of Africk. 8thly, Elizabeth, married to Philip the third, Earl of Flanders, and Duke of Burgundy. This King's Bastard-Children were, Alonso, Earl of Bar∣celos, and first Duke of Bragança; and Beatrix, married to Thomas Earl of Arundel, in England. 9. This King reduced the ten Bezants,His Arms. before used in each of the five Scutcheons of the Arms of Portugal, to five, the Cross of Avis appearing underneath, in Me∣mory that he had been Master of that Order; and because he received the English Order of the Garter, which is of S. George, he used for his Crest, the Head of a winged Dragon; and from that time forward, the Portuguese use to call upon S. George in the time of Battle. 10. Discoveries in this King's time were made by John Gonzalez Zarco,Discove∣ries, made in his time. Tristan Vaz Teixeira, and Bartholomew Perestrello, who being drove they knew not whither by a storm, found the Island they called Puerto Santo, in the Year 1418; and two Years after, that of Madera, where they found a little Oratory, and Inscription, declaring that one Machin, an English-Man, had been there before. Giles Yanez attempting what none durst before him, pas∣sed beyond Cape Bojador, and there planted a Cross. CHAP. IV. The Life and Reign of Edward the First of the Name, and Eleventh King of Portugal; his Actions, and Death, from the Year 1391, till 1438. 1. KIng Edward was Born at Viseo,Birth of King Ed∣ward in the Year 1391. He was with his Father at the taking of Ceuta, and married Ellenor Daughter to King Ferdinad the first, of Aragon,1391. in the Year 1428. The Body of King John be∣ing deposited in the Cathedral of Lisbon,1428. on the 14th. of
August, the next Day his Eldest Son Edward was pro∣claimed King.1433. An Astrologer advised him to pass by that unfortunate Day,An Astro∣logical Pre∣diction. for that all the Constellations were Conspired against him. But he religiously lighting these Predictions, went on with the Solemnity, and was Crown∣ed that very Day. Then began the Astrologer publickly (as he had before done in private) to denounce, that his Reign would be short as to time, but tedious for the Mis∣fortunes which would happen in it. The New King went to divert himself at Sintra, where his Son Alons, not full 20 Months Old, was Sworn Heir to the Crown by the Nobility. This was the only time the like Ceremony was performed without the Concurrence of the Commonalty by their Representatives. He was also the first that had the Title of Prince given him in Portugal;Alonso, Son to King Edward the first that  the Title of Prince▪ in Portu∣gal. his Father following the example of the other Courts of Chri∣stendom. The first that used it, was that of England, where the Heir of the Crown was called Prince of Wales. From Sintra, the King sent his Summons to all the Pre∣lates and Nobles, for them to meet, in order to attend the Translation of his Father's Body, to a noble Sepulchre designed for it in the Church of Batalla, belonging to the Dominicans, and of the invocation of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, built by that King, in Memory of the Victory obtained in that Place. 2. It will not here be amiss,The Fune∣ral of King John. in short, to say something of his Funeral, which may shew the Custom of those times. All the Nobility and Clergy Assembled at Lisbon. The Mourning then used, was either white Sack-Cloath, or raw Canvas. Such was the Apparel of all the Nobi∣lity, and their Families. The Pallace was all Hung with Black. On the 25th. of October, all the Company marched in orderly Procession, from the Pallace to the Church, with great silence; the Bells of all the Churches ringing. At the Church, after a short Sermon, the Bo∣dy was placed on a Mausoleum, and then the Divine Office for the dead, performed with great Solemnity. Prince Peter, and many other great men, stay'd in the Church all Night with the Body, and next Day, after Mass and Sermon, a costly Offering was made of Gold, Silver, and rich Brocados. This done, the Body was pla∣ced on a Triumphant Charriot, which was drawn through the Streets by the King, his Brothers, and the Nobility. In the New Street, and in the great Place called Recio,
Scaffolds were erected, on which Learned Men made Fu∣neral Orations suitable to the Occasion. At S. Vincent's Gate, Four Horses were put to the Charriot. Four times the Funeral halted betwixt Lisbon and the Church of Ba∣talla; at Odivellas, Villafranca, Alcoentre, and Alcobaça. The Fifth Day it came to the Church of Batalla, whither the Cortes or Parliament was summoned and there all that great Assembly assisted at Mass, and the other Fu∣neral Rites. 3. The King hasted away to Leyria,King Ed∣ward holds a Parlia∣ment. flying from the Plague, for here began his Misfortunes. The Cortes or Parliament was held at Santarem, where the King gave general Satisfaction. Then he applied himself to the cares of the Government. He caused also the Laws to be epitomized, and reduced to one Volume, taking special care that they should be put in Execution. His next care, was to moderate excess in Apparel and Diet; and then he Ordered, That only one of the Princes, and such of the Nobility as were named, should attend at Court at one time; the rest being sent away to their Estates, and they to relieve the others in their turns.1434. Thus the en∣suing Year was spent.A general Council. Pope Martin had before this time, summoned a general Council to meet at Basle, for Uni∣ting the Greek and Latin Churches.1435. To this Council were sent Six Embassadors from Portugal. The Union of the Two Churches took Effect, but was not lasting; for the Greeks not finding those Supplies they expected from the Pope against the Turks, soon fell off. The Portuguese Em∣bassadors obtained a Grant of the then Pope Eugenius, That the Kings of Portugal might be Crowned and A∣nointed in the same manner as those of England, and France. This same Year, the King designed his Sons should receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, with great Pomp and Solemnity; but News being then brought, that the Kings of Naples and Navarre, Prince Henry, and above 100 Persons of great Note, were taken Prisoners in a Sea Fight, by Philip Duke of Milan, all publick Joy ceased, and the Court was filled with Mourning; never∣theless the Young Princes were confirmed. 4. This same Year also it was,An Expe∣dition a∣gainst Tangier. that the Princes, Henry and Ferdinand, having first gained the Queen to their Party, perswaded the King to take in Hand an Expediti∣on against Tangier, in Africk. It was long before they could prevail upon him; but at last, overcome by their
importunities, he took the Fatal Resoluton. A Tax was laid upon the Kingdom, for the Expence of this War; and all the Preparations, for such an Expedition diligent∣ly made. On the 17th. of August the Princes Embarked, and the 22th. they sailed from Belem.1437. The particulars of this Unhappy Undertaking belong properly to the Portuguese Africk, where they are to be seen at large; but the even was,The Portu∣guese Ar∣my destroy∣ed by the Moors, and the King's Bro∣ther taken. That most of the Portuguese Army perished, and Prince Ferdinand remained in Captivity, he being left as an Hostage, for restoring Ceuta to the Moors, upon their suffering the Relicks of the Portu∣guese to return home. Prince Henry the Adviser of this Enterprize, sent Notice to the King, how he left his Bro∣ther in Servitude, and tho he was the chief Cause of his falling into that Misfortune, yet advised not to Ransom him at so dear a rate, as by restoring Ceuta, to the Infi∣dels. Those many Portuguese who escaped out of Africk, most Wounded, Naked, and Starved, Landing on the Coast of Spain, in the dead of Winter, found such extra∣ordinary Charity in the Towns of Castile,The Chari∣ty of the Spanids▪  through which they travelled, that I dare avouch, they had not met the like in their own Country. They were all bountifully Cloathed, their Wounds dressed, and Money liberall be∣stowed upon them. In every House they had the Beds given them, and being well recovered, were suppli∣ed with all they could desire to carry them home. The King informed by these People, of the charitable Enter∣tainment they had found, ceased not to extol the good∣ness of those who had shown such Favour to his Subjects, and to express his Gratitude, he sent Letters to Sevil, and other Places of Andaluzia, where his Subjects had been received, full of Acknowledgments and Commenda∣tions, and offering himself, and his Kingdom, ready to require them. 5. The King, before the News came of this Disaster, was removed from Lisbon, to Santarem, flying from the Plague that then raged in that City.The Plague at Lisbon Having Advice there of the danger his Forces were in at Tangier, he made all possible Preparations to relieve them, but too late, for before any could set out, part of the vanquished Fleet re∣turned.148. The following Year the King summoned the Cortes or Parliament, to meet at Leyria. He gave them in Charge, to consider what was to be done, concerning Prince Ferdinand, left an Hostage to the Moors, for the
delivery of Ceuta.Differences in the Cor∣tes, about the ran∣soming of Prince Fer∣dinand. He produced a Paper written by that Prince, signifying that Ceuta could not be maintained, and therefore it was better to give it up, then suffer it to be taken. The Princes, Peter and John, with all the Commons, voted that the Place should be delivered, but the Archbishop of Braga, said, That a Christian Town could not be given away to the Infidels, for one Man, without the consent of the Pope. Others were for defer∣ring the Exchange for some time, and in the mean while, to offer a Summ of Money and all the Moors in Portugal which were many, for the Prince; and in Case this were not received, that the Pope and Christian Princes should unite their Forces against Africk, which if it could not be effected, then Ceuta should be delivered. 6. The King stood dubious amidst such variety of Opi∣nions. At length he resolved to have recourse to the Pope, and all the Christian Princes, believing they would all to∣gether assist him to ransom his Brother. From them he received nothing but words of Comfort and Advice, not to surrender Ceuta. The Plague was now so diffused throughout the Kingdom, that the King wandred from Town to Town. Being on the way to Tomar, a Letter was given him, which he no sooner opened, but the in∣fection it brought seized him.14. In that Town he di on the 9th. of September,King Ed∣ward  of the Plague. in the 47th. Year of his Age, ha∣ving reigned Five Years and near a Month. In his Will, he ordained his Brother should be ransomed with Money; but in Case that were refused, then Ceuta should be given for him. That his Wife, Queen Ellenor, should Govern the Kingdom, and the Prince his Son. He was well Sha∣ped, Strong, his Visage round, his Beard thin, his Hair black, his Eyes heavy, but taken altogether, his Counte∣nance was graceful. He loved gay Apparel, and always appeard in Publick with Splendour. As to his Inclina∣tions, he was Merciful, and a lover of Truth and Justice. For outward Accomplishments, he was an excellent Horseman, loved Wrestling, and was much addicted to Hunting. He writ some Treatises in Latin, favoured learned Men, and was very Religious. Several New sorts of Money were coined by him, and considering how pro∣digal his Predecessors had been, in giving away the Re∣venues of the Crown, he confirmed a Law invented by his Father, That no Female should inherit any Gift of the Crown.
7. His lawful Issue (as he had no other) was as follows.His Issue. 1st. D. Alonso, his Successor. 2dly, Ferdinand Duke of Viseo, Master of the Military Orders of Christ and Santi∣ago, and Constable of Portugal; and also Father to Ema∣nuel, who was afterwards King. 3dly, Philippa, who died of the Plague at 12 Years of Age. 4thly, Ellenor, married to the Emperor Maximilian, who was Grand-Father to the ever-renowned Charles the 5th. D. John de Silva and Meneses, fell passionately in Love with this Princess, and followed her till he saw her married; after which he became a Franciscan Fryar, and led a very ex∣emplary Life, at Montorio near Rome. 5thly, Katherine, contracted in England and Navarre, yet never married. 6thly. Joanna, Born after the Death of her Father, and married afterwards to King Henry the 4th. of Castile. CHAP. V. The First Part of the Life  Reign of King Alonso, the Fifth of the Name, and Twelfth King of Portugal, from the Year 1432. till 1469. 1. KIng Alonso the 5th.The Birth of King A∣lonso. Succeeded his Father being but Six Years of Age. He was born at the Palace of Sintra, in the Year 1432. His Father in his Will, or∣dained,1432. That the Queen should have the Government of the Young King and Kingdom;His Acces∣sion to the Crown and Differ between the Qn and Nobility. but every Nobleman stri∣ving to draw the Power into his own Hands, caused all to run into Confusion, whence ensued greater Destructi∣on than had been produced by the preceding Plague. They blamed the King for committing the care of the Realm to a Woman, she a Forreigner, and what they most resented, a Castilian, as they termed her, tho' she was Daughter to the King of Aragon. The Princes, Bro∣thers to the late King, were the Heads of these Factions, and particularly Prince Peter, who was always an Enemy to the Queen. Prince Alonso being proclaimed King, in the Sixth Year of his Age, on the Tenth of September, in the Town of Tomar, the Second Day after his Father's Death, Queen Ellenor took upon her the Government, as had
been ordained by her Husband's Will, and so far laid a∣side all former Animosity with Prince Peter, that they did nothing without his Advice, and desired him joyntly with her to Sign the Writs of Summons for the Cortes or Parliament. Before the Cortes could meet, Prince Peter, upon pretence of Zeal to secure the Succession, in Case the Young King should die before he was Marriageable, cau∣sed his younger Brother Ferdinand to be Sworn Heir to the Crown conditionally, if the other died without Issue. The Queen pleased with these outward shows of Loyal∣ty in Prince Peter, discovered to him, That the King her Husband had declared to his Confessor, it was his Will, that the present King Alonso should marry Elizabeth, Daughter of the said Prince Peter; to which she willing∣ly consented, and desired it might be immediatly per∣formed. The Prince, tho' astonished at so great a fa∣vour, accepted the offer. No sooner was this noised a∣broad, but Alonso, Earl of Barcelos, Bastard-Brother to Prince Peter, designing to marry the King to his own Grand Daughter, prevailed with the Archbishop of Lis∣bon, the Queen's Favrite, to diswade her from that Re∣solution. Prince Pet understanding the Design, asked the Queen to confirm her Promise to him under her Hand; which she, tho her mind was altered, easily granted. 2. The Cortes being met at Torres Novas,The Cortes meet, and instead of settling Peace, wi∣den the Breach. where Peace ought to have been established, there Discord broke out▪ The Nobility envying Prince Peter the Honour of mar∣rying his Daughter to the King, Conspired against him. However, it was carried in this Parliament, That the Queen should have the Education of the King, and Prince Peter the Power of the Government. She was content; but his Adversaries stickled against this Resolution, so that they came to be divided; the Nobility affirming the Queen ought to Govern, and the Commons asserting it was their Right to nominate the Prince a Protector. Prince Henry mediated between them, allotting the Queen the Charge of the King and the Revenue, appointing the Prince to Defend the Kingdom, and allowing Earl Alonso to take Charge of the Administration of Justice, with the Advice of the Council, and Approbation of the Queen and Prince, directing the Cortes to meet Yearly to settle all greater Matters. Prince Peter, tho' nothing was left him but the bare Title of Protector, submitted rather
than embroil the Kingdom. Earl Alonso, tho' he had more than he could have demanded, was dissatisfied; and the Queen, pushed on by the Prince's Adversaries, would part with nothing. The mutinous People obli∣ged the Queen to accept of what was allotted her. Earl Alonso sent his Son to demand of Prince Peter the Note the Queen had given him, for Security of the King's Marrying his Daughter; he, in scorn, tore it in pieces, and so returned it. 3. Embassadors from Castile had been some time in Portugal,Embassa∣dors of Ca∣stile sent away with∣out an An∣swer. and could not be heard by reason of the pre∣sent Disorders. At length they had Audience of the Queen at Lisbon, where they proposed, in the Name of King John the Second of Castile, That the Bishops, ex∣pelled during the Schism, should be restored; That the Military Orders of Avis and Santiago in Portugal, should submit themselves, as they had been before, to those of Calatrava and Avis in Castile; That some Portuguese Bishopricks, formerly subject to the Archiepiscopal See of Sevil, should return to its Obedience. After some Debate, they were sent away without any Answer, which was to be given by Portuguese Embassadors appointed to follow them. The People were not at all pleased with the Queen's Administration, and pressed Prince Peter to take it upon himself. She flying from the Plague, then in the City, retired to Mount Olivet, where she was de∣livered of the Princess Joanna, afterwards Queen of Ca∣stile, and received Letters from the Pope, condoling the Death of the King, and advising her not to deliver Ceuta for Prince Ferdinand. Prince Peter, stirred up by the People to take upon him the Government, and advised to it by his Brother, Prince John, to prevent a Civil War, delayed the time. At length, the People, wholly averse to the Queen,The People averse to  Queen. ran in multitudes to oblige the Prince to enter upon the Administration of the Publick Affairs, and he, tho' displeased with the Queen, pacified the Multitude, perswading them to put off that Design till the Meeting of the Cortes or Parliament. 4. The Queen privately writ to all the Members of Parliament to come armed,Tumults a∣gainst the Queen. that they might suppress the Rabble. But Prince Peter understanding it, as Pro∣tector, charged them to be ready to obey his Orders. This done, he took leave of the Queen in a course man∣ner, which President made her the more slighted,
she being sensible of it, speedily removed to Alenquer. The Citizens of Lisbon elected a Standard-bearer, and held Seditious Meetings, in contempt of the Queen's Letters. The Archbishop fortified himself against the Citizens, they stopped his Revenue, sent Complaints against him to Rome, and he was forced to fly to Castile. The Multitude, headed by a Cooper, declared Prince Peter should Govern, and a Taylor ratify'd this Decree. Thus the Kingdom was disposed of by a Cooper and a Taylor. The Governour of the Castle of Lisbon held for the Queen, but being sore pressed by the People, was forced to surrender it to Prince John. Prince Peter sent to Summons the Queen to the Parliament; she replyed, she would not go, unless he resigned all Claim to the Government; but he rather chose to stand to the Election made of him by the Cooper and the Taylor.Prince Pe∣ter made Regent by a Cooper and a Tay∣lor, Heads of the Rab∣ble. The Prince coming from Coimbra to Lisbon, accepted the Govern∣ment at the hands of the Multitude, which was after∣wards confirmed to him by the Cortes or Parliament, to which the Young King was brought, after sufficient Se∣curity given his Mother that he should be restored to her. Nevertheless, he was forcibly taken from her, and she retired to Sintra. Thence she craved Assistance of her Brothers, the Princes of Aragon, who sent Embas∣sadors to intercede for her, but they were dismissed with∣out any Answer. She ceased not to make Friends in Navarre and Aragon, and the Prince secured Castile to his Party. The Queen, in order to make her Escape, sent away her Plate and Jewels, which were of a great Value, to be kept in the Castle of Albuquerque. Em∣bassadors came from Castile to require she might either be restored to the Government, or have leave to depart the Kingdom. But no satisfactory Answer being given them, she hereupon made her Escape, with her Daugh∣ter Joanna, born after the Death of the King. 5. The Queen being missing,Civil War in Portu∣gal. all was in Confusion. Crato, and all the Castles subject to that Priory, held for her, and thus the Civil War commenced. Some Places were taken by the Prince, and he resolved to Be∣siege the Queen in the Town of Crato, but she having called some Castilian Troops to her Assistance, after ma∣king much havock, withdrew into Castile. Alonso, Earl of Barcelos, still held out for the Queen, but his Son following the Prince, brought him over to that Party,
tho' not without difficulty. Thus, for some time, all Storms seemed to be blown over. About this time was brought from Rome a Dispensation for the Young King to Marry Prince Peter's Eldest Daughter Elizabeth, as also the Orders of Santiago and Avis in Portugal were exempted from any Subjection to the Orders in Castile. The Dispensation being come, the King was marryed by the Consent of the Cortes, then sitting, to the Regent's Daughter,1441. at Obidos on the 15th. of August, 1441. The Bridegroom was then Ten Years of Age,The Young King mar∣ries the Regent's Daughter. and the Bride Seven or Eight. The Queen Dowager still pressed to be restored to the Government, and the King of Castile sent several Embassages in her behalf, which nothing availing, it was feared a War would ensue; but that King dying, all that Negotiation fell to nothing. Thus the Queen Dowager being forsaken on all hands, and having spent her Treasure in solliciting to make War upon Portugal, went away at last to Toledo, where she lived upon Charity, and there died, as was suspected, poisoned by the Regent, tho others say, by D. Alvaro de Luna, then Favourite to the King of Castile. 6. The King of Castile being jealous of the Aragonian, asked some Supplies of Men out of Portugal. They were accordingly sent him, under the Command of the Con∣stable Peter, Son to the Regent; but there being no use for them, they returned home. However, the Con∣stable, while he was in Castile, concluded a Match be∣twixt that King and the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Prince John.144. King Alonso of Portugal being now Four∣teen Years of Age,King A∣lonso take upon him the Govern∣ment, and confirms all that had been done by the Re∣gent. according to the Custom of Spain, took upon him the Government in the Assembly of the Cortes or Parliament, thanked Prince Peter for his good Administration till that time, and desired him to con∣tinue in it till he were of riper Years. Next, he ratified his Marriage with that Prince's Daughter, and then went away to Alcaçaras, where the Embassador of Castile was Proxy for his Master in the Ceremony of Contract∣ing the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Prince John, to that King. There also the Lady Beatrix, Sister to Elizabeth, was contracted to Prince Ferdinand, Brother to that King. Prince Peter by this time thought he had wholly gained over all his Enemies that opposed his Advance∣ment to the Government, but now it appeared it was but a counterfeit Reconciliation. The Duke of Bra∣ganza,
the Earl of Ourem, and the Archbishop of Lisbon prevailed with the King to remove him from the Go∣vernment, laying Disloyalty to his Charge, and they at the same time displaced all Officers, as well Civil as Military, that had been preferred by him. Not so con∣tent, they accused him of aspiring to the Crown, and so far prevailed, as to have him banished the Court; which done, several Libels were dispersed abroad, fraught with nothing but Reflections upon him, and many Articles laid to his charge, were Judicially examined. Prince Henry came from Algarve to Court, to vindicate his Bro∣ther's Honour, but to little purpose, because he was look'd upon to be no less guilty than the other, and both of them were charged with poisoning King Edward, Queen Ellenor, and Prince John. D. Alvaro de Almada, Earl of Abranchez, in the King's Presence challenged any Man that should lay blemish on the Prince's Repu∣tation; but the King was carryed away to Sintra by his Favourites, that he might not give ear to those that fa∣voured Prince Peter. 7. The King from Sintra issued out his Orders,Prince Pe∣ter, the late Re∣gent, in Arms, and declared Rebel. for∣bidding all Persons to Converse and hold Correspondence with the Prince; also Summoning all the Queen his Mother's Servants, who had been discarded, to appear, and put in their Claims; and Commanding the Prince not to depart from his own Lands without the King's leave. He was also commanded to deliver up all the Arms that were in Coimbra, which he refused to do. The Duke of Braganza being called to Court, was to pass through the Prince's Lands, and therefore intended to Travel well attended; but the Prince marched out with Forces to oppose him, and tho' several times Orders were brought him from the King, to return to Coimbra, he still advanced towards the Duke, who was forced privately to fly,1449. and make his escape to Santarem, where the Court then was. Hereupon he was declared a Rebel and Traytor, and Forces were raised with Expedition against him. D. Sancho de Noronha, Earl of Odemira, was sent with Forces against the Constable, Prince Peter's Son, who fled to Castile, where he found not such kind Entertainment as he expected. Queen Elizabeth being the Prince's Daughter, studied how to save her Father, and gave him Advice, that the Fifth of May was the day appointed to Besiege him. Then she went to the
King to beg Pardon for him, which the King said he would grant, provided the Prince himself would beg it, acknowledging his Faults. He did so in a Letter to the King, but the Queen shewing him her Letter, wherein the Prince vindicated himself, and said, he complyed so far only to satisfie her; the King said, since he did not really acknowledge his faults, he merited no Pardon. The Prince's Enemies, to prevent the Queen's inter∣ceding for him, kept him as much from her as they could, and imprisoned D. Alvaro de Castro, a Man of a most beautiful Person, and excellent Behaviour, as stand∣ing accused of too much Familiarity with the Queen, but the King knowing well her Vertue, caused D. Alvaro to be set at Liberty, and did him great Honour. 8. The King had now gathered a numerous Army, but could not set forward for want of Provisions and Carriages.The King comes to a Battle with the Rebels. But the Prince on his part set forward from Coimbra with 1000 Horse, and 5000 Foot, and came within five Leagues of Santarem without meeting any Opposition. There he was advised to return to Coimbra, but he chose to advance towards Lisbon, and by the way put to Death about fifty Horse of the King's, that at a distance called him Traytor. Being come to a Brook called Alfarreveira, he there chose a convenient Ground for a small Body to oppose a greater, for he had not yet 8000 Men, and the King's Army consisted of above 30000. By that Multitude he found himself encompassed on the 20th. of May. Proclamation was made, declaring all Traytors that should thenceforth adhere to the Prince; yet none forsook him, but some of the King's Army de∣serted to him. Some Shot of Musquets and Cross-bows flying from the King's Camp to the Prince's, he an∣swered with some Cannon, one of the Bullets whereof falling near the King's Tent, so enraged his Army, that they immediately, without Orders, fell on, and in a moment broke and put to flight the Prince's Forces. He himself fighting resolutely,Prince Pe∣ter killed. was shot through with an Arrow, and died. His inseparable Friend, the Earl of Abranchez, having sworn not to forsake him in Death, after having performed incredible Acts of Bravery, was there also slain. Most of the Prince's followers were ei∣ther taken or killed. His Body was left three days in the Field, and then being laid upon a Ladder, four Country men carryed it to the poor Church of Alverca,
where it was buried. The King was received at Lisbon in Triumphant manner. Many Persons were executed on Account of these Troubles, and their Heirs, to the Fourth Generation, declared Infamous. The Prince's Enemies fearing the Queen might some time or other Revenge the Death of her Father, advised the King to be divorced from her▪ but he received her with all the marks of True Love and Affection. They begged of him some Towns that had belonged to the Prince, which he freely gave them; but the Cities of Porto and Por∣talegre would not submit to be given away to any Body, and were therefore annexed to the Crown. 9. The Princess Ellenor during this time was contra∣cted to the Emperor Frederick the Third,The Prin∣cess Elle∣nor con∣tracted to the Empe∣ror Frede∣rick the Third. and was now delivered in the Month of August to his Embassadors. They embarked at Lisbon, and landed at Leghorn, whence she was conducted to Sienna, where the Bridegroom met her, attended by Ladislaus King of Hungary, his Brother Albertus the Arch-Duke, and other Princes. Hence they travelled together to Rome, where they were crowned with the usual Solemnity.1451. Prince Ferdinand, who was marryed to the Lady Beatrix,1452. Daughter to Prince John, privately built a Caravel, and went away in it to Ceuta, to employ himself against the Moors, but the King soon sent for him home, and to settle his Mind, gave him the Towns of Beja,1453. Moura, and Serpa. The great Monarch of the Turks, Mahomet, having taken Constan∣tinople, Pope Calixtus stirred up the Christian Princes to unite their Forces against the Common Enemy. Our King offered to serve in Person one Year with 12000 Men, but all these Projects fell to nothing. Our Queen had before this time brought forth a Son and a Daugh∣ter, whereof the former died,1455. and now on the third of May she was delivered at Lisbon of another Son, whom she called John, as the first had been, for the special De∣votion she had to that Name. He was sworn Prince, being but a Month old, with great Solemnity. The Queen upon this Occasion obtained leave of the King, that the Body of her Father, Prince Peter, might be placed in the Tomb he had built for himself at the Fa∣mous Monastery of Batalla. At this time also a Match was concluded betwixt the Princess Joanna, King Alonso's Daughter, and Henry the Fourth, King of Castile. She was Seventeen Years of Age, and very beautiful, which
was all her Portion, and she was conducted to Castile, by Count Alvaro Gonzalez de Atayde. Elizabeth our Queen died on the Second of December following,The Queen's Death. not without suspicion of Poison given her, by her Father's Enemies, fearing she might prevail with the King to Re∣venge his Death. She was carried to the Church of Ba∣talla, with the greatest Pomp that had been used at the Funeral of any Queen. For Beauty, Patience, Obedi∣ence, and Piety, she was inferior to none. The Mon∣astery of Xabregas of the religious of S. Eloy, was foun∣ded by her.1456. The King ordered the Body of his Mother, Queen Ellenor, to be brought from Toledo, to be buried at the Church of Batalla. As far as Elvas it was con∣ducted by the King and Queen of Castile, and there they were met by our King. 10. The Bishop of Silves brought the Croisade from Rome,1457. granted to Encourage Christian Princes to joyn their Forces against the Turks.The Croi∣sade brought in∣to Portu∣gal. Our King made Prepara∣tions for that Expedition, and recalled Peter, the Consta∣ble and Master of Avis, Son to Prince Peter, who was Banished to Castile. He also coined a New sort of pieces called Cruzadoes, from the Croisade and the Cross on them. These were of pure Gold, and great Weight, that they might pass in Forreign Countries, but the other Christian Princes not answering on their Part, he bent his Mind upon Prosecuting the Conquest of Africk. Tan∣gier was first aimed at,1458. but this Resolution was changed for Alcaçer.Alcazer, on the Coast of Africk, taken by King A∣lonso. Twenty thousand Landmen were appointed for this Service, who set sail from Setuval the 12th. of Octo∣ber, in Two hundred Sail of Ships. They no sooner ar∣rived than that they were Victorious, and reduced that Place; the Particulars of which Action are in the Portuguese Africk. A Peace was now established with the Duke of Britany,1459. whose Subjects had taken many Portuguese Ships, which was repaid them in the same kind.1460. The following Year died Prince Henry, who first gave Encouragement, and promoted the Disco∣veries on the Coast of Africk. A Year after he was fol∣lowed by Alonso, Duke of Bragança, Bastard-Son to King John the First.1461. The King being advertised, That it would be easie to surprize Tangier,Tangier taken. set sail from Lisbon in November, and tho he met with many difficulties he be∣came Master of that Place. The Catalonians rebelling a∣gainst their lawful Sovereign, King John of Aragn, sent
to invite Peter, Son to the Unfortunate Prince Peter, to that Principality as being descended of the Ancient Earls of Barcelona. He hasted thither from Ceuta, but lived not long there, and lies buried in the Cathedral. King Alonso went over from Ceuta, to Gibraltar, to meet the King of Castile, who craved Aid of him against his Nobi∣lity; that not content with staining his Honour, sought to deprive him of the Crown.1464. Here it was agreed, King Alonso should marry Elizabeth, Sister to the Castilian; and his Son Prince John, the Princess Joanna, but all this took no effect.1466. Queen Joanna of Castile, on whom those People cast all their Reproaches, accusing her of Adultery, only in malice to D. Beltran de la Cueva, the King's Fa∣vourite, whom she treated with Courtesie; came to the City Guarda to crave Aid of the King her Brother against the Rebels, who called her Daughter a Bastard, and had opprobriously used a Statue they had erected to the King her Husband. King Alonso intended to have succoured her, but was prevented by the Death of Prince Alonso of Castile, who had been proclaim'd King, in opposition to the King his Brother; whereupon ensued some tranquility in the Affairs of Castile. King John of Aragon, made great Interest that his Son Ferdinand might marry Elizabeth, Sister to the King of Castile. Our King Alonso, also sent Embassadors to demand her according to the Articles con∣cluded at Gibraltar. But these Embassadors could not prevail, for she was already engaged to Ferdinand, and much more to those who advised that Match, in oppositi∣on to her Brother, that she might the better, with their assistance, deprive him of the Crown. That Match was concluded in February, 1469.1469. This is that Elizabeth, so much admired by the Spaniards for Sanctity, and yet, by this it appears she aimed to Usurp the Crown from her Brother, and actually did it from his only Daughter.
CHAP. VI. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King Alonso, the Fifth of the Name, and Twelfth King of Portugal, and his Death; from the Year 1470, till 1481. 1. ON the 18th. of September,14. died at Setubal, Prince Ferdinand, Brother to King Alonso, and Father to many Children; whereof one was Emanul afterwards King. Soon after his Death, his Daughter Ellenor was married to Prince John, he being Fourteen Years of Age, and she Thirteen. Twelve Portuguese Ships now coming from Flanders, were taken by the English; whereupon, our King ordered Reprisals to be made, and sent Em∣bassadors to complain of it; which was followed by a lasting Peace. In the mean while, Persons were sent to discover the Port of Arzila, on the Coast of Africk, who brought an Account, that 30000 Men were requisite for that Expedition; 24000 Landmen, besides the Seamen, were shipped on Board 308 Sail of all sorts.141. The King sailed to Lagos in Algarve,King A∣loso  and Tangier. before he discovered his De∣sign, then passing over to Arzila, took that Place, as he did Tangier, forsaken by the Inhabitants upon the first News of his approach.He change his . Upon this Conquest, the King changed his Titles, which before were, King of Portugal, Algarve and Ceut for those of, King of Portugal, and both Algarves, that on this side, and that on the other in Africk. Prince Ferdinand, after he was taken in the for∣mer Expedition, against Tangier, lived Six Years in Sla∣very, and his Body remained Twenty more among the Infidels. But the King gave now in exchange for his Bones, Two Wives, and a Daughter of Lord of that Place;14 and afterwards King of Fi. Th Bones were brought over, and buried in the Famous Church of Batalla. King Hry of Caste, and our King Alonso, had an interview between Badz, and Elvas, about a Match for the Prince of Portugal, with , Princess of Castile, but it had no Effect; for the rebel∣lious Castilians, openly declared her a Bastard, and Eli∣zabeth, that King Sister was married to Ferdinand
Aragon, by the Name of Princess of Castile. It it hor∣rid to think, with what Impudence they durst Declare that Princess a Bastard, seeing she was Born in Wed∣lock; and for what they pretended of the King's Impo∣tency, it was contrary to Reason; since it is notorious the Queen was Jealous of him, and she could have no occa∣sion for jealousie, had she found the King unfit for the Company of Women. But the World is sufficiently con∣vinced, there can be no true Reason given to justifie Re∣bellion, yet Rebels never want pretences to Colour their Villany. 2. King Henry of Castile met his Sister Elizabeth at Segovia,Affairs of Castile. and he dying on the 11th. of December follow∣ing, it was generally believed he was poisoned. In his Will, he appointed his Daughter Joanna to succeed him, and desired the King of Portugal, to take her to Wife. At the Hour of his Death, his Confessor pressed him to declare who was his lawful Heir; and he answered his Daughter Joanna. Nothing more could have been done to prove her Legitimate, but nothing will suffice against hardned Rebels. Scarce was the Princess Elizabeth assu∣red of the King's Death, when she caused her self to be proclaimed Queen at Segovia. In the mean while, the Marquis de Villena, the Earl of Benavente, and the Bishop of Siguenza, appointed by King Henry, to see his Will executed, sent to the King of Portugal, praying him to set forward with all possible speed, and that not only they, but many more Nobles, and the principal Cities of Ca∣stile, would declare for him. The King was then at Estremoz, where having consulted his Council, he resol∣ved to accept of what was offered; and in order there∣unto, sent his Lord Chamberlain, Lope de Albuquerque to Castile, who returned to him with fresh Assurances, in the Month of January, the King being then at Evora. Elizabeth the New Queen, sent some religious Men to advise our King not to engage in an unjust War (as she termed it) and to offer him another Joanna, Sister to her Husband Ferdinand,Alonso  War with Ca∣stile in  of the . in Marriage. He answered he was resolved to stand by his Niece, being obliged to it, as an Unkle, as a King, and as a Gentleman. 3. Whilst he made Preparations for War, he sent an Embassador to Ferdinand and Elizabeth, to demand that Crown, who returning with such an Answer, as he had expected; he immediately advances to Castile, by the way
of Aronches, with 5600 Horse, and 14000 Foot. With this Army he came to Plasencia, and was there joyfully received by many of the Nobility. There he found the true Queen, and was contracted to her, those there pre∣sent, and many absent, by Proxy, swore Allegiance to him. The King then stiled himself King of Castile, and Portugal, and nothing was wanting for Bedding with the Queen, but the Dispensation from Rome, which Ferdi∣nand and Elizabeth, with all their might opposed. No sooner was this known to the Castilian King and Queen, but they also took the stile of Castile and Portugul, and sent Forces to invade that Kingdom, which having made some spoil returned without any opposition. Queen Joanna sent her Letters, to all the Towns of Castile, ex∣horting them to return to her Obedience, since they had twice sworn her lawful Heiress to the Crown. The King marched to Arevalo, and thence to Toro, which City held for him, and the Castle he took by force. Zamora was delivered to him, and thither he conducted his Bride. Thence they returned to Toro, where Queen Joanna, Mo∣ther to the Bride, and Sister to the Bridegroom, died on the 13. of June. Ferdinand and Elizabeth raised all the Forces they could, and had now gathered together 12000 Horse, and 30000 Foot. With this Force Ferdi∣nand marched and encamped before Toro, where feigning Friendship, he sent to advise King Alonso to depart, or to decide the matter by single Combat; neither whereof, he well knew, could as circumstances stood be accepted. However, Peter de Avendanho so cut off the Castillian's Provisions, that he was forced to draw off his Army to Medina del Campo. Thither came Elizabeth to Ferdi∣nand, reproaching him, that he had not accepted of a single Combat, on such terms as the Portuguese allowed of. But Money beginning now to fail them, and they fearing to tax the People, had recourse to the Clergy, who gave them half the Plate of the Churches. 4. Some Overtures of Peace were now made, but came not to any head. Our King marching to relieve Burgs, was recalled by the revolt of Zamora, which Elizabeth of Castile, laying hold of, gave out that he fled, which drew many to her Party. The Portuguese now grew weary of being abroad, and the King wanting Money, his Subjects refused to furnish him upon that Account; so that all his Affairs went backwards. King Alonso thus
streightned, discharged many of his Army, and many more went away without expecting a Discharge. The Governour of the Castles on the Bridge of Zamora, being corrupted by Ferdinand and Elizabeth, some advised to build a Wall betwixt them and the Town, and they would perish; but the Archbishop of Toledo, and other great Men, perswaded the King to remove to Toro, lea∣ving behind in the Castle, all his Equipage, because he could not then Travel with so much Baggage. Ferdi∣nand immediately entred the City, and attacked the Ca∣stle, but without success. King Alonso sent him a chal∣lenge, and he refused any single Combat, for which he was again, severely reproved by his Wife Elizabeth; she being fitter to have been Ferdinand, than he was to be Elizabeth.1476. In January the Prince of Portugal came to Toro, with some Troops, and was there received with great joy, except by the Duke of Arevalo, and Marquis de Villena, who began to incline to King Ferdinand. King Alonso however resolved to put all to the issue of a Battle, tho the Archbishop of Toledo, of all the Castilian Nobi∣lity that invited him, was the only Person that stood now by him. Fifteen Days after the Princes arrival, King Alonso marched towards Zamora to meet King Ferdinand, leaving his Queen behind at Toro. He attacked the Bridge, but to no purpose. Overtures of Peace were again made without any likelihood of success, for it was decreed, no Accommodation should be purchased without Blood. King Alonso seeing he wasted his Army, lying before a Town in the dead of Winter, his Enemy lying close, re∣turned towards Toro, his Forces braving the Castilians by the slowness of their March. Ferdinand ashamed to have been so long dared, at length sallied out to fall upon the Rear of the Portuguese Army. Alonso suspect∣ing no such thing, was now marched down a Hill in great disorder, as being at the Gates of his own City. It was debated among the Castilians, whither they ought to pur∣sue their Enemy, who they said fled, or return to Zamora; but the Cardinal, Peter Gonzalez de Mendoza, having from the top of the Hill, taken a view of the Portuguese Army, said it would be a shame to return without bid∣ding Battle, and thereupon their Army advanced. 5. King Alonso perceiving the approach of the Enemy, drew up his Army. In the Van he placed the Castilians, and his own Houshold. He himself ed the main Body,
Prince John the left Wing, and the Archbishop of To∣ledo the Right. D. John de Castro, Earl of Monsanto brought up the Rear. The Sun was now going down, and a small Rain began to fall when the to Armies engaged. Prince John gave a vigorous Charge on his side, and was received with no less Bravery, yet forced the Castilian Wing to retire to the main Body. At the same time the King advanced before his Men, and the Fight was maintained on both sides for the space of an hour before any gave Ground, both Reserves coming up to second their Princes. The Portuguese, over-powered by the number of their Enemies, began to for∣sake the Royal Standard, which was taken, after both the bearer's Hands were cut off. King Alonso in despair would have cast himself into the midst of his Enemies, if not disswaded by some of his Followers.The Portu∣guese Ar∣my route. In Con∣clusion, the King, and those Gentlemen that could bear him Company, fled to Castro Nunho, where they were honourably received by Peter de Avendano the Gover∣nour. Prince John, who had defeated the Enemy's Right Wing, seeing the rout of the Army, with what Forces he could gather, stood firm on an Eminence, where he continued all the day. Most of the other routed Portuguese cast themselves into the River Duero, where more perished by Water than had done by the Sword. King Ferdinand (who never loved Fighting) did not lead his Men, but stood with a strong Party on a rising Ground, to secure his own Escape, in case of need, and seeing his Right Wing drove by Prince John, and the main Body hard put to by King Alonso, he with that Body of Guards hasted away towards Zamora, with∣out expecting to see the Event of the Battle. Thus he came at Night to Zamora in a Consternation, not know∣ing whether he was Victorious, or defeated. Such was his Cowardize and Precipitation. 6. The Prince continued all the Night on that Emi∣nence, we have already mentioned, by sound of Trum∣pets, and the light of Fires calling together the Remains of the scattered Army. In the Morning, when he ex∣pected to have been charged by the Castilans, it appeared they were gone after the King to Zmora; whereupon he marched away in good Order, with Colours flying▪ to Toro. Finding no News of his Father there, all was in great Confusion▪ ill Advice was brought him where
was. They met, and together received a courteous Mes∣sage from King Ferdinand, who sent the King all his Equipage which he had taken in the Castle of Zamora. The Archbishop of Toledo, who only of all the Castilian Nobility adhered to the Portuguese, asked leave now to depart to defend his own Lands, which were wasted by King Ferdinand's Commanders. The Bishop of Evora with his Troops was sent to Conduct him on his way; who being come back, returned with the Prince to Por∣tugal, to defend the Frontiers, then much infested by the Enemy. King Alonso had sent D. Alvaro de Atayde from Toro into France, designing to follow in Person, and crave Succour for carrying on the War, in case this Embassador found a favourable Reception. King Lewis entertained D. Alvaro with such feigned Friendship, that he easily perswaded the King his Master to go over into France. The King having resolved upon that Journey, after settling the Government of those few Places he held in Castile, about the beginning of June set forward for Portugal, carrying with him his Bride, that should have been Queen, Joanna, now spoiled of her Crown. Being come to Miranda, Alonso Sas into ance. she went away to the City Guarda, and he to Porto, where he intended to Embark for France. Thither repaired the Prince, Nobility, and Clergy, disswading him from that Voyage, but he was not to be moved from that Resolution. He set Sail with 21 Vessels of several sort, and in them 500 Gentlemen, and 2200 Men at Arms. By the way he touched at Ceuta, next at Marseilles, and landed at Colivre, where he was received with Respect by the Governour. At Perpignan, in Honour to him, the Prison-Gates were set open. Thence he sent D. Francisco de Almeyda to King Lewis, to appoint the Place where they should meet; and great Honour was shewn him all the way he tra∣velled through that Country. 7. At Bourges King Lewis met him, and extraordi∣nary Civilities passed between them. They agreed, that King Alonso should go to the Duke of Burgundy his Cousin, to crave Aid of him, or in case he could not grant it, by reason of the War he was engaged in with orrain, then to perswade him not to molest King Lewis, whilst he assisted King Alonso. That to make the King's Title undeniable, the Pope's Dispensation should be im∣mediately obtained, for him to Marry Queen Joanna,
true Heiress of Castile. That each of them should ap∣point four Persons to adjust what Army and Treasure was requisite for carrying on their Design. King Lewis readily offered a good Sum of Money to Bribe all such Governours of Towns, as could by that means be drawn to their Party. Embassadors were immediately dispatch'd to Rome to obtain the Dispensation, and King Alonso set out to meet the Duke of Burgundy, who then lay at the Siege of Nancy in Lorrain. They met upon the River, then frozen over, and the King being conducted to the Army with all possible marks of Honour and Re∣spect; the Duke there shewed him, how little Confi∣dence was to be reposed in the Promises of the King of France, who the next day appeared with an Army in favour of the Lorrainer. The day after, the Burgundian was killed, and King Lewis being bent upon the Con∣quest of Burgundy, sent King Alonso to Paris, where he was received with the greatest Magnificence imaginable. All, the Embassadors could obtain of the Pope, was, that if the King of France would furnish King Alonso with a sufficient Force to reduce Castile, he would then grant the Dispensation. Hereupon the two Kings met at Arras, where Alonso plainly discovered he could repose no Trust in Lewis. He went away to Roan, and there spent a great part of the Summer, waiting till his Fleet was fitted out to return home. He went down the Ri∣ver to his Fleet, then at Harfleur, but fearing to be stayed by the King of France, and ashamed to return home after that unfortunate Journey,K. Alon resolves  his  at Hierusa∣lem. he resolved to go spend the rest of his Days in Hierusalem. On the 24th. of September before Day, he went out to a Chappel near the City, with only four Servants, having ordered his Chaplain, Stephen Martinez, to expect him half a League further. There he dismissed one of the four, giving him the Key of a Cabinet, in which were found four Letters; one for the King of France, giving him an Account of his Design, and desiring him to favour those Servants he left in his Kingdom. Another for Prince John his Son, charging him upon his Blessing immedi∣ately to cause himself to be Proclaimed King. Another to the Kingdom in general, Commanding the People to receive him as such. The last was to those left at Har∣fleur, directing them to be Obedient to the Earl of Fa▪ till their return to Portugal.
8. Monsieur de Labret, by the King of France his Or∣der, attended upon King Alonso, who sent out every way to find him, and having met with him the se∣cond day, stopped him, but with all imaginable Respect. There he received a Letter from King Lewis, by which he was perswaded to alter his Resolution, and to return to Portugal, where, on the Tenth of November his Son was Proclaimed King in the Town of Santarem, pur∣suant to the Letters he had sent to that effect. Only four days had he worn the Crown, when his Father ar∣rived, and he in Confusion asking, how he should receive him? The Duke of Braganza answered, As your Fa∣ther, and as your King. The Prince accordingly met him at Oeyras, where kneeling he kissed his ands, and resigned the Government up  Alonso would have contented himself with the  of King Al∣garve, but the Prince persisted he would accept of no∣thing during his Life. Whilst the King was abroad, Queen Elizabeth laid Siege to Toro, which was bravely defended, till one Bartholomew, a Shepherd, discovered to the Castilian Generals a Place, which being thought unaccessible, was left unguarded. Wherefore Six Hun∣dred Men in the Night, conducted by the Shepherd, sur∣mouned all those difficult Passes, and got into the Town. The Count de Marialva, who was Governour, quitting the Castle, fled to Castro Nunho, yet the Lady Mary Sarmiento, Widow of John de Ʋlloa, who had been Con∣stable of that Fort, defended that Place, till seeing no hopes of Relief, she was obliged to surrender it upon most Honourable Articles. Presently after, Queen Eli∣zabeth caused the other Places that held for Portugal, to be besieged, and had them surrendred to her. In the mean while the Portuguese Forces wasted the Country about Badoz and Cuidad Rodrigo; and Alonso de Car∣as, Master of Santiago, did the same on the Portu∣guese Borders, both Parties executing the utmost Cruel∣es usual in War. 9. Upon the return of King Alonso out of France,143. the War was revived, and he thought of Marrying the Lady Joanna, having obtained a Dispensation; but Prince John his Son used his utmost Endeavours to obstruct it. The Bishop of Evora going into Castile with 700 Horse, and Number of Foot, to assist the Countess of Mellin, followed the Portuguse Interest, was met by the
Master of Santiago, routed, and taken Prisoner, yet bri∣bing his Keeper, he escaped to Merida, and ever after did the Castilians much harm, till the Peace was con∣cluded. Both Parties being sufficiently exhausted, easily condescended to Treat of a Peace, which was concluded at Alcaçovas on the Fourth of September,1479. excluding the unfortunate Princess Joanna,Peace con∣cluded be∣twixt the two Crowns who against her will was forced to become a Nun. Yet she lived to see God's Judgments fall upon them that drove her to that Ne∣cessity; for Prince John, who hoped to Marry his Son to the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, and by that means to make him Heir to that Crown, saw that same Son dragged to Death by a Horse, and none of his Race ascended the Throne of Portugal. King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth outlived their only Son John, and had only a Daughter left, who conveyed that Crown to the House of Austria.1480. Nor was the Plague, that began the following Year at Lisbon, and lasted Fourteen Years, less to be accounted of than Heavenly Vengeance. The Castilians, contrary to the last Articles of Peace, sent a Fleet to Trade on the Coast of Guinea. Our King sent a Squadron, under the Command of George Correa, to obstruct them.1481. He met with 30 Ships of Castile upon the Coast called Mina, and after a sharp Engagement, obtained a compleat Victory, bringing several of them to Lisbon. 10. King Alonso, ever since the Lady Joanna of Castile was constrained to take upon her a Religious Habit, fell into an extraordinary Melancholy, and had resolved himself to turn a Monk; but returning from acquaint∣ing his Son with his Design to Cintra, he there fell sick of a violent Fever, which in a few days carryed him off. His Death was upon the Eighth of August,The Death of King Alonso. in the 49th. Year of his Age, and 43d. of his Reign. He was o a Graceful Presence, somewhat bulky, had a thick Beard, his Hair dark-brown, and of Condition extreamly cour∣teous. In War he was active▪ in Peace negligent▪ a Lover of Learning, learned himself, and was the first King that collected a Library in the Palace. It was said of him, That he was a better Man than a King; and on the contrary of his Son, That he was a better King than a Man. He was Bountiful to Prodigality, temperate in Eating and Sleeping, and of such Continence, that becoming a Widower at  Years of Age, he is said
never after to have known Woman.His Issue. His Lawful Issue, and he had no other, was, first, John, who died in his Infancy. Secondly, Joanna, who being contracted to several Princes, they all died before she could be marryed, and she became a Dominican Nun at Aveyro. Thirdly, John, who succeeded his Father. 11. The Discoveries in this King's Reign were as fol∣lows:Discoveries during his Reign. Nunho Tristan, and Antony Gonzalez sailed as far as Cape Blanco, in 20 Degrees of North Latitude, whence they brought some Moors, and also Blacks, then a Rarity in Spain. Nunho returned, and proceeded as far as the Islands of Arguin. Lanzarote and Yanez found the Island of Garças, whence they brought 200 Slaves. Antony Gonzalez returning, pierced as far as the Island Tider: Alvaro Fernandez discovered Cape Matos, and going 100 Leagues farther, slew the Lord of that Country. Gon∣zalo de Sintra at Angra lost six Men, which was the first Loss sustained in these Discoveries. Denis Fernandez reached as far as the River Sanaga, in 16 Degrees of North Latitude, and discovered the Islands of Cabo Verde, Buenavista, Santiago, and S. Philip. Vincent de Lagos, and Lewis Cadamusto, a Genese, found the Islands Ter∣ceras, being Eleven in number. The Islands of S. Tho∣mas and Principe, the Kingdom of Beni, as far as Cape Catherine, and Sierra Leona, were also discovered. John de Santarem, and John de Escobar, found the Coutry called Mina. Ferdinand Po, that which bears his Name. The Islands Azores were now first known, so called from the many Hawks seen there, and are Nine in num∣ber, lying due West of the Rock of Sintra. In one of these, on the top of a Mountain, called Del Cuervo, or of the Crow, was found a Statue of a Man on Horse∣back, his Head bare, his Left Hand on the Horse's Main, the Right pointing to the West: It stood upon a stone Pedestal, which, together with the whole Statue, was all of one piece, and under it were certain Characters cut in the Rock, but could never be understood.
CHAP. VII. The First Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Second of the Name; and Thirteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1455. till 1491. 1. IN the renowned City Lisbon,Birth of King John the Second. on the Third of May, 1455. was born the most excellent Prince John the Second, King of Portugal, sirnamed the Perfect and the Great.1455. He was baptized in the Cathedral, with the greatest pomp and solemnity, that had till then been seen. This Prince was educated and instructed in all Arts, that can accomplish a Person of that Character. This, and his personal Worth, moved King Henry the 4th. of Ca∣stile, to propose a Match between him and his only Daughter, the Lady Joanna. However the King his Fa∣ther, gave him to Wife, the Lady Ellenor of Lancaster, eldest Daughter to his Brother Ferdinand; having ob∣tained the Pope's Dispensation for it, and they were ac∣cordingly married on the 22th. of January, 1470.1470. Soon after his Marriage, the King preparing for his Voyage into Africk, the Prince asked, and obtained leave of him, to bear him company, where he behaved himself with such bravery, that his Father Knighted him in the Ms∣que of Arzila, then converted into a Christian Church, on the 24th. of August, 1471.147. Alonso the Prince's only Son being born on the 18th. of May, at such time as King Alonso, was marching into Castile, to marry the Lady Joanna,1475. rightful Heiress of that Crown; he ordained, that in case he had Issue by her, and his Son should die before him, then his Grand-Son should be sworn his Heir, which was done, and Prince John was left to govern the King∣dom.1476. How he marched with Forces to the assistance of his Father, then at Toro in Castile; and how he behaved himself in the Battle between that Place, and Zamora, has been said in the Life of that King.1477. Upon his return into Portugal, he recovered Alegret, taken by the Casti∣lians. Having been, as was said in the last Chapter, pro∣claimed King in his Father's life time, and by his order; upon his return out of France, he restored to him the
Regal Authority, by the advice of the Duke of Bra∣gança, and yet he thought to have put that great Man to Death afterwards upon that same Account. 2. King Alonso having revived the War with Castile,1478. Lope Vaz de Castel-Branco, seized the Town of Moura, and called himself Earl thereof. The Prince resenting this Insolence, sent Six Men, who being admitted into his company, slew him as he was Hunting; which done, the Prince secured the Town, and gave it to the Prin∣cess Beatrix, his Mother-in-Law, to whom it property appertained. The King lying on his Death Bed at Sin∣tra, the Prince hasted thither to see him, and his Father dying on the Three and twentieth of August,1481. he was the second time proclaimed King the last Day of that Month.King John proclai∣med. Nunho Pereyra immediately upon the New King's A∣cession to the Crown, presented him with a Note he had given him under his Hand, in his Minority, promising to make him an Earl whensoever he ascended the Throne. The King considering he had obtained that Note in his In∣fancy, when he had not judgment to know on whom he ought to bestow Honours, tore it, telling him, it was a sufficient Favour he did not punish him for having used sinister means to obtain it. He had resolved to build a Town and Fort on the Coast of Africk, called Mina; to this purpose he fitted out a Fleet, commanded by James de Azambuja, who had with him 500 fighting Men, and 100 Masons, with all materials for the Work, so fitted, that at their landing there was nothing to do, but to put them together. Azambuja landing, caused Mass to be said on the Shoar under a Tree,Fort of St. George▪ on the Coast of Afric, . whither the King called Caramansa, came to him, with a great Re∣tinue, and was converted. The Fort was built, and cal∣led S. George; which done, Azambuja sent home his Ca∣raves with a great quantity of Gold. 3. Before this Fleet sailed, the Cortes or Parliament had met at Ebora, where the Form of Obligation, that Lords and Governours of Places were to enter into with the King, was settled, because till then the Nobility and Commanders exercised a despotick Power in their Juri∣dicions independent of the Kings, and by their tyranni∣ed Proceedings were grown burdensome to the People, and dangerous to the Sovereign, who had little more left him but the Name. King John being now at Peace a∣broad, ordered that no Lord should exercise a judicial
Power in Cases Criminal. This pleased the People, but made him odious to the Nobility. Soon after, he made a Law, That his Judges, and other Officers of Justice, should execute their employments throughout all the Territories of great Men that pretended exemption from them. All the Grandees opposed these New Ordi∣nances; but the King was not so jealous of any, as of Ferdinand Duke of Bragança, a Servant of whom pre∣sented to the King certain Letters from the King of Ca∣stile to the said Duke, which much increased the King's suspition,1482. and caused him to decree his Death. In the mean while,The Plague at Lisbon. the Plague beginning to diffuse it self at Lisbon, King John removed his Court to Monte-Mayor, a more healthy Place. An Embassador was sent into England, to confirm the established Friendship with that King. Another was also dispatch'd to Castile, about concluding the Match designed betwixt Prince Alonso of Portugal, and the Princess Elizabeth of Castile, which was not effected till afterwards Embassadors came thence to Portugal on that Account. By his Embassadors that had been in Castile, the King had farther information con∣cerning the Duke of Bragança his holding Correspon∣dence with that King. The Duke was warned by the King to forbear any farther proceeding in that Correspon∣dence; yet he desisted not, but on the contrary, propo∣sed to unnaturalize himself, in order to be at liberty to withstand his Sovereign. The King understanding that the Duke accompanied his Son Prince Alonso in his Jour∣ney from Moura to Evora, he resolved to apprehend him. After the Solemnity of the Princes Reception was over, the Duke coming to take his leave of the King, was, by his order, secured. 4. The Duke being now in Custody, the King called his Council, and laid before them the Copies of his Let∣ters of Correspondence with Castile. Judges were ap∣pointed for his Trial, before whom he appeared twice, but refused to come the third time.The Duke of Braganca beheaded for High-Treason They thereupon past Sentence of Death upon him, which was publickly executed upon a Scaffold, by severing his Head from his Body. D. Alvaro de Portugal, one of the Duke's Bro∣thers, was banished, and found such Favour in Castile, that he was made President of the Council. The Mar∣quis of Monte-Mayor, his other Brother, having made his escape, was executed in Effigy. This done, the
King and Queen took a Progress through the Provinces betwixt Duero and Minho, and behind the Mountains. In February they returned to Santarem,1484. where they found the Death of the Duke of Bragança, instead of security to them,The Duke of Viseo, Conspires against the King's Life. was like to produce greater danger. The Duke of Viseo, Brother to the Queen, had conspired to Mur∣der the King, in hopes to Succeed him; as he would have done, had he not endeavoured to anticipate the time. His Associates were, the Bishop of Evora, and several other Persons of Note. This Treason was discovered to the King by Antony de Faria, who had it from James Ti∣noco, Brother to a Servant-Maid of the Bishop, that gave him the first information. James Tinoco gave the King a particular Account of the Design, but found not entire Credit, till D. Vasco Coutino confirmed all he had said. Three times the King escaped the Danger, being provi∣ded against it since the information given him; and yet none of the Conspirators perceived he knew any thing of it. On the 22d. of August being at Setuval, he sent for the Duke; and having taken him aside, asked of him, what he would do to the Man that designed to kill him. The Duke answered,The Duke stabbed by the King. I would kill him first if I could. Then replied the King, You have given judgment against your self. At the same Instant he stabbed him, so that he fell down dead at his Feet. 5. Late at Night Proclamation was made for appre∣hending the rest of the Conspirators,The other Conspira∣tors puni∣shed. and the next Mor∣ning the Duke's Carcass was exposed to publick view up∣on the Scaffold. Most of the Traitors were apprehended. The Bishop of Evora being put into a Cestern, was there eaten alive by Worms. His Brother Ferdinand was be∣headed; the same end had Peter de Albuquerque. D. Gu∣tiere Coutino died in Prison, and D. Alvaro de Atayde fled to Castile, and was afterwards pardoned by King Emanuel. The Count de Pena-Macor died at Sevil, and Ferdinand de Sylveyra was killed in France. D. Vasco Coutinho, one of the discoverers, for his loyalty was crea∣ted an Earl; and Tinoco the other, being of less Quality, had 5000 Crowns down given him, and a Church Re∣venue worth 1500 a Year▪ This done, the King bestow∣ed all that had belonged to the Duke of Viseo upon his Brother Emanuel, and with it the hopes of Succeeding to the Crown, as also, of the Empire of Asia; for at this time, Burtholomew Diaz, by the King's order, dis∣covered
the Cape of Good Hope, which he then called Tormentoso, or Stormy, because of the ill Weather he met with there. 6. Whilst these things passed in Portugal, the City S. George in Guinea increased, and the Christian Religion diffused it self; whereupon the King, this Year, first stiled himself Lord of Guinea.1485. Several sorts of new Coin,King John stiles him∣self Lord of Guinea. as well of Gold and Silver, as of Copper, were now also spread abroad in Portugal. The King had sent D. Peter de Noronha his Embassador to Rome, to pay his Obedience to the Pope, and obtain of him the Croisade, in order to prosecute his Conquests in Africk, for which he made Preparations throughout the Kingdom.1486. Four Venetian Galleys being taken by the French, and the Men put ashoar almost naked at Cascaes, the King not only relieved them with Cloaths, and other Necessaries, but gave them such a Sum of Money, as redeemed their Galleys, wherewith they returned home. Whereupon that Republick sent a Solemn Embassy, with Presents, to return him Thanks for that extraordinary Act of Ho∣spitality.Azamor in Africk submits to the King. The Town of Azamor in Africk sent this Year to submit it self to our King, and was taken into Protection. The way to India by Sea beginning to be laid open, after the Discovery of the Cape of Good Hope, the King sent Alonso de Payva, and John de Cubillan, to take a Journey into India by Land. Others followed them; but the particulars of those Actions belong to the Portuguese Asia, where they may be found. The Catholick King and Queen falling short of Ammunition at the Siege of Granada, sent to desire a Supply of King John, which was speedily and plentifully conveyed to them. John Alonso de Aveyro discovered the Coast of Beni, and brought thence the first Pepper that was ever brought from those Parts; as also an Embassador from that King, who was honourably entertained, and sent back loaded with Presents. James de Almeyda, a Knight of Malta, Sailing for Africk with 30 Sail, in which were 1500 Horse, and 1000 Foot; and being put by his Port, landed near the City Anafe, where encountring a mul∣titude of Moors, he killed 900, and carryed away 400 Prisoners. The King improved this Accident, by giving out he had chastised those Moors for their Disobedience to their Prince Mley Belabe, which that Prince believed, and ever accounted himself much obliged to King John.
7. Barraxe, a Valiant Moor, with a Party of 400 Horse, and as many Foot, took a great Booty about Tangier; but the Governour of that Place, D. John de Meneses, instantly pursued him, took him Pri∣soner, and recovered all the Prey. The Jews, who in great Numbers lived in Castile, seeing themselves con∣demned to the Flames▪ by the erecting the Inquisition in that Country,The Jews fly out of Castile into Portugal. swarmed into Portugal. King John at first entertained them; but afterwards being sensible of their wicked Practices, for that pretending to be Chri∣stians, they ceased not to Judaize, he sent out his Offi∣cers, who burnt some, chastised others, and filled all the Prisons with them. This made many of them fly over into Africk, where they professed themselves openly Jews; whereupon the King forbid any more passing over thither, upon pain of Death; giving them Liberty, at the same time, to remove to any Christian Country. But tho' it happened some Years latter, let us here relate what was done in this case. In the Year 1492. vast multitudes of Jews came out of Castile into Portugal, engaging to pay the King a certain number of Ducats for each Head, and only desiring to be permitted to pass through the Kingdom. Eight Months were allotted them to stay, and certain Ports assigned them to Embark. The Term expiring, many went over to the Coast of Fez, where they were plundered and abused by the Moors, having been little better treated by the Portuguese. Many re∣turned to Castile, pretending they were converted, and many stay'd in Portugal under the same colour. The King, the following Year, finding them obstinate in their wicked Practices, made all that could be found Slaves; and taking their Children away, sent them to the Island of S. Thomas, to be there brought up Christians. Thus the Jews came first to mix their Race with that of the Ancient Portuguese. 8. The King, notwithstanding it was a time of Peace, ceased not to lay up Magazines in all his Garrisons,1488. and fortified the Town of Olivença, which alarmed the King and Queen of Castile; but he satisfied them, and went on with what he had begun. In Africk, D. Vasco Cou∣tinho, Earl of Borba, with only 70 Horse, defeated 450 Moors, and took their Commander, who lay in wait to have surprized him. Upon the receipt of this News, the King sent over 150 Horse, and some Foot, to en∣courage
his Forces there. They passed the Bridge of Alcacerquibir, that had never before been passed by the Portuguese, and returned with Slaves and Cattle. In the Month of October arrived at Lisbon,Bemoy, an African King▪  into Por∣tugal. Bemoy, King of Jalof in Africk, who being expelled his Kingdom, came to ask Succours for recovering of it. He had Audience of the King at Setuval, and having proposed the Mo∣tive of his coming, was answered, That nothing could obstruct the assisting him, but his being an Infidel; for that it was not allowed Christian Princes to give Aid to Pagans. He replyed, he was ready to receive the Faith, and only sorry that it might be thought he was moved to it by any Temporal Interest. On the Third of No∣vember, he, and six of his principal Followers, were baptized; the King, Prince, and Duke Emanuel being Godfathers. On the seventh the King Knighted him, and gave him for his Arms, Gules, a Cross, Or, within an Orle of Portugal. Next, he did Homage to the King, and promised Obedience to the Pope. This done, the King sent him home with 20 Caravels well manned and provided, under the Command of Peter Vaz da Cunha, with Orders to erect a Fort at the Mouth of the River Zanaga.He is  Peter . This Expedition succeeded not, for Cunha fearing to venture himself in that unhealthy Coun∣try, murdered the unfortunate Bemoy, and so returned home with the Fleet, and the King unjustly connived at this Villany. 9. At the beginning of the Year the King went into Algarve, and thence sent over some Forces, with Ma∣sons and Materials, to build a Fort at the Mouth of the River Larache, ordering it to be called Graciosa. Muley, King of Fez, in whose Territory it was, understanding how the Work advanced, set down before it with 40000 Horse, and a vast multitude of Foot. King John sent Succours to the besieged, but all too weak to withstand so great a Force. He thought of going over in Person, but the Moors offering to suffer the Christians to de∣part, the offer was accepted, and the Place abandoned, Barraxe that Moor who had been taken Prisoner by D. Vasco Coutinho, being ransomed, now held Correspondence with a Gentleman, called Lope Sanchez, about betraying the City Ceuta to him. Sanchez held him in hand, and gave Advice to the King, who sent to secure that Place 50 Sail from Algarve, well manned and stored, under
the Command of D. Ferdinand de Meneses. He and his Brother Antony, that was before at Ceuta, marched out with 150 Horse, and 1000 Foot, and falling upon the Town of Targa, easily took it, as being abandoned. The Town they utterly destroyed, took some Ships, Cannon, and Ammunition, and released some Christian Captives. This Action cost not one drop of Blood. D. Ferdinand marched away to Alcaçar, and joyning with the Governours of that Place and Tangier, he again set out with 400 Horse, and 1200 Foot, towards Camice, which the Moors call the Inchanted, because it was thought inaccessible, standing upon a craggy Hill. Now the Inchantment ceased, for the Place was taken by Assault, and razed down to the Ground, 400 of the Defendants, who hid themselves in the Mountain, being put to the Sword. But this Victory was not so cheaply purchased as the other, for it cost the Lives of 70 Men. 10. Prince Alonso was now going into his Fifteenth Year,1490. an Age fit to Marry, and he was already contracted to the Princess Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to King Fer∣dinand and Queen Elizabeth of Castile. The News of her being affianced to him by Proxy at Sevil, being brought to Evora, where the King then was, that City was filled with all publick Demonstrations of Joy. From thence soon after it was diffused throughout the whole Kingdom.The Plague in Portu∣gal. The Plague then raging a Lisbon, and spread∣ing as far as Evora, as also the News brought of the Death of the Princess Joanna, the King's Sister, in the Monastery at Aveyro, might have been looked upon as ill Omens forboding the evil Success of this Marriage. The publick Joy was turned for some time into Mourn∣ing, but soon after resumed again. Nor did the Prepa∣rations for the Wedding cease all that time, and they were the greatest that had ever been seen in Portugal. The Palace at Evora being thought too little to Enter∣tain the Bride,Prince A∣lonso mar∣ries Eli∣zabeth, Daughter to the King and Quein of Castile and Ara∣gon. was much enlarged. On the 22d. of No∣vember the Bride was brought to the Borders of the two Kingdoms, and on the Bridge of the River Caya, the Cardinal D. Gonzalo Perez de Mendça, Archbishop of Toledo, delivered her to Emanuel, Duke of Beja, sent to receive her. Betwixt Evas and Estremoz the King and Prince met her. At the Church of our Lady of Espineiro, which is without the Walls of Eora, they were marryed by the Archbishop of Braga, and in that
Monastery the Prince bedded her. November the 27th. they made their Solemn Publick Entry into the City, with such Grandeur, as is not easily to be expressed, no more than can the infinite Rarities that were served up that Night at Supper. Besides the Balls, Musick, and other extraordinary Divertisements, the King appointed a Solemn Tilting, in which he deservedly carryed away the Honour from all that ran. In May the King, Queen, and Princes removed to Santarem, the Divertisements never ceasing,149. till upon Tuesday the 12th. of July,The Prince killed by  fall of his Horse. the Prince riding abroad after Dinner, and being upon a Full-speed, his Horse fell upon and Mortally bruised him. He was past all Remedy, and died the next day at the same hour he had fallen. Thus was that Scene of Joy converted into a horrid Spectacle of Sadness. The Prince was magnificently Interred in the Church of Batalla. The Princess was sent back to Castile all clad in the deepest Mourning, and in a Horse-Litter covered with Sackcloath. CHAP. VIII. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of King John, the Second of the Name, and Thirteenth King of Portugal; from the Year 1492, till 1495. 1. ON the 25th. of May, 1492.1492 King John laid the Foundation of the Magnificent Church and Hospital of All-Saints in the beautifullest Square, or Market-Place of Lisbon, scattering some Money under the first Stones laid, having obtained leave of the Pope to incorporate all other Hospitals into this. The French, then at Peace with Portugal, had taken a Caravel bring∣ing Gold from Guinea; whereupon the King seized all the Vessels of that Kingdom within his Ports, which caused the Caravel to be restored untouch'd. King John in the Year 1485 had sent James Cano with a Fleet to Guinea.Further Dsveries in Guinea. He came to an Anchor at the Mouth of the River Manicongo; lying in Seven Degrees of South
Latitude, and understanding that King was far off in the In-land Parts, he sent some Portuguese to him with a Present, who not returning, he seized some Blacks, and brought them away to Portugal, assuring the People they should be restored; whereupon King John sent them back loaded with Gifts, which so obliged the Black King, that he said, That must be the true God, whom a Prince of so much Honour adored. He sent an Embassa∣dor to him, offering Submission to his Authority, and desiring Priests to Instruct the People, and Workmen to build Churches, and a Fleet returned with all that had been desired. The King and a great number of his Subjects were baptized, as also the Queen and Prince. The King soon fell off again, because Christianity ob∣liged him to adhere to only one Wife, and therefore he resolved to declare his Second Son, Panso Aquitimo, who continued an Idolater, his Heir. Alonso, the eldest Bro∣ther, the Lawful Heir, and a Christian, was absent when his Father died, but hasting to Court, was proclaimed King. His Brother Aquitimo thought to surprize him, but failed; for his great Army was overthrown by a handful of Portuguese and Blacks that followed Alonso. Many of the Prisoners declared they were overthrown by a glittering Army, led by a Commander that carryed a white Cross. Alonso being secured in his Throne, be∣came the Apostle of that People, in which good Work most of his Successors have followed his Example. 2. In the Month of March,1493. Christopher Columbus, after discovering the Islands of America,Columbus after disco∣vering of America, rives at Lisbon. entred the Port of Lisbon, to Revenge himself, by shewing what he had found, to King John, who had before rejected him when he came to offer his Service, and whom he thought it would now grieve to see what he had lost. Some Gen∣tlemen offered the King to Murder him, which he not only refused, but calling Columbus to him, honoured and made him Presents. This Discovery alarmed all Spain, the Castilians fearing to be disturbed in their Con∣quests there, and the Portuguese pretending it appertained to them. Many Messengers and Embassadors passed between the two Kings,Spain and Portugal divide the World  them at last, their Ministers meeting at Tordesillas, divided the World betwixt them. To the Portuguese was allotted from 370 Leagues to the Westward of Cabo Verd, all to the Eastward; and all to the West from that Place, to the Castilians, drawing
a Line there from North to South, so that commencing from that Point, one half of the Globe remained to each Crown. Many Persons of Note came about this time from Foreign Parts to see, and some to serve King John. Among them was a French Prince, whom the Portuguese call Monsieur de Lion, who offered to serve in Africk with 300 Horse at his own cost. The King of Naples also sent his Embassador with Rich Presents. 3. This Year and part of the next the King spent in taking a Progress through his Kingdom,144. and settling the Affairs of greatest Importance, for being grown sickly, he could not apply himself to Business of less moment. He also fitted out the Ships in the River of Lisbon, that were to Sail to discover the way to India by the Ocean, and gave the Command of them to Vasco de Gama, with Instructions how to proceed. His Di∣stemper increased, and not only cost him his Life, but laid a lasting stain upon the Good Name of his Subjects. Some of those who designed to have murdered him by the Sword,King John poisoned. now executed their Design with Poison. A Woman, held in Esteem for her Sanctity, warned him to have a care of Poison, which nevertheless he drank out of a Spring near Evora, which Water he liked best. That this was true, appeared by that two Gentlemen, who drank with him at the same time, died as well as he. His Distemper seemed to turn to a Dropsie, and the Physicians advised him to go to the hot Baths at Alvor in Algarve. One of them opposed the rest, af∣firming, this would shorten his Days, but he was a Jew, and therefore found no Credit. The King fell into a Flux, which being stopped, he became wholly Lethar∣gick. Coming a little to himself, he asked, how the Tide was; and being told, said, he should die within two hours. Just at Sun setting he gave up the Ghost on the 25th. of October. Being sensible he must die, he com∣manded the Plate furnished by the Churches for the late Wars, to be restored. He ordered Duke Emanuel should Succeed him, having first used all possible means to leave the Crown to his Bastard-Son George, which was the greatest Act of Injustice he was  indeed that could be. Having  the Queen, Princess Beatrix, and the Clergy in his Life time, he now begged Pardon of them.
4. Tho' the King earnestly desired to see Duke Ema∣nuel before his Death, he could not compass it, some Persons perswading that Prince, his Design was to kill him. There was a small Box, whereof he always kept the Key, which was generally supposed to contain no∣thing but Poison: Saint But this Box being opened after his Death, there was found in it a Book of Instructions for to make a good Confession, a Hair-cloath, and a Disci∣pline stained with Blood. Hence the People took occa∣sion call him a Saint, as many before accounted him a Tyrant. In his Will the King ordered 3000 Masses should be said for his Soul, that 41 Orphans should be marryed, that the like number of Captives should be redeemed, that the great ospital of Lisbon should be finished, that half the Plate taken from Churches by his Father for the War against Castile, should be restored, that Duke Emanuel should Succeed him in the Throne, that his Bastard-Son George should have the City Coimbra, with all the Royalties wherewith Prince Peter had it before, that in case Duke Emanuel died without Issue, the afore∣said George should Inherit the Crown, and that none of the Persons banished the Kingdom by him, should be restored. After his Death he had the Commendations of his very Enemies. His Body was conducted with great State from the Cathedral of Silves to the Monastery of Batalla, where it is said to have been found long after uncorrupted, which increased the Opinion of his San∣ctity. He marryed his Cousin-German, Ellenor, Daugh∣ter to Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo, and the Lady Beatrix, Daughter to Prince John. She was a Princess endued with singular Beauty, Wit, and Vertue, and lies buried in the Monastery of the Mother of God at Lisbon, founded by her self, in the Cloister among the Nuns is her Grave, without any distinction. 5. Let us now give some Specimen of the many Ver∣tues that adorned this King. Vertues First, for his great Zeal in Matters of Religion, Pope Innocent VII. publickly cal∣led him▪ The Eldest Son of the Church. Daily he per∣formed several Devotions upon his bare Knees, and in the Holy Week spent whole Nights in mourning before the Sepulchre. He forbid the use of Mules, and because the Clergy said, they would have recourse to the Pope on that account, he made it Death for any Body to them, and so that Dispute  Justice
was such, that he rewarded some Judges, before whom he was Cast in Law Suits; and hearing a Man was con∣demned to Death, who had been Fourteen Years in Prison, he pardoned him, saying, They better deserved to die, who had kept him so long, to Condemn him at last. Few ever exceeded him in Liberality and Gratitude, for having borrowed 1500 Ducats of Peter Pantoja, and kept them but five days, he then sent him his Money, and 250 Ducats for the Use of it. Pantoja complain∣ing that the Interest was too great, he ordered him as much more, and said, He would do so as often as he com∣plained. James Fernandez Correa, his Factor in Flan∣ders, having lent Maximilian the King of the Romans 30000 Ducats without his Order, he sent him Thanks for so doing, and gave him 1000 Crowns. Edward del Casal, a Man of Worth, having employed another to beg some Favour for him, the King seeing him, said, Since you have Hands to serve me with, why have not you a Tongue to speak to me? 6. There was nothing that daunted him,More of his good Qua∣lities. in so much that others fearing to go aboard the Fleet, because of the Plague, he went himself, and is said to have spoke unconcerned with the Ghost of a Gentleman that was dead, and came to warn him of the Conspiracy of the Duke of Viseo. Favourites he never had any, and was such an Enemy to those sort of Ministers, that the Car∣dinal George da Costa, who had entire influence over his Father, fled to Rome before his Accession to the Crown. None that deserved well, passed unrewarded, for he car∣ryed about him a Table-Book, in which were the Names and Services of all those that merited of him. All Men had access to him, their Business was heard and answered. Truth was so much admired by him, that he made D. John de Meneses his Lord Steward, only be∣cause he said, He always spoke the Truth,  it were displeasing to him. As for Learning, he understood Phi∣losophy, was skilled in Mathematicks, well versed in History, and a great admirer of Poetry. Tho' his Countenance represented much of Gravity, and his Car∣riage had much of Majesty, yet at times he was pleasant and facetious. To conclude, his Government was in∣feriour to none of the best Kings that preceded him, and may be a Pattern to all those that come after him. Scarce any excelled him in all sorts of Vertues, and fo
his Zeal to Religion, he was the first that propagated it in the Torrid Zone. In short, he was a Father of his People, Bountiful, Just, Merciful, Generous, Brave, a lover of Truth, and sure rewarder of Merit. 7. King John had only one Lawfully Begotten Son,His Issue. which was Prince Alonso, born at Lisbon in the Year 1475. and who died, as has been said, unfortunately, by a Fall off his Horse in the Year 1491. being newly married to the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to King Ferdinand, and Queen Elizabeth of Castile. This King had also One Bastard-Son, called George, created Duke of Coimbra, Marquis of Torres Novas, Master of the Military Orders of Santiago and Avis, and Lord of the Lands that had belonged to Prince Peter. He had also the Town of Aveiro, and of him are descended the Dukes of that Ti∣tle, who keep the sirname of Lancaster, taken by them in Memory of Queen Philippa, Daughter to the Duke of Lancaster. King John at length fixed the Arms of the Kingdom in the manner they are used at this Day, reducing the Castles in the Orle to the certain Number of Seven, and seting the Five middle Escutcheons upright. 8. Discoveries in the Reign of King John were as fol∣low.. James Cano sailed to the River and Kingdom of Manicongo. James Alonso de Aveiro to that of Beni, and brought thence the first Pepper that came from those Parts. Bartmew Diaz to the Cape of Good Hope, and passed beyond it, to the River called Del Infante. Peter Covillam, and Alonso de Paiva, Men versed in ma∣ny Languages, went to Grand Cairo in Egypt; then embarking on the Red Sea, saw the City Adem, where parting, Paiva went into Ethiopia, Covillan to Cananor, Calicut, Goa, Sofala, Mozambique, Quiloa, Mombara, and Melinde▪ then returned to Adem, and Grand Caire, where his Companion and he had appointed to meet; but the other being dead, he returned again to Adem, thence to Ormus, and then traversed Abissinia, being the first Man that ever performed those Travels. Christopher Co∣lumbus offer'd his Service to King John, but not being encouraged by him, he discovered the West Indies for King Ferdinand, and Queen Elizabeth of Castile and Aragon.
CHAP. IX. The first Part of the Life and Reign of Ema∣nuel, the First of the Name, and Four∣teenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord, 1469, till 1509. 1. THough the late King John laboured all that in him was to have left the Crown to his Bastard-Son George, yet neither the Queen, nor the Subjects would consent, because Duke Emanuel had a most undoubted Title to it.King Ema∣nuel his Birth and Descent. This Emanuel was Son to Prince Ferdinand, Grandson to King Edward, and Great Grand∣son to King Alonso V. and Cousen German to his Prede∣cessor King John, whose undoubted Heir he was, that King leaving no lawful Issue. He was born in the Town of Alconchete,1469. in the Province of Riba Tejo, upon Thursday the last Day of May, being the Feast of Cor∣pus Christi. His Mother being in Labour was delivered of him just at the time that the Blessed Sacrament pas∣sed by her Door, and therefore she called him Emanuel, the proper Name of Christ, which signifies, God is with us. During his Infancy Emanuel was one of the Hosta∣ges between the King of Castile, and King John the Se∣cond. The very Day King John killed James, Brother to this Emanuel,14. he gave him all the other's Estate, only changing the Title from Duke of Viseo, to that of Beja. He also constituted him Master of the Order of Christ, Constable of the Kingdom, and General of the Frontiers betwixt the Rivers Tagus and Guadiana, so that his Revenue amounted to above 70000 Crowns per Annum, which was very great in that Age, and that Kingdom. His Family was encreased when he went the second time into Castile to conduct the Princess Eliza∣beth, Wife to Prince Alonso, into Portugal. King John, as is said,King Ema∣nuel  dying without any lawful Issue, and not able to prevail for his Bastard-Son George, Emanuel was pro∣claimed King with the usual Solemnity, upon  the 27th. of October, 1495, and in the 26th Year of his Age. 2. The New King went away to uevo, where James , Prior of
Crato, presented to him George, King John's Bastard-Son, whom he received favourably, and treated as if he had been his own. Here the Cortes or Parliament met, but did little Business, as well by reason of the Plague, as for that King John had left all Things in good Order. After sending Embassadors to Rome and Castile, the King gave the Tenth of all his Revenues in Africk, to the Churches there, and reinforced those Garrisons. At Setuval came to him the Sons of the late Duke of Bra∣gança,1496. executed by King John, their Unkle D. Alvaro, and D. Sancho, Son to Alonso, another of that Duke's Brothers, who were all restored to their Estates. He now sent another Embassador to Rome, to obtain the Pope's Dispensation for Knights of the Military Orders to mar∣ry, which was granted. At Torres Vedras, whither he fled from the Plague, he received Embassadors from the State of Venice.Jew ba∣nished the Kingdom The Jews whom King John had made Slaves, in great Numbers had now Liberty to depart the Kingdom; and though they offer'd the King a Present of a considerable Summ of Money, he would not accept it. A time was set for them all to depart, and it was order'd that they should leave behind them all their Children that were under Fourteen Years of Age. Many of them rather than deliver their Children to be bred up Christians,147. murdered them; and some there were that killed themselves as well as their Children. The time of their Departure being put off, they offer'd, if their Children were restor'd them, and Twenty Years allowed them in which they could not be punished for Offences against Religion, that they would become Christians. This granted, the greatest part of them was Baptized, the rest were sent over into Africk, together with the Moors then also expelled, but these were allowed to car∣ry their Children with them. Those that remained in Portugal committed many Enormities, in contempt of the Christian Religion, and becoming Rich, had the Op∣portunity of corrupting all the Nobility of the King∣dom, by mixing their Families. 3. At  the King had it debated in Council, whether the Discovery of India ought to be prosecuted or not; and after much contesting, it was resolv'd in the Affirmative. Vasco de Gama was thereupon piched up∣on to command Four Ships designed for that Voyage. The Particulars of his Success may be seen in the first
Vol. of the Portuguese Asia. The King, by his Em∣bassadors, having concluded a Match for himself with Elizabeth,Emanuel marries Elizabeth, Widow of the late Prince A∣lonso. Princess of Castile, Widdow of the Late Prince Alonso of Portugal, in the Month of October she was brought to Valencia de Alcantara, where King Ema∣nuel waited for her. Presently after the King and Queen were married, came the News of the Death of John, Prince of Castile, Brother to the new Queen, and Heir of that Kingdom. New Charters were now given to all the Cities and Towns of Portugal, which were all con∣tained in Five Books, One of each Province. About the end of the Year, the Queen being with Child, Em∣bassadors came from Castile to induce the King and her to go into Castile, to be sworn Heirs to that Crown. The King took the Advice of the Cortes, or Parliament therein;1498. and it was resolved he should go. On the 29th. of March they set forwards with a small Retinue, not exceeding 300 Horse. All this Company was in Mour∣ning for the Prince of Castile. The Duke of Medina Sidonia met them at Badajoz, with a Retinue somewhat less. Soon after the Duke of Alva, and Count de Feria, with a like Number. King Ferdinand came out of Toledo to receive them, and they were entertained with extraordinary Magnificence. On the 28th. of April King Emanuel and his Queen were sworn Heirs of Castile, in the Cathedral Church. This Ceremony being over, they travelled towards Zaragosa to be there sworn to the Succession of Aragon. They entred that City on the first of June, where many Disputes arose concerning the Privileges of that Kingdom. On the 24th. of August the Queen of Portugal was delivered of a Son, and died before she could be laid in her Bed. She was buried in the Church of St. Hierome, without any Pomp, because she had so ordered it in her Will. 4. King Emanuel returned to Portugal, Aragon▪ and Por∣tugal. and was re∣ceived at Lisbon with great Joy in . H now un∣derstanding that his Son Michael, born of Queen, had been sworn Heir of the Crowns of and Aragon, resolvd to have him sworn in like manner in Portugal. To this purpose he assembled the or Parliament at Lisbon, on the 7th. of March, where all the Representatives took an Oath to him, as lawful Successor, the King confirming his former Grant, that no Castilians should at any time be admitted to Places of
Honour and Trust in Portugal. About the end of this Year, which was the 4th. of his Reign, the King resol∣ved to translate the Body of King John his Predecessor, from Silves, where he was buried, to the stately Church of Batalla, the burial Place of the Portuguese Princes. He went in Person to Silves, and found the Body whole, as it was seen Fifteen Years after by the Cardinal Hen∣ry, and others, which confirmed the Opinion of Sancti∣ty that was conceiv'd of him. The Body was honoura∣bly conducted to the Church of Batalla, and there laid in a Marble Tomb. This Year also the King dispersed several sorts of new Coins of Silver and Gold, as he did again in the Years 1504, and 1517. He had before given large Revenues to George, the late King's Bastard-Son, and this Year 1500 gave him the City Coimbra, with the Title of Duke, made him Lord of Montemayor l Viejo, and bestowed on him the Mastership of the Military Orders of Santiago and Avis. Next he mar∣ried him to the Lady Beatrix de Villena, Daughter to D. Alvaro, the Brother of Ferdinand Duke of Bragança, Beheaded by King John. 5. Now came the News that Prince Michael, King Emanuel's Son, and sworn Heir of all the Kingdoms of Spain, had departed this Life at Granada, being not yet Two Years of Age. It was requisite the King should marry again, and a Match was accordingly concluded with Mary, Daughter to King Ferdinand, and Sister to King Emanuel's late Queen. Her Portion was 200000 Crowns down, and 10000 a Year settled upon the Re∣venue of Sevil. The Archbishop, D. James Hurtado de Mraza, conducted her to the Borders, where the Duke of Bragança, attended by several of the Nobility, her. The Marriage was solemnized at Alcacer , on the 30th. of October. No sooner was the King married but he resolved to make an Expedition into in Person,. and to that effect had assembled an Army of 26000 Men. The Venetians at this time, hard by the Turks, made use of the Pope's Mediation, to obtain of our King to desist from the Enterpize he had in Hand, and to employ his Forces in their Assistance. The King consented, and sent them Thirty Sal, under the Command of D. John de Meneses, Son to the Earl ; and for his Encouragement before his De∣parture, he was created Earl of rouça. In this Squa∣dron
were 3500 fighting Men. Another Squadron fol∣lowed, being designed for the Coast of Oran, in order to attempt taking the Fort of Mazalquivir. They sailed from Lisbon about the middle of June, and having assaul∣ted that Place in July, with the loss of 20 Men, and no prospect of Success, the Squadron, provided for that Ex∣pedition, returned to Lisbon. D. John de Meneses, with his 30 Sail off of Tunez, took 3 Genoese Ships full of Turks, Moors and Jews, the Genoese he set at liberty. Near Corfu he was met by Twenty five Venetian Galleys, and five Galleons, where both Fleets saluted each other with great Joy. The Turks understanding the Fleets were joyned, retired to their Ports, and the Portuguese Squa∣dron returned home. 6. The King had yet reaped no Advantage from India, but the bare Discovery of it by Vasco de Gama, and yet as if the Treasures of that Empire had been brought him, he in Thanksgiving laid the Foundation of that wonder∣ful Structure of the Church and Monastery called Be, or Betlem, on the Banks of Tagus, about a League from Lisbon. This Fabrick is Magnificent for its Greatness and Workmanship, but above all for the largeness of the Arch above the Chancel, where, after the manner of all Cathe∣drals, it opens into a Cross, which Arch, tho vastly spacious, has no Pillar to support it. This Monastery was given to the Fryars of the Order of S. Hierome, and is plentifully en∣dowed. Opposite to the Monastery, in the very River, the King erected a Fort, which, tho not large, is Beau∣tiful, and Commands the River, serving at the same time for a Rampart to the Church; it is called the Fort of S. Vincent. D. Jayme, or James, Duke of Bragança, who was restored to that Honour by King Emanuel, laboured under such a deep melancholy, that he sometimes for∣bore taking his natural Sustenance. Nevertheless, through the King's Perswasions he married the Lady Daughter to D. John de Guzman, third Duke of Mdi Sidonia. But no sooner was he married, than he absented himself with only one Servant; leaving a Letter for the King, in which he begged of him to bestow all his Pos∣sessions upon his Brother Denis, because he was resolved to spend his days at the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem. Messengers were sent several ways with orders to bring him back. Some of them found him at Calatayud; in the Kingdom of Aragon, and prevailed upon him to return.
Being brought back, he had by his Wife a Son called Theodosius, who succeeded him; and a Daughter named Elizabeth, married to Prince Edward, Son to King Ema∣nuel. His first Wife dying, he fell in Love with the Lady Joanna de Mendoza, Daughter to the Governour of Mou∣ram, and having obtained leave of the King, married her; and by her had Four Sons, and as many Daughters. 7. Queen Mary,1502. second Wife to King Emanuel, was delivered of her first Son on the 6th. of June, 1502.The Queen delivered▪ of a Son. At the time of his Birth happened a violent Storm of Rain; and when he was Baptized a Fire broke out in the Palace; we shall see in his Life what these Prodigies por∣tended. A Fleet sailed from Lisbon, under the Com∣mand of George de Melo, and Gaspar de Aguilar, design∣ing to take the City Targa, on the Coast of Africk, but returned, having sustained Loss, and effected nothing. The King for the Success of his Fleet, undertook a Pil∣grimage to Santiago in Galicia; presented that Church with a rich Silver Lamp, made in the Form of a Castle, and gave Bountiful Alms. In his return, at Coimbra, he resolved to erect a stately Tomb for Alonso, the first King of Portugal, whose Body lay there in a very mean Sepul∣chre. At Porto he finished the Silver Shrine of S. Panta∣leo,1503. Patron of that City. The King had now a second time resolved to pass over into Africk,A Famine in Portu∣gal. and had all things in readiness for the Expedition, when he was again pre∣vented; being obliged to attend to the Relief of his own Kingdom, labouring under a Famine. He remedied this Evil, by bringing in Plenty of Corn from all the Nor∣thern Countries.Discoveries in North America. In the Year 1500, sailed from Lisbon, Gaspar Cortereal, to attempt some Discovery in the Nor∣thern Seas. He discovered a Country, which by Reason of its delightful Groves, he called Verde, that is Green. The People were but Barbarous, of a middle Stature, very Swift, expert at shooting with the Bow, and skil∣ful at casting Darts, whose Points are hardned in the Fire, cloathed in Skins, living in Caves and Cottages, and having no Religion, but believing in Auguries, and very jealous of their Women. The following Year, he re∣turned thither to make some farther Discovery, but he staying long, his Brother Michael went out in Quest of him, with two Ships, in May 1502; and neither return∣ing, another Brother prepared to seek them, but was hindred by the King. It being believed both these Bro∣thers
were lost in that Country, discovered by the first, the Name of it was changed to that of Tierra de Corte∣reales. About the middle of this Year, the Cortes being Assembled, the King caused his Son to be sworn Heir to the Crown. The Country, tho Poor, gave the King 50000 Duccats, to carry on the War in Africk. On the 4th. of October, was born at Lisbon, the Princess Eliza∣beth, her Birth being attended with the same Prodigies of Storms, as her Brother's was; she was afterwards married to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, her Dower above a Million of Ducats, 900000 in Money, and the rest in Jewels. 8. Elizabeth,1504. Queen of Castile and Aragon, died this Year 1504, at Medina del Campo. Her Death was con∣cealed from Elizabeth, Queen of Portugal, her Daugh∣ter, because she was near her time of Delivery, and ac∣cordingly on the last Day of December, was brought to Bed of a Daughter, called Beatrix, after Dutchess of Savoy. There followed upon it such Terrible Earth∣quakes, that whole Towns being swallowed up,155 the People fled Distractedly to the Mountains.The  of Egypt threatens Jerusa∣lem. The New Year began with Threats from the Soldan of Egypt, that he would destroy the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, un∣less the Portuguese desisted from their Conquests in India, where Edward Pacheco was now doing Wonders, and King Ferdinand of Castile from invading the Moors.An Account of the Por∣tuguese Conquest in India But these Menaces were little regarded, both Kings proceed∣ing in what they had undertaken. Now returned the King's Embassadors, sent to Pope Julius, and with them came a Merchant Ship, which being infected with the Plague, spread it throughout all Spain. Edward Pacheco returned at this time from India, leaving that Part of the World, astonished at his Actions. King Emanuel him∣self went out to receive him at landing, with a numerous Train; he walked under a Canopy with the King, his Actions were set out in the Church, by the Bishop of Viseo. An Account of them was also given to all For∣reign Princes, and they were made known to all the Kingdom. After all this Honour, the same Pacheco was cast into Prison loaded with Irons, and tho he cleared himself of all that could be laid to his Charge, he was only turned out of Goal, and left to live upon Charity, as did his Son and Grand-Son after him; till in the time of King Sebastian, the prime Minister Giles Yanez de
Costa, obtained him the grant of a Commendary, and because none was then Vacant, gave him that he had obtained for his own Son. 9. On the third of March, 1506.1506. at Abrantes was born the King's fourth Son,Birth of the King's fourth Son. Lewis, an admirable Prince for his Judgment, Learning and Valour. So addicted to War∣like Affairs, that a Fleet of 60 Sail was provided for him, to go into India, but the Design was disappointed. He served under the Emperor Charles the Fifth, at the taking of Tunis, and gained Honour. He was never married, but had a Bastard-Son by the Lady Violante Go∣mez, this was Antony, who afterwards, upon the Death of Henry the King and Cardinal, aspired to the Crown. Upon the 6th. of April,A great Mutiny on Ac∣count of a supposed Miracle. it being Sunday, certain Persons in the Church of S. Dominick, fancied a Crucifix in one of the Chappels, cast forth a miraculous Light; a New Convert that had been a Jew, said it was the Reflection of the Sun from a Window. Hereupon, without farther Examination, they dragged him out of the Church and burnt him. The Rabble assembled about the Fire, one of the Friars with vehement Speeches Encouraging them. Two other Friars ran about the Streets, crying out, He∣resie! Heresie! with Crucifixes in their Hands. Above 500 Men gathered in Arms, who slew as many of the New Converts, burning their Bodies. The number in∣creasing, upon Monday Morning they murdered Men, Women, and Children, dragging them from the very Altars, whither they fled for Sanctuary; so that this Day above 1000 perished. This was continued the third Day, to the number of 400 being destroyed, so that in all they amounted to 2000 murdered, among them many that were not New Converts; for the desire of Plunder was more than the Zeal of Religion, as it is in all Mutinies, whatever the Pretences be. The King then at Avis, was highly offended at this Insolency. He took away the City Charter, and sent thither the Prior of Crato, and Baron of Alvito to punish the offenders. Some were hanged, others had their Goods confiscated, and the two Friars burnt, all that belonged to the Monastery were banished. 10. James de Azambuja was sent to erect a Fort on a Point of Land in Africk,1507. opposite to the Island Magador,Birth of the King's fifth Son it was called Fort Royal. July the 5th. the King and Queen being at Abrantes, was born their fifth Son, whom
they called Ferdinand.1508. He was a great lover of History, and no less addicted to Warlike Affairs. The following Year, the Limits of the Conquests, on the Coast of Africk were settled betwixt the two Crowns of Spain and Portu∣gal. All Eastward of Belez de la Gomera was assigned to the Spaniards; thence Westward was allowed to the Por∣tuguese. This Year 1509, was born the Prince of Portu∣guese Poets,1509 Luis de Camoens. On the twenty third of April,Birth of Camoens, the great Portu∣guese Poet the Queen was delivered at Evora, of her sixth Son, called Alonso. At Seven Years of Age, Pope Leo the Tenth, sent him a Cardinal's Cap; afterwards he had both the Archbishopricks of Lisbon and Evora, and the Abby of Alcobaça, all at one time. This Year also the Work continued from the time of King John the First, and Founder of the famous Church and Monastery of Ba∣talla, which ought to have been finished, was interrupted, and nothing done to it since, so that ever after, that mighty Fabrick remains Imperfect. Mondragon, a French Pirate, having the foregoing Year, taken a Rich Ship com∣ing from India, had now fitted out Four great Galleons upon the same Design. The King sent out some Ships against him, under the Command of the Renowned Edward Pacheco, who after a sharp dispute near Cape Finisterre, sunk one of the Pirate's Galleons, and took the other three. Mondragon was presented to the King, who freely forgave him. CHAP. X. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of Emanuel, the First of the Name, and Four∣teenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1510, till 1521. 1. NOthing remarkable happened the Year 1510,1510. but that many Moors, and Hords of Arabs, along the Coast of Africk, submitted themselves to King Ema∣nuel,1511. and became his Tributaries. The following Year threatned a Breach between Castile and Portugal; be∣cause King Ferdinand fitted out a Fleet at Malaga, with Design to invade the Portuguese Conquests. The Pope calling upon him for Succour against the French, obliged
him to desist from that Enterprize. Nevertheless, that Faithless King as if his Designs had not been known, solicited King Emanuel to joyn with him against France, and highly resented that he Courteously entertained a French Squadron in his Ports. Henry the 8th. King of England, who had married Katherine, Sister to the Queen of Portugal,King Ema∣nuel re∣ceives the Order of the Garter, from King Henry the Eighth of England. now sent King Emanuel the Garter, having received him into that most Noble Order. On the last Day of January, was born at Lisbon, Prince Henry, the King's Seventh Son; a mighty Snow falling just before his Birth, which is a thing rarely seen in Lisbon. We shall have more occasion to speak of him hereafter, when he ascends the Throne. Alonso King, and Apostle of Congo, this Year sent his Son Henry, and his Brother Emanuel,1512. with many Young Noblemen into Portugal, to be instructed in the Christian Faith.Henry, Son to the King of Congo, comes into Portugal, With them came Peter, that King's Cousin, whom he sent as his Embassa∣dor to Rome, to submit him and his Kingdom to the Pope. King Emanuel sent the Black Prince Henry with the Embassador; they arrived at Rome the following Year, where they were courteously received, and dismis∣sed by Leo the Tenth,1513. then sitting in 8. Peter's Chair. 2. D. Alvaro de Castro,The King punishes his Lord Stew∣ard for his cruelty to a Servant. was Lord Steward of the Houshold, and in great Favour. He finding a Servant of his own, whom he had turned away, talking with a Slave in his House, caused him to be so cruelly lashed, that all his Body was but one continued Sore. The Ser∣vant putting nothing on but his Cloak, came into the King's Presence, where letting it fall, he said, Ecce Ho∣mo; Your Lord Steward has done this to me, only for talking to one of his Slaves. The King astonished at this Barbarity, immediately sent Andrew Perez Landin, his Clerk of the Closet, to acquaint D. Alvaro, that he de∣prived him of his Charge, ordered he should remain a Pri∣soner in his House till farther order, and pay 500 Crowns to that Man. D. Alvaro's Kindred came to the King to intercede for him, but finding the King implacable, they went away Discontented, and returned not to Court; whereupon the King ordered the Two Sons of D. Alvaro, to be struck out of his Books. At last upon the hum∣ble Application of D. Alvaro's Wife, he was sent for to Court, severely reprimanded, and then pardoned. Last Year began the Preparations, and now was fitted out a Fleet of above 400 Sail,1514. carrying 18000 Foot, and 2600
Horse, all under the Command of Jayme or James Duke of Bracança. He sailed from Lisbon about the middle of August, and landing on the 28th. of the same Month in Africk,Azamor, on the Coast of Africk, taken. took the City Azamor. Those of Tite and Almedina, being abandoned by the Inhabitants, he also possessed himself of with ease. Then having ravaged the Country, without any opposition, he returned to Lisbon The Particulars of this Expedition, properly belong to the Portuguese Africk. 3. King Emanuel resolving to Dedicate to God,Presents of the First Fruits of India, sent to the Pope. the First Fruits of India, thought the shortest way was to present them to the Pope, his Vicegerent. With this Present he sent Three Embassadors, the chief whereof was Tristan da Cunha, with a most magnificent Retinue. The Present consisted of an Elephant covered with Cloth of Gold, and governed by an Indian; a Persian Horse with rich Furniture; a Panther that would Hunt, and was at Command like a Dog; and a whole Suit of Vestments, for all occasions, all of Cloth of Gold, so thick Embroidered with Pearls, and precious Stones, that the Ground of it could not be discerned. The whole was valued at 500000 Crowns. Bernardin Freyre, and Fran∣cis Pereyra Pestana, arriving now from India, the King caused them to be cast into Prison; being informed how unworthily they had treated Mathew, Embassador from Ellen, Grand-Mother of David, Emperor of Ethiopia, and Regent of that Empire, during her Grand-Son's Mi∣nority. There they remained till the said Embassador interceded for them. He was an Armenian Christian, Judicious, Learned and Bold. The King received him with Respect, and by him a Letter, from the Empress, Five Medals of Gold, and a great Cross made of the Wood of that our Saviour suffered upon; and kept in a Gold Case. In her Letter the Empress offered her assi∣stance towards forwarding the King's undertakings in Asia; and desired since they were both Christians, that their Families might be allyed by mutual Marriages, that so they might be the better enabled to destroy the Turks,1515. and Moors,The King's Eighth Son born. in those Parts. On the 7th. of September, 1515, was born at Lisbon, Edward, the King's 8th. Son, of whom more at the end of this Chapter. Embassadors were sent to Castile,1516 to condole with Queen Germana, upon the Death of her Husband King Ferdinand; and to Flanders, to Charles, afterwards the 5th. of that
Name, Emperor, to offer him Elizabeth, Daughter to King Emanuel, in Marriage; and ask his Sister Ellenor, for Prince John. This Year ended with the Birth and Death of Mary, Emanuel's Ninth Child. 4. Prince Antony,1517. the King's Tenth Child, was born at Lisbon,Birth of the King's tenth Child. on the 9th. Day of September. He lived but a few Days, and left his Mother so Weak, that she died the 7th. of March following, of an Impostume in her Bowels;The Queen dies. being but 35 Years of Age. She was generally lamented, being extreamly beloved for her Fruitfulness, her great Love to the King, her liberality to the Poor, her Devotion, Affability, Modesty, Piety, Industrious∣ness in the good spending her Time, and special care of Instructing her Children. As to Features, she was neither beautiful, nor deformed. She founded the Monastery of S. Hierome, in the Berlings; and lies buried in the Church of Belem. Before the Queen's Death, the King put an Elephant, and a Rhinoceros together, to see the manner of their Fight, being naturally Enemies; but the Elephant being young was frighted, and forcing his way through a Place that was barred, ran about the City, overturning all he met. The Rhinoceros was afterwards sent as a Present to the Pope, but the Ship was cast away; however the dead Rhinoceros being cast a Shoar, was taken up, and the Skin stuffed and carried to Rome. John Diaz Golez, a Portuguese Pilot, flying from Justice, escaped into Castile; where he perswaded certain Mer∣chants to fit out Two Ships, and Trade into Brasil. King Emanuel complaining to the Young King Charles, these Encroachers were punished. John Wallop, an English Gentleman of Worth, afterwards Governour of Callis, came into Portugal, offering to serve in Africk upon his own Expence. He served Two Years at Tangier hon∣ourably, and then returned home; having received the Order of Knighthood of Christ, and other considerable Favours, and continued always a great Favourer of the Affairs of Portugal. 5. Soliman the great Emperor of the Turks, having taken Grand Cairo, and all the Dominions of the Egyp∣tian Soldans; King Emanuel pressed the Pope, to excite all the Christian Princes to joyn their Forces against him, but without success. The Body of S. Auta, one of the 11000 Virgins, was now brought to Lisbon, and placed in the Monastery of the Mother of God, where it
is held in great Veneration. The King being extreamly afflicted for the Loss of his Queen, had thoughts of re∣tiring to Algarve, contenting himself with that little Portion of his Kingdom, and leaving the rest to the Prince his Son. But the Prince led away by his Favourites, being too forward, and dropping some disrespectful words of his Father, moved him to change that Resolution; and not only to retain the Power in his own Hands, but to marry the Wife he had designed for him.1518. To this pur∣pose,The King marries again. D. Alvaro da Costa was sent Embassador into Castile, and the Treaty so privately managed, that the Bride was contracted to the King by Proxy; before the Design of the Embassador was known in Portugal. Her Portion was 200000 Crowns down, and 5000 per An∣num; during her Life. She was conducted to the Bor∣ders of the two Kingdoms by several Noblemen of Spain, and there received by Jayme or James Duke of Bragança, accompanied by a great Train of Persons of Quality on the Twenty third of November. At Crato, the next Day, she was married by the Archbishop of Lisbon. Thence they went to Almeyrin, because the Plague was brief at Lisbon. Here the King, on St. Andrew's Day, received the Order of the Golden Fleece, sent him by his Brother-in-law King Charles. 6. Ferdinand Magellanes a Gentleman of Worth, who had served well in India and Africk, being refused some small Addition to the Pension he enjoyed for his good Services, some envious Persons disswading the King from showing him any Favour, discontented at this hard U∣sage, solemnly Unnaturalized himself as the Custome was then, and went over to Castile, at such time as the Mo∣lucco Islands were thought to appertain to the Conquests of that Crown. He there offered to find out a New way to those Islands,1519. and being furnished with Five Ships, sailed from Sevil about the beginning of August,Magellan discovers the Streights of his Name and discovered those Streights, which will Eternize his Name, being of him called the Streights of Magellan. The Particulars of this Voyage, as more properly appertain∣ing to that History, are to be seen in the Portuguese Asia. The King laid a Duty upon Corn, to which imposition some Places consented. John Mendez Cecoso, Mayor of Evora, opposed it. The King sent for, and promised to re∣ward him if he would comply; but he persisting obsti∣nately was confined to his House. Soon after he commen∣ded
him for his Resolution, and remitted that Tax. The Commonalty of Castile now rising in Rebellion against their King,1520. who was gone into Germany, being chosen Emperor upon the Death of Maximilian, sent the Dean of Avila to offer the Crowns of Castile and Leon to King Emanuel. He believing no Confidence could be reposed in those that were Rebels to their Lawful Sovereign, not only advised them to return to their Obedience, but sent Supplies of Ammunition and Money to the Cardinal Adrian, afterwards Pope, the Constable, and Admiral, then Governours during the King's Absence. 7. Ellenor the new Queen of Portugal was the last Year at Evora, on the 18th. of February delivered of a Prince called Charles, who lived but Fifteen Months. This Year on the 18th. of June,1521. at Lisbon, she brought forth the Princess Mary. Many Matches were proposed for this Lady, but none took Effect, so that she died a Maid at the Age of 57 Years. After long Debates, and Three several Embassies sent by Charles Duke of Savoy to ob∣tain Beatrix, King Emanuel's second Daughter for his Wife,Beatrix, Daughter to King Emanuel, married to the Duke of Savoy. the Match was concluded. She had 150000 Crowns Portion, and was conducted to Savoy with extra∣ordinary Expence. Eighteen Sail were fitted out to trans∣port the Princess, and a most splendid Retinue accompa∣nied her. In fine, she embarked on the 5th. of August, lay Five Days a Board on the River, and then set Sail on the Day of the Feast of S. Laurence. By this Princess the Duke of Savoy had his Son Emanuel Filibertus, from whom the Dukes of that House are descended. Ber∣nardin Ribeyro, a Man well born, and an ingenious Poet, was in love with the Princess, and she favoured him for his Wit. Seeing her depart he became a Hermit at Sintra; thence he went a Pilgrim into Italy, and retur∣ning through Savoy he received Charity of the Dutch∣ess, who knowing him, ordered he should not stay in the City. He returned Home, and ended his Life with his Pilgrimage. The Venetians, who had for many Years enjoyed all the Trade of Spice, being now depriv'd of it by the Portuguese having discovered India, sent an Embassador to pray they might be allowed all that was above what the Kingdom consumed, at a certain Rate. This Embassador was honourably entertained, but re∣ceived not a satisfactory Answer.
8. Such was now the flourishing Estate of Lisbon, that it was thronged with Forreign Embassadors and Merchants from all Parts. In the height of this Prospe∣rity and Grandeur King Emanuel fell sick of a Lethar∣gy, then the epidemical Distemper reigning. Per∣ceiving his End draw nigh, he performed all the Acts of a good Christian,King Ema∣nuel dies. and died the 13th. of December, 1521. the Ninth day of his Sickness, the 53d. Year of his Age, and 27th. of his Reign. His Body was Interred in his Church of Belem, where his Son built him a stately Tomb. Before his Death happened a most cruel Fa∣mine, and after that, a terrible Plague. The Pestilence continued the following Year, and such prodigious Earth∣quakes shook the Island of S. Michael, that Mountains fell upon some Villages, and others were overturned in∣to the Sea, with great slaughter of the Inhabitants. King Emanuel, as to Stature, was tall, somewhat lean, his Hair dark-brown, his Forehead high, his Eyes green and pleasant, his Arms so long, that when hanging down, his Fingers reached below his knees. He was much addicted to all Sports, as Riding, Dancing, Mu∣sick, and Feasting; very Devout, and therefore on Holy∣days went to several Churches; extraordinary Charitable, a lover of Astrologers and Jesters. He reformed several Religious Houses, that lived not regularly. 9. His Structures were so many,His Stru∣ctures, and other Work. and so great, it would swell to a Volume to particularize them; in short, they were Thirteen Monasteries in Portugal, besides all those in Asia, Africk, and America; and besides Repairs in other Places, Eight great Churches, the great Hospital of Lisbon, Five Palaces, Custom-houses, Store-houses, many Magazines plentifully stored, and above Twenty Forts of considerable Magnitude, besides many of less note. Also several Bridges, Moles, Fountains, and other Works were begun and finished by him. To encourage Gentlemen to serve in Africk, he instituted new Com∣mendaries to Reward those that deserved well, and al∣lowed Wages to an Hundred Knights for their Enter∣tainment there. He first gave the hundredth Penny of his Revenue to Pious Uses. By him the Laws of the Kingdom were digested into Method, and Registers made of all Estates and Foundations, as also a Book of the Arms of the Nobility. Kings at Arms, and Rules of Blazon, were of his introducing into Portugal, Antony
Rodriguez, the first Master of that Science here, being sent to most Courts of Christendom, to inform himself perfectly therein. The Chronicles down to his own days he caused to be corrected, Rewarding Edward Gal∣vam, and Ruy de Pina, who laboured in that Affair. He had three Wives; the first, Elizabeth, Widow of Prince Alonso, in her Right he was at Toledo sworn Heir to the Crowns of Castile and Leon. The second was Mary, Sister to the former, both Daughters to King Ferdinand and Queen Elizabeth of Castile and Aragon. The third was Ellenor, Daughter to King Philip the First of Spain, Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Niece to both his former Wives. 10. By his First Wife he had Issue,His Wives and Issue. Prince Michael who died at Zaragoça, not quite Two Years of Age, ha∣ving been Sworn Heir to all the Kingdoms of Spain. By the Second Wife, he had, First, John, his Successor. Se∣condly, Elizabeth, Wife to Charles the Fifth, and Mo∣ther to King Philip the Second. Thirdly, Beatrix, Wife to Charles the Third Duke of Savoy. Fourthly, Lewis, Duke of Beja, and Constable of Portugal, Father to An∣tony, Prior of Crato; who tho a Bastard aspired to the Crown. Fifthly, Ferdinand, Duke of Guarda, who left no Issue. Sixthly, Alonso, the Cardinal and Archbishop of Lisbon. Seventhly, Henry, the Cardinal and Arch∣bishop of Braga, Lisbon, and Evora; who afterwards was King. Eighthly, Edward, Duke of Guimaraens, who married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heiress of James Duke of Bragança, by whom he had two Daughters; Mary the eldest married to Alexander Farnesius, Duke of Parma; and Katherine, Dutchess of Bragança, from whom, tho the younger, are Descended the late Kings of Portu∣gal. Ninthly, Mary. Tenthly, Antony, who both died in their Infancy. By the Third Wife, First, Charles, who died in Infant. Secondly, Mary, who died a Maid at the Age of 57 Years, having been disappointed of several Matches that were proposed for her.
CHAP. XI. The First Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Third of the Name, and Fifteenth King of Portugal; from the Year of our Lord 1502. till 1543. 1. KIng John the Third,King John the Third his Birth. was Second Son to King Ema∣nuel, and the First, by his Second Wife, born at Lisbon on the 6th. of June, 1502, about Two in the Morning. It was observable, that this being the midst of Summer, when the Weather is usually settled fair, just at that time, there arose such a terrible Storm of Wind, Rain, Thunder and Lightning, that none living had ever seen the like. Whilst this Prince was Baptizing, there broke out such a Fire in the Palace, as alarmed the whole Court, and gave occasion to various Conjectures on what it might Prognosticate.150. The Prince was just a Year old, when his Father Assembling the Cortes, or Par∣liament at Lisbon, caused him to be sworn Heir to the Crown. At three Years of Age he was weaned. Being come out of his Infancy, he was given in charge to Gonzalo Figueyra, a Noble Citizen of Lisbon, the Queen his Mother still overseeing his Education. The Bishop of Tangier taught him his Grammar, and Lewis Teyxeyra instructed him in the Laws, yet he profited little in either, never thoroughly understanding any Book that belonged to them. Nor was he more successful in Astro∣logy, taught him by Thomas de Torres, then Famous in that Science and Physick. In short, at the end of his Studies, the Prince was found very ignorant; for tho' he had an excellent Memory, he never applyed himself to Learning, and his Masters feared disobliging him. In the Year 1512. the Prince fell down from a Gallery in the Palace,1512. so that for 24 hours the Doctors despaired of his Life. After that, he came to himself, and re∣covered, a small scar of a hurt received in the fall re∣maining on his forehead. Next, he had a violent Fit of Sickness, which once passed, he continued healthy all the remaining part of his Life. At this Age the King
began to make himself acquainted with Business, to which he applyed himself better than to his Book. 2. The King,1515. later than had been expected, settled the Prince's Family, and appointed all the Officers of his Houshold, among which, his principal Favourites were D. Lewis de Silveyra, and D. Antony de Ataide. D. Lewis de Silveyra was suspected to incense the King a∣gainst his Father, after his marrying Queen Ellenor, Sister to Charles the Fifth, once designed for the Prince, as was said in the forgoing Chapter.1519. Hereupon D. Lewis was banished the Court, but as soon as ever King John came to the Crown, he was recalled. It being the Custom to Proclaim the new King the third day after the Death of his Predecessor,1521. this Solemnity was, for several urgent Reasons,King John proclaim'd. deferred till the sixth day, when it was per∣formed with the usual Ceremonies. The new King un∣derstanding that a Fleet was fitting in France, in order to make new Discoveries in India and Brasil, and that several French Pirates infested the Portuguese Seas, sent D. John de Silveyra to put that King in mind of the An∣cient Friendship betwixt those two Crowns, and require redress of those Wrongs. This Embassador had an Ho∣nourable Reception, but no Success in his Business. Ayres e Sousa went Embassador to the new Pope Adrian,1522. then at Zaragoça, in his way to Rome, to Complement him upon his Promotion to S. Peter's Chair.1523. D. Lewis de Silveyra, King John's Favourite, was sent to the Empe∣ror Charles the Fifth, to offer him Elizabeth, the King's Eldest Sister, in Marriage. Yet of a sudden his Instru∣ctions were altered, and he ordered only to Complement that Prince upon his happy Arrival in Spain. The cause of this sudden change was this: The Ship, called the Victory, the first that sailed round the World, and the only one that escaped of those that discovered the Streights of Magellan, arriving at the Islands of Cabo Verd, the Inhabitants understanding she came from the Molucco Islands, designed to secure her; but they on board having some Jealousie of it, immediately set Sail, leaving behind their long Boat, with thirteen Men, who were sent away Prisoners to Lisbon, whilst the Ship made her Voyage, and arrived safe at Sevil. The Emperor complained hereof to the King, and he again that the Emperor's Ships invaded his Conquests, demanding the Lading of the Ship Victory. D. Lewis de Silveyra spent
Eight Months in his Embassy at the Emperor's Court, without dispatching any Business, and then returning to Portugal, found the King at Almeirin, where at his first access, forgetting or neglecting to kiss his Hand, he found himself quite out of favour; for D. Antony de Atayde, making his Advantage of the others absence, had quite worked him out of his Master's Affections. Neverthe∣less, D. Lewis continued at Court, without ever expres∣sing the least Resentment for his Fall. 3. D. Antony de Atayde,The Cha∣racter of D. Antony de Atayde the King's Favourite. now the only Favourite, was a Person well deserving that high Honour for his singular Prudence and Moderation. There are sufficient Testi∣monies of the former, and I will bring one that may fully evince the latter. The Lord of Azambuja, Head of one of the ancientest Families in Portugal, designed to sell that Town to supply his present wants. The King told D. Antony, it would be proper for him to buy it, because it joyned to his Estate. He answered, It was more for his Highness's Reputation, to supply the wants of so Ancient and Honourable a Family, than to suffer it to fall to nothing, by selling an Estate of that Anti∣quity. The King took his Advice, and so generously re∣lieved that Gentleman, that he was enabled to preserve his Patrimony. This is a good Remark for those, who, to advance their own Fortunes, are so far from regard∣ing any Private Person, that they stick not to ruin Kings, and overturn Kingdoms. It was now thought time that the King should Marry, and James, Duke of Bragança, proposed to him Queen Ellenor, his Mother-in-law, as Wife to the late King, who was vastly Rich. This Pro∣posal being noised abroad, was so well liked, that the Council of Lisbon addressed him, in behalf of them∣selves and the whole Kingdom, praying he would con∣descend to it. The King could not approve of Marrying his Father's Wife, and was freed from their Importuni∣ties by the Emperor's desiring he would suffer his Sister to return to Castile, which was accordingly performed. 4. A March being proposed for the King with Kathe∣rine,15▪ Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth▪King John Marries Katherine, Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. Embassadors were sent to Burgos, where that Prince then kept his Court, to treat about it. The Articles agreed upon were, That the Bridegroom should pay the Charge of the Di∣spensation; the Emperor should be at the Expence of her Journey; That she should have 200000 Ducats
down, and 5000 a Year for her Portion, besides Jewels and other Necessaries. That the third part should be given to her at her Marriage, and that her Joynture should be 10000 Ducats a Year, with all the Lands and Towns the Queens used to possess. The former Peace was confirmed, and Supplies promised reciprocally in case of need. About the end of the Year she was con∣ducted to the Borders by the Bishop of Siguença, and Duke of Vejar, and there delivered to the Princes Lewis and Ferdinand, sent to attend her. The King received her at Crato, and she proved one of the best Queens in the World. She was happy in bringing forth many Chil∣dren, but unfortunate in the shortness of their Lives, which gave occasion to the Multitude to say, It was a Judgment of God on the King, for the Familiarity he was suspected to have with the Queen his Mother-in-law.1525. At the beginning of the Year a motion was made of a Match betwixt the Emperor and our King's Sister,The Empe∣ror Charles the Fifth Marries Elizabeth, Sister to King John. the Princess Elizabeth. Embassadors of the Emperor and the King's Commissioners meeting upon this Sub∣ject, agreed, That the Emperor should be at the Ex∣pence of the Dispensation, and the King defray the Charge of her Journey, as had been done in the Marriage of the Emperor's Sister; but the Portion now given with this Princess, far exceeded that, for it amounted almost to a Million of Crowns. In November the Em∣peror's Embassador was contracted for the Emperor to the Princess, and the day after they set forward with the King and Princes. 5. The Empress's Journey into Spain was delayed till the Dispensation came from Rome,1526. and then being at∣tended to the Frontiers by many of the Nobility, she was there delivered to the Spanish Noblemen sent to re∣ceive her. She was conducted to Sevil, and there re∣ceived with Pomp suitable to so great a Princess. Soon after came the Emperor, and in March the Marriage was solemnized. We must now pass over seven Years, without men∣tioning any thing of the Affairs of this Kingdom, be∣cause we find nothing Remarkable, except that in the Year 1531. there happened a most terrible Earthquake,1531. which overthrew many Buildings,A great Earth∣quake. but chiefly at Lisbon, and round about it, where whole Towns were over∣whelmed. About this time also the Tribunal of the
Inquisition was erected for suppressing of the Jews. Muley Hazen,1534. expelled the Kingdom of Tunis by the Famous Pirate Hariaden Barbarossa, fled to the Empe∣ror Charles the Fifth for Succour. The Emperor under∣took his Protection, and in order to it, desired Assistance of King John, particularly praying him to send an ex∣traordinary Galeon, then Famous for its greatness, called the S. John.1535. The King sent him that, and two others of great Bulk,King John sends Suc∣cours to the Emperor. besides 20 smaller ones loaded with store of Ammunition, and bravely manned. The Command of this Squadron was given to Antony de Saldana, who had served well in India. At Barcelona he joyned the Em∣peror, and was by him Honourably received. Prince Lewis stole away from Court, to serve under the Em∣peror Charles the Fifth; but of this we spoke at the time of his Birth, in the Reign of King Emanuel. The King sent him 100000 Crowns, and the Emperor re∣ceived him at Barcelona with all possible marks of Ho∣nour. They set out with 400 Sail, and made themselves Masters of Guletta and Tunis. 6. From the Year 1535. we find nothing worthy of Memory till 1539. a Year Remarkable for the Death,1539. first,Death of Prince Phi∣lip, and of the Empress of Prince Philip, who was scarce Six Years of Age, who departed this Life at Lisbon; and then of the Em∣press Elizabeth, who ended her days at Toledo. Nor was the following Year less fatal,1540. since in it were snatch'd away,And of others. first, Antony the King's Son, being but Eleven Months old, then the Cardinal Alonso, and lastly, Prince Edward, both Brothers to the King. D. Michael de Silva,1541. Bishop of Portalegre, and Clerk of the Closet, at this time fled privately to Rome, where he had before negotiated for a Cardinal's Cap, which was given him immediately upon his arrival at that Court.1542. The King was so highly offended at this Contempt, that he dis∣claimed him as a Subject, and deprived him of all the Benefices and Honours he enjoyed in the Kingdom. All Persons that should presume to hold Correspondence with him, were subjected to the same Penalties; yet the Cardinal's Brother, D. George, transgressed against this Decree, and was therefore committed Prisoner to the Fort of Belem, to answer that Misdemeanor. The Prin∣cess Mary, the King's Daughter, at the time of her de∣parture to Castile to Marry Prince Philip, begged and obtained of her Father that the said D. George might be
pardoned, only upon the Penalty of going to serve at Arzila,1543. where he behaved himself in such a manner, as gained him great Reputation. 7. The Match betwixt Prince Philip of Spain and the Princess Mary of Portugal was concluded by the Spanish Embassador,Prince Philip of Spain Mar∣ries Mary, Princess of Portugal. Lewis Sarmiento de Mendoza, who stood Proxy for the Prince at the Ceremony of Contracting the Princess to him, which was performed by Prince Henry. About the middle of October the Princess set forward towards Castile with a most Splendid and Ho∣nourable Retinue, consisting of 5000 Horse, and 2700 Sumpture Mules. Francis, King of France, hearing of this Match, whereof the King had given him no Ac∣count, was highly offended, and expressed his Resent∣ment to D. Francis de Noronha, the Portuguese Embas∣sador at his Court. That Gentleman, tho' unacquainted with the Affair, so mitigated that King, and soothed him with such convincing Reasons, that he appeared wholly satisfied, and by his Prudence, a Breach that might have happened between the two Crowns, so strictly allied for many Years, was prevented. In August, Edward, the King's Bastard-Son came to Lisbon, and was received with general Applause by the King, Queen, and all the Court. He was Born in the Year 1525. and brought up in the Royal Monastery of S. Hierome da Costa. He was a promising Youth, but cut off in his Prime, for he lived not much above two Months after his coming to Court, and died in the 22d. Year of his Age. CHAP. XII. The remaining Part of the Life and Reign of John, the Third of the Name, and Fifteenth King of Portugal, from the Year 1544, till 1557. 1. THE Years 1544 and 1545 passed without any thing Remarkable,1546. or at least Historians do not give us Account of any Passages in them.King John receives the Golden Fleece. Nor is there any thing of more note in the Year 1546, besides that King John received the Order of the Golden Fleece, sent him
by the Emperor Charles the Fifth. In March follow∣ing, the King being at Almeyrin, King Henry of France sent Monsieur de Biron to him, desiring he would stand Godfather to a Son he had newly born; which the King granted, and D. Constantine of Bragança, Brother to that Duke, went to represent his Person. It was found necessary, for the security of the Conquests in Africk, to erect a Fort over the Bay of Alcaçar. The King ordered his Embassadors residing at Brussels with the Emperor, and with Prince Maximilian, then Governing Spain, to encline them both to send some Auxiliary Galleys for carrying on that Work, the particulars of it may be seen in the Portuguese Africk.1548. Prince John was now Twelve Years of Age, and still continued under the Government of Women, when the King began to think of settling his Family, which was accordingly done in February following.1549. Antony de Pesquera had some Years since set out a Ship at S. Lucar, and traded in the Por∣tuguese Conquests of Guinea and Brasil, and was now returning to those Parts. King John sent out Vasco Lo∣renço, with Orders not to take him, unless in the Con∣quests, but he over-hastily seized him in the Canary Islands; whereof Prince Maximilian, who then go∣verned Spain, complaining, he was released, and Vasco Lorenço for a time confined to the Castle of Ovidos, but soon discharged. George, Bastard-Son to King John the Second, who had absented himself from Court all the time of his Youth, came now to it at 70 Years of Age, and fell in Love with one of the Queen's Ladies, not above 16. They were privately contracted, yet never married, the King obstructing it, and so the Young Lady was left under some Scandal. 2. The King considering long Peace had disarmed the Kingdom,Ordinances  by the King. ordered all People should furnish themselves with Arms. Such as had 2500 Royals per Annum, were obliged to keep compleat Armour, a Sword and Spear; every Man that had double this Yearly Income, to keep a Musqueteer; and so forward for every time that Re∣venue was doubled. Because Horses were scarce, he for∣bid Mares engendring with Asses for Mules. The Wolves being numerous, and destroying much Cattle, general Huntings were appointed upon certain days, and Rewards assigned to such as brought in the Skin of a Wolf. The King, weary of multiplicity of Business,
remitted a great part of his Care to the Council, and from this time the Kingdom began to decline. Pope Paul III. dying about the end of this Year, Dr. Baltasar Faria, the Portuguese Embassador at Rome, used all his Interest for Prince Henry of Portugal, but on the 17th. of February,1550. Cardinal John Maria was declared Pope, by the Name of Julius the Third, and King John sent D. Alonso de Lancastre to Complement him upon his Promotion to S. Peter's Chair. Most of the Copper Coin of the Kingdom having been carryed out, because the Metal was worth more than it was coined for, the King new coined other Pieces,New Coin. which being much under the value, the Kingdom was soon filled with it counterfeit from other Parts. Tho' Prince John had his Family settled before, yet he kept not House apart from his Fa∣ther till this Year 1551.1551. Certain French and Turkish Pirates infesting the Coasts of Spain and Portugal, the King prevailed with the Emperor to fit out some Ships to scour those Seas;1552. he did the same himself, and they were appointed their several Stations, with Orders, up∣on occasion, to joyn and assist one another. 3. A Match being concluded for Prince John with the Princess Joanna,1553. Daughter to Charles the Fifth, and Eli∣zabeth,Prince John Mar∣ries Joan∣na, Daugh∣ter to Charles the Fifth. the Prince's Aunt, and her Portion settled at 360000 Ducats; the Duke of Aveyro, and the Bishop of Coimbra went with a numerous and splendid Retinue to receive her upon the Frontiers. She came to Elvas about the end of November. At Barreyro the King met and conducted her thence to Lisbon, where a few days after she was marryed to the Prince, to the general Joy of all the Kingdom, hoping a numerous Issue from them. But all Humane hopes are vain, for the Prince died the Second of January following.1554. His Distemper was an inward consuming Fever,Prince John dies. which being supposed to proceed from too much use of his Wife, she was re∣moved from him to the Queen's Apartment. There the Prince's Death was kept from her knowledge, the King visiting her without Mourning. The Princess was left with Child, and on the 19th. of January brought forth a Son,The Prin∣cess deli∣vered of a Son who was called Sebastian. The Princess being out of danger, was acquainted with the Death of the Prince, and went into strict Mourning. She would have cut off her Hair, in token of Sorrow, but the King would not permit it. Being one Night in Bed with her
Husband there appeared to her a Woman in Mourning, who giving one blast vanished, as if she had foretold all her Delights would vanish into Air. Other Nights she perceived the Lights in her Chamber put out without seeing any Body to do it. Twice being at a Window with her Ladies, she saw many Men cloathed after the Moorish Fashion, with Torches in their Hands, cast them∣selves into the River. All these were looked upon as un∣happy Omens of the Prince's Death, and other Calami∣ties that ensued. 4. Prince Philip of Spain, Brother to the Widow Princess, being upon his Departure for England, to mar∣ry Mary the Heiress of that Crown; by his Embassadors desired of King John, that he would suffer the Princess to return to Spain, to Govern that Kingdom. In May, the Princess set forward from Lisbon,The Prin∣cess Go∣verns Spain. attended by Prince Lewis, as far as Arroyolos; where he delivered her to the Duke of Bragança, who conducted her to the Borders of the Kingdom, and there gave her up to the Bishops of Osma. and Badajoz, and to D. Garcia de Toledo, who was Lord Steward. She Governed Spain with Discretion, and Founded a Monastery and Hospital in Madrid. This Summer sailed from Lisbon, D. Peter da Cunha with Five Ships and Four Galleys, to Guard the ast of Algarve. Being in the Bay of Tavira,An En∣gagement he discovered the famous Turkish Pirate, Xaramet Arraez, with Eight Galleys. D. Peter gave orders to engage them, but the Ships not be∣ing able to come up for want of Wind, he engaged with only his Four Galleys. The Admiral Galleys attacked one another, and at first the Portuguese had the worst; whereupon the Turks boarder her, but were beaten out; and Fortune changing, D. Peter took the Turk. The other Three Christian Galleys boarded as many of the Infidels, whereof they took two, and sunk the Third. The remaining Turkish Galleys, seeing these lost, fled. Of the the Turks 150 were killed, and 100 taken, 230 Christian Slaves were released, and 40 Portuguese perished. Two Portuguese left ashoar when the Galleys went out to meet the Enemy, swam aboard with their Swords in their Mouths. D. Peter returned Victorious to Lisbon, where he maintained the Turk his Prisoner, till he was exchan∣ged for a Turk, who turning Christian, was called Peter Paul, and had behaved himself so well, that the Command of the Galley was given him; but he being taken by the
Infidels and carried to Mazagam, had certainly been put to Death, but was spared only upon Account of Xara∣met, for whom he was exchanged. 5. On the the 27th. of November, 1555,1555. died Prince Lewis the Delight of Portugal,Prince Lewis dies. and a Person of singular Learning, Judgment, Courage, Generosity, and Piety. He went twice into Castile, once to agree with the Em∣peror about reducing the King of France to forbear tra∣ding in the Portuguese Conquests, which he effected. The Second time, to Conclude a Peace betwixt the Emperor and King of France. He built a stately Palace at Salva∣terra, but lived not to finish it. The following Year, the King settled the Rules of Precedency,1556. about which there had been great Contests; ordering that all Titles should take place according to Seniority. Now the Mis∣fortunes of this Crown seem to be Compleat,1557. for the King died aged 55 Years,The King dies. when he was ripest for Govern∣ment, and left the Crown to Prince Sebastian then unfit for Rule, as being but Three Years old. He was sud∣denly snatched away, yet not so but he had time to end his Life like a Christian. He was of a mean Stature, ra∣ther inclined to Fat than Leanness, his Complexion rud∣dy, his Eyes dark Blew, but lively, In matters of Justice he always inclined most to Mercy, was a great lover of Peace, made an excellent choice of Ministers, and loved not to heap many Employments upon one Man. In the Year 1553, he founded the University at Coimbra, and afterwards with great charge brought Professors to it from Paris. The Ancient Aqueduct, built by Sertorius at Evora, was by him repaired; much was added by him to the Building of the Monastery of Belem; by him also the Custome-House, and Arsenals were erected; as also the Churches of our Lady of Grace, S. Francis, and S. Rocque; besides many other publick Works. All the religious Orders were by him reduced to live up to the rigor of their Rules; and Houses founded for all sorts of Women to retire to. He instituted the Council of Cons∣cience, and that of the Military Orders. No want ever prevailed with him to lay heavy Taxes on his Subjects. Tho' he heard the Advice of many, he always followed his own Opinion, which was the Cause he often erred. 6. To conclude, King John proved an excellent Prince, and singular Champion of the Catholick Religion. His Children were as follows: First, Alonso, who died a Child.
Secondly, Mary, First Wife to Philip the Second of Spain. Thirdly, Elizabeth. Fourthly, Beatrix. Fifthly, Ema∣nuel. Sixthly, Philip. Seventhly, Denis, all which died young. Eighthly, John, who married the Princess Jo∣anna, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and died soon after. Ninthly, Antony, who lived not out a Year. His Bastard Issue was: First, Emanuel, who died a Child. Secondly, Edward, Archbishop of Braga, a Pre∣late of Piety and Learning. 7. In India Nunho da Cunha overthrew the King of Monbaça,Actions a∣broad du∣ing his Reign. and slew him of Cambaya. D. John de Ca∣stro with such wonderful Courage, as rather seemed Rashness, Engaging a vast Multitude at the Second Siege of Diu, obtained one of the most wonderful Victories that raised the Renown of the Portuguese Valour. Hector de Silveyra, besides many other re∣markable Actions, subdued the King of Adem. George de Albuquerque with only 80 Men, held out a Siege against the King of Bintam, who had 12000. D. Simon de Me∣neses burnt the City Braçalor. Peter de Silva defended Ma∣laca against the Power of Five Confederate Kings. Thus many others in Asia and Africk, and even the Portuguese Women at Zafin, shewed their Valour, helping to de∣fend that Place against the Moors. The Particulars of these Actions belong to the Books of the Portuguese Asia and Africk, to which we refer the Readers; our intent here being to Treat only of the Portuguese Affairs in Europe. The END of the FOURTH BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF PROTUGAL. The Fifth BOOK. CHAP. I. The Life and Reign of Sebastian the First of the Name, and Sixteenth King of Portugal; with the total Destruction of him and his whole Army in Africk, from the Year 1554. till 1578. 1. PPrince John,he Birth of King Se∣bastian. Son to King John the Third dying, left his Wife the Princess Joanna, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, with Child. On the 18th. Day of her Widowhood, she was delivered of Prince Sebastian, at Lisbon, it being the 20th. of January, 1554. This Prince's Birth cleared up the Clouds of Sorrow contracted by the Death of his Fa∣ther, and all the Kingdom resounded with Expressions of Joy. On Account of his Name, Pope Paul the 4th. sent him one of the Arrows taken out of the Body of S. Se∣bastian,
which this Prince took for his device, and institu∣ted the Military Order of the Arrow, which lasted not long. He was Three Years of Age, when, by the Death of his Grand-Father, he inherited the Crown, being left under the Government of his Grand-Mother Queen Ka∣therine,1557. a Princess extraordinarily qualifyed for that Charge.His Accessi∣on to the Crown. Yet the Queen, thinking it a dangerous Em∣ploy, quitted it when she had held it little above Two Years. From her the Government was transferred to the Cardinal Henry,Cardinal Henry, Regent. the King's Unkle, who was judged to undertake it with a willing Mind. He being much affected to the Jesuits, sent for F. Lewis Gonzalez de Ca∣mara from Rome to be the King's Preceptor, and joyned with him F. Amador Rabelo, and F. Maurice. D. Alex∣ius de Meneses was appointed his Governour.1563. He took upon him the Government on the Day of S. Sebastian, which was his Birth Day, he being then just Fourteen Years of Age, and was warned by Peter Nunez, the fa∣mous Mathematician that it was an Unhappy Day. 2. King Sebastian,Odd Acti∣ons of King Sebastian. tho he shewed great Zeal in mat∣ters of Religion, yet had some actions so Extravagant as seemed to foreshew his Destruction. After going to Bed he would rise at Midnight and go out with D. Alvaro de Meneses his Page, whom also he would leave behind and spend an Hour or Two by himself, on the Shoar, after which he returned home. Other times he would cross the River Tagus in a Boat with Sancho de Toar, at the same time of Night, where landing, a Boat was seen to bring another Man from towards Belm; they two would walk together two Hours, and no Body could tell who the Man was, or what they discoursed about. Near Sin∣tra there is a thick Wood where he used to spend two Hours, at Night, alone. At Almeirin he lay in wait on a Tree, for a wild Boar, and hearing the Boughs shake, he discovered a Bulk which he ran at, and laid hold of it; some of his Company coming in, found him Wrest∣ling with a wild Black, who having fled from his Master, had lived long on the Mountain. Having ordered that none should be suffered to pass by the Forts of  and S. Julian, without being obliged to come in and give an Account of themselves; To see if his orders were obser∣ved he went into a Boat, passing both these Forts through showers of Bullets sent after him, and returned without discovering himself. He would put out to Sea in a Gal∣ley,
when the Weather was most Stormy, and laughed at the Danger. D. Alvaro de Castro, his Favourite, dy∣ing, he went some Nights to his Grave, where he was heard to talk, and returned with Tears in his Eyes. Most of his time he spent among the wild Beasts in the Woods, seldom applying himself to Business, for the dispatch whereof, by the Advice of Cardinal Henry, he made choice of two Gentlemen, which were D. Martin Perey∣ra, and Martin Gonzalez de Camara a Priest. These two discharged that Trust with much Honour; but Martin Gonzales wholly Monopolized all the King's Fa∣vour to himself. 3. Tho the Kingdom was miserably exhausted,The King prepares for an Ex∣pedition in∣to Africk. the King, who had fixed his Mind upon the Conquest of Africk, ceased not to make vast Preparations for that Enter∣prize. All that Flattered him, upon this score, were ad∣vanced to his Favour; but such as more prudently repre∣sented the mighty difficulties and dangers of that Enter∣prize, were soon removed from his Presence. Even his Grand-Mother, for giving Advice against this undertak∣ing, became so irksome to him, that she was upon de∣parting to Castile; yet he was again reconciled to her. Whilst the Kingdom was thus tossed with various agi∣tations at home,Exploits in India. several Fleets arrived from India, and brought Advice of the Progress the Portuguese made in those Parts. D. Constantine, Son to James Duke of Bra∣gança, had taken the City Damam. D. Lewis de Ataide made Braçalor Tributary, and with 600 Portuguese de∣fended the City Goa, against Hidalcan, who Besieged it with 100000 Indians, 2000 Elephants, and 400 pieces of Cannon. D. Francis Mascarenhas held out nine Months in Chaul, against Nizamaluco, who Besieged it with 150000 Men. George de Moura, and Antony Chale, raised the Siege of Onor, the same was done at the Town of Chale. D. Leonis Pereyra defended Malaca against the King of Achem. D. James de Meneses destroyed many Places on the Coast of Malabar, and all the Kingdom of Maga∣lor: These, and many other such notable Victories, which may be seen at large in the Portuguese Asia, excited the young, unadvised, but ambitious King, to attempt the Conquest of Africk, that he might not be outrun in glory by any of his Subjects. 4. Inflamed with these aspiring Thoughts, he went the first time into Africk at twenty Years of Age. To this pur∣pose
he sent D. James de Sousa,1574. Governour into the King∣dom of Algarve,Sebastian passes over into Africk with Orders to Ship off the Forces rai∣sed for that Expedition. Antony, Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, was sent before to Tangier; many Gentlemen followed him, so that he made up a Body of 800 Horse. The King was resolved for Africk, and yet had no Fleet, and all his Friends disswaded that Voyage. He feigning he went to divert himself at Sintra, ordered D. Alvaro de Noronha, with Three Galleys, to meet him at Cas∣cais, where on a sudden he Embarked, ordering Simon de Vega, who guarded the Coast, with one Galley and five Ships to follow him. All that followed him, seeing themselves shipped just in their Hunting Apparel, stood amazed. From Cape S. Vincent the King sent Messengers with Letters to all Cities, Towns, and the Gentry, in∣forming them with his Designs, that they might follow him. Many from all Parts resorted to him, both by Sea and Land. The Cardinal, Prince Henry, was left Go∣vernour of the Kingdom. The King was received in Africk with great Joy by his Subjects; but not with much Terror of his Enemies, for they perceived his Preparati∣ons were not suitable to the Undertaking. He hunted there as if he had been at home, and made several In∣roads into the Country, which provoked the Moors in great numbers, under the Command of the Alcayde Cid Admubenania, Viceroy of Mequines, to draw together to oppose him. The Multitude was great, and advanced Confidently, seeing the small number of Christians. Our Cannon plaied upon them, and the Infidels gave the first Onset, in which many of them that were foremost fled. The King was always in the Front, and with his Exam∣ple, so encouraged his Men,He defeats the Moors, and re∣turns to Lisbon. that they cleared the Field of the Enemy. Next Day the King expected the Enemy in the same Place, but they thought not good to attack him; nor did he prosecute his Victory, saying▪ He came not to make War, but to visit his Garrisons. He retur∣ned to Lisbon in November, at such time as it was feared he was lost; for News was brought of his embark∣ing at Tangier, and a violent Storm had long osted him at Sea. 5. Before this time a Match had been proposed for King Sebastian, with Margaret, second Daughter to Henry the second, King of France. And Embassador was sent to King Philip the second of Spain, by King Seba∣stian,
at his return out of Africk, to incline him to give him his Daughter Clara Eugenia to wife; she was after∣wards married to the Archduke Albertus, and the result of the Embassy was,1576. That the two Kings should meet at Guadalupe.He has an interview with the King of Spain. To save expence, King Sebastian travelled by the Post, with several Persons of Quality, and assoon as he came into the Borders of Castile, was Magnificent∣ly Entertained at the Cost of King Philip, who had also ordered all the Keys of the Towns he passed through to be delivered to him. Nine Days after the King's Depar∣ture, the great Warehouses of Merchant Goods, next to the King's Palace, were accidentally Blown up, with such force, that the Noise was heard at Santarem, which is fourteen Leagues distant, and great Stones, and pieces of Timber were cast far from the Place, and many re∣mote Buildings were shaken. King Philip met our Seba∣stian the Day before Christmas-Eve, half a League from Guadalupe. They embraced friendly, and then Philip saluted the Portuguese Noblemen; Sebastian as the Stran∣ger went first into the Coach. Fifteen Days they staied at Guadalupe. Philip endeavoured to disswade the Por∣tuguese from his designs upon Africk, but not prevailing, promised to assist him with 50 Galleys, and 5000 Men; and contracted at his return from that Expedition, to deliver to him his Daughter.1577. After this they parted, with the same expressions of Love and Affections as they had met, and King Sebastian in his return home, presen∣ted the Spanish Gentry and Officers that attended him. 6. Being come to Lisbon,Preparati∣ons for a second Voy∣age into Africk. he hasted his Preparations for a second Voyage into Africk; to which he was the more encouraged by Muley Hamet, who was at War with his Unkle Muley Maluco for the sovereignty of Mo∣rocco, and being worsted offered to remain Tributary to Portugal, if enthroned by the King. Cid Adelcherim, Lord of Arzila having sided with Hamet, delivered up Arzila to Edward de Meneses, Governour of Tangier, who sending for Succours to the King, there was scarce enough found in the Magazines to furnish him; where∣by, King Sebastian perceived how impossible it was for him to fit out a Royal Fleet that Year. Nevertheless, he ceased not to use all possible means for forwarding his Design. To this effect he had a free Gift of 15000 Duc∣cats from the Clergy. The Croisade was set on foot to Money▪ a Tax laid upon Salt, Donatives required
of the People, Money borrowed of rich Men, the Reve∣nues of the Crown anticipated, and a great Summ raised of the Convert Jews, on Account of a general Pardon granted them. Besides this, they listed none but the basest sort of People that had no Money to buy them∣selves off,Several Prodigies. and were carried away by force. King John the Third's Ghost is said to have appeared to F. Lewis de Moura, foretelling the ill success of this Enterprize. A∣bout the same time a vast number of Fishes called Espa∣da's; or Sword-fish, were cast a Shoar, one whereof of an extraordinary Bigness, had upon it a Cross, from the Arms of which hung two Scourges, and the number of that Year,1578. which was 1578. Armies were seen fighting in the Air, in the Province bewixt Duero and Minho. Colonel Vasco de Silveira always heard a doleful Voice following of him; and one Night, in the Field of Al∣meyria saw a great Fantome it proceeded from, which being by him asked the cause of its Groans, answered, I bewail my self and you, seeing you and those I always loved, engaged in so great a Disaster. This same Hobgoblin was seen by him near the King's Tent, in the Field of Alca∣cer, the Night before the Battle. 7. Notwithstanding all these Preparations,The King not to be moved from his Resolution. there wan∣ted not some who urged the King ought not to ex∣pose his Person; but he, to divert them, caused Edward de Meneses, Governour of Tangier, to signifie by Letters to him, that the Moors were wholly unprovided. These he shewed in Council, and because D. John Mascarenhas persisted to contradict him, he caused a Consult of Phy∣sitians to declare, That tho a Man had been brave in his Youth, he might become a Coward in his old Age. D. Lewis de Ataide known for his brave Exploits in India, he sent thither again, after having chosen him General of his Army, and this because he advised him to be very cir∣cumspect in this Affair. The Citizens of  prote∣sted to the King, that if he persisted in his Resolution they would detain him by force. The King of Morocco, tho he were well provided against this Invasion, failed not to exhort King Sebastian to Peace; but neither these Motives, nor King Philip of Spain his failing to send the promised Supplies of 50 Galleys, and 5000 Men, could stop this unfortunate Prince from runing headlong to his Ruin. All things being in readiness for his Departure, the King would have appointed Henry the Prince Cardinal
to Govern the Kingdom in his Absence; but he refusing, Five Governours were appointed, viz. D. George de Al∣meyda Archbishop of Lisbon, Peter de Alcaçova Surveyor of the Revenue, Francis de Sa, D. John Mascarenhas, and the Secretary Michael de Moura. 8. On the 14th. of June,The King and Nobi∣lity Em∣bark. King Sebastian, attended by all the Nobility and Gentry, rode to the Cathedral, where his Standard was Blessed, on which was the Figure of our Saviour Crucifyed. He returned not to Court, but to expedite what was yet wanting,A Fleet of 1000 Sail. went directly a∣board his Galley. The River was covered with 1000 Sail, all filled with such gaudy, but ill disciplined Forces, that they seemed rather to carry a rich Prey to the Enemy than Weapons to Fight. On the 24th. of June, the Fleet sailed from Lisbon.Landmen. The Land Forces made up the num∣ber of 18000.18000 At Cadiz the King staied Seven Days to gather all his Fleet, and sailing thence, anchored before Tangier on the 6th. of July, about Midnight. The Moor▪ Hamet sent his Son Muley Xeque that Night to visit the King, and came himself in the Morning. Hence the King removed to Arzila, where the Moors that were of his Party joyned him. Larache is Five Leagues distant from this Place; Thither he was first designed to go by Sea, and now the Resolution was taken to March by Land.The Army lands at Arzila. The Forces landed, and numerous Troops of the Enemy approaching to discover, the King threw himself into all Dangers, envying others every opportunity of gaining Honour. Here he staied longer than he ought to have done, and Provisions began to grow scarce. Ha∣ving given all necessary Orders, and taking five Days Provision, the King advanced on the 25th. of July to∣wards Larache, and continued his marches till the 4th. of August, when he encamped between the Rivers Haiuad Macharim, and Lucus, and where he was informed that the King of Morocco was himself at hand, which was not then expected. The Enemy immediately passed the River Lucus, covering the Hills and Plain with 150000 Men, most of them Horse. 9. The Christians had marched Seven Days with only Five Days Provision,The Chri∣stian, and Moorish Armies engage. and therefore it was thought neces∣sary not to delay the Fight till next Day. The Enemy perceiving it, advanced in the Form of a Half Moon to enclose the Portuguese Army which was drawn up in the best manner time would permit. Both Kings having with
their Presence in all Parts encouraged their Men, the signal of Battle was given on both sides. Having well nigh en∣compassed the Christians, the Infidels began to play their Cannon, which disordered those that had charge of it in the Portuguese Army. After a short pause, the King gave the Charge; others following his Example, great slaugh∣ter was in a short time made among the Moors. Yet the Multitude began to prevail, when the Castilians, Italians, and Germans, falling on, routed a multitude of Barbari∣ans; so that the Christians, in the heat of the Action, be∣gan to cry Victory. On a sudden a Voice was heard to cry, Halt, Halt; which most Men obeyed, till seeing the Enemy return upon them, they renewed the Fight with almost as great Success as before, the King in Person do∣ing Wonders. He of Morocco thinking all lost, advanced a Horseback to Encourage his Men,The King of Morroc∣co slain. but soon fell down dead. Hamet Taba, a Renegado, put him into a Litter, and feigned he gave out Orders from him. Halican, a Renegado Portuguese, Encouraged the Infidels, and was by some taken for the King himself. The Germans did Wonders, but the Portuguese Foot being undisciplined was disordered by the Enemies Cannon.The Rout of the Christians. Now all began to be in Confusion, which the King perceiving, he perfor∣med Actions beyond belief, rushing into the midst of his Enemies, not as a General, but as the bravest of Soldiers. George de Albuquerque meeting him gave him his Horse to carry him off, but he mounting Charged again into the thick of the Enemy. D. Antony, Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, was much wounded, and the King offered him his Horse, as did Christopher de Tavora. King Seba∣stian meeting Lewis de Brito, with the Royal Standard stripped and wrapped about him, cried out, Hold it fast, and let us die upon it. Christopher de Tavora advised the King to suffer himself to be taken, but he being offended at the Advice, fell in again among the Moors; where be∣ing seized, Brito rescued him, and was himself made Prisoner, and with him the Standard was taken, which afterwards certain Portuguese bought at Fez, for a small matter. Brito taken saw the King at distance, no Ene∣my pursuing him; and afterwards D. Lewis de Lima met him making towards the River. This is the last time he was seen by any of his People, tho others say he was found dead after the Battle; and others more ondly expect his return to this Day; but where he died only
God knows. Hamet the Moor, that sided with him▪ was drowned in passing the River. 10. To reckon what Men of Note were slain,Of 18000 Men, only 50 escape. were tedi∣ous and needless, since of 18000 Combatants, that com∣posed that Army, only 50 escaped being killed or taken. The Body of Hamet the Moor being carryed to the new King of Morocco, he caused it to be flea'd, and hung on the Walls of Fez; his Son Muley was brought to Por∣tugal, and became a Christian. Some will have it, that the Body of King Sebastian was also found, but others deny it. A rumour of this Disaster was spread abroad at Lisbon before any body brought the News, till at last D. James de Sousa the Admiral returned home, after ha∣ving waited two days at Larache to take up any that escaped, and chiefly in hopes of the King, who was not known to be dead. Some would have it, that he came in the Fleet, but Landing, had absconded for shame. However, there being no tidings of him, till an Ac∣count was brought from Africk, that his Body was found, it was resolved that the Cardinal, Prince Henry, should succeed him in the Crown.Come Coun∣terfeits Personate King Se∣bastian. Nevertheless, upon the vain Rumour of King Sebastian's being still alive, four or five base Fellows had afterwards the Impudence, to Personate him▪ causing thereby no small Troubles▪ Many other Prodigies are reported to have happened, besides what we before related; but being very dubious, it will be needless to repeat more of them. 11. King Sebastian,The Chara∣cter of King Sebastian. as to his Inclinations, was Reli∣gious, Merciful, a Lover of Justice, and no less Boun∣tiful than any of his Predecessors. As to Stature, he was of the largest size, and well proportioned; fair of Complexion, his Eyes blue, his Countenance Majestick, his Strength more than ordinary, and his Heart un∣daunted. He died in the 25th. Year of his Age, and 21st of his Reign, but the 11th. after he took the Go∣vernment into his own Hands, and lies buried in the Monastery of Belem. In his Time the value of Copper Money was abated, to prevent the Importation of it from Foreign Parts. On the contrary the Silver was raised, which drew much out of Spain. King Sebastian coined some Pieces of Gold, worth 1000, others of the value of 750 Royals, for himself to give away with his own Hand.
CHAP. II. The Life and Reign of Henry, the First of the Name, and Seventeenth King of Portugal; from the Year 1512, till 1580. 1. CArdinal Henry,Birth of K. Henry. Eighth Son to King Emanuel, and Seventh by his Second Wife, Queen Mary, was Born at Almeyrin on the last day of January, 1512. Pope Paul the Third sent him the Cardinal's Cap, and he was at once Archbishop of Braga, Lisbon, and Co∣imbra, Abbot of the Famous Monastery of Alcobaça, and twice Governour of the Kingdom; tho' unfit for the Crown, so fit for the Mitre, that upon the Death of Pope Paul, he had many Votes in the Conclave to succeed him. Whilst Governour, he never forbore to Act as a Prelate; and tho' a Prince of the Church, he performed all the Duties of a private Priest. He was at Alcobaça when the News was brought of the loss of the King his Nephew,1578. and his Army. The Governours sent him this Advice by D. John Serran, Provincial of the Jesui. He immediately set out for Lisbon, where, upon his arrival, the publick sorrow was renewed, upon the Consideration that the Inheritance of the Crown should fall to him, then 67 Years of Age, and the last of the Male Line. Henry being come to Lisbon, called to him the Duke of Bragança, and other Persons of Knowledge and Experience; and seeing there was yet no certain Account of his Nephew's being dead or alive, the Coun∣cil, and a number of able Lawyers were ordered to Con∣sult what was to be done in that Case. They agreed, the Cardinal, tho' a Priest, was capable of Inheriting the Crown;Cardinal Henry first decla∣red Prote∣ctor. but it being yet doubtful what was become of the King, he should therefore take upon him the Government, with the Title of Protector, which he accordingly did in the Palace of the Duke of Bragança on the 22d. of August. 2. Soon after his entring upon the Government,He is crowned King▪ the News of the King's Death was brought, and his Funeral Obsequies were performed with general Lamentation. On the 28th. of August, after having said Mass, the new King and Bishop, Henry, proceeded to the Church
of All-Saints Hospital, where he had before received the Mitre, now to put on a Crown. He was the second Melchisedeck, for since the first, till him, none ever was at once both Priest and King. The Ceremony of his Inauguration was performed with no less Lamentation than Pomp, and he returned from the Church to the Palace a Temporal as well as Spiritual Prince. A few days after his Exaltation, came the News, that Antony, Bastard-Son to Prince Lewis, having escaped out of Sla∣very, was at Arzila, and tho' much offended at him before, he extreamly rejoyced to hear of his Safety. Antony by his Affability had gained the Affections of all Men, and the People looked upon him to have as good a Title to the Crown as King John the First had almost two Ages before; and in Truth, the Right was the same, for they were both Bastards. Antony had fallen into the Hands of a poor Moor, who ransomed him for a small matter, being told, he was a Priest▪ and if not presently redeemed, would lose his Benefice, and thereby become incapable of paying his Ransom. About 16000 Persons remained in Captivity, to Redeem whom, 20 Trinita∣rians were sent to Fez and Morocco. F. Francis da Costa settled the Ransom of 80 Gentlemen at 400000 Ducats, and paid down 300000, remaining himself an Hostage for the rest;Ingrati∣tude of cer∣tain Gen∣tlemen. yet those Gentlemen getting home, never thought of releasing him, till he was bought offby the Kingdom, the Moor refusing to take any thing for him but Pearls. F. Amador Rebelo, a Jesuit, was sent to Argiers, to Ransom those that had been sold thither. King Philip of Spain obtained of the Moors the Body of King Sebastian, which he afterwards brought into Por∣tugal. He also redeemed the Duke of Barcelos, Son to John, Duke of Bragança, and afterwards entertained him with all possible expressions of Affection in Castile. 3. No sooner was the new King enthroned,Several Pretenders to the Suc∣cession of the Crown, but all those who pretended a Right, began to put in their Claims to the Inheritance of the Crown. Philip the Se∣cond of Spain, afterwards the First of Portugal, sent D. Christopher de Moura to condole with King Henry for the late Loss, and to Congratulate his Accession to the Crown, without mentioning his Title to the Succession, but with private Instructions to advance his Interest. The Candidates were, First, King Philip of Spain, as Son to the Empress Elizabeth, Daughter to King Ema∣nuel,
Secondly, the Lady Katherine of Bragança, Daugh∣ter to Prince Edward, who was Brother to the Empress. The difference betwixt these two Pretenders was, that the Lady, tho' a Female, claimed the Crown, as de∣scended of the Male; and the King, as being himself the Male, tho' descended of a Female. Of these the former was the better Title without dispute, but neither so good as that of Alexander, Prince of Parma, in the Right of his Mother, who was elder Sister to the Lady Katherine. The Duke of Savoy had a Title, but not so good, by his Wife, the Princess Beatrix, Daughter to King Emanuel. Antony, Prior of Crato, pretended to be Lawful Son to Prince Lewis, Brother to Prince Edward, the Empress, and Dutchess of Savoy; but having never been owned as such by his Father, or any other Person, that was meer Pretence. The People pleaded, the Right of Election was in them, and shewed Prescription, as in the case of their first King, of King Alonso the Third, and King John the First, all which in reality were but Fortunate Usurpers. The Pope also would Inherit this Crown, as being now devolved to the Church, being in the Hands of a Cardinal, and urged, that it had been Tributary to the See of Rome; which was true, but a poor Title for Inheritance. Katherine of Medicis, Queen of France, alledged, she was descended of King Alonso the Third, by his first Wife Maud, Countess of Bologne, on whom he had a Son; but her Title was rejected, as over antiquated, being above 330 Years standing. Savoy and Parma were soon thrown out, because too weak to carry on their Pretences, not because they wanted a Title. The People attempted to carry it by Election, but miscarried. The Dispute rested betwixt Philip of Spain, Katherine of Bragança, and Antony, Prior of Crato, we shall soon see where the Controversie ended. 4. Several Methods were proposed to determine these Differences.Means pro∣posed to re∣concile tha different Pretensions Some would have one of King Philip's Sons Marry the Daughter of the Duke of Bragança. Others, more inclined to Antony, would have that Daugh∣ter given to him. Others there were, who advised the Cardinal, tho' old, and a Priest, should Marry. Many Pamphlets were spread abroad, some of them against King Philip, and others for him, which last were so well penned, that they seem to have inclined King Henry to his Interest, as they did many others throughout the
Kingdom. But the City of Lisbon openly declared its aversion to him, offering to raise 20000 Men, and threat∣ning to burn the Houses of those that favoured him. Antony, Grand Prior of Crato, that is, of the Knights of Malta in Portugal, laboured in vain to prove himself Legitimate, and King Henry seeing him persist obsti∣nately in that Design, banished him the Court. The City of Lisbon now again pressed King Henry to obtain a Dispensation of the Pope to Marry; he excused him∣self on account of his Ecclesiastical Dignity, rather than his Age or Infirmities. No Excuses availing, D. Duarte de Castello-Branco, and Dr. Ruy de Castanheda were ap∣pointed to go Embassadors to Rome; but they went not, for the King still urging his Inability, and his Infirmities being apparent, his Excuses were at last received. 5. Since there were no hopes of Issue in King Henry,Five Per∣sons ap∣pointed to Govern after the King's Death. he was pressed to declare who ought to Succeed him, which he refused, leaving it to Governours and Judges to determine after his Death. For appointing of them, he presently summoned the Cortes or Parliament, who named Fifteen Persons for Governours, of whom the King chose five, which were D. George de Almeyda, Arch∣bishop of Lisbon, D. John Mascarenhas, Francis de Sa, James Lopez de Sousa, and D. John Tello de Meneses. Also 24 Lawyers were nominated, and of them 11 elected to be Judges; and the Names of them all to be kept close, till the Death of the King. All swore to stand by these Decrees. The substance of the Oath was,The same appointed to decide the Contro∣versie con∣cerning the Succession. That the King dying, they would obey the Go∣vernours appointed, and would acknowledge him for their Lawful Sovereign, that should be declared such by them. The Duke of Bragança, as one of the Candi∣dates, swore to stand to their Determination; the same did Antony, the Grand Prior, yet afterwards he recanted before the Pope's Nuncio, alledging, he had sworn for fear of his Unkle. King Philip's Embassadors refused to take the Oath for their Master, pleading, he was Law∣ful Heir of the Crown, and therefore not obliged to allow of that Decision. The Cortes being broke up, each of the Candidates, which were now but three, viz. King Philip, the Duke of Bragança, and the Grand Prior, began to speak their Thoughts more boldly. The two latter were soon banished the Court by King Henry; who perceiving that Antony grew haughty, having
obtained a surreptitious Judgment of his Legitimacy, got leave of Pope Gregory XIII. to inspect into and determine that Affair. After some time spent in en∣quiring into it, he at length positively declared him Il∣legitimate. The Grand Prior, dismayed at this Sentence, and the great Power of his Adversary, proposed to King Philip's Embassadors, that he would be content with the Kingdom of Algarve, and Title of King, or else that he might have the Government of the Kingdom for Life, with a Revenue of 300000 Ducats, half of them to remain to his Heirs. King Philip answered, That Kingdom was too small for so many Kings. 6. King Henry ceased not to prosecute the Grand Prior, and sent Orders to Apprehend him at Coimbra, where he then was, but he made his Escape, and lurked about in the Province between the Rivers Duero and Minho. Next, he issued out his Proclamation, Summon∣ing him to Surrender himself, but he obeyed not. The King was now at Almeyrin,The Plague at Lisbon whither he fled from the Plague that raged at Lisbon, and spread it self through∣out the Kingdom. There he summoned before him the Principal Members of the Cortes or Parliament, and the Embassadors, before whom he declared himself for King Philip, ordering them to Capitulate with him. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal were easily brought to approve of the King's Proposition, but the Commons opposed it. Soon after, the King Assembles the Cortes, intending to put an end to this Controversie; but all he or the Nobility could do, availed not, so that the Di∣vision ran as high as ever it had been. The King's Death now drawing on apace, Katherine, Dutchess of Bragança, came from Villa Viciosa,1580▪ to try if she could prevail with him to declare her his Heiress.K. Henry dies. He heard her, and soon after, without returning any Answer, gave up the Ghost. 7. King Henry was of a middle Stature,His . in shape like his Father, of a lively Spirit, patient of Labour, and in his Youth trained in all the Exercises that belong to a Prince. Damianus de Goes says, he understood Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and was well read in Mathematicks, Philosophy, and Divinity. He says further of him, That he had an absolute Command over his Passions, was temperate in Speech, a great lover of Truth, a no∣table keeper of Secrets, an Enemy to Detraction, an ad∣mirer of Justice, free in giving Advice, averse to Favourites,
and inclinable to all Vertue. Notwithstanding all these Qualities, he was a better Priest than King. His first Spiritual Promotion was to the Priorship of Sancta Cruz, which Monastery he reformed, and increased its Reve∣nue. Next, he had the Archbishoprick of Braga▪ where he spent his Revenue, relieving the Poor in time of Fa∣mine. The same he did at; Evora. He maintained many Foundlings, gave Portions to Young Maids, re∣deemed Captives, and performed himself all the Duties of a private Priest. At Braga he assembled a Synod, endowed Schools in that City, repaired the Monastery of S. Fructuosus, punished severely all Crimes in the Clergy, especially Incontinency. The See of Evora being added to his other of Braga, he did the same good Offices there, and founded the University under the Jurisdiction of the Jesuits. Many other notable Works he performed, and being created Cardinal and Legate to the Pope, still increased in Works of Piety. 8. In this Henry expired the Kingdom,Observa∣tions on the Rise and Fail of Portugal. erected by another of the same Name; the first died in the Year 1112. and the latter was born in 1512. So that the Name of Henry, and Number 12, were the beginning and end of this Monarchy. Thus the Seventeenth was the last Native King of Portugal. The Moon laboured under a great Eclipse when he died,15. in the 68th. Year of his Age, and second of his Reign. His Body was deposited at Almeyrin, where he died, till King Philip translated it to the Monastery of Belem. CHAP. III. The short Administration of the Five Gover∣nours. Antony, Grand Prior of Crato, or the Order of Malta, proclaimed King by the Multitude, the short time of his Ʋsurpation. 1. NO sooner was King Henry dead at Almeyr but the Five Governours began to exercise Power.. The Commons held their Assembl , and appeared inflexible; Martin
Camara was sent to appease them, and promise they should have all the Records relating to the Succession. It was proposed the Governours should remove to San∣tarem, and disband the Forces they entertained. The Prior of Crato drew near to Lisbon, thinking the City would receive him; they ordered him to remove farther, yet he approached nearer, and at last was admitted. The Governours and Commons were at variance, and could agree upon no one Point. King Philip wrote to the Governours, Parliament, and chief Cities, admonishing them to Proclaim him King,Philip of Spain Arms to secure the Crown  Portugal. and at the same time su∣specting them, gathered his Forces. He chose Ferdinand Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alva, then a Prisoner at Ʋzeda for Miscarriages in Flanders, to be General of this Expedition. Philip removed to Guadalupe on Pretence of Devotion, thither came to him the Portuguese Em∣bassadors, desiring him to forbear Force, and stand to the Determination of the Judges; But he told them he could not lay down Arms till he was proclaimed King. The Governours, weary of the Commons, sent them word, they were dissolved, and might depart. They doubted at first, but soon after obeyed. This done, the Governours, to rid themselves of such as opposed King Philip, sent them away to the Frontiers and other Parts, on pretence of securing the Kingdom. 2. King Philip, now at Merida, spread his Forces along the Borders of the Kingdom, ordering the Com∣manders to treat such Portuguese as resorted to them, courteously.Preparati∣ons in Por∣tugal to oppose Phi∣lip. The Portuguese, tho' they knew of these Preparations,, yet because the King courted them, they thought he was weak. Such of the Governours as fa∣voured him, were afraid to discover it, and therefore Francis Barreto was sent into France to obtain 6000 Foot of that King, which done, he was to go to Rome, to move the Pope to Mediate that King Philip might stand to Judgment. D. Elisio de Portugal was sent to the Em∣peror. The Fleet was also ordered to be fitted out D. Emanuel de Portugal erected a Wooden Fort on a Bank of Sand at the Mouth of the River, to secure the Harbour. There being great want of Men, the Fryars from the Pulpits encouraged them to take up Arms, and became more insolent when they incensed the Rabble to Rescue Antony Suarez, who was hanged for murdering Ferdinand de Pca, an Ancient Grave Man, and Alderman
of the City, for that he opposed Antony the Grand Prior by whose order he was assassinated, and he now pressed the Governours to declare him Legitimate. D. John Tello, one of the Governours was sent to Belem with absolute Power, and there joyned with D. Emanuel de Portugal, both of them being Mortal Enemies to Castile. These Two wanting Money designed to sell the Crown Jewels but Christopher de Moura deterred any from buying, affirming, They would lose their Money, for that the King would take them from them, and their Persons would be in Danger. 3. The Portuguese Embassadors followed the King to Badajoz, where he dismissed them, with the same An∣swer as before. The Governours still remained irreso∣lute, but resolved to secure themselves, and therefore re∣moved to Setuval, that being a stronger Place. The Duke of Bragança and Spanish Embassador followed them, and they began to talk of summoning the Cortes or Parliament, as if the Duke of Alva were not now upon his March.Elvas, and other pla∣ces, delive∣red to King Philip. In the mean while, the City Elvas was deli∣vered up to King Philip, there being. Two Parties in the Place, and Sixty Horse appearing before it and cutting off its Water. The same happened at Olivenza. Serpa, Mura, Campo-Mayor, Aronches, and Portalegre did the same. Antony, the Grand Prior at Santarem, was by the Rabble proclaimed Protector of the Kingdom,Antony, the Ba∣stard, de∣clared Pro∣tector by the Rab∣ble. and he going to lay the Foundation of a Fort, a Base Fel∣low called Antony Baracho flourishing a Clout on the point of his Sword, cried out Antony, Antony, King of Portugal. All the Multitude took the word, and pur∣sued it, so that none durst contradict them. Only he made some seeming Opposition, which was but to heighten their Desires. Mounting on Horseback he was conducted to the Church, and thence to the Town-Hall, where all present swore Allegiance to him. This done, he resolved to set forward for Lisbon, believing himself secure if received there. This News was soon carried to the Governours at Setuval. But before we proceed, let us give some further Account of this Mob King. 4. Antony, Prior of Crato, that is of the Order of Malta, was born at Lisbon in the Year 1531, being Ba∣stard-Son to Prince Lewis, the Son of King Emanuel, by Vlante Gomez; yet he made efforts to prove himself Le∣gitimate, but all unsuccessfully. He was bred to Learn∣ing,
but made but little progress,1531. only understood La∣tin, and had some rudiments of other Sciences.The Birth and Edu∣cation of Antony Prior of Crato. His Particular Talent was a smooth Tongue, which was very Attractive. Incontinency was so predominant in him, that in the depth of his Misfortunes he could not refrain from it. Upon some Distast given him at Court, he went into Castile and was kindly Entertained by King Philip.1560. At Tangie he served against the Moors, and gained Reputation;1568. and Accompanied King Sebastian in both his Voyages to Africk, where, as we have seen, he remained in Captivity. Being ransomed, he returned to Portugal, and soon began to aspire to the Throne. Finding King Philip so powerful an Enemy, he offered to Compound, but his Proposals were rejected. What followed till his being proclaimed King at Santarem, we have seen above. The Governours hearing thereof, and fearing he would soon be upon them, Fortifyed them∣selves. At Lisbon all things were in the greatest Confu∣sion imaginable. King Philip was at Badajz▪ and the power of his Army much extolled; which spurred all Antony's Followers to press the Kingdom to Declare for him, that so united, they might the better oppose the Spaniards. The Council of Lisbon, refused to admit Antony as King, but would receive him as Protector; which he refusing, they prepared to oppose him. 5. Antony advanced to Lisbon,Antony, enters Lis∣bon, . and tho but slenderly attended, entered the City; all that saw him saluting him as King. He went to the Town-House, and being there proclaimed; all that were present swore Alle∣giance to him, which done, he immediately sent to ac∣quaint the Duke of Bragança, the Governours, and other Noblemen, of his Exaltation. His next care was to raise Men, and dispatch Expresses to England, and France, to crave Succours. Having gathered 1500 Men, he set forward for Setuval, where the Governours were, sending before the young Count de , his great Favourite, with a Letter, admonishing them to submit. They thought to have defended themselves, but the Gount being possessed of the Gates, they fled away pri∣vately, and met again at , where they gave their definitive Sentence in Favour of King Philip. An∣tony hasted to Setuval, and having secured the City, re∣turned to Lisbon, where the Forts of S. Julian, and . The Duke of
who had retired to his Town of Portel, sent thence to King Philip, offering to come to Composition, but it was now too late, for that Prince was too far advanced. The Duke a Alva had passed the River Caya in June, which parts the two Kingdoms, with 20000 Men, 6000 Carts, and 25 pieces of Cannon. He marched peaceably as if it had been through a Country subject to his Master, all Places submitting themselves as far as Estremoz. This Town was soon perswaded by D. Christopher de Moura to surrender, but D. John de Azevedo held out in the Ca∣stle, till seeing the Cannon planted against him, he en∣deavoured to escape, and being taken, was sent Prisoner to Villa Viciosa; the Duke of Alva declaring he spared his Life in regard to his want of Experience. Hence the Army moved, and took in Evora, and Monte-Mayor, and so proceeded to Setuval, without committing any was in all the Country. 6. The grand Prior provided for his Defence, but wan∣ting Men, and no Succours coming from France, he sent the French Consul residing at Lisbon to hasten them, and he went to spend the Money he carried.The Spa∣nish Forces,  Duke  Alva,  near to Lisbon. Now perceiving the Duke approached, having taken Alcaçer do sal near Setuval, and being wholly unprovided to oppose him, he suffered his Officers to commit many Extortions to raise Money. Slaves had their Freedom given them to take Arms, Money was coined of less Weight than usual, all the Jewels of the Crown were sold, the Money designed for Redemption of Captives seized, Convents were searched for Money deposited in them, and the Plate of the Churches was seized. The Fryars took Arms, and went about the Streets, exciting others to do the like. Setuval was soon surrendred to the Duke of Alva, and only a Tower held out that secures the Haven, under which lay Three Galleons. D. Alvaro Bazan, Marquess of Santa Cruz, coming up now with 60 Galleys, and 25 Ships, and some Cannon being planted on an Eminency, at the first shot the Galeons surrendred, and soon after the Tower. The Grand Prior seeing the best Part of the Kingdom in the Power of King Philip, and the Nobility daily resort to him, began now to suspect his own Fol∣lowers.Duke de Alva▪ pas∣s the Ri∣ver Tagus. The Duke of Alva after long consulting where to pass the River Tagus, at length took the Advice of the Portuguese that adhered to him, which was, to go over in the Galleys to Cascais. D. James de Mes lying with
some Men behind a Mountain, did not hinder the landing, and was therefore accused of Cowardize. The Grand Pri∣or marched out to Belem, with some few ill armed Troops, but soon retired. The Duke took and plundered Cascais, where D. James de Meneses, being taken, had his Head cut off. This put Lisbon, and the Grand Prior, into a great Consternation; and he gathered about 8000 undisciplined Men, with which he marched towards Belem on the 5th. of August. On the 4th. Day after, he removed and posted himself on an Advantageous rising Ground over against the Bridge of Alcantara. In the mean while the Duke advanced to batter the Fort of S. Julian. 7. D. James de Cazamo, a Spaniard, who had served the Grand Prior, came now to him, and prevailed with him to submit himself to King Philip, but the King re∣mitted the whole Affair to the Duke of Alva, who broke off that Negotiation.The Fts upon the River ta∣ken by the Spaniards. The Castle of S. Julian, after be∣ing Two Days battered, was delivered up to him. The Wooden Fort at the Bar was abandoned by the Defen∣dants, and the Spaniards possessed themselves of it. King Philip now published his general Pardon to all Persons whatsoever concerned in these Broiles, except the Grand Prior, and some other of the Heads, conditionally that they submitted by a Day appointed. Lisbon was willing enough to embrace this offer, but feared as much to be plundered by its armed Rabble, as by the Enemy. Eight Days the Two Armies lay close by each other, without doing any thing. At length the Duke sent Sanch de A∣vila with 15 Horse, and some Foot, to discover which way the Tower of Belm might be attacked. A greater number of Portuguese met them, and a Skirmish , tho not considerable, the Spaniards retiring. That they planted their Cannon, and the next Day the Tower was delivered to them. The Duke perceiving the Ground Prior kept his Ground, which prevented the City from surrendring, he went in Person to take a view his Camp▪ and found it well seated, but not fortifyed. He resolved to attack it at Midnight, and have strict Ordere that the City should not be plundred; King Philip ha∣ving given it him particularly in Charge. At the tm appointed▪ he marched, the Spanish Shps and then riding in the River. The Grand Prior encourage his Mn, which were now but a small number, and disciplined. The Spanish Army consisted of
20000 Men, the Portuguese were not above 4000. The Cannon having played on both sides,Antony's Army rout∣ted. the Spaniards assaulted the Bridge, where was a sharp dispute, but that once gained, the Portuguese soon fled to the City, where Antony opened the Prisons, and then with some few that would follow him, shifted for himself. 8. Notwithstanding the contrary Orders, the Spaniards during Three Days plundered Lisbon,Lisbon plundered by the Spa∣niards. which so displeased King Philip, that he threatned to punish all the Officers, and so severely reproved the Duke, that he is thought to have died of Grief Antony having staied at Sacavem near Lisbon, removed to Santarem, which Place, tho the first that declared him King, refused now to admit him. Thence he fled to Coimbra, where he fortifyed himself, and having gathered 5000 Men, sent Orders to the Pro∣vince betwixt Duero and Minho, to own him King, and entered Aveyro by force. The Towns in Africk imme∣diately submitted,Antony, forced to fly  ab∣scond. but the Tercera Islands stood by An∣tony. Sancho de Avila set out from Lisbon, with 400 Horse, and 6000 Foot, to pursue Antony. Coimbra opened her Gates to him, and Antony removed to Porto, which Place refusing him admittance, he began to batter, and there∣upon it was surrendred to him Sancho de Avila followed the Grand Prior close, and coming to Porto, battered it from the same Place the other had done, and entring plundered it. Antony escaping thence, and being for∣saken of all Men, absoncded for a long time in the Moun∣tains. Being close pursued at the River Lima, he had certainly been taken, but that one Thomas Cacheyro, who still followed him, Swam over the River with him on his Back. In this manner he fled from Place to Place, nar∣rowly escaping in several Disguises. King Philip offered 80000 Crowns in Gold to any that could discover him, and the many poor People were concerned in his Escape, none ever offered to betray him. Antony came in dis∣guise to Lisbon, and thence to Setuval, where a Woman assisted to hire a small Vessel for him, which carried him into England; whence he passed into France, and was there favourably entertained by the Queen Mother Ka∣therine of Medicis, and her Son the Duke of Alenson, who aspired to a Crown, and hoped if he could get Forces into Portugal, to secure that to himself. 9. The Tercera Islands still held for Antony, and at the same time expected King Sebastian, who was killed in
Africk,The Terce∣ra Islands for Anto∣ny. and many pretended to prophecy the Day he would come to them. King Philip being about to make his Entry into Lisbon, received this News from the Islands, and therefore sent thither Peter Valdez with 600 Men and some Cannon to reduce them. He found a very ill Reception, and therefore kept at Sea, not know∣ing what to do. Advice was brought him, That D. Lope de Figueroa was preparing at Lisbon to follow him with a greater Force; and he, that the other might not have any share in the Honour of subduing those Islands, rashly adventured to land. With much difficulty he got ashoar upon S. James his Day, and at First took some pieces of Cannon from the Portuguese. But Cyprian de Figueyredo, the Governour, coming out of the City with all the Force he could make, drove before a Herd of Oxen, which being pricked forwards upon the Spani∣ards, put them into disorder, and he then falling on, drove them into the Sea, where 450 of them perished. Many Barbarities were committed towards the Dead, some being cut in Pieces, and others dragged about the Streets. Valdez was in this miserable Condition, when D. Lope de Figueroa came to be a Witness of his rash∣ness; for he could do nothing after that Loss. Upon the News that Levies were making in England, France, and Flanders, to bring Antony into Portugal, the King sent the Prior of Malta, to secure the Province betwixt Duero and Minho. Ambrose de Aguiar, and Peter Pe∣ixoto, were sent to the Terceras. The Marquis de Santa Cruz returned from Sevil, with Twelve Galleys, and Twenty Galleons, and found there Thirty Vessels ga∣thered from Portugal, Biscay, and other Places. With this Force he sailed towards the Islands in July.Antony arrives at the Ter∣cera with a Fleet from France. Antony at the same time sailed from France with Fifty eight Sail, in which were above Seven thousand Men, com∣manded by Philip Strozi, and Monsieur de Bris. He arrived at the Island of S. Michael, before the Spaniards, and plundered the Town of Laguna. The Inhabitants of Punta Delgada, the chief Town of the Island, fled to the Mountains. Ambrose de Aguiar, who had been Go¦vernour, was dead, and now Peter Peixoto, and Laure Nogueyra commanded. They marched out with about Three thousand Spaniards and Portuguese, to meet the French, by whom they were defeated, and Nogueyra flying to the Fort, died there of his Wounds. Antony,
after summoning the Fort, in vain prepared to batter it when the Spanish Fleet appearing, diverted him from that Design. 10. After several Essays made,1582. the Two Fleets joyned Battle on the 26th. of July.Antony's Fleet de∣stroyed by the Spa∣nish. The Engagement lasted Five Hours, in which the French Admiral, and Vice-Admiral, being taken, Two great Ships sunk, and about Two thousand of their Men slain, the rest fled. Philip Strozi being taken died of his Wounds, as did D. Fran∣cis de Portugal, Earl of Vimioso. John de Jaen, Chaplain to the Major General, frighted by the Cannon, ran down into the Hold, where he died with fear. Anthony think∣ing some of his Commanders had not done their Duty, as being corrupted by the Spaniards, cut off D. Duarte de Castro's Head, on suspition that he was one of them. He was not himself in the Fight, being then received ashoar in the Island Tercera, where he was received as King. Some of the French Ships returned to France; others plundered the Island of Fayal. The Marquess after his Victory, having Twenty eight Lords, Fifty Gentle∣men, and a great number of Marriners and Soldiers, Prisoners, beheaded all the former, and hanged the lat∣ter. This done, he returned to Lisbon, carrying with him Two India Ships he met in the way. Antony coined Money, much under Weight, wracked the People to raise more, incited the religious Men to take Arms, and forbore not too, in the midst of his Misery, to endea∣vour to corrupt Nuns. He sailed thence in November, with Thirty Sail for France, but some of them forsook him by the way.. About the middle of February, King Philip returned to Castile. As soon as the Season was fit for sailing, Monsieur de Chartes, a Knight of Malta, came from France with 1200 Men to secure the Islands to . In July arrived there the Spanish Fleet, con∣sisting of Sixty Sail, and among them Twelve Galleys, which caused admiration; for that those Vessels had ne∣ver before been used in the Ocean, but for Coasters. In this Fleet were One thousand two hundred Men com∣manded by the Marquess de Santa Cruz. On the 24th. of this Month, the Admiral would have proclaimed a general Pardon, but could not be heard. He landed at Mole,The  and after Three Days resistance became ab∣solute Master of the  the Defendants flying to the Mountains. Monsieur de Chartes articled to depart
with the French, leaving their Colours. D. Emanuel de Silva the Governour, after absconding some time, was betrayed by a Slave, taken and beheaded. His Head was put up where he had set up that of Belchior Alfonso, for finding with King Philip, and it is remarkable, he had said it should be taken down when his were fixed in the Place. Some were beheaded, others hanged, and all that had any Honours or Employments conferred by Antony, were deprived of them. All the other Islands were easi∣ly reduced. 11. Antony having left all he possessed in the Seas,Antony flies into England. and having no hopes of Succour in France, went over into England, the differences betwixt King Philip and Queen Elizabeth encouraging him to hope for assistance there. The Queen was easily perswaded to embrace this Enter∣prize, and offered her Ships, and Two thousand Men that had served in Holland, but upon very hard Terms, which were granted, and are these; That the Queen should furnish 120 Sail, 15000 Landmen, and 5000 Marriners, for which Antony within Two Months after he was in possession of Lisbon, should pay down Five Millions, and 300000 Duccats a Year for ever. That the English should Traffick freely in Portugal and India. That the Queen might bring her Fleet into Lisbon Ri∣ver, and Antony should be obliged to assist her against King Philip. That the Garrisons in Portugal should al∣walys be in the hands of English, maintained by the Kingdom. That Bishopricks should be conferred on English Catholicks, and so others too tedious to relate. Sir Francis Drake had the Command of the Fleet, and Sir John Norris of the Land Forces, which were 22000 Men. They sailed from Plimouth, and arrived at Co∣runa the 4th. of May, where they landed, and having spent Five Days before the Place without any success, returned to their Ships with loss. In the mean while King Philip sent Advice to Lisbon, That the Cardin Alvertus who was Governour, and the Count de who was General, might be in readiness. The English landed some Horse, and 12000 Foot at Peniche, which Place they took, and thence coasting along, entered th River of Lib. The Count de Fuentes, with some Troops of Horse, endeavoured to secure the Country, et Norris marched with a great Body of Troops wards Lisbon, and fortyfied himself close to the City.
There he lay some time, but still finding that not one Por∣tuguese came over to him, nor that Drake did not come up the River, he marched back and embarked his Forces. Many of his Men died by the way, of the Plague, which was got among them in Portugal, and the rest arriving at Plimouth, spread it through all England. 12. Antony seemed now only to have come to take his last Farewel of his Country, for ever after he resided in France,He dies in France. tho' never quitting his claim to this Crown, till he died at Paris in great Poverty, and the 64th. Year of his Age. His Body was buried in the Church of the Nuns of Ave Maria, and the Inscription on his Tomb, calls him King. He was endued with several good Qua∣lities, his Person was comly, and his Countenance plea∣sing. He was not unlearned, especially in Divinity, and wrote a Paraphrase upon the Penitential Psalms. He could not marry, as being of the Military Order of Mal∣ta; but by several▪ Women had the following Bastard Children: First, D. Emanuel de Portugal, who married Emilia, Daughter to William Prince of Orange. Se∣condly Christopher, who died in France. Thirdly, Pe∣ter, who became a Franciscan Friar, and was called of the Desart, remarkable for Piety and Learning Fourthly, Denis, who took the Habit of S. Bernard, in the Mona∣stery of Valbuena. Fifthly, Alonso, who served in the Galleys of Naples, where he died. Sixthly, John, who died very Young. Seventhly, Philippa, a Bernardin Nun. Eightly, Luisa, a Franciscan Nun. Ninthly, and Tenth∣ly, Two Daughters, whose Names are not extant, but they were both kept in the Monastery of Huelgas, near Burgos, by King Philip the Second. CHAP. VII. The Reign of Philip, the Second of Spain, and First of Portugal; and Eigthteenth King, from the Year 1580, till 1598. 1. PHilip the Second of Spain,Birth of King Phi∣lip. and First of Portugal, Son to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and the Empress Elizabeth, Daughter of King Emanuel of Por∣tugal,
was born at Valladolid on the 23th. of March 1527. After the loss of King Sebastian in Africk, he sent Don Christopher de Moura to condole with the New King, and Cardinal Henry, offering his assistance in reestablish∣ing the Kingdom in its former Splendor, and Money for the redemption of Captives. The First he ransomed, was the Duke of Barcelos, Son to him of Bragança, and with him several Gentlemen. King Henry dying, and the Kingdom being in a Confusion, for that the Go∣vernours feared to declare who was the next Heir, and the Multitude began to declare for Antony the Grand Prior; King Philip came to Badajoz, hoping his ap∣proach would induce the Portuguese to declare for him; but being deceived of his Expectation, he sent the Duke of Alva who reduced all the Country with much ease, as we have seen in the foregoing Chapter. At the time the King intended to enter the Kingdom in Person, he fell so dangerously Sick that he was given over. He sud∣denly recovered, and Ann his Queen who was with him died. Being restored to his Health, he was received at Elvas,He enters Portugal. D. Christopher de Moura, and Nunho Alvarez Pereyra, attending upon him as Ministers of State for this Kingdom. Lisbon was not yet quite clear of the Plague, and therefore he ordered the Cortes or Parlia∣ment to meet at Tomar on the 15th. of April. In his way thither he met the Dutchess of Bragança, and they were long together, tho' their Discourse was not over pleasant; for the King treated her not with all the Com∣plement she expected, and she never gave him the stile of Majesty. Being come to Tomar, before the opening of the Parliament, he caused himself to be Sworn King, according to the Portuguese manner, and his Son Prince James Heir of the Crown.An Am∣nsty. Next he granted a general Pardon to all that had sided with Antony the Grand Pri∣or, only excepting Fifty two Persons, and excluding all religious Men, that espoused his Quarrel, from Spiritual Promotions. 2. The Parliament was opened the 19th. of April,He holds a Parlia∣ment. the King sitting on his Throne. The King bountifully be∣stowed his Favours upon all there, and yet there were more discontented than pleased. It was proposed to sup∣press the University of Coimbra, because it had suppor∣ted the Grand Prior, but the King would not suffer it to be done. What the King granted of his own will to
the Kingdom in general,Priviled∣ges gran∣ted to Por∣tugal. was as follows. That he will keep all their Ancient Priviledges, and Immunities. That the Parliament shall always meet within the King∣dom. That none shall be Governour of Portugal but a Native, unless it be a Prince of the Blood. That all Places of Trust and Honour, shall be given to Natives. That all the Officers of the Houshould shall be kept up, and none but Natives shall be such. That the same be observed in India, and America, and none but Portuguese Ships shall be allowed to Trade thither. That all the Money coined in the Kingdom, shall be stamped with only the Portuguese Arms. That all Church Preferments, and Commendaries of Military Orders, shall be given to Natives. That no New Imposition shall be laid upon the Church. That there shall be always a Portuguese Council with his Majesty, for the Affairs of the King∣dom. These are the Principal Heads, the others being much of the same Purport, or less Material, I omit for brevity sake. They were in all Twenty five Articles. King Philip bound himself by Oath to perform them, left his Blessing to such of his Heirs as preserved, and his Curse to those that violated them. 3. The Cortes being broke up,Philip's publick En∣try into Lisbon. King Philip resolved to make his solemn Entry into Lisbon, but because the City had not yet finished the Works designed for his Recep∣tion, he staid some Days at Almada, a Town on the opposite side of the River. On the 29th. of June he en∣tered the City, attended by all the Nobility, with the greatest Splendor and Majesty imaginable. Thus ended the Calamities of this Kingdom, which had lasted Two Years, during which short time there may be reckoned Five several Reigns; which were that of Sebastian, of Henry, of the Five Governours, of Antony, and now of Philip. For the easier dispatch of Business, the King ordered there should be but Two prime Minister, viz. Antony Pineyro, Bishop of Leyria, and D. Christopher de Moura, the former because he had no Kindred, and the latter because he made no Account of them, for Moura was never known to prefer any of his, tho' he had many. Nunho Alvarez Pereyra was made Secretary, and was equal in Power to them, tho' not in Title. The King had appointed to return to Castile in November, but Prince James dying, he was forced to call a Parliament, to cause his Second So  sworn Heir to the
Crown.1583. The Parliament met the beginning of the New Year,Another Parlia∣ment held. and swore the Prince; and among other things the King granted leave for wearing of Silks. Mary the Empress, Sister to King Philip, and her Daugh∣ter Margaret, came to meet the King at Lisbon. The Portuguese expected the former would have been left to govern them;Philip re∣turns to Castile. but the King made choise of her Son the Cardinal Albertus, Archduke of Austria. On the 11th. of February the King set forward for Castile, carrying with him the Lady Juliana de Lancastro, Heiress of the Noble House of Aveiro. 4. All Men began to observe how the Cardinal Alber∣tus was qualified,Cardinal Albertus, Governour of Portu∣gal. and they found his Inclinations were good. Only two things remarkable happened during the time of his Government. One was the English In∣vasion, under Antony the Grand Prior, before spoken of. The other the counterfeit Sanctity of a Nun.The Hipo∣crisie of a Nun. She pre∣tended to live without eating, and indeed had no other Sustenance, but what she got out of artificial Candles she pretended to burn in her Oratory. She also imprinted on her Body the Five Wounds of our Saviour, so artifici∣ally, that the cheat was scarce to be discerned, even after she was discovered. During the short time this Hypo∣critical Scene was acted, she wrought some Miracles. Being at last examined, she was punished, and from thenceforth led so Godly a Life, as almost purchased her the Opinion of Sanctity, she before endeavoured to gain by Hypocrisie. The King tho' he left the Cardinal in Por∣tugal, governed the Kingdom himself with the assistance of his Portuguese Council, composed of very worthy Persons, in the choice of which he never erred. The conceit some People entertained that King Sebastian was yet living,15 gave Occasion to some Persons to take upon them his Name and Character. Sebastian. The Son of a Tiler, born at Alcobaza, who had been Apprentice to a small Turner of Heads, in Lisbon, and expelled the Order of Carmelites in his Noviceship, went away and lived like a Hermit, on the Borders of the Kingdom, near A∣querque. After some time the People censuring his course of Life, he left it, and putting on good Apparel, he travelled about that Country well mounted. Some presently gave out he was King Sebastian, which he at first denied, but finding them positive, at last complied with their Humour, and suffered two of his Followers to call themselves, the one Christopher  and
the other the Bishop of Guarda, both which had been slain with the King in Africk. Some few days they lived well among their Adherents, and gathered Money, but being apprehended by Order of the Arch-Duke Albertus, the Counterfeit Sebastian, after having been shewed at Lisbon, was sent to the Galleys, and his Companion, the pretended Bishop, hanged. 5. Scarce was the last Impostor punished, when ano∣ther started up in his place. This was one Gonzalo Al∣varez, the Son of a Mason, who, like the other, became an Eremite, and did much seeming Penance, lashing himself, and then crying out, where he might be heard, O unhappy Sebastian, all thy Penance is but little, in re∣spect of thy Crimes. A Rich Farmer, called Peter Alfonso, joyned with him, and concealed him, giving out Orders in his Name. At length he gathered 800 Men, calling himself Earl of Torresnovas, Lord of Cascais, and Go∣vernour of Lisbon. None saw the pretended King but the Daughter of the false Earl, she being designed Queen, and also the Wife of Antony Simoens, a Rich Man. Whensoever this Pageant King was forced to ap∣pear abroad, he wore a great pair of Spectacles, which covered most part of his Face. He sent a Son of Simoens to the Governour Albertus, to Order him to quit the Palace, for that he was coming to undeceive the People. This Messenger being taken, and then let go, increased the Opinion of the People, that it was King Sebastian, because Antony Simoens having known him, would not otherwise have suffered his Son to go on that Message. The Judge of Torresvedras was ordered to Apprehend them, but he attempting it, was, together with his Clerk, cast headlong from a High Place, and killed: Gasper Pereira, for reproving them, was also murdered, with his Son and Nephew, and his House plundered. Antony Fonseca, an Alcalde de Corte, went next with 400 Spa∣niards,The false Sebastian executed. commanded by Captain Calderon, who, after killing a few of the Mutiniers, took the Upstart King. At Lisbon he was hanged and quartered, as was the false Earl, Peter Alfonso, with others. Some were sent to the Galleys, and the Towns of Ericeyra, Carbonero, and Mafra were left almost desolate, the Inhabitants flying for fear of Punishment. Yet after all this, many thought King Sebastian must come out from the Desart, and there was scarce any that lived an Eremitical Life in Portugal, who was not imagined to be that King.
6. Elizabeth,Queen Eli∣zabeth's Provoca∣tions, and King Phi∣lip's Design against her Queen of England, not regarding that she owed her Life to King Philip, joyned with the Re∣bels of Holland against him. She sent over to then As∣sistance Robert, Earl of Leicester, with 3000 Men. Sir Francis Drake also sailed from Plymouth in August, and Landing at Bayona, was beaten off thence. Next, he fell upon the Islands of Caboverde, where he took a con∣siderable Booty, and all the Cannon of the Fortifica∣tions along the Sea-coast. Thence he sailed to Sancto Domingo in the West-Indies,1586. which City he ok and plundered. The same he did at Cartagena, and then passed over to Florida. About the beginning of this Year King Philip set out the Proclamation for regula∣ting the Stile to be used in Letters, which till then caused much Confusion, every one aspiring to greater Titles than belonged to them. King Philip, provoked by the many Wrongs done him by Queen Elizabeth, resolved upon the Conquest of England, and to that purpose gathered a Mighty Fleet in the vast Port of Lisbon. It contained 130 Sail, most of them very large, under the Command of D. Alonso Perez de Guzman, Duke of Medina Sidonia, and Generalissimo. The Land Forces amounted to 20000,1588. the Mariners above 11000. They sailed from Lisbon the 27th. of May, and after being dispersed by a Terrible Storm, met again at Corna. Sailing thence, the greatest part of this Mighty Fleet was destroyed, either by the English, or by violent Storms, which drove it round Scotland and Ireland, so that the Duke of Medina Sidonia with a very few re∣turned to Santander. In Revenge of this Attempt, Queen Elizabeth sent the Fleet, we before spoke of in the Life of Antony the Grand Prior, to Invade Portugal. The Disappointment she met there, made her think of Intercepting our India Fleet. To this purpose she fitted out 50 Sail,1591. commanded by the Earl of Essex, who sailed directly to the Islands Azores. King Phil sent out his Fleet, under the Command of D. Alonso Bazan, against him. Near the Island Flores the two Fleets en∣gaged, with so much Advantage on the part of the Spaniards, that they took the English Vice-Admiral, yet presently after, some of the Spanish Fleet perished in a Storm. However, the English took the Flag-Ship of three that came from India in the Year 1593.1593. tho D. Alonso Bazan sailed from Lisbon to prevent them. He
found seven English Ships in the Island Flores waiting for the other two that came from India, and he took them. 7. The Arch-Duke,1594. Cardinal Albertus, being called away to Madrid,Portugal governed by Com∣missioners. to receive the Archbishoprick of Toledo, the Government of Portugal was committed to D. Mi∣chael de Castro, Archbishop of Lisbon, the Counts D. John de Sylva of Portalegre, D. Francis Mascarenhas of Sancta Cruz, D. Duarte de Castelobranco of Sabugal, and Mi∣chael de Moura, Secretary. The English Fleet again appeared before the Tercera Islands, hoping to meet with the Ships from India. The Earl of Essex was Ad∣miral, he destroyed Fayal and Pico, then Landing upon S. Michael, plundered Villafranca. Lastly, one of the India Ships falling into his Fleet, he thought to have carryed it off, but was disappointed by her being fired. This done, he sailed from the Islands. Prince Charles, Son to King Philip, was naturally of a turbulent Spirit, and is said to have held Correspondence with his Father's Enemies, and to have practised against him. Hereupon he was cast into Prison, and Judges appointed to inspect into the Cause, who passed Sentence of Death against him. His Father allowed him no other Favour, than to choose what Death he would die; and he said, they might kill him as they pleased. Being prepared for it, four Slaves strangled him with a Silken Rope. D. John of Austria, tho' a Bastard, was no less haughty, and aspired first, to the Kingdom of Tunis, then, to that of England; but the King lowered all his haughty thoughts, and he is believed to have died a violent Death. King Philip having been some time sick, at last was confined to his Bed, as well by reason of Weakness, as that the Gout was broke out in Sores upon his Hand, Foot, and Knee. Fifty three days he lay in such condition, that his Bed could not be made, and on the last of them he died. His Patience in his Sufferings was wonderful, for he pityed those that attended him more than he did himself. Having performed all Offices of a good Chri∣stian, he gave up the Ghost the 13th. day of September, being Sunday,1599. at Five in the Morning, in the Year 1599, in the Famous Monastery of the Escurial,King Phi∣lip dies. the 71st. Year of his Age, the 18th. of his Reign over Portugal, and 41st. over the rest of Spain. He was the first King, since the Goths, that possessed all this Monarchy entire.
8. King Philip was of a middle Stature,His De∣scription. an awful Presence, had a high Forehead, blue and beautiful Eyes, a handsom Nose, thick Lips, the lower somewhat fallen, as is usual to the House of Austria, fair Hair; and ta∣ken altogether, his Person was Majestick. He wanted the Sense of Smelling, or at least had very little of it. He had four Wives; First, Mary, Daughter to King John the Third of Portugal.His Wives and Issue. Secondly, Mary, Queen of England, Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by whom he had no Issue. Thirdly, Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Second, King of France. Fourthly, Ann, Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian. By the first he had Charles, whom he put to Death, as has been said. By the third, Elizabeth Clare Eugenia, Countess of Flanders, Wife to the Arch-Duke Albertus. Also Katherine, Wife to Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy. By the fourth, first, Ferdinand; secondly, Charles Lawrence; thirdly, James, all three died young; fourthly, Philip, who succeeded his Father; fifthly, Mary, who died an Infant. CHAP. V. The Reign of Philip the Third of Spain, and Second of Portugal, and Nineteenth King, from the Year 1578. till 1621. 1. SIngular was the Wisdom of the late King, and consequently the loss of him was extraordinarily lamented by all his People. Their Sorrow was much mitigated by the great hopes conceived that his Successor, Philip, would prove no less capable to wield the Sceptre than his Father had been.Birth of Philip the Third. This Prince (being the Seventh Child of his Father, and Fourth of his Mother Queen Ann) was Born in the renowned Town of Ma∣drid,1578. on the 14th. of April, 1578. and was the Second of the Name in Portugal, and Third in Spain. He was sworn Heir of Portugal on the first of February, 1583.158. and afterwards of his other Kingdoms,1598. this being the first of them that took an Oath to him. The many Embassages he received with singular Grandeur, the Fleets he set out, the great Supplies he sent to Pope Paul the
Fifth, and the Emperor Ferdinand, and many other par∣ticulars of his Reign, as appertaining more properly to the History of Spain, where he resided, are purposely omitted here, because we design only to adhere to what particularly belongs to Portugal. His Resolution was won∣derful in banishing the Moriscoes,The Mo∣riscoes banished Spain. or those that were de∣scended of the Race of the Moors, who pretending to become Christians, committed many Villanies and Sacri∣ledges, at the same time underhand holding Correspon∣dence in Africk and Turky, in order to bring over the Moors into Spain again. Charles the Fifth, Ferdinand and Philip the Second, had all of them entertained thoughts of putting this same Design in execution, but the many Inconveniences that attended it, still deterred them. 400000 of these base People were dispersed throughout the Kingdom, who all upon the King's Edict departed the Kingdom, having liberty to carry away with them all they were worth. Upon the Birth-day of this King, a Preacher Prophetically foretold the Banishment of the Moriscoes, threatning them with the New-born Prince. 2. Often did this King promise to Visit his Realm of Portugal in Person, but still failed, being put by his Re∣solution by his Favourites, who for their private Ends disswaded this Journey, not regarding how much a King loss the Affections of his People, who never suffers him∣self to be seen by them.1619. At length, when least expected, he suddenly set out in April, 1619. bringing with him Prince Philip,Philip the Third comes into Por∣tugal. and the Princesses Elizabeth and Mary, and (as his Father had done) he made his Publick Entry in∣to Lisbon on S. Peter's Day. His Reception was the greatest that ever till then had been heard of; for the Portuguese, ravished with Affection and Joy to see their Prince among them, erected such Fabricks on the Land, and made such mighty Works on the River, as seemed to fill, up both those Elements of Land and Water, and scarce left room for the admiring Multitude to behold him that all those Expences were made for.His Recep∣tion. It is impossible to describe the particulars of this most Glorious Entry. The River Ta∣gus was covered with an innumerable multitude of Ves∣sels, built in the shape of several Fishes and Sea-Monsters. The King was brought in a Galley (attended by many others) built with such admirable Workmanship, that the like was never before seen, and it obliterated the Memory of the Famous one made by Ptolomy, King of
Egypt, which at that time was the Wonder of the World. Whilst this multitude of Vessels rowed down the River, the thundring of the Cannon from the Vessels themselves, and from the Castle, shook the Earth, and rent the Air. Being come on shoar, the King proceeded to the Cathe∣dral, and thence to the Palace, entertaining his Lyes with such prodigious Sights of Gold and Silver, that the time falling short to view all, he returned the next day to be∣hold the lofty Fabricks, which expressed the greatness of their Affection who received him. Such was the Magni∣ficence of the Piles erected, such the Cost bestowed on them, and such the solid Strength of them, that they seemed as if designed for many Ages, not for the use of one only day, which was too short a space even to de∣molish them. 3. The Majesty of these Works was so amazing, that the King, tho' used to Regal Entertainments, said. He never till that day thought himself a great King. Hereby seeming to call Lisbon, Felicitas Philippica, as once Julius Caesar gave it the Name of Felicitas Julia. In the Palace he performed the two Solemn Acts of Swearing the Prince and holding the Cortes or Parliament,He holds Parlia∣ment. which met with extraordinary Joy and Satisfaction of all Men, but  the end disappointed them of their hopes. First, for that the King was scarce seen by his Subjects, and next, for the unsatisfactory Answer he gave to their Demands. The Reason of it was, that his coming to the Kingdom, and calling the Parliament, were Actions proceeding from his own Inclination; but the disobliging of them, was wholly the product of the ill Advice of his Ministers. His Fa∣vourites fearing he should take an Affection to the Por∣tuguese, and perhaps continue among them, were uneasie at the Splendor of his Entertainment, and so much In∣fluence had they over him, that he gave more Credit to their Words, than to those marks of Respect and Loyalty he saw with his Eyes. This is the greatest Misfortune can befal a Prince, to be so led away and infatuated by the Flatteries of Favourites, who only attend their private Interest, as to forfeit the Affections of their People. This is the height of Tyranny in Ministers, to covet all for themselves, and allow nothing to others. 4. Seven Months the King spent in his Journey to Por∣tugal,His stay and return to Madrid. staying there, and returning home. Being come to Madrid, he departed this Life the last day of March, in
the Year of Grace 1621. the 43d.1621. Year of his Age, and 23d. of his Reign.His Death. His Body lies buried with his Prede∣cessors in the Royal Monastery of St. Lawrence, com∣monly called the Escurial. His Picture, drawn as he appeared at the Cortes or Parliament held at Lisbon, in his Robes, with the Collar of the Golden Fleece, and the Steptre in his Hand, represents him of a pleasing Aspect, yet full of Majesty. Of Stature, he was rather little, but proportionable; his Forehead high, his Eyes blue, his Lips thick, his Complexion fair, with a fresh Colour, his Hair yellow, his whole Countenance beautiful, and represent∣ing much Grandeur. He was a most Holy Prince, and at his Death seemed to have only one thing to lament, which was, that he fulfilled what his Father had Pro∣phetically foretold, viz. That he suffered his Favourites to have so much the Ascendant over him. Had he given less Ear to his Ministers (who always mind their own Advantage, tho' with the loss of their Master's) and been more absolute in taking his own measure, he had proved one of the greatest and most successful Princes in the World. For he was so Fortunate, that notwithstanding all the Miscarriages of those that governed him, he still came off with Honour and Reputation, adding new Conquests to his Dominions, both in India and Africk. 5. His only Wife was Margaret of Austria,His Wife and Issue. Daughter to the Arch-Duke Charles and his Dutchess Mary. She was one of the most Renowned Queens this Kingdom ever had, and it enjoyed many that deserve Immortal Fame. After her Death, the King in Continency imitated his Predecessor Alonso the Fifth, for he never would Marry again; and it is generally believed he never had to do with any Woman but his Queen. His Issue was, First, Ann Mary Mauricia, Wife to King Lewis XIII. of France, her Dowry 500000 Crowns in Gold. Secondly, Philip; who succeeded him. Thirdly, Mary, born at Valladolid the 18th. of August, 1606. afterwards Queen of Hun∣gary. Fourthly, Charles, born at Madrid the 14th. of September, 1607. Fifthly, Ferdinand, born at the Escu∣rial May the 17th. 1609. he was a Cardinal, Archbishop of Toledo, Prior of Crato, and Abbot of Alcobaça. Sixthly, Margaret, born at Lerma in May 1610. and died the 11th. of March 1617. Seventhly, Alonso, born at the Escurial September the 22d. 1611. and died the fol∣lowing Year. His Mother also died in Childbed of him,
leaving her Subjects in unspeakable sorrow and want of her. 6. In this King's Time the Plague raging in the City of Lisbon,Prodigies. was observed to cease immediately after the Image of the glorious Martyr S. Sebastian had been seen to sweat plentifully. A Year before the King's Journey to Lisbon, two Comets of a wonderful Magni∣tude appeared in the Signs of Virgo and Libra, one of them so prodigiously great, it renewed the Memory of that which appeared at the Birth of Mithridates, that extended over one quarter of the Heaven. After them ensued the Death of Popes and Kings, the overturning of States, and the fall of Great Ministers, whose Ruin is by nothing more evidently foretold than by the unlaw∣ful means they use to rise, and yet none takes warning by him that went before, to avoid the Precipice. At the City Baçaim in India there happened such a violent Storm, as carryed away Churches, Houses, Trees, and Mountains. Several Apparitions were seen in the Air, re∣presenting Men, Fires, and Battles. The Holy Man, F. Bartholomew, of the Martyrs, Archbishop of Braga, was beatified; his Body is in the Town of Viana. Margaret de Chaves now flourished in Sanctity, and made a mi∣raculous end. CHAP. VI. The Reign of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal, and the Twentieth King, from the Year of our Lord 1605, till 1628. 1. KIng Philip the Third of Spain,Birth of Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal. and Second of Por∣tugal, being at Valladolid with his Wife Queen Margaret, their Son Philip the Fourth of Spain, and Third of Portugal, was born upon Good-Friday, which fell then upon the 8th. day of April, in the Year 1605. His Birth was celebrated with the greatest Demonstrations of Joy, and most of Expence,1625. that had ever till then been seen. His Father dying, he retired to the Royal Monastery of S. Hierome,1621. whence a few days after he returned to take Possession of his Crowns left him by his Ancestors, his Magnificent Entry dispelling the Clouds of Sorrow that
hung over the Heads of the Subjects, and filling their Hearts with Joy. He entred upon the Government, gi∣ving ample Testimonies of a more pregnant Judgment than could have been expected at those tender Years,His Acces∣sion to the Crown. for he reformed the Councils, established wholsom Laws, pu∣nished evil Ministers, and ordered that all those who were in Office, should give in true Estimates of what they were worth, that it might afterwards appear how their Estates were advanced in his Service.K. Charles the First of England, then Prince of Wales, in Spain. On the 16th. of May, Charles, Prince of Wales, afterwards King of Eng∣land, came incognito by the Post to Madrid, and went to Lodge at the English Embassador's House, and by him made known the design of his coming. The Catholick King made a Publick Entry with him from the Escurial with that Solemnity that is only used at the Reception of the Spanish Kings, giving him the Right Hand under the Canopy, and attended by all his Court, every Man th day vying to out do the rest in Splendor, and in te∣stifying his Joy. Afterwards, several Sports were made, to Entertain the Prince, the King himself, at the Riding used with Canes instead of Spears, signalized his Dexte∣rity. The Match betwixt the Prince and Princess Mary being proposed, learned Men were consulted, and agreed upon the Conclusion, but not the Formalities. It was hoped it would have succeeded, but Providence had or∣dered otherwise. 2. The Arms of Spain were at this time employed in several Parts,The Dutch in Brasil. in all which many Portuguese served with singular Reputation. The Rebel Hollanders having In∣telligence of the evil Posture of Affairs in Brasil, resolved to attempt the Conquest of that Country, and to that effect, moved several of the Northern Princes, grown envious of the Power of Spain, to assist them in the En∣terprize. They fitted out a Fleet in Holland and Zealand, it consisting of 35 Sail, under the Command of Admiral John Vandort, and carryed 3000 chosen Men, a good Train of Artillery, with all other Necessaries. The Design was kept very private. In December the Fleet set Sail, and having passed the Line in 6 Degrees of South Latitude, according to the Orders given, the Admiral opened his Instructions, and found he was commanded to invade Baya de Todos Santos, or the Bay of All-Saints. This Bay is thought to be the greatest in the World, and is the sort to the City S. Salvador, seated on a rising Ground
along that Mountainous Shoar, extending out in length from North to South. It has a Cathedral Church, and had once a Court of Chancery, which has been taken away with good cause; for the greatest Injustice that can be in a State is to be pestered with too many Officers of Justice. This City is the Metropolis of all that vast Province of Brasil in America, and on the East side of that Continent, stretching forth 1200 Leagues along the Coast, being a Delightful, Rich, and Pleasant Soil. 3. The Fleet entred this Bay, and began to batter the Suburb next the Sea,The Dutch Land, and take the Capital City of all Brasil, cal∣led Baia. where was begun a Fort in the Wa∣ter, in which Antony de Mendoza, Son to the Governour James de Mendoza, commanded, but was forced to aban∣don it, because in no condition then to withstand the fury of the Enemy's Cannon. In the mean while 1000 Mus∣queteers landed, and advanced towards the City without any Opposition. They halted in the Suburb of S. Benedict. Night came on, and all the Inhabitants fled out of the City, which the Enemy took Possession of in the Morn∣ing. The Governour staid  his House, and was thence carried away aboard the Admiral. All the People had for∣saken their Houses, leaving an inestimable Booty to the Rebels, who polluted the Churches, and committed all manner of Sacrilegious Outrages. D. Mark Teyxeira the Bishop with his Clergy had offered to withstand the Enemy, but none adhering to him, he retired to a Vil∣lage. Mathias de Albuquerque, who was next in Com∣mand to the Governour, then a Prisoner, was 100 Leagues off at Pernambuco. He sent an Account of what had hap∣pened into Portugal, where the Advice arrived in July. The King writ to the Governours of Portugal a Letter with his own Hand, in which he expressed how much he valued the Portuguese Loyalty, and what returns he ex∣pected from them upon such an Exigency.A Fleet sent against the Dutch. The Portu∣guese, to answer their King's Expectation, speedily resor∣ted from all Parts of the Kingdom to Lisbon, and in the space of three Months fitted out a Fleet of 26 Sail, in which was most of the Gentry of the Kingdom, all at their own Cost, without putting the King to any charge. D. Emanuel de Moura Corte Real, Marquess of Castel Ro∣drigo, gave the Example to others, raising a sightly Com∣pany of Musquetiers, which he sent upon this Expedition at his own Expence. This stirred up others to do the like, for among the Portuguese Emulation is more prevalent
than Vertue. D. Alonso de Noronha, tho' old, that had been Governour of India, listed himself, and many Gentlemen of Quality followed his Example. I shall not name them, because among the Portuguese every one had rather his Name should be omitted, than that his Neighbours should be inserted with him. 4. The Portuguese not being a sufficient Power to re∣cover Brasil, a Spanish Fleet was at the same time fitting out, but not so soon ready, for the former stay'd a Month for the other in the Port of Lisbon; and sailing thence in November, expected it at the Island of Santiago the chief of those of Cabo Verde till February, which delay proved not a little advantageous to the Enemy. The Portuguese Squadron consisted of 26 Ships,1625. and in them 4000 Men; in the Spanish were more Ships, and 8000 Men; the for∣mer commanded by D. Emanuel de Meneses, the latter by D. Frederick de Toledo Ossorio, Marquess of Valdueza. Whilst these Squadrons, now united, make their Voyage, let us see what was doing at Baia. The Hollanders, pos∣sess'd of the City,Other Actions of the Dutch after ta∣king Baia. took several Vessels, which knowing nothing of what had happened, fell ignorantly into that Port. They sent five Ships laden with Booty to their Country, with the News of their Success, and with the Governour, and Provincial of the Jesuits, that had been taken Prisoners. After the taking of the City, D. Mark Teixeira the Bishop took upon him the Command of General, for the Defence of the Country, and drew near to the Place with 1500 Men, the third part of them Blacks. Several Encounters happened betwixt his Men and the Enemies, in which he lost 7 or 8 Men, and the Rebels above 300. In one of these Skirmishes Capt. Francis de Padill killed Col. John Dort, and cut off his Finger, on which he wore a Ring, the Soldiers stripping his Body, cut off his Privities to shew them to his Men. These Barbarities were a greater shame to them that acted, than to him that suffered them. Two runagate Portuguese re∣penting, and deserting back from the Enemy, were re∣ceived by our Men upon the points of their Swords; and cut in pieces. The Port of Tapagipe was recovered from the Rebels, and the Commander of it sent Prisoner to Lisbon. The Bishop fell sick, and died, and Francis Nunez Marinho succeeded him in the Command, who behaved himself will till D. Francis de Moura was sent thither by the King with some Supplies, till the Fleet
could come. He pent up the Enemy within the Town, recovering from them the Suburbs of the Carmelites and S. Benedict, but the City was strong, and in the Port were 26 Ships well manned. Their whole Force con∣sisted of 3000 Men of several Nations, and 500 Blacks. 5. The Spanish and Portuguese Fleet arrived at Baia upon Good-Friday,1626. to the great Terror of the Rebels. 4000 Men landed immediately.The Spa∣nish and Portu∣guese Fleets ar∣rive at Brasil. The General, D. Emanuel de Meneses, and the Admiral, D. John Faxardo, remained aboard, drawing up their Fleet like a Half Moon, to hin∣der the flight of the Enemy, Peter Roiz de San Estevan, Marquess of Cropani, marched with the 4000 Men to the City, D. Frederick de Toledo, the Spanish General, follow∣ing him. They took their Posts, and began to carry on their Works, when about 300 of the besieged sallying, killed 50 of our Men, most of them Persons of Note, yet they were forced to retire. The Cannon being planted, the Bullets flew so thick, that in a few days all was full of Ruins, and the besieged began to be dismay'd. The same Fate attended their Fleet, for D. Emanuel de Meneses landing, from a Battery he raised on the Shoar, sunk se∣veral of their hips, destroying many Men. The Enemy's only hope was in the Succours they expected, but they came only to be Spectators of their shameful quitting the Town. Their Soldiers began to complain they had been decoyed thither, and were weary of the Service, their Commander in Chief proclaimed, that all such as would go over to the Portuguese Camp, should have leave, but two that declared for it, were hanged. This silenced them for a while, but soon after they proposed the surrendring the City, and the Governour opposing them, was not only affronted, but wounded. To prevent their deserting him, he designed to burn the Fleet, but before he could put it in execution, they surrender'd, Articling only for their Lives.Baia reca∣vered. In the Town was found an extraordinary Rich Booty, which the Spanish Soldiers made the most of. The Merchandize found there was valued at above Three Millions, in Money 300000 Ducats, 2000 Quintals of Powder, each Quintal is an Hundred Weight, an infinite quantity of Ball, 230 Pieces of Cannon, 3000 Musquets, 800 Corslets, the same number of Saddles, 600 Blacks, 6000 Bushels of Meal, 50000 Hides, and 2000 Pipes of Wine. The two Squadrons returning home, suffered by Storms, some perished, the rest arrived in their Ports.
6. King Philip most generously rewarded the Portu∣guese,King Phi∣lip Re∣wards the Portu∣guese. who so signalized their Zeal upon this occasion, for his Council Advising, that he should grant to the Sons of those that were killed in his Service, all that they possessed belonging to the Crown, he not only consented to it, but afterwards, without being asked, he added more with his own Hand; That forasmuch as he was desirous such Sub∣jects might live, he not only allowed that Favour to those that were killed, but to all that went in the Fleet. This same Year a Fleet of above 100 Sail of English assaulted the Island of Cadiz,Cadiz as∣saulted by the Eng∣lish. whither many Portuguese Gentle∣men, after providing for the Security of their own Coasts, resorted, to express their Zeal for the King's Service. Af∣ter some time, the Enemy was repulsed with loss, and retired, leaving many of their Men dead behind them. Before this Invasion of the English, the Famous Bell of Villilla in the Kingdom of Aragon, is said to have rung out of it self.Two great Losses to Portugal. Portugal sustained two inestimable Losses, the one before the Passages we have spoke of happened, the other after. The first was the taking the City Ormuz by the Persians, with the assistance of the English. The other, the Destruction of its Fleet, which being set out to Convoy the Ships from India, was wrecked on the Coast of France, where all the Ships, and most of the Men, among whom were many of Note, perished. Since the loss of King Sebastian in Africk, this King∣dom had not so great a Misfortune. 7. Here our Author,The Con∣clusion. Emanuel de Faria, puts an end to his History. He composed the whole at Madrid, and being there at the time of the Revolution, durst not pro∣ceed any further, because as a Portuguese, he would not write any thing that should derogate from the Honour of his Country; and as being in the hands of the Spa∣niards, it was dangerous to say any thing that might be offensive to them. He only adds an Account of the Chil∣dren King Philip had till that time, and some short Re∣marks upon the Publick Affairs of the World, which make nothing to this History. Let us therefore put an end to this Part of the History, and proceed to the Sup∣plement, wherein will be found all that was worth our Knowledge, from the Time where he leaves off, to our Days. The End of Emanuel de Faria y Sousa his History of PORTUGAL.
The Supplement to Emanuel de Faria e Sousa his Hi∣story of Portugal, from the Year 1640, where he left off, till this present time, collected from the best Authors that have written thereof, and from Authen∣tick Information of Eye-Witnesses. Anno 1640. 1. THE Spaniards had now been near 60 Years possessed of the Kingdom of Portugal.1640. Phi∣lip the Second of Spain,The Con∣dition of Portugal. after the Death of Henry the Cardinal-King, had carryed it against the House of Bragança by force of Arms, tho' with no good Title, and that Kingdom was insensibly become a Pro∣vince of Spain, without any appearance that the Portu∣guese could ever be able to withdraw themselves from that Foreign Subjection. The Nobility of the Kingdom durst not appear in that Splendor which became their Quality, or claim all the Priviledges due to their Birth, for fear of raising a Jealousie in the Spanish Ministers, at a time when Riches, Birth, or Meritwere thought suffi∣cient to render a Man suspicious, and cause him to be per∣secuted. The Gentry were in a manner banished to their Country Houses, and the Commonalty groaned under the heavy Burthen of the Taxes. The Count Duke de Olivares, Prime Minister of State to Philip the Fourth of Spain, thought a new Conquest could never be too much weakned. He knew that the Natural Antipathy which was betwixt the two Nations could not but render the Sovereignty of the Spaniards odious to the Portuguese. That it must be ever offensive to them to see all Places of Trust filled by Strangers, or else by Men of no Ex∣traction, who were wholly devoted to the Interest of Spain. Therefore he thought to secure his Masters Au∣thority by keeping the Nobility out of Employ, the Gentry remote from Business, and the Commonalty so poor, that they could not have the heart to aspire to any change. Besides, he drew out of the Kingdom all the Young Men that were fit to bear Arms, employing them
in Foreign Wars, lest those turbulent Spirits should di∣sturb the Peace of the Government. Yet this proceed∣ing, which might have succeeded, if not pushed on too far, had a far different consequence than was expected, both by reason of the ill Circumstances the Court of Spain then lay under, as also because of the Prime Minister's Character, who was naturally morose and inflexible. No pleasing Methods were now used in raising of Taxes, but they were rather collected as if they had been Con∣tributions gathered in an Enemy's Country. The Por∣tuguese having now nothing more to lose, and as little to hope for, thought of casting off that Subjection, which they always believed unjust, and was now become insup∣port able. 2. Margaret of Savoy,Margaret of Savoy Dutchess of Mantua, Governs Portugal. Dutchess of Mantua, governed Portugal with the Title of Vice-Queen, yet she bore only the Title circumscribed within a limited Power. The whole Intrigue of the Government, and all the Autho∣rity was in the Hands of Michael de Vasconcellos, a Por∣tuguese, who, under the Character of Secretary of State, was the absolute Minister in the Kingdom. He received his Orders immediately from the Count Duke, whose Creature he was, and became most acceptable to him by finding Methods to draw great Sums of Money out of Portugal, and by sowing the Seeds of Sedition among the Nobility, favouring some, and depressing others, which raised implacable Enmity betwixt them. This Discord was the Minister's Security, he believing they could never Plot against the Government, who meditated how to exercise their Revenge upon one another. 3. In all Portugal there was none but the Duke of Bragança who could give the Spaniards any Disturbance.Only the Duke of Braganza could give the Spani∣ards Jea∣lousie. That Prince was of a soft and agreeable Temper, much given to his Ease, his Judgment rather sound than piercing; in Business he aimed at the main Point, and could easily dive into such Matters as he applyed himself to, but loved not application. His Father, Duke Theo∣dosius, who was of a fiery Temper, had laboured to in∣graft in him his Natural Hatred to the Spaniards, that he might regard them as Usurpers of his Right, and had done all that in him was, to inspire into him Ambition and Resolution enough to attempt the Recovery of a Crown which was due to him. D. John had imbibed his Father's Sentiments, but that in such measure as was
most suitable to his Peaceable Temper. He hated the Spaniards, but not so as to seek Revenge with the Ex∣pence of his Quiet. He was ambitious, and did not de∣spair of ascending the Throne of his Ancestors, but was not so impatient as his Father had been. He thought it enough to keep within Prospect of his Hopes, without hazarding an easie Life, and more than Private Fortune in Possession, for a Crown that was very uncertain. Doubtless, had he been the Man Duke Theodosius would have had him, he could never have compassed what he aimed at. His Actions were so narrowly looked into by the Count Duke's Order, that if he had not been so entirely given up to his Ease and Pleasure, he must of necessity have been discovered; and if once discovered, his Repose and Fortune had both been sacrificed. The Court of Spain would never have put such Power into his hands, and suffered him to live in the midst of his Country. Nature made him more Politick than Art could have done. His Birth, Estate, and Right to the Crown, were no Crimes, but his being Formidable, was Crime enough, according to the Laws of true Policy. He was not ignorant of it, and found there was no way to wipe off that Guilt, but by rendring himself less to be feared, and appearing wholly devoted to his Pleasure. Nothing was to be seen at Villaviciosa, the ordinary Re∣sidence of the Dukes of Bragança, but Hunting, Feast∣ing, and such-like Country Divertisements, as if Nature and Fortune had conspired to qualifie him for those Times. In short, such was his course of Life, as gave not the Spaniards the least Umbrage of his aspiring to the Crown, and yet it furnished the Portuguese with assured hopes of a wise and mild Government, if they themselves would attempt to Enthrone him. 4. His Conduct could breed no Suspicion,The People of Evora Mutiny. but an Ac∣cident that happened some time before, in which he had no hand, had begun to raise a Jealousie in the Prime Mi∣nister. The People of Evora, provoked by certain new Taxes, had mutinied, and in the heat of that Fury, amidst their Complaints against the Tyranny of the Spaniard, some Acclamations had been heard for the House of Bragança. Here it first appeared how much Philip the Second erred in leaving within the Kingdom a Family so Powerful, and that had so good a Title to the Crown. Hereupon, the Council of Spain resolved
to secure the Duke of Bragança, or at least, to remove him out of Portugal. Immediately the Government of Milan was offered him, which he refused, pleading want of Health, and Knowledge in the Affairs of Italy. The Prime Minister seemingly approved of his Reasons, but found out another Method to draw him to Court. The King being about to March to the Frontiers of Aragon, to punish the Rebellion of the Catalonians, he wrote to the Duke, exhorting him to be present in that Expedi∣tion at the Head of the Nobility of his Country. The Duke,The Duke of Braganza refuses to go into Ca∣stile. who was upon his Guard against all Artifices of the Court, answered, He was not in a Condition to de∣fray the Expence he must be at in that Expedition, to support the Grandeur of his Family. These repeated Denyals gave the Prime Minister ground to fear the Duke, notwithstanding his Natural Propension to Ease, had still some thoughts of a Crown. Considering there∣fore of what Importance it was to the King his Master, to secure his Person, he omitted nothing that might con∣duce to the compassing his Design. But it being dange∣rous to use Force, because of the great Affection the Por∣tuguese always bore to the House of Bragança, he resol∣ved to bring him to his beck by all imaginable exterior marks of Affection, and of an entire Confidence in him. 5. There was War at that time betwixt France and Spain,The Duke made Ge∣neral. and the French Fleet having appeared on the Coast of Portugal, furnished the Prime Minister with a fair Pretence for carrying on his Designs. It was requisite there should be a General to Command the Forces that were to Guard the Coast. This Commission was sent to the Duke with such an Absolute Power, as seemed to put the whole Kingdom into his hands: Yet this served only the better to hide the Bait. For at the same time, D. Lope de Ossorio, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet, had Orders to put into the nearest Port to the Duke, as if he were drove in by stress of Weather, or on some other Pretence, and having drawn him aboard, as to an Enter∣tainment, to carry him away to Spain. But Fortune ordered it otherwise, for the Spanish Admiral lost several Ships in a Storm, and the rest being dispersed, he could not gain the Coast of Portugal. This no way discouraged the Count Duke, who looked upon the Disappointment as meerly accidental, and therefore he laid his Project another away, writing to D. John in such terms, as
expressed the greatest Confidence, lamenting the loss of the Fleet, which left the Coast open to be insulted by the Enemy, and advising him to visit and strengthen those Places that were most exposed. At the same time he sent him 40000 Ducats to raise new Forces, if requi∣site, and to defray the Charge of his Progress. In the mean while, the Governours of all Strong Holds being for the most part Spaniards, had private Instructions to secure him, if a favourable Opportunity were offered, and send him into Spain. D. John suspecting these extraordinary marks of Kindness, made the Minister fall into the Snare he had laid for him. Tho' he returned Thanks for the Trust reposed in him, and gave special Assurances of Fidelity; yet he made use of this Opportunity to pre∣fer his Friends to such Posts as might be most for his own Interest. He made use of the Money to Purchase new Creatures, and always visited the Forts so well at∣tended, that there was no hopes of seizing his Person. 6. All the Court of Spain,The Duke in his Pro∣gress lays the Foun∣dation of his future Greatness. being ignorant of the De∣sign it was grounded upon, loudly exclaimed against the Prime Minister for putting such Power into the hands of a Person so suspitious;  the King liked the Project the better, because no Body could dive to the bottom of it. Thus the Duke of Bragança, under colour of exe∣cuting his Employment, freely traversed all Portugal, laying at the same time the Foundation of his future Greatness. He had a Magnificent Retinue, which drew the Eyes of the People after him; he heard all Men with extraordinary Courtesie; he curbed the Insolency of the Soldiers, and at the same time commended the Officers, and used all possible mean to oblige them. His Beha∣viour charmed the Nobility, for he received them with obliging marks of Distinction, according to every Man's Merit and Quality. To be short, he bestowed Favours where-ever he came, and yet gained more Friends upon the hopes of what they might promise themselves from him, than what at present they received. So that those who saw him, thought they prayed for their own In∣terest, when they offered up their Vows for his exalta∣tion to the Throne. His Partisans did not neglect at the same time to do all things that might be for the establishing of his Reputation. John Pito Ribeiro, the Comptroller of his Houshold, was the Man that laboured most to reduce to an exact Method the hopes of his
Master's Exaltation, which were yet but in Prospect. This was a vigilant active Man, expert in Business, and passionately zealous for his Master's Promotion, as ho∣ping to have no small hand in the Government, if the Duke ascended the Throne. His Master had owned to him, that he would willingly embrace a fair Opportu∣nity of seizing the Crown, but would not do it like one who had nothing to lose; that therefore he gave him leave to manage that Affair, yet so, as it should never appear that he was any ways concerned. 7. Pinto had long applyed himself to discover what discontented Persons there were at Lisbon,Pinto, the Duke's A∣gent, Con∣spires with some of the Nobility. and to increase their number. He spread Complaints against the pre∣sent Government. He put the Nobility in mind of the Honourable Employments their Families enjoyed under their Natural Princes, and represented their being sum∣moned to the War in Catalonia, as an Honourable Ba∣nishment. Among the Merchants and Shop-keepers he complained of the loss of their Trade, discoursed of the Tyranny they lay under, and extolled the Dutch and Catalonians, who had asserted their Liberties. The Clergy he stirred up, by shewing how the Priviledges of the Church were infringed, and benefices given to Strangers, which ought to be the Reward of Merit and Learning among the Natives. Such as he knew to be Malecontents, he discoursed about his Master's Qualities, to sound their Inclinations. So cunningly did he manage their several Humours, that after having secured many in private, he at last gathered a Number of the Nobility, and among them was the Archbishop of Lisbon. This Prelate was of the Family of the Cunhas, which is one of the best in the Kingdom; a Man of arts, beloved by the Peo∣ple, but hateful to the Spaniards, for whom he had no less aversion, because they had, through the Interest of the Vice-Queen, given the Archbishoprick of Braga to D. Sebastian de Matos de Noronha, and made him Pre∣sident of the Council, called d'O Paço. The rest that made up this Assembly, were D. Michael de Almeida, so great an Enemy to the Spaniards that he could never be perswaded to appear at Court, D. Antony de Almada, and his Son D. Lewis, D. Lewis da Cunha, Nephew to the Arch∣bishop, Melo, the great Master of the Game, D. George his Brother, Peter de Mendoza, D. Roderick de Sa the Great Chamberlain, and many Officers of the Houshold,
whose Employments were become only Titular, since Portugal had lost its Native Kings. To these, the Arch∣bishop, who was naturally a well-spoken Man, made a Speech, representing the state of the Kingdom, since it fell into the hands of the Spaniards, in its most hideous form. He shewed them, how Philip the Second, to se∣cure his Conquest, had put to Death many of the No∣bility, not sparing even the Clergy, having to that effect obtained a Bull from the Pope. How the Spaniards had ever since followed the same Maxims of Government. That no Man's Life or Estate was safe. That the Nobi∣lity was slighted, Benefices given to unworthy Persons, the People consumed with Taxes, the Country lay waste, and Towns desart, the Men being carryed away by force to the War in Catalonia. That the last Orders from Court for Summoning the Arrier-Ban, served only to draw away all the Nobility, that they might end their days in Exile, whilst their Estates were given away to Strangers. In fine, that he would rather wish to die, than survive the utter Ruin of his Country, and hoped so many Worthy Persons were not met there to no pur∣pose. 8. This Discourse renewed the Memory of every man's private Grievances,The Conspi∣rators in∣censed, re∣solve to put their De∣signs in execution. but above all, they resented the Sum∣mons for Catalonia, as designed for their utter Ruin. These Considerations, and the desire of Revenge, made them resolve to take the necessary Measures for shaking off so heavy a Yoke. They blamed themselves for ha∣ving suffered patiently so long, and concluded it was absolutely necessary to expel the Spaniards, but were divided upon what Form of Government to choose. Some were for a Commonwealth, like that of Holland. The others were for a King, but differed about the Per∣son; some proposing the Duke of , others the Marquess of Villarcal, and others the Duke of , all three Princes of the Blood-Royal of Portugal; every Man speaking according to his private Affection, or pro∣spect of Advantage. The Archbishop, who was entirely devoted to the House or Bragança, making use of the Authority of his Character, declared to them, that the choice of a Governour was not Arbitrary, since they could not in Conscience break the Oath of Fidelity they had taken to Spain, unless it were to enthrone the Right∣ful Heir to the Crown, which was the Duke of Bragança.
Besides that, his Power and Interest was such, that with∣out him, they could hope for no Success, tho' he were not, as indeed he was, the first Prince of the Blood. Then he descanted upon the Duke's good Qualities, and so managed the Assembly, that they all resolved to make him their King, and that every Man should use the ut∣most of his Endeavours for carrying on that Design. Thus the Assembly broke up, having first fixed the Time and Place for another Meeting, wherein they should take the necessary Measures to secure a speedy and happy Suc∣cess to their Enterprize. Pinto seeing all well disposed in favour of his Master, writ privately to him, to draw near to Lisbon, as well to encourage the Conspirators by his Presence, as to take Order with them about putting the Design in execution. Upon this Advice, the Duke some days after set forward from Villaviciosa, and came to Almada, a Village opposite to Lisbon, on the other side the River, as if he had fallen in there accidentally in his Progress through the Kingdom. He had so splen∣did an Equipage, and was followed by such a Numerous Train of Persons of Quality and Officers, that he looked more like a King going to take Possession of his Crown, than a General that was visiting the Posts under his Charge.The Duke visits the Vice-Queen Being so near Lisbon, he could not omit paying his Respects to the Vice-Queen. When he entred the Great Court before the Palace, all the Avenues were thronged with People flocking to see him, and all the Nobility came to Conduct him before the Vice-Queen. Such was the Joy throughout the City at the first sight of him, that he seemed either to want only a Herald to Proclaim his King then, or else courage to seize the Crown. But he was too wise, to commit his Fortune to the wild Sallies of the giddy Multitude; and therefore having visited the Vice-Queen, he instantly retired to Almada, without so much as entring the House of Bra∣gança, for fear of heightning the Jealousie of the Spa∣niards, who were already too much alarmed. 9. Pinto having made the Conspirators observe his Master's fearful Cautiousness,The Conspi∣rators De∣puties con∣fer with the Duke at Almada said, they must make their Advantage of his stay at Almada, and use a sort of Vio∣lence to oblige him to accept of the Crown. His Advice being approved of, they gave him in charge to know of his Master, when they might wait upon him with their Proposals; which he did, upon Condition only three of
the Conspirators should come to him. Michael de Al∣meida, Antony de Almada, and Mendoza, were accord∣ingly privately conducted into the Duke's Closet at Al∣mada. Antony de Almada represented to him the mise∣rable state of the Kingdom, the little Security any Man had of his Life or Estate, and that even he himself had no other Refuge to fly to but the Crown. He shewed him the low Condition the Spaniards were reduced to, the Assistance he might expect from Foreign Princes who were Enemies to the House of Austria, and parti∣cularly from France, the Conveniency of the Sea for bringing of Succours; and lastly, the small Number of Spaniards that were left in Portugal, the Garrisons being drained to supply the Army in Catalonia. This Discourse was pleasing enough to the Duke, yet nevertheless keep∣ing himself within the Bounds of his Natural Timidity, he answered so as they might not have cause to despair of him, nor to hope much more than they did before; telling them, He was sensible of the deplorable Condi∣tion of the Kingdom, and of his own Danger; that he commended their Zeal for their Country, and was be∣holding to them for their good Wishes towards him; but that it was not as yet time to think of applying such violent Remedies, which might prove of Fatal Conse∣quence. To this dubious Answer, he added such Caresses and particular Thanks, that they could no longer doubt but that their Proposals were acceptable, and yet they found he would make no advances till the Success of their Enterprize was past all danger. After some private Con∣ference with Pinto, he returned to Villaviciosa, but not with that inward quiet which he used to enjoy as a pri∣vate Man, and therefore immediately communicated the whole Affair to the Dutchess. This Lady was by Birth a Spaniard, and Sister to the Duke of Medina Si∣donia, a Grandee of Spain, and Governour of Andaluzia. She was naturally ambitious, and her Father had endea∣voured to improve that Inclination in her. Besides her Knowledge in other Languages, she was so perfect in her own, and had such an insinuating way, that she drew all mens hearts. All the Customs of Portugal she had made Natural to her self, and had by her extraordinary Application and Carriage gained an absolute Ascendant over her Husband, who never undertook any thing of moment without her Advice, and therefore could not
proceed farther in this Affair without consulting her. To her he revealed the whole Conspiracy, the Parties concerned, their Zeal in carrying it on, and all that had happened to him at Lisbon, and at Almada in the Con∣ference. He told her how much the Nobility were of∣fended at the Expedition against Catalonia. That never∣theless, the greatness of the Danger discouraged him, as did the fear that the Great Ones, out of Envy, would oppose him; that the Power of the King of Spain was formidable, and little Confidence to be reposed in Foreign Princes. These Considerations weighed more with the Duke, than the desire he had of a Crown. But the Dutches, whose Aion was more rooted, presently embraced the hor of a Crown, and used all the Argu∣ments her Rhetorick could furnish her with to perswade him, yet so, as that he should see a greater Number of Conspirators engag, and never openly espouse the Cause, till the moment it should be put in execution. 10. The Court at this time was not free from Care.The Prime Minister of Spain re∣solves to draw the Duke out of Portugal. The extraordinary Joy the People express'd at Lisbon, at the sight of the Duke, alarmed the Prime Minister. He suspected there were Private Cabals held at Lisbon, and certain groundless Reports, which are commonly the fore-runners of great Revolutions, increased his Jealousie. Several Councils were held hereupon, and it was finally resolved to call the Duke of Bragança to Madrid, that so the Portuguese, wanting a Head, might have no hopes left of succeeding in their intended Revolt. On the 20th. of October, 1640. the Count Duke de Olivares sent an Express to the Duke of Bragança,1640. to acquaint him, the King expected him at Court, to be informed by him of the Posture of Affairs in Portugal, assuring him he should receive all marks of Honour that were due to his Birth and Quality. This Positive Command strangly surprized him, as knowing, should he refuse to Obey, the next Orders would be, for carrying him away by force; and thinking he was betrayed, concluded himself fallen into the depth of all Misfortunes.The Duke's Arts in re∣fusing. Nevertheless, that he might gain time, and advertise the Conspirators of his Danger, by the Advice of his Dutchess, he sent a Gentleman to Madrid, to assure the Prime Minister of his Resolution to appear suddenly before the King. This Gentleman had private Instructions to find some coun∣terfeit Excuses for his delay from time to time. Being
come to Madrid, he assured the King that his Master followed him. He hired a great House, bought Rich Furniture, hired Servants, and lay'd out much Money, as if he daily expected his Master. Soon after, he pre∣tended he had received Advice, that his Master was sick; and finding this Fraud would not last long, presented a Memorial to the Prime Minister, desiring that the King would ascertain in what manner his Master should be received at Court. This was done, in hopes that the Grandees opposing him, the Dispute might be held on foot some considerable time. But the Count Duke, to avoid all delays, perswaded the King to decide the Con∣troversie in favour of the Duke of Bragança; so that he could  longer doubt of as Honourable a Reception as he cou himself desire. 11. As soon as the Conspirators understood what Or∣ders the Duke had received from Court, they sent Men∣doza to assure him of their stedfastness, and to perswade him openly to joyn with them. They met a Hunting, and being withdrawn into a Wood, Mendoza made use of the most preing Arguments to engage him to espouse his own Quarrel. The Duke answered, He approved of their Proceedings, and was fully resolved to Head them. Mendoza returning to Lisbon, informed the Conspirators how he had sped, and that the Duke would have Pinto repair to him. He was sent, and with him the whole Scheme of their intended Proceedings. Pinto acquainted his Master, how great a Misunderstanding there was be∣twixt the Vice-Queen and the Secretary Vasconcellos, and withal told him, nothing could have fallen out more advantageously for advancing his Affairs. The Duke, who was fully convinced of the force of his Reasons, found himself more pressed forward by the Gentleman he had sent to Madrid, for he writ, that the Prime Mi∣nister would admit of no longer delays. This made him resolve to lose no time. However, he writ to that Gentleman, that he should acquaint the Count Duke de Olivares, that he would have been at Madrid long since, but for want of Money to support his Dignity, which as soon as it could be raised, he would set out towards the Court. The Duke carryed Pinto to the Dutchess's Apartment, where several Methods were pro∣posed about the Execution of their Design. At length the Duke concluded that Lisbon should be secured, for
that being the Capital City, would shake the whole Kingdom, and that the same day it was done, he would cause himself to be proclaimed King in all the Towns that depended on him. That such of his Friends as were Governours of Towns should do the like where they commanded; and that the People should be made to rise, even in the Villages that were subject to any of the Conspirators; to the end that the Conflagration being general throughout the Kingdom, those few Spaniards that were in it might not know which part to have re∣course to first. That he would march his own Regiment into Elvas, the Governour of which Place was wholly at his Devotion. That as to the securing of Lisbon, he must leave it to them to Act as Opportunity should offer. Nevertheless, his Advice was, that their first rts should be made against the Palace, that having seized the Vice-Queen, and all the Spaniards, they might serve as Ho∣stages to oblige the Citadel to Surrender, which might otherwise incommode the City. He gave Pinto two Let∣ters of Credence, directed to Almeida and Mendoza, only requiring them to give entire Credit to the Bearer, and to be faithful and couragious in putting what they had promised in execution. 12. Being come to Lisbon, Pinto delivered his Credentials to Almeida and Mendoza. Then they sent for Lemos and Correa,The Conspi∣rators con∣trive how to incense the Citi∣zens of Lisbon a∣gainst the Spaniards. two Citizens of the Duke's Faction, who em∣ploying many Workmen, and having gone through all the Offices of the City, were in great Reputation among the People. They had before made it their business to incense the Citizens against the Spaniards, by spreading Reports of new Taxes to be raised, and had designedly discharged many of their Workmen, pretending that the Trade being lost, they had no Business for them; but in truth, that Want might make them the readier to rise; and yet from time to time they relieved them, that they might be entirely at their Devotion. Besides, they held Intelligence with the chief Men of every Quarter, so that they assured the Conspirators, that having but one day's Warning, they could raise the greatest part of the Peo∣ple at an hour appointed. Having made sure of the Tradesmen, Pinto admonished the other Conspirators to be ready upon the first Notice given them, and to secure as many Friends as they could, as it were upon some Private Design, without entrusting them with the Secret.
All things being disposed as they could desire, Almeida, Men∣doza, Almada, Melo, and Pinto met, and fixed Saturday, the first of December, for putting their Enterprize in execution. Advice was immediately sent to the Duke, that he might the same day cause himself to be proclaimed King throughout the Province of Alentejo, which for the most part held of him; and it was agreed, they should have one Meeting more, to fix their ultimate Resolutions. On the 25th. of Novem∣ber they met at Night, as had been agreed, in the Palace of Bragança. They found they could make up near 150 Gen∣tlemen, most of them Chiefs of Families, with all their Ser∣vants, and about 200 Citizens and Tradesmen, who by their Reputation could easily draw the greatest part of the People after them. It was resolved Vasconçellos should fall a Victim to the Resentments of Portugal. Some there were who pro∣posed that the Archbishop of Braga should undergo the same Fate, as being a great Friend to the Spaniards, and For∣midable for his great Parts. But D. Michael de Almeida op∣posed it, representing how odious the Murder of a Person of such Dignity would render them to the whole World, and that it would draw the Indignation of all the Clergy upon the Duke of Bragança. Nothing remained now but to order the manner of their Rendevouz, and giving the Attack. It was agreed, that they should divide themselves into four Bodies, which at one and the same time should rush into the Palace, that having possessed all the Avenues, the Spaniards might be kept asunder, and so disabled from relieving one another. That D. Michael de Almeida should Attack the German Guard at the Palace Gate. Melo, the Great Master of the Game, his Brother, and D. Stephen da Cunha, at the Head of the Citi∣zens, were to Attack a Company of Spaniards that mounted daily at a Place, called The Fort. Tello de Meneses, Emanuel de Saa, the Great Chamberlain, and Pinto, were to secure the Apartment of Vasconcellos, and to make him away imme∣diately. D. Antony de Almada, Mendoza, D. Charles de No∣ronha, and Antony de Saldanha had it in Charge to seize the Vice-Queen, and all the Spaniards that were in the Palace, to be kept as Hostages, in case of need. That whilst they were busie in making themselves Masters of their several Posts, some Horsemen should be detached to Proclaim John, Duke of Bragança, King of Portugal, about the City. That having gathered the Multitude into the Streets, they might make use of them as there should be occasion. The As∣sembly broke up, having agreed to meet on Saturday the first of December, some at Almeida's House, and others at those of Almada and Mendoza, where the Conspirators were to Arm themselves.
13. Whilst the Duke of Bragança and his Friends thus pursued their Ends, the Prime Minister, alarmed at his De∣lays, sent away an Express to him, with positive Orders for him to come away instantly; and that he might have no Excuse, sent him a Bill upon the Treasury for 10000 Du∣cats. This Command admitted of no Demurs, and there∣fore in the presence of the Gentleman that brought the Ex∣press, he gave Orders for his Family to set forwards towards Madrid, and dispatched a Gentleman to the Vice-Queen, to acquaint her with his Departure. He writ to the Prime Minister, assuring him, he would be at Court within Eight Days,The Duke presses the Execution of the Con∣spiracy. and at the same time acquainted the Conspirators with what had happened, shewing them the absolute necessity there was of executing their Designs on the day appointed. Nor were the Conspirators backward; but some odd Acci∣dents had like to have put off the Execution, if not broke all their Measures. Almada revealed the whole Design to a Man of Quality, that used always to rail violently against the Spa∣niards, but finding him timorous, with his drawn Sword made him swear Fidelity. Nevertheless, suspecting the Man, he kept his Eye upon him, and acquainting his Associates with his Jealousie, they resolved to delay their Enterprize; yet the next day perceiving all was quiet, they were ashamed to have been so easily terrified, and persisted in their first Re∣solution. Another thing fell out, which cast a great Damp on them; for on the Eve of the Day appointed to rise, Vas∣concellos the Secretary was seen to cross the River, which they imagined he did upon some Intimation of the Design, and that he went to bring over some Forces from the other side; but he returning at Night, having only been at an Entertainment, all was calm again. It was late before the Conspirators parted. George de Melo, who lodged at a Kins∣man's House out of the Town, thought he would take it ill, that he had not been acquainted with the Design, and therefore at his return home, gave him a full Account of the whole Matter. The other, tho' surprized, seemed to rejoyce at it, and thanked Melo for reposing such Confidence in him. They parted, and Melo being in his Chamber, began to blame himself for his rashness, in trusting a Man he was not well assured of. Walking in his Room full of these troubled Thoughts, he heard some noise, and looking cut of his Win∣dow, could perceive his Kinsman ready to take Horse. He ran down in a rage with his Sword in his hand, and by force made him return to his Chamber, then taking the Keys of the House, secured him till the next day, at which time the other complyed, and resolved to joyn with the rest of the Con∣spirators. 14. At length the Day came which was to decide whether
the Duke of Bragança should deserve the Title of King,The Conspi∣rators meet and execute their De∣sign. and Deliverer of his Country, or be called Rebel, and Enemy to the State. The Conspirators met early at the Houses of Al∣meida and the other great Men, where they were to Arm themselves. In all their Countenances appeared such Confi∣dence, as gave assured hope of Victory; but what is most Re∣markable, is, that among so many Persons as were concerned, and some of them Women, none should fail of their Word, or betray their Trust. All being armed, they repaired to the Palace by several ways, and most of them in Litters, the better to conceal their Number and Arms. They were divided into four Bodies, as had been agreed, and expected the Clock should strike Eight, which was the moment appointed to fall on. As soon as the Clock struck, Pinto gave the Signal agreed upon, by firing a Pistol, and then all Parties fell to their Work. D. Michael de Almeida fell upon the German Guard, which being surprized, for the most part unarmed, was overcome without much strugling. The Great Master of the Game, his Brother, and D. Stephen da Cunha charged the Spanish Com∣pany before the Palace, at the Place, called The Fort. Most of the Townsmen, who knew of the Design, were in this Action, and boldly fell in with Sword in Hand upon the Court of Guard. None signalized himself more than a Priest, who carrying a Crucifix in one hand, and a Sword in the other, amidst his loud Exhortations ceased not to Act beyond the most desperate of the Conspirators. None could stand before him; so that after some small Resistance, the Spanish Officer and his Soldiers were forced to Surrender themselves, and for safety of their Lives, to cry out with the rest, God save the Duke of Bragança, King of Portugal. Pinto having made his way into the Palace, headed those that were to Attack Vasconcellos his Apartment. At the foot of the Stairs they met Francis Soarez de Albergaria, Judge of the Civil Causes, who seeing this Tumult, would have interposed his Authority to appease them; but hearing all cry▪ God save the Duke of Bragança he thinking in the Duty of his Office, cry'd▪ God save the King of Spain and Portugal. This cost him his Life, for one of the Conspirators shot him with a Pistol think∣ing it meritorious to punish that Fidelity which now became Criminal. Antony Correa, first Clerk to the Secretary, ran out upon the noise, and was stabb'd by D. Antony de Meneses, yet ye turned up his Eyes full of Revenge, and said, What I dare you strike me? All the Answer Meneses returned, was to stab him three or four times again, till he fell, yet he survived all these Wounds, to die some time after by the hand of the Hangman▪ Being quit of this Obstacle, the Conspirators pressed forward towards the Secretary's Chamber. James a Captain of Foot, was then with him, who
seeing so many armed Men, and supposing they sought the Life of Vasconcellos, tho' he owed no Obligation to that Mi∣nister, yet out of meer Generosity he endeavoured to keep the Door with his Sword, till the Secretary could make his escape; but being wounded in his Right Arm, so that he could not hold his Sword, and over-powered by the Multi∣tude, he leaped out at a Window, and had the good Fortune to escape. Immediately the Conspirators broke into the Cham∣ber, and not finding the Secretary, tho' they searched all cor∣ners, they threatned an Old Woman-Servant with present Death, if she did not discover him; and she, to save her Life, pointed to the Place where he was, being a close Cupboard or Closet, taken out of the thickness of the Wall, where they found him covered with Papers. Fear prevented his uttering one word, and D. Roderick de Saa gave him the first Wound, firing a Pistol at him; after which, several of the Conspi∣rators having struck him, they cast the Body out at the Win∣dow, crying, The Tyrant is dead, let Liberty live, and D. John, King of Portugal. 15. The Multitude, who had flocked to the Palace, gave great shouts of Joy, seeing the Body cast down, and falling upon it, every one endeavoured to have a stroke at it. Such was the end of Vasconcellos, a Man of great Parts, and inde∣fatigable, who had gathered vast Riches, part whereof was plundered in this hurly-burly.The Vice-Queen and others seized. Pinto losing no time, hasted to joyn the Party that was to seize the Vice-Queen, and found they and all the rest were already successful. Those who were to enter that Princess's Apartment being come to the Door, and the enraged Multitude crying out, they would set fire to it, if not opened quickly, the Vice-Queen with her Ladies, and the Archbishop of Braga, appeared in her Cham∣ber, believing her Presence would appease the Nobility, and cause the Commonalty to retire. Whereupon advancing some steps towards the chief of the Conspirators, she said, I confess, Gentlemen, that the Secretary has justly incurred the ha∣tred of the People, and your Indignation, by his Austerity and in∣solent manner of proceeding. His Death is a sufficient Revenge. Believe that what has hitherto passed, may be attributed to the hatred conceived against the Secretary, but if you proceed in this Uproar, you cannot avoid being reputed Rebels, and you will de∣prive me of means of excusing you to the King. D. Antony de Meneses answered, That so many Persons of Worth were not met only to punish a Wretch, who ought to have died by the Hands of the Hangman; that they came to do Right to the Duke of Braganza, to whom the Crown of Right apper∣tained. She would have replyed, but Almeida fearing the Conspirators might cool, said, Portugal had no King but the Duke of Braganza; and then all the Conspirators cryed out,
God save D. John, King of Port The Vice-Queen seeing them past reclaiming, thought to find more Respect in the City, but as she offered to go down, D. Charles de Noronha prayed her to retire to her Chamber, and not expose her self to the fury of the incensed People. In a Rage, finding her self forcibly detained, she cryed out, Why, what can the Peo∣ple do to me? To which Noronha rudely answered. Nothing, Madam, but throw your Highness out at the Window. The Arch∣bishop of Braga, enraged at what Noronha said, snatched a Sword from a Soldier, and offered to run upon the Conspi∣rators in Vindication of the Vice-Queen; but D. Michael de Almeida laid hold of and told him the danger of provoking those, who, but for him, had decreed his Death. This made him curb his Passion, in hopes of a more favourable Oppor∣tunity of Revenging himself upon Noronha. The rest of the Conspirators seized the Spaniards that were in the Palace, or City. The Marquess de la Puebla Steward to the Vice Queen, D. James Cardenas, Major-General; D. Ferdinand de Castro, Intendant of the Sea, the Marquess de Bainetto, an Italian, Master of the Horse to the Vice-Queen, and several Sea-Officers, were made Prisoners; which was done with as great ease, as if they had been apprehended by Order of the King of Spain. No Man stirred to defend them, and they were in no condition to do it, being most of them taken in Bed. 16. This done, Antony de Saldanha led the People to the Courts of Judicature, where he made an Harangue to them upon the present Happiness of Portugal, in being delivered from Tyranny,All Pro∣ceedings ordered to run in the Name of D. John, King of Portugal. and restored to their Natural Prince. His words were received with general Applause, and all Proceed∣ings for the future ordered to run in the Name of D. John, King of Portugal. In the mean while, D. Gaston Coutinho re∣leased all those out of Prison, who had been committed through the Severity of the Spanish Ministers; and they thus unexpectedly delivered, formed themselves into a Body, no less Formidable than, that of the first Conspirators. Amidst this general Joy, Pinto and the other Principal Men were not free from Care. The Spaniards were still possessed of the Citadel, whence they might Canonade the City, and whilst it held out, the King of Spain had always an inlet at Command. Therefore thinking they had done nothing, till they were Masters of that Place, they went to the Vice-Queen,The Citadel taken from the Spa∣niards. demanding of her an Order for the Governour to deliver it up to them. She rejected them with scorn; but Almada swearing, if she persisted, he would instantly Mur∣der all the Spaniards that were taken; For fear of Sacrifi∣cing so many Persons of Quality, she signed the Order, believing the Governour knew his Duty too well, to obey an Order, he could not but be convinced, was extorted from
her. It fell not out as  expected, for the Spanish Go∣vernour, D. Lewis del Campo, a Man of no Resolution, see∣ing all the Conspirators in Arms before the Citadel, vow∣ing they would put the Garrison to the Sword, unless they instantly surrendred, was glad to depart with so good a Pretence to hide his Cowardize. The Citadel being sur∣rendred, and the Conspirators now secure on all sides, they immediately dispatched Mendoza, and the Great Ma∣ster of the Game to carry the Happy News to the Duke of Braganza, and assure him there wanted nothing to compleat the People's Happiness but the Presence of their King. Yet was not his Presence equally desired by all Men. The No∣bility looked upon his Exaltation with an envious Eye; The Gentry, who had no hand in the Conspiracy, stood dubious. Some said, they knew not whether he would justifie those proceedings. The Creatures of Spain were in a Conster∣nation, and only took care to save themselves from the Fury of the Multitude. The Duke's Friends, knowing his Intention, prosecuted their Business. They met at the Pa∣lace to settle Affairs till the Arrival of the King, and un∣animously chose the Archbishop of Lisbon President of the Council, and Lieutenant of the Kingdom. He refused at first, saying, there was more need of a General, than a Person of his Character, but soon complyed, upon Condi∣tion, the Archbishop of Braga should be joyned in Com∣mission with him. This subtil Prelate's Design was, to make the other as guilty, in respect of the Spaniards, as him∣self, if he accepted; or if he refused, to render him odious to the new King and People. He of Braga perceived the Snare, but being wholly devoted to the Spaniards, posi∣tively refused to have any share in the Government. Thus the whole Power fell into the Hands of the Archbishop of Lisbon. D. Michael de Almeida, Peter de Mendoza, and D. An∣tony de Almada, were appointed his Counsellors. 17. The Governour's first care was to make himself Ma∣ster of three great Spanish Galeons that were in the Port.Three Spa∣nish Gale∣ons seized in the River of Lisbon. Several Barks were fitted out, and manned with the choice Youth of the City, each endeavouring to signalize himself, but they met with no Opposition, the Officers, and most of the Soldiers having been secured ashore, at such time as the Conspiracy took effect. Expresses were sent the same Even∣ing to all the Provinces to excite the People to give Thanks to Heaven for the Recovery of their Liberty, and Command∣ing all Magistrates to cause the Duke of Braganza to be proclaimed King, and to secure all the Spaniards. The next care was to dispose all things for the Reception of the new King. The Archbishop acquainted the Vice-Queen she must withdraw, to make room for the King and his Family. He
caused an Apartment to be furnished for her in the Royal Mansion-House of Xabregas, which is in the Suburbs. The Vice-Queen, upon the first Order, left the Palace, but with a Countenance full of Indignation, and without speaking one Word. Only a few of her own Servants, and the Archbishop of Braga, though with the hazard of his Life, attended her. Still the Duke of Braganza was in suspense, not knowing how Affairs had succeeded at Lisbon, till Melo and Mendoza arriv'd at Villaviciosa. By the joy of their Countenances, and their casting themselves at his Feet, more then by their Words, he understood he was King of Portugal. He conducted them to the Dutchess, to relate what had happened, and they gave her the Title of Majesty; whereas the former Kings and Queens of Portugal had only the Stile of Highness given them.The Duke proclaimed King in the Towns of his Depen∣dance. That same Day D. John was proclaimed King in all the Towns that depended of him. Alfonso de Melo did the same at Elvas. The new King set forward for Lisbon with the same Equipage he had provided to go to the Court of Spain He was attended by the Marquess de Ferreira his Kinsman, the Count de Vimioso, and many other Persons of Quality. The Queen was left at Villavicio∣sa to confirm that Province in its Obedience, by her Pre∣sence. All the ways as he went were thronged with Peo∣ple, that ran to see him, pouring Blessings on him, and Cur∣ses on the Spaniards. All the Nobility, Officers of the Crown, and principal Magistrates went out to receive him far from Lisbon, where he made his Entry amidst the joyful Acclama∣tions of the Multitude, on the 6th. of December. All that Night the City was enlightned with Bonfires and Illuminati∣ons, which gave occasion to a Spaniard to say, That he was a happy Prince, since all that Kingdom had cost him but one Bonfire. 18. The whole Kingdom followed the Example of Lisbon,The whole Kingdom follows the Example of Lisbon. as if there had been a particular Conspiracy in every Town. Expresses arriv'd at Court daily, bringing the King Advice, of Towns, and whole Provinces that had expelled the Spa∣niards, and submitted themselves to him. The Governours of other strong Places had no more Courage than he of Lis∣bon. most of them shamefully marching away without so much as firing a Musket. Thus within Fifteen Days the Spaniards were drove out of all the Kingdom of Portugal. Only D. Ferdinand de la Cuva, St. Ju∣lian, at the Mouth of the River, taken. Governour of the Castle of St. Julian, at the Mouth of the River , appeared reso∣lutely set down to keep that Fortress for the King his Ma∣ster. The Garrison consisted only of Spaniards comman∣ded by brave Officers, who made a vigorous Resistance at the first Approaches of the Portuguese▪ There was no remedy but to besiege the Place in form. Heavy Cannon was brought
from Lisbon, the Trenches opened, and carried on to the Counterscarp, notwithstanding the continual Fire, and fre∣quent Sallies of the besieged. But Treaty being the surest, and often the shortest way, the King made such Advantagi∣ous Proposals to the Governour as he had not the Power to withstand. The great Summs the King offered him, toge∣ther with a Commendary of the Order of Christ, prevailed with him. The Treaty was concluded, and the Fortress sur∣rendred, upon pretence he had not a sufficient Garrison to defend it, notwithstanding the principal Officers refused to sign the Capitulation, and principally D. Roderick Chalon, a young Gentleman of Andaluzia, of great Courage, and Colonel of a Regiment, who offered to hold out three Weeks longer to expect the Succours from Spain, which they heard to be at Sea, under the Conduct of the Duke of Maqueda. The King thought it not fit longer to delay his Coronation, that his Royal Authority might become the more Sacred, and his Person more respected among the People. This Ceremony was perfor∣med on the 15th. of December, with all possible Magnificence. The Duke of Aveiro, the Marquess of Villareal, the Duke de Caminha his Son, the Count de Monsanto, and all the Nobi∣lity of the Kingdom assisted at the Ceremony. The Arch∣bishop of Lisbon, at the head of his Clergy, and attended by several other Bishops, received the King at the Gate of the Cathedral, and there all the Three Estates took the Oath of Fidelity to him. A few Days after the Queen came to Lisbon, having been received at a distance by the whole Court, and the King himself. 19. The News of this Revolution being soon carried to the Court of Spain,How the News of his revolt was received in Spain. struck to the Heart of the Prime-Mini∣ster; yet making the best of that Disaster, he accosted the King with a Countenance chearful, and full of Assurance, saying, Sir, I bring you happy News, your Majesty has just now gained a great Dutchy, and a considerable parel of Lands. The King, in a surprize, asked in what manner. Sir, replied the Minister, the Duke of Braganza is run mad, he has suffered himself to be deluded by the Multitude, who have proclaimed him King of Portugal, now all his Lands are forfeited to the Crown, and that Family being extirpated, your Majesty will, for the future, possess that Kingdom in Peace. The King was not much taken with these plausible Words, and only told him, That Care must be taken to suppress a Rebellion that might prove of dangerous Consequence.
Anno, 1641. 1. THE new King of Portugal omitted nothing that might conduce to his Establishment on the Throne. After his Arrival at Lisbon,New Go∣vernours placed in the Fron∣tiers. he presently appointed Gover∣nours for all the Frontier Towns, choosing for that pur∣pose Men of Fidelity, Valour and Experience, who im∣mediately went away to their Posts with what Forces they could gather, and used all possible diligence to put the places committed to them into a posture of defence. Commissions were given out to raise Forces, and imme∣diately after the Coronation, the Cortes or Parliament was Summon'd: They met the 28th of January, and by a solemn Act acknowledg'd King John to be their lawful and rightful Soveraign, as descended by the Princess his Mother from Prince Edward, Son to King Emanuel. In this Assembly of the three Estates, the King declared, that for the support of his Houshold, he would content himself with his own private Revenue, and would lay apart all those of the Crown to supply the ne∣cessities of the Kingdom, and that the people might re∣lish the sweetness of his Government, he abolished all new Taxes imposed by the Spaniards. The most consi∣derable employments he gave to such of the Conspira∣tors as had best deserved, yet, Pinto had no share in this promotion, but nevertheless, had so great an influence over the King, that though he had not the Title of a Minister of State, nothing of moment was done without him. Having settled all things at home, the King next bent his thoughts towards Foreign Princes.Ambassa∣dors sent to all the Courts of Europe. He dispat∣ched Ambassadors to all the Courts of Europe, to move them to own him, and at the same time to gain Allies and raise new Enemies to the House of Austria. A League offensive and defensive was concluded with the Hollanders and Catalonians, both at that time in Rebel∣lion against the King of Spain. That Monarch nor be∣ing in a condition to use immediate force for the redu∣cing of Portugal, still hop'd he might by fair means or threats work upon the new King, and to that end writ a Letter to him in the Stile of a Sovereign, but in most affectionate terms. The Answer was such as no less tou∣ched the King of Spain, than the News of the Revolt
had done before. He had his hands full in Flanders, Italy, Roussillon and Catalonia, and yet rather than seem to abate any thing of his Royal Grandeur, resolved to hazard all, rather than suffer this Affront to pass un∣revenged. The Duke of Medina Sidonia was order'd to raise Forces in Andaluzia, the Count de Monterey in the two Castiles, and the Marquess de Valparaiso in Leon and Galicia. And because a Fleet was the most abso∣lutely necessary, the Duke de Maqueda Admiral of the Ocean, had Orders to gather all the Vessels that were fit for Service, and to infest the Coast, whilst the others acted by Land. 2. Of all the Ambassadors sent by the King of Por∣tugal to the Christian Princes,The Bishp of Lame∣go, going Ambassa∣dor to Rome,  by the Spaniards. only the Bishop of Lame∣go designed for Rome, miscarried: The Master of the Vessel that carried him, put into Cartagena, a Port of the Kingdom of Murcia, and delivered him up to the Spa∣niards, for which Treachery, he received a Reward of 2000 Crowns. That Prelate's Life was in great dan∣ger, for he had certainly been Executed but that the King was put in mind that the Marquess de la Puebl, and five or six other persons of Quality were Prisoners at Lisbon. This Consideration mov'd him to order the Bishop should be civilly Treated, least, the Prisoners at Lisbon might suffer for his sake. Fortune, which the Year before had so highly favoured the new King, still seemed wholly devoted to his Party. All the Forts on the Coast of Africk, (except Ceuta, and Tangier, which at last afterwards submitted) upon the first News of what had hapned in Portugal, withdrew themselves from their Obedience to the Spaniards, and sent to acknow∣ledge King John, and assure him of their utmost Fide∣lity. Nor was this all, for the Vice-Roy of Brasil, ha∣ving. Intelligence of the Revolution, sent his Son to Lisbon to take the Oath of Allegiance to the new King, in his Name, and in the Name of all the Inhabitants o that Coast, who testified an extraordinary satisfaction for that Change. The Islands Azores, resolved not to be the last that declared for the King, and to give him some proof of their Fidelity, at the very beginning of his Reign, they seized 10 Ships coming from India, that knew nothing of the Revolution, and sent them to Lisbon, after having taken off all the Soldiers that were aboard them. In May also this Year, a  dispat∣ched
Express from India, by John de Sylva Tello, the Vice-Roy, brought the News that the King had been Proclaimed in all his Dominions in Asia,King John Proclaim∣ed in India. and as far as the Coast of China. The Hollanders at this time were very powerful in those Seas, and being at War with Spain, did all the harm they could in the Portuguese Co∣lonies and Factories, endeavouring with the assistance of the Indians, utterly to extirpate all others, that they might themselves ingross that Trade. To this purpose, they omitted not any manner of Villainies that might conduce to their advantage, and particularly though they had afterwards certain Intelligence of King John's being Proclaimed, and being in amity with their State, yet they ceased not to prosecute their ends in those remote parts, as shall appear in the Sequel of this History. However, before the Revolution reached India, they had got footing in Ceylon, laid Siege to Malaca, which they took, and had their designs against Go, and all other the Portuguese Conquests in India. In America also they were possessed of Pernambuco, Paraiba, Rio Grande, Ciara, the Islands of Tamaraca and Ferdinand de Noronha, and towards the South of Porto Calvo and Segeripe, all places appertaining to the Crown of Portu∣gal. But after they had information of the Truce conclu∣ded betwixt Portugal and Holland, they perfidiously made themselves Masters of Angola, and the Island of St. Thomas in Africk, of Maranhao in America, and of Malaca in India. To compleat this Prince's Happiness, though before there was a mortal Enmity betwixt the Portuguese and the Hollanders, yet now on the 12th of June a Cessation of Arms betwixt the two Nations was agreed upon and concluded,A Cessation of Arms with the Dutch. at the Hague, for 10 Years, and soon after the States sent an Ambassador to Con∣gratulate the King, upon his Accession to the Crown. The Portugal Ambassador returning, brought with him Two Regiments of Horse, and considerable supplies of Arms and Ammunition. The Catalonians also sent the Lord Sala on the same Account, and to Ratifie the League before concluded by the Portuguese Ambassador. 3. All new erected Monarchyes are subject to a thou∣sand accidents,A Conspira∣cy against the New King, disco∣vered. and unless protected by some Heaven∣ly power, can scarce continue long in their full splen∣dor. The King of Portugal was raised to the Throne of his Ancestors, in a manner almost miraculous, he
mounted without any opposition, 600 Towns, and 15000 Villages, submitted to him in less than eight days, and all the people of the Kingdom declared they were never happy till his Accession to the Crown. Ne∣vertheless, no sooner was he seated on the Throne, but he found many Enemies, and among them some of those who had helped to raise him to that Grandeur. About 100 of the Greatest Men in his Kingdom, Conspired to destroy him, and if Heaven had not protected him, there had been but a short space betwixt the Birth and Grave of his Sovereignty. The Arch-Bishop of Braga, the chief Inquisitor, two other Bishops, the Marquess of Villareal, and his Son, the Duke de Caminha, were the principal Conspirators: D. Lorenzo, Pidez de Car∣vallo, the Count de Armamar, and D. Augustin Manuel, were brought in as Associates, the Jews of Lisbon were concerned in the Design, and there was a party in the Fleet then lying at Belem, one Man being aboard every Ship, in order to Fire it upon a signal given. Laurence Pidez de Carvallo, was to break into the Queens Apart∣ment with 100 Men, to secure all there. It was given in Charge to the Jews, to fire the City in 8 or 10 pla∣ces, that the people being busied there, they might have time to force the Palace. The Inquisitor General sent Letters into Spain to acquaint the King with the De∣sign, that the Forces on the Frontiers might be ready to March to Lisbon, upon the first Advice, and the Duke de Maqueda to enter the Port with the Fleet of Spain. Concerning the manner of discovering this Conspiracy, there are three several Accounts. One is, that the Let∣ters being directed to the Marquess de Ayamonte, who was Governour of the Spanish Frontiers, he broke them open, and sent them back to the King of Portugal, when he had seen the Contents, which is most probable; he being afterwards Convicted of High-Treason, and put to Death, at Segovia, for Conspiring against his King, with the Duke of Medina Sidonia, and the new King of Portugal. Another says, that a Spy employed by the King to go often into Spain, meeting a Bohemian who was em∣ployed to carry the said Letters, and suspecting something by his Discourse, made him Drunk, then Stabbing him, and having taken the Packet, brought it to the King; but this seems not to have any thing of probability, or con∣sequently of Truth. The third is, that D. Alfonso de
Portugal, Count de Vimioso, being deprived of his Com∣mand on the Frontiers, and grievously resenting that Af∣front; the Arch-Bishop of Braga, conceived the desire of revenge would easily engage him to enter into the Conspiracy. He therefore discover'd the whole design to him, and the Count seeming to embrace the propo∣sition acquainted the King with the whole matter. The Conspiracy being discovered, the King so ordered the Affair, that most of those persons therein concerned were apprehended, without the least noise or confusion. The 5th of August, at 11 at Night, was the time appointed, for putting the Conspiracy in execution. That very morning the King caused all the Troops that Quarter∣ed in the neighbouring Villages, to march into Lisbon, upon pretence of a review to be taken in the large place before the Palace. He with his own hand, gave several Billets Sealed up, to persons he could confide in, with positive Orders to every one, not to open his Billet till 12 at Noon, and then punctually to obey what it di∣rected. Then having sent for the Arch-Bishop of Braga, and Marquess of Villareal under colour of communica∣ting some important Affairs,The princi∣pal Conspi∣rators seized and punished. they were both seized in the King's Lodgings about Noon, without any noise: At the same time a Captain of the Guards publickly appre∣hended the Duke of Caminha, in the place before the Pa∣lace. Those who had received the Billets having open∣ed them, found each an Order to take up one of the Conspirators, and secure him in such a Prison, till fur∣ther order, which was so punctually executed, that 47 were taken without any difficulty, none endeavouring to escape. When the News of the Conspiracy was noised abroad, it is not possible to express the rage con∣ceived by the multitude against those that were the fo∣menters of it, every Man desiring to be the Executioner of them, as is the nature of the Rabble, wherever they conceive a hatred. The Wrack, forced a Confession from many of the Criminals, and the Arch-Bishop, the In∣quisitor, the Marquess of Villareal, and Duke de Cami∣nha, to save themselves that misery, owned the whole Design. The Marquess, the Duke, the Count de Ar∣mamar, and D. Augustin Manuel, were sentenced to be Beheaded. The Arch-Bishop and Inquisitor, because of their Character, the King Condemned to perpetual Im∣prisonment: All the others were adjudged to be Drawn,
Hanged, and Quartered, and they all suffered according to the Sentence pronounced against them, upon the 29th day of August. It is remarkable, that when the Mar∣quess on the Scaffold had spoke to the people, they cri∣ed out furiously, let him die, let him die: To which the Marquess answered; So the Jews cried out against Christ. 4. These Executions having secured the Prince,Several Military expeditions. he bent all his Thoughts upon War, and having to that purpose obtained of the King of France five Colonels of Horse, three of Foot, and two of Dragoons, he order∣ed them to be ready to march to the Frontiers, and rai∣sed new Troops to reinforce his Army that lay then be∣fore Badajoz: However, they were otherwise employ∣ed, for the Council not thinking it expent to wast an Army before a Town that did them no , those Troops that besieged it were recalled to serve else∣where. The first Act of Hostility I meet with betwixt the Spaniards and Portuguese, was in the Province of Alentejo, near Elvas. A Party of Spaniards having broke into that Province, exercised all manner of Cruelties to terrifie the People, sparing neither Age nor Sex, nor even the Churches. D. John de Acosta, who Comman∣ded at Elvas, having notice hereof, sent out five Com∣panies of Foot under the Command of Gaspar de Sequeira Manuel; These were followed by 400 Men under the Con∣duct of Luis Mendez de Vasconcellos: These being joy∣ned by certain Troops three Leagues from Campo Ma∣jor, marched towards the Spaniards, who still continu∣ed their Ravages, and Charging them, killed 200 upon the spot, pursuing the rest to the Gates of Badajoz, where they took shelter. This fortunate beginning was followed by like consequences; 600 Spaniards advan∣cing into the Province of Alentejo to surprize the Town of Montalvao; Mascarenhas, Collonel of a Portuguese Re∣giment, with only four Companies Attacked them be∣fore they came to the Town, and with such good suc∣cess, that having killed 18 or 20, the rest retired to the Pass on a small River, and he fearing some ambush, be∣cause Night drew on, pursued no further. In the mor∣ning perceiving they were quite gone, he followed them as far as the Town of Ferreira in Castile, which he Plundered and Burnt without any opposition, though it might easily have been defended against a greater power. Beyond the Mountains, the Spaniards had sack∣ed
and Burnt four open Towns, to revenge which, Le∣wis Gomez de Figueiredo passed over into Galicia, took the Town of Monterey, and having pillaged reduced it to Ashes. To requite this, another party of Spaniards fell into the Countrey about Braganza, but the Inhabi∣tants and Soldiers who Quartered thereabouts assem∣bling, cut most of them in pieces, and then piercing into Castile, burnt seven Villages, and the Town of Geronda, of which, they left nothing standing but the Walls: At the same time, Luis Gomez de Figueiredo with 1500 Foot and 300 Horse fell upon the Marquess of Tarrasona, who marched towards Valverde with 2000 of the former, and 200 of the latter, and after a Fight, which lasted about four hours, obtained the Victory, which had been greater but that Night coming on hindred the pursuit. 5. Daily Action more and more incensed the two Na∣tions,Other War like ex∣ploits. and an implacable hatred had taken possessi∣on of their hearts, so that the Frontiers were never free from slaughter and Rapine. D. Gaston Coutinho the Por∣tuguese General, being informed that 6000 Spanish Foot, and 800 Horse had fortified themselves in two Villages, one whereof was in Galicia, the other in Portugal, he marched with 30 Horse to view them, and finding their Works weak enough to be overthrown, if Attacked with vigour, ordered his Foot to advance: A Party of the Enemies Horse that advanced, was easily Repulsed, which causing some Consternation in the main Body, gave time to plant two pieces of Canon against them. These two pieces having played some time, D. Gaston who had made four Batallions of his Foot courageously assaulted the Works in as many places: The Soldiers be∣ing as forward in the pursuit of Honour as their Offi∣cers, nothing could withstand them: They forced the Entrenchments, took four redoubts, entred the place and took all the Baggage, but not contenting them∣selves with this Victory and the gaining of 11 Colours, they burnt all the Villages for two Leagues about. A∣bove 400 Spaniards were killed upon the place, 14 Of∣ficers, and 70 Soldiers were taken. Nor was this all, the Portuguese General making his advantage of the E∣nemies Consternation, the next day marched into Ga∣licia, and pursuing those that having escaped, had for∣tified themselves in another Village, forced them again to retire, burnt nine Houses, and then returned home
with Honour, and his Soldiers enriched with Plunder. In the mean while, Vasco de Azevedo Coutinho, and Emanuel de Sousa de Abreu, being continually infested by the Ex∣cursions of the Spaniards, gathered all the Forces they could and marched to Lobos, in the Castle of which place, the Spaniards always had a safe retreat, after committing their ordinary Ravages. This Castle they assaulted and carried with the loss only of 22 Men, which done, they burnt 700 Houses, as well in the Town of Lobos, as in the neighbouring Villages. This was not yet the last stroak of ill fortune the Spaniards felt. Martin Alfonso de Mello, understanding a great body of them was marched from Badajoz to Attack Olivenza, a Town seated on the River Guadiana, which parts Spain and Portugal, assembled all the Forces he could to relieve that place. Being on his March, an Express came to him from the Governour, giving an account that they had assaulted the Town in two places, but met with such a vigorous opposition that they were forced to retire with the loss of 200 Men; neverthe∣less, he desired some succour, least they should return. They accordingly returned, hoping to surprize the place, feigning themselves a Portuguese Convoy with Provisi∣ons, yet met they with no better success, being again repulsed with the loss of 140 Men. Martin Alphonso, still hoped to be able to overtake them in their return, but they taking another way than was given out, he missed of them, and therefore dismissed his Troops to their several Garrisons. It was a generally received Opinion throughout all Spain, though the Author of it was not known, that the Duke of Medina Sidonia,The Duke of Medi∣na Sidoni∣a, being su∣spected in Spain, Challenges King John. held secret Correspondence with the King of Portugal, and favoured his Cause. The ground of this Suspicion was, that King John had to his Queen the Sister of that Duke, and upon this Jea∣lousie, it is thought the King of Spain talking one Day with the Count Duke de Olivarez, complained to him, That he had three or four times observed the Family of Guzman was fatal to his Grandeur: The Count Duke who was himself of that Family, immediately dispatch∣ed an Express to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, summon∣ing him to appear at Court with all possible Speed. He obeyed, and being come to Madrid, he was perswaded, that to clear himself of the imputation of Disloyalty
cast upon him, he should publish a Manifesto, contain∣ing a Challenge to the new King of Portugal. Others are of Opinion, that the Duke knowing himself to be in some measure guilty, published the said Declaration and Challenge of his own accord, to blot out the ill Opini∣on conceived of him: Whatsoever the grounds were that moved him to it, Certain it is, he published and disper∣sed throughout Spain and Portugal, a Cartell in Vindica∣tion of his Honour, charging the new King with the Crime of Rebellion; and challenging him to single Combat with all the Formalities used in those Cases. This Cartel was dated at Toledo, the 29th. day of Sep∣tember, 1641. and is too long to trouble the Reader with in this place; nor is it significant, since as it happens to most things of that Nature, no Notice was taken of it. 7. The Bishop of Lamego betrayed to the Spaniards,The Portu∣guese Am∣bassador at Rome. as has been said above, being now exchanged for certain Spaniards of Quality; continued his Journey to Rome on his Embassy to his Holiness. Upon his Arrival, the Spanish Embassador protested, that he would immedi∣ately return to Spain, in case the Pope received him as Embassadour from Portugal. Hereupon the Pope to prevent Disorders that might happen, ordered he should come to Town by Night, but suffered him to be visited as an Embassador. He of France sent his Coach to fetch him from Civita Vecchia, with a Guard of all the Portu∣gese and Catalonians that were then at Rome. Being come thither, he took up his Lodging at the French Em∣bassadors, who received him at his Door with all possi∣ble marks of Respect: We shall see what became of this Embassy in its proper place. On the 27th. of Sep∣tember, arrived at Lisbon a Fleet of 18 Sail from Ango∣la, richly laden; two days after came in another from Rio de Janeiro of no less value in sundry sorts of Com∣modities. Anno, 1642. THE Island Terzera was the only Place which had refused to submit to the new King of Portugal,The Island Terzera reduced. the Governour thereof proving more faithful then the rest to the King of Spain. He began to want Provisions and
Ammunition, which being known in Spain, two Ships were sent to him loaden with all Necessaries for his Re∣lief. These Vessels were taken by the Ships of Portu∣gal, which lay about this Island, on purpose to intercept all Succours. D. Alvaro de Viveiro who commanded in the Fort, being now reduced to great streights, and seeing no likelihood of being reliev'd; capitulated, and march'd out with 263 Men, two pieces of Canon, and all other marks of Honour, leaving behind 800 sick Men, who according to Articles were to be taken care of, and sent away as soon as well. D. Emanuel de Souza Pacheco was sent to govern that Island. The Portuguese Fleet consisting of 13 Sail, sailed together with the Dutch, designing to intercept the Spanish Galeons; but the Dutch treacherously forsook the Portuguese, who in a Storm lost their Admiral and Vice-Admiral, the other Ships being much shatter'd. 2. Soon after the Surrender of the Island,Forreign Alliances concluded. News was brought that the Portuguese. Ambassador in Sweden, had concluded an Alliance betwixt the two Crowns, which the King for the satisfaction of his People, caused to be proclaimed by his Heraulds. To confirm which, in a few Days there arrived at Lisbon four Swedish Ships la∣den with Naval and Warlike Stores, sent by the Ambas∣sador; and Letters were brought from the Queen of Sweden, in which she gave their Portuguese Majesties as∣surances of her firm Adherence to them in all that should be for their Service. Tristan de Medoza had in like manner established a firm Friendship and Alliance with the Hollanders. However, the Dutch Fleet that was up∣on the Coast of Goa in India, took some Portuguese Ships commanded by Sancho Faria de Silva, who was kill'd in the Action with 50 of his Men. At the same time they took several places in Brasil, driving out the Portuguese. D. George Mascarenhas, who was Vice-Roy there, sent Advice to the King, and he immediately writ to Francis de Andrade Leitan his Ambassador in England, ordering him instantly to go over to complain to the States of the taking of those Places. The States considering how uncapable the King was at that time to do himself right, made small account of his Ambassador demanding restitution. Goa was at the same time Besieg'd by the same Fleet, which not being strong enough for such an Enterprize, begged the assistance of a Neighbouring
King: That Prince blocked it up by Land, but as soon as he understood of the Revolution of Portugal, he rais'd the Siege, joyn'd in League with the Portuguese Vice-Roy, and by this Means, the Dutch Fleet was forc'd to retire. 3. All this while the Frontiers of Castile and Portugal were full of Soldiers:The Pro∣gress of the War in the Province of Alentejo. The Garrison of Campo Mayor of∣ten broke into Estremadura. Parties of Horse from Ba∣dajoz appeared frequently at the Gates of Elvas, and the Governor of this last Place, as often drove Cattel from a∣bout Badajoz. Though these inroads were not very con∣siderable, yet they were not performed without Blood∣shed; Time heightning the hatred betwixt the two Na∣tions, both Parties encreased their Troops. The King of Portugal erected six places of Arms on his Frontiers, and put 5000 Men into each of them. The Spaniards assembled on all sides, and four or five Armies appeared in as many places to oppose and infest the Portuguese. Here∣upon daily Action ensued, sometimes the one, and sometimes the other being superior: Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses Governor of the Province of Beira, was one of the first that gained upon the Spaniards. He made an inroad in∣to Old Castile, where he took and burnt the Towns of S. Martin and Elgas, with the Castle of the latter, which commands all the Territory of Gata. Having made himself Master of Valverde, and finding it conveni∣ently seated to annoy the Enemy, he left in it a Garrison well provided. A small Body of 2500 Spaniards endea∣vouring to give a check to his Proceedings, was put into Disorder at the first Charge; and the Portuguese using their Advantage, cut in pieces most of their Enemies. Martin Alphonso de Melo Governor of Elvas, was no less successful about the same time. For having received intelli∣gence that a party of 300 Spanish Horse ravaged the Country betwixt Badajoz and Valverde; he sent out a good Body of Horse, with 150 Musqueteers, ordering them to attack the Enemy wherever they met them. This was so couragiously performed, that most of the Spanish Horse being slain upon the place, the rest quitted their Horses to save themselves in a small Wood hard by; so that 274 Horses became a prey to the Victors. These were yet but small Advantages; D. Francis de Melo General of the Portuguese Horse in the Province of Alen∣tejo, entred Estremadura, where finding no Forces to op∣pose
him, he took Aroches, Villar del Rey, Codissera and Ancinasola; defeated some Troops that adventured to oppose him, took a vast Booty, and so many Prisoners, that the King of Portugal ordered many of the least con∣siderable to be set at Liberty. D. John de Garay Gover∣nor of Badajoz, sent out 800 Horse, and 2000 Foot, with design to surprize Olivenza, but D. Francis de Melo charging them by the way, put them to flight with the slaughter of 300 Men. 4. These continual Incursions kept the Spaniards al∣ways upon their Guard,Other Mi∣litary Acti∣ons. and made them think of secu∣ring themselves. To this purpose they began to fortifie Aldea del Obispo; but Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses being unwilling to suffer that Work to go forward, marched with 500 Foot, and four Squadrons of Horse, attacked the Place, and carryed it, though obstinately defended: 140 Spaniards were kill'd in the Assault, and 116 taken, and all the Works, as well Old as New, were levelled with the Ground. Then passing on, he did the same to the Town of Castillejo, which was no less offensive to the Portuguese Frontiers, then the other would have been. The King to shew he was no less formidable by Sea then by Land, even in the first rise of his Greatness; fit∣ted out 13 great Men of War, under the command of Antony Tellez, ordering him to seek out the Spanish Fleet, or in case he found it not, to attempt some Sea-port Town; the Spaniards, though weak, omitted not to make their utmost efforts, and infest their Enemies Coun∣try, as much as in them was. Chelas, a considerable Town of Estremadura, and seated near the Frontiers of Alentejo, did often send out Parties, which did incredi∣ble damage in that part of the plain Country subject to Portugal. Francis de Melo who had the charge of those Frontiers incensed hereat, marched with all the Force he could gather, with a resolution to carry that Place; nor did he fail of his Design altogether, for meeting a Squadron of Spanish Horse he cut them off, and then applying his Scaling Ladders, after a Dispute of five Hours, entred the Town. His Men immediately fell to the Plunder, which lost them the opportunity they might have had of entring the Castle with the flying Enemy. Francis de Melo seeing nothing more could be done then plundering the Town, returned leaving the
Streets full of dead Bodies, and having lost but 16 of his own Men. 5. Whilst the War continued in this manner betwixt these two Neighbouring Nations,Alliances in Africa and Asia. those of a greater di∣stance sought the Frindship of the new King of Portugal. That King near Goa whom we mentioned before, was the first that moved for this Friendship, when he rais'd his Siege from before the City: The King of Morocco was not long behind him, for he understanding how fast the Crown was settl'd by the unanimous approbation of the whole Kingdom, and so many Alliances with most Princes of Europe, except those that were devoted to Spain, sent now into Portugal, to desire leave of the King that an Ambassador might come to put an end to the A∣nimosities which had been produced by the violent pro∣cedure of the Spaniards. 6. The ill Fortune of the Spaniards raised in them an implacable desire of Revenge.Military Action in the Pro∣vince of Tralos Montes. They assembled 1500 Foot, and 300 Horse, to take a Fort that Ferdinand Tel∣lez de Meneses had built in Val de Mula, on the Frontiers of the Province Tralos Montes, and marc till they came in sight of the Fort; there discovering  Portuguese Horse, and 400 Foot, they halted to consult what was to be done. D. Sancho Manuel, the Portuguese Camp-Master having obtained Leave of Ferdinand Tellez, though so unequal in Number, charged the Enemy so vigorously, that at the first shock the Foot fled, and the Horse seeing the Rout, durst not come up to support them. Having with such ease overthrown those Troops, the Portuguese General resolved to make use of the Ad∣vantage, being informed they were retired to Fuentes in Castile, where some Fortifications were begun to be thrown up. Being too weak to attack them there, he stayed till 500 Foot more had joyn'd him, and then advanced; he planted some Canon against the Place, and began to batter it, but seeing no effect, thought of sending for more Troops to carry it by Escalade, when he was told the Spaniards assembled in great Numbers from all parts to cut off his Retreat. His danger drew D. Alonso Fur∣tado de Mendoza to his Assistance, but being still much inferiour to the Enemies, they retired with Speed, and unmolested by the Spaniards. Nor was there any more quiet on the Frontiers of Galicia; for D. Martin Dara∣din the Governour of that Kingdom, not being in a con∣dition
to oppose two Portuguese Armies that broke in up∣on him at once, they burnt 150 Villages in that Coun∣try, and returned home with a considerable Booty. 7. It was now but reasonable the Forces should have been put into their Winter Quarters; nevertheless the Duke d'Alva having gather'd all the Power he could sent them under the Conduct of his Son to wast the Province of Beira.In the Pro∣vince of Beira. Ferdinand Tellez de Meneses having Notice hereof▪ formed a Body of 7000 Foot and 2700 Horse, resolving to prevent the Spaniards, whose Forces were no less Considerable; he marched to Val de Mula, and encamped before the Town of Guardan, which he Summoned, and finding no Disposition in the Governor to surrender, batter'd it with two pieces of Canon. The Battery was of little effect, and therefore Ferdinand Tellez commanded Peter Sousa de Castro to at∣tack the Out-works with all the Musqueteers, and Gas∣par de Seixas with some other Battalions to sustain him; The Attack was begun with great Resolution, and con∣tinued for three Hours, at the end whereof the Be∣sieged put  a white Flag, and sent a Drum to offer to Capitulate The Garrison marched out upon sorry Terms, the Governor and Officers being only allowed to carry their Swords, and all the Souldiers to the number of 340, being sent Prisoners to Lisbon. The Booty was great, besides much store of Provision and Ammunition found in the Place; but the main Consequence of taking this place was, that it secured the Portuguese Frontiers, and laid those of Castile open to Incursions. Whilst this was doing, about the Province of Beira, without the Spanish General, who had taken the Field, his attempting to succour the Town; D. Antony Mascarenhes commander of Valladores, took Quintas and Corgra. D. Sancho Ma∣nuel plunder'd and burnt the Towns of Sorvo, Avilar and Chalenga; the Captains, Edward Miranda, and Emanuel de Andras, did the same to those of Basquilha, Villar del Puerto, and Saranitho, and so did others all along the Frontiers. D. Francis de Melo, General of the Cavalry in Allentejo, being abroad with 300 Men, the Governour of Badajoz upon Notice of it, marched out with 700, and leaving half of them in Ambush, with the other half ad∣vanced to draw on the Portuguese: Melo thinking he had no more Enemies to deal with but what were in sight, charged them, and they as soon retired, till they drew
him into the ambush. He was at first surprized, seeing himself Attacked by that fresh body, but recovering him∣self, divided his men, and sent one part to charge those that had drawn him on whilst the other engaged those that lay in ambush. In this manner the Fight continu∣ed a considerable time, after which, fresh Troops ap∣peared, coming from Badajoz, to the assistance of the Spaniards, and others from Elvas, to sustain the Portu∣guese. These last were 1600 Foot, and four Squadrons of Horse, under the Conduct of the Count de Obidos. Now the face of Affairs was changed, for the Portuguese ob∣tained a Compleat Victory. The first of the Spanish Troops were cut in pieces, and the last retired with the loss of 176 Horse. Of the Portuguese, 37 were killed in the ambush, and 16 in the Engagement after it. 8. The Assembly of the States,The Cortes or Parlia∣ment held. or Parliament of Por∣tugal, being the only Authority that could establish the Crown, and raise such supplies as were necessary for the support of it; the King fixt their Meeting for the 18th. of September, and that day the Session was com∣menced with all the Ceremonies usual upon such occasi∣ons. The Bishop of Elvas performed the Office of Chan∣cellor; acquainting that Assembly in the King's Name, with the causes of their being convened: He represented the great Blessing of Liberty, the King's extraordinary Care to repair the Harms done by the Spaniards, the mighty Power he had, as well by Sea as Land; the Al∣liances he had made Abroad, and put them in mind how he had never lay'd any Impositions upon his People, but maintained the expence of his House upon the private Patrimony of his Family; and that being now much ex∣hausted, he recommended it to them to find out means to support so great a Charge, assuring them of his Royal Protection, and that their Liberties and Privileges should be religiously preserved. Great was the expectation the King had conceived of this Assembly, nor was he disap∣pointed, for they gave such Testimonies of their Duty, as exceeded even his Hopes. They returned Thanks for his Care in asserting their Liberties, for delivering them from the Yoke of Spain; for the Alliances he had made Abroad, and for all his good Intentions, offering him their Lives and Fortunes, and sending him a Blank Pa∣per, that he might dispose of their Estates as he thought fit for the support of the State, and purchasing his Brother's
Liberty, who was kept Prisoner by the Spaniards ever since the beginning of the War, having been put into their hands by the King of Hungary, in whose service he had been nine Years. The King returned the blank as it was sent to him, and had more plentiful supplies granted him than he himself would have demanded. The Parliament settled two Funds, the one for Land, the other for Sea-Service: All other expences were to be supplied out of the Patrimony of the House of Bra∣ganza. 9. D. John Rodriguez de Souza, y Vasconcellos Count of Castelmelhor,A Conspi∣racy to seize Carthage∣na, disco∣vered; and the Portu∣gueses se∣cured. went over to Brazil in the Spanish Fleet, in the Year, 1639. In 1641. he was sent by his General to the Spanish Plantations, in the West-Indies. The News of the Revolution of Portugal, being then brought to the Fleet, the Spaniards cryed down the New King's Title, and exclaimed against the Portugueses as Rebels. This sensibly touched the Count de Castelmel∣hor, yet he was forced to bear with it, being in no con∣dition to make his resentment appear without his cer∣tain destruction. There were seven Portuguese Gallions in the Fleet, and in them 3000 Men. With the Officers of these Ships, he conspired to seize the Fleet; as also the Town and Cittadel of Cartagena, in new Spain, be∣fore which, they were then at Anchor. Most of the Of∣ficers were already engaged in this Design, and all dis∣posed for putting of it in execution, but the Count ha∣ving communicated it to Antony Tenezedo a Portuguese, in whom he confided, as having done him many signal favours; he discovered the whole matter to the Gover∣nour of the Cittadel, who immediately apprehended the Count, and had him Condemned to Death. This Sen∣tence had been executed within two days, had not the Count appealed to the Court of Madrid, and the Ad∣miral of the Fleet having had the Sentence confirmed by the Council there, no hopes remained for his deliverance but in God. Whilst the Admiral sent into Spain to have the Sentence confirmed, the King of Portugal got intelligence of what had hapned. He immediately sent away a Caravel, Commanded by a Captain, in whose Conduct he had great confidence, ordering him to sail for Cartagena, and use all possible means to deliver the Prisoner. The Weather proved favourable to the De∣sign, the Captain Arrived safe, and found means to let
the Count know he was come to rescue him. To this purpose, he agreed with a Dutch Captain who Com∣manded a Frigat in that Port, for the Caravel being so leaky, that it could not be put to Sea again, he burnt it. In the mean while, the Count with ready Money and large promises, corrupted a Corporal, and two Spanish Soldiers, that had the keeping of him, and they altoge∣ther got aboard the Dutch Frigat, which carried them safe to the Island of Tortuga, where they were favoura∣bly received by the French Governour. Thence they went over to the Island Tercera, and lastly arrived at Lisbon, where they were bountifully rewarded by the King. Anno, 1643. 1. THE hatred the Spaniards and Portugueses bore to one another, was too great to suffer them to lie still: Though the Season was not yet fit for Action, the Frontiers were never free from incursions. D. San∣cho Manuel a Portuguese Major-General, thinking no dif∣ficulties too great to be surmounted, marched out with 150 Horse, judging that a sufficient number to plunder the Town of Fituro in Castile, four Leagues from the Frontiers of Portugal. His Design being divulged, and the Spaniards believing his Forces greater than they were, they abandoned the Town, leaving it to be ran∣sacked by the Soldiers without the least opposition. But the retreat proved not without danger, for the Spani∣ards of the neighbouring places assembling to the num∣ber of 200 Horse, Charged them before they could re∣cover their own Frontiers, and that with such resoluti∣on, that the Portugueses were at first forced to give ground. But having quitted all the Booty which encombred them, they rallied, and giving a fresh Charge, worsted those by whom before they had been drove. Night com∣ing on, put an end to the Battle. The number of the Dead was equal, and the Victory had been dubious, but that the Spaniards got away in the dark, leaving the Booty and the Field to the Portugueses. This small Action was the cause of a greater, for the Marquess de Elecha, General of the Spanish Horse, resolving to re∣venge that loss, entred Portugal with 500 Horse, and
300 Musketiers, surprized the Town of Sabugal, fired 13 Houses, killed seven of the Inhabitants he found in Arms, and drove away all the Cattle he found. Not content with this, he returned by the way of Alfayates to brave the Garrison, but this boldness cost him dear. Ferdinand Tellez de Menezes the General who was with∣in two Leagues of that place, gathering 200 Horse and three Companies of Foot, sent to the Governour of Al∣fayates to joyn him with the best men he had, which was accordingly performed; that Governour bringing with him 200 Men. With this force they pursued the Spaniards, and having overtaken, fell upon them: The Fight was bravely maintained, for the Spaniards and Portugueses gave three several Charges in such a manner, that it was not discernable who had the better: being now fallen in after the Fire, with Sword in hand, and the Marquess de Elecha, the Spanish General, and D. Francis de Erasso, who was next in Command to him, being both Slain, Victory began to incline to the Por∣tugueses, for the Spaniards dismayed at the loss of their Commanders fled, leaving the Field strewed with Dead Bodies, Arms and Plunder which they quitted to save their Lives. The Portugueses were forward enough to have pursued them, but Ferdinand Tellez held them in, fearing to fall into some ambush, being to pass before the Enemy. The Duke of Alva's Enterprize redounded more to the honour of the Spaniards. He being desirous of do¦ing something considerable in Portugal, drew together 8000 Foot and 900 Horse, with which he entred Por∣tugal, burnt four open Towns, put many of the Inha∣bitants to the Sword, and finding a vigorous resistance at Eschallam, which place, he had caused to be Attack∣ed at the same time, he retired again, to avoid meeting all the Troops of the Frontiers drawn together to oppose him. 2. It was not only the success on the Frontiers that rendred the King of Portugal fortunate. Two Jesuits being procurators for the Provinces of Cochin and Goa in India, arriving at this time, brought him an Account how well affected the people in those distant Provin∣ces were to his interest. This happy News was a great addition to the joy of his success in War, for they assu∣red him that most of those Eastern Princes had joyned in League with his Vice-Roy, as soon as they under∣stood
he was restored to the Crown of his Ancestors. The King who omitted nothing that might encourage his faithful Servants, and gain him new Friends, sent away two Gallions, and six other Vessels, with all ne∣cessaries to the former, and with assurances to the latter, that they should always find in him a brotherly return of affection, as long as they continued their friendship to∣wards him. 3. Francis de Lucena,The Secre∣tary Fran∣cis Luce∣na, put to Death upon account of a suppo∣sed Conspi∣racy. Secretary of State ever since the Revolution, had upon complaints preferred against him by his Enemies been committed Prisoner to the Castle of St. Julian, but nothing being proved against him, after a long Imprisonment, the King had resolved to re∣store him to his Honour, when an unfortunate accident on a sudden brought him to an untimely end. The Count de Obidos General of the Province of Aleitejo hap∣ned to take a fellow coming from Badajoz, who prov∣ed to be Servant to Peter Bonete Adjutant to the Major-General. Upon examination, this Man declared that his Master held Correspondence with the Spaniards, and he being thereupon Apprehended and put upon the Rack, made a Confession, which at his Death, he de∣clared to be false; but wherein he accused D. Joseph de Meneses, Governour of Fort St. Julian of a Design of betraying it to the Spaniards, Francis de Lucena, the Secretary of holding Correspondence with them, and se∣veral others of joyning with them in these Treasonable practices. All the persons accused being put to Tor∣ture, some of them to the last, denied their knowledge of any such Treason, but others, to be eased of their misery, owned all that was laid to their Charge. Up∣on this weak evidence, several were put to Death. D. Joseph de Meneses, endured the Rack constantly, deny∣ing it, and being cured, the King offered him again a Command, but he refused it; saying, He was now re∣solved to serve him, who knew how to Reward services, and punish Offences. The unfortunate Secretary, Francis de Lucena, being put upon the Rack, and being weak with Age fainted away without Confessing. Never∣theless, though all had recanted that accused him, he was Condemned to Death as a Traytor, and suffered accordingly, positively denying any guilt in the matter he was accused of, to the last minute of his Life. The Rabble would have torn him in pieces when he was
brought Prisoner from the Castle of St. Julian, for in all Countries they are ready to devour the innocent, bu he was then preserved by the Guards, to be made a Sacri∣fice to that many headed Monster in a more solemn man∣ner, being publickly beheaded upon a Scaffold. 4. Whilst due Examination was making into this piece of Treachery,King John rewards those that suffered for the Conspi∣racy at Carthage∣. the King of Portugal made gene∣rous acknowledgments to the Count de Castelmelhor, on account of his good Endeavours and Sufferings before-mentioned. The post of General of the Frontiers, be∣twixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, given him as the first Reward of his Fidelity in the West-Indies, seeming too small a Recompence for a Service of such Consequence; he added to it a present of a considerable▪ Sum of Money, a Commendary of the Military Order of Christ, worth 2000 Crowns a Year, gave the reversion of it to his Children, and confirmed that Earldom to his third Ge∣neration. To Father Ambrose a Benedictin, concerned in the Counts Escape, he gave a Benefice. To Antony de Abien, Captain of the Caravel, that went for him a considerable Commendary. And because Dominick de Sylva, Antony Rodiguez the Spanish Corporal, two Souldiers that were upon the Guard, and the Dutch Captain that lent his Vessel to forward the undertaking, had all contributed to the Earl's Deliverance; they also were made par∣kers of the King's Bounty. The Dutch Captain had 2000 Crowns, Dominick de Sylva was Knighted, and had a Company in a Marine Regiment with a Pension. The Spanish Corporal had also a Company in the Land-Service, with a Pension as the other. The two Souldi∣ers were likewise made Captains, but without any other addition of Honour or Pension. These Acts of Genero∣sity in the King, redounded much to his Honour, as did no less his Prudence in placing good Commanders upon the Frontiers. George de Melo General of the Gal∣leys, was put into the Fort of St. Julian, to secure that Place, whilst D. Joseph de Mnezes the former Gover∣vernour was proceeded against. D. Francis de Sousa Cou∣tinho, returning from his Embassy of Sweden, had the Government of the Island Tercera conferred on him. D. Alvaro de Abranchez was appointed General of the Fron∣tiers of Beira, ad D. John de Sousa, of those of the Pro∣vince Tralos Montes.
5. About this time News was brought to Lisbon of two several Accidents which moved different Passions in the People.The King of Spain's Favourite disgraced. One was, that the Count Duke de Oliva∣rez had lost the favour of the Catholick King, whose prime Minister he had been for the space of 22 Years; and because his Government had appeared. Tyrannical to the Portugueses, there were few of them, who did not express extraordinary satisfaction at his fall. The other piece of News produced great Compassion in such as were least Zealous for Religion.Several Persons suf∣fered Mar∣tyrdom in Japan. F. Antony Francis Car∣din a Jesuit, and general Procurator for the Society in the Province of Japan, gave an account, that four Por∣tuguese Amabassadors from Macao, being at the Town of of Nangassaqui, with 66 Persons in their retinue, for the settling of Trade, and to endeavour the planting of the Faith there; the Emperor of that Island, whose Name was Toyogun, had cast them all into Dungeons, then put to Death the four Ambassadors, with 53 of the chief of their Retinue, and sent home the other 13 in derision of the Apostles, to carry the News of that Bloody Execution to Macao. The Dutch notwith∣standing the Cessation of Arms, betwixt the Crown of Portugal and the States of Holland, entred the City Ne∣gapatan in India; the Portugueses not being able to with∣stand them, and obliged them to ransom it for 110000 pieces of Eight. A Treaty was afterwards set on foot for settling a Truce betwixt the two Nations in those parts, but the Hollanders thinking it more for their Advantage to continue the War, soon broke it off. The next Act of Hostility they committed, was in the Island Ceylon, where thinking to surprize the Portugueses quarter'd in the Village Curaza, as relying on the Truce betwixt the two Nations, they marched against them; but they having intelligence of their coming, charged them with such Bravery, that of 400 Hollanders, scarce any escaped being kill'd or taken. This Victory gave the Portugue∣ses in that Island quiet for some time. But still the War was continued in other parts. After the Dutch had left Negapatan, it was besieged by a Neighbouring Nayque or Prince of the Indians, but he meeting with a vigorous opposition, soon desisted. 6. In America, the Portugueses under the command of Antony Teyxeyra, after a long Siege, recovered from the Dutch the City St. Luis of Maranhao, they being forc'd
to abandon it for want of Provisions, and most of them afterwards perished by the hands of the Indians, whom they had barbarously used. Our Affairs were not so successful in Angola where our Men under the Command of Peter Cesar were worsted by the Dutch, who after∣wards concluding a Truce with them, treacherously fell upon them, killing 40, taking 187 Prisoners, and for∣cing the rest to fly for safety to the Mountains. Our Fort at Mozambique enjoyed most Peace, for the Empe∣ror of Monomotapa having been lately converted to the Faith, by the religious of the Order of St. Dominick, professed an inviolable Friendship towards the Portugue∣ses, and had obtained a number of them of Julius Mo∣niz, the Governor of that Fort for his Guard. 7. The Pope always continuing fix'd in his Resoluti∣on,The Portu∣guese Am∣bassador at Rome not being ad∣mitted, re∣turns home. not to give Audience to the Bishop of Lamego, sent by the King of Portugal, with the quality of his Ambas∣sador to Rome, that Bishop was at length oblig'd to re∣turn home. He was conducted by some of the Duke of Florence's Horse to Leghorn, where four Portuguese Ships lay ready to carry him to Lisbon. D. Luis Perei∣ra de Castro Counsellor in his Majesties Council of Con∣science, was nevertheless chosen to undertake another Voyage to Rome. But because the rejecting of a se∣cond Ambassador might be of ill Consequence to the Crown of Portugal, this Counsellor took only the stile of Deputy of all the Clergy of the Kingdom, to repre∣sent their wants, and how prejudicial it was to refuse to admit an Ambassador from his Portuguese Majesty, who had omitted nothing that might tend to convince the Christian World of his Zeal for Religion, and his Respect to the Holy See. Anno, 1644. 1. IN pursuance to the League concluded betwixt the Kings of France and Portugal;Great Pre∣parations both in Spain and Portugal. the former excited the latter, to invade the Territories of Spain with all his Power by Sea and Land, that so he might be put in∣to a Condition to make the greater progress in Catalonia. Hereupon King John gave Orders for gathering an Ar∣my of 12000 Foot and 2000 Horse, which was to enter Castile by the way of Alentejo. The Catholick King
having Advice hereof, the better to secure his Dominions on that side, whilst he attended the Affairs of Catalonia, gave the command of his Army in Estremadura, to the Marquess de Torrecusa. Mathias de Albuquerque having served the King of Portugal well, was by him continu∣ed General of the Frontiers. The first attempt made by the Marquess proved unfortunate, for he could not make himself Master of Ougela, a little Town in Portu∣gal, which after the Gate had been forced with a Pe∣tard, was bravely defended by the Inhabitants, for the space of six Hours.The Por∣tuguese ar∣my in E∣stremadu∣ra. Among the other Defendants, a Woman did Wonders with a Baker's Peel; and though wounded, could never be perswaded to retire till the Assault was given over. The Portugueses after this were not slack to return the Spaniards their Visit at Mentejo; which place, though well fortifyed and defended by four Companies, they assaulted and took by Scalade, where falling disorderly to Plunder, the Spaniards took the op∣portunity to rally, and fell upon them so resolutely, that they had all Perished, but that the Monteiero Mor came in opportunely with his Horse, and forced the Spaniards to retire to the River Guadiana, where many of them were drowned. Hence the Portugueses advanced, and ra∣sed Membrillo an open Town, save a Trench that had been thrown up about it. The same they did to Villa Nueva de Barcarota, but attempted not the Castle, in which was D. Francis de Velasco, Lieutenant General of the Horse of Castile, who having but 500 Horse with him, was not able to appear in the Field against the Por∣tugueses. They being now 6000 Foot and 1100 Horse▪ with 6 pieces of Canon, took and destroyed Villar del Re, Roca de Almanacite and Puebla, all Towns of E∣stremadura. These Actions of the Portugueses struck to the Heart of the Marquess de Torrecusa, as perceiving a sort of Faintness in his Soldiers, which looked like infa∣tuation, being wholly opposite to the natural Bravery of the Spaniards. He called a Council of War, in which he proposed to take the Field, and give the Enemy Bat∣tle. Many applauded his Propositions, yet others advi∣sed to besiege Olivenza, as the strongest of the Enemies Garrisons, which would draw their Forces out of Spain, and perhaps necessitate them to give Battle upon Terms of Disadvantage. This opinion wanted not some to sup∣port it, but the Marquess and others persisting in the Re∣solution
of hazarding a Battle, their Authority prevailed. The Spanish Army consisted of 7000 Foot, and 2600 Horse in 34 Troops, under the command of the Baron de Molinguen, who was now to command the whole Ar∣my, because the Marquess was to stay at Badajoz. These Forces met the Enemy sooner than they ex∣pected. 2. On the 26 of May, 1644,The Spa∣nish Forces defeated. Albuquerque the Portu∣guese General, finding himself reduc'd to that necessity, that he must either fight or fly, chose rather to hazard a Battle, than forfeit his Reputation. He performed the Office of a Major General, ordering his Battle himself. The command of the Right Wing he gave to the Monte∣iro Mor, and the Left to the Commissary General, who had under him the Dutch Horse, commanded by Captain Piper. The two Armies ingaged, and the Spaniards gave such a furious Charge on the Portuguese Left Wing, where the Commissiary commanded, that the Dutch Horse fled, and running upon their own Foot, so disor∣der'd that part of the Army, that the Spaniards drove them from their Ground; their General being in danger to be bruised to Death, his Horse falling upon him, but a French Captain saved him, giving him another Horse that ran lose, and sustaining the shot of the Enemy till he mounted. Being delivered from that Danger, he had recourse to the Body of reserve, which advancing to the Place, which the Spanish Horse had left to pursue the Dutch, and others that fled, made such Havock among the Foot, before Victorious, that they were forced to fly. The Horse returning from the pursuit, and seeing the Foot broke, could never be brought to a Charge, but betook themselves to their Heels, quitting their Cannon and Baggage. Of the Spaniards, about 2000 Foot and 700 Horse were killed and taken, with about 40 Colours and Standards. Of the Portuguese, 750 were slain, and among them two Collonels. The Portugueses continued a Day in the field of Battle, least the Spaniards should return and vaunt they had kept it. King John rejoycing at this Victory which secured his Crown, crea∣ted the General Earl of Alegrette, giving him a Pension of 4000 Crowns, and rewarded many other of the Prin∣cipal Men in the Army. The Marquess of Torrecusa la∣boured to gather all the Forces of Estremadura; being grieved he was not present at the Battle, as believing it
lost for want of Conduct, and it troubled him the more, because he was the adviser of it. 3. Whilst these things hapned in Estremadura, several Incursions were made on all the Frontiers of the King∣dom, but in them was nothing Memorable, for the Portu∣gueses were most upon the Defensive, and the Spaniards only kept the War afoot, till the affairs of Catalonia might be settled, that then they might turn their whole Force to this side.A sham Conspiracy. About this same time, D. George de Mascarenhas, Count de Monte Albano who was of the Council of State, and had other great Employments, was impeached of Conspiring with others against the King, for which he was committed to the Castle of Be∣lem, and the rest to other Prisons. Upon Examination, the Accusation was found malicious and groundless, whereupon he and all the others on the second of No∣vember were honorably discharged, and restored to their Estates and Honours. At this time also dyed the Arch-bishop of Braga, one of the managers of the first Conspiracy against the King. Dying, he made it his request to the King, that he would pardon his Treache∣ry, and grant that his Body might be Buryed without some Parish Church, without any inscription upon it, to the end, no Memory might survive of one that hath been Traytor to his King. 4. The Portuguese Governors on the Coasts of America at length concluded a Truce with the Count de Nassan,The Affairs of Ameri∣ca. who governed at Pernambuco for the Hollanders. Yet so far were they from observing the Articles of it, that they rais'd a new Fort at Segeripe, took several of our Ships, and committed many Barbarities against the Portugueses; that according to composition, remained under them at Pernambuco. These things moved John Fernandez Veigra, and Francis Berenguer, to lay the design this Year of expelling them that Province; the success of their Enterprize belongs to another place. In Africk, Tangier had till this time held for the Spaniards, but now the Garrison secured their Governor, sent him Prisoner to Lisbon,The Dutch contrary to Faith gi∣ven, take several places in India. and declared for King John. The Moors thought to have surprized that City, and gave a desperate As∣sault, but were repulsed with great Loss. The Dutch in India, notwithstanding their repeated Orders from the States to cease from all Hostilities, still found pre∣tences to carry on the War; and landing a great num∣ber
of Men in Ceylon, took the Fort of Negumbo, having first overthrown the Portugueses that were to defend it; they presuming, though much inferiour in Number, and contrary to their Orders to meet the Enemy in open Field, who pursuing them after the defeat, entred the Fort in that Heat, putting above 300 of our men to the Sword. The City Macao in China was near falling a∣gain into the Hands of the Spaniards; many of the In∣habitants favouring their interest, and raising a dangerous Tumult to promote the same, but by the Courage of Sebastian Lobo the Governour, who fired from the Castle upon the City, together with the In∣terposition of the Jesuits, it was again reduced to Obe∣dience. Gonzalo Sequeyra was sent Ambassador by the King to the Emperor of Japan, but through the Instiga∣tion of the Hollanders was not received. Anno, 1645. 1. THis Year the King having regard to the good Ser∣vice done by the Earl of Castello-Melhor,Actions in the Pro∣vince of A∣lentejo. in the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, appointed him Ge∣neral of Alentejo. In April he took possession of that Command, and at the same time received intelligence that the Marquess de Leganez was come to Badajoz, to command the Spanish Army. Soon after the Counts Ar∣rival at Badajoz, 500 Spanish Horse made an Incursion into the Territory of Campo Mayor, whence they retired with great Booty. In their retreat, the two Captains Emanuel de Gama Lobo and D. Charles Jordano, charged them with 300 Portuguese Horse, recovered the Prey, and took from them 80 Horses. The Count de Ca∣stello Melhor, presently after attempted to drive the Country about Badajoz, and to that purpose marched with 800 Horse and 1500 Foot, but returned with∣out doing any thing more, than driving the Ene∣mies advanced Parties to the Walls of Badajoz. In re∣turn, the Spaniards with a Body of 700 Horse, fell in∣to the Country of Barbacena and Sancta Olaya, which is two Leagues from Elvas and Campo Mayor; the Horse of both which Places, to the Number of 500, joyning, charged them in their Retreat, reco∣vered all the Booty, and took 60 of their Horses. The
Count de Castelmelhor having thoroughly examined the strength of Badajoz, thought to have surprized that place, and in order to it marched with 5500 Foot, and 1200 Horse, two Petards, and eight pieces of Canon, which last being useless for a surprize, were the cause he failed of his design, for the Carriages breaking by the way, (as was thought rather through the malice of those who had them in charge than neglect) so much time was spent in fixing them again, that it was day before he could reach the Fort of Telena, which being a League from the City, he was forced to return without attempt∣ing any thing to Elvas. 2. The King having certain intelligence that the Spa∣nish Army daily increased at Badajoz, gave out all the necessary Orders for his Troops to Rendesvouz at El∣vas, and to be himself the more at hand, went over to Aldea Gallega, which was the cause that many of the Nobility and Gentry repaired to the Army.The Spa∣nish Army on the Por∣tuguese Frontiers. On the 25th day of October, the Marquess de Leganez, marched from Badajoz, with 12000 Foot, 3000 Horse, 10 pieces of Cannon, and a Train proportionable, and halted in sight of the Bridge of Olivenza, and Fort St. Antony. In two days he took the said Fort, and another at the foot of the Bridge, both which, he demolished, and broke several Arches of the Bridge, to cut off the Com∣munication of Olivenza. Whilst the Spaniards were bu∣sie at this work, a Party of 600 of their Horse, meet∣ing 400 of our Foot, under the Command of Major John da Fonseca Barreta, within two Leagues of Estre∣moz, cut most of them off, the Major being the first that Fled; whereas, he might have easily drawn his Men within an Inclosure which was by, and have there∣by secured them against any Horse. The King of the Mal∣divy Islands, in India, being now come to Portugal, to crave Aid of the King against a Brother who had Usur∣ped the Crown; served in the Army this Campaign, and was treated with all imaginable respect. Count Castelmelhor, having drawn together all the Force he could, and being yet Inferiour to the Enemy, kept him∣self still within the Olive-Gardens at Elvas, but conti∣nually sent out Parties to Alarm the Enemy. D. Rode∣rick de Castro, with 1000 Horse, and 500 Musketiers, sustaining one of those Parties, the Enemy Charged it, and pursuing too far, he cut off 90 of their Horse. A∣nother
of our Parties being beyond Badajoz, took the Count de Izinguen, who came to be Lieutenant-Gene∣ral of Horse, in the Spanish Army, and being sent to Lisbon, continued a long time Prisoner in the Castle of Belem. The Marquess de Leganez, having done nothing more than break the Bridge, and demolish the two Forts, returned towards Badajoz, and in 12 days ere∣cted a new Fort at Telena, near that City, destroying at the same time a Tower, in which, was an Ensign and 15 of our Men, a League from Elvas. This is all that was done of moment, in the Province of Alentejo, and both Armies went into Winter-Quarters. 3. In the Province betwixt Duero and Minho,The War in the Provin∣ces betwixt Duero and Minho, and Tralos Montes. there was no memorable Action; only small inroads made on both sides: But the Province Tralos Montes, enjoy∣ed perfect Peace, both Parties lying still, each fearing to provoke the other. D. Ferdinand Mascarenhas, Count de Serem, Governed Beira. At his first coming thither, the Spaniards drove a Prey from about Villa Tropim, and Malpartida, but Captain Ruy Tavarez de Brito, o∣vertaking them with 100 Horse, recovered all, though at the cost of his own Life. Soon after, the Enemy lay∣ed Siege to Salvaterra, but without success; for the Count having drawn together all the Force he could make to relieve it, and being reinforced from Alentejo, they broke up the Siege and departed. They being gone, the Count fortified the Frontier places, and obli∣ged the Countrey People to retire farther from the bor∣ders, because he was inferiour to the Enemy in For∣ces. 4. We left John Fernandez Vieyra,Actions of John Fer∣nandez Vieyra in Brazil a∣gainst the Dutch. the last Year in the Mountains of Pernambuco, expecting succours from Ba∣hia, to make War upon the Hollanders. They laid se∣veral designs to take him, but he having timely notice; still escaped their hands. They promised 1000 Florins Reward for his Head, and he on the other side offered 8000 Crusados for any of the Heads of those of their su∣pream Council. Henry Hus was sent with 1500 Dutch, and 800 Indians, into the Mountains, to cut him off with all his Party; but he having gathered 1200 men, where∣of only 200 had Fire-Arms, posted himself so advanta∣geously, and received them with such resolution, that after a dispute of several hours, they were totally rou∣ted with much slaughter, and had not the Night shel∣tered
them, none had returned to carry the News. The Arms taken in this Action were the principal part of the Booty, because of the great want of them there was among the Portugueses. John Hus, revenged himself up∣on the innocent Inhabitants of the Towns of St. Lau∣rence and Apopucos, who lived under the protection of the Dutch, robbing and putting them to the rack. Soon after Antony Philip Camarao, and Henry Dias, with the Blacks and Indians under their Command, joyned John Fernandez Vieyra. Andrew Vidall, also sent with some Foot, by Antony Tellez, Governour of Bahia, to ap∣prehend John Fernandez, for breaking the Truce with the Dutch, took part with him against them. Advice being brought them that the Hollanders plundered Var∣zea, and carried away the Women that were there, they marched with all speed and defeating them in the Field, obliged those that retired into a House to sur∣render themselves. Though the Hollanders complained that Andrew Vidal being sent to their assistance, had joyned their Enemies, yet they as soon as he was lan∣ded, had burnt the Ships that brought him from Bahia. 5. The Dutch going about to disarm the Portuguese Inhabitants of the Town of Sirinhaem,Faithless proceedings of the Dutch in Brazil. they were so in∣censed, that gathering together under Hypolito de Ver∣coza, they drove them not only out of the Town but out of the Fort, whither they had fled for safety. At Pontal de Nazareth, our Men had also Besieged the Dutch in the Fort, and Martin Sourez Moreno, with his Regiment coming to the assistance of the Besiegers; Theodosius Straet, the Governour, underhand contrived how to deliver it up to them, and he with most of his Men entred into their Service. Andrew Vidal, who had been in this last Action, having again joyned John Fer∣nandez Vieyra, they resolved to block up the place called Arrecife, and the City Mauricea, which was im∣mediately put in execution, all the Forces being posted in the most convenient places, to cut off the Enemy from all relief by Land. They Attacked and took the Fort St. Cruz, seated betwixt the Arrecife and the Town of Olinda, the Commander with 60 Men taking Ser∣vice among the Portugueses. The Fort of Porto Calvo, was also taken by Christopher Lins, the Garrison being streightned for Provisions, and he having intercepted a Vessel coming to their relief.
6. Whilst these things were doing, the Portugueses of the River of St. Francis, following the example of the rest of their Countrey-Men, falling upon the Dutch, who would have secured the principal Men among them, flew some, and drove the rest out of Town. Then be∣sieging them in the Fort, and being reinforced by some Companies sent by the Governour of Bahia, they obli∣ged them to surrender, and rased the Fort, that the E∣nemy might never think of recovering it. Andrew de Rocha de Antas, and Valentin de Rocha were the princi∣pal promoters and managers of this enterprize, who ha∣ving delivered their own Province▪ marched with the Soldiers and such others as would follow them, to joyn John Fernandez, and his Forces before Arrecife. Here it was resolved to Attack the Island Itamaraca, whence the Besieged had all their sustenance. The De∣sign was put in execution with 800 Men, who falling to plunder before they had secured the Victory, were repulsed, 80 of them being slain, and many wounded. The Besieged made a great sally upon the quarter where Henry Dias Commanded, but his Blacks received them with such bravery that very few returned to the Town. Nevertheless, having agreed with a Regiment of Dutch, that served the Portugueses, that in the heat of the Acti∣on they should fall upon them; they ventured to make another Sally, but with no better success, the Treache∣ry of the Hollanders being timely prevented by their Col∣lonel, who suspected their fidelity. A few days after, 130 of them Deserted, whereupon the rest were disar∣med, and sent away to Bahia, except only the Colonel, Theodosius Straet, who was found innocent, and served to the last. But it is time we leave them to the next Year. 7. At Tangier, the new Governour D. Gaston Coutinho, made an inroad into the Countrey, with 150 Horse, overthrew a Party of Moors, and returned with a great booty, which proved fatal to Tangier; for the Plague then raging among the Moors, was brought into the Town, and in half a years time carried off 1700 persons; a great number for that small place. The Affairs of India we related in the last Year, and have nothing more, but that D. Philip de Mascarenhas, the new Vice-Roy Arrived at Goa, from Ceylon, and entred upon the Government. The Truce with the Hollanders
is the cause there will be little to say relating to those parts. Six Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon for India, and arrived in safety. Anno, 1646. 1. D. John Mendez de Vasconcellos, the Portuguese Ge∣neral for the Province of Alentejo,The Portu∣gueses ra∣vage the Frontiers of Estrema∣dura. had an Ar∣my of 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, about Elvas, ra∣ther to serve the interest of the Catalonians, than for any desire King John had to make any incursion into Estremadura. D. Roderick de Castro, General of the Horse, and his Lieutenant, D. John Mascarenhas, were ordered to march with 600 Horse, carrying 300 Foot behind them to Olivenza, where they should receive farther Or∣ders, of what was to be done on the 17th of July, at Night. They marched with great secrecy, and having there received instructions, continued their march thence all Night, and at break of day without meeting the least opposition, entred, plundered and burnt the Town of Sta. Marta, bringing away a great booty, though the place was eight Leagues up the Countrey, betwixt Ba∣dajoz and Cafra.The same from the Province of Beira. The Portugeses of the Province of Beira, were not idle, but made a road as far as Valverde, driving away all the Cattle, and taking many Prisoners. Not content with what was done, they advanced to Silleros, a place six Leagues higher in the Countrey; but here they met not with their usual success, for after some skirmishing, they were forced to retire. The Spaniards to divert the Enemy from ravaging Castile, on the 5th of August, Attacked Fiaces, but to no purpose, for tho' the Wall was low and weak, it was so resolutely de∣fended that they were forced to quit the enterprize. 2. Wherever the Portugueses came,The Portu∣gueses take Codisseira. they utterly de∣stroyed all before them, that the Enemies Frontiers be∣ing bare and desolate, they might find the greater diffi∣culties, if they attempted to invade Portugal. Now to remove the Spaniards still farther off, and in case the War continued to employ them about recovering of their own, or if a Treaty of Peace were set on Foot, to have something to restore, they were resolv'd to attempt the taking of Codisseira. This place was considerable as well for its Riches, as the Strength of the Castle
and Number of its Garrison. The Count de Alegrette, who as has been said, was rewarded with that Title by the King, to show himself worthy of it, resolved to use his utmost Endeavours to gain this place. It was diffi∣cult to carry it by open Force and a Seige, and there∣fore he concluded upon a Surprize. Having chosen 600 Foot, and some Troops of Horse, backed by a good Number of Voluntiers, and provided Scaling Ladders, Petards, and all other Necessaries, he Marched by the way of Portalegre and Elvas to Aronches, where he was reinforced by other Troops and Voluntiers, with which Forces he posted himself within a League of Codisseira. There he halted till Night, having secured all the Men he met by the way; That none might carry Intelligence to the Enemy. His eagerness made him think it dark enough sooner than really it was; And therefore ap∣proaching the Place, whilst yet some glimmering of Light was abroad, he was discovered at a distance, by a Sharp sighted Sentinel, who giving the Alarm in the Town, was soon answered by the Castle, in both which Places, As well the Inhabitants as Souldiers, Ran to the Walls, and put themselves in a posture of Defence. Notwithstanding, all the opposition made from the Walls, the Portugueses boldly made up to the Gate, and Fired the Petards at the Town and Castle Gates, which were torn in pieces, and they Entring put to the Sword, all they found in Arms. D. John de Guevara, was reti∣red into the great Market-place with many of his Offi∣cers, hoping there to Maintain his honour; but the harm they did among the Portugueses, enraged them the more, so that they were scarce satisfyed to disarm and make them prisoners of War. The Danger being over, they fell to plundering the Town, and not so content set fire to it, reducing to ashes the place they designed to have maintained. This success made the Victors think of attempting Badajoz. They marched to Telena, a Fort Built the foregoing Year,They At∣tempt Ba∣dajoz. by the Marquess de Le∣ganez, -work to Badajoz. There were in it, 150 Spaniards, who at the first Summons, basely Sur∣rendred upon discretion; and the Fort was demolished. Whilst the  were at work, the Forces advanced to Badajoz, where the Marquess de Moinguen was Go∣vernour, who presently marched out with 7000 Foot, and 150 . The Portugueses tho' much inferior in
number stood their Ground, and obstinately defended themselves for the space of seven Hours, but were at last forced to retire, having lost many Men, besides many more wounded. The Spaniards say, the Fort of Telena was not Demolished, but left in the same Condi∣tion the Portugueses found it, they wanting time to ruin the Works, or remove any thing out of it, being forced to retreat with Precipitation. 3. Nothing better was the success of the Marquess de Aytona,Actions in the Pro∣vince of Beira. the Catholick King's General, betwixt the Ri∣vers Duero and Minho, in his design of surprizing Salva∣terra. He marched with 600 Foot, and 500 Horse, but the Count de Castelmelhor, who commanded the Por∣tugueses in that Province, understanding his Design, post∣ed himself under the Walls of that Place; and the Mar∣quess perceiving his Intentions had taken Air, posted himself not far off, and being master of the Field, erect∣ed a Fort upon an Eminence, that might serve as a Bri∣dle upon the Garrison of Salvaterra, and where he might be at Hand upon any Opportunity, to throw himself into that place which was very considerable, as being upon the Frontiers of Beira. Some considerable Action might reasonably be expected here, the Spaniards keep∣ing to their Strength, and the Portuguese to theirs, and the Forces on both sides daily encreasing. The Spanish Army grew up to the Number of 10000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, which on the 20 of November, undertook the Siege of Salvaterra, and pressed it so vigorously, that they soon lodged themselves upon the Ditch, and had be∣gun to mine, hoping in few days to carry the place. This was the posture of their Affairs, when understan∣ding that all the Forces of the Province of Beira, com∣manded by Count Seren, reinforced by others of Alen∣tejo, under the Conduct of D. Sancho Manuel, were marching with all possible speed to the Relief of the Town, they raised the Siege with such Precipitation, that they left behind them much Provision, Am∣munition, their Baracks, and about 300 sick and lame Souldiers. The Portugueses coming later then they had hoped, as those who were stayed by the violent Rains, were much troubled to be disappointed of meeting the Spanish Army, the routing of which they had promised to themselves, and greater Security to their Frontiers for the future. Having burnt the Baracks, and the
Country round about, they returned to their Winter-quarters, as the Spaniards had done on their side. 4. Thus stood all the Affairs on both sides,Both sides cease from Hostilities. when as well the one as the other perceived that this sort of Acti∣on served only to harrass themselves. The Catholick King seemed to maintain an Army to no purpose, since in 5 or 6 Years time, he had done nothing but waste Mony, and loose Men and Ground. All the Portugueses did, was to destroy Towns, frighten the Country Peo∣ple, and kill some few Soldiers. These Considerations moved both Parties to put their standing Forces into Garrisons, and forbear farther Hostilites. Whilst the Catholick King attended the Affairs of Catalonia, and made his Interest at Rome, to obstruct the new King's being treated as such by the Pope, and the vacant Bene∣fices in Portugal, to be filled by Men of that Princes presenting; he laboured to heap up Treasure of the Riches brought him from India, that whenever the Catholick King should renew the War, he might not want Mo∣ney, which is the Life and Sinews of all Armies. He also took care to strengthen himself with Friends and Confederates, and having secured the King of France, his Ministers endeavoured to joyn in Amity with the new Common-wealth of England.Portugues Affairs at Rome. It remained to solli∣cite the Friendship of the See of Rome, not only by per∣forming the publick Act of Obedience, and filling the vacant Churches, but by satisfying that Court, as to two Points, which it seemed to resent. One was, that King John persisted in retaining some Revenues taken from the Church. The other, that he kept the Arch-bishop of Braga Prisoner, for which he was excommunicated, and therefore the Pope demanded, that the Revenues should be restored, and the Arch-bishop put into his Hands, as being his proper Judge. To those things the Portuguese Ministers answer'd, that had the Pope sent his Nuncio, the Dispute about those Revenues, might have been easily accommodated; it being made appear, that the Crown was in possession of them for about 600 Years. And as to the Arch-bishop, that he being guilty of High-Treason, what the King had done, was justifi∣able according to the Canons, and therefore he could in∣cur no Censure of the Church. Nevertheless, the King was ready to commit the Tryal of that Cause to such Judges, as his Holiness should appoint; but not to deli∣ver
his Person, because of the danger there was, that he should be set at Liberty by the way, if he touched at any port of Spain; as also, because King John not be∣ing yet owned as such at Rome, they would not adjudge the Arch-bishop guilty of High-Treason. The Court of Rome seemed satisfyed as to this Point, but not as to the other. 5. In this place it will not be amiss to relate the end of the Misfortunes befallen to Edward,Of Ed∣ward Bro∣ther to King John Brother to King John. It was said above, how he was taken in Germa∣ny, where he served the Emperor, and delivered up to the Ministers of Spain, as guilty of being privy to the revolt of Portugal. It was layed to his Charge, that being a Subject of the King of Spain, he had not disco∣vered to him the designed revolt of that Kingdom. On this account, he was put into the Castle of Milan, where fresh Evidence was found against him. He was kept with Guards upon him in the very Room, all his own Servants being removed from him, upon Suspicion that they contrived his Escape. The Governor of the Ca∣stle imagining that his Confessor who was a Jesuit, might have a hand in that Contrivance; sent him word to chose another, so it were a Subject of the King of Spain, and no Jesuit, letting him also know, that every now and then he must change his Confessor. This Message be∣ing delivered by the Lieutenant of the Castle, D. Ed∣ward broke out into a Passion, which he had never done before, and among many other rash Expressions, said, His Comfort was, that he suffered for the King his Bro∣ther, for his Family and Country, for which he was willing to lay down his Life. This the Lieutenant deposed a∣gainst him; and several Soldiers also restifyed, that being upon his Guard, they had heard him drink a Health to the King his Brother. The Governor having taken those depositions, there came a Commission from Spain, appointing three Judges to try him, and they again ex∣amined all the Witnesses; then they proceeded to ex∣amine the Prisoner himself, who being asked what he knew of the design of revolting in Portugal; utterly de∣nyed he had any knowledge of it, but unadvisedly in his Discourse, added, that being at Lisbon, F. Bartholomew Gerreiro a Jesuit had told him, that many Sebastianists (so they called those affected to the line of Braganzza) de∣sired him not to depart Portugal, because they thought his
Presence necessary for carrying on their Designs; that ne∣vertheless he would not see any of them, but went away for Germany. Next, they asked him whether he had gi∣ven the King (meaning the Catholick King) an account of those Words; he said he had not, as making no ac∣count of them, but had immediately departed the Kingdom. They also put Questions to him about the Healths he had drunk, and the words he spoke upon the changing his Confessor, but they laid the chief stress on the words spoke by F. Guerreiro, and his not discovering them to the King, for which they pretended he was guilty of High-Treason, and consequently deserved Death. D. Edward pleaded, that he being a Knight of the Military Order of Christ, the judgment of secular Judges against him was void. To this they answered, that in cases of High-Treason, those Priviledges cease; besides that, two of the Judges were also Knights of Military Orders. Death put an end to this Controver∣sie, for the Prisoner falling Sick, either through his long Suffering, or some other Cause, put the same period to his Life and Imprisonment. 6. For the better settlement of the Affairs of the Na∣tion,The Cortes or Parlia∣ment meet. then in some disorder, through the long continu∣ance of the War; the King had summoned the Cortes or Parliament to meet in December, of the foregoing Year. They being accordingly assembled, redressed ma∣ny Grievances, occasioned by the Army; ordered, that for defence of the Frontiers, there should be kept in Pay, 16000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and as well for the pay∣ment of them, as other Expences of the War, assigned 2150000 Cruzados, which in English Money, is 286666 l. 13 s—4 d. allowing 3000 Reis to the pound, according to the common Computation. 7. We left the Portugueses at Pernambuco last Year, successful on both sides,The War in Brazil. and besieging the Hollanders in their Towns, all along the Coast. These last, erected a new Fort, to secure the Communication between Sinco Pontas, and Afgados, but their Garrisons attempting to cast down the Woods that were in the way, were o∣bliged to quit that Work, with the loss of many Men. At the same time, D. Antony Philip Camarhao, who was gone to reduce the Indians of Rio Grande, gave a great overthrow to the Dutch, who came to attack him with 500 Men of their own, and 1000 Indians. The News of this suc∣cess,
being brought to John Ferdinandez Viegra, he sent for Andrew Vidal, with six Companies to reinforce the Victors. To the end, the Enemy might not perceive his Forces were lessened, he kept them in continual A∣larm; and Henry Diaz, who commanded the Blacks, with only his own Men, took the new Fort the Dutch had erected, putting all within it to the Sword. An∣drew Vidal, at Paraiba, having laid himself in Ambush, sent out 40 Portugueses, who drew 220 Dutch and Indi∣an into the Snare, where they all perished. Both the Besieged and the Besiegers at Pernambuco suffered great Want, but several methods were found to relieve the latter. The former had no hopes, but in a Fleet they expected from Holland▪ They had three Ships, which lay to secure their passage to the Island Itamaraca, and other parts of the Continent, which John Fernandez Vieyra perceiving, he attack'd them with 500 Men in Boats, who took one, and burnt the other two, then passing over to the Shore, he drove the Defendants from several small redoubts, and erected a Fort at the Port St. Mark, in which he left 200 Men with 18 pieces of Can∣non, which he had taken from the Enemy. 8. The Dutch were now reduced to the last Extremi∣ty,The Dutch in Brasil receive Succors. when 3 Ships arrived from Holland, bringing Provi∣sions, Ammunition and Men; as also an Account, that two Fleets were fitting out, the one to secure Per∣nambuco, the other to conquer Bahia. Near the same time, a small Ship and two Caravels, brought some re∣lief to the Besiegers from Portugal. John Farnandez Vieyra, was several times warned, that a Conspiracy was carryed on against his Life; yet he still slighted the Advice, till being one day advanced from his Company, he saw three Fire-locks levelled at him, whereof only one gave Fire, and shot him through the Shoulder. Ne∣vertheless he pardoned the Conspirators, contenting him∣self with only a verbal Check, given them Face to Face. Now at length, arrived a great Fleet from Holland, un∣der the Command of Sigismund Van Scop, with 4000 Men, and all other Necessaries. To oppose this great Power, the Portuguese Commanders gather'd all the Soul∣diers and Inhabitants, that were before dispersed in pla∣ces of less Consequence, and so considerably encreased their Force, that they stood no longer in fear of their E∣nemies. On the 5th. of August, Sigismund Van Scop mar∣ched
with 1200 Men, to attack the Town of Olinda; but a pass that led to it, being well fortifyed, he twice assaulted it, and was as often repulsed with great loss, and himself wounded. The following Night, 1000 Men sallyed upon one of the Portuguese Quarters, but with with no better Success. After this, Sigismund rai∣sed some small Forts in convenient places, as well to secure that Coast, as to amuze his Enemies; his design being as soon as his Fleet could be made ready, to sail for Bahia, and make himself Master of that Place, but that belongs to another Year. 9. Africk this Year affords us nothing remarkarble,Affairs in Africk and India. only some Incursions of D. Gaston Coutinho, Governor of Tangier, and the Martyrdome of Sebastian Gomez, who suffered Death with exquisite Torments, for his constan∣cy in the Faith. D. Phillip Mascarenhas, continued in the Government of India, where likewise there happen∣ed little of moment, by reason of the Truce with the Dutch; only about the latter end of April, 46 Sail ly∣ing at Anchor, without the Bar of Goa, ready to sail the next day; such a sudden violent Storm arose, that not a Vessel, or so much as one Man was saved, but all to∣gether perished in the Sea. Anno, 1647. 1. JOhn Mendez de Vasconcells,Several Enterprises on the Fron∣tiers of A∣lentejo. who still commanded in Alentejo, finding his Forces too weak to with∣stand the many Incursions of the Enemy, applyed him∣self with great diligence to fortifie the Frontiers, and particularly Ouguela, and Campo Mayor; but upon Ad∣vice, that the King had appointed Martin Alfonso de Melo, Governor of that Province, he retired to Lisbon, being unwilling to serve under him. Andrew de Albu∣querque, General of the Artillery, commanded during the Absence of the Governour. No sooner was he vest∣ed with this Power, but the Spaniards made an Incursi∣on with all their Horse, into the Country, betwixt Ge∣romenha, and Elvas, and carryed away a great Prey; Albuquerque, though he drew out of Elvas, being too weak to oppose them. To revenge this, he sent Henry de Lamorle with some Troops, to draw out the Spani∣ards of Albuquerque, which he managed so dexterously,
that bringing them into an ambush they were totally rou∣ted, and 120 Horses taken. The Enemy made another Incursion towards Olivenza, but as they retired, 200 Portuguese Horse Charging them in the Rear, recovered all the Booty. At this time came to Elvas, Martin Al∣fonso de Melo, the new Governour. The Baron de Mo∣linguen General of Horse, Commanded the Spanish For∣ces. He gathered 1200 Horse, and advanced towards Elvas, 800 Horse, and three Regiments of Foot march∣ed out upon the alarm. Martin Alfonso sent the Horse before, ordering Andrew de Albuquerque to Attack the Enemy, if he found them on this side the Rivers Gua∣diana or Caya. Albuquerque Detached the Commissary-Ge∣neral, D. John de Ataide, with four Troops, and the same Orders. D. John finding only a part of the Ene∣my on this side, would not Charge them, which Anto∣ny Jaques de Payva perceiving, he fell on with his Troop, but being overpowered, his Men fled; those with D. John, instead of seconding, followed their example, as did also those that were with Albuquerque. The Spa∣niards pursued, till they discovered our Foot, and An∣drew de Albuquerque rallying his Horse under their shel∣ter, when having no Foot, they drew off carrying a∣way 40 Prisoners. John Paschasius Cosmander, our prin∣cipal Ingenier, passing betwixt Estremoz and Elvas, was unhappily taken by a Spanish Party. The King offered the Count de Singuen in exchange for him, but the Spa∣niards left no methods untried to bring him to their Ser∣vice, till at last they prevailed. 2. The Count de Castello Melor,Actions be∣twixt the Rivers Du∣ero and Minho. who Governed the Province betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, Un∣derstanding that the Count de S. Estevan, General of Galicia, was to March with 1500 Foot, and 400 Horse, to visit the Frontiers, sent out of Salvaterra, Collonel Francis de Franca Barboza, with 450 Foot, to possess himself of an Advantageous Post called Maley∣tas, near the River Minho, and a Musquet Shot from Salvaterra. The Adjutant Labarta, was Ordered with 20 Horse, to attack the Enemies Scouts, and as if he were Overpowered, to retire and draw the Enemy within the reach of the Foot. Labarta Executed his Orders, and was pursued by 5 Battalions of the Enemy. With Francis de Franca, were 100 Dutch, who fled at the sight of the Enemy, and many Potugueses followed
their example, however Francis de Franca with such as stood by him made good his ground till the Spaniards retired. The Province Tralos Montes still pteserved its quiet, both Parties being inclinable to admit of it. Count Seren who Governed Beyra, having Obtained Leave to quit that Post, the King divided it into two Parts, Appointing two Generals because the Province was Large. D. Roderick de Castro had the Territory about Guarda, Pinhel and Lamego. D. Sancho Manuel that about Castelbranco, Viseu and Coimbra. D. Roderick being come into his Province, immediately disposed all things for the Defence of it, and repulsed a Party of the Enemy that broke in by the way of Alfayates. His next design was to take the Fort of Galegos, 4 Leagues from Almeyda, and 2 from Cuidad Rodrigo. To this purpose he gathered 60 Foot of the Standing-Forces, and 2500 of the Militia, with 160 Horse, and 3 pieces of heavy Canon. On the 23d of August, he marched from Almeyda, and the next day came before Gallegos, Plan∣ted a battery, and began to play upon the Place, but perceiving it required more time to make a breach than he could well spare, and Understanding the Garrisons of all the Neighbouring places were marched to Cuidad Rodrigo, to Relieve Gallegos, he thought a Fair Oppor∣tunity was offered him of taking St. Felices, a Place of more consequence. Wherefore they Instantly broke up, and marched towards it with 120 Foot, and 120 Horse, and by the way Understood, that all the Gar∣rison of the place was marched, except 300 Foot, and 800 of the Country People. Upon this advice he hasted forwards, and giving the Assault at several places together, Entred the Town, Plundered and Burnt it. D. Antony de Isasse, the Governour having Lost 150 of his Men retired with the rest into the Castle, and D. Roderick, Returned with great Honour to Almeida. Severall other small Skirmishes hapned, in which the Portugueses still had the better, which so Encouraged D. Roderick, that gathering 800 Foot, and 150 Horse, he made an inroad into the Territory of Cuidad Rodrigo, Burning all the Open Towns, and utterly destroying the Country, without meeting the least opposition. D. Sancho Manuel, Governour of the other part of the Province, was not idle, but cut off 100 Spaniards, that had taken a prey in his district, and Fortifyed Salva∣terra,
upon advice that the Enemy were assembling a considerable body, which he was not able to Oppose in the Feild. 3. This Year the King created his Eldest Son Theo∣dosius,A Design to Murder King John. Prince of Brasil, and began to Assign the Reve∣nues of the House of Braganza, for the maintaining of his House. As the King studied all means to secure his Crown, so the Ministers of Spain omitted not by all ways, tho' never so unjust, to contrive his destruction, and had now infallibly compassed it, had not a special Providence preserved him. One Dominick Leyte, a Na∣tive of Lisbon, who had been Clark in one of the Courts, and was well descended, fled to Madrid, where, having offered his Service to that King's Ministers, he under∣took upon several great promises, and some rewards in possession, to Assassinate King John. In order to it, he returned to Lisbon in May, with one Emanuel Roque, where, by degrees, he hired several Houses in the Tur∣ners-Street, next the Church of St. Nicholas. He opened Doors all along from one House to another, made loop∣holes through the walls to the Street, and provided se∣veral Fire-locks loaded with Poisoned Bullets, to Shoot the King as he passed that way in procession upon Cor∣pus-Christi-day; that if one piece should happen to fail, another might certainly hit. The day being come, and he lying in wait, tho' he twice attempted to fire, his Heart failed him, and the King being passed, he shut the Doors, and went away to the Monastery of Our La∣dy of Grace, where Emanuel Roque expected him with two Horses, and they both returned to Madrid. There he framed excuses for missing of his Design; and re∣ceiving fresh encouragement, returned again to Lisbon. By the way, he discovered his Design to Emanuel Roque, who getting to Town before him, on pretence of taking a Lodging, discovered the Treason. Dominick Leyte, being Apprehended, Confessed the Crime, had both his Hands cut off, and was afterwards Hanged and Quar∣tered. 4. The Marquess de Niza,Negotiati∣ons at seve∣ral Courts. who had been before Am∣bassador in France, was sent back this Year to sollicite the Concluding a League betwixt the two Crowns. He proposed to Cardinal Mazarine a Match betwixt Prince Theodosius, and the Eldest Daughter of the Duke of Or∣leans, which the Cardinal seemed to approve of, yet it
took no effect, no more than the League at that time. However, King John sent three Men of War to joyn the French Fleet. At Rome, F. Nunho da Cunha, presen∣ted a long memorial to the Pope, pressing him to Con∣firm the Bishops Elected by the King, because of the great want of Prelates there was in all the Portuguese Dominions, but without any success; for three Popes successively, absolutely persisted in the denial. Francis de Souja Coutinho, who was Ambassador in Holland, af∣ter having interposed all the delays that could be ad∣mitted to hinder the States sending a Fleet to Pernam∣buco, finding they had now 30 Sail ready to put to Sea, boldly made use of certain blanks he had of the King's, to assure them that Parnambuco should be restored; which done, he immediately gave the King an Account thereof, desiring he would order him to be secured, and if it were necessary to take off his Head, to satisfie the States, rather than the fraud should be imputed to His Majesty. By this wile the Fleet was kept back from June till December, when it was put out three times, and was still beat back by unseasonable weather, to the great advantage of the Portugueses in Pernambuco. The King on the other hand, always pretended he had ordered his Subjects in that Province to lay down their Arms, that they maintained the War in Contempt of his Commands, and that the succours they had from Ba∣hia, were all by stealth. Several proposals were made for buying those places the Dutch possessed there, but they all came to nothing. 5. We left Sigismund Vanscop,Prosecution of the War in Brazil. the Dutch Commander at Pernambuco, preparing his Fleet to attempt the Con∣quest of Bahia: All things being in readiness, he set sail from the Coast of Pernambuco called Arrecif, about the end of January steering his course for the River of St. Francis, the better to conceal his Design upon Bahia. There he took in what necessaries he wanted, and being joyned by Anderson's Squadron, sent thither before, put to Sea again, and soon appeared before Bahia. Fear∣ing to attempt the City, e Anchored at the Island Ta∣parica, opposite to it, and three Leagues distant, where he speedily erected a For, and four redoubts on as ma∣ny Hills that Command it, then stretched out his Fleet, so that all the Shoar lay exposed to his Cannon. Anto∣ny Tellez the Governour of Bahia, fortified the passage,
from the Island to the City, but adventuring contrary to the advice of the Council of War to Attack the Hol∣landers in their strength, was repulsed with great loss. This done, he immediately sent advice to the King, of the Condition he was in, who ordered him speedy re∣lief. Twelve Ships were fitted out, under the Com∣mand of Antony Tellez de Menezes, Count de Villa-Pou∣ca, with Orders, that after relieving Bahia, five of them should be delivered to Salvador Correa de Sá, and Benavides appointed Governour of the Province of Rio de Janeyro, and Captain-General for the Kingdom of Angola. His instructions were to endeavour the reco∣very of that Kingdom, basely usurped by the Dutch, af∣ter they had overthrown Peter Cesar de Meneses, under colour of friendship, as was said before. The Fleet set sail, and the Dutch at Pernambuco having intelligence of it, and fearing it was designed against them, earnestly pressed Sigismund Vanscope to quit Bahia, and come to their assistance, for they were much pressed by the Be∣siegers. The Portuguese Governours at Pernambuco, per∣ceiving that the Dutch about Rio Grande improved that Countrey, which was a great relief to the Besieged, sent Major Antony Dias Cardoso with 300 Men, who de∣stroyed all he found there, driving away 200 Prisoners, and a vast number of Cattle. After this, Andrew Vidal marched with 800 Men to Ceará Merim, on the North of Rio Grande, and wasted all that Territory, killing 70 Hollanders, and bringing away many Prisoners, and as much Cattle as supplied the want of Provisions there was before in the Camp. Whilst these 800 Men were abroad, the Besieged made several Sallies, but without any success, and John Frnandez Vieyra to curb them, or∣dered that several Parties should continually keep the Enemy in alarm. Then the more to streighten them, he raised a Fort opposite to one the Dutch had built to cover the City Mauricia, which he managed with such dexterity, keeping them always upon their guard, that though it was begun about the beginning of October, they never perceived the work till the 6th of November, when our Artillery began to play upon the City, the Shoar and the bar, for all those places were within reach. We also Attacked and carried the Palace of Count Na∣sau, guarded by two Companies, which having Plun∣dered, our Men returned without any loss. At this
time Sigismund Vanscop returned with his Fleet, having abandoned his Fort at the Island Taparica, before the Arrival of our Fleet. The Count de Villapouca Arrived at Bahia, eight days after the Enemy had abandoned the Fort; but eight of their Ships again appeared upon the Coast. Some Ships went out to receive them, and af∣ter a long dispute, two Portugueses and as many Dutch were burnt and sunk. The Count took possession of the Government of Bahia, and Antony Tellez de Silva the former Governour remained there about his private Affairs, but with ill success, as will hereafter appear. The five Ships designed for Angola, went away in De∣cember, to joyn Salvador Correa, at Rio de Janeyro; what they did we shall see in its place. 6. D. Gaston Continho,How things stood in A∣frick and India. Governour of Tangier, never ceased to infest the Moors, and overthrew some parties of theirs that came to ravage the Territories of Tangier. This Year the Fleet of Spain consisting of 47 Ships and several small Vessels, and Commanded by D. John of Austria, appeared before that City, as if it were de∣signed to Land Men, but after some Hours Canonading on both sides, put to Sea again. D. John Luis de Vascon∣cellos, who Commanded at Marzagam, sent Presents to the Alcayde of Azamor, and the King of Morocco, to purchase their friendship; yet the Alcayde with 300 Horse, made an Incursion to the Walls of Marzagam, and though D. John fought with him from nine in the Morning till three in the Afternoon, he was forced to retire, being overpowered by the number of the Infi∣dels. In India, the King of Marava, commonly called Yeveré, trusting to the strength of the Island Ramanan∣cor, revolted from the Nayque of Madure, to whom he was tributary. The Nayque asked the assistance of the Portugueses, for conveying his Forces into the Island. They sent a Fleet to his aid, and by their means the Rebel was reduced, and they received the Reward pro∣mised for their assistance. Four Ships sailed this Year from Lisbon to India, two whereof perished in the La∣titude of Mozambique.
Anno, 1648. 1. THE Count de St. Lorenzo,The Spani∣ards Be∣siege Oli∣venza without success. govern'd Alentejo, and with great industry disposed all things for the defence of that Province. D. James Mexia Marquess of Leganes came the second time to Badajoz, to Com∣mand the Spanish Forces. His coming was the cause that all the Portuguese preparations were redoubled, new Forces raised, and the Frontiers fortified. Whilst the main Bodies were gathering on both sides, the Mar∣quess de Leganes sent 600 Horse by the way of Albu∣querque to plunder the Countrey as far as Marvao. The Count St. Lorenzo, having timely notice of it, sent Achim de Tamericourt, the Commissary-General, with 400 Horse and Orders to fight wheresoever he should meet him. Tamericourt, executed his Orders with so much bravery, that meeting the Enemy near Portale∣gre, he soon routed them, took 200 Prisoners, and re∣covered all the prey. This disaster provoked the Mar∣quess de Leganez to hasten putting in execution his De∣sign upon Olivenza, which place, the Ingenier Cosman∣der (who before we said was won by the Spaniards) had ingaged to put into the Catholick King's hands without much difficulty. On the 20th of June, he ap∣peared at break of day before Olivenza, with 8000 Foot and 3000 Horse. Cosmander, who had the dire∣cting of the Attack, divided these Troops into four parts, ordering them to give the Assault in as many places; reserving to himself a barrier of the covered way, where the Soldiers used to come out to work. The Spaniards advanced with resolution, and mounted two Bulwarks before the Centinels gave the Alarm. The Soldiers of the next Guards, and some of the Inhabi∣tants hasting to the places where the danger was, main∣tained the Fight till the rest of the Garrison came to their relief. D. John de Menezes the Governour, at the first Alarm, ran half Naked with his Sword in his hand into the Street, and with his example so encouraged the Soldiers, that they drove the Enemy, forcing many to cast themselves down headlong from the Bullwarks. Yet the danger was not over, for in other places the Spaniards had turned some Cannon of the other
Bullwarks upon the City, and many fell on both sides. D. John, though he had received three wounds, ceased not to act, as well as give out Orders. The danger lasted till it was clear day; when Cosmander thinking to force the barrier of the covered way, was shot dead from the Wall. His death put an end to the dispute, for though the Marquess de Leganez dismounted his Horse to carry on the Assault; those that were drove out so discouraged the others that were to come on, that the Marquess was forced to sound a retreat, and immediately returned to Badajoz. After this in several small rencounters the Portugueses were successful against the Spaniards; took a considerable Convoy from them near Albuquerque; and the Count de St. Lozenco made an Incursion as far as Talavera, whence he returned with a great Booty, passing in sight of Badajoz, in hopes the Marquess de Leganez might be drawn out, but he stirred not. Some difference arising betwixt the Count and John Mendes de Vasconcellos, who had governed that Province before, the King sent the latter Prisoner to the Old-Tower, where he remained till the time we shall speak of him hereafter. In all the other parts of the Kingdom, there was no Action of any consideration this Year. 2. On the 26th of April, was Born the King's third Son, Prince Peter, (now King) and was Baptized by the Bishop of Elvas,Birth of King John's Son Peter▪ now Reigning. Negociati∣ons in France and Rome. with all Solemnity and publick De∣monstration of Joy. The Marquess de Niza, who was Ambassador in France, ceased not to sollicite the con∣clusion of a League betwixt the two Crowns, but all his endeavours proved successless; whereupon, in Fe∣bruary of the following Year, he left Paris, and retur∣ned home. F. Nunho da Cunha, was still at Rome, solli∣citing the Affairs of Portugal. Two Capucins came to Rome with the Title of Ambassadors from the King of Congo, to give his Obedience to the Pope, and obtain of him Bishops and Missioners, for propagating of the Faith. The Pope gave them publick Audience, and appointed an Arch-Bishop, two Bishops, and 3 Missi∣oners, Spaniards and Italians, giving them a Summ of Money, and ordering them to imbark in  port of Spain. F. Nunho da Cunha, opposed the sending of these Bishops and Missioners, because that the Kingdom of Congo appertained to the Conquest of Portugal, and
Dr. Emanuel Alvarez Corrillo, was sent from Lisbon by the King, to second him as well in that, as solliciting the Expediting of Bulls for the Bishops of Portugal, but all they could effect, was only to stop the Voyage of the Bishops and Missioners of Congo. 3. Whilst these things happened in Europe,Success of the Portu∣gueses a∣gainst the Dutch in Brazil. the Dutch continued blocked up on the Coast of Pernambuco. In January, the Portuguese Governors of that Province, re∣ceived Intelligence, that the Fleet under the Count de Villa Pouca, was arrived at Bahia, but that no Succour was to be expected from thence. They were no ways dismayed at this News, but resolved to proceed more vigorously than before. Accordingly they sent Henry Di∣as with his own Regiment, and some Companies of D. Antony Philip Camarao, to Rio Grande. He march'd with such Secresie and Expedition, that the Enemy knew nothing of it, till they felt the effects of his Arri∣val, for he Burnt and destroyed all before him. Such as could escape, retired to Gurairas, a fortifyed place in a Lake, but he attacked, and carryed that also by Night, putting all within to the Sword, without sparing Sex or Age. Thence he marched to Cunhau, which was also fortified, yet was deliver'd up, those within on∣ly compounding for their Lives. The King at last con∣sidering of how great Consequence it was to expell the Dutch out of America, sent Francis Barreto de Menezes, with two small Vessels, and 300 Men to command there, as Camp-Master General. By the way, he met a Dutch Squadron, by whom he was taken, and carryed Prisoner to Arrecife, where he was kept in Custody 9 Months, and at last made his Escape, with one Francis Bra, Son to the Officer that had him in keeping. Being come into the Portuguese Quarters, he joyned with John Fernandez Vieyra, and Andrew Vidal being positively set down to endure the utmost Extremities, rather then forsake the Enterprize they had in hand. They sent Captain Paul de Cunha, to sollicit some Succours from the Count de Villa Pouca, at Bahia, but he returned without any, at such time as a Fleet was arrived from Holland, which consisted of 44 Sail, with 9000 Land-Men aboard it, besides Sea-Men, when it came out, but some had perished in a Storm. Upon the Arrival of this great Power, the Portugueses gather'd all their For∣ces, quitting the most distant, and least advantagious
Posts; and yet after all, they could make up but 2200 Men fit for Service. Sigismund Vanscop, who comman∣ded the Dutch, proclaimed a Pardon to all Slaves, or Portugueses, that should come over to him, but it took no effect. On the 18th. of April, he took the Field with 7500 Foot, 500 Seamen, 300 Indians, 5 pieces of Cannon, and a great quantity of Ammunition; and mar∣ching to the Fort Barreta, the Captain who commanded there, unadvisedly went out with 80 Men, most of whom were kill'd, the Captain taken, and his Ensign surrendred the Fort. Francis Barreto, who commanded the Portugueses, having called a Council of War, it was resolved to give the Enemy Battle, though at such great odds, rather than stay to be beaten out of all their Posts by degrees. According to this Resolution they march∣ed, and posted themselves in a small Plain, at the Foot of the Mountains Gararapes, on the 16th. of April. They sent out Major Antony Diaz Cardoso, with 20 Men to observe the Enemy, who stirred not that Night, but ap∣peared next Morning, being Low Sunday, upon the Mountains; Antony Dias with his 20 Men, and 40 In∣dians that had joyned him, skirmishing in their Van. The Enemy drawing near, our Men attack'd them with Sword in Hand, and at the first Charge disordered their Van, which retiring to the other Troops, endeavoured to rally. Henry Dias, with his Regiment, pressing hard upon them, was overpowred by the fresh Troops, and forced to give way, so that many of the Portugueses who were disordered in Confidence of the Victory, began to fly▪ Francis Barreto, in good time rallyed them, and charging the Enemy again, recovered the Day. Yet the Dutch were not soon broke, for the Fight continued four Hours very obstinate. At last the Dutch gave way, and retired to a Hill, whether Francis Barreto thought not good to pursue them, because his Men were spent with Travel, and fasting 24 Hours. There were taken 33 Colours, many Arms, and a great Booty. At Night the Enemy returned to the Shoar, leaving behind 1000 Dead, and carrying 523 wounded; of the Portu∣gueses, 80 were killed, and 400 wounded. This done, Francis Barreto marched back to possess his former Quar∣ters, hoping the Enemy was not in a Condition to de∣stroy them, and so it proved; for they had only pos∣sessed themselves of the Fort Barreta, and Town of O∣linda,
which last he resolved to recover. At Night he sent Henry Diaz with his Regiment, and some other Companies, who drove out the Enemy, killing 160 of them, and recovered 5 pieces of Canon. Francis Barre∣to ordered the Works to be rased, and his Men to re∣tire to their Post. Sigismund Vanscop sent a Drum, de∣manding exchange of Prisoners, which was refused, and they all sent away to Bahia. Some Ships of the Dutch Fleet that had been separated by Storm, arriving now, Sigismund several times attacked the Quarters of Henry Dias, but was as often valiantly repulsed by the Blacks. There was great want of Men and Provisions in our Quarters, which was in some measure remedyed by the arrival of Collonel Francis de Figueyroa from Bahia, with 300 Men, and a quantity of Cattle. The joy of this Succour was abated by the Death of D. Antony Philip Camarao, Governor of the Indians, a good Christian, and resolute Soldier. Sigismund Vanscop perceiving Fortune favour'd him not at Pernambuco, put to Sea with some Ships, and landing in several parts of Baia, returned with a great Booty he had gather'd. Francis Barreto growing better versed in the Affairs of that Country, con∣tinued the War with good Conduct, as we shall see in the following Years. 4. It has been said above, that Salvador Correa was sent from Lisbon with the Title of Governour of Rio de Janeyro,The Dutch beaten out of Angola in Africk. and General of the Kingdom of Angola. In January, he arrived at Rio de Janeyro, and found there Emanuel Pacheco de Mello, with the 5 Ships sent by the Count de Villa Pouca, in pursuance of the King's Or∣ders. Salvador Correa was no sooner landed, but he cal∣led a Council to deliberate about recovering the King∣dom of Angola. It was unanimously resolved to go up∣on the Enterprize, and for the carrying of it on, the In∣habitants contributed 55000 Cruzadoes (which is 7333l. 06 s.—04 d.) This encouraged him to hire 6 Ships, and buy 4 small Vessels. He listed 900 Land Men, and 600 Sea-men, and having made all necessary Provision for them, sailed for Angola on the 12th. of May, with 15 Sail. The weather proved so bad, his small Vessels could not keep up with him. However he arrived at Quicombo, where he was ordered to raise a Fort, and landed to view the place. Five days after, arrived his Vice-Admiral, and two of the small Vessels, but the
Night following, the Vice-Admiral sunk in the Bay, without the least Wind, no Man knowing what should be the cause of it. In her perished 360 Men, for only two were saved. Salvador Correa called a Council, where he proposed, that though the King's Orders were not to make War upon the Dutch, as supposing they li∣ved peaceably with the Portugueses, yet finding on the Contrary, that they ceased not to make War upon those who were retired up the Country; he thought it was but reasonable to assist their Country Men, and expell those Usurpers. All that were present answered, they would either recover Angola, or dye. With this una∣nimous Consent he set sail again, and arrived at Loanda. Having taken a Black, he reported that 300 Dutch, with 3000 Blacks so streightned the Portugueses, who were fled to the City Masangano, that it was impossible to have any Correspondence with them. Having received this Confirmation of the unjust proceedings of the Dutch, he sent to summon the Governor of Loanda to surrender. This Message so surprized him, that he sent to desire only 8 days, to resolve what was to be done. Salvador Cor∣rea perceiving this was only to gain Time to call in their Men that were Abroad, replyed he would grant two Days, after which they must expect to be treated with the utmost Rigour. They accepted of the offer, and in that time gather'd all the Force they could into the Fort of St. Michael, which commands the City, and that of our Lady on the Shoar, both which can contain 5000 Men. At the expiration of the two days, Salvador Correa sent to know whether they were ready to surrender; but they answered, they were resolved to hold out to the last. Hereupon he instantly landed 900 Men, and mar∣ched to the Town, which he entred without Oppositi∣on, possessing himself of the Fort S. Antony abandoned by the Enemy, who had left in it 8 pieces of Canon, whereof only two were nailed. With the other 6 and 4 Demi-Canon brought from the Ships, he formed two Batteries that Night, which at break of Day began to play on the Fort of St. Michael, but not with any consi∣derable effect. Salvador Correa displeased at this disap∣pointment, and more at the News, that the Dutch had defeated the Portugueses at Masangano, resolved to ven∣ture upon a desperate Action, which was to assault both the Forts, joyned by a Line of Communication, and
defended by 1200 Dutch, French and Germans, and as many Blacks. Accordingly at break of Day, the assault was given, and though bravely carryed on, he was forc'd to retire, leaving 163 Men killed, and carrying off 160 wounded. However he resolved upon a second attack, but the Enemy prevented him, by hanging out a white Flag, and surrendring the Forts. Five days after the Surrender, the Dutch that were abroad in the Coun∣try, being 250, with 2000 Blacks, upon Advice that the Forts were besieged, came to relieve them, but fin∣ding them lost, agreed to be sent away with the rest, notwithstanding the Queen Ginga, and the King of Congos Officers encouraged them to continue the War. The Fort of Benguela hearing what had happened at Loanda, was immediately surrendred by the Dutch that held it. Sal∣vador Correa, having gathered all the Portugueses that were dispersed about the Mountains, repeopl'd the City Loanda, and sent some Vessels to recover the Island St. Thomas. But those Dutch that he sent away, passing by that Island, and giving an account of their ill success, their Country Men there, went away with them, lea∣ving behind their Artillery, and most of their Ammuni∣tion, which the Portuguese Inhabitants soon made them∣selves Masters of. Not content with this, Salvador Cor∣rea sent all along that Coast, to all places where the Dutch had factories, and in two Months, wholly clear∣ed the Country of them. Being now rid of the Dutch, Salvador Correa, resolved to take Revenge of Queen Ginga, the King of Congo, and their Confederates, who had assisted them. He gave the Charge of this Expedi∣tion to Bartholomew de Vasconcellos, with whom joyned the King of Dongo, and the Jaga of Ambaca, who had always been faithful to the Portugueses. Vasconcellos, soon reduced the King of Congo, and other lesser Princes; the Island of Loando, being taken from the former, and new Tributes imposed on him, as a Punish∣ment of his Infidelity. Queen Ginga fled 300 Leagues up the Country. This Queen was Daughter to a King of Angola, who was beheaded by the Portugueses, in re∣venge whereof, she gathered all the Youth she could, killing the old People and Children wherever she came, and continued a savage Life in the Mountains with these Robbers, always watching, all Opportunities of doing harm to the Portugueses. Now at length being driven
up the Country, she sent an Ambassador, and concluded Peace with Salvador Correa, who so well settled that Kingdom, that it continues ever since under the Domi∣nion of Portugal. 5. D. Gaston Coutinho, continued in the Government of Tangier,Africk and India. making many inroads into the Country in which he gained much Honour; but the Forces in that City being but small, he could not make so great ad∣vantages as might otherwise be expected, of his Valor and Conduct. De Philip Mascarenhas, the Vice-Roy of India, sent D. Alvaro de Ataide, with a Squadron, to the Coast of Coromandel, to fortifie the Town of Nega∣patam, which the Portugueses had lately built. The Nayque of Tanjaor, in whose Territory it stood, sent an Army to hinder the Work. D. Alvaro landed 500 Men, and after a sharp Dispute, put the Indians to flight, with much slaughter. This done, he saw the Fortifications finished, and returned to Goa; nothing more of Note happened in India, during the Government of D. Philip Mascarenhas, which lasted till the Year 1651. The War in Portugal being prosecuted with small Force on both sides, and the Campaign being often spent in small Incursions, do not afford much matter worthy an Histo∣ry, which is the Reason, the Relations of Affairs at home are so short; and the Actions abroad being very considerable, though I endeavour to reduce them to as small Compass as may be; yet because I would omit nothing that is remarkable, they often swell to a greater Bulk than the Domestick, and force me to insist longer upon them then I had designed. Anno, 1649. 1. WE left the Count de S. Lorenzo,Count St. Lorenzo his Actions in Alente∣jo. governing the Province of Alentejo with good success. This Year, knowing that some Troops of Forreign Horse were come to Badajoz, he promised Rewards to all Sol∣diers or Officers that should come over to him, perfor∣ming his Promise to the full, with the first that deserted; so that in a short time, the greatest part of them quitted the Spanish Service. At this time, all Prisoners on both sides, as well Soldiers as Officers, not above the De∣gree of a Captain, were set at liberty on both sides. In
April, 600 Spanish Horse driving the Cattle betwixt Fronteyra and Cabeza de Vide, were resolutely Charged by the Commissary Generall Tamericourt with 16 Troops, and utterly defeated, 120 of them killed and double the Number taken. The Baron de Molinguen the Spanish Camp-Master Generall after this defeat quitted his Post, and D. Francis de Tutavilla Duke of S. German succeeded him. At the Request of the Count de S. Lorenzo the Commissary Generall Tamericourt, was made Lieutenant Generall of Horse, and a Commendary given to the other Commissary Du Quesne. There being also great want of Horse, King John sold Crown-Lands to the value of 4000 Cruzodoes per Ann: to buy Horses to Mount the Cavalry, rather than impose new Taxes upon the People. The Horse being recruited, their Generall Andrew de Albuquerque Marched with the whole Body and the Foot of Elvas, Olivenza, and Campo Mayor thinking to reduce Albuquerque. He plundered and burnt the suburbs, but was repulsed by the Town and Castle and returned with loss. Neither had John Homem Cardoso sent out by him with 100 Horse, to sur∣prize a Spanish Troop, better success, for Meeting 15 Spanish Horse he charged them and they kept him in play, till 7 Troops came up and took John Homem and 60 of of his party. Tamericourt now Lieutenant General Mar∣ched with 900 Horse to Revenge this loss, and having drawn out the Enemy from Badajoz and Talavera, tho' they were more Numerous than he, put them to flight killing 250, with the loss of 40 of his own. These are the most Remarkable actions of this Year in the Pro∣vince of Altentejo. 2. Count Castello Melhor, who till now Governed the Province betwixt Duero and Minho, was called away to go Governour of Brasil, and the Viscount D. James de Lima succeeded him in his former Post.D. James de Lima, Governour of the Pro∣vince be∣twixt Due∣ro and Minho. That Province scarce felt any effects of War except Two or 3 inconsiderable incursions, after which both Parties again rested, as if it were in Time of Peace. D. Hierome de Ataide Count de Atougua was now sent to Command in the Province Tralos Montes, where finding the Standing-Forces very weak, he Endeavoured to secure the Country the best he could with the Militia. Whilst he went to provide for the Safety of Braganza, the Commissary General of Horse La Morle Comman∣ded
at Chaves, but had positive Orders only to stand upon the Defensive. Nevertheless he marched with 220 Foot and 90 Horse, to plunder the Town of Ʋmbra, which having performed and returned with the booty, he was set upon by 1500 Foot and 350 Spanish Horse, who cut in pieces 140 of his Men and made the rest pri∣soners, except some few Horse with whom he fled to Chaves, where he Dyed of the Wounds he had received. 3. D. Roderick de Castro,D. Rode∣rick de Ca∣stro in the Province of Beira. who by reason of sickness had been absent; Returning to his Government of part of the Province of Beira, sent Captain Francis Naper with 100 Horse, and Orders to lay himself close in am∣bush Two Leagues from Cuidad Rodrigo, whence he was to detatch a small party to drive the cattle about that City, that so 4 Troops which were in Garrison there might be drawn into the Snare. He Executed his Orders so successfully, that the Spaniards disorderly pursuing the detached Party, he fell in and cut off 30 of them, putting the rest to flight. The Enemy revenged this misfortune upon the poor Country People, killing many unarmed, in return for which cruelty, D. Roderick with 600 Foot and 200 Horse, marched to Sabugo a Town Two Leagues from Cuidad Rodrigo, of about 300 Houses which he plundered and burnt down to the ground. The Spaniards assembling a good Body pur∣sued him retreating, but he drawing up at their approach, they marched off. After this D. Roderick joyning his Forces with D. Sancho Manue who Governed the other part of the Province, they both together burnt many open Towns in the Territory of Cuidad Rodrigo, and re∣turned with a considerable booty. That part of the Province which was subject to D. Sancho Manuel was this Year free from any acts of hostility. 4. The affairs of Portugal both at Rome and in France, continued in the same posture we left them the last Year. Francis de Sous Coutinho still continued in Holland much hated by that People,The Dutch prepare to make War upon Por∣tugal. who looked upon him as a Faithless man, for the many assurances he had given them of the Kings quitting Pernambuco, which they saw took no Effect. Nor was the King and Councill better satisfied with him, because of the great Expence he made and small Success of his Negotiation. At length the States Ordered Francis de Sousa to depart, being resol∣ved to declare War against Portugal, to which purpose
they fitted up 25 Sail in Zealand, sent supplies to Per∣nambuco, and ordered 12 Ships carrying 2800 Souldiers for that Coast. Not long after they directed Francis Cou∣tinho to obtain a new Commission from the King, for that they had important matters to Treat with him about. He Acquainted the King with it, and, D. John de Me∣nezes who was appointed to succeed him dying, he conti∣nued there till the following Year. Antony de Sousa de Macedo at this time Embassador in England, was Ordered to withdraw from that Court, that he might not be a witness to the most infamous act that ever sub∣jects committed against their lawfull Sovereign, in the unparalelled Murder of King Charles the I. 5. Whilst these things hapned in Europe,Progress of the Portu∣guese As in Brazil. the Forces at Pernambuco were not idle. Sigismund Vanscop, as has been said, was Arrived at Arrecife; and now the Be∣sieged began to think of some Enterprize. On the o∣ther side, Francis Barreto, though weak, still lived in hopes, for he had promise of succours from Bahia, and was informed from Lisbon, that the King had settled a West-India Company, like that of Holland. Francis Barreto, omitted nothing on his part that could tend to the com∣passing of his Design. Collonel Brink, Commanded the Dutch, under Vanscop; and some Italians that de∣serted from the Portugueses, informing him how weak they were, he obtained leave to march into the Field, to undertake some considerable Enterprize, and dspo∣sed all things in order to it. Barreto having notice there∣of, gathered all his Men that were dispersed, repaired his Works, ordered the Bridge of St. Bartholomew to be fortified, and all the people that attended their Plan∣tations to be ready upon the first Alarm. On the 18th of February, Collonel Brink, marched out with 5000 Foot, 700 Pioniers, and six pieces of Cannon, guarded by 300 Sea-men, and advanced towards the Fort Bar∣reta, whence without halting, they departed towards the Mountains Gararapes; upon advice hereof, Barre∣to called a Council of War, in which, it was resolved to follow and give them Battle; and accordingly he set out with 2600 Portugueses, Blacks and Indians. A∣bout four in the Afternoon, they reached the Moun∣tains Gararapes, and found the Enemy posted on some of them with Guards in the Valleys. Some were for Charging them immediately, but because the Men
were weary, it was put off till the next day. That Night many of the Inhabitants that were dispersed a∣bout the Countrey reinforced the Camp. Morning dis∣covered the Enemy in the same posts as the day before, and Francis Barreto was resolved to expect they should Attack him. Thus they continued till about One in the Afternoon, when the Dutch beginning to move, Bar∣reto sent Collonel Andrew Vidal along the side of a Hill, to possess himself of the Top. John Fernandez Vieyra, with 800 Men advanced along the plain betwixt the Hills. Both of them met with vigorous opposition, but their example animating the Men, they put the Enemy to flight in both places. Thence they marched at the same time to beat the Enemy from the Top of a Hill which Collonel Brink himself maintained, in which place, they advanced not much till Brink being shot dead, his Men were dismayed, and then all fled outright. The Portugueses pursued as far as the Fort Barreta, the dispute having lasted from two of Clock till eight at Night. Of the victors 47 were killed, and above 200 were wounded, of the Dutch, above 2000 were left dead in the Field, and among them Collonel Brink, the Prisoners and wounded Men were yet more nume∣rous. The Dutch Standard, 10 Colours, six pieces of Cannon, and a great quantity of Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions were taken. Francis Barreto having no more Men than just sufficed to carry on the Siege, un∣dertook no other Action this Year. On the 4th of No∣vember, sailed from Lisbon to Bahia, the first Fleet set out by the new Company. The Count de Castello Melhor, appointed Governour of Brazil, Commanded it, and Peter Jaques de Magallaens was to bring it back. 6. D. Gaston Coutinho,Tangier and India. still continued Governour of Tangier, and had some small rencounters with the Moors, but no Action hapned of moment. He repaired the Walls of the City, cleared the ditch, and settled there the Redemption of Captives, which till then was ma∣naged at Ceuta. In November he resigned the Govern∣ment to D. Luis Lbo da Sylveyra, Baron of Alvito, and returned to Lisbon. At Marzagao, there was nothing remarkable this Year, except the death of the Gover∣nour. The King appointed Nunho da Cunha da Costa to succeed him. Neither doth India afford us any thing, because the Truce continued with the Dutch, and D.
Philip Mascarenhas, the Vice-Roy, was in amity with the Indian Kings. Anno, 1650. 1. THE Province of Alentejo, still continued under the Government of the Count de St. Lorenzo. Whilst he made the necessary preparations to oppose the Enemy.The Prin∣ces Rupert and Mau∣rice, fly to Lisbon, from the English, and are protected. It hapned that the Princes Rupert and Mau∣rice, Sons to the Count Palatin, put into Lisbon, fly∣ing before the Fleet of the English, which Anchored be∣fore the Bar. King John generously resolving to protect the two Princes, ordered the Count de St. Lorenzo, to send to Lisbon three Regiments of Foot, and 200 Horse. The want of these Troops in the Province was suppli∣ed by the Militia. The Spaniards understanding that the Frontier Garrisons were weakned, sent all their Horse to lie in wait for the Garrison of Olivenza, who by Night without being discovered, posted themselves in the Olive-Gardens about the place. John Homem Car∣dso, going out in the Morning with his Troop to dis∣cover, on a sudden perceived his retreat was cut off. However, he was no way dismayed, but closing his Ranks, and joyning Captain William Lanier, a French-Man, who supported him, he resolutely forced his way through the Enemies Squadrons, and recovered the Town without any considerable loss. The Spaniards returned to Badajoz. Some days after, the Count de St. Lorenzo sent Tamericourt with 800 Horse, to attempt somewhat against the Garrison of that City. Giles Vaz Lobo, who led the Van with 50 Horse, Attacked the discoverers that came from the Town, and pursued them to the Gates, taking 20 of them; which done, they drew off, and the next day Tamericourt routed two Troops between Badajoz and Albuquer∣que. Winter drawing on, the Count de St. Lorenzo, procured leave to return to Court, and the Camp-Ma∣ster-General D. John de Costa, governed the Province in his absence. He received intelligence that the Spa∣niards assembled their Troops, and threatned the Ter∣ritory of Castello de Vide and Portalegre. Andrew de Al∣buquerque, General of Horse was sent to oppose them, who laying himself close in ambush at Melrisso, sent out 40
Horse to Charge the advanced Parties of the Spaniards, which they did, and retired to their Body. But the Spaniards suspecting the Design, would not pursue them, and the Portugues Troops rising out of their ambush, the Enemy thought not fit to encounter them, but re∣tired leaving their prey, which was restored to the Countrey people. Of the Spaniards in the pursuit, 124 were taken, and among them a Captain of Horse and some sutlers. Not content with this, D. John de Costa marched with 2000 Foot, and 1800 Horse, sending Ta∣mericourt before with 600 Horse, to plunder the Towns of Arroyo and Malpartida, ordering him to make his Retreat so leasurely that the Enemy might assemble their Forces. He executed it according to his Orders, and was pursued by a great Body of Horse and Foot, and un∣der the Command of D. Alvaro de Viveros General of the Spanish Horse, who perceiving Tamericourt, was supported by D. John de Costa, with so strong a Party, retired without doing any thing. D. John de Costa pur∣sued him for some space, but to no effect; and Win∣ter being now advanced, he had not the opportunity of undertaking any considerable Enterprize. 2. The Province between the Rivers Duero and Min∣ho,Small in∣cursions made by the Spani∣ards. afforded not any matter for History. That of Tras os Montes governed by the Count de Atouguia; had not any considerable Action; Only the Count de St. Este∣van who Commanded the Spaniards on those Frontiers gathered his Forces, as if he designed some considerable Enterprize; but understanding the Count de Atouguia, was in a good posture to receive him, he contented himself with burning two small Towns, and dismissed his Troops to their several Garrisons. After this, a Par∣ty of the Enemy, consisting of 1000 Men made an in∣cursion from Monterey, and ravaged a part of the neigh∣bouring Countrey, driving away a considerable booty. The Count de Atouguia, upon the first notice hereof, marched out with a small number, and meeting a Par∣ty of the Spaniards, easily put them to the root, the rest retired with precipitation to Monterey. D. Rode∣rick de Castro, and D. Sancho Manuel, betwixt whom the Government of the Province of Beira was divided, as we have seen before, were both this Year employed in raising Forces; the former for Alentejo, to make up for those that had been sent thence to Lisbon, to oppose the
English, and the latter to secure the Conquests in India. Both of them had some reincounters with the Spaniards, who broke into their Territories; and they also made some incursions upon the Enemy, for the most part with success. But all these Actions being performed by small Parties, and much alike to what have been already re∣lated; to particularize them all would swell to a Vo∣lume, and will only serve to tire the Reader, where∣fore I have thought fit to pass by most of them. The last expedition of D. Sancho this Year, was, the taking and burning the Town of Huelga, abandoned by the Inhabitants, who secured themselves in a Tower. Hence he returned home, with a considerable booty, which he had gathered in the neighbouring Countrey, with∣out meeting the least opposition. 3. This Year proved unfortunate at Sea. Antony Tel∣lez de Menezes, Count de Villapouca, having resigned the Government of Brazil to the Count de Castello Mel∣hor, set sail for Lisbon, with the Men of War that had carried the latter. Peter Jaques de Magalhaens, Admi∣ral of the West-India Company Fleet, set out at the same time with 18 Men of War, and 80 Merchant∣men. Having made the length of the Tercera Islands, such a Storm arose, that four of the King's Ships were cast away, and in them Antony Tellez de Sylva, with most of the Men. The Count de Villapouca, and Pe∣ter Jaques, with the Ships under his Command, arrived safe in Lisbon, and brought a considerable return for the great expences the Company had been at. The Princes Rupert, and Maurice, (as was said at the begin∣ning of this Year) having put into the River of Lisbon, and Blake Admiral of the English, in pursuit of them, coming to an Anchor at Cascaes, it was debated in Coun∣cil,The Princes Rupert and Mau∣rice, with a Portu∣guese Squadron put to Sea, and return without fighting. whether the Princes should be protected, and after hearing all that could be said on bothsides, the King generously resolved on the Affirmative. Blake, resolving to Attack them in the Port, the King fitted out 13 Men of War, under the Command of Antony de Siqueira Va∣rajao, an old Soldier. The two Princes joyning this Squadron, they put to Sea to meet the Enemy, having Orders to Fight betwixt the two Capes, but the Ene∣my upon their approach, standing to Sea, they return∣ed into the Port without engaging. Antony de Siqueira, wanted not Enemies to blame him for not Fighting,
and the King hearkning to them, gave his Command to George de Melo, who had the Title of General of the Galleys. A few days after, he sailed out, and the Ene∣my again standing to Sea, they were surprized by so terrible a Storm, that all the Fleet was dispersed, some Ships drove to Algarve, and one falling into the Eng∣lish Fleet was taken. The Tempest ceasing, the Eng∣lish discovered, the Brazil Fleet, of which, they took 15 sail, and Winter coming on, returned home. This gave the two Princes an opportunity of putting to Sea again, after acknowledging the many favours they had received of the King, and particularly, that of prote∣cting them, though contrary to his own interest and the Maxims of State Policy. 4. Since the departure of the Marquess de Niza, Christipher Soares de Abreu continued at the Court of France,Proceedings of several Ambassa∣dors. where by reason of the troubles of that Kingdom no further progress was made as to the Affairs of Por∣tugal, but the Friendship before Established continued firm. All his sollicitations at Rome having proved inef∣fectual, the King now resolved not to trouble the Pope further, so that nothing new hapned at that Court. Francis de Sousa Coutinho was still Embassador in Holland, and dexterously diverted those People from sending supplies to Brasil. The States having Endeavoured to corrupt his Secretary, that they might see the Kings Letters, he improved their artifice to his own Advantage. For his Secretary having acquainted him with the over∣tures made to him, he ordered him to consent to them, and having filled up several blanks he had under the Kings hand, as he thought convenient, delivered them to the Secretary, who conveyed them to the States, and they supposing them to have been the Kings Letters, were thereby induced to deferr sending a Fleet they had designed for Brazil. It was not long after this, when a Servant of his having accidentally Shot a Coachman, the Rabble rose and made 3 Assaults upon his House, and had certainly Murdered him and his whole Family had he not been relieved by the Prince of Orange his Guards. In September, Antony de Sousa de Macedo who had been Embassador in England came to the Hague, and Francis de Sousa went away to Rese as Embassa∣dor at the French Court. Since the departure of An∣tony de Sousa from London, there was no Portugues Mi∣nister
there, that whole Kingdom being then in confu∣sion. 5. We left Francis Barreto the Portugues General in Brazil Twice Victorious over the Dutch,The War in Brazil pro∣secuted. in the Moun∣tains Gararapes. Sigismund Vanscop the Dutch Comman∣der thinking this success had rendred the Portugueses less vigilant, made a sally at break of Day upon the quarter of Captain Antony Borges Ʋchoa, who having Notice of his approach, received him so warmly without his works, that he was soon Forced to retire leaving many of his Men dead behind him. The Dutch General made many other Sallies both before and after this, but none considerable till the 7th of October, when he attempted the quarter of Captain Emanuel de Aguiar with all the Foot in the Garrison, but neither here was his Success any better than in the former Attempt. On the 15th of December, they again Marched out and lay close in ambush near the Salt-pits, but the Portugueses having intimation of the Place they lay in, attacked them there, and after a Vigorous resistance put them to flight with considerable Slaughter. In these and the like attempts the Year was Spent, the Enemy still decreasing in power, as receiving no supplies from Holland, our Embassador Francis de Sousa artificially diverting all that were designed for them. 6. The Baron de Alvito, who governed Tangier, know∣ing the chief support of that place consisted in the booties brought in from the Countrey,Tangier and India. ceased not to surprize the Moors in several parts, and brought home conside∣rable preys, which was a great relief to the Garrison. Nunho da Cunha did the same at Marzagao, and in one incursion killed 300 Infidels, and brought away 47 Cap∣tives. D. Francis de Noronha succeeded him in that post, and entred upon his Command with no less success than his Predecessor went off. In India, D. Philip Mascaren∣has was still Vice-Roy, and this being the last Year of the Truce with the Hollanders, they seemed inclined to attempt the Kingdom of Jafanapatan before it was ex∣pired. This obliged the Vice-Roy to send a Fleet un∣der the Command of D. Roderick de Monsanto, to the re∣lief of that place, but the Dutch attempting nothing, the Fleet returned to Goa. The Count de Aveyras, sailed from Lisbon this Year, to be the second time Vice-Roy of India, but he died by the way. Four Ships and two Cara∣vels, were sent this Year for India.
Anno, 1651. 1. D. John da Costa, governed the Province of Alente∣jo,Enterprizes on the Fron∣tiers of A∣lentejo. as was said the last Year, during the absence of the Count de St. Lorenzo, which continued till the Year, 1657. Through the negligence of the Commis∣saries of the stores, Forrage grew so scarce on the Fron∣tiers, that several Troops of Horse were forced to re∣tire from Elvas, and Campo Mayor, farther into the Countrey. The Spaniards made their advantage of this opportunity, for a Party of 1200 Horse, and 600 Foot, from Badajoz, carried away a great booty from the Territory of Villaboim, there being no Troops in rea∣diness to oppose them. To revenge this loss, D. John da Costa, ordered Andrew de Albuquerque, General of the Horse, with 1000 of them, and 800 Foot, to make himself Master of Salvatierra, which is six Leagues from Olivenza, and where the Spanish Commissary-Ge∣neral John de Rozales then was with some Troops. An∣drew de Albuquerque assembled his Troops at Olivenza, and marched with such secrecy to Salvatiera that he had secured all the avenues before the Enemy heard of his approach. The Foot broke into the Town with little opposition, and with as little took the Castle, where they made 100 Horse Prisoners. The booty was very considerable, the Town consisting of 400 Houses. Andrew de Albuquerque returned to Olivenza, having lost but three Men in this Action, for certain Troops of the Enemy that appeared served only to be Witnesses of the burning of the Town. Some few days after, D. John da Costa lay in ambush to cut off the Troops of Badajoz, that used to come out to Forrage between the Rivers Guadiana and Caya, but they not going out that day, his Design was disappoin∣ted. His Horse being now much out of Case for want of Forrage, the scarcity till continuing, he studied all means how to disable the Enemies Troops. Being in∣formed that they had turned 400 Horses to grass near Medellen, which is 16 Leagues from Campo Mayor; he gave charge to Captain Emanuel de Saldanha to endea∣vour to destroy them. Saldanha committed this Enter∣prize to his Lieutenant, Francis Lobo, who set forward
twice, with only 10 Men to put this in Execution, but discovering parties of the Enemy both times, he was forced to return. The third time he went through, and having defeated 15 Men that guarded the Horses, kill'd most of them, and returned in safety. The Enemy now making great Preparations to enter upon Action, D. John da Costa, who had neither a Force to oppose them in the Field, nor Provisions in the Frontier Towns to hold out a Siege, acquainted the King with his wants, who sent large supplies of Mony, whereby the Province was put into such a Posture of Defence, that the Spani∣ards thought not fit to attempt any thing on that side. But D. John da Costa being thus supplyed, ceased not to molest them, with continual Incursions. Not to speak of other small Parties, one of 30 Men, commanded by the Cornet Stephen de Rocha, came off with more Hon∣our then Success. Being advanced in the Enemies Country, he found his retreat was cut off by 7 Squa∣drons; whereupon he retired to an old ruined House, he found in the Field. The Spaniards surrounded it, and offered him quarter, which he refusing, they attacked it, and were repulsed. After endeavouring in Vain to burn it, they went away, carrying with them the Horses of those in the House, and the Cornet returned to Moura, a Foot, having lost two of his Men. About the begin∣ning of November, Prince Theodosius, the King's eldest Son, having privately stole away from Court, without his Fathers Knowledge, appeared at Elvas, and was there received with all the Respect due to his Person. The King was not a little disturbed at this Accident, be∣ing jealous of the Prince's Designs, and therefore used all gentle Means to draw him back to Lisbon; but that which at last prevailed with him, was want of Money, which forced him back to Court about the end of De∣cember. He positively resolved to return to the Fronti∣ers, but was detained for some time by the King, till Death put an end to his Designs, as we shall see in its Place. 2. The Province between Duero and Minho,The Vis∣count de Villa Pou¦ca, burns two Towns in Galicia. seemed to spare it self all this while, that it might be the better able to sustain the heavy burthen of the War, which fell upon it the ensuing Years. The Viscount de Villa Pouca, was still Governour there, who perceiving that the Towns of Portela and Vieyra, were the Rendesvouz
for the Troops of Galicia, when they joyned those of Monterey, he caused both those places to be burnt down to the Ground. The Garrisons of certain Forts, the Spaniards had raised on the Frontiers of Galicia, per∣swading the Country People to rebuild several Places that had been destroyed on the Borders during the War, they began to assemble, in order to restore those Towns. Twice they attempted to rebuild them, but they were as often totally demolished by order of the Viscount, whereupon the Country desisted. The Count de Atouguia who governed the Province, Tras os Montes, lived this Year free from Action; both sides, as if it had been by Agreement, forbearing to infest one another. Nor was there any considerable Action in that part of the Pro∣vince of Beyra, which was under the direction of D. Roderick de Castro; most of the Year being spent in In∣cursions of no great Moment. In November, when the Prince, as has been said, appeared at Elvas, D. Roderick, that it might be said he had infused new Courage into the Army, marched with 1500 Men, and entring the Town of Bodon, plundered and burnt it. D. Sancho Ma∣nuel who governed the other part of the Province, ceased not all the Summer to infest the Frontiers of the Enemy, and to repulse such of them, as made inroads into the Country, subject to his Command. By agreement this Summer, the Prisoners on both sides were set at Liberty without Ransom. 3. Francis de Sousa Coutinho,Negotiati∣ons in For∣reign Courts. having left the Ambassy of Holland, as has been said, according to the Orders he had received from the King, removed to Paris, where he had Audience of Cardinal Mazarine, but nothing was concluded betwixt them, by reason of the civil Broils then prevailing in France. At Rome, the Portuguese Af∣fairs continued in the same Posture, notwithstanding the Sollicitation of the Cardinal d'Este. Antony de Sousa de Macedo, who had succeeded Francis de Sousa Coutinho, in the Ambassy of Holland, followed the Footsteps of his Predecessor, entertaining the States with hopes of an Ac∣commodation, to gain time, whilst the Dutch might be expelled Brazil. Having in some measure settled those Affairs, he laboured to enter upon a Treaty with the Par∣liament of England, which was forwarded by D. Emanuel Peryra, sent over to that effect, and afterwards, com∣menced by the Envoy John de Guimaraens.
4. Francis Barreto,Francis Barreto prosecutes the War in Brazil. with unparalleled Resolution and Constancy, continued the War in Pernambuco. About the beginning of March, he layed 300 Men in Ambush, betwixt the Forts of Sinco Pontas, Affogados and Barre∣ta, hoping to cut off the Communication between those Places and Arrecife. Twelve of these Men discovering a Boat of the Enemies, swam to it, and took it, and the Dutch that came to succour their Boat, discovering the Ambush, retired in time, so that the Portugueses had not the Opportunity of making any further Advantage on them. The Hollanders of the Fort Affogados, made a sally upon the quarter of Mendoza, but were soon re∣pulsed with the loss of 6 Men, besides those that were wounded. Francis Barreto, understanding that the Dutch had great quantities of Sugar Canes at Rio Grande, whereof they expected very soon to make their Advan∣tage; he sent thither, Captain John Barboza Pinto, with 300 Men, who after destroying all the Country, and taking 18 of the Enemy, returned with a great number of Cattel. Sigismund Van Scop, the Dutch Commander, desiring to perform some Action, which might encourage the Besieged, resolved to destroy the Thicket, which co∣vered the quarter of Aguiar, from the Fort Affogados. To put this in Execution, he marched out with the greatest part of his Strength, but Emanuel de Aguiar, who commanded there, being in a readiness, received him so roughly, that for six Months after, he never of∣fered to sally again. Continual Success, put Francis Bar∣reto out of doubt of Success, and therefore he ceased not perpetually to sollicit the King, and Count Castello Mel∣hor, then Governor of Brazil for Succour, that he might with speed put an end to that War, before the Dutch now at Peace with all the World, had the leasure to send supplies thither, which might much retard, if not whol∣ly destroy, the success of his Labours. 5. The Baron de Alvito still governing Tangier,Tangier and India. it happened that certain Vessels laden with Corn from Lis∣bon, and the Islands, sailing for that City, were cast a∣way, which caused so great a Famine in that place, that the Inhabitants were forc'd to feed on Herbs and Roots they could gather in the Fields. The Baron generously at his own Expence, maintained the Sick, and a multi∣tude of Children, which would otherwise inevitably have perished. This Calamity reached the Horses, who could
not be maintained upon Grass alone, so that it was dif∣ficult to make Excursions, which added much to the great scarcity of Provisions. D. Francis de Noronha, Go∣vernor of Mazagam, sent an Ambassy, and Presents to the King of Morocco, which was by him honourably recei∣ved, and generously returned. D. Francis continued in this Command, till the Year 1654, during which time, nothing remarkable happened there, so that we shall not have occasion to make any mention of him. This was the last Year of D. Philip Mascarenhas, his Vice-Royship in India, and in it there was little remarkable, only the Chendarraos, a vagabond sort of People in the Country of Hidalcan, possessed themselves of the Mount or Promon∣tory of Chaul, whence they were drove by the Vice-Roy's Order, by D. Alvaro de Atayde. This Year two Galeons and a Pink sailed from Portugal to India, and the Galeon, S. Philip built there, arrived at Lisbon. Anno, 1652. 1. THE Prince who (as was said) returned to Lis∣bon the latter end of the last Year,The Prince made Cap∣tain Gene∣ral of all the Forces in Portu∣gal. used all pos∣sible means to perswade his Father to send him again to the Frontiers, but the King jealous of him, could not be worked upon. At length to conceal his own Jealousie, and disappoint that Design of his Son, he appointed him Captain General of all the Forces in the Kingdom, tha having the Charge of all, he might not apply himself to command in any one Province. D. John de Costa, neve ceased to harrass the Enemies Frontiers, bringing i thence considerable Booty. In revenge, the Spaniard drove a great Prey from the Territory of Telena, and though Lieutenant General Tamericourt marched after them with the Troops of Olivenza, they being far befor him got safe into Barcarota. Before, that place was large Field, encompassed with a Ditch, and lying unde the Cannon and small shot of the Town, which the Spaniards believed would secure their Prey. However Ta∣maricourt coming to Barcarota, dismounted part of h Horse, and breaking into the Field before day, dro away all the Cattel, without receiving any considerabl Loss. The Spaniards sallyed out upon him, but suddely retired; and he marching off with the Booty, restred it to the Country People. Neither was he less sucessful,
a few days after, when engaging the Troops of Badajoz, he took the Spanish Lieutenant General of Horse, D. Francis Hibarra, with other Officers, and 120 Horses. The Prince being now Generalissimo, sent his Orders to all the Provinces of the Kingdom, absolutely forbidding any Incursions to be made for the future, into the Spanish Frontiers. D. John de Costa, upon receipt of this Order, replyed to it, shewing how disadvantagi∣ous it was to the Kingdom, by reason of the great Be∣nefit reaped by those inroads, for he in the space of two Years, had destroyed above 1400 of the Spanish Horse, having scarce lost 100 of his own. Besides he looked upon this as so great a check to his Authority, that he desired leave to lay down his Command. The Prince being well satisfyed of D. John's Zeal and Fidelity, re∣called his Order, and the King gave him the Title of Earl of Soure. He to appear worthy of this Honour, endeavoured to make amends by his Conduct, for what he wanted in Strength. To this purpose, he secretly gathered 1500 Horse from the Neighbouring Garrisons, which Lieutenant General Tamericour, and Commissary General Duquesne divided betwixt them. With these Troops they passed the River Guadiana, and lay close in the Wood near Badajoz. In the Morning, a Squadron of Horse issuing out of the Town according to Custom, they were drove back by some of our Troops. Fresh Troops seconded the Enemy from the City, and they kept in play, till D. Alvaro de Viveros took the Field, with all the Horse of that place, and having drawn them up, advanced further then was thought convenient for the safety of the Town. Duquesne who was nearest, thinking it now time, moved towards him with more Courage than Order. The Spanish General halted and bravely stood the Charge, in which Duquesne received three Wounds, and Captain Sancho Dias was kill'd, with several Soldiers; the rest of the Troops missing their Commander, retired with Precipitation. Tameri∣cour perceiving this Disorder, charged furiously with his formost Troops, which being too open in their Ranks made but little Impression; but those in the Rear com∣ing up, behaved themselves with such Bravery, that af∣ter a long Dispute, they broke the Enemy. The Troops of Duquesne, and part of those with Tamericour, being wholly blinded by the Dust, fled to Olivenza, believing
the rest were cut off. Tamericour rallyed the rest, mar∣ched off with above 200 Horses he had taken from the Prisoners; among whom, was a Captain of Horse, and other Officers. The Count de Soure, being a strict ob∣server of Discipline, commended those that had behaved themselves well, and severely checked those that had fled, giving the King also a particular Account of the Merits of the former, and Demerits of the latter. 2. The Viscount de Villa Nova, Governor of the Pro∣vince betwixt Duero and Minho, still continued in per∣fect Tranquility, nothing happening in his Command, but that Captain Labar, a valiant French-Man, disorder∣ly with a party of Horse, charging another of the Ene∣my, was himself killed, and most of his Men wounded. The Province Tras os Montes, governed by the Count de Antouguia, by consent of both Parties, was for several Months free from Action. Some small Incursions were afterwards made on both sides, but none of Note. The King having now chose the Count de Penaguiao his Lord Chamberlain, to go Ambassador into England; appoint∣ed the Count de Atouguia to execute his Office, and John Mendez de Vasconcellos, was sent in his place to govern the Province. The most remarkable Action per∣formed this Year by D. Roderick de Castro, in his Divi∣sion of the Province of Beyra, was the burning of the Town of Martiago,Some Acti∣ons in Bei∣ra. which contained 300 Houses; the other Enterprizes were too small to merit any place here. D. Sancho Manuel, who commanded in the other part of Beyra, understanding that a Troop of the Ene∣mies was quartered at Lobeyros, and had twice repulsed parties of the Portuguese Militia that ravaged the Country thereabouts, ordered the Cornet Domi∣nick Homen, with 40 chosen Men to lye in wait for them. He sent before some of the Militia to drive the Cattel; the Spanish Troop backed by a company of Foot, immediately rushed out upon them, but the En∣sign who was at hand, furiously falling in upon the Foot, broke them, and with the same Success routed the Horse, killing many, and taking several Prisoners. This Success was soon ballanced by a greater disaster, for D. Sancho being informed that the Spaniards gathered a great Power, in order to break into his Province; and not being in a condition to oppose them, he thought to divert them, by making at the same time an inroad
into their Frontiers, hoping he might retire to places of safety, before they could intercept him. With this De∣sign, he gathered 350 Foot, and 200 Horse, and mar∣ching to Segura, sent before Captain Gaspar de Tavora with 140 Horse, to drive the Cattle about Sacravim, which done, he had orders ro retire to Collonel John Fialho, who should expect him with 60 Horse, and the rest of the Foot, at a place called Salto, near the River Lagao. Gaspar de Tavora, executed his Orders with such expedition, that by Noon he had joyned John Fiallo. But the Spaniards having notice of D. Sancho's March, no sooner entred Portugal, then they turned back, and marching towards their Town of Carza, by which the Portugueses must of necessity pass, appeared before John Fialho, when least he expected it, with 600 Horse, and as many Foot. He covering his Horse with the Foot, re∣tired in good order for above a League, till coming to a Pass, the Enemy drew up before him. Necessity now obliging him to charge them, he fell with such Bravery upon the 600 Foot, that he absolutely broke them; but in the mean while, the 600 Spanish Horse charging his 200 now divided from their Foot, after some short dis∣pute overpowered, and totally routed them. The Ene∣my pursued their Advantage, and John Fialho rallying his Foot, recovered an advantagious Post to defend him∣self. The Enemy ceased their pursuit in care for their Foot, which had been overthrown, and return'd to compleat their Victory, by destroying John Fialho and his party. He had, as was said, gained an advantagi∣ous post; but having spent all his Ammunition, was made Prisoner with all the Officers of Horse and Foot, 140 Horse escaped, the rest with all the Foot, were ei∣ther killed or taken. After this Disaster, D. Sancho Ma∣nuel retired to Idanha Nova, and garrisoned the Fronti∣ers with the Militia, writing to the Prince for supplies, which were soon sent him. Being recruited, and joyn∣ing his Forces with those of D. Roderick de Castro, he resolved to revenge the late Affront, by surpising the Ci∣ty Coria. They marched with 1500 Foot, and 700 Horse, some Petards, and other necessaries for such an Enterprize; but the distance being great, they could not come before the City till after day. However, having divided their Foot, they attacked the Suburbs in two places, which they entered, plunder'd and burnt;
which done, seeing no possibility of forcing the City, they retired, and each returned to his Province. 3. The troubles of France increasing, rendred all Fo∣reign Negotiations so uncertain at that Court, that Fran∣cis de Sousa Coutinho, having obtained leave of the King, came to Portugal, leaving D. Felicianus Dourado Secre∣tary of the Embassy, to Reside there during his absence. At this time there was held at Paris a Synod of Bishops,Endea∣vours used for obtain∣ing Bishops, but in vain. to whose Consideration King John recommended the finding of some expedient for prevailing with the Pope to precognize the Bishops of Portugal. They used their utmost endeavours, but the Spanish Interest still pre∣vailing, nothing could be done at this time. Antony de Sousa de Macedo, having obtained leave of the King to quit the Embassy of Holland, D. Antony Rapozo Succee∣ded him in that employ. He made it his business to heighten the misunderstanding betwixt the English and Dutch, because the latter having sustained great losses by the War they were engaged in with the former, were thereby disabled from sending succours to Pernambuco. The King at the same time considering how advanta∣geous the Friendship of England might prove to his Affairs, resolved to send an Ambassador thither, and pit∣ched upon the Count de Penaguiao for that employ, as we have said before. 4. Francis Barreto,Francis Barreto, his further Actions in Brazil. the General of Pernambuco, conti∣nued the Siege of Arrecife, with considerable resolution, hoping at length to reduce the Besieged, whose only hope consisted in the succours they expected from Hol∣land. The first part of the Year passed without any memorable Action. In May, Francis Barreto, ordered Major Antony Diaz Cardozo, with 400 Men, to lie close in ambush, and send out parties to endeavour to draw the Garrisons of the Forts Barreta and Affogados, into the snare. The Major posset himself of the post as∣signed him without being discovered, and sending out certain small Parties drew out the Enemy, as he had designed, but the number of the Hollanders being grea∣ter than had been expected, the Fight continued doubt∣ful for above an hour; at length the Dutch were rou∣ted and fled to their Forts, leaving the Field covered with dead Bodies. After this, Barreto being informed that the Enemy had laid up great store of Brazil-Wood and other Commodities at Rio Grande, in order to be
transported into Holland, he sent thither the Collonel Andrew Vidal with 300 Men, who burnt their wood, wasted all the Countrey, and returned with a great booty and many Prisoners. The Dutch had in those Seas 50 sail of Ships, from 20 to 30 Guns, but so ill Manned and Equipped for want of supplies from Hol∣land, that tho' they met the Portuguese Brazil-Fleet and fought it, yet after a short dispute they were forced to retire without any Prize, and the Fleet arrived safe at Lisbon, on the 26th of October. 5. We left the Baron de Alvito,The Spani∣ards try the Governour of Tangier, without success. Governour of Tan∣gier, labouring under great scarcity of Provisions the last Year. He had not as yet received any relief from Lis∣bon, which being known at Ceuta, D. John Soares, who Commanded there for the Spaniards, hoping their wants might reduce that Garrison to revolt from their King, sent two Brigantines and a Bark thither, ordering the Commander of the Bark to enter the Port, and con∣vey the Letters he had writ for that purpose, to the Ba∣ron, and other Men of note. This being put in exe∣cution, the Baron read the Letters, which were to per∣swade him to submit himself to the King of Spain, with promise of great Rewards, or else to offer him safe passage to Lisbon. The Baron, whose Loyalty was not shaken, having in vain endeavoured to draw those in the Bark a-shoar, caused another to be fitted out, in which, went several resolute Gentlemen with Fire-Arms, and Orders to Attack the Enemies Bark, when they should approach to receive the Letter they expe∣cted. The Barks coming together they fired, killed three of the Spaniards, and carried the rest Prisoners to the City. This Action so exasperated the Spaniards, that they sent three Ships to interrupt any relief that might be designed for Tangier, but the Baron ordering the Vessels that came from Lisbon to be detained in Al∣garve, till further advice from him, the Enemy quitted their station, and gave way to five Caravels with Provisi∣ons to relieve that City. The Baron being informed that certain Captive Moors in the Town, had by intelli∣gence with those abroad, agreed to let themselves down the Wall of the old Town, near which, the others were to lie hid in order to receive them; he ordered three Soldiers habited like Moors to be let down, and when the Infidels came on to succour them, they were
received with such a volley of great and small shot, as laid many dead before the Town, the rest flying with more speed than they came on. 6. D. Philip Mascarenhas, having ended his Vice-Roy∣ship in India, and obtained leave of the King to return home,The Affairs of India. imbarked for Lisbon, and died by the way. The Count de Aveyras, sent by the King to succeed him, dying also in the Voyage, as was said before; the Sealed Patents, which are always laid up to provide for such exigencies, being opened, it was found that the care of the Government was committed to D. F. Fran∣cis dos Reys, Primate of India, Francis de Melo de Castro, and Antony de Sousa Coutinho. Having entred upon the Government, they fitted out a Fleet of 22 Sail, Com∣manded by Antony de Sousa Coutinho, one of the Go∣vernours. This Fleet set sail in order to recover Mas∣cate; some of them entred that Bay, but receiving much harm from the Cannon of the Town, they stood out again, and came to Anchor in the River Lafette, 100 Leagues from Mascate. They had lain there but a few days before they discovered a mighty Fleet of Arabs, Commanded by one Hali a Moor. Antony de Sousa, received them with such gallantry, that after the Battle had lasted many Hours, he obtained a Compleat Victory, killing above 5000 of the Infidels. Captain Antony Lobo, in this Action, being boarded by two of the Enemies Vessels, set fire to his own Powder, and blew himself up and both them. Antony de Sousa re∣turned to Goa, where he found D. Vasco Mascarenhas, Count de Obidos, whom the King had appointed Vice-Roy, upon the News of the Death of the Count de Aveyras. Within a very few days, the whole City running into Mutiny, offered the Government to Antony de Sousa, who rejected their offer; then they pitched up∣on D. Bras de Castro, a Turbulent Man, who presently accepted of it, which done, they seized upon the person of the Count, and kept him Prisoner. But God shewed how displeasing to him this Rebellious Government was, by the Judgments that immediately attended the beginning of it, for the Dutch before the expiration of the Truce began a War, which proved the most fatal to the Portugueses, of any they ever had since the Con∣quest of that Countrey. The Hollandrs resolving to break the Truce, fitted out 10 Ships, under the Com∣mand
of John Mansucar, who coming to Tutocorim, seized all the Money laid up there to buy Pearl, and at the same time took a Ship bound from Cochim to China. D. Bras de Castro, immediately prepared to oppose them. Ceylon was the place next to danger, as being that they had always aimed at. Emanuel Mascarenhas Homem, was Governour there, who hearing of the preparations of the Dutch, sent four Companies to secure Calaturé, the safety of Columbo depending on that Port. This reinforcement not coming in time, the place fell into the hands of the Enemy, and for Columbo, all the people of the Countrey flocking thither could not hold out long for want of Provisions. The News of this loss being carried to Manicravare, where Lope Barriga Comman∣ded, the whole Garrison mutinied, because, according to the Orders received from Mascarenhas, he designed to march them to Columbo, and killing some that oppo∣sed them, sent him away and took the Field. The King of Candia thinking to make his advantage of this disorder, marched a good body of Forces towards them, and offered them large terms if they would come over to his Service. They answered him with their Wea∣pons, and after a fight which lasted many hours, reti∣tired to Columbo. Emanuel Mascarenhas the Governour, having gathered what Forces he could into the City, designed to oppose the mutiniers, and fired three pieces of Cannon. They resolved to be revenged, being re∣inforced by two Companies of Foot, which deserted to them from the City, but the Religious and Inhabitants to prevent the mischief they saw impending, opened one of the Gates and let them in. Emanuel Mascarenhas, took Sanctuary in a Monastery, and the City chose for their Governours Gaspar de Araujo Pereyra, D. Francis Rolim, and Francis de Barros da Silva, and to Command in the Field Gaspar Figueyra da Serpa, an experienced Soldier. He hearing the Dutch with some Natives were abroad gathering Cinnamon, marched to cut them off, but they having intelligence of his march, were gone before; so having reduced some Towns that had re∣volted, he returned to Columbo. The Governours re∣ceiving advice that the Dutch were raising a Fort at Angratota, which would Command all the Countrey about Columbo, sent Gaspar Figueyra with 500 Foot, to drive them thence. Gaspar Figueyra, marched with ex∣pedition,
and having secured all the Avenues by which the Enemies might receive any relief, carried on a Trench so close to their work, that having raised a Platform and planted thereon one piece of Cannon, he so in∣commoded them, that after 10 days the Dutch surren∣dred upon discretion; 110 of them were taken, 40 Jaos, and 300 Chingalas, who were severely punished, as being for the most part Subjects to the King of Por∣tugal. At the same time John Botado, who was in the Inland with a Company of Portugueses and some Blacks, was set upon by an Officer of the King of Candia, with 3000 Men, and though the Blacks forsook him, the Por∣tugueses fought so desperately that they put the Indians to flight, leaving so many dead, that those who saw them could not be perswaded they had been killed by so few. John Botado, with his Men retired to Columbo. Four Ships and one Caravel sailed this Year from Lis∣bon for India, and two Ships from thence arrived in Portugal. Anno, 1653. 1. KIng John had resolved not to make any great Efforts to carry the War far into the Spanish Territo∣ries,The War proceeds coldly on both sides. concluding it his securest course to fill his exchequer, fortify his Towns and build Ships, whilst the Spaniards wasted themselves with their Wars in Italy and Flanders, were diverted from putting Portugal into any danger. This was the reason that he kept no more Forces afoot in Alen∣tejo, then served to secure the Frontiers, and consequently the actions there were of small moment and few of them worth relating. The most considerable was a party of 950 Horse, and 100 Musketiers, Commanded by Andrew de Albuquerque Generall of the Horse, which defeated 1300 Spaniards, killing 200 of them among whom was their Lieutenant Generall of Horse, the Count de Ama∣rante, and taking above 400 Prisoners. Neither did this Year produce any Exploits of note in the other Provin∣ces, which continued in full Peace, bating some small Alarms given on bothsides, which only served to keep the Garrisons upon their Guard without any damage done on either side.
2. In the midst of all his fortunate Successes, the King received one Fatal blow, which outbalanced many of his former prosperities. This was the death of his Eldest Son Prince Theodosius,Prince Theodosi-the Kings Eldest Son dyes. whom for his excellent qualities he entirely loved, The Prince, as has been before hinted, had Laboured under a tedious sickness, and tho' the Force of it was abated, he never after en∣joyed perfect health, for there continued a defluxion upon his stomach, which no medicines could ever remove, but on the contrary some that were used seemed to hasten his End. On the 3d of May he took to his bed, and for 6 Days the Phisitians Employed all their Art for recovering of him, the whole Clergy and layety offering up their Prayers to God for him. All proved in vain, for the Number of his days was compleat, therefore on the Night he received the Viaticum and on the 15th gave up his Ghost. The Encomiums bestowed on this Prince are so great, they will appear incredible, and therefore I think fitter to omit than trouble the Reader with them. He dyed Aged 19 Years, 3 months and 7 days. His body was buryed in the Royal Monastery of Belem, being Attended thither by an incredible multi∣tude of the People Lamenting the Loss of so hopefull a Prince. Immediately after his death the King assem∣bled the Parliament, in which his Second Son Prince Al∣fonso was Sworn Heir to the Crown. The 3 Estates agreed to Support the charge of the War with the Tenth of all Temporal and Spiritual Estates, and in case the Spaniards should besiege any considerable place, then to add one Fourth part more of the said Tax; but if it should happen the Enemy Invaded the Kingdom with such powerfull Forces as might bring it into danger, then they offered all they had for the Support of the Crown: Before the Parliament broke up, the King su∣stained another Loss, in the Death of his Eldest Daughter Joanna, who departed this Life on the 17th of September, She Lyes buried in the Monastery of Belem. 3. The Affairs of Portugal continued much in the same posture we left them at the Courts of Rome,The Portu∣guese Em∣bassadors brother, be∣headed for murder in England. France and Holland, In England the Count de Penaguiao sollicited the settling of a Peace with the Usurper Oliver, who was much offended at the protection given in Lisbon, to the Princes Rupert and Maurice. But this Embassador before the End of his Negotiation met there with a Di∣saster,
which cost the Life of his Brother. The manner of it in short was thus. D. Pantaleon de Sa, the Embassa∣dors Brother walking one Evening in the New Ex∣change, and resenting an affront which he thought he had received from one Gerard, the Night following repairs to the same place attended by the Embassadors retinue, and with Sword and Pistoll, falls upon all he meets. A great Hubub rising, the Portugueses were beat off, chiefly by one Collonel May an Irish man. One Greenway was killed in the scuffle. For this Murder D. Pantaleon de Sa, as the Author of the Tumult was Try∣ed and condemned. Having in vain pleaded his privi∣ledge and made his escape out of Prison by the help of the Lady Mohun, being again taken, he was beheaded upon a Scaffold on Tower-Hill. 4. Francis Barreto who Commanded in Pernambuco,Francis Barreto holds the Dutch closely be∣sieged in Brazil. tho' his Forces were much lessened and no supplies came, was not at all discouraged, but carryed on the Seige of Arrecife with a full Resolution either to Conquer or die. The besieged were now reduced to despair, and there∣fore determined to attempt gaining the Fort Arrayal, which Sigismund their Generall knowing to be a dif∣ficult Enterprize, endeavoured to divert them from, but perceiving he Laboured in vain, told them, the only means to attack that Fort was by Gaining first the quar∣ter of Aguiar. On the 11th of March, he marched out of the Fort Affogados with the greatest part of that and the Neighbouring Garrisons. Captain Alfonso de Albuquerque Commanded at the quarter of Aguiar. He not thinking it for his honour to receive them in his works, marched out and soon drove them back to their Forts. Twice after this they attempted the same Post, and were both time repulsed with considerable Loss, which caused them to forbear any farther attempts on the besiegers and em∣ploy their Men in bringing provisions from the River of S. Francis. These Men were met there by 100 Portugue∣ses and some Blacks Commanded by Captain Francis Bar∣regos, who the first firing was shot through the body, Yet his Men continued the Charge with such bravery, that they drove the Dutch to their Fort, and thence to their Ships, without the provisions they came for. Here upon the Council sent one of their body into Holland to press for speedy releif, but the Dutch having been defeated at Sea by the English, were not then in a condition to send any.
Francis Barreto having notice hereof, resolved when the Portuguese Fleet arrived to make his utmost Efforts for expelling the Enemy that Country. Accordingly he met the Admirall and Vice-Admirall to concert the measures they were to take, but the result of this Consultation and the Effect that followed belong to the next Year. 5. D. Roderick de Alencastre at the Beginning of this Year,D. Rode∣rick de Al∣encastre defeats a party of Moores at Tanier. succeeded the Baron de Alvito in the Government of Tangier, which he managed with greater dexterity than many had expected by reason of his Youth. Being informed that about a place called Gibalcaro, there were certain Hords of Arabs come thither for conveniency of pasture, he sent the Commander in cheife of the Horse, with 92 Troopers to attack them by Night. Being come near them some advised him not to fall on them till mor∣ning when he could do better Execution, however he obeyed his orders slew a great Number of Infidels, took 17 prisoners and returned with a great booty, in which were six Camels which D. Roderick sent to the King. D. Roderick performed severall other actions of less note, for a Famine raging among the Moors at that time, they brought him intelligence for bread, and others brought Horses and Cattle to sell in the City. 6. The danger increased in India,War in In∣dia with the Dutch. where D. Bras de Castro had usurped the Government; for the Dutch threatened Ceylon, and other places were not free from Apprehensions. The three Governors, who we said last Year commanded in Ceylon, sent Gaspar de Figueyra de Serpa, with 900 Foot to reduce the Towns that had revolted, and bring in Provisions. The King of Can∣dia's Forces forsook the lower Country, and entrench∣ing themselves strongly, endeavoured to exclude him the Upper. He attacked them vigorously, and their number being great, was repulsed, but they adventu∣ring to pursue him, he rallyed, drove them back, and entred their Works with them, making a mighty Slaugh∣ter. This Success made many Towns submit, which payed their Arrears of Contributions, and a great quan∣tity of Cinnamon, Provisions, Arms, and other Plunder was conveyed to Columbo. Soon after, 10 Companies were sent to attack a Town on the Frontiers of Candia, where there was great store of Provisions; and though 10000 Chingalas defended a Wood that lay in the way, they were defeated, and the Town taken. On the 11th
of May, arrived at Columbo, Francis de Mello de Castro, sent to command in that Island, by D. Bras de Castro, with 8 Ships, and 150 Foot. With him went D. Alva∣ro de Atayde, as General of the Forces, but his Age and Diseases rendred him incapable of that Post; whereup∣on Francis de Mello gave it to his Nephew, Antony de Mello de Castro, who being drove out of the Field by the King of Candia; Francis de Mello, at the earnest re∣quest of all the People, restored Gaspar de Figueyra de Serpa to that Command. No sooner had he received it, but he marched out against the King of Candia, and ha∣ving worsted him in several Encounters, forced him to retire to the City Candia, near to which he encamped, and continued a considerable time; underhand raising such jealousies in the King's Mind, that he caused him to behead many of his Favourites. The Dutch at the same time had agreed with Hidalcan, to besiege Goa by Land, whilst they blocked it up by Sea, promising him the plunder of the Place. They came before it according to agreement with a Squadron, but Hidalcan failing with his Forces, they drew off again without attempting any thing. This Year two Galeons sailed from Lisbon for India, under the Command of Luis de Mendoza Fur∣tado. The Ship Nossa Senhora da Penha de Franca, re∣turning home from India, was taken by the Hollanders in the latitude of Pernambuco. Anno, 1654. 1. TO begin this Year, Tamericour, Lieutenant Ge∣neral of Horse, by order of the Count de Soure, marched with all the Horse he could gather, and some Foot, to the Valleys of Mata Moros, and St. Ann, near the City Xeres. All the Country people was retired to those Places, and defended them the space of some Hours; but being at length defeated, the Villages were plundered and burnt; which done, the Portuguese Troops loaden with Booty, returned to their Quarters. Very few days passed before another Enterprize of more Consequence had the desired Success.Oliva ta∣ken by the Portugue∣ses. Oliva was a large Town, not far from the City Xerez, defended by an old Castle, and was the Receptacle of the Spaniards, when they made incursions on that side. Thither Andrew de
Albuquerque, though not well recovered of his Wounds, marched with 2000 Foot, and 1500 Horse. By break of day he attacked the Town, and made himself ma∣ster of it without any difficulty. At the Castle he found more opposition, because two Petards he ap∣plyed to the Gates, failed of the intended effect, and all the Spaniards able to bear Arms, had retired thither. However, Albuquerque lodged himself under the Wall, and began to carry on two Mines. The Besieged per∣ceiving it, began to parley, and after three days, surren∣dred upon Condition, every one might take with him what he could carry. The Booty was great, because not only the Inhabitants of Oliva, but of many other Towns, had conveyed their Goods thither, as to a place of Security. This Conquest cost the Lives of 42 Men. Albuquerque added some Works to the place, and leaving a Garrison in it, returned to Elvas. The Count de Soure having obtained leave to repair to Lisbon; Andrew de Albuquerque, was left supream Commander in the Pro∣vince of Alentejo. The King expresly commanded him to forbear making any Incursions into the Spanish Terri∣tories, or driving thence any Cattle, except such Hor∣ses as were fit for Service. The Duke de S. German, the Spanish General, upon notice hereof, offered to a∣gree, that no harm should be done on either side to the Country people; but Albuquerque representing to the King, the great Advantages that accrewed to his Army by these Incursions, the King recalled his former Or∣der, and the War was carryed on as before. The Spa∣niards,The Spani∣ards carry off a great Booty. to shew they had not made those Overtures, for want of Strength, drove a great Prey from the Territo∣ry of Monsaras; and the Captains, Denis de Mello, and John Ferreyra da Cunha with their Troops, attempting to recover it, were defeated, and they with 34 of their Men taken, but soon set at liberty, it being agreed that Prisoners should be discharged. 2. Scarce any thing of Note happened this Year in any of the other Provinces; both sides for the most part contenting themselves to preserve their own, and save the Country People from Destruction. Antony de An∣drade de Oliva, who had been a Franciscan Fryer, and left that Order upon several Pretexts, had now obtain∣ed leave of the King to go into Spain upon some odd Project, as he was a Man of a restless Spirit; returning
thence,Some Per∣sons appre∣hended up∣on a false Informati∣on of their correspon∣ding with Castile. he accussed Sebastian Caesar de Meneses, and his Bro∣ther F. James Caesar, of holding Correspondence with the Spaniards, whereupon they were both secured and committed to Prison, where they continued a long time. Francis de Sousa Coutinho, returned this Year to the Am∣bassy at the French Court, where nothing occurred worth relating; no more that at Rome, or in Holland, things continuing still there in the same Posture. The Count de Penaguiao, not able to bear the loss of his Brother, having concluded a Peace with the Usurper Oliver, re∣turned home, carrying with him the Ratification of the Peace. 3. Francis Barreto, the General of Pernambuco, meet∣ing with the Amiral Peter Jaques,Francis Barreto turns his Blocade at Arrecise into a for∣mal Siege. and his Vice-Admiral at the Town of Olinda, to confer together about putting at end to the long Blocade they had made of the Dutch, and having called a Council of War, it was resolved to turn it into a formal Siege. In order to it, they agreed their first attempt must be to gain the Fort called Rego, which was upon the Salt pits. Peter Jaquez went away to the Fleet, with a Resolution so to secure the Bar of Arrecife, that no Succour might possibly be conveyed in. On the 5th. of January, the Works by Land were advanced nearer, and the Enemy shut up within a nar∣rower Compass, and a Battery of 9 Pieces of Cannon raised against the Fort Rego, Collonel Andrew Vidal ta∣king up his Post there. On the 11th of January, Francis Barreto with 2500 Foot, marched to the Fort, raised two batteries the one of 7 and the other of 5 Pieces of Cannon, and began to carry on his approaches with great Art. That Night they came within Musket-shot of the Fort. On the 15th both the Cannon and small shot played incessantly on bothsides, the Dutch at the same time attempting to put some succour into the Fort, but were disappointed. That Night Hugh Naquer who Com∣manded in the Fort Surrendred, Capitulating for the Garrison to march out with their Armes, and to be sent to Portugal. Before day, he marched out with 70 Men. Two Companies of Portugueses were put into it. Hence Francis Barreto marched to the Fort Altanar, which af∣ter some short resistance was delivered upon the same con∣ditions as the other. Before the taking of this Fort the Dutch had abandoned 3 others, and now quitted 3 more, with the same precipitation. Barreto designing next
to attack the Fort of Sinco Pontas, was informed that the Enemy had secured a Post, he thought to have lodged his Men upon; whereupon he sent Collonel Andrew Vidal, with 1000 Men to dislodge them, which he did; and Fortifyed himself in the same Place. Next Mor∣ning the Canon was conveyed thither and the Trenches were opened against the Fort Sinco Pontas. The Dutch perceiving the danger to approach, made overtures for a Surrender, which were easily admitted; and after some days Spent in adjusting all differences, they finally agreed upon the following Articles. That the Dutch should re∣main possest of all their moveables. That they should have some of their own Ships with Iron Guns, to Tran∣sport them to Holland. That such as would might stay there and be Treated in point of Religion as they were in Portugal. That all the Out-Forts be put into the hands of the Portugueses with their Artillery and Ammunition. That a Garrison be immediately received into Arrecife and the City Mauricea, where the Dutch might continue 3 Months but without any Sort of Armes. That all Ships coming from Holland for Four months to come have the Liberty of all those Ports. That the Dutch give hostages to secure the Surrender of all other places they possest, belonging to Portugal on that Coast. That the Indians, Mulattos and Blacks who served, be pardon∣ed. These were the principall Articles signed on both sides the 26th of January. Next day the Portugueses took possession of all the Posts where they found 121 brass Guns, 170 of Iron; Ammunition and provision for a Year and great quantity of Stores. The same Night that Arrecife was delivered, a Dutch Lieutenant Collonel fled over to the Island Itamaraca, and perswading the People there that the Portugueses spared neither Sex nor Age, they Shipt themselves and goods on board two Fri∣gats, and Sailing to Paraiba spread the same Terror there, obliging Collonel Autin, who Commanded, against his will to Embark on a Ship that arrived there from India, and leaving the Fort in possession of 50 Portugueses who were prisoners there. All other places in Brazil were recovered with the same ease to the great honour of Fran∣cis Barreto, after the Dutch had Tyrannically possest them∣selves of them for the Space of 30 years, reckoning from their first coming thither which was in the Year 1624. The recovery of Pernambuco hapned 8 days after D. Hi∣rome
de Ataide, Count de Altouguia had taken possession of the Government of Brazil at Bahia, being successor to the Count de Castello Melhor. Collonel Andrew Vidal, was sent to carry this good News to the King who rewarded him and all the cheif Officers according to their Merit. 4. Our Affairs in India were not so successful as in A∣merica.The War in India un∣successfull to Portu∣gal. D. Bras de Castro continued in the Government, no Vice-Roy being yet come to call him to account for his Usurpation. Francis de Mello, who commanded in Ceilon, sent out Antony Mendez Aranha, with 400 Portu∣gueses, and some Chingalas to endeavour to fight the Dutch, but they avoided coming to blows as much as could be, knowing that want of Provisions would in time ruine us. He marched and in the way to Calature, found an Entrenchment guarded by some Blacks whom he defeated. Then advancing to Diagao a place where he must pass the River, he found it Guarded by two Companies of Dutch, and a Number of Chingalas, upon whom he kept Firing for the Space of 10 days, and ha∣ving provided boats to waft his Men over, the Dutch quitted the Post and he possessed himself of it. He con∣tinued 30 days about Calature hoping to draw out the Dutch, and then finding his Design succeeded not, mar∣ched through the Country of Alicaao then subject to the Enemy, destroying all that stood in his way. Here he received orders to march up the Country, in order to furnish Columbo with provisions whereof there was great scarcity, and when he had Spent 20 days without finding any, so that his Men were consumed with Labour and want, 700 Dutch with a great Number of Chingalas lay in the way he was to pass at Tebuna to intercept him. Antony Mendez drew up his Men under cover and keep∣ing a continual fire upon the Enemy, who were on a rising ground, drove them thence. After this Action he received advice from Columbo that Five Galeons were arrived there with relief from Goa, yet they left the City in no better condition then they found it, for ha∣ving in an Engagement near Gale lost their two Com∣madores, the other Captains fell at odds about the cheif command and putting to Sea met 11 Dutch men of War by whom they were all destroyed. The Dutch now wan∣ting men in other places abandoned Calature, which An∣tony Mendez possessed himself of as also of the Port Ali∣cao,
three Leagues from Gale. His good Services be∣ing mis-represented by his Enemies, he was call'd away, and his Command given to Gaspar de Araujo Pereyra, who being soon found incapable of it, Antony Mendes was again restored. The Dutch repenting they had quit∣ted Araujo and Calature, had battered the former, the space of 15 days, and passed the River to attack it, the same day that Antony Mendez arrived there. He seeing no possibility of maintaining it, resolved to march off his Men to Columbo; but the Enemy having wholly cut off his Retreat, he was forced to engage them, having chose an advantagious Post, which his Men maintained with incredible Bravery, till a chance Bullet flying into the Enemies Powder, blew up all their Ammunition, kil∣ling above 50 of them; whereupon the rest fled, lea∣ving 200 of their Companions dead upon the spot, this was the end of this Years Actions there. Three Ships sailed from Lisbon for India, one whereof was cast away upon the Bar of Goa. Anno, 1655. 1. THE War in all parts of Portugal,Very small matter this Year of martial Exploits. was this Year carryed on with so little Vigour, that it is scarce worth the mentioning; but that something must be said to carry on the Series of the History. The Provinces of Alentejo and Entre Duero and Minho, afford us no matter at all. John Mendez de Vasconcellos, who governed that of Tros os Montes, and the foregoing Years had continu∣ed in perfect Peace, had now received Orders from the King, as had all the other Governors to infest the Ene∣mies Frontiers with Incursions, which he put in Execu∣tion. The Spaniards in revenge, drove all the Cattle about Miranda, but Antony Jaques de Payva, who com∣manded in that Town, sent out a party, which defeating the Enemy, recovered all the Prey, and brought away all the Cattle of the Spaniards that grazed about Samil. This done, Antony Jaques, with 250 Horse, and 200 Foot, marched to Caravajales, and passing by that place without Opposition, burnt the Town of Tavora, and 19 Villages, returning with a great Booty. Soon after 500 Spanish Foot, and 150 Horse, having gather∣ed all the Cattle about Ifanes; Antony Jaques set upon
them with a lesser number, yet with such Valour, that few of the 500 Foot escaped being kill'd or taken. The People of Gallicia offered John Mendez a Cessation of Arms, which he accepted of, but the King not appro∣ving of it, it was of no Continuance. 2. John de Mello Feyo,Small in∣cursions in Bea. governing that part of Beira, which was before subject to D. Roderick de Castro, re∣solved not to be idle. Having borrowed 150 Horse of Nuno da Cunha, who Commanded in the other part of the Province, and joyned them to Six Troops of his own, and a Regiment of Foot, he marched to Villa Vieja Nine Leagues from the Frontiers, towards Cuidad Rodrigo. After plundering Villa Vieja, he charged a body of 300 Spanish Horse and as many Foot that was ga∣thered to oppose him, and after a Vigorous resistance made by them, in so much that at the first his party seemed to decline, he put them to flight pursuing them as far as S. Felices. Antony Soares da Costa Governour of the Castle of Salvaterra, held a friendly correspon∣dence which is allowed of in time of War between Gentlemen,A doble pice of Treachery. tho' serving in opposite parties, with D. Al∣fonso de Sande a Spanish Officer. This familiarity in∣creasing, D. Alfonso took occasion to make proposals to Antony Soares, for delivering up that Castle to the King of Spain, promising him large rewards for that Service. Antony Soares pretending an Inclination to comply, car∣ryed on the Negotiation, till he obtained a Letter from D. Lewis de Haro prime Minister of Spain, with a sce∣dule under that Kings hand containing Large promises if he delivered the place. Having received these assu∣rances he resolved to Revenge the wrong done to his Reputation, in attempting his Fidelity. He agreed with D. Alfonso to receive him with 30 more into the Castle of Salvaterra, in disguize as if they came thither to Trade, leaving the rest of the Troops belonging to Al∣cantara ready in a Wood hard by. The day being ap∣pointed D. Alfonso came according to agreement, and a small wicket of the Castle was opened at which the 30 entred one at a time, the entrance not being capa∣ble of admitting more at once. As every one was let in, Antony Soarez caused his brains to be dashed out with a Club, and in this manner cruelly butchered all the 30 reserving only D. Alfonso de Sande, whom after sending an account to the King of his barbarity, he inhumanly
tyed to the mouth of a Canon and giving fire to it shat∣tered his body into atoms. Antony Soarez might have been faithfull to his King, without committing an act so full of horror, which he himself could not but have abominated if committed by the most barbarous Infidels, and which cannot but appear execrable in the sight of all that profess the name of Christians. 3. The Portuguese Affairs in other parts of Europe continued much in the same posture we left them. For the several proposalls made in France for conclu∣ding a League offensive and defensive, all came to no∣thing.Nothing of moment done in for∣reign courts, or at Tan∣gier. Nor could there any thing be done at Rome, the Pope being fully bent against passing the Bulls for the Portuguese Bishops. The Dutch had resolved to revenge the Loss of Pernambuco upon the Trade of Portugal, but the plague which raged amongst them disappointed their designs. In England the Peace was concluded and rati∣fyed with the Usurper. America yield us no subject for History since the Expulsion of the Hollanders out of Brazil, where the Count de Atouguia was supream go∣vernour. Neither is there much to be said of Africk where D. Roderick de Alencastre still Governed Tangier, which was this year Three days beset by 10000 Moors under the Command of Gaylan. who did no other harm save the spoiling of some gardens. D. Francis de Noronha Governour of Mazagao, having obtained leave to return home, left that Command to Nuno da Cunha who had held it before, and he dying, the King sent Alexander de Sousa Freyre to succeed him. 4. The Count de Sarzedas was sent this Year Vice-Roy into India,Considera∣ble losses of the Portu∣gueses in India. who arriving at Goa, secured D. Bras de Castro and all those that had any hand in the imprisonment of the Count de Obides, sending them to Portugal, there to receive the punishment due to their crimes. He next ap∣plyed himself with great care to regulating all disorders in that government, and to releive Ceilon then in distress, but death cut him off in the midst of his progress, which we may conclude to be the principall cause of the loss of that Island, the manner whereof we are now to declare, tho' the surrender was not til the following year 1656. At the beginning of this Year, Gaspar Figuegra de Serpa had waged War so successfully upon the King of Candia, that he had reduced him to Peace. The Dutch layed siege to Calature and continued before it 10 days, at the
End whereof finding themselves too weak to carry it, they departed. Before D. Bras de Castro was deposed from the government of India, he sent Antony de Sousa to succeed Francis de Mello in the Government of Ceilon, with Six Galliots and Two pinks laden with provisions and other necessaries. Meeting Two Dutch Men of War, these small Vessels were dispersed, Two of them ran ashore, two made their way to Columbo, and Antony de Sousa with Two more got into Jafanapatan. Thence he went by Sea to the Port Putelao 15 Leagues from Columbo, where Antony Mendez Aranha met and conducted him safe by Land to that City, into which he was received with great joy, and Francis de Mello put him in posses∣sion of the government. Twelve Dutch Men of War arrived at Ceilon from Batavia, Six of them lay before the Barr of Columbo, the other Six made their way to Ca∣lature, where Landing their men they layed Seige to it, and the place being very ill provided, after the Garrison had endured the utmost Extremities it was at last, surren∣dred upon honourable Termes. Gaspar Figueyra de Serpa not knowing that Calature was lost, advanced with 500 Portugueses to endeavour to put some succour into it, but being attacked by 1600 Dutch, was totally routed and many of his men killed. The Hollanders pursuing their Victory came and sate down before Columbo, raised Four batteries, and playing continually with 12 peices of hea∣vy Canon, ruined not only the houses but the works of the Town, and gave a furious assault to the Fort Sancta Cruz, yet without success for they were repulsed with considerable Loss. At the same time severall other at∣tacks were carryed on with great obstinacy, insomuch that at last the Dutch broke into the City, where they found no less opposition, than without, most of them that entred being either killed or wounded. At length they were repulsed in all parts with the loss of near 1000 men. This discouraged not the Dutch who still carryed on their works with great diligence, raising new batteries and lodging themselves upon the edge of the ditch. Then they fell to mining which the besieged understanding, they countermined and drove them out of all their subterraneous works. These losses made the Enemy alter their resolutions and change the Siege into a blockade, whereupon the Governour turned out 300 persons that were not fit for Service, whereof about 200
escaped into the Mountains. The Dutch having recei∣ved considerable supplies, carry on their works anew, and again fall to battering of the place incessantly. Em∣bassadors from the King of Candia were conducted through the Enemies Camp into the City, where they demanded it should be put into the hands of their Master. All the answer they received was by thrusting them out of the gates. Though they shewed this resolution, the City began to be infected with the stench of the dead who were not well buried, and Famine raged so violently that it was proved that Mothers had eaten their own Children. Gerard Huld the Dutch Generall being kil∣led by a shot in the Head, the Governor of Galé, who succeeded him in that Command, fearing least another Ge∣neral might come and rob him of the Honour of taking the Place, carryed on his Works, and plyed his Batte∣ries so briskly, that several large Breaches were made. On the 7th. of May, 1656. he assaults St. John's Bul∣wark, and carrying it, with the same heat enters a new Fort that was raising; thence the Dutch venture to break into the Town▪ whence after a long dispute they were beat out, and the Besieged following their Advan∣tage, recovered the Fort and Bulwark; yet fresh Ene∣mies coming on, the Dutch again made themselves masters of the latter, and lodged themselves therein. That Night the Governor of the Town being informed that two Women had eaten their own Children, caused them to be shot to pieces at the mouth of great Guns. Next Day, seeing it impossible to maintain the Place, he call'd a Council, where it was resolved to surrender. After some Debates, the Articles were agreed upon, which were honourable to the Besieged, and in pursu∣ance to them, the Governor marched out with only 94 Officers and Soldiers, and 100 Towns-men. The Hol∣landers committed all manner of Sacriledge in the Town, and without regard to their Articles, plunder'd those few Towns-men and Soldiers that were left alive. But from so infamous a Nation, nothing but Villany can be expected. The Count de Sarzedas, Vice-Roy of India dying, as was said before, upon opening the Pa∣tents of Succession, it appeared that Emanuel Mascaren∣has Homem, was to fill his Place. Four Ships and one Caravel sailed this Year from Lisbon to India.
Anno, 1656. 1. THE King's Distempers which had long molested him,No milita∣ry Exploits of moment this Year. daily increased, yet he omitted not to apply himself to the Cares of the Government. The War was still carryed on with so little Vigour on both sides, that nothing occurs this Year, but some few Incursions, more like Robberies than military Exploits, and the conse∣quence of them inconsiderable Skirmishes, whereof so many have been already related in the foregoing Years, that to say more of them, will only serve to nauseate and tire the Reader. This quiet was general throughout all the Provinces of the Kingdom, and enabled them the better to bear the Storm that ensued after the King's Death; for the Spaniards then altering their measures, the following Years were full of Action; considerable Armies appeared in the Field; Bloody Battles were fought▪ and the Portugueses in the end, obtained glori∣ous Victories. 2. Francis de Sousa Coutinho,Negotiati∣ons abroad. continued still Ambassa∣dor at the French Court, and maintained the good Cor∣respondence that has always been betwixt that Crown and Portugal. The King being desirous before his Death, to have his Ambassador admitted by the Pope, ordered Francis de Sousa to go in that quality to Rome. He o∣beyed, and though assisted by all the interest of France, and appearing with as great a Train as any other Am∣bassador, could never obtain to be admitted as such by his Holiness. Antony Raposo▪ who resided with the same Character in Holland, having received a Letter from the Arch-Duke Leopold, iting him to discover the Secrets of his Master, upon proe of great Reward, sent the Letter to the King. The Dutch, with the goods News of their Success in Ceylon, began to forget their loss at Pernambuco, and consequently appeared more favoura∣ble to Antony Raposo. Francis Ferreyra Rebello, who re∣sided in England, after the Ratification of the Peace, had no Business of moment. The Count de Atouguia gover∣ned Brazil, much beloved and esteemed by the Inhabi∣tants, for his Generosity and good Conduct.
3. At the beginning of this Year D. Ferdinand de Menezes,The Count de Ericeyra succeeds D. Roderick de Castro, in the Go∣vernment of Tangier. Count de Ericeyra, was sent Governor of Tan∣gier. With him went 11 Caravels, with recruits of Men and Horses, Cloaths and Provisions for the Garri∣son. D. Roderick de Castro, having put him into possession of the Government, departed, and arrived again at Lis∣bon, with the 11 Caravels that carryed the new Governor. As soon as the Count had viewed the Garrison, he mar∣ched out against the Moors, and having drawn them with∣in the reach of his Entrenchments, where he had placed his Foot, with some pieces of Canon, made a considera∣ble slaughter among them. In May, the English Fleet, under the command of Montague and Blake, appeared before Tangier, and asked leave to water, which was granred them; but they going ashore disorderly, some of them were killed by the Moors. The Fleet be∣ing gone, the Count set out his Horse to burn the Corn the Moors had sowed about Tangier, which was effectu∣ally performed; but the Moors pressing hard upon those who had fired it, recovered the Cattle they were driving to Tangier. Alexander de Sousa governed Mazagao, but that place affords nothing but the usual skirmishes with the Moors. What happened in India was related the last Year, and this furnishes nothing new, only two Ships sailed thither this Year. 4. The King growing daily more and more infirm,The King's last Sick∣ness and Death. and still continuing his Custom of Hunting once a Week, went out accordingly on the 25th. of October, but feeling a great pain in his Side, returned home be∣fore Noon. Some days were spent by the Physicians, in applying all sorts of Medicines they thought proper, but his Distemper still increasing, he at length made his Will, and received the Viaticum with great Resignati∣on. Those few days he lived after this Preparation, were spent in Devotions for the most part, and the rest in giving advice to the Queen, the Princes, his Coun∣sellors, Generals and others, who had any share in the Administration of the Government. At length, on the 6th. of November, being Munday, having given all ima∣ginable Tokens of true Repentance and Christian Piety, he gave up the Ghost into the Hands of his Redeemer. The King being dead, the Lord Chamberlain dressed him in the Royal Robes, and layed him upon a Bed; the Bells throughout the City, and the Tears of his Sub∣jects,
equally signifying the loss sustained by the King∣dom. After noon the Council met, and opening his Will, found he appointed the Queen Regent of the Kingdom, and Protectress of his Children, that the Royal Chappel should be finished according to the Model by him begun; that the Monastery of S. Clare, at Coimbra, should be finished. That several Pensions should be given to Per∣sons there named. That 2000 Cruzados should be im∣mediately distributed to poor Monasteries, and that his Body should be interred in the Church of S. Vincent. All the while the Body lay in State in the Guard Cham∣ber of the Pallace, the People thronged to see it. Thence it was removed, attended by all the Officers of the Houshold, and Clergy of the whole City, to the Church of S. Vincent, and there put▪ into the Tomb ap∣pointed for it. King John was of a middle Stature, very handsome before he had the Small Pox; his Hair fair, his Body gross, but strong. He hated gayety in Cloaths, and therefore was careless in his Dress, al∣ways an Enemy to new Fashions. His Discourse was Witty and Pleasant, his Judgment sound, but affecting to have all his Orders unblameable; he was often too slow in his Resolutions. He had but one Wife, which was the Lady Luisa de Guzman, Daughter to the Duke of Medina Sidonia. By her he had Issue, Theodosius, who dyed at Lisbon,His Wife and Issue. in the 19th. Year of his Age; Emanuel and Anne, who both dyed in their Infancy, at Villa Vi∣ciosa, before their Father ascended the Throne. Alfon∣so, who succeeded his Father, and was afterwards depo∣sed. Peter now reigning. Joanna, who dyed at Lisbon, in the 16th. Year of her Age. And Catherine Queen of England. One Bastard Daughter called Mary, who li∣ved and dyed in the Monastery of Carnide, near Lis∣bon. In this City, the King dyed upon Monday, the 26th. of November, in the Year 1656, at the age of 5 Years and 7 Months, whereof he was 26 Duke o Barcelos, 10 Duke of Braganza, and 16, King of Por∣tugal. Anno, 1657. AFter the death of the King, the Queen Dowager wh was also regent during the minority of her Son, be∣ing
a Woman of a haughty and active Spirit, pre∣sently bent her thoughts upon making some conside∣rable attempt on the Enemies Frontiers, least they should imagine that the loss of their King had discouraged the Portugueses, or dissipatated their Councils. To this effect, and to gain her self a greater Reputation among her own People, she ordered the Count de San Lorenzo, who then Commanded upon the Frontiers, with all se∣crecy and expedition to attempt the surprizing of the Fort of Barcarota, in which she was informed there was but a small Garrison. At this time Francis Tutta-villa Duke of St. German was Generall of the Spanish Frontiers, by birth he was an Italian, and as to his person and experi∣ence a Soldier of known courage and Conduct. He ha∣ving private intelligence of the design covertly put 500 chosen men into Barcarota, with orders to Stand upon their guard, that they might surprize those who came to surprize them.The Portu∣gueses a¦temptin Barcarota are repul∣sed with loss. The Portuguese Forces, who knew no∣thing of this reinforcement, boldly making up to the Fort before break of day, were on a sudden assaulted by the Spaniards sallying furiously upon them, and they expecting no such reception were soon put to flight, and a great number slain and taken prisoners. This rash and fruitless attempt by which the Queen thought to have made herself terrible to her Enemies, produced a quite contrary effect, for it only provoked his Catholick Ma∣jesty to carry on the War against Portugal, with greater vigour than had been done of late years. In order there∣to the Spanish Generall the Duke of St. German having been sent for to Madrid, and there fully empowered to act, as he should find most expedient, returned to the Frontiers well furnished with mony, Armes, provisions, 20 peices of Canon, and an Army of 13000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. He was at first doubtfull whether he should bend his Force against Elvas, or Olivenza, but considering the dammage received from the frequent ex∣cursions of the garrison of the latter of these two places, he resolved to attack it. Olivenza is seated in a plain almost a League from the River Guadiana, and beset on all sides with hills that command it being within Ca∣non shot. The Fortifications of the place were after the modern manner consisting of Nine bastions, two half Moons and two Forts, and was next to Elvas the stron∣gest place in Portugal. The Duke being come before
the Town and perceiving the Seige would be a work of time,The Duke of St. Ger∣man the Spanish Generall besieges O∣livenza. enclosed the whole place within his lines, posses∣sing himself of the hills and strengthning his lines with 21 redoubts, and four large places of Armes. Four bat∣teries were presently raised, which played with good success upon the Town, but whatever they cast down in the day the besieged repaired by Night. After which another was planted on the Monastery of St. Francis, which overtopping the Walls slew many in the streets, till such time as a strong work was cast up by the garri∣son, which covered that part of the Town. The trenches were diligently carryed on and many sallies made by the besieged. The Duke perceiving the conquest of this place to be a work of great difficulty, thought fit to re∣duce it by Art as well as Main-force. Having there∣fore suffered his men to lye still severall days, as if he intended to starve the Town, on a sudden in the dead of Night, he assaulted the greater of the two Forts with his whole power. The besieged being at first surpri∣zed and not knowing whither to run, gave way  the Enemy, who thought themselves possest of the Fort till Emanuel de Saldanha the Governour of the Town, com∣ming with fresh supplies drove them out, and the Duke fearful of exposing his men sounded a retreat. Twenty days after the Town was invested, the Count de St. Lo∣renzo came to the relief of it, with an Army of 12000 Foot, and 3500 Horse. After being four days on the Banks of the River, he moved nearer to the Enemy and planted a battery against their works, but the Duke having raised also another, did such Execution that he was glad to withdraw and return to his Camp near Ju∣rumenha. Three days he lay there, and then again drew near to Olivenza, to discover how the Town might best be relieved, or at least to encourage the besieged by his presence, to which purpose he sent severall Messages to the Governour,The Por∣guese gene∣rall endea∣vours to draw away the Spanish Army from Olivenza by giving a diversion. with false promises of speedy relief. At length the Count seing no possibility of Forcing the Enemy without hazarding his whole Army, thought it better to endeavour to draw them from the Seige by a diversion. In order to it he marched to Badajoz, ho∣ping to surprize that important place in the Night, by sending 3000 men who by the likeness of their habit and Language, might be admitted as if sent from the Spanish Army. These being near the gate were discovered, and
the Garrison and Townsmen running to Arms were put to flight, after leaving about 300 dead behind, besides several Officers of Note. This Enterprize proving so unsuccessful, the Count de St. Lorenzo marched towards Albuquerque, burning and destroying all the Country in hopes by that means to draw the Spanish Army from Olivenza, and at last sits down before Valencia pressing that place day and Night, but with great loss on his side, for it was no less bravely defended by Sebastian Granero, the Governour an old Souldier of known Valour. In the mean while the Duke of St. German had ply∣ed Olivenca so hotly that the works of the place were all ruined, and the greater Fort almost demolished by the mines he had sprung. Emanuel de Saldanha the Go∣vernour seeing the ruin of his works; and that the Army which ought to have relieved him was marched away, obtained a truce of the Duke conditioning to deliver up the place if not relieved by a day appointed. The Count de St. Lorenzo having received this advice before Valencia, immediately raised his Siege and marching first to Portalegre came thence and incamped at Jurumen∣ha, from which place he writ to the Governour of Oli∣venza in hard Terms, commanding him at the peril of his Life, to defend the place to the last extremity, and promising to come to his relief as soon as he had recei∣ved some recruits he expected. Saldanha the Governour being sensible of his own weakness, and the vainness of the Counts promises▪ resolved to perform the Articles he had agreed upon with the Spanish Generall, and ac∣cordingly on the day appointed delivered up the Town to him, marching out himself with about 2500 Foot and near 600 Horse. Not one Townsman remained be∣hind him, such was their hatred to the Spaniards. It was generally agreed the Town could have held out some days longer, and the Governour being accused of not having performed his duty, but to have made a hasty and dishonourable surrender, was first kept prisoner at Lisbon; and afterwards banished the Kingdom for ever. The breaches of the Town being repaired and a good Garrison put into the place, the Duke marched towards his Enemy, burning and wasting all the Country before him, by this means intending to draw the Count to a battle; but perceiving this nothing moved him, he sits down with his Army before Moron. This Town is seaed
upon the River Guadiana, secures the passage of that River, and covers Olivenza. About the Town there was only an old wall, but the Castle was of greater strength. The inhabitants terrifyed by the fate of Oli∣venza, no sooner saw the Cannon begin to play upon their Walls but they abandoned the Town, and retired into the Castle which was well fortifyed. This success caused the Duke to alter his resolution of fighting, and now he resolved to make himself Master of the Castle before he would come to a battle. On the other side the Count de St. Lorenzo who before carefully shunned hazarding his Army, seeing now the ill consequence of suffering the Enemy to encroach so far upon him, was wholly bent upon engaging, but the River being betwixt him and the Enemy who carefully guarded all the Fords, and some Skirmishes being unsuccessfull to the Portugueses, still the generall dreaded to expose his whole Army to the fury of the Enemy, and of the River at once. John Ferreira the Governour of the Castle being now sore pressed by the besiegers, and no less by want of provisions, and seeing no likelihood of releif, on the Eleventh day after the Castle was invested,Moron surrendred. deli∣vered it up: all the inhabitants marching out with the garrison. After this success the Victorious Duke mar∣ched back to Badajoz, intending to return and besiege Jurumenha, but the excessive heats made him defer that enterprize for a more favourable Season. Nothing more of moment passed this year, but that the Portugueses rased the Fort of Oliva, which before they had ta∣ken from the Spaniards, as not tenable after the loss of Olivenza. Anno, 1658. QUeen Luisa a Woman naturally ambitious and haughty,The Queen prepares to invade Ca∣stile. was extreamly perplexed to see her great designs against Spain miscarry, and her Enemies trium∣phant in the taking of Olivenza, and daring of her Army the last Summer. She feared the unconstant multi∣tude, who always judge of things according to the suc∣cess, and when that fails immediately flye at the go∣vernment. To strike a Terror therefore into her En∣emies and to still the murmuring of the People, she re∣solved
once more to carry the War into the Bor∣ders of Castile. To this purpose she renewed the Al∣liance, concluded by the late King, with France and England, and having sent to both for Supplies of Men, caused 13000 Foot, and near 4000 Horse, to be spee∣dily drawn together. The command of these Forces she gave to John Mendez de Vasconcellos, an old Soldier, who had served under the Catholick King in the low Coun∣tries. This done, it was decreed in Council, in com∣plyance to her Will, that Badajoz should be Besieged, because that Place if taken, would add much Reputation to her Government, and would be as a Bridle upon the Spanish Garrison in Olivenza. The Duke of St. Ger∣man, who was then at Badajoz, having by his Spies, re∣ceived Intelligence of these great Preparations and the design of them, immediately dispatch'd an Express to acquaint D. Luis de Haro, the prime Minister of Spain therewith; as also to inform him of the weakness of the Garrison of Badajoz, and the ill posture of defence of the Place. Whilst Relief was expected, he lost no time, but drew together all the Forces he could, and gather'd such stores of Ammunition and Provisions, as the time and his Exigencies would permit. Few days were pas∣sed, before the Portuguese Army appeared on the fur∣ther side of the River Guadiana, near which Badajoz is seated. The River in Summer, is fordable in ma∣ny Places, and is joyned to the Town by a good Stone-Bridge, at the Foot whereof, is the strong Fort of St. Christophers. On the top of the Hill, on whose side the Town lies, stands the Castle; but the Walls of the Town were at this time decayed and unfit for Defence. The Duke not being as yet provided for a Siege, sent out his Horse to give some stop to the Enemies sudden approach.The Por∣tuguese Army lays Siege to Fort St. Christo∣pher near Badajoz. But the Portuguese General, who ought to have immediately past the River, and invested the Town then unprovided, missed his Opportunity, by setting down before the Fort of St. Christopher. This Fort is seated on a Hill, on the further Bank of the River from the Town, and about a Musquet shot from the City; being a regular Fortification after the modern manner. D. Ventura de Tarragona General of the Artillery, comman∣ded in the Fort. The Portugueses immediately possessed themselves of two Hills, on each of which there was a small redoubt, on which they planted their Cannon, and
thence battered the Fort. Next day they opened their Trenches, and carryed them on with great Application; the Besieged on their side, doing all that could be ex∣pected for their Defence, in which they made many vigorous Sallies; in one whereof, after a hot Dispute, they drove the Besiegers before them with much Slaugh∣ter, and destroyed their Works. However, the Be∣sieged soon repaired the Works, and began to press the place, which obliged the Duke of St. German to send in all haste for two Regiments that were in Andaluzia, one of Spaniards, commanded by the Marquess of Lan∣carote; the other of Irish, under the commnnd of Col∣lonel Walter Dungan, who was afterwards Earl of Li∣merick. These two Regiments, the Spanish General had decreed should relieve the Fort, which began to be distressed; but the Portuguese had appointed 6000 cho∣sen Men to be always in readiness to oppose such At∣tempts, and had broke the Line of Communication be∣twixt the Foot of the Bridge and the Fort, by which supplies used to come from the Town, so that this same was now an Obstacle against those that were to succour the Besieged. Thus the Fort was reduced to the last Extremity. This moved the Spanish General, to or∣der a Spanish Major, with two Captains and 160 Men to attempt breaking through the Enemies Line, which they most resolutely performed, and got into the Fort. No sooner were they entred, but D. Ventura the Gover∣nor, commanded them to attack the Besiegers in the re∣doubt they had possessed themselves of; but this ans∣wered not their former Success, for being overpowered by the multitude of Enemies, the Major was killed, one of the Captains shot through the Arm, and such of the Men as could escape, fled in disorder to the Fort. Hereupon the Governor sent to acquaint the Duke that he could not hold out 24 Hours, unless he was conside∣rably reinforced, so as to be able to remove the Besie∣gers from the Posts they had possessed themselves of. Im∣mediately the Duke ordered the Marquess of Lanzarote, with 800 of the best Men, and some Voluntiers to march to the Relief of the Fort, and to recover the two redoubts. It was a desperate piece of Service, for such a handful of Men to attempt against such a multitude yet they charged with such Fury, that having brok through the Enemies Line, and being supported by
sally, from the Fort, they gained the redoubts, and drove the Enemy from their Camp. This Success cost the Marquess his Life; however, though the Portugue∣ses twice attempted to recover their loss, they were both times repulsed, and at last forced to desist. John Men∣doz de Vasconcellos the Portuguese General,The Siege raised from before the Castle, and layed to Ba∣dajoz. having spent a whole Month before this place without any Success, but with great loss, and despairing of carrying it, resol∣ved now at last to removed and lay Siege to the Town. He had before sent over some Troops to invest place, and work upon the Lines, but now he marched over, and bent his whole Force against it. The first considerable Action in this Siege, was the taking of two Hills which the Spaniards had fortifyed and strongly gar∣risoned. John Mendez attacked them with all his For∣ces, and after a sharp dispute, in which he lost many Men, made himself master of them, the Defendants be∣ing all killed or taken. Next e assaulted the Fort of St. Gabriel, which being but weakly Manned, was easi∣ly carryed. But he found not the reducing of the Fort of St. Michael, a work of so much ease; for Collonel Dungan who commanded there, defended it with extra∣ordinary Bravery, till it was no longer tenable, and then surrendered it upon Articles; when the Besiegers had lost 1800 Men before it, and among them many Persons of note. Having made himself master of this Fort, John Mendez finished his Lines, encompassing the whole Town with them, which before the reduction of these Forts he could not do. Then he began to bat∣ter the Place, to cast in Bombs, and to press the Besie∣ged on all sides. Within the Town much harm was done by the Enemies shot; but scarcity of Provisions, and Diseases proceeding from ill Food, were more terrible then all other Dangers, and now no hope remained, but in the relief they expected from without. The News of this Siege being brought to Madrid, highly incensed the multitude, and perplexed the Council, in which at length it was decreed, that D. Luis de Haro, the King's Favourite and prime Minister of State, should march in Person with all the Forces he could gather to the relief of the Town.The Spa∣nish Army advances to relieve Badajoz. Accordingly he immediately set forward with a gallant train of Voluntiers, and came to Merida, where the Rendesvouz of the Army was appointed. His Army consisted of 12000 Foot, and 3500 Horse.
The Duke of St. German being informed of D. Luis's Ar∣rival at Merida, resolved to meet him at that place, and having in order to it forced the Lines of the Besiegers he broke through with 1000 Horse, and arrived safe Merida. Thence the Spanish Army marched with a possible Speed to the relief of the Besieged, but th Portuguese General, not thinking it prudent to expos his Army, now much diminished and harrassed to the E∣nemy, who came fresh into the Field, drew off in the Night, and retired hastily into Portugal. D. Luis de H∣ro the next day, entered the Town in triumphant man∣ner. Having given the necessary Orders for repairing the Damage done by the Enemy, D. Luis marched with his Army, now increased to 13000 Foot, and near 6000 Horse, into the Frontiers of Portugal, burning and de∣stroying all where he came, as he did the Town and Castle of Villa Buim. Thence, though contrary to the advice of the Duke of St. German, because Winter drew on, he marched to Elvas, and laid Siege to that place. The Town is seated on a Hill of difficult Ascent, and was then under the Government of Sancho Manuel, resolute and fortunate Commander. The first attem of the Spaniards, was upon the Monastery of St. Francis standing within Musquet shot of the Town, which though well defended, they made themselves masters of as also of the Church of Santangracia, seated on a Hil without the Town. This done, they fell to work up∣on their Lines, and took their Posts about the Town. Nothing was omitted by the Governour that might con∣duce to a vigorous Defence; but the Besiegers by de∣grees, having cut off all their Communication abroad▪ and possessed themselves of all advantagious Posts, the place was no longer in a posture to hold out long, had it not been speedily relieved. In order to it, all the Gar∣risons were drained, and the Portuguese Army rendes∣vouzed at Estremoz, under the command of the Count de Castagneda. Here the Count received Advice from the Governor of Elvas, that his Garrison was extreamly weakened through Want, Sickness, and continual La∣bour, for which Reason he should be obliged to sur∣render, unless speedily succoured. Upon this Advice the Count de Castagneda set forward with 12000 disci∣plined Foot, and 3500 Horse, besides a confused multi∣tude
of all sorts of Rabble that followed the Army as Voluntiers. With this Force he came and drew up be∣fore the Hill of Santangracia, whither also the Duke of St. German drew up the best part of the Troops to re∣ceive him. In this posture both parties continued all that Night. By break of day the Portugueses began to advance towards the Lines, and made their first effort upon the quarter where Nicholas of Cordova commanded, the fight was obstinate for a considerable space, and the Portugueses were twice forced to give back. Mean while the Besieged making a furious Sally,The Battle of Elvas. endeavour∣ed to ruin their Enemies Works, that they might open themselves a passage to their Army. Thus the Spani∣ards▪ who were the lesser Number, being charged in Front and Rear, made a desperate and bloody Fight, till their right Wing of Horse being overpowered, was put to flight. The Duke of St. German seeing the Foot left naked on that side, came himself to their Succour, with a party of chosen Horse. Hence rushing furiously upon his Enemy, he received a shot in the Head, which made him fast from his Horse. This accident of the Ge∣nerals who was esteemed dead, so discouraged the Spa∣niards,The Spani∣ards de∣feated. that they presently gave way on all sides, yet so that they carryed off their General. In the mean while the Portugueses meeting no opposition, cleared their passage to the Town. Roderick Moxica who was Major Gene∣ral, and next in command to the Duke of St. German, lying at this time at his post near the River Cailla, for∣tifyed himself, and received all that fled from the Bat∣tle, still skirmishing with the Enemy till Night, when he drew off, and saved the remainder of the Spanish Ar∣my. For the Count de Castaneda satisfyed with having relieved the place, thought not fit to hazard any more by pursuing the Enemy. Of the Spaniards, above 2000 were killed, as many wounded, but very few ken. On the Portuguese side, about 1000 fell. De Luis de Haro, who had been a spectator of the fight, at a di∣stance, seeing all lost, made his way to Badajoz. Thus ended this present Year.
Anno, 1659, and 1660. AFter the mighty efforts of the last Year, both parties being exhausted and wearied,No Warlike exploits for two Years. as if it had been by mu∣tual consent, kept themselves so quiet, that these two Years do not furnish us any Military Action worth the writing. The Spaniards had bent all their Thoughts upon concluding a Peace with France, that so they might wholly apply themselves to the War with Portugal. To this effect a Treaty was set on Foot, and the whole af∣fair managed by the two prime Ministers, Cardinal Mazarine for France,Peace be∣twixt France and Spain. and D. Luis de Haro for Spain. After long debates, which belong not to this History, a Peace was Concluded betwixt the two Crowns; the French renouncing their League with Portugal, upon Condition that King should quit all claim to the Crown, and be restored by the Spaniard to all his ancient Patri∣mony, as Duke of Braganza. The Portuguese Ambassa∣dor, who attended the Cardinal, during the whole time of the Treaty, had not failed to use his utmost endea∣vours, to obstruct the whole Negotiation taking effect, or at least, to prevent his Master's interest being aban∣doned. But the particular interest of France, outweigh∣ed all that could be urged in behalf of an Ally; and the Cardinal assured the Ambassador, that notwithstan∣ding the Peace, his master's Interest should not be forsaken for that the French would be in a better Condition to support him, and could not want a pretence for so do∣ing. This Promise of the Cardinals proved not Vain, as will appear by the Sequel. Count Schomberg, an ex∣perienced French Commander, was already in the Portu∣guese Service, and had under him some French Troops, which were afterwards increased to a greater Number. The Spaniard immediately, after the Conclusion of the Peace with France, began to apply himself to carry on the War against Portugal with all his Force; and to that end, several old Regiments were brought over out of I∣taly and Flanders. D. John of Austria, the King's Ba∣stard Son, who had commanded in the Low-Countries▪ and in Catalonia, was appointed General, the Duke o St. German his Lieutenant General, Alonso Poderico Ma∣jor General, James Cavallero, General of the Horse
and Gaspar de Cueva General of the Artillery. On the Portuguese side, whether through want of Intelligence of the Storm that threatned, or through want of Means is uncertain, but the War-like Preparations were not Proportionable. Since these Years afford nothing mate∣rial, let us pass on to the next, wherein we shall meet with more Action. Anno, 1661. D. John of Austria,D. John of Austria with the Spanish Army, in∣vades Por∣tugal. having received the Command of the Army, and finding all things provided suitable to his Expectation, in the Spring entred the Frontiers of Portugal, with 13000 Foot, and above 6000 Horse, a Force not so considerable for its number, as for that they were all old tryed Troops. The Count de Castaneda General of the Portuguese Army, could scarce gather 10000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, so that he was in no Con∣dition to make head against the Enemy. Hereupon D. John being master of the Field, marched his Army in sight of Campomayor, as if he intended to have set down before it, but having put the place into a Consternation, he suddenly wheeled off; in his way, took and de∣stroyed the small Town and Castle of Origuela, and then unexpectedly invested Aronches.He takes Aronches. This Town is seated upon the River Alegrete, contains about 500 Houses, its chief Trade is Cloath, but at this time the Walls of it were ruinous, though it had a Castle, which was of no Strength. No sooner was the Cannon planted, and be∣gan to play, but the place surrendred upon Articles; all the Inhabitants out of hatred to the Spaniards, retiring with what they could carry away. Here D. John con∣tinued, till he had strongly repaired the old Works, and cast up new ones, then having plundered all the Country about, without any Opposition, he marched back the Army to Badajoz. This loss stirred up the Portugueses to a rash Action,The Por∣tuguese Horse un∣der Count Schom∣berg, rou∣ted near Badajoz. for Count Schomberg, with 16 Squadrons of Horse, had the boldness to appear about the Bridge of Badajoz, as it were provoking the whole Force of the Spanish Ar∣my, which then lay in and about that place, to revenge this excess. D. John immediately sent out D. John Pa∣checo, Lieutenant General of the Horse, who attacked
the Portugueses with a small handfull of men at first, yet with such resolution that they gained no advantage, till he was shot dead upon the place, but then fresh Sup∣plies still comming from the Town, at last the Portu∣gueses were overpowered, many of them slain, many taken, and the rest Forced to save themselves by Flight. This success was the less pleasing to the Spaniards, be∣cause of the Loss of D. John Pacheco, who was a person of tryed Valour and Conduct. D. John being informed that much dammage was done on the Frontiers of Castile,D. John of Austria takes Al∣conchel. by the excursions of the garrison of Alconchel, sent D. James Cavallero with the best part of the Army to invest it, and himself followed soon after him. Alconchel is near the River Guadiana, has a Castle and had been lately fortifyed by the Por∣tugueses. The Seige was carryed on but coldly, either to draw the Portugues Army to attempt the relief of the place, or else because the inhabitants being divided in factions, it was not doubted but they must speedily surrender. Nor was D. John deceived in his expecta∣tion, for the Governour perceiving the heats within to increase, and the Enemy without to threaten the utmost extremity if he proved obstinate; was forced to submit, and accept of honourable conditions. The Fortifica∣tions were speedily repaired and a Spanish Garrison put into the place. This done D. John returned to Badajoz and put his Army into Winter-Quarters. Anno, 1662. 1. THe Last years losses, and the present preparations of the Spaniards, had sufficiently alarmed Portugal, to oblige the Queen to use her utmost industry to be in a condition to oppose her Enemy. In order to it the Treasury being exhausted, heavy Taxes were im∣posed upon the People, which they did not pay without much murmuring,Catherine Infanta of Portugal married to King Ch. the II▪ of England. and reluctancy. To strengthen her self by foreign allyances, she had concluded a match for her daughter the Princess Catherine with his Maje∣sty Charles the Second, King of Great Britain. The Queen had Entertained hopes of Marrying this Princess to the King of France, but he having chosen the Infanta of Spain, her next recourse was by that affinity, to secure
the Friendship of the King of England. The new Queens portion was a considerable Sum of Money, the City of Tangier upon the mouth of the Streights in Barbary, and the Island of Bombain in the East-Indies. On the other side the King of England was to assist the Portu∣gueses with a body of Foot, to serve as auxiliaries under the Command of Count Schomberg. The Earl of Sand∣wich with the Royal-Navy, conveyed the Queen into England. Upon the News of this match and that Tan∣gier was to be delivered up to the English, the King of Spain once more attempted the fidelity of the gover∣nour of that City D. Lewis de Almeida, endeavouring to perswade him rather to betray the place to him upon hopes of a considerable Reward, than to put it into the hands of the English; but the governour was not to be moved, who rather fearing that the inhabitants and Garrison would never be brought to consent, to their Kings orders of delivering up the place, as soon as the English Fleet appeared in sight to take possession of it, he sent out the greatest part of the garrison, and many of the inhabitants upon pretence to repell the Moors, who appeared then in bodies about the Town, and whilst they were abroad ingaging and pursuing the In∣fidels, gave possession of the City to the English. 2. Notwithstanding all the Queens care and dili∣gence, the Spaniards were first in the field, and much superiour the Portugueses in Strength.D. John of Austria burns and plunders the Country. D. John of Austria took the field at the beginning of May with 13000 Foot, and 5000 Horse all old Troops. His first design was to lay Siege to Estremoz, but the Count de Castaneda the Portugues General prevented him, by planting him∣self before the place with his whole Army, which then consisted of 8000 Foot and 3000 Horse. Hereup∣on D. John turned away as if he intended to march di∣rectly to Lisbon, which put that City into a consterna∣tion, and no less surprized the Count de Castaneda fea∣ring least the Capitall of the kingdom should fall into the hands of the Enemy; and had the Spanish Army held on their march, as they began, in all likelihood they must have made themselves masters of it without any op∣position. But D. John spent his time in plundering and burning the Country, and having made a halt near a brook called Zapateros, he sent then D. James Cavallero with Two Regiments of Foot, and most of the Horse,
to attack the Town of Villabuim, a place considerable both for it's Riches and Strength, nevertheless the Go∣vernour who was a French man, upon the first approach of the Spaniards resolved to Surrender, having privately Articled with the Spanish General, that for the saving of his Reputation, he might be permitted to fire his Cannon for an hour without ball, that so he might be thought to have made some defence. Yet the Surrender was not without blood, for some of the inhabitants en∣couraged by a Parish-Priest,He takes and raises Villabuim. endeavoured to make some opposition, but were soon quelled by the Spaniards. The Town and Castle were raised down to the Ground, for a Terror to other places. Hence the Army moved towards Villaviciosa, and having taken an express that was going to Elvas and Jurumenha, to encourage those governours to defend themselves couragiously, upon promise of speedy relief D. John sent him back to the Count de Castaneda to let him know he would be with him the next day. He performed his word, but the Count who was much inferiour to him in numbers, kept himself close in his Camp under the Walls of Estremoz. D. John intending to attack him in his Camp, was dis∣waded by the Duke of St. German, and marched away to Borba, a place of small Strength, but that had a Castle, and the governour Roderick, da Cunha being a desperate man, had perswaded the Townsmen to joyn with the Garrison, to defend it. Such was his Folly or rashness, that he reproached and fired upon the Trumpet that came to bring him the Summons to Surrender, whereupon the Town was assaulted on all sides and taken. The governour with a few men retired into the Castle, which having for a while stood the shock of the Canon, and beginning now to give way to it's fury, Acunha's heat being somewhat allayed, he sent out to beg he might be admitted to conditions. No intreating could prevail with D. John, who being incensed, would admit of nothing but that they should Surrender upon discretion,Borba de∣livered to him. which was accordingly done. The Souldi∣ers were all made prisoners of War, the Town plun∣dered, and Burnt, the Castle Demolished, and da Cu∣ha the Governour, with Two Captains were strangle in the Market-place. 3. Hence the Spanish Army directed its course to Juru∣menha,Jurumen∣ha beseiged by D. John. an antient and noted Town seated upon a hil
along the East side of it runs the River Guadiana, on the West is a pleasant hilly Country for the most part covered with Trees, Gardens and Vineyards. On the top of the hill over the Town stands the Castle which is strong, and has 17 Towers. The Fortifications of the Town were all New, and consisted of Five very large bastions, severall half Moons, a good ditch, and Trench, with other modern works. Emanuel Lobato Pinto was at this time Governour of Jurumenha, the garrison consisted of 3000 men and was plentifully stored with provisions, and all Sort of warlike-ammunition, when the Enemy sate down before it. D. John posted his Army about the Town, drew his lines, whereof the extreams ended at the River, which as has been said, waters one side of the Town, and then opened his Tren∣ches and began to raise batteries. The line of circum∣vallation was carryed on with the utmost diligence, and fortifyed to perfection, least the Portugues Army, as was expected, should find an opportunity of relieving the place. On the other side the Governour omitted no∣thing, that might conduce to the security of his garrison, yet so as that he always spared to expose his men, re∣serving them for the last extremity. The Portugues Ge∣nerall understanding how Jurumenha was beset, sent thither Emanuel de Sequeira an able Commander, to assist the Governour in defence of the place. He got in by a boat in the Night unperceived by the Enemies Guards. D. John raised two strong Forts, one on each side of the River, and betwixt them layd over a bridge of boats, by which he received plentifully sup∣plies from Olivenza, and with his Cannon cut off from the besieged the use of the River. All things being disposed for an attack, he ordered the Spaniards and Italians upon a signal given in two severall places, to attack the covered way. The Spaniards going on too precipitary after a long fight, were repulsed and drove back to their Trenches with the Loss of many men, among which were several Officers; but the Italians, whose Conduct was better, with small loss lodged them∣selves on the counterscarp, and yet the next day it being thought a work of too much difficulty to force the Town on that side, they were ordered to quit the Post they had taken. Being moved thence, they were ordered to joyn the Germans, who lay before the
great bastion, which, it was hoped, might with more ease be ruined, and four more pieces of Cannon were there planted to batter it, which played with good success and began to fill the ditch. In the mean while a French Ingenier sent from the Portugues Camp to view the Spanish Lines being taken, discovered to D. John that the Count de Castaneda had resolved to attack him in his works, having with him at that time 13000 Foot and 3000 Horse, and only expecting the auxiliary English, which according to the contract of marriage with his Majesty of Great Britain would soon be with him. This intelligence caused D. John to fortify his Lines, having by the advice of the Duke of St. German, resol∣ved, to receive the Enemy within them, tho' others advised to march out and meet them. Having disposed all things for the reception of the Portugues General, to forward the Seige, he orders a general assault to be given to all the works of the besieged, the Italians and Germans without much difficulty lodged themselves in the counterscarp, and the Spaniards upon whom lay the hottest Service, after four hours fight with great slaughter on both sides, made themselves masters of two great bastions, and all the space betwixt them; so that now the Town had no other defence left it but it's bare wall. This was the condition of the place, when the Count de Castaneda with the Portugues Army, came and encamped within a League of the Town, but after severall movements to discover the weakest part of the Enemies works, finding it a matter of too great difficulty to Force their Lines, he marched away, having before his departure sent a Letter to the Governour, directing him to make the best conditions he could for his garrison, for that it was impracticable to relieve him. All hopes of releif being Lost, and the Town now reduced to extremity, the Governour upon a fresh Summons from D. John, capitulated and delivered up the Town upon such Terms as he could obtain. Thus after a months Seige D. John took possession of Jurumenha,Jurumen∣ha surren∣dred. but void of inhabitants, who all marched away out of their hatred to the Spaniards, yet well stored with provisions and Ammu∣nition, tho' the Portugueses had spoiled most of their Corn before they quitted the place. D. Ferdinand de Escovedo, was left Governour there after the works had been sufficiently repaired.
4. Having secured Jurumenha, D. John lost no time, but immediately marched away towards Vviciosa, where the Portugues Army then lay strongly intrenched. used all his endeavours to draw the to a battle, bur∣ning and wasting all the Country about, but perceiving the Count de Castada was unmoved, he removed and planted himself betwixt Aveiro and Monforte, both which places, tho' well Fortifyed, being terrifyed with the success of the Spanish Arms, surrendred upon the First Summons. Both place being secured with good garrisons he  thence without delay to Crato, a Town belonging to the Knights of Malta, encompassed only with an old ruined wall, and a small Trench, but very Rich and at this time filled with great Stores of Provisions. Tho' the place was not Tenable, the Count de Castaneda▪ fearing to lose all those stores, put out the former governor and sent to succeed him an old rash Major. This man never regarding the weak∣ness of the place, answered the summons sent him by D. John with scorn and contempt, whereupon the Can∣non began on all sides to ruin the old walls, and from the higher grounds to beat down the houses and kill the People in the Streets. The inhabitants and even the garrison Souldiers perceiving themselves exposed to inevitable ruin through the fooll hardiness of their new governour, being also headed by the old one, in a mu∣tinous manner beset his house and obliged him to send to beg conditions which when offered he had slighted,He  Crato. but it was now too late, D. John sought Revenge for the insolence of the Foolish Governor and would not hearken to any Termes. In this deplorable condition, the inhabitants sent out again two Antient-Priests, to move the Spanish General to Compassion, but whilst they were pleading for the Town, the Enemy without expecting any Command from their Officers, broke in and made themselves Master of the place. D. John by his Authority took care that none but such as were in Arms should be put to the Sword, no woman Ra∣vished, nor no Churches sacked. Through a mistake both the Governours were led to Execution, till D. John being informed of the innocence of the former that had been layed aside, caused him to be honourably dismis∣sed, and the latter for his rashness was Shot to Death in the Market-Place. The Town of Crato was plun∣dered.
and burnt down to the Ground, and the Castle blown up. From Crato, the victorious Army marched to Oguela, which at first stood out against the Summons sent in, but soon after, whilst the Governor had sent out to treat of a Surrender, the Spanish Soldiers as they had done at Crato attacked and entred the Place. Of which dishonourable Action, when the Governor com∣plained to D. John, he caused all their Goods to be re∣stored to the Inhabitants, and granted honourable Con∣ditions to them and to the Garrison. The Count de Sartinara was appointed Governour of this place, and with him were left two Italian Regiments. After which Actions, D. John put his Army into Quarters, and so ended the Affairs of this Year. Anno, 1663. 1. BOth Crowns were earnestly intent upon renewing the War this Year,King Al∣fonso takes upon him the Govern∣ment. and nothing was omitted on either side, that seemed conducing to a vigorous Cam∣paign. King Alfonso being now at Age, to take upon him the Government of his Kingdom, according to the custom of Portugal, had removed his Mother from the publick Administration of Affairs, and was therefore ambitious to begin his Rule with some important Action, which might gain him Reputation both at Home and A∣broad. His first step hereto was to remove the prime Ministers and Officers of the Kingdom, and to supply their places with others more suitable to his own Incli∣nation, or less offensive in the Eyes of the People, then the former had been. He called to him the Count de Castaneda, who had of late commanded the Portuguese Army, pretending he had need of his Counsel at Court, but in reality to ease himself of a Man, who being pre∣ferred by the Queen, was likely to adhere to her par∣ty, and she who was of a haughty proud Spirit, and had been removed from the Government against her Will, now was forming a Faction to support her Au∣thority. D. Sancho Manuel, Count de Villaflor, who had commanded in the Province of Beira, was made General of the Army, in the place of the Couut de Ca∣staneda. It was this D. Sancho Manuel who bravely de∣fended Elvas, when besieged by D. Luis de Haro. Den∣is
de Melo, was appointed General of the Horse, Luis de Meneses of the Artillery, Count Schomberg was continued in the post of Camp-Master General, and now was the Custom first introduced into Portugal, of using Major Generals, which they had not in their Armies before. The Army also was considerably reinforced by the accession of the English and French Auxiliaries. The Count de Villaflor haing spent a few days at Lisbon to receive Orders, took a Progress, and visited all the Garrisons of his Province of Alentejo, giving the necessa∣ry Orders in all places. 2. D. John of Austria had thought to take the Field very early in rhe Spring, but was disappointed by the la coming of the Spanish Regiments from Milan. As soon as they arrived, he took a review of his Army, which he found to consist of 15000 Foot,D. John of Austria in Portu∣gal, with an Army of 21000 Men. and about 6000 Horse. With these Forces he marched into the Fron∣tiers of Portugal the same way he had taken the year before, when he besieged Jurumenha. His design was not known to any Man, except the Duke of St. German, but it was given out he intended directly for Lisbon. At first, the Count de Villaflor was in Confusion, not know∣ing what place this Storm would fall upon; but upon second thoughts, seeing D. John still advance into the Country, he concluded that Ebora was the place he aim∣ed at, because he well knew it was that Generals custom to attempt the conquest of Towns, that were of great Name and small Strength, such as Ebora was. Being fixed in this his Opinion, he threw into that City 3000 Foot, and about 1000 Horse, which with 5000 Men of the Inhabitants able to bear Arms, he thought would so long defend the Town, till he could be in a posture to re∣lieve it. In the mean while the Spanish Army advanced through the Countrey, burning and wasting all in their way, without the least Opposition, till at last the Count de Villafor with a small Army on a sudden fell in upon their Rear, and for the present, put all into some Disor∣der; but D. John having given Orders for all to halt, and then brought his Light Horse about to relieve those that were ingaged in the Rear, he was forced to draw off and retire to Estremoz with some loss. Three days after, the Spanish Army encamped near Ebora. D. James Cavallero, the General of the Horse, was sent before to secure all Posts about it; which done, the whole Army
followed, and took its Posts about the Town, at such time as they seized all the Cattle, which was then too late to be drove from the Country about into the place. 3. Ebora is one of the largest, and most antient Citie Portugal, seated in a large Plain. On the South, in prospect is terminated by beautiful and fruitful Hills,Ebora, be∣sieged by D. John. a the foot whereof is the stately Monastery of the Carthsi∣ans. On the North of it runs a small River, which be∣ing drawn out into little Trenches, fertilizes the Plain. About the Town is a Mud Wall, and at this time some other small Works had been cast up, such as the present Exigency would permit. The Water for the use of the City, is brought from the Neighbouring Hills, up∣on a continued row of Arches. This Aqueduct they thought to secure by a Fort, but the Enemies sudden ap∣proach prevented them. Luis de Mesquita was now Go∣vernor of the Town, a Man of noble Extraction, but no Souldier, whom the Garrison disdaining to submit to, Emanuel de Miranda an old Commander, was sub∣stituted in his Place. The Spanish Army having invested this place, the general Officers were intent upon securing all the advantagious Posts. In the mean while the Portu∣guese Horse made some Skirmishes to keep them off at a distance, but being beaten back to the Town, the Besie∣gers in the pursuit, possessed themselves of the Mona∣stery of St. Antony, which they found but slenderly guar∣ded, and lay commodiously to offend the Town. But the Spaniards sped not so well at the Carmelite Mona∣stery, which lay betwixt that of St. Antony, and the Ci∣ty; for after six Hours sharp dispute, they were forced to leave the besieged possessed of it. This done, D. John distributed the Posts to his Army, but thought it need∣less to intrench himself, not doubting to be master of so weak a place, before the Portuguese General could gather a sufficient Force to attempt the relief of it. However the Trenches were opened against the Town, and Batteries raised, but the first that gained a post were the Italians, who with much bravery stormed, and took the Monastery of the Carmelites, whence planting their Cannon, they made a great havock in the Town. The Spaniards ashamed to be outdone by the Italians, carryed on their Works with great diligence, and ha∣ving with much slaughter repulsed the Besieged, who sallyed upon them, made themselves master of the
Church of St. Dominick, which overlooking the Town, they planted their Cannon upon it, to the great Damage of the Besieged. D. John, seeing the miserable condition of the Place, sent another Summons, offering honoura∣ble Conditions if they surrendred in time, which all the Officers of the Garrisons, seeing no possibility of holding the Place, or likelyhood of Relief, thought it time to accept of, but Lewis de Sousa, Elect Bishop of Porto, and Administrator of the Church of Ebora, a Man fit∣ter for the Army than the Church, crossed their design, raising Factions among the People and Garrison, and by this means obstructed the surrender that and the follow∣ing day. The Clergy and Laiety, Women and Chil∣dren flocked to the Works, and endeavoured to make up the Breaches, but all in Vain, for more was already ruined than could be retrieved, and the continual Fire of the Enemies Cannon, rendred all their efforts unsuc∣cessful. This Fury being spent, and the People coming to themselves, at length they capitulated, and delivered up the City upon such Conditions as could be obtained, which were not very Honourable. On the 9th. day, after it wa invested,Ebora delivered to D. John. the City was surrendred. There marched out 2000 Foot, and 300 Horse of the Garri∣son, who according to Articles were to be conducted into Castile, and there to remain Prisoners of War during the Summer. 4. The News of the Siege of Ebora being brought to Lisbon,The Por∣tuguese General Count de Villaflor, ordered to relieve E∣bora. caused mighty commotions and tumults in that City, whereupon the Young King by the advice of his Counsel, sent orders to the Count de Villaflor, to releive Evora at any rate, and at the same time commanded the Count de Castaneda, with what Troops he had and could raise to suppress all Seditions in Lisbon. The Count de Villaflor received his orders the very day that Evora was Surrendred of which as yet he had no notice, and therefore having called a Council of War, the advice of the Count Sabugal was followed, which was not to hazard a battle at any disadvantage, but to cut off the Enemies Provisions. In order hereto, the Army being now 12000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and having recei∣ved intelligence of the Surrender of Evora, marched and incamped at Laondil where they had plenty of Pro∣visions and streightned the Enemy. In the mean while the News of the Surrender of Evora, being brought to
bon,A mutiny at Lisbon for the loss of Ebora. the multitude ran headlong into all Sorts of Licenti∣ousness, and not only the vulgar rabble appeared in the se∣dition, but great Numbers of the more substantial sort joyned with them. The First effort of their fury fell upon the Arch-Bishops Pallace, which they plundered, burning and carrying away all that was in it, the Arch-Bishop himself having before made his escape to Court. Thence they turned their rage against the Count of Castaneda, whose house they ransacked as they had done the Arch-Bishops, he himself being also fled; and after him they exercised the same barbarity, towards the principal Magistrates and other great Men of the City. Whilst this passed in the City, the King consulted with the Arch-Bishop, the Count de Castaneda and other great Men, about the means of quelling this Sedition. The Count advised to fall upon the raging Multitude, with such Forces, as were in the Town, whereof the greatest part were Forreigners, and there∣fore would be faithful, in the performance of their duty. But the Arch-Bishop's opinion prevailed; which was to let the fury of the multitude pass over, and then of themselves they would Return to their Duty. The Rabble having raged all about the Tow came at last to the Kings Pallace, where many being weary, and coming to themselves began to slink away, and at last the King Looking out of the Window, and telling them that his Army now besieged those, who had before layed Siege to Evora, they all retired with confusion to their houses, blaming one another, for what they had all done. No Notice was for the present taken, of what had hapned, but some time after, several of the Ring-leaders were punished under other pretences. 5. During these Transactions,D. John. marches out of Ebora to give the Portu∣gueses bat∣tle. D. John of Austria, repai∣red the Fortifications of Evora, and finding Provisions began to grow short, having left a small garrison in the City, marched out to give the Portugueses battle, tho' con∣trary to the advise of the Duke of St. German, who was utterly against hazarding a battle, till the Forces they dayly expected from Castile were arrived, and for the subsistance of the Army, advised the turning out of the inhabitants, upon whose stores the Souldiers might live many days. The Portugues Army lay within half a League of Evora, having a small River before it. Thi∣ther D. John marched thinking either the Portuguese
would give him battle upon equal Terms, or else that he should remove them from their advantagious Posts, by 17 pieces of Canon which he planted upon an Emi∣nence. But the Count de Villaflor resolving not to quit his Advantage, and the Canon which was ill planted, doing as much Execution among his own, as among the Enemies men, D. John drew back and encamped with∣out Canon Shot of the River. Thus both Armies con∣tinued all Night ready for Action. At break of Day, D. John moved in order of battle, to force the passage of the River, where a bloudy dispute ensued, till, after a considerable Loss on both sides, the Portugueses stan∣ding their ground, the Spaniards who fought at great disadvantage, were forced to give way, and retire into the plain of Ebora. D. John discouraged at this repulse, put 3000 Foot, and 600 Horse, under the Command of Francis Gattinara Count of Sartirane into Ebora, resol∣ving to march back into Castile without coming to a battle, if possible to avoid it by marching over the Mountains. His first days march met with no obstruct∣ion, because the Count de Villaflor was marched before, in order to choose an advantageous Post to give battle in, where the Horse might be of small use, in which the Spaniards were much Superior to him. Some there were, who advised to march on all Night, but D. John thinking that would look too like flying, refused that wholesom advice. In the Morning he was informed, that the Portugues Army was at hand, being covered from him by the tops of the hills. It was no time now to think of avoiding a battle, and therefore D. John drew up his Army, and being possessed of a high hill, thought good to remove and make himself master of two others that lay in the way to Estremoz. At the same time the Portugueses not knowing any thing of the Enemies design, had resolved to possess himself of the same place. Hereupon the Count de Villaflor advancing with the Horse, fell upon the rear of the Spaniards, whose Horse were upon the Plain, their Foot having already gained the hill. D. James Cavallero facing about with his Horse, received the charge and made good his ground, so that the Portugueses having spent half the day and gained no advantage, began now to faint un∣der the toil and heat, which D. John perceiving, he speedily possessed himself of the two hills he aimed at,
drew up his Horse in four bodies upon the Plain, pla∣ced his baggage in their Rear, and planted his Canon upon the hills. On the other side, the Portugueses seizes the hill which D. John had quitted, looking upon it as part of Victory,The battle of Ebora. to possess the ground the Enemy had designedly abandoned. About three hours both Armies continued in these Posts, refreshing their wearied men, when D. John thinking he had given them the slip, be∣gan to continue his march, but the Count de Villaflor perceiving it, resolved not to suffer him to go off, with∣out hazarding a battle. The signal being given, he ad∣vances, and the Portugues Left wing of Horse first char∣ged the Right of the Spanish, who recieved them with such Resolution, that the Fight continued a long time doubtful, till Emanuel Freire one of the Portugues Ge∣nerals of Horse wheeling about with some Squadrons he had reserved, set upon the Enemies flank and broke through them, whereupon the whole wing was soon put to flight, as was the reserve coming to their relief, and the Left wing which was ordered to relieve the Right by reason of the distance and badness of the way, could never be brought to ingage. Mean while Count Schomberg, who commanded the Portugues Foot, re∣solved to attack the Enemy upon the hill. This being an Action rather rash than valiant, the English auxilia∣ries undertook climbing the hill upon their hands and feet, and tho' many of them fell, yet the greater part gained the top, which encouraged three Regiments of Portugues Foot, to ascend a farther way about which was much easier. This extravagant rashness, of the English, so terrifyed the Spanish Foot, that they immediately without sense of shame betook them∣selves to flight. In a moment their whole infantry was put to the rout, notwithstanding D. John alighting from his Horse, performed all that man could do to make them rally and face the Enemy. But now the victorious Portugues Horse, comming in to second their Foot, there ensued a terrible slaughter, for it was no longer a Fight. The Duke of St. German who had been sent before to mark out a Camp, hearing the noise of the Canon, hasted back, and finding the whole Army dis∣persed and routed, with much difficulty perswaded D. John to save himself by flight. So both the Generals hasted away to Aronches▪ D. James Mazacan whose
squadron had not been broke, gathering as many of the Horse as he could, made the last effort against the vict∣ors, but being overpowered, he was forced to give way to the stronger side.D. John of Austria defeated. Of the Spaniards were slain in this Fight about 4000, the wounded were more, and above 3000 taken, and among them the Marquess del Carpio, Eldest Son to D. Lewis de Haro. Of the Portugueses above 1000 were killed, and many wounded. All the Enemies Canon, and baggage, as also D. John's most splendid Equipage was taken. 6. The Prisoners taken in Fight were all sent to Lisbon, where the joy of the multitude was as extravagant, as their rage had been for the loss of Evora. The King therefore finding all was secure at home, sent those Troo he had kept at Lisbon, to bridle the Rabble, under the Command of the Count de Castanheda, to join the Count de Villaflor,The Count de Villa∣flor reco∣vers Ebo∣ra. with orders to lay Siege to Evora. These two Generals put their orders in Ex∣ecution, and fmally besieged that City, yet knowing no Enemy could come to it's relief, forbore any assaults to spare their Men. The Count de Sartirane, who as has been said, was made Governour of that City by the Spaniards, defended it with much bravery, the Space of Eleven days, being ignorant what was become of the Spanish Army, but being then informed of it's defeat by a Letter from D. John, in which he ordered him to provide for the safety of his garrison, he then Surren∣dred the place upon honourable conditions. 7. D. John having gathered the remains of his broken Army,D. John atttempts Elvas, but is re∣presed. and received some recruits out of Gallicia, sent D. James Cavallero, with a good body of Horse and Foot, to endeavour to Surprize Elvas, but the garrison having taken the Alarm, he was repulsed, and forced to retire without effecting any thing. To add to the misfortunes of the Spaniards, their great Magazine of powder which they had layed up at Aronches, was accidentally blown up, which ruined many of the new works they had made about the Town since they took it, and killed above 2000 of the garrison and inhabitants. 8. Winter put not an end to Action,The Duke of Ossuna builds, a Fort not far from Almeida. for the Duke of Ossuna, who Commanded upon the Spanish Frontiers, about Cuidad Rodrigo, tho' he could gather but a small Force, yet being ambitious of Fame, he resolved to a Royal-Fort, not far from Almeida the Portugues
Frontier. He marched to the place he had pitched up∣on with what strength he could make, and began the work which was extreamly difficult by reason of the unseasonableness of the weather, and the danger from the Enemy, to oppose whom he incamped before the work with all his Force to cover the Labourers. Peter Jaques de Magallaens, who commanded upon those Frontiers, was then sick, and Alfonso Furtado de Mendoza was sub∣stituted in his place. D John of Austria who was now returned to Bajadoz from Court, where he had been to answer to what was objected against him upon account of his late defeat, hearing of this undertaking of the Duke de Ossuna, sent him large Supplies under the Command of the Count Bouette, with which accession the Duke was now increased to about 7000 Fo and a∣bout 2000 Horse. Not above a Canon shot from him lay the Portugues Army, consisting of a like Force. Mendoza perceiving the Duke was not to be drawn to a battle, his only design being to cover his work, and it being a rashness to attack him in his Camp, thought the only way to draw him thence would be to enter the borders of Castile, and put all things to Fire and Sword. To this intent he sent out a party of Horse to Almeida, which the Duke perceiving, charged and there  a ot dispute; the Portugueses giving way, and drawing on the Enemy till the rest of their Forces came up with them. Thus the Fight was protracted till the gross of both Bodies came to Engage, and then the Spanish Horse gave ground, and had been utterly routed, had not the Count de Bouette stood firm with his Troops, and given those that fled time to Rally. But the Duke perceiving there was no likelihood of standing the shock of the Portugueses, sent a Squadron of Horse to fall into their Camp, which they understand∣ing, drew back to secure their works, and the Spaniards design, being no other than to discharge themselves of them, both parties as it were by consent, returned to their Camps. The execution on both sides was e∣qual, in all about 800 Horse fell, but not so many Foot. This drawn battle was the last, neither side being desi∣rous too far to provoke the other. However the Duke finished the Fort he had begun, into which he put a strong garrison, under the Command of D. Gregorio Tapia. Thus ended the Action of this Year, with the Year it self.
Anno, 1664. 1. NO sooner the Spring begun to open then the Por∣tuguese Army to repair to their general Rendes∣vouze at Estremoz. Being assembled to the number of 15000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, under the Command of the Count de Castanheda, they marched into the Fronti∣ers of Castile, with a Resolution to besiege Valencia de Alcantara, a place strong by Nature, but not regularly fortifyed. In their way they spent some days upon the Banks of the River Caia, about the Bridge of Badajoz, shewing themselves there, as it were to provoke the Enemy to Battle. D. John of Austria, who was then in that City, had a sufficient Body of Horse, but neither Foot enough, nor any store of Ammunition to encounter the Portuguese, having lost all the foregoing Summer. How∣ever to do what the time would permit; he caused all the Frontier Towns to be strongly Garrisoned, and his Horse to attend the motions of the Portuguese Army, so as to keep them from straying to waste the Country, but not to hazard an Engagement.The Count de Castan∣hed be∣sieges Valencia, de Acant. The Count after a few days, marched and invested Valencia. This Town is seated upon a cragged and rocky Ground, by it runs a rapid Stream, and on its North side is a large plain; it had no modern Fortification, as was said before, howe∣ver some new Works lately cast up, added to the Natu∣ral Scituation of the place, rendred it of a considerable Strength. Fabritius Rossa, an Italian of known Valour and Conduct, was Governour of the Place, and had with him a resolute Garrison of Spaniards and Italians. The Count de Castanheda, perceiving the strength of the Place, and resolution of the Garrison, resolved formally to besiege it, and to that purpose, possessing himself of the Monastery of St. Francis, which was within Cannon shot of the Wall, planted there his first Battery, and then raised several others in convenient Places. Mean while D. John of Austria, being in care for the Town, sent D. James Correa with all the Horse, either to attempt put∣ting some Succour into the Town, if he found an Op∣portunity, or at least by his Presence, to encourage the Defendants. Correa having marched up to the Portu∣guese Lines, and finding them in a posture to receive
him, attempted nothing, but wheeled off again, and marched back till Night over-took him. Then having ordered his Troops to halt, he sent out Count Bouette with a Party, to bring in some Provisions for his weary∣ed Men. The Count being departed, a sudden cloud of Dust which arose, being driven by the strength of the Wind, so terrified the Spaniards, who imagined the whole Portuguese Army was coming upon them, that they dis∣persed and fled about all the Hills, casting away their Arms, and leaving their Baggage, so that all their Com∣mander James Correa could do, was not of any effect to bring them again into a Body. Count Bouette retur∣ning with the Provisions he had gather'd, found only the scatter'd Baggage, and marks of their flight, where∣upon he went after, and having overtaken them in the Morning, they returned together with dishonour to Badajoz. But the Count de Castanheda making use of his time, and having now made several Breaches in the Walls fit for an assault, sent to summons the Governor to surrender in time, since all hope of Relief was vanished, and the place was in no condition to hold out. The Governour to gain time, entred upon a Treaty, but pro∣posed such high Terms that they were scornfully reject∣ed by the Portugues, and immediately the Batteries were renewed with more fierceness than before. Then fol∣lowed a furious Assault, which the besieged stood with such undaunte Resolution, that after a great slaughter on both sides, the Portugueses were compelled to give it over. This repulse moved the Count to carry on his Works more deliberately, and endeavour to spare the Blood of his Soldiers. But it was not long before Am∣munition began to grow scarce in the Town, which o∣bliged the Governor to hearken to a Capitulation offer∣ed him by the Portuguese, for fear least they becoming sensible of his want, should afterwards impose harder Conditions upon him. However, though the Proposal was most grateful, yet he carryed himself very high, and would not seem to comply, but upon powerful Argu∣ments and Perswasions. At length, after much debate, it was concluded,Valencia taken by the Portu∣guese Ge∣neral. that besides all other Honourable Con∣ditions, the Governour should be allowed to send to D. John of Austria for Relief, and that if he were not then relieved, he should surrender the Town. In the mean while all Hostilities were to cease, and a Messenger
having brought this account to D. John, he sent D. James Correa with 3000 Foot, and what Horse he had to at∣tempt to succour the Town, but he being much inferi∣our in all respects to the Besiegers, thought not fit to expose his small Forces to certain Destruction. After the expiration of the four Days, the Governour deli∣vered up the Place, marching out with his Garrison up∣on as honole Conditions, as he could himself de∣mand. 2. Whilst D. John of Austria's Credit daily decreased on account of these many losses,The Duke of Ossuna assults Ca∣stel Rodri∣go, and is repulsed. the Duke of Ossuna thought it fit to raise his own Reputation. In order hereto, he marched to Castel Rodrigo, a Portuguese Town, encompassed with an old but strong Wall, and several Out-works; yet better secured by the Courage and Ex∣perience of its Governour, John Ferreira, who had there in Garrison a Regiment of tryed Valour. This place the Duke hoped to have carryed by Storm, but having been several times beaten off with great loss; he sate down quietly before it with 7000 Foot, sending a∣bout his Horse to gather Provisions. After a few days lying still, as if he had no further design against the Place, he marched off, that he might the better surprize the Garrison, for in the dead of a dark Night, he retur∣ned again, attempted to scale the Walls, where the Watch was negligently kept, yet being discovered, and the Town taking the Alarm, he was beaten off, and no hope left of prevailing, either by an Assault, or Sur∣prize. Both these Designs failing, he resolved upon a formal Siege, and accordingly raised his Batteries, whence he shook and ruined the Walls with his heavy Cannon. Peter Jaques de Magallaens, who commanded the Por∣tuguese Forces in those Parts, and to whom the defence of that Garrison belonged, having gathered all the For∣ces of that Province, marched with speed to its relief, and posted himself on a Hill, opposite to the Town, so disposing his Troops that the Enemy could not judge of their number, hoping thereby to move them to raise the Siege, which fell out as he expected; for the Duke not being able to judge of his Strength, thought not good to expose himself to uncertainties, and therefore drew off from the Place. Peter Jaques having gained this Point, resolved to pursue the Enemy, and force him to a Battle before he received the Reinforcement he expect∣ed
from D. John. It was no hard matter to draw the Duke to a Battle, he being a Man that relyed more upon Chance and Fortune, then Prudence and Conduct; therefore as soon as he perceived the Portugueses were not superiour to him in number, he chose his Ground, and drew up his Men. Both parties being disposed for the Fight, the Spaniards made the first ons advancing hastily and Firing; but their Precipitation  them into Disorder, which the Portugueses taking the advantage of, they fell in with their Horse and Foot, and in a moment put them to the rout.The Duke overthrown by Peter Jaques de Magalla∣ens. The Duke, who had rather play the part of a Soldier then a General, having in person several times charged the Enemy, seeing himself almost abandoned by his own People, and beset by his Adversaries, at last saved himself by Flight. Of the Spa∣niards, about 2000 were killed, and near 500 taken; of the Portugueses, 800 were lost: All the Spaniards Baggage and Cannon, with the Duke's Equippage were taken. This Action was performed about the beginning of the Summer; afterwards the Heats increasing, and both Parties being sufficiently worn and tired, they retired in∣to quarters of Refreshment, and nothing more happened worth the relating; let us therefore pass on to the ensu∣ing Year. Anno, 1665. 1. WE are now drawing to the end of this tedious War, and though betwixt the death of King John, and the Conclusion of the Peace, there happened several things remarkable enough in the Civil Government; yet I have thought fit not to interrupt the Series of Marshal Affairs now drawing to a Period, but rather to put an end to the course of these extern contentions, and when I come to relate the intestine Troubles and Confusions, then at once to sum up those Accidents that preceded in order to them, that then the Reader may with the more ease to his Memory, take first a view of the whole War, and next of the strange Catastrophe that ensued, with all the previous Accidents tending to it. 2. Before the main Armies could take the Field, both parties ceased not to infest their Enemies Frontiers with frequent Incursions. But for the most part, these Acti∣ons
were inconsiderable,A Body of Spanish Horse rou∣ted. being rather like Robberies, then publick Hostilities. The first Action of moment we find this Year, was an incursion made by 1000 Por∣tuguese Horse, towards Badajoz, plundering and burning all the Country before them. Count Marsini at this time, commanded on the Spanish Frontiers, who upon the news of the Spoil made by the Portugueses, comman∣ded D. James Correa General of the Horse, with 500 Men to oppose the Enemy. Correa after representing the weakness of that number, having received a check for his seasonable Advice, marched out. The Portu∣gueses were then dispersed, but hearing of the Approach of the Enemy, assembled their Troops, and having lay'd part of them in Ambush, with the remainder charged the Spaniards, who meeting less opposition then they had expected, thought themselves secure of the Victory, till being encompassed by those that rose out of the Am∣bush, most of them were either killed or taken. D. James Correa, with those few that could escape, fled to Badajoz, not much troubled at his loss, because he had been contrary to his Judgment and Advice, sent upon the Action with so small a Force. 3. Whether it was that the Portugueses were resolved to stand upon the Defensive, and therefore spared their Forces;The Mar∣quess of Caracena General of the Spani∣ards. or that the Difficulties their new rising King∣dom labour'd under, would not permit them to be so forward as the Enemy, is hard to determine; but cer∣tain it is, the Spaniards were generally the first that took the Field. So this Year, the Marquess of Carace∣na, who with a general Applause for his good Service in Italy, and the Low-Countries, had been appointed General for this War, having taken a review of his Army, which he found to consist of 12000 Foot, and a∣bout 6500 Horse, marched into Portugal, with a full Resolution to besiege Villaviciosa. This Town is the antient Seat and Patrimony of the Dukes of Braganza, and is properly called Villaviciosa, because of the plea∣santness of the Air, the fruitfulness of the Soil, the beau∣ty of its Forrests, and other Delights wherewith that Territory abounds. The Town it self is seated on a high Hill, and is divided into three parts. The first which is in the nature of a Suburb, contains several Monasteries, many Inhabitants, and the stately House of the Duke of Braganza. To this joyns the Town, en∣compassed
with an old Wall, but little inhabited. A∣bove all, stands the Castle, well enough fortifyed for that time, having a Ditch, a covered Way, a Half-Moon, and other Works. Christopher Brito, was at this time Governor of the place, and had under him se∣veral expert Commanders, and 1000 Garrison Soldiers, besides the Towns-men that were fit to bear Arms. As soon as Brito understood the Enemy advanced towards him, he secured and strengthened three strong Posts without the Walls, viz. the Duke of Braganza's House, which was built like a Castle;The Mar∣quess of Caracena, besieges Villavicio∣sa. the Fort of St. Benedict, and the Gate called No. Eighteen Companies of Spanish Musquetiers immediately assaulted these three Posts at the same time with much Bravery, but they were all three with no less Valour made good by the Defendants. However, Brito considering those places were too far remote from the Town, to be kept without great ha∣zard of weakning his main Strength, drew off his Men the Night following, and abandoned them. As soon as Day appeared, the Spaniards commanded by Roderick Moxica, entred the Houses next to the Town, without any Opposition, all that were able to bear Arms, being withdrawn into the Town. Here the Soldiers commit∣ted all the Outrages that could be expected from the cruellest Enemy, sparing neither Sex nor Age; ravishing Women, and prophaning even the Churches, till some religious Men who had made their Escape, giving an account of these barbarous Proceedings to the Marquess of Carazena, he took Order to cure this Licentiousness of the Soldiers. Being thus possessed of the Suburb, the Marquess planted his Cannon against the Town, but being impatient of delay, he assaulted the Wall with Scaling Ladders, and at the same time applyed a Petard to one of the Gates, yet all in Vain, for he met with such vigorous Resistance, that he was compelled to draw off his Men. Next he applyed himself to under∣mining, but the Earth being unfit, this Work proved more prejudicial to him than to the Besieged. At last, having made some Breaches in the Walls, the Italian Foot were ordered to mount them, which they perform∣ed with as much Gallantry as could be imagined, but those who to divert the Besieged, were to Scale the Walls, being easily repulsed with great Loss, by reason their Ladders were too short, and all the Strength of
the besieged making good the breaches, all that the Ita∣lians could do was to lodge themselves under the Walls. In the Mean while the Spaniards who besieged the Castle were not Idle, but having battered it gave a most furi∣ous assault tho' with no better success than the Italians had done, yet with greater slaughter on both sides. In this Action Brito the Governour received three wounds, and lost several Officers and Soldiers of good Note. Af∣ter these repulses, the Marquess proceeded cautiously, yet never ceasing to batter the works with his Cannon. At length receiving intelligence that the Portugues Army was upon it's march from Estremoz to relieve the place, least he should find his Forces divided betwixt the Town and the Castle, he resolved to bend his whole strength against the Town and to leave the Castle for another time. However least the besieged should have the op∣portunity of relieving the Town from the Castle, he commanded the Spanish Foot to attack the palisade of the Castle, whilst the Italians gave the General assault to the Town. This Action was very hot, both parties be∣ing obstinately set down not to give way, but at last Va∣lour must give place to number, and the Italians having gained the tops of the Walls and breaches, such of the defendants as escaped were forced to retire into the Castle: Nothing being now left the besieged but the Castle, the Marquess sent to Summons the Governour to Sur∣render, threatning the danger of delay, who never∣theless sent the messenger back with a very slight an∣swer. The Marquess being now wholly intent upon taking the Castle, raifed a battery against it upon the top of the Church, dedicated to the Conception of our Blessed-Lady. 4. Whilst the Castle was thus prest by the Spaniards, the Count Castanheda General of the Portugues Army,The Count de Castanhe∣da the Por¦tugueses General, advances to relieve Vil∣laviciosa. advancing to its relief, sent Francis Carneiro a Captain of Foot, with only two Soldiers, who with an unparallel∣led boldness rode through the besiegers, to give the go∣vernour an account of the approaching relief, and the two Souldiers with the same bravery and success, retur∣ned to their General with the News of what they had done. In the next place, the Count called a Council of War, to consult whether it were fit to hazard a battle, where it was unanimously decreed to Fight the Enemy. The Count being joyful at this universal agreement, sent
presently a Trmpeter, to advertise the Marquess of Carazena of his approach, and to let him know now pleasing it was to him to give battle to so great a Ge∣neral. The Marquess looked upon this message only as a bravado, and sent back an answer accordingly, then calling a Councel of War, after sundry opinions had been heard, the Marquess his opinion prevailed which was to give the Enemy battle. This done he made choice of a Plain below the Castle, whether he marched with his Army, leaving 1500 Foot, which he judged a sufficient strength to keep in the besieged. 5. Near to Villaviciosa is a Plain commonly called the Plain of Montesclaros,The Battle of Monte∣sclaros. encompassed about with Hills and Rocky cliffs, but pleasant and diversifyed with Trees and Vineyards, and full of ditches and other im∣pediments to Armies. Into this Plain, the Portugueses came first leading 16000 Foot, and 6000 Horse. The Spaniard was much weaker, having lost many men in the siege besides those he had left at the Castle. The Marquess of Carazena knowing the nearer the Enemy drew to him, the more advantagious the ground was for him, because there was not Room to spread abroad, he caused his men to possess themselves of that ground, his Foot stretched out, keeping the side of the Moun∣tain, and his Horse marching in the Plain on the Left. This his celerity did not a little startle the Count of Castanhena, for that his Foot and Artillery were not as yet come up, and he feared to be Forced to engage be∣fore they could reach him, but Count Schomberg upon advice from him, hastning their march, delivered him from this perplexity. The Marquess drew up his Foot in two Lines, the Horse because the ground would al∣low no more Front were drawn up in five, the Spanish Horse had the Right wing, the Forreigners the Left. In the Portugues Army, almost all the Horse were on the Right, and the Foot on the Left, the nature of the place not allowing the Horse to be imbattled on both wings, yet among the Horse were disposed some Com∣panies of chosen Foot. That wing which consisted only of Foot, was in two Lines, yet all was so contrived that the Horse could speedily relieve the Foot, or the Foot the Horse as occasion required. Things being in this posture, after the Canon had played, The Mar∣quess Commands Alexander Prince of Parma, General
of the Forreign Horse, to charge the Portugues Right wing, which he performed with such Valour and fury, that he drove the first Line of the Portugueses in great disorder upon their Rear. The Spaniards having in the pursuit broke their Ranks, fell in upon the pikes of the Foot, that had been mixed with the Horse, which sorely galling them, quite changed the Face of Affairs; for whilst they Laboured to extricate themselves from that peril, the Horse who before had fled, rallying charged them afresh. They that before thought themselves vict∣orious, being thus pressed on all sides began to give way and fall into disorder: Then Count Rabata who Com∣manded the German Horse, seeing them just ready to fly, rode up a in Rage, and upbraiding the cowardize of his men, brought them on to the Charge afresh. The Prince of Parma also rallying those that were dispersed, the battle was again renewed, and the Portugueses charged more fierce∣ly than at the first onset; insomuch that the Spaniards prevailed driving their Enemies, and the Germans ha∣ving made their way through the Right, were falling in upon the Left wing. The Portugues General percei∣ving the danger, sent Count Schomberg, the Count de St. Lorenco, and other chief Officers, to give a check to the Enemy. These having gathered the dispersed Troops, and drawn fresh succours from all sides, restored the Fight, yet so that both wings were joyned together, and so pressed the harder upon the Spanish Troops, almost tired with the fatigue of the long Service. Hereupon the Mar∣quess of Carazena, who from a Hill viewed the Action and gave orders, seeing his Left wing born down, sent or∣ders to James Correa who Commanded on the Right, either to come immediately to the relief of the Left, or else by charging upon the Left of the Portugueses to draw them away to him. Correa obeyed not his orders, whe∣ther through cowardice, or Treachery, or that the ground would not permit, is uncertain. Thus the Ita∣lians and Germans being forsaken by their Friends, and beset on all sides by their Enemies, were almost all cut off, yet dyed not unrevenged, having made a great slaughter, and amidst the multitude, slain many Officers of note, Count Schomberg narrowly escaping when his Horse was killed under him. Now at length the Spa∣nish Right wing came on, after their Left was utterly lost, but it was a matter of much difficulty to charge
over the heaps of dead Bodies, and scatter'd Arms. Be∣sides the Horse were gauled by the scattering Compa∣nies of Foot, who with their Pikes, discomposed and broke their Ranks, so that they were forced to wheel often, and rather defend themselves, then offend their Enemies. At length being seconded by their Foot, they gave such a violent Charge, that the Portugueses, who had stood long to it before with various Fortune, faint∣ing, began again to decline, till their General, the Count of Castanheda seeing that was the last effort, com∣ing in with his Guards and what Troops he could ga∣ther, and acting the part of a Soldier, as well as of a General, inspir'd new Courage into them, and restored the Fight. In this Heat, when the Success stood doubt∣ful, two things concurred to bestow the Victory on the Portuguese. One was the taking of James Correa, Ge∣neral of the Spanish Horse, the other, that the Swissers serving in the Spanish Army, being discontented for want of their pay, went over to them. The Spanish Horse dismayed at these two unexpected Accidents, immedi∣ately fell off, the Portugueses pressing upon them, yet so as not being suffer'd to pursue, the others rather re∣tired then fled. Nothing remained now but the Foot, who being beset, for that Count Schomberg had seized all the advantagious Posts,The Spa∣nish Army totally rou∣ted. sought desperately, having scarce any hopes left to escape. The Fight had lasted seven Hours, and both sides being tired, both the Spa∣nish Horse and Foot, because the Portuguese did not pursue, marched off with Speed, and began to ga∣ther up such as had fled farther, so that they made a considerable Body. Count Castanheda unwilling to suffer so great a Party to escape, sent Vasconcellos and John de Silva with some Troops of Horse, who wheeling about a Monastery, fell in with them, and stayed their March till the Count came up with the rest of the Ar∣my. The Spaniards being thus enclosed without hope of safety, either by fighting or flying, were finally over∣thrown and cut to pieces. About 4000 Foot of several Nations, who before the Spaniards were enclosed, had retired to a place of Strength, seeing the whole Army lost, surrendered upon Discretion. Near 1000 more, who had fled to the Woods, were either taken, or pe∣rished there. In all about 5000 of the Spaniards are re∣ported to have been killed, and not fewer taken, and
of both sorts were many Officers of Note. Nor was the Victory cheaply bought, above 2000 of the Victors being slain, among which were several remarkable Per∣sons. This was the decisive Battle of Montesclaros, which finally settled the Crown upon the Head of the new King of Portugal. The Marquess of Carazena see∣ing all lost, made his way to Villaviciosa, where he ordered the Forces he had left there, to continue the Siege, to rise from before the Place, least they should be overwhelmed by the Victorious Army. They with all speed drew off their Artillery, and marching in good Order, though often attacked by the Portugueses, made goo their Retreat, first to Jurumenha, and thence to Badajoz, whither the small remainder of the Army was fled. Thus the Marquess in his old Age, tarnished that Reputation he had gained in his Youth. 6. This great Battle was the last Action of Note,King Phi∣lip of Spain's Death. that concluded the War betwixt Spain and Portugal; for this Year, on the 17th. of October, dyed Philip the IV. King of Spain, leaving that Crown to his Son Charles II. then but four Years of Age, and the Government being in the Queen his Mother, she soon after concluded a Peace with Portugal. Having now put an end to the War, we shall in the few remaining Years, have occa∣sion only to treat of the Deposition of King Alphonso, which insued, and the tendencies to it. 7. However, to the end that Narration may be no ways interrupted, though this be not exactly the proper place, we will proceed without interruption to what remains. Great debates had been at the Court of Ma∣drid, after the death of King Philip upon the subject of Peace or War. Not only the multitude, but even the most considerable of the Nobility, considering the great Expence, the many Losses, and the little Progress made in the War, were inclinable to Peace. The Queen her self was for it, but politick seemed averse, the better to discover the dispositions of the People. Nor would she seem to comply with their desires alone, till the English Ambassador then Resident at Madrid, had signi∣fied to her, that unless she would hearken to some Propo∣sals of Peace, the King his Master should be obliged to protect and defend his Brother the King of Portugal, with all his Forces both by Sea and land. These Threats joyn'd to the general consent of her own Sub∣jects,
at length drew the Queen to assent to a Treaty. By her the King of England was chosen Mediator, and Guarantee for the Treaty and Peace that was to ensue. Commission was given to the Marquess del Carpio, then a Prisoner at Lisbon, to make the Overtures, and Treat with full Power. Not to enter into the tedious Transactions of the Treaty, or to ll up too much space with the Articles at large, the substance of them whereupon the Peace was finally concluded was this. That both Kings should restore all Places taken du∣ring the War, which either of them possest, appertain∣ing to the jurisdiction of the other, except Ceuta, on the Coast of Africk, which the Marquess del Carpio ser∣ved to his King. That all Confiscations made during the War, should be restored by the Peace. That all Trade and Commerce should be free betwixt the two Crowns, and the Portugueses in Spain to enjoy the same Priviledges as the English did; the Spaniards in Portugal the same they stood possessed of in the time of King Se∣bastian. That all Prisoners on both sides be set at li∣berty without Ransom. That the Portugueses have free passage through all the Dominions of the Catholick King, either by Sea or Land. That all Controversies arising on account of Trade, or otherwise, shall be ami∣cably composed betwixt the two Kings, without having recourse to Arms. That the King of▪ Portugal, if he think fit, may be admitted into the League that is be∣twixt his Catholick Majesty, and the King of Great Britain. All other points to remain in the same Condi∣tion they were in during the Reign of King Sebastian. That the King of England be Guarantee for these Arti∣cles concluded, and Mediator in all such Differences as may happen to arise. Upon these Conditions the Peace was concluded betwixt his Catholick Majesty, and the King of Portugal, through the Interposition and Media∣tion of the King of Great Britain; this was the end of that War, which had now continued 28 Years, and thus the House of Braganza was established upon the Throne of Portugal.
The Conclusion of the History. HAving now brought the War to this happy Conclu∣sion,A word concerning the follow∣ing Sheets. for the House of Braganza, it remains we should shew into what Troubles and Confusions they brought themselves to the endangering of the new gotten Kingdom, to the ruin of their Head, the then King, to the perpetal in famy of the disloyal Actors, and to the asto∣nishment of all their Neighbours, who were spectators of their monstrous proceedings. It will not suit with the brevity of this History, to clear all the matters of lesser moment, which others have handled at large, and for the most part with more Partiality, then solid Truth. Let it suffice, that nothing shall be omitted which is worthy of Memory, and might seem to influence, or promote those alterations that happened in the State. The ac∣count of the War with Spain has been taken from the best Authors that have treated thereof, but in the ensuing Discourse, I have not only consulted Authors, who as was said before, are too Partial, or else wanted Information; but having had the advantage of living a considerable time in Portugal, I have received great Light into those Affairs from several Persons of Pru∣dence and Judgment, who were Eye-witnesses to all the Transactions. But because it may be offensive to some to lay the Truth too naked, I shall abridge the Relation as much as may be, giving all the respect to the Li∣ving, that the Subject will bear without wronging the Dead. Nothing of Favour nor Affection can draw my Pen to favour either side, as well in regard I am a Stranger to both, as for that I can expect no Reward or Interest from those that are deprest, but ought rather to mistrust being cryed down by the prevalent Faction. Whatever my Fortune is, I will not conceal the Truth, but to avoid all Reflection, will barely relate the mat∣ter of fact, without discanting upon it. King Alfonso in his Infancy, when he was but three Years of Age,The source of King Alphon∣so's Mis∣fortunes. had been taken with a Palsie, which du∣ring those very tender Years, was hard to be removed; but as he grew up in Strength, fit Remedies being ap∣plyed, he became perfectly cured, so that no sign of it remained, except some small Contraction in his Right
Hand. This fatal Palsie, may be said to have been the very Source of all this unfortunate King's Calamities, for though, as has been said, there was scarce any token of it left in him; yet his Enemies made their use of it, to perswade the ignorant, that it had affected his Brain, and that he was consequently become unfit for Govern∣ment. To gain their slaunders the more Reputation, they never ceased to accuse him of false Crimes, and to blacken in the most odious manner, his youthful Over∣sights and Extravagancies, which in themselves were no more then what are daily seen in those raw Years, where Power is joyned to heat of Blood. The Nobility were averse to him, because he was naturally vehement, and therefore they feared he would in time crush their Pride, and make them sensible of that distance which ought to be betwixt a Monarch and a Subject. His Mother a haughty Woman, became implacable, because being al∣ways used to rule, she must against her Will resign up the Power to him. His Queen it is most likely, bore more Affection to his Brother then to him, as is visible by the Privacies that passed betwixt them, from her first coming into the Kingdom. His Brother could not withstand the Temptation of a Crown, which by stretch∣ing out his Hand might be secured, and by delaying too long, might have slipt away for ever, if the King had either had Issue, or out-lived him. And in fine, the giddy multitude were ever lovers of Change, and so artificially prepared by the horrid Reports daily spread against the King, that many of them looked upon him no otherwise, then as a Monster, or a Fury, for so was he represented to them, and the custom of Portugal is such, as their Kings are but little seen by the Peo∣ple.The Count de Ode∣mira Go∣vernor to the young King. His . King John dying, and his Queen entering upon the Regency, D. Francis de Faro, Count of Odemira, was appointed Governor to the young King Alphonso, who being a Man of excellent parts, and allyed to the Blood-Royal, omitted nothing that might be conducing to the Improvement of his Charge, taking care that he should be  in such learning, as became a Prince, and into him such notions of Politicks, as his Age was capable  was not naturally addicted to study, and therefore perhaps made not so great an Im∣provement, as his Governor expected, who not consi∣dering
his Age, would perhaps have him to be a Man before his time, and therefore was much offended, that he would addict himself to the Company of other Boys like himself, and follow the Sports used among them. But generally speaking, the King's greatest delight was in violent Exercises, and particularly in making parties of Boys, and seeing them fight. Among the rest that used to divert him, was one Antony Conti de Vintimi∣glia, the Son of a Genoese Merchant, but born at Lis∣bon, who being crafty above his Years, by always ap∣plauding and furthering the King's Designs, so worked himself into his Affection, that he took no Delight in any pastime without him. Conti knew so well how to improve his Fortune; and the King's Favour, that at length, he became by his continual attendance upon him, an Eye-sore to the Count de Odemira, and gene∣rally to all the Nobility, who were jealous that a Man of mean extraction should have the Ear of their Prince, fear∣ing he might in time grow up so as to cope with their Grandeur. Hereupon the Queen joyned her Authori∣ty to that of the Count, to forbid the King's farther en∣tertaining of young Conti. He obeyed for a while, or at least saw him but by stealth, till at length impatient to be curbed, he slighted their injunctions, and fell again to his former familiarities with him. The Queen and Count who had no power to constrain, seeing their ad∣vice rejected, were force to connive at this return of their Familiarity, hoping that Time, or some Accident would change the King's Inclination. The King being of Age to be able to mount a Horse, his Governour in∣structed him carefully in that manly Exercise, as belie∣ving this might conduce to draw him from other less honourable Pastimes, but it proved not as he expected; For Alphonso took the advantage of the riding place, to admit not only Conti, but also many others of the meanest sort, whom he delighted to see wrestle, pitch the Bar, and Fight, not sparing at times to mix himself among them. The Count not knowing what other course to take to break the King of that Company, ad∣ventured one day to cast them all out of the Place in the King's sight, reproaching and threatening them all, but particularly Conti, to whom he denounced Death, if he were seen again with the King, who though at that time he said nothing, yet he highly resented it, and
afterwards was mindful of this Boldness of his Gover∣nor. The absence of Conti lasted not long, for the King's Mind being wholly bent upon him, and some who thought to make their Fortunes by flattery, repre∣senting this Separation as a Diminution of the Royal Au∣thority, he was soon recall'd. Being to return to Court the more to terrifie his Enemies, he endeavoured, and that successfully, to incline the King to mischievous Sports, such as fighting of Mastives, Bulls and Horses, and to flinging of Stones with Slings, which often flying at Rovers, did harm to People at a distance. These acci∣dents were the cause that no Murther, or other Mischief, was committed in the City, but what was improved by his Enemies, as if Countenanced by Alphonso. But now the Count de Odemira to draw him from these unseemly Exercises, put him upon Fencing, in which he made no great Improvement, because he would not observe Rule, but wholly put himself upon cutting and thrusting with all his Force in such sort, as he often eluded Art it self. Within the same Pallace with the King, lived his Bro∣ther Peter,The Queens Ambition, and Diffe∣rences be∣twixt the two Bro∣thers. and their Mother the Queen Regent, a Wo∣man not so zealous for her Children, as careful to pre∣serve the power she had got, being used to rule, and disdaining to part with it. The Infante, so all the Chil∣dren of Kings are called, (except the Heir to the Crown, who alone has the Title of Prince) and his Brother were ever at Variance, nor was it possible to reconcile them, because the Elder looked upon it as a Presump∣tion in the younger, who blamed and condemned all his Actions, and the younger being supported by his Mother and the great ones of his Party, never ceased to give him fresh provocations. Antony Conti perceiving the King was now at those Years, that the Charms of Beauty began to work upon him, lost not this opportu∣nity of securing himself in his Favour, but by all possi∣ble means endeavoured to heighten his Desire, and pro∣mote his Pleasure. The Queen Mother observing that her Son, though he carried it with great Dissimulation in respect to her, could not forbear casting many amorous glances upon her adies, and fearing least the splendor of the Crown might induce some of them to submit to his Will, sound no expedient to secure their Honour, but by taking away all Opportunity. To this purpose, she appointed him a separate Retinue, and a particular
apartment in the Pallace, which, tho' he was of Age she had forbore doing before, least he should wrest the Government, she was so unwilling to part with, out of her hands. This sudden change for some time withheld Alphonso, always beset with the great men of the King∣dom, from the mean company he before took delight in. But Conti fearing least if he took to a solid deportment, his favour would soon decline, never ceased till he drew him back from those grave formalities, to the practice of his former violent and extravagant Exercises. It is worth the observing, that tho' in Portugal it be one of the things the Nobility and Gentry most value them∣selves upon, to ride at a Bull with a spear and strike him therewith, yet, one of the great crimes objected against Alphonso, is that as he was riding in the Plain beyond Tagus, he ran with his spear at a Bull, but so unfor∣tunately, that his Horse being gored he was cast to the ground and taken up for dead. His delighting in unruly Horses, his liking to fierce Dogs and many other such youthful excesses are urged against him and painted out as the blackest infamies. Yet no∣thing has since been more improved to his disadvantage, or then made a greater noise,Slanders cast upon the King. than his attacking alone three men in a dark Night, whom for a considerable space he set very hard, till Number prevailing he at length fell, having received at their hands two wounds and was saved from farther perill by his servants com∣ming in. These very Actions alledged against him, prove that he was not so Lamed with the Palsy, as was pretended by his adversaries. And as for the extrava∣gancy of quarrelling in the street, it is a fault so habi∣tual to Youth in all parts, that to object it to him, as a crime unpardonable, looks as if indeed there were none real to accuse him of. But it is most certain that what in the unfortunate is accounted Vice, in the for∣tunate passes for Virtue. However after he was recovered of his wounds, the Councel of State in the Name of the Kingdom made a remonstrance to him, upbraiding him with things past and desiring him for the future to have more regard to the safety of his Person. Indeed as it pro∣ved a course piece of Court-ship to pray their King to spare his Life that he might afterwards End it miserably in imprisonment. This remonstrance had such effect upon the King, that tho' he did not abandon Vice, yet he
changed those his fierce inclinations, for others more soft and secure, such as are the intriegnes of Love, so that now his whole delight was in Feasting and Women. He walked the streets of Lisbon at Night with a Train of bravoes, ranging to lewd houses, and sometimes those that accompanied him committed outrages upon such as they met: Neither was this all, for at length even by day he would slip out or suffer women to be brought to him to the Court. To divert him from these scandalous cour∣ses, his Mother with some of the Nobility, contrived to fill his mind with business, giving him some part in the administration of publick Affairs, yet so as that the su∣pream Authority might still remain in her hands. Thus Alphonso was brought to give audience with his Mother, and to assist in Council, and was not at all averse to it, so that tho' he did not quite forsake his vices, yet he had not so much leisure to indulge them. Conti was not at all displeased at these proceedings, hoping this would be the means for advancing his Fortune, and therefore lost no time or opportunity, but plyed the King with immoderate suits for himself and his companions. The first thing the King asked for him of his Mother, was that he might be admitted into the order of Knighthood called of Christ, which as she durst not absolutely refuse for fear of provoking her Son, so she delayed granting it, still putting him off from time to time with seveal excuses. Conti perceiving her subtilty, sailed not to press the King, urging how unworthy his grandeur it was to be refused that which was in his power to take, and by these and other insinuations so fiered his mind, that at length he forced the Queen to condescend to all that was asked for him. Being thus raised from the degree of a Merchant to that of a Minister of State, not only the meaner sort made application to him in their Suits, but even the Nobility had recourse to him in matters of mo∣ment least his interest should thwart their designs, nay even the Queen herself, tho' contrary to her haughty in∣clination, refused not to truckle to his greatness, fearing she could not maintain her Authority by opposing him. But he knowing all this Courtship was Feigned, used Art against Art. shewing a good countenance to all yet at the same time arming himself against all Emergencies. To this purpose he began to make a party in the Court, introducing instead of the experienced Nobility, all the
youth into places of honour, and preferring some of mean parentage; till the Queen, fearing least the increase of his party should prove her downful, began openly to op∣pose him. Thus the Court was divided into factions, some siding with the King, others with the Queen, and others adhering to Neither. Conti ceased not to blow the Coles, but his chief aim was to perswade the King to take upon himself the Government, urging, as the truth was, Denis, Alphonso the 5th and Sebastian Kings of Por∣tugal took upon them the administration being yet youn∣ger than he. That which most moved the King, was that his Mother falling sick at this time, the whole Court was made to him, which gave him to understand what a diminution it was to his splendor, and therefore he be∣gan to be inflamed with a desire of absolute command. The Queen recovering and reasuming the care of the go∣vernment, found the King more intractable than he had been before, as being wholly bent upon wresting the power from her by force, if she should refuse to resign. This was a deadly stroke to her ambitious Spirit, which abhorred the thought of falling from that height where∣in she had upheld herself for so many Years; nor could she be without some care for the Kingdom, if it were wholly left at the disposal of a wilful and unexperienced Youth, beset with a croud of dangerous and unskilful favourites and Councellors. Being perplexed and tor∣mented with these thoughts, she resolved to set up her Younger Son Peter against the King,The Queen sets up the Infante a∣gainst the King. that so he in hopes of attaining the Crown through her means might be wholly at her devotion, and at the same time Alphonso fearing to lose his right might be kept in awe. There∣fore to prepare the Infante who of himself was willing enough, she perswaded him he ought to be declared Prince and Heir to the Crown, alledging that his Bro∣ther was impotent, and consequently the Kingdom must devolve to him. For the Executing of this design, she tampered with all the Nobility and Magistrates, inten∣ding to call the Cortes or Parliament to confirm her resolution, but finding it a matter of greater difficulty than she had expected, most men abhorring to set up two Brothers, as it were two King's, to rend the Kingdom and destroy themselves, and thinking it a rashness to condemn Alphonso as impotent before any proof were made of his Ability, she desisted from the method, but
not from the design. Her next practice then was to set out the Infante in the most splendid apparel, to cause him to show himself often to the People, to give him a Family composed of all such as were disaffected to his Brother, and to put him into a house the best in Lisbon built by Christopher de Moura Marquess of Castelrodrigo. Having thus set up the Infante in opposition to his Brother, and secured him to herself, her next artifice was to counterfeit a desire of quitting the regency and retiring into a Mo∣nastery of Nuns. For this purpose she drew up a subtle writing intimating her pretended desire, and yet so wor∣ded it that the great men and principal Ministers to whom she sent it for their advice, soon saw into the depth of it, which was that she desired to be, as it were, constrained to continue the Regency, yet so as she must be drawn to condescend by the removal of Antony Conti and the rest of his party from about the King. Those to whom the writing had been communicated being all her crea∣tures,The Council combine with the Queen. and fearing least if she were suffered to abandon the government, they should by the King be deprived of the preferments they enjoyned, resolved not to forsake her least they should be involved in her fall. Therefore by writing they gave her to understand, that tho' she were resolved to lay down the administration of the Kingdom, it was not yet time to do it, till she had re∣moved from the Person of the King, those that seduced and led him into ill courses. Nothing could be more pleasing to the Queen than this answer so pat to her pur∣pose, since they had fulfilled all her wishes without ob∣liging her to express them. However that all might seem to be carried by the advice of the Council, know∣ing they were all resolved to perform her will, she would have nothing done but what should be there dis∣cussed and given under their hands. The Councel met accordingly, and, tho' some of the gravest among them opposed the design, as too visible an affront to the King, yet it was carried,The faction seize Conti the Kings favourite in the King's appartment and send him to Bra∣zil. that Conti and his adherents should be seized, and sent into banishment contrary to the will of the King, for this Council sat not to serve him, but his Mother. In pursuance to this resolution, the Queen ha∣ving secured the King in her Lodgings upon pretence of business, the Duke of Cadaval with his Party Entred the King's apartment, where Conti then was. He seeing a Throng and suspecting some danger locked himself in,
but the Duke without respect to the Sacredness of the place, or to the Remonstrances of the Count de Castello∣melhor who would have diverted him from that Action, offered to break open the door, whereupon Conti seeing no hopes of escaping, and the Count not able to relieve him or acquaint the King, delivered himself up to the Duke upon promise of Life. At the same time some some others of Conti's partizans were secured partly in the pallace and partly in the Town, all which were imme∣diately put aboard a Ship that lay ready to Sail in the River and sent away to Brazil. The Queen being in∣formed that all she had commanded was put in Executi∣on, led the King forth into the great Hall, whither she had assembled all the Nobility, Ministers of State, and Magistrates of the City, the better to appease, and ter∣rify the King. Here a Remonstrance was made to him in the Name of the Kingdom, full of grievous com∣plaints against his Conduct, and against his Favourites, whom to prevent any farther ill consequences they de∣clared they had been obliged to send into banishment. This done having kissed his hand they departed. It was no small surprize to the King to be brought so un∣expectedly into that assembly, and therefore not rightly conceiving the drift of what had been said, he began to ask the meaning of it. Garcia de Melo told him that to satisfy the complaints of his People, they had sent Conti and his adherents into banishment. He scarce believing they durst offer him such an indignity, began loudly and in a rage to call upon Conti, and running to seek for him threatned to follow him, wheresoever they had sent him. Melo told him his search would be in vain for that he was now under Sail for Brazil, that as the case stood he must have either parted with Conti or his Crown. At this answer he seemed somewhat to compose himself. Then calling for Emanuel Antunes, who only had esca∣ped of all his former Favourites, he shut himself up with him and the Count of Castellomelhor. These two gave him a full Relation of what had passed, and here were layed the first Foundations of the Counts ensuing great∣ness. After this meeting, the King appeared unconcer∣ned at what had hapned, and rid according to custom that Afternoon, but he had learned to Counterfeit, and had other thoughts within his breast than what appeared by his countneance.
This mighty act of policy which the Queen had con∣trived to perpetuate her Regency,Count Ca∣stelmelhor succeeds in the King's Favour. was the very cause of her speedy falling from it. Count Castelmelhor, a Man above exception for his Birth and Parts, had now succeeded in the Kings Favour, in the place of Con∣ti, and omitted not to encourage him in the resolu∣tion of taking upon him the Government. Besides a young Lady belonging to the Queen, for whom the King had a more then ordinary Affection, made him the more earnest, discovering to him all his Mothers private Discourses. For the better carrying on his Design, the King ordered the Count, whose waiting Week was expired to wait on another, least one might succeed him, whom he could not so well confide in. This done, he retired according to custom to Alcantara, a House near Lisbon, carrying with him his Brother and a great Train. That same day he returned to Lisbon, and visited his Mother, discoursing so lovingly with her, that all resentment seemed to be passed, but on a sudden, without acquainting her, he went back to Alcantara, accompanyed only by the Count de Castel∣melhor, and the Count de Antouguia. From thence he dispersed Letters into all parts of the Kingdom, to the Officers of the Army, and Governors of Towns, ac∣quainting them, that being now at Age, he had taken upon him the Government.The King resolves to take the Govern∣ment upon him. Then he ordered all the Nobility and Ministers of State that were at Lisbon, to repair to him to Alcantara. The Queen astonished at this News, and fearing to be cast down from her Regen∣cy, assembles the Council of State, where it was resol∣ved that Emanuel Pacheco, should be placed upon the Road to stop all those that should offer to repair to the King; that the Queen should write a Letter to him in soft Terms, desiring him either to delay some time his taking the Government upon him, or at least to admit her to bear a great part with him, and that in case per∣swasions failed, she should then use Force to constrain him. Accordingly Pacheco turned back those that were going to Alcantara; the Guards, and all the Queens Ad∣herents, were ordered to be ready in Arms to support her, and a Letter was sent to the King from her, full of allu∣ring and soft, but all deceitful Expressions. But before the sending of the Letter, the People of Lisbon percei∣ving that the Court armed against the King, began to
run into tumult for his Defence, fearing least any vio∣lence might be offered him. This zeal of the Multitude was what humbled the Queen, and therefore seeing no hope left of prevailing by open force, she had recourse to Artifice and Entreaty, and therefore, as has been said, sent a submissive Letter by the Bishop of Targa. In this Letter among other things, the Queen urged to have the Cortes or Parliament call'd, that she might there re∣sign the Government, but the King and the Count per∣ceiving this was only a contrivance to gain time, an an∣swer was sent her by the same Bishop. The purport of this Answer was, that the King considering the great Burthen of care that attended the Government, was wil∣ling to ease his Mother, who had long laboured under it, of that Toil, and to take it upon himself. She now plainly perceiving that there was no longer hope, either by Force or Art, of retaining the Government, resolved at length to quit it, least it should be violently taken from her. However, she wished it might be done in the Pallace, that the World might believe it had been free∣ly resigned, and not to be forcibly extorted from her. Those who were acquainted with her Subtilties, advi∣sed the King not to trust himself to her Power, which made him delay some time at Alcantara. However, at length finding himself secured on all sides, and the Queens Interest declining, since the People of Lisbon had declared for him; he repaired to the Pallace, where in the presence of the Nobility, Ministers of State, and Magistrates of the City,She is at length for∣ced to re∣sign. the Queen delivered up the Seals into his Hands, which is the usual Ceremony in Portugal, when a King takes upon him the Government. This Ceremony was perform'd on the 23d. of June, 1662, the King then wanting but one Month of 19 Years of Age, whereas according to the antient custom of Portugal, their Kings were always reputed of Age at 14, and accordingly at those Years, the Regency ought to cease. The Queen Mother thus discharged of the care of Go∣vernment,She pre∣tends to retire, but stays at Court in hopes to wrest the Power from her Son. began again to talk of retiring, but that after such a manner, that no Body believ'd she truly meant it. For first she talked of building a new Monastery, but could never find out a convenient Place, then of erecting an Apartment for her self, near some of the old ones, but none would admit her. And this it was believed was her desire, only to protract time, and to continue
in the Pallace, till some new emergency might again call her to the Government. But now all the Court was made to the King, all the Nobility attended him, and there wanted not crouds of Flatteers and Syco∣phants to fawn on him. His principal Ministers and Favourites were the Counts of Castelmelhor, and Atouguia, and Sebastian Caesar de Meneses. These managed all principal matters of State, and on their Counsel he chiefly relyed. His Enemies however never ceased to slander him, spreading it abroad, that being wholly void of Sense, he only spoke such Words as they put into his Mouth. Count Castelmelhor endeavouring to establish himself absolutely in the King's Favour, eased him asmuch as was possible of the publick cares, indulging his Incli∣nation to Horses, Arms, and even to Women, but with∣out any publick Scandal. At this time the Count deli∣vered out of Prison, Henry Enriquez de Miranda, who had been confined by the Queen, and he being now brought to Court, became one of the King's greatest Fa∣vourites, and yet though he was raised to this Degree, there never happened the least Disorder betwixt the Count of Castelmelhor and him. Much otherwise was it with the Count of Atouguia, Caesar de Meneses, and Count Castelmelhor, but the latter not thinking himself yet thoroughly established, would not attempt so soon to cast them down.Count Ca∣stelmel∣hor rises, At length having wholly gained the ascendant over the King, and having all things as prime Minister at his disposal, he lodged himself in the Apartment that had belonged to Prince Theodosius the King's eldest Brother. He only wanted now some charge that might always keep him about the King's Person, and there being none at that time vacant, he thought of one that of late had been suppressed, or incorporated in∣to that of the Secretary of State; in Portuguese it is cal∣led Escrivao da Puridade, that is the private Secretary, This employment he begged of the King, who readily granted it, and though the Secretary of State insolently enough disputed it, caused him immediately to settle him in the possession thereof. By this charge he also ob∣tained the right to a Seat in the Counsel of State. Be∣ing thus raised to the highest pitch of Favour, he began to bestow preferments without measure upon all his Friends and Adherents, and at the same time omitted not to crush and terrifie his Enemies, that the power of the one par∣ty,
and the dread of the other might be a sure stay to his greatness.Those that affronted the King in the Per∣son of Con∣ti banish∣ed. In the next place, he advised the King to shew some resentment for the Affronts done to his Per∣son, during the Queen's Regency; as particularly in the forcing away of Conti out of his Apartment, and o∣ther the like Insolencies, which if not punished, might draw him into contempt. In pursuance of this Advice, the Duke of Cadaval, Garcia, and Emanuel de Melo, the Counts of Soure, Pombeiro, Peter Vieira, Secretary of State, who had often audaciously reprov'd the King, and some others, all guilty enough, were sent into Ba∣nishment. This proceeding against so many persons of Note, though but an act of Justice,The Queen Infante, and their party hold Consultati∣ons against the King. ministred occasion to their partizans to revile anew the King and his Government. And now the Queen seeing her self excluded from all publick Affairs, began again to cherish the Infante, and to hold frequent and private Consultations with him, wherein it was always inculcated that the King was stu∣pid and unfit for Rule. Count Castelmelhor who was not ignorant of all their Machinations, contrived all ways he could to separate them, but all in vain. For the Infante building upon the notion of his Brothers In∣capacity, had more mind to be himself a King, then to be next to a King. Therefore he carryed himself with profound Dissimulation, studying all ways to elude the Arts of the Favourite. But the Count seeing he could not otherwise prevail upon him to desist from his Ca∣bals, perswaded the King to change all his Servants, putting in their places such as he could confide in, that so he should have the less opportunity of carrying on his Designs. The next thing was to perswade the Queen at length to retire from Court, as she had so often pre∣tended to desire, though by her proceedings it plainly appeared nothing was more distastful to her than the thoughts of a private Life. Yet seeing the King so in∣clinable to have her retire, she again has recourse to her Dissimulation, and sends to ask leave to withdraw to some private House, because the Apartment she had be∣gun to build was not yet finished. The King's Answer was, that it became not her Granedur to quit the Pa∣lace for a private House, but that if she were so desirous of a retreat, she might cause more Diligence to be used in finishing her Structure, which till then, had gone on
very slowly. Soon after, Alfonso being informed that his Mother never ceased to use all Arts to advance his Brother Peter to the Throne, being terrifyed with the danger of his Crown, which yet at last, by these same Practices, was ravished from him; he sent an absolute Order for her to depart from the Palace. This positive command pressing, and fearing to be forced away, she at length resolved to depart, and accordingly on the 17th. of March, 1663, withdrew to the new Apartment she had built at a small distance from Lisbon, being attended thither by the King,The Queen at last for∣ced to re∣tire. the Infante, and all the Nobility. The Queen Mother being thus removed, the Infante seemed now wholly devoted to please the King, except in one only thing which he knew to be offensive to him, and that was in frequently visiting his Mother, and enter∣taining private Discourses with her. Nor was she wan∣ting often in publick to warn him of the danger of this his assiduousness towards her, whether she really meant it as dangerous to him, or rather did it artificially to make the King the more odious, and procure themselves the greater Commiseration. Thus with great difficulty, Queen Luisa was at the last not only put out of the Re∣gency, but even out of the Palace. Alphonso, to whom the nearness of his Mother had been a curb,The King grows more loose in his Life. being now delivered from▪ that restraint, ran more licentiously into all the Vices of Youth. Count Castelmelhor fearing a disorderly Life might hasten his fall, in whose Ruine he must himself be involved, stu∣dyed several means to reclaim him, or at least to conceal his Extravagancies, but it is a work of great difficulty to correct the vicious Inclinations of Youth, especially when supported by the lustre of a Crown. In short, his Vices were too visible to be excused, but to lay to his Charge all the Villanies his Adversaries have aspersed him withal, were too much to wrong his Memory; for it is certain, that no insolence was committed during his Reign, which the malice of his Enemies has not re∣proached him withal. However, so certainly it was, that the King indulging his Appetites and Vicious desires, the whole burthen of the Government was in a manner devolved upon the three Favourites, that is, the Counts of Castelmelhor, and Antouguia, and Sebastian Caesar de Meneses. Castelmelhor had long meditated to over∣throw the other two, but as long as the Queen conti∣nued
at Court durst not attempt it, least they having lost the King should become an accession to and strengthen her party. Now she being removed, there remained no other obstacle to the fulfilling his desire, and therefore by often buzzing false infor∣mations into the King's Ears, he first caused the Count de Atouguia to be expelled the Court and soon after to be banished the City. None remained now to cope with him but Meneses,Conti re∣called from Brazil. who to support himself per∣swaded the King to recall▪ Antony Conti from Brazil, hoping that he being returned and restored to his for∣mer Favour, would not in gratitude omit to stand by the man that had been the cause of bringing him back from banishment. The Count could not be long ignorant of this practice, and therefore immediately so worked the King, that Meneses was banished before Antony Conti could arrive to support him. Soon after Conti arrives from Brazil, the Ship that brought him being received into the port of Lisbon with sound of Trumpets, firing of Cannon, and all other demonstrations of joy, as if it had been the reception of some Soveraign Prince. Yet all this was but a glimmering of happiness to Conti, for Count Castelmelhor having perswaded the King, that as it was a Vindication of his Royal Authority to recal him from banishment, whither he had been sent in con∣tempt of Majesty, so to entertain him at Court would only serve to provoke the Nobility,But bani∣shed the Court. to whom the very name of Conti was odious, for these reasons without suf∣fering him to Land at Lisbon, he was sent away into the Country with express Command, not to presume to come near the Court. Nevertheless to the End it might be thought this exile was not the effect of his jealousie, but rather of his care both for the safety of the King and Conti, he omitted not to caress him at that distance, sen∣ding him frequent presents, and a considerable employ∣ment at Court falling, he caused it to be conferred upon him tho' absent, and bestowed a Rich Benefice upon John Conti Brother to Antony, who was in orders. Conti was not so dull, but he could Easily see through these Ar∣tifices. Therefore he used all his endeavours to obtain an interview with the King,Conti pri∣vately meets the King. not doubting but if he once saw him, he should be restored to his former favour. Such industry was used to compass his design, that at length he had a private meeting with Alphonso at Alcanta∣ra
the Count being then absent. At this conference the King's former affection was so revived, that he of∣fered to carry him immediately to Court. But Conti fearing his sudden and unexpected return might prove dangerous, desired it might be put off for the present, only praying the King, that he would recal from ba∣nishment those Noblemen who had been exiled for ad∣hering to his Mother. This interview, and the proposal made by Conti being made known to the Count by one that had overheard their discourse, he soon discovered the design was to make a party to ruin him. To the End then to prevent his Enemy and turn that destruction up∣on himself, he employed several Spies to observe all his words and Actions, not sparing any expence for intelli∣gence. By these means at length he discovered that Conti had conspired with the Noblemen to restore the Queen to the regency,A conspira∣cy against the King discovered and merci∣fully puni∣nished. leaving the King nothing but the empty name and Title without any power or Authority. Ha∣ving got knowledge of this Treasonable practice, and found witnesses to prove it, he instantly acquaints the King, who appointed judges to examine the matter. Upon a full hearing and sufficient proof, several of the conspirators were convicted, and yet (tho' by his Ene∣mies the King had always been accused of excessive cruelty) not one of the Criminals suffered death, only D. Theodosius de Melo Brother to the Duke de Cadaval was banished Five Leagues from Lisbon, Sebastian Cesar de Meneses into Algarve, and Antony de Conti to O Potro▪ The General depositions involved the Queen Mother in the common guilt, whereupon a Secretary was sent to examine her, but she refusing to answer, the King let that fall. Count Castelmelhor puffed up with this suc∣cess, removed from the apartment he was in before to another nearer the King, where it being observed by such as envied him, that more Court was made to him than to the King himself, his name was thereby rendred the more odious, and he being now arrived to the high∣est pitch of his greatness, and capable of no increase, be∣gan soon after to decline. Simon Vasconcellos Brother to Count Castelmelhor,The Counts brother fa∣vourite to th Infante. after serving in the Army several Years with great Reputa∣tation, coming now to Court, so gained the ascendant over the Infante, that it was observed as very remarkable to see the two Royal Brothers so vastly differing other∣wise
in inclinations, yet so addicted to these two Bro∣thers, that they seemed not to move without them. Soon after the Infante falling sick, Vasconcellos attended him with such dilligence, that he not only confirmed himself in his favour, but incurred the ill will of all his other prin∣cipal Servants, who upon this disgust quitted the In∣fante's, Service, but very few days past before they were all recalled by the King except only the Count de Eri∣ceira. All things being thus restored the King preferred Vasconcellos not only to be Gentleman of the Bed-Cham∣ber to his Brother, but also constituted him Superinten∣dant of his House. This his preferment again dis∣pleasing the Family they all quitted their Employ∣ments, and it being too great a condescention to recal them again, others were put into their places, for the most part creatures of Count Castelmelhor, and therefore not acceptable to the Infante, He thereupon thinking himself beset with so many Spies, resolved to alter his course of Life, so as he might become less suspitious to his Brother and at the same time more popular.The Infante counterfeits a Religious Life to gain followers. No∣thing could be more fit for these designs than Religion, to that therefore he seemed wholly addicted being se∣dulous at Prayers, visiting Churches, reading pious Books, conversing with Religious Persons, and employ∣ing the rest of his time in other Studies. Being thus taken up he seldom visited the King, as if he had been wholly bent upon Heavenly Affairs. Some thought his change of Life to proceed from a Disaster which hap∣ned, and was that Augustin de Ceuta fell suddenly dead at his and the King's Feet; but those who pretended to see farther thought it only a politick device to gain ap∣plause, and get the Crown from his Brother. Whilst these things were in agitation,A match concluded for the King. on the 1th. of March, 1665, arrived at Lisbon the Marquess de Sande from France, where he had concluded a Match for the King with the Princess of Nemours, and by the Infante's order had made overtures on his behalf to the Duke of Bouil∣lons daughter, which also had taken effect, so far as they were agreed in words, tho' the Articles were not signed. This Marrige was proposed in order to secure the succes∣sion of the Crown, in case the King as had been given out should be incapable of getting Children. But now the Infante having changed his mind, upon what account is uncertain, could by no perswasions be prevailed upon
to consent to this marriage, although the King himself pressed it very home. This match being thus broke off, the Marquess de Sande having in order to conclude for the King first enquired whether the report that went of the King's impotency were true, was assured by the Count Castelmelhor, that the King had already several illegitimate Children, which was a sufficient evidence against that imputation. All things being then disposed for the comming of the Royal-Bride, the Marquess retur∣ned to France, to Conduct her to Lisbon. On the 25th of February, 1666,The Queen motherdyes. the Queen Mother falling sick and perceiving her End to approach, sent to both her Sons who according to custom were then at their diversion of Hunting at Salvaterra, to come and take their last Farewel of her. They came not till the 3d day after when having kissed her hand and received her blessing they departed, and within an Hour after she expired, making a very Pious and Religious End. She was a woman of a wonderful resolution, a great Soul, and singular wisdom which appear'd in the ad∣ministration of the government both in Peace and War. It was she that pushed her husband to take the Crown, she helped to keep it on his head, and she by her indu∣stry and care secured it to his posterity. Her skill in matters of government was above the capacity of a wo∣man, and she was so sensible of the danger of discord betwixt brothers, that she obstructed Edward brother to her husband King John, from making his escape when he was confined by the Emperor, least returning home he should not brook the greatness of the King his Brother. But what appeared most rare in her was that being a Spaniard, a name odious to the Portugueses, yet she knew so to carry herself that she gained the Love and esteem of the whole Country. Yet all these good Qualities were somewhat sullied by her unbounded ambition, and insatiable desire of rule, which were the cause she would never quit the government, or Court, till forced from them both, and that she increased the hatred be∣twixt her two Sons by setting up the younger in opposi∣tion to the Elder. In fine, to give her her due, her Ver∣rues far surpassed her vices, and it may justly be said of her that she was the glory of her Family, the deli∣verer of Portugal, and the honour of Spain▪
The Queen Mother being dead, the King believed him∣self more safe, and on the contrary the Infante deprived of her support, thought himself more exposed. Count Castelmelhor who till then had stood in some awe of him because of her power, acted now with more freedom. Thus the Infante growing more discontented,The Infan∣te grows discontent∣ed, and the King jealous. the King at the same time grew the more jealous of his reserved∣ness, and consequently averse to all those he saw him fa∣vour, or cherish. Upon these discontents, some of his Servants fearing to offend quitted him, and others were removed from him, so that his retinue was much below the dignity of the Brother of a King. Some days he bore with this hardship, till the News of the New Queens being set forward, obliged him to press the King, that he might appear like himself at her reception. The King orde∣red him to give the Names of such as he desired should attend him, but not approving of those he made choice off, nothing was concluded upon, tho' many debates passed betwixt them on that account. At length on the 2d. of August, 1666, the Fleet which brought the Queen entred the River of Lisbon, the News whereof being brought to the King, he is reported to have received without the least demonstration of joy, or satisfaction, which was then looked upon as an ill omen of the fu∣ture success of that Marriage. The Marquess de Ruvigny who Commanded the French Fleet having sent to the In∣fante to beg leave to pay his respects to him, he layed hold of this opportunity, to put the King in mind how dishonourable it was to them both, that the Admiral should find him so ill attended. What could be done in so sudden an Emergency was, that the King sent his own Servants to attend his Brother during that Ceremony. This was no way pleasing to the Infante, who being highly incensed against Count Castelmelhor,The Infante enraged a∣gainst Count Castelmel∣hor. as the only man that had obstructed his having those Servants he desired, forbore not openly to revile and threaten him with the severest punishment, when occasion should of∣fer, which Vasconcellos the Counts Brother, who was present resenting, went away and quitted his Service. So now there remained with him but two Servants of any Note or Quality, whereupon he sent a message to the King, to desire he would give him leave to retire from Court, since he would not allow him to live in that Splendor that was due to him. Nothing could have
more incensed the mind of the King than this message did; insomuch that tho Count Castelmelhor, fearing least the discord betwixt the two brothers should run too high, used all his interest, to obtain of the King for the Infante those Servants he desired, he could never prevail. Therefore the Infante perceiving the King's ob∣stinacy was not to be overcome, since it had not yielded to the intreaties and power of the Count, when he had amidst the rest of the crowd, hid his want of attendance at the Queens solemn entry into Lisbon, he withdrew himself to Quelas a League and a half from the City, ac∣companied only by Roderick de Meneses. Fame having immediately spread abroad, not only through the City but through the whole Kingdom, the News of his re∣treat; the universal report was that all things were prepa∣ring for a Civil War. At Lisbon Peter's party was already more numerous than Alphonso's, the vertues of the for∣mer were every where extolled, and the vices of the latter no less exaggerated; but above all the affection of the one, and the aversion of the other to Count Ca∣stelmelhor weighed more than all other things, with the People who bore him an implacable hatred. Many of the Nobility interposed to pacify the brothers, but all their endeavours proved in vain, for neither of them would abate any thing of his demands. When all other means failed, the Queen who then was indisposed sent for the Infante,Strange show of af∣fection be∣twixt the Infante, and the Queen. who being come to her, they received one ano∣ther with such affection, as seemed to be a sufficient ear∣nest of the Love that was growing betwixt them. Here the Queen prevailed that he should not depart the Court, and should wholly leave that affair to her management, which he could not refuse her, being as was believed already somewhat fired with that Sight of her. At length the difference betwixt the Brothers was reconci∣led, the Prince chose other Servants and the King al∣lowed of them. Yet tho' they seemed to have layd aside all animosities, the grudges betwixt them were of a higher nature than to be so easily forgot. But Peter was supported with a deep dissimulation, Alphonso had little of that Art, and for the most part threatned much more than he would perform, which was the cause that he was often heard to let slip very harsh expressions against his Brother. He having long meditated how to rid him∣self of these displeasures, at last ixed upon a Method,
which was to beg of the King the Post of Constable of Portugal, which is the same as Generalissimo. The more he insisted in demanding, the more positive the King was in refusing, as being not ignorant of the danger of such a Grant. Count Castelmelhor was astonished at this Request, and spared not to tell the King, that it was not the General's Staff, but the Crown that he aspired to, and that it were well to crush his aspiring Spirit. Nor so satisfyed, he used all his Endeavours to find out, who had advised him to demand that Post. At length it appeared to him, that Counsel could proceed from none but the Counts of Torres and St. John, who had been excellent Commanders in the Portuguese Ar∣my. Them therefore he instantly removed from him, sending them away to their Charges on the Frontiers. Nevertheless, though the abetters were removed, the causes of dissention still remaining, the differences betwixt the two Brothers, grew daily higher and higher, and at last the Queen who ought to have laboured to compose them, became her self a Party, leaving the Interest of her Husband to adhere to that of his Brother. Besides her proper Inclination to the Infante, two things perhaps might conduce to move the Queen to this unjust pro∣ceeding,Motives of the Queens Aversion to the King. the one that the King was already grown wea∣ry of her, and the other (from which perhaps his Aver∣sion proceeded) that he was jealous of her too great Propension to his Brother. Count Castelmelhor contri∣ving how to dissolve this knot of Affection that was be∣twixt the Queen and the Infante, thought nothing so effectual as marrying of him, which without delaying, he proposed to the King, who approving of the Advice commanded his Brother to make choice of a Wife. He having desired some time to consider of a matter of that Importance, returned his Answer in Writing, signifying in substance, that he was ready to comply with the King, only praying that a Servant of his might be em∣ployed to go to the Courts of Europe to find out a Lady fit for him to match with. Neither the King nor the Count saw into the design of this deceitful Answer, which was contrived only to protract time, and there∣fore they approved of it, and admitted of John de Roxas, whom he had named to go upon that Embassy.
About the beginning of the Year 1667,1667. the King went to Salvaterra,The Queen and Infan∣te's Party increases. according to custom, with all the Court. There the Cabals were continued betwixt the Queen and the Infante, and now the party they had gained, was more numerous then that which adhered to the King. But some time after, an Accident that hap∣pened was improved to heighten their Animosities. A French Man belonging to the Queen, was murthered upon the Road in Alenejo by a Carryer, who fled and took Sanctuary, but being forced from thence, was car∣ryed Prisoner to Coimbra, and thence conducted to Lis∣bon. There he was tryed before all the Tribunals, till he came to the Council of State, none daring to pro∣nounce Judgment against him, because he implored the protection of the Church, as having been taken out of Sanctuary, a thing never permitted in Portugal. The Queen, who thought nothing was done to thwart her, but through the Malice of Count Castelmelhor to her, being inraged, that Justice was not done upon the Murtherer of her Servant and Country-man, railed bit∣terly at him, laying all her discontents to his Charge. Nor yet so satisfyed, she refused to be present at the Bull Feast, usually kept at Lisbon upon St. Anthony's Day, alledging she could not shew her self to the Peo∣ple, till Justice were done her. Among the rest that took upon them to vindicate the Queens cause,The In∣fante open∣ly espouses the Queens quarrel. the In∣fante was the hottest, as looking upon the Injuries done to her, to be levelled at himself, who had wholly espou∣sed her Interest. Therefore he ordered Count Castel∣melhor to bring the Secretary of State, who had carry∣ed himself very disrespectfully towards the Queen, in the Affair of the Murtherer, before the Council, to ans∣wer for his Insolency. There contrary to his Custom, Peter inveighed largely against him, and with such vehe∣mency, that the Council signed an Order for his Banish∣ment, which notwithstanding all the Count's oppositi∣on, was obeyed, and he sent into Exile. This Success against the Favourite, encouraged the Infante to aim at greater things, his party daily encreasing; for besides the Queen, there adhered to him the Duke of Cadaval, who had been Banished by the Counts Procurement, D. Sancho Manuel, who after defeating the Spanish Army at Estre∣moz, had been remov'd from his command by thesame Interest, and many more of the Nobility, on sundry other
Accounts, besides the thoughtless multitude, stirred up by the desire of Novelty, and animated with the name of so many Heads of Note. Notwithstanding the Strength of this Faction, it was yet thought too soon to attempt any thing against the King directly, and judged more proper to let the Storm fall upon his Favourite,The Facti∣on level a∣gainst the Favourite. who being once cast down, the King would be left ex∣posed to all their Practises. To consult of the means of removing the Count, there was a great Meeting held of all the Infante's Confederacy; he also being present. There most Men being averse to Murther, if the thing might be otherwise performed, it was resolved to seize upon, and send him away, either into India, or some other remote parts of the World; yet so, that if he should make resistance, or attempt to escape, then he should be killed. Many days passed not, before the Count had intire Information of the whole Conspiracy against him, and having layed it before the King, he was by him impowered to use such means for their common Se∣curity, as he should think most effectual. He present∣ly doubles the Guards at the Palace, arms all his own Creatures, set his Spies, and stirs not out of the Palace, without a sufficient Train and Guard for his Security. This sudden change at Court, alarm'd the City, so that the People ran in heaps to the Palace for Information, but finding that there was no interruption of publick Af∣fairs, nor any thing but the increase of the Guards, they soon dispersed and returned to their Houses. The Infante finding his project defeated, to avoid all Suspition, re∣tired to his Country-House at Quelas. Whilst he was there almost in despair for the great disappointment he had received, a Discovery was made, or pretended to be made, for the certainty of it could never appear, that the Count had hired People to poison him. Hereupon his Partizans advise him to be very circumspect in se∣curing himself, and they on their part were not wanting in spreading abroad the danger they pretended him to be in. Having thus prepared the Multitude, and being sensible that the Count could not but study to secure himself by his downfal, the Infante made instant appli∣cation to the King, to punish him according to the hai∣nousness of the Offence he alledged. To this effect he wrote to the King, acquainting him that he was convin∣ced the Count practised against his Life; that therefore
he demanded he should be banished from the Court, or else, that he himself should be forced to fly into Fo∣reign parts for Safety. Both the King and Count ha∣ving read this Letter, referred the whole matter to the Council of State. There it was fully discussed, one par∣ty affirming that it was a Presumption at one time to ac∣cuse the King's Favourite, and assign his Punishment in such a manner as seemed to threaten the King himself; that if the Count were justly accused, he ought to be tryed according to the known Laws of the Kingdom, and if convicted, to be punished; but that if it should appear he was wronged, care ought to be taken, least the Prince's aspiring practices should not be prejudicial to the King. The other side on the contrary being devo∣ted to the Infante's Interest, urged all the plausible Rea∣sons they could gather to shew that he ought to be com∣plyed with, Right or Wrong, either in regard he was the King's Brother, or for fear he might effect that by force, which he could not obtain by Entreaty. After conferring both Opinions, they came to this Resolution, That it should be put to the Tryal,The King offers the Infante Satisfacti∣on. whether the Infante could be appeased by Submission, and all manner of humble Application. To this effect the Marquess of Marialva was sent by the King to acquaint the Infante, that the Count was ady to come and beg his Pardon upon his Knees. But he considering, that to accept of this Submission would no way forward his End, for that the Count would still remain at Court, after two days delay, sent back the Marquess with his Answer, signifying that nothing but the Banishment of the Earl could satisfie him. Alphonso hoping his Brother's Fury might abate in time, delayed sending to him again for the present, whereat he being the more enraged, caused a Letter to be deliver'd to the King, among other things, threatning not to appear at Court, as long as Cont Castelmelhor continued in it. A Cabinet Council being called upon this second Billet, some were for ap∣prehending the Infante himself, as now grown too dan∣gerous, others more moderate, were only for securing his Family and Adherents, and so leaving him naked. This latter Advice was approved off, but the Execution being delayed, and Peter having received Intelligence thereof, he stood upon his Guard, arming all his Fol∣lowers, and promising to live and dye by them. Next
he summons the Counsellors of State,The Coun∣cil and Magistrates of Lisbon combine with the Infante. and Magistrates of Lisbon, who being met at his House, he inveighed be∣fore them against the King his Brother, and Count Ca∣stelmelhor, impeaching him of Practices against his Life, and desiring their assistance to be revenged of him, since the King would not consent to his Banishment. After having spoken to this effect, he gave them the same in Writing, to which they unanimously answer'd, they would stand by him, and support his Dignity to their utmost. It is easie to conceive how much King and Count were concerned at this audacious proceeding,The King fearing the faction, of∣fers to compound with the Infante. which was an absolute usurpation upon the regal Authority, for it was no less in the Infante to summon the Tribunals, and in them it was not much less than Treason to obey the Summons, but above all, to ingage to stand by him. Finding by this Tryal how great the strength of his Party was, they resolved if possible to mollifie him, and therefore the King sent to him to discover, who were the Count's Accusers, that so he might be pro∣ceeded against in due form of Law. The Infante posi∣tively▪ refused to discover the Evidence, unless the Count were first removed from Court. Alphonso put it to the Council and ablest Lawyers, whether it were le∣gal and beseeming the King's Dignity, that the Count should be removed before the Witnesses were known, and it was carryed by the Majority, that the demand was unjust and unreasonable. This their result, under their Hands, the King sent to his Brother; at the same time sending away Expresses to the Commanders on the Frontiers and Sea-ports, to suffer no Man to depart the Kingdom. By these means the expectation of a Civil War, which till then, had gone no farther then Lisbon, was spread abroad throughout the whole Kingdom. The Infante advising with his Friends upon the result of the Council sent him by the King, they came to this Reso∣lution, that in case his Majesty persisted in protecting the Count, then Peter without his consent should speed into the Province beyond the Mountains, where the Count of St. John had the command of the Forces, which he should march to Lisbon, and joyning with the multi∣tude by open Force should constrain the King to com∣ply with all his demands. Having fixed this Resoluti∣on, he sent the King a long Letter full of invectives a∣gainst
the Count, and complaints that he could not ob∣tain Justice, concluding that his Majesty made more ac∣count of the Earl then of him, and seeing both could not live together, he had resolved to quit the Court. Upon what Account he intended to withdraw, we have seen but just before, not to submit to the King's Will, but to force him to comply with his. And though he pre∣tended privately to withdraw himself, yet the prepara∣tions for his Journey were so publick, that there was none so blind, who could not discover it. Nor was this done without cause, for the report of his removal being spread abroad, and that it was in the nature of a Flight from the Favourite, the whole City began in a moment to rise in mutiny, several of the Nobility open∣ly fomenting it, and declaring that was the day, on which according to an antient Propheie,Lisbon mutinies at the instiga∣tion of the Nobility. the Streets of Lisbon were to run with human Blood. Seven Thou∣sand Men are reckoned to have appeared that day in Arms, to stop the Infante's Journey, and to decide the Controversie betwixt the Count and him. This popu∣lar Fury being made known to the King and Count, they both perceiving themselves too weak to withstand the violence of that Storm, resolved instead of that lofty Course they had followed before, to stoop to Necessity, and try what good Words could work upon the Infante. To this purpose, the King sent him a Letter, full of most loving Expressions, desiring him to suppress that Tumult, which had been raised on his Account, and to come to Court, where all things should be disposed to his Satisfaction. The Answer to this Letter, was in no less obliging Terms, only in the Conclusion, the Infante again intimated, that the King must resolve either to part with the Count, or him, and must take his choice be∣fore things came to Extremity. Count Castelmelhor perceiving, that neither Threats nor Intreaties prevailed upon the Infante, and that the mutiny in the City was grown to such a head, it would endanger both the King and himself, resolved at last to consent to leave the Court, the King promising him, that as soon as that Storm were blown over, he would take a progress on pretence of visiting the Frontiers, and in his return, would restore him to the Court,The Queen assists the Infante. and to his Favour. But least his Ba∣nishment should seem wholly extorted by the Infante, he perswaded the Queen to interest her self in that affair,
and beg it of the King, that he so might rather seem to have condescended to her intreaty, than to the necessity imposed upon him by his brother. She fearing to diso∣blige the Infante, or thwart his designs, would not in∣termeddle in it, till by a messenger sent to him she had his direction how to proceed. Nor was she satisfyed with one message, but sent again for more particular in∣structions, so great was her concern for him, and so lit∣tle for her husband. Being now fully informed of his will, she concludes the business with the King and Count, who submitted to withdraw himself upon faith given for the safety of his person. But before he departed, he would have articled that the Infante upon his removal, should clear him from the imputation of the design of poisoning him. Whether his conscience accused him of any such practice, or whether he feared, being once cast down, his innocence could not protect him against the malice of his Enemies is uncertain. Thus the Count being assaulted on all fides by the Infante, by the Queen, by the Nobility, and by the multitude, and not able to stand the shock of so many Enemies, at length withdrew from the Court,The Count withdraws. and lodged himself in a Monastery about Seven Leagues from the City. But as his expul∣sion was not the End, but rather the means to compass the designs then carryed on, so the divisions and distract∣ions at Court instead of ceasing, increased, for as long as the ambition of the Infante, and the King's neglect of the Government lasted, only the pretence but not the cause of these troubles was removed. Nothing could be more grievous to the King,The King in great per∣plexity. than to consider, that upon all occasions his brother being back∣ed by the multitude extorted from him, whatever he desired, which made it plain to him, that at last he would not forbear to aim at, or fail of wresting from him the Crown. His violent nature made him more open, when he should have been most circumspect, and therefore his thoughts being filled with the hatred his Brother bore him, the jealousy he had of his Wife, the perfidiousness of the People, and the disloyalty of the Nobility; he could not forbear inveighing against his Bro∣ther in publick, and even before the Queen, who he knew gave the Infante a particular account of all his words and Actions. In this perplexity, he caused the extraordinary companies that had been raised by Count
Castelmelhor, to be filled up for the security of the pal∣lace.The Infante resolves to proceed. On the other side the Infante flushed with success, resolved wholly to root out all that was left of the Fa∣vourites party about the King, for tho' the Count him∣self was removed, yet his creatures remained at Court, and nothing of moment was Transacted without his ad∣vice, had by messengers betwixt them. Before the In∣fante could put his designs in practice, he was adverti∣zed by the Queen of all the words the King daily let fall against him,The King betrayed by the Queen. and perhaps of more than ever had been spoken. This intelligence caused him to hasten the Ex∣ecution of his projects. The principal men at that time remaining near the King of Count Castelmelhor's facti∣on, were Henry Enriquez de Miranda, Emanuel Antunez, and Antony de Sousa de Macedo the Secretary of State. Of these the chiefest was Miranda whom therefore the Infante resolved first to destroy, and to that end sent some privately to warn him to depart the Court, before he run himself into greater danger. Despair so seized the unfortunate man, considering the expulsion of the Count, that he attempted to kill himself, but being prevented, he fled fearing to be torn in pieces by the Rabble. Count Castelmelhor having received information hereof, instant∣ly advised the King to be circumspect in all his words and Actions, for that it was easier by fair means to sup∣plant his Brother, than by open Force. His advice be∣ing approved by the King, upon the next occasion that offered, he summoned his Brother to appear in Council where some important matter was to be debated, but no kind messages or Letters were of any Force to move him to come, till the Queen sent for him, when he appeared with a great Train of followers, and full of dissimula∣tion. The King received him not so coldly as before, but being no Master of the Art of Counterfeiting, could not so well hide his just displeasure as the other. Howe∣ver this feigned reconciliation might have produced some good Effects,The King makes choice of Antony de Sousa de Macedo in the place of the Count. had it not been decreed by fate that the unhappy King must perish. To hasten his ruin it fell out that Alphonso, who was not used to that continual burden of business, seeking on whom he might lay that weight, pitched upon Antony de Souza de Macedo one of the Counts creatures, who for some words spoken to the Queen had been ordered into banishment, but unknown to her lay concealed at Court. In order to raise him to
the Honour of prime Minister, the King begged of the Queen that she would forgive his offence, and consent that his banishment should be remitted, but notwithstand∣ing his repeated instances, and submissive intreaties she remained implacable. Alphonso thinking to Conquer her obstinacy by extenuating the crime, put into her hands the order of Council for his banishment, wherein it was expresly set down, that rather for to satissfy her resent∣ment, than for that his fault deserved such punishment, they had for some days thought fit to send him into exile. This which should have been a motive to appease, so enraged her, that she flew out into many extravagant speeches unbeseeming a private woman, and much more a Queen,The Queen's undecent behaviour towards the King. and after venting her fury in this undecent manner without any regard to the King's presence, she flung into another Room, whence she sent a billet to him demanding to have Antony de Souza severely punished. The King hoping her passion would fall by degrees, and that she might be brought to reason, shewed not her billet according to custom to the Council of State, but she on the contrary becomming dayly more intractable, and he not able long to hide his resentment, their animosities swelled to such a pitch that the Court was almost emp∣ty, all men shunning him as declining, and she admitting none to her presence being wholly Transported with the desire of Revenge. Mean while Antony de Souza ap∣peared more openly in the pallace than he had done be∣fore, being always well attended to prevent danger, But there wanted not those who soon spread it among the People, that he threatned the City in case he were ex∣pelled the Court, that he would repair to the Army with the which he would return to punish their Rebellion with fire and Sword. Many such like discourses were framed and given out on purpose to incense the People against the King, and fix their affections upon his bro∣ther, as their deliverer from Tyranny and oppression. Things being thus disposed the Infante to requite the Queens Favours and raise himself one step nearer to the Crown, resolved by open Force, if other means failed, to expel Antony de Sousa from the Court. In order hereto on the 5th of October, 1667, he went from his House to the Pallace accompanyed by a great Number of the No∣bility,The In∣fante heads the Rabble. and all the Rabble of the City following in a most Tumultuous manner. Being come to the Pallace,
he stayed till all the Councellors of State summoned by him the day before, were come, that the foulness of the Action might be somewhat disguized by their presence. They being all come, he enters with them the King's Bed-Chamber before he was awake, who was not a little sur∣prized to see such a croud Rush in upon him at so unseaso∣nable an hour. Then the Infante, told him, that his Crown and Person were in extream danger, the multi∣tude being in Arms about the Pallace, demanding, An∣tony de Souza should be delivered to them, to receive condign punnishment for the affront he had done to the Queen. To these words he added more threats in the name of the People, but as he would have run on, the King in a rage interrupted him, calling aloud for his Sword. The Infante according to his usual dissimula∣tion calmly offered him his, which he would not accept. The Noise of the Multitude filling the Pallace, brought the Queen to the King's apartment, where she found him in a violent passion, and enquiring, as if she had not known, what the matter was, he told her that An∣tony de Souza in malice and despight to his Authority had been murdered, and that now they came in Tumul∣tuous manner to force him to pardon the murderers. But she who knew better, replyed that Souza was living, which the King would not believe till the Duke of Ca∣daval having dragged him from his lurking place, brought him into his presence. At his sight he was somewhat appeased, and then the Queen, Infante, and the rest of their followers left him abruptly. When they were gone, the King said he forgave them, who had so unde∣cently urged the expulsion of Antony de Souza, to which the Count de Sabugal then present insolently answered, they stood not in need of pardon but deserved praise, and this he repeated till the King told him, he would bestow pardon and praise where each was requisite. So much is regal Authority depressed, when faction pre∣vails. Antony de Souza, this Tumult being over, conti∣nued still in the Pallace, which the Infante observing, consulted with his Friends what was next to be done. One among them hotter than the rest, said the next thing was to assume the Crown, whilst the Peoples affection stood for him, but he took him up very short, being un∣willing as yet to have the secrets of his heart pryed into, as fearing an Action done in that Tumultuous manner
could not be durable.Antony de Sousa, and Emanuel Antunes the remain∣ing Friends of the King forced to fly. It was resolved that Antony de Souza and Emanuel Antunes should be threatned with death, unless they departed the Pallace. They percei∣ving no power was left in the King, or their friends to protect them, stole away privately, without the King's knowledge by Night. Next Morning the King missing them, ordered search to be made for them,The King abandoned by all Men. but in vain, for his orders were wholly neglected. In this Condition, finding himself forsaken by his Friends, and oppressed by his Enemies, he knew not which way to turn himself, or of whom to ask Advice. His Council sided with the Infante, his Queen favoured him, the People followed, and the No∣bility adhered to him. Thus all things being in ex∣tream Confusion, even the moderate party began to think no way was left to settle Peace, and restore Tranquili∣ty; but the assembling of the Cortes or Parliament. The Magistrates of Lisbon, and the Common Council, were the first that petitioned the King to summon the three E∣states, but he being sensible, the only design was to de∣throne him, put them off from day to day, without any positive Answer: Whereupon they took the boldness to write to all the principal Towns of the Kingdom, ex∣horting them by importunate petitioning to extort the King's Consent. A few days after, the Council of State, at which were present, the King, Queen and Infante, unanimously made their Application to him, to the same effect, but he being the more convinced it was a de∣sign lay'd against his Person, became the more obsti∣nate in refusing, so that nothing was done for that day. But the next day the Council meeting again, and sending him a most audacious remonstrance full of invectives a∣gainst his Conduct, and urging the necessity of assem∣bling the three Estates; and besides not only the Magi∣strates and multitude of Lisbon, but generally of the whole Country pressing upon him with Threats and o∣pen Violence, he was at last constrained contrary to his Inclination to comply with their demands: For it was now come to that pass, that the Council did not advise but command him, wheresoever he went, the clamours of a Parliament followed him, and from all parts Let∣ters were brought, urging the same thing. It was now equally dangerous to him to refuse, or to call the Cor∣tes, for the intent was not to do justice, by calling
them,The King forced by his Ene∣mies to call the Assem∣bly of the States. but to palliate disloyal practices under that Name. Not content to have extorted a complyance to the meet∣ing of the States, though the King desired it might be delayed till his return from Salvaterra, which would be about the middle of February, they obliged him to send out the Writs of Summons, for the first of January, 1668, so impatient is the desire of Rule. After this Violence committed upon him, the King finding himself beset on all ides by his Enemies, and no hope left of safety among them, his Crown, Liberty and Life being all in eminent danger, he resolved to fly to some other place. To this purpose he caused Horses to be provided, and Boats upon the River,He designs to fly to the Arm▪ but is prevented by his Bro∣ther. thinking to try his Fortune in the Province of Alentejo, but his Brother who wan∣ted not Intelligence, having all the Power, prevented his Design. The time appointed for the meeting of the Cortes or Par∣liament being come; the Queen, who well knew the King would be deposed by them,The Queen knowing the King would be deposed flies to a Mona∣stery. disdaining to appear her self in a less Sphere than that she had been raised to, re∣solved before Hand to separate her self from him. Ac∣cordingly on the 21st. of November, 1667. she retired to the Monastery of Franciscan Nuns, called Esperanca, in∣to which, when she was entred, she gave out she was a Maid, as being untouched by the King, and that she came thither for refuge amidst those Confusions that embroiled the Kingdom. Presently after, she sent the King a Billet, writ with her own Hand, to this ef∣fect, That she had left her Country and Friends, to become his Wife, but finding she was not acceptable to him, and fearing the dangers that threatned on all sides, she had re∣solved to return into France. That she desired his leave, and the restitution of her Dower, since the Marriage was void for want of Consummation. Having read this Billet, the King was so enraged, that he immediately took Coach, with a resolution to force her from the Mona∣stery; but the Infante who was privy to the whole mat∣ter, was there before him with a vast Company, and withstood him, so that he was forced to return without doing any thing. Amidst all his Misfortunes, and the Affronts put upon him, nothing so nearly touched Al∣phonso as this last offered him by the Queen. As soon as setled, she sent for the Infante and conferred with him in
private, as was then given out about her return into France, but the more received Opinion, and approved by the Event, was that there they agreed to be Marryed; as soon as her Marriage with the King could be made void. Her next Care was to send to the Chapter of the Ca∣thedral Church of Lisbon, to desire their Judgment for the dissolution of the Marriage, then she sent for all the Nobility, who being come into her Presence, she de∣manded their Assistance and Protection; and lastly, she sent an Express into France, to acquaint the King and her Kindred with what she had done. Mean while King Alphonso overwhelmed with such a continual stream of disasters, following one upon the Neck of another, being insulted by the Commonalty, contemned by the Nobility, deluded by his Brother, and forsaken by his Wife, stood as one amazed, and al∣most stupified, not knowing what course to take. Nor was there any left to extricate himself out of this Laby∣rinth of Confusions and Miseries. But now approach∣ed the last act of this Tragedy, and all that had been before acted under a mask, must appear bare-fac'd to the World. Therefore the Council of State being as∣sembled together with the Magistrates of the City, it was resolved the King should be layed aside, and the Government put into the hands of his Brother. Yet that the Action might appear the more justifiable, they agreed to endeavour to perswade the King to resign up the Government to his Brother, but in case he refus'd, then it was concluded he should not only be deposed, but imprisoned. However that it should be left to the determination of the Parliament, whether the Infante should be enthroned as King, or the King restored to his Liberty. This Decree being passed in the morning by break of day, the whole Council went without the In∣fante, to acquaint the King with their Resolution. A∣mongst them the Marquess of Cascaes more insolent then the rest, being told by the King's Servants that he was still asleep, bid them awake him, at the same time fell him∣self a knocking rudely at his Door.Insolent words of the Mar∣quess de Cascae▪  The King being thus disturbed; ordered the Council to be admitted. Then the Marquess of Cascaes, with a loud Voice ac∣costed the King in these very Words, without the least respect or common Civility. Thou lyest wallowing in Sloath and Pleasures, when the ruin of the Kingdom threa∣tens
thee and us through thy Fault. Therefore since thou art unfit to Rule, or get Children, pass from thy Self willingly that Burthen, which thou art not able to bear, to thy Brother Peter, least the Kingdom be deprived of a King, and the Royal Family of an Heir, and least thou be forced to that a∣gainst thy Will, which thou wilt not freely consent to. The rest of the Council spoke to the same effect, though not altogether in such audacious Language. The King, tho' surprized at so trayterous a Proposition, answered, That he was a lawful King, and brought to that pass, by the Malice and Perfidiousness of his Enemies;Alphonso resolutely denies to resign the Crown. but that how∣ever, no Fear or Danger should force him to resign the Crown as long as he had Breath to draw; yet if they would use Violence to him, that then he would appeal for Justice to the supream Tribunal, which is above all Kings, against those that violated his Authority, and wrongfully snatched his Crown. Being thus disappoin∣ted of their first attempt, the Council repaired to the Infante, where they protracted their Debates till late at Night, for being resolved to use force, they feared least the People, who before took their part against the Fa∣vourites, should be of another Mind, when the matter came to touch the King's Person. However, after much time spent in fruitless projects, they came to this Resolu∣tion, That the King should be forcibly deposed and im∣prisoned, that for the better palliating that odious Acti∣on, and involving the People as a party in it, the Infante himself accompanyed by all the Nobility and Magi∣strates, should put it in Execution, that the King's con∣finement should be at first concealed, till by spreading abroad several rumours, the People were prepared to allow of it; and lastly, that either by Art or Threats, the King should be obliged to sign an Act of Renuncia∣tion,The Infan∣te heads the multi∣tude, and sets upon the King, and exorts from him an instru¦ment of Resignati∣on. to the end, it might be thought, the King had vo∣luntarily given up the Government to his Brother. All things being thus disposed, at break of day the Infante repairs to the Palace, attended by an infinite multitude. There he set a Guard upon the King, and having lock∣ed all the Doors that led to his Apartment, he sent An∣tony Cavide to notifie to him, that by the general consent of the Kingdom he was deprived of the Government and his Liberty, and also by the most terrible Threats to extort from him the signing of the Instrument of Re∣signation prepared for him. The unfortunate King see∣ing
himself wholly in the power of his Enemies, and fearing the utmost effects of their Malice, signed the In∣strument which was immediately made publick as a justi∣fication of the Treasonable Practice. It contained in substance, that he freely resigned the Government to his Brother Peter and his Heirs, reserving only to himself Three Hundred Thousand Cruzados a Year, with the Mansion House of the Family of Braganza. A Cruzado is Four Hundred Reis of Portuguese Money, and Three Thousand Reis, is just Twenty Shillings English, so that 300000 Cruzados, makes the just Sum of 37500 l. Sterling. But how well even this miserable Composi∣tion for a Crown was observed, may appear by his being kept ever after a Prisoner, with only a few Ser∣vants of no Note, such as his Brother thought fit to al∣low him, so that in all probability his Expence could not amount to the tenth part of that Summ. The unhappy King being thus dethroned,The Cortes meet. and made Prisoner, the Cortes or Parliament summoned by him met soon after at Lisbon, about the beginning of Febru∣ary, 1668, to destroy him by his own Authority. At first there were great Debates amongst them, whether it were at all lawful to take an Oath to Peter as Regent, and next Heir to the Crown, or whether the Crown should also be transferred to him; some doubting whe∣ther the first were justifyable, and others more violent, urging the latter ought to be done. At last the Majori∣ty agreed to the setling the Regency and Succession up∣on Peter, but were generally averse to his usurping the style of King, thinking it enough, that he who was judged unfit for Government, was removed from the Helm. Peter after having put it to the Vote, whether he should assume the Crown, finding his Pretension re∣jected, endeavoured to have it believed he was averse from it. But the Queen who intended to make him her Husband, and could not endure to think of losign any part of her Title,The Queen presses to have Peter declared King. He is received as Regent. or abating any thing of her Pride, and being a Woman, that knew not how to dissemble her Vanity, urged the matter more home to the States, who nevertheless decreed, that he should exercise all the re∣gal Power, without assuming the stile. The Controver∣sie being decided, there arose another, which was whe∣ther the King should be allowed his Liberty, or confi∣ned, but in Conclusion, it was determined he should undergo perpetual Imprisonment.
There had been a League offensive and defensive,1668. con∣cluded betwixt France and Portugal,Peace with Spain. at the beginning of the Year 1667, against Spain, by which the French were obliged to give the Spaniards a powerful diversion in Flanders, which they performed with great Success. After that some Overtures of Peace being made by the Spaniards, the Portugueses began readily to give ear to them, and though the French Ambassador pressed that the Negotiation might be in common with his Master, as in justice according to the League betwixt them, it ought to have been; yet the Prince who now ha the Government, more mindful of the peculiar Interest, which was to secure the Power he had newly gotten, then of what in Honour was due to France, entered upon a separte Treaty of Peace with Spain. His Ma∣jesty of Great Britain was the Mediator, and in his Name the Earl of Sandwich assisted at the Conferences. At length the Peace was concluded betwixt the two Crowns, on the 13th. of February, 1668, and published 10th. of March following. This Peace was highly cry∣ed up among the Rabble, as an effect of the Govern∣ment of the Prince, when all Men plainly saw, and were sensible that in reality the victories obtained by King Alphonso, were the only motives that obliged the Spaniards to propose it, and that the Overtures had been made while he was yet at the Helm, which must have had as good a success, had he remained time enough in the Throne to bring things to Perfection, and perhaps he might have done it without the dishonour of abandon∣ing his Confederates the French. On the 13th. of February 1668. the Chapter of the Cathredal of Lisbon, with others, they had culled out all prepared for the design, pronounced the Marriage betwixt King Alphonso,The Mar∣riage of the King and Queen de∣clared null. and the Princess Mary Francis Elizabeth of Savoy null, and that therefore both of them were left at Liberty to dispose of themselves. Then the three Estates and Magistrates of Lisbon, as they had been before directed, moved the Prince and Princess, that since the former Marriage was declared null, they would consent to match together, on pretence it was for the good of the Kingdom. This they were moved to, in regard they were unwilling to restore her Dower, and the Parties were no less ready to consent to what themselves had before contrived and agreed betwixt
themselves. However tho' there had been care taken for the disanulling the former marriage by such persons as were wholly in the interest of the cause, there was yet started a scruple, that it was not Lawful to proceed to a new match, especially with the Brother of the former husband without a dispension. But the Prince, though pretending only to comply with the Cortes had not been negligent in that Affair, for not long after the Publication of the nullity, arrived in Por∣tugal the dispensation from the Cardinal of Vendosme the Popes Legate a Latere in France, by which it appears the dispensation was granted by one that was a party in∣teressed in the Affair, and precedent to the sentence of nullity.The In∣fante mar∣ries the Queen. Upon these grounds they made no difficulty to proceed to the Nuptials, the Ceremony whereof was performed at Alcantara by the Bishop of Targa, Ad∣ministrator of the Arch-Bishoprick of Lisbon, on the 2d of April 1668. After the marriage, fresh instances were made that the Prince might be declared King by the Cortes, but this attempt also proving ineffectual, he no∣tifyed to them that on the 9th of June following, he would take his Oath to maintain the Laws of the Realm, and receive from them theirs of fidelity, which was accordingly performed. The three Estates continued their Session after this till the first day of August, 1668, when they broke up. Several months being passed af∣ter the consummation of this marriage, when the thing done was not to be retrieved without horrid scandal, and embroiling the whole State of the Church, then at last the Prince bethought himself of sending to the Pope to confirm the Cardinal's dispensation. Pope Clement the 9th who sate in St. Peter's chair, seeing no possibility of recalling what was past, and relying upon the informa∣tion of the Chapter of Lisbon, did expedite a Brief directed to James de Sousa Chief Inquisitor, Antony de Mendza commissary for the Bull of the Croisade, Martin Alphonso de Melo Dean of Evora, Lewis de Sousa Dean of Porto, and Emanuel de Meneses Arch-Deacon of Evora, impow∣ering them to dispense in his name with the said mar∣riage. This Brief was dated December the 10th. 1668. These persons so authorised accordingly in the Popes name, delared the marriage of King Alphonso null, that of his Queen with the Prince to be good and valid, and all the Children that were, or should be gotten between
them to be Legitimate, which sentence they pronoun∣ced upon the 18th of February 1669. When the unfortunate King had been detained a con∣siderable time Prisoner in the Pallace of Lisbon,1669. it was thought necessary to remove him,King Al∣phonso sent prisoner to the Island Tercera. least the People com∣ming to themselves and commiserating the sufferings of their Sovereign, should make some commotion that might endanger the present government. It was therefore re∣solved to send him into the Island Terecera, whether he was conveyed by the Count de Prado, then Comman∣ding the Portuguese Fleet, and there continued several years under a strict Guard. At length not only the Peo∣ple of Lisbon, but throughout all Portugal understand∣ing by those who came from that Island, that he led a most miserable Life in that remote Island, and was al∣most reduced to the last extremity through sufferings and anguish of mind, there was cause to apprehend they would in time be moved to resent his calamities, and perhaps be stirred up to revenge them upon those who were the cause thereof. Besides it fell out that the King of Spain at the same time fitted out a Navy at Cadiz without declaring for what intent, which being known at Lisbon, those who dreaded the Return of the King, as having been the promoters of his Ruin, presently ima∣gined it was to take him from his banishment. For these reasons he was sent for with all possible speed, and brought back into Portugal,He is brought back and confined to the Castle of Cintra. where he was lodged in the Castle of Cintra upon the Sea Coast not far from Lisbon. In this place he was not only observed and Guarded, but as closely confined as if he had been a common Malefactor, the very Windows of his lodgings being made up, so that he could not look out, but that what Light he had, came from above his height. This ac∣count of his usage in that place I received from Dr. Reis a Phisitian at Lisbon, whose Son was Phisitian to the King, and who had several times the opportunity of seing him, being sent for by his said Son to assist his Ma∣jesty when indisposed, for scarce any body else was ad∣mitted to see him. In this deplorable condition the wretched King continued till his death. But before we give an account of his End, it will be fit to set down those few matters of moment that preceded it. And indeed there are but few things that can furnish matter for History. Portugal ever since the
conclusion of the Peace with Spain, having been inga∣ged in no War, nor furnished any other important sub∣ject to treat of. Warlike Kings, and turbulent govern∣ments are the properest for swelling of Histories, the great accidents and Councels then occurring giving great variety to dilate upon; but in a peaceable and quiet State, there is little to be found more then the settled and regular proceedings which being always in a manner the same, are not worth the writing because they neither delight nor instruct in the reading. Some few things re∣main, which being of no mighty consequence shall briefly be set down, that we may at length put an End to this History. The new Prince regent, as has been said,Birth of the Infante Mary Frances. was Marryed to his brothers Wife, Mary Frances Elizabeth of Savoy on the 2d. of April. By her he had before the End of the same year a daughter named Mary Frances, the only fruit of that surprizing marriage. And tho' at first it was looked upon, as a great token that God approved of their proceedings by giving them issue so suddenly, yet afterwards those very persons who cry∣ed up this providence, could not but be undeceived when they perceived, that these Princes living together about 16 years never had any other Child, and even she dyed without being marryed. All things having succeeded prosperously to that Prince, as he that had established himself in the government, secured his Bro∣ther, gained his Wife, and now got a Daughter, his only care was how to continue in amity with all the World, that so he might firmly Establish his new at∣tained power. He preserved Peace both at home, and abroad in such Tranquility, that for several years there will remain nothing else memorable of him to posterity. In the Year 1677,1677. the Portugueses of the continent of Brazil in America seeeking to extend their borders,A Portu∣guese Colony at Rio de la Plata in America, destroyed by the Spani∣ards. which reached to the great River called de la Plata, passed over the said River and Planted a Colony at Buenos Aires, which the Spaniards looking upon as an incroachment upon them, they gathered to a body in those parts, and falling upon the Portuguese Planters, put them all to the Sword. Advice hereof being brought into Portugal, the Prince Regent expressed his resentment by his Embassa∣dour at the Court of Madrid, demanding Reparation of dammages. The thing was long in debate, both par∣ties arguing for their Right to the place and protracting
time. At length the Portuguese weary of delay began to let fall some threats of a War, but with so little prepa∣ration to it, that the Effects were not to be feared. How∣ever the Spaniards being more inclinable to compose the difference amicably, than to enter upon a War on so slight an occasion,The dif∣ference ad∣justed. sent into Portugal the Duke of Giove∣nazzo their Embassadour extraordinary, who after seve∣ral conferences with the Portuguese Ministers, concluded the matte to the satisfaction of both Parties. The In∣fanta only Daughter to the Prince, being now almost marriagable, and her Father despairing of having any more Issue by his Wife, he thought of disposing of her, and having cast about to all parts for a fit match, at last pitched upon the present Duke of Savoy, then a youth un∣der the tuition of his Mother. Embassadors were sent on both sides to Treat in the Year 1680,1680. who so managed the affair,A match concluded betwixt the Infanta and the Duke of Savoy. that all things were concluded and agreed upon. And to remove the only obstacle which was the Law of Lamego, whereby it is enacted, that the heiress of the Crown Marrying a Forreigner, she shall forfeit her Title, to provide I say against the obstacle of this Law, the Cortes were summoned and met at Lisbon the same Year. There they passed an Act for dispensing with the said Law for that time, provided it should not be a pre∣sident for any other. This impediment being taken away, there seemed to remain nothing to obstruct the happy conclusion of the Nuptials but the distance of the Parties. the Duke of Savoy, who according to contract was to come into Portugal, sent before over Land a con∣siderable Number of Coach and saddle Horses. On the other side the Prince Regent fitted out a squadron of 12 men of War, to Conduct the Duke to Lisbon. All the Ships were gilt and painted, but above, all the Ad∣miral was gilt from stem to stern, the poop and prow down to the surface of the Water, and the sides down to the gunwale. The great Cabin was painted by the best Masters in Lisbon, and the floor layed in squares of Ebony and Ivory. The Bed was most Rich, and the Royal-Standard all of Cloath of tissue, with the arms of Portugal in the highest raised Embroidery. Portu∣guese Seamen being at that time scarce, especially able ones, great encouragement was given to all strangers that would enter into the Service. When all things were prepared, this sightly Squadron set Sail in the Year
1681, and arrived safe at the Port of Villafranca in Savoy, expecting there to take the Duke of Savoy on board.The Match broke off. In the mean time all things were preparing at Lisbon, with the greatest splendor imaginable for his reception. Triumphal Arches were built, extraordinary bull Feasts contrived, and all the Gentry strove to outvie one ano∣ther (even to the ruin of their Estates and empoverishing their Families) in Gallantry. Yet all these mighty pre∣parations were cast away, for when it was thought the Duke would have gone aboard the Fleet, he at first be∣gan to delay and protract time, and after deluding them in this sort as long as he could, he at last positively broke off the Match. His subjects had always been averse to it, and that with good cause, as being unwil∣ling to part with their Soveraign without hope of ever seeing him again, as going to leave them for a Crown; and then if he should return, it must be with dishonour, as being disappointed of the End for which he left them. These considerations had at last prevailed upon his Mother, his Council, and himself, to alter their resolu∣tions, so that tho' the Articles of the marriage had been ratified on both sides, and so great an expence made towards the comsummating of it, all that had been done was dissolved and came to nothing. The Fleet returned to Lisbon with small satisfaction, and found as little there either at the Court for the affront put upon it, or in the City for the extravagant and useless expence it had been put to. This was the End of the de∣signed marriage of the Infanta with the Duke of Savoy. The year 1683, put an End to the long sufferings of the most unfortunate Alphonso the 6th King of Portugal.Death of King Al∣phonso. He dyed on the 12th of December, at the Castle of Cin∣tra, in the Fortieth year of his Age, and 16th of his imprisonment. It is impossible to give a just character of him, fear of offending the prevailing party having stopt the mouths of his Loyal Servants and Friends, who best knew and would speak honourably of him, and there being no credit to be given to the slanders of his adversaries, whose chief care it ever was to reproach his person, and blacken his Actions. And this per∣haps is the greatest of calamities Kings are subject to, that their misfortunes do not terminate with their Lives, for never Prince was yet dethroned tho' never so bar∣barously, but his memory was also rendred odious to
prosperity, by all the Arts that malice could invent, because prevailing wrong could not subsist but under the colour of Right, and to defame justice oppressed, is to flatter and support iniquity Reigning. To say King Alphonso had no vices, were to say he was not man, yet to make them so enormous, as some would have them believed, were only to vouch for malice, and counte∣nance disloyalty. Through the course of his Reign, that is, whilst he was in power, there appears none of his actions that have been urged against him, tho' aggravated with the most malicious circumstances, which have not been seen in thousands of Subjects and yet passed unpu∣nished, either as without the reach of the Law, or excu∣sed as the effects of extravagant Youth. For his judg∣ment, as it could not be expected to be so solid at his Years, as in a riper Age, so neither can it be found by his words, or deportment that he was any way defective therein. And lastly as to his impotency in regard to pro∣creation, that, if true, could have been no lessening of his personal right to government, but it is so far from be∣ing certain, that I have heard several persons affirm they knew his illegitimate issue, whose mothers if they durst, would upon Oath confirm the assertion. But there is no∣thing so certain, as that Portugal never was more suc∣cessful both by Sea and Land than under this government, for under him were obtained four of the greatest victories against the Spaniards, which produced the Peace, the glo∣ry whereof was ascribed to his brother, who had done nothing to purchase it. And if any object that those Triumphs were due to the Generals, we must deprive all King's of the glory of warlike Exploits, who do not actually Command their Armies in person, besides that it is no small honour to him that he chose such Counsel∣lors as could direct, and such generals as knew how to act so much for his advantage. And as for the maritine affairs greater Fleets came home yearly from India and Brazil, and far lesser losses were sustained by Ship-wrack during his Reign than in many years after. This may suffice in some measure to do right to the memory of this unhappy Prince. Yet it may not be ungrateful to add one word more, touching certain words reported to have been spoken of him just before his death. The closeness of his confinement, and the danger of reporting his words abroad by those who heard them, is the cause that we
cannot be so positive in this particular therefore I do not avouch it for a certain known truth, but as a rumour whis∣pered about where People durst speake. It is said of him that when he was in the last agony, and as it were brea∣thing his last, he should say, I am now going, but it will not be long before the Queen shall follow me, to give an account before the dreadful tribunal of the wrong she has done me. As I do not averr this for a certainty, so it is very observable the said Queen outlived him but a very short time,The Queens death. that is, only three months and a few days. Her death was on the 27th of December, of the same year 1683, and since there is little to be said in her commendation, it will be better to be altogether silent than to make reflections upon the dead. King Peter II. now seated on the Throne of Portugal,King Peter upon the death of his brother, succeeds in his Throne. by the Death of his Brother, received the Compliments of all Forreign Princes upon his accession to the Crown. In the Year 1684. and the first of the new King's Reign, D. Francis de Tavora, being Vice-Roy of India, the City Goa, the Capital of all the Portuguese Con∣quests in those parts was besieged with a mighty Army by the Raja Savagi an Indian Prince,1684. who took part with the eldest Son of the Great Mogul,Goa besie∣ged by the Indians. Aurenge Zeb, then in Rebellion against his Father. The Inhabitants defended themselves with Resolution, and sent to ac∣quaint Aurenge Zeb, with the danger they were in up∣on his Account, praying Relief. He presently comman∣ded his second Son to march with an Army of 100000 Foot, and 80000 Horse, and a great Train of Artillery to their Succour. Upon the approach of this mighty Army,The siege. raised. the Raja raised his Siege and departed, in his way destroying all the Country about Goa. The Siege being raised, the young Prince sent to assure the Portu∣gueses, that his Father would be always ready to assist them against their Enemies. They in return, sent a solemn Ambassy to the Mogul, by whom a setled Friend∣ship was established with that great Monarch. The King having long continued a Widdower, and having no Issue, but only one Daughter, was earnestly pressed by his Subjects to Marry to secure the Succession. Hereupon, by the advice of his Council, he resolved to demand in Marriage one of the Daughters of the E∣lector Palatine, and accordingly in the Month of October 1686, he named the Count de Villar Mayor, his
Ambassador Extraordinary to that Elector upon this occasion, who set forward in December following, for Heydelberg, where he arrived in the beginning of the Year 1687, with a very splendid Retinue. In June he made his publick Entry, which was extraordinary mag∣nificent, and the next day after he had Audience, in which he demanded of the Elector, his Daughter, the Princess Mary Sophia in Marriage, for the King his Ma∣ster. At the same time, in complyance to the Request of the King of Portugal, a Squadron of Men of War was fitted out in England, and sailed under the com∣mand of the Duke of Grafton to Rotterdam, there to take aboard the new Queen, and conduct her to Lisbon. On the 8th. of July, the Ceremony of the Marriage was performed at Heydelberg, on the 10th. the Queen set out on her Journey towards Rotterdam, on the 27th. she went aboard the English Squadron,1687. at the Briel, and on the 11th. of August,King Peter Marries the Princess of New∣burg. arrived in the River of Lisbon. That same day the King went aboard to receive the Queen, and conducted her ashore, where the Marriage was consummated the same Night. The exact Neutrality which Portugal has observed during the late Wars, which have harrassed and exhausted the greatest part of Europe, is the cause there is nothing worthy our Observation to add relating to that Kingdom. Only this may be ob∣served, that as the War has improverished other States, so they by continuing in Peace, have vastly enriched themselves, and so improved their Maritime Strength, that they have at this Present, near 100 Sea-Men, for one they had 20 Years ago, for now they Trade in their own Vessels to all parts of Europe, whereas at that time, all their Commodities were transported upon For∣reign Bottoms. And moreover their own particular Trade to their Plantations in America, and to India is vastly augmented. Such are the Fruits of Peace, espe∣cially when other Nations sink under the Calamities of War. To conclude, there remains nothing more, but to set down the Royal Issue of Portugal. The Present King Peter II. on the 11th. of August, 1687. as was said before, marryed Mary Sophia, Princess of Newburg. He had issue by her, first John, born in 1689, and dy∣ed the same Year. Secondly, another John, born in 1690. Thirdly, Francis born, 1691. Fourthly, Louisa, born in 1694. And lastly, Emanuel born in 1697. FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table, contain∣ing the Principal Matters in this History. A. ABidis exposed, brought to Court, teaches the People to yoke Oxen, Plow and Sow, page 13 He Reigns. p.14. Actions of the Lusitanians in Africk. p. 31 Actions in the Province of Alentejo. p. 426 Actions of John Fernandez Vieyra in Brazil against the Dutch. p. 428 Actions in the Province of Beira, p. 433, and 468 Actions betwixt the Rivers Duero and Minho, p. 439 Actions in Africk, p. 305 An account of the Portuguese Conquests in India. p. 319 Adrian the Emperour. p. 78 Affairs of America. p. 425 Of Castile. p. 290 Of Africk and India. p. 438 Of India. p. 472 Africans invading Spain destroyed. p. 104 Africk and India. p. 452 L. Agnes de Castro cruelly murdered. p. 228 Alans and Suevians in Lusitania. p. 83 Albertus the Cardinal, Governour of Portugal. p. 367 Alcazer and Tangier on the Coast of Africk taken. p. 287 Alliances in Africk and Asia. p. 413 Almanzor again makes great Spoil. p. 135 K. Alonso the I. of Leon successful against the Infidels. p. 114 K. Alonso the II. of Leon called the Chaste. His Conquests. p. 117 K. Alonso the III. of Leon, called the Great. p. 122 King Alonso the IV. of Leon, resigns the Government to his Brother Ramiro. He repents and raises War. p. 127 K. Alonso the V. of Leon, under tuition. p. 137 Is slain. p. 139
K. Alonso the VI. of Leon, flies to the protection of the Moors. After his Brothers Death returns, and is recei∣ved by the People as their King. p. 148 His Wives and Issue. p. 149 K. Alonso the I. of Portugal, his Birth. p. 158 He Knights himself. Besieges his Mother, takes and puts her into Irons. p. 159 Being himself besieged by King Alonso of Castile, he arti∣cles for his Deliverance, and breaks his Faith. Wars with the Moors▪ Then with Castile. p. 160 Is saluted King. p. 162 Defeas the King of Castile. p. 163 Takes Lisbon. Particulars of the Siege. p. 165 Overthrows the Moors with a handful of Men. Another like Exploit of his. p. 166 Wars with Leon. p. 167 Being put to flight breaks his Leg, fulfilling his Mothers Curse when he put Fetters upon her. Besieged in San∣tarem by the Moors, sallies out, and defeats them. p. 168 His Death. p. 172 His Armes, Wife and Issue. p. 173 K. Alonso the IId. of Portugal his Birth. p. 180 He attacks the Towns given by his Father to his Sisters. Is routed by the King of Leon. p. 181 Recovering, defeats the Army of Leon. Is reconcil'd to his Brethren. p. 182 Laws enacted by him. p. 183 His Death, Wife and Issue. p. 184 K. Alonso the III. his Birth and Actions, till his Assumption to the Crown. p. 192 He is received as Regent. Puts away his Wife and marries another. p. 193 Conquers Algarve. p. 194 His Cruelty towards his lawful Wife. p. 196 Resumes his former Gifts, and opposes the Clergy. p. 198 His Description, Death and Issue. p. 199 His Arms, Men famous in his time. p. 200 K. Alonso the IV. wholly addicted to his Pleasure. p. 219 At variance with his Bastard Brother. Ibid. Marries his Daughter to the King of Castile. p. 220 Enters Castile with an Army. p. 225 Aids the Castilians against the Moors in Person. . 226 The two Kings overthrow the Infidels. p. 227 His eldest Son privately marries the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 228 His Death, Wife and Issue. p. 229 His Arms. p. 230
King Alonso the V. his Birth. His accession to the Crown, and Differences betwixt the Queen and Nobility. p. 279 He marries the Regents Daughter. Takes upon him the Government, and confirms all that had been done by the Regent. p. 283 Takes Alcazer on the Coast of Africk. p. 287 Takes Arzila and Tangier. Changes his Title. p. 289 Wages War with Castile, in defence of the rightful Heiess. p. 290 Prosecutes the War. p. 291 Sails into France. p. 294 Resolves to end his days at Hierusalem. p. 296 His Death. p. 297 His Issue and Discoveries during his Reign. p. 298 K. Alonso the VI. takes upon him the Government. p. 5 The source of his Misfortunes. p. 529 Slanders cast upon him. p. 533 Resolves to take upon him the Government. p. 538 Those that affronted him in the person of Conti Banished. p. 541 He grows more loose in his Life. p. 542 A Match concluded for him. p. 545 He offers the Infant satisfaction. p. 552 Fearing the Faction offers to compound with the Infante. p. 553 Is in great perplexity. p. 55 Betrayed by his Queen. Makes choice of Antony de Soa de Macedo, in the place of Castelmelhor. p. 556 Is abandoned by all Men. p. 59 Forced by his Enemies to call the assembly of the States Designs to fly to the Army, but is prevented by his Broth. p. 560 Resolutely desires to resign the Crown. p. 562 Is sent Prisoner to the Island Tercera. Brought back and confined to the Castle of Cintra. p. 566 His Death. p. 569 P. Alonso marries Elizabeth Daughter to the K. and Q. of Ca∣stile and Aragon. p. 360 He is kill'd by a fall from his Horse. p. 307 Alonso Son to K. Edward I. that had the Title of Prince in Portugal. p. 275 An incredible Relation. p. 121 An Astrological Prediction. p. 275 Antonius Pius Emperour. p. 78 D. Antony de Aaide Favourite to K. John the III. his Cha∣racter. p. 331 Antony de Sousa, and Emanuel Anunez, the remaining Friends of the King, forced to fly▪ p. 559
Antony the Bastard, declared Protector by the Rabble. p. 356 His Birth and Education. He enters Lisbon, and is salu∣ted King. p. 357 His Army routed. He is forced to fly and abscond. p. 360 He arrives at the Terzeras with a Fleet from France. p. 361 His Fleet destroyed by the Spaniards. p. 362 He flies into England. p. 363 Dyes in France. p. 364 Arian Heresie first spread in Lusitania. p. 92 Arms of Porto. p. 34 Artilius again overthrows the Lusitanians. p. 31 Augustus Caesar comes into Spain. p. 69 Is acknowledged Emperour of the World, and temples erected to him. p. 70 Azamor on the coast of Africk submits to the King of Portugal. p. 303 is taken by force. p. 323 B. BAbelTower built. p. 3 Bacchus in Spain. p. 11 Badajoz Besieged. p. 497 Baia recovered. p. 379 Barbarities of the Rebellions Rabble. p. 255 Barbarous Sacrifice. p. 17 Battle betwixt two Kings. p. 292 Betwixt private Men and their Forces. p. 199 Of Ourique and Reflections upon it. p. 162 Of Elvas. Spaniards defeated. p. 499 Of Evora. p. 514 Of Montesclaros. p. 524 Beatrix Daughter to K. Emanael marryed to the Duke of Sa∣voy. p. 326 Bemoy an African Prince flies into Portugal. Is murdered by Peter Vaz da Cunha. p. 305 K. Bermudo advanced to the Throne, overthrows the Moors. He resigns the Crown. p. 117 K. Bermudo the II. looses many places, and is routed by Al∣manzor. p. 134 K. Bermudo the III. succeeds. p. 140 Betus the VI. King of Spain. p. 5 Birth of our Saviour. p. 71 Of King Emanuel's fourth and fifth Sons. p. 320 Of Camaen the great Portuguese Poet. p. 321
Of King John's Son Peter now reigning. p. 446 Of the Infanta, Mary Frances. p. 567 Bishop of Lamego going Ambassador to Rome, taken by the Spaniards. p. 402 Blanch Divorced from the Prince. p. 221 Body of Spanish Horse Routed. p. 521 Bgud the African ravages the Coasts. p. 65 Both sides cease from Hostilities. p. 434 D. of Braganza Beheaded for High-Treason. p. 301 Brigus IV. King of Spain. p. 4 Brutus the Consul takes the City Lacobrica, and destroys the Countrey about Braga. p. 42 He destroys near 60000 Galicians, Conquers Lusitania and Galicia and Triumphs at Rome. p. 43 C. CAcus chosen General. p. 12 Cadiz Assaulted by the English. p. 380 Caesar comes into Lusitania. p. 57 Subdues the Herminij, and routs a vast multitude. p. 58 His remaining Actions in Spain. p. 59 He returns, and expels Pompey's party. p. 62 Overthrows young Pompey at Munda. p. 63 Conquers the Lusitanians and setling Peace at Beja, calls that City Pax Julia. p. 65 Cais Caligula Emperor. p. 74 Carthaginians come to relieve the Phaenicians. p. 15 They are defeated. p. 16 Expelled by the Romans. p. 26 M. of Caracena General of the Spaniards. p. 521 Besieges Villaviciosa. p. 522 C. Castenheda Besieges Valencia de Alcantara. p. 517 Advances to relieve Villaviciosa. p. 523 Castile separates from Leon and erects a Government under two Judges. p. 126 Castilians enter Portugal. p. 263 C. Castelmelhor succeeds in the King's favour. p. 538 He rises. p. 540 His Brother favourite to the Infante. p. 544 He withdraws from Court. p. 555 Catherine Infanta of Portugal married to King Charles II. of England. p. 502 Celtae settle in Portugal. p. 14 Cessation of Arms betwixt Spain and Portugal for three Years. p. 267 With the Dutch. p. 403 Charity of the Spaniards to the distressed Portugueses. p. 277 Charles V. the Emperor marries Elizabeth, Sister to K. John III. p. 332 K Charles I. of England, then Prince of Wales, in Spain. p. 367
Chindasuindus possesses himself of the Kingdom by force. p. 100 K. Chintila holds two Synods. p. 100 Christian and Moorish Armies Engage. p. 346 Christian Dominions in Spain divided betwixt the two Sons of K. Alonso. p. 123 Church setled. p. 80 Church of St. James the Apostle in Galicia Dedicated. p. 123 Cincinnatus succeeds Caesar. p. 60 City Braga founded by the Carthaginians. p. 19 City Mirtiry built by the Tyrians. p. 21 Civil Broils. p. 132 Civil War in Portugal. p. 282 Citadel taken from the Spaniards. p. 397 Conspirators incense the People against the Spaniards. p. 392 Resolve to put their designs in Execution. p. 387 Meet and execute their design. p. 395 Their Deputies confer with the Duke at Almada. p. 388 Claudius and Aurelianus Emperors. p. 80 Claudius and Nero Emperors. p. 75 Clergy joyns in Rebellion with the Laity. p. 189 Cneus and Sextus the two Sons of Pompey in Spain. p. 62. Coimbra taken by the Advice and Assistance of the Monks of Lorvan. p. 144 Columbus after discovering America arrives at Lisbon. p. 308 Combat betwixt two Women. p. 267 Common complaints when subjects will rebel. p. 186 Complaints made to the Pope and all things adjusted. p. 186 Condition of Portugal. p. 381 Considerable losses of the Portuguese in India. p. 485 Conspiracy against the King of Castile, discovered. p. 258 Against the Protector. p. 261 Against the New King John. p. 403 To seize Cartagena. p. 416 Against King Alonso VI. p. 544 Constantine the Great. p. 80 Conti seized by the faction and sent to Brazil. p. 536 Is recalled from Brazil, but Banished the Court, privately Meets the King. p. 543 Conversion of Lusitanians from Arianism. p. 94 Corocoa a famous Robber. p. 71 Cortes meet, and instead of settling Peace widen the breach. p. 280 Meet again. p. 415, 436, and 563. First Council of Braga. p. 83 Council and magistrates of Lisbon combine with the Infante. p. 553 Counterfeits personate King Sebastian. p. 348, and 367 Count S. Lorerco his Actions in Alentejo. p. 452 Crassus destroys near 40000 Spaniards. p. 61
Croisade brought into Portugal. p. 287 Customs of the Inhabitants. p. 17 D. DEath of Prince Philip, the Empress, and others. p. 333 Debates about proclaiming the Protector. p. 261 K. Denis his Birth and Succession to the Crown. He marries Elizabeth, Daughter of Peter, King of Aragon. p. 209 Has differences with his Brother Alonso. p. 210 Enters Castile the second time. p. 211 Is chosen mediator betwixt the King of Castile and the lawful Heir then banished. p. 213 An unjust sentence given by him against the rightful Heir. p. 214 He is at variance with his Son. p. 215 His structure and other Works. p. 217 His Wife and Issue. p. 218 Denis Son to K. Peter enters Portugal with an Army. p. 269 Design to murder K. John. p. 441 Differences betwixt Castile and Portugal, composed by the Pope. p. 195 In the Cortes about ransoming Prince Ferdinand. p. 278 Adjusted. p. 568 Discoveries in North America. p. 319 Dolabella again subdues the Lusitanians. p. 44 Double Treachery. p. 484 Duke de Alva with the Spanish Forces draws near to Lisbon. He passes the River Tagus. p. 358 The Forts upon the River taken by him. p. 359 Duke of Braganza refuses to go into Castile. Is made Gene∣ral. p. 364 Duke of Lancaster invited by the Portuguese, Lands in Galicia with 2000 Horse and 3000 Archers. p. 269 He meets K. John. P. Henry of Castile marries his Daugh∣ter. p. 266 Duke of Medina Sidonia being suspected in Spain, Challenges K. John. p. 408 Dutch contrary to Faith given, take several places in India. p. 425 In Brazil receive succours. p. 437 Beaten out of Angola in Africk. p. 449 Prepare to make War upon Portugal. p. 454 In Brazil. p. 376 They take the Capital City called Baja. p. 377 Other Actions of theirs after taking Baja. p. 378 E. EArthquakes. p. 57, and 332 Earthquakes, Inundations, and Storms, for 8 years. p. 178 Eclipse of the Sun. p. 245
K. Edw. holds a Parliament. His Expedition to Tangier. p. 276 He dies of the Plague. p. 278 His issue. p. 279 P. Edward his Birth. p. 274 P. Edw. contracted to Ellenor Sister to Alonso, K. of Aragon. p. 272 Edward Brother to K. John IV. p. 435 Effects of love. p. 142 Egica King. p. 106 Q. Elizabeth's provocations, and K. Philip's design against her. p. 369 Ellenor II. Daughter to King Alonso, married to Peter King of Aragon. p. 227 Q. Ellenor flies to Castile. p. 256 Princess Ellenor contracted to the Emperor Frederick III. p. 286 Elvas and other places delivered to K. Philip. p. 356 K. Emanuel his Birth and descent. He is proclaimed King. p. 313 Marries Elizabeth Widow of the late Prince Alonso. p. 315 Then Marries the Sister of his last Queen. Sends succours to the Venetians against the Turks. p. 316 Founds the Monastery of Belem. p. 317 His Queen delivered of a Son. p. 318 He receives the Order of the Garter from K. Henry VIII. of England. Punishes his Lord Steward for his Cruelty to a Servant. p. 322 His Eighth Son Born. p. 323 Birth of his Tenth Child, and Death of his Queen. p. 324 He Marries again. p. 325 His Death. His Structures and other Works. p. 327 His Wives and Issue. p. 328 Embassadors sent to all Courts of Europe. p. 401 Embassadors of Castile sent away without Answer. p. 281 Emerita Augusta, now Merida, Founded by Augustus. p. 69 Endeavours used for obtaining of Bishops, but in vain. p. 470 Endeca Usurps the Crown of Portugal. p. 96 He is Deposed and shorn a Monk, by Leovigildus the Goth. p. 97 Engagements by Sea. p. 172, and 337 English and Portugueses take Towns in Castile. p. 248 Enterprizes on the Frontiers of Alentejo. p. 462 C. Ericeira succeeds D. Roderick de Castro in the Government of Tangier. p. 489 Ervigius succeeds Wamba. p. 105 His Actions. p. 106 Exploits in India. p. 342 F. FAbius Maximus defeats the Spanish Army, and kills Curius their General. p▪ 38
Fabulous's relation. p. 161 Faction levelled against the Favourite. p. 551 Faithless proceedings of the Dutch in Brazil. p. 429 False Sebastian executed. p. 368 Famine in Portugal. p. 318 Famous Battle of Aljubarata. p. 263 The Account given of it by the Spanish Historians. p. 264 Favila succeeds Pelagius. p. 114 K. Ferdinand of Navarre, kills K. Bermudo, and becomes sole Monarch of Castile, Leon, Portugal, Galicia, and Navarre. p. 141 He is called the Great. His Conquests over the Infidels. p. 143 Dying, divides his Dominions. p. 145 Ferdinand King of Portugal, his Birth. He engages in War a∣gainst Castile. p. 236 Enters into League with the Moorish King of Granada. p. 237 Marries the Lady Ellenor divorced from her Husband. p. 241 Joyns in League with John of Gaunt against Castile. p. 242 Enters into League with the King of Castile against him of Aragon. p. 244 Underhand treats with the Dukes of Lancaster and York, a∣bout subduing Castile. p. 245 After the Peace he again submits to the Antipope. p. 249 He falls sick. p. 250 He dies. His Character, and Issue. p. 251 Fifteen Thousand Spaniards slain by Mummius. p. 30 Five persons appointed to govern after the Death of the King, and Cardinal Henry; the same to decide the Controversie concerning the succession. p. 352 They rule Portugal. p. 354 Flavius Gundemarus Reigns. p. 99 Flavius Suintila Reigns. He utterly expels the Romans. p. 100 Fleet of Castile worsted by the Portugueses. p. 211 Fleet of Castile ravages the Coast. p. 248 Fleet of French at Porto. p. 163 Fleet of English, French, and Flemmings, in the River of Lisbon. p. 164 Fleet sent against the Dutch. p. 377 Forces of Castile overthrown by those of Portugal. p. 146 Foreign Alliances concluded. p. 410 Fort S. George on the Coasts of Africk. p. 300 Francis Barreto prosecutes the War in Brazil. p. 465 His further Actions in Brazil. p. 470 He bolds the Dutch close Besieged in Brazil. p. 476 Turns his blockade at Arrecife into a formal Siege. p. 480 Francis de Lucena the Secretary put to Death upon account of a supposed Conspiracy. p. 419 Froila a Portuguese Count, rebels. His submission. p. 138 K. Fruela kills 60000 Moors. p 115
Fruela II. Usurps the Crown. p. 126 Fulvius overthrows the Spaniards. p. 29 Funeral Pomp of the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 232 Further Discoveries in Guinea. p. 307 G. GAlba governs the Province. p. 32 Galba Emperor. p. 76 Galicians overun the most part of Lusitania. p. 66 Galienus Emperor. p. 79 Garzia has for his part Galicia, and the North of Portugal. p. 124 Gargoris finds the use of Honey. p. 12 Gascons come into Portugal and assist the Christians. p. 136 General Council. p. 276 Gerion comes into Portugal. p. 5 He becomes King. Introduces Idolatry. p. 6 S. German Duke Besieges Olivenca. p. 492 Goa Besieged by the Indians. The Siege raised. p. 571 Gonzalo Hermigues his Actions. p. 169 Goths who they were. p. 82 They enter Spain. p. 85 Great and bloody Battle. p. 111 Dearths and Storms. p. 20 Famine. p. 177 Fleet from Lisbon for the Conquest of Ceuta. p. 271 Floods, Storms, and Sickness in Spain. p. 65 Preparations in Spain and Portugal. p. 422 Guimaraens betrayed to the New King. p. 262 H. HAmilcar subdues all Spain. p. 22 Hannibal settles in Spain. p. 23 Marches into Italy. p. 25 Henry the Count, marries the Bastard Daughter of King Alon∣so of Castile. p. 149 Opinions concerning him. p. 151 His Original of Burgundy. p. 153 His coming into Portugal. He gains the Affection of King Alonso, who marries his Aunt. He takes to Wife, Teresa the said King's Bastard Daughter, and has in Dower the City Porto, and its Territory. p. 154 Overthrows the Infidels, and takes Almanzor Prisoner. For his good Services, receives other Territories of King Alonso. p. 155 Another Overthrow given by him to the Moors. A Moor∣ish King restored by him. He performs other great Actions. p. 156 His Death, Character and Issue. p. 157 Henry K. of Castile in Portugal. p. 238
He invades Portugal. p. 242 Quarters in the Suburbs of Lisbon. p. 243 Henry Prince of Portugal marries Blanch Aunt, to the King of Castile. p. 220 He contracts with the Lady Constance, Daughter▪ to D. John Emanuel. p. 221 Henry the Cardinal Regent. p. 341 His Birth. He is declared Protector, and crowned King p. 349 His Death. His Eulogy. p. 353 Henry Son to the King of Congo, comes into Portugal. p. 322 Hercules governs Spain, and leaves the Crown to Hesperus p. 10 Hercules the Theban in Spain, verthrows Cacus. p. 12 Hesperus deposed, and Atlas set up in his pace. p. 10 Hostilius Mancinus overthrows 30000 Spaniards. p. 37 How things stood in Africk and India. p. 444 Hypocrisie of a Nun. p. 367 I. S. James the Apostle in Spain. p. 74 D. James de Lima Governor of the Province betwixt Duero and Minho. p. 453 Iberus II. King of Spain. p. 4 Jews conspire against the King, and are punished. p. 106 Fly out of Castile into Portugal. p. 304 Banished the Kingdom. p. 314 Ingratitude of certain Gentlemen. p. 350 Inhuman Murder. p. 140 Insolent Words of the Marquess de Cascais to the King. p. 561 Interregnum of an Hundred Years. p. 11 John, Bastard Son to K. Peter, aspires to the Crown. p. 252 Before assuming the Crown, he murders Count John Fer∣nandez Andyro. p. 253 He is declared Protector of the Kingdom. p. 254 The Castle of Lisbon taken by him. p. 255 His Contrivances to usurp the Crown. p. 256 He fails Sick. p. 272 He dyes, his Character, Wife and Issue. p. 273 His Arms, discoveries in his time. p. 274 His Funeral. p. 275 John II. proclaimed King, his Father arrives 4 days after. p. 296 His Birth. p. 299 He is again proclaimed King. p. 300 Stiles himself Lord of Guinea. p. 303 Is poysoned. His Death. p. 309 Is reputed a Saint, his Virtues. p. 310 More of his good Qualities. p. 311 His Issue, Discoveries during his Reign. p. 312 John the III. King, his Birth. p. 329 He is proclaimed King. p. 330 Marries Catherine Sister to the Emperour Ch. the V. p. 331
Sends Succors to the Emperour. p. 333 Ordinances made by him. p. 335 He dies. p. 338 Actions abroad during his Reign. p. 339 John the IV. proclaimed King in India. p. 403 He rewards those that suffered for the Conspiracy at Car∣thagena. p. 420 His last Sickness and Death. p. 489 His Wie and Issue. p. 490 John Prince of Portugal, privately marries Mary, Sister to Q. Elenor. p. 244 He murders her. p. 245 John Prince of Portugal, marries Joanna Daughter to Charles the V. He dies. His Princess delivered of a Son. p. 336 D. John of Austria with the Spanish Army, invades Portugal. Takes Aronches. p. 501 Takes Alconchel. p. 502 Burns and plunders the Country. p. 503 Takes Villabuim and Borba. Besieges Jurumenha. p. 504 Takes Jurumenha. p. 506 Enters Crato. p. 507 Comes again into Portugal with an Army of 21000 Men. p. 509 Besieges Evora. p. 510 Evora is delivered to him. p. 511 Marches out of Evora to give the Portugueses Bartle. p. 512 Is defeared. Attempts Elvas, and is repulsed. p. 515 Islands of Bayona in Galicia. p. 45 Jubelus III. King of Spain. p. 4 Julian the Count Favourite to King Roderick. p. 108 Is sent Ambassador into Africk. p. 109 Meditates Revenge. Brings the Moors into Spain. p. 110 K. KIngs of the Alans and Suevians. p. 83 King of Castile obstructs the Marriage of the Lady Constance. p. 222 King of Castile marries the Daughter of K. Ferdinand. p. 249 King of Castile invades Portugal. Is at variance with Queen Ellenor. p. 257 Kings of France and Portugal meet. p. 294 King of Spain's Favourite disgraced. p. 421 King bent upon publick Rejoycing for Peace. p. 270 Kingdom of the Suevians united under Remismundus. p▪ 91 L. LEovigildus the Goth wars upon his Son Herminigildus, on account of Religion. p. 96 He persecutes the Catholicks, but dies one himself. p. 97 P. Lewis dyes. p. 338 Lisbon besieged by Sea and Land. p. 258 The Siege raised. p. 260 Mutinies at the instigation of the Nobility. p. 554 Plundered by the Spaniards. p. 360 Most of it burnt. p. 243 Lisias made King. p. 12 Lominij three Sons of Gerion. p. 8 Lusitania governed by Lieutenants. p. 99
Lusitanians revolt, and are reduced. p. 44 Lusus ascends the Throne. p. 10 M. MAgellan discovers the streights of his Name. p. 325 Manner of lamenting the death of a King. p. 174 Many places in Portug. taken and destroyed by the Moors. p. 133 Recovered. p. 137 Marcus Aurelius Emperour. p. 79 Margaret of Savoy, Dutchess of Mantua, governs Portugal. p. 382 Mary Francis Elizabeth, Wife to King Alonso the VI. assists the Infante. p. 554 Motives of her aversion to the King. p. 549 Her undecent Behaviour towards the King. p. 557 Knowing the King would be deposed, she flies to a Mo∣nastery, p. 560 She presses to have Peter declared King, p. 563 Her Marriage with the King declared null, p. 564 Her Death, p. 571 A match concluded betwixt the Infante and D. of Savoy, p. 568 It is broke off. p. 569 Mauregatus the Bastard usurps the Crown. p. 116 Mauritanians ravage Spain. p. 79 Maximin Emperour. p. 79 Means proposed to reconcile different pretensions▪ p. 351 Meeting at Lisbon about K. Ferdinands Marriage. p. 241 Men famous for Learning. p. 93 Mezerbal subdues Portugal. p. 17 Michael Prince sworn Heir of Castile, Aragon & Portugal. p. 315 He dyes. p. 316 Military Action in the Province of Tralosmontes. p. 413 Monks of Claraval come into Portugal. p. 159 Monte Mayor taken and demolished. p. 145 Moors to the Number of 200000 Foot, and 40000 Horse lan∣ded in Spain. p. 111 They over-run all Spain. p. 112 Ravage the Country. p. 177 Vanquished at Elvas. p. 183 Moriscoes banished Spain. p. 372 Morocco King slain. p. 347 Moron surrendred. p. 494 Mountainous People descend into the Plain. p. 1 Murderers fly to Castile. p. 229 They are racked. p. 231 Mutiny at Lisbon for the loss of Evora. p. 512 On account of a supposed Miracle. p. 320 N. Nabuchodonosar in Spain. p. 15 Negotiation abroad. p. 488 At several Courts. p. 441 In Forreign Courts. p. 464 In France and Rome. p. 446 Nerva Emperor. p. 77 New Coin. p. 336 New Governors placed in the Frontiers. p. 401 New Queen gains Friends by her Generosity. p. 242
Noah's Flood. p. 1 His Off-spring why dispersed. p. 2. Normans invade Galicia, and are cut in pieces. p▪ 132 Notable Example of Loyalty▪ p. 193 Number of Infidels, and greatness of Booty. p. 227 O. OBservations on the Rise and Fall of Portugal. p. 354 Odemira, Count Governour to the young K. Alonso the VI. His manner of proceeding. p. 530 Of 18000 Men only 50 escaped▪ p. 348 Oliva taken by the Portuguese. p. 478 Only the Duke of Braganza could give the Spaniards jealousie. p. 382 Ordono the 1st. King of Castile rebuilds many Towns. He is overthrown by the Moors. p. 121 Ordono the II. K. of Castile succeeds Garcia. He twice over∣throws the Moors. p. 124 Being vanquished by the Infidels, recovers and spoils the Country. p. 125 Ordono the III. King of Castile disturbed by Rebels subdues them. p. 130 He takes Lisbon. p. 130 Ordono, sirnamed the Wicked, advanced to the Crown: p. 131 Orus Libicus, or Hercules comes into Spain, kills the Lominij, and makes his Son Hispalus King. p. 8 Osiris comes into Spain, kills Gerion, and gives the Crown to his three Sons. p. 6 He returns into Egypt. p▪ 7 Ossuna Duke builds a Fort not far from Almeida, p. 515 Attacks Castel-Rodrigo, and is repulsed. p. 519 Is overthrown by Peter Jaques de Magalhaens. p. 520 Other Conspirators punished. p. 302 Other military Actions. p. 412 Other War like exploits. p. 407 Otho Emperour. p. 76 Overtures of Peace rejected. p. 259 Out-laws surprize Evora. p. 167 P. PArticular Affairs of Portugal. p. 115 Peace after the Birth of Christ. p. 73 Concluded betwixt the Kings of Castile and Portugal. p. 212, 230, 243. Confirmed with mutual Alliances. p. 213 Concluded at the instance of the Pope. p. 240. Conclu∣ded betwixt the two Crowns. p. 297. Betwixt France and Spain. p. 500. With Spain. 564 Concluded with∣out the knowledge of the English. p. 249 Concluded. p. 266 Not observed. p. 269 At length established, p. 270 Ratified, p. 271▪ Pelayo, or Pelagius the first that opposed the Moors. p▪ 113 People of Braga subdue Porto. p. 68 Averse to the Queen. p. 281 Of Evora mutiny p. 283
Perpenna chosen General of the Lusitanians▪ p. 54 Vanquished by Pompey, and put to Death. p. 55 Persecution under Galienus. p. 79 Peter the Ist: King of Portugal his Birth: p. 230 Begins his revenge whilst Prince. p. 229 He punishes the Murderers of the Lady Agnes de Castro. p. 230. His Death, Justice, and Magnanimity. p. 234. Laws Esta∣blished by him. His Person, and Interment, p. 235. His Issue. p. 236 Peter King of Castile flying from his Rebellious Subjects, re∣fused protection in Portugal. p. 233 Peter the II. now King of Portugal, whilst Infante and Brother to K: Alonso, counterfeits a Religions Life to gain follow∣ers. 545 Grows discontented, and the King his Bro∣ther jealous. Is enraged against Count Castelmelhor. p. 547. Strange shew of Affection betwixt him and the Q. 548: His and the Q. party increases. He openly espouses her quarrel: p. 550 Resolves to proceed. p. 556 Heads the Rabble, p. 557 Heads the Multitude again. Sets upon the K. and extorts from him an instru∣ment of Resignation, 562 Is received as Regent, p. 563 Marries the Queen, p. 565 Upon the Death of his Brother succeeds in the Throne, d. 571 Marries the Princess of Newburg. p. 572 Peter, Bastard Brother to K. Alonso the first of Portug. p. 170 Peter the Infante made Regent, by a Cooper and a Taylor heads the Rabble. p. 282 Takes up Arms and is declared Rebel, 284 Comes to a Battle with the King. And is killed. p. 285 Philip Prince of Spain, marries Mary Princess of Portugal. p. 334 Philip the II. of Spain, and first of Portugal, armes to secure the Crown of Portugal, whilst they prepare to oppose him. p. 35 His Birth, 364 He enters Portugal. Grants an Amnesty, Holds a Parliament, 365 Grants Priviledges to Porta∣gal. His publick entry into Lisbon, p. 366 Holds ano∣ther Parliament, Returns to Castile, p. 367 He dyes, p: 370 His Description, Wife and Issue, p. 371 Philip the III. of Spain and II. of Portugal his irth. He comes into Portugal, His Reception, p. 372 He holds a Parlia∣ment, His stay and return to Madrid, p. 374 His death, Wife and Issue. p. 374 Philip the IV. of Spain, and III. of Portugal, his Birth. p. 375 His accession to the Crown. p. 376 Rewards the Portu∣guese, p. 380 His Death. p. 527 Pinto the D. Agent conspires with some of the Nobility, p. 380 Piso kills 5000 Lusitanians, p. 56 Plague. p▪ 228 At Lisbon, p: 277, 301. 353▪ In Portugal, p▪ 306 In Lisbon where the Queen dyes of it, p. 270
Pompey subdues many places, p. 55 Pope Alexander grants the Investiture of the Kingdom of Por∣tugal to Alonso under a Tribute, p▪ 171 Porto rebuilt, Its Armes, p. 84 Portugal, how divided by Augustus, p. 71 Governed by Commissioners, p. 370 Portuguese Fleet wastes the Island of Cadiz, p. 240 Portuguese Army destroyed by the Moors, and the King's Standard taken, p. 277 Portuguese Ambassadors Brother beheaded for a Murther in England, p. 475 Portuguese Army routed. p. 293 Portuguese General endeavours to draw away the Spanish Army from Olivenca, by giving a diversion. p. 492 Portug. Army lays siege to Fort S. Christoph: near Badajoz. p. 495 Portuguese Horse under Count Schombergh routed near Badajoz. p. 501 Portuguese Colony at Rio de la Plata in America, destroyed by the Spaniards. p. 567 Portug: Fleet all but one Galley taken by the Castilians. p. 246 Portuguese Ambassador at Rome. p. 409 Not being admitted, returns home. p. 422 Portuguese Army in Estremadura. p. 423 Portuguese Affairs at Rome. p. 434 Portuguese Fleet slips up the River to Lisbon. p. 259 Portuguese Nobility insult their King on account of his Favou∣rite. p. 146 Portugueses attempting Barcarota repulsed with loss. p. 491 Portugueses ravage the Frontiers of Estremadura. The same in the Province of Beira. They take Codissera. p. 431 They attempt Badajoz. p. 432 Preamble to the Conclusion. p. 529 Presents of the first fruits of India sent to the Pope. p. 323 Prime Ministers of Spain resolve to draw the Duke out of Portugal. p. 389 Princes Rupert and Maurice, fly to Lisbon from the English, and are protected. p. 457 They put to Sea with a Portuguese Squadron, and return without fighting. p. 459 Prince proceeds in his disobedience. p. 216 Prince marches off with the scattered Army. p. 293 Princess governs Spain. p. 337 Principal Conspirators seized and punished. p. 405 Priscilian the Heretick Condemned. p. 88 Proceedings ordered to run in the name of D. John of Portu∣gal. p. 397 Proceedings of several Ambassadors. p. 460 Prodigies seen in the Sky. p. 128, 223, 375, 345 Prodigious Birth. p. 91 Progress of the Carthaginians in Spain. p. 21
Of the War in the Province of Alentejo, p. 411 Of the Portuguese Arms in Brazil. p. 455 Prosecution of the War in Brasil. p. 442 Protector proclaimed King. p. 262 Q. QUeen Luisa prepares to invade Castile. p. 494 Her Am∣bition. p. 532 She sets up Peter the Inante against King Alonso. p. 537▪ The Councel combines with her. p. 536 She is forced to resign the Government. Pretends to retire, but stays at Court in hopes to wrest the Power from her Son, p. 537 She, the Infante, and their party hold Consultations against the K. She is at last forced to retire. p. 542 Her Death. p. 546 R. RAmiro I. King of Leon, his Actions. p. 119 Ramiro II. of Castile and Leon, destroys a great Army of Infidels. p. 128 Ramiro III. succeeds under the tuition of his Mother, and Aunt. p. 132 Rebels seize the Queen. p. 180 Recaredus succeeds. He becomes a Catholick. p. 97 He dies. p. 98 Remarks upon the number eight. p. 111 Upon some conceits of the Portuguese Authors. p. 152 Remismundus marries the Daughter of Theodoricus. p. 92 Ricciarius his Reign. p. 88 He is overthrown by Theodoricus, King of the Goths. His end. p. 89 Richila makes himself master of Lusitania and Andaluzia. p. 88 Robert Labril and Richard Cambil Englishmen, with a Fleet of 63 Ships, arrive at Lisbon, and assist the Portugueses a∣gainst the Moors. p. 177 Roderick last King of the Goths. p. 108 He ravishes Florinda the Daughter of Count Julian. p. 109 His Army of 120000 Foot and 10000 Horse. p. 111 Roderick de Alencastre defeats a Party of Moors at Tangier. p. 477 Roderick de Bivar commonly called Cid, his Birth. p. 139 Roderick de Castro in the Province of Beira. p. 454 Romans come into Spain. p. 25 Defeated by the Spani∣ards. p. 27 Twice defeated. p. 28 Romantick Story of King Ramiro. p. 129 Rout of the Christians. p. 347 S. SAguntum destroyed. p. 24 St. Vincent's Body translated to Lisbon. p. 171 Sancho I. of Castile an Usurper called the Fa. Returns and expels Ordono. p. 131 Sancho II. overthrows his Brother Garcia and takes him pri∣soner. p. 147
After subduing Portugal, he Conquers Leon and become sole monarch. p. 14 Sancho I. King of Portugal, succeeds his Father Alonso. p. 17 His Actions under his Father. p. 174 He repairs an builds many Towns. p. 175 Takes Silves in Algarve with the help of a Foreign Fleet. Subdues Algarve, and adds that Title to Portugal. p. 176 His Death and Issue. p. 179 His Arms. p. 180 Sancho II. King of Portugal ascends the Throne. p. 185 He entirely defeats the Moors at Elv. p. 186▪ His Sub∣jects ripe for Rebellion, tho' he is blameless. They cavil at all his Actions. p. 188 He is betrayed by all his mini∣sters. p. 189 His Brother Alonso made Vicar of the Kingdom by the Rebels. He flies to Castile. His Death. p. 190 His person described. p. 191 Sappho the Carthaginian gathers Gold in Spain. p. 1 Schism in the Church. p. 247 Sebastian King of Portugal his Birth. p. 340 His accession to the Crown. Odd Actions of his. p. 341 He prepares for an expedition into Africk. p. 342 Passes over into Africk. Defeats the Moors, and returns to Lisbon. p. 343 Has an interview with the King of Spain▪ makes preparations for a second Voyage into Africk. p. 344 Not to be moved from his resolution. p. 345 He and the Nobility embark in a Fleet of 1000 Sail, with 18000 Land∣men, they land at Arzila. p. 346 His Character. p. 348 Sertorius his origin. p. 45 He comes into Lusitania, his practices, his Warlike ex∣ploits. p. 46 He is worsted by Pompey and Metellus. p. 46 Routed by Metellus. p. 50 The Romans sustain great los∣ses by him. p. 51 Is again overthrown by Metellus and Pompey. p. 52 Recovers, and worsts the Romans. p. 53 Is murdered. p. 54 Several people plant new Colonies. p. 17 Great Battles. p. 19 Towns founded. p. 20 Pretenden to the Crown. p. 350 Military expeditions. p. 239, 406 Persons suffer martyrdom in Japan. p. 421 Enterprizes on the Frontiers of Alentejo. p. 438 Synods. p. 95 Sextus Pompeyus appears again and makes great commotions. p. 6 Sham Conspiracy. p. 425 Sicanus succeeds in the Throne. p. 10 Sicceleus resigns. p. 10 Siculus the next King. p. 11 Sidonians in Spain. p. 14 Sins of our Saviour's Birth in Spain. p. 72 Silves again recovered. p. 187 Single Combat. p. 221 Sisbutus chosen King. p. 99
Sisenandus succeeds in the Throne. p. 100 Small incursions made by the Spaniards. p. 485 Small incursions in Beira. p. 484 of Egypt threatens Hierusalem. p. 319 Some persons apprehended upon a false information of their corresponding with Spain. p. 479 Spain divided by the Romans. p. 26 Spain and Portugal divide the World betwixt them. p. 308 Spaniards return and rout the Consul. p. 29 They try the Governor of Tangier without success. p. 417 They carry off a great Booty. p. 479 They besieg Olivenza without success. p. 445 Overthrown. p. 11 Spanish Army advances to relieve Badajoz. p. 497 Spanish and Portuguese Fleets arrive at Brazil. p. 379 Spanish Forces defeated. p. 424 Spanish Army on the Frontiers of Portugal. p. 427 Storms. p. 239 Strange Action of a jealous Woman. p. 197 Strange tryal of n innocent Bishop. p. 135 Stratagem of the Christians against the Moors. p. 141 Success of the Portuguese against the Dutch in Brazil. p. 447 Suevians, Vandals, Alans, Burgundians, and Selingi. p. 82 Suevians incorporate with the ancient Lusitanians. p. 86 Suevians, Alans, and Selingi, joyn in League against the Ro∣mans. p. 87 Suppression of the Knights Templers. p. 214 Synod at Toledo. p. 98 T. TAgus V. King of Spain. p. 5 Taking of Santarem. p. 164 Talent used in Portugal. p. 178 Tangier and India. p. 456, 461, 465 Tantalus commands the Lusitanians. p. 41 Tercera Islands for Antony the Bastard. p. 361 They are reduced. p. 362 Theodoricus having Conquered Spain, puts it under Governors. p. 90 Theodosius Prince of Portugal, made Captain-General of all the Forces in the Kingdom. p. 466 He dies. p. 475 Three Brothers fall at variance. p. 45 Three Spanish Galeons secured in the River of Lisbon. p. 39 Tiberius succeeds Augustus in the Empire. p. 74 Titus and Domitian. p. 76 Total Eclipse. p. 177 Trajan Emperor. p. 77 He reduces the Lusitanians revolting. p. 78 Truce for a year. p. 225 Truce not duly observed. p. 267 Tryal of Ordeal in use. p. 119
Tubal Lands in Portugal. p. 3 He is first King of Spa. p. Tlga succeeds. p. Tumults against the Queen. p. Two great losses to Portugal. p. 380 Two Kings set up in Lusitania. p. 90 Two Kings meet in friendly manner. p. 244 Two Synods held by Recesuindus. p. 101 V. VAlencia de Alcantara taken by the Portuguese Gener. p. 518 Vasco de Gama sent to discover India. p. 314 Very small matter of martial exploits in the year 1655. p. 483 Vespasian Emperor. p. 76 Vice Queen and others seized. p. 396 Villaflor Count and Portuguese General marches to relieve E∣vora. p. 511 Recovers Evora. p. 155 Viriatus his Original. p. 33 He is worsted by Metellus. p. 34 Routs Vetilius, defeats Plancius, and overthrows Cl. Vnima∣us. p. 35 Worsts Nigidius. p. 36 Is obliged to re∣tire by Fabius Emilianus. p. 37 Rotus opilius and is himself put to flight by Pompey. p. 38 He again de∣feats the Romans, makes Peace with them. The Peace bro∣ken. p. 39 He is killed by Treachery. His Funeral Pomp. p. 40 Viscount de Villa Pouca burns two Towns in Galicia. p. 463 Viso Duke conspires against the King's Life. Is stabbed by the King himself. p. 302 Vitellius Emperor. p. 67 Ʋlysses in Portugal. p. 13. W. WAmba his strange advancement to the Crown. His Wars in France and Spain. p. 102 Rebels in France subdued by him. p. 103 War betwixt the people of Braga and Porto. p. 76 Betwixt Castile and Portugal. p. 210, 224 In the Pro∣vinces betwixt Duero and Minho, and Tarlos Montes. p. 428 In Brazil. p. 436. Betwixt the Romans and Suevians p. 87 Prosecuted in Brasil. p. 461 Betwixt the Christian Kings of Spain. p. 140▪ In India with the Dutch. p. 477 In India unsuccessful to Portugal. p. 482 Proceeds coldly on both sides. p. 474 Renewed with Castile. p. 296 Wetericus Usurps. p. 99 Witisa Son to Egica Reigns in Portugal. After his Fathers Death he is Monarch of all Spain. His cruelties. p. 107 Wonderful Dearth. p. 14 Y. YOrk Duke arrives at Lisbon with 3000 Men. His Son con∣tracted to the Princess Beatrix. p. 247 The End of the Table.
