G1879A 11941784 51284
A most Excellent and , and  ORATION, or DECLAMATION OF GREGORY NAZIANZEN'S Stigmatizing, and condemning the Emperor JULIAN FOR HIS Apostatising from the TRUTH, AND ontaining, by way of History, the Perse∣cution of the Christians during his reign, the Confutation of Pagan abominations, and the obscenity, as well as absurdity, both of the substance, and Ceremonies of their pretended Religion, with respect unto it's Doctrine, and the more, or lesse, consequential Ceremonies, ap∣proved of among the Primitive Christi∣ans. London, Printed by W. Godbid,  at the Blew-Anchor, at the lower walk of the New-Exchange, M. DC. LXII.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN THE DIVINE. His upbraiding the Emperour JULIAN for his Apostacy. HEAR this, all ye people, give ear unto me, every inhabitant of the earth; for with a strong loud Trum∣et, and as mounted on a high ower, looking on all sides, every way, I call, to assemble you toge∣her: Hearken, Countries, Na∣ons, and Languages, all sorts of Men and Ages, every one that ow is, or hereafter shall be: Yea,
(to make my Summons the more universal) listen, I say, all ye Pow∣ers of Heaven, and Angels alto∣gether, by whose irresistable means a great Tyrant was destroyed; a great one, and not such a one as Sihon King of the Amorites, or Ogge the King of Bashan, petty Potentates, and destructive to the Israelites onely, a small portion of the Universe, but the Apostate Dragon, the great Wit, the All-daring Assyrian, and common Ene∣my of the whole world; who not onely threatned ruine and destru∣ction to all the Earth, but also hatcht despiteful imaginations, and belched out most abominable blas∣phemies against the Almighty. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, Esa. 1. 2. O Earth, (for the times require I should use the loftiest terms of the most Seraphical Prophet, who spake the highest of all the rest) neither is it to small purpose, he calling and invoking them for wit∣nesses against a cast-down People of Israel that had sinned against
God, if I appeal unto the self-ame creatures, against a Dragon, a Tyrant, who had as highly trans∣ressed against the same God, to is own irrecoverable downfall, nd, as a just reward for that his tragious wickedness. Hear also, if thou hast any sense, In Orati∣ons and Speeches, the Anti∣ents here∣tofore made to set forth, sometimes the good∣ness of fa∣mous men by way of postrophe, they spake unto them as if they had en present, and had sense and apprehension of at they spake (whereof they were yet doubtful, appeareth here by our Author Gregory Nazian∣n) and not contented thus to commune with em, they intreated them, That if they had any  (as here) or knowledge of things in this rld to do so and so. This was a kind of doubtful mpellation and solliciting of them, if their state  such as that they could take notice of these , that then they would, &c. and no otherwise  Dr. Fied of the Church. lib. 3. cap. 20. ou Soul of that great Constance,  the Cristian Souls of Empe∣ours that were before him: Thou ul, more especially, of Constance, ho having attain'd the inheritance  Jesus Christ, hast advanced his orship upon earth, and so well ablished his Authority with the esent Age, that, of all the Em∣perors
that ever were, mad'st thy self the most venerable, and com∣mendable for the same. But, O dire misfortune! the like whereof was never heard, that thou couldst not foresee an unlucky mishap, unworthy altogether, and incompatible with the merits of thine other illustrious Acts, name∣ly, Thy making way for that Man's rise unto Empire and Rule amongst Christians, who, of all other, be∣came the greatest Enemy and Per∣secutour of the Christians. In which one Act, to ill purpose, thou mis-imployed'st thy clemency and courtesie, by unfortunately preser∣ving him to life, who was the death of so many, that far excelled him in all manner of vertue and piety, while they lived. Nevertheless, that the soul of thou, the aforesaid Constance, now receivest great solace, I verily as∣sure my self, as well in perceiving that his wickedness long since ex∣tinguished, and Christianity redu∣ced to its pristine integrity, as in
this my discourse, which, at pre∣sent, I offer to God, as a more ac∣ceptable sacrifice, purer, and bet∣ter, I suppose, than those of beasts, or other vain and detestable im∣molations of meats and drinks, the magnificence and greatness of which sacrifices declared more learly unto all the world their im∣iousness, and (as I may so term ) foolish wisdome in so doing. or the custome and practice of esh and blood, siding with dark∣ess, abandoned the light of truth, hich, while but glimmering upon rrupt natures, the fruit thereof  came dry, and in an instant withe∣d, together with the abomina∣e stock, that, for a time, sustain∣ them. The rooting out of hich unfortunate wretches, be∣g men, sometimes of greater rldly wealth than other worthi∣ss, hath rendred them equally  famous, as well for their pre∣pitate downfal, as prophane  worthiness, to all succeeding .
As for my self, who offer unto God a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and pay my vows to the most Ps. 50. 14. High, who is he that can set up a Theater of Thankfulness, equal in any sort to the least grace we have received? Or, what Voice thun∣der out thanksgiving in that man∣ner as is most fit, for such ineffable benefits, as I would have it? What Auditors, with me, will entertain the words I am now a framing? The retribution I am, at present, about to render unto the Divine Word through discourse in words, though not so agreeable perhaps to the efficacy of that gracious ap∣pellation In the be∣ginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, Joh. 1. 1. the Word, wherewith h is so pleased (among many other Titles assumed by him) to accep of? Again, the sting of infamy b reproach in words, as a deserve and due punishment to him, wh made it a crime unto Christians i the Greek Tongue to make use o words? In which regard, out of  pernicious envy, and hatred to¦wards us, he forbad all Christian
the use and exercise of speaking that, which ought to be common to all men. In which his so doing, s if to him alone the propriety herein wholly belonged, thinking thereby to have more reason then ll other, he shewed himself there∣by the most foolish and unreasona∣ of all men, and that for two rea∣ons; First, Because thereby he eclared himself to be of opinion, hat the Greek tongue was to be ade use of onely for the service f Religious matters, and not like∣ise as indifferently for all other urposes, according to the usual anner of uttering whatsoever no∣ons of the mind in that self-same ialect: Just as if under the name nd notion of Trading, he should orbid, at the same time, the use of ll manner of Trades practised mong that Nation. Secondly, Because he thought we were so dull, s not to perceive the things he id, to be done on set purpose, hereby greatly to deprive us of so onsequential a benefit: we mak∣ing
some account of the excellen∣cy of that language, and he fear∣ing thereby his impiety, might the more easily be convinced. As if arguments had their force in the elegancy onely, and appropriating of Greek words to the same pur∣pose, and not in the knowledge rather of simple and sincere truth. Besides, having a tongue, it's less possible to hinder us from setting forth the truth therewith, than from otherwise adorning the same with eloquence in that language. So that, being inhibited by Julian's Ordinance to learn Greek, he might hinder us onely to speak as the Athenians did, that is to say, more elegantly, perhaps, and pro∣perly: but never the more, for all that, retain, or stop the currant of truth it self. Whereby he made his weakness appear sufficiently, and yet never the more with-held himself from being reproved, and confuted, having over and above acknowledged, that in that he had nothing to doe to meddle, or to
trouble his head with such matters. The truth is, It was not for a man who had no great assurance, either in the truth of his own Re∣igion, or in his own ability of eaking well, to go about to hin∣er us from speaking; no more han if he should think himself the aliantest Champion in the world, nd thereupon forbid all gallant hen, either to fight, or to enter to the lists with him. No, so to o would be thought rather a sign f a fearful Coward, than valiant Captain, seeing the prise is won of hose that fight, and not of them at sit still; of those that have eir full strength allowed them, nd not of the maimed, or that are ated in any part of their vigour  try mastery with. If there∣ore thou beest in fault, for hin∣ering on thy part the means of ombating, and wilt not suffer  to fight, therein thou shew∣t thy self overcome, and thence all I carry the victory against ee without contending, because
thou permittest me not to fight. See then the fine doings of this wise Emperor, and Law-giver, who, that there might be nothing free, whatsoever, from his Tyran∣ny, hath published his own folly, by being, in the beginning of his Reign, desirous, and undertaking after to exercise that his Tyranny on words, and on the Art of eloquent speaking. It will be a most fitting thing for me notwithstanding, to render all possible thanks to Almighty God, with the words of my mouth, for recovering so to do through his providence to offer up unto him all kind of honorable sa∣crifice, not sparing any thing there∣in, either of goods, or other inhe∣ritance possessed by me; who, having run the hazzard both of the times, and of his Tyranny, have been preserved however, by the onely providence of God, for that purpose, whom, before all things, we are bound neverthe∣less, both with our words and
deeds, to glorifie after that man∣er. As out of an abundant Harvest, herefore, common to all partakers ith me of such his grace, I'l fi∣sh the intended discourse I have  say of Words, fearing, if I stretch  speech farther, I be longer han is requisite, and somewhat ex∣avagant beyond the due bounds  that subject, for which I came ther to dilate of. And now, me-thinks, I perceive y discourse well-nigh approach∣h, and advanceth it self, in a ge∣ral congratulation, to all that I hold at present. And therefore, call unto a spiritual Dance, and efreshment all you, who in fast∣g, weeping, and praying, pass ys and nights to obtain deli∣erance from oppressing evils, ounding a most assured remedy ereof on Hope, that never fail∣h. I call, in like manner, those, ho have suffered infinite pains, avels, and vexations, through eat and dverse torments of the
times, been made a spectacle to Men and Angels, (as the Apostle speaks) their bodies abased, but 1 Cor. 4. 9. their souls remaining invincible, doing all things through Christ that strengthneth, and comforteth them. And you, after the same sort, who, undervaluing (the object of mor∣tals malice) wordly honors, have taken in good part the spoiling of your temporary goods, have, for a time, been injuriously separated from your Husbands, Wives, Fa∣thers, Mothers, Children, or any other, in whatever degree of blood, affinity or friendship, allyed unto you, were willing to participate with your Saviour, in the fruit of his blood-shedding, and otherwise suffering for his Name-sake, being now able to say and sing with the Prophet unto God, Thou hast Ps. 66. 12. caused men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water, but thou broughtest us out into a place of safety. I call, on the other side also, to this famous Banquet, all those, who, acknowledging God
above all things, have hitherto re∣ined an assured faith, notwith∣anding the mysteries of Provi∣nce, which, oftentimes out  contrary accidents, draw un∣oked for events, and by vertue ereof, win us as evincingly to epentance, our reason being for∣erly carried away with perverse petuosity, which should have en held out, or renewed it self,  not being so envious at the fool∣sh, Ps. 73. 3. (as the Psalmist hath it) when  saw the prosperity of the wick∣; but rather conforming our lves to the will of God, and con∣uing constant to the end, by put∣ng little repose in what we saw resent before our eyes; which eing brought to pass nevertheless  we would have it, should con∣rm and further fortifie us in the uth. I call, also, you, who have our minds wholly fixed on the cafold, and great Theater of this orld. In doing whereof, I will  the words of Esdras, saying, ome hither, women, who come to
see the plays, and stop the eyes of your minds, keeping them from er∣rors and deceits, know, it's the same God that's exalted among the Na∣tions, exalted in all the earth: In all times, and things, he hath won∣derfully and extraordinarily made himself known, but never so mani∣festly never so evidently, as at this time. Moreover, would to God there were even in this good company, in this numerous Troop, which heretofore chanted with us, not a feigned and unsavoury Song, and whereunto we gave honorable way, have opinion they'l one day ren∣der themselves worthy of reproof. But I wonder wherefore they are so retired apart from us, and mar∣vel how, in so solemn a Rejoycing, they are not present with us, and that contrarily they have made a particular Dance, which falls not at all in any good cadence. They'l pardon me though I speak after this manner, and that zeal encites me to declare and manifest things as
they are. Notwithstanding I will eviate the stinging of my tongue,  the honor of the hope and pre∣rvation of my brethren, having w more respect to the antient endship, then to the neglect I . But yet because hereafter I all be more patient, I will be ore vehement at present in chid∣g and reproving. I exclude then  of this Assembly with grief and me trouble, a sort of men, la∣enting at that they understand , grieving at that they feel for there lies the pity of their il) however I reject it. These  they who have not sowed on  and firm ground, but their  fell upon stony places, where ey had not much earth; The me are they that hear the word, nd for a while with joy receive it,  have they not root in themselves, nd therefore dure but for a time; r when tribulation or persecution riseth because of the Word, by and  they are offended. I will banish from this company
yet further off those that are worse who departing from him that ha purchased, and conducted them t a place of greater safety, and mag¦nificence, have given no manner o resistance to the times, or to thos that cousen'd them into a miserabl and slavish captivity: but rather with obstinate alacrity, shewe themselves perverse, and of no re¦putation, being scandalized at th good word of God, and suffere themselves to be carried awa without any affliction, or tentatio at all assaulting them. Nay ra∣ther, (like inconsiderate wretches  they are) either to gain some littl temporary estate, or retain other evil gotten goods, have sold their e∣ternal salvation in exchange forsuch transitory trash, such riches (falsly so called) of short continuance. And now, seeing we have cut off from this noble Assembly, that which is superfluous, let us take courage, and purifying our bodies and souls as much as is possible for us, all agreeing in one spirit, with
one voice, sing the triumphant and torious Ditty that Israel rejoy∣ in, at the time when the  were swallowed up in the , (Meriam leading and be∣ning the Tune, as followeth) I  sing unto the Lord, for he hath Ex. 15. 1.  gloriously, the Horse  his Rider hath he thrown into  Sea. (I change that of the ) But where it hath pleased , and as he thought fit and just,  that doth, and disposeth all , even He that turneth the Amos 5. 8, 9.  into the morning (as the phet Amos hath it) and maketh  day dark with night:— strengthneth the spoiled a∣nst the strong:—He rules  governs, as in a circle, all this rld, that which agitated and tubled, and which is not: all our  that are subject to variation  change, and that are carried etimes on this manner, and etimes on that, for our sakes,  are immoveable, fix'd, and  firm in the Divine Provi∣dence,
however they seem to go  proceed contrarily. That whi is known to the world, (viz.  Divine Wisdom of his Father)  us is covered and hid: He hat put down the mighty from th Luk. 1. 52. seats, and exalted them of low de¦gree. Also, (which I have take from another Text of Scripture▪ The Arms of the wicked shall  broken, but the Lord upholdeth  righteous. In like manner fro another place, as my memo serves me, (having abundance  Texts wherewith to compose th Song, and which offer themselve to this Thanksgiving) It's he  raisethg up the wicked above the , Ps. 37. 17. then putteth him down agai that he appears no more: If we tak heed to turn away readily, and  the evil pass. Who is he among them th treats of Divine matters, that  sufficiently sing, and make relatio of these things? Who, that ca worthily represent the power o God, and make all his praises un∣derstood?
What voice or power of quence equal this miracle? Who  that divided the sea by his , that brake the head of the  in the waters, that brake  head of the Leviathan in pieces,  gave him to be meat to the  inhabiting the Wilderness?  Who hath shut up the sea with , when it brake forth, as if it  issued out of the womb? When  the cloud the garment  and thick darkness a  for it, and brake up for it my  place, and set bars and , and said, Hitherto shalt thou , and no further, and here shall  proud waves be stayed? Truly  hath appeased them, they not  been long time furious and  up. Who is it that hath  us the favour to go upon the  of Serpents and Scorpions,  laying not our selves in wait to  their heels, that, at the same , assailed us publickly, and  up their heads against us,  also he ordained we should
tread under our feet? Who is that hath done justice and judg¦ment when it was not looked for Who, that hath not for ever reac¦ed out the rod of sinners upon  righteous? (I say, upon the right¦ous, if righteous any may be said be, while remaining upon eart and no otherwise) or (to spe more humbly) upon those  knew God? For the truth is,  have not been afflicted as righteous for, as none simply are so, so, fo being so none are afflicted but fo their good, and to the end (lik brave Champions) they should pu shame and confusion upon their af∣flicters. But, as sinners rather, w had the punishment of sin through afflictions imposed upon us; after which, the Lord, in mercy, hath been pleased to shew his fatherly care and affection towards us, by his so having chastned us, that we might become wise, and (as far as he thought needful) to make us the more advised in our after return unto him. For, He hath not re∣buked
us in his anger, nor chastned  in his heavy displeasure; but  shewed his mercy in the one,  in the other, viz. in his chastise∣nt and pardon. Who is it that  done vengeance among the tions? chid and rebuked his ? The Lord strong and , the Lord mighty in battel.  a Voice, a Verse, that hath  to the great graces we now , which Isaiah uttered to  ages, and is very agreeable  this season, and sutable to the  of benefits, at present,  by us: Sing, O heavens, Isa. 49. 13. be joyful, O earth, and break  into singing, O mountains: God hath comforted his people, will have mercy upon his afflict∣▪ For all creatures, all  have knowledge, as I , of these things. For the Rom. 8. 20,21,22.  was made subject to  not willingly, but by reason of  who hath subjected the same . Because the creature it  also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into th glorious liberty of the children  God. For we know, that the wh creation groaneth and travelleth  pain together untill now. The Apo¦stle also enters further into the sam celebration, and rejoycing, to  God's children have the enjoyin of this contentment and delight Now then, Sing, O barren, (for Isa. 54. 1. cannot pass by the alledging  Scripture) thou that didst not bear break forth into singing, and  alond, thou that didst not travel wit child, for more are the children  the desolate, than the children of th married wife. Rejoyce also all you, who hav been wrapt up in this unpleasan and irksome winter of adversity For God hath had pity of his peo¦ple, and hath not forsaken his in¦heritance: He hath done wonder¦ful things, his antient determina∣tion and purpose is true, which  to satisfie those that fear him, tha hope in his mercy. For he hat broken the gates of brass, and
th bars of Iron in sunder. t's true, because of our  he hath humbled us; but  ave been comforted, and the  being broke, we have been  by the grace of God, which  called us, and which comforts  that are lowly of heart. See  I compose this Hymn with  Words, and Divine ▪ And truly, I know not how to  merry, and recreate my soul  any other, being transported  my self (as it were) with lowing content. So that I  no esteem of low and  things, fitting and alledging  many matters, which are  unto me by the holy . ell then, there have been  (in the first place) the  of God's providence in  Translation of Enoch, and  of Elias; in Noah that , and, with him, a  of all things, in a little  of wood, containing the
whole world, from the Deluge the Universe, to the intent  the Earth after might be f¦nished with more righteous In¦bitants. Again, in old Abraha that was called, and gratifi'd in latter days with an off-spring, make Faith of an other seed,  promised posterity: who willing presenting, according to Go command, his onely son, that  free-born, in sacrifice, in stead him found a Ram in a Bush, God's appointment, to offer  unto the Lord. The ruine  of the wicked Sodomites,  were swallowed up with fire  brimstone, was wonderful, wh at the same time, righteous  and his family were onely save And, which is yet more wonder the Pillar of Salt into which  wife, for looking back, was tu¦ed, remaining after, to represe unto all faithless people, what fearful thing it is, when on called of God, to return  unto the acting of what ever thi
expresly forbidden by him. We ead likewise of Joseph, who was old into Egypt, and being filled with the wisdom of God, was after made Governor next under Pha∣aoh of that whole Land, to make he better provision in a time of earth and scarcity, for his father acob, and all his houshold. Moses ad the honor to see God, received, nd gave the Law to the Israe∣tes, Of the 10. Com∣mande∣ments. and, being appointed by God  to do, was their Conductor out f Egypt to the Land of Promise. The ten Plagues of the Egyptians, nd the deliverance of the Israe∣ites, at the same time inhabiting in he midst of them, was very won∣erful. So was the Sea its turning ack with a Rod, and going toge∣her again upon a word spoken by Moses, at what time the Israe∣tes had passage through the same,  on dry ground, and the Egypti∣ns were drowned, and utterly ver-whelmed with the waters hereof to their final destruction. What can be spoken enough of
those two Canopies (as I may  speak) carried over the heads  the Israelites by God himself, in their passage unto the Land of Canaan through the wilderness the Pillar of the Clowd which l them by day, and the Pillar of Fire which gave them light by night? Of Manna, rained among them in their Camps, as they went, from the Lord out of hea¦ven, and Quails sent them from the same hand of Providence enough to glut six hundred thou¦sand persons in the Wilderness▪ Of the just quantity of that hea¦venly Manna measured out  them by God, whereof they ha never the more to store up, th gathered more at a time then wa commanded them, nor they  less, to suffice nature, that gather¦ed not so much? Of Waters some drawn out of a stony Rock others, of bitter made sweet? Of Amaleck's being fought against b Prayers, in a mystical and hidde manner? The Sun its standi
still, and the Moon staying her ourse? Jordan divided, and the Walls of Jericho falling upon the ound of Trumpets made of Rams orns, after compass'd about seven ays? The Earth, and the Fleece  Wool, interchangeably wet nd dry? Strength in Samson's long air, equal in power to a whole rmy? A little company that ap'd water carrying away the ictory, and with as small a num∣er vanquishing, beyond their nemies expectation, many thou∣nds of their adversaries? I need ot, I perswade my self, recite so any wonders as followed upon he Incamation, and happy com∣ming of Jesus Christ into the orld by birth, or that which the oly Apostles after did in his ame. Many Books and Histo∣es there are, that plentifully bear itness of those matters. But of  which is come to pass in these mes, I shall again further make  manifest unto you. Hearken then, and I will re∣late
the same to all you that fear God, to the intent that the ge∣neration that is next to come, and the succession of generations after that, may know the wonder∣ful power of God. In which regard, because its not so easie a matter to declare these things, without re∣presenting the greatness and qua∣lity of the peril wherein we were formerly plunged, and that cannot be done without discoursing of the evil complexion of his nature, and of what principles and seed of ma∣lice he came, who was the Au∣thor thereof, to such outrages (ha∣ving by little and little encreased his impiety, even as poison that comes from cruel Beasts, and ve∣nomous Serpents) referring the larger and more ample discourse of those acts, to those that have a purpose to compose Tragical Books and Histories, (for having not the leisure to dilate much of things too far from our present subject) I shall, in reciting part among many others, leave something
printed and engraven on your me∣mory, as on a pillar, to be com∣municated to them that shall come after us, and betake me to his more principal and apparent actions. He then (viz. Julian) having been first preserved by great Constance, succeeding in the Em∣pire of his father, when the Troops were armed against their Chiefs, making some stirs, and he Imperial House governed by ew Captains: Then, I say, eing saved with his brother by ncredible and extraordinary means, e gave not thanks either to God or his preservation, or to the Emperor, by whose means he was preserved; but persisting un∣grateful both to the one and to the ther, shewed himself an Apo∣tate to God, and rebellious to Constance his Foster-father. Now you must know, there was  Palace wherein these two bro∣hers, who alone remained of the lood of the Emperors, were, by he commandment of that most
gracious Prince, brought up, and there served according to the fa∣shion of Emperors. That he (viz. Constance) did, to justifie him∣self in part, that the disasters, happening in the beginning of his Reign, came not from him. Then▪ to shew the freedom and mag∣nanimity of his courage, in calling them to the Association with him in the Empire. Finally, for the better, and more firmly establish∣ing of his estate. In which, not∣withstanding, there fell out more goodness than prudence, with re∣spect unto himself. They then, being at rest and tran∣quillity from all business, becaus they had not yet the Imperial dig∣nity, but by destination, and i hope, their age not permitting tha they should be employed i places of command; received by the care of the Emperor, who wa their Uncle, perfect instruction i all sorts of Sciences. Certainly they gave themselves the more to Philosophy, not onely
that which treats of Reasons and iscourses, but also Moral, and which concerns Piety, frequent∣g and conversing with persons ccomplish'd, and who made their ertues appear in their honest and olish'd actions: so that they made hemselves to be enrolled in the rder of Church-men, so far, hat they read the Gospel to the eople, not thinking it any de∣aing, or disparaging themselves n point of honor, so to do: but n the contrary, supposing there could not be in a Prince or Po∣tentate a more excellent orna∣ment, than to be actively em∣ployed in their own persons about Offices touching Religion. So that n them a great affection to Moral Philosophy, and Christian Do∣ctrine, appeared, building for the Saints and Martyrs magnificent Tombs, giving great gifts to Churches, and being conversant about such like Acts, which were evident tokens, and shined in both of them, for a time, as
lively Characters of Christian Phi∣losophy, and the fear of God. One of them indeed was trul and vertuously inclined to piety for, though of a stirring and trou∣blesome nature, yet, for matte of Faith, he was constant and firm▪ But the other dissembling, an gaining time, hid under the ap∣pearance or shew of simplicity▪ an evil intention of mind, (a one may guess at the matter.) To which purpose I cannot conceal  Miracle that then hapned, a goo one, and such as may serve for in∣struction to many, that are not so sincere as they should be in the truth of Religion, of which openly they seem to make much professi∣on. These two brothers being employed in beautifying the Mo∣numents of Martyrs, and a jea∣lousie between them who should bestow most magnificence and li∣berality in building a Chappel they set up with great costs and charges; as they did not proceed with the like design, so the Masons wok
thereabout did not go on with the  success of dispatch to the one rty, as to the other: for where∣ what the eldest set workmen out, proceeded on to some tol∣able perfection, God being eas'd to accept the same, as metimes he did the sacrifice of , that, as an offering of the rst-born, with a pure and sincere art, was presented unto him. he other's work, viz. of the ungest, (see, alack, the Lord's ghting of the wicked in things nder'd by them unto his ser∣ce, who by small discovereth eater matters) his work, I say,  the sacrifice of Cain, was ab∣minated by the Martyrs. The artyrs indeed he made to smile at hat he did, but the ground, ne∣rtheless, sunk under that part  the Fabrick which was built by . Which, so soon as perceived  him, made him bestir himself  taking pains to erect the same ain out of hand; but, after all  labour and pains-taking, it dis∣dained,
for all that, to receiv foundation from a person so d¦famed, so blasted in his reput¦tion; as if thereby proclaiming  the world the after-ruine whic necessarily should befall it for  own unworthiness; or, as if in  hapning, it would honor the Ma¦tyrs, by the neglect and litt esteem it seem'd to make of  detestable a person. Which ce¦tainly was an undoubted presa of his folly and arrogance, as  of the contempt he should  afterwards towards holy Ma¦tyrs, together with many othe outrages purposed by him to  put in practise against the Church of the Christians, and other th like places destinated by the¦unto sacred uses. With respe whereunto the Almighty, aft this sort, (though for the prese it was not known apparently  any, yet) at a distance seemed  persecute, as it were, the Persec¦tor, and well nigh declared the re¦ward and recompence of those  impious doings.
O the subtle nature of corrupt ypocrisie to do evil! which, not∣ithstanding, could not avoid the ain that was set to catch him, nd into which he fell afterwards! O how admirable is the Lord, in manifesting what was to happen, y cutting down wickedness, and aking further declaration of his acious providences; a Miracle uly Paradoxal, yet true. O the eat fore-sight and heroick mind f the Martyrs! that for the pre∣nt, would not receive honor rom him, who, for the future, hould disparage them, that re∣used Monuments and Gifts from im, who should make many a rave Champions faith, against is will, illustrious, and envy hem, at the same time, in their ombats and victories, for so fight∣ng! To say truth, they would not, y any means, permit themselves lone should receive scandal, and e injuriously dealt withal; viz. That their Monuments should be uilt by so wicked hands, and
other Churches served with more holy, neither give occasion after to the Author thereof thereby to boast in such his profaneness,  setting up with the one hand  some, and pulling down with the other to the rest, certain Cha∣pels dedicated to holy Martyrs, some of them reproached, and other in outward shew reveren∣ced and respected by him; vail∣ing, under a counterfeit appea∣rance, ever, the true neglect and contempt he usually made of all things. Wherein, nevertheless,  found no great matter to glory of, though never so well advised in deceiving men, God Almighty, at the same time, being undecei∣ved, who understandeth all things, and confoundeth, in their ow subtlety, the most crafty, though never so cunningly masking them∣selves under the colour of what ever appearances otherwise. For, although the Lord with-held not, for a seson, this indignity done to the Martyrs, neither the forecast
and hidden malice wherewith the  was put in practice, nor stop∣d the current of such wicked in∣ence from falling upon them,  causes ever just, and best own unto himself, according to his inscrutable wisdome,  secret disposal of all things, even as 'twas his will to have  iniquity of the Amorites come its full, before their destruction) et requisite it was nevertheless the story, that this malignant ture should be detested of all , and the honour done by him the Martyrs, as unworthy of , be utterly rejected. A thing, heeded, which may serve well  the edification of many, there∣ to discern the equity and justice God in his all-wise acceptance all things, in what manner so  offered, and presented unto . For it is he that saith to Israel hen they had sinned: Bring no ore vain oblations, Incense is an Isa. 1. 13. bomination unto me, the New Moons, and the Sabbaths, the cal∣ling
of Assemblies I cannot  with; it is iniquity, even the s¦lemn meeting. Neither doth  that is sincere and down-right to∣wards God, need any thing depe¦ding upon men to take delight i that's unworthily presented unt him, the Lord no less abhorri him that killeth an Oxe, then th slayeth a Man; that sacrificeth  Lamb, then that cutteth off a Dog neck: casting out of his Temp the hire of a whore, receiving  holding suitable to his acceptan the sacrifice that is presented un him with pure and innocent hands with a mind lifted up to heave and clean from taking pleasure  whatsoever sin committed by hi No marvail then, if he refused th honour that Julian after offered  to him, seeing wickedly, and from  malignant heart, he presented th same unto God; who regards  as man, neither casteth he his  upon the outward appearance, b penetrateth even into the bottom of the heart and thoughts, whenc
virtue and vice fetch their appro∣l, and receive either recom∣ence of reward, or punishment ccordingly, from the Almighty. hus fared it with Julian in this atter. If any difficulty of be∣ef therein remains, so that the uth thereof may be called into estion, there are witnesses yet ving to be produced that saw the me, who related, and represented  miracle unto us, and who have  purpose also to communicate a ore ample and full description ereof unto posterity. Well then, after become men, ey should have entred into the recepts of Philosophy (would to God such their entrance had never een, or that they had attained nto the perfection thereof; which,  them that are well born, serves as  weapon of true virtue, to defend hem from the impostery of all anner of contrary inconveni∣nces, though, to the perverse and ase minded, it becomes sometimes  spur, to set them forward in their
untowardness, (as in Julian, wh to give the Devil his due, was we vers'd in the study of whatev profane literature.) It's true,  was a great Philosopher, and ye for all that, 'twas not possible  him to conceal his disease, to kee close in his mind the deceit of im¦piety that therein lurked. For,  fire in wood, though the flame ap¦pears not, is known by the smo and sparkles that ascend from  or, as water that runs in hollo places, in time of great wind having no way to expatiate it sel nor issue free, but is oftner troub¦led, and mingled with earth, an other filth, renders a sad noise fro within, being prest with the vio¦lence of the wind, and kept bad by the force of other accident meeting together with it: So thi man, though he concealed much o his profound wickedness by reaso of the time, and instruction of th Emperour, it not being for a whil either lawful, or safe to make known his irreligion openly, ye
discovered he nevertheless, some∣g then of the inwards of his ghts to men of more under∣ding and subtle in Paganisme,  in the true Religion, and Do of Jesus Christ: Also, in the  which he had with his Bro∣, wherein he maintained the eks (that is, the Gentiles) ing then befitted him, under Pre∣e of disputing to uphold the ker side: but it was, indeed, a ourse, or exercise meerly a∣st the true Religion, and which  much contented them who  the character of a more impi∣ Religion imprinted in their ts. ut so soon as the Emperour had ared his Brother Gallus King  he Romans, giving him, with  Government, a great part of  Land; and that to Julian also,  permitted full power, and , to keep company with the ctors and freely to hear the dis∣rse of the Gentiles: And also,  Asia was as a School to him
of the false Religion, whose In¦bitants, the most part of them,  conversant and much verst in Ast¦logy, and Prognostication; that  can fore-tell things to come,  likewise in Sorcery, and in Incha¦ments, (a Science ordinarily f¦lowing the other) there remain no thing but one, viz. that  and authority were joyned to i¦piety. Now, it was long befo that the great iniquity of some ¦quired this for him to our : as who say, the health,  good constitution of the Christi body being arrived to the  of its perfection; power, hono and plenty of all things brough change. For, the truth is, it harder matter to keep, then to ¦tain unto what is desired, an eas thing by care, and pains-taking, call back, and cause lost felicity return again, then to conserve after gotten: Seeing, when in p¦session of this world's goods  any great aboundance, we are  to wax proud, and A man's
the Wise man tells us) shall Pro. 29. 23.  him low: but honour shall  the humble in spirit. , being humbled after afflicted  our pride, (for after pride, hu∣lity often follows, as after hu∣lity, honour; God resisting the , and giving grace unto the ,) we are thereby the more nestly enforced to seek after  lost condition till we obtain  same: which, after found, we  not so heedful in preserving till  made more wise by having the  in the whole, or, at least in  taken away from us. In this  (as it should seem) it befel  Christians at that time, God,  weigheth all things equally, asureth all things justly, being eas'd to oppose, after this man∣r, one contrary to, or with an . Which, that holy man after od's own heart, David having  much experience of in his life∣me, puts usually in the number of  gracious mercies the Lord  done for him by abasing him,
and then restoring him, not bei unmindful, upon any occasion,  thankulness to acknowledge  good he thereby received fr him. To which purpose, what  he? Before I was afflicted, I  Psal. 119. 67. astray: but now have ▪I kept  word: Putting by this method ¦mility between Sin and Repe¦tance, as if it were engendred  the one, and likewise did engen the other. Which, if ye mar is most true; Sin, for the  part, being the Mother of Hu¦lity, and Humility of Repentan So we, after humble, have  lifted up, and whereas heretof being by little and little, thro the good conduct of God brou to such an estate, and measure  happiness, as we are now in  (as I may so say) at such his m¦cies, it seemed good unto God  cast us down. Among many other sad thin that then befell us Christians, 'tw none of the least, that the Kin¦dome, and Life of Caesar (viz.
Gallus) came to an end. How  fell out, or by what means, I  forbear to tell you, as being illing to offend either the  thereof, or him that suffered it, that respect I owe unto the Pie∣ of them both. Nevertheless,  approving of them in their knesses, but considering them hey were men, they could  of them be exempted from  faulty, and in that regard both enough to be reprehended, were not possible that the reasons  we shall use to accuse the , might be the justification of  other. This man then (Julian I mean)  the appointment of Constance,  presently heir, not of the  but of the Kingdome of his ther Gallus, and soon after was  also with him, who gave him  estate, being forced to pay the mmon tributeof all men, as over∣me, and carried away by death,  the loss, and destruction of all  survived him.
And now, what shall we touching this most divine, this  Christian Emperour? I care  for addressing my complaint  any but to thee, O thou  Soul, as if thou sawest, and he¦est me, while, at present, dire¦ing my speech unto thee!  know, that it can offend thee in  thing, who art now resident  God, who inheritests his  who art gone from us here  to exchange thy earthless  for a better, and more durabl heaven. Tell me, neverthele who was it that suggested  counsel unto thee of leaving  thy successour? who gave to  that advice, which comes so  short of that sublime subtlety;  great judgement, wherewith  wa'st indued; not onely above  the Princes of thine own  but above them all, in like  that ever were before thee? Th who hast purged our Horizon  barbarisme, and subdued Do¦stick Tyrants, the one by reas
other by force, but with such terity both, that the one did no , was no let, or hinderance  other: and whose Trophees eived by armes and battles,  fair, and great; but those  without effusion of blood,  yet more excellent, and ap∣red more glorious to all the . Thou, to whom from all  of the Universe Embassa∣, and Deputies were sent: , to whom all Nations yield∣ obedience, or, at least, were  the point of obeying, so that , who were not yet , carried themselves in that , as if already they had been rcome: Thou that wa'st led by  hand of God in all thy delibe∣ons and actions: Thou whose gment seemed to surmount all  force; and thy Force, on other side, to surmount all gement: but the glory, or fame  Piety, bore the bell away,  from the one, and the other.  then, in this onely act of
thine shewedst thou thy self , and hast been surprised?  what purpose, I beseech thee,  that easie propension of this  inhumane goodness? Which of  infernal Spirits was it that  the same into thy mind?  was it possible that thou shoul deliver, in an instant, to a  villain, to a common murdere▪  fair an inheritance, so  an ornament? (I mean the C¦stians under thy dominion, in  life time.) The Flock  through the out-spreading  of that bright Morning-star, good Sheepheard Jesus Christ shining upon them, is so  in all the world? The royal Pr¦hood of God multiplied,  spread abroad with so much  and travail here on earth. It may be (my Brethren) I  seem unto you to have shewed  self partial and malicious in  discourse, in that, among the  sons of my accusation, I do  readily adde what is true. But, if
observe what I have declared, u'l find by the same arguments  my complaint, I have suffici∣tly justified what I said, and ewise that the absolution is fix∣ to the accusation. For, when I oke, and used this term good∣ss, I thereby declared his inno∣nce. And now, who is he, among em who have known him but eanly, who knowes not that be∣use of his zeal to Religion, and fection to us-ward, wishing all od, and prosperity to the Chri∣ans, he made so great account  Julian? as also, that he made  so much reckoning of the ho∣ur of his race, or of the increase  the Empire, as of us? But, on  contrary, would have given all ings, the Empire, life, and all hereof any thing is dear, and ecious, for our assurance, and eservation? there having been ever man living, that desired a ing more to heart, then he the gmentation of Christianity, and
to see it attain to the height of glo¦ry, and power in his days. For certainly, neither the su¦duing of Nations, nor the goo Policy of his Empire, nor  abundance of his Wealth, nor  hieght of his Honour, nor the Co¦templation that, in name, and e¦fect, he was King of Kings,  any other things, in which  ground their felicity in this wor ever brought him so much conte as that we by his means, and he , prospered both with Go and Men, and thereby (as in a mi¦rour) saw the authority of  Church established indissolubly  ever: raising thereon his consid¦rations higher, and more royal then many others, in clearly di¦cerning that the Roman Estate ¦thered its greatness, and increas with that of the Christians. An in consideration (it seems) th untill the coming of Christ in  flesh, They attained not unto  highest point of rising into an ¦solute Empire of Monarchy,
Perfection of Government, which , and not before, could ever rought to pass, or accomplish∣: He remembred our cause, (as  reason he had to do so) with  much zeal, good will, and all rty affection. So that, if it pened at any time, that it was  somewhat harsh to us, it  not that he the less esteemed  or would do us a dispeasure, or tifie others to our prejudice:  his seeming severity tended  to reduce us to one and the Wor belief, and not otherwise to ide, and separate us by Schismes.  for all this, he was but little tchful (as we have formerly ) on his own guard through his plicity, as also, in his clemency  appeared a kind of weakness:  he that is without malice thinks  of malice, and therefore he  not of that which was to , by his not knowing what it  to dissemble. By such means as these impiety  in by little and little, two con∣trary
affections meeting togethe the one in a good people, the ¦ther in the wickedest and  Atheistical man of the who world: who fretting without ca against the Christians, had nothi to say against our doctrine:  having no considerable precepts  the Gentiles School, that could  maintained by reason, without e¦ample, sought by his impiety  render himself renowned and ¦mous, beginning, in a new ma¦ner, a war with him, who ma him Emperour. But when  knew he could not carry it  vertue, and lawful means, he  do it by the contrary, namely  the same affection, that he broug about his other mischeif and wic¦edness. Behold then the Apolo made to Christians in the  half of Constance: which  not but seem just and equitable  men of judgement. Howev there are some who finding them¦selves satisfied in this matter,
not yet be satisfied therewith, but cuse him of simplicity, and small re∣sight in imparting the Empire,  thereby putting the Authori∣, and Forces into his hands, who as his enemy, and whose Brother  had formerly put to death. Hereupon, it is necessary for us little to discourse upon this, though  be but to shew that this act of  was not wholly against reason,  humanity both, no, nor yet un∣ecoming altogether the grave ovidence, and good judgement  the Emperour. For, it would  a shame to us, having received  much honour from him, and owing him to be so accomplish∣d, and excellent in piety, not to eak further in his just defence:  especially, seeing he is dead,  hath now left us. In which gard we cannot justly be re∣oached for using flattery, having  liberty to speak freely, with∣ut any suspition, in proposing law∣l onely, and true grounded argu∣ents on his behalf.
To which purpose, who wou not have thought the honours co¦ferr'd upon him should have re¦dred him more mild, and peac¦able? as also, the confiden wherewith too assured of hi more ingenious, and just? Lik¦wise, in that the two Brothers ha by a royal judgement, and sen¦tence, the one received punish¦ment, the other advancemen there was no possibility of belie¦ving, that he, who had adorned J¦lian's youth with dignities and ho¦nours greater then could ever b hoped for by him, would ever pu¦nish the eldest without a just nd lawful cause. So that, for resolu¦tion of the thing in question so f it may be answered, the one  Constance his acts ought to be at¦tributed to the temerity of Gal who was punished, and the oth to the good nature of himself, wh gave those honours unto Julian Or, to say truth, Constance had no so much assurance in Julian's fait and oath, as in the power that wa
then remaining in his own hand. Some thinke, under the same elief Alexander the great gave orus, not his life onely (who ravely on the other side, fought or the Crown) but also the King∣ome of the Indies. Neither ould he make his magnanimity etter appear, then by such an act f his, who being Alexander, hought there went more of him  overcoming, then by armes; eeing 'twas in his own power (as  conceived) if the other, viz. orus, had shewed himself un∣rateful, and rebellious thereupon, o have overcome and utterly van∣quished him afresh. So his great ssurance, great Constance his con∣fidence, I mean, in his own strength, was the cause of his so liberally estowing those great honours, that ut of a magnanimous mind, and heroick spirit, he so profusely con∣ferred upon Julian. But what need I debate so much of this, seeing its easie for me, al∣though I let go this reason, to gain
my cause? For if he that truste another man, doth ill, how muc more he that is trusted, if he fa in such his trust? and if it b blameable, not possibly to fore▪see an evil inclination; in wh degree of blame and baseness sha we put that perverse nature, tha so foully deceived him, who so fairly, and ingeniously trusted there∣unto? But certainly it's a thing, where∣of we cannot soon beware, unles we be as malicious in our selves. Besides, let us do what we can, it's a hard matter to make a wicke man good. For reason would, that this man should have shewed himself faithful to Constance: an if there had been any sparke of ill-will towards him, to have utterly extinguished the same. But, on the contrary, in recompense of so many benefits, he conceived against him an evil affection, became  Malefactor towards him his Bene∣factor, making it his design to do evil unto that gracious Emperour,
who had no other design, then to do ood unto him. Behold, good people, the do∣trine that the Platonists, the hrysipsians and the famous Peripa∣ticks, the Stoicks, and other, who orme their pallats to speak so rettily, have taught him! Take otice of the Geometrical Pro∣ortion, the discourse of Justice, nd of those Patient Philosophers, that maintain, It's better to take, hen to do wrong. See also what rave Preceptors, what great Coun∣ellors of State, what grave Law-makers he took to him in the quar∣ours, and drew out of taverns; and of whom he was wont to say that [he approoved not their man∣ner of living, but rather admired their eloquence:] nor it neither, but, possibly, rather their impiety. These alone were the men, whom he thought good to advise with, and to ask counsel of, in whatever to be done, or, otherwise, left undone by him. And, are we not well advised
(think ye,) to admire this kind  people, who forme Idea's of Co¦mon-wealths in their discourse, th can never be reduced into Act who sooth up cruell Tyrants  their Oppression, with fair speechs and present to the gods a half pen with a grave look of the fore¦head? Of this sort, some believ there is no God at all; Others n Povidence, but that all thing come to us by hap-hazzard,  chance: Some, that we are go∣verned by the Stars, and Figures  fatal necessity; (I know not where they have it, nor from whom) Others, that all things tend to Vo∣luptuousness, and therein the quint∣essence of humane life consists; but, as for Virtue, they give it a fine name onely, and extend its relation no further then the limits of this life, positively putting it down for granted, that [the faults we commit in this life dyes with us, and no further account to be made for them after death.] The ablest of all their Wise men are
endued (it seems) with no bette nowledge, but being wrapt up in he muddy and obscure darkness of rrour, and ignorance, never lifted p the understanding to discern ver so little the beams of saving ruth, but rather troubling them∣elves with things here below, and that fall under the cognisance of the senses, never comprehended ny thing about the nature of De∣vils (as most reasonable it is that God, the Creator of them, should be) If there were any one among them, that had dived never so little further into the abstruse secrets of nature, being destitute, at the same time, of the grace of God, he rested upon that which to him seemed easier to understand, and brought the vulgar multitude to conforme themselves thereunto. Is it then any great wonder, that he, who was endued with such Pre∣cepts, and taught by such Masters, should prove a Traytor to him that trusted him? a Felon, and rebell to him that raised him up? If there
be yet any other question of de∣fending, by accusing him, He could not (I should think) be much troubled in mind for the death of his Brother, who was his Brother's enemy by reason of his Religion, and so much displeased to see Christianity flourish. No, but being transported with rage rather against true piety, he the sooner troubled the State, to establish and give liberty to his false, and foolish opinions: it being requisite, ac∣cording to their reasons, to annexe the Empire to Philosophy, and (as it fell out after) rather to complete, then to cause the evils of the Com∣mon-wealth to cease. Now the first Act of his rebel∣lion, and temerity was, to make himself be crowned, and to pro∣cure, or rather assume to himself the sublime title of Emperour; which, in times past, was wont to be obtained, not as a rape, or prey of fortune but by succession, or by the will of the Emperour, or else (as anciently practised) by Order
from the Senate. But he would  acknowledge, as author of his nour, him, who was the true rd of the Monarchy. Then ving forged in his mind a foolish cessity of taking up armes, which  was so rash, and un-advisedly ld to undertake, (See but what  contrived, and to what point he duced his oversight and folly, O  extreme fury of this man!)  went armed with great forces gainst his Prince, and part of the est, under the colour and covert  excusing himself for taking up∣ him the Crown. I say under  colour, &c. because, as yet he ssembled, and endeavoured to ver his disloyalty, and madness  a time, when indeed, his whole ope, and full intention was to tablish himself in the Empire, nd by his ingratitude render him∣lf notable to all the world. Wherein his hope (as it fell out fter) did not deceive him, was ot in vain. With respect where∣nto, I would not that they should
be ravish't with admiration,  mind not the incomprehensib height of God's Providence go¦verning all things, and ascribe litt or nothing to him in the all-wise di¦posing, and regulating of State who, whatever they imagine to th contrary, as sweetly, as secretly ordains whatever he will hav brought to pass, in its due seaso and the same for the better alway though silly men sometimes mis∣like thereof, and are not, per∣haps, satisfied in their understand∣ing wherefore he doth so. No this Divine Providence (you mu know) induced not this man  do evil: For, God is not the Au¦thor of evil, but of all goo things, sin proceeding never from him, but from the party alone tha makes choice thereof. As for this wicked Impe of Sa∣tan, (I mean Julian) he stayed no his restless motion, but readil running to those Companies thi were of his government, and unto a part of the Marches of the Bar∣barians,
whereof, rather by craft, hen by open war, he became Ma∣ter, approached the Imperial Court (as instructed so to do, say ome of his Party, by Prognosti∣ation, and the advertisement of Devils, who promis'd him an hap∣y adventure, and a change of hem that then governed the af∣airs:) or, according to the saying f those who know truth, he the ooner advanced, thereby to arrive, t a day prefixt, to effect horrible nd secret wickedness, as hasting to e at the murder, whereof himself was the author, covering the con∣piracy then by means of one of is Domesticks. So that, it was ot divining, but knowing certain∣y, and the act it self a work of wickedness, and not a benefit the Devils had granted him: who by hat which fell out in Persia, have ade the power they had well ap∣ear of luckily conducting his af∣airs. Let them be quiet then, who attribute to Devils his celeri∣y, or quick dispatchin that matter,
however, we cannot deny but th the foul act of his consulting with d¦vils was damnable. Nevertheles had not the disease of the Empe¦rour prevented the incursion of th Tyrant, and the secret war bee stronger then the disclosed army the Villain had soon felt, that  hasted to his ruine, and that, be¦fore he was chastised by the asto¦nishment he was put into by  Persians, he had carried the pu¦nishment of his deserts to the R¦man Territory, where he, befo that, had contrived his wicked con¦spiracy, which was likely enough because as then he discovered no himself, although enclosed with th army of the most valiant Emperor, that he might have no way of es∣caping: as it was easie to judge by that which happened afterwards, there being but little expectatio of cutting off the means of re∣treat to him that had already th Empire in his hand. But, as th Emperour marched vertuously a∣gainst perfidiousness and impiety
(Good God what a mischeif do I  make mention of!) he dyed  the middest of the way, repen∣g himself to God, and Men,  he had been so kind unto Julian, , as much as it was then  for him to do, shewed the af∣tion he bore to the true Religion. Years, at present, mixt with joy  down my cheeks, and, as the  and Floods, strive together, , in their meeting, mingle, and uble one an other, while I am covering what happened after.  the end and issue was pleasant  agreeable to us, as the begin∣ng had been sad and heavy, not ely in regard of the Christians,  their afflictions, which pro∣eded, either by the instinct of  evil Spirit through the will of od, who knows the cause there∣; or (it may be) from our ar∣gance, which had need of being strained, and purged: but also  the regret of that wicked soul,  of those, carried together with ▪ to perdition. There are some,
who bewail onely the last plagu and torments they endure here be¦low, as having no respect at al but to this present life, and,  their mind, regard not the futur nor believe any chastisement sh be imposed upon, or recompe done them for the things commi¦ted by them in this world, leadi the lives of beasts, and mindi nothing but the present time onely placing their soveraign good in h¦mane tranquillity, and, contrarily attributing misfortune, and infe¦licity to adversity, and to thing that happen crosse to their desires▪ But, as for my self, I deplore mo the torments they shall receive i the other world, and the which  surely, though secretly prepare for the wicked (to say nothing  that which is more grievous, viz. to be deprived, to be banished from the presence of God for ever∣more. Alas what sore punishmen will that be!) But how can I refrain bewail∣ing of this miserable man? how
otherwise chuse but more lament ose, who, of their own accord,  self-motion have retired them∣lves to his false worship, then ose that compelled thereunto by rsecution? And how can I hinder  lamenting yet more him, that rried others, then those who vo∣ntarily rendred themselves, and  part, or sided with the wicked  their profaneness? Contrarily, it's a thing neither rievous, nor irksome to Christians  suffer for the Name of Christ, ut a happy contentment, not one∣y in consideration of the heavenly fe, but also of the constancy and lory he hath made way for them to ttain unto here below among pe∣ils. Whereas to the followers of Ju∣ian, the evil that's already befallen hem is beginning of future torments that are threatned, and destined for them hereafter. So that, it had been much better, they had been longer punished here, then to be reserved to that high seat of justice
in heaven. But I will not in hereon further, that I may  the Law, that forbids rejoycing  the fall of an enemy, when he  cast down; and that rather, bei our selves in better condition,  should shew our compassion to¦wards him in his greatest nece¦sity. I will resume therefore the chi scope of my discourse, and spea of him from whom proceeded  unlimited a desire after vice,  immense a zeal to all manner  wickedness. How came it to pa that he ran so fast to mischief from whence was that his en∣mity to Jesus Christ? He entre and entituled himself his Disciple he had the knowledge, by confe∣rence, touching many subtle dis∣courses of truth, proposed by him∣self, and heard, from others, fin precepts of saving health, or eter∣nal salvation. And behold, no sooner came he to be Emperour, but he made open profession of Paganisme, as if he had been a∣shamed
of being formerly a Chri∣an, and for that reason would ischief the Christians, because mself had been a Christian in the ginning. But here was the ori∣nal of his audaciousness, (as they , who boast of their being of his  Counsel) having washed  ground with filthy and dete∣able blood, (see, into what foul rms I am constrained to fall!)  had a purpose to have establish∣d abominable ceremonies in op∣osition unto ours, being himself according to the Proverb) as the ow that wallows in the mire. He rofaned his hands thinking to wash nd purge them with that, that uched the sacrifice, which is done ithout effusion of blood, by means hereof we participate with God n his Passion, and in his Divine Nature. The Royal Palace was mployed in dissections and sacri∣fices, serving himself in his wicked reign with wicked Coun∣ellers. And now, while making mention
on of dissections, and of the foolis or rather damnable affection he bore to them, I know not, whethe I should put in writing, a common and triviall miracle, or give credi unto what is said of it. For, the truth is, my mind hangs, as in  ballance, not knowing which way to incline, there being some thing worthy to be beleived, others not▪ Neverthelesse, it being no new thing, but oftentimes happening that upon the change of grea estates, by means of such vai dissections of beasts, &c. som prodigious things have been pre∣signified (though, in this manner to fall out after, is that which seem worthy of admiration, both to me, and to all them, who are willing, and have a desire that holy thing should be declared, and handled holily) I shall take the boldnesse to make further relation of what's reported. Behold then what happened. One day as he sacrificed, the standers by saw in the entrails of the beast [a
crosse crowned in a circle] which ought astonishment, and troubled me of his own Party, as if there∣ had been signified that we ould carry away the victory: t the Prince of impiety being ore couragious, replyed that it pressed rather we should be shut , and enclosed. Behold then  miracle that I spoke of! If it  false, the wind will blow it ay, if true, it's Balaam Prophe∣ng; and Samuel coming again, d appearing unto the Witch of ndor, and Saul; the Devils con∣sing Christ, whether they will  no, and the Truth, to procure lief, proved by its enemies. It ay further be that this was done,  ordained, to reduce this man om his impiety. For God, who  prone to mercy, can, and doth ten use many extraordinary waies  lead men unto salvation, through  knowledge of the truth. See an other thing (reported of  any, and credible) one day, ing into a hideous, and almost
inaccessible cave (would to  from thence he had fallen i Hell, rather then gone on furth to such mischiefs) and having man in his company worthy of  Hells, who took himself to be great Master in this Science,  rather Sophistry (for among th they have a fashion to devine  conferring of future things  Devils in obscure places, wheth it be they love darknesse, beca they are darknesse it self, and exc¦lent Work-men in the darkn of sin, or, be it they avoid meeti with good people on the face of  earth, least such, after seen them, might take any power fro them in their devining) he  struck into a great fear. Now, astonishment had seised on  villanous man at his first entra into the Cave, before spoken  and increased more and more aft (For it's said such dealers with  Devil have strange and inward b¦ings, and representments) and  there appeared unto him Ph¦tasmes
of fire, with (I know not hat) other follies, and raving ymeras; Being surprized there∣ith (for he was a Novice in this ctrine) he had recourse to the rosse of Christ, and call'd to his Admit we grant this History to be true, and that Satans flight at the sign of the Cross made by Iulian, was inforced, might not God, for the confusi∣on of the Apostate and for the glory of the cross, which Iulian, out of spight,  hate of Christ despised, put that terrour into Satan,  the sign of the Crosse, that he was affrighted there∣ith; I think thees no Orthodox Christian, who will , but that God might do it for such an end: and so,  suppose, G. Nazianzen here, with respect to this mira∣e of the Crosse, may be understood.  him against whom he then re∣ted. (That which followes is ore notable.) The Crosse of hrist had the better of it: for the evils were overcome thereupon,  the frights vanished; But what  out afterwards? Mischief took eath again, he again grew hardy,  begins, as formerly to play his anks afresh; whereupon the me frights, in an instant, repre∣nt themselves. What then? He as fain to addresse himself, once ore to the Crosse of Christ; im∣ediately after the Devils are qui∣ed: whereat, the Novice being
in a great perplexity, the Master  the Sacrifice, that was near  perceiving the matter, pervert both the truth, and him, told  the Devils were not affraid of  Crosse of Christ, but had both  and Christ in abomination.  evill speech of that leud man c¦ried him away quite: for as he sai so he immediately perswaded hi and thereby drew this untowa Disciple of his into the gulfe  utter destruction. Wherein th was nothing strange, for a vicio nature will sooner follow the co¦sell of a wicked man, then retire  the advice of a good. What he  and what he said more in the Cave and what illusions he was cheat with before he came up, they  learned the same, and since instr¦cted others therein, know very we He came up I am sure, much tro¦bled in mind, making the sa appear more evidently in his ou¦ward gestures, and in the gastlyn of his looks, as also by those mean further manifested, who they we
whom he adored, continuing on  that time more especially  he was alwayes full of ) to commit all manner of kednesse. I say, from that time, ause then he shewed, and made  be more seen. Insomuch (as I eive) he gave it out to be taken  of, that he had not lost his  in descending, and having fel∣wship with Devils, calling the aviour, in that his being inspired, ball, and appropriating there∣th to himself fair, and honourable . These were his beginnings. But  that which he hatched was closed, and the mind that he had  persecute us appear'd, he thought  an other device worthy of a man rowly flush't, and perfect in ckednesse, or else, that had  the same of those, who had  exercised in such doctrine. For  it was a thing too bold, and gross,  declare War openly, and consti∣te himself Captain of Paganisme, hich had brought some difficulty
to that whereat he aimed: so w had made our selves more couragi∣ous, if they had not taken us b force, and had opposed to Tyrann the great affection which we ha to the true Religion: it being th disposition of generous courages t be bent against those, who woul carry things by force: Even  the Flame, thats excited by th wind increaseth so much the more as the wind is more vehement grounding his judgment therein, no onely by the reasons he had to comprehend it, but also by prece¦dent persecutions of the Christians which had brought to Christianity more glory, then diminution, in tha Christians had setled their minds i piety, and, as hot Iron in water, hardned them against perills. Bu he thought that making War wit subtlety, and adding force with perswasion, also mingling a mild manner of dealing with his Tyran∣nical power (which was nothing else, but to cover the fire with a¦bait,) he thought (I say) that this
manner of proceeding was ground∣d on reason, and would carry the atter. For, above all things, he vyed them, who were Champi∣ns of Martyrdome, and therefore rove, with all his might, to force, nd constrain people to return to aganisme, and proceeded so sub∣ely in it, that none perceived it: nd contrarily we endured punish∣ents without having the honour f Martyrdome. But, it was reat-simplicity in him, for all that,  to do. First, because he per∣waded himself, we knew not the ause why we were in trouble, nd that by this Sophistry, and Ca∣illation, he thought to cover the ruth, not seeing that the more he aboured to take away these honors, o much the more he made us ap∣ear greater, and fairer. Secondly, or that he perswaded himself, that what we did, was for the desire of ain-glory, and not for the zeal of truth. As on their part, for the ame cause, they were wont to make use of Empedocleans, of Ari∣steans,
of Empedotineans of T¦phonians, and a troop of such li wicked juglers. One of whi casting himself into the Gulphs  Sicily, to make men beleive  should become a God, and be ¦ken from them, to change this  for a better, was discovered  his chamlet Cloak, which the flam cast out, to be dead, and cons¦quently no God, but a lover on of vain glory, and an ignorant,  silly Asse. Others, secretly retiring in pl∣ces under ground, sick of the sam disease of vain-glory, and love  themselves, being discovered after got not so much renown by the secret retreats, as reproach for suc their impostures. But, as for Christians, its thei only joy, to suffer for Gods cause for the true Religion of Christ: i comparison whereof, we ma little account of pleasing men have no other aim, but to be accepted of the Almighty.
Besides which consideration, they at are truly wise, and lovers of eavenly, and divine matters,  to be joyned with Christ alone,  Christs sake, without any other ward: they that do good works ith intention of receiving recom∣ence for the same, being in the econd degree of vertuous people: nd they that abstain from evil do∣ng for fear of punishment, in the hird. Thus is it with us, that are rue beleiving Christians, and the proof that we are so minded indeed, s easie for them to find, that will undertake it. But, Iulian desirous to deprive us that are Christians of the chief honours, (for many judge by their own affections, the affections of others) above all, set upon our Fame and reputation. Wherein he pro∣ceeded not openly, as former per∣secutors, but Tyrannically invented alwayes something against us, that it might be to him a chief crime, to force the people of the habitable earth and to tyrannize over the
most perfect, and accomplish't do¦ctrine that ever was. But certainly, he made war wit us, and persecuted piety in th cowardliest, and basest manner tha might be, in regard, among th persecutions wherewith he astlicte us, he caused frauds, and decei to interveene in troubling us. For, whereas power branche it self into two considerations, th one consisting in perswasion, th the other in Force, and Violence▪ He made use of that part of his power which was the hardest and most inhumane, namely force; (reflecting for the most part unto Tyranny, through the unrulinesse of the Common People both in City and Country, whose audaci∣ousnesse is otherwise intollerable, being carried inconsiderately unto all attempts sometimes, without either wit, or discretion) This force he put in practice against the Chri∣stins without any expresse Edict, or Ordinance, for what he would have them do, but onely that he would
establish an unwritten law, by hich he forbad any one of them ould be sought after for his good ill, and affection to Religion. The ntlier part of his Power, which as perswasion, he reserved to him∣lf, although he kept not the same violately. For, as nature cannot ermit, that the Leopard should uit his spots, or, the Moore his lacknesse, or Fire its heat, or he Devil the hatred he bears to han (who from the beginning was  murderer) so it could not suffer hat this man should abandon his ruelty, wherewith he was fully ncensed against us. But (as they ) the Cameleon changeth her self iversly, and can take all colours, ut while I leave there this fabu∣ous Sophister, Proteus the Egyp∣tian Iulian did the same to the Christians, bearing towards them all affections of the soul, except mildnesse, his very mercies to them being cruell, and his perswasion mixt with much violence; covering, under the outside of equal dealing,
all manner of injustice, and oppre¦sion. Which the more easily  be guessed at, by those subtle me usually put in practice by him,  draw us to his lure: His perswasio to this purpose being alwaies bri but his violence, which follow after, if not yeilded unto in wh he would have, lasting long. In  word, his accustomed manner  dealing with us, was after the fashi¦on of Hunters seeking to catch thei game, viz. either with snares  of fair words to take us,  with other weapons of violence  make after us, untill reduced unde him as his prey. Having resolved in his mind, and made good this division of hi power into seeming mildnesse, an force, he betook himself to another stratagem (which only was resolved upon, though otherwise very incon∣stant, and extreamly variable in all his proposals) and t'was this, to begin the execution of his wicked∣nesse upon those of his own House, and Guard (a way practiced by all
Persecutours) there being no hope f invading those that are further ff, if those nearer hand be not rst looked after. Even as an Ar∣y cannot fight its enemies, if, at he same time, it be revolted gainst it's chief. For this reason, e changed all the Officers of the mperial house, putting some away, thers to death, neither, for that wanting in their several respects articularly to this great Emperour, ut because they then shewed it most of all, and at the highest. For which two considerations they ecame (it should seem) unprofita∣le and might not be suffered to serve him. He gained the Souldiery after∣wards, partly by himself, partly by means of their Commanders: and esteeming it easier to perswade, he won some by Offices and Digni∣ties, others, (who knew no other Law but the Will of their Prince) by their simplicity: and (to say more) he drew to him a great part of the Army, viz. as many as he
found weak, and inclinable, and who then, and before, were ser∣vants of the times. Having gain∣ed some, and in hope to gain o∣thers, he was not nevertheles Master of all, neither could he th persecuted us, procure to himself such a multitude by his ministry, but that yet there remained more then seven thousand, who bowed not 1 Kin. 19. 18. the knee to the Baal of his power, who worship't not the Image of his gold, and who, though bitten per∣haps Dn. 3. 18. with his Serpentine words, by looking after on the Brazen one, or on one that was a type of Christ Num. 21. 8. on the Crosse, received no hurt by him. Of which number there were not a few, that had honours and dignities, whom, a man would have judged in appearance, might have suffered themselves to be wrought upon, either by fear, or hope. There were also very many of low condition, of no great esteem, but for their number, un∣to whom having given the assault, he was by them repulsed: even as
a great, and thick wall by a thin and eak Engine. Moreover, he angred not him∣lf any more, because those that ot from him had courage, and onquered: for he was so much out f his senses, that those, whom he oped to overcome, seemed to him s all won already. Yea, he had he boldness to undertake against he great Standard, which being oftily displayed, with the Cros woven therein, conducted, and magnificently guided the Army, that had the Vertue (as the Latine word bears the name) of comfort∣ing, and lessening labours and tra∣wails, and which (as a man may say) is the King of Standards, as well of them adorned, and enobled with the Pictures of Emperours, enrich't with devises by Embro∣deries of diverse colours, as of those carried at the end of a Lance, and flying in the air, with faces of horrible Dragons, and jaws gaping, casting flaming lights, and embroi∣dered with ranks of Shels repre∣sented
to the life in cloath of Gold, & thereby affording both applause, and pleasures to the beholders. Af∣ter then that with content he had ordered his House, and thought he was on the top of all his businesse and out of whatever fear and dan∣ger, he attempted that which fol∣lowes. What was that? to suppresse the truth of God, by labouring, Tooth and Nayl, (as we say in the Proverb) utterly to subvert, and root out, not onely the Christians, but also Christianity it self, from off the earth. O foolish, wicked, and ill taught man in things out of thy reach, and of highest concernment! dared'st thou thus obstinately to undertake so silly, and unlikely an enterprise against that fair portion of Gods inheritance, and Manna of the habitable earth, which had penetrated throughout all extre∣mities by means of the profit, and facility of preaching of the Gospel, (that thou childishly calledst folly, and yet had subdued the wise, with∣stood Devils, and resisted time)
as being old, and new together, accordingly, as those of thy party, the Heathens have composed one of thy Gods? The first, viz. the Janu truth of the Old Testament, de∣clared but to a few, the last, viz. that of the New to very many: the former, as the draught or dis∣cription of a shadow, the latter as the accomplishment of the same mystery folded up, and reserved for a certain time onely, and to be revealed after. Again, who, and from whence art thou, that thou daredst to set upon so rich an inhe∣ritance of Christ? so rich, and great, I say, both, and which shall never perish, although there were never so many more furious, and more out-ragious then thou wast: but shall advance itself, and grow more and more famous for ever? In regard I beleive the Prophesies of old, and those things in like manner which are manifest at pre∣sent before our eyes, things that as God he hath created, and as man inherited, which the Law hath set
forth, but grace accomplished, the Prophets fore-told, the Apostles confirmed, and the Evangelists consummated, or made good and perfect from the beginning unto all ages. Hast thou been so bold as to approach near the holy Sacrifice of Jesus Christ with thy abominations? and to come with the blood of thy beasts in opposition to his divine blood, that hath washt and purged all the world? Diddest thou dare to make War against peace? to lift up thy loose hand against him that was fastned both for thee, and by thee upon the tree? hast thou set, or composed thy tast against Gall? wouldest thou set up a Trophee in defiance of the Crosse of Christ? erect against his Death a Destru∣ction? against his Resurrection a Rebellion? against the truest Mar∣tyr that ever was (if a Martyr we may call him) those that were no Martyrs?
Persecutor as Herod, Traytor  Judas, but that thou never shew∣d'st thy repentance in an halter as e did! Thou who hast crucified esus Christ in like manner as Pi∣ate! enemy of God's as the Iews! who, to thine own inevitable, hough future destruction, wast eserved, for a time, to be Author f so much mischeif! dost thou othing respect those that have een sacrificed for the name of Je∣us Christ? Hast thou no regard to hat great St. Iohn Baptist? to St. Pe∣er, St. Paul, St. Iames, St. Steven, nd a world of other valiant Cham∣ions, that both before, and since heir time, have miraculously main∣ained Gods truth in peril of their ives and goods? manfully fought gainst fire and sword? powerfully ubdued beasts and Tyrants by pre∣ent torments, and denounced condemnations, as if they had only borrowed their bodies, or, indeed, had no bodies sensible at all of what they suffered for Gods cause?
Now wherefore all this? That with their mouth, at last, they should renounce the true Religion? So belike or, otherwise, thou wouldst never have caused honour to be ordained for them, together with praises, and feasts. But so far off was this Devil Iulian from bringing this to passe, that the Christians in his reign, for the most part, not onely still perfisted in their former profession, and defence of Gods truth, but also by them De∣vils were cast out, Diseases cured, Apparitions and Prophesies fol∣lowed, their humane bodies upon touching, or repairing unto, had vertue and power given them a well as their sanctified souls, to work miraculous effects: yea fur∣ther, drops onely of their blood, or, the like little remains of their Martyrdome, had the same efficacy and power, &c. What sayest thou▪ wilt thou still slight, and not yet have a reverent esteem of such like persons? Thou, who admirest the burning of Hercules, caused upon
a disaster of having offended wo∣men? and the dismembring of Pelops, either for the love of stran∣gers, or Gods? with respect where∣unto the Pelopides rendred them∣selves noble and remarkable both by the shoulders, and by the Ivory: who admirest the gelding of the Phrygian Preists, that receive their shame with the sweetnesse of musi∣cal Instruments, wherewith appeas∣ed after? the torments and cruelties used in the mysteries of Mythra, The Persi∣ans wor∣shiped the Sun under the name of Mythra, by offring up men as a sacrifice unto it. and his burnings, as well just, as mystical? That murdering of Stran∣gers kil'd by Bull's The Sacrifice of that Kings Daughter, because of the City of Troy? and the blood of Meniceus which was shed for the Thebans? then that of the Daugh∣ters of Scedasus at Euctres? thou that makest so great account of those young Laconicks, who whipt one another till the blood follow∣ed, and besprinkled the Altar for the delight of that chast Goddesse, and Virgin? who makest so great esteem of the Hemlocke of Socra∣tes?
of the Thigh of Epictetes? of the Belly of Anaxarchus? whose patience was more by necessity then of good will: who commend∣est also the precipices of Cleombro∣tus, moved to cast himself from thence by the reading of the dis∣course of the Soul? the dispute of Pythagoras touching his Beanes? the content of death by Theanes? or of I know not what other of his School, and Sect? Neverthelesse, thou most wise and generous, if thou wilt not ad∣mire the things I have said came to passe heretofore because of our Religion: at least contemplate on that which is present, and consider the patience of our Scipioes, and Epamnonda's: seeing thou marchest with thy Army, and causest thy self be served with meats common, and not delicate to eat: that appro∣vest very much of those Emperors, who make War, and conduct their Armies themselves: that savourest of I know what gene∣rosity, and discretion in honouring
the virtue of thine enemies, and makest more esteem of the valour f thine Adversaries, then of the owardlinesse, and idlenesse of whosoever of thine own party: eest thou not many among us, aving in their possession neither ouses nor goods, stript likewise f their flesh and blood, and yet hrough such their sufferings ap∣proaching near unto God? who ye on the bare earth, their feet as Homer speaks of a certain Devil that desired to honour him) all irty! who are humble, and yet levated above all here below? who are on earth here with men, nd yet, at the same time, in hea∣ven above with God? who are bound, and yet free? forced, and yet invincible? who possesse no∣thing in the world, and yet injoy all things that are in the world? who consist of two sorts of lives, the one which they make no reckoning of, the other, whereof they esteem very much? who dye to live? who through the dissolution of body and
soul, are re-united unto God? who live exempt from all inordi∣nate affections, and yet filled with the holy and true love of God? to whom appertains the fountain of light, whose beams already pene∣trate their souls: who are spiritually nourished, as it were, with ange∣licall singing of Psalms? and kept turns, whole nights, together in praising God? who have thei minds already in heaven, by a di∣vine rapture, before they dye? to whom appertains cleannesse and purity? who know its all one to depart from this world, and to be with God? to whom belongs rocks, and also paradise? to be cast down upon the earth and yet to be set upon thrones in heaven? to be naked in their bodies, and yet cloathed with incorruption in their souls? to be here in deserts, but yet in heaven with good com∣pany? who neglecting and repres∣sing the sensualities of the body, injoy, for all that, a perpetual, and un expressible content of the
soul? whose tears are the deluge f sin, and restauration of the orld? whose extended hands put ut fire, tame the raving of wild easts, dull the edge of the sword, ake whole troops fly away? and now thou also, that, at length, hey shall withstand, and triumph ver thy impiety, although, for a , thou bravest it, and, with thy evils, dancest (as I may so say)  the delights of thine own hearts sts, and heathenish devices. Nevertheless, O impudent fel∣ow as thou art! how can it be hat, in the mean time, thou better onsiderest not of these things? hou, who art as liable to death, as ny other worldling? How can'st hou find in thine heart to make no reater esteem of those before poken Saints of God, neither to everence them as thou oughtest? re not the gifts and graces, where∣ith those clear Lights of heaven hine so bright, far to be preferred efore the unsatiable covetousness f Solon that wise man, whom
Craesus made tryal of with his Ly¦dian gold? or the Philocaly of S¦crates, that is, an affection in doat¦ing upon fine things? for I am ashamed to think of, much less b in love with his foul sin (of Sod¦my, I mean) although, with ver much artifice, heathen men hav strove to cover it, and are com¦mended for their so doing. O the licourishness Plato shewed i Sicily? which brought him to suc a condition, that he was sold with¦out being redeemed by any of hi own disciples, or other of th Greek Nation? Or, the glutton of Xenocrates? the Cinicalne of Diogenes? who made a Tun hi house, wherein he more accounte of Beggars, then of Princes; o Barly-loaves, then of fine Manche (as the Tragedy hath it.) Or, th Philosophy of Epicurus? who kne no other soveraign good, then th pleasure he took to please hi senses. You, make great account o Crates. Certes, 'twas an exploi
worthy a brave Philosopher, vo∣untarily to quit himself of his reat revenues: and, that they not inder him in his study of Philo∣ophy, to cast away much riches ormerly possessed by him in great ontempt, but the manner of his penly making known the same, y boastingly publishing the know∣edge thereof to posterity, is a gn he was ambitious of popular pplause: a mark whereby we dis∣ern him to be affected as well with he tumour of Vain-glory, as with he humour of being a Philosopher. ou admire him, who being at ea, and commanding all his goods,  a tempest, to be cast over∣oard, thanked fortune that she had educed him to a Sultan, or to a hilosophers cloak. Also Anthiste∣es, who, as a quarreller, having all is face broken, made no more ac∣ount of it, then the writing on his prehead, as on a table the name f him that had beaten him; to he end, peradventure, he might make his complaint more hainous
against him, when time should serve. Thou highly prizest  other, that lived not long since who making his Oraisons to th Sun, stood upon his feet as long a the day lasted, observing, it ma be, to begin then when it came nea the Earth, that such his prayer might be the breifer, and finishing them when the Sun set. Thou als makest great account of him, who in winter, being on the guard, too his charge so to heart, that he passe the whole night, which froze hard in contemplation, and had hi mind so intent thereon, that he fel not the cold at all. Thou praises also the curiosity of Homer's desir to know the Riddle of Arcadia and Aristotle, who stayed sometim on the bank of Euripus, to under∣stand the cause of its Ebbing an Flowing; neither of which bein perfectly understood by either o them, was the cause of the one an of the others death. Thou esteem∣est also of the Wells of Cleander of the Girdle of Anaxagoras, an
of the Weeping of Heraclitus. Now tell me, how many hast thou of these? and how long have they asted? And wonderest thou not at so any thousand of ours, that have ollowed the like Philosophy, and ar more admirable, all their lives? eest thou not how, in all parts of he world, as well men, as women f our Religion, have striven one ith an other, even unto admira∣ion on all sides, who should be ost renowned for vertuous living, orgetting even the laws of nature, hen endeavouring to appease God  their chast conversation and pa∣ence, not onely the meaner sort f people that are wont to live of odily labour, but the great and fa∣ous also for their ancestry and ignities? Who changed their for∣erly accustomed delicious man∣er of living in all plentifulness  variety of delights, for the rder discipline of a more severe , to follow Christ: who, though  attaining to the grace of elo∣quent
speaking, (true piety not consisting in Rhetorical straines, and in the fruit of wisdome pro∣ceeding from the lips (according to the opinion of one of your own Poets) and being of little value,) yet most excellent they were, not∣withstanding, in the sweet disposi∣tion of their souls, in the sincere and exact government of their lives and actions, to the Will of God. But this man, shutting his eyes to all this, and aiming onely to please Devils, (which already many times, justly overwhelmed him) before he made any Ordi∣nances for common affairs, rush' upon the Christians: and, althoug he had two things which gave hi trouble, viz. the Galileans (for  he was pleased injuriously to ca us) and the Persians, who, bearin troubles patiently, continuall made war against him: So it was he had a business came so near him that the Persian war seemed  him but as a Play and Fable: where
of, though he made no shew, yet he was so transported with fury, that every one took notice of him: But this so prudent person, so good a common-wealths-man, conside∣red not, that in the first Persecu∣tions, there happened but a little confusion and trouble, because our doctrine was not then spread among so many people, the knowledge of the truth as then made manifest but to few that had need of more light, but now that the Word of our Sa∣viour is so far spread, and so well establish'd among us, to strive to pull it up, and to shake Christiani∣ty, it's no other thing, then to over∣throw the Roman Empire, to ex∣pose to all manner of danger and azzard the whole State of the Re∣publick: which is the worst that our greatest enemies can wish to us, namely to see us receive these evils from our selves, and by the means of this new and admirable Philosophy and Policy, by which we become so happy, and return to the first age, and golden condition
of the world that was without trou∣ble, without all kind of dissention, or Warring one with another. But they'l tell me, the People are gently governed, Taxes remit∣ted, Magistrates worthily chosen, Theeves punished, and such like things, with respect unto tempora∣ry felicities, and make it good. For it must needs be we should have our ears tingle with such manner of applauding him in his Government. But the divisions, neverthelesse, and commotions of Towns and Coun∣tryes, the destruction of families, the quarrels of private houses, the separation of married folks, that were likely to follow such a mis∣chief, and, as the truth is indeed, have followed the same, brought they any augmentation to his glory, or commodity and benefit otherwise to the Common-wealth? Who is he, that is such a Partizan of Paganisme, so void of common sense as to avow the same? For, even as in a mans body, when a member or two are out of order,
the other cease not to do their office, and to conserve the welfare of the rest that are in health, and the greater number, by means whereof, even those that were ill affected, ut of frame often come again to their naturall constitution: but when too many parts are ill affect∣ed, there's scarce any remedy, but hat the whole body becomes in danger to be overthrown: So in tates and Republiques, particular defects may sometimes be made p, when, at the same time, it fares well with the generall: but when he greater part is weak, without doubt the General is in much haz∣ard to be destroyed. A case so obvious and trivial to every com∣mon understanding that the grossest enemies we have cannot possibly ut soon foresee the same, especi∣lly at this time that the Christians re so increased. But the malice of this man hath o blinded his reason, that hand over head he ceaseth not to molest ll manner of Christians, little and
great: Yea, so tainted he is with all kind of wilfull hatred against us, not onely unworthy of a judiciou Emperour, but also of a far meane man in understanding and place that, as if, with our Name, h could take from us the beleif whic we repose in Christ, he hath com∣manded our Name should b changed, and that we should be no longer called Christians: yea,  make us ashamed, as if thereby w were accused of some great crime he made a new edict touching th same, calling us therein, and o∣daining we should be called Gali∣leans, in stead of Christians; she∣ing indeed thereby that the name o Christian is a glorious and honoura∣ble Title, otherwise, certainly,  would never have taken it from us▪ and, in lieu thereof, given us a other lesse famous, and not of the like reputation. Or, whether fearing some vertue to lye hid under tha Name, which might cause those o his Party tremble, so oft as spoken in their hearing [in like manner as
those Devils in the Gospel are reported to have trembled at the name of Christ] took away the occasion of their being so troubled, by forbidding us to be called after that name. As for us, we desire not to change those names whereby he is called, knowing nothing more ri∣diculous, then those appellations of Phales, Isiphales, venerable Pan, &c. wherewith he takes a pride to be stiled: being Names not onely infamous, and shame∣lesse, but such, as upon considera∣tion of the reasons wherefore at first they were taken up, cannot otherwise then give offence unto modest ears that take notice there∣of, Neither envy we his title of Caball, whereof he boasts so much in his follies, or that other epethice of Hercules Kill-cowe, &c. wor∣shiped as a God, because, in his Thirteenth labour, he begot with Child in one night fifty daughters of Thyestes.
If endeavour to find out new names, wherewith to reproach him for his fouler, and more villa∣nous actions, we are not ignorant how to fit him with a great many more to the purpose, then those, whereby to vilifie us, he hath in∣vented against the Christians. The History of his unworthy Acts is not so altogether unknown to us, but that it's an easie task, thereout to furnish our selves with Names more then a good many, whereunto to intitle him, as due to his de∣serts, though much unbeseeming the man he would be taken for, being not content to be stiled by the Title of Emperour of the Ro∣mans onely, but also would be cal∣led Emperour of the whole world. For so he perswaded himself, he should be before his death, as being bewitched into such a be∣liefe by those Devils, and Magi∣cians that thereinto infatuated him. As for our being call'd Galile∣ans, that are Chistians, we are no whit ashamed thereof, seeing Christ
our blessed Redeemer was so called. Yea further, seeing he that is Lord, Creatour, and Governour of the Universe, Son, and Word of God the Father, sitteth on the same Throne, with him, Mediatour, and High Priest, and, for the love of us, (that despised, and cast his Image in the dust, as ignorant, per∣haps, a great many of us, of that high mistery of his Deities con∣junction with our flesh) took upon Phil. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 24. him the forme of a Servant, and ore our sins in his own body on the ree, that they might dye with him: If he, I say, suffered himself to be called a Samaritan, and (which is worse) a Devil: (to whom it was an easie matter with an Hoast of Angels, yea, a word speaking only to vindicate himself, and repulse a whole world of wicked men) and was neither offended thereat, nor made complaint against them that did him that injury, but sent them gently away, (shedding tears to obtain pardon from God his father for them that crucified him) shall
we, that are vile worms, how∣ever christned in his Name, hold it an unseemly thing, think it much to be defamed, after that sort, or troubled therewith, when, in the same manner, reproached for his sake? God forbid. Nay rather,—being reviled, we blesse: being persecuted, we suffer it, esteem∣ing 1 Cor. 4, 12. more of such injuries, and other scoffings, wherewith reproachfully thou tauntest us, then to be other∣wise made rich by thee, for a time, with the muck of this worlds goods, then to be advanced by thee to fleeting Honours, and Offices, and whatever other earthly preferment that's in thy power, and choice to confer upon us. Yea, moreover, whereas it's thy whole delight, thi hearts content is solely fixed on such matters, we stick not to make open profession unto thee, and un∣to all the world besides, in the words of the Apostle, that we de∣termine not to know, (much lesse to be affected, and hunt after) any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2, 2. and him crucified.
He had one quality more in him, an unworthy and dishonest one both, and that was, he accustomed himself, when covertly ayming to gain us to his Party, at the same time to put on the Fox his skin upon that of the Lions, or, (as I cannot better express the same) to cloth, under the mask of Minos his justice, his own cruelty, and op∣pression. To abridge my discourse, the rest of his abominable actions I'le leave further to be dilated, unto those hereafter that shall be pleas'd more largely to pen the whole Hi∣story thereof, not doubting, but many will strive to make Posterity acquainted with things of such consequence, and whether Trage∣dy, or Comedy, (call them as you list) deserve not to be concealed. As for my part, I'le reduce unto those passages before spoken of, one, or two of his most signal acts, to let them who admire his deeds, and count him praise-worthy for the same, know, a man cannot in∣vent
charges enough, is not able to find faults so many, or reproaches so great and shameful, as he de∣served. It's a maxime among Empe∣rours, (I know not whether it be practised with other Monarchs, but among the Romans it's exactly ob∣served) viz. that, in honouring them, they set up for the reigning Emperours, publick Statues; for, as for Crowns, and Diademes, they suffice not (it should seem) no, nor Scarlet, nor solemne Ordi∣nances, nor Taxes, and Tributes, nor great number of People to ap∣plaud them at their first entrance into Supreme Authority: but it's their pleasure, over and above, like Gods, to be adored, that thereby they may be held for more maje∣stical and sublime. They will also have the same adoration done, in like manner, even to their very Pictures, and Images, that thereby their eminency may be set forth more absolutely, and completely. Among these Images, and Repre∣sentations,
each Emperour chuseth severally unto himself certain of them: e. g. Some, setting forth to the life great Cities making Pre∣sents: Others, a famous Victory crowned with triumph: Some, Magistrates on their knees, with de∣vises expressing their Charges and Offices: Others, cruell Beasts kill'd with Arrows, directly shot through again; Others certain vanquished Barbarians laid prostrate at their feet, or otherwise kill'd in diverse manners. For they desire not onely the truth of things, whereof they assume the glory to themseves, but also, to have Representations, and Pictures thereof. See now how this man plotted, what craft by him was used against the Christians. As those, who in drinks sometimes mingle poison, so he infused, upon a time, abomination among his Imperial Ceremonies, confounding together the adoration of Idols with the Ordinance of the Romans. For which purpose, among the Ef∣figies of Emperours, and other
usual Pictures, he caused to be in∣terposed the resemblances of De∣vils, and that done, exposed them to the People, Cities, and princi∣ple Governours of Provinces. These Images, or Pictures were after that manner contrived, that who so adored the Emperour, the mischief could not be avoided, but, at the same time, he must, of necessity, adore therewith Devils, the Effigies, or Pictures of Devils, being so cunningly interweaved with those of the Emperour. Now who so adored not those Representations, the Imperial Majesty was offended there∣with, and the Party refusing to give honour thereunto found guilty of High Treason against the Em∣perour. There were some wiser, and more advised, who finding out the deceit, were not taken with this so artificially invented snare; who were afterwards punished for such their prudence, under the pre∣tence, they had not honoured the Emperour: when as the true cause
was, for their being faithful rather to the great Monarch of heaven and earth, and to the true Religion. A great number of the simpler and poorer sort of people were ensnared herein: who, in my opi∣nion, deserved to be pardoned for their innocency, being by subtlety thereunto inforced. After this sort, matters being thus deceitfully handled, 'twill be sufficient to make this person infa∣mous, and worthy of just reproof, in regard private Persons, and Princes, should not govern them∣selves alike in their affairs, their actions being of different weight and importance, a private person not so much to be blamed when he doth any thing by subtlety, and after a covert manner, because o∣therwise, perhaps, he is not able to compass what he would have, by force, and therefore is constrained to use art, and dissimulation: but, as for a Prince, it should be other∣wise, because, as it is a shame to be overcome by force, so, I esteem it
yet a greater, to cover his designs with craft, and faining. There's beyond this an other matter, which, though it came from the same forge and conception, is yet worse, because the evil of greater conse∣quence. I will annex it here unto what I have spoken formerly. There was a certain day, where∣in the Emperour would bestow a Largesse, whether accustomed and ordinary, or more solemn and at a prefixt time, to manifest his in∣ward malice towards us, it skills not. 'Twas ordained then, all the Army should assist therein, that every one, according to his degree▪ and dignity, might receive his Lar∣gess and Pay. (Behold here another mistery of villany, see here how iniquity playeth its part) under the colour of liberallity he would bring it to passe, by alluring the Souldiers with money, (who for the most part, are ordinarily cove∣tous enough, if not too unsatiable) The businesse was this. Being pompously set in great state, and
also very powerful through his wiles, by reason whereof, (as if he had been an other Melampus, or Pro∣heus) he could change himself into whatsoever formes, at his pleasure, ccording to the quality of affairs he had in hand, (the story that I am bout to tell, would move com∣passion in whosoever of any good nature, or tollerable apprehension, whether beholding this sad specta∣le with their eyes, or otherwise earing the samerelated unto them:) There was before him Gold, there was Incense, and just against him Fire; close by stood the Master of the Ceremonies, who gave notice what was to be done: The out∣ward pretence was, the making se of certain more ancient, and honourable Ceremonies in that their reception of the Emperours Largesse, but the issue after was, They were to Sacrifice Incense in the Fire, and receive from the Emperour the wages of such their perdition (very little indeed for a thing of so great concernment, for
the losse of so many souls, by their committing therein so hainous and execrable an offence against the Almighty.) O wretched gain! O miserable recompense! wherewith the Souldiery were betrayed, and sold by such an invention they who had conquered the whole uni∣verse, by means of a little Fire, a little Gold, and a little incense, were discomfited and destroyed▪  (which was more pitiful) thought not upon their death and ruine. Such as went thither, for the lucre of  little money lost thereby their souls, kissing the Emperours hand, and perceiving not, that, at the same time, they kist the hand o their Assasinate, and were nothing the better by so easily suffering themselves to be carried away, a by an inviolable Law, unto such simplicity, and unadvisednesse▪ How many thousand Persians should there have been to have made such a defeat? how many archers, and slingers of stones? how great a number of armed Souldiers? what
engins to beat down walls could have done that, which one onely hand, one only journey, and one wicked counsel brought to pass, and accomplished? I will insert here one story more lamentable then the former but ow recited. 'Tis reported that some of the before-said Souldiers having been deceived by ignorance, after the Act committed, and re∣iring to their Houses, as they were at Table with their Companions, and about to drink water (as ac∣customed to doe) not thinking of the mischief which they had brought upon themselves, but taking the cup in their hand, and lifting up their eyes on high, began to call upon the name of Jesus Christ: Whereat, one of them more sensi∣ble of what they had done, then the rest, said to them, after this man∣ner. [What mean ye to invoke Jesus Christ, after renouncing him?] with which words being astonished, and stricken (as it were) half dead, what strange thing (say
they) do you affright us withall? tell us, when was it that we re∣nounced him? unto whom the other replying, when ye burnt incense before the Emperour, which was a sign of such your renouncing him; presently these poor souls leapt from the board, as men bereaved of their wits, and, incensed with despite and choler, an to the Mar∣ket-place, crying aloud, [We are Christians, we are Christians, we have not been Traitors to thee, O Saviour Christ! let all the world know it, and principally our good God, for whose sake we are con∣tent to live or dye, as seemeth good to him: we have not wilfully ab∣jured the confession of thy holy Name; if with our hands we have transgressed, our hearts never gave consent thereunto: we have been deceived with the Emperors Gold; that was it, whereby we were con∣taminated: but such our unperceived abomination, when time was, we have since the knowledge thereof, utterly abandoned, and desire our
blood may be shed in expiation for hat great offence formerly com∣mitted by us.] After which Out∣ries openly made by them, they an directly to the Emperour, furi∣usly throwing the Gold received rom him formerly, before his face, n presence of the standers by, unto he earth, exclaiming with a loud oice, we have not been call'd by hee to receive honour, but to be markt with the infamy of Repro∣ates: Do us the honour, who are hy Souldiers, to kill and sacrifice s to Christ, who is our King: For he Fire of Incense burned by us at hy command, command us to be urned with fire; and for the ashes hereof, reduce thou us to ashes: cause our hands to be cut off, which nwittingly have been advanced to other Gods: honour others with thy Gold, who will not repent the eceiving of it: as for us, the riches which we look for, is to gain Christ, which gain vve prefer before all other gain, before vvhatever other riches, or honour, or things of this
life, that thou art able to impart un∣to us. This vvas it they said, and ad∣vertised others to take notice of th craft that vvas put upon them, t purge themselves from the sins o this intoxication, making satisfa∣ction, or leastvvise endeavouring so to doe, by their blood, unto Christ Jesus that dyed for them With vvhich resolution of their the Emperour being exceedingly irritated, vvould not, neverthelesse command them to be put to death publikely, for fear of rendring them Martyrs in his so doing: but gav order they should be sent forth∣vvith into exile, punishing them that vvay, the more reservedly, fo the neglect, the little regard the seemed to shevv unto his person i their Speeches, and Actions before him, but novv specified. Had he pu them to death, there could nothing be more acceptable unto them and, as for his Banishing of them, they vvere so far off from being troubled therevvith, that they too
it as a great favour from him, re∣joycing with inward delight in their souls, (I dare say) in that thereby they conceived themselves the more freed, or at least, they were the more removed out of sight from being upon every occa∣sion, defiled and deluded further with his enchantments and de∣ceits. Having this intention, and im∣ploying otherwise his malice di∣verse wayes (for his mind was no∣thing setled) and inflamed more with a Diabolicall fury, than with ny naturall reason, being uncon∣tant in his resolutions, he concea∣ed alwayes the secrets of his wick∣dnesse. But as 'tis said of the re of Mount Aetna, that it is hid∣en in the bowels of the earth, ourishing and increasing its self in eing retained by force, or some ther thing, (viz. the breath of a Gyant in torments) rendring hor∣ible murmurings continually from he low pits thereof, casts out a moke on the top, (an inevitable
sign of the calamity aproaching, if the fire become so great that it cannot be stayed) and then with violence breaking its bounds, as∣cendeth upwards, and enlarging its widenesse, makes a strange vomit∣ing, which spoiles and corrupteth the Land neer adjoyning: So was it with this man, who sometimes commanded, and helped himself in our affairs with the frauds, and impostures of his deceitfull, and sophisticall Edicts. But, since his untamed fury was let loose, he could not by any means conceale his malice. Fo from that time, he began to per∣secute those of our Religion open∣ly. Where, passing over thos Ordinances he made against ou Sacred Churches, (which wer generally published) together wit robbing us of those Offerings, an Money consecrated to God, pro∣ceeding no less from avarice, the irreligion; the forcibly taking a way of our holy Ornaments, whic were pulled from us by filth
and profane hands, the Priests and Sextons, for keeping them, being dragged up and down, and tormented, defiled also and cove∣red over with blood streaming from their bodies torn with lashes of rods, when their hands at the same time, were fastned to pillars; the Crosse-bow-men running through Provinces, and Cities, wickeder and crueller then himself, who gave the command that we should be utterly routed instead of the Persi∣ans and Scythians: Forbearing (I say) the speaking of these things, who is it that knoweth not the Sa∣agenesse of them of Alexandria? who, among many other enterprises which furiously they put in practice against us, making use of the Li∣cenciousnesse of the times, without any either honesty, or modesty in o doing, (being a people furious nd turbulent by nature) so far eightned after destruction, their hirst, that (as 'tis reported) they fil∣ed our holy Temple with two sorts of blood, viz. the blood of beasts
sacrificed, and of Men. In which barbarousness of theirs an Officer of the Emperours Army was chief, who, for this onely cruelty, got him a name, and made himself fa∣mous amongst them. Who is he, moreover, that hath not heard of the swarms of the He∣liopolitans, and rashnesse of the Gazeans? who, for their mercy∣lessenesse towards us, in recom∣pense thereof were honoured and applauded by him, and had expe∣rience of his liberality. Who is he that hath not been made ac∣quainted with the fury of the Are∣thusians? who till then being alto∣gether unknown, were since had by him in great reputation, it not be∣ing vertuous actions alwayes that bring reputation and credit to per∣sons, but also superlative wicked∣nesse sometimes, and, never the like heard of, brutish invention pu in practice to punish innocen Christians. I will onely recite tha which may seem horrible and crue to very Atheists themselves.
Certain chast Virgins knowing little of worldly affairs, as excluded from the sight of almost all other save themselves, by these barbarous Arethusians having been dragged stark-naked into the Market-place, to the intent they might be put to the more open shame, were com∣manded to have the hair of their head cut off, after which, their flesh cut in peices, (my God! scarce have I the patience to repeat it) was immediately thereupon by them savagely devoured with their Teeth in a Feast sutable to that their execrable fury, filling their bellies also then with the raw Livers of those Virgins, and after that, com∣mon meat being brought in, some of them took the bowells and guts of the aforesaid Virgins, yet reak∣ing hot, and mingling them with hog-wash, threw them to the Swine, before the others faces, that they might see their hungry hogs tear the same, and, together with barly mingled amongst it, eat it up all. A dish of meat which till then,
never the like was fed upon, and wherewith the Inventer thereof should have endeavoured to glut the Devil onely: As, the truth is, the Devil after made a fine meal of the blood of the wounds which that wicked Emperour Julian re∣ceived in his bowells, and whereof he was slain when shot into his body in the last Wars that he ever fought upon earth, with the Per∣sians. Again, who is such a stranger in our affairs, as hath not heard of Marcus Arethusius a famous man among us? who ignorant of the story of him, except I relate the same at present? who in the raign of Constantine's giving full liberty to the Christians to exercise their Religion, pull'd down one of the Gentiles Temples, or rather a re∣treat, or habitation of theirs for Devils, and converted a great number of them that were Pagans unto the Christian faith, to the right way thereby unto everlasting life, as well by the excellency of his man∣ners,
as by his eloquence: and for the same cause, was not well liked of by the Arethusians, or, at least, those among them that were fol∣lowers of Devils? But, since the affairs of Christians were troubled, and that those of the Greeks, and other Gentiles began to rise high, he could not avoid the violence of the time. For the vulgar, being wont; for a time, to retain their passions. as fire that is hid in wood, or, as a stream of Water that is stopt, upon any the least occasion riseth, and breaketh through all. He then observing the madnesse of the peo∣ple, who were not a little animated against him, and threatned him, was resolved at first to flye from them, not so much for want of courage, as to obey the command of Christ, which wills us to retire from one City to an other, and thereby to give way to our Persecutours. For good Christians must not onely re∣gard their own particular, though never so vertuous and constant, as beware of their enemies, and that,
on their part, they give not the least occasion to do them an injury, which, without scandall to their weak brethren, and to the preju∣dice of true Religion which pub∣likely they make unfained profes∣sion of, 'tis in their choice to put by, or make prevention of. It so fell out, neverthelesse, that per∣ceiving many to be apprehended, and dragged before Magistrates be∣cause of him, and that there were some in danger of the losse of their souls, by reason of the cruel perse∣cutions wherewith they were affli∣cted in their bodies for his sake, he would not altogether neglect them, who for the making sure of his per∣son, were in hazzard to lose their own. Wherefore, being first ho∣lily and well-advised, he returns back from his retirement, and offe∣ring himself to the people, resolved with patience to undergo whatever calamities of the times: With re∣spect whereunto, what injuries and oppressions were there, unto which he was not exposed?
What could be more lamentable? every one brought (I know not what) resolution to adhere to that foul sin of diversly afflicting him, carrying neither any regard to the constancy of him, nor to the quality of his Persecutours; who were the more irritated against him through a supposition, that his return to them proceeded rather from a con∣tempt, or neglect that he made of their persons, then of any virtue, or constancy in himself to under∣goe vvhatever tribulations to be inflicted upon him by their fury. Whereupon, this holy old man, this voluntary Souldier of Jesus Christ vvas led through the City (venera∣ble for his age, but more for his life to all the vvorld) exposed to these tyrants, and hang-men, and conducted by people of all manner of qualities, rich and poor, young and old, men and women, some of one sort, and some of another, hurried together: yea (and which was more strange to behold) those who had estates, and were of
the wealthiest, strove together, were emulous among themselves, who should punish him most, all indifferently esteeming it a com∣mendable thing to inflict whatever torments upon him, and to triumph over him; Whom all the people of the Town villanously handled, some halling him through the Streets, other thrusting him into the Kennels: these plucking him by the hair of his head, those smit∣ing him upon every part-of his body: using further, shamelesse reproaches, and not to be spoken of, among so many other mischiefs; just as those are wont to be done unto, vvho vvere punished in those Paganish mysteries of Mythra. He vvas also lifted up in the air as in a svving, too and fro tossed from one side to the other: he had his precious body received naked upon the points of their Pen∣knives, who acted their parts in this mournfull and sad Tragedy against him: Yea further, they put his legs in a presse, and squeesed
them to the bones: they cut off his ears with a fine slender thread, making him, in the mean time, stand upright in a basket, and rubbing, or besmeering him all over with honey and salt, they exposed him to Waspes and Bees about noon, when the sun shined hottest and clear: which made his flesh seem, as it were, to melt, and gave those animals a warm throat full of this happy meat. I call the meat, this flesh happy, because, however tor∣tured, yet suffering patiently for Christs sake, he rendred every part of his body happy, as a blessed sa∣crifice, and most acceptable in the sight of God. There's an other story as well worthy to be remembred, and spo∣ken of him, and that is this. This good old man and young both (for the dolours which he un∣derwent in his old age caused him not to abate of the lively chearful∣nesse he was indued within his youth) smiling in the height of his torments, was heard to utter these
famous and most remarkable words unto his tormentours, saying, [I esteem very much the posture wherein you have put me in thus lifting me up, It's a good omen to see my self exalted, and others below me.] He had as much to say touching the different condition wherein himself was, in compari∣son of those that persecuted him: the contemplation whereof seem∣ed to make him feel no more pain, then as if he had been onely an assister at the tormenting of ano∣ther, taking those his sufferings for an honour, and not for a punish∣ment, wherewith they seemed after a sort, but indeed were no way able to afflict him. Where is there a man never so little gentle and debonaire, that is not affected with this gallantry, that reverenceth not this holy Martyr for these brave acts? But the times permitted not to shew pity in such cases to the Christians, neither the irregular passions of the Empe∣rour, whose unrelenting will it
was still, that the people, Cities, and Magistrates should, by all means, carry themselves cruelly unto us, though many of them, for all that, were utterly ignorant of the bottome of his wicked heart. Thus went the affairs with this con∣stant old man. If you ask the reason? 'Twas because he refused to give five Shillings to his Executioners: which was an argument evident and plain, that he had the patience to suffer for the cause of God, and his true Religion only. In regard, whilst they demaunded at first a great sum of money, in lieu of the Temple it's being pull'd down by him, and would abate nothing of that price, but either the whole sum was to be laid down by him, or else he rebuild it at his own charge, one would have thought this refusall of him came from want of means, and disability to sa∣tisfie what was demanded, rather then from zeal to the true Religion: but after that by his constancy he had gained to be abated in part, and
continually had something cut off with respect unto the price former∣ly required, so that the demand in the end amounted but to a little in value, yea so little that it was easie for him to pay it, the difference between them was who should re∣main master, they in making him give something, though never so little, or he, on the contrary, (who was not to be forced,) to pay any thing at all, although very many there were that voluntarily offered to give for him more then they de∣sired, not onely because of his un∣parallel'd piety, but also in consi∣deration of his invincible and un∣conquerable constancy. At what time a man might cleerly see, he fought not in this list for money, but for Religion. Let then those that so much ad∣mire this Philosophicall Emperour, resolve us, whether these, and the like actions of his, were signes of mildnesse and gentlenesse, or contrarily, of much pride and cru∣elty. As for my part, I beleive
the Question is soon answered. I have not as yet declared how this Sufferer was one of them, who had formerly saved this detestable Prince, when all his Race was in dangers, by secretly conveyhing him away from those that sought to destroy him. The reason, it may, be, of his deserving to be so grie∣vously punished, namely, for his imprudent preserving him then, who became after so great a plague to all the world. In consideration of which whole businesse, with re∣spect unto the patient suffering all manner of cruell torments, and other lamentable reproches by this Martyr of ours, A certain Greek, that is to say, a Pagan in Religion, (though in his behaviour otherwise, somewhat above, and beyond all other of his kind that ever lived either before or since his time, to be admired at) being not able any longer to behold the tormentours on his own Party, and the con∣stancy of him that endured thus all manner of punishment on the
other, brake forth into these note∣able words unto the Emperor, and in the presence of the whole com∣pany that was then assembled to∣gether, & spake after this sort. [Are not we ashamed, Sir, to fee our selves so overcome of the Christi∣ans, that we have not the power to be masters over one poor old man, who hath gone through all sorts of torments, and of whom, if we had had the better, it had been no great matter? is it not a great impeachment of our credit, when all's done, to retire vanquished by him? Whereupon (as it seemed then) the other Officers blush'd, but those Kings, that is to say, the Pa∣gan Priests mock'd at it. Could any thing in the whole earth be more shameful and wretched, not with relation so much to him that suffer∣ed the same, as, on the other side, especially, who caus'd these mis∣chiefs, and other the like abomi∣nable outrages to be put in pra∣ctice?
In this sort, after a most bar∣barous, and never the like heard of inhumanity, dealt they with Arethusius? So that the cruelty of Phalaris, and of Echetus will seem small, in comparison of theirs; more espcially of his who com∣pelled them thereunto, and was Author thereof. O that I could meet with the Creature, that had the gift to infuse into me the Knowledge of Herodotus, the Elo∣quence of Thucidides, whereby to paint out the wickednesse of this man; to set forth in livly col∣ours to Posterity, the whole Histo∣ry of those severall passages of pro∣found villanies that were acted by him throughout all his whole life. I pass to make mention of Orontes, or of them who had their throats cut in the night, which he hid in favour of the Emperour, being staid because of the body of him to whose death he seemed to consent, for that would be more proper to be put in Verse. Nei∣ther will I speak of the Caves,
and places under ground in the Imperial Pallace; or, of that which was done in Ponds, and in Pits, and in Ditches filled with the per∣nicious treasure, and detestable mysteries, not only Anatomies and dissections of Children and Virgins (made use of to cause Divels appear by Divinations, & in other abomina∣ble and irregular Sacrifices) but also, of them who were in trouble for the true Religion. Concerning all which, it's my advice not to tax him openly; and that because himself was ashamed thereof. And good reason, for it's certain, had he not endevoured to keep them secret, they had turn∣ed to his confusion, after made known and discovered. As for the Christians of Caesarea, a magnanimous People, and con∣stant in Piety, who were so inju∣red, and cast down by him, it's not a matter, it may be, which de∣serves reproach; because that being irritated against Fortune, (which sometimes was contrary to him)
in time of prosperity he had (in his opinion perhaps) just cause of vengeance; as also, we must excuse somewhat the injustce that then bore sway, and wherewith hey were then so much infested. Who is it that knows not how he multitude furiously incensed gainst the Christians, killed a great number of them, and threatned et worse? And thereupon the Governour of the Province keep∣ing a middle way betwixt the time present, and the Edicts then al∣ready made, and esteeming it, on the one side, better to comply with the Season, and on the other, to carry some respect unto the Laws; after putting a great num∣ber of the Christians in prison, chastised also some Pagans. Where∣of, being afterward accused, he was brought before the Emper∣our, and thereupon deprived of his Government: Whom (al∣though alleadging the Emperours Ordinances, on which he had grounded his Judgement) it failed
but a little of his being condem∣ned thereupon unto death; thoug in the end, he experimented hi clemency, and was banished only▪ His Reply, nevertheless, to th Emperour, was gallant and brave For, when extolling unto him th valour of the Pagans above the Galileans, in that one Paga sometimes brought under his Sub∣jection many Galileans. [Wha great matter is it, (quoth th Governor to the Emperor) if on Pagan overcome or subdue a mul∣titude of Galileans? Hath not you Highnesse made an Edict for th Pagans to do thereafter; Are no they backed by your Command, to use all manner of violence a∣gainst them, when whosoever will, is not only permitted, with all sor of injustice, to molest them, but also assisted, and may call for what help as he thinks fit, at his plea∣sure, to wrong and confound them? When as he that is most cruell, is most commended; he reputed the best Subject that ex∣erciseth
his wit most to vex them? When for a Pagan, in the least manner, to be courteous to a Ga∣ilean, is to be criminous in the ighest degree? When noneless with∣tand, none sooner yeild themselves o our fury, than those Galileans? When not only a few, but many undreds of them, though of force to resist, yet in obedience to your Majesties pleasure and will, pati∣ently submit themselves to one poor Pagan Executioner, to be punished? To beat then those that resist not, and after to boast of their manhood that do so, what is it, but to publish rather their violence, than to make good their valour to Posterity? Besides, the pleasure of a Prince, or Em∣peror, is a Law not written, which, being upheld by force and authority, hath much more power in it, than when written, and not upheld by the same force to maintain it. This should not be so (say they) who have set forth unto us a new
God, good and gracious. Con∣trarily, your Highness pub∣lickely hath forbidden us to trouble the Christians, as also commanded that Christians should not be in∣jured at every mans pleasure; so that thereby the Christians are dis∣charged from our causing them any more wrongfully to be af∣flicted. The Hydra, though you cut of one of its heads, is never the less hurtfull, because, in stead of tha one cut off, other nine succeed in the place thereof. And (if we must beleeve Fables) did we ever see a Patarical Chimaera gentle and pleasant, because it had three divers Formes, which should ra∣ther cause the same to be thought hideous? Or, must that infernall Cerberus, or Scilla, the plague of Sea-men, be counted harmless, because the upper parts thereof (as 'tis said) are pleasing and beau∣tifull to the sight, as resembling a faire Creature of humane kind, when the rest of it are full of the
figures of Dogs-heads, and of other wild beasts, that commit all man∣ner of mischief? when it swalloweth up whole fleets of ships, and is as dangerous as Charybdes, right over against the same? But what? Wilt thou find fault with the arrowes and stones, and excuse the Crosse-bowes, and those that shoot in them? Or, shall we condemn the Hunters dogs for gree∣dily running after their prey, and worrying of it, and at the same time, hold them excused and innocent, that make use of them? 'Twill be very far from reason so to conceive, and needs some so∣phisticall cheat to cover over, and wrap up the truth by the force of a fair speaking tongue, to defend these vices. Their's a means (I confesse) to warrant (in some sort) him that would disguise himself with these subtleties, by taking to him the Helmet of Pluto, the Ring of Gy∣ges; which, in turning the beril or broad part, makes him that
wears it, become invincible. On the contrary, this great impostor, by how much the more he striv to walk in the dark, and no body see him, to dance in a net (as we say in the Proverb) and not be perceived, by so much the sooner (as it happened) was he descried and laid open by the judgement of truth: at least, by those that had eyes in their heads to perceive, that he alone was Author of these mischiefs, of those actions, which himself with all his subtlety, was never able to make good. So easie a matter it is for wickednesse, we see, to be convinced and made ma∣nifest unto all men, when, however daubed over, for a time, with fair shewes, it hath recourse still unto its own naughtinesse, and falls foul upon the head alwayes of its first contrivers. If the acts thus committed by him untill this time were very un∣couth, and far strange from mag∣nanimity, or whatever other Im∣perial vertue, may we say that
what he fore-thought to put in pra∣ctice for the time to come would prove better, and more ingenuous? No such matter: yea, it had been somewhat more tolerable, if what he purposed to do, had not been far worse, and crueller, then that which we have already recited. For, even as a Dragon, when he raiseth part of his scales, and beginneth to set up his bristles, the other being sin a readinesse, its not possible for him, but he must also raise, and set them up, in like manner, al∣though; till then, they were com∣posed, and stirred not: Or, as in Thunder, when rumbling in the clouds, the lightning thereof we dicern with our eyes, before hear with our ears the great Claps that follow after: So, this fulminating Emperour had already hatched in his mind, and contrived in design those abominable enterprises which after he intended to bring to pass, and was fully bent most barbarously to put in practice against us Which were so strange and unusuall till
then, that to him alone it apper∣tained both to invent, and to cause them after to be executed. Its true, before his time, the Christi∣ans had been made sensible of grea troubles and vexations that Diocle¦siaen their first Persecutour, an Maximinian (who succeeded him being worse, as also Maximi (the cruellest of the three, whos Statues beaten down in publiqu places, and yet to be seen, serv as a memoriall of the hurt done b him, and in which are engrave for ever the deformities of his Per¦son)▪ brought upon them. But nei¦ther of these three, no, nor an Tyrant that ever preceded them at any time thought of, or invente the like Stratagems, wherewith  torment us, had he lived to hav finished such his diabolical desig and hellish purposes against us. These then were his drifts, ( those of his Privy Councel averr But he was prevented by the grac¦ous providence of God, and  the tears of many a good Christia
that shed them in abundance, applying no other remedy against the venome of this their Persecu∣tour. It was in his intention also, to take all manner of liberty from Christians: and to inhibit them all things: viz. The conference of Publique Assemblies, of Markets, and of all Places also, wherein any Jurisdiction was held: as being none of them capable of such rights, if first he had not presented Incense before the Altar, and there∣by discharged the Salary of such, and so signal a mystery. O Emperours, O Kings, O Law-makers! Have not yee (even as the Influence of heaven, the light of the Sun, the benefit of the Air, by a gracious and universall Decree, are common to every one) established Laws, and Ordinances for all the world freely and indiffe∣rently to make use of? Yet this wicked man, this Perverter of all things would go about to deprive us Christians thereof. So that though
never so much injured in our Per∣sons, cheated in our Goods, or receiving what ever other intolle∣rable wrong from them, it should not be permitted us, by way of Justice, to have any recourse to whatever Laws, or Ordinances, to right us. In this regard, they be∣gan to assume liberty to themselves to mock and flout us, yea to assault us with blowes unto that excesse, that they scarce suffered us to fetch our breath, or enjoy one quiet hour amongst them. Which nevertheless, was so far from disheartning us for making ever the lesse profession of the faith and repose that we put in Christ Jesus, that it heightned in a great many of us who were so in∣jured, a greater constancy to Gos Glory, howbeit to the Authors of our Persecution, greater sham and reproach for so troubling us. But lets hear the Reason, of all this (I beseech you) of this Assasi∣nate, of this Apostate-Law-givers thus dealing with us.
You shall have it in his own words, your Law (quoth he) per∣mitteth you neither to defend your selves, nor to demand reason of justice, nor to possesse any thing in particular: but rather to make no account of this world, or, of the things that are in it, as being all of them transitory, and vain. Moe∣over that, It's not for you to render Mar. 5. 39. 40. evil for evil, but whosover shall smite you on the one Cheek, to turn to him the other also: again, to 5. 44. one suing you at the law, to take a∣way your cloake, to let him have your coat also. It may be, he will adde, We must pray for them which despightfully use, and persecute us. For, how should not he have the exact knowledge of all things com∣manded, and permitted us Christi∣ans? He, I say, who before attain∣ing to the Empire, was entred into the Order of a Reader of the holy Scriptures, and who had the honour to serve at the high Altar, as also, to adorne our Martyrs with Chur∣ches, and Chappels?
Above all, I admire one thing of him, that, seeing he had exactly studied our Books, he took no no∣tice, (or else, in good earnest, would not see that which is written elsewhere) viz. Every wicked man Ps. 73. 37. that goes away from God shall perish: In like manner, He that troubles them, who remain faithfull, and contrives punishments, whereof himself is worthy. With respect whereunto, If we must needs be such, as he will have us, and go∣vern our selves according to those aforesaid Precepts of our Saviour, concerning the regulating our Acti∣ons thereunto: and, as for himself, in the mean while it may be lawful for him to live as wickedly as he lists, in all manner of ungodliness, by using oppression, and whatever other deceit against Christians, that desire to live more quietly, in all righteousnesse towards God, and good conversation towards their Neighbour: If the actions (I say further) of mans life, being either vertuous or vicious, the Gods,
whom those of his own Party seem to worship and obey, ap∣prove of vertuous men, and re∣ject those that are vicious: If this be a thing confessed by the Testimony of our very Enemies, and of those that persecute us, we have then gained what we de∣sire to have granted, we have obtained our cause. If it be said by them moreover, that on their side also, they have any honesty, or fair deportment, though but in word onely, and not in deed to∣wards us, and are not so impudent and accomplished in wickedness (thereby supposing to please them∣selves, though not their prophane Gods) as to maintain, that vice appertaines to them as their pro∣per inheritance: Let them shew us how, and what Justice there is in it, that we should be so con∣stant in our suffering afflictions, and they not to pardon such as pardon them; considering we have the better at one time, and you at another; seeing the affairs
of this world rowle and change, first of one fashion, then of an∣other. Have the Christians ever used you, as you have used them? What Libertys have we deprived you of? Against whom is it, we have incited the Peoples fury? To whom have we sent Captains, that that did more than was comman∣ded them? What People have we reduced into the danger of ha∣zarding their lives for us? Who are they we have deprived of their Pla∣ces and Honours, appertaining unto them, as to honest men? In a word, what did we ever commit like unto many things which you have in part executed, and in part, threatned to practise against us? Truely, you cannot say what: You (I say) who so reproach us for being defective, for our com∣ing short of that meeknesse, and gentlenesse, that by Christ our Masters counsell is required of us. Moreover, Thou, who art so wise, and well advised, in shutting us up within the narrow Precincts
of Christ's stricter advises in the Gospel, why markest thou not, that in those very places, some things are injoyned us, upon promise of reward, if we do thereafter, which are not imposed for all that, upon necessity of obeying, under pain of punishment, if we not per∣forme the same? For, though it be a thing very excellent, and to be wished that all were perfect, and if possible, attain to the top of well-doing, in whatsoever commanded, or for∣bidden us: Yet, seeing there's a great difference between those that do those duties whereunto injoyn∣ed, some obtaining to a great height of perfection; others unto a mediocrity only: What reason hast thou, to make Ordinances, whereunto all are not bound for observance, and yet punishest such as performe them not? Every one, not deserving a reward for what he doth, being not liable presently unto punishing for what he doth not.
And therefore, in binding our selves unto what we should ob∣serve, as much as may be, through the whole course of our lives, it becometh us, at all times, to re∣gulate our manners and actions, by the Laws of true Philosophy; which, as it rewardeth ever, where rewards become due to our de∣serts, by doing what it commands; so it punisheth no at any time, where punishments are not due for our not doing that, whereunto, by way of counsell we are onely, lovingly and most tenderly ad∣vised. But, I will again embarque my self in the discourse of what he [Julian] did touching Sciences, and the use of Tongues; it not being possible to refin from of∣ten making mention of him, and forcing my self to defend him in what lies in my power to speak truely in his behalf, and yet just∣ly otherwise, rendring him wor∣thy of neglect, where he deserves the same. In which regard, he
never did, (I may speak it im∣partially) a more unjust and in∣sufferable action, than when he would have prohibited us Christi∣ans the study thereof. Which per∣verse resolution of his, barbarously intended against us, every man, me thinks, that with delight, ad∣dicteth himself to the profession of good literature, should con∣temn, even as I do, who cannot hold from revealing my self to be of that number, and who, by rea∣son, and in comparison, thereof, have quitted altogether, and wholly abandoned all other things of this life; whether they be goods, money, jewels, plate, authority, honours, or the like trash, depend∣ing upon those unappeaseable tor∣mentours; the vexatious desires of this world, that as in a dream, bring fading pleasures, but no true joyes to the beholders thereof with their eyes. But, as for my self, I have embraced the onely study of Tongues, and other Sciences, ha∣ving
no manner of regret at the pains I have endured, aswell by Sea as Land, to attain thereunto; desiring that I, together with all my Freinds and well-wishers, may be abundantly furnished, and fortified therewith: And which I have allwayes cherished, and cho∣sen above all things, next unto that Soverain good, the glory of God, and Salvation of the Elect, depending on him in his Son, and our Saviour Jeus Christ, through the grace and powerfull operation of the Holy Ghost. So that if every one (as Pindarus hath it) feels, or is sensible of his own losse most, it's necessary for me to discourse of this subject; not any thing that can be imagined be∣ing so agreeable therewith, as to render all possible thanks to the Word or Son of God the Father, by the words and benefit of the tongue, for that the study of Tongues, and other Liberal Sci∣ences have hitherto been left free to us.
But, what ayled thee? or from whence proceeded it (O thou light and unsatisfiable man!) that thou wentest about to forbid the Chri∣stians this study of Sciences and Tongues? which was, not onely in the number of those evils, where∣with we were threatned, but also, well neer ordained and published. Why so? And Wherefore I pray? Whose counsell, reason (I be∣seech you) hath carried thine Un∣derstanding? (call'd by thee, in thine own terme, and fancied phrase, Mercury.) What will∣fully wicked men, what inchant∣ed Devils have suggested the same unto thee? If thou wilt, we will tell the truth, why. It was requisite and meet for thee, after committing so many foul and enormous things, that thou shouldest be reduced unto such a passe, as to be hurried in∣to thine own confusion, by, in what thou reputed'st more pru∣dent and wise, therein unwit∣tingly to make thy self appear to
all the world a very fool through thy much over-sight, and indis∣cretion. For, say, I pray; To what did this thy Ordinance tend? What reason therein had'st thou, for that thy new and strange prohibiting us the leave of attaining to the knowledge of the Tongues, and o∣ther Sciences? If any equall, and in∣different? produce the same, and wee'l quietly be satisfi'd without further complaining. For, as ac∣customed we are to overcome with reason, so will we never (with Gods help) be so destitute of common sense, so void of tolerable understandig, as not to yeild, and give place to reason, in like manner. Yea, but reply you, Sciences and the Greek tongue belong to us; even as Barbarisme, and Ig∣norance to your Religion; which consists in no other great matter, then to say only [I beleeve.] But they among you, nevertheless that follow the Sect of Pythago∣ras,
will they not laugh you to scorn for so saying? Seeing [Ips dixit, the Master said it.] was enough among them: viz. Their great Principle, and of more ac∣count, than whatever answer else, though never so prudent, and to more purpose. For after this first, and so much esteemed maxime of theirs, in making no further an∣swer, (which was injoyned all them that followed his Philoso∣phy,) he accustomed himself to speak little: It being certainly ob∣served among them, upon what∣ever Question asked, or reason demanded to reply onely, [So Py∣thagoras is of opinion.] and there∣with without other satisfaction, or further resolution given, to rest content. So that, it was in a man∣ner the same thing, though with some little change of words and syllables; for them to remain satis∣fied with Pythagoras their Master's [I have said it.] as for us, with respect unto what said by Christ our Master, to say [We must be∣leeve.]
All this notwithstanding, you forbear not still to mock, and detract us, for that, by our Religi∣on, we have bound our selves to give credit unto that, which Per∣sons filled with the Spirit of God, have transmitted unto us. Whereas, their very authority, were there nothing else, is proof sufficient for what they have writ∣ten, being of more power, and force, to convince the gainsayers, than all the Ipse dixit's of Py∣thagoras, all the Demonstrations, and Positions of whatever other Philosophers, and humane Doctors since the beginning. But suppose the tying our selves to believe certain Doctrines, de∣livered unto us after that sort, be lyable in good earnest, to be re∣proved, and justly contradicted by you: How can you prove the use of Tongues to be in your power only? If so, How comes it to pass, that we, against your Laws, and Ordinances, have a share therein? For, to whom belongs the Greek
Tongue? to whom to speak, and understand it? I say, to speak, and understand it, thereby to distinguish the force of words, with which you aequiocate, when diverse things are comprehended under one, and the same expression; some under∣standing one thing, and some ano∣ther? But thou must confesse, the Greek tongue depends either on the Service of thy Religion; or else, on the pleasure of those that first invented, and established the same. If on thy Religion, tell me where, and by what Preists, it was first ordained, that the Greek tongue should be spoken therein; as we see it hath been resolved, whereof, and to what Divels, we should sacrifice? For, according to the Statutes, and Rules of your Doctors and Preists, it's not law∣full unto all, to use all alike; or, to one, to use all after the same manner. In what Place, (as in the Countrey of the Lydians) is it a holy thing, proper and pecu∣iar unto them, to render curses
unto Hercules? and to beleive, they do this fained God a great ho∣nour in singing reproachfully unto him? Or, (as to the Inhabitants of Taurus) to kill Strangers? And (as in Lacedemonia) to be whip'd till the blood springs forth untill it touch the Altar? To whom is it a holy matter, (as to the Phrygians) to be gelt, as they were, the Mu∣sick sweetly sounding, and they losing their genitals in dancing? Or, (as in other places) to use So∣domy, keep brothel Houses, and make use of such other the like mysteries? There was a custome, and ordi∣nance also, to speak Greek unto some of their Devils. Which, if still it should be used, it could not prove, or thereby be inferred as a proper, and peculiar thing for the Greeks, or Pagans to apply to some one of their Gods, or Devils that whereof every one might be serv∣ed, every one of them make use of:. Even, as it is ordained to sa∣crifice very many things that are
vulgar and common: which, if thou sayest, it's not so, and the Di∣alect of this tongue appertains pro∣perly to thee, as of thy domain, and in this right, repellest us: I answer, it cannot be comprehended what reason thou hast for it, or how thou can'st appropriate it to Devils. For, although the Service, or Ca∣ball of thy Religion be performed in the Greek tongue, it followes not therefore, that the Greek tongue depends on Religion: neither is it a sufficient reason to proscribe, and exclude us from making use of so good a Dialect: the conclusion would not be pertinent. As if two Qualities happen to be in one Sub∣ject, it followes not, those two are one same thing. For, supposing one same man to have the Art of Drawing Pictures, and Melting Gold, it should then follow that his Gold-meling, and Picture-drawing should be one and the same thing: Which but to suppose only were a very vain, and most absur'd conceit.
I demand then of thee, (who art so jealous of the Greek tongue,) what thou meanest, in not permit∣ting, but rather going about to hinder us from making use of it? Forbiddest thou us thereby the down-right, and trivial manner of speaking thereof, accordingly as the Common People are accust∣omed to speak it? or, that of speak∣ing more elegantly therein, and with choicer tearms, that are not so intelligible of the unlearned, or of those that are not so well ver'st in the knowledge of Tongues. A Tongue is not proper, or pe∣culiar to them, who have invented it, or to any Art, or Profession comprehended in the mind: but to all that can understand it. For, even as in the Artificial tuning of Musical Instruments, the string heightned, or loosed, renders divers sounds, yet all, accord∣ing to his mind, that, to make good Harmony therewith, playeth; and governeth the Instrument: So useth the divine Word, the great
and Soveraign Work-man, for matter of Sciences, and so forth, with us; It being, according to his pleasure, that this man should in∣vent one Art, that an other, and communicate the same, without appropriating either, to their first Inventors: and thereby render out lives more pleasing, more accep∣table, or more tunable each to other. Tell me, then? the Greek tongue, appertains it to thee alone? What? the Rudiments of Letters, were not they the Invention, first of all, of the Phoenicians? or (as ome say) of the Egyptians? or rather of the Hebrewes, a wier Peole then either of them, who maintain their Law in Tabls of Stone, was first written by the finger of Cod? be∣longs it to thee alone, to speak eleganly, as those of Athens? and measures (I ought first to have named the Science of encamping, and making War) to whom belong they? Belongs not that of War-like Inventions to the Euboeans, if it
be true Palamedes was of that Na∣tion, and for the same reason, evil spoken of, accursed, envyed, and after condemned by those that set forward to the Conquest of Troy? Well then, If the Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Hebrews, of whose Inventions we make use, in our doctrine: If the Inhabitants of the Isle of Euboea, claim that as theirs properly, the same reason that thou alleagest: what shall we do? or how justifie our selves to them? w being liable, by the same Law, tha thou wouldest make, to be deprived of many excellent Arts, descended unto us from others, and, conse∣quently, our selves forced to ren¦der them back again to their firs Inventors; till, at length afte returning what we had from them▪ It befall us, as it did the Jaye i the Fable, who, when she had restored unto other Birds the fea¦thers that she borrowed of them her self afterwards remained naked and became deformed.
To give an instance, or two, in certain Particulars. The Art of Poesy, doth it belong to thee only? or may it not rather be ascribed to a poor Old Woman? who being punch'd on the shoulder (as the tale goes) by a young fellow passing by, and affronting her, she fell there∣upon into such a fury, that unad∣visedly, and upon a sudden she rapt out a Verse: whereat the fel∣low taking delight, with more cu∣riosity after skanned the feet there∣of upon his fingers: and, by this means, the admirable Art of Poesy was first occasioned. Again, if thou braggest, and art so vain-glo∣rious because of thine Armes, tell me, brave Sir, from whom had∣dest thou them at the beginning? Were not the Cyclops they that first invented the Art of Forging? If Scarlet also be so much prised by thee above all things, who made thee so cunning and knowing a man therein, as not to ascribe the first finding out thereof to the Tyrians? in whose Countrey a Shepheards
Dog of theirs browsing upon a Swad of red Beans, and his Chapps becomming all over, as it were, bloody therewith, gave his Master a hint thereby, to take notice of the Flower thereof: And from thence sprang the first attempting to Die, with the juice of it, that cloth which is now in so great esteem with you, O ye Emperours! and great Persons. What sayest thou in thy claime farther unto Husbandry, touching Plowing, and Tilling the Earth? As also, to the Art of making Ships? when the Athenians deny thee the right, to be the sole Master, and Proprietor thereof, by ascri∣bing the first invention therein, to Ceres, Triptolemus Dracon; as also to Celeus, Icarus, and to the rest of that Fabulous rout. Where took your filthy Mysteries, (fit onely to be celebrated in the night) their first rise? To pass by these foolish matters, and have a fling again at thy fury, or rather impi∣ous acts: From whence hadst thou
the Invention of taking thy first imitation of formalityes, and giving the same to thy Paganisme, as also other of thy most abomina∣ble Ceremonies in serving thy false Gods, are they not from the Thracians, (as the Greek word  signifies;) and thy man∣ner of Sacrificing from the Cal∣deans, and Cypriots? Even as A∣stronomy from the Babylonians; Magique, from the Persians; the Art of Divining by Dreams, from the Telinesians: as that, by Birds, from the Phrygians, who first ob∣served the motion, and flying of them. To avoid prolixity; From whence hath sprouted every Sci∣ence put in practise by thee? Hath not some one, or other, gathered from each of them a particular In∣vention, and through reducing the whole altogether into one Mass, thereby forged out unto thee a false, and foolish Religion? May we not then openly avow it to thy face, that when thou shalt have rendred up each Art of thine, to
it's own Authour and Inventor, there will remain nothing behind to thee, but thine own Folly, to∣gether with thy new Ordinance of denying us all things, for the fur∣ther establishing of thy fond and wicked Religion? Thou being the First of the Christians that hast plotted a revolt against Jesus Christ thy Master; as in former times, the Scythian Slaves rose up in Rebellion, and revolted against the Scythians that were their Ma∣sters. In my conceit, thou hadd'st done better, to have endevoured the discomposing, the overthrow∣ing of our Union; who, in relati∣on to thy Laws and Ordinances, seem wicked, and perverse; that thereby the remainder of thy Em∣pire being at rest from such like fighting businesse, a man might see the Roman Republique (as in it's first splendor) delivered from all civill warrs, which are far worse than forrain: Even as we should rather prevent the destruction of our own bodies and flesh, than that of Strangers.
Now, (Howbeit all the Actions of this our Impostor towards Chri∣stians, in relation to what before spoken of, fall out to appear frauds, only cover'd over with courtesies, & consequently, far unworthy of Im∣perial Majesty,) I shall yet pro∣duce some finer, and fuller of sub∣tlety, that were acted by him. To which purpose, He per∣ceiving after all this, that in con∣fideration of the Precepts, Do∣ctrines, and Divine Testimonies, aswell of the Old, as New Testa∣ment, (of the Old, by Prophesies, and evident Inspirations of Gods Spirit: Likewise of the New, by the Revelations of the Son of God, and of Miracles, great, and re∣markable to confirme us in those things, which, by the Fundamental Positions of our Religion, we make open profession of,) we began to become most constant, and confi∣dent in the Truth, and Faith of Christ; that we might not be quit∣ted in these respects without his assaulting, and offending us for the
same, as he did others, upon the like occasion. Behold he contrives and puts in execution his designes against us! as Rabsheketh (Leiue∣tenant to Senacherib King of the Assyrians) sometime did against the Jews, who entered with an Ar∣my, into the Country of Judea, 2 King. 18. 17. and having with great power, laid Seige before Jerusalem to take it, when he saw he could not carry it by force, and that the Traitors within could not deliver him no∣thing according to his expectation, he endevoured with fine words, and in the Jews own language, to make himself master thereof; which the besieged taking notice of, demand∣ed first that, addressing himself to them, he would speak in the Assy∣rian tongue, and not in the He∣brew, for fear, least under the sweet∣nesse of their own language, they might cunningly be brought into servitude: So this man [the Em∣perour Julian] after the same manner, desiring to bring us under his subjection, was upon the device
of founding Colledges in all Towns, of erecting Pulpits to Preach in, and Chairs to read and expound his Pa∣gan instructions, as well, those that concerned manners, as other pre∣tended holy mysteries: likewise, of publishing a Form of Prayers sung by them, and answered one toano∣ther: also, touching the Disci∣pline of those who should happen to be faulty in the Preface of their Caball; and, generally, imitated all good orders, and establishments that are observed in our Religion. For he had well-nigh brought to passe an Ordinance for building of Hospitals, and other Publique houses, also Recluses for Virgins, and other that for Devotion desire to retire themselves from worldly affairs: again, other Places, where care to be taken in making provi∣sion for sick folke, and other sort of Distributions to poor people: also, as we are wont to use letters of recommendation from one Countrey to an other in favour of the Necessitous, as occasion offered
it self, so would he have ordained to be done on his party: with the like wholesome constitutions bor∣rowed from us, and seemingly much approved, and liked by him, in like manner. Behold then, what this new So∣phister, and Teacher of strange doctrines had resolved upon! But, in that, touching these matters, the purpose and intention of this man was not accomplish'd and effected, I cannot say whether it was more advantagious to us, (that were forthwith delivered from him, and his) or to him, (whose enterprises were vain as dreams:) because, easie it had been present∣ly to discern the difference betwixt the actions of men, and the imita∣tions of Apes: Of whom, though it be said, they can counterfeit some subtleties which men use, and do bfore them, to deceive them, yet herein they are to seek, in that not able through their imitation to discover the reason of our craft in so doing. Whereby it falls out, that
neither the Thessalonicall Mare, nor the Woman of Lacedemn, nor those who drink of the water of Arethusa, I mean the Sicili∣ans do better carry away the price among them of their kind, then the Ceremonies and Customes of Chri∣stians: Which, though comely, significant, and grave, as also of laudable use, are such, not withstand∣ing, as cannot be attained unto of any other sort of men, that go about to imitate them: their Original being taken, not so much from the Invention of Men, as from the assistance of God, in their making, and continuing the same still to his Church, and People. But, there's nothing prettyer, then (as on a Theater) to observe, and heed well the admirable imi∣tation of these men, and excellen∣cy wherewith they endeavour to counterfeit us. What then, I trow, is the manner of their teaching? What the end of their assembling together? Is it not, that (as Plato saith) we may see this City move
and wag? which is but a discourse in words. Whereas true Philoso∣phy, in the generall, consisting of two Parts, viz. Theoreticall, and Practique: the former more hard and sublime, the latter, though lower, yet more profitable; both of them, helping each the other, are in perfection in our Religion. Because, as we make use of the Theory for the knowledge of hea∣venly things, so we establish the Practique as the basis thereof: it not being possible to participate with, or to attain unto true know∣ledge in the Theory, without en∣deavouring to do thereafter in the Practique. As for their Manners, I know not whether therein they are, either more ridiculous, or vile, and ab∣ject, their Law-makers destitute of divine inspiration while compo∣fing them, and the Laws themselves thereupon resembling roots of trees undermined and carried away with water, floating up and down, without having any firm foundation
whereupon, for any long time, to repose them. To compare, neverthelesse, our our condition with theirs in this regard; As they give unto them∣selves the liberty to sport and play in many Passages of their Fables: so we, in like manner, are not debar'd of all mirth, when com∣manded, in Scripture, to rejoyce with them that tejoyce: neither free, more then they from sadness, when advised to mourn with them that mourn &c. there being with us, as well as with them, A time (as Solomon speaks) to weep, and Ecles. 3. 4, 7, 8. a time to laugh: a time to dance:—a time to keep silence, and a time to speak. A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace. Let their Theater then (I know not what else to call their Temple) be set up, and they of the better sort in the Common-wealth, o that have attained unto gray hairs, be placed in the highest chairs, o whoever else make themselves ta∣ken
notice of for the honour of their race, or wisdome in things of this world, (wherein there is more false and fading pleasure, then true piety;) for wee'l agree to them in this point. What then? As for their after rejoycing, let themselves, in what they have a mind, please themselves, be cloath∣ed with Scarlet, honoured with Flags and Garlands: If this be true felicity, and above that which the common sort can attain unto, let them (a Gods name) enjoy the same, esteem the estate that is vul∣gar and low to bring with it neglect and contempt both: contratily, the other, that's more magnificent and exquisite, to gain authority, and beleif: never will they abase them∣selves so much, I am sure, as to esteem it, as we do, a point of honour to be humbled; and, not in the fashion of clothes, but in the manner of well living to make true estimation of what represented be∣fore our eyes, imploying our whole time, not about trifles, and curio∣sities,
but in that which depends on the inward man, and consists, not in seeking after popular ap∣plause, but in well governing all manner of unruly passions, and affections incident unto our souls. On which point, for the present, wee'l set up our rest. Now what followes after? Thou, for thy part, wilt represent unto thine Auditory riddles, or dark, and hard matters to be interpreted [Divine Oracles] (as thou callest them) Thou wilt read, and expound unto them Books, that treat of the mystery of thy Religion, and of the World. But, tell us, what are those Books? and who be the Au∣thours thereof? Will it not be a fine thing (think ye) to sing of the Generation of the Gods fained by Hesiod, and of their Wars set forth by him? of the Rebellions of Ty∣rants and Giants, with their deaths? and of other horrible accidents and disasters that befell Cottis, Giges, Briareus, Enceladus? of your Gods, some described, by the
same Author, to have Dragons feet, othes cloathed with Thunder? of your Isles thrown down upon them, and serving for receptacles, and graves, to those that they are cast upon? Again, to sing of the sun∣dry foul Swarms, and diversity of imagined Hydraes, Chimera's, Gor∣gon's, and the like monstrous mass, and confused rabble of all manner of other wickednesse, and profan∣nesse? Are not these sweet things to gather out of Hesiod, and to feed the ears of the People withall? Also, the bewitching story of Or∣pheus following thereupon, with his Harp, and Song drawing after him Wild-Beasts, and Birds? To relate of Jupiter his magnificent Titles, and the many significations thereof? with his being the most high Soveraign among the Gods, and yet covered with dung (whe∣ther of Sheep, of Horses, or of Mules, I know not) that thereby he might make the power of his God-head understood, by his pro∣ducing from thence a great number
of small insectile creatures, and giving life unto them upon their productions? After all which, to make mention of that impure Goddesse of theirs, who more im∣modestly, than became her feminine Deity, shewed her self half naked; to make her worshippers (I think) as well in love with Her, as with the Religion, wherein she was publickely adored, and represented after that fashion, by her Images, and other Pictures in her Temples, and else-where, to be look'd upon? Neither doth herein the totall or whole sum of their foolish fopperies consist but unto these, (as upon a Stage) are made to appear Phanes, Euricapeu, and he that swallowed the other Gods, and vomited them up again, or discharged his stomach of them afterwards, to make himself known the Father of Gods, and Men. Are not here, in these high Points of their Religion's mystical matters, sound and subtle Doctrines of Edi∣fication for the Common People
to gather out, and to make use of for their Souls health. Besides these, and a number of the like ridiculous toys, Certain Allego∣ryes are invented, by their Doctors imaginations therein, transcending humane capacity by which they pre∣cipitate as weltheir own, as their au∣ditorsunderstanding unto confusion. Again, touching Homer, and those many fond stories fabled by him, where wilt thou affixe the same? For it's he, who of old, composed Comedyes, or rather Tragedyes concerning your fained Gods. You'l finde (I beleeve) both the one, and the other in those redoubted Poesies of his, whereof some cannot chuse but move and stir up their laughter, as well as other, tears. The truth is, 'twas not a matter of small consequence for Oceanus to be reconciled to Thetis: and therefore, well might she run about, and rave like a mad woman, upon the thought only, that through the abstinence, for a time, of conjugall duties; viz. in
not commixing dry things with moist; there might eminent dan∣ger follow after, to the prejudice of the whole world. Be it so. But what tolerable reason may be given? what the least sober inter∣pretation can be made of that meeting of Jupiter and Juno, the same time, when at mid-noon, not at mid-night, Juno so shamelessely entreated, and entised him also, mostlasciviously to accompany with her? Your Poets endevour, indeed to dissemble it in their verses, strewing for them a bed of fresh hearbs, and renewing the same with flowers of Safron, and Hiacynths. But where? and from whom had they these things? To what end further? and what reason is there yet among you, that the same Juno, Sister, and Wise of the aforesaid Jupiter, should sometimes hang in the Air, and in the cloudes coun∣ter-ballanced with chaines of ion, together with manacles of gold? She, I say, who had her arms so white, and her fingers so rosie?
Had any of the other Gods de∣manded a reason of Jupiter, where∣fore that his fair Goddesse was put into such a posture by him, with∣out first asking pardon of him, for that his presumption, he had cast himself in danger of Jupiter's dis∣pleasure, for that his good Office shewed towards Juno. At another time, the said Juno, neverthelesse, sportingly encom∣passing her slender waste in the loose girdle of sweet love, put on, to∣gether with it, such blandishments of enticing affections, such wining∣ly bewitching charmes of wanton expressions, that with his own lips thereupon, he could no longer re∣frain, from giving sentence on her behalf; protesting she so irresistibly surprized him, in those her amorous allurements, that, of all his other Mistrisses, there was none to be compar'd to her. What means also that divine mystery of the brown eye-brows, and the shaking of those locks that made all the heavens tremble? What the wounding of
Mars, that dull lover? and of that indiscreet Adultresse Venus the fair, shut up in a brazen nett, bound, and manacled by lame Vul∣can, who, to his own shame and confusion, assembling the Gods to∣gether, to see this spectacle, for a little money let them depart again? If able to render a reason of such like toyishness, tell us further, I pray, what was meant by that fright, and stir among the Gods, touching that unchast Helena, that by reason thereof, the Heavens fell on such a thundring, the Earth on such a cracking, that it wanted little, but both had been removed out of their places: the Sea like∣wise turned upside-down; the gates of Hell opened, and thereupon, what before, so long time lay hid, made known and discovered. All which, and more, a great many the like strange things, having been as strangely and diversly de∣livered unto Posterity; who is he among you, so subtle and profound, yea, though he had the understand∣ing
of Jupiter, that with what ever discurring imaginations higher than the cloudes, can reduce them to common sense, or in any kind of mediocrity, make them as much as tolerable to be understood? Which if true, & they are not a∣shamed to confess as much; in like manner acknowledge them to be base and dishonest things; then the proof thereof, (without having recourse to a Mythologie to serve them for a covering, with respect unto what they suppose so finely to have found out and invented,) will be apparent and manifest enough. What shall we say further? Is it not a handsome thing, think ye, for those men, that hold so firmly & con∣stantly unto what in the Ceremonial circumstances of their profound Religion, they make profession of, to abuse and fool themselves after this sort with obstruse and non∣sense Fables? Thus, neverthelesse, they are accustomed to do, for the most part, who thereby would en∣deavour in what ever, though never
so weakly said, or done by them, to escape from being reprehended. But they'le reply, perhaps, the bu∣sinesses before spoken of are but meer conceptions, matters, which they so greatly stand not upon, but invented on set purpose onely to take up the Peoples thoughts, and delight their fancies withall. If so, then let them produce, and shew us other things of their Theology, that are more solid, and naturall, that we may further confer with them about the same, and, in the interim, tell us, whether it be not great sottishnesse to boast, and make a more then ordinary account of matters that are onely fabulous, and to be blushed at? Again, whether it be not a foul shame, to publish to all the world hidden things, and unknown to many (sor every one is not learned) with pictures, and figures, and (which is worse) with great losse of money in Temples, Altars, Statues? also by Sacrifices, which put men to the cost of so many crowns? When a man may
be pious enough in the true Religi∣on without much cost, is it not a folly to desire rather to follow er∣ror, and falsehood with infinite charges? But, let them say, they are Fictions and Jeasts, wherewith Po∣ets abound in their measures, and in Fables, to delight, and tickle their ears therewith that hear them, mixing, after that sort, hidden and covered senses, that few but learn∣ed and discerning men know how to make use of: I ask the question, how can others make account of, or have those deites in any great esti∣mation, when those Poets of theirs, themselves abuse after that grosse manner, the Gods they would have honoured, that it's reward enough for them, that they are not punish∣ed for their so doing? For seeing, by their Law, under pain of death, they are prohibited, in any man∣ner, to use whatever Blasphemy, or reproach towards the Gods, what punishment, (suppose ye) are they worthy of, that frequently, and
in publique mock, and jest at them, in their Poesies, after the foulest manner, with the filthyest, and most injurious taunts can be thought on; yea, and leave the same after, as in a Comedy, unto Posterity, for, a long time, to be laughed at? Touching their having some things more covered, other more manifest in their Religious Wor∣shipping of their Gods, I acknow∣ledge that in our Religion it is so also, but with this difference: In our Books concerning the same, the common and litteral sense hath no∣thing foul, or dishonest in it: and that which is hid to the vulgar, to the learned therein it's very admi∣rable and clear: even as if a body perfect in beauty were in some se∣cret place, covered with a vest∣ment fit, and correspondent there∣unto. Moreover, Representations and Resemblances of Divine things, ought, methinks, to have nothing therein dishonest, or, unworthy
of what they signifie: or, be such as men would take ill, if the same should be done unto them. Yea rather, they ought to be things exquisite in beauty, or, at least, not vile and base: that, either discreet men may justly take ex∣ception at, or, the vulgar be there∣by scandalized. On the contrary, what you pra∣ctise, there's no credit to be given unto, and what outwardly repre∣sented by you, is as detestable. For, what sense is there, to make a man's self be led in the streets through the dirt, and drawn to the Port among rocks and shells? What is the end? And to what pur∣pose are such like things recorded by you? As for thine own part, thou wilt forge us Jests, and Allegories, of thy Travels and imaginations, but no body will give credit unto, o beleeve the same. And why? be∣cause what already in sight, and a∣bove-board, is plain enogh, and intelligible. Whereby, as thou
gainest none that will give eare unto thee, so thou losest lookers on, to behold and see what thou wouldest have taken notice of: men, aswell stopping their ears, as with-holding their eyes, the while, from the apprehension of such un∣likely, and impertinent matters. Again, the reason of your Theory, and Allegories is such, and so far from the purpose intended by you, that it is easier too bring together things far apart and seperated asun∣der, than to make agree, and re∣concile in one and the same person, your fictions and figures. It being thus with them touch∣ing their religious Mysteries fought and derived from Naturall Philo∣sophy, what may, or will be said by them with respect unto their Morality? What Principles and Maxims have they in use therein to forme men unto vertue? What remonstrances to better by degrees and make them more perfect? They'l reply, perhaps, and say, for example, first, that Concord is
a fine thing, viz. to see Cities uni∣ted, People, and Families agree well together, and Every one, for his own particular, to govern him∣self according to the right Rules of uncorrupted Nature; which se∣parating, and yet reuniting all things, hath composed, though of Many Parts, yet but One onely Frame, or fabrick of the Whole world. And this they'l not stick (it may be) to shew, and set forth by diverse examples. But in re∣lating to the Wars of the Gods, their Seditions and revolts one with another, and an infinite number of mischiefs, and evils which they suffered, and procured thereby, and whereof the most part of their Poesies are full: Instead of peace∣able, they make their Auditory mutinous; in stead of wise, vain; rather than thereby render the Proud, Humble; or the Audacious, Modest, and well mannered by such examples. For if, without ha∣ving such (as it were) Pictures be∣fore their eyes, it be an hard peice
of business, to bring them from evill to good, from vice, to vertue; who naturally are inclined, and given over, in a manner, to all filthinesse. How may we imagine it a thing possible, to perswade such unto a more orderly life, unto more peaceably behaving them∣selves: when in prosecution of such their other evilly inclined affecti∣ons, they seem but only to conform themseves, in so doing, unto the ex∣amples of their false Gods? which profain Deities of theirs, being diversly set forth unto them by Poets, their only Preachers, (as I may so say) some as Patterns of one vice, some of another: What are they, the People, otherwise thereby, then as it were, encourag∣ed unto the same? What their Gods, but their Guides (I mean the Peoples Conductors) in what∣ever manner of evill Concupi∣cence? Neither are those foul Feinds Patterns only, but also Pat∣rons of all kind of abomination: and in consideration thereof, are
as severally honoured, and served by their several Worshippers and Servants, with severall Altars, and Sacrifices, dedicated, and sacred unto such, and such foul enormi∣ties, &c. With respect whereun∣to, your Party, having their full swing, and liberty to wallow in as licenciously as their hearts can wish; would it not be a hainous matter to punish by Law, things established by Law? For their Gods to take vengeance on those men, for acting those things, in re∣gard whereof, themselves are espe∣cially acknowledged to be Divine, and more particularly, adored as the only Patrons of such affairs, and in whose behalf, it's rather an honourable, than reproachfull mat∣ter, to be Vicious; (if vicious in such a case, it be lawfull to cal any?) Would any man beleeve this? or, can there be any such in justice? any supposed wrong o offence taken so oppressive, an not to be tolerated among you as this?
Secondly, If we prefer, and ex∣toll the honour and respect due to Fathers, and Mothers, and for that they are the first mediate cause of our entrance by Birth into the world, give them Honour with the first: Doth not Theology, and Reason both teach that we should do so? To which purpose, doth not their God Saturne do well? hath he not left them a fine ex∣ample? He, who gelt Ʋranias, that he should beget no more gods, and then threw his genitals into the Sea, whereof a God was after engendred? And Jupiter, that, in imitation thereof, rebelled against Saturne his own Father? Such ex∣amples of cruell Paricides among the Gods, and the like, do they not well to insert in their Books to be imitated of Children, in ho∣nouring their Fathers and Mothers, after the same fashion. The third point, shall be Neg∣lect of Riches; as who can say, the not procuring of them at all hands, is no matter how, though
never so wickedly. To which end, in what matter shall their Mercu∣ry be represented? What shall we say to that sharke? what honour? and after what scene, are we to atribute the same to his budget? to the vertue and gift of grace that this filching God had to steal, and carry away, with a trick of nim∣ble conveyance, whatsoever he once laid his prolling fingers upon? What to Phoebus also, who is said to give nothing without gold? un∣to whom, nothing is so welcome as ready coin? Behold! are not these rare encouragements and ex∣amples, to put men, though by nature otherwise never so cove∣tously affected, into an utter de∣testation of the muck of this world, money, so perniciously sought after. Moreover, with what face can Jove's Preists exhort his worshipers unto Continency, when Jupiter, sometimes, wholly applyes him∣self to the love of Women? at other, to Phrygian boys? for whose
sake (if Poets say true) he turn'd himself into an Eagle. &c. Also, wherefore is it, that at a Drinking match, wherein, meeting with o∣ther of your inferiour Gods, to the end those profane Deities might be more voluptuously attended up∣on, you feign him to cause them to be served, and waited upon by those boys, he so much delighted withall, in stead of Butlers, and other Servitours? Let Hercules, (if you please) be there also, who deflowered fifty of the daughters of Thyestes in one night: And then I know no reason, wherefore ha∣ving put an end to this thirteenth labour of his, he may not be put likewise into the number of those other Gods. Their furious, as well as fighting God Mars, will he not be a fine fomenter of Peace? A ready resolver upon all occasions, to cut of holler? Bacchus their God of Wine, a sober Deity to encourage his worshipers unto a due moderation in quaffing and drinking? And that crafty Com∣panion
of theirs Coster, to with∣hold men from deceipt and cozen∣age? Again, when others are sad, that move from place to place, upon seeble and weak legs; will not that limping God of theirs, that halts both on the one side, and on the other, be a notable bar, and obsta∣cle to keep light and unseasonable Jesters from scurrill mockery, and unbridled laughter? Jupiter, who together with a foul company of o∣ther devouring Devils, ran so fast to that pompous, and magnificent Feast of the Aethiopians, without reproach; a jolly means to remove and take away Gluttony? In like manner Hercules [Kill-Cowe] (as he is sometimes styled) who, tor∣menting upon a time, a poor La∣bourer, devoured one of the Oxen of his Team: And for that rare act of his, got himself a Name, or Title of renown? and generally all those other Gods, that make so much hast to be fed with the fu∣mings, and incensings, and pour∣ings
out of all manner of Offer∣ings made unto them, in their Sacrifices. These heathenish customes, hate∣full doings, horrible abominations usually put in practice by those of your Party, approach they any thing near (think ye) to that inno∣cency, that excellency, that inte∣grity of sound faith, and good life, whereunto we are exhorted, and which we [all that unfainedly de∣sire, not only to be thought, but also to be indeed Christians] are commanded in our Religion, and Doctrine? No such matter. Besides, we have other manner of light to lead us, other Teachers, (namely Christ, and his Apostles, and Pro∣phets, &c.) to instruct us other∣wise, and to instill into our hearts obedience, and reverence unto what enjoyned we are, or, upon whatever terms, councelled and advised by them. From whom we, upon every occasion (whatsoever too many of us, God knowes, either through weaknesse, or, at least,
willfulnesse, have not the power, or goodnesse to perform as becom∣meth their Disciples) are never∣theless at all times lovingly invited in the words of our Saviour, [—Whatsoever ye would that Mat. 7. 12. men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.] Again, it is, with us a sin, not only to commit an evil actually either in word, or deed, but also to do the same in thought, as being liable thereby unto pu∣nishment before God (who dis∣cerneth the secrets of the heart) thought not so easie to be taken notice of by men, who cannot see the same, and consequently punish the offenders by that means. Yea, so exactly are we bound to carry our selves in point of Conti∣nency (according to the Rules of Christ our Master) that even the eye is by him forbidden us, thereby onely to lust after any unlawfull thing. In Point of Anger not only the bloody hand, but also the bloody heart is restrained. In case of
swearing, not onely that we swear not falsly, but also that not lightly in like manner, or, not at all: not at all, that is, in our common and ordinary discourse and talke, or, when as not legally called before a Magistrate, thereby to attest the truth. As for our [goods (of fortune] as we usually call the wealth of this world) to possesse them, as if we possessed them not, by not valuing them in comparison of our chief good reposed in heaven. With respect whereunto, some, among us, have taken little thought for possessing any; some, instead there∣of have imbraced poverty: and, not a few, having first renounced the voluptuousnesse of the belly, and vice of gluttony (a dangerous Mistrisse, and Mother of many sins) have after that so consumed the part Mortall, by means of the immortal, (it may be said of a truth) a man could not discern almost any flesh on them, having acquired a law of vertuous living to them∣selves
by not being carried away so much as unto smaller sins, and whereof there is no account made that they are so. Is it not an excellent thing, thus, whereas others punish onely acts outwardly committed against God, or Man, we, the evil intentions of our hearts likewise? and thereby endeavour, at least to cut away not onely the branches, but the root also, to stay not onely the streams, but to stop up also the head of that impure fountain from casting forth that noysomness which would quite poison us after, through its more violent, and dangerous defluxi∣ons? Tell me, in what place among you, and what People they are, that wish well to these that injure them? Where is it (I beseech you) that your men do good to those that hurt them? as if reproaches offend∣ed nothing, but the truth? Who are they on your Party, that take it patiently when persecuted? that upon with-holding from you your
Cloak, will render unto them your Coat also? pray for those that curse you? and (in a word) by a singu∣lar sweetnesse, overcome evil with goodnesse, endeavouring, by inno∣cently suffering wrong, to make those that afflict you therewith bet∣ter, if it be possible? But admit we should grant you, that by your manner of endoctri∣nating your Disciples, in time, you might cause them thereby to cut off somewhat from their former excesse, and superfluity of naughti∣nesse: how could you, for all that, by your never so much instructing them in your Precepts, make them, or your selves attain unto that per∣fection, whereunto our Religion aspireth? Seeing we are not con∣tent with well doing only for the present, but think ill of our selves, if not make a dayly progresse fur∣ther and further in godliness so long as we live in this world, and also cause the same to appear evidently unto all that are acquainted with us. If not endeavour, with all our
power, to do thereafter, we should be very sorry, and fitly enough might be thought only to resemble Moles, who are said to move con∣tinually, and yet not to stir far from the same place: or otherwise to appear unto those that look upon us, like Horses in a Mill, who, by the force of a whip, turn all day incessantly in the same room, with∣out advancing from where they be∣gan at the time, when they were first set about their work in the morning. For whatever mediocrity you suppose sufficient for those of your Party, by the Laws of your hea∣thenish Religion, to consist in: we hold it our duty to strive still, and labour more and more to add ver∣tue to vertue, grace to grace, one good work still to another: as never thinking our selves perfect enough, or to have done all that is com∣manded us, while living in this world: till, at length, our race be∣ing run out here, we are brought un∣to the end of our journey, unto that
glory which is above, and after shall be revealed unto us, for which we were created at first, and whether, through Gods mercy, we doubt not but we shall attain at last, if, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, we fail not to set our mind, and thoughts for recovering the same, on the love of God the Fa∣ther, through a lively faith in his onely Son, and our alone Saviour Jesus Christ: who, by the mighty working of his power, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, will, without all perad∣venture, change these vile bodies of ours, and make them like unto his glorious body, take off from us the corruption of our flesh, and put on upon us the incorruption of his Spirit, give us in exchange for this Bochin, or vail of tears here, the endlesse comfort, and ever∣lasting joyes of that heavenly Jeru∣salem which is above: or that secure Haven, after all our storms in this life, of never failing happinesse in the life to come: where we shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any Rev. 7. 16. more, neither shall the Sun light on us, nor any heat: where there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, neither any more pain: Where the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world, shall feed us, and cloth us, and cherish us, and lead us continually unto flowing waters of the Foun∣tain of all felicity, and content for evermore. To whom, with the Father, and Holy Ghost, three Per∣sons, and one ever living, and wise God, be all Glory, and Ho∣nour, and Dominion, and Might, and Majesty, and Thanks-giving, now at present, and world with∣out end, Amen. FINIS.
