G407 12137564 54788
CHARITY TRIUMPHANT, OR THE VIRGIN-SHEW: Exhibited on the 29th. of October, 1655. Being The LORD MAYORS DAY. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhill, 1655.
To the Right Honourable, Alder man DETHICKE, Lord Major of the City of LONDON. My Lord, VIEW the Roman State under which Government soever you please, whether in the beginnings, un∣der many happy KINGS, or in its change from Monarchy to De∣mocracy, or in its little resurrection to Aristo∣cracy, under the Marian and Scyllan Tyranny, or then in its exaltation into Empire, and absolute Soveraignty; you shall alwaies find every Age, and sort of Governours, adorning and exempli∣fying their severall Authorities by Anniversary Shewes and Pomps to the People, who are na∣turally pleas'd with such Gleames and Irradia∣tions of their Superiors, and gaines at once Ho∣nour to the Magistrate and effects content to the People. The severest and in other matters most rigid Policies or Common-wealths (to wit the Spartan, and Lacedamonian, and Athenian) smooth'd the rugged Front of their power in this Punctilio and reason of State, and Plato and Aristarchus, and
Aristides (though never so just, never so strickt) indulg'd alwaies these Ingratiations to the Peo∣ple. It is the publike Banquet, whereunto you invite the Commons of the City; who expect and rejoyce alwaies to see some of their money spent upon themselves, and so for Recreations, and other Permissions of Supream Governors, it was alwaies thought a peice of prudentiall and warrantable license and wise dispensation, to let the people spend their own time, and some of their money, where they pleas'd, especially in in∣nocent and delightfull diversions. I cannot here set forth the reason of the late extinguishing these Civick Lights, and suppressing the Genius of our Metropolis, which for these Planetary Pageants and Pretorian Pomps was as famous and renoun∣ed in forraign Nations, as for their faith, wealth, and valour. The Ingenie, Artifices, Mysteries, Shewes, Festivals, Ceremonies, and Habits of a State, being amongst the Decora, and unsepa∣rable Ornaments of it. Take away the Fasces, and the Consuls are no more feared, but scorn'd; Let fall the Noble Sword of the City in any place, and you are sure the Mayor has there no Privi∣ledge, no Livery, no distinguishing of Societies, and Fraternities, no Caps (in daies of old) no Prentices, no Truncks, no Citizens, no Robes no Judges, no Maces, no Magestrate: And so for
Anniversary Shews, and harmelesse and merry Recre∣ations, without a moderate permission of them, very little content to the multitude. Right Honourable, I therefore, being the Son of a Citizen, Congratulate this Return of the City-Gallantry and manifestation of her severall Splendors in your Majority to your honoured self, it being most proper that the lost Beauty and Mag∣nificence of the place, should be restored by One (if I mistake it not) a brother of the prime Company, and therefore most fit to lead, that so it being begun in the Virgin society; it may like Vestall fire never go out: And because the Scenicall Contrivement & Pageant Brave∣ry is but an Ephemeron, or Diurnall birth and issue of one day, and so Exit till the next yeare. Poetical fancy do's beg leave to supply that defect, and to inlarge the glory of your day (my Lord) to the period of your year; And because many a far off will be glad to heare what they could not see, and some would willingly retaine and keep, what this day was seen by them. This short Po∣em shall be to those that saw it, a Remembrancer, or representation, and to the remote Wel-wishers of the Cities honour, a written Pageant or Pegma Metricum, and so I address my self (my Lord) to your Virgin, whom I shal labour to make as famous, as your Ho∣nour has made her Dowagable; and by this Paper∣work to give a procession unto your Nobleness and Piety beyond the Demeans of Cheapside. Your Honours Servant, Emd. Gayton.
NO more let Perseus Noble Story Carry away the publike Glory: Nor let Andromeda the fairt, With this our Virgin Starre compare, Nor Let St. George (though Englands Saint) Of his Grand Legend longer vaunt: Nor let the Maid, whom Dragon green, (The fairest Monster ever seen) For killing Maids, and such prey stealing, If we may credit Doctor Heyling. Let not that Maid, nor any other, (Alwaies except the Virgin-Mother) Stand in so great Italicâ As Do's the Virgin of this day. That Virgin Sacrifice that dy'd With Vaile unvailed, and Zone unty'd, [Iepth.] Upon her Fathers Oath ill made, And worse perform'd, aside belayd; And that of Iphigenia (If those be two) they must give way: And Lipsius-Virgin in his Gown Is by our Virgins Dresse put down. (Alas his Gown could nought procure, Criticks and Poets still are poore!) See how she rides! See how she comes! Alarum'd in with Fifes and Drumms: Not Venus with the bribed Winds Blowing her Hair (the Snare of minds)
And all her fluttring blind array Of Cupids, that fore-run the way; Not in her richest Pearly Shell, Nor yet Proserpina for Hell When the great Lord of wealth (her love) Did all the Intrals of his Earth improve, To catch (the not so taken Maid) In's Ebon Carre made Light afraid, And richest Stones, benighted day, Did so much Gallantry display: As when our Virgin and her Pages, The Pride of this, the talke of Ages That are to come, did passe the street In Satten all from head to feet; 'And every Virgin who stood by, 'Wish'd secretly, O would that I 'Were of the Mercers Company! The sight was rare, but envious clouds, The glorious day in showrs beshrowds; And Winds in Malice, or in Love To sport or court her highly strove. Avaunt you hollow Issue of the Earth, And Mountaines vast unruly Birth, Play with our Navall sights and tosse The Ciy Barges in the Thames. The Barges; there's the smaller losse: Prostrate your selves before that Barge That carries now the Cities Charge;
Those red white streamers now are come, And do command you to be dumb; The Lord Mayors Barge. Or if you'l blow, your breath dispose, To fill them like the red white Rose: That all the Asure Thames may tell, The Mayor is comming by the smell. All the rest of the Bar∣ges in blew. Will you not cease? then Canons rore, And fire them off from Lambath shore. The Winds they are but foure, and you Are thirty strong, in open view. Thirty Canons went off. Gunner the Lintstock straight prepare, And we will thin foule winds to aire: Or if our Virgin do desire, Wee'l turne you all from aire to fire. When so translated you will be More like unto Virginity. For Rain, and Earth, and Winds are gross, But rarified they lose their drosse: Then you will proper Convoys be For this great Act of Charity: Which is of Love a gratefull strife, To deck a Virgin for a Wife? And by the Trophies of an houre, To make her a perpetual Dower. 'Which makes the Virgins who stood by 'Wish heartily, O would that I 'Were of the Mercers Company. FINIS.
