H1214 12012515 52450
A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields. At the FUNERAL of Bernard Connor, M. D. Who departed this Life, Oct. 30. 1698. With a Short Account of his Life and Death. By William Hayley, D. D. Rector of the said Church, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. LONDON, Printed for Iacob Tonson, at the Iudges-Head, near the Inner-Temple Gate in Fleetstreet; and at Grays-Inn Gate in Grays-Inn Lane, 1699.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Doctor Connor. PSALM XC. 12. So teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. THere is nothing more apparent to the capaci∣ty of all men than the uncertainty of life, and nothing of which mankind is more universally perswaded than the necessity of Death; these are truths so self-evident, that there needs no labour to demonstrate them, the fate of past Gene∣nerations has given us palpable arguments to im∣print them upon our minds, and the present, and every such like occasion of meeting, are so many
fresh renewals of the impression; so that as to the Doctrinal part all men seem to be  wise, and the most ignorant does not want an instructor to tell him that he must Die, and that every day of his Life brings him one Step nearer to the Grave. And yet though men are thus universally wise in the Theory, we find them almost as universally unwise in the more necessary point, that of practice. Men know they must Die, they daily discourse and complain of it, nay in their temporal concerns their covenants, projects and securities, they consider and provide for it, and yet they are so blind that they seldom apply it to their great, their eternal concerns, or draw from it those plain and easy conclusions, which it naturally furnishes to perswade to a cir∣cumspect and religious manner of living. Some look upon it as a great truth indeed, but so plain as not to need the being reflected on, and therefore neglect it as hardly worth their notice, or at least think the consideration of it may be as∣sumed at their leisure. Some again know it is too true, and they are afraid of it; they see 'tis pointed and must prick their consciences, if they suffer themselves to dwell upon it, and therefore put away the evil day far from them, remove the thought of it from their minds, as they wish they could do
the thing from their persons, and say in their hearts to such suggestions, as the Demoniacks did to our Saviour, that they should not come to torment them before the time. And others use the important truth yet worse if possible, and endeavour to distort it to patronize folly and levity; they conclude since life is short 'tis best enjoy its delights as fast as they can, and live apace because they must shortly de∣part; and so advance for their common Motto, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we die. Thus the great and useful lesson of the brevity of life, which Nature teaches, and the word of God incul∣cates, misses of its true end, which is the reforma∣tion of our manners; is overlook'd by the negligent, dreaded by the voluptuous, and perverted and a∣bused by the daring and prophane. The Sacred Author therefore of this Psalm, who is supposed to have been Moses the favorite of God, makes it his petition, that he might be directed by the aid of Heaven in the application of this piece of knowledge; and since the world was generally so unfortunate, as not to make a due use of it, that God would graciously please to teach him and his people the way to profit by it. He knew ve∣ry well that our days pass on insensibly, and that we bring our years to an end as it were a tale that is
told; that the days of our years are threescore years and ten, that if they exceed, 'tis but to bring an accession of labour and sorrow; and that their date is made much shorter by our own ill conduct, and the just punishment that it deserves; that the di∣vine anger frequently cuts the thread of a dissolute life, and the divine providence sometimes straitens the bounds of a pious one, and therefore that all are concerned to reflect seriously on their frail and un∣certain state, and to make that consideration a motive to a wise and a watchful conduct; and since all wisdom comes from above, and 'tis God himself that must direct our goings in his paths, or else our foot-steps will slip, he makes this his supplication, and thereby directs us to do the same, that God the Author of all that is good in us, or useful for us, would so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Wisdom is in the sense of my text, the prudent administration of our life, the disposal of our ways agreeably to reason and religion, the careful preser∣vation of our innocence in this world, and the se∣curing our happiness in a future one; these being the great ends of Man, and consequently the ob∣taining of them being the main of our hopes, and the due prosecution of them the most exalted wis∣dom.
And the applying our hearts to this wisdom, is the making it the ultimate design of all our thoughts and actions, the fixing our minds upon it, the en∣tertaining it with such serious meditation as the dig∣nity of the subject requires, the keeping it still in our view, and not letting it either escape by inad∣vertency, or grow remiss by its becoming familiar, but the persisting in a constant, uniform contri∣vance and endeavour, to order the little time we have so wisely, as to secure our eternity by it, and so work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. This is to be the great important result of the num∣bring our days, or the reflecting seriously on the short∣ness and uncertainty of human life; this is the ex∣cellent lesson that we are to learn by the present, and by all other like occasions of assembling, which were piously designed, not for vain useless osten∣tation, but for our real instruction and improvement; and were not so much intended for ceremony to the dead, as for advantage to the living; this be∣ing an opportunity when our hearts are supposed to be more mollified, and more capable of serious impressions, when our tears should soften and pre∣pare the soyl for the reception of God's word, and further its fruitfulness; when our senses being fill'd with the demonstration of the vanity of this world, we should sensibly rellish the joys of another. And
O! that it would please God so to bless what I am now about to deliver, that it might effectually engage us all, not to a faint reflection on morta∣lity, which passes away with the pomp of the fu∣neral, but to such an habitual remembrance of it, as might work its natural effect, the applying of our hearts to true wisdom; to unfeigned holiness and the fear of God. This would be an effect truly answering the charity of our deceased Brother, who being now (as we hope in God) united to the society of the Saints in glory, would with them more rejoyce at the conversion of a sinner, than at panegyricks on himself; and be more pleased at the improvement of others vertues, than at the re∣cital of his own. Now in order to this end, I shall in my discourse upon these words observe this following method. I. I shall shew that the numbring our days fur∣nishes us with excellent motives to a pious and ho∣ly life. II. That the applying of them to this end is the highest piece of wisdom. III. I shall enquire how it comes to pass that they have generally so little influence on the minds of men, as not to engage them seriously to a con∣stant and habitual piety.
IV. I shall conclude with an earnest exhortation, to make that due application of our hearts to wis∣dom which the text directs us to pray for, and the present occasion does so movingly recommend to us. I. That the numbring our days furnishes us with excellent motives to a pious and holy life. The numbring our days is the serious consideration of the brevity and uncertainty of life, and the fatal necessity of a dissolution; that we must die, that it will not be long before we do, that the time is not at our own disposal, no not in our knowledge, that the method of our ending our days is as un∣certain as the time, but that whenever or however it happens, it opens a passage into an eternity of joy or misery. Such reflections as these make up the work of numbring our days, and at first ap∣prehension they must strike the mind with attenti∣on and concern; but they are too many to be con∣sidered all together, and too fruitful of arguments to have them all at one glance deduced and attend∣ed to. I shall therefore distinctly treat of some at least of the principal of them, and shew the motives they afford to piety and a holy life. 1. The numbring our days implies that we must die, and that a period must be put to them; whate∣ver can be numbered must end, 'tis only infinity
that is always durable. The life of man is indeed properly eternal, and his mortal life is but the prologue of it, we were made principally for another world, and this present one is but the journey that leads to it. Let it be therefore never so durable we must at last come to our long home, and its length will then be nothing, when eternity is put in the balance with it, how pleasant soever the objects of our senses may be, however our affections may doat upon them, and make us say within our selves, as Peter did to our Saviour on the mount, It is good for us to be here. Yet the eternal Laws of mortality oppose their bent, and cry aloud to us that we have here no abiding city. Our bodies are tabernacles that cannot last long, and nature it self by degrees moulders these our houses of clay, to make way for death, and that lands us upon immortality. The consideration of this is sufficient to teach us that the business of this world is not to be our great∣est care; that what is needful for our temporary support is not of so great importance, as what makes a provision for an endless life; what if every thing here does not fall according to our wishes? or what if it does? what if the world frown upon us, and we meet with disappointments in our designs, necessity in our fortune and pains and diseases in our bodies?
what if all these join together to make our journey uneasy? if we are sure in the end to find a lasting comfort, to have all our tears wiped off, and an ad∣mittance given us into the joy of our Lord? and what if Fortune smile upon us here for a moment? what if we are feared or envy'd, caressed or loved by those about us? what if we have health of body, plentiful estates and fair reputations? if in the mean time our hopes reach no farther, and death is to put an end both to our grandeur and our ex∣pectation? would not any man that reflects seri∣ously on this be apt to say to himself, shall I spend my thoughts or contrivance for that which profiteth nothing? or for so short a time? shall I loose my rest and my peace, to be rich or great in the sight of my neighbours, when I am poor and miserable in the sight of my God, destitute of the riches of his grace, and the Spiritual treasure of good works? shall I gratify my own follies and vices, and in the hurry of them fancy I live for a moment, and so be car∣ried away blindly into everlasting Death? O stupi∣dity and madness! that can please it self with the gaie∣ty of a mortal state, and in the mean time not make provision for immortality! 'tis enough that this world passeth away, to make us not value it; and that our home is in another, to perswade us to think of, and provide for it.
2. Another reflexion that the numbring of our days will afford us, is, that life is at best but short, and of no considerable duration; if we reckon it from our birth to the period of a good old age, 'tis no vast cir∣cuit; when Iacob had lived near twice the common age of man, and the days of his pilgrimage were 130 years, he told Pharaoh that the days of the years of his life were but few as well as evil. 'Tis the usual com∣plaint of those that spend their time in enquiries af∣ter Sciences, in the search of Nature, or the improve∣ment of Arts, that knowledge is of a vast extent, and life is but short to work it out; but if we measure the greatness of the work that most concerns us, the sub∣duing our corruptions, the improving our graces, and the study and practice of our Duty, this short time will appear yet more inconsiderable, the days fly swiftly, and the night hastily approaches wherein no man can work. I do not now mention, that a great part of this life is spent before we come to any maturity of thought, that another great portion is given to ne∣cessary employments and diversions, and a third glides away insensibly in the silence of thoughtless Sleep; for the present let us suppose that all of it were in our hands to husband and employ to our spiritual advantage, and that we were sure it should not be suddenly snatcht from us, yet alas! it is easily mea∣sured,
we see how short it seems to ourselves, when we look back upon what is past of it, and if we do but compare it with eternity, it quite disappears and vanishes into nothing. Let us see then what use wisdom would make of such a consideration as this; would it pass this little time it has given it to no purpose? or to wicked ones? would it study methods and contrivances to waste and mispend it? would it neglect its work or add to it? would it carelessly let slip the opportunities of repentance and amendment, or render them yet more difficult by affected and habitual impieties? these methods are directly opposite to a perswasion of the brevity of life; such a thought would be pro∣ductive of diligence and watchfulness, and would make us vigilant in catching at and improving eve∣ry opportunity that Providence is pleased to afford us of making our calling and election sure; we should account it unexcusable folly to waste our pretious time in the serving of our lusts, in the jollities of extravagance, or the Supinity of sloth and idle∣ness; we should then conclude that we ought at least to employ our time well, if we could not pro∣long it, that we should make some progress in our spiritual race, press on daily nearer and nearer to perfection, and be therefore more active, because we find we have not long to run; but above all we
should dread the going backward in our course by vice and licentiousness, and the fettering our selves in the sinful pleasures of the world, and loading our minds with the clogs of wicked affections and vici∣ous desires. Whoever is truly sensible that his hours are few, will not dare to be prodigal of them, and he that wisely considers that his work is great, and that it must be done, will tremble at the thoughts of idly neglecting it, remissly engaging in it, or foolishly swelling its bulk or obstructing its progress. 3. The numbring our days will convince us, that this short life is yet shorter to us; that its pe∣riod is uncertain and unknown; and what must ne∣cessarily end quickly by the common laws of nature, is frequently by our own follies, by chance and accident, and by an over-ruling providence suddenly broke off and concluded, or which is equal to us, render'd useless to our main design, the preparing for another life. We may perhaps arrive to the age of man which the Psalmist assigns, that of three∣score years and ten; we may possibly, by a gentle hand of God be called from the hurry of business, the vanities of the world, and the temptations of pleasures, and have leisure, upon a bed of retire∣ment, without acute or discomposing sickness, to think and prepare for Heaven, and make our peace
with God; these advantages 'tis possible the divine clemency may afford some of us; but we are to re∣flect that these are extraordinary advantages, that God does not generally vouchsafe to men, but is pleased to indulge only to some few as particular expressions of his Paternal love. The present occa∣sion of our meeting must divert us from such expe∣ctations, and if we turn our thoughts upon the usual methods of mens departure, we see that the most are taken off, when they least think of it; some suddainly without time to reflect, some by acute diseases that disturb the mind, and take away ei∣ther its sense, or the calm which is necessary for di∣vine thoughts; and in some the vigor of the under∣standing wears away with the strength of the body, and dotage takes up that time which they had de∣stin'd for the work of their Conversion; thus we see we are not rationally to expect that our years should grow to their possible extent, or that they should be useful to us if they did; and therefore we should constantly be apprehensive of what may always happen, and be still prepared for what may every day arrive. This reflection then must necessarily awaken us from the lethargy of security; and shew us the fa∣tal imprudence of putting the evil day far from us.
Have I not begun my preparation for death till this day, and yet for ought I know this may be the very last day of my life? I may perhaps this hour be called to give up my accompts, and wretched man than I am! I have scarce yet had it in my thoughts, that I have an accompt to make! must not such a consideration as this terrify the sinner, discover the egregious folly of a wicked life, the necessity of repentance, and that a speedy one? is it possible that a man could take any pleasure in the most de∣lightful of all his sensual enjoyments, if he refle∣cted that in that very moment he were to expect death as the reward of it? this he knows he deserves, and he does not know but he may feel; and there∣fore he can never be easy or satisfied, while he re∣members it, till he has made his peace with that God, in whose hands are his life and death. No∣thing sure can be a more rational inducement to draw off our dependance on the world, than to think we do not know how soon we may quit it, nor is there a more natural consequence of the un∣certainty of death, than the absolute necessity of a present and certain preparation. 4. The last suggestion I shall offer from the num∣bring our days, which carries with it one of the strongest motives to a true use of life; is, that the
same moment that terminates our days, puts an end likewise to all opportunities of conversion or recon∣ciliation to God. As the tree falls so it lies, and as the grave receives us, so will it deliver us to judg∣ment. Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation, but in death no man can re∣member God or make his peace with him in the pit. Were there a middle state, where we might have a double prospect, backward on the vanities and fol∣lies of the world, and forward on the two portions of endless bliss or torment, and might we be there admitted to sue out our pardon, and to make at∣tonement for the errors of our life, it would pos∣sibly not be reckon'd folly, to defer our preparati∣ons for another world, till we had done with this; but Sacred writ assures us, that there is no such mid∣dle state or opportunity of reconcilement, but that as certainly as 'tis appointed for all men once to die, so certainly after death succeedeth the judgment: and we shall not be judged according to any future thoughts we may have hereafter, but every man shall receive according to what he has done in the flesh whether it be good or evil. Is there then no thought, or labour in, or beyond the grave? is there nothing that can avail us to∣wards joy in the world to come, but our passing of
our days on earth in a conscientious discharge of our duty? and can we live here, as if we had no∣thing to do, or nothing but what we might defer till a future state? is this life our only stage of probation and tryal, and must the other receive us as we are qualified when we go out of it; and can we think we are not concerned how we behave our selves here, or deliver our selves up to our Iudge? if when we depart hence spotted and polluted with unrepented sins, there is no fountain left to purge our pollutions, but a devouring fire only to punish them, sure we cannot be so stupid as not to wash away speedily our habitual vices, in repentant tears and a bitter humiliation, and labour mightily in this our day, for the things that belong to our peace, be∣fore they are hid from our eyes. And if those only are addmitted into the company of the lamb, who are sanctified by his blood, and cloathed with innocence, will not common sense tell us, that we ought to lay hold on the merits of his blood and passion, by a zealous performance of the duties of that covenant which was sealed by it, and by a careful preser∣vation of our integrity, and an affectionate doing of his Will while we are in the flesh, make our selves meet to be received into his glory, cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, and perfect
holiness in the fear of God? that when we come to die, we may do it with joy, and embrace our dis∣solution, as that which will crown the pious life on earth, with an immortal one in Heaven. These are the genuine applications of some of the most considerable reflections, that arise from the numbring our days, whereby it appears, that this lesson furnishes us with excellent motives to a holy life, I come now to shew II. That the applying of them to this end is the highest piece of wisdom. And that, whether wis∣dom be taken for judging aright, or for the doing what is most for our interest and advantage. 1. If wisdom be taken for judging aright, or de∣ducing just consequences from evident truths, what can be more evident than the wisdom of these con∣clusions? if we must quit this world, and then en∣ter upon an eternity of joy or misery, is it not ra∣tional to take care how we steer our present course, that we do not make a fatal mistake at last? if the time we have to stay be but short, is it not just and fit that we be cautious of loosing and misapplying it? if its duration be uncertain, and futurity be out of our knowledge, does it not highly become an understanding creature, to be prepared for what may happen? and if this opportunity being once
lost, there be no other to retrieve our hopes, does not common reason urge us immediately to embrace and employ it? and do we not all act thus in those affairs that relate to our temporal concerns? and how then should it not be prudence to judge alike with reference to our eternal ones? the contrary judg∣ments which Libertinism raises, how unconclusive and absurd are they! life must end, therefore 'tis no matter how we spend it; 'tis short, therefore 'tis not worth our improving; 'tis uncertain, and there∣fore 'tis in vain to design any thing in it; and 'tis our only opportunity, and therefore—what? that we must neglect, pervert and abuse it! O senseless folly, and unmanly stupidity! we pretend in vain to reason, if we can judge no better; we have no pretence to understanding, no not so much as to that of the beasts that perish. 2. But then if we take wisdom for the doing of that which is most for our interest and advantage, one should think there were no need of proof to evince, that to spend our life in goodness and piety, is the most useful deduction we can make from the vanity and brevity of it; for what do we loose by it? or what do we gain by the contrary? if there be cer∣tainly a future judgment, an eternity of bliss, and a lake of everlasting fire, we are then sure nothing
but piety can bear the one, can be admitted into the other, or delivered from the last. And I would ask a prophane and impenitent person, how he thinks he can bear the pomp of the last tribunal? what thoughts would be raised in him from the sight of a distant Heaven, and what sense he would have of the torments of a present Hell? if these things must be, sure reason as well as religion must make the Apostles reflection, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? But what if these things were only probabilities and conjectures? what if we were not fully assured that there were to be a future state, but only ap∣prehended and dreaded it? a pious life would still be the most advantageous conclusion we could de∣duce from this; for what do we loose by it? nothing but some of the deceitful pleasures of sense, which alwasy fall short of our hopes, end in dissatisfaction, and never fully gratify: and yet we gain in exchange the delights of vertue, which are deep, real and lasting. And what great pleasure is it that we have from vice? is it enough to make amends for the fears and dread we have, least the checks of our conscience, and the voice of reason and religion should prove true at last? does it ballance the dismal apprehen∣sions we have upon a sickbed, or upon approaching death? No, I am fully perswaded, that as there is
no one so wicked but he would die the death of the righteous, and wishes it whilst he lives; so there is not any so profligate, but when he sees his last hour is coming, he would most willingly choose to have had all his years confin'd to a bed of weak∣ness, and debar'd all the sensual delights of the world, so that he might die like the good man, and have that peace of conscience, and comfortable as∣surance of happiness, which the pious Christian has when he departs this life. I shall therefore make no question but that eve∣ry one that hears me is fully convinced, of the wis∣dom of applying the thoughts of death to the re∣formation of life; and so may be all mankind are, when they do but reflect; and yet we see these reflections are like man himself, short-lived, uncer∣tain, and too often fruitless; and therefore that they may not be so with us, let us if we can, find out the causes of this unhappiness in order to avoid them, and this I am to endeavour in my third Ge∣neral. III. Where I am to enquire, how it comes to pass that these things have generally so little influ∣ence on the minds of men, as not to engage them seriously to constant and habitual piety. Now to omit others, I conceive it generally owing to one of these two reasons.
1. Men do not generally consider seriously, or reflect on these truths, with that attention and me∣ditation as is proper for a matter of so great impor∣tance; the world is most commonly taken up with interest and pleasure, and mens thoughts are habitu∣ally possest with contrivances of another nature; and when a person is so overbusy in raising his fortune, gratifying his appetite, or combating with necessity, matters of religion, and particularly preparation for death, may wait long before they are admitted; and when they are, they have but a short hearing, and are presently dismist with a be gone for this time and when I have a convenient opportunity I will resume ye. Now inconsideration is a certain obstruction to the most excellent rules or motives that can be gi∣ven a man; the Doctrine I now press is a soveraign medicine indeed, but it must be applied and digested; if the patient will not receive and keep it, 'tis in vain to expect any benefit from it. 'Tis as plain an argument as sense and reason can invent against the worship of an image, that it is a thing insensible and uncapable of adoration; and yet not only the Gentile world, but the Israelites themselves; and, I wish I could not add, some Christians, have been drawn in∣to the folly, and the Prophet Isaiah in his 44. Ch. and 19. Verse gives the reason for it. And that
is, that none considereth in his heart, I have burnt part of it in the fire, and shall I make the residue of it an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? And thus the certainty of death, and the bre∣vity and vanity of life, are as strong motives to vertue and piety, as can possibly be given to men, but yet they can never have a due effect, if Israel will not know, if the people will not consider. And therefore it is that the mercy of God breaks out into that pathetical wish in the 32. Deut. 29. O that they were wise that they understood this that they would consider their latter end. 2. If there are many that will not consider at all, there are many likewise that baffle their consi∣deration, with the hopes of such advantages as pos∣sibly may happen. They know and consider too that they must die, and that their life is short and un∣certain, and they are not ignorant that they must make their peace with God before they depart this life, or perish everlastingly; but yet 'tis possible they may live to a good old age, and wear out by de∣grees; may have leisure to think, and be good when they are no longer able to enjoy the pleasures of life, and then they resolve to lay aside all other bu∣siness, and think of eternity. They see there are some that God blesses with a gradual and a sensible
departure, and therefore they hope for the same mercy which God vouchsafes to these some, and do therefore abuse his patience and long sufferance, be∣cause they hope for it. I do not now urge the un∣reasonableness and ingratitude of such a carriage, nor contend that the goodness of God should rather lead us to a speedy reformation; I am only now noting that how unreasonable soever it be, yet still this is a great cause of the backwardness and roerastination of repentance: Hope is a flattering passion, it will represent what is possible as if it were certain, and what is sometimes given, as if it might be always expected; and so by pursuing these vain hopes men loose their real ones, and are overtaken by evil when they promised themselves peace. They hope death will not come quickly, and so squan∣der away life, and by expecting a longer durati∣on of their being in this world, are not hasty in laying the well grounded expectation of bliss in a future one. Now if there be any here present who have hi∣therto deferr'd their preparation for another world, who are in the strength of their youth, and resolve still to put off this work 'till old age, I need not send them far for arguments to convince them of their folly. Our deceased Brother God has called away
in the vigor of his youth, about the thirty third year of his age, when the world was in expectation of great things from him, and when possibly improve∣ment in natural knowledge, reputation in his professi∣on, and advancement in his fortune filled and employ∣ed his thoughts. He had liv'd a vertuous and a sober life, free from those extravagancies which men in the luxuriant bloom of youth and wit are too of∣ten carried into, and by which they run into a ha∣sty decay; and yet God has been pleased to call him away in the midst of his course, and to make him our warning of the uncertainty of life. Thus his fate is one argument for us, and if we regard his judgment in this matter, that will be ano∣ther; for though he had been free from the debauches of the age, yet what he seem'd most to lament at his death was that he had not been better prepared for it, and that he had not employ'd more of that time which he spent in the search of nature and the entertainment of Philosophy, in the more useful search into the state of his Soul and the concerns of a fu∣ture life; so that both the persuasion of his mind and his early departure strike in with my main design, to press men to apply their hearts betimes to this piece of true wisdom, the early preparing for eternity. But before I come to the close application of this, it will
perhaps not be unacceptable to you to have some short account of his life and death who gives the occasion of this present Admonition. He was born in Ireland, and educated in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and remained in his own Country, as I am informed by his Friends, till about the twentieth year of his age; when in order to cultivate his Studies, and to apply his mind to Physick, and work out his fortune, he betook himself to travel. His parts and conduct were soon taken notice of in the Court of France, where the Care and Government of the Sons of the high Chan∣cellor of Poland who were then in that Kingdom, was committed to him, and he attended them in their travels into Italy, Sicily, Germany, &c. which gave him opportunity of making many considerable Ob∣servations in those Countries. At his arrival in Po∣land, whither he accompanied these Gentlemen in their return., he was made Physitian to the late King, and by him recommended to his Daughter the E∣lectoress of Bavaria, to have the care of her health. After some stay at the Elector's Court, he departed thence with several marks of esteem and favour, as he had before done from the Court of Poland, and he came through Holland into this City, where he was admitted into the Royal Society and the Colledge of Physicians.
Whether it were only to perfect himself in Phy∣sick that he came into England, where our Professors have deservedly the reputation of excelling those of our neighbouring Nations, or whether his riper years gave him other Opinions in matters of Religi∣on than would have been tolerated in the Courts whence he came, I had not opportunity of infor∣ming my self. In fact, he had not been long in England but he became so far acquainted with our Doctrine and Discipline, and approved of both so well, that he professed himself a Member of our Church, what were the main arguments and induce∣ments to his conversion, though I could wish they were publick, I could not particularly examine; for I knew not of his sickness till two days before his death, when he was very weak; and I was then ignorant of his having been bred up in the Roman Communion, and had I known it, I should still have thought it more necessary to employ that little time his weakness would enable him to hold a discourse, in examining his present sincerity, and directing him in his last work, thn in enquiring into the occasi∣ons and reasons that brought him to a change of his Religion. He had in his sickness, before his distemper ar∣rived to a great heighth, and while he was in his perfect senses, made his Will, in which he left five
pounds to the poor of this Parish where he now li∣ved, and desired that if it should please God to take him out of this world, I might preach him a Fu∣neral Sermon, and that it might be made publick; his friends let me know this, and at his and their re∣quest I visited him; I found him very much decay∣ed in his strength, but perfectly sensible, as he had still been, in the intervals of his fits, though the heighth of his Feaver put him into ravings. As soon as I saw him he requested of me what his friends had told me beforehand, and I presumed his de∣sign in it was that he might be vindicated from the suspicion of some Heterodox opinions which his cen∣surers imputed to him, as well as that his death might be the occasion of an useful discourse to the living. I therefore told him that in case I complyed with his desire, I thought it would be expected I should say something of a person whose writings and cha∣racter had rendered him so much known to the world, and had given occasion to some people to speak doubtfully of his principles in Religion, and that for this reason, among others, it would be very pro∣per for me to have some satisfaction from him, as to his Faith; upon which I put several questions to him, as whether he believed the Gospel? whether he gave credit to the Miracles that are there record∣ed; and lookt upon them as attestations of the truth
of the Christian Religion? whether he believed that Jesus Christ was the Saviour of the world, and that he came to be our Propitiation, and to satisfy divine justice for the sins of mankind? to which, and such∣like questions he answer'd affirmatively with great earnestness; and when I discoursed him on the sub∣ject of that Book of his, which occasion'd suspicion of his Principles, he declared that he had no inten∣tion to prejudice▪ Religion thereby, and remitted me to his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury for farther satisfaction, to whom he said he had ex∣plain'd himself in this matter, and as an attestation of his sincerity had received the Sacrament upon it, at the Parish Church of St. Martin's in the Fields, which I have since found to be true. I then began to examine him as to the state of his Soul, what sense he had of his sins? and what remorse for having at any time offended God? and whether he were perswaded of the necessity of re∣pentance and amendment of life in order to gain the Salvation purchased by Iesus Christ? to all which he gave me very satisfactory answers, and expres∣sed great sorrow for the sins and errors of his life past, and then join'd with us very devouty in the Prayers of the Church, in the Office for the Visita∣tion of the Sick. In the afternoon of the same day I went with a
desire to have had some farther discourse with him, but the violence of his fit being upon him, he was not in a condition to be spoken with. The next morning I visited him again, and found him in one of his intervals, still sensible but very much weakned. I took this occasion to talk with him more particularly concerning his principles, and upon mentioning the merits of our Saviour, askt him whether he depended entirely on the merits of Je∣sus Christ, and his intercession for pardon of his sins and reconcilement to God? and he made answer that he relied only on the merits of his Saviour. He was then put in mind of receiving the Sacrament, and he said he desir'd it with all his Soul, I asked him whether in receiving the Sacrament he had in his view the professing himself a disciple of Christ and a Member of his Body the Church? and if in receiving it from my hands he desired to profess him∣self a Member of the Church of England, which que∣stion being a second time distinctly put to him by a friend of his then present, he answered with very great seriousness that he did; then I put him in mind of his neglect of receiving the Sacrament, which he had not done since about two years ago when he communicated at St. Martins, and he express'd a sorrow for it; by all this I thought he sufficiently purged himself from the imputation of Deism, Soci∣nianism
or Popery, I lookt on him as a true penitent Member of the Church of England, and I gave him the Sacrament. He received it with signs of very great devotion, with expressions of hearty repentance for all the sins and follies of his life, and earnest petitions for pardon, and so I left him, as far as we could judge, in a Christian disposition for death, which I look'd upon as very near. These are things which I think my self obliged to give a particular account of, partly to answer what I conceive was the design of the deceased, and part∣ly upon occasion of an accident that happen'd some hours after I left him; which perhaps it will be thought not fair to conceal; A certain person, who it seems was a Romish Priest, came to the Doctor's Lodgings, and desired very earnestly to see him, declaring that he was his Country-man, his Friend and his Relation, those about him, looking upon him as very near his departure, were unwilling he should be disturbed; but upon great importunity did at last grant the stranger admittance, who com∣ing to the Bed side, call'd the Doctor by his name and saluted him in his native Language three times before he regarded; but at the third time he cry'd out for God's sake assist me. Upon which the com∣pany was prevailed with to leave the Room, but the Doctor's most intimate friend returned to the
door and heard the Doctor repeating over his Confi∣teor in Latin, in a very huddled manner; upon which the Priest gave him Absolution, and then asked him whether he would have extream Unction, and the Doctor said yes, after which it is suspected it was given him. Now here could I imagine the Doctor was in his senses, and that he was really in his heart of the Roman Communion, while he only acted this part in the last scene of his life, I should look upon it as a very great stain on his memory; and I am per∣swaded it would give everybody a shocking Idea of that Religion which would allow a person so to prevaricate both with God and Man. But I confess I believe his judgment was now quite decayed, and that he did not know what he did; for he was thought dying by those about him, though he recover'd out of that Agony and liv'd till next day. His friend assures me that in his sick∣ness he turned away another Romish Priest, who would have seen him, that the Doctor thanked him for it, and desir'd that none of those persons (ad∣ding a reproachful word which I do not think de∣cent to publish) should be admitted to him, and that it was the Doctor's own desire that I should at∣tend him in his sickness; and I cannot see what oc∣casion there should be for such a piece of dissimula∣tion
if he had been of the Roman Communion. Now if the case were thus, that he was really past his senses, it cannot but give us some resentment of the confidence of persons, who will take such liberties in our Land as to obtrude themselves upon the dying Members of our Church, when they know what se∣verities any Protestant must expect, who should dare to do any thing like it in a Popish Country. And it must give us some indignation against the vanity of that Church, which hopes to save a man by words said over him in which he bears no part; and a∣gainst the prophaneness of those Priests who prostitute the most Sacred parts of their Religion, to those who have no faith in them or regard for them. How∣ever it be, I thought it a sincere part to lay the thing open as it happen'd, that it might not be pre∣tended that any thing was concealed which should argue him of the Roman Communion, or that we do, what we justly reproach our adversaries for, endeavour to gain credit to our Church by feigned and pretended conversions. IV. It is time now to hasten to the last thing I proposed, to conclude with an earnest exhortation to all that hear me, to make that due application of their hearts to wisdom which the Text directs us to pray for, and the present occasion does so movingly recommend to us.
Does the numbring of our days then afford us the most moving and prevalent arguments to a pious course of living, and does the shortness and uncer∣tainty of life and other reflections drawn from it, naturally excite us to caution and vigilance; let us then for our own interest, and for the glory of God, be perswaded to fix it in our minds, and meditate upon it. Nature has written it in legible characters, and providence gives us frequent demonstrations of it, in the Funerals of our friends and acquaintance; and this day affords us a fresh instance to awaken our memories. Let not this occasion then be unpro∣fitable and vain, let it not add to our condemnati∣on, by proving a new slighted call to conversion; but let the natural death of our Brother be the com∣mencement of our spiritual life; and if we have not yet considered of our great change, let us now be∣gin; and let not business, pleasure or time obliterate the thought, or stop its growth; but let us constant∣ly recall it upon all occasions, in temptation it will help us to fly and resist, in business it will prevent immoderate care and anxiety, and in pleasures it will make us cautious to guide them by innocence, and confine them with moderation. Thus will it be of use in all the scenes of our life, and keep the judg∣ment steady, and the passions in sobriety. But above all, let us take care that our medita∣tions
on this subject be not bare thought and per∣suasion, but that they have their due energy upon our manners; let not actual amendment of our lives be put off till another day, nor Iet vain hopes of future opportunities, which may be will never come, make us loose the present which God has put into our hands. If we know we must die, let us live as men that expect it, if our time at best cannot be very long, let us not give idleness or sin any share in it, and if our end, for ought we know, may be now at hand, and no one can tell, but his turn may be the next, let us endeavour to leave behind us a pattern for imitation and love, and not for ter∣ror and abhorrence. And in the last place, since we have no other time allotted us but this mortal life, to provide for eternity, and to secure our happiness; let all our actions speak that we think of it, and are preparing for it. So shall our life here be a blessing to our selves, a joy to our friends and a be∣nefit to the publick, and our death when ever it comes, shall be acceptable and welcome, not attend∣ed with anxious distrust, and doubtful expectations, but chearful and resigned, and such as gives a bles∣sed presage of a happy immortality. Which God of his mercy in his due time grant unto us all, Amen. FINIS.
