H3758 11906120 50667
Mr. Hunt's POSTSCRIPT FOR Rectifying some MISTAKES in some of the Inferiour CLERGY, Mischievous to our GOVERNMENT and RELIGION. With Two Discourses about the SUCCESSION, And Bill of EXCLUSION. In Answer to Two Books Affirming the Unalterable Right of SUCCESSION, and the Unlawfulness of the Bill of EXCLUSION. In turbas & discordias pessimo cuique plurima vis; pax & quies bonis artibus indigent. Tacit. Hist. l. 4. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by the Booksel∣lers of London and Westminster. 1682.
To the Right Honourable, JOHN, EARL OF RADNOR, Viscount Bodmin, Lord Roberts, Baron of Truro, And Lord President of His Majesties most Honorable Privy-Council. My Lord, THE Reason that moved me to inscribe these following Discourses to your Name, is to create a prejudice, and bespeak a good esteem with all Mankind to whom your Lord∣ships Character is arrived, of my Integri∣ty and Snicerity therein. Your Lord∣ships
free and open Acknowledgment of your self to the World, That you have liv'd your inward Nature, That you never dissembled or disguised your self, avowed plainness, and despised all Arts, Intrigues, and Applications, hath made your Lordship Universally Honoured every where, and by all sorts and parties of men entirely trusted; and you are become an Illustrious instance, That no∣thing is so popular in a Noble Person, as Simplicity and open Sincerity; no, not Bounty and Beneficence it self, to which Office likewise your Lordship is not indebted, or in any arrear. A great Moralist prescribes and commends to all Men that would hold on an uninterrup∣ted Course of Virtue, and preserve their Innocence, to put on  as a Defensative and Out-guard to Virtue; That is to say, a stiffness and inflexible∣ness of Mind, something that can resist those soft and gentle prejudices, that perswade undue compliances, and abuse
the facile, weak, and tender Minds, to accommodate themselves in little Matters to the present occasions, until by little and little, sincerity is almost quite peri∣shed from the World, and mischiefs apt to destroy it ready to follow in conse∣quence of such unmanly compliance. Men to relieve themselves from inward reproach, whilst they contradict their in∣ward sense, have found out the specious names of Civility, Submission to our Superiours; Nay, have usurpt the glori∣ous name of the Virtue of Modesty, (which is the Noblest and most ample Virtue, which gives Rules that are al∣most comprehensive of our whole Duty; for to this Virtue we owe a greatness of Mind, and a reverence of our selves, as well as equability and Justice to others) to varnish over Dissimulation, Craft, Hypocrisie, Flattery, Treachery, Falshood, and a deceitful Conversation: And are bold to reproach the severe Honest, with the Names of Morose, Disloyal, and
Disobedient, to turn off from them∣selves the shame of their own prevarica∣tions and utter defections from publick Interest; which God knows men easily slide into insensibly, if they once suffer themselves for any regard whatsoever to be carried off from the Rule of Right; for they bring themselves under some kind of Necessities of complying with the Evils their first aberrations occasi∣oned, by greater faults; which increase reciprocally at every turn, until they be∣come desperate Out-laws, absolve them∣selves from all Duty they owe to their King and Countrey, abandon themselves to Chance, to live and subsist by unto∣ward shifts and arts, which increase their first Guilts, and turn their Errors into unpardonable Crimes: having ship∣wreck'd their Consciences, they care not if the Government be wreck'd too, to which they have made themselves so ve∣ry abnoxious. This whilst men please others, they
lose themselves, and from Flattery it is easily proceeded to the most mischie∣vous Treacheries. He that despiseth his own way, shall dye, saith King Solomon. A man that ac∣commodates himself to serve Occasions, dissembles himself, and appears other than he is; will soon extinguish his Con∣science, and dye to Virtue. He that doth not honour himself, will not regard men; and they that do not Reverence Men, will not fear God: Qui non verentur ho∣mines, fallent Deos. The Arts of Complaisance so much relyed upon at the Courts of Princes, hath extruded the Laws of Honesty thence, where they are most necessary. This hath made the Condition of great Men very uncertain and fortuitous, in∣finitely subject to Chance and Hazard, the Thrones of Princes unstable and tot∣tering, and left the Peace and Security of Kingdoms scarce at any time undi∣sturbed with Fears & Jealousies, evil sur∣mises,
and contending Factions, upon Rea∣sons true and false, real and feigned cau∣ses. Every man almost is sometimes com∣plaining of the uneasie condition that he himself concurs to make to himself, but is always in some sort miserable, by fearing from others whom he gives too much cause to fear from himself, and to mi∣strust him for his double dealing. But what other consequence can they expect, that ever feign, and uncessantly dissemble, but not to be believed, not to be trusted, hated for their baseness, and feared for that great Evil they would dissemble. The greatness of the Evil designed, is justly measured by the coarse and base Artifices they use to hide them: they are impudent to all the discerning and wise, whilst they busily set themselves by mean and base Arts to abuse the Fools and in∣considerate, the vain and the credulous; whom they have at the same time in the greatest scorn, whilst they have nothing to value themselves upon, but that such little men are deceived by them.
But there is another sort of men that design well for the Publick, whilst they dispense with the strict Laws of Truth and Sincerity. But I cannot tell upon the whole matter, whether they are not more hurtful to themselves, than profi∣table to the Common-wealth, by their well-design'd and honestly-directed com∣pliances and dissimulations. I mean, such men as lend themselves to the service of the Publick; who are so kind as to disfi∣gure themselves, to take other shapes and appearances of what they are not: Who are content to neglect their Ho∣nour and Reputation of Sincerity, whilst under a feigned assentation they hinder all the evil, and do all the good they can do, and the present state of things will permit; and suffer the rest with a great compassion for the Publick Weal. But such mens Praise must come from God, their Honour will never be entire a∣mongst men; and after all the difficult and hazardous Services they can per∣form
for their King and Countrey, their Honour will still remain suspected, doubt∣ful and obscure amongst men, who must judge according to appearance. When we have been often abused by the fairest pretenders to a regular and constant Vir∣tue, we cannot easily trust those that have sometime dissembled and represt it. My Lord, It is a peculiar Felicity of your Lord∣ship, that from a Generous and Honest Nature, and a Noble Mind, rather than from the institution of Books (though your Learning is famously great) to which you seem made rather than in∣structed; your sincerity is incorruptible, and stands in no need of that Artificial Defensative and Out-work which is prescribed by great Moralists, as neces∣sary to weak Minds to secure their Vir∣tue, especially when Virtue it self is out of Repute and disgraced. You have persisted constantly in one even Tenor of Life, have been Uniform,
Regular, and Consistent with your self. There may have been some complyance in appearance to your Lordship, but you never yet departed from your self; nay, you have not so much as incur'd the sus∣picion of so doing. No man makes any Question about your Lordship, or what it is you design; it is no mans Enquiry, no mans doubt: You have been always the same, and are, as every man concludes, immutably so. You are not unhappy to pass under Conjectures and various Opinions, there is no need of a Cry∣ptique man to unriddle any intricacies in the course of your Life. Votivâ pateat veluti descripta Tabellâ Vita senis. No false insinuations can hurt your Name: No Service but what is just, will ever be imposed upon you; no My∣steries of Iniquity will be committed to your Breast: no man will be offended at you, but he that hath reason to be dis∣pleased
with himself, and takes himself in a sort reproved by every honest man, as every man doth that condemns him∣self. You cannot be disgraced by any Faction, but a real dishonour will return upon those that attempt it: Every ho∣nest man will be sensible, if you (be∣ing reckoned and esteemed a publick good) are lessened: And you cannot fail of Honour from the worst of men, when in Honouring you they Honour themselves, and honestate their designs. My Lord, You represent to us the Condition of the Nation not desperate and incura∣ble, whilst you preside in His Majesties Councils: for no man can believe you would be an unconcerned Spectator of our Ruine, or the Preparations to it; or that you would contribute any thing thereto, by giving us a vain confidence of a secure condition, and suffer your fam'd Integrity to be Suborned to so mischievous a Deceit.
My Lord, Your Lordship hath afforded a migh∣ty recommendation of sincerity and sim∣plicity to the practice if the world; you have Honoured thereby the Age wherein you live, acquired true Ho∣nours to your self, and are thereby be∣come a publick Blessing. I hope I shall have your Lordships Pardon in making a further advantage of your Lorships Noble Integrity and Wisdom, by pre∣suming to offer these Sheets to your Lordships favourable Judgment. That I adventure to appear to so great a Judgment, is the best Argument I can use to the World for my integrity and honest designment therein; and besides, the good Opinion of so great a man as your self, would give great assurance to my own Conscience. If your Lordship doth think any thing therein useful to the World, I am sure it will have your Lordships Countenance, which will make them more useful, since, as my Lord
Bacon observes, The Cause of Laws, and Defence of the ancient State, hath ever found this Priviledge, That such as for their own Interest disturb the same, Excuse (if they Honour not) their Defenders. My Lord, I shall ever pray for increase of Ho∣nour to your Lordship, and that full of years you may change this Life for a bet∣ter; to which I am bound, for that I esteem you a Publick Good, if I had no particular Obligations (as I have) to your Lordship; and for the greatest Reason I take my self Obliged to be in true Honour of your Lordship, My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, THO HUNT.
THE PREFACE. I Cannot but take notice, That my honest Design in my Argument and Post∣script, to serve the Church of England, and therein the Nation, hath been by many perverted: and how it hath been endeavoured to make them loose that effect to which they were sin∣cerely directed. I have therein asserted the rightful Authority the Bishops have in the Government, & represented the just Expectations the Nation hath of their due Exercise of that Authority for the publick good; and have endeavoured to remove the great prejudice against their
Order, especially those that are occa∣sioned by the Mistakes of the Inferiour Clergy; for such we have taken notice of, as those which do most hurt, then esteem and affect them with the greatest dishonour and danger. I have therein faithfully defended the Authority and Power of the Bishops in the Govern∣ment: But these I take to be but other Names for the Duty they owe to the Common-wealth. Civil Honours and Dignities declare respectively the trusts that the Government hath plac'd in the persons under such Characters, and ad∣measure the Duties and Offices that are expected from them. The present state of the Kingdom doth most importu∣nately urge and require, that they should perform their duty in its fullest and utmost extent, and thereby vindicate the honour of their Order: It cannot fail being venerable, in the same degrees we find it beneficial. All positive Du∣ties indeed have an indefinite latitude,
and we have a great liberty in the per∣forming of them: They are not peccant against the rule of Virtue, who do not always exhibit to us the most Excellent Actions. It is not expected from the Duty that every man owes to his King and Countrey, that he should serve them always to his utmost Capacity, and with an Heroical Bravery. But he that doth not lend all the assistance to their service which his place requires, and his power can perform, in the greatest Exi∣gency, in the Extreamest need, is a wretched Traytor, and Betrayer of his Countrey. In the Postscript I have by no means lessened the Authority of the Church, or narrowed their Capacity of serving the Publick weal. But with great sa∣tisfaction considered their Authority, and how much they may contribute to the u∣niting our Distracted Nation, almost ruin∣ed by our Divisions, which are occasioned and promoted by the Enemies of our
Church, and principally designed for her Destruction. If we loose our Go∣vernment, for the sake of her ruine, and in order to that we loose it; and which is worse, if we lose it, it must be by the instrumentality of her Clergy: if the Government be not preserved, the Church must perish. Therefore I did not confine my thoughts to a Defence of the Church her Rights, but employ'd them for the Pre∣servation of the Church her self, and did endeavour to remove some great Preju∣dices and Mistakes, that assist the designs of her Enemies upon her. Mistakes to which our Enemies owe all the power they have to hurt us; in virtue of these Mistakes, their malice is onely considera∣ble; it could never have affected us, nor we brought within any danger or fear of them, if these vain Opinions had not been entertained by some of our Church-men.
And yet two Discourses so agreeable in all the parts thereof one to another united in Design, and that could not possibly but concur to the thoughts of any man that truly and heartily design'd to serve to the prosperity of the Church and State, are endeavoured to be set at variance with themselves; and some there are so false and unjust, as to sug∣gest, That the Argument for the Bishops Right, was written to set off the Post∣scipt with some advantage; and that the Author design'd to gain from the Argument, a more pardonable liberty of inveighing against the Church-men in the Postscript. If this had been the conceit of men of the Popish Faction only (and not al∣so of many Gentlemen whom I princi∣pally designed to serve, and in them the Church of England, thereby) I should not have thought it worthy my notice. For every man understands it is their bu∣siness and design to divide the Church-men
from the Interest of the Church, to set the Church against her self. To rob the sheep of their shepherds, and the pastors of their flocks. They know (and true it is) that no good and useful Constitution can ever be destroyed but by it self; i. e. by ceasing to be so: And that the people will never part from any thing wherein they find their benefit and advantage; except they can deprave our Church, they can never hope to destroy her. They have cor∣rupted some of our Church-men with Principles that subvert our Government, and betray the Rights of our People. They have debauched the Manners of our Church-men, and lessened their Authority and Esteem with the people. The Order is enslav'd by Collation of Preferments upon less worthy men. Qui beneficium accepit libertatem vendidit. They have raised a bitter zeal against that Separation, that they themselves have contriv'd, fomented, and promoted.
And it is brought to pass, that those are accounted Church-Fanaticks, though Conformists, that cannot contentedly see and endure the near approaches of ruine both of Church and State: These are their fear and their hate. The Sons of Anak, the Giants of the Land, that they they imagine so insuperable, that they are for making themselves a Captain and returning back into Egypt. Against these they exercise the keenness of their Wit; and to supply themselves with matter of Raillery against them, they lick up the Vomit of the Popish Priests, and whatever is malitiously said by them against the first Reformers, is daily re∣peated by our young Clerks out of the Pulpit, with advantages of immodesty and indiscretion, for the disservice and dishonour of their Order: with the im∣pudent Lies that the Papists have forg'd against Luther, Beza, and Calvin, and other renowned instruments in the Re∣formation, they disparage the Reforma∣tion:
of great service this to the Church of England, and the Protestant Religi∣on. These young men, like Dotterels, Apes, and Parrots, who have no more understanding than those Animals, are perpetually repeating any thing, though never so destructive to Church and State, that is suggested by any Popish Mercenary Writer, if he hath but the cunning to bestow an idle Complement upon the Church, or calls Rogue and Villain seemingly or in pretence for their sake; especially, if he can furnish to their young invention any Topicks of Raillery against an imaginary Presbyte∣ry, and against Parliaments, an essential part of our Government, and the secu∣rity of our Liberty. A very fair capa∣city and recommendation this (as they imagine) to Preferment. These are the Men, I confess, for whose sake I writ the Postscript. And if it can conduce any thing either to reform them from their Errors, or else to make them of no re∣gard
with the People. That they be not hereafter taken to speak the sense of the Church of England, and we ty'd down to certain ruine by her pretended Authority. And especially that she may not hereafter suffer under the scan∣dal of such forward and precocious youths. I say, if I can obtain by my endeavours any of these effects in any degree, I reckon I have performed an a∣greeable service to the King and King∣dom. We have a sort of young men, that have left nothing behind them in the University, but the taint of a bad exam∣ple, and brought no more Learning with them thence, than what serves to make them more assured and more re∣markable Coxcombs; who will under∣take to discourse continually of the In∣terest of Religion, of which they have no manner of sense; and of the Con∣stitution of our Government, of which they are utterly ignorant.
These take our degenerate Gentle∣men to be the great Supporters of our Religion and Government, whose Loy∣alty consists principally in Rounds of Brimmers and Huzzahs; who have not so much leisure from their repeated Ex∣cesses and Debauches, as to consider that they are not the wiser for their Cups. In these Loyal Debauches too many of the young Clergy do most scandalously assist, for the service of the Church, and for maintaining the honour of their Or∣der. This, if the Superiour Clergy do not in time redress, they will betray our Re∣ligion, and ruine the Government both in Church and State. These degenerate Levites are magnifying perpetually the Priviledges of their Tribe, extolling their Order, yet in terms that disgrace it, but by their Lives they vilifie it. The most degenerate off-springs of Noble Fa∣milies, are the greatest Braggadocio's of their Discent: Those boast most of their Ancestors, who dishonour them by their Relation.
The Jews did not boast more of their Temple, the Templum Domini, the Templum Domini, at that time when they had filled up the measure of their ini∣quity, and the destruction both of their Temple and Nation was at the door, (their Temple had not one stone left up∣on another, and they carried into Cap∣tivity) than these Gentlemen do of the Church of England, when Popery is like to be let in upon her, by their wick∣ed follies, and indiscretions: Popery, I say, which by some Doctrines undermines the very foundation, and by others un∣roofs the Edifice, and defaces the Walls of Christian Faith, and leaves nothing thereof but Altar-stones for their Idola∣trous Sacrifices: what ever the fates will be that they are pulling down upon the Nation. The Apostolicalness of their Order will not secure it, if they do not fill up the duty of their Office, no more than the Templum Domini did priviledge the
Jewish Church and Nation from de∣struction. A Temple without a Numen, and an Undedicated Church, are things common and profane. They may remember there are Churches of Christ that do make a shift without their Order, and Religion need not perish though the Order fail: but may subsist much easier than Nati∣ons under Change of Governments, which yet generally last longer than any one form. Nothing can subsist longer, or at least to any good purpose, than it answers the ends of its Institution, and if it do not, it is much better that it should not continue than that it should subsist. Grotius in his Book De Jure Summa∣rum Potestatum circa Sacra, assigns these Reasons for the Discontinuance of Epis∣copacy in some Churches, viz. Longa at∣que inveterata jam plane Officii Episcopalis depravatio. Nomen & Eminentia Epis∣copalis eorum culpâ quibus obtigerat omnem sui reverentiam perdiderat, & in odium
venerat plebis. Non debent (saith he) res bonae damnari quia sunt qui iis abutuntur, sed verso in morem abusu intermitti res ip∣sas non est infrequens. The young men of the Church of England have their Heads filled with the Imagination of a numerous Sect of Presbyterians amongst us, and have form'd a frightful Idea and Character of this Imaginary Sect, as sworn Enemies to the Episcopal Govern∣ment. Whereas our old Puritans and late Dissenters, (I speak of the gross of them, for they are not answerable for the Fools and Rogues sent amongst them, or at least spirited by the Roman Priests, no more than any other Party or Division of men are for the Rogues that pass under their numbers or respective denominations) have not disliked the E∣piscopal Government; though by their senseless and unaccountable scruples, they have depriv'd themselves of the benefit of the Communion of our Church, and thereby give so much scandal to the Go∣vernment,
and make the Popish Plot considerable, which can no longer sub∣sist, than they are pleased to continue obstinate in their conceited follies. They beg to be re-admitted, to have the terms of our Communion made easie, by relaxation of a Ceremony or two, and a few matters of Scruple: To be received again under the Governance and Guidance of our Church; and are ready to acknowledge the benefit of the Episcopal Order in the Church of Christ. Let this be askt by any man, who doubts the truth thereof, of any man that is considerable amongst our unhappy Dis∣senters. Dr. Durel in his Book called Vin∣diciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, tells what a high opinion the Reformed Churches abroad have of our English Episcopacy; and that the Bishops were deposed by them, because they would not assist, but op∣pos'd, the Reformation, not of dislike to their Order. Mr. Calvin in his Opusc. de Necessitate Reformandae Ecclesiae, hath de∣clared
himself to be of the same mind; Talem (saith he there) nobis Hierarchiam exhibeant in quâ sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent; ut ab illo tanquam vinco capite pendeant, & ad ip∣sum referantur, in quâ sic inter se frater∣nam Societatem colant, ut non alio modo quam ejus veritati sint colligati. Tum vero, nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, si quis erunt, quos non eam revereantur, sum∣mâque obedientiâ observent. His very good liking and great approbation of the Order, appears plainly by the ear∣nestness and vehemency of his stile, whereby he expresseth himself in the matter. Beza de Minist. Evangel. Gra∣dibus, Cap. 23. affirms Essentiale fuit, quod ex Dei ordinatione perpetua, necesse fuit est & erit, ut Presbyterio quispiam & loco & dignitate primus Actioni Guber∣nandae praesit cum eo, quod ipsi divinitus attributum est, jure. Peter de Moulin, Part. 2. Thes. 33. Episcopos Angliae, in∣quit, post conversionem ad fidem, & Ejura∣tum
Papismum asserrimus fuisse fideles Dei Servos, ne debuisse deserere munus vel Titulum Episcopi. Monsieur Drelincourt in his Letters from Geneva, upon the happy Restoration of our King, 1660, saith, Quandoquidem Germania & Hel∣vetia suos habent inspectores & superin∣tendentes, Dania vero ac Suecia suos E∣piscopos, non video cur quis offendi debeat quod Angliae sui etiam sint Episcopi. Quod si eadem Regminis forma apud hujus Regni Ecclesias non obtineat, id ideo fit, quod non convenit cum rerum nostrarum statu, cui nihil aptius excogitari potest quam pastorum aequalitas: verum si De∣us, apud quem omnia possibilia, & in cujus manu sunt Corda Regum, ac populorum Mo∣narchae nostro, & omnibus illius subditis, aut saltem maximae eorum parti eam grati∣am indulgerent ut reformationem Evangeli∣cam amplecterentur, meo quidem judicio, impossibile esset inter tantum pastorum nu∣merum aequalitatem retinere, compelleret que necessitas ad instituendos quosdam qui ali∣qua
praeeminentiâ gauderent prae caeterîs, quique eorum moribus invigilarent. The great men of the French Protestant Church, though under the state of a severe Persecution, who follow the In∣stitutions of Mr. Calvin, do at this time applaud the Constitution of our Church, and speak of it in terms of high esteem and honour, as may be seen in the Letters of Monsieur Moyne, Monsieur de l'Angle, and Monsieur Claude, writ∣ten to my Lord of London, Published by the Dean of Pauls, in his Book cal∣led the Ʋnreasonableness of Separation. Dr. Durel, after he hath in the afore∣mentioned Book, shewed that Geneva was a Free City of the Empire, of most ancient time; That the Soveraign Au∣thority was in the Senate of that City: That the Bishop was Chosen by the Ca∣nons and Citizens, and Swore Allegiance to the Government before he entred the City; and that the Consuls of the City did take his Oath. That Petrus de
Baulme, their last Bishop, Anno Dom. 1533. being detected of a design to be∣tray the City to the Duke of Savoy, fled from the City; and at that time the City was, and for two years after continued, Roman Catholick; so that what wrong (if any was done to the Bishop) was done by the Papists. That two years after the Bishop fled from the punish∣ment of his Crimes, the Authority of the Senate attempted the Reformation of Religion. After this, I say, Dr. Du∣rel thus concludes, Confidenter dicam Ge∣nevenses cum Religionem emendarunt, Epis∣copalis regiminis ab Ecclesiâ Eliminatio∣mem, reformationis partem necessariam haud duxisse. Besides, all amongst us that have the name of Presbyterian called upon them at the pleasure of the Popish Faction, subscribe to the Nine and Thirty Arti∣cles, in what they declare of the Do∣ctrine of the Church of England about Obedience to our King and Governours,
and are therefore in profession as Loyal as any of those that boast themselves True Sons of the Church of England. Indeed Scotland hath been disgrac'd by a vile sort of Presbyterians, the one∣ly true Presbyterian Sectaries in the world, in any considerable body or uni∣on. These men have deservedly put that name under eternal infamy, by their turbulent and contumacious carriage a∣gainst the Kingly Authority. But to speak the truth, this is not im∣putable so much to Presbytery, as to the barbarous Manners and rough Genius of that Nation. Though it hath afforded some men in all Ages of great Excellen∣cy in all sorts of the most commendable Qualities. That Nation was infamous for Disloyalty, and a barbarous Treat∣ment of their Kings, before Buchanan and Knox were born. The Scots boast of One hundred and fifty Kings in Suc∣cession in that Kingdom: how many Names they have feigned to make out
the boast of the Auncientry of their Kingdom, we do not know; but certain it is, they really Imprisoned, Deposed, and Murdered Fifty of their Kings at least, before the time of Mary Queen of Scots, whose prosecution was promoted and assisted by the English Bishops. A fine Kingdom that, to make Experiments and try Conclusions upon! There is little reason to charge the Guilt of the unexpiable Murder of our late Excellent King, for which at this day we are doing most severe penances, upon Presbytery, which was not thought of here in England till the War was be∣gun. The heats that produced that un∣happy War, were from other Causes and Reasons, as every body may know. But when that War was once begun, (as no War can be managed by fore-establi∣shed Rules and Measures) it did not stand within the reasons and first designs thereof, but was prosecuted and ma∣naged by such means and measures as
were necessary and possible. This will always happen more especially in a Ci∣vil War, wherein though both parties share in the Causes, yet the Guilt to be sure belongs to the Rebels side. The Parliament in the Course of the War, in their distress, prayed Aid of the Scotch Nation, who was shortly before entered into the Covenant. They re∣fused them any Assistance, except they would enter into that Covenant which they had passed upon their own people. By this accident that part of the Nation that was engaged in that unnatural War, of the Parliaments side, were im∣posed upon by the Scotch Presbytery. But after the Covenant was thus impo∣sed, they still retained the English Loy∣alty, filled the Town with Protestations and Remonstrances against the Kings feared Murther; declared out of their Pulpits against the Actors of that detestable Tragedy; were continually contriving to restore our present King
to the Government of his Kingdoms; and of their instrumentality in his Resto∣ration, the King himself is very sensible. I wish the Church too were made sen∣sible of the extinction of that prejudice the Scotch Covenant created against her; for though God be thanked she hath sur∣vived almost all of those deluded Cove∣nanters, yet the apprehension of the danger, or the remembrance of the evil, at least, will return with the mention of that name, and render it very displeasing. I wish, I say, that prejudice was remo∣ved by their frank Declaration of their good liking of her Order in general; and by their humble desires to be spared in the matters whereof they yet remain in doubt, by the indulgence of the Church: That we may not incur the danger of loosing our Religion and Government, by the scandal that is given to the Church-men at the old remembrance of what hath been done here by some that were of the Presbyterian Name.
For this matter of Offence they of the Popish Faction do with mighty ad∣vantage to their Villainous design culti∣vate and improve. They stigmatize all that oppose the Popish Plot, with the Name of Presbyterians, and thereby would denote them Enemies of our Church-Order. By this means they have brought ma∣ny, too many Eminent men of our Church to at least a dead Neutrality, as if things were come to this pass, that they must perish either by that or the Popish Faction, and had nothing left them to do, but to chuse which way our Church shall be destroyed: A cold comfort this would be, that whatever way they should take, they must assist to the destruction of their Order. Upon this rock we are like to be split, this makes our deliverance to stick in the birth, and upon this hinge the fate of our Religion and Nation will turn. Lord, what a prodigious thing is this, that
is come to pass in our age. Religion it self must be the devoted thing to the rage and folly of the Priests of that Religion. Let them in the Name of God consider what iniquity it is to declame against the faults of others, and not endure to hear of their own Crimes: To hate one-another for those very proceedings that their own faults occasion: where the fault is in both sides, the fault is in nei∣ther, so as they may justly accuse one a∣nother: and yet they will both fall un∣der a most severe Condemnation, to be sure, in the next world, if they do not both miss their aims, and be confounded with guilt and disappointment in this. I wish it were considered, that scarce any Nation ever yet perished, that was so blinded in her own concerns, that she had not discerning men enough to have preserved her from the destroying Evil, if many good and wise men did not perswade themselves, it was better to suffer it than to endeavour to prevent
it: and from the fears of one Party, and the dislike they have conceived against the other, determine with themselves to stand Neuters, whilst they want Reso∣lution to oppose the dangers that one side threatens, and think the disorders of the discontents incorrigible. It was a wise Law of Solon, That if the Common-wealth at any time should be divided into Factions, that the Neuters should be noted with infamy; by which every man was obliged to take a side or Party; and all the virtuous, peaceable, and modest, were engaged to appear openly in the concernments of the Government: he concluded assuredly, that by this means Peace would be more easily re∣stored, and terms of an accommodati∣on more readily invented and entertain∣ed; the Factious Knaves of both sides turned out of Office, their Evil Designs disappointed, and the ruine of the Nati∣on by the Extremities of wicked men prevented.
For the worst men are most forward in Factions, and the greatest beautefeus most honoured by their respective con∣tending Parties, before the wise and good interpose. . The Causes of the Differences would be better understood, be rendred clear and conspicuous, when the honest men (such as can have no interest but the publick good, whose Authority is more prevalent with the people than the clea∣rest Reason) do declare them: and those that are mis-led and abused into Ex∣treams, would then unite and conspire against those who gave the first occasion to the Divisions, and promote them. As did the Factions of the Colonnois and the Ʋrsins, who having discovered that Pope Alexander the Sixth set them still at discord and variance amongst themselves, so by their Calamities and Falls to en∣crease the strength and power of his Son
Borgia, they fell to agreement among themselves, and made head against him their common Enemy. If all that are true Protestants, and true lovers of our Government, would declare themselves on the behalf of our Religion and Government, in such terms as befit honest men, and as the Exigency of our present state shall require; we shall find the numbers of Addressers re∣duced to the Dukes Pensioners & Crea∣tures. The number of Phanaticks made so few, that the Papists would again be∣come the Fautors and Defenders of Fa∣naticism, as they were about ten years since, lest the numbers of Fanaticks should not be big enough to make a Scare-crow for the Church of England, or the Schism not considerable enough to disgrace her. All discerning men see, that the late Addresses have been obtain'd by appli∣cation: That the design therein was to make Voices for the discontinuance of
Parliaments, and for a Popish Succes∣sion. If the people are pleased with these things, there is no wrong done them; and if we affect a change of our Religi∣on and Government, it may be easily obtain'd. The King hath no reason to consent to disinherit his Brother, if the People re∣joyce in the hopes of such a Successor, or at least will acquiesce under that fate: but if we would avoid it, we must de∣precate it in such applications to his Ma∣jesty, as consists with true Loyalty, and with such earnestness as the matter re∣quires; and at the same time represent the smalness of the numbers of Addres∣sers, and the inconsiderableness of their quality. Thus his Majesty would un∣derstand better the Sense of his People, especially when most of the Addressers themselves shall, by joyning in such Ap∣plications, shew what they meant by Lawful Successors in their Addresses:
And that when in the same Addresses they did engage to serve the King with their Lives and Fortunes, they did not intend to subject themselves and all that they have, to his Majesties absolute pleasure. In that they thank his Majesty for his Promise of frequent Parliaments, they desire them; and when they thanked him for his promise to maintain the Pro∣testant Religion, they desired the con∣tinuance of it, and such a Law as is ab∣solutely necessary for its preservation. Then it may appear that the Abhorrers themselves did not understand that the name of the Earl of Shaftsbury in the business of Abhorrence, is but like the name of John a Styles and John an Oaks, of Titius and Sempronius, in putting a fictitious Case: And that the onely Question askt, was, Who are the most damnable Plotters at this time, the Pro∣testants or Papists? And that this was the Question intended to be put to the People in the Sollicitation of Addresses of Abhorrence, is evident.
If we did dutifully represent to his Majesty these Proceedings, as the Arts of our Enemies for dividing us, and the Methods of our designed Ruine, we should not be undone; and there is no∣thing more than this necessary for the preventing of our Ruine, since we have so gracious a King. Our King is duly stiled, Pater Patriae; he will not suffer his People to be cala∣mitous (as no good Prince can suffer his to be) from any cause whatsoever that is to be removed; no, not from their own Fears and Jealousies, if they are innocent, reasonable, and probable. The Affections of a Prince to his Peo∣ple, supersede his Affection towards any private Relation: So strong is the Tye of Duty upon him, from his Office, to prevent publick Calamities, as no respect whatsoever, no not of the Right Line, can discharge; nor will he himself ever think, if duly addressed, that it can. By the Kingly Office, he is taken up
from amongst men, and is made a God to us; he is not to suffer the passions of a private man, so as to be swayed by them. In this high capacity. In the matters of the Government, nothing ought to de∣termine him, but the Common weal, to which purpose all Governments are instituted. Besides, the excellent humanity of our King, which hath made his Reign so clement, doth dispose him to a tender Affection towards his People committed to his care, and must powerfully incline and perswade him to do any thing that is necessary for preventing such Evils; which as they are greater than can be supported by his People, so if they come upon us, we shall never be able to e∣merge or recover from under their pres∣sures. There wants nothing but a universal desire of being happy, to make us so; and nothing but a declaring our steady abhorrence of the Evils we cannot su∣stain,
is further necessary for preventing them: Our Enemies will be destroyed meerly by our uniting; they have no direct Strengths of their own, all their hopes and confidence is in our Divi∣sions. We may evacuate their designe, by making it impossible, without a Conflict with any of the Evils fear'd: We shall have no Enemies from that time we are at peace with our selves; if we have courage enough to say we are not con∣tent to perish, we are immediately safe. Our Traytors would disappear, if we had no Neuters; and we cannot lose either our Religion or Government, if we have a just concern for them. If the Protestants would in time understand that the single Art and Stratagem they have to undo us, is by dividing us, we should not assist it by receiving false and hated Characters of the several Sects that are amongst us from the Popish Writers; and represent them to our
selves as more detestable than the Popish Traytors, and alike Enemies to the Go∣vernment. It is no more agreeable to a scrupulous man about a Ceremony of the Church, to depose and murder his law∣ful Prince, than to a man of a nice Con∣science to be impiously wicked. Too true it is, all Nations and Religions have been sometime or other stain'd with the horrid guilts of Deposing and Murdering Kings, under a pretence of destroying Tyrants, and vindicating their Country from Oppression. The Bishops con∣cur'd with the Temporal Lords in de∣posing the second Richard: In an Ad∣dress to that King they justifi'd them∣selves therein, Ex Antiquo Statuto, from the Constitutions of the Kingdom; and Ex facto nuperrimè dolendo, by which they meant the deposing of Edward the Second. Knighton, one of the Decem Scriptores published by Mr. Selden, gives us the Address in terminis. Until the Collectors of Dissenters Sayings can
justifie the Bishops in this matter, let them not trouble the world any more with the farrago of some of their wic∣ked Sayings, thereof to make a Character of a Dissenter: for it belongs no more to him, as such, to be a Traytor or Rebel, than it doth to the Character of the En∣glish Bishops to depose their King, and cause his most Sacred Bloud to be shed and profan'd as a common thing. But for removing the fears that our cautious Church-men have of Dissen∣ters, which hath cast them into a cold in∣differency and inert neutrality at this time, when if ever the Applications of an active Prudence are required from all honest men, and lovers of their King, Country, and Religion, I wish they would weigh and consider the mischiefs on either hand: What the Popish Party designes, and what the Dissenters would have: What powers the Popish Party have, what endeavours they use to force their Superstitions upon us, and to
change our Government: That the Dissenters have neither Power nor Will to destroy our Religion or Government: They are already of our Church, and it is expected that they should be Petitio∣ners to the Bishops for their intercession towards obtaining some Indulgence in some little matters, that may bring them into an entire Communion with us. It may easily be known who are for the preservation of our Government, or dis∣solution of it, by their Desires or Ab∣horrences of Parliaments; (and who desires Parliaments more than Dissen∣ters?) which would preserve our an∣cient Government in Church and State, and the true Religion establish'd among us, and recover us into a firm Peace and Union, by just and necessary provisions for their support. Whilst the Govern∣ment is preserved, the Church is safe and secure: for no man can fear that the King and the States of the Realm will ever give place to wild Fanaticism, and
suffer so excellent an Ecclesiastical con∣stitution as we enjoy, to be subverted, for any Extravagancies that shall deserve the name of Fanaticism. But the pre∣tences of our Neuters for their Neutra∣lity, are not more groundless than their reasonings are absurd, by which they oppose the only remedies to the Evils that now beset us, and the greater we fear. That absurd Opinion, Dominium fun∣datur in gratiâ, is charg'd upon those that are for the Exclusion of the Duke; and they think by pronouncing this piece of absurd Latine, they have at once put to silence and shame all the rea∣sons of Nature, Religion, and State, that urge it and require it. That there is nothing can be more ab∣surd than that Dogma, will appear, for that almost whole Dutch Systems of false and paltry Theology go to the making of it, in the most tolerable sense it can have; and for that it hath been
improv'd into a most villainous sense, to give countenance to the vilest Outrages of the German Anabaptists. But Dominium signify'd Property, not Government and Rule, until our admi∣rably accomplished young Divines of this last Age, out of their great skill in the Latine Tongue, would have it so, for the service of the great Defender of the Protestant Religion, and of the Church of England. All Rights, as well Natural as Civil, are forfeitable by Crimes, in such measure and degree as Laws appoint, and as good Government requires: Notwith∣standing Grace be not admitted a good Title to any thing that the Saint will de∣sire, though of the Roman stamp. I confess, Natural Rights, (but they are very few) are not controlable by Laws, but are by Laws to be defended, and the free use of them to be justifyed and allowed, most certainly not to be condemned by any Civil Authority.
A right in Nature every man hath to live, until he hath forfeited his Life. Whatever he doth that is necessary for his preservation, is and ought to be justi∣fyed by all Laws, though he kills, though he breaks the Civil Inclosure of Proper∣ty; which cannot, and was never inten∣ded to shut out the Natural Right that every man hath in the last extreamities. Every man hath a right to his plank in a Wreck, though the owner of the Ship perish by him for want of it. All the Authority of all the Legisla∣tors in the world united, cannot make unlawful any Act that is done in self-pre∣servation: Sub moderamine inculpatae tu∣telae, where the man is innocent. But Civil Rights are without iniquity alterable and controleable by Laws, and by acts of Government ordainable to the publick good. Nothing is so intirely, perfectly, and abstractly Civil, as Government, the per∣fect Creature of men in society, made
by pact and consent, and not otherwise, most certainly not otherwise: and therefore most certainly ordainable by the whole Community, for the safety and preservation of the whole, to which it is in the reason and nature of it intire∣ly design'd. But we are told by some, that will not contest the lawfulness of Exclusion, That we trouble our selves with the fears of an imaginary danger: That we are endeavouring a remedy against the Evil that may never happen: That we im∣pertinently trouble our selves about pro∣viding that which we may never want or need: That the Duke may dye be∣fore the King: And if the Duke should survive, he neither can nor will change our Religion: That it is not lawful for any man, Occupare facinus quod timet, and to destroy the person whom he fears. I wish it were considered on the other side, That if the Duke dye before the King, there is no wrong done to the
Duke by Excluding him. It is onely his hopes and expectations that are cut off, for the preventing our fears; a possi∣bility of hurt provided against, by shut∣ting out the possibility of effecting it; and that not by any hurt to his Person, but meerly by disabling it: a Remedy pro∣portioned and suited to the disease: we desire to be eased of our fears, by a just security against them. But if the Duke should certainly survive the King, and could and would change our Religion, they who thus discourse, seem to allow it lawful to exclude him. But for that they say the Duke, if King, will not or cannot change our Religion: let every man consider his present Will and Pow∣er, and how far he hath proceeded to∣wards it, before he is entred into his Kingdom. These silly dreamers disho∣nour him, whilst they pretend to serve him. His Princely Virtues make him the more dreadful to a Protestant King∣dom. They who thus talk, make him
a bad man of that bad Religion, weak in his conduct, and feeble in his power: But how can this be, when they have in∣structed the Nation into absolute obedi∣ence, and have measured the duty of obe∣dience by the Kings pleasure, and not by Laws: That the pleasure of a King is irresistable; some of them will not allow passive obedience to be at all o∣bedience? Besides, all caution is proportioned to the greatness of the Evils feared. No wise man ever left the sum of his Af∣fairs to Chance. Where the Evils are not to be remedied or resisted when they happen, the caution is just that pre∣vents them. If there be no remedy a∣gainst the Evil we fear, but the Exclu∣sion, the Exclusion is not onely lawful, but commendable. And for this we have the Authority of the Illustrious Grotius, under his general Doctrine and determination, Lib. 2. Cap. 1. De Jure belli ac pacis.
It is Engraven in Capital Letters up∣on the Foundation-Stones of all the Go∣vernments in the world, That any per∣son unfit for Government, shall be Ex∣cluded from Governing. Though Fools cannot read it until the foundations be removed, and the Government subver∣ted. That his Royal Highness hath ren∣dred himself unfit for the Government, hath been declared more than once, by the unanimous consent of all the States of the Realm; and how far the King hath been of the same opinion, may be conjectured by those Expedients that have been offered in several Parliaments, by Privy-Councellors and Ministers of State, and the Dukes greatest Friends. Onely such were those of the late Par∣liaments that opposed the Bill of Exclu∣sion; but even these were for seque∣string the Royal and Soveraign Powers and Authorities during the Life of a Popish Successor, and to leave him con∣tent with the Name of a King onely.
An Indignity this both to the Name and Office: a thing repugnant to the Fundamental Constitutions: This tends to destroy the Monarchy it self: It points directly to the Evils of the late times, and would make the Parliament Sequestrators of the Crown. But such absurdities those that appea∣red most his Friends would run us up∣on, rather than a Popish Prince should become our King: Such an abhorrence they themselves had against the mischiefs that would thereupon ensue to the Na∣tion. Is it fit after this, that the lawful en∣deavours to Exclude him, should be ac∣counted a Protestant Plot; and those that desire it, for that reason onely, accounted Enemies to the Government, and De∣signers to change it? What madness is it, that his arrival amongst us should be welcomed with any tokens of joy! That Addresses should be made in his favour! That we should court that mischief, that
the wisdom of all our Estates in several late Parliaments have consulted how to avoid. To turn so fond of a Popish Successor, as to be content to quit our Parliamentary Constitution, our Govern∣ment, for his sake: for his sake we have had Parliaments Dissolved, and his pre∣sence will not give us leave to hope for a Parliament. But let no honest man be affrighted and put out of Countenance with any Imputations or Reproaches of Sedition, whilst he adheres to the Sense of all the Estates in Parliament, and that which hath been in some sort the Kings Sense too. They are the Seditious, that propound deceitful Expedients, which tend to change the Government, and to Embroil His Majesties Kingdoms; who are con∣trary to the Sense of the States of the Realm; oppose the voice of Nature, and the common Sense of the whole Ra∣tional world: That are contrary to the
Government, and do, as much as in them lies, go about to dissolve it, by lessening the Powers of Parliament, exercised and declar'd in their Acts; and more especi∣ally in the Act of Parliament, 13 Eliz. Cap. 1. for that purpose was that decla∣ratory Law made, to prevent our re∣lapse into Popery, and the return of the Popish Superstition and the Roman yoak upon us. These therefore are the only Murmu∣rers amongst us against Moses and Aaron, our Civil and Ecclesiastical Reformers, who brought us out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the house of Bondage, who though dead, yet speak, and their Autho∣rity yet lives in our Laws, and is to be obey'd by us: we have no rules of Obe∣dience to our Prince, but the Laws, and the Authoritative Declarations of the Government, which are called the Kings Laws, and the Kings Will and Pleasure (whensoever they were first made) in all succession of time. These Murmu∣rers
are saying one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return into Egypt; and yet they rub their fore∣heads and say, that they are clear of the gain-saying of Korah and Dathan, and are not of the company of Abiram. Though if they will consider the story, they will find themselves in that compa∣ny: for those that were for a Captain to return into Egypt, Numb. Cap. 14. did continue their Murmurings, upon what ensued thereupon against Moses and Aaron, headed by Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. Cap. 16. and both are remembred as one offence, Psalm 106. So miserably do these men abuse their Consciences first, and then abuse the Scripture to serve their turn. The un∣stable more than the unlearned, wrest the Scriptures, to their own destruction. These men against all congruity and ana∣logy, do object the story of Korah and his Accomplices against the Adherers to Moses and Aaron, and reproach them
with the Names of those Evil and un∣fortunate men, who do what they can to hinder our return into Egypt, and are not for this Captain of theirs. Quis tulerit Graccos de Seditione querentes? These are the most dangerous Schis∣maticks, a most mischievous sort of Puri∣tans. The malignity of Puritanism is, to pretend to be more righteous than Laws. Where no Divine Law inter∣poseth, but the matters are left by God to the prudence of Governments, and to their appointments and directions: to pretend Religion for their Schismati∣cal Separations: to disobey their Go∣vernours, when they have no command of God against their injunctions, though they have no Law of God for the mat∣ter injoyn'd. But the Church-Puritans have some pretence for their Disobedi∣ence, because Religion is certainly of Divine Institution in the Substance and Essentials thereof: they pretend they keep
close to the Divine Institution, and they at the worst do but preposterously prefer Sacrifice to Obedience. But this Civil Puritanism which we complain of, is neither Obedience to God or man, nor yet Sacrifice. Sacrifice it cannot be, where Religion it self must be the Vi∣ctim; not Obedience, but an enormous and monstrous sort of Disobedience: they disobey not to please themselves, but for meer mischief to themselves; these are sinners against their own Souls with a witness. By departing from the Rules of Government, they are a∣bout to betray Gods true Religion, and the Government; and they must become either Rebels or Slaves, either Apostates or Martyrs. But Martyrs if they be, it will be rather of their folly than of Religion, and God will take no plea∣sure in the Sacrifice of Fools. The wickedness and folly of these men, seems peculiar to this present age; it seems prepared by the Divine Nemesis,
to punish our prevarications from the rules and obligations of that Religion, which we have dishonoured by our pro∣fessing to believe it, that so it and we should perish and be extinct together; that we should then pretend to be con∣formable to the Institutions of his Holy Religion, when we are in a course of utterly subverting it. What impudent hypocrisie is this, to pretend to obey our Governours for Gods sake, when they really are con∣trary to the Fundamental Constitutions of State, and by being so, assist to the Extirpation of Gods true Religion Esta∣blisht amongst us by Law! Laws can∣not be controul'd by the Princes pleasure; they oblige when his Personal Com∣mands do not. Kings cannot make their Governments other than an univer∣sal consent hath made them; and such we are obliged to continue them. A man may neglect his own private right without fault, for in that he is onely
accountable to himself. But the Rights of the Government, the Rights of the Community can never be lessened or neglected in their use, when the condi∣tion of the Nation requires their Exer∣cise. Where we have a liberty or right to do an act, a supervenient necessity makes that act our duty. When the case occurs wherein that right is to be used, and for which that Authority was created, then they that have that right and that authority, are as much obli∣ged to use it, as if there had been an express Law to injoyn them. To be short, I wish the haters of Pu∣ritans would consider for themselves, as well as others, that there is an obedience of Faith, as well as of Manners, due both to God and our Governours. That our judgments are to be form'd by the rules of right Established by Law, as well as our actions to be governed in obedi∣ence to Laws commanding and enjoyn∣ing
them. By that Faith that every man owes to the Government, he is ob∣liged to defend the Constitutions there∣of: they are more properly Covenants than Laws, which yet Aristotle calls so; they are the Communes Reipublicae Spon∣siones. If we do not form our actions in agreeableness thereto, and comport with them in our judgments, we do not onely disobey the Authority of Laws, but are also false Traytors to the Go∣vernment, by violating our publick Faith. And now, O ye people foolish and unwise, ye stupid and perverse generati∣on! will you still persevere to call that which is lawful, nay, necessary, nay, commendable and heroical, to which we are urged by necessity, to which we are obliged by the virtues of Religion to God, Loyalty to our King, the Faith that we owe to the Community, A do∣ing Evil that Good may come thereof? Your own Condemnation must be just,
if you be detruded amongst the number of stupid Sots, reckoned amongst those that have lost their Reason, extingui∣shed their Faculties, suppressed their vir∣tue, and have no other use of their Rea∣son left them, but what is to betray them to greater Evils, as a just punish∣ment for their former abusing it. You perversely and absurdly mis-apply words without sense: To the purpose that you may give countenance to your im∣pieties, your utter neglect of Gods true Religion, the safety of your Prince, and the publick peace, and become Traytors to God, your King and Countrey, with∣out any sense or remorse. I have but one Observation to make, and one word of my self, and I shall conclude. The Observation is this: Scarce any Government hath been intestinely de∣stroyed, but its destruction was from it self; which could never have hapned, if the great men had not been guilty of
connivance at, and sufferance of Evils that might have been timely prevented. And for that after the long continued stupidity of the upper and lower vul∣gus, which are moved by nothing but what they feel; they have grown im∣patient of the smart of those Evils they could not, or would not foresee. To this Histories do give ample testimony, as they do also testifie, that Concussions in Governments, and Convulsions in State, proceed mostly from Flatterers, incroachments of power, attempts upon the Government, and decay of Faith and Trust in our Governours; and se∣condly, from Factious Demagogues. But these never appear, until the Flat∣terers and Projectors upon Government have first played their tricks: they wait as Owls for the twi-light, and Wood∣cocks for the winter; they are onely useful as revulsive remedies against the Evils of the other: but are without all manner of Grace, where the Govern∣ment
is uprightly and duely Administred. And thirdly, and principally, from the frailty of Humane Virtue. When some of better place, for the preservation of the Ancient Government, and Gods true Religion amongst us, will not endure to forego or loose some accommodations or advantages of life, which they may be well without, and perhaps do not de∣serve; how can it be expected that the generality of Mankind should suffer Martyrdoms in meer Loyalty, (that is) be contented to become miserable and and calamitous, and have no other pay∣ment for their miseries and Calamities they suffer, but that their Prince receives therein an imaginary pleasure, and a false satisfaction? When all is said, men will never go∣vern themselves by the Doctrine of the severe Casuists: But their virtue of Loy∣alty will bear the same proportion as their other virtues do to the Canon of Morality.
The best service that can be done to any Government, is to keep it true to its own Constitution, good and tolera∣rable to the People. To this all wise and good men should in their several places apply themselves with Heroical zeal, a busie care, manly and firm resolutions; and thereby pre∣vent, if possible, those Evils that Man∣kind will not endure and sustain. If all that were dis-interested from any Faction, would interpose with wise applications to such purposes, Govern∣ments would not be so easily dissolv'd, and Nations rendred miserable or ruin'd. If all that are illightned, and truly ho∣nest, would thus dutifully behave them∣selves at all times to their King and Countrey, both Demagogues and Flat∣terers would soon be ashamed, confoun∣ded and forsaken, both by Prince and People, and Governments be of ever∣lasting continuance.
But that no man may wonder at my boldness, and the freedom I have used in these Discourses, I have only this true account to give of my self. That Loyalty and Religion, and the Prospe∣rity and Peace of my Countrey, have therein entirely conducted my thoughts, and guided my hand. I have therein affirmed nothing but what is publickly known for truth, and which the Cause I defend requires to be said. It is the Cause of our Government, Religion, and Nation, that I advocate: The Cause is pleaded in its proper Court, before God and the King, Angels and Men; no other forum can take Cognizance of the Cause. To this the Writers of the other side hath invi∣ted us by, appealing thereto with their Reasons. I am free from any just imputation of malice and contumely against the person who is most concerned in the right disputed: I have consul∣ted therein his true Interest, which cannot be di∣vided from the Peace and Happiness of Three Kingdoms. Justice her self will acquit me from having done any thing amiss; and I cannot suffer in the Censures of honest and reasonable men. In these Considerations I am encircled as in a brazen wall, safe and secure; for as for the fears of Rage and Injustice, they shall never af∣fect me.
The POSTSCRIPT. SIR, I Now render you my hearty thanks for your free advice you gave me, concerning the publishing of the Argument for the Bishops Right of Judging in Capital Cau∣ses in Parliament, and for asserting their civil Honours and Rights in the Government. Be∣cause it hath given me an occasion, both of vin∣dicating the most of the Inferiour Clergy from those Imputations which you have remembred to me, and are commonly discoursed to their disadvantage, whereby they have lost their E∣steem with the People; and also of rectifying the mistakes of some (for their number is not great) who have given too much cause therein of pub∣lick complaints. You disswade me from giving any assistance to the Rights of the present Bishops, for that the Clergy out of whom the Bishops must be made, have entertained Principles that are de∣structive to the Government. They affirm (you say) That it is in the Power of a Prince, by Divine Right, to govern as he pleaseth; that the power of the Laws is solely in him; that he may, if he please, use the consent of Parliaments to assist the reason of
his Laws, when he shall give any, but it is great condescention in Kings to give a reason for what they do, and a diminution to their most unaccountable Prerogative. You say, That they are for a Po∣pish Successor and no Parliament, and do as much as in them lies, give up our Ancient Government and the Protestant Religion, the true Christian Faith, to the absolute will of a Popish Successor, giving him a Divine Right to extirpate Gods true Religi∣on established amongst us by Law, and to evacuate our Government by his absolute pleasure. Our Government by a King and Estates of Parliament, is as antient as any thing can be re∣membred of the Nation. The attempt of alter∣ing it in all Ages accounted Treason, and the punishment thereof reserved to the Parliament by 25 Edw. 3. The conservancy of the Govern∣ment being not safely to be lodg'd any where, but with the Government it self. Offences of this kind not pardonable by the King, because it is not in his power to change it. This is our Government, and thus it is established, and for Ages and immemorial time hath thus continu∣ed; a long Succession of Kings have recogni∣zed it to be such: And just now, when we are under the dread of a Popish Successor, some of our Clergy are illuminated into a mystery that hath been concealed from the beginning of Go∣vernments to this day, from the wisdom of all Princes and Ministers of State; That any autho∣rity in the Government, not derived from the King,
and that is not to yeild to his absolute Will, was re∣bellious, and against the Divine Right and Authority of Kings in the Establishment, against which no usuage or prescription to the contrary, or in abate∣ment of it, is to be allowed. That all Rights are ambulatory, and depend for their continuance upon his pleasure. So that though the Reformation was made here by the Government established by Law, and hath acquired civil Rights not to be altered but by the King and the three Estates. These men yet speak (say you) as if they envied the Rights of their own Religion, and had a mind to reduce the Church back again into a state and condition of be∣ing persecuted, and designed she should be stripped of her Legal Immunities and Defensatives, and brought back to the deplorable helpless condition of Prayers and Tears; do utterly abandon and neglect all the Provisions that God's providence hath made for her protection. Nay, by this their new Hypo∣thesis, they put it by Divine Right into the power of a Popish Successor, when he pleaseth, at once, by a single indisputable and irresistable Edict, to destroy our Religion and Government. And these opini∣ons, you say, they are the more inclined to en∣tertain, for that they believe no Plot, but a Presbyterian Plot; for, of them they believe all ill, and call whom they please by that hated name, and boldly avow that Popery is more eligible than Presbytery; for by that they shall have greater Revenues, and more Authority and Rule over the Lay-men.
This is a heavy Charge, if true; but it is impu∣table (I am sure) but to a few, and not so gene∣rally, as some malevolent men of the Popish Faction are industriously busie to have it. For if it were, I confess it might choque the constancy, Resolution and Zeal of the most addicted to the service of the Church-men, and make them at least very indifferent in their Concerns. For these mistakes are so gross and inexcusable, that they ought, if they could perish by themselves, to be permitted to suffer the smart of their own follies, and to be corrected by the evils they are drawing down upon themselves, with their own hands. They deserve to suffer as betrayers of their own Country: To be prosecuted with greater shame and ignominy, by all of the Reformed Religion, than the Traditores were by the Antient Christi∣ans: These their deserting of the true Christian Faith, being much less excusable than their fault that deserved that name, and of greater mischief, as of deeper malignity. How many of the Clergy-men are thus misled we know not; but they seem many more than they are, because they are most in view, and come often under observation, frequent publick houses, and talk loud, because they want the Comple∣ment of their Preferments. But certainly, Sir, what you say to be the de∣clared Opinions of some Clergy-men, is the busi∣ness now of the Papists to propagate. Hoc Ithacus velit, & magno mercantur Atridae.
These are agreeable to, and indeed make up the most modern Project and Scheme of the Po∣pish Plot. Since the discovery of their first Design of kil∣ling the King, and massacring of the Protestants, they have taken such courage, by observing how little power we have to prevent their Design, that they have us in scorn, and in the vilest con∣tempt. They now think that we are not worth de∣stroying, but by our own hands; that we are not worthy of their trouble, or the charge of Executioners of their providing. How enter∣taining is it to his Holiness, to find the Church of England, the impregnable Bulwark of the Reformed Religion, easily fall into his hands, by the unpresidented folly of some of her Sons, without the trouble of attacking her either by Force or Argument, which have hitherto wanted success, and such attempts always atten∣ded with dishonour, and mischief to his See. How pleasant will it be to him to see us perish, and our destruction to be from our selves! With this he will answer all the irrefragable Apolo∣gies of the Church of England for her de∣parture from the Communion of the Romish Church. Then he will say with triumph, our Church destroyed her self, and perished by a Divine Fate, for her unwarrantable and Sacrile∣gious Schism; for so he will call our Follies, and impute them to Divine infatuations. The
manner of our destruction will be a better Ar∣gument, and of more force against the Do∣ctrine of the Reformation, than all the Argu∣ments of all the Doctors of that Church to this day. For this purpose, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, it is, that Sir Robert Filmers Books were Re-printed together, and recommended by the Title-page and the Publick Gazet to our reading. Since the Discovery of the Plot, we have had variety of Books Printed to the same purpose; viz To prove that all Kings, as Kings, are absolute by Divine Right. Since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, we have had men imploy∣ed to search all our antient Records and Histo∣ries, to find out something more antient than our Parliaments as now constituted, that it may serve as a pretence to take them away. Since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, we have the memory of our late calamitous War revived, to raise a Panick fear of another, and to make the King believe that the genius of the Nation is Rebellious, and that the Prote∣stant Religion it self is to be apprehended by Kings. It is difficult to tell how that late unhappy War began, or how it came to issue so Tragi∣cally in the Death of the late King; though we know how it ended; viz. The Nation re∣covered within twelve years after the most de∣plorable Death of that excellent King, into a re∣nowned
Loyalty; and in spight of a great Ar∣med Power, never before foil'd, ever victorious, then kept on foot for the Interest of a very few men, restored our present King (may his Reign be long and happy) to the Government of his Kingdoms, without the least assistance of any of the Cavalier-party, and oblig'd a wary Gene∣ral in the head of a factious and republican Army to Loyalty. Nay, within that time also, the Nation had re∣covered out of their partial Lapse into Fanati∣cism, bred up great numbers of excellent Scho∣lars, who mastered the prejudices of those times, were reverenced by the chief of the Presbyterian party, and are the beauty and strength of the Church of England at this time. The Presbyterians themselves were grown reconcileable to the Church of England, and had learnt by woful experience the mischievous∣ness of Schism, upon no better pretences than what then might have been satisfied and accom∣modated. When the King and Church were restored, Fanaticism had expired, if some old peevish and stiff Church-men had not studied obstacles against an universal Accommodation, and some crafty States-men had not projected that the continuance of the Schism would be of great service some time or other, to destroy the Church of England, and change our ancient Government; which is now apparently the Po∣pish
Plot; and if ever it be affected, it will be with this trick of affrighting the Church of England with the apprehension of Fanaticism, and making them suspicious of Parliaments. As many of them as are drawn into an opinion of the disloyalty of our late Parliaments, the illusions of the Popish Plot have passed upon them, and they are under the power of its fasci∣nations. But both the Loyalty of the late Parlia∣ments, and also how much it imports the Plot∣ters to have it believed that they design upon the present Government, will at once be clearly understood, if it be considered what hath been done for the forging of a Protestant Plot, (which was intended at the first opening to ex∣tend to the House of Commons), Things so wicked, as would make a virtuous man ashamed of the Age he lives in. But after all endeavours to find witnesses for their purpose, powerful encouragements, and great rewards, they have drawn none into their assistance, but who are publickly known for Rogues, or who wanted Bread, or had no Reputation to loose. If the falshood of this forged Plot had not been utter∣ly improbable, they might have procured bet∣ter seeming, and more credible witnesses. They might sure have found in this Age men bad e∣nough, not already infamous, to have testified a probable Lye. But so necessary it is to the Po∣pish design, that a Protestant Plot be believed, that they are not discouraged at the manifest
detection of their Conspiracies, Perjuries and Subornations; but will still go on as if they had a power to work miracles of villany for their Re∣ligion, which is no better. Our modern Politi∣cians have been most observant agreeably to their virtuous make, how frauds, perjuries and violence have prospered and succeeded in some particular cases, and have brought about some designs; they imagine such means throughly multiplied, to be able to conquer all things which they design. But these Arts, which have had success by the permission of God, when one Vil∣lain hath been to destroy another, will not pass upon the Protestant Religion. Let them seri∣ously in time despair, and give over such enter∣prises; For there is no Enchantment against Jacob, nor Divination against Israel, the Lot of Gods inhe∣ritance, and his peculiar Care. If Mordecai be of the Seed of the Jews, Haman shall fall before him. It is matter of comfort to us, and despair to the Plotters, that not one of their Plots yet, but hath proved abortive, or they have been de∣feated by their very success. Besides, pray let it be observed how this De∣sign of lessening our just confidence in Parlia∣ments, is otherwise carried on and promoted. It is now become the principal business of the Mercenary Writers for the Plot, to pick up and cull out all the enormities and irregulari∣ties of those times, the Vitia temporum, and sto∣ries of wild pranks of some beastly Fanatical
people, that exceed the common degeneracy of those ill times into which the Nation by undi∣scernable degrees so fouly lapsed, to make there∣of an ugly Vizard; and this they clap unduly up∣on our fifths of the Nation, upon all that love and adhere to our Government and Religion, to render them suspected of destroying again the English Monarchy and the Protestant Religion, even for those very proceedings that they make for preserving both. For the service of Popery requires, that whatsoever opposes it, must be branded with Treason and Fanaticism; that such delicate persons as are fond of the name of Loyal∣ty, though they understand not in what it con∣sists; that hate the name of Fanatick, since it is become as common a name of reproach, as the Son of a whore, though they understand not so well what it means, may be sure so to behave them∣selves, as to be reckoned for Loyal and not Fana∣tical, by taking the measures of the one and the other, according to the new notion of the Plot-Writers, and so become theirs with all their idle prattle. But let them make their best of this foolish sort of men, if that was all they could effect by this project. But they design further upon the Nation, viz. to match the fears of Popery, with a fear as great of the like Evils to those of Forty one; as if these Plotters had power by their interest to raise a new War, when we have power and au∣thority in our Government, if it were exerted,
to destroy them by Justice. But these State-Mountebanks think it convenient, because the Nation was cast into a Frenzy in Forty one, there∣fore now, when in perfect health, we are to be cast into a Lethargy to prevent our relapse; and in the mean time they intend we should perish insensibly and quietly, that way they design to destroy us. It is since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, that Popish Mercinaries have been hired to write virulent Libels against the Church, and bitter Invectives against Fanaticks. Out of the same Mint came a villanous Libel, called Omnia Comestia a Belo, against the Church, apt to render the Church-men suspicious of another detestable Sacriledge designed; and that loath∣some Print entitled the Committee, or Popery in Masquerade. Many parts whereof hath no o∣ther reason of belief, but that they have been the Subject of some drunken Rhimes in former times; but it is in the whole an insufferable Li∣bel against the Nation, by its application to this Age. These Mercinaries are the Authors as well of treasonable Libels against the King, which they form so, as they may seem to come from the Fanatick party, to render the King jealous of them, as they are of the Libels against the Par∣liament and their proceedings, to breed misun∣derstandings between the King, Parliament and People.
It is since the Popish Plot was discovered, that Fanaticism is represented more intolerable than Popery: That the Popish Plot, evident to the satisfaction of the King and several Parliaments, and of our greatest Judicatures, is yet told us not to be so certain, as that the Fanaticks are Trai∣tors in their hearts, though they own no prin∣ciples, as the Papists do, that warrant Treaso∣nable practices. And these Mercenaries, as frankly as if they had for the dividing of the Na∣tion a Warrant so to do, call all Fanaticks that oppose Popery, desire Parliaments, and expect they should use that power that is lodged in them, to keep out Popery, and preserve our Go∣vernment, and to bring to punishment those wicked men that have notoriously designed to destroy it. The belief of the Popish Plot, in the mean time, is by scoffs and paltry Rhimes permitted publickly to be sung in the Streets, put out of Countenance, and those that believe it exposed as a sort of credulous Fools, or designing Knaves. Such a vile esteem the Papists now have of us, that they prosecute us with their scorn, and use us as if we were below their hate. They think our divisions, which they have made, have already destroyed us; and they now hire a sort of Scaramouchy Zaneys, Merry Andrews and Jack-Puddings to insult over us, and make a sport at our miseries.
These pleasant Knaves cry with one side of the Face, and laugh with the other; but in the mean time they cry in jest, but laugh in good earnest. He that had the art of imitating a grave Spaniard with one side of his body, and a brisk French-man on the other side, rendred both Nations ridiculous. These vain fellows deprave every thing they meddle with; and whatever they say of Church or State, Religion or Policy, is raillery and abuse, and Pamphleting scurrility. Lord, under what seeming fatality do we labor, that it can be thought to the Service of the Church or State, to employ such Knaves! We are used like Sampson, bound, and our Eyes put out, and made sport for the Philistims. By these py'd Pipers, our young men are seduced, and danc'd down a precipice; though these merry Knaves have not skill enough to com∣mend them for Rat-catchers, if our City should be infested with that vermin, as they say the Town of Hammel once was. But the Dae∣mon that appeared there a py'd Piper, who de∣stroy'd their Children as well as their Rats, was not more mischievous to that Town, than these motley Knaves are to the Kingdom and Nati∣on. It is an insufferable indignity, That the tra¦gical State of our Nation should become al∣most daily the matter of a Rascally Farce; the very anguish and groans of the Nation turn∣ed
into Laughter and Mockery, such a barbarity was never used to a Nation. It is an excess of Petulency, to make abstract misery in the very form of it, mimically repre∣sented matter of Mirth and Laughter. These men were born out of time, and were fit for no Age but that of Nero, of whose consort they should have been, when he played the Destruction of Troy, to the Burning of Rome. But I do not doubt but His Majesties Justice will e're long overtake the Incendiaries, that are so pleasant at the embroilment of his Kingdom, when it shall be duly represented to him what beautefeus they are, and unmerciful deriders of the Calamities of his People, which they occa∣sion or promote. Tho they think they may pass any thing of this kind upon the Nation, made vain with trifling false wit and Buffoonery. It is now Twenty years since our Nation was infected with this sort of wit, and now we are to dye of the disease. We have a Fiddle provided for us that have been bit with this venemous Tarantula, to dance and frisk us to our destruction, not to our cure; and yet we pay the Fidler. This thing Wit, the greatest debauchment of this Age, hath depraved not only the Manners, but the Judgment and Understanding of the Nation too. It hath been accounted the best accomplish∣ment of men in place, the best part of the Learning of this last Age: It is not the reason of the Leviathan, so much as the vanity of Wit,
that hath propagated Atheism, and corrupted our Manners. This hath made our Judgments in∣sincere and trifling; our determinate resolutions in matters of the greatest moment, slight and Phantastical; introduc't idleness and neglect of solid Learning, which requires labour and appli∣cation to obtain, while this extemporary faculty has been accounted an admired accomplish∣ment. There is a sort of Wit very commendable, which Tully calls celeritas in verbis, and the Greek Epigram, , which is a pleasant entertainment in conversation, and a commendable refreshment, where our minds are tired with anxious and graver busi∣ness, and the troubles and cares of humane life; but this ought to observe its times, its proper subjects, it ought to be confined to Table-talk an evening-compotation, and the hours of mirth, and the relaxation of our mind: It may be used decently in a Comical Farce; but it is not allowable in Satyr, most undecent is the use of it in Tragedy. But yet it hath insolently interposed in our Politicks, governed publick Councels, sometimes determined debates in Parliament; hath made our Pulpits contempti∣ble, our Theology trifling: It is admitted to resolve the greatest Questions, and determine Cases of Conscience, to establish and refix Church-Government; hath usurped an autho∣rity to alter and pull down Governments, and
to render them tottering, when they are as firm∣ly establisht and fixt as a Rock. That Wit that is abhorred by all men that are wise and honest, is that versatile shifting, squinting, distorting of the Understanding, that it views nothing truly, and represents things not according to their true nature, but under false Fantastical Schemes, which they affix to them, to abuse the judgments of others: a man can never arrive to any perfection in this faculty, until he is become false, and lost his truth and modesty: none but weak men are entertained with it, and such who do not desire to understand truth, but to serve a turn, and love to be deceived, and who deceive themselves for advantage. It is in perfection in old Knaves, and admired by young Coxcombs. It is the Hypocrisie of the Tongue, a plausible mode of lying and slandering; and at best, but a pleasant Knavery. It will render ridiculous or culpable, by false representations, the most noble and heroical a∣ctions, and put false colours upon most detestable Villanies. It can discredit a man by honouring him, and make a thing incredible by the very mode of believing it; making a man ridiculous, it concludes him at the same time unworthy; and to confute the most avowed Truths, there needs no more than to raise a sit of laughter up∣on it; which has the same effect with the men of wit, and their vain admirers, as reducing a
false proposition to an absurdity: Thus the rea∣son of this Age is governed by our risibility. The Popish Writers have thus tickled us with their Wit, that we are ready to dye and perish laughing, and we know not, nor care to consider or judge of what does truly concern our preservation. And by improving the vanity of some youngsters, they have drawn them to question the Truth of the Popish Plot; and some can believe every hour of the day, when they meet with a merry Popish Pamphlet, that there is a Protestant Plot on foot; though they believe it, I am sure, not much longer than they are reading it. I will not grudge my pains in furnishing a short Demonstration of the Popish Plot, since it is of such importance to the saving of these men and the whole Nation, which possibly may fix their minds (notwithstanding so vain they be) into a belief of it; which I have made short, that it may be the better remembred; which I do in kindness to them, since it was lately (and may be so again shortly) a criminal matter to bring the truth of it into question; and they are by all honest men reckoned as Plotters them∣selves who doubt it. The Plot has been declared by the Kings Pro∣clamation, and four Parliaments, one of them consisting of Pensioners and Dependents on the Court, which for eighteen years together, were giving Demonstrations of their Loyalty to their Prince, almost forgetting the publick
Weal: A solemn National Fast has been Indicted by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority of the Kingdom, for averting the mischiefs thereby de∣signed, and solemnly Celebrated by the whole Nation; in which, certainly, they did not mock God, and deride his Providence. Many unparallel'd Villanies have been commit∣ted, for the stifling, concealing, and suppressing the discovery of it, which (however wicked the Papisti∣cal Sect of base, false and degenerate Christians are) we cannot without breach of Charity towards them, think they would commit cheaply, and without cause, and to no purpose. They have murdered a Minister of Justice, because he had the knowledge of it, and left nothing undone that they thought necessary to Assasinate another for strenuously opposing it. They have attempted upon the Lives of our Witnesses. By perjuries and forgeries they have endeavoured to charge them with the most infamous crimes, to destroy them in their Lives and Reputations too, in a form of Justice. They have attempted by fears and rewards upon the integrity of all our Witnesses, to draw them to retract their Te∣stimony against the Plot; for which some of their Agents have been judicially censured; One Gen∣tleman to the Pillory, Fin'd 1000 l. and Con∣demned to a years imprisonment: so evident and notorious was his offence, and by the Court thought so heinous, that it provoked the passion of the Court, and they seemed to
exceed the ordinary Rules of Justice, for that they judged the Case to be of an exorbitant and transcendent nature. The Plot of the Meal-Tub is a sublimated piece of wickedness, the last accomplishment of villany; it hath out-done all former, and Will never be out-done in after-Ages. The Papists by the Discovery of the first Plot be∣came less hopeful in a Massacre, and of effect∣ing their purpose by force: They dare not now kill the King, for that the World would not now believe it to be done by Mr. Claypole and his feigned accomplices; which must have born the blame from the Papists, and he and they long since Executed as Traitors, if that part of the Plot against the Kings Life had not been prevented by being detected. I say, the first design of the Plot being rendered less feasible by the discovery; They keep the King alive with care, as well for their avoiding the rage of the Nation, as to lessen the credit of the Plot: But contrive to destroy as many as they thought fit to be Massacred, in form of a legal process, and to charge them with a design of raising Rebel∣lion against the King. They had made a List of a great number of considerable persons, whom they intended to charge, principal Nobles and worthy Gentlemen about the Town; had pre∣pared witnesses to swear the charge against them, and would certainly with more ease, after the first Conviction and Execution, have sworn all that
they had a mind to destroy into the same guilt. And thus all the truly Religious, the Noble, Good and Virtuous of our Nation, that had courage enough to own, assert and defend the true Christianity, and our Government, must, to the eternal dishonour of our Nation and Religion, have suffered the execrable death of Traitors. We have reason to think them humane, when they onely designed a Gun-powder Treason, or a Massacre. Our abhorrence of this usage dischargeth in us all reluctancy to Martyrdom: Let them bring us to the Stake as Martyrs, then we shall bear our Testimony to the truth of the best Religion, and our Lives will not be cheaply lost; but by this means we must be forced to dishonour this Religion by our deaths. By a Massacre or a Gun-powder Plot, the vile∣ness, cruelty and treachery of that Apostate Church, had been declared to all the World, and that false Religion, as well as the professors of it, had been rendered detestable, for which end a good man would scarce refuse to dye. But by this means they would have forced us to personate their own proper Crimes and Vil∣lanies, and dishonour our own peaceable and ho∣ly Religion. A man of Honour prefers his Ho∣nour to his Life, and would redeem it by his Death: But by this means we were, though innocent, to lose our Lives by dishonour, and to fasten a stain upon our Memories by our death. The Priests, their impudent Lyes at their deaths,
in denying the matters of the Plot, of which they were upon clear evidence Convicted and Sentenced, must have past for truths; and all our worthy men dying with protestations of their innocence, must to the everlasting infa∣my of our Religion and Nation, been account∣ed false and impious at their last breath. There is no reason to be assign'd of the patience of God or Man towards such miscreants, but that they may have time to add one impiety to ano∣ther, until an easie vengeance triumphs over them. And though this last mentioned Plot is clear∣ed beyond all exception, their Faces are hardned, and they are not yet ashamed; but they have since contrived and suborned Witnesses to swear the ve∣ry Discovery of the first Plot to be a false contri∣vance of a Plot against the Papists. To this pur∣pose they suborned a Son by perjury to commit parricide against his Father; this the greatest Sin against Earth, the other the greatest affront against Heaven. What a Religion is this, that must be thus supported! Nay, as if they did not fear or care to loose the favour of their most indulgent Prince, which they have possest since he used Papists in making his escape at Worcester; they have con∣trived these two last Plots with such Art, as to bring them under his Majesties Observation, and represented them as things fit for his en∣couragement. Sure if they were not urged
with the fears of a real guilt, and a restless Con∣science of the Plot, they would never have ad∣ventured thus to have interested the honor of the King, and to tempt him to abandon them to the publick Justice of the Nation; which begins to grow impatient, by the delays of it a∣gainst this Hellish Plot. For we have had four Parliaments dissolved since the Discovery of it, one a darling to the Crown. The bringing into question the Dissolution of that Parliament in the House of Peers, upon the reason of an unnatural Prorogation, was not long before censured, and some great Lords imprisoned there∣fore; proceedings so unwarrantable, that it was after thought fit by that House to obliterate the Memory of them; so necessary was that Parliament then thought to the service of the Crown. The Dissolution of that Parliament, gave us reason to fear that the King had no more business for Parliaments. By these Dissolutions, no publick ends that are intelligible are served, no Interest but that of the Plot is gratified; no persons of any sort receive their satisfaction but the Plotters, who are respited thereby from pub∣lick Justice, and gain time to bring their Plot to effect. This is the end the Papists have served; but the King our great Physician of State, had ano∣ther reason that hath gned him: for he knew the strength of the Pl, our Disease, and that a Disease that is dangerous, is sometimes
to be palliated, until the season comes to make a thorow Cure; for it many times kills the Pa∣tient to precipitate the Crisis. All these De∣monstrations of the Plot are past under every mans observation. But that we know so little of it after all this time: It is now above three years since the first discovery. That the Plotters now ordinarily escape Justice. That a great Judge did abate his first Zeal in punishing the Plot, lest he should exasperate it; and Reason of State might thus require it. These things prove the greatness and strength of the Plot, as well as the reality of it; these declare the Plotters interest is great, that the Plot is yet unbroken, stanch and hopeful. Therefore we are not to believe our selves well, and live fine Regimine, as the Physicians say, but to expect, address to, and desire our Cure. That the Papists think it yet hopeful, is evident from the Priests and the Lawyer ab∣juring their guilt with their last breath. We had the honest Confessions of the Convicted Priests and other Traitors of the Popish Trea∣sons of which they stood Convicted, in the time of Queen Elizabeth; and in the time of King James, of the Gun-powder Treason. What then could induce our Plotters Convict, to utter most solemn Perjuries the next minute before they were to appear to God? nothing sure, but that they then hoped that the Plot might
be executed; they did it for the interest and ser∣vice of their Church, and for the better bringing that Plot to effect for which they dyed; and for which at their deaths, to conceal, they ad∣ventured Heroically upon lyes and perjuries; which if confessed, would have been frustrated and become Abortive: For it must not be be∣lieved that even that Church is so degenerate, as to permit and allow men to such impieties, for the punctilio's of honor, though of the Church it self. But while they are not done for the sake of him that commits them, but for an im∣portant interest of their Church, (such as the carrying on of this Plot) they say they loose their nature by the direction of the intention, they become a pure piece of mortification and self-denyal, an adventure to trust God in what they do for his sake, and for his service; and their Casuists will no more call them in this Case lyes or perjuries, than Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac (though that was at Gods express command) was murder. But the God of Truth, that God who hath declared, that when he him∣self in any entercourse with Mankind interposeth an Oath, that the matter under that Oath is ir∣revocable, peremptory and absolute, cannot li∣cense or dispense with perjurious falshoods for a∣ny end whatsoever. But I must remark one thing more, and that is, touching the credit of Dr. Titus Oats, and Capt. William Bedloe, viz. That they have been
incurious in their conversation, have followed their own natural course, allowed themselves in their passions, have been apert and unreser∣ved, have not cared who they offended, have sought no mans favour, seem to care for no mans opinion, have valued and supported them∣selves only by their veracity, and have seemed to set all the world at defiance to find a flaw in their evidence, and have had little of friend∣ship or esteem, but for the sake of their disco∣very. Besides that so long a time hath not af∣forded a possibility, by all the Artifice, Interest and unhallowed frauds of Rome, to falsify any one part of that evidence. But numberless e∣vents have given credit and authentickness to their Testimony. Did ever any feigned Testi∣mony bear it self up with so much Confidence, Bravery and Assurance? was there ever any false witness that did not endeavour to render himself acceptable, to bespeak favour, which draws after it credit, and to appear of the most unexceptionable behaviour? Their faults and imprudences, such as they have been, we would not have wanted, to make their evidence beyond all exception. The undoubted truth of their evidence alone, hath given them the civil respect of all honest men, and will give the Doctor the publick ho∣nours of the Nation in due time. I will not re∣cite the innumerable Sham-plots contrived a∣gainst the Protestants, every one of them a De∣monstration
by it self of the truth of the Popish Plot, because I have no design to exasperate, but awaken these men that are asleep and secure in this storm. This trouble of demonstrating of the Plot, may seem unnecessary to the judicious, nay, to the plain sort of honest, upright, and well-mean∣ing men; and so it would certainly have been, had not some young Gentlemen, by this paltry thing called Wit, been corrupted in their judg∣ments, and brought into a Scepticism, and wild undetermination in a matter of so great concern∣ment. This despicable faculty hath made a famous Gentleman, who hath a liberal Dose of it, a Writer of Books, caused him to waste so much Paper, and abuse so many Readers; but in all that I have read of him, there is nothing true and sincere, or truly and sincerely said; his Judgment is made false by his Phantasie, or he hath serv'd a turn by his Versatile windings and Wily conceits. That dangerous faculty that he indulgeth, hath imposed upon him, which the severe and honest enquirers after truth are concerned to mortify and suppress. And I do earnestly recommend to all ingenious Gentlemen, that would be rightly instructed and informed, neither deceive others, nor would be deceived themselves, as they love truth and virtue, wisdom and sober thoughts, to despise this sort of wit in others, and repress it in
themselves. And never allow it to be used, but in the hours of mirth, in the Relaxations of their minds from serious Contemplations and matters grave and weighty, where this pro∣phane thing Wit ought always to be shut out with care. Enough hath been said for rectifying the mistakes of any true Protestant, especially any Clergy-man of the Church of England, which you have objected against them about our Go∣vernment or Parliament, Dissenters from the Church of England and Popery. Especially, when it is made apparent that these mistakes are made serviceable to the Popish Plot, and the means which the Popish party prosecute to com∣pass and bring about the ruine of our Church. But that nothing may be wanting, that lies in my poor power, for pulling their Foot out of the Snare, I shall more distinctly consider them. First, I shall desire them to consider what our Government is, and where the true know∣ledge of it is to be found. And where can it be found, but in our Statute-Books, the Com∣mentaries of our Law, the Histories of our Go∣vernment, and of the Kingdom? Search them if you be at leisure; if you are not, consult those that have read them, and whose business and em∣ployment it is to understand them, and you can∣not fail to be informed. That the King hath no power to make Laws,
that both Houses of Parliament must joyn with the King in making a Law. It can with no more reason be concluded that the King hath the Legislative Power, because his Assent makes the Bills in Parliament Laws, than it can, because the third Unit added to two makes a Triad, that the other two do not go to the ma∣king of that number. When a matter's moved from the King in Par∣liament to pass into a Law, the Commons consent last. The Letters Patents of Ed. 3. for making the Eldest Son of a King in Succession Prince of Wales and Duke of Cornwal,Sir E. Cook 8. R. was confirmed (as they must have been, otherwise they would have been void) by the House of Commons. And yet we will not say, that the House of Commons can make a Prince of Wales or Duke of Cornwal. And yet upon no better reason than this, some men will talk as if they believed them∣selves, that the Legislative power is in the King, when no King of England yet ever pretended to it; but by their process of Law have punished such officious and mischievous Knaves. They also will tell you that, the Laws are the measures of our Allegiance, and the Kings Pre∣rogative, and declare the terms of Obedience and Government. That a Legislative authority is necessary to every Government, and therefore we ought not to want it; and therefore Parliaments, in
which our Government hath placed the making of Laws, cannot be long discontinued, nor their Conventions rendred illusory and in vain, which is all one as to want them. That to Govern by Laws, implieth that great fundamental Law, that new Laws shall be made upon new emergencies, and for avoiding unsuffe∣rable mischiefs to the State. By the Statutes of 4 Ed. 3. c. 14. 36 Ed. 3. c. 10. it is provided that Parliaments be holden once every year. The Statute of this King required a Parliament every three years; which being an affirmatory Law, doth not derogate from those of Ed the 3. But if the King doth not call a Parlia∣ment once in a year, he neglects these Laws; and if he delays calling a Parliament three years, he ne∣glects the other Law of his own time too. And for that he is by the Law intrusted with the calling of Parliaments, he is at liberty to call them with∣in the times appointed. And that Laws ought to be made for Redress of mischiefs that may ensue, appears by the Statute of provisors, 25 E. 3 cap. 23. In which we have these words: Whereupon the Commons have prayed our said Soveraign Lord the King, that sith the right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm is such, that upon the mischiefs & Dammage which happeneth to this Realm, be ought and is bound of the Accord of his said People in his Parliament thereof, to make Remedy and Law in avoiding the mis∣chief and damage which thereof cometh:
which that King agreed to by his Royal Assent thereto given. I dare be bold to say, that never any Bill in Par∣liament was lost, and wanted the Royal Assent, that was promoted by the general desires of the people. If Popery therefore (which is the greatest mis∣chief that ever threatned this Kingdom) can be kept out by a Law, we ought to have such a Law; and nothing can hinder such a Law to be past for that purpose, but want of an universal desire to have it. I desire these Gentlemen to consider, how they will answer it to our Saviour at the last day, if they suffer his true Religion, and the professors of it, to be destroyed and per∣secuted, when nothing but their desires of a thing lawful to be had, and of right due, was requisite to prevent it. Their sufferings will be just and righteous from God, if their sin occasioneth it, and very uncomfortable to themselves. The extent of the Legislative Authority, is no∣where to be understood, but by our Acts of Par∣liament, in which it hath been exercised and used, and by such Acts that declare the extent of its power. By the 13 Eliz. cap. 1. it is made. Treason during that Queens Life, and forfeiture of Goods and Chattels afterwards, To hold, maintain & affirm, that the Queen by the Authority of the Parliament of England, is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force and va∣lidity, to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the descent, limitation, inheri∣tance and Government thereof.
And this authority was exercised by Entailing the Crown in Parliament in the times of Richard the 2d, Henry the 4th, Henry the 6th, Edward the 4th, Richard the 3d, Henry the 7th, thrice in the time of Henry 8th. and upon the Marri∣age of Queen Mary to King Philip of Spain, both the Crowns of England and Spain were Entai∣led, whereby it was provided, that of the seve∣ral Children to be begotten upon the Queen, one was to have the Crown of England, another Spain, another the Low-Countries. The Articles of Marriage to this purpose were confirmed by Act of Parliament. Those that are truly Loyal to our present So∣veraign, have reason to recognize with high sa∣tisfaction, that such a power of altering and li∣miting the descent of the Crown, is duly lodg∣ed in the King and States of the Realm: For under the Authority of an Act of Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, we derive our selves to the happiness of his Government, and He his Title to the Crown of Scotland, which drew to him the Imperial Crown of England. For Robert Stewart, first King of Scotland of that Family, lived in concubinate with Elizabeth Mure, and by her had three Sons, John, Robert, and Alexander; afterwards he Married Eufame. Daughter to the Earl of Ross, and after was Crowned King of Scotland: He had by her Wal∣ter Earl of Athol, and David Earl of Straherne. When Eufame his wife died, he Married Eliza∣beth
Mure. After that by one Act of Parliament, he made his natural Children first Noble, that is to say, John Earl of Carrick, Robert Earl of Menteith, and Alexander Earl of Buchquhane. And shortly af∣ter, by another Parliament, he limited the Crown in Tail Successively, to John, Robert, and Alexan∣der, his Children by Elizabeth Mure in Concubi∣nate, and after to the Children of Eufame Ross his Legitimate Children; who are to this day in their Issue by this limitation, by authority of an Act of Parliament in Scotland, barr'd from the Crown; and we hope ever will be, by the continuance of the Line of our most Gracious King. Note, that though a subsequent Marriage by the Civil Law, which is the Law of Scotland, in such cases, doth Legitimate the Children born be∣fore Marriage of a Concubine; yet it is with this exception, that they shall not be Legitimated to the prejudice of Children born afterwards in Mar∣riage, and before the Marriage of the Concubine. Besides, the reason of the Civil Law in Legiti∣mating the Children upon a subsequent Marri∣age, is this, viz. a presumption that they were begotten affectu maritali; which presumption fails, where the man proceeds to Marry another woman, and abandons or neglects his Concu∣bine. But I desire these Gentlemen that are so un∣willing to be safe in their Religion, which I be∣lieve is most dear unto them, That if any Law should exceed the declared
measures of the Legislative Authority, though in such case they may have leave to doubt of the lawfulness of such a Law, yet if it be not against any express Law of God, they will up∣on a little consideration determine it lawful, if it be necessary to the Commonweal; for that nothing can be the concerns of men united in any Polity, but may be governed and order∣ed by the Laws of their Legislature for pub∣lick good: for by the reason of all Political so∣cieties, there is a submission made of all Rights, especially of the common rights of that Commu∣nity, to the government of its own Laws. But all this, and a hundred times as much, will not satisfie some Gentlemen of the lawfulness of our Government, and the extent of the Legislative power of Parliaments, since they have entertained a Notion, that Monarchy is jure divino, unaltera∣ble in its descent by any Law of man, for that it is subject to none. That all Kings are alike ab∣solute. That their Will is a Law to all their Subjects. That Parliaments and the States of the Realm in their Conventions, can be no more than the Monarchs Ministers, acting under and by his appointment, which he may exauctorate and turn out of office when he pleaseth: For there can be (say they) under the Sun no ob∣liging Authority but that of Kings (to whom God hath given a plenitude of power) and what is derived from them. That this divine absolute∣ness may govern, and exercise Royal Power im∣mensely,
and that it is not subject to, nor to be abated or restrained by any humane inventions or contrivances of men: (however necessary and convenient Kings have thought them in former Ages) by such methods and such Offices and Officers (of which number the States of the Realm may be, or not be, as Kings shall please) as they shall by their absolute Will order or ap∣point. Our Parliaments, say they, are Rebellious, and an Ʋsurpation upon the unbounded power of Kings, which belongs to every King as such Jure or∣dinario, and by Divine institution: That a mixt Monarchy, as ours is, is an Anarchy; and that we are at present without a Government, at least such as we ought to have, and which God hath appointed and ordained for us: That we by adhering to the present Government, are Rebels to God Almigh∣ty, and the Kings unlimited Power and Autho∣rity under him, which no humane Constitution, no not the Will and Pleasure of Kings themselves can limit or restrain, for that, jura ordinaria & divina non recipiunt modum: That the Le∣gislative Power is solely in the King, and that the business of a Parliament (if they would think of being onely what they ought to be) is onely to de∣clare on the behalf of themselves and the People (that send them for that purpose certainly) the obedience that is due from them to such Laws as the King shall make, and that they may be laid aside whol∣ly when he pleaseth. And after all this, what matter's it with them what we say our Go∣vernment
is, hath been, or where the Legisla∣tive Authority of the Nation is placed, or how used? But I desire these Gentlemen to consider how they come to these Notions, upon what reason they are grounded. How a Government esta∣blished by God and Nature for all Mankind, should remain a secret to all the wise, good, just, and peaceable men of all Ages. That Kings should not before this have understood their Authority, when no pretences are omitted for increase of Power, and enlargement of Empire. I desire them to consider that this secret was not discovered to the World before the last Age, and was a forerunner of our late unnatural War; and is now again revived by the republishing of Sir Robert Filmer's Books, since the Discovery of the Popish Plot. I wish they would consider, that the reasons ought to be as clear and evident as Demonstra∣tion, that will warrant them to discost from the sense of all Mankind in a matter of such weight and moment. That to mistake with confidence and over∣weening in this matter, will be an unpardonable affront to the common sence of Mankind, and the greatest Violation of the Laws of modesty. I desire that they would consider, and rate the mischiefs that will certainly ensue upon this opi∣nion, and whether a probable reason can there∣fore support it.
That they would throughly weigh, ponder, and examine the reasons of these bold and new Dogmata. For their enquiries ought to be in proportion diligent and strict, as the matter is of moment; and if they are not, their errour and mistake will be very culpable, and the sin of the errour aggravated to the measure of the mischief which it produceth and occasion∣eth. Where is the Charter of Kings from God Almighty to be read or found? For nothing but the declared Will of God can warrant us to destroy our Government, or to give up the Rights and Liberties of our people. If they are lawful, I am sure it is villany to betray them, since all Political Societies are framed, that all may assist the common Rights of all. I cannot imagine they can pretend an umbrage from the holy Scriptures for such unheard-of Opinions. The Jews indeed had a Government and Laws of Gods framing and appointment, and a King of their own chusing; and such a King as they desired, by Gods permission they had: But their form of Government ought with less rea∣son to be the rule of all kingly Governours, be∣cause it was a Government chosen by themselves: then the Laws of the Jews ought to be the Laws of all Nations (which they are not) though made and enacted by God himself. Christ would not make himself a Judge in a
private Right submitted to him: He determi∣ned the right of the Roman Empire by the pos∣session of Soveraign Authority; and such as the whole world had made it, his Disciples were ob∣liged to acknowledge it, by their obedience and submissions, which is the sum of the Apostles Doctrine in this matter. The Christian Religion instituted no form of Governments, but enjoyns us to be obedient to those we have, not onely by express command in the case, but by its general Rules of a most re∣fined, improved, and extensive morality. But though I said the Scriptures have not prescribed or directed any universal Form of Governments, yet the Scripture hath declared the falshood of this new Hypothesis of Kingly Government to be Jure Divino, or by Divine Right: For St. Peter, 1 Peter 2.13 and 14, stiles Kings, as well as the Governours under him, the ordinance of man; which cannot have any o∣ther sence, but that men make them, and give them their powers. By St. Paul the power of Governments indeed is called Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.2. but that is for this reason, be∣cause in general God approves of Govern∣ments as necessary to the well-being of Man∣kind, for the improvement of humane nature, for the punishing of Vice, encouragement and security of Virtue; without them it being im∣possible to live honestly and in peace. And he hath made them the under-Ministers of his pro∣vidence
and care over Mankind, and expects of them, that they should promote his true Honour and worship in the world, which will be always accompanied with the exercise of all civil vir∣tues. These two different places must be so under∣stood, that they may be both true; and by no o∣ther interpretation can they be reconciled and made consistent. It is impossible that any thing can be of mans appointment, which is of Gods Ordination; there can be no such thing as a Co-legislative power of Men with their Maker. Government there∣fore is from God, as he hath made Governments necessary in the general order of things; but the specification thereof is from men. The best de∣finition that can be made of Government, is in the words of both the Apostles put together, , and such Governments which men make, God approves, and requires our obe∣dience to them, upon all those reasons which make Governments necessary. The natural and easie consequence and re∣sult of these Scriptures, is this; which I desire those Gentlemen to observe: That whatsoever is not lawfully established by men, no Law of God, not the Christian Law, doth oblige us to obey. The Christian Religion doth equally con∣demn, in the reason of its Institutions, Usurpa∣tion and Contumacy. Where the Apostle ad∣monish
us, that if we be free, we should not become Servants, he hath by virtue of that Admonition, made it commendable not to suf∣fer the encroachments of Power over us. Most certainly therefore, as the Christian Religion doth not prejudice the Soveraign Rights of Princes, such as they are in the several Forms and Models of Monarchical Governments, non eripit terrestria, qui regna dat coelestia, as Se∣dulius; so doth it not enlarge them: when by the Gospel God made us free from his own posi∣tive Laws to the Jews, sure he did not intend there∣by, de Jure, to render us Slaves to the Arbitrary pleasure of men. No man intends by any thing in the Scri∣pture, that all Mankind is obliged to any one Form of Government, and therefore all men are left to their own. It hath not therefore alter∣ed the terms of Government and Obedience that every Nation hath established for themselves, but hath confirmed, and strictly obliged the obser∣vance of them. To Obedience to Government, we are ob∣liged by as many ties as there are Christian Vir∣tues; and he must disown his Christianity, that departs from his due Allegiance, And since our Saviour is declared King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, all Christian Kings are to govern in imi∣tation of his mercy and goodness, and in sub∣serviency to the interest of his Religion and Kingdom.
Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis, cuncta supercilio moventis. Whence then is this absolute Authority of Kings, if it come neither from God nor man? Give me leave now to inform you, that these opinions render you all Traytors, guilty of Trea∣son of State, perduellionis rei, obnoxious to be punished as Traitors by an Authority lodg'd in Parliament, in the Constitution of the Govern∣ment. You your selves must needs condemn your selves to have forfeited all your own, who hold such Principles that tend to destroy every mans Right, by resolving all things into the absolute pleasure of a Monarch; in which you mostly dis∣serve the King, and are contrary to his Ma∣jesties late Declaration. The men of these Prin∣ciples, the less of the Government they are in∣trusted with, the better; for the less they have to give up and betray. I confess, if I could be∣lieve that this Doctrine was become Orthodox among them, and the prevailing opinion of the Clergie. I should conclude us to be the most un∣happy people under the Sun. This is an Hy∣pothesis indeed, that will bring on new Heavens and a new Earth; but such wherein no Peace or Righteousness can ever dwell. But I deem all such as are Defenders and Promoters of it, do deserve a civil Excommunication, more smarting than their Ecclesiastical: and to be condemned
to live upon, and onely feed themselves with their thin and crude Speculations. To be excluded from any share of that Government that they professedly in their Principles betray. To be puni∣shed as seditious persons, and most mischievous Schismaticks, far more intolerable in this mat∣ter, than the scrupulous Brotherhood, for their boglings at an indifferent and insignificant Ce∣remony. For that to the ruine of our Religion, and destruction of the publick Peace, they di∣vide from that Polity, to which by drawing here their first breath, they made Faith; and to which the condition of their birth doth oblige them; they falsifie that which Arrian in his Epi∣ctetus calls the , than which nothing is more sacred and inviolable. By creating themselves a new Allegiance, and obtruding it upon their fellow-Citizens, and Mem∣bers of the same Kingdom, they set up a King∣dom within a Kingdom, more dangerous and mischievous than the Papal Imperium in Imperio; which certainly will be introduced, if this Mo∣dern and monstrously-extravagant opinion can prevail by a general Credence. It is criminal, and no less dangerous to the being of any Polity, to restrain the Legislative Authority, and to entertain Principles that disable it to provide remedy against the great∣est mischiefs that can happen to any Commu∣nity. No Government can support it self with∣out an unlimited power, in providing for the
happiness of the people: No Civil establishment but is controulable and alterable to the publick weal. Whatever is not of divine Institution, ought to yield and submit to this power and Authori∣ty. The Succession to the Crown is of a civil na∣ture, not established by any Divine Right. Seve∣ral Kingdoms have several Laws of Succession; some are Elective, others Hereditary, under seve∣ral Limitations. All humane Constitutions are made cum sensu humanae imbecillitatis, under rea∣sonable exceptions of unforeseen accidents and emergencies that may happen in humane affairs; and so they must be intended, and so interpreted. The several limitations of the descent of the Crown, must be made by the people in confer∣ring the Royal Dignity and Power, which is more or less in several Kingdoms. And the descent of the Crown in particular cases, is governed accor∣ding to the presumed will of the People; and the presumption of the Peoples will, is made by measuring and considering what is most expedi∣ent to the publick good; whereas private Estates are directed in their descent according to the pre∣sumed will of the Decedents. And this is the reason tha the descent of the Crown is gover∣ned by other rules than private Estates. Onely one Daughter, and not all, as in private Estates, shall succeed to the Crown, because the strength of the Kingdom is preserved when continued u∣nited, and the peace and concord of the people
better established. A son of the second venter shall inherit, which is not allowed in private E∣states; because a son of the second venter is equally of the bloud of the great Ancestor, upon whom the Crown was first conferred by the people, or after he had got into the Throne obtain'd their Submis∣sions, and may equally participate of his virtues. If the Royal Family be extinct, it belongs to the people to make a new King, under what limi∣tations they please, or to make none; for the Po∣lity is not destroyed if there be no King created; and consequently, in case of this cesser or discon∣tinuance of the Regnum, there may be Treason committed against the people. By all which it is evident, that the Succession to the Crown is the peoples right: And though the Succession to the Crown is Hereditary, because the people so ap∣pointed it, would have it so, or consented to have it so; yet in a particular case, for the saving the Nation, the whole Line, and Monarchy it self, it may be altered, by the unlimited power of the Legisla∣tive Authority. We have been more just to the Royal Succession, than the wonderful Sir Robert Filmer; for his Hypotheses will not allow at all of Hereditary rightful Succession: For he, esta∣blishing the right of the universal Empire of the World in Adams right Heir, since this Illumina∣to hath enlightned the world in this secret, no Successor can, according to his Doctrine, derive any hereditary right from his Predecessor. His ti∣tle can be only his own possession; for no man can
claim by descent the Usurpation of his Father, but he that is not conscious to the wrong, and is bonae fidei possessor, under the presumed right and title of his Father. I would be understood to speak as the matter can be considered in a free reason, not under the prejudice of any positive municipal Law; for to such Laws the right of Crowns, as the renowned Knight will have it, are not submitted. So that here in this matter their Knight fails them, and can give them no help. Their other friend, the great Leviathan-maker, is so far from establishing an Hereditary Succession, that he leaves Kings to be rightfully assaulted, deposed, and destroyed by any person that can, who stands in danger of being destroyed by the King, though justly condemned to death; Leviathan, Part 2. cap. 21. Those (saith he) that have commit∣ted a capital Crime for which they expect death, have the liberty to defend themselves by Arms, as well as the Innocent. But I mention him onely to render him detestable; for I take his Books to be the dehonestamenta humani generis. But I desire them to regard the sence of all Mankinde, in the words of Isiodorus Pelusiota, . This governed the Judicious and Learned Dr. Falkner; for when he had carried Christian Loyalty as high as he could, to the honour of our Religion and the benefit of the world, for which we are all extreamly beholden to
him, he concludes thus in his excellent Book, called Christian Loyalty, (viz) That if any Prince undertakes to alienate his Kingdom, or to give it up into the hands of another Soveraign Pow∣er, or that really acts the Destruction, or the Ʋni∣versal Calamity of his people; Grotius thinks that in his utmost extremity, the use of a Defence, as a last refuge, ultimo necessitatis presidio, is not to be condemned, provided the care of the Common Good be preserved. And if this be true, saith he, it must be upon this ground, that such attempts of ru∣ining do ipso facto include a disclaiming the gover∣ning of these persons as Subjects, and consequently of being their Prince or King. What unreasona∣bleness is there then in shutting the Door upon him, and making it fast against him by an Act of State, who hath excluded himself by his principles and designs? For the truth of the fact, I shall onely refer you to his Secretary Coleman his Letters, wherein he saith, That his Masters in∣terest, and the King of France his interest, is one and the same, and their design, their glorious design, the same, (viz) the extirpating the Northern He∣resie. How far the King of France hath com∣plied with the design, the cruel Persecution and Exiles of his Protestant Subjects (who at the time of that Letter were under the security and protection of the Laws of that Kingdom, and the Faith of that Crown) do declare to the world. And by what secret influences I know not, he is made so great, his Conquests so easie and expe∣dite,
that he is like to do the work himself here in England too, and go away with all the Glo∣ry. But if the work must lie upon our hands, let no man think with himself that Popery is not to be introduced here, because the numbers of Papists are few; for that will not render the design impracticable, but the execution of it more cruel and barbarous; a whole Nation up∣on the matter must be corrupted from the Faith of the true Religion, or destroy'd. One single arm of an ordinary strength, not resisted, may assassinate a whole Nation. Let no man betray his Country and Religi∣on, by pretending the example of the patience and sufferance of the Primitive Christians for our rule. The Reformed Religion hath acquired a civil right, and the protection of Laws: if we ought not to lose our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, but where forfeited by Law, we ought much rather not to lose them for the profession of the best Religion, which by Law is made the publick National Re∣ligion. And it is strange that some men of the same Religion in profession, can think (that not∣withstanding) it makes no matter what is done to men if they be Religious; but if they be not so, the least publick injuries and injustice threatned or done them may be resisted, vindicated, remedied, and by right defended by old Laws, or new ones to be made for that purpose. The Christian Religion was publish'd when
the whole world was Pagan, and therefore it was submitted to such usage as the Governments would give it. But when the Christian Faith had by miracles of patience declared it self to be of Heaven, and of a divine Original; according to the Prophesies on that behalf, it took possessi∣on of the Empire; Crowns and Scepters became submitted to the Cross; The Christians acqui∣red a civil right of Protection and Immunity, which they ought not, they cannot relinquish and abandon, no more than they can destroy themselves, or suffer Violence and Cruelty to destroy the Innocent. Such as thus perish, shall never wear a Martyrs Crown, but perish in the next world for perishing in this. This will be interpretatively Crucifying Christ afresh after he is received up into Glory, i. e. after his Reli∣gion is exalted into Dignity, and Honour, and civil Authority. If the Senate of Rome had been Christians, they would never have given up the Government to a Pagan Augustus, with a power to him and his Successors to make Laws for ex∣tirpating the Christian Faith. What is said of the Christian Religion and Paganism, holds between the Reformed Religion and Popery. If any man is so vain, as to say, that an unaltera∣ble course of Succession to the Crown is established amongst us by Divine Right: I say, he is a man fitted to believe Transubstantiation, and the in∣fallibility of the Pope; he is deeply lapsed into
Fanaticism, he dreams when he is awake, and his Dreams are Dreams of phrensie. There are some things so false, that they cannot be disproved, as some things are so evidently true, that they can∣not be proved. This Proposition hath no colour to ground it self upon, no medium to prove it, no argument for it which is to be answered; nor is there any thing more absurd than it self, to re∣duce it to. But if any shall adde, that this Do∣ctrine is the Doctrine of the Reformation, and adventure to tell the people so; they are the most impudent falsaries that ever any Age produ∣ced; when there is scarce a Child but hath heard what was done, said, and maintained by the Clergie of England in the Case of Mary Queen of Scots, a Popish Successor, in the earliest time of our Reformation here in England. Our Age is blessed with a Clergie renownedly Learned and Prudent: By the Providence of God, and the Piety of our Ancestors, they possess good, though not to be envyed, Revenues and Ho∣nours. It is scarce possible they should have many a∣mong them that can countenance a proposition so wickedly impious and sacrilegious, That we cannot have new Laws for the preservation of our Religion, but must lose the old at the pleasure of a Popish Successor, against not their own interest, and the Rights of the Church, but against the Rights and Liberty of Religion it self. For she is capable of Franchises and Immunities, which
ought above all things to be most zealously asser∣ted and defended by her Ministers. Can they them∣selves with their own hands ever pull down her Hedg and destroy her Defensatives, and expose her helpless to the rage of her implacable Enemies, and suspend all the Legal security she hath for her pre∣servation, upon the Life of our present King, whom God long preserve? If Kings be admitted to have a power to make Laws, one Proclamation may establish the Popish Religion amongst us; which the Papal Bulls, so long as that See continues, will never be able to effect. Next to Religion her self, the Revenues of the Church challenge their faithful care, for they are at best but Usu-fructuary Trustees of her Endowments for the Succession, which they will wretchedly betray to an Arbitrary Succes∣sor, if they do not repress such Opinions that pretend to change the Government into an ab∣solute jure Divinity Monarchy, which will leave nothing jure divino but it self and the Pope∣dom. Kings for their so doing have the autho∣rity of Sir Robert Filmer, who affirms in his Treatise called the Power of Kings, Fol. 1. That the Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patents, Priviledg∣es and Grants of Princes, have no force but during their Life, if they be not ratified by the express consent, or at least by the sufferance of the Prince following, who had a knowledge thereof. This is but the necessary consequence and result from the Doctrine of the absolute power of a Prince:
for in such Government the Concessions of a Predecessor can no more oblige the Successor, than he can Govern when he is dead; and the Successor must be absolute in his time, as the Predecessors were in theirs. But in vain is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird; this deceit is of so gross a thread, that it cannot pass with the common people, much less upon our Clergy. But I will not dissemble what may be the true reason of the seduction of some young good-na∣tured Gentlemen of the Clergy. It is thus they perswade themselves, that if these principles and opinions of the Ʋnlimited Power of Kings had been received, the late Wars had been prevented: Not rightly considering, that if such opinions had never been broached, or Uni∣versally rejected, that War could never have ensued; and we should together with peace have enjoyed our ancient Government which our An∣cestors transmitted to us, without that miserable inter-regnum. I would not be perversely understood by any man, as if I went about to justify our late War: This is all I say, that every Government once established will continue for ever, if all the parts of it would unalterably consent to pre∣serve it, to which their natural Allegiance doth oblige them: And never any Prince endeavo∣red to change the Government, but where part of the people were first willing, or content to have it so.
Those false flatterers that go about to remove the boundaries of power, and change the Govern∣ment, are the greatest enemies to the quiet and happy Reigns of Kings, and the peace and prospe∣rity of Kingdoms. And if they do adventure to call their fellow-Subjects by any opprobrious names of disloy∣alty, because they will not joyn with them in such change, they are as absurdly impious and insolent, as any Prince or State would be, who should challenge another, as free and absolute as himself, for his Tributary and Vassal; and traduce him for a troubler of the World, because he would not Compose the Quarrel, thus inju∣riously sought, with the surrender of his Crown and Dignity. I desire these Gentlemen to consider, that the happiness of a Nation is best supported with Truth and Justice: This new Doctrine is not true; and whosoever entertains a belief of it, is not onely barely mistaken, but will be led by the mistake, into the most mischievous, impious, and sacrilegious injustice and treachery. It is very agreeable to a good man, to em∣brace a proposition with an easie belief, that of∣fers the least seeming probability of a security against the miseries of War, by all means to be avoided. But this Doctrine of the Divinity of Kings, is most dangerous to the Peace of King∣doms, for it is pregnant with Wars: Besides that it will give bad Princes, which sometime
hereafter may be Born into the World, (for such there have been now and then) power to make their Reigns worse than War, and Plague and Famine to boot. The Panick fear of a change of the Govern∣ment, that this Doctrine occasioned, and the Divisions it made among us, was the principal cause of the late War. It is not without reason, that, together with these new principles, revived since the Discovery of the Popish Plot, we have a perpetual din and noise of Forty one. Then that fatal War began, which proceeded to the destruction of the Prince, and ruin of the Church and State: The remembrance of it is the principal matter, that stuffs our weekly Pamphlets; and it is brought into common dis∣course, and grown so trival, that it is menti∣oned and heard without abhorrence and regret: And what Service this can be to His Majesty, I do not understand; much better it were, that the memory of it were utterly extinct and abo∣lished for ever, except onely in the Anniversary of that great Prince that so fell. Then, I say, and then onely, is it fit to be remembred, when we are on our Knees to God Almighty, and in his presence affecting our selves with sorrow and remorse, deprecating the like Judgments, and bewailing the National Sins that occasio∣ned those: For notwithstanding, the Glories of that Great Prince his unhappy death, and the
admired Devotions of the , The sto∣ry of the Calamities of his people, (all his three Kingdoms involved in War during his Reign) and the remembrance of them, will be with some Men not very Loyal, a stain and diminu∣tion to the Glories of the Royal Family. In Princes, their Calamities are reckoned amongst the abatements of their Honor; and meer mis∣fortunes are disgraces, and have the same influ∣ence upon the minds of the common people, as real faults and male administrations. How then can this tend to the peace of the Nation, or the Honor of the King? what satis∣faction is it to have our almost-healed wounds, thus perpetually rub'd and kept green? —Quis sua vulnera victus commemorare velit — Why should any of our Nation insult over the miseries of his own and neighbour King∣doms, when he must be the most barbarous villain, and have devested himself of all huma∣nity, that is not deeply empassioned at the re∣membrance of them? If a Thuanus, or a Philip de Comines were to pass a Judgment of the condition of our late times, upon the conside∣ration of our late Tragedies, and the Preludi∣um's to it in the Reigns of King James and the late King; it would be formed and pro∣nounced
in these words of Tully, upon another oc∣casion: Mihi quidem, si proprium & verum nomen vestri mali quoeratur, fatalis quoedam calamitas incidisse videtur, & improvidas hominum mentes occupavisse, ut nemo mirari debeat humana consilia divina ne∣cessitate esse superata. But this is not all, — Nec Dum finitur Orestes. We are affrighted by the weekly Pamphlets, with the expectation of another Parliamentary War; and this is the true reason of the mention of the late War, that we may forgo our Parlia∣ments for fear of another. So it is written in our publick Prints, which are published under permission, as if Parliaments are designed to be rendered hateful, and to be feared as Plagues, Famines, or Inundations of the Sea. But who is to begin, who designs this War, the Pamphleteers, or those that set them on work, best know: We had never heard of any such thing, if the Mercenary writers of the Popish Faction had not told us of it, as they do weekly: and hitherto we cannot find any Colour for this affrightful Lye; they are impu∣dent so to talk of it as if they believed it, and have brought some as weak men, as they are false Knaves, to a belief of it: But to do them no wrong, those may best know what is to come
to pass, who have the power of contriving and de∣signing. Qui pavet vanos metus veros fatetur. The vilest Traitors cannot contrive a greater prejudice to the King and his Family, than by advancing such a dismal thing into credit and belief: for fears, though but upon imaginary and false grounds, produce real effects, as well as they are in themselves really afflictive; and that almost equally, if of continuance, to the evils feared. Do these men speak like true Loyalists, that are mentioning perpetually the Calamitous War in the time of our Kings Fa∣ther, and fright us with another now ensuing; after those Universal, Solemn, and hearty Joys of the whole Nation for his Restauration, after so many Millions of Money most dutifully issu∣ed out of the affections of his people from time to time at His Majesties Royal pleasure, and nothing complain'd of, but that they have not opportunities of issuing ten times more, to the service of His Majesties Glory? Nay, they speak of this ensuing War, as if the Royal Standard was already displayed, and the Rebels had made their Musters; which must certain∣ly affect the Royal Family with the greatest dan∣ger. If there were twenty Trajans derived from one stock, that had Reigned in an uninterrupted Succession, Two immediate Successours, that
should have their Reigns successively attended with civil Wars, were enough to efface their own, and the glories and merits of such Ancestors. But base Caitiffs, you can no more truly believe the last Parliaments designed upon his Majesties Crown and Dignity, to make War, and change the Government, than you can believe that eve∣ry Mothers Child of them, before they came up to the last Parliaments, set his House on fire and burnt his Wife and Children. But these impudent Forgeries against the House of Commons, are contrived to make the people afraid of Parliaments: that this new model of Government in process of time, when we have an enterprising Successor, may take place, for the service of the Popish Religion. For upon the strength of Dr. B—s performance, who hath with great labour found out (which is hard for any man acquainted with our English History to be ignorant of) that our Parliaments were not always such as now constituted: This blessed change of our Government will never be atchie∣ved. The Nation will never be perswaded, by any thing that he hath found out in his diligent re∣search, that the House of Commons is an over∣grown Wen, an unnatural Accrescency to the Go∣vernment, and fit to be cut off, if that which is offered in the Argument to consideration be duly weighed. Neither can the most insolent Para∣dox of Sir Robert Filmers Patriarcha, contribute much to this purpose. But for that I have in my
Argument too forwardly despised it, considering that many have conceived a favourable opinion of it, that it may be able to deceive but a very few for the time to come; for the sake of such Gentlemen who have not chosen their side, are glad of the least Colour or dream of a Shadow, a single opinion of any body, it matters not whom, to relieve their modesty in their notorious de∣fections from Truth, Justice and the Govern∣ment; I shall here consider his Hypothesis, e∣specially for that it was Re-printed, and is mag∣nified by the Factors for the Popish Plot. And first, I will draw it out shortly, in all its strength, and make it more argumentative than he hath left it, (for he hath left his wil∣ling Readers to find out the Argument, and to make the Conclusion.) Adam, saith he, was the Father of Mankind; that to him as Father, belonged an Absolute dominion over all his de∣scendents; that all Men being so born, are born under subjection to such an Authority: This Au∣thority so reserved upon us by God, and the con∣dition of our birth, and the manner of coming into the World, is to be submitted to, in the person of the present King, who by becoming King, is for that reason vested with this Absolute Authority. This power, and the duty of our sub∣jection to it, results from our being Born, and coming into the World, after the manner of men. This power of Kings is grounded (by him) meerly upon this natural resultance, and not
from any positive and express Revelation from God, for such, neither we, nor he, yet ever heard of. We will now then consider, what there is of weight in this fictitious Reason of Government, in which the World is so lately illuminated by this Speculator; what force there is in it to un∣ravel all Models of Government that are fra∣med in the World, to confound Kingdoms and Nations, and to give Warranty to the bringing upon us all the miseries that are designed by the Papists for us; which we are to be prepared to suffer, with most conscientiuos patience, from the comforts and supports of this insolent and vain pretence. I appeal to the Reader of him, whether in thus stating his Doctrine, I have not made it more Argumentative and concluding to his purpose than he left it: I will take this method of remonstrating the futility of his Hypothe∣sis, By considering what a Father is, and what his Duty towards, and Power over his Chil∣dren; in which it will be found, that nothing of Empire belongs to him as Father; that no more belonged to Adam over his Children, than did to any of his Children over their own. That the Authority of Parents over their Children, continues together with Soveraign power, and is not at all abated by it; and that it
cannot be the same, because it continues entire with it. That there is no footsteps in the Records of the Old Testament, to verifie his Hypothesis; that we could not have wanted some Declarati∣ons about it from God, (if true) it being a matter so necessary for us to know. That no claims were made, (that we know of) to any such authority in the earliest times, when the Right was unpre∣judiced, and must have been best understood, and could not have been forgotten, as now it is utter∣ly. Besides that it was never used. The first Histo∣ries Recorded in the Bible, make every Child of the common Ancestor alike independent and absolute, and so it would for ever have conti∣nued: And to this day we should have been in the state of Nature, and not United in any Go∣vernment, and so no King yet in the world, not∣withstanding the Paternal Authority. That his Instances of exercising Soveraign power by the Fathers of Families, are not concluding, and to his purpose. That admitting Adam had while he lived been Universal Monarch, (yet if there be no o∣ther reason and Foundation of Monarchy in the World, but this of Sir Robert Filmer) A∣dams right Heir not being known, (and if he were, might perhaps be an Ideot or Lunatick, some Cobler or Botcher under a Stall, or mean Person unfit to govern) we can have no right∣ful
King in the World: for certain it is, that there is nothing in the World so personal as Re∣lations, and the duties and Rights that do result from them: For they are neither assignable to, nor can be exercised or exacted by and between any persons, but the Relatives themselves: So that this power of Sir R. F. hath no foundation of reason in the nature of things, was in Fact ne∣ver exercised, and is now utterly fallen to the ground, and all Government with it. A more puzled, vain, sensless and unlearned Paradox, was never yet offer'd to the world, nor a thing more mischievous ever received. For first, the abso∣lute Power of a Prince over his Subjects, is not at all connatural to the dutiful Care of a Father over his Children. It was the good pleasure of God that this part of the immense world should be planted with men endowed with a Capacity to admire his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and therefore to render him praise and worship: He design'd that we should be happy in our own enjoyments, and promote the happiness of each other; which is not to be performed, but by a mind serene, beneficent, and loving. He provided that the disseminations of Love should run parallel, and be under alike necessity with the propa∣gation of our kind. For the planting Love in our Nature, he instituted Marriage for Procrea∣tion, that we might owe our Being to the state of the greatest and most agreeable friendship,
and tenderest affection. That for many years we should be educated by a pure, single, and undesigning love of our Parents: and the friend∣ship of that conjugal State, should be maintained by, and principally exercised in, their common care of their Issue. Every Act of Love of either of the Pa∣rents to the Child, being the best instance of love to the other of them; an endearment of a reciprocal love, and a provocation to the like love and care of the Child. And for this love the Children naturally pay a return of an affecti∣onate honour to their Parents; and by that ho∣nour which we so naturally render our , our Earthly gods, we are initiated, trained up, and instructed devoutly to worship our heavenly Fa∣ther. God did likewise ordain, and so it was, that all Mankind should derive from one stock, be made of one blood, and every Man every Mans Brother, of the same Family and cognation. By this it was provided by the Father of us all, that we should be born into the World, under the tenderest care for our preservation, and improve∣ment of our Nature; be powerfully enclined to love and beneficence; whereby we may be pleased with our selves, and at Peace and Amity with our whole kind; and disposed to celebrate the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of our almigh∣ty Creator, with most affectionate Praises. That the Generations of Mankind might certainly proceed, God planted in our Natures
powerful and irresistible instincts to procrea∣tion, which the Jews call a Precept, tho after this no Precept seem'd necessary, for en∣crease and multiply they make a Command. But we follow our own propensions, and have no conscience of obedience to a Law, when we observe and follow them; which are so strong, pleasurable, and entertaining, that if God had not planted a restraint of Modesty in our Natures, and a sense of decency, we should over-do the business, and degrade our selves from the dignity of our Natures. Thus far the Parents are fulfilling Gods ap∣pointments, and gratifying their own Natures. What from all this can give them a right over their Child? All men coming into the world this way, are no less free, than if they had been form'd in Lucretius his Bottles, and drop't out of his imaginary matrixes, and we were all  & Aborigines. In this they are onely executing the appoint∣ment of God, are but his Instruments to bring us into this World, and are all along reward∣ed and entertained, and caressed by the order of Nature. Adam ow'd this duty to God his Father; and so ordered it was, that he ow'd it to himself, and to his own natural propensions, pleasures and satisfactions to propagate. The several succeeding generations of men, as soon as they are men, have as much Right to the enjoyment of themselves, to the freedom of
their own Will, and to live by their own mea∣sures, as Adam himself had. Our Parents do not give us life, but hand it to us from the Fountain of being, the Universal Father of all things. Vitai Lampada tradunt. And this is allowed, acknowledged by all Mankind: for assoon as Children can Govern themselves, we declare them free, that they are sui juris, they are extra familiated, and become themselves Fathers, and acquire to themselves. The Jews, who had a Kabala of the truest and most antient Theology and Morality, best under∣stood their own Laws, and were furnished with the knowledg of what Power and Authority Fa∣thers had over their Children, whether by nature, or by vertue of the fifth Commandment, did take their Sons to be ipso jure, Emancipated and suoe potestatis, as soon as they were pubertatis plenoe: The time of which they reckoned, at the farthest, when they were 13 years, 3 months and one day old. And therefore whereas it was one of the Laws of Moses, Deut. 21. v. 18, 19, 20, 21. That the stubborn and Rebellious Son, at the Com∣plaint and prosecution of the Father and Mother, was to be judg'd to be ston'd to death; They say a Son was not under this Law until he was 13 years and one day old: for until that time he was not Filius proecepti, not bound to any Laws: As
not until that time presum'd of competent dis∣cretion, consideration, or conscience, to make him a Transgressor, or Breaker of a Law. But three Months after, they reckoned him compleatly a∣dult, upon a general Presumption: when (and sooner, if he were sooner adult) he was free from the Power of his Father, and could not incur the mentioned Law, which condemns the rebellious and stubborn Son to be stoned to death. Mai∣monides Tract. Memarim. But the Father who struck the Son, after he was adult (the Jews tell us) incurred Excommunication, for that he of∣fended therein against the Law, Levit. 19.14. Thou shalt not put a Stumbling-block before the Blind: By which Precept they understand all things in∣decent and dishonest to be forbidden. By which it doth appear, that the Jews did not take their Children to be longer under the authority of their Fathers, than until they commenced, in the soonest account, Men. Besides, that Law of Deut. Chap. 21. seems to be onely a permission of an unnatural kind of severity to the offended Pa∣rents, at whose suit onely the punishment of that Law could be inflicted; such a sort of permission and liberty it was, as was indulg'd to them in the matter of Divorce. But that which hath imposed upon this Gentleman, I believe, is, for that while they are to be educated, Parents exercise an Au∣thority over their Children, which a sower Fa∣ther may imagine to be Power. This I be∣lieve
gave the Gentleman his mistake, because he saith a Child and a Slave doth not differ; which is a shrewd indication that he was some∣thing too masterly over his Children. But all equal parents know and understand, that the Education of their Children is duty and care; and it may, not improperly, be called a Sort of Generation-Work. For I pray let it be considered, That the foetus is not perfected assoon as it is extruded the Matrix, no not until it be able to perform, unassisted, all the Actions of its proper life. That the life of a man is a life of Reason. That he cannot do the Acts of a man until he hath it in the exercise of it. He is not a perfect foetus, so as to be neglected by his parents, as soon as he can feed himself: the man after this may miscarry; and after this, if exposed by his parents, and not continued under their care, be abortivated. Education is a kind of Incubation. Our faculties are to be formed and drawn out in∣to use, as well as our body to be organized, be∣fore we can be denominated men. While this is accomplishing, the parents are but executing the natural instinct of propagating their like; until they have made them men, they are not begot∣ten in their own likeness. They therefore with an easie propension, and a natural care, do apply themselves to offer things to their observation, to furnish their Memories, to try their judgments in little Essays, to render them discoursive, to draw out their faculties into use, until by little
and little they arrive at discretion, and a power to form true judgments of what belongs to them; and to govern themselves in such Affairs and bu∣sinesses that are to employ them. But while this is a doing, they are under a Government of love and care, by the Arts of Discipline to be trained up to perfection. Several freakishnesses and caprices are to be cured, and the strength and luxuriancies of several natural Appetites are to be abated and restrained; and they are to be held to attention and observation, and made patient of instruction: Correction is to be administred to these purposes, and by these measures: But this duty of Correction doth not participate any thing of the Nature of Civil Government. It hath nothing of the Nature of punishment, ex∣emplarity, or vindicative Justice. It is not for the gratifying of the Parents displeasure to secure him against wrong or in∣jury, to deter others, but to amend, improve, and better the Child, and always terminated to, and directed to that end; and by those measures it is tenderly and affectionately admi∣nistred. It will not be impertinent to observe, that our Common Law had no opinion of any Soveraign Authority in a Father. And also that the Statute of 25 E. 3. which declares petty Treasons as well as high Treasons, doth not declare the Sons kil∣ling the Father to be Treason, tho Treason it is
for a Servant to kill his Master. In which we have the Authority of our Parliament, and of the constant opinion of our Judges. That the nature and relation of a Father and a Son, doth not favour any thing of Government, or of a servile or Political subjection; For that they have not made Parricide Treason, though it is the most unnatural and most detestable Crime, and a far greater sin than that of killing a Master. But further, to clear the true notion of a Fathers Authority, that it is duty and care, not Empire and absolute will; Let it be consi∣dered, that God by his right of Creation hath an absolute, plenary, and direct dominion over us; we are more his than we are our own, or than any thing can be ours. Yet when he was plea∣sed, of his gracious condescention to our ca∣pacity, to quiet our fears of his power, and to invite our love, and assure our hope, he did declare himself our Father, thereby to assure us, that he would not rule us pro imperio, and according to his absolute right he had o∣ver us. That stile he himself delights to use, and gives us leave to call him our Father; by which we all understand, that he will not pro∣ceed with us according to his Right of abso∣lute domination, no not in the terms of strict Right and Political Justice: But that he will con∣sider our frame, pity our infirmity, correct us as his Children, but not punish us with an ex∣terminating Justice.
Amongst the Romans antiently no man was admitted a Judge in Criminal Causes, but he that was a Father of Children; that the se∣verities of a Judge, might be abated by the tenderness of a Father; that he who had Chil∣dren of his own, might have the more pity to those of others; so different is the Office of a Judge, from the natural duty and tender∣ness of a Father. It is the greatest violence that can be done to Nature, to compel a Fa∣ther to sit in Judgment upon his Son. Next to that of obliging and compelling a man to execute himself, to make it the Fathers duty to pronounce a capital Sentence upon the Son, is the most unnatural thing in the World. The Father and the Son in this consideration are con∣junctae personae; and when the Sin of the Father is visited upon the Son, the Son is afflicted, but the Father is punished; and when the Son hath the Question, the Father is taken to be confessed in tormentis silii. But for a further instance to make it ap∣pear how incompetent the duty of a Magi∣strate is with the Nature of a Father, I will observe, that notwithstanding a Law was given to Adam and all his Sons, to establish Judica∣tures according to the Tradition of the Jews, as may be seen in Mr. Selden his Book de jure Gentium secundum Hebraeos; which Law by the way had been supervacaneous, if the Power of a Prince did belong to Adam in the right of his
Paternity, and a Government had been provided for them by their Birth. Yet, I say, notwithstand∣ing that, there was such a Relaxation of Justice in the World before the Flood, because it could be only administred by a Father, or such who participated of the stock of love lodg'd in the common Father, from whom his Children did derive their tenderness one to another, as they themselves sprang from him. That the World was grown so wicked within two ages (as men then liv'd) from the Creation, that a Universal deluge was brought upon the World, by the just Judgment of God, for the outragious and in∣sufferable Wickedness that had spread it self u∣niversally over mankind, 8 persons only except∣ed. The overflowing deluge of Wickedness, that caus'd the deluge of waters, can't be imputed to a more probable cause, than to the indulgence and impunity that the observed and understood near∣ness of Kindred, that all men stood then in to one another must naturally occasion. This is a sad consequence of that natural Love in Parents towards their Children, which was intended for the propagation and advance∣ment of Mankind. But since that now we are estranged one from another in remote and un∣known degrees, and that prejudice is over; here is a Gentleman, to destroy the World another w and to undo us by unreasonable and un∣d power, (which is alike apt to make  fit for another Universal destru∣ction,
if it be not without more destroyed by it) doth endeavour to turn the exercise of such power into a Right, and to give it war∣ranty from the Reason and way of our pro∣pagation; and by this means to destroy us fa∣ster than we can be born and bred, and impair the Generations of Mankind, to render them extreamly miserable, or wicked, which is much worse; extinguish the light of the World, which is Love and Amity; and destroy the encou∣ragement and reason of almost all relative Mora∣lity. What a Saturnine Father have we got, to make a golden Age! who ever would have thought, that the , the most moving, kind∣est, most tender, pleasing, and beneficent in∣stinct in Nature, planted by God the Father of us all, for the propagating, educating, and improving humane Nature, should ever be made use of to found a right of Tyranny, and Arbitrary domination, the greatest de∣stroyer and depraver of Mankind? What Monster hath this last Age produced! a Christi∣an, a Father, seriously endeavouring to per∣swade all Mankind to offer up their Children to Moloch the Saturn of the Easterlings, who was but the Devil of Tyranny, as the name im∣ports! This , the true Origine and Fountain of Love and Amity, and the social Virtues which render men humane, from whence
flows all the happiness of Mankind, will by this Doctrine be corrupted and rendred unsin∣cere and self-designing. For when a Father performs an Act of Generation, it seems now he designs to add a slave to his Retinue; and when a Child is born, there is another Item added to the Inventory of his Estate. If this Fountain be corrupted, there can be nothing sincerely kind after it in Humane Nature. The Levia∣than is out-done by this Gentleman, and hath not performed half so renownedly in the great Work of depraving Humane Nature, as our Patriarchal Knight will do, if his Admirers can bring him in∣to vogue and esteem. For the Author of the Leviathan allowed something good in Humane Nature, several equal propensions, which he terms her Coun∣sels, and sometimes adventures to call the Laws of Nature: But he concludes they are not practi∣cable, and they are only fools who govern them∣selves by them. But this Gentlemen will not allow Nature to be good in her first institution and design∣ment; though in this I think they are near agree∣able, that Mr. Hobbs made the Pourtraicture of Humane Nature in an agreeableness to his own evil Ingeny; and this Knight did set himself: when he made this his draught of a Father, he could have no other Original but himself, or the Idea of the morose and sowr Dr. P. H. his ad∣mired friend; but by his Character he had at least
misfigured his understanding, and made it his own Nature by liking it. 2ly. No more of authority belong'd to Adam over his Children, than does to any of his Children over his; for that this Authority pro∣ceeds from Nature, and Nature is alike in all men. The duty of their education, and the Au∣thority over them that is competent to that purpose, is as much belonging to them, and in∣cumbent upon them, as upon the Protoplast. The duty is so personal, consisting , that it cannot be transferred, or permitted absolutely to any other person by the Parents; nor can any man challenge a right to it, or discharge the Fa∣ther from it, or require the same affection, sub∣mission and reverence that is due from a Child to his Father. To expect relative duties without Relation, is most unnatural; it is as impossible as incon∣gruous. We may as well love and hate, rejoyce and grieve, without the proper object and in∣citements of those passions. The fundamental Rule of all morality, is that of Epictetus, , (that is to say) by the State and Condition in which we stand, the relations and respects under which we are considered, our duties are determined, measured, and adjusted: upon which see Simplicius his Excellent Dis∣course, wherein many things are said agreeable to our purpose. This moral Aphorism is as certain as any proposition in Euclid, as the Doctrine of
proportional Triangles, and received as such by all the Masters of Moral Philosophy. There is no other foundation of our duty to God or Man, or towards our selves: This Rule, whatever it is, must declare it. Whatever is measured and al∣lowed by this Rule, is commonly called, (which is comprehensive of all that is honest, just, and fit) . The application of this Rule is called by St. Paul , which when a man ob∣serves, he is perfectly moral. A man may as well pay his debts by giving away his Money, be grateful to his benefactor by being benefi∣cent to strangers, as perform that duty he owes his Father, to any but he that is so: It is as impos∣sible to separate the shadow from the Substance, as to make that subsist by it self, which grows by resultance from the state and condition of the per∣son; or that without that state of the person, from which it doth arise, it should ever accrew. 3ly. Admitting Adam had a Soveraign Au∣thority over all his descendents, which must grow (if there was any such thing) from some positive institution, and not from his paternity, yet the natural Authority and Duty of Parents towards their Children, continues entire toge∣ther with Soveraign Power, and is not at all abated by it, and therefore cannot be the same. No Soveraign Power can extort the Children from their Fathers Authority and Care: This is a duty in Nature before Governments. They cannot belong to the Government, before they
are filii praecepti, and capable of the Consci∣ence of a Law. It is a duty in Parents to e∣ducate their Children, and a right they have in consequence to govern them, that cannot be taken from them. It is the Parents duty to form their Consciences. They are appointed by God, the great Ministers of his Providence and Grace to the Children. That they perform this Office, he hath tyed them to it by the sweetest constraints and almost violences of Nature, by an irresistable love and tyes of Endearment that cannot be broken. This de∣clares their Right of Authority over their Chil∣dren, against any interposings of Soveraign Au∣thority to its prejudice, let or hinderance. Tho∣mas Aquinas positively determines, that it is not lawful for Christian Kings to baptize the Chil∣dren of the Jews against the will of their Parents, for that (saith he) it is against the course of natural justice. 4ly. Thereis no footsteps in the Records of the old world to verifie this Hypothesis. That such Authority was so much as pretended to, used or exercised by Adam; but we find instances against it in the short History before the Flood. Cain received no sentence from Adam his Prince and Soveraign Judge, but from God himself, or rather from his Shecinah, or some visible Repre∣sentation of his presence. Thence he obtained some degree of impu∣nity, and his life protected. No mention here
at all of Adam his taking the Tribunal, or Cains arraignment, or of any pardon or in∣dulgence granted by King Adam. Lamech that had killed a man by mischance, did not alledge his case at his Father Adams Court, and the matter of extenuation of the Man-killing; we hear of no pardon of Course to be allowed, when the circumstances of fact had been first judicially considered. How could a thing of such importance be omitted in the story of the old World, though so short? It was of more concernment, than to know that Tubal Cain was the first Smith, and Jubal the first man that made a Musical instru∣ment, to know the original nature and reason of Government. Besides, we find all the grand-Children of Noah becoming Princes of Countries, and the Sons and grand-Sons of Esau alike Dukes and Princes; that is, at least absolute Fathers of their own Families, and ruling over such as were their slaves and dependants. And the 12 Sons of Jacob are all called Patri∣archs. When Nimrod plaid the Tyrant, we find no∣thing said for his justification, upon any Patriar∣chal right. But if we consult the Traditions of the Jews, they will inform us of another original of Go∣vernment, and that is this: They say that God gave several Precepts to Adam and his
Sons, and Noah and his Sons, and one amongst the rest, that they should erect Governments, which his Sons could not have performed with∣out Rebellion against their King-Father, if Adam had been so, as Sir Robert Filmer first dreamt. Also besides that of making Governments, there was a Precept given them of honouring their Parents, Selden de jure Naturae secundum Hebraeos, fol. 792. And therefore the Precept of honouring Parents, is a distinct duty from that of obedience to Governments. By this Precept they had Authority in general to e∣stablish Governments amongst themselves, in the specification of which, they were left to their own liberty and discretion, and therefore were not obliged to any single form of Government. It must be understood, that the Precept which re∣quired the Sons of Adam and Noah to establish Governments, required also every mans Sub∣mission to their Orders, Laws, and Decrees, when established. Lastly, We will consider of the instances he gives of the Exercise of Soveraign Power by Fa∣thers of Families, which are as impertinent to his purpose, as his Doctrine is groundless and precari∣ous: But they are these: Abraham's War, and Ju∣dahs Judgment upon Thamar. As to the first, of Abraham's making War; We say we cannot allow that making War doth argue any Soveraign Authority: It is sufficient, that he who makes it is under none
to make a vindicative War lawful. For an injured Person may, in the State of Nature, vindicate wrongs by an Authority derived from God and Nature to a just satisfaction: Because there is no competent Judicature to appeal to for right and redress. But see how unhappy the Gentleman is! This very instance of his production, is clearly against him: For if Sove∣raign Power had been Patriarchal, Abraham had been guilty of Treason, in making War without a Commission from Melchizedech the King of Salem, who, as the Learned men con∣jecture, was Shem his Patriarch and Chief, and known by him for such. But because Abra∣ham, the best man perhaps in any Age, did not take a Commission from Melchizedech his Pa∣trialchal chief, and yet he was blessed by Mel∣chizedech when here turned from the War; We may conclude, that neither Melchizedech nor Abraham knew of any such Patriarchal Sove∣raignty. And also from this great Example it appears, that it is lawful for him that is not a Soveraign, if he be not under any, to make War. I will not enter into a discourse, whence and how is derived the Authority of making War and capital Sentences, (for the same rea∣son must warrant both) which hath puzled some great Divines. Dr. Hammond, that great man, was at a loss in this enquiry, and thinks that nothing but a Divine Authority can warrant
them, which hath put them upon strange extra∣vagant Hypotheses of Government, and sent this Knights brains a Wool-gathering. But this may satisfie any man of sence, That whatever is ne∣cessary for the general happiness of Mankind, and for preserving peace in the World, and pro∣tecting the innocent, and dis-inabling the migh∣ty oppressors, is more commendable to be done, than the killing a man in his own defence is sim∣ply lawful. As to his second instance of Judah his Sen∣tence pronounced upon his Daughter-in-Law Thamar, which the Knight would have an exercise of Patriarchal Soveraign Authority; we say, how could Judah do this by a Patriarchal Power, when Jacob his Father was then alive, and for all that appears, Judah his Son was not extrafamiliated? Besides, which is very unlucky, Thamar was then none of his Family, or of the Subjects of his Do∣mestick Empire; for his Son her Husband being dead, she was free from the Law of her Husband, and ceased to be a Subject of his Paternal King∣dom. But Mr. Selden, under the Authority of some Rabbins, which he cites in his excellent Book before mentioned, fol. 807. saith, That Ju∣dah might have the Office of a Prince or Magi∣strate in a district in that Country, and by that Authority might judg her according to the Laws of that Country. But what the Law was, and the Nature and Reason of her Offence, by which it became Capital, is not understood, as he tells us
in the place before-cited. I shall not trouble the Reader with unfolding the matter. But why doth he trouble himself to make Kings Fathers of their Countries? Some cannot be so, and some have no mind to be so; and yet they ought to be Kings. And some that have not been Kings, have been so, and so styled; as the great M. Tully, for defeating the Catiline-Conspiracy, was by decree of the Senate called Pater Patriae. Those are with reason truly called Patres Patriae, which either relieve their Country from misera∣ble pressures, which is the civil death of a Nati∣on; and for this reason our King hath the honour of being called Pater Patriae, and we hope that he will wear that honourable Title, upon a second deliverance of us from a most deplorable condi∣tion. Or else such are called Patres Patriae, who bring the Nation to an exalted state of happiness, so much beyond their old state of things, that they seem to give the Nation a new civil Life, Being, and Birth. For his etymological argument from the no∣tation of the Word, it is too putid to be insisted upon, though not more ridiculous than his Hy∣pothesis. But for that the reduction of our duty to our King to the fifth Commandment, may seem to give some advantage to this Hypothe∣sis, with Fathers who know no bounds of their power over their Children; It must be obser∣ed,
that the Decalogue is not a compleat Rule of Morality. The Decalogue comprised the Principal Laws of that Common-wealth which God their Law-giver by a most Solemn Act of his Legislation, did more awfully oblige them to observe. God that time was their King; Rebellion was as Idolatry; and the sin of Witchcraft, and the Defection of one of their Cities to Idolatry, was punished as a revolt and Rebellion, Deut. 13. v. 15. He had provided for his Honour and Worship, and their Allegiance, in the first Table; and did design by the fifth Command∣ment to lay the Foundation of all positive mo∣rality, by providing for a Reciprocation of kindnesses, by enjoyning the gratitude and fit∣ting returns of Children to their Parents, and by putting Children under obligations to be taught and instructed by their Parents. But our duty to Governors is more duly referred to all the other Commandments, because Govern∣ment secures the observation of those Laws to us, by which we enjoy our selves and ours, freed from the Volations of Lust, Appetite, Fraud and Violence. We do not honour our King by relief in his fortune, which is commanded to be done by our Parents in the precept of honouring them; our subsidies and Aids are not to that purpose, but contributions to the charges of the Govern∣ment; they are the just price of our immunity and
protection, from fraud and violence; for which cause pay we tribute. But whatsoever he be, that hath more respect for this Knights Works than I have, may find him more gently treated by a very worthy Gentle∣man, in a very candid and judicious Book cal∣led, Patriarcha non Monarcha. But what is the meaning of these flattering Books? they cannot but be nauseous to His Ma∣jesty, who is a very wise Prince, and knows how sensless such Books are: and besides, they make the People afraid, and the Nation unquiet, from the apprehensions they give, that the Govern∣ment will be changed. Notwithstanding the King hath given such solemn assurance to the Na∣tion by his late Declaration, That we shall have frequent Parliaments, and that he will govern by Law. They would have had a better market for the Divinity they bestow upon Princes, with Alexander after he had lost his Vertue, and with those vile Emperours whose Names are Regum opprobria, for such the flatterers of ancient times Deifyed: those who had ceas'd to be men they made Gods, and when they had left no∣thing about them that was tolerable, they mag∣nified their power, which was already most in∣tolerable. If the Kings hereafter would but read the History of Kings, under that conclusion, that a wise observer of Humane Events made after
a long observation and experience, and would make Experiments of the truth of it in their own reading, Kings would be glorious, and the Nations they govern happy and full of peace. They would find therein so many effectual Do∣cuments to fear God and regard men, and govern them righteously. It is this: Si Vitam spectes hominum, si deni{que} Mores, Artem vim fraudem, cunct a putes agere. Si propius spectes, fortuna est arbitra Rerùm. Nescis quid dicis, sed tamen esse putas. At penit us si introspicias, & ultima primis Connectas, solus rector in orbe Deus. Alciat. People can be no happier than Government and Laws design to make them, though they do not always answer the good designments of the Government. To what purpose then are these new Hypo∣theses fram'd and published? Kings are exempt∣ed by their Office, and the sacredness of their persons, from all fears, but the fears of Nature, and these can never be discharged. Those who do ill, will fear ill eternally, though their power were made little less than omni∣potent; for the frame of Humane Nature hath made it necessary to be so. Besides, God hath made one thing against another: There is a divine Nemesis interwoven in the nature of
things. And God will always govern the World. Omne sub regno duriore regnum. The great Mogol at his Inauguration swears, That his People shall be at peace at home, and victorious abroad, afflicted neither with Plague nor Famine, but enjoy Health and Plenty all his days. This seems extraordinary Pompous and Ar∣rogant; but it means no more than this, that he will govern them so vertuously, that Gods Providence shall be always propitious to his People; and is no more in plain English, than what our Church offers up in her publick Prayers for the King, (viz.) That he may go∣vern us in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness; that he may live long, and so govern us, ought to be every honest mans Prayers. But after all these vain Hypotheses contrived for making Kings Absolute, it will be more easie for Kings to make their Reigns unquiet, and turn their Kingdoms into Fields of blood. But lastly, to revive the ancient Zeal of the true Members of the Church of England against Popery: To rectify the mistakes of some Gen∣tlemen of the Clergy about the Dissenters: And of our late Parliaments, and their proceedings in reference to them; Let it be considered, how unreasonable their
apprehensions are of any danger to the Church of England, from the desires of the House of Commons, of some indulgence or toleration in favour of the Dissenters at this time; especi∣ally when the Protestant Religion is so shrewd∣ly beset: she hath reason now sure to take all such for her Friends, that are heartily Enemies to Popery, though not so skilful as they should be to ward off its assaults. Since the Papists presume to call them Fanaticks, though exactly conformable to the Church of England, that will not assist to bring on the Popish Plot by dis-believing it; and put us in fear of the Fa∣naticks, by taking all the courses imaginable to provoke and exasperate them, and to increase their discontents (which they maliciously heighten, and by falshood and forgeries misre∣present:) To graft thereupon a Pretence of a Protestant Plot, for a pretext to extirpate Pro∣testantism and introduce Popery, which they impudently pretend to be of a more firm Alle∣giance to the Government than the Reformed Religion. I pray let it be considered, that that which is tolerated is put under disgrace, even for that it is tolerated; and that which tolerates, even for that it tolerates, hath the governing Autho∣rity; and in so much as it indulgeth, it obli∣geth to modesty and reason; and if that indul∣gence should be abused, it may and will be re∣tracted. It was never intended by the House
of Commons, that the Church of England should be altered or modelled to an agreeable∣ness to any form or sect of the Separation, or prescrib'd to by any of the Dissenters; or that she should be made subject to any of their rules or opinions, or her Liturgy laid aside for Directories, or, which is worse, undervalued to the prophane way of extemporizing: For as ge∣nerally used and exercised, it deserves no milder a stile. That the Church should always govern by her own Wisdom in her own Province, and in those things that appertain to her, can never be deny'd her. No man hath reason to say, though he hath great cause to dislike the Separation, and to have a bad opinion of the Dissenters, that he had rather submit to Popery, than to any form of the Separation, for he need do neither ex∣cept he pleaseth. No man that thus expresseth himself, but will be suspected to seek an occa∣sion and pretence to become a Papist, and to make a defection from the Church of England. But if these Gentlemen have such a displea∣sure against Schism and Separation (which cer∣tainly is the worst disease any Church can la∣bour under, and at this time threatens the de∣struction as well of the Protestant Religion it self, as it doth to the Professors of all denomi∣nations) let this sharpen their Zeal against Po∣pery (which by its unhallowed arts hath occa∣sioned and exasperated our Schism,) and put
them upon the use of all means to reconcile, if possible, the Schism, (that the Papists have al∣ready made, and by all means endeavour to continue) and take away, if possible, the occa∣sion of it for the time to come: And thus de∣feat the Arts of the Priests and Jesuits for supplan∣ting our Church. It is a most deplorable thing, that our Church should be kept rent and divided, in danger of being lost, between Rituality and Scrupulosity. Though the Scruples of the Nonconformists, which I always thought, and do still think groundless, and unreasonable, have often moved me into some passion against them; yet upon consideration, I think this their Scrupulosity may be of God, and that some men are by him fra∣med to it. That he hath provided it, as a bar and obstacle in the Natures and Complexions of some devout men against any Innovations what∣soever, that dangerous ones may not steal upon the Church, for the better maintaining the sim∣plicity and purity of the Christian Religion and Worship. But in saying this, I have said no∣thing that is apt to give them a conceit of them∣selves, but rather to humble them: For the best men are not govern'd by their Temper and Con∣stitution, but correct them by their Reason, and determine themselves by a clear and him Judge∣ment. What affrightment, all this while, either to Church or State, from this weak and pityable
Scrupulosity? Where lyes the Treason or Sacri∣ledge, nay or so much as contumacy against our Ecclesiastical Governours, which is so much up∣braided to them? The Christian Religion may be prejudiced by addition to, as well as substraction from her rule: The Church of Rome by her additions hath al∣most evacuated the Christian Faith. Besides, there may be a fineness in the out∣ward mode of Religious Worship in it self very justifiable, which may be not congenial to men of a course make. The Worship of God will al∣ways favour of the manners of the people; men of dull capacity can scarce admit of any Ceremo∣nies without danger of falling into superstition, or hardly escape being vext with endless and incura∣ble scruples about them, until for ease of their minds they throw them off. But the wisdom of the best Law-makers hath considered in giving Laws, what the people would bear, and not what is best to be enjoyn∣ed; and many things have been tolerated by them which they did not approve, Ne majoribus malis detur occasio, aut etiam ne vilescant sine mori∣bus leges. There is nothing more exposeth the Autho∣rity of Government to contempt, than a pub∣lick and an open neglect of its Injunctions. But where obedience to Laws is exacted under se∣vere penalties, where it doth not greatly im∣port the common good to have them observed,
that Government is unequal, and useth its Au∣thority unjustifiably. Leges cupiunt, ut jure re∣gantur. The consideration of the sad effects the Schism in our Church hath occasioned, the con∣tempt that it hath brought upon our Ecclesi∣astical Governours. That Religion it self is thereby made the scorn of Atheists. That the Papists are thereby furnished with matter of ob∣jection, reproach and scandal to the Reforma∣tion. That every Age since it begun hath heightned the malignity of the Schism. That it seems now to despise the Cure of the greatest Cassanders. These considerations, I say, make it infinitely desirable to have it utterly extinguished. There seems to be now left but one way of accommodating our Divisions, and that is, that we do not hereafter make those things wherein we differ matter and reason of Divisi∣on. That the Children of the Light and Refor∣mation, be at length as wise in this matter as the Church of Rome, which is at unity with it self, under more and greater differences than those that have troubled the peace of our Church; which is sufficiently known to all Learned men. Had it not been happy, that this Schism had been prevented by the use of the power of the Church in Ecclesiastical dispensations? If no Law had been made touching the mat∣ters
that gave the first occasion to the Schism, it had been in the Power of the Church to have prevented it. No good Bishop but would have relaxed the Canons that enjoyned these Ce∣remonies (about whose lawfulness there hath been so much Zeal mispent, and unwarrantable heat and contention raised) for the sake of peace, and preservation of the Unity of the Church, to men peaceable, and otherwise obedient to her injunctions. So dangerous it is to make Laws in matters of Religion, which takes the conduct of Religion in so much from the Guides of the Church. The beginning of contention is like the breaking out of waters, saith the wise man; and they are assoon as begun, more easily end∣ed. Before the Contenders have exasperated one another with mutual severities and contumelies, which at every return increase, until both sides lose either their Vertue, or the Reputation of it. Can any man imagine that any prejudice can accrew to the Church of England, if she did enlarge her Communion by making the con∣ditions of it more easie? especially if this may be done without annulling any of her institu∣tions, which the better instructed Christians will always, and the Weak may in time de∣voutly observe. But till they can, they may be received and retained of her Communion, and not be rejected by her censures, though they
do not submit to all of them at present. Will it be any prejudice, that the Number of her Bishops be increased, and that Suffragans be appointed or approved by the present Bishops, in partem solli∣citudinis, as was enacted by the Statute 26 H. 8. cap. 14. Which Law was repealed by 1, 2 P. M. and revived by 8 Eliz. cap. 1. These Suffragans were not intended to participate of their Honours or Revenues. Had it not been much more eligible to have dispenced with invincible Scru∣ples, rather than a Schism should have been occa∣sioned, which the longer it continues will be more incurable, and with greater difficulty accommo∣dated, as it grows likewise more mischievous? Is it fit that the peace should be hazarded, or the Nation put with reason or without reason in fear of it: Or a Kingdom turned into a Shambles for a Ceremony, or a Ritual in our publick Wor∣ship, which if omitted would leave the exercise of it solemn and decent? For no man knows the obstinacy of inveterate prejudices, founded perhaps in the very Complexions and Natures of the Dissenters, hardned also in their way by observing how little effect Laws have had for reducing their Numbers, and also how unpra∣cticable any Severity is in the present broken and distracted state of the Nation. Why may not Standing at the Sacrament be tolerated, (though Kneeling is the devoutest gesture, and to me most agreeable) when it is a posture of Pray∣er enjoyned in the Primitive Church, in their
solemn Meetings for Divine Worship, between the Feasts of Easter and Whitsontide? Why may not the signing of the Cross in Baptism for the sake of Peace and Unity, be dispensed with where desired, when the Sacrament is entire without it? Why may not our publick Liturgie be chan∣ged and altered, though it may be defended as it is, and as it is, entertains the devotions of the best men, meerly for this reason, because it is not liked in some parts of it by some men, yet truly devout? Besides, it is the wish of some excellent persons of the Church of England, that our publick Offices were more, and those we have not so long; and that the Church had a greater Treasury of Prayers, and by variety of Forms for the same Office, were enlarged in her spirit of Prayer, and her publick Devotions heightned. Why may not the Rubrick be altered as general scruples shall arise, by the Authority of the Church? this would not lessen her Au∣thority, but advance the esteem of her Wis∣dom in the exercise of it, when she useth it for edification. It is much better sure to give place to an innocent opinion, when entertained by consi∣derable Numbers, though a mistake, than to keep up contention and strife. Peace in the Church is better than precise and nice Orthodox∣ness; and Union is to be preferred before un∣necessary Truth, which is of no more impor∣tance to our Salvation, than one of Euclids Pro∣positions,
though to be sure not so certain, and of less use. The business of the Church is not to make men great Clerks, to improve us to the sub∣tilty of the Schools; but to build men up in the Faith and Love of God, by which they may be instructed to every good Work. Her aim is not to make men courtly in their behaviour in our Churches, but truly devout: and true devotion will never fail to make the Publick Worship so∣lemn, and advance it beyond a decent formali∣ty. But I would not be mistaken; it is not the Dissenters I intend to befriend, but the Church of England: for as for them, I declare I have no liking to any thing they say or do; and am especially dissatisfied with their very bad man∣ners. It is difficult to abstain from an inve∣ctive, but that I think it would be thrown away upon them, and that they are at pre∣sent incorrigible. This is not the season for instructing their Wisdoms; we must wait for the mollia tempora fandi. I thus conclude, since that excellent person the Dean of Pauls hath been treated by them with such petu∣lancies and rude insults, for his Sermon of the mischiefs of Separation. If a discourse mana∣ged with almost irresistable reason, candour, temper and Address, be matter of exasperation, and they turn again, and are more hardned in their obstinacies, and become more confirmed
in their separating way, nothing but their own thoughts, and the consideration in what a des∣perate condition they have brought the Refor∣med Religion by their Separation, will reclaim them. But it is expected that Governments should be wise, that they manage and controul the Follies and Weaknesses of those committed to their care, that they may do the least mischief to themselves and others, and by prudent and practicable methods amend and reform them. The most froward, weiward, and stubborn Children give their Parents the most care, and opportunities of exercising the most tender love for them, though they can take no complacency in their awkerdness. The Church of England is concerned to retain all her Children in her Family, to shut out none by abdication; that their numbers be not few, and she be asha∣med when she speaks with her Enemy in the Gate. Not to provoke any of them to wrath, lest they forsake her, and turn against her when distresses shall come upon her. She hath reason at this time sure to make her Discipline easie, and to learn of the Church of Rome to be more comprehensive. Their Doctrine of comprehension is so large, that it destroys the Religion to increase the number of Professors: but I mean no more, than that positive and al∣terable institutions may give place to the peace, security, and preservation of Religion it self,
to whose service they were first fram'd and design'd. It hath been heretofore, of old it hath been said, Mores Leges in potestatem pertraxerunt suam. Plato formed an Idea to himself of a Common∣wealth, without respect to the manners of men; but he writ another, which he calls,  that is to say, accommodated and fitted to the man∣ners of the people, and such as they would bear. Origen, in his Book against Celsus, applies to Mo∣ses the Answer of a famous Law-giver, who asked, , i. e. whether those Laws he had given to his Citizens were the best? the answer was, , i. e. not simply the best, but the best they would bear. And we all know what God permitted to the Jews, in the matter of Di∣vorce, for the hardness of their Hearts. When all is said, People must be governed as they can. But in the mean time, it is pity any of our zeal and indignation should be mispent, when we have use for it all against the Church of Rome, the source whence all our Divisions spring. To which we owe the first Separations that were made in our Church; which appears by undeni∣able Records, published by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Book called the Ʋnreasonableness of Separa∣tion. How they have propagated, multiplied, exasperated, and promoted our Divisions, to tell you, would make a Volume; besides, no Prote∣stant is now to know it. I have only this fur∣ther
to observe, that the Church of Rome at first only designed by the Arts of dividing us, and breaking us into several Communions, to disgrace the Reformation, to make our spiri∣tual Governours, Pastors, and Teachers, lose their Authority with the People: To deprave our Religion with licentious opiniastre, and absurd dogmatizing; to load our departure from that Church, with the mischief of innumerable Schisms; and to make us reconcilable to the Tyranny and Impostures of that Church, from the vain opinions and licentiousness of the Se∣ctaries, who have been seduced, managed, infla∣med, and made wild by their imposturous Arts and Deceits. This, I believe, was only at first designed by the Priests, but now they apparently design by the Dissenters to destroy the Church, or by the Church to destroy the Dissenters, that they more easily come to rights with her. They imagine the Dissenters are very numerous, and that the Nation is fallen into two great parts; that the Dissenters numbers are vast. But God be thanked, they neither make our Grand Jury-men, nor the common Halls of the City of London, for chusing the Lord-Mayors or Sheriffs. And I challenge any man to give me a List of all the Names of Dissenters that were of the House of Commons in our two last Parliaments: I am sure they will not make a Number: but they reckon the Numbers of Dissenters, by the
care they have taken to increase it. They used great art to continue the Separation when His Majesty was restored: Since, Laws have been made to raise the Animosities of Dissenters, but scarce ever executed for repressing them. If for any reason of State the Laws here and there, and for a spurt, have been exacted, secret com∣forts and supports have been given to their Preachers of greatest Authority with them. And when they have seem'd to preach with the courage and zeal of Confessors to their Audi∣tors, they have not only been assured of indemp∣nity, but have received rewards. How pros∣perously did the work of Separation go on by these Councils of our Achitophels! by these means they concluded it would be heightned, that it would admit of no terms of an accommodati∣on. How insolent were their Harangues! more taking with their deluded Auditors, while they apprehended them acted with an invin∣cible zeal of Religion. What Animations did their People receive to defy the Church and her Authority, when their Preachers despised Fines and Imprisonment, to their seeming, out of pure zeal against her Order! It is well known, several of them were in Pension; and no men have been better received by the D. than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. &c. Ringleaders of the Separation. Besides that Po∣pish Priests have been taken and executed for preaching in Field-meetings in Scotland. They have
raised there a sort of Enthusiasts more wild and mischievous than any we had amongst us in the times of licentiousness. They have had, not∣withstanding, great Lords that have patronized them, who were always well received in their applications in their favour, at St. James's; and several of their Preachers, who were not Priests, have received Exhibition and Pensions for their encouragement. It was necessary that the Fana∣ticism planted in Scotland, should be very loath∣some, to make that Nation abate any of their zeal for the Protestant Religion, or to neglect their fears and apprehensions of Popery, or to make the least step towards it. Awake, you drowsie Sleepers, open your eyes! the Sun is risen, there is light enough to fill your sight, if you would look up, and were willing to see. Could any thing be conceived more apt to bring the Church of England into contempt and scorn with those of the Separation, than to have Laws made in her favour, penal Laws which are thought to be of her procurement, and not exe∣cuted? Vain and ineffective anger is always returned with contumely, scorn, and hatred: Cupide conculcatur nimis ante metitum. And so it hath succeeded in this case; nothing hath been more passable than the basest scurrility upon the Church, the Bishops, and the Clergie. The Atheist, the impious and profane, have listed themselves Fanaticks, that they might have the greater Li∣berty of reviling Religion it self with impunity.
Consider how the Church of England is used, which is truly the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion. About ten years since, they designed to slight her works, and demolish her, by a ge∣neral Indulgence and Toleration: And now they intend to destroy her Garrison, those that can and will defend her against Popery. By one of their Pamphleteers, the Separation is called an Usurpation upon the Government; and all the Dissenters (as such only) Rebels, and Trai∣terous to the King. The same Gentleman would perswade the world, that the ready way to ex∣tirpate Popery, is by rooting out of Fanaticism; whether (saith he) the Fanaticks bring on the Jesuits Plot, or the Jesuits the Fanaticks, is not a farthing matter: But in the mean time, that the Papists have a Plot on foot, needs no proof. That any sort of Protestants are engaged in a Plot, can∣not be proved: But all honest Protestants of the Church of England, think it more righteous to punish the Deceivers, and pity the Deceived, and wish them only cut off that make Divisions. It is one way of curing, or rather of extinguishing the Disease, to kill the Patient; but no Prince did ever yet provide Cut throats for his People, in epidemical Diseases, instead of Physicians. But if the Papists could arm other Protestants against Dissenters, there would be the less work for Papists to do: And they will be sure to requite them for this Favour with Polyphemus his Cour∣tesie.
For, to give the Devil his due, they are not themselves so fond of Massacres and destruction of Hereticks, as to envy that employment to any other that will undertake it. They had rather any other party of men should do the drudgery for them. Besides, what one sort of Protestants shall execute upon another, will give them better pretence and more hardiness (if they wanted either Pretence or Resolution to destroy such as they call Hereticks) to execute the like destruction upon the Church-Prote∣stants, who certainly differ more from the Pa∣pists, than the Separatists do from our Church. Surely there is good reason they should be more sharply treated by the Papists, than they treated the Dissenters. And if they are in such sort used, they must lay their hands upon their mouths, and be silent before their Persecutors, and acknowledge the righteous Judgment of God, in bringing such tribulation upon them, from their Enemies, wherewith they troubled their own Brethren. But there are better ways sure of putting an end to the Popish Plot, than by putting it in Exe∣cution for them; That is to say, By suppressing that contumacy that is grown so rife in the Dissenters, against the Church of England, by putting the revilers of her Establish∣ment and Order under the severest Penalties. By the Church her condescention and indul∣gences to those that are weak and scrupulous,
and the peaceable Dissenters, such Condescen∣tion will not abate, but magnifie her Autho∣rity. The Church of England will not be by this means lost, but her Governance preserv'd, especial∣ly if the Relaxation that shall be made proceeds from her ex mero motu, and is not imposed upon her by any secular Authority. Nay, she will be∣come by this means more ample and venerable. What Glories will then shine upon the heads of the Bishops! We shall all rise up and call them blessed. They will attain an  here, and receive divine Honours while they live. Their Order will be recovered into the highest Venera∣tion, and it will never be after a question in the English Church, whether the Order of Bishops be Apostolical. The Parliament will make all Laws yield and comply to such happy, peaceable, and gratious Intendments. All the people will honour them as their common Saviours, that shall thus snatch us from the very brink of Ruine, and render the designs of the implacable Enemies of the Church, ready to take effect to the destruction of our Religion and Nation, utterly defeated. But what punishments can we think too severe upon any, that shall be guilty of such insolent Iniquity, as not to allow that Liberty to the Church, which they seek as a favour from her to themselves; that will not let the Church escape their Censures, when she graciously exempts
them from her Censures, and pities their Er∣rors and Follies? What Fines and Imprison∣ments, Pillories and Scourgings, do they deserve, that persecute the Church with Revilings, when they themselves are tolerated? Their condem∣nation must be just, whatever their doom be, themselves being Judges. They will suffer as evil doers, and disturbers of the peace, not for their Religion, but for a most extravagant and intolerable unrighteousness. They who will not tolerate others, are themselves for that reason most intolerable: Against these our Laws are to be sharpned, and their iniquities to be punished by a Judge. But the Statute of 35 Eliz. which punisheth dissatisfaction, and peaceable with∣drawings from the publick Worship with Exile and Death, declares how odly the business of the Separation hath been managed, and with what disadvantages to the Church; as it doth also the impracticableness of Laws, that make perhaps invincible prejudices, and modest and peaceable dissatisfactions, capitally criminal. The execu∣tion of this Law is scarce possible. It is by no means agreeable, either to the Christian temper of our Church, or his Majesties great Clemency, of which he hath assured us in the general course of his Reign. And especially for that, that Law hath been very rarely proceeded upon. A Gen∣tleman that lay in Cambridge-Goal, under the Judgment of that Law, was reprieved by his Majesty, with a great dislike expressed by him
against that and such like severities. Whatever extravagances of a few wild Fanaticks of that Age occasioned that Law, the state of the Se∣paration and of the Nation being quite alter∣ed from what it was then, the execution of this Law now, would be something like a She∣riffs serving a Writ out of date in another Coun∣ty, which can have no effect but mischief to him∣self. While our Dissenters are thus reasonably in∣dulged, and strictly obliged to their peaceable behaviour, they can give no apprehensions to the Government, either in Church or State. This is all that is designed, and all that they ought to have. This certainly would be readily yield∣ed them in this present juncture especially, if the Evils of the late unhappy times did not stand up∣on their score. But I perswade my self, that as this course, if it had been heretofore taken, would have pre∣vented one great cause of our late Troubles; so it will in such measure prevent them from re∣turning, as the Separation can be accounted the cause of them. As for the Sacriledge and Spoil which was then made upon our Church, it could never have hapned, but upon the dissolution of the Govern∣ment, nor can it even happen again. That War would have been impossible, if the Church-men had not maintained the Doctrine, that Monarchy was Jure Divino, in such a sence
that made the King absolute; and they and the Church in consequence perished by it. But God be thanked, we see the Church a∣gain restored to her endowments, grown wiser than to desire to hold that precariously, and at pleasure, she doth enjoy by an unmovable legal Right. Of the three Estates of this Kingdom (for to suspect any such thing of the King, would be unpardonable Blasphemy) there can be no reasonable suspition: Though of the House of Commons it is become now lawful to suspect, and say any thing that is evil. But no man but the Villains that design by dishonouring them to change the Government, hath reason to en∣tertain such a thought. The Members of the House of Commons in our latest Parliaments, were all, upon the matter, entirely conformable to the Church of England. They were persons of the best Estates, Reputation, and Honour in their Countries: And they, or such as they, are like to make our succeeding Parliaments. I have leave to put them under the impreca∣tion of the severest Curse, if ever they do sa∣crilegiously impair the Church of her Revenues. And I desire it may be assisted with the hear∣ty and passionate desires of all good Christians, that so the Curse I now pronounce may operate upon them who shall incur it. He that designs, contrives, or consents to spoil the Church of any of her Endowments: May a secret Curse waste his Substance; Let his Children be Vaga∣bonds,
and beg their bread in desolate places. Besides, I know it is meditated, and designed by many, and the best men, that use to be sent to Parliaments, to redeem in part that infa∣mous Sacriledge that was committed in the times of H. 8. Then Rectories appropriate to Religious Houses, which had by Appropriations the cure of the Parish, that ought after the dis∣solution of the Monasteries to be presented to, were vested in the Crown; whereby not only the Church was robbed, but the People chea∣ted of their Tythes, which were theirs to give, though not to retain, their Proemium for the Priests Ministrations; which are now often most slen∣derly, and sometimes scandalously performed. As also to disincumber her Revenue of the Charges and Impositions of First-fruits and Tenths, which were imposed and exacted by the Pope, upon his pretence of being the oecu∣menical Pastor and High-Priest of the Christian Church; and at that time likewise conferred up∣on the Crown, and are as unreasonably conti∣nued, as any thing can be that hath a Law for a pretext. But for this, a Compensation may be given to the Crown; and some way will be found out for augmentation of Vicaridges and re-indow∣ment of Churches that lost all in that unpa∣rallel'd Sacriledge, committed by the unsatiable Avarice of that haughty and luxurious Prince. These designs employ the care of a great num∣ber
of our principal Gentlemen, to purge the sin and dishonour brought upon the Nation by that extraordinary King. But if there were reason for any fear, that the Nation could again incur the guilt of Sacri∣ledge, What warranty can this give to any of the Clergy of our Church to slack or abate the Zeal that is due for the purity of her Doctrine, prudence of her Discipline, and her commen∣dable, decent, and intelligible Devotion? Are they worthy to be named of her, that are ready to dissert her, out of fear of a remote possibility that she may not always have such Largesses to give as she now bestows upon her Sons? Will they prefer the gift to the Altar, and declare all their Godliness to be Gain? To suffer Popery for such a consideration to be induced upon her, is a far worse and more detestable Sacriledge than that they pretend to fear. This is to make the Anathemata of the Temple to inserve to the dishonour of the Numen. To desecrate the Altar for the sake of the gift: And will by the just Judgment of God (I fear) bring the abomination of desolation again into our holy places. Let none of her Sons, for the obtaining a Dig∣nity, or a capacity for a double Benefice, betray her by neglecting her interest, thinking with themselves that she will otherwise be supported; for this their doings is no less than the sin of Ju∣das, who took money to betray our Lord, ima∣gining
that he would by a Miracle rescue him∣self from the hands of those to whom he sold and betrayed him. The honest of our Clergy will have little sa∣tisfaction when that day comes. When they shall be reduced to Prayers and Tears, if they are fail∣ing in any thing that they may lawfully do to prevent that miserable state, their Tears will be as water spilt upon the ground; and their Prayers will never find acceptance with God, nor be returned into their own bosom. Disce Miser pigris, non flecti numina, vot is. Praesentem{que} adhibe, dum facis ipse, Deum. But above all, those fine men are not to pass un∣reproved, who are preparing pretences for their Revolt to the Roman Church. They tell us, that the Reformation is depraved, and Popery it self is much amended since the Reformation; that it is not so grosly superstitious, (though her Super∣stitions are still enough to stifle Religion) nor so fabulous in her Legends, (she need make no new ones, since she gives authority still to the old) nor so imposturous in her cheats (for her Priests have not been Hocus-pocusses of late, used so ma∣ny tricks of Legerdemain, and presented their Puppet-plays of moving and squeaking Images) since the Reformation, as before. But they may know, that the reason why we have not maintained the dignity of the Refor∣mation
intire, is this; for that Popery hath not been utterly extirpated from amongst us, though their frequent Treasons, and their notorious se∣ductions have deserved it. By its continuance amongst us, and the resorts of their Priests hither, it hath created and fomen∣ted Divisions amongst us, and corrupted her Chil∣dren from their obedience to her guidance and instructions: But she her self is still the same she was, the Reformation of the Church is still in∣tire. She hath made good her departure from the Church of Rome; her Adversaries have not been able to convict her of any fault therein, and by an easie victory she hath triumphed over all their oppositions and contradictions. And though Popery appear not altogether so deformed, by her Priests artificial Dress, and the Representations they make of her to seduce us, and entice us to come again under her Yoke; yet we know she hath more established her Tyranny by the Council of Trent, and more corrupted her Morals by her modern Casuists since the Refor∣mation, and thereby hath rendred her self more detestable, and for ever to be avoided. But though it may be true, that the Popish world is beholden to the Reformation, and Po∣pery it self is thereby amended in some overt things, and reformed in those Countries that have not reformed from her. For in the Light of the Reformation they have seen Light, and have been ashamed of some of their works
of darkness, and do not bring into present use some of their most gross Impostures, and some worse than Pagan Superstitions. Yet when this light is extinguish'd, it will be a most dismal and eternal Night upon the Christian world. If we return to her, our Ears will be bored, and we shall be irredeemably enslaved. The spirit of Popery, if it returns and possesseth us again, that hath been walking in the reformed Countries as in dry places, seeking rest and find∣ing none, and finds us thus swept and garnisht, will bring with it seven Devils more wicked than it self, and our last estate will be worse than the first. The Pride, Cruelty and Avarice, Domination and Luxury of their Priesthood, will be aggrava∣ted upon us, and the minds of the Laity more lowly depressed by Superstition and Ignorance. The Gospel of Cardinal Palavicini will be the Ca∣non of the Christian Religion, or it may be some∣thing worse; for who can tell what will be the Religion that that Church will offer in process of time to the world under the Christian-Name? When the Pope by his pretended infallibility may make the Christian Religion what he please, by interpreting, adding, altering, or detracting with an uncontroulable Authority. For us therefore to become Papists, to return to the Church of Rome, acknowledge the Popes Infallibility, (there is no other way to become Papists) is virtually to be∣tray the Christian Faith, to renounce our Allegi∣ance to our Lord Christ, to prefer the Bulls of a
profane Pope, to the holy Oracles of God, and the Revelation of Jesus, God blessed for ever. With this Religion therefore we can never make an accommodation; we may as well make a Covenant with Hell. This (as Dr. Jackson, one of the glories of the Church of England, in his Book called The Eternal Truth of Scriptures, ve∣hemently admonisheth us) admits no terms of parley for any possible reconcilement: whose fol∣lowing words to this purpose, I shall here tran∣scribe. The natural separation of this Island from those Countries wherein this Doctrine is professed, shall serve as an everlasting Emblem of the Inhabitants divided Hearts, at least in this point of Religion: And let them, O Lord, be cut off speedily from a∣mongst us, and their Posterity transported hence, ne∣ver to enjoy again the least good thing this Land affords: Let no print of their Memory be extant so much as in a Tree or Stone within our Coast. Or let their Names, by such as remain here after them, be never mentioned, or always to their endless shame: Who living here amongst us, will not imprint these or the like wishes in their Hearts, and daily mention them in their Prayers. Littora Littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas, Imprecor arma armis, pugnent ipsi{que} Nepotes. Which he thus renders.
Let our, & forein Coasts, joyn Battel in the Main, E're this foul Blasphemy Great Britain ever stain. Where never let it come, but floating in a Flood, Of our, our Nephews, and their Childrens blood. I shall only subjoyn my hearty Desires and Pray∣ers, that we may all fear God, and be zealous for his true Religion. Honour the King, and firmly adhere to the Government, and in our several places steadily oppose and resist those Villains that are given to change. That by our Ʋnion we may defeat the crafty designs of our cruel and implacable Enemies, who if they can continue those Divisions they have made amongst us by their wicked Arts, will certainly at length destroy us; who are bent upon our destructi∣on, though they themselves perish with us, we cease to be a Nation, and our Language be forgotten in a foreign Captivity. Sir, Now I have given you my Answer to your Reasons, to disswade me from publishing the Ar∣gument for the Bishops; by representing how few of the Clergy can with reason be thought guilty of Opinions so mischievous to the Church and State, which you charge to have generally corrupted them; and how easily and with little consideration they will be laid aside by them. I will make no other Apologie for the publish∣ing this, than that I have communicated these thoughts to no Man alive, either of the Church
of England, or any other denomination, or con∣sulted any mans advice about it. That I can serve to design of no party of men herein, nor any particular design of my own: I wish they can be serviceable in the least degree to publick good. I have had them by me a great while, and have considered them under the several va∣rieties of temper that our bodies are disposed to, which induce different thoughts, and various apprehensions in most things, under the several passions that the fluctuation of publick affairs have occasioned; under the Ebbs and Flows of Hopes and Fears in reference to the state of the Kingdom, for some length of time. And find∣ing them to have the same appearance, and to give me the same satisfaction in all their several postures, and the views that I could take of them. I assure my self I was sincere when I thought, and that they result meerly from my Judgment (such as it is) uncorrupted. That I am not perverted or biassed by any secret passion or de∣sire of any sort, which many times lurk and steal upon us, deceive us unawares, and undiscer∣nedly abuse us. Sir, the sum of my Apologie is this; that I know my self sincere, of honest In∣tentions, moved by nothing but a hearty love and affection to our King, Religion, and Coun∣try: And for what any man shall think of me, I am not Solicitous. Yours, T. H.
The Great and Weighty CONSIDERATIONS Relating to the Duke of York, OR Successor of the Crown, Offered to the KING, and both Houses of Parliament: CONSIDERED. WITH An ANSWER to a LETTER from a Gentleman of Quality in the Coun∣try to his Friend, relating to the Point of Succession to the Crown. Whereunto is added, A short HISTORICAL COLLECTION touching the same. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. 1682.
TO THE READER. I Have in the Postscript offered Rea∣sons of the Lawfulness of an Act of Exclusion, which to all true Pro∣testants must needs be desirable, if it can be lawfully obtained. Yet for the farther satisfaction of unthinking people, and Men of weak Minds, (who are never certain, (especially in great Matters) where Men of Note are divided in their Opini∣ons; but for that very Reason, where they have no direct Reason to guide them in forming their Judgment, remain scrupu∣lous, if not doubtful; and for that they doubt, they must therefore conclude the Matter, as to themselves, at least unlawful) I have Reprinted these Discourses, (that were Printed near three years since, in An∣swer
to two Books, written by two Emi∣nent Persons; the first supposed to be writ by a great Secretary, the other by a notable Lawyer thereto employed, under promises and expectations of great Preferments. This mans Book especially, is highly ap∣plauded by the Ducal Party; his very words made the stile of the Act of Parlia∣ment in Scotland for the Recognition of the unalterableness of the Descent of the Crown, and his Book accounted unan∣swerable, and the whole Cause, by the Asser∣ters of this Doctrine, put upon the force and consequence of his Reasonings. And indeed, I have seen nothing so considerable, made publick and offered to the World, for the defence of the unalterable Right of the Descent of the Crown, as are the reasons of these two Books which we have considered in these following Discourses.) To the end that the reasons against the Bill of Exclusion, as well as the reasons for it, being duly examined together, no ho∣nest man may from a doubtful Conscience
be any longer under a necessity of suffering the Mischiefs of a Popish Successour, which will be more intolerable when they come to be felt, than any imagination can suggest, or any words can express. True it is, the Most cannot consider duly of a Matter, and determine upon it, by their own proper Reasonings and Discour∣sings: and yet they have so much reason as to think, That where Doctors differ they have respectively their reasons for their different opinions, though they themselves do not apprehend them; and consequently at least doubt, and of what they doubt they conclude unlawful. Yet even the Most may judge what weight and moment the reasons and ar∣guments upon which each party ground their Conclusions are of, if they are truly, clearly, and nakedly propounded, reflected upon, and made fit for their Judgment and Capacity: and they may thereby be brought to discharge their doubt, and determine with clear satisfaction, in any matter so dis∣cussed,
if they will honestly and duly con∣sider. I perswade my self, I have by the re∣flections I have made upon the Discour∣ses of these two renowned Authors, pre∣pared their Reasonings for the judgment of the ordinary sort of men, if honest. To such, their Arguments must appear so frivolous, as they will conclude these Authors down∣right Advocates for the Popish Superstiti∣on and Cruelty, under the thin pretences of defending, That a Successour to the Crown, by an ordinary and common right, cannot be Excluded by an Act of State. Such a Successour, who (if he be not a Pa∣pist, yet) hath openly departed from our Church, in which he was born, and for which his Father suffered Martyrdome; and for the preserving the Peace of Three Kingdoms, disdains to tell us he is a Pro∣testant; and neglects the direful Impreca∣tions of his Grand-Father; though no Curses are so operative, as those of Parents upon their Children, upon weighty causes
solemnly pronounced: These can kill at the Root the most flourishing and prolifical Families, make their Root rottenness, and their Blossom to go up as dust; Omnem vastant stirpemque domumque. . And therefore I have caused these re∣flections to be Reprinted, if happily they may conduce any thing towards a full in∣formation of my doubting honest Coun∣trymen, in a matter so weighty; and con∣sequently, towards the prevention of the ef∣fusions of English Blood, in Wars, Mas∣sacres, and Martyrdomes, and of the lawless, violent, and bloody attempts to be made for the Extirpation of the Re∣formed Religion Establisht amongst us by Law, by the Romanists. And lastly, to∣wards the re-establishment of our Govern∣ment and Nation in Peace and Tranquil∣lity again, which are now most miserably distracted, by the fears of a Popish Succes∣sour, and by the Doubts about Excluding him.
If we did not doubt without reason of the lawfulness of Excluding a Popish Suc∣cessour, we should have no reason to fear him.
The Great and Weighty CONSIDERATIONS, &c. CONSIDERED. WHatever is the subject matter upon which we exercise our thoughts, or whereupon we make our En∣quities, doth not make the Considerations of slight and vain Men GREAT and WEIGH∣TY. A man of slender Endowments doth not commence to be Wise, as soon as matters of great Moment take up his Thoughts. But if he be of such a make, as renders him capable of being in any degree wise, he is affected with an ingenuous Shame, finding the matters too hard for his Capacity, and above his reach: He is displeased and dissatisfied with his own dark, indistinct, and confused Conceptions, in which he himself can receive no satisfaction: he suspends, and de∣termines nothing, but that he doth not under∣stand the matter, and resorts with deference to those who are wiser than himself. But there is a sort of Arrogant Fools who trouble the World, make it difficult to under∣stand plain Truth, confound the Notions of
things, blend things of remote distances in their nature together, or put one thing for another that have no affinity to each other; puzzle and perplex the minds of the Weak. These deserve the Indignation of the better sort of Judgments, who cannot but be empassio∣ned while they see a great part of mankind abused to their hurt. By the villanous practices of some, designed to the endurance of the greatest mis∣chiefs; and by a sort of silly Knaves attempted upon, for deceiving them into a permission of all the pretended evils to come upon them; who presumptuously use their little Wit to ensnare the Consciences, to perplex the Minds of the Mul∣titude by Objections puzzling to the weak, by such Reasonings, as none but fools could think of, and none but bold Knaves would offer to the World: Such I take to be every immodest man who will adventure, not from his Understanding, and therefore from his Will, and consequently his Interest, to speak things that have no conse∣quence, and are not induc'd by the Laws of Rea∣soning and Discourse; that have a tendency to dispose men to scruple of Conscience, and make them doubtful and unactive against the evils of the greatest size that are design'd against them, and to neglect or resist the Counsels of God a∣gainst themselves, and fatally fall under the de∣signed evils, notwithstanding they are provided of a just and allowable Remedy against them. There are, and ever was, and ever will be, to
the trouble of Mankind, a sort of literate Fools (who will always obtain some reputation with the stupid admiring Vulgar) made by Na∣ture to little Understanding, and who have lost that little for want of using it; who by Books good of bad, it matters not much, become grea∣ter Fools than they could have been, if left to simple Nature; who by imperfect remembran∣ces, and undue joyning of things more imperfect∣ly understood, make most perverse Judgments in all things they are conversant about. And if it happen that by their Complexion they prove forward, and are opinionated of their false Learn∣ing, they obtrude upon the World their unna∣tural, monstrous, and incoherent Conceptions. And if they chance to mix their Discourses with passages of Holy Scriptures, and thereby entitled Religion to their Absurdities, they more power∣fully amuse, distract, and abuse the Consciences of the common People, and perplex them with Scruples and Prejudices, and that sometimes a∣gainst the only means of their preservation. And this calls upon, and urgeth the Charity of such to whom God hath given a better under∣standing, to appear and come forth for the unde∣ceiving and rectifying the Judgments of the most deceivable part of Mankind, and with just igno∣miny and scorn to beat down the assumings and presumptions of such Pretenders and Smat∣terers in Letters; especially in such a Weighty Matter as this, when the poor people (if mistaken)
must be mistaken to their Ruine, and perish by the Deceit, if deceived; which, I hope, is scarce possible for very many to be, by this frivolous Pretender and Offerer of Considerations, which none but he that deserves our pity could think of; but for that he dares to offer them publickly to the World, and under the stile of [Great and Weighty Considerations,] he most justly deserves our Indignation, a private Scorn, & a publick Cen∣sure. For that purpose we will now produce him. HE begins his Considerations with a Consi∣deration and Recommendation of himself, and would fain prove his Honestly; for he was with reason conscious that this undertaking would render him more than probably suspected: He proves, as well as any thing he undertakes, and as well as it can be proved, That he is an honest man. This he would have the World be∣lieve, because there is such a thing as sincerity in the World; and for that there have been some men that have owned an afflictive Righteous Cause against self-interest, and the displeasure of a prevailing Faction: but we know the Cause that he Patronizes, is the most unrighteous Cause that ever any man of Front espoused: but that should not trouble us. But that which afflicts us, and is the heart-aking of all good men, is, That this Scribler with too much reason we know, presumes that the Brave men (whom he re∣viles
for adhering to the only means of the sa∣ving of three Kingdoms) with the Gross of the Nation, are designed to be subdued by a party of men whose strength the King in his profound Knowledg and Wisdom best knows how to Cal∣culate: but certainly this Addresser imagines ve∣ry great, whatever he pretends, and that he is well backed by force. Otherwise he could not adventure publickly to despise the Interest of a House of Commons. If this Considerer and his Fellow-Conspirators had not some secret reserves of Strength, he would not advise the King as he doth, to Adhere to, and Govern with the House of Lords and his Privy-Council, and to lop off the House of Commons from the Government as an unprofitable Branch. In the next Paragraph he tells us, The Chief∣est Principle and Maxim of the true reformed Reli∣gion in this Kingdom, is fully Epitomized in this excellent Precept, Give to every one his due. If there can be more nonsense spoken in so many words, It is this Patriot must do it; and you shall find him often performing what I have under∣taken for him. And sure, after such demonstra∣tions of his Honesty, and proof of his Understan∣ding, you must take him for a True Patriot, and a fit Addresser of GREAT and WEIGHTY Considerations. In the next Paragraph he undertakes to com∣mend
and allow, chide and disapprove our lead∣ing Men; I believe he means of the House of Commons, but we want his Name; it's fit he should discover himself, before we can admit him to sit Judge of the Actions of the most excellent Persons of the late House of Commons. I per∣swade my self he would blush, (however immo∣dest he appears in his Address) if he were drawn out and exposed to publick view under such a Character; we might spare him the Pillory, rot∣ten Eggs, and Turnep-tops, which is due to infa∣mous Libellers against Governours; for he is a man of such fashion (I believe) that he would suf∣fer too much of Shame and Confusion of Face, (if he were but known well enough to be pointed at) after we have done with him. In the fourth Paragraph, he allows it is a glo∣rious thing to establish the True Protestant Re∣ligion; but he would not have it established up∣on Quick-sands: neither would we, because it is impossible it should be so established; we would not have it depend upon loose accidents, expos'd to Chance and Contingencies, and expect it should be supported by rare events, and morally impossible: nor to be left at Six and Sevens, a chance that is not upon the Die, and hope that things should out of their Course and Nature unite and combine together for its support. That which is Glorious is so, because it is Ex∣cellent in it self, and difficult to be atchieved;
and whatever is difficult, is to be obtained by un∣usual and extraordinary means: to deny or con∣demn the use of them when lawful, is to deny us the end; and is so far in truth from allowing it to be Glorious, that he doth not allow it at all. That it is made difficult to support the Prote∣stant Religion, we owe to the Popish Conspiracy; and the design of this man is to make it impossi∣ble: to that purpose he requires you to lay aside Humane Policy, which is the same as true Pru∣dence (which is the onely Guide God hath given us, and the onely Oracle he hath left us to con∣sult in our Affairs, and is never repugnant (as he would have it) but always conformable to the Laws of God and Nature) lest we should be fur∣nished with a Remedy against the designed mis∣chiefs to us and our Religion. To this commendable sort of Policy, the de∣sign of the Bill will be made agreeable in the fol∣lowing Discourse. That we may admit the ab∣surd Doctrins of the Church of Rome, we are re∣quired to abandon our Reason; and that we may more easily again fall unto her, we must (if we will be ruled by the Considerer) renounce our Prudence; and those that will not, must endure his slanderous Reproaches, with which he goes on to revile the Promoters of the Bill of Exclusion, whom he calls Hypocrites, Factious Spirits of the Fanatical Leven; that they make a Cloak of Religi∣on to palliate black Designs; fierce Zealots, acting
like the Rump-Parliament, Guilty of Antichristian attempts, repugnant to the Ordinance of God, and to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; a few tur∣bulent Zealots, assuming to themselves a Soveraign and despotical Power of Deposing the DƲKE of YORK: and says, That they impudently affirm, That this hath been the Ancient Custom of Parlia∣ments, to Depose Princes, and dispose of Kingdoms; whereas the Crown hath been always Haereditary, and never depended upon the Suffrages of the Sub∣ject. Since this bad man presumes to say so many bad words falsely of the Excellent Members of the late House of Commons, reproches their Zeal for the publick Safety, most Heroically exerted in the time of the greatest Need, and most threat∣ning Dangers; calls their appearance for the sup∣port of the Protestant Religion established by Law, Hypocrisie: And the prosecuting the Dis∣covery of the Hellish Plot, and the best means of preventing the Plot from taking effect, black De∣signs. Since, I say, his Immodesty hath given him so much Licence, I wonder he had no more Scurrilities, especially since he is so impertinent as to call the Bill of Exclusion, an Antichristian Attempt, Repugnant to the Ordinance of God, (though God never yet made any Law or Ordi∣nance in that Case,) and the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; though no Laws of Men are so Fundamental but they are alterable. The Constitution of Government is indeed
unalterable by Law, but no Laws but are alter∣able by the Government; for the Government was before Laws, and made and constituted most chiefly for the business of Legislation. That the House of Commons assumes a Sove∣raign Power, he knows to be false; and knows too, that all the world knows he is therein a Falsary. What can be expected of Candour or Sincerity from a man of such Effrontery? and to the ma∣king the Slander compleat, he joyns Despotical to Soveraign power, as if they were the same; an instance of his egregious Ignorance, except he flat∣ters the King: and would signifie to him that he hath despotical power, because he hath a Sove∣raign Power: and this commends him indeed for a true Patriot. A Despotical Power is such as Masters use over their Servants, that command what they will, because they will. Soveraign Power is exercised for the good of those that are governed; and the Commands that come from the Soveraign Power, are Laws that are deduc'd from publick Reason, as they are the publick Measures, and are always reasonable, or pretend to be so. No body ever affirmed, before this Addresser to the King, That it hath been the Ancient Custom of Parliaments to dispose of the Crown, or that it depended upon the Suffrages of the Subjects; which he falsly and maliciously adventures to say, to misrepresent the most Venerable late House of Commons, whose Proceedings will ju∣stifie
themselves in true Story to all succeeding Generations, and will, we all hope, be seconded and out-done by the next; if the good People can keep themselves from being deceived by such Artificial men as this Addresser is. But this is said, and truly, That a Parliament, which is King, Lords, and Commons, have decla∣red, and particularly, a Parliament in the Reign of that most Excellent Princess Queen Elizabeth, of Eternal Memory, (the wisest and greatest of the Princes that are Glorious for the Reforming the Christian Religion) did declare a Power in them∣selves, for Great and Weighty Reasons of State, to alter the Succession, otherwise than of course it is by Law appointed: and most reasonable it is; for no Government can want a Power to preserve it self, and obtain its great end, viz. the preser∣vation of the Community and Polity it self; and no less Reasons than these, require and urge the Use and Exercise of this Power in an Act of Par∣liament for Excluding the D. from Succeeding to the Imperial Crown of England. In order to these ends, the Power of a Parliament is unre∣strain'd, and unlimited; which this Considera∣tion-Monger calls Scoffingly (Impiously and Prophanely towards God, and irreverently to∣wards the Government) Omnipotency. In the next Paragraph, he produceth his first Reason against the Excluding Bill. And by an execrable Argument, he adventures to prove,
That the descent of the Crown is Sacred, viz. That an Attainder in Treason cannot debar the next Heir from succeeding in the Government. But if the Heir had died of that Attainder, the Argument had been spoiled. For cannot that Power that can inflict Capital Sentences, and that ought to do it against all in subjection that in∣cur them, Banish instead of Kill? sure he is no true Friend to his Royal Highness, whatever he pre∣tends; we will sooner admit him a true Patriot, for that he makes the condition of his presum∣ptive Heir so hard, That he must either Die or Reign. A very judicious Advocate, and deserves very well of his Client, who will remember him, sure, when he comes into his Kingdom, for bringing him into such danger. I believe this considering Patriot shifted him∣self in this Consideration into France, where they have Princes of the Blood, against whom no Criminal Process can be formed, nor no Attain∣der of Blood is admitted, to the purpose that the most enormous Crimes may not seem faults in those that participate of the blood of that haughty Tyranny. But the better to disguise himself, he criminates the Parliament, calls the House of Commons in derision Cunning Politi∣cians, that would have a new Model of Govern∣ment; he chargeth them with assuming a power to depose the King, and will conclude, because he will, (and hopes the People will take his Word for it) for no other reason in the world,
that we may as well Depose the King, as fore∣close a Presumptive Heir, which he will call de∣posing him: for this Ruffian-like man will not submit to the common use of Words, and is at defiance with the common Sense of Mankind; and will say it, That it is as lawful to Depose the Possessor of the Crown, as to make an Act of Parli∣ament for preserving the Life of the present King, by disabling the next Successor that brings it in danger: And likens the late House of Commons, upon the score of their Bill of Exclusion, to the Rump. Oh! for a Discoverer that would bring this man to Light and Shame, and thereby to Reason and Sobriety. Upon this weak and slight colour of a Reason, see in the next Paragraph how he lays about him, with what vehemency and expostulation; and yet in his magisterial Rant, the trifler could no sooner name an extravagant Bill, but he thinks of a Box of Gilded Pills, which if he had been lately under cure by Mr. Hobbs his Doctrine of the train of Thoughts, they could not escape coming together. And yet this Thinking Ad∣dresser is not altogether so happy in dividing and opposing, as in compounding. For he affirms, that to go about to establish the Protestant Reli∣gion by a Bill to Exclude the Popish Successour, is inconsistent with the Government, and is to destroy the very Root and Life of Govern∣ment.
But, pray Sir, for the sake of Reason tell us; Doth the Government it self depend upon the person that Governs? or is the Government it self changed by the alteration of the Successi∣on? may not Governments, for kind the same, have different modes of Succession? and are not the kinds of Succession, more than the kinds and forms of Government? Can the Government be safe without a Power to exclude a Person inhabil in Nature to support it, or of one Principled to destroy it? Can we imagine a Government which is of Humane Contrivance, to be without a Power to preserve it self; and an Authority, in Cases that threaten its Ruine, to interpose with apt Remedies for its preservation? That a Go∣vernment made by men should be left meerly to chance, and the contingency of Birth, whatever happens of inability in the Persons that come under the general Rule and Limitation of Succes∣sion? Doth the Exercise of this power turn the King∣dom from being Hereditary to Elective? is there no difference between the inconvenience of Judg∣ing of the several Degrees of fitness in several persons competently qualified, and the proceed∣ing upon evident notoriety to exclude one that designs the subverting of it, and the destruction of those that are to be governed and protected and hath incurr'd a severer Doom? I well hope there are very few in this Nation so ill instructed, that doth not think it in the Power of the Peo∣ple
to depose a Prince who really undertakes to alienate his Kingdom, or to give it up into the hands of another Soveraign Power: Or that really acts the Destruction or the Universal Cala∣mity of his People. The Learned and Judicious Mr. Falkner, than whom there is no person of this Age with the Church of England in greater esteem; Who truly merits the high esteem of all men for his excellent Candour and Learning: In his Book called Christian Loyalty, cannot deny the right to be so upon those cases really happening, but is not willing to suppose such Cases can ever hap∣pen in Fact. He tells us, If any such strange Case as is proposed, should really happen in the World, it would have its great difficulties. Gro∣tius (he tells us) thinks that in this utmost extre∣mity, the use of such defence as a last refuge, ul∣timo necessitatis proesidio, is not to be condemned, provided the care of the common Good be preser∣ved. And if this be true, saith he, it must be up∣on this Ground, that such attempts of ruining do ipso facto include a disclaiming the Governing these persons as Subjects, and conseqently of be∣ing their Prince and King; and then, notwith∣standing his Proposition (saith he) would remain True, viz. That it is not lawful upon any pretence whatsoever, to take Arms against the King. All that Mr. Falkner offers in this matter, out of his commendable Care and Zeal to Peace and Government, is, to argue the Cases in Fact im∣possible,
and that such suppositions may be the undue imputations of Factious persons against their Soveraign: He thinks that Princes may have a Consideration of the Account they must give in the other World of their Government here: That they have a regard to their Honour and Esteem, and a Respect to their Safety; To the quiet and serenity of their own minds, and will avoid the Diroe Ʋltrices, and the Tortures of mind that attend Cruelty, and the Actors of great mischief, and by such Considerations as these be contain'd in their Duty. But do these Arguments of his, that should reasonably, and ordinarily do, secure us against the Oppressions of Potentates, give us in this juncture any Security? are these Considerations Disswasives or Incitements to a Popish Prince to act our Fears, and give reality to the Suppositi∣ons? To any under the Principles and Counsels that guide such a Prince already entred upon the Design, and his party obnoxious, these Conside∣rations would urge him to proceed, and make our Calamity certain: These Arguments of his ap∣plyed to such a state of things, is like a Protestatio contra factum; and like the Sophistical Argu∣ments of the Stoicks, who would undertake to prove a thing acknowledged and existent and present to be impossible. How wild then and transported must this Pa∣triot seem, who will undertake to argue the Bill guilty of the highest Iniquity and Injustice, Ar∣raign
the greatest and Best part of the Nation adjure them to answer it at his Tribunal, chal∣lenge us (for so his Expostulations and Enquiries of us doth import) with intentions to over-reach Providence; and that we despair of the justness of our Cause, or the goodness of God. And he tells us, That God doth not want our Wickedness to fulfil his Holy Will. We answer: How far the Providence of God will assist us in this undertaking we know not, it is not new in the world for the most Righteous Causes to be unprosperous; we are only to do our Duty, and leave the Issue and Event thereof to his All-Wise Providence. But we know, and are most assured of the Justness of the underta∣king; and we have a good hope in the goodness of God, that he will succeed it, for that herein we are doing nothing that is evil, but fulfilling his Holy and Good Will: I mean, not that we are certain to obtain what we desire and pursue: But it is the will of God concerning us, (who hath left us in the hands of our own Counsel, and hath not told us, That he will save us by a Mi∣racle) that we should be Loyal to our Sove∣raign, zealously love that excellent Religion and that excellent Government that his Gracious Providence hath established amongst us by Law: And also that we desire and endeavour by Law to disable (in the understanding of the representa∣tive of the Nation) a profest Enemy both to our Religion and Government, from getting into the
Throne; that he be not by that advantage of Power, enabled to effect his purpose. But we are resolved we that will not call that Design Evil, tho' it do not succeed; nor think that we are not doing the Holy Will of God, tho' we should be unprosperous therein, and without success. If there was an Oracle to Consult, we would not know what the Success should be, lest our Virtue should lose its Glory. No brave man, but would despise all Auguries, when he is to con∣tend for his Country, and things more precious to him than his Life. Sortilegis egeant dubij. This false Patriot takes Sanctuary in his Revolt from publick Interest; and he thinks he is swim∣ming to Shore with his Plank before a Wreck, and will fly the Danger before it approaches: but we will do our Duty, weather the Storm secure of the event: for the goodness of the Cause makes us hopeful, and we will Triumph in our Integrity tho' disappointed. Of any other Will of God, save what is his Will for us to do, as Citizens, Soul∣diers, or Martyrs, we are not so sollicitous to know. The Noble Roman, when advised by his Friend Labienus to Consult the Oracle of Jupiter Am∣mon, as to the event of the War in which he was then engaged, Thus answered him, Quid Quaeri Labiene Jubes? an liber in armis Occubuisse velim potius quam Regna videre? An noceat vis ulla bono? fortunaque perdat
Opposita virtute minus? Laudandaque velle Sit satis? Et nunquam successu crescit Honestum? Scimus & haec nobis non altius inseret Ammon. I do but right to my Country-men, to bear my publick Testimony, that their generous and godly Resolutions are agreeable to this Noble Roman. But that done, I will calmly tell him, That we are in a Legal method, allowed by the Government, contending for its preservation by the Bill of Exclusion; and that most certainly he can have no right against a Law (for such it will be, when that Bill hath the Royal Assent) to any thing that he shall forfeit thereby: And whether such a Law is not most righteous, let God, An∣gels and Men Judge. And here it will not be amiss to admonish this Patriot, That no man hath a Right to any thing from God and Nature (to use his Words which he useth, but doth not understand of what Import and value they are in this place) for the Rights of Property are of positive and civil Appointment and Institution. No man can have, or is entitled to any thing, but what, and as the Law allots it to him. They design what is Right, what Wrong, and what is Injury and Theft; and the Law of God, both in the Reason and Nature of man, as well as by express Revelation, forbids it. Nec natura potest justum secernere iniquo. Men make Governments, and God Com∣mands us to obey them; yea, God Commands
us in our Nature, to form our selves into Go∣vernments. For that Mankind cannot tolera∣bly subsist without them. What is greatly con∣venient, and promotes the happiness of men, therefore seems to be Commanded, and there∣by a positive and affirmative Law of God in Na∣ture is declared. What is or would be greatly mischievous to mankind, if generally permitted, is therefore understood by us prohibited. The Mischief declares the thing forbidden, and is the indication of a Negative Precept, or prohibitory Law. The pleasure and satisfaction of mind that men take in being beneficent and agreeable to, and deserving well of their own kind: The remorses, shame, fear and regret that men necessa∣rily suffer from the sense of their own actions, when they are offensive, unequal and unreaso∣nable, are the Sanctions of the Laws of Nature, and are truly the Rewards and Punishments of God in Nature. So that Anarchy, which is the most intole∣rable state of Mankind, a state of War and Vio∣lence, unreasonable Passion, and unbounded Appe∣tite, seems to be the most forbidden thing by God in Nature. But Government, because it makes men equal and reasonable, just and peaceable, kind and be∣neficent, or finds them so, encourageth them to be so, and protects them in being so; seems to be the most principal Institution and Appointment of God in Nature, for that it is recommended to
us by all that which conduces to our happiness. And thus, and for this reason, are Kings and Go∣vernours said to have their Authority from God, and therefore Government is called , Rom. 13.2. Gods Ordinance. But the forms of Go∣vernments, the Persons of the Governours, the Order of Succession, their respective Powers and Ministries, are of Mans appointment: and agree∣able hereunto, Government is called , or a Humane Creature, 1 Peter 2.13, 24. to which the Apostle enjoyns us to be Obedient for the Lords sake, and in Conscience of our Duty to God. Agreeable hereto is that Noble Tradition a∣mongst the Jews of the seven Precepts given by God to the Sons of Noah, that is, to all Mankind, for from him we all secondarily derive, in which the great Titles of the Law of Nature are decla∣red, and to which all the Nations of the World were obliged: one of which is De Judiciis. The words of the Precept, which is the Seventh, are no more, signifying that the Law of Nature, or the Will of God in Nature, doth command us to live in Politys and under Governments. This Law was given or declared to all Mankind, when they were in a State of Nature, before Govern∣ments were constituted; and by that Law of Na∣ture, obliged to form themselves into Societies, to enter into mutual Obligations, to stand to and abide the common measures of Law, and to assist and submit to the Sentences and Decrees of com∣mon
Judicatures. These were the first Oaths of Allegiance that were taken in the world: but when a single person was entrusted with the executive power of Laws, they swore this Alle∣giance to him. For in all regular Governments (as it is in this of ours) the King commands no∣thing but according to the Prescript and Formu∣la's of Law: And the whole business of Govern∣ment, as between those that are to be Governed, is making Laws, and executing them in a due Administration of Justice. As Corollaries to what is said, I shall add, first, That Mercenary Guards are very unnatural to Governments, as they seem, upon the foregoing Reasons, to be instituted and appointed by God in Nature, which receive conformation from the Tradition and Doctrine of the Jews (the best in∣structed Nation in the world in the Mind of God) for that the whole body and power of the Go∣vernment or Polity are bound to see the Law, and Results of their common Judicatures obey'd, and are amply sufficient for that purpose. So that the head of the Polity, by the posse populi, being most powerfully instructed to execute the Laws, Mercenary Guards seem intended and designed, by those that imploy them, to execute matters illegal and extrajudicial; or at best they make a very hard case upon the people, that they must support a great charge, and pay a great price for jealousies and fears. Secondly, That by the natural obligation of
the ancient Oath of Allegiance, every Member of the Polity is bound to resist and subdue all ex∣trajudicial Forces, riotous and routous Assem∣blies. But the nature of Government, and its true original, hath been prejudiced by an unhappy mi∣stake that hath long since invaded the World; men that understand nothing but Words; and Grammar-Divines, that without contemplating Gods Attributes, or the nature of man, or the reasonableness of moral Precepts, have underta∣ken to declare the sense of Scriptures; and infer that the Soveraign Power is not of Humane In∣stitution, but of Divine Appointment; because they find it there written, that by him Kings Reign; imagining that when the Scripture saith, God commands, or doth this, that God commanded it by express Words, or doth it by an immediate position of the thing done. Whereas in Nature his Commands are nothing but the natural Light God hath bestowed upon Mankind: Likewise God's doing a thing is only the course of natural and second Causes, to which, because God gives the Direction or Motion, he doth both, and is said to do all that is done. Besides, all the Precepts that God gives us that are agreeable to the Law of Nature, must be un∣derstood as Nature and Reason doth direct. Vi∣detur Lex Dei idem dictans quod natura, ita accipi quomodo ipsa natura accipiendum monstrat, nisi ad∣datur aliquid Expressius; Grotius Comment. fol.
121. The Laws of God, that confirm the Laws of men, innovate nothing but a new obligation to observe them (but only) as commanded and intended by those that made them. All humane Constitutions and Governments must be subser∣vient and obsequious to their own intentions. Omnes res conditoe famulantur vitoe humanoe: Eve∣ry Form of Government is of our creation and not Gods, and must comply with the safety of the People in all that it can, without its own dis∣solution: and was never intended unalterable, or at least inflexible, but was intended and made under reservations, reasonable exceptions of un∣foreseen accidents, and rare contingencies in hu∣mane Affairs. And the Law of God, that comes in confirmation and establishment of humane In∣stitutions and Laws, binds only according to their natures and intendments. How unreasonable therefore are the Tragical Exaggerations of the considerer, making it the most heinous wickedness, and the most crying Injustice, to alter that which in its own nature is alterable, and by an Act of the Government to exclude the D. from the Succession, as a person unfit and unsafe to be entrusted with the Govern∣ment! (though in the general order thereof, he was thereto designed) besides that he hath for∣feited that kind of right that he had by that ge∣neral appointment. Is this, saith he, the way of establishing the Protestant Religion? he saith, this is exactly to
follow the footsteps of that Monster of Ingrati∣tude, the wicked Jeroboam, who after God of his infinite goodness had raised him from nothing, and established him Monarch of the ten Tribes of Israel, yet was he so mistrustful of Gods Power in preserving his Kingdom for the future, that he thought nothing could secure it but his own ac∣cursed Policy. Our Considerer seems to have a high value for Rule and Domination, otherwise he would not have called the advancement of Jeroboam to rule by Usurpation, an effect of the infinite goodness of God. But these words were put in, to make that story of Jeroboam parallel to our case: and he intends thereby to remember us of the little power that the reformed Religion sometimes had, perhaps in the time of Queen Mary; and to charge upon the Protestant Religion, and re∣proach it with a Revolt and unjustifiable Schisma∣tical departure from the Church of Rome in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and the acquiring and possessing it self of the Government: And now, behold the man! now you know him and his Religion, and how fit he is to offer Considerati∣ons for the D. against the Bill. But shortly, to destroy his parallel, he may know, that the Reformation did only assert and reassume the Rights of the Crown usurp'd by the Bishop of Rome: We did reform the Religi∣on of our Church to primitive Christianity, from which the Church of Rome had seduced us; but
therein we used no other Power than what be∣longs to every Church to reform it self: we were never of right and duty subject to the Church of Rome, she never rightfully had any Authority over us, and therefore we could not Schismatically revolt from her; nor are parallel at all in this to Jeroboam, though this man will compare us to him, and thereby slily charge us with monstrous Ingratitude to God, and accursed Policies; because we will not again give up our Civil Rights to the Tyranny of Rome, nor lose again the true Chri∣stian Religion in the Superstitions and corrupt Doctrines of that Church; and because we will not forbear to use that power which is lawful to every Government. Except this be his meaning, and he himself a Papist, he might with as much pertinency have told any other story of Jeroboam, or of any other of the Kings of Israel and Judah, in the Books of the Kings or Chronicles; or of Belte∣shazzar or Nebuchadonozor, Zenacherib, Ahasue∣rus; or Holofernes, or Antiochus, or any other King or Name in story Sacred or Prophane. Of all these he could not have found out any thing more unlike to have compared with us, to have remarked himself for a man of great Considera∣tions. For Jeroboam corrupted the true Worship of God to support an Usurped Crown; but the design of the Bill against which he declaims, is to support a Lawful Government, and the best Religion by a legal Act of that Government.
So that we will invert that Wo which he pro∣nounceth against us out of the Prophet; Wo un∣to him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong, into a Wo against himself Wo unto him that putteth evil for good, and dark∣ness for light, and casteth a stumbling-block before his neighbour. But in what follows of this Writer of Consi∣derations, I doubt me whether he doth not act the part of a scorning Atheist; for that he would perswade the World from all care and regard of Religion, by telling us, it is able to shift for it self, it being the work of Gods own hand. His Atheistical scorn and low valuation of the true Christian Religion, is further very notorious and remarkable, for that he makes the establish∣ment thereof amongst us to be such a like work of the Almighty Hand of God, that establish'd Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel. O thou In∣sensatus Galata! to return thy own Exclamati∣on which thou usest against thy own honest and discerning Country-men, upon thy stupid self: For who, I pray you, but a senseless man, would compare a providential permission of the revolt of the ten Tribes for the sins of David, and the sins and oppressions of Solomon (to which the People were prepared by the exactions, oppres∣sions, and riotous Reign of Solomon and his Suc∣cessor Rehoboam) to the work of the Reforma∣tion, which was the delivery and restoring to it self the Gospel of Christ, and his true Religion,
(which was spoiled and depraved by the Church of Rome) for the benefit I doubt not of all the Ages of Mankind to the end of the World; a∣gainst which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail; and which we in despight of the Roman Successor shall see yet flourish in this Land. But we must not expect, though God did first plant his Church by Miracles in Nature, and de∣monstrations of the Spirit of Power, by the won∣derful Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and by the Spirit of Glory resting upon the Primitive Martyrs of the Holy Faith, and did restore the purity of the Christian Faith by a Miraculous Providence and the Spirit of Martyrdom, which we are now peacefully and Legally possessed of; I say, we have no reason to expect Wonders for our preservation, when it seems to be in our own hands: Nor ought we to subject the Professors of the True Religion again to Slaughters, Fire and Faggot, Tortures, Inquisitions and Massacres. Let us not think that our Government, as it lies in History, and our Laws in Books and Par∣liament-Rolls (which will easily suffer an Index expurgatorius, and make no complaint,) can de∣fend us and it against the Instruments and En∣gines designed for its subversion in the Plot, and the powers that have been long addressing to that purpose, and are now at leisure to execute what we know is designed against us, better than we can make out and discover. This Expression, I know, would scarce pass for sense in any other
Age or Matter, but we live in an Age of Mystery and Prodigy, producing things Monstrous and unnatural, and our Language must be agreeable to the things we speak of. The True Patriot proceeds and affirms, That it is an unwarrantable Attempt, and a point with∣out example or president, to Depose a Prince for not complying with his People in Religion. I ap∣peal to all that shall read him, whether he ap∣pears to be a man of Reading enough to warrant him to pronounce a general Negative in this matter? But by this time there is nothing so ex∣travagant but you will allow agreeable to the man. I believe immodesty is the unhappy Vice and Fate of his Nature, for no man ever arrived to the like Degree in it before him: you must not ask what he means by a point without example or president, or why he puts us a point that is not in our Case, and still will be talking of de∣posing a Prince; for this man oweth no account of his matters. But, thou False Considerer; So Loyal I am, That I would not have that point in the Case for half I am worth. But pray why thus impertinent? Why dost thou send us to Asa and Maachah, Jeroboam, Reho∣boam, Jehu and Joram, Asa and his Mother, and Azaria? we know little of the Constitution of the Jewish Monarchy, save that God after the Jews had rejected his Government, and desired a King, kept some remains of his Theocracy over them, which he administred by his Prophets,
whom he commissioned to Exauctorate and A∣noint Kings. Their Histories are short; but be∣sides, every Nation is to be governed by their own Laws, and there are as many kinds almost of Go∣vernments as there are Governments; we are not warranted by their Presidents, nor to be Justified or Condemned by them; but we must Stand or Fall to our own Laws. But let this Patriot know, that our case will never be Cromwels, (as he re∣proaches us,) & we will not, neither can we stand in need of any Apology that would serve either for the Rump or him; for we are preserving that Government and Church which they destroyed. Neither will we, O man of small Considerati∣on, make use in our defence of the Papists exclu∣ding the King of Navarr, a Protestant King in France: No more than we will allow the French to murder a Protestant Minister, because we exe∣cute a Seditious Traiterous Roman Priest: No more than we can allow in others, or justifie in our selves to prosecute dissenting Protestants, whose Principles are peaceable and obedient to Governours: Because we duly sharpen our Laws, and exact the Severity of them against the Pa∣pists, the sworn enemy to all Religions but their own, and to all mankind upon the score there∣of. How grosly therefore is that of the Apostle misapplyed, Whosoever thou art O man that judgest another, &c. For doth a publick Executioner incur the Judgment of shedding mans Blood, for
executing a Sentence against a Murderer. Thou man of Observation mayst possibly know what kind of Beasts we muzzle and tye up. He observes for our Imitation, That the Ortho∣dox did not Depose the Arrian Emperours: we ought undoubtedly to imitate them therein: for that no man, much less a Prince, ought to lose any right for a Speculative Error, or meer mis-belief: But onely for wicked practices and opinions that promote, excite and encourage them. But it is also very observable, which the Considerer, by his mention of Julian the Emperour in this place, gives me occasion to offer: That the Behaviour of the Church towards the Pagan Roman Empe∣rours, was much different from that which they bore to Julian, who succeeded to Christian Em∣perours, was educated a Christian, and some∣times bore a place in the Church: for whereas the Apostles had enjoyned the Christians to pray for the Pagan Emperours, though actual Persecu∣tors of the Church; yet the whole Church did Curse and Anathematize Julian with an Anathe∣ma, quo Deus rogatur ut aliquem è medio tollat. In Julianum cum defectioni adderet machinationes evertendi Christianismi, usa est Ecclesia isto extre∣mae necessitatis telo, & à Deo est exaudita. Gro∣tius in Luc. Cap. 6. Vers. 12. I will not trouble the Reader with more Quotations to this purpose; the Authority of this Great man is more than ten Witnesses. And for what he lays down ge∣nerally, that the Orthodox did not Depose the
Arrian Emperours: I must remember him out of Socrates the Ecclesiastical Historian, lib. 2. cap. 38. Gr. when the Souldiers of Constantius the Arrian Emperour were by his command sent to enforce them to become Arrians, they took Arms in defence of their profession of Religion; how justifiable therein, I will not now discourse. But this may be said, that the Christian Religion with indifferency to all Sects, was made the Re∣ligion of the Empire by Imperial Rescripts, and all Christians had thereby a Civil Right to a free and undisturbed profession of their Religion in their several Perswasions: For Constantine the Great carried so indifferent an hand between the Contending Parties, that he endeavoured to make Peace rather by silencing the Disputes, than by determining the Controversie: Worthy of the imitation of the Guides of Christendom; and the onely means of freeing the Reformed Reli∣gion from being depraved by the Jargon and Gibberish of the Sectaries. If the Crown should devolve upon the Roman Successor, it would require consideration, whe∣ther we could justifie the Dethroning of him; though the French Papist could not be justified in rejecting the King of Navar. But this untrue Patriot shifts his Cause from what it is, to what it is not, that he may have some colour to inveigh against the true Patriots, far more excellent and righteous than himself; and have some umbrage to betray the best Reli∣gion
and the best Government, while he pretends with false Hypocrisie to support them. But I am glad to find in him at least one grain of Sense and Honesty; he saith well (to do him right) that is the best Religion that gives every one his due. But he must consider farther, to the confusion of the Cause he Advocates, That to give every one his due, is to administer De∣fence to the Innocent, and by Authority of Law to subdue the aggressors of Mankind, how great and mighty soever they be; for they that are mighty Offenders, ought in proportion to be mightily punished: Fiat Justitia therefore, as he saith, Ruat Coelum: for, to punish, much less to lay a restraint upon evil Persons, is not to do evil that good may come of it; which he would impute to the proceedings in Parliament against the Duke, for which he must be self-condemned, for I can∣not take him for a German Anabaptist. And now we find this Considerer complain∣ing of some Pamphleteers, that write ridiculous∣ly Sophistical, and unreasonable Reasons; that tell stories (he saith) of Edgar Athelin, Willi∣am the Conquerour, Arthur Plantagenet, and King John; that write Antichristian and Fanatical Lo∣gick, never heard of, until the Spirit of Belial re∣vealed it to Oliver and the Rump. I believe, if there be any such Pamphlet, this Pamphleteer is the Author of it, or some of his Complices: to the purpose that there might seem some one worse than his own; and that he might be able
to quarrel with, and confute, and do advantage to his bad Cause by some worse Reasonings than he would seem to be Master of, or than his Cause is capable of, which is not capable of a good one. But what he says cannot possibly be true of any Pamphlet; but rather than he will not be slandering, he will slander himself, and belie the Devil: For observe, he saith, they use Fanatical Logick, and Antichristian Logick. The true Fa∣naticks, being impatient of the restraints of Rea∣son, and to be confined to sober sense, call Lo∣gick and Reasoning by that which they would seem most to hate, Antichristian. The true An∣tichristians and Papists, being impatient of the light reproof and discovery of Reason, call sound Reason Fanaticism. But our Writer is so ven∣geancely angry with reasoning, that with the same breath he calls Logick, for the sake of rea∣son, Antichristian and Fanatical too; and ren∣ders himself suspected of being an Antichristian Fanatick. And yet any one may see, that it is not the thing it self that he is thus angry with, but the name of Logick that he thus exposeth; for what it is he knows not, he seems to think it comes by Inspiration, and that there are two sorts of Lo∣gick; one good, but he is not acquainted (for all that appears to us) with the Spirit from whence that is derived; and another bad, which, he says, is inspired by the Spirit of Belial; where∣as
most certainly there is no such Devil amongst all the Orders of the Apostate Angels: Sons of Belial I have heard of indeed, that did evil with∣out profit, without design, for evils sake; but these are such men as need no Tempter; for they will be wicked without a Tempter, according to the fatal propensions of their vitious Natures, and are not to be managed by the Devil himself: And to this sort of men doth our Pamphleteer seem somewhat to approach, for that he is an un∣accountable Transgressor. No reason can be given of him, why he should with so much seeming earnestness concern him∣self to perswade the People to abandon to an utter neglect those things that of all others are of most value to them, their Religion, Govern∣ment, Lives, Liberties and Estates. To perswade a whole Nation to lay violent hands upon them∣selves, to cut their own Throats, to burn them∣selves alive and their Houses; and to destroy themselves, their Wives and Children, Bodies and Souls too, for Conscience-sake. That there can be a Subject not subject to Laws; and that of∣fences that cannot be rated, because their mischiefs are infinite, for that very reason must not be pu∣nished; and he would have us reckon it a sin of the most heinous nature, to punish the Offen∣der with a diminution only in his power to do those evils which are most notoriously by him designed, and will be effected by means of his own making and causing, if he himself should
relent and refuse to execute them. If in this Age of License, immodesty could entitle any man to be a son of Belial, our Writer of Considerati∣ons might fairly pretend to it, who is immo∣dest for impudence sake, which spends it self in waste, and cannot effect any thing but the expo∣sing it self. In saying this, I should think my self very severe, but that he hath published his own shame; and if I would, it is not in my pow∣er to cover it. But he hath not shewed the worst of himself yet, he attempts further upon the Understanding of the People; he will have us believe that we owe Allegiance to the Presumptive Heir; that we have as many Kings as Princes of the Bloud; and that a Son hath a right to his Fathers Estate before he is dead: For the probable Successor can have no more right to the effect of the Oath of Allegiance, than the eldest Son to receive the Profits of his Fathers Estate without his leave in his Fathers Life-time. If this Gentleman's Father had had any Land, he would have understood the difference between his right to the Land after his Father's Death, and his hopes and possibility onely to have it du∣ring his Father's Life. The word Heir is joyn∣ed with Successor in the Oath of Allegiance, to signifie, that it means Heirs in the proper sence, which is such that succeed to the Inheritance; and not such as are in expectancy or possibility of having the Inheritance, who are improperly
and equivocally so called. And tho' the thing is so plain, that every man as well as the Lawyers agree what is said; yet my Lord Cook, for saying the same, is called by this Gentleman, Silly and Ridiculous, Fallacious and Impertinent. The Lawyers tell me, that it is a Rule in the Law, Non est hoeres viventis; that is, No man can have an Heir while he lives; and they like∣ways say of all the Reguloe Juris, There is not one of greater extent and rule than this; that it hath governed Ten thousand Cases near upon in the Common Law; and they withal assure me, that notwithstanding this man (amongst o∣ther civil terms) calls the Lord Cook Fallacious, they firmly believe, if a Fee had been offered to him of the value of his Estate, which is about 200000 l. he would not have signed an Opinion with a Videtur to the contrary; but he is resol∣ved that all Mankind shall be mistaken, and he will call their reasonings in this matter what he pleaseth; New Machiavillian Logick, a word that dishonestly he took up, on purpose to expose the Bill to the Vulgar, imagining in his profound Consideration, that some of the Multitude will, upon the hearing of Machiavillian, fall thereup∣on into an unwitting dislike of the Bill. Nay, he will conclude an Heir Apparent to be an Heir, because he could not be Heir Appa∣rent unless he were an Heir; when the word Apparent and the word Presumptive more espe∣cially
joyned to Heir, is a term of Abatement or Negative, and distinguisheth him from being a real Heir, and speaks him no Heir, but onely one in a near possibility of being so. But, says he, it is a manifest contradiction for one to be Heir Apparent, and not to be Heir; as it is to be a Learned man and no man. Prius est esse, quam esse tale. I wish we had his Name, that we may mark the most absurd reasonings by it, for the everlasting Honour of this Pretender to Reaso∣ning and Discourse. We all know that the word Heir is a Name to design a Person under such a relation and respect, and imports nothing of en∣tity; and we may use our own abstract Terms properly or improperly, and without any corre∣spondent reality, to an equivocal sense. But he adds Profaneness to his Levity, and as if the Holy Scriptures were writ to so trifling a design, as to be an Oracular Dictionary, and In∣fallible Nomenclature; he tells us how the word Heir is used in Scripture, when the holy Writers formed their Language by the vulgar Idiomes amongst the People of the Jews, and never in∣tended to write Law-Cases, much less to declare the Common Law of England, or imagined that their stile should be produced to expound our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. But now, thou vain Considerer, wilt thou hence conclude, that the Duke of York is Heir and Successor? That we now owe him Faith and Allegiance? That he is already in the Throne,
and that this Bill, though it pretends onely to foreclose him, doth truly depose him? It is insufferable, that this man should impute to the House of Commons, and the best People of England, Diabolical Fiction, the worst of all Je∣suitical Equivocations, and of endeavouring to make a colour to their perfidious and perjurious dealings, for these reasons onely, because we will not be∣lieve, or take our selves to have sworn Allegi∣ance to the Duke of York, when we swore it to the King: Because we will not allow that a Par∣liament of England, which is the King, Lords, and Commons, have no more to do with our Government than the Pope of Rome; or that the Pope hath as much power to depose one of the Kings, as the Parliament hath to punish a most obnoxious Subject: This he dares address to the King, and publish to the World. He proceeds to presume and tell us, that this at least must be granted, that whosoever is by Bloud next Heir to the Crown, we are by our Oath obliged before God to bear him Faith and true Allegiance: nay, to defend him against all attempts, until he is disinherited by Act of Par∣liament; and therefore, says he, whatsoever we do against him, before this Act be fully established, is a violation of our Oath, and therefore the very attempt of voting and passing this Bill, makes the actors and abettors Perjurers before God and the World. Sure it will be allowed, that this Gentleman is
mistaken; sure he doth not intend to speak Trea∣son, but hath a way of speaking which he will use by himself, and will make Words stand for what he hath a mind to: which Will and Plea∣sure of his, this peremptory absolute man thinks himself not bound to explain, though to save his Neck, if he should be Indicted therefore of Treason, which I desire he may, and Arraigned too, for the better clearing the matter, if it be pos∣sible, how we are now bound to bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Duke: But he will sooner be Hanged, than make out how a thing may be done Lawfully, which is not Lawful to go about: That the Duke of York may be Law∣fully Dis-inherited, but the Voting and Passing of the Bill must be Perjury. May not he that is bound by an Oath to pay money, desire a release from the Debt without Perjury? Cannot all Civil Debts, Duties and Contracts, though confirmed by Oath, be discharged by the Interested Per∣son, to whom the Duty is to be performed, and for whose Benefit the Contract is made? May not Kings, by renouncing their Governments, make the Oath of Allegiance cease to all effects of Obligation? And cannot an Act of Par∣liament that shall disable a Successour, equally prevent it from passing any Obligation upon us? But shortly to explain of what Import, and for what reason the words Heirs and Successors are put into the Oath of Allegiance: and it is this,
That in case of the Demise of the King, and the Devolving and vesting of the Crown upon the Heir and Successor, the Oath that we took to the Predecessor, by virtue of those Words laies hold upon our Consciences, and obligeth us to him from the first minute of his Reign, but not be∣fore; and so we are not one minute free from the Bonds of our Allegiance. This being the scope of the Law that requires it, and of the Oath it self, it must likewise be by that interpreted; for finis discendi est ratio dictorum, and an Oath doth not oblige as this or that man would interpret, neither according to the vulgar or technical use of the Word, but in such a sense as is adaequate and agreeable to the Intent and End of the propo∣sing and requiring it. But by what is said before, it appears that we are not yet under the Obligation of that Oath to the Duke, and that it is in the Pleasure and Power of the Parliament, whether we ever shall be; our Comfort is (whatever he thinks) that there is a great difference between Hopes and Enjoy∣ment: And further, it appears that the Heir Apparent is but equivocally, and in a less proper sense so; and yet this Considerer (who if he be not a perfect Atheist, and serves a turn in this Paper, must be a Papist in his heart) according to the Modesty of the Gentleman, chargeth us with Je∣suitical Equivocations in the Oath of Allegiance, while in the mean time he is equivocating the King out of his Throne, shifting the Duke into
his place, by an aequivocal Abuse of the word: the coursest slight that ever was used by any Hocus Pocus, or any Pretender to Legerde∣main. And yet upon the Confidence of these weak and mistaken Reasonings, he presumes to arraign the House of Commons of the greatest Injustice and Iniquity, and would have us apprehend Sla∣very the Arbitrary and Despotical Power of Parliaments. The loss of all Security either of Property or Liberty, by a prevailing Faction of Parliament; which he will be able to effect at the same time when he can perswade us to dissolve the Polity, and exchange the best and safest Go∣vernment into an Anarchy. To be without Judges, for fear of unrighteous Sentences; and without a Power of Legislation, for fear of Laws of Iniquity. But it is not a new thing for obno∣xious Criminals and Out-laws to turn Rebels a∣gainst Government. What this man is, and what the Cause is he Espouses, is declared sufficiently, in that he hath no better ways of Advocation and Defence, than by Opposing and Reviling the Government it self; and he that dares revile the Government, would, if he had Power, Destroy it. In that he calls the major part of the House of Commons a Prevailing Faction, I challenge him Guilty of the Highest Treason, of a Treason not onely against this Government, but of a tran∣scendent Treason, of a Treason virtually against
all mankind, for that we cannot subsist without Polities, and no Polities can subsist but by defe∣rence to the results of the Governing Power, which is Interpretatively in the resolves of the major part. But he proceeds to question, whether, by the Constitutions of this Government, the Parlia∣ment can extend their power to shut out the Duke from succeeding to the Crown; for ad∣mitting (he means) That it is Just, which we will not accept of as a voluntary concession of this Considerer, (for that it doth appear not onely Just, but highly necessary, to exclude the Duke by Bill) he will then draw it into question, Whe∣ther there be any competent power in the Go∣vernment for doing a thing not onely just, but ab∣solutely necessary for the preservation of the King and Kingdom? Whether there be any Sub∣ject too great for Justice, or any private Right that is not governable, and may not be ordered as to the Legislature shall seem necessary to the pre∣servation of the whole? Whether that which is properly the Right of the Community (for so is the Succession) may receive no alteration in a single instance, for the Weightiest Reasons? and whether he that declares that he will not Govern, but Destroy, and doth virtually re∣nounce the Government, may not be left out of the Succession? This is the true state of the Question; and the Question thus stated, gives its own solution; And who, except those of
the Conspiracy, do not so state it, and allow it? As to his Question, Whence the Parliament derives their Power: let him know, that the Parli∣ament derive their Power and Authority from the same Original the King derives His: The King hath not His Power from them, nor they theirs from the King: They both derive their Authority from the Consent of the People in the first Con∣stitution of the Government, either tacit or ex∣press, or by their express or tacit Consent, in the insensible, and little, or great, and more remark∣able alterations that the Government hath suffer∣ed in the course of Time. The King can make the Parliaments Power no greater than it is, nor they His. Though true it is, he may put an unlimited Trust reposed in Him, into Stated Laws, and Govern by Counsels established into Laws; which is not to alter or lessen His Power, but to make it more Safe and Wise, and impeccable in the exercise of it. He may ascertain the indefinitness of his Power, that it may not be abus'd. And that King doth best provide for a happy and wise Administration of his Government, who leaves the fewest things to fortuitous resolves, who reduceth his Prerogative to the measures of Common Right, and makes the Kingdom secure and safe, by leaving the Succession less Capacity and Scope to do mis∣chief. It is mostly incumbent upon his Sacred Maje∣sty to secure the Government committed to his
Care, and keep it upright, and steady upon its own Basis, and to preserve all things in a due and Legal Course: To watch to prevent all machi∣nations against it, and such as would destroy and subvert it; and by his executive power of the Laws, obtain to us the ends of Government, that we may live quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godli∣ness and Honesty. For the sake of this High Trust, and the Dignity of this Office, his Person is most Sacred and Inviolable. The King and his great Council providing for the establishment and security of the Government in their proceedings are not tyed up to forms of Judicial proceedings; but are to act upon such inducements, and in such methods, whereby the Wisest men govern their affairs; in which they are at perfect Liberty, and not under the restraint of Laws. They cannot do unjustly, whatever me∣thods or means they use, that are prudentially and morally necessary to this End. This power can be no more wanting in Go∣vernments, than we can be without Government: That which establisheth the one (which is the Law of God declared in the Make and Frame of Humane Nature) affirms and allows the o∣ther. By the Authority of this Law of God so decla∣red and promulgated, as I have told you, do Kings Reign, and Senators or Princes Decree Ju∣stice. By virtue of this Law, and in Obedience to it, is this Bill fram'd (against which this Consi∣derer
declaims like a speaking Brute.) From this Law of God, the said Bill when it passeth into a Law, will have its Approbation, Sanction and Establishment. But against this Bill, with his accustomed Truth, Candor and Modesty, he doth object, That if such an Authority shall belong to the Par∣liament, as to disable one successor upon such in∣ducements as are sufficiently known; a Parlia∣ment some time or other may be corrupted by a King, and by mercenariness comply with him to sell the Succession of the Crown to a Foreigner. We all well enough know, that this Bill is de∣signed to keep out the Tyranny of France, or at least the French Tyranny: But for this I leave the King to reckon with him and the Pensioners of the late long Parliament. The Gentleman continues to add the story of Ahab, contriving to possess himself of Naboth's Vineyard, by causing him to be falsly accused of Blaspheming God and the King; by which, if true, by the Jewish Laws, Ahab had been Justly entitled to it as a Royal Escheat. But if he had not been as stupid as a Block, he had not mention∣ed this story, which is a president and an ad∣judg'd case against himself; who, but a Line be∣fore, had so vilely Blasphemed so great a King, a far greater King than Ahab, though the Parlia∣ment divide some Authority with the King in the Government: But what were the Constitu∣tions of the Jewish Monarchy, this Writer of Con∣siderations,
I am sure, knows no more than his Foot-boy. But let him know, that the Romish Reli∣gion is a Blaspheming God; and to bring the Kings Life in danger, is worse than to Blaspheme him. See what wise Work this Considerer makes; when, for∣sooth, he would argue, That the Duke of York cannot be shut out of the Succession, no more than Ahab could take Naboth's Vineyard from him. The man of Weighty Considerations tells us in the next Paragraph, That God was Incensed against Esau for selling his Birth-right; and there∣fore the Duke must not lose his, contrary to his Will, and all Justice, by a prevailing Faction of his Inferiours. Who ever told him, That God was Incensed against Esau for selling his Birth-right? Did not God purpose the Birth-right to Jacob, be∣fore the Brothers were born, and before they had done Good or Evil? Could God be angry with him for agreeing and executing his own Purpose and Decree? Did not Isaac and Rebekah both know and understand the Oracle, and in Obedi∣ence to it, Jacob was effectively Blessed by his Father Isaac's confirming the Blessing first gotten by surprize, and by the Solemnity of that Bles∣sing, his Father Isaac transferred the right of the Promise made to Abraham, to be fulfilled in the Line of Jacob? Indeed the place he quotes in Heb. 12.17. is this, Let no Whoremonger or Pro∣phane Person be amongst you, like Esau, that would prefer a Sensual pleasure before the great things
that were promised by our Lord to them that obey him. Wherein the mention of Esau's Sto∣ry, is only to illustrate and set off what they fell short of the Grace of God, and the designs of his Holy Institution. Indeed, if he could prove to us, that his Royal Highness, being the younger Brother, had any such thing transmitted to him in his Generation, as the Jews called the Segulah (by which they mean some peculiarity, which did appropriate the Right of the Promises made to A∣braham,) which Jacob had, and Esau wanted, they say; If he had any Divine mark upon him (besides the Contingency of his Birth) that design'd him & mark'd him for a King, besides Roman Zeal, there would be some Consequence in his Discourse, and this would be the best Argument that he hath yet us'd (though the King would be little beholden to him for it:) But where God doth not interpose by express Revelation, Humane Affairs, Concerns and Interests of all sorts, must be Governed and Ruled by the Laws, Orders and Decrees of the re∣spective Governments. I would not have been so long in animadverting upon this last passage, but that I think our Considerer hath taken into his assistance in these Considerations some Di∣vine, by his abounding so much in Scriptural Allegations: And that hereby you may see the Size of the rest of the men of that Order, that are Chaplains to the Cause of the Succession, and that they ought to be of little regard in this mat∣ter, as they deserve none; it being not in their
way: though in matters that belong properly to their Function, they may deserve much who are of the meanest of that Order. Our Gentleman next proceeds to his political Arguments; but those can be answered, I per∣swade my self, by every man who hath heard of the Plot. Though a man of his Size may frame puzzling Arguments that may perplex mens Minds with scruples and doubts; which a Fool may do, and a Wise man cannot remove; yet it is scarce possible for him to deprive men of their Senses, and make them insensible to all the Evils that they hear, see, and feel, and justly fear. If the Protestants are not (as he saith) very strong abroad, we have reason to be more united at home, and united by the awful Authority of a Law. If we are threatned with a great power of the Roman Religion from abroad, (which he affrights us with) we have no reason to retain the biggest power to hurt us within our own Bowels. But if it be in the power of such bad men as this Pretender to divide by slights and wiles the good People of England, and keep them from uniting in the onely means of their safety, we must perish: But Wo be to them by whom we are thus destroyed. His last effort upon the minds of the People is to intimidate them, that by their fears they may fall under the evils they design upon us: he scatters his menaces, as if he were in the place of God against us, and as if he had the executing of
the Plot in his Power, and tells us of sins that fit us for ruine. It is convenient to these Plotters to imagine us mighty wicked, that they may be∣lieve we deserve the Vengeance they design. Our Government it self, our Laws, our Religion must become wicked, when they arrive to a probable power to hurt us: They never contrive a Gun∣powder Plot, a Massacre, or burning a City, but they dream the iniquity of the People is grown ripe; They would turn us into Sodom and Go∣morrha (which this Considerer frights us with) if they could call for Fire from Heaven; and then publish us to all the world (if we were much better than we are) to be as wicked as the Ci∣ties of the Plain. If we cannot obtain this Bill, I shall then begin to think, that the Decree is gone forth, and our Fate is approaching, and that God will let these Villains have their will over us. By Gods displeasure, not theirs, I shall take the true measures of our Sins; His displeasure will be remarkable and evident, if he seems to deny us the means of our Safety and Preservation, and which is the onely means of the Kings Salvation from their Traiterous design. If this Bill do not pass, they will take him for a wicked King too; and they will say, he hath no lawful Issue to succeed him, for his own sins (though our Considerer saith at present, that our Sins are the cause of it) and many other remarks of wicked∣ness they will make upon him, when they find it convenient and for their interest to destroy
him; at best he will be then but Tenant at Will to them of his Life, as well as his Crown, which this Considerer most slanderously chargeth to be designed by us: but if he will follow the coun∣sel of that excellent Bill, he may live long, and see good days, and peace upon our Israel; to which let all good people say, AMEN. I shall onely remark two or three things in the close of the Paper of Weighty Considerations. First, that he undertakes to say and affirm, that the King is as much subject to the Power of the Parliament as the Duke; which doth dethrone the King himself, and lessens him to the degree of a Subject. Secondly, that in this his Address he perswades the King to rend the Government, to lay aside the Commons of England, and aban∣don them as Rebels; to divide from them, and govern by a House of Lords and Privy Council. And thirdly, that the most venerable and Loyal Parliament that ever was conven'd in this Na∣tion, though not so clearly purged from the cor∣rupt Villains of the late long Parliament, as the next we hope will be, are charged by him to follow the Anarchical Encroachments of the Fa∣ctions in the Rump-Parliament; by which he insinuates that we must become Papists, ad∣mit of a Popish Successor, or be used as Rebels and Traitors: by these three Remarks it is evi∣dent, what Principles and Designs these men are of, that oppose the Dukes Bill; and from thence you may find reason to assist it, and promote it
with the greatest unanimity and resolution; and the rather, for that the Duke himself cannot want Considerations to dispose him to approve of it. For what should he do with a Crown that he cannot wear? Why should he accept of a trust that he cannot discharge, and a Government that his Principles oblige him to transfer to a Forein Prince? he is too generous a Prince to enter up∣on a Province onely to betray it. He is a Prince of great Charity: it was that sure∣ly mov'd him publickly to confess the Roman Reli∣gion, that he might thereby recommend that Religion to our belief, for the better reforming us from Heresie: Why then should not the same Charity move him to renounce the Government, lest he should offer an irresistable temptation to the People to a Rebellion? a greater sin accounted by a King, though a Catholick, (however the Priests rate it) than an errour in belief. But how can we imagine that he will conde∣scend to be our King? He doth not intend to ac∣cept of our Oaths of Allegiance, and had rather not be King, than we should be his Subjects upon those terms. Why should we trouble him with the name of King, reproach him, call him Apo∣state, Heretick, and Infidel, by swearing our selves his Subjects in the terms of the Oaths of Alle∣giance and Supremacy? Pray think no more of it, write no more Great and Weighty Considera∣tions; for he intends to be no more your King,
than he doth to desert his Religion and the Ro∣man Catholick Faith. Besides, his Zeal and Services, and the Diffi∣culties that he hath undergone for that Church, and the hazards he hath incur'd, deserve the best Place, and highest Office in that Church, which is that of a Priest; he ought not to be put off, and meanly rewarded with the Sheriffalties, which their Eminencies of the Conclave despise, and be prefer'd to all the Drudgeries and Cruel∣ties that the Priesthood of that Church require of the Kings of that Communion that become Zea∣lots. He is a Prince that can deliberate and consider, and will conclude, that it is better for him to be∣take himself to a Monastery now, before he hath filled the Land with Blood and Slaughter, and all the mischiefs that the hellish Plot designs upon us, than to take Sanctuary in one hereafter, load∣ed with the melancholy considerations of a lost design, and intolerable guilt, if he himself should chance to survive, and not perish ingloriously in the enterprize, never to be gathered to his Fathers, and shut out of the Sepulchres of Kings. He is a great lover of his Brother, as he ought in gratitude to be, who lets him live, and in his good opinion too, after he had departed from his Allegiance, and become a Member of another Hostile Polity and Regimen, and after, in conse∣quence thereof, the King's Life is brought in conspicuous danger: Besides, that it was natu∣ral
and necessary that attempts upon the Life of the King should ensue upon his publick declara∣tion of himself to be a Papist. And we cannot, without thinking too meanly of him, think him without a foresight thereof: there remains there∣fore no way for him to avoid the guilt of his Brother's Murder, (we tremble at the probabi∣lity of it) than by renouncing the Crown. The King cannot in probability die before him, except he falls to the Interest of that Religion which his Highness doth profess. So that the Duke will relinquish nothing by the consenting to the Bill, but the hopes to succeed upon his Brother's Murder; but he would not the one (so virtuous we will think him) to obtain the other. Admit him to be King, he must be a King without Subjects; for he must be a Slave to one part of the people to destroy the other: these may not be, the other will not be his Sub∣jects. To be an open Enemy is more Princely, than to submit to the sordid methods of Falshood and Treachery, than to betray us and deceive us in the confidence we justly should have in him, if he should succeed to the Crown by a legal ap∣pointment. He hath already departed from the Government, which is Treason in a common per∣son; but we will give it in him an honester name, and call him onely an Enemy to our State and Religion, and his departure to be an overt decla∣ration of Hostility; let him therefore be con∣sistent
with himself, purchase the Government by Conquest, by the assistance of the Arms of France, his Popish Adherents, and home-bred Trai∣tors. But let him not assume the Crown by Ti∣tle and Succession, under obligations to govern by Law, and to preserve us in our Religion, which is our Legal Right, and more precious to us than any thing else the Law entitles us unto. Let him not add falshood to his mistaken and cruel zeal, and do all the mischiefs the Plot designs, while he pretends to Govern. Let him openly assault us Miscreants, subdue us Infidels, that al∣ready stand Cursed and Excommunicated, whom he hath Warrant enough from his Religion to destroy with an utter destruction. He is an excellent Son of King Charles the First, of blessed Memory, who died a Martyr for the Government of Church and State, and lost his Life as well as his Government, when he could not preserve it any longer by his Sword; And do you think that James his Son, who car∣ries the Royal Name of his Grandfather, though the first of England, yet the Sixth of that Name in Scotland, will suffer the Government to be al∣tered, and to be a King and no King? It is more just for him to chuse an Exclusion from the Suc∣cession, than to suffer the Government to be changed; we must therefore suppose him to be willing rather to consent to the Bill and renounce the Succession, conformably to the recent ex∣ample of his never-to-be-forgotten Father, than
to consent to, or be bound by any Act of Parliament that shall alter the Government: They are not his Friends, nor agreeable to him, that would spoil the Government, more valu∣able in his esteem (as well as his Father's) than a personal Reign: That would make him a King in mockery; That conspire against the Government it self, which he will not, he ought not to sustain and endure, as long as there is any Iron and Steel in the hands, or Blood in the Veins of Loyal Roman Catho∣licks. He is an equal Prince, and will not take it so much to Heart, that he sees the People of his Nativity not stupid Sots, but that they can be sensible of the dangers that he urgeth them with, and provide apt remedies against the evils which threaten us. But if these Reasons will not obtain his ex∣press Consent to that Law for his Exclusion, they will be allowed Inducements sufficient enough to pass it and conclude his Assent; for the nature of a Law is, to be first rea∣sonable, and to make those willing that should be consenting to it as reasonable and fit, but are not, and to render them obedient and sub∣mitted: For this is one of the greatest bene∣fits of Government, that they that cannot or will not chuse what is best for themselves, the
Laws will chuse for them, with regard to the Publick Good. For the better clearing the matter of the Constitutions of this Realm, in re∣lation to the Succession, I thought it ne∣cessary to add the substance of an Act of Parliament yet in force, made 13 Elizabethae.
13 Elizebthae Cap. 1. An Act whereby certain Offences are made Treason. FOrasmuch as it is of some doubted, whether the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, remaining at this present in force, are vallable and sufficient enough for the surety and preservation of the Queens most Royal Person, in whom consisteth all the happiness and comfort of the whole State and Sub∣jects of the Realm: Which thing all Faithful, Loving, and Dutiful Subjects ought and will with all careful study and zeal cnosider, foresee, and provide for; By the neglecting and passing over whereof with winking Eyes, the might happen to grow the subversion and ruine of the quiet and most Happy State and present Government of this Realm (which God defend.) Therefore, &c. to Declare, &c. during her Maiesties life, that the Right of the Crown was in any other Person, should be Treason. And such Person that should, dur∣ing her Maiesties Life, Vsurp the Crown, or the Royal Stile, Title, or Dignity of the Crown or
Realm of England, &c. they, and every of them so offending, shall be utterly disabled, during their natural Lives onely, to have or enjoy the Crown or Realm of England, or the Style, Title, or Dignity thereof, at any time in Succession, In∣heritance, or otherwise, after the Decease of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, as if such Per∣son were dead: any Law, Custom, Pretence, or mat∣ter whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. Af∣ter which, these words follow. And be it further Enacted, That if any Person shall in any wise hold, and affirm or maintain, That the Common Laws of this Realm, not al∣tered by Parliament, ought not to direct the Right of the Crown of England; Or, that our said Se∣veraign Lady, the Queens Majesty that now is, with and by the Authority of the Parliament of England is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient Force and Validity to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Discent, Li∣mitation, Inheritance, and Government thereof: Or, that this present Statute, or any part there∣of, or any other Statute to be made by the Autho∣rity of the Parliament of England, with the Roy∣al Assent of our said Soveraign Lady the Queen, for limiting of the Crown, or any Statute for Re∣cognizing the Right of the said Crown and Realm, to be Iustly and Lawfully in the most Royal Per∣son of our said Soveraign Lady the Queen, is not, are not, or shall not, or ought not to be for ever of good and sufficient Force and Validity to Binde, Limit, Restrain, and Govern all Persons their Rights and Titles, that in any wise may or might claim any Interest or Possibility in or to the Crown of England, in Possession, Remainder, Inheritance, Suc∣cession, or otherwise howsoever; And all other Per∣sons
whatsoever, every such person so holding, affirm∣ing, or maintaining, during the life of the Queens elly, shall be adjudged a High Traitor, and suf∣r and forfeit, as in Cases of High Treason is ac∣ustomed; and every Person so holding, affirming or maintaining after the Decease of our said Soveraign ady, shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels.
AN ANSWER TO A BOOK, Published 1679. Intituled, A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN of Quality In the COUNTRY, to his Friend, &c. Relating to the Point of SUCCESSION to the CROWN, &c. BY several accidents the former sheets have stopt in the Press, from a few days afte the Great and Weighty Consideration were published; and being now ready to com forth, we have a Gentleman of Quality, as h calls himself, undertaking from Scripture, Law, History, and Reason, to shew how improbable ( not impossible) it is to bar the next Heir in th
right Line from the Succession, in a Letter to his onoured Friend A. B. And now after so long a time of considerati∣on, one should think the many men of great Parts nd Learning that are dependents on the Duke, pirited with zeal and ambition, should have of∣fered all that they have to say against the Bill or excluding his Royal Highness. And this eing (as may be reasonably concluded) the last endeavours of the most learned and best parted men of that Interest; This Letter for that rea∣son onely, but not for any thing of moment that t offers, deserves to be considered. We will not follow him from Paragraph to Paragraph, since the greatest part of it is vain and empty, pedantick, bombast, and putid af∣fectation. I shall onely draw you up short Summaries of his several Reasons, and give them all the ad∣vantages they can challenge, and improve them by just and natural Inferences: And that I think will be enough of confutation, and a suffici∣ent countercharm against his deceiving the Peo∣ple. He first lays down for a Ground, That the Succession to the Crown of England is insepar∣able annexed to Proximity and nextness of Bloud, by the Laws of God and Nature; And all Statute-Laws contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, are, ipso facto, null and void. That it is contrary to the Laws of God, he
proves by the Law of God given by Moses to the Jews in the 7th of Numbers, that directs how the Succession of Lands should be amongst the Jews; and whatsoever Statute-Laws are contrary to those Laws are null and void, he saith. The consequence of this Argument is this That the Laws given by God to the Jews are Laws to all Mankind: That our common-Law and Statute-Law is against the Law of God, and null and void, because not agreeable to the Law of Moses: That the eldest Son is not to take by Descent the whole inheritance, but a double por∣tion onely, and that the Crown must be disposed of in Descents accordingly: That not the first Son only, and one Daughter, but all the Daugh∣ters of a King, if never so many, must succeed to∣gether to the Crown: That no Father can sell his Patrimony; for that was the Jewish Law, and established in that Chapter he quotes. He proves it to be a Law of God further, for that God saith to Cain of Abel, That his desires shall be subject, and thou shalt rule over him. The consequence of this, is, that because Cain could not kill Abel, (notwithstaning he was to have the Primacy) That Abel much more could not kill Cain his Elder Brother. And further he proves that to be a Law of God, because God maketh choice of the first-born to be Sanctified and Consecrated to himself. And therefore it most certainly follows, with this Gentlemen, that he which is not the first-born
must be so too. I wish his Royal Highness, the second born, the Consecration of a Priest; (which the Text means, notwithstanding the Text doth not allow it him) so that he will not pretend to the Consecration of a King, which is clearly out of the meaning of the Text. He says, Consonant hereunto are the Suffra∣ges of the Doctors of the Civil and Imperial Law. The Consequence of this is, first, That he is not bound to be coherent to himself; for he was be∣fore proving the Law of God to be, That the Suc∣cession of the Crown is inseparably annxed to proximity of bloud, and now he tells us of some Opinions of Fathers and Doctors that are conso∣nant thereunto, when they do not at all relate in their Opinions to what he had produced out of Moses his Law. Secondly, it follows, that he is im∣pertinently troublesome to his Reader, by telling him of the Opinions of great names in this mat∣ter, that the Eldest Son by ordinary right is to have his Fathers Estate in some Countries, or that the Crown doth so ordinarily descend where the Succession is hereditary; he should have spared them for another time, when he shall say some∣thing that all mankind doth not agree in. Third∣ly, That he is a man of little reading, otherwise he would have been insufferably impertinent by 10000 quotations in this matter. Fourthly, That he is no Civilian? for that in this place he calls the Soveraignity a Fee, when all men agree that a Crown is of that fort of Inheritancs, which
they call Allodiums, that are held . This would have made a swinging Argu∣ment for his Jure Divino, if he had thought of it, but we will give it them gratis. He tells us the Duke of York is in the same condition as the El∣dest Son of the King Reigining, though his Bro∣ther be King: That the second Son of a King Regent, when the first is dead, living his Father, is within the 25. of E. 3. that makes it Treason to compass the death of the King's Eldest Son; and that such Second Son is Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwal. The Consequence whereof is, that he very impertinent, or else the Duke of York is now Prince of Wales, and Duke of Cornwal, and that he is within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. This Argument of his he leaves to be further illustrated and pursued by the Church-men and Civilians: But lest they should fail, this Episto∣ler (for I now am well assured, that this question and cause is to be managed by the Sword, by Massacres, and the French Plot, and not by Writing) I have adventured, and will proceed to illustrate his Arguments, and pursue them into their Consequences, & leave the Epistoler of Qua∣lity to be pursued with laughter; for he deserves no worse, if it be true that he professeth, that he is a Protestant and Lover of the Government. Now he will, he saith, as best sorting with his profession, and with a discourse of the nature, drive proofs from the Authority of the Com∣mon
and Statute-Law of England. From whence it follows, That the Common-Law and Statute-Laws of England are proper to be consulted with, for declaring the Laws of God, and the Laws of Nature; which they never yet pretended to do. And Secondly, it follows from thence, that this Epistoler no more understands the Common and Statute-Laws of England, and what places they are to have in the Conduct of our manners, and guidance of our Consciences; than he doth (as appears by what he hath said be∣fore) what is the Law of God or Nature. He lays it down as most evident, That all the humane Acts and Powers in the World cannot hin∣der the Discent of the Crown upon the next Heir of the Blood? because (though they may hinder the Possession and Enjoyment of it) This is a Dowry which the great King of Kings hath reserved to his own immidiate Donation, and hath placed above the reach of a mortal Arm; and mankind can no more hinder or intercept it, than it can the Influences of the Stars or the Heavens upon the Sublunary world, or beat down the Moon. The Consequence of this is, that the man is Lu∣natick and of insane memory and hath forgot and denies what in the same breath he affirms: Eor, he agrees humane Power may hinder the possessi∣on and enjoyment, and yet it is no more possible to hinder the Descent, than to stop the Influen∣ces of Heaven, and to pull down the Moon. Secondly, It follows, that that which is done is
impossibe to be done. Thirdly, that there is no Right at all by Descent, nor can be any Descent of the Crown; for that it is reserved, as he says, to Gods immediate Donation, And we never yet heard of any immediate Gift or Donation thereof from God. And if the Duke will stay until that be done, we most so∣lemnly declare we will accept him for our King; and he shall be a King to intents and purposes (as he terms it;) we will be kinder and juster to him than his Freinds of the same perswasion with the Epistoler, who will give him the Name and Style, and would Abridge him, as they pretend, of the Power and Authority of a King. He says further, That when the Duke is King, that the Legiance and Fidelity of the Subject is due to him by the immutable Law of Nature; from whence it clearly follows, that he must stay until that time come: That when he is a Loyal and Foyal King, we are to be Loyal and Foy∣al Liege-men and Subjects, For Calvin's Case which he cites, by the general Opinions of all considerable Lawyers, is Apocryphal, where it makes Allegiance absolute, and more extensive than the Legal Power of Kings. But here he sub∣joyns such loathsom Pedantry, that I cannot but remark it: He subjoyns to his mention of Calvin's Case, that Aristotle, Nature's Amanuensis (as he calls him) agrees with that Case, in that he saith, . and Sene∣ca's Natura commenta est Regem. But for my pro∣mise
sake, I will make no further Observations up∣on him, than by bare repeating of it to expose it. That the King and his Successors are Kings by Nature, he proves; For that the Statute Laws do frequently stile the King our Natural Liege-Lord: And for further proof tells us, that in Indictments it is set forth, that the Treason is commited contra debitum Fidei & Ligeantiae quod naturaliter & de jure impendere debet: And the King in Indict∣ments is sometimes styled Natural Lord. Whence it follows, that we are born under Al∣legiance; that no man that is born under any form of Government can deny Faith unto it, though he never expresly swore Allegiance. That the King of France is not our Natural Lord, neither doth the Oath of Allegiance bind us to that Form of Government, if introduced, because the King was born to no such King∣ship: Nor is our King a Natural Lord to any Forreigners that come hither; and the Form of the Indictment against Forreign∣ers, as the Lawyers know, must be in another Form. And further it followes, That in all chan¦ges of Government, the word natural is to be adjoyned to Allegiance in all Indictments of Treason committed against the Government in its several changes that it may suffer; And this all the Lawyers with one voice pronounce. He sums up all that he hath said before, thus: No humane Power can hinder the Descent of the Crown upon the Right Heir; the Descent makes
the King, Allegiance is due to the King by the Law of Nature; The Law of Nature cannot be abroga∣ted by humane Power: That Common-Law is more worthy than Statute-Law, and the Law of Nature more worthy than both. But upon better consi∣deration of the whole matter, it follows with better Consequence, That Nature hath made no Laws about Property, nor about Govern∣ments; otherwise all Laws of Right and Pro∣perty, and all Governments would have been the same; for what she makes are Universal, as the Nature of man: Besides that if he knew where she became a Legislatrix, or if this Gentleman could direct us to a veiw of her Pandects, we ought to acoord all our Laws to them. Second∣ly, That Common-Law is not to be preferred be∣fore Statute-Law; For the Judges who declare the Common-Law are not wiser than Parlia∣ments; and the Common-Law appears so bad a Rule, that it requires oftentimes amendment. Thirdly, It follows, that no Legislation is Law∣ful, for that which is to be preferred, is best, and that which is best is to be a Law for ever. Fourth∣ly, That no Allegiance is due to any Prince, but whom the Law appoints, and as the Law ap∣points: That he that is not King, to him no Al∣legiance is due. That humane Power is com∣petent enough to alter as well as make any hu∣mane Constitution. That which by humane Authority was made, and made also descendible (for all Crowns are not descendible) can be alte∣red
by the same Authority in its Discent. The greater part of this ensuing Discourse, is, the remembrance of the Tragedies that have been acted upon the English Nation by our Kings: For we have not only suffered under their bad Government, but they have Usurpt one upon another, and we have been infinitely miserable by being drawn into Wars, to dispute which of them should Govern us after their own manner and fashion. If this Epistoler had had any reguard to mankind, any bowels and com∣miseration for the vast Miseries and Calamities which we have suffered thereby, except he had depressed all mankind so far below this Jure-Di∣vinity Head, as if they were no more considera∣ble than a swarm of Flies, and ought to perish by Thousands, to the Pleasure, Lust and Ambition of any that is big enough to pretend to a Crown; he had not here talked so gloriously of the Mat∣ter of Succession; he would have put the Crown in Cypress, and vail'd its splendour with a mour∣ning dress; he would not have talked of Pearls and Oriency, (in his foolish style) Jewels and Gems of Magnitude. But, if they, by Cruelty and Treachery have murdered one another, and usurpt upon the Le∣gal Right of Succession, and did keep the people in a state of War for Centuries of years; shall not we exclude a single Person from the Successi∣on, to prevent more and greater Miseries to be
executed perhaps in one year upon this poor Nation, than the former Usurpations did pro∣duce in Centuries of years? But let him attempt the Crown, notwithstan∣ding an Act of Parliament for his Exclusion, he is all that while but attempting to make us miserable; if he be not excluded, he doth it certainly: We exclude only his Person, not his Posterity; and we will not entail a War upon the Nation, though for the sake and interest of the Glorious Family of the Stuarts. The next Argument he produceth is this, viz. that in Acts of Parliament the Right of Successi∣on is called a Natural Right, and consequently that it is unalterable. The consequence of this Argument is, that a Right by Birth is a natural Right, and that truly; for men are born by na∣ture. Secondly, It follows, that no man hath a natural Right by Birth to the Inheritance of his Father, or that his Father cannot give it from him, or he himself foreclose himself by Treason and Felony. Or else it follows, that notwith∣standing Princes of the Bloud succeed by the right of their Birth, which is a natural Right, or a Right by Nature; they may be set aside, and excluded the Succession to the Crown upon as great reason as we have for this Bill of Exclu∣sion. His Law-Farrago of Statutes that have been adjudged void, because unreasonable and impos∣sible, concludes, that a Statute-Law in a matter
that is not unreasonable and impossible, is a good and binding Law; and therefore he ought to have a profound veneration and deference to it (in which we use only his own words in this matter, which are the least foolish) when it pas∣seth into a Law. But if he cannot find the reasonableness of this Bill, in what we have offered, we may fur∣ther conclude, that nothing will convince him but French Auxiliaries, and a Stack of Faggots in Smithfield. If this Act be impossible to be ex∣ecuted, we must conclude that it is in the Pow∣er of his Party to execute our Laws, Religion, and Government, and to Assassinate the Nation. We wish only, on the behalf of our Religion and Government, that we had as great assurance that the Bill would pass into a Law, as the reaso∣nableness thereof is evident. But this Epistoler (whose Province he saith is Law) nextly undertakes to say, That the Suc∣cesssion of the Crown to the next Heir of the Bloud, is a Foundamental and Primary Constitution of this Realm, and indeed the Basis and Foundation of all our Laws. The Succession of the Crown to the next Heir of the Bloud, is one of the highest, essen∣tial, and undivided Rights of the Crown. That no Person or Community can give away, or transfer, a thing which they never had to give. Of this na∣ture is the Right of Succession to the Crown, which is not the gift of a man, but the immediate Dowry
(that World he is fond of) of God, Nature, and the immutable Customs of the State. Whence it follows, that God, Nature, and the immutable Customs of State, met together once upon a time about this Matter; or that the im∣mutable Customs of State did sometime consult God and Nature about this matter; and agreed their Sentiments. Or, God and Nature and immutable Customs of State are all one: That Customs of State are made without People: That Customs of State are as immutable as God and Nature: That God and Nature cannot alter that which is once a Custom: That God cannot be heard, though he interposeth with all the Obligations that he lays upon us to Humanity and Justice, from his own Philanthropy and Justice, to pro∣tect the whole Body of an Innocent Nation, from, destroying Zeal and wasting Superstition; nor Nature her self be heard in her close injun∣ctions of self-preservation: But immutable Cu∣stom a more powerful Supream, must prevail a∣gainst God and Nature, though at first they stuck together in making this Primary Constitution the Basis and Foundation of all Laws: for no∣thing else was certainly in the mind of God and Nature so much, as to set up a Royal Family a∣mongst us a part of Mankind. And to shew a particular kindness to the English People (for he hath not dealt so with every Nation:) That he doth not certainly think us worthy of any
Laws, any Lives or Estates, if we do not aceept of this singular favour, nor if we do accept, wo worth us miserable people. But Laws, it seems, we can have none without it; for that's the true Basis and Foundation (saith he) of all Laws. And this follows with good reason; for the Suc∣cession of the Crown to the next of Bloud, is one of the highest, most essential, and undivided Rights of the Crown: for it is clear we must lose our present King, and he be divided from his Life and Crown, rather then the Succession be devided from the next of Bloud; and after that, what matters it what becomes of the People, of no regard certainly, of no regard at all, nor to be considered, where the Rights or pretences of Kings are concerned. And further, because Kings cannot alienate the Crown, which doth not lie in Dominion, but in Truth: not in Property, but in care; for Offi∣cium est imperare, non regnum: And because that people cannot be sold like Droves of Cattle: there∣fore it is with clear and irrefragable reason in∣fer'd by this Letter-writer, That the King must not live; that he cannot remove an irresistible temptation against his own Life: And we must receive a King that hath devoted us a fat Sacri∣fice to his cruel Superstition, as his party hath our King, that they may more easily come at us.
Lastly, he saith, That the right Heir of the Crown cannot be bar'd or excluded by Act of Parli∣ament; because the Accession and Descent of the Crown in an instant absolutely purgeth and dischar∣geth all Obstructions and Incapacities whatsoever, created by the same Act of Parliament. From whence it followes, that the Earl of Dan∣by, if he were next Heir, might succeed, if he should be attained of Treason of State by Parliament; wheras if the King cannot pardon him, as he cannot, he could not in that case of the descent of the Crown pardon himself. The Heir of the Crown attainted, upon the devol∣ving of the Crown upon him, is therefore pur∣ged from the Attainder, because he can pardon himself, and is intended to do so; but a Treason of State can never be pardoned by the King. Our young Lawyer knows well enough, that an incapacity by Act of Parliament to execute an Office growing upon a moral disability of execu∣ting the trust of that Office, is not in the Kings power to pardon. Secondly, from hence it fol∣lows, that that Attainder which leaves a capa∣city to obtain a Pardon of the King, doth not at all differ from an Attainder that excludes all capacity from the King to pardon, and which in the Constitution of the Government he hath no power to pardon; such are all Treasons of State where the King is not the Pars laesa, and where it is not a private wrong, a single crime, but the
attempt is upon the whole Government. Third∣ly, hence it clearly follows, that he that is no King, and upon whom the Crown can never de∣scend, (as it will not if this Bill passeth into an Act) he being without the Imperial Crown, without right, and without possession of it, is yet a King. That there is no difference between an Act of Parliament which leaves the Successor to a possibility of being purged from the Attainder it makes; and that Act of Parliament which leaves no such possibility, qut doth most absolute∣ly and expresly exclude him. His Positions must therefore be false, and his Arguments not concluding, from which such no∣torious falshoods and absurdities are naturally infer'd. Instead of further argument, he tells us a mat∣ter of Fact, of an Act of Parliament made 28 H. 8. cap. 7. to render Queen Elizabeth incapable of Succession: And that she notwithstanding got into the Throne: And that Sir Nicholas Bacon (who had consulted the Judges) told the Queen, that there needed no formal Repeal of the said Act; for that Corona semel suscepta, omnes omnino dese∣ctus tollit. The Consequence of this is, that if the Duke can, notwithstanding an Act for his Exclusion, get into the Thhone, he will; and so let him. Se∣condly,
that a King de facto, though a bad one, is not to be removed at the expence of a Civil War; that it is madness to part with a good one, when in possession, and cruelty to the People. Detrahere Dominum urbi servire parata. But afterwards in the 35 of Hen. the Eighth, the Crown was limited by Act of Parliament. in case the King and Prince Edward should die without Heirs of ether of their Bodies, to the La∣dy Mary and the Heirs of her body; and for want of such Heir, to the Lady Elizabeth and the Heirs of her body. We are no ways concerned in the justification of our Bill, to approve of the humorous Caprice of Henry the Eighth, and the arbitrary Laws that he made in his time about the Succession: they are instances of his haughty Government, that he imposed upon Parliaments, and that he took the Crown to be at his dispose, and transferrable at his pleasure, as his Money and Lands: a great indignity to Mankind, and an injury to the na∣ture of Government! But that the Succession of the Crown is the right of the whole Com∣munity, their Appointment, their Constitution, and Creature in Parliament, and alterable as far the Bill designs, and for such reasons as presseth and urgeth in the Case of the Duke. Whether this, I say, is not to satisfaction proved in these
Sheets; and whether this Epistoler hath produ∣ced any shadow of Reason to prove the contra∣ry, let the World judge: And whether he hath given us any thing for reason, but the insignifi∣cant bluster of Words, canting Language, and pedantick Nonsence, which will never pass with any man of the least spark of sence for Argu∣ment. Neither do we place the Right of Succession to Government in the same rank with private Inheritances; nor ever were they governed in any Country by the same Rules; though this Epistoler hath produced the Laws of God by Moses to the Jews (which was only to govern private Inheritances amongst them) to prove the unalterable Succession of the Crown amongst us: which is so wild an impertinence, wherewtih he begins his Letter, that he will be ashamed of it when he reviews it, and conceal his name for ever with care. That there is one Rule for the Succession of the Crown, and another for the Succession of private Estates, is from these Reason; That pri∣vate Inheritances are disposed of in Succession, according to the presumed Will of the Decedens, which is collected from the general Opinion and Practice of the people in disposing of their E∣states by Settlements; or by their Wills and Testaments, in case of Allodiums: or else the Succession goes according to the direction and
limitation of the Lord made in the first collati∣on of the Fee in case of Fees. But the Descent and Succession of the Crown is governed and di∣rected by the presumed Will of the People: and that presumption of the Peoples Will is made by measuring and considering what is most ex∣pedient to the publick good, or by the express limitation of the People in their conferring the Royal Dignity. In Allodiums, in defect of Heirs, the Inheritance belongs to the Soveraign Power, as a thing that is Nullius in bonis, and hath no owner. In Fees, when the Family is extinct it Escheats to the Lord of the Fee. In Crowns, upon the extinction of the Royal Family, it belongs to the People to make a new King, under what limitations they please, or to make none, for the Polity is not destroyed if there be no King appointed: and consequently in case of this cesser or discontinuance of the Regnum, there may be Treason committed against the people. That the Succession of the Crown is directed according to the presumed Will of the People, and collected from what is most expedient gives us the reason why one Daughter or Female of the next degree shall succeed to the Crown, and not all, if more than one; whereas a private Inhe∣ritance is equally divided amongst them all: For it is the Interest, and therefore the presumed Will of the People, that the Kingdom should continue
undivided. The strength of the Kingdom is preserved in being continued united, and the Peace and Concord of the People thereby esta∣bled. That a Son by the Second Venter shall succeed to the Crown, which is not allowed in private Estates, is, because one so born is equally of the Family of his Father; and the expectation of the people as great from him, being descended from that glorious Person upon whom the Crown was conferred by the people, or who after he had got into the Throne, obtained the submis∣sions of the People. The same reason admits an Alien born, though he be estranged from us by his Birth. Est in Juvencis, est in equis patrum vertus. Though what I have said in this matter, is so obvious, that no considering man can escape these thoughts, yet I cannot think it impertinent to add it here, to clear what I have laid down in the precedent Sheets, as an undoubted truth, and evident in it self; That the Succession to the Crown is the peoples Right. But there is nothing, I per∣ceive, to be allowed clear and evident, when we live in an Age wherein Fools and most ignorant persons will undertake, by the Liberty of the Press, to print and publish to the world their crude thoughts, and with great assurance offer their uncouth Opinions with astonishing presum∣ption.
Besides to the reasonableness of this Do∣ctrine, it is agreeable to the Illustrious Grotius, De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. 2. cap. 7. And nothing follows from his collected Law-cases about the different Rules of Succession of the Crown from private Fees, but that he is a very young Lawyer, or an old senseless Jobber of Law-Cases. But I hope that all men that read him, will with resentment think themselves used with scorn, when they see what frivolous Fellows at∣tempt upon them to deceive them; and will be fully convinced, that the Bill is reasonable, just, and fit, since they have nothing better to object against it. The last endeavour of the Epistoler is to re∣move the Authority of Parliaments, and the Act made in the Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth. The words of which are printed at the close of the Papers against the man of Great and Weighty Considerations. Our case is not in its reasons un∣parallel to those that introduced that Law, and occasioned the making of that Declaration; but whatever was the particular Reason, the Decla∣ration of that Parliament in that Act is general, and therefore it is an Authority not to be im∣peached, to prove that there is such a power to alter the Succession of the Crown, for great Ends, and weighty Reasons, and just Causes. Besides, that such a power is lodged in the Parliament, is clearly proved by us from the nature of Govern∣ment,
in the foregoing Sheets: As also, that such a power will not be abused by using it in this Bill of Exclusion, of which I hope no body upon the reading of them will retain any longer any manner of doubt. But I cannot, before I have done, but take notice of his little Artifice. in that he doth suggest, that by the Act of Par∣liament of the Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth, cap, 1. the Title of the Family of Stuarts is excluded; when it is evident by the words of the Act, that the Disability there enacted is only per∣sonal. And his story of Monsieur the Duke of Anjou designing then to marry the Queen, is a false and malicious insinuation, to hurt the memory of that excellent Princess. And con∣sequently, that King James and his Race had, and have, notwithstanding the validity of that Act, a good Title to the Crown: And that the validity of that Act may be maintained, without derogation and injury to his Majesties sacred Ti∣tle, whom God long preserve.
A short Historical Collection touching the SUC∣CESSION of the CROWN. WHether the History of the Succession of the Crown will allow so good and clear an Hereditary Right, Jure humano, as we have yielded in the precedent discourse, the Reader will best judge by the short Historical Collecti∣on touching the Succession hereto subjoyned. In the Heptarchy there was no fit Hereditary Right, one King tripping up the heels of ano∣ther, as he had power, till one got all. After that, Alfred, Bastard-son to Oswin: Adel∣stane Bastard-son of Edward the Elder: Ed∣mund, Surnamed the Martyr, Bastard-son to King Edgar: Harold, Surnamed Harefoot, Bastard-son to Canute, wore the Imperial Crown of Eng∣land. But a Law was made under the Saxon Monar∣chy, De Oodinatione Regum, directing the Ele∣ction of Kings, and prohibiting Bastards to be chosen. Edward the Confessor was no King Jure Haere∣ditario; but the right was most indisputable at first in Edward Son of Edmond Ironside, Father to Edgar Etheling his Nephew, during his life; and after his decease, in that Edgar, who was Ne∣phew also to the Confessor.
William the First, called the Conquerour, was a Bastard, and had no right but from his Sword, and the Peoples Suhmissions, and their Electing him. William Rufus was elected against the right of his Elder Brother Robert then living. Henry the First was made King, favenle Clero & Populo, his Brother Robert still living, whose Eyes were after put out at Cardiss-Castle in Wales. King Stephen was elected a Clero & Populo, and confirmed by the Pope, and Maud Daughter of Henry the First excluded. Henry the Second came in by consent, yet he had no Hereditary right; for his Mother Maud the Empress, Daughter and Heir to Henry the First, was then living. King John had an elder Brother Jeoffery Earl of Brittany, who had Issue Arthur and Elianor, which ought to have succeeded before him; but he Arthur his Eldest Brother's Son living, was elected a Clero & Populo; and being divorced from his Wife, by his new Queen had Henry the Third. Henry the Third was confirmed and setled in the Kingdom by the general Election of the peo∣ple; Elianor, Daughter to Jeoffery the elder Bro∣ther, still living. Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Son of Edmund by Philippa Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke Clarence, a younger Son of Edward the Third,
was in the Parliament 9 R. 2. declared Heir Ap∣parent of the Crown: which could not be but by force of an Act of Parliament. Henry the Fourth came to the Crown by way of Election; and in his time, viz. in the eighth year of his Reign, was the first Act of Parlia∣ment made for Entailing the Crown with Re∣mainders. By vertue of which, his Son Henry the Fifth became King, and after him Henry the Sixth. In Henry the Sixth his time, Richard Duke of York claimed the Crown: and an Act of Parli∣ament was made 39 H. 6. that Henry the Sixth should enjoy the Crown for his life, and the said Duke and his Heirs after him. After which, King Henry raises an Army by the assistance of the Queen and Prince, and at Wakefield in Battle kills the Duke; for which, 1 Edw. 4. they were all by Act of Parliament, attainted of Treason; and one principal reason thereof was, for that the Duke being declared Heir to the Crown after Henry by Act of Parliament, they had kill'd him: which Act of Attainder was 1 H. 7. repealed, and the Blood of the King, Queen, and Prince restored, in terms of disgrace and detestation of so barbarous an Attainder, Rot. Palr. Anno 1 H. 7. Edward the Fourth succeeds upon the death of H. 6. by vertue of an Act of Parliament made in the time of H. 6. for entailing the Crown as Son and Heir to the Duke of York. Edward the Fifth succeeded by vertue of the same Act of Entail.
Richard the Third having got the Crown, he was confirmed King by Act of Parliament; which likewise Entail'd the Crown: which was done upon two reasons pretended: First, for that by reason of a precontract of Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fifth his eldest Son, and all his other Children, were declared Bastards. Se∣condly, for that the Son of the Duke of Clarence, second Brother to Edward the Fourth, had no right, because the Duke was attainted of Treason by a Parliament of Edward the Fourth. The Act of Parliament for Bastardizing the Children of Edward the Fourth, was in force until repea∣led in the time of Henry the Seventh, after his Marriage with Elizabeth the Daughter of Ed∣ward the Fourth. Henry the Seventh comes in by no legal Title: First, because Edw. 4th his Daughter was then living. Secondly, his own Mother was then living. In his first Parliament the Crown was Entail'd upon him and the Heirs of his body. And observable it is, that after the death of Eli∣zabeth his Queen, Daughter and Heir to Ed. 4th. there is no notice taken of any right which was pretended to by Hen. 8. during his Fathir's life, as being Son and Heir of his Mother, who had the legal Right to the Crown by an ordinary right of Succession. Henry the Eighth Succeeded, who did (as all his Laws speak) derive his Title to the Crown by the Fathers side, and not by the Mothers. In
his Reign the Crown was Entail'd thrice by Act of Parliament, Confirm'd by the general Oaths both of the Spiritualty and the Lasty; and it was made High Treason to refuse such Oaths; and se∣veral Attainders were in his time by particular Acts of parliament of several persons who oppo∣sed such limitations of the Crown, and the autho∣rity of the Laws that made them. But the great Law of the three was made in the 35th year of his Reign, Cap. 1. whereby power was given him to give and dispose by his Letters Patents, or by Will, the Imperial Crown of the Realm, to remain and come after his death, for want of lawful Heirs of Prince Ed∣ward, the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth to such person or persons, in remainder or rever∣sion, as should please his Highness. In which Act there was a Clause, that made it high Treason to speak or write against that Act, or to go about to annul or repeal it. Besides, there is another Proviso in that Act, That if the Lady Mary should not keep such conditions which the King should declare by his Letters Patents or last Will, the Imperial Crown should come to the Lady Elizabeth: And if the Lady Elizabeth should not observe the same, then the Crown was to go to such person as the King by his Letters Patents, or last Will, should limit and appoint. By virtue of which limitation in the Act of Parliament afore-mentioned, Edward the Sixth succeeded to the Crown, and after him Queen
Mary: in whose Reign, in an Act of Parliament for Conformation of the Articles of Marriage be∣tween her and Philip of Spain, the Crown was again Entail'd; but she dying without Issue, the Lady Elizabeth became Queen, who had been declared a Bastard (as well as her Sister Mary) in the life of their Father; and therefore succeeded to the Crown by force of the Entail made in the 35 H. 8. Cap. 1. Pursuant to these Presidents in fact, in the 13. year of the Reign of Q. Eliz. an Act of Parlia∣ment was made, declaratory of the power of Par∣liament in the limitation of the Succession, which made it highly penal to deny the Authority of an Act of Parliament for the limitation of the Crown. Several persons in her time were procee∣ded against upon that Act, and had the Judge∣ment of Traytor, and as Traitors executed for being contrary to that Law. This Queen dying, King James succeeded, who was (as the Statute of Recognition made in Par∣liament the first year of his Reign, declares) li∣neally, rightfully, descended of the most excel∣lent Lady Margaret eldest Daughter of the most renowned Henry the 7th, and the high and No∣ble Princess Queen Elizabeth his Wife, eldest Daughter of King Edward the 4th, the said Lady Margaret being eldest Sister of King Henry the 8th, Father of the High and mighty Princes of famous memory Elizabeth late Queen of England. It is further observable, that upon the Marri∣age
of Queen Mary to King Philip of Spain, both the Crowns of Emgland and Spain were entailed; whereby it was provided, that of the several Children to be begotten upon the Queen, one was to have the Crown of England, another Spain, another the Low Countries: The Articles of Mar∣riage to this purpose were confirmed by Act of Parliament and the Pope's Bull. And by that Act of Parliament for confirm∣ing the Articles of Marriage, Philip was created King, and did exercise Soveraign Authority, and particularly in making Laws together with the Queen: the Stile of the Soveraign Assent to Bills in Parliament in their time being, Le Roy & la Roigne les veulent. And likewise for that it was agreed by the States of both Kingdomes, and the Low Countries; it is therefore probable, that it was the Univer∣sal opinion of the great men of that Age, That Kings and Soveraign Princes, by and with the consent of their States, had a power to alter and bind the Succession of the Crown. FINIS.
