m1027a 99832855 37330
REATISE OF THE VERTUES and USES OF SEVERAL PANACEA'S OR MOST Infallible Remedies IN PHYSIC. By James Massard one of the most anci∣entest Doctors of the Colledge of Grenoble. Nov. 20th. 1685. This may be Printed, Rob. Midgley. London, Printed for the Author dwelling at present at Oliver Martinet a Taylor, at the Kings Arms in New-Street near Covent Garden, 1685.
THE PREFACE. I Have formerly publish'd a Discourse touching Panacea's, or the chief Re∣medies in Physic: Those that wou'd know the Vertues of 'em must read that Treatise; the matter is important, and therein clearly explicated. And Mr. Blegny's Journal of Physic for the Month of August 1681, Pag. 378. gives a full and advantagious account of the aforesaid Book. Also in his Journals of Physic for the following months, he gives a description of the two Treatises which I publish'd one concerning the Venerial Distemper, and the other of Fevers. And all these Remedies are of such vertue that the sick are soon enabled by 'em to walk abroad about their affairs.
CHAP. I. The Vertue of the Panaceas or Ʋniversal Remedies. THE Panacea's are the greatest and most infallible remedies in Physic; they cause no loathings, are necessary not only to sick people, but to those that are in perfect health for prevention of distempers, and they never do hurt: they heal most Dis∣eases which seem incurable, and make o∣ther Remedies efficacious. CHAP. II. The vertues and use of potable Gold. THIS drink is of liquid Gold, of the colour of fine Gold, it is of a fine scent, agreeable taste, and rejoyceth the heart as soon as 'tis taken.
This potable Gold is so perfectly dis∣solved, that it cannot be any more reduc∣ed into a body, and therefore easily mixes with the Spirits, penetrates all digesti∣ons, and so communicates with speed it's rare Vertues. The potable Gold is a rare Divine Pa∣nacea, helping all natures in every distem∣per, preserving health, keeping off the infirmity of old age, cures Fevers, and inflammations, eases pains, calms nature regulates all her motions, and brings to her assistance new and prevailing forces, Dissipating the very cause of distempers, and driving 'em out by insensible transpi∣rations, removing the indispositions of the parts, and happily restoring health and vigor. Fifteen or twenty drops of this liquor of Gold is enough, taken in a Spoon with a little good Wine, or Cordial water at any time, even at Meals, twice or thrice in a day; a man needs no direction or precaution in the matter, for this Reme∣dy
heals without any sensible evacuation. CHAP. III. The Vertues of the great Panacea. WANT of Transpiration being the general cause of all distem∣pers, so the Remedies which in opening the Pores render the body transpirable, are universal Remedies for their Cure. The great Panacea is of an agreeable colour, having neither taste nor smell, no nauseous belches in the Stomach: It makes no sensible evacuation in healthy persons, it puts the body into a gentle breathing, animating the Spirits, and thereby preserving health and encreases strength. This Panacea heals the sick, by opening all the passages of the body, in dissolving the causes of the distemper, destroying it by making way for those evacutions,
which nature requires, and at the same reducing 'em to order: In fine, by taking away the impure viscuosities and filth, which lies in the very substance of the parts, which are the roots whence dis∣eases Spring. So likewise, does it infallibly cure all sorts of Fevers, and Inflammations, as Plurisies, Small Pox, Appoplexies, Head-Aches, pains in the Breast, all Consumpti∣ons, all sounding Fits, Vomitings, Cho∣lics, Gravel, Womens pains in Labour, Vapours, Suppressions of Monthly Efflu∣viums, loss of Blood, Costiveness, Griping in the Guts, paleness in the Countenance, cures Rheumatisms, and is of rare ver∣tue against the Gout. Moreover, this Remedy heals all sorts of Wounds which are not absolute mor∣tal, in speedily stopping the Course of Blood, and dissolving and emptying by insensible transpiration, and by Urine, or by Stools, the Blood which is extravased, and diffused, in what part soever of the
body it be, and likewise hindring in∣flamations and Fevers, which often fol∣low upon Wounds. In short, by consoli∣dating immediately by a balsamic vertue all bruises inward or outward. Concerning the using of this Panacea. You▪ may take the weight of one or two drams in Powder at one time, or else made into Sugar Plums to the number of ten, at each time. In violent Distempers, they are to be taken commonly twice a day, to wit, in the morning, after dinner, or at night. In long illness, it suffices to take 'em once a day. This Powder is to be mixt in a Spoon with a little good Wine, or else take it in Sugar Plums, drink a Glass of good Wine after this remedy, and an hour after some good Broth, afterwards you may eat as at other times, if your illness be not very great. But to keep the body open, boyl in Broth made of Veal, or the like, without,
Salt, or in water with a little Sugar, an ounce or an ounce and an half of good Tamarins with pot-herbs, during a quar∣ter of an hour, after which strain it with∣out squeezing. This Broth is a little sharp, and very agreeable to the taste. Or else, take a Glyster which is made of four or five ounces of the best Cassia, taken out of the stick, with as much Honey, boyl them in a sufficient quantity of ordinary deco∣ction, for a quarter of an hour: After∣wards strain this before you take it, it re∣freshes, it purges sufficiently, and leaves the body open. As to the manner of Diet, there is no need of much scrupulosity, 'tis suffici∣ent if one avoids, all kinds of excess. As this Panacea frees nature, regulates her motions, and turns all food into good nourishment: so one may without the least hurt in using this remedy follow ones own inclinations in eating and drinking what we please, for as much as nature be∣ing assisted with proper remedies, has no irregular desires.
CHAP. IV. Vertues, and use of Flowers of Silver. THE Flowers of Silver are pleasant to behold, and agreeable to take. This Panacea of Silver is diaphoretic, and fe∣brefuge, it cleans the Organs of the body, opens her passages, purifies and renews the blood sweetens the humours, appeases the inflammations, and rectifie all digesti∣ons. And therefore this Panacea extin∣guishes Fevers, as well intermitting as Hectic, and continual ones, and cures most inveterate distempers, without any sensi∣ble evacuation. A dose of this remedy consists of thirty or forty Grains, it may be taken at any time but at Meals.
CHAP. V. The Vertues of the aperitive Panacea. THE obstruction of the Entrails being the usual cause of long illnesses, so the aperitive Panacea's are universal Reme∣dies, for the cure of inveterate maladies. And indeed experience shews us, that opening Pills cure the pains and giddiness in the head, a weak digestion, and weak∣ness of the stomach, shortness of breath, and hypocondraic indispositions, and all other melancholly distempers, the Sympa∣thetic Epilepsie which is the commonest, the Scurvy, Jaundice, pale colours of Mai∣dens, the Dropsie, the suppression of the monthly Courses, the Whites, fits of the Mother, the Copilations, Costiveness, and obstructions of the Bowels. Of the use of the aperitive Panacea. Take in the morning seven or eight
little Pills, or aperitive Confections, in a Wafer, or in the yolk of an Egg, or in a preserved Cherry without the stone, drink immediately after this Re∣medy a little good Wine, and an hour af∣ter drink some Broth. These pills loose the body over night, and keeps it always open. You must take for the cure of these a∣bove-mention'd distempers for fifteen days together, or three weeks every other morning, sometimes seven or eight of these aperitive pills, sometimes the weight of a dram and an half of the great Panacea above-mention'd, drinking im∣mediately after these Remedies a little good Wine, and suping an hour after some Broth, or two Dishes of Coffee before breakfast. Whilst you are in this Course of Phy∣sic, you shou'd eat good wholsome Meats, and such as are of easie digestion, with∣out interrupting your ordinary imploy∣ments: To prevent a relapse, take for
some Months all the fifteen days two or three doses of these Remedies. CHAP. VII. Of the Vertues of the precipitate of Paracelsus. THE precipitate Mercury of Paracelsus, purifies and renovates so efficaciously the whole body, that it heals all sorts of Ulcers and Scabs, and amongst others the venerial one, which is nothing else but a pestilential Scab, brought from the Indies. Experience shews that those who are af∣flicted with the most inveterate venerial distempers, are perfectly cured with this Remedy. Concerning the use of the precipitate of Paracelsus, for the cure of the Venerial distempers: Take every morning during a month, ten or twelve Grains of this Precipitate made into a Pill, mix with it some kind of Conserve; drink immediately after
a glass of good Wine, and within an hour some Broth made of Veal, in which must be boyl'd an ounce and an half of good Tamarins, to keep the body open. Althò this Remedy requires no farther direction than that of eating wholesome Meats, such as are in common use, and does not oblige a man to leave off any bu∣siness, yet does it procure so sound a con∣stitution of body, that 'tis experienc'd, a man finds himself more healthful now than he was before his illness. CHAP. VII. Vertues and use of the refreshing Panacea. A Good colour being one of the Signs of health, every body desires such refreshments, yet few persons know which are the true ones. Cold things often heats us, and there are corrosives which do much refresh us. This appears in the u∣sing
of water, which causes a burning Fever in those who drink of it, when they are hot, because it then congeals the blood, and hinders transpiration. On the contrary Spirit of Sulphur, which is ex∣treamly corrosive and vitriolic, mightily refreshes being taken in broth, or an ope∣ning drink, because it sweetens the acri∣monial juice of the body. It makes an a∣greeable Salt to the taste, which being without the corrosion of the Spirit of Sulphur, much refreshes all the Bowels being taken in Broth. One may use of this Salt, during the time or after the use of other Remedies, to pro∣cure by this means a greater refreshment. During the use of these Panacea's, you may purge your self once or twice, with the following remedy; Take two drams of good Rhubarb cut small, half an ounce of Tamarins, half a dram of Corriander, an ounce and an half of the finest Mannaha Make all of it boyl some time in Pullet. broth, or in two Glasses of decoction of
Liquorish, and let it stand soaking all night on the hot ashes. The next morn∣ing strain it and then take it. CHAP. VIII. For hollow Teeth. HOllow Teeth do much pain some people, who knowing no Remedy, are at last constrain'd to pull them out, tho they may be made well by putting in a little grain in the hollow Tooth, which perfectly cleaning it, renders it thereby like the rest. CHAP. IX. A Plaister for the healing of Wounds, Ʋl∣cers and Swellings. THIS Plaister is good for the curing all external hurts: it consolidates wounds, and draws out all venemous hu∣mours
which may hinder the re-union of the parts, and corrupt them, it also ex∣tinguishes the malignity of Ulcers, and effectually solves all swellings. CHAP. XI. An Oyntment for the inflammation of the Eyes. THE inflamations of the Eyes are sometimes of that nature, as instead of being bettered by ordinary Remedies are made worse. This Oyntment for the Eyes, lessens immediately their pain, their inflamation, fieryness, and cures them in a short time. FINIS.
