M1273 13675191 101225
AN HEART-MELTING EXHORTATION TOGETHER with a Cordiall CONSOLATION. Presented in a Letter from New-England, to their dear Coun∣treymen of Lancashire. Which may as well concern all others in these suffering times. By RICHARD MATHE Teacher of the Church at Dorchester and WILLIAM TOMPSON Pastor of the Church at Brainy in New England. HEBREWS .13. Exhort one another daily whilest  is called to day. 1 THESSALONIANS. 5 14. Comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for I Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Pauls-Church yard, near the little North door. 1650.
To all those that professe the name and true Religion of JESUS CHRIST in Lancashire; specially to the Inhabitants of Toxteth near Liverpool, of Newton, Winwick, Eccleston nr Croston▪ of Much-Woolton, and the places thereabouts. Richard Mather and William Tom∣pson wish mercy and grace, truth and peace, from God the Father, through our Lord IESUS CHRIST. Christian Countreymen, and dear friends, THat which the Apo∣stle Paul professeth of himself concern∣ing the nation of the Jews,Rom. 10.1 that his hearts desire and praier unto God for them was, that they might be saved:
the same may we professe of our selves concerning you. And because at thus many hundred and some thousand miles di∣stance, we cannot make known our true and great desire after you salvation by word of mouth, therefore we are wil∣ling to testifie the same by a few lines in writing, humbly desiring that for that purpose a word or two of Christian ex∣hortation in this way of a Let∣ter, may not be unwelcome to any of you, but graciously blessed by the God of heaven unto you all, to those good ends which we intend therein. Indeed we could have wish∣ed (had it been the will of God) that as we were born a∣mongst you, and for some years have been Preachers of the e∣verlasting Gospel in your coasts (though the weakest for such a
work, and the most unworthy of thousands we do acknowledge) so we might also have continu∣ed to live and to die together. For your Christian communion as long as we could enjoy the same, whether in publike as∣semblies or private families was very dear unto us: and to this day in our conferences one with the other, we do often re∣vive the remembrance thereof with much comfort of heart. And when the iniquity of the times was grown to such an height, that amongst others, far more eminent lights, our selves also must be put under a bushell, and might not be per∣mitted in any publike employ∣ment, to seek the salvation of your souls; yet God knows, and many amongst you, we doubt not, do remember how we could not leave your Con∣gregations,
nor depart out of your coasts, without much in∣ward affection of heart and many tears, because you were dear unto us. And when that saying of the Apostle, Act. 20.25. did come into our mindes (as it came into our mindes very often) you will scarcely beleeve how our hearts were affected at the remembrance thereof; considering with how little variation those words of his unto those Ephesians might be applied to our condition and yours at that time, when we did plainly perceive that most of you amongst whom we had gone preaching the Kingdom of God, in all likelihood should see our faces no more: which was unto us no small grief; Neverthelesse though we thus speak concerning our hearty af∣fection towards you (which
was and is as much as we pre∣tend, and very cordial in Christ Jesus) yet we would not be so understood, as if we were wea∣ry of our present place and portion; For we do not re∣member that since our coming into this countrey (and the one of us hath been here above the space of ten years, and the other not much less then nine) that of all this time we have had one repenting thought of this transmigration of ours. True it is, we were most un∣willing you may be sure to turn our backs upon our dear native countrey, and upon your selves in many respects. But those things which the wisdome and will of God had determined before, concerning our transportation into these Western parts of the world, he hath thus fulfilled: and bles∣sed
be his Name for the same; For whatever others say or think of New-England, we for our parts must both think and say as long as we have a day to live, that great was the good∣nesse of our God, that ever he was pleased to bring us hither. For considering what light of truth doth here plenteously and clearly shine forth, what Churches are here gathered and planted, with what liber∣ty▪ and purity the Ordinan∣ces of Christ Jesus are here ad∣ministred, by what Magistrates civill justice is here dispensed, and the Common-wealth go∣verned, how holinesse and righ∣teousnesse is countenanced and encouraged, and all known im∣piety and iniquity prosecuted to condign punishment, both in Church and Common-wealth, in a word, considering what
means of grace and glory are here plentifully afforded, and peaceably enjoied, we must therefore needs say, that if it be not our own fault, howe∣ver it go with others, and how∣ever it hath been with us in times past, we may now be happy and blessed in Christ Je∣sus, both in this and in another world. And indeed we cannot but stand amazed at the free grace of God, and wonder with great admiration at that wise, and gracious, and holy dispensati∣on of divine providence, where∣by it comes to passe that such unworthy ones as we be, must be here in a land of peace, to en∣joy the many good blessings of God, both for earth and hea∣ven in quiet habitations, when in the mean time it fares full ill, God knows, with the land
of our Nativity, and with ma∣ny thousands therein far better then our selves, whom the Lord hath left after all their other pressures, under which they have formerly groaned, now at last, to see the most dolefull daies that they have ever seen in England, because that for∣merly-flourishing Kingdom is now wofully at warre within it self, and that sore plague of the devouring sword (as sore an one as any of the four, which are thus called by the holy Ghost, Ezek. 14.21.) hath already devoured much English flesh, and drunk much English bloud; many hundreds and thousands of all ranks and degrees, both great and small, since these warres begun, ha∣ving already lost their lives, and ended their daiet in these grievous Nationall calamities,
and (God knows) how many more may shortly do the like, because for ought we can hear the wrath of the Lord is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. In regard whereof we may take up the complaint of the Prophet, and say,Jer. 9.1. Oh that our heads were water, and our eyes were foun∣tains of tears, that we might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of our people. For indeed we desire to bewail the sorrows, distracti∣ons and distresses of that dear countrey where we were born, and wish we had hearts to do it more compassionately and effectually then these dull and dry spirits of ours can yet at∣tain unto; though we hope it is not our distance for the space of three thousand miles from that land, nor our absence from
thence for the space of nine or ten years, nor all the water that in all this time hath flown in this great Atlantick Ocean between England and us, that hath or ever shall wash away the thought and remembrance of England, and of Gods peo∣ple therein out of our hearts, but that we shall preferre the comfort, peace, and prosperity of it and them, before our chief joys. And being thus minded, we hope you will give us leave out of that hearty affection and good will which we bear unto our Nation, and more abun∣dantly to you-ward, to com∣mend unto you our dear coun∣treymen a few words of Chri∣stian counsell and advice, con∣cerning some things which we deem conducible to your eter∣nall comfort and salvation,
which we so heartily long af∣ter: and which advice is none other but the very same which we would wish to be given to ourselves, if our soul were in your souls stead. You have seen (right dear∣ly beloved) how the great Judge of the world, and King of the Nations, by a sore and long continuing warrre, for the space of seven or eight and twenty years together, or thereabouts, hath been afflict∣ing the Germane Nation for their sinnes: and how of late time he hath brought the like judgement even to your doors, in that distressed if not de∣stroied Kingdome of Ireland: and now you plainly see also that he will bear with Eng∣land no longer, but they also must drink of the same cup of bloud, whereof others have so
deeply drunk before. In which and other Kingdomes and countries that might be na∣med, the dispensation of the Almighty is and hath been such, as if he were resolved by fire and by sword to plead with all flesh,Isa. 66.16. and that the slain of the Lord shall be many. And we doubt not but many of you do well know the saying that is written,Isa. 26.9. That when the judgements of God are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn righ∣teousnesse. Yea truly, though his judgements were not upon our selves, but only upon o∣thers, yet he would have us learn righteousnesse thereby, or otherwise it will be an ag∣gravation of our iniquity and impenitency, and a provocati∣on of the Lords greater dis∣pleasure; As it was against Iu∣dah,
When the Lord saw that for all the causes whereby back∣sliding Israel committed adul∣tery,Jer 3.8. and he had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous sister Iu∣dah feared not, but went and plaied the harlot also. And Belshazzar is sharply reproved and plagued by the Lord, be∣cause he had not learned righ∣teousnesse by all the judge∣ments which had befallen Nebuchadnezzar his father, whereof he his sonne was not ignorant. Thy father Nebu∣chadnezzar (saith the Pro∣phet) when his heart was lifted up,Dan. 5.20, 21, 22. and his minde hardned in pride, was depo∣sed from his Kingly Throne, and they took his glory from him, and he was driven from the sonnes of men, and turned out among wilde
beasts, and thou his sonne (O Belshazzar) hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knew∣est all this. Whereby we see it is very much displeasing to the Lord, and dangerous unto our selves, if we see and know the Judgements of God upon others because of their sinnes, and do not humble our selves, and turn from our iniquities, and fear before him that is so dreadfull and holy a God, and terrible, though righteous in his doings unto the sinfull sons of men. But if the calamities upon others should thus strike all our hearts with a holy fear in regard of our selves, how much more ought this fruit to be found in us, when the Judgements of God do fall upon our own backs? Surely at such a time the Lord consi∣dereth what courses he hath
taken with a people for their amendment, and is not a little displeased if his corrections up∣on them be in vain: as you may reade at large, Am. 4.6. &c. I have sent famine amongst you (saith the Lord) and yet you have not turned unto me: I have sent drought a∣mongst you, and yet you have not turned unto me: I have sent blasting and mildew, I have sent pestilence amongst you, after the manner of Ae∣gypt, and other judgements more there mentioned, and yet ye have not turned unto me. So that the Lord takes an ac∣count what corrections he hath corrected men withall, and what amendment hath been wrought thereby, and if it be otherwise he is very much displeased that men should be so incorrigible, yea, in such
case the Lord will either pur∣sue such persons and people with more and sorer judge∣ments, yea,Lev. 26.21. &c. seven times and seven times more judgements, and one seven after another. till their uncircumcised hearts be humbled; or else he will utterly leave them, and give them up, as those whose case is incurable, and their condi∣tion desperate. For so we reade, Isa. 1.5. Wherefore should you be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more: which condition is exceeding fearfull and lamentable: But by all this you may see that when the judgements of the Lord are in the Earth, whe∣ther upon our selves or others, they that see them, or feel them, or hear tell of them, ought to learn righteousnesse thereby, or otherwise it is like
to be worse for them. Sith therefore you have known the judgements of God which he hath brought upon Germa∣ny for many years together, and upon Ireland and England of late times: God would be very angry if you should re∣main impenitent, unhumbled, and unreformed, though you have known all this. Where∣fore (Dear friends) we beseech you, Let our advice and coun∣sel be acceptable to you, which yet is not our counsel but the Lords,Lam. 3.4 That every man would now search and try his waies, and turn again to the Lord. Let every man now call him∣self unto a strict examination, for all the course of his life, and smite upon his thigh,Jer. 8.6. & 31.19 and say, What have I done; yea, let every man now learn to be vile in his own eyes,Job. 40.4 to ab∣horre
himself,Job. 42.6. and to repent in dust and ashes; judging himself before the Lord with sorrow and shame for all his a∣bominations, and pouring out from a broken and contrite heart, free, full and plain con∣fessions of the same; yea, now let every man cry mightily unto God,Jon. 3.8. for mercy and for∣givenesse in the bloud of the Redeemer Christ Jesus, and turn to the Lord from all the evill that is in his heart or hands, that so all the judge∣ments of God that are in the Earth, may not be in vain un∣to you, and your sinne and mi∣sery encreased thereby, but that by them your iniquity may be purged,Isa. 17 9. and this may be the sweet and blessed fruit thereof, even the taking away of your sin. But when the Jews were ex∣horted
by the Prophet Mala∣chy to turn unto the Lord, with a promise that he would then return unto them, they made him this answer,Mal. 3. 7. where∣in should we return? plainly declaring thereby, that they knew but little that was amisse in themselves, whereof they should repent, or wherein they had need to be reformed. And therefore lest there should be any soul amongst you, that should entertain this exhor∣tation of ours in the like man∣ner, and be or pretend to be ignorant whereof they should repent, give us leave therefore as the Prophet must,Isa. 58.1. Shew the people their transgressions, and the house of Iacob their sinnes, and another Prophet is bidden to Cause Ierusa∣lem to know her abominati∣ons.Eze. 16.2. Give us leave (we be∣seech
you) after their exam∣ple, to instance in some prin∣cipall sinnes which were very common in Lancashire when we were there, and which we fear are much continued in that countrey unto this very day, and therefore had need to be repented of. And first of all, we may mention that generall sinne of prophanenesse or Atheism, and disrespect of all Religion, when multitudes of men and wo∣men from one end of the coun∣trey to another, have so de∣meaned themselves, as if they had been born for no other end but to serve themselves, and their own lusts,1 Joh. 2.16. the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, and so have spent their daies as if there had been nothing else for them to do, or to look af∣ter,
but to eat and to drink, o sleep and to play, to build and to plant, to buy and to sell, to marry and to give in marriage, and the like; but with as much irregiousnesse and prophanenesse of heart in all these things, and with as much neglect of the glory of God, and the salvation of their souls, and the means thereof, as if there had been no God to be served or acknowledged, or as if themselves had had no souls to be saved. It is but too apparent, (the Lord knows) how the glorious and holy Name of God hath been impi∣ously prophaned and blasphe∣med in that County by multi∣tudes of vain and wicked Oaths, in the mouths of Gen∣tlemen and mean men too, yea, and very children; how the holy Sabbaths of God which
he hath commanded to be san∣ctified for ever, and for that end hath bid us remember the same, have been greatly prophaned and polluted, not only by neglect of publick and private worship, whereby the same should have been sancti∣fied, but also by the contrary prophane and impious practi∣ces in stead thereof, such as are carding, dicing, drinking, bowl∣ing, bear-baiting, shooting, pi∣ping, dancing at greens, ales, may-poles, and such like. And when the licence for sports and recreations upon the Sabbath, came forth from Houghton-Tower, (to the lasting shame and infamy of the place and County where such an unhappy birth was brought forth) oh how gladly was the same en∣tertained and embraced by multitudes of people in that
Countrey! and how proudly did they bear up themselves upon the authority of the same, to the confronting and defi∣ance of the faithfull Ministers of God, that would not, nor could not consent to such pro∣phanations, but by authority of the 4th Commandement of God did bear witnesse against the same. It is also a further testimony of this spirit of pro∣phanenesse that now we are speaking of, that duties of Re∣ligion have been so exceeding∣ly neglected in private fami∣lies, children and servants be∣ing not at all instructed and catechized, yea, many families having not a Bible in them, morning and evening praier be∣ing never used, nor any bles∣sing upon the creatures desired of God, when men have gone unto their meals, all directly
contrary to the expresse word of God, Deut. 6.6, 7▪ Eph. 6, 4. 1 Tim. 4.4, 5. and the commen∣ded examples of David.Psal. 101. Josh. 24.15. Act. 10.2. Gen. 18.19. Joh. 8.39. Ioshu∣ah, Cornelius, Abraham, and such like servants of God. But if the saying of Christ our Sa∣viour be true, as it cannot but be most true, that they that are the children of Abraham will do the works of Abraham, surely, then the neglect of family-du∣ties (for the practice whereof Abraham is so much commend∣ed) doth testifie to the faces of many people that they are no children of Abraham, nei∣ther children of his flesh, nor children of his faith; and whose children they then are you may all judge; yea, such hath been the impiety of many persons, that such as have made some conscience of Gods holy Name, and service, and Sab∣baths,
and have shewed any care to walk with God in the way that is called holy, them they have greatly hated, des∣pised, derided, slandered, and other waies evill entreated and persecuted, and all because they seemed to be more holy then themselves. Wherefore to make an end of this particular, If there be any soul among you, whether man or woman, whether young or old, whether great or small, that stands culpable of this prophanenesse and ungodli∣nesse, and that is a despiser and hater, or so much as a care∣lesse neglecter of God, and the holy things of God, care∣lesse of Gods word and the knowledge of it, of his Sab∣baths and the sanctifying thereof, and of the Christian duties of Gods holy worship
in publike Assemblies, and in private families, yea, carelesse of walking with God in holines for his own particular, but walks in his own lusts of swearing, whoredome, drunkennes, or any other. Let such an one be exhor∣ted to repent; yea, as he ten∣dreth his own eternall comfort be earnestly entreated to re∣pent; yea, charged and com∣manded in the name of God the father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, to repent of all this his wickednesse and turn unto the Lord. For the word is gone out of Gods mouth, and shall not be recalled,Heb. 11.14. but must stand for e∣ver: that without holines no man shall see the Lord, except it be as a Judge against all such ungodly sinners, but never see God to his comfort in this or in another world.Psal. 50.2. Oh consider this there∣fore all ye that forget God, lest
he tear you in pieces, and there be no deliverer: yea, consider it seriously and beleeve it of a truth, for the Lord hath spoken it,Gal. 5.20, 21. 1 Cor. 6.9.10. that neither whoremongers nor adulterers, nor drunkards, nor any that walk in such waies and works of the flesh, shall have any inheritance in the kingdome of God. Be assured of it, for the day is coming when you will finde it most true, that where there is no holy knowledge of God in the minde, no change of the heart from its former prophanenesse and uncleannesse, and no pu∣rity and sanctity of the affecti∣ons and desires, no reformation and sanctification of the life and conversation, such a man so continuing is most certainly a man of death, prepared against the day of slaughter, and shall immediatly drop down with∣out
all hope of recovery into hell, as soon as death shall strike him to the ground. Oh then whosoever you are that reade or hear these words, humble your selves for all your ini∣quities,Joel 2.12.13. and turn unto the Lord, with fasting and weep∣ing and with mourning: For he is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great goodnesse, and repenteth of the evill: cast away all your trans∣gressions,Eze. 18.30. and so iniquity shall not be your ruine, for the Lord hath said and sworn, that as he liveth he taketh no plea∣sure in the death of the wic∣ked, but rather that he turn from his way and live;Ezk. 33.11. turn you, turn you, wherefore will you die? The very Angels of heaven will be glad at the day of your conversion. But if you harden your hearts, and refuse
to hearken to the gracious call of the Lord, your damnation is just, your bloud will be up∣on your own heads: you have been warned and warned a∣gain and again, by many wor∣thy Ministers and messengers of God, that have preached in your Congregations; and amongst others you have been warned heretofore by us in preaching, and now by us in writing. But besides this sinne of pro∣phanenesse  and open ungodli∣nesse, there is another evill no lesse dangerous, which is of∣ten found amongst them that professe more purity and re∣formation of life, and that is, when men blesse themselves in their own righteousnesse, and think their condition safe and good, meerly because of some legall reformation, without
any feeling of their need of Christ, any high prizing of him, any earnest longing for him, any true relying or resting on him. That it is incident to professors to offend in this kinde, is plain, by that which is written of the Pharisees, that they trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised others, and accordingly one of them is brought in boasting of him∣self before God,Luk. 18.9, 10, 11, 12. that he was not like other men, he was no extortioner, no adulterer, no unjust person, nor like that Publican, but he fasted twice a week; he gave tithes of all that he possessed, and the like. And it is said of the nation of the Jews generally,Rom. 10 3 that they being ignorant of the righte∣ousnesse of God, and going a∣bout to establish their own righ∣teousnesse, did not subject them∣selves
to the righteousnesse of God. Which place doth also shew the dangerous condition of all such justitiaries in this respect, that being so full of their own righteousnesse, they submit not themselves to the righteousnesse of God, nor unto Christ Jesus who is the end of the Law, for righteousnesse to every one that beleeves. But of this you may be sure, that whatever a mans righteousness may be, unlesse he were one that had never sinned, he hath nothing in him that is of any worth for the present justifi∣cation of his person, nor for the everlasting salvation of his soul. For the text is plain, that in Gods sight there is no flesh living that can be justifi∣ed. Psal. 143.2. And there∣fore such holy men as David, Daniel, Nehemiah, Paul, and
others, durst not stand to be tried and justified that way (Psal. 143.2. Dan. 9.18. Neh. 13.22. Phil. 3.9.) but have been glad to fly for this mat∣ter only to the free mercy and grace of God, and the righte∣ousnesse of Christ Jesus which is by faith, and you will finde that it will be best for you to do the like. It may be you will say, We have no need to be told of this, for we are not Papists to hold justification by works, but do beleeve that justifica∣tion is by faith only without the works of the Law. Never∣thelesse we cannot think it needlesse for men to be put in minde of this matter, I partly because there are many (the Lord knows) in that dear countrey of ours, who disco∣ver themselves to be deeply
tainted with this as well as other points of Popery; and partly because this Popery, this pride and self-love is na∣turall to all the sons of men, being a part of that originall sinne which is common to all as well as to those that make direct profession of popery; and therefore your selves, un∣lesse you were free from all originall corruption, are in danger of this relying upon self-righteousnesse as well as Papists; nay we fear (be it spoken without offence) that there are sundry amongst you that do so rely indeed, and though they be not outward∣ly culpable in respect of po∣pery and prophanenesse, but professe a stricter and purer way, yet in very truth are in no better condition to God∣ward then others are as be∣ing
utterly without part and portion in Christ Jesus. For the manifesting whereof, we hope you will easily grant, that whoever hath no more religion in him, but what might have been attained if Christ had never been, such an one, whatever relgion he may seem to have, is certain∣ly without Christ, and in a state of death unto this day. And that so it is with many professors may appear by this; that trouble of consci∣ence for sinne, and reforma∣tion of life, after that trou∣bler is all the religion that is found in many professors; for let a man attain to these two, to be stung in consci∣ence for his sinne, and after∣wards to take up a stricter course of life in the practice of good duties, as praier in
his family, frequenting of Ser∣mons, conversing with Chri∣stians, and such like▪ and how many are there that hereup∣on would account themselves and be accounted by others to be right good Christians, and in a most blessed condition? Whenas the truth is, all that is here mentioned, is no more then might be wrought by the Law though Christ Jesus had never come into the world. For a seri∣ous consideration of the curses of the Law being threatned might produce the one, and the serious consideration of the du∣ties of the Law being pressed & urged might produce the other; but both the one and the other without Christ, and consequent∣ly both the one and the other without salvation, sith there is no salvation without Christ. Wherefore (dear friends)
in the bowels of Jesus Christ we do beseech you, examine your selves whether it be thus with you or with any of you; ask your selves this Question, whether any Evan∣gelicall and saving work of grace and faith in Christ be yet wrought in your souls; or whether all that yet you have had experience of, doe amount to no more but le∣gall affrightment and legall amendment? And if upon ex∣amination, any soul amongst you shall finde his condition to be no better then this that here we are speaking of, in the name of God, let such a soul be deeply humbled and repent in dust and ashes, for this amongst all his other sinnes, that he hath prized Christ no more, thinking him∣self to be rich and encreased
in goods, and to have need of nothing, because of legall du∣ties and mmon graces, not knowing how through want of Christ Jesus in his soul, he hath all this while been miserable, and wretched, and blinde, and poor, and naked. And let a man consider with himself, (and the Lord grant that he may consider it se∣riously) that it is not all this humiliation and reformation that can make satisfaction to the justice of God for any one, though but the least of all his manifold transgressions, nor justifie his person in the sight of God; and therefore if he die in this condition, (which God forbid) he will certainly die accursed, and notwithstanding all his glori∣ous profession of religion, his good estimation amongst o∣thers,
or the good opinion that he hath or hath had of himself, he will at death e∣verlastingly perish from the glorious and saving presence of God; because it is a most infallible and divine truth that must stand for ever, and all flesh shall finde it so; that he that hath the Sonne hath life, and he that hath not the Sonne hath not life, 1 Joh. 5.12. It were therefore much to be desired, that there were in men such an heart as was in the Apostle Paul, who ha∣ving many legall priviledges, and having been zealous of legall duties, so that in re∣spect of the righteousnesse of the Law he was blawelesse, yet counted all these things losse for Christs sake, for whom he suffered the losse of all, and did judge them to be dung that
he might winne Christ, and might be found in him, not having  own righteousnesse which  the Law, ut that which  by the faith of Christ, even the righteousnesse which is of God by faith. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. An excellent les∣son, and worthy to be learn∣ed by every Christian, yea, a lesson that must be learned in some measure of truth by all those that must be saved; For Christ himself prescribes it as the first particular to him that would be his disciple, that "he must deny himself, Mat. 16.24. And by a mans self that must be denyed, he means this self-righteousnesse as well as other things. For sure it is, that if ever a man must be sa∣ved he must be saved by Christ, because there is not salvation in any other. Act.
4.12. and if by Christ, then  man must beleeve in Christ for without faith a man can have no union nor communi∣on with Christ nor ever please God. Eph. 3.17. Heb. 11.6▪ And if a man have faith in Christ, then Christ must be precious in his sight, for unto them that have faith he is preci∣ous. 1 Pet. 2.6. And if Christ be precous in any mans sight then he must loath himself in his own sight, and not only cast away all the practice o wickednesse, but all trust and confidence in the filthy rag of his own righteousnesse, Isa. 64.6. that so selling all that ever he hath, he may buy that most precious Pearl, the Lord Iesus Christ, and his righ∣teousnesse, Matth. 13.45. A Pearl of such inestimable worth and value, that he is
most unspeakably happy that ath it, and of such absolute necessity, that they are most wretched and accursed who ive and die without it. Lastly, to name no more particulars, This is another, and not the least of the sinnes for which our Countreymen should be humbled and re∣pent in the sight of God, viz. that the authority and will of Christ Jesus in Church-ad∣ministrations, hath been no more acknowledged and re∣garded. For sith he is the on∣ly King and Lord and Law∣giver to his Church, Psal. 2.6. Jam. 4.12. therefore his Church, and all things in his Church ought to be establish∣ed and ordered according un∣to his appointment, or if it be otherwise, his royall authori∣ty is injured thereby. Now
if his appointment in these matters were observed, then Churches for the quality of their matter should consist of none but Saints, and visible beleevers, Isa. 60.21. Ezek. 44.7, 9. Zach. 14. ult. Ephes. 1.1. and for the quantity thereof, no greater number but one Congregation. 1 Cor. 14.23. Then functions and offices of ministery which are not from heaven, but from men, Mat. 21.25. should not be tolera∣ted in his Church, nor any of those functions and offices be wanting which the Lord Jesus hath appointed and ordained. Eph. 4.11. Phil. 1.1. 1 Tim. 5.17. Then none should be chosen or received unto any office in the Church, but such as are qualified with gifts for their places. 1 Tim. 3.2, 3. &c. nor should their entrance in∣to
their places be without the choice and free consent of the Church, Act. 1.23. & 6.3, 5. & 14.23. and when they are entred, they should execute their places with all diligence and faithfullnesse. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Tim. 5.17. and the worship which in these Churches should be performed, should not be by the precepts and ca∣nons of men, but according to the will and word of God, with discipline administred ac∣cording to the rule of Christ Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. In all which particulars (the Lord knows) there hath been great swer∣ving from the appointment of Christ, both in your Coun∣trey, and in other places of England: in that prophane and vile men have been al∣lowed for members of the Church, and the signs and
seals of the body and bloud of Christ prophanely admini∣stred to such whom the Scri∣pture calleth dogges and swine▪ Matth 7.6. Also, in that besides the Congregationall Church appointed by Christ, there have been Diocesan and Pro∣vinciall Churches, which he appointed not, and Arch-Bi∣shops, Lord-Bishops, Deans, Chancellors, and many more functions and offices in the Church, which were all in∣vented and devised by men; and Pastors, Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, which he him∣self appointed, greatly neglect∣ed and out of use. Many have been admitted to the ministe∣ry, which have been altogether unfit for any such weighty and sacred emploiments, and obtruded upon the Congrega∣tions by Patrons and Prelates,
and when they have been in their places, have been most neg∣ligent and unfaithfull therein, not minding the glory of God, nor the salvation of the peoples souls; and Ecclesiasticall Disci∣pline hath been administred by Officers and Laws, and Canons and Courts, and worship perfor∣med by Service-book and Cere∣monies, in many particulars: of all which it may be truly said, they are things which the Lord never commanded, nor did they ever come into his heart, as Jer. 7.31. But here it may be some man may say,Object. If things have been a∣misse in these particulars, what is that to us? we hope it is not our fault.Answ. Such an one we would pray to consider that in many particulars the people have been willing enough, yea, too willing of these corruptions that have been invented and imposed by
others; as when the Prophets prophesied falsly, and the Priests did bear rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so. Jer. 5.31. And where it hath been so that the people have been wil∣ling of these corruptions, there the people have reason to be humbled for them, though the things were first invented and imposed by others. But say it had been against their mindes that such corruptions have been pra∣ctised, yet it should greatly grieve a godly heart to see such injury done to Christ Jesus, a that other laws besides his, and other Lords besids him should have dominion over the people of God▪ Isa. 26.13. and such injury done unto the Church of Christ, a that by means of these usurpati∣ons and impositions of men, sh should be bereaved of a grea part of that spirituall liberty
which was purchased for her by the price of his precious bloud; and lastly, it should grieve every Christian heart, in regard that many a soul (God knows) hath been endanger∣ed to everlasting perdition, as by the rest of the corruptions fore-mentioned, so especially by that dumb and unfaithfull Ministery which hath been set over many a Congregation, the Lord having said that where vision fails, there the people perish; and if the blinde leade the blinde, both must fall into the ditch, Pro. 29.18. Mat. 15.14. Unlesse therefore you will say (which we hope you doe abhorre to think) that though the corruptions brought in by the Prelacy and Hierarchy, have been the destruction of the souls of thousands, and
have been most injurious to Christ Jesus your Lord and ours, and to his Church which he so dearly bought, yet all this is nothing to you, you have no reason to be affected with these things, unlesse (we say) you will thus carelesly passe over these matters of this high con∣cernment and importance, we know not how you can satisfie your consciences in the sight of God, without a serious and deep lamenting and bewailing of the fore-mentioned corrup∣tions in Church-administrati∣ons, as well as any other ini∣quities of the land. For sure it is, many have heretofore been deeply guilty of sinne in these things, and our dear Countrey of Lancashire hath had her part in this guilt as well as other places; yea, and ourselves (the Lord be mercifull to us in re∣gard
of this and the rest of our sins) have not been free when we lived amongst you from a great deal of ignorance and guilt in this kinde. In regard whereof we are now the more desirous to provoke our selves and our Christian acquaintance and friends to a serious repen∣tance for these things; willing also by this means if it were the will of God to make some sup∣ply of our defectivenesse in ex∣hortations of this kinde in times past, when (as we must needs acknowledge) we fell a great deal short of duty herein; but being now and long ago con∣vinced of the evil of the things afore-mentioned, we think it our duty both to lay the same deeply to heart, and to provoke our acquaintance to do the like. Wherefore we be∣seech you, let it not seem a
small thing unto any of you, that there have been such cor∣ruptions in the house of God, and the administrations there∣in. But let every soul seriously learn to be ashamed in the sight of God, that men have set their posts by Gods posts, and their thresholds by Gods thres∣holds. Eze. 43.8. that is to say, their own inventions by Gods institutions. And if men be once ashamed of these things as well as of other their sins, then the Lord hath promised in this Scripture, Eze. 43.11. to shew them the pattern of his house, the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the Laws and Ordinances thereof. But there is no hope that men should ever come to see the beauty and comely order of a pure Church, and the holy things of God therein, unlesse
they be humbled and ashamed of their own iniquities and a∣bominations, as in other things, so also in this particular of mixing the devices of men with the holy institutions of God, which we heartily wish all the servants of God seri∣ously to consider and to lay to heart. Neverthelesse, we doe ac∣knowledge that your condition stands in need of consolation as well as exhortation, though we thus speak; For we have heard of sad and doleful things that have befallen that Coun∣trey as well as other parts of the Kingdom, by means of the bloudy distempers of warre wherewith the Lord hath af∣flicted the land. It hath been reported to us by printed Cur∣rantoes and by letters, that ma∣ny bloudy battels have been
fought in your coasts, that ma∣ny of your Towns have been besieged and taken, many hou∣ses in Lancaster and elsewhere burnt to the ground, many men robbed and plundered of their estates, many fain to fly from their houses and habitations for fear of the enemy, and glad to wander they and theirs for succour and relief where they could finde the same amongst strangers, that much bloud hath been shed at the battel at Houghton Common, at the ta∣king of Liverpool, of Bolton, and other places in the Coun∣trey, and such as have escaped with life have been forced to endure and undergoe much hardship and misery, though their lives have been given them for a prey. In regard of all which we confess you have need of cordials and comforts,
and oh that we had the skill to minister the same unto you in such sort as might be for the re∣freshing of your disconsolate hearts. But the best is, he that counts the wandrings of his peo∣ple, and putteth all their tears into his bottle, he is able to comfort the comfortlesse a∣mong you, that have suffered for his sake, and will effectu∣ally do it in due time. In the mean season be entreated (dear Brethren, all you children of affliction) to stay your hearts a little from sorrow, and re∣frain your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears, while we propound to your conside∣ration such grounds of conso∣lation as we finde in the blessed book of the Scriptures of God, and which have been sanctified and blessed unto us through his grace, for the bringing of our
hearts to some measure of qui∣et contentation and comfort in the saddest hours of affliction that have befallen us in the passages of our pilgrimage, from our first times until this day. Which grounds of conso∣lation we trust the Lord may be graciously pleased to blesse in like sort unto your souls. First of all, All our afflictions in this world do not happen by chance, or meerly by the will of devils or men, but they are all such as our heavenly father hath appointed us unto; and as our Saviour sometimes said Shall we not of the cup that our Father hath mixed for us? Joh. 18.11. 2. He that sometimes said, I have seen, I have seen the af∣fliction of my people that is in Aegypt, Exod. 3.7. he is still the same allseeing and allsuffici∣ent
God, and so beholds and observes all the sufferings of his servants, and all the injurious and outragious dealings of their enemies, Psa. 10.14 17. 3. Nor doth he only see our sufferings and no more but so, but also (such is his goodnesse) he doth sympathise with us in the same: so that our Lord and Redeemer in all our afflictions is afflicted with us, and ac∣counts our sufferings as his own. Isa. 63.9. Zach. 2.8. Act. 9.4, 5. Col. 1.24. 4 Our heavenly father like a good Physitian doth never af∣flict his children willingly nor giveth them bitter potions to drink, but as it were by con∣straint and being necessitated thereunto, when they in regard of some spirituall distemper or corruption doe stand in need thereof. Lam. 3.27. 1 Pet. 1.6.
5. And to shew how unwil∣ling he is of the sorrows of his servants, he saith he is angry but a little against them, but for their enemies that are so fierce and handle his servants so severely, he professeth to be sore displeased with them for this dealing of theirs, and for their eager minde to help for∣ward their affliction, which he counts a going beyond their Commission. Zach. 1.15. 6. The power of the malig∣nant enemies of Gods ser∣vants is so limited by the Lord, that not the most malicious of men, nor yet any of all the de∣vils in hell can go one jot be∣yond his leave and commission, who as he hath set bounds to the sea, saying thus far shalt thou go, but no further, and here shall stay thy proud waves. Job. 38.11. Even so in like sort
doth he restrain the rage and tumult of the wicked against his servants. Psa 65.7. 7. The afflictions of the god∣ly are alwaies so ordered by the Lord, that for measure they shall not be immoderate, nor more then they are able to bear, Jerem. 30.11. 1 Cor. 10 13. nor shall they in the issue do them any hurt, but great good, both in purging out their sinne and corruption that they may be par∣takers of his holinesse, Heb. 12.10. Isa. 1, 25. Joh. 15 2. and in confor∣ming them to Christ, Rom. 8.29. and to the blessed Prophets, A∣postles and Martyrs that have been before them. 8. The Lord doth not love his children ever a whit the lesse because they are afflicted, Heb. 12.6, 7. Rev. 3.19. but on the contrary is many times then nearest unto you, when they
are in greatest tribulation, and then affords unto them the most of his gracious presence, the most mighty support, most rich supply of patience and long-sufferance and other gra∣ces, and the sweetest glimpses and apprehensions of heavenly glory, with the most lively ex∣pectations of future blessed∣nesse, 2 Cor. 1.5. & 4.16. God was never nearer to the three Princes, Dan. 3. then when they were in the furnace, nor to Daniel and Ezechiel, and Iohn in glorious vision of God, then when they were in captivity and banishment, nor unto Ste∣ven, then when the stones came thickest about his head. 9. This is the common way in which all have gone that have gone to heaven, and why should we expect to be singu∣larly priviledged above all the
rest of the Saints, and not ra∣ther be content to bear these things with patience, the same afflictions being accomplished in our brethren that are in the world, 1 Pet. 5 9. 10. All the sufferings of this life are but for a moment, for yet a little while, and he that shall come to work our perfect deliverance, he will surely come, and will not tarry, 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 10.37. And sure it is, that if our lives were the longest that ever any were, and that of all this time we should never see good day, yet all this in re∣spect of eternity were such a nothing, that that eternall weight of glory will abundant∣ly recompense us for the same. Rom. 8.18. These and such like Argu∣ments of consolation against all the sufferings of the Saints
in this world, we doubt not but many amongst you have been long ago taught of God to con∣sider. Neverthelesse our un∣feigned love to your souls hath moved us in this manner to re∣vive the remembrance of them at this time, though you doe already know them, and be e∣stablished in the present truth. And besides these considera∣tions afore-mentioned, which are more generall, and applia∣ble to all afflictions and trou∣bles, whatsoever the Saints may be exercised withall in this life; there are sundry things in the ground and cause of your pre∣sent sufferings, as also in respect of the condition of your ene∣mies by whom you suffer, that may also be grounds of conso∣lation to every sincere and Christian heart. As first of all, because the
war wherein you have been en∣gaged, and by means where∣of you have suffered so great things, was not (as we con∣ceive) offensive and volunta∣ry, but meerly defensive and taken up upon necessity, be∣cause otherwise it could not have been avoided, but your estates, your wives, your chil∣dren, your liberty, your laws, yea, your very lives, and (that which ought to be dearer then your lives) the true Religion of Christ Jesus, these must all have been prostituted to the pleasure of Papists and other prophane and impious people, the sworn servants of Antichrist, and bloudy enemies of God and of the Kingdome; And therefore if Nehemiah spake to good purpose when he bad the rulers and people of Iudah to remember the Lord which is
great and terrible, and to fight for their brethren, their sonnes and their daughters, their wives and their houses, Neh. 4.14 your selves we doubt not may have comfort in your fightings, whatever you may hazard or loose therein, because you have as many relations and interests to fight for, and of as precious importance and concernment as any that Ne∣hemiah doth there mention, and some of a great deal more, so that if any ask why you would engage your selves in this war, the events whereof have been to many so sad, such may satis∣fie themselves if they will but consider what matters you had lying as it were at stake: and you may well answer in the words of David for the satis∣faction of your own and others consciences, "Was there not
a cause? 1 Sam. 17.29. 2. And doubtless it is a great comfort in sufferings when they that suffer can say unto God,Psa. 44. for thy sake O God these things are come upon us; In which case the Church Psal. 44.22 doth greatly comfort them∣selves, and our Saviour in this respect doth comfort his disci∣ples, both pronouncing them to be blessed when they so suf∣fer, and commanding them thereupon to rejoice and to be exceeding glad, Matth. 5.11, 12. Now inasmuch as your suffer∣ings are sufferings for that do∣ctrine, that worship and that government of the Church, which is prescribed in the Scri∣pture, against Popery and Pre∣lacy and other corrupt inventi∣ons of men, we therefore doe esteem the cause of them to be no other but the very cause of
God, and of his Christ: and so you may well claim a share in those consolations which be∣long to those who suffer for the cause of God and for righte∣ousnesse sake. 3. Nor is that nothing which is so often mentioned in the Scripture, that the bloud of Gods servants doth cry for ven∣geance against their enemies▪ Gen. 4.10. Rev. 6.10. In which respect you may be assured that he that saith the death of the Saints is precious in his sight, Psal. 116.15. will not suffer the bloud which you or yours have shed or shall shed for his cause (the cause you have now in hand) to be alwaies unreven∣ged, but will surely finde a time to render tribulation to them that trouble you in his waies, 2 Thes. 1.6. For their tu∣mult and outrage and blasphe∣my
is already come up into his ears, Isa. 37.29. so that he will doubtlesse avenge your cause, yea, and avenge it speedily, Luk. 18.7, 8. 4. Your brethrens bloud that is already poured out in this cause, you cannot tell how much good it may have done, and will doe, nor what good your selves may doe by your constancy. But this you know how the Apostle saith, the things that were done to him, did turn to the furtherance of the Gospel. Phil. 1.12. and the old saying, that the bloud of Martyrs hath been the seed of the Church, hath been abundantly verified in our land, and in Lancashire, as well as in other parts. For who knows not what a multi∣tude of professors have been brought forth in the Kingdom and in our County by means of
the sufferings of the Martyrs in Queen Maries daies? Was not blessed Bradford born in Man∣chester? and George Marsh in the Parish of Dean near Bolton? and Ieffery Hurst in Leigh? and doth not he that knows these places well know, that profes∣sion of the truth, and power of godlinesse hath abounded in these and the places therea∣bouts, much more then in many other places? And why may we not look at this as one part of the precious fruit of the suf∣fering of the Saints afore-men∣tioned, who received their birth and first being in those places? And if we should mention re∣verend Bourn, wise Gosnall grave Midgeley, both the fa∣ther and the sonne, and should say that Manchester hath no fared the worse for the first, nor Bolton for the second, nor
Rachdale and Leigh for the two last, we should not be vain in so saying. For we think it is clear that where these or other of the Lords Prophets have suffered any thing for his sake, and in any measure of truth have stood up for reformation, there God hath blessed the Countrey round about, so that there hath not any where been found more profession and power of Religion then in those parts. And if your own present sufferings may produce the like effect (as why may it not?) we trust you will not so much sorrow for the bitter∣nesse of the things you suffer, as rejoice and be glad for the happy and sweet fruit there∣of. 5. Rome is now ready to be ruined, and the time of her destruction now posteth on
apace. For the beast now re¦ceiving a wound and deadly blow in the downfall of the Prelacy and other corruptions depending thereon, doth there¦fore thus lay about him and bestirre himself in killing the servants of Jesus, Rev. 11.7. as it hath been the manner of Satan to shew forth the greatest wrath, when he knows he hath the shortest time, Revel. 12.12. Therefore (dear brethren) be patient for a while, a very little while, for it will not be long afore the storm be over, and then we shall have glorious daies: For Babylon being once fallen whose fall is not farre off, new Ierusalem will then come down from heaven as a Bride prepared for her hus∣band. Rev. 19.7. Which times you may be assured will be very glorious: for the report and
vision of them was so joyfull to Iohn, that transported therewith he could not contain himself, but fals down to worship the Angel that revealed unto him these things. Rev. 19, 10. & 22.9. which though it was his in∣firmity, yet it argueth the great felicity of those times, the tidings whereof did so tran∣sport the spirit of so great and holy an Apostle. 6. But though the time of your sufferings shall be but short, yet your recompence for the same shall be lasting and large. For though neither you nor your children should live to see the happy daies that are a coming and drawing on, but that you should be taken away in the battel, whilest you are fighting for and with the Lamb against the beast and his adhe∣rents, yet of this you may be
assured that so many of you (and we hope they are not a few) as have known the Lord Jesus in truth and in sincerity, shall no sooner end your daies in this world, but you shall be taken away to heaven, to the fruition of eternall rest and peace, where you shall expe∣rimentally finde it made good unto your souls, that your light affliction which is but for a mo∣ment, will work for you a farre more exceeding and eternall weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And in the mean time, if God conti∣nue your lives, he is able (the earth being his and the fulnesse thereof, Psa. 24.1.) to give you an abundant recompence even in outward matters, for all the losses that you have or may su∣stain for his name, 2 Chro. 25.9. However, that same hundred∣fold in spirituall and internall
blessings, which our Saviour hath promised in such case, Mar. 10.30. that same you shall be sure to receive in this life, be∣sides eternal life in the world to come. And for your children or friends that have already lost their lives in this cause, or may lose the same hereafter, he would have you besides other considerations to be comforted in this, that you shall see them again at the latter day, when you and they shall for ever be with the Lord. Wherefore to draw to an end, sith your war wherein you have been engaged and where∣in you have suffered such things, hath been meerly defensive and necessary, because you could not avoid it, and sith the cause for which you contend is not your own, but the cause of Je∣sus Christ, sith your sufferings
are so precious in the sight of God, that he will surely take vengeance on your enemies, sith your present pressures and trou∣bles and constancy therein may be profitable to posterity many a day hereafter, and that the time of your sufferings must be but short, and then be follow∣ed with happy times that will ensue in this world, and after∣wards be rewarded with eter∣nall glory in another: We be∣seech you therefore dear Bre∣thren and friends, put away now all base and unworthy sorrows and fears, and quit your selves valiantly like men, and be strong,1 Cor. 16.13. Heb. 12.12 Phil. 1.28 lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. In nothing fear your adversaries, which is unto them a token of per∣dition, and to you of salvation, and that of God; but sanctifie the Lord of hosts himself, and let him
be your fear,Isa 8.13. and let him be your dread. If you have been plun∣dered and robbed of your e∣states or a great part thereof, you know the Christian He∣brews took such things not on∣ly patiently but also joyfully, knowing that they had in heaven a better and an enduring sub∣stance:Heb. 10.34. and your selves shall do well to be like minded to them therein. If you have lost your dear friends in these broyls and battels wherewith the kingdom and your Countrey hath been embroiled: if any woman have lost her dear husband, any hus∣band his dear wife, any father his childe, any childe his father, any friend or brother his bro∣ther or friend; Consider whe∣ther you could ever loose them in a better quarell, or for a bet∣ter cause: Christ Jesus and his Gospel and Ordinances are sue
better then a thousand, either husbands or wives, either fa∣thers, or children, or other friends: and he knows but lit∣tle the worth of Christ and of the things of Christ, that doth not esteem them ten thousand times better then all the world besides: and indeed as our Sa∣viour saith, He that loves these things better then him, is not wor∣thy of him. If you should be stripped of your estates and friends, and afterwards of your lives also, you know our dear Saviour laid down his life for you, and therefore it is but e∣quall, if you give all that is dear unto you, and even your very lives for him. If you lose any thing for him and his cause, you shall be no losers in the end, but by that time all ac∣counts are cast up, you shall finde you have an hundred-fold
for all your losses whatever they be or can be, we mean as our Saviour doth,M. 10.9, 30. even an hundred fold in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting. Should you forsake the truth for fear of affliction, which God for∣bid, you might then peradven∣ture for a time preserve your e∣states, and liberties, and lives, (and yet that may be a question too) but suppose the best, you should neverthelesse have a ve∣ry losing bargain of it in the end, and should shew your selves to be penny-wise therein and pound-foolish. For our Sa∣viours words must stand, and all flesh shall finde them most in∣fallibly true,Mr. 8.35. that he that shall save his life shall lose it, and he that shall lose his life for his sake and the Gospels, shall save it. Ma∣ny of you have been professors of the truth for these many
years, it is fit therefore that by this time you should be grown up to some good measure of heavenly-mindednesse, and li∣ving by faith even then when sense and reason, and all crea∣ture-comforts shall fail. Look not therefore on things that are seen,2 Cor. 4.18. but on things that are not seen, for the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal. Learn now by faith to see him that is invisible, and thereby to endure all that may befall you,Heb. 11.27. as Mo∣ses sometimes did by that means. Buy the truth but sell it not, Rather sell all that you have for the buying thereof: for the merchandise thereof is bet∣ter then silver,Pro 23.23 and the gain thereof, then fine gold. The Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, and the grace of Christ therein is such a treasure and such a pearl that
he deals like a wise man that shall purchase the same,Mat. 13.46. though with the losse or sale of all that he hath. For Popery (we trust) you so far do see the vanity and loathsomenesse thereof, that you will never decline nor turn aside thereto: but take heed of Arminianism, Familism, and all other erroneous doctrines, of which these daies are so fruit∣full: especially take heed of the leaven of the Anabaptists: which (if we be not mistaken) is so dangerous and pernicious, and yet withall so contagious, and apt to spread in these daies, that we scarce know any other, of which Christians had so much need to take heed, and to be advertised and exhorted so to do. It is but too manifest that many of all sorts are now a daies hankering and leaning that way, and it is therefore a
testimony of our love, and so we hope you will take it, that we advise you to beware lest you also or any of you be pluck∣ed away with that or any other error, and fall from your own stedfastness. Love one another, and cleave together in firmness of Christian and cordial affecti∣on. The enemies of the truth are not so weak, nor you so strong, that there can be any need of your dissentions and divisions for the weakning of your selves or the strengthning of them.2 Pet. 3.17. Divide & impera. Di∣vide them and make your selves Masters of them all, is one of Machiavels principles, and a most perillous one it is. It will be your wisedom to take heed lest the Jesuites should practise the same design amongst you, whether among your military Commanders or otherwise,
your safety and strength under God doth in great part consist in your unity and agreement a∣mong your selves; Beleeve the truth when it is held forth unto you either in books and private discourse, or specially in the publike Ministry, & receive it in the love of it,2. Thes. 2.11. that you may not be deluded with lies. Content not yourselvs with literal knowledg in the brain & head, but chiefly look after spirituality and since∣rity of heart, and manifest and shew forth the same by the power of godlinesse in all your conversation. What upon sober and serious consideration you shall finde your selves shall have most need of another day, whether the day of death or the day of judgement, or any other day of deep distresse, of that (if you be wise) doe you chiefly make your choice now:
and what will be most uncom∣fortable then, do you now aban∣don; And to apply this gene∣rall, the day is coming and not far off neither, when the favour of God through Christ Jesus, true interest to his speciall love, as reconciled through the bloud of his son, with the amiable and sweet light of his countenance, will be of more worth to the soul, and yield more satisfacti∣on to the heart, then all that this world can afford, from the rising of the Sunne to the going down thereof. Yea, the day is coming when these things will all be miserable comforters and physitians of no value, but those other will then be found to be of such absolute alsufficiency to the soul, as that he shall be most happy for ever that hath them, and of such necessity that he shall be most wretched and ac∣cursed
that shall live and die without them. Wherefore we beseech you, consider wisely what now you have to doe, and now with Mary make choice of the better part, which will ne∣ver be taken from you. Choose the Lord God in Christ for your portion, and the lot of your inheritance; choose not a∣ny way of sin, or errors, or crea∣tures for your God, for they are no Gods: but now make a choice (and the Lord direct you so to doe) that you may have the comfort of the same here∣after, and for evermore. We doe not think our selves to be the only Prophets, nor that we only are able to give a word of counsel or comfort to our countreymen: we trust we are so far conscious to our own weaknesse, that such arrogant apprehensions are far from us.
Nor doe we doubt but Lanca∣shire is blessed of God with ma∣ny faithful and able Watchmen, who are continually blowing the trumpet in your streets, and imparting the message of the Lord amongst you, much more suteably to your condition, then we at so many miles di∣stance can possibly do, of whom we have no other thoughts but that the meanest of them might adde much unto either of us. But because we dearly love our Countrey, though we live not in it, therefore we think it meet to seek the weal thereof in the best manner we are able, and we hope we may be allow∣ed so to doe. We also consider, that sometimes the God of hea∣ven may give as great a blessing to weaker means, as to those that are more excellent and e∣minent, that so himself and not
the means, may have all the glory. Finally, we are both of us well stricken in years, and posting on apace towards our dissolution, and never like to see your faces, nor you to see ours in this world, and there∣fore we are willing to doe this office of love unto your souls, conceiving it may be the last that we can do unto you in this kinde before we die: and glad we should be if you may have the Lord Jesus Christ, and the things that concern your own peace in remembrance after our decease. Upon these and such like considerations we have ad∣ventured to do as here you see, hoping our sincere and loving intentions will be accepted in good part. For which we desire no other recompence at your hands, but the benefit of your praiers on our behalf, and this
we do most affectionately re∣quest from you. Finally Bre∣thren farewell: and the God of all grace who hath called us to his eternal glory by Christ Iesus,1 Pet. 5.10, 11. af∣ter that you have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish streng∣then, settle you: to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Fear none of those things which possibly you my yet suffer,Rev. .10. but be you faithful unto the death, and the Lord hath promised he will give unto you a Crown of life. To his grace we commend you all in our best desires, and so rest, Desirous of your eternal comfort in Christ Jesus, RICHARD MATHER, WILLIAM TOMPSON▪ Dorchester in New England, the last of De∣cember, 1649.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER. UNderstand dear Friends and Coun∣treymen, and any to whom this ensuing Let∣ter may be presented, that the Authours who writ the same, did intend it on∣ly as a small Remembrance of that Christian love that
ought to flow and abound in all that are members of that misticall body, accor∣ding to that Heb. 3.13. so especially it ought to ma∣nifest it self betwixt Mi∣nisters and people; and though these Friends that now write are so distant that they cannot speak to those to whom they write, as sometime they have done, yet they cannot for∣get those bowels of love as here is expressed and once did more fully declare to be in them when they
dwelt among you; and though it come so late to your hands, the reason was, the place being so remote, and the way of conveyance so difficult, being it was intended to be Printed that so the more might enjoy it: The Presse at that time being full of other imployment (which was in the Year 1645.) it was cast by so long, that at last the Authours thought it out of season, and so sent for it home a∣gain to N. E. till now this
Year, some Friends un¦derstanding and seeing o it, encouraged the Au∣thours to put it forth still, which they (willing to shew their love to their Countreymen) condescend∣ed unto: And therefore let it not seem to thee as an Almanack out of date, but well weigh and consi∣der it, and what thou findest in it that concerns thee in any kinde, make use of it to the glory of God and thine own good, for that is it which the Au∣thours
wish and desire, as their preachings formerly, and Letters now expresse, that the Name of God may be glorified in you, and you in him. FINIS.
