M1287D 12677822 65600
OF THE OPENING OF RIVERS FOR NAVIGATION, The Benefit exemplified, By The Two AVONS Of Salisbury and Bristol. WITH A Mediterranean Passage by Water for BILLANDERS of Thirty Tun, between Bristol and London. With the Results. LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, 1655.
To his Highness, OLIVER, Lord PROTECTOR of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging. May it please your Highness, ALthough this following Design be see forth both plain in speech, and unpo∣lished for eloquence (my Genius ha∣ving not assumed the one, nor my en∣deavors in Literature attained the o∣ther) not for want of desire, but abi∣litie to perform it: Yet notwithstan∣ding I beseech your Highness favor to make the best Con∣struction of it, which here I most humbly present to your Highness, under whose wing I flye for protection and assi∣stance,
which otherwise will be an Embryo or Abortive never to receive life, if not animated by your powerful hand. Wherefore in all humility I do make this Address unto your Highness, by the great lustre owned to your Name from all parts of Europe, your Conquest of the Seas making your Highness receive famous and renowned Courtship from all Princes; All Lands being ambitious of our friend∣ship, in Contemplation of divine Providence thus advan∣cing you and your affairs: And as your Highness is thus esteemed by all Forrein Nations for your happy archieve∣ments, so I the humblest of your servants am desirous, by presenting this which is the first Domestick service, to your Highness Consideration, to make you as popular at home as you are abroad, that all may see your aims are no other than the true advancement of the Publick good of this people now under your Highness Government; the continuance whereof shall have the daily prayers of him, that as in duty bound, remains July the 9. 1655. Your Highness, though unworthy, yet most humble and faithful Servant, Francis Mathew. If your Highness approve of this Overture pre∣sented, and be pleased to Command my Attendance on the Lords of your Highness most Honorable Privy-Council, I shall be ready to give them fur∣ther Satisfaction herein, for perfecting this Design, and removing all difficulties.
Of the opening of Rivers for Na∣vigation, &c. IN these Papers we are not to re∣flect upon this Island, as capa∣ble of such waterings as the flat Netherlands, whose benefits may seem to allure us to the like industry; nevertheless Englands fair Valleys, and rich Inlets, through which many noble Ri∣vers insinuate themselves, might with the imitation of the industrious Netherlanders be made in many places docible of Navigation, to the inestimable comfort, satisfaction, ease, and profit of the pub∣lick, especially during the seven (which we call) winter-months, when waters abound in our Ri∣vers, and the Sea-coasts so dangerous for Naviga∣tion. The Objections of the difference of the Soyl, must not deterr us from so advantagious an enter∣prize,
terman will not think himself highly advanced, to come out of a River into the Sea; out of a Bil∣lander to a man of War, whose constant pay will be far greater, and whose imployment will be of much more credit, and carry with it more hope of pre∣ferment? Hence also many thousands of Horse, now only used for Packs and Burthens, would be spared, and so multiplied for Warlike service, and their feeding imployed upon improveable stocks. The facility of Commerce from one place to a∣nother, and the cheapness of transportation of Commodities without so much grinding and plowing up our high-wayes, which maketh them now in so many places so impassable. You shall see Western Waggons, which they call Plows, carry forty hundred weight; insomuch as between Bristol and Marlborough, they have been en∣forced at a Hill they call Bagdown-hill, to put twen∣ty beasts, Horse and Oxen, to draw it up: This great abuse by this means would be taken away, by keeping our high-wayes pleasant; and withal, by this transportation of Commodities by River, the price of Commodities would fail. The Imposition, though easie, laid upon every such Navigable passage, would, as Rivers by de∣grees are opened, amount to a fair revenue, without any grievance at all to the people, but rather with much comfort as it is imbraced in other Countries, where they cannot live without the help of these Billanders, passing and repassing daily from Town to Town, from Market to Market, and from Coast to Coast; these be only some few of so many bene∣fits which will result from the opening of Rivers.
General Observations upon all Rivers as they are thought fit to be made Navigable. To rise as high in opening the said Rivers as they shall be found feazable, there to make a Wharf, Magazine, See Rastal a large in his Ha∣vens & Rivers upon the 27 of Eliz. or Ware∣houses for all such Commodities as are useful to those parts of the Country, both for Trade in Merchandizing, and Service in time of War, with far greater expedition. If any other River practiceable for Boats lie neer the head, Let the head of the Avon which falleth down from Rugby to Warwick, and so into the Se∣verne, be exa∣mined with the Welland, which riseth neer to the head of the Avon, & falleth down to Stamford, and so through the Isle of Ely, into the Sea. or side of the said River, and that the ground favor the opening of a still River to be drawn between them, then to joyn them with Sasses, alias Locks, or otherwise. But should the ground be re∣pugnant, then a fair stone Cawsey, not exceeding one little days journey for Horse, or Carts, to be raised between the said Rivers; where the Navigation ends, a Wharf, or Magazine to be made as aforesaid, if these Rivers reach from Sea to Sea, not other∣wise. By the like industry, many Mediterranean passages by water, with the help of such Cawseys, would be found from one Sea to the other, and not to have the old Channel of any River to be forsaken to gain a shorter passage.) For, as hath been said, Ri∣vers are never out of their way; and upon these Navigable pas∣ages, our chief Manufactures should be set up for the Commo∣dities of transportation. Object. These great works alwayes bring forth great diffi∣culties, though the benefit should be never so apparent. Answ. Can any thing of this nature seem difficult to a State resolved to do good to its people? Difficulties are the bounda∣ries of narrow hearts, such ought not to be the heart of a State, which should most rejoyce in difficult things, in the overcoming of which, so much honor is atchieved. A business well pondered and seriously resolved on, by a powerful Ʋndertaker, is carried like the world upon Atlas shoulders, without groaning. Object. 2. Most of our Rivers in the Summer time will want water to carry a Boat, even our Thames sometimes is so shal∣low, as our Barges are gravelled. Answ. Such Rivers as shall be judged fit for Navigation must not be debarred the Contribution which other Springs, Brooks, and Rivers would give them; wherefore all such
Streams, These expresly forbidden in Magna Char∣ta, Cap. 2. See Henr. pri∣mi, Cap. 12. Al∣so Walsing∣ham, in Edw. 3 And see John Davis in his I∣rish Reports. great or small, which would willingly fall into our said Rivers designed for Navigation, ought to be free, and not to be bound up with Wears, Sluces, Pens for Mills, and the like imprestures, which keep up, stop, and divert the Waters from their natural Course, and fall into those Navigable Rivers. Those Mills either the State should buy of the Owners of them, and erect for every Water-mill three Horse-mills, for the necessity of the Country adjoyning, or so agree with the Owners of them, that they pulling up their Water-mills and such apparent purprestures for the free Course of Waters should themselves set up the said Horse-mills for the use of the Country in places more convenient, then to go in some place a mile or two to a Water-mill, which asketh a days imployment for a man and Horse. And truly, if the consumption of our Timber hold on but some few yeers more, there will be none left to build either Wa∣ter-mill or Wind-mill, they requiring the best and strongest Tim∣ber we have: so that of necessity we shall be driven to set up these Horse-mills, which are built with our meanest Wood, our Oak being little enough to maintain our Shipping, were it never so well preserved hereafter. The Avon of Bristol made Navigable as high as Malmsbury and Calne, with the Profits for Transportation of Coals and other Com∣modities. Which also may with facility produce a Mediterranean pas∣sage by water from Bristol to London. The Coal-pits in Kings-wood neer Bristol, and if they suf∣fice not those Colliaries upon the Severn-side to furnish that Country so much destitute of Fuel up to Malmsbury and Calne, in this manner may be looked upon: This River made Na∣vigable for Billanders flat-bottomed Boats of thirty tun, which draw loaden but three foot and an half of water. The work being feazable at a far less Charge than the yeerly Profit will come to, these Collyers are to be dealt with to bring Coal ei∣ther out of Kings-wood, or from the Severn, to a place assigned them for wharfage, they affording the Newcastle Chaldron at the said Wharfage for 10 s. 2 d.
Those Collyers in Wales, the State may take it into their own hands, giving the Owners yeerly more for them then they now make. These Colliaries setled, These of Kings∣wood are upon the States own soyl. and the River of Bristol made Na∣vigable, the State to licence 300 of these Billanders, each bea∣ring thirty Chaldron (only London measure) and these to bring Coal from the Wharf up the said River as high as Malms∣bury and Calne, paying 10 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron at the Wharf, and 5 s. for every such Chaldron for the passage up the River, and sell them at Malmsbury and Calne for 18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron. The Owner or Merchant of the VVharf having for every such London Chaldron delivered, These sold at 18 s. 2 d. Lon∣don Chaldron. 10 s. 2 d. The State for the passage of every such Chaldron 5 s. The Billander for his fraight for every such Chaldron, 3 s. The difference of Newcastle and London measure in the Chaldron, being a third Coal, two Newcastle Chaldron ma∣king three of London: The surplus of measure should be gi∣ven to the State, to be landed neer the said VVharfs, upon a VVharf called the States Wharf. The other VVharfs to be divided into six; Surplus of mea∣sure to belong to the State. every VVharf ha∣ving his squadron of 50 Billanders, belonging to the Owners and Merchants of the several VVharfs; which VVharfs may have their Names from the Colours they shall bear. These Wharfs to be kept by the Owners of the Coal which lieth upon them, who are to receive (as hath been said) 10 s. 2 d. for every Chaldron given out, London measure. These Billanders are to sayl up the River, every squadron by its self, having each his Admiral, and Rear-Admiral, carrying their Flags of proper Colours, none of the said squadron sayling before his Admiral, nor any behinde his Rear-Admiral; and this to prevent disorder as they pass through the Country. They are so to discharge both the duties at the Wharf, and the duties for the Passage, as to make no stay at all. Every Admiral at the discharge of the duties for his whole squadron (for he is to undertake it) is to receive a Ticket for his free passage through the River, without which they are not to pass the Block-house or Fort for preserving the States reve∣nue.
These Wharfs aforesaid, are to have correspondent Wharfs at Malmsbury and Calne, and to be regulated as the former, one Squadron not unlading at anothers Wharf, where each Bil∣lander is to receive for its fraight of 30 Chaldrons, 4 l. 10 s. every voyage; and two of these voyages may well be made in one month. The Wharfs paying the Billanders their Salary, and keeping the Coals for all such as fetch it there at 18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron. As concerning the Coal, before should be laid upon the States Wharf, being the third Coal gained in the Nowcastle measure, that also is to have at Malmsbury and Calne a Wharf called the States Wharf, corresponding to the former, where that sur∣plus of measure should be had and kept for the benefit of the State, in thankfulness for that great charge in making the River thus Navigable, for the benefit of the Country: And thereby the benefit of the Coal, and Passage, cometh to the State (the fraight of the Billander only excepted.) The ground-work being thus laid, the Profits are these:   l. s. d. Every Billanders fraight with 30 London Chaldron for the Passage only, These from Bristol to Malmsbury, and Calne, making two voyages every  monthe, carry 126000 Chal∣dron. Fruits to the State Every voyage — 7 10 0 Every Squadron of 50 of these Billanders fruits to the State every voyage — 375 0 0 Every voyage of 300 Billanders for Passage only, fruits to the State — 2250 0 0 Surplus of Measure to the State alone:       Every such Billander fraight with the Surplus of Measure upon the third Coal, fruits to the State, both for Coal and Passage— 22 10 0 Every Squadren of 50 Billanders, every Car∣riage fraight as aforesaid, fruits to the State— 1125 0 0 Every voyage of those 300 Billanders fraight as aforesaid, fruits to the State — 6750 0 0 The Coal as they are first brought to the Wharfs should be so Ordered, as the third Coal be duly carried to the Wharf of the State. As to cleer what hath been said, If 20 Chaldron Newcastle
measure be brought from the Pits to the VVharfs, they are to be divided into 30 Chaldron London measure, of which the State is to have 10 Chaldron laid upon its VVharf; and so proportio∣nable to all that are brought from the Pits to any VVharf, the third Coal being alwayes carried to the States Wharf. The Staple of Coal being thus setled for all that Country about Malmsbury and Calne, and Coal being sold there constantly for 18 s. 2 d. the London Chaldron to all that will fetch them, that is, at the price of 6 d. the London Bushel; No question is to be made, but that a marvelous great quantity will be thus vented, to the great blessing of the people, who now pay about Calne and Malmsbury never under 12 d. the Bushel, and commonly more, being carried by horse from Bristol: Should 50000 Chaldron only be thus yeerly vented, it is a great Re∣venue, and would in the very Profits to the State rise in this sole Commodity of Coal. unto— 20833 6 8 That is, for Passage— 12500 0 0 And for the third Coal gained— 8333 6 8 And no doubt Bristol, so great a place of Traffick, would make use of this River as high as Calne towards the transporta∣tion of their Merchandize from Bristol to London, it being the worst and most hilly part of the way, and lieth full in the pas∣sage to London.   l. s. d. A Billander of 30 Tun, laden with Merchan∣dize from Bristol to Calne, taking but one Far∣thing per pound, fruits to the State every voyage 62 10 0 It may well make two voyages every Month. This River being thus practiced as high as Malmsbury and Calne, should our Seas be at any time infested with Enemy Fleets in such sort as with  eminent danger, London and other parts of this Common-wealth, could not be served with Coal from Newcastle and Sunderland; How facile a thing it were from Malmsbury, lying upon the said River, to open a passage for these Billanders of 30 Tun, which draw water but three foot and half, loaden into the Ri∣ver Isis, by Creeklade and Latchlade, and so into the Thames, all that land-passage being not above 4 or 5 miles (inviting the Ʋndertaker) being very low, and practicable ground, most fit for the Designe.
By this means there would be a Mediterranean passage from Bristol to London by water; Not only for the supply of much Coal in time of necessity, but for all other Commodities brought into Bristol, which in time of Hostility London could not otherwise enjoy, but by excessive Rates for Land-carriages or conveyances by Sea: but by this passage once opened, all Commodities may be brought from Bristol to London (even at one farthing per pound) we now paying all the winter-time for carriage by Land between Lon∣don and Bristol 4 s. per cent. and so preserve our horses for the States Service. The whole Charge of this Navigable Passage would be paid with the Profits of one only yeer: And as for Coal for 2 s. more upon the London Chaldron for fraight, they also this way would be brought to London at 20 s. 2 d. the Chaldron, London Chaldron. Howsoever great caution ought to be used, that du∣ring times of Peace no Coal should be brought to London this way, to the end our shipping, which is much imployed in the transportation of that Commodity, might still be kept up, for the safety, benefit, and honor of this State. It were good that the 2 d. upon every Chaldron were paid towards the defraying of the Salary of Officers upon the VVharf, and towards the Passage yeerly at Cardiff, the neerest Colliary to Bristol, that is upon the Severn, excellent Scotish-Coals, which also would drive a great trade upon this passage, being sold by the Tun. This passage in time of Peace should be used for transpor∣tation of Merchandize to London, and from London to Bristol, only from the first of October to the first of April, partly not to obstruct our Navigation by Sea, all the Summer-time when the doubling of the Cape of Cornwal is not dangerous, nor our Coasts so subject to storms; And partly by reason of the Avon, and Isis, and the Thames it self in those winter-months will not want water, which in the Summer they do: And for Coal, our Seas being not infested, none should pass higher then Malmsbury and Calne, not to hinder, as hath been said, our Navigation, for that Commodity by Sea, which must still be en∣deavored to be kept up to the full. Now who should be the Ʋndertaker of this great work but
the State it self? it being too great an expence for any private man or Corporation to lay out; and of too great a Profit for them to receive, being effected. Some endeavors have been used by that noble Patriot, Sir John Harrington, to make this River Navigable between Bristol and the Bath, which work I have seen: This to be ob∣served well by by the Cities of Bath and Bri∣stol, lest they labor in vain. but the Design being too narrow for this our great Proposal, it were in vain to be again set upon, either by any private man, or the said two Towns, unless they intended to make the River and their Sasses so large as the River to carry Billanders of thirty Tun, and their Sasses to hold half a dozen of these Billanders at once. I went down to see Sir Joh. Harringtons intended Sass some two miles below the Bath, & I found the Engineer to have much abused the noble Knight in his work, making his Sass upon the very Dam of the River, which would have been a perpetual and forcible enemy to his work. Besides, I found by measuring his Sass, that it would contain but one only Boat, and that only of 8 Tun: which narrow Design would no way have served to this our Mediterranean Passage; But must have been again ript up and destroyed: The Sass it self being to be otherwise placed, and made far larger. He who hath seen the Sass, between Ipris and Vuerne in Flanders, will confess it a noble work, and capable of Publick Service (which this I spoke of no way is)  much is the memory of that noble Knight to be honored, in shewing himself to his ability, a publick man, laboring so much for the good of his Country. Many Sasses are to be made upon this River of Avon, it be∣ing so much a fayling-water, insomuch it is now forced to be kept up with many Dams, every one of which must have his Sass, but not upon the Dam, but upon the side of it, as the Figure expresseth. The Proposer of this Paper hath no other interest in this De∣sign, than a true Patriot ought to have a desire for the Publick good, to see it effected, and by it his Country served: And if he shall perceive it imbraced, it will encourage him to offer up to the Publick service of his Country other improvements of greater Consequence. FINIS.
diagram of Sir John Harrington's proposed sasse (lock) on the River Avon Aboue and below the Damme. Thus the Sasse to goe The Auon. The Damme. Sir Iohn Harringtons Sasse The Auon.
