M1437 15704100 104473
THE Conquests and Triumphs OF GRACE: BEING A Brief Narrative of the Success which the Gospel hath had among the INDIANS of Martha's Vineyard (and the Places adjacent) in New-England. WITH Some Remarkable Curiosities, concerning the Numbers, the Customs, and the present Cir∣cumstances of the INDIANS on that Island. Further Explaining and Confirming the Account given of those Matters, by Mr. Cotton Mather, in the Life of the Renowned Mr. Iohn Eliot. By MATTHEW MAYHEW. Attested by the Reverend Mr. Nath. Mather, and others. Whereto is Added, An Account concerning the Present State of Christianity among the Indians, in other Parts of New-England: Expressed in the Letters of several Worthy Persons. best acquainted therewithal. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-hall-street, over against St. Mary Axe, 1695.
WE whose Names are un∣der-written, are well Assured and Satisfied of the Truth of these Narratives, concerning the State and Success of the Gospel amongst the Indians in New-England. George Griffith. Matthew Mead. John How. Vincent Alsop. Isaac Chauncy. Nath. Mather.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir. William Phipps Knight. Captain General and Governour in Chief of the Province of the Massa∣chusett-Bay, in New-England. TO THE HONOURABLE William Stoughton Esq Lieutenant Governour. TO Major GENERAL, Wait Winthrop Esq To the Reverend, Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard Colledge. AND To the Reverend, Charles Morton, Pastor of the Church in Charlstown.
SHOULD I not make Honourable men∣tion of Your Names, for Your conti∣nual Care of, and Inspection into, the Great Work of Civilizing the Indians, and Promoting the Work for their Conversion▪ and the hope of future incouraging the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, to such who as yet areStrangers to the God of Israel; I should be justly condemnable. I have in the insuing Scrole, presented to the World a True Narra∣tive, though Short, of the Beginning, Progress and Present State of the Indians on Martha's Vineyard and Islands Adjacent, and Places on the Mainland to them relating, respecting their Conversion. That I have not spoken of other parts of New England, may be justly Excused; since I have Written little more than what is of my own knowledge: of other places I must have presumed from report. Of the Calumnies cast on the Indian Professors, I have in the discourse presented to Your view, (as in other things) spoken briefly, which I hope will be some Satis∣faction to You. I shall only desire of You, that incouragement might be given to some English, or Indian, Spirited for such Service (humbly conceiving an Indian most probably like to effect the same) to visit the Indians, bordering on New England; who might carry to them the glad Tydings of the Gospel; but since I may not doubt Your Prudence, in this as in other your weighty Affaires; I shall not add to this, but Subscribe Your EXCELLENCIES, And Your HONOƲRS, Most Humble Servant, MATTHEW MAYHEW. Martha's Vineyard, Iune 18. 1694.
THE PREFACE.
THAT Blessed Work, which is the Prin∣cipal Subject of these following Narratives, was begun about Fourty or Fifty Years ago: And there were then Published, for Three or Four Years successively, several Prints giving account of its Progress, under the Titles of, The Day daw∣ning, &c. Strength out of Weakness, &c. Tears of Repentance, &c. to the great rejoycing of the Hearts of many Precious Saints of that Day. Since that Time, there hath been but little (that I know of) Communicated to the Publick, concerning that Affair; save only that Letter from my Dear Brother, Mr. Increase Mather, to Doctor John Leusden of Utrecht, which is here Inserted, and which was (soon after it was Received) Printed in Latine, as it was Written; and also Translated into French, and into English; and the French Translation Printed in the Netherlands, the Latine and the English here in London; first by it self, and the English again afterward in the Story of the Life of Mr. John Eliot, by my Dear Nephew Mr.Cotton Mather: Which ife of Mr. Eliot was first Printed in New England, and hath been Printed thrice here in London, (tho' not without being great¦ly maimed, according to the Direction and Pleasure of our English Index Expgtorius. This Letter when first rinted here, was Presented to the King by the Right Honourable the Lord Wharton. These other Papers, here joyned therewith, were lately Printed at Boston in New England, and sent over from thence to my Hand by my Dearest Brother there. I give this so Particular an Account con∣cerning these Relations, that the Reader may rest assured and satisfied concerning the Truth and Cer∣tainty of Matter of Fact, as here reported.
The Jesuits about 130 Years ago, endeavoured to amuse the World by their Epistolae Indicae, and other Prints, with Stories of the Conversions wrought by them, and their Companions, in the East-Indies and Adjacent Isles. But, as many of the Stories which they tell are palpable and impudent Impostures, so if all that they vaunt of their Conversions were true, no milder Censure of them can be given than that which Christ passeth on the Conversions made by the Pharisees, who (he tells us) compassed Sea and Land to make one Proselyte; and when he was made, he became twofold more a Child of Hell than they who proselyted him Of the Justness of this Judg∣ment there needs no other Evidence than that Book Entituled, Manuale ad Sacramenta Ecclesiae mi∣nistranda, D. Ludovici Cequeira Japonensis Epis∣copi opera ad usum sui Cleri ordinatum. Cumapprobatione & facultate. Nangsaquij, in Col∣legio Japonico Societatis Jesu. Anno Domini, MDCV. It is a Directory for the Ministring of their Sacraments, as also for Reconciling or Pu∣rifying Churches and Burying-Places, for making Holy-water, for blessing Priests Garments, New Crosses, a Paschal Lamb, Bread, New Fruits, Candles, New Houses, New Ships, Nets, New sown or planted Ground, Sick Cattle; as also for exorcising or driving out Devils from Bodies, from Storms of Hail and Lightning, from Haunted Houses; with more such Trumpery. It appears by it all along, what woful Christians they there make; the most Solemn Services wherein they are instructed, and to which they are ingaged, being full of abo∣minable Idolatries, foul and gross and sottish Super∣stitions, execrable Blasphemies, horrid Conjurations, and damned Magical Practises: In all which their miserable Converts follow, and have going before them those Agents for Hell and Factors for the Devil, their wretched Priests and Perverters. But in these New England Preachers, and Con∣verts among the Indians there, the Reader will find nothing but the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gos∣pel, and the Power of the Grace of Christ accom∣panying it.
It must be confessed, they have not in use among them either Lordlike Bishops, or Pompous Ceremonies, or Set Forms of Human Composure and Prescribing for Publick Prayer and Praise. But surely there may be Real Converts to Christ, True and PureChurches, and Acceptable Worship tendred up to God, without those Things which the Scripture knoweth nothing of. The truth is, those Persons whom the Lord hath used and honoured in this Blessed Work, have no more fondness for such Things, than the Zealots for them have for the Preaching and Propogating of the Gospel. But be Men of what Perswasion soever, if they be good, and be of Holy Paul's Spirit, they will nevertheless rejoice, That however Christ is Preached and Re∣ceived among those who, they and their Fore-fathers for many Generations, even beyond all Memory or Record, sate in Darkness, and in the Region and Shadow of Death, if ever any did. These As∣saults upon the so long quietly continued Possession of the Devil, and the rescuing so many of his mise∣rable Thralls from his Power, it is likely hath much inraged him against New-England, and caused him to bear a singular Spite to that Plantation: And certain it is, he hath by his Instruments raised more Trouble to those Colonies, than to any other of the English Nation in America. That this Work of Gospellizing the Barbarous Indians hath been set on foot so soon; kept alive so long, and carried on to such a Progress, by a Ge∣neration of Dissenters, should be lookt upon as a Real upbraiding of the other Colonies of the English Nation in those Goings-down of the Sun, for their great Neglectfulness of it. Never let it be said, nor let there be occasion given for it to be thought, that the English Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies,
will not admit of the Gospel's being Preached to blind perishing Heathens, that they might be saved; nor that the Ʋsers and Approvers thereof can have no Heart or Zeal for such a Good Work. O that what of that kind hath been done in New England, might provoke others to an earnest Imitation of this Example, and an holy Emulation of them in this Work so manifestly tending to the Glory of Christ! So prayeth Nath. Mather. This 29th. of the 11th. Month, 1694/5.
Of the Indians Inhabiting in New-England, and Adjacent Provinces. Language.TO speak more of the Original of this People, than that they are descended from the Loins of their great Grand∣father Adam, however divers worthy men, have their divers Sentiments; I shall not pretend; but that they are Origi∣nally of one Language is most evi∣dent: nor is the admired knowledge of those Ancients so admirable, for their ready speaking more than Twenty Languages which may rationally be supposed to have been but one Originally; though suffering some Change, by occasional accidents: We know, the divers pronouncing of the same words, without dif∣ference in Dialect, may render the speaker hardly intelligible, to him that writes alike with him; nor do I think the speech of these A∣mericans so divers, but that an Indian who is
well acquainted with his own, may by conver∣sing with those, supposed of a different and other speech, promptly Express himself in very few years, so as to be well understood by Forty of these Nations; who by reason of Wars, the want of Trassick and Commerce, and the advan∣tage, other Nations have had by Literature; have severally suffered much alteration of that Language, at first indifferently spoken by all, which yet is not more differing, than the pre∣sent Language of the English, from their speech not many hundred years since; which although it would not readily be understood, by a present Londoner, if he should speak with his great Grand-father, who than lived, yet hath not so altered, but no long Converse, might render them mutually intelligible. Of words not un∣like in the Indian Tongue hardly intelligible without customary discourse of Nation with Nation, I might instance in above an hundred; such as Nuppaw, Duppaw, Ruppaw, the Sun; At∣tik, Ahtooque &c. a Deer; Winnit, Wirrit, Good; and the like, Pum, Pum me, Pim, Oyl or Fat; these and the like, were doubtless the same words, little altered; beside which, the alone difference in Pronouncing the same word, might seem a great difference in the Speech or Lan∣guage: for Example, Wirrit pronounced short, sounds Writ, and might be not less readily un∣derstood, by differently accenting the same word; to which I might add words, as such,Expressing the mind of the speaker, being Com∣pounded of other words, suitable for such Com∣position, yet as such might be called new, or distinct from a speech in former use; of which words, near the one half of this Peoples Lan∣guage is. I have been the larger concerning their Language, that such English whose hearts may incline to so good and great a work, may be incouraged, to go among those who yet have hardly heard the Name of the LORD named among them. Government.Their Government was purely Monarchical; and as for such whose dominions extended further than would well admit the Princes per∣sonal guidance, it was committed into the hands of Lieutenants, who Governed with no less abso∣luteness, than the Prince himself: notwithstand∣ing in matters of difficulty, the Prince Consulted with his Nobles, and such whom he esteemed for Wisdom; in which it was admirable to see the Majestick deportment of the Prince, his Speech to his Council, with the most deliberate dis∣cussion of any matter proposed for their advice; after which what was by him resolved, with∣out the least hesitation was applauded, and with at lest a seeming Alacrity attended.
The Crown (if I may so term it) alwayes descended to the Eldest Son (though Subject toSuccession. usurpation) not to the Female, unless in de∣fect of a Male of the Blood; the Blood Royal, being in such Veneration among this People, that if a Prince had issue by divers Wives, such Succeeded as Heir who was Royally descended, by the Mother, although the Youngest; esteem∣ing his issue by a Venter of loss quality than a Princess, not otherwise than Sachims or Noble∣men. Nobles.Their Nobles were either such who descended from the Blood Royal, or such on whom the Prince bestowed part of his Do∣minions with the Royalties; or such whose descent was from Ancestors, who had time out of mind been Esteemed such. Yeomen.Their Yeomen were such who having no stamp of Gentility, were yet esteemed as having a natural right of living within their Princes Dominion, and a Common use of the Land; and were distinguished by two Names or Titles, the one signifying Subjection, the other, Tiller of the Land.
Villians.Although this People retained nothing of Record, nor use of Letters, yet there lived among them many Fa∣milies,who although the time of their Fore∣fathers first inhabiting among them, was beyond the Memory of man, yet were known to be Strangers or Forreigners, who were not Priviledg∣ed with Common Right, but in some measure Subject to the Yeomanry, nor were not dignified, in attending the Prince, in Hunting or like Exer∣cise; unless called by particular favour. Revenue.The Princes, as they had not other Revenue, than the Presents of their Subjects (which yet was counted, Due debt) Wrecks of the Sea, with the Skins of Beasts killed in their dominion, and many like things, as First Fruits, &c. so they wanted none; for in case of War, both People and Estate was wholly at their dispose; therefore one demanded nor Expected Pay. If we re∣spect their Court, it was doubtless maintained in great Magnificence, in distinction from the Sub∣ject, which is the utmost can be obtained by the Greatest Monarch; their Families, and attendants, being well Cloathed, with Skins of Moos, Bear, Deer, Beaver, and the like: The Provisions for their Table, as Flesh, Fish, Roots, Fruits, Berries, Corn, Beanes, in great abundance and variety, was alwayes brought by their Neighbouring Subjects; of all which they were as void of Care, as the most Potent Princes in the Universe.
Dominion on Seas.As the Prince was acknowledged, Absolute Lord on the Land, so he had no less Soveraignty at Sea: for as all belonged to him, which was stranded on the Shore of his Sea-Coast, so whatever Whales or other Wreck of Value, float∣ing on the Sea, taken up, on the Seas washing his Shores, or brought and Landed, from any part of the Sea, was no less his own. I shall conclude this brief account of the In∣dians in general with what long since passed be∣tween the late much Honoured, Mr. Thomas Mayhew, and an Indian Prince, who ruled a large part of the Main-land. Grandure.This Prince coming to Martha's Vineyard, with his usual attendants, being about Eighty Persons, well Armed, came to Mr. Mayhew's House, and being ad∣mitted, sat down; Mr. Mayhew entred the Room, but being acquainted with their Customes, took no notice of the Prince's being there (it being with them in point of Honour incumbent on the Inferiour to Salute the Superiour:) a considerable time being past the Prince broke Silence, and said, Sachem (a word importing in their Language not more than Noble, or Worshipful) Mr. Mayhew, are you well? to which having a Friendly reply; and treating of several things, and of the Island
Martha's Vineyard, being Peopled with English; the Prince desiring something wherein the Eng∣lish were concerned, Mr. Mayhew promising to effect what he desired; immediately Subjoyned, that he must First speak with the Inhabitants; the Prince demanded why he recalled his Promise; for said he, What I Promise or Speak is alwayes true; but you English Governours cannot be true; for you can't make your words nor intentions true; but mine are alwayes true, for I make them true; greatly disdaining the Popular Government of the English in this Country. Having Promised an account of the Conversion of many Indians. Inhabiting these parts of America, it may well be Expected I should say something of their Religion, while Heathen.
Religion.They generally acknowledged and worship∣ped Many gods; therefore greatly esteemed and reverenced their Priests, Powaws or Wizards, who were esteemed as having immediate converse with the gods: to them therefore they addressed themselves in all difficult cases: yet could not all that desire that dignity (as they esteemed it) obtain Familiarity with the Infernal Spirits; nor were all Powaw's alike Successfull in their ad∣dresses: but they become such either by im∣mediate Revelation, or in the use of certain Rites and Ceremonies, Tradition had left as means con∣ducing to that end: insomuch that Parentsoften out of certain Zeal dedicated their Chil¦dren to the gods, and Educated them accord∣ingly, observing certain Diet, debarring Sleep, &c. yet of the many thus designed, but few obained their desire.
Supposing that where the Practice of Witch∣craft has been highly esteemed, there may be given the plainest demonstration, of Mortals having Familiarity with Infernal Spirits; I am willing to let my Reader know that not many years since, dyed here one of the Powaw's, who never pretended to Astrological knowledge, yet could precisely inform such who desire his Assi∣stance, from whence Goods Stolen from them were taken, and whither carried; with many things of the like nature: Nor was he ever known to indeavour the concealing his knowledge, to be immediately from a god Subservient to him, that the English worshipped. This Powaw being by an English-man, worthy of Credit (who lately informed me of the same) desired to advise him, who had Stolen certain Goods which he had lost, having formerly been an eye witness of his ability; the Powaw after a little pausing, demanded why he requested that from him, since himself served another God, that there∣fore he could not help him; but added, If you can believe that my god will help you, I will try what I can do; which diverted the man from further inquiry. I must a little digress, and tell my Reader that this Powaws Wife was accounteda Godly Woman, and lived in the practise and profession of the Christian Religion, not only by the approbation, but incouragement of her Husband; She constantly Prayed in the Family, and attended the Publick Worship on the Lords Dayes: He declared that he could not blame her, for that she Served a God that was above his; but that as to himself, his gods continued kindness, obliged him not to forsake his Service. That the Powaw's by the Infernal Spirits often killed Persons, caused Lameness and Impotency, as well as shewed their Art in performing things, beyond Humane, by Diabolick Skill, such who have conversed much among them have had no reason to question.
Their practise was, either by desiring the Spirit to them appearing to perform, what mis∣chief they intended; or to form a piece of Leather like an Arrow-head, tying a hair there∣to: or using some Bone, as of Fish (that it might be known Witchcraft, to the bewitched) over which they performed certain Ceremonies; and dismissed them to Effect their desire. Such Inchanted things, have most certainly, either entered the Bodies of the intended to be by them wounded; or the Devil hath formed the like, within their Flesh, without any outward breach of the Skin; which we have good reason to be∣lieve, the Powaw's acknowledging that practice, and such things having been taken out of theFlesh or the supposed to be bewitched. Or by their Seizing something of the Spirit (as the Devil made them think) of such they intended to Torment or kill, while it wandered, in their Sleep: This they kept being in Form of a Fly, closely imprisoned; and according as they dealt with this, so it Fared with the Body it belong∣ed to. Of the Cures performed by them, on the Bewitch∣ed, I could give many instances; I shall briefly hint at two. The one, of an Indian on Martha's Vineyard, called afterward George; who having been some∣time greatly Tormented, and now wholly im∣potent, his Friends advise him to the Powaw's, concluding him to be Bewitched; they being met, and dancing round a great Fire, the Sick lying by, some of the Neighbours entered the House, being perswaded that a great Powaw, now called to cure, had bewitched the Sick: They threaten him that as he had Bewitched, unless he would Cure the Sick man, they would burn him in that fire; after many Excuses, too long here to relate, they took him up, resolving at least to Singe him a little; who no sooner felt the heat of the fire near him, but the Sick immediately recovered. This was a thing Pub∣lickly known to the English, as well as Indians, in the Neighbourhood: there can be no doubt of it.
The other I shall instance in, was a Relation from Capt. Thomas Dagget Esq now deceased, and Richard Sarson Esq Justices of the Peace; who being on an Island, where a Bewitched Woman lay in great Extremity and wholly impotent: The Powaw's there having without Success in∣deavoured the Cure; the related sent to Mar∣tha's-Vineyard, for more famoused Powaw's: The said Gentlemen, were admitted to be pre∣sent, on certain conditions; the Powaw's, goe to dancing; who with the Spectators, used certain Ceremonies usual in such cases; one of the Powaw's Praying to his god, with such ardent desires and servency, that Capt. Dagget told me, had it been to the true God, it had been a Prayer Exceeding most that he had heard: The issue was, they in a Deers Skin caught the Spirit (as they said) which entered the Woman; this they said was the Spirit of an Englishman drown∣ed in the Adjacent Sound: Yet it was then sup∣posed, the Powaw was by, which bewitched her: The issue was, she immediately recovered: The Powaw told her, unless she removed to Mar∣tha's Vineyard, she would again be Sick, for being an English Spirit he could not long confine it.
Of the Conversion of the Indians, inhabiting certain Islands near adjoyning to the Continent of New-England; and the Propa∣gation of the Gospel by some sent to the Maine∣land from thence. THE Worshipful Thomas Mayhew in the Year 1641. having obtained a grant of Martha's Vineyard, Nantuket and Elizabeth Isles, to make a Settlement; his Son Mr. Thomas Mayhew in the Year 1642. Setled at Martha's Vineyard, with a few other inhabitants, where his Reputation for Piety, his natural gifts, beside the acquired by his Education (having attained no small knowledge in the Latin and Greek Tongues, and being not wholly a Stranger
to the Hebrew) soon Occasioned his call to the Ministry among that handful. Not long after, Viz. in the year 1644. God who had Ordained him an Evangelist, for the Conversion of these Gentiles, stirred him up with an Holy Zeal and Resolution, to Assay what Success he might find in that work; he takes opportunity to insinuate, the Love and good will he bore to that People, and soon finds Occasion to let them no their Deplorable Condition, under Satan; who as he had kept them in Ignorance of those Bodily and Earthly things, which might render their Lives in this World more happy; so of those that related to their Future happi∣ness in that to come. And whereas he could not be in hopes of being heard in a more Publick, he Treats them in a more Private way; sometimes going to some particular Houses, of Persons whom he esteemed most Rational and Well qualified; other while discoursing with par∣cular men. The first Indian imbracing the motion of forsaking their gods, and Praying to the true God, called I a coomes; Esteem∣ed by the Indians as a contemptible Person among themselves; unto this man, God who ordereth all things for His own Glory, gave so great a measure of Faith and Confidence in His Power, that he is soon beyond the fear of Concealing his Contempt of their gods: The Sachems and Powaw's being much inraged, threaten his Life; the Powaw's or Wizzardstold him (a thing Publickly known) that he could not be ignorant, that they could kill such as displeased them, Viz. by Witchcraft: he answers for himself before the Sachems, Witches, and a great Assembly; acknowledges the god they Worshipped had great Power, but Limited, and was Subservient to the God he now had chosen; therefore although by their means many had suffered much, and some were killed, he despised their power, as being himself a Servant of Him, whose Power over∣ruled all Powers, and ordered all things: The Expecting multitude wait the event, which while they Concluded, to be Sickness or Death, the good man remaines wholly Sound to their astonishment. Mr. Mayhew makes use of this advantage, is uncessant in his labour, and Pro∣mises, Now while they Stumbled in doubt of their own, to set them in the Right Path; he spares not his Body by Night nor Day, lodges in their Houses, proposes such things to their Consideration he thinks firstly requisite, solves all their Scruples and Objections; and tells them, they might plainly see, it was in good will, for their good, from whom he Expected no reward, that he sustained so much loss of time, and endured wet and cold. It pleased God to give such Success to these indeavours, that it was not long before he obtained Pub∣lick Audience among them; when generally, he spent more time after Sermon in reasoning
with them, than in Sermon; whereby I must tell my Reader, it came to pass, that their Religion was as well in Head as Heart. This worthy Servant of the Lord continued his pain∣full Labours among them until the year, 1657. in which time, God pleased to give such Success to his faithful and unwearied Labour, that many hundred men and women, were ad∣ded to the Church; such who might truely be said to be Holy in Conversation, and for knowledge, such who needed not to be taught the first Principles of Religion; beside the many hundred of looser Professors of which, that such worthy Christians, whose godly Zeal, for Propagating the Gospel, to such who sat in Darkness and saw no Light, provoked an holy Emulation, to compass Sea and Land, by their liberal Contributions for Proselyting the Hea∣then, to the Service and Worship of the Lord Jesus (who yet Survive) might rejoyce, since that, God gave a Blessing to, and caused a Plentiful harvest to Succeed their Sowing in these Waters: and that the Successors and Children of those ever to be Honoured de∣ceased Christians might rejoyce, that their Predecessors Religious intent, in giving freely of their Worldly Goods, to advance the Work for Salvation of Souls, was so far from de∣minishing their Estates; that they thereby left an Inheritance to their Childrens Children.I shall give a true Relation of the Progress, and present State, of the undertaking, and Gods blessing following the endeavours of those he called, for Converting the Indians, on Martha's Vineyard and Adjacent Isles; by letting the World know, who, and how qualified these were, who were Esteemed Christians.
When such a Number professed the Christian Religion, as gave Occasion to the Indians in gene∣ral to Esteem them a Sect differing from them∣selves, and by the denomination of, Praying men, to Signalize that difference; and that their Number was such as to Meet Publickly to Wor∣ship God: such who forsook their Heathenish Worship and Idolatry, professing to become Christians, in the Publick Assembly declared the grounds and reasons moving them to im∣brace the one, and forsake the other way, with their Resolution to Pray, to Serve, and in∣deavour to Obey the true God in Jesus Christ; how this Resolution was wrought in them, what Temptations had obstructed, what Reason, Scripture and Strength from God had incouraged them, and inabled them to retain such Reso∣lution: how, they had often Prayed to God, and yet been overcome by discouragements, and Temptations &c. Closing all with profes∣sing a Resolution, by Gods Assistance, to Pray to, and Serve Him and Him onely; begging the Prayers of the Congregation to God intheir behalf: which said, many of the Con∣gregation took them by the hand, in token of love and good will. If after such Pub∣lick Profession, any was observed not to per∣form the usual Worshipping of God, in Pray∣ing with their Families, desiring a Blessing on their Food, or the like (who yet in their Publick meeting constantly attended) they were Publickly Examined of the same: Of which let me give a remarkable instance: One who after his Admission (if I may so term it) into the Number and Society of the Praying Indians, being present at a great As∣sembly, after the Exercise, was by him that Preached, informed that it was reported, he had ceased to Pray, desired him, to let the Congregation know, what grounds and mo∣tives occasioned such neglect; the man answer∣ed, It was true, he had not lately used Publickly to Pray; yet did sometimes Pray Privately; that he did not in his judgment disapprove the Service of God, but acknowledged it to be good; but found himself weak; not able to live up to Rules of that Religion: but when God should give him more strength, he hoped he should be again a Praying man. Thus Mr. Mayhew continued his almost in∣expressible labour and vigilant care for the good of the Indians, whom he justly esteemed, his Joy and Crown: and having seen so great
a Blessing on his faithful indeavours in the making known the Name of his Lord among these Gentiles, with indefatigable pains, ex∣pecting no reward, but alone from Him, who said; Goe teach all Nations, Lo I am with you: God moved the hearts of some Godly Christians in England, to advance a Considerable Sum for incouraging the propagating, and preach∣ing the Gospel to the Indians in New-England: And seeing the Spirit given to sundry of the Indians, with the gift of Prophesying; according to the promise, given by Him who Ascended, and gave gifts unto men; an able Godly English-man, named Peter Foulger, who was imployed in teaching the Youth in Read∣ing, Writing, and the Principles of Religion, by Catechising; and being well Learned in the Scripture, able to assist them in what might be needful: his Honoured Father, the Governour, well skilled in their Language, and highly honouring the Work for their Conversion; whereby, if in his absence, any difficult matter might happen, they might find suitable Assistance: In the Year 1647. he intended a short Voyage for England; but alas! the Ship wherein he took Passage was never heard of; Thus came to an Immature Death, Mr. Mayhew, who was so affectionate∣ly esteemed of by the Indians, that many years after, he was seldom named without Tears.
Mr. Thomas Mayhew, after the loss of his Son, as aforesaid: Seeing no such Salary, probably to be obtained, that might invite a Minister to imbrace the work among the In∣dians; and little hopes of finding any of the Spirit of his Son, or Mr. ELIOT, to bear the burthen, attending, and in that day of necessity to be undergone; without a prospect of more than could well be expected, for incouraging to so in-it-self troublesome imploy; and that his onely Son had spent his Strength, and yet rejoyced in the mid'st of those many Aches, Pains and Distempers, contracted by his often lodging in their cold Houses, and induring Wet and Cold, in faith of Gods accepting of, and prospering him in that, whereunto he could see nothing could rationally move him; concludes, that it was Of God, and not of man; he therefore resolves to Visit and incourage them often; he goes once every Week to some of their Plantations; and with the Assistance of Godly Indians, who taught and instructed their Neighbours on the Lords Days, perswaded the Indians of the Gay∣head, who many Years, were obstinately re∣solved not to admit the Glad-Tydings of the Gospel among them (being animated by the Sachims of the Continent) not to imbrace it; so that now the Indians on the Islands of Martha's-Vineyard and Nantuket, might justlybear the denomination of Christian: the num∣ber of Adult Persons on both Islands, being a∣bout three thousand; of which I have taken the more particular care to make an exact Compu∣tation, that I might Vindicate Mr. Cotton Mather, from the Imputation of over-reckoning, when in the Life of Mr. Eliot, he reckons the number supposed on Martha's Vineyard professing the Christian Religion to be Sixteen hundred. The Indians being thus brought over to the acknowledgment and profession of the Christian Religion; and many of them desiring to joyn in such Communion, whereby they might injoy the presence of God in all His Ordinances; Mr. Mayhew and Mr. John Cotton (now Pastor of the Church of New-Plymouth) who having been sometime Preacher to the English, had attained some knowledge in the Indian Tongue, and Preached unto them two Years; being well Satisfied with their suitable qualifications, after mature Consideration and Advice, con∣cluded to give their Help and Assistance there∣to; which was happily accomplished, to the good Satisfaction of the English Church, and Godly Professors of the Island; who by advan∣tage of many years acquaintance with them, had great Experience of their qualifications. An Indian Church Confederated, at Martha's Vineyard. Aug. 22. 1670.
Mr. Mayhew by Mr. Cotton's removing from the Island, was left alone as to any English Assistance: But Mr. John Mayhew his grand∣son, being called to Preach to a small People; by the urgent and ardent desires of the Indians; and being well skilled in their Language, com∣plyed with them; and once every Week Preached at some of their Plantations. His diligence was now to be doubled, especially after Mr. Mayhew his Grand-fathers Death, in the Year 1681. by reason of certain Hete∣rodox Opinions, likely to take root among them; and being a man of great natural parts, he used to desire such who had imbibed any of those Principles, to produce their Reasons; as likewise any that desired to be resolved in any matter, to give him advantage to resolve them in Publick; that others might receive Satisfaction and Instruction; whereby I believe and know, that they received more Convicti∣on, Instruction and Satisfaction, than in the ordinary way of Preaching; which alwayes notwithstanding preceeded that: insomuch that none of those Erroneous Opinions spread to the disturbance, or unsettlement of the Church, nor generallity of professors among them: but having finished what God in His All-wise Providence, saw good to improve him in; he deceased in the Year 1688. leaving the Indians (if I might now so term them)in an orderly way of Religiously Congrega∣ting, in their several Assemblies on the Lords Day, and hearing their several Teachers, who usually began with Prayer, Sang part of a Psalm, then from some portion of the Scrip∣ture spake for the Conversion and Edification of his Hearers: As also a Church which then or soon after consisted of at least One Hundred Communicants, being according to the most strict Order of the Congregational Way: Which leads me to say something of the Discipline used among them. The Church then are a Selected Company of Professing Believers, in Covenant according to the Congregational practice, having Officers ac∣cordingly; and keeping up the Exercise of a severe Discipline, by publick Admonition in case of the disorderly walking of any member of their Society; and if after the Reproof and Admonition of the Church, any proceed in their evil Courses, such are proceeded with by Excommunication.
I would then willingly know of those De∣tractors, who either publickly or more privately, have indeavoured to Scandalize so great a work; What kind of people they ex∣pect to see a Church consist of? Or when it will come to pass, that some shall not be re∣tained in Churches (who yet may be deemedan Holy People) whose Conversation may be grievous to the Church, though the Church can find no Expedient for their Excomunica∣tion? I know that many who are in no measure qualified for Church Fellowship, think it no small disparagement to themselves, that Indians should be accounted worthy of what themselves cannot be admitted to: how it is in other places I know not, but here some, whose religious pretences have gained Credit abroad, and have not Scrupled to Stigmatize the Indians with greatest opprobry, in par∣ticular cases of their complaint, the Indians have been found wholly innocent, and them∣selves sordidly Vilanous: but when shall it be that the Seed of the Serpent shall cease to hiss at, and open their Mouthes against the Seed of the Woman? which yet I could de∣monstrate, hath in several cases which have occurr'd here, against the Indians, broken the Serpents head, in his Children, and if it were possible filled them with Shame and Confusion:—however, the Sober Religious People here, have done, and doe, esteem them as Christians indeed; and although the Building be not all of Living Stones, yet as it is an House, is so far esteemed an House of God; Insomuch that I have heard some Godly English, their Neighbours, Members of Churches; profess they were troubled, that their unacquainted∣nessin their Language was such, that they could not well (but otherwise would gladly) partake with them, in the Ordinances of the Lords Supper. I must acknowledge, that as the Number of the Indians are greatly decreased, so especi∣ally of the Godly and Religious; it being a thing so obvious, that in the year 1690. of the Indians of Martha's Vineyard alone; of the number of more than one hundred Adult Persons that dyed, not less than three fourths, were of the Sober Religious Professors; that it was by the English Inhabitants vulgarly taken notice of: the which notwithstanding, in the year 1692, of the before mentioned Church, were remaining more than one hundred; with∣out mentioning those many Confessors, before mentioned, whose Publick Declarations of their several Convictions, Temptations, and Reso∣lutions to endeavour to Serve the true God, would have drawn Tears from the eyes of any who had but in the Serious retirements of Consideration acknowledged a Deity.
I must not conclude before I tell the Rea∣der, that as in the Apostolick times, the Church sent forth from among themselves, for the Con∣version of the Nations, so these Indians on Martha's Vineyard did not only to the Island of Nantuket, being about 1500 Adult Per∣sons;but likewise to the Maine-land. Of those of Nantuket I shall subjoyn a Letter, from the Worshipful John Gardner, who is well acquaint∣ed with them, having divers years Assisted them in their Government, by instructing them in the Laws of England, and deciding difficult cases among them. Worshipful SIR. I Haved Received Yours of April the 8th. 94. with your desire to be informed of the pre∣sent State of our Indians, as to their Number, Worship and Government; an Answer to your desires, take briefly: Their Decay is Great, Chiefly in Number, there being now but about Five hundred Grown Persons: As to their Wor∣ship, there is Three Societies or Churches: Two Congregational, One, of the Baptists, but their Number is small; but their is Five Constant Assemblies or Meetings; Two amongst them that went by the Name of the Antepeatames or Po∣watoms,; and that I may now say, there is not known a Powaw amongst them: and although it is true, there is a great decay in Religion among the first Societies, many of their best men, and I may say Good men are Dead: Yet a∣mongst
the now Praying Indians, there is an In∣crease; God Raising up some, yea even of Them∣selves, Preachers and Serious men too, some of them; which is cause of Thankfulness: but that there is a decay with many is to be Lamented; the cause I take to be their not preserving the Truth in the Love of it; their Love to Drink: their being more mindful of Form than Substance; which puts me upon endeavour to make them sensible, That it is neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision is any thing, but the Keeping the Commandments of God; Faith that works by Love, the New Creature, and things of that Nature. As to their Government, They are wholly under Their Maje∣sties, or the English Government; the method is, they have Three distinct or Town-Courts, with Power to hear and determine to Forty Shillings: the Magi∣strates they chuse themselves yearly; and when Cho∣sen and Approved of, they have Commissions with liberty of Appeal to the English, which they make much use of: Greater matters come to the English. This in short is the Truth of their Present State. I am Your Real Friend and Servant, Iohn Gardner. Nantuket, MAY, 17th. 1694.
Here we must take notice of Gods giving Success to the Ministry of the Indians; and acknowledge, that although there have been some decay, yet on that Island, there is not onely a Form, but in some measure the Power of Godliness. So likewise on the Maine-land; by the alone Ministry of the Martha's Vineyard-Indians, was the Civilizing and Conversion of the Indians on the Maine-land, at a place called Succonet, and parts Adjacent: who as they were Con∣verted by the Ministry, sent from the Church of Martha's Vineyard, so the Officers were by them (as likewise were those of Nantuket) Or∣dained by laying on the hands of their Presby∣tery; of these although I have been no eye∣witness; yet I have received account, from even such who bare no great respect to Religion, that they are as beyond Comparison, Exceeding the other Indians in moral Vertue; so likewise from other Judicious Persons, their Neighbours of whom I shall name. Mr. William Vobes, a Person now representing the Free-holders of those parts, in the Great and General Assembly, of the Province of the Massachuset-Bay in New-England: nor have these People as yet depen∣dance on, nor Expectation from any other than their Mother, the Church of Martha's-Vineyard.
Of the Indians Govern∣ment when Christian. I have already told my Reader, that the Go∣vernment of this People was the best of all Governments, Monarchy; and it has been judged not without reason, that a main ob∣struction in the progress of the Gospel in the American Plantations, was, if not yet is, the jealousy the Princes conceived of the Invasion of their Government through the pretences of Religion, and the Eclipsing their Monarchical Dignity.
The ever Honoured Thomas Mayhew there∣fore finding that the Princes on these Islands, who although they maintained their absolute Power and Jurisdiction as Kings; were yet bound to doe certain Homage to a Potent Prince on the Continent: and although they were no great People, yet had been wastedby Intestine Wars, wherein the great Princes on the Continent (not unlike European Prin∣ces for like Reasons of State) were not unassist∣ing, whereby they were necessitated to make these Princes the ballance to decide their Con∣troversies, and several Jurisdictions, by pre∣sents annually sent, whereby obliging the Princes to give their several Assistance as oc∣casion required: and seeing his Son as afore∣said in a zealous indeavour for their Con∣version, he judged it meet that Moses and Aaron joyn hands; he therefore prudently lets them know, that by order from his Master the King of England, he was to Govern the English which should inhabit these Islands; that his Master was in Power far above any of the Indian Monarches; but that as he was powerful, so was he a great lover of Justice; that therefore he would in no measure invade there Jurisdictions; but on the contrary Assist them as need required; that Religion and Go∣verment were distinct things. Thus in no long time they conceived no ill Opinion of the Christian Religion.
When afterwards the number of the Christian Indians were increased among them, he per∣swaded them to admit of the Counsels of the Judicious Christians among themselves, and in cases of more than ordinary consequence ofa Jury for Tryal; when likewise he promised his Assistance and Direction with the Prince; when notwithstanding the Princes assent was to be obtained, though he were no Christian. Thus within a few years there was a happy Government settled among them, and Records kept of all Actions and Acts passed in their several Courts, by such who having learned to Write fairly were appointed thereto. The Princes with their Sachims (or Nobles) made Publick acknowledgment of their Subjection to the King of England, being nothwithstanding mindful to be understood as Subordinate Princes, to Govern according to the Laws of God and the King. Here I shall take leave to insert two Remarkables. During the late unhappy War between the English and Indians in New-England, about Nineteen years since; an Evil Spirit possessed too many of our English, whereby they suffered themselves to be unreasonably exasperated a∣gainst all Indians; of such there were some on these Islands, who could hardly be so moderated by Mr. Mayhew, and others in Go∣vernment with him, as to be restrained from rising to assay the disarming of the Indians; for whose satisfaction Capt. Richard Sarson Esq was ordered with a small party (the Indians being on these Islands Twenty to one, having
Arms) to Treat the Indians on the West end of Martha's Vineyard, who were mostly to be doubted: he returns with the insuing An∣swer: That the delivering their Arms would expose them to the will of the Indians ingaged in the present War, who were not less theirs than the Enemies of the English; that they had never given occasion of the distrust inti∣mated; if in any thing not hazarding their safety, they could give any Satisfaction for proof of their Fidelity, they would willingly attend what should reasonably be demanded of them; but they were unwilling to deliver their Arms, unless the English would propose some means for their safety and livelihoood: With this Return they drew a Writing in their own Language, which I have often read, and would have Verbatim inserted, but cannot at present find it; the Substance was, that as they had Submitted to the Crown of England, so they resolved to Assist the English on these Islands against their Enemies, which they esteem∣ed in the same respect equally their own, as Subjects to the same King; which was Sub∣cribed by the Persons of greatest note among them. Having this answer, the Government resolved, and accordingly improved them as a guard, furnishing them with suitable Ammunition, and
found them so faithful that even some nearly related, in observance of general instructions given them, so soon as they landed from the Continent, were immediately brought before the Governour, to attend his pleasure; inso∣much that the English (although the War, with respect to the multitude of Indians inhabiting the Continent, and their advantage by the nearness to the French had no good aspect) took no care, but left the whole to the Indians; nothing doubting to be advertised by them of any danger from the Enemy. This was the effect of the bringing the Gospel of Peace among them, Viz. a Peace-bringing Gospel. The other observable I shall add to show as their Loyalty, so their observance of the Laws of England.
In the time of the late Revolution, when man∣ny in hopes there was no King in Israel, ex∣pected to have done what they saw good in their own eyes: Several of our English threat∣ning to fetch certain Sheep in possession of the Indians inhabiting a small Island Adjacent to Martha's Vineyard, which Sheep they asserted were Stolen from them, who met with repulse; the Sachim least there should happen any misunderstanding of that matter, immediatelymakes his report to me in these words, Viz. Several of your English have been on my Island, and would have forceably taken Sheep from thence; and we are much threatned therewith; I am doubtful if they persist in that Resolution, it may Occasion Blood-shed: you know that while your Grand-father and my Father lived, there never happened any difference in such things, nor hope will be Occasion given by me. I desire the same Amity may be continued, nor can the English say, that we have not manifested our Allegiance to the King by a continued Subjection. And although it is true, we have desired your Order should come to us, rather than your Officer, which hath gene∣rally been observed; yet we are willing in Case the English pretend any thing ours have injured them in; let an Officer by writ from Autho∣rity doe his duty, then we shall know how in an orderly way, to be relieved; yet shall the least Boy bringing your Order, as in your Grand-fathers time, Command any thing: And if you see cause on any complaint about our Sheep, your may com∣mand all of them; hoping to find as hitherto a decision by the Rules of Justice: We hope we shall not see (as is too much practised in other places) an English-man, pretending an Indian to be in his debt, to come to our Houses and pay himself; or in other cases beat our People; but as hitherto we may have equal Justice, being the King Sub∣jects; and Violence and Riot committed on ourPeople by the English may be esteemed of the same nature and quality as ours against them; of which, with the Justices, we pray you would Consider, and take speedy care. I shall as to their Government only add; that in their several Plantations or Town-ships, they Elect three or more to joyn with the Sachims (or Lords of the place) who hold Courts, for issuing such Controversies as happen among them, the Sachim presiding in such Courts, or in case he decline that Office, another is E∣lected in his place: if either party dislike the Judgment given, he Appeals to a Superiour Court, which consists of some of the most esteemed of each place, being some of their Magistrates, where some Principal Sachims is Elected to preside for one Year: and from this Court an Appeal lyes to the English Court. In giving Judgment, they observe such rules and orders made and recorded among themselves, and the English Law, the knowledge whereof they much aspire unto. They have likewise some among them, whom the less able to de∣clare, or defend their own Cases, imploy as Attornies; some of which are to admiration Critical in their pleadings.
I shall close the whole when I have told the Reader, that their Children are generally taught to Read, and many to Write; in one of their Towns the last Winter, Viz. 1693. Thirty Chil∣dren were at School, Twenty more of the same place, at the same time, accidentally, being not supplyed with Books, could not attend it. Such who are too far distant from any School are often taught by some of their Neighbours. In diverse places are lesser Schools. CONCLƲSION. May, if not a double, yet a single Portion of the Spirit of an ELIOT of New England, the Mayhews of Martha's Vineyard, a Bourn of Sand∣wich, in the late Colony of New-Plymouth, fall on some Persons, who may, induced with an Holy Zeal for God, and the Conversion of Souls, according to their Example, Be instant in Season and out of Season, indure all things, be∣come all, unto those miserable Creatures, that if possible they may Win some, not doing the Work of the Lord negligently, by only Preaching a Ser∣mon to such who desire to hear; but by frequent visiting them, and from House to House, disputing with and convincing them, shew that it is God, and not themselves they Serve; believing there
is a great and Eternal Weight of Glory attending those whom the Lord shall find So Doing: Then may we hope to see a Blessing on this Land, and Peace on our borders; and the Indians bordering on us, shall obey not out of Fear, but for Conscience sake. May the Indian Church send forth some from among themselves, to the more Remote Indians, with as good Success as when to the next bordering Indians. May the Royal Heart of our Gracious KING still favour so Great and Glorious an Undertaking: To which may the LORD our GOD, give His Blessing. AMEN.
Postscript. HAving among many things, worthy of notice in the Precedent Discourse, omitted some Remarkables, of the Indian Converse with Infernal Spirits; I thought meet to briefly touch some things therein Remarkable: and to insert a Narra∣tive of the Decease of a Prince, memorable for his forsaking his People for the sake of Christ; and his return with happy Success in Pro∣selyting his Subjects, to the Worship of God in Christ. This I find Written on the out-side of a Book, in the Library of Mr. John May∣hew deceased: which please to take as fol∣loweth. Mittark, Sachim (rather Prince) of the Gay-head, on Martha's-Vineyard, Deceased January. 1683.
This Princes Subjects being resolved to continue in their Heathenism, notwithstanding his imbracing the Gospel; grew so disaffected to him, that he for a time, removed to the East end of Martha's Vineyard; whither af∣ter three years abode at the said place, he again returned, having perswaded his Peo∣ple into a willingness, that such who would, might attend the glad Tydings he pretended to bring; whereupon He himself opened to them the Mysteries of the Gospel, dispencing the word to such as came to hear him; in∣somuch that at this day that People are All Christians by Profession.
The day before his Death I being with him, inquired of him concerning his hope; who after he had treated some time of the Mutability of an earthly Life; Said, I have hope in God, that when my Soul departeth out of this Body; God will send his Messengers, who shall Conduct it to Himself, to be with Jesus Christ; and then with great earnest∣ness, pronounced these words; where that Everlasting Glory is! As for my reasons; (said he) I my self have had many wrongs of Enemies, of whom I have sought no Revenge, nor retained evil in thought, word, nor deed; and I also expect the same from God; but (said he) I proceed no further, for God is very Merciful: then I asked him of his wil∣lingness to Dye; he replyed: It is now Se∣ven Nights since I was taken Sick, and I have not yet asked of God, to live longer in the World. In this World are some benefits to be injoyed; also many troubles to be indured; but with respect to the hope I have in God, I am willing to dye; here I am in pain, there I shall be freed from all pain, and injoy that Rest that never endeth. Then pointing to his Daughters, said, There be three of my Daughters; (relating how they were disposed of) and you my Daughters, if you loose your Father, Mourn not for me, but Mourn for your selves, and for your Sins: Mourn not for me, for though you are unwilling to spare me, and I might be helpful to you if I should Live longer in this World, yet to dye is better for me.
Of Powaws or Persons improving the In∣fernal Spirits to Effect their intended Mali∣cious Harms: I can inform of a Converted Sachim; who in his Publick Protestation, said as followeth. Viz. That he having often im∣ployed his god, which appeared to him in form of a Snake, to Kill, Wound, and Lame such whom he intended mischief to, he imploy∣ed the said Snake to Kill, and that failing toWound or Lame Hiacooms, the first Convert on Martha's Vineyard; all which proved ineffectual, and having seriously considered, the said Hi a∣combs Assertion, that none of the Powaw's could hurt him, since his God, whom he now Served was the Great God, to whom theirs was subservient; he resolved to worship the true God, from which time during Seven years, the said Snake gave him great disturbance, but that he never after his Praying to God in Christ, ever imployed that said Snake in any thing, which about that time ceased to appear to him.
I can also inform, of an Indian Powaw, who although he was not accounted Reli∣gious, yet said, he was a Christian, who be∣ing questioned by some English of such mat∣ters reported of him, acknowledged, that de∣signing to Kill by Witchcraft a certain Indian who accidentally lodged in the House with him and his Brother, while he went out to inchant an Hair, his Brother who before lay from, now contrary to his knowledge lay next to the fire, it being then their custom to lye bare-back't to the fire; he when he came in, nothing doubting but that it was his E∣nemy, directed the inchanted Hair to the back of his supposed Enemy, which immediatelyentering his body, killed him; but in the Morning it proved to be his Brother. The thing was well known; and this Powaw seemed with great remorse and sorrow to acknowledge the same to such of our English who inquired of him, concerning that matter.
A Further Account, con∣cerning the present State of Christianity a∣mong the INDIANS in other parts of New-England. COncerning the further progress of the Gospel among the Indians in America; the Reader may take this following Account, which is Extracted out of several Letters sent to the Reverend Increase Mather, Praesident of the Colledge at Cambridge in New-England. Mr. Samuel Treat Pastor of the Church in Eastham, in a Letter bearing date August 23. 1693. Writeth as followeth:
Reverend & Worthy Sir. I Being Advertised that it would not be unseasonable or unservicable at this Jun∣cture, to give your self a true and impartial account, both of the number as also of the present State of our Indians, and Accepta∣tion and Entertainment of the Gospel among them, and their professed Subjection there∣unto: Wherefore Sir, you may be assured as followeth.
That there are Five Hundred and Five A∣dult Persons of Indians, within the Limits of our Township, unto whom these many years past, I have from time to time imparted the Gospel of our LORD JESUS, in their own Language, (and I truly hope not without Success); and yet I continue in the same Service, earnestly imploring, and not with∣out hopes expecting, and waiting for a more plentiful down-powring of the Spirit from on high among them: and I verily doe not know of, nor can I learn that there is so much as one of these Five Hundred Indians, that do's obstinately absent from, but do joyntly frequent and attend on thePreaching of the Word, and countenance the same, not only frequenting and attending seasons of Worship of a divine Sanction, but also all other occasional Opportunies, when the Gospel is dispensed to them; and when our Congregations Solemnize Publick Days of Prayer with Fasting or of Praises (I usu∣ally giving them Advertisement thereof) they readily comply therewith, in their respective Assemblies. They have four distinct Assem∣blies in four Villages belonging to our Township, in which four Assemblies, they have four Teachers of their own choice, of the more Sober, well Affected and Ʋnderstand∣ing Persons among them, who do duly Preach to them, when I am not with them; these Indian Teachers repair to my House once a Week, to be further instructed (Pro modulo meo) in the concernments proper for their Service and Station. There are in the four abovesaid Villages, four School-masters (of the best accomplisht for that Service) who teach their Youth to Read and Write their own Language. There are also Six Justices of the Peace (or Magistrates) in the four abovesaid Vil∣lages, who regulate their Civil Affairs, and Punish Criminals and Transgressors of the
Civil Law; they have their stated Courts and other Inferiour Officers in a Subserviency to their Civil EUPOLITUESTHAL. There are among them, many of a Serious, sober, civilized Conversation and Deportment, who are making Essays towards a further Pro∣gressive step of Obedience and Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel, viz. an Ecclesiastical Com∣bination, having a great desire to be Baptized. They are very Serviceable by their Labour to the English Vicinity, and have all along since our Wars with their Nation, been very Friendly to the English, and forward to serve them in that quarrel. Their Deportment and Converse, and Garb, being more Manly and Lau∣dable than any other Indians, that I have ob∣served in the Province. But Sir, I would not be tedious, onely Craving your Interest at the Throne of Grace for us, that we may be Serviceable to the Name and Kingdom of our LORD JESUS. So I Subscribe. SIR, Yours willingly, Samuel Treat. Eastham, August, 23. 1693.
Mr. James Noyce Pastor of the Church in Stonington, in a Letter dated the Fifteenth of March last, Writeth thus. Reverend Sir. YOƲRS I Received, and Rejoyce that God hath Stirred up any that doth take care and Con∣tribute towards the advancing Christs Kingdom a∣mongst the Poor Heathen; and do and did for∣merly believe, that where God sends Light, He intends Love; and where God gives little, He ex∣pects less: and therefore the Labours of the Re∣verend Mr. Eliot, Mr. Mayhew, &c. have not been lost, they have not Run in vain, but that many are gone to Heaven of their deceased hearers. And I should count it my Joy and Crown to win one Soul of them to Christ. And am in hope that some one or two of the Pequots, that were my Friends and lived on my Land, upon my endeavour have obtained Mercy, now dead, who dyed Praying, Re∣nounced wholly the way of the Heathen Worship, &c. Also some of our Captive Servants professing the Faith with many Tears are Baptized, and give good Testimony in their Knowledge, Converse and Conversation of a real Gracious work upon them. I have in my House a Witty hopefull Sachems Son, one of the chiefest quality in these parts, bound fast
to me to be instructed to Read and Write, and in the way of Life, which hitherto gives great hopes, and no discouragement; he is about Thirteen Years of Age. And once I had the advantage to Asto∣nish many of the Heathen, and of the chief of them, by Gods answering Prayers in the presence of many Heathen, by raising a very Sick Indian Lad (Eng∣lish also present) after the Lad was given over by Indians and English, and was speechless; and se∣veral Powaws had Powawed, and given that Sentence, that the Lad would Dye; but he is a∣live to this Day: The Story is too large to write, but I believe God did Glorifie Himself in the sight of the Heathen, according to Humble and Earnest Petitions, made in the presence of about Thirty Heathen: all seemed to be much Confound∣ed and awakened. One very Witty and Wise Sa∣chem there present told me, he would be a Christi∣an, but he was afraid his heart would not be right, without which Profession would be in vain, and he was afraid Wine and Women would be his Ruine, he should not forbear, but he owned and almost all present, when I Prayed, Our God was the Great and True God, but they were Poor Indians, and they did not know Him. Of these things and much more many English witnesses are alive, but some are dead. I have heard also the Reverend Mr. Fitch did at the Request of the Mohegs, keep a Fast for Rain, in the Time of Great Drought, at the Request of the Heathen,
when their Powaw's had long Cryed for Rain, and God answered by sending Rain the same day, to the great Astonishment of the Heathen. Yours to Serve, Iames Noyce. Stonington March, 15. 1693,4. Mr. Rowland Cotton, Minister at Sandwich, in a Letter of June 27. 1693. Writeth thus. Reverend Sir, I Have Endeavoured to take an Exact Ac∣count of those Indians, Adult Persons, who do constantly attend upon the Dispensa∣tion of the Gospel, in the place that at pre∣sent I am concerned for. And we do find that in Manshipau, Sanctuit, and Cotuit, Villages bordering on each other, and all belonging to the same Assembly; there are no less than Two hundred and Fourteen, besides several Straglers, that have no setled place, do repair thither. To carry on the work of the Lords Day there is appointed on Simon Papmonit: and at other times I shall diligently intend their good according to my Capacity. Reverend Sir, I desire your Blessing on Your Servant, Rowland Cotton. Sandwich Iune, 27. 1693.
Mr. Thomas Tupper also has given an Account of One hundred and Eighty Indians, unto whom he does dispense the Word, concerning whom he has Charitable hopes that they do (and that with Zeal and Sincerity) Embrace the Gospel. There are moreover, in Plymouth Colony about Five Hundred Indians, amongst whom Mr. John Cotton (Pastor of the Church in Plymouth, and Son to the Famous Cotton of Boston) hath and doth preach the Gospel. Likewise Mr. Peter Thatcher, Pastor of the Church in Milton, is a Faithful Labourer amongst the Indians at Punkepaog. So is Mr. Grindal Rawson, Pastor of the Church in Mendam, among the Indians in those parts; and Mr. Bondet, who is Minister to the French Congregation at Oxford, in the Nipmug Country. The Indian Church at Natick (which was the first Indian Church in America) is since Blessed ELIOI's Death, much diminish∣ed and dwindled away. But Mr. Daniel Gookin hath bestowed his pious Cares upon it.
Besides the Labours of the English in New-England, Mr. Dellius (a worthy Dutch Minister) at Albany has Learned the Language of the In∣dians in those parts; God has Graciously Smi∣led on his Endeavours, so as that Considerable Numbers of them are Converted to the Faith of Christ, and there is reason to hope that whatis done, is but the First-Fruits of a Great Har∣vest to follow. Take the Account which him∣self giveth, in a Letter bearing date the 16th. of January last. His words are these. Reverend Sir,
I Have this to add to my former, that a Jesuite, called Milet, whom the Oneydes took prisoner about four years agoe, and who is now in that Castle a great man among them, uses all his Sultilty to frustrate my Labours, by by making false Impressions upon the Indians concerning our Religion; yet God Almighty is pleased to strengthen my Proselytes in that way I teach them more and more; some∣times there happens difference and disputes between my Proselytes and his, concerning the points of Religion, but ours alleadge they Confute the others. This I must say for them, that they take a great deal of pains and are very Zealous to learn, and very Devout in their practice; I am under savour of opini∣on, that the Jesuit Catechism, with the Cases of Conscience added thereto, writ by their own Hands, which they learn the Indians, which is either in your or your Reverend Son, Mr. Cotton Mathers possession, may be Servi∣ceable, to convince our Proselytes and othersFrench, that come here of their penicious Principles, and wish the same might be sent me. I had put Six or Seven Psalms in their Native Language upon our Notes, but were not perfected, now they are finished and the Ten Commandments also. The new Infant Church among the Heathen Increases, there being Seventeen last Communion day, the Thirty first of December last, who took the Sa∣crament with us, and four others Baptised the same day. Thus God is sought of them that asked not for Him, and is found of them that sought Him not. I think that God has a great People of them yet; the Lord send a Blessing to those means that are used for the Enlarge∣ment of His Kingdom among them; and Bless you, and all that Labour in His Vine∣yard, which shall ever be the Prayers of him, who is, Reverend SIR, Your most Faithful and Obedient Servant, in our Lord Jesus, Godefridus Dellius. Albany, Ianuary, 16. 1693,4.
A LETTER CONCERNING The Success of the Gospel amongst the INDIANS in New-England. Written by Mr. Increase Mather, Minister of the Word of God at Boston, and Rector of the Colledge at Cambridge in New-England, to Dr. John Leusden, Hebrew Professor in the University of Ʋtrecht. Translated out of Latin into English. Worthy and much Honoured Sir, YOUR Letters were very grateful to me, by which I understand that you and others in your famous University of Ʋtrecht, desire to be informed concerning the Converted Indians in America: Take therefore a True Account of them in a few words.
It is above forty Years since that truly godly Man, Mr, John Elliot, Pastour of the Church at Rocksborough, (not above a Mile from Boston in New-England) being warmed with a holy Zeal of Coverting the Americans, set himself to learn the Indian Tongue, that he might more easily and successfully open to them the Mysteries of the Gospel; upon account of which he has been (and not undeservedly) called, The Apostle of the American Indians. This Reverend Person, not without very great labour, Translated the whole Bible into the Indian Tongue; he Translated also several English Treatises of Practical Divinity, and Catechisms into their Language: Above 26 Years agoe he gathered a Church of Converted Indians in a Town called Natick; these Indians confessed their sins with Tears, and professed their Faith in Christ, and afterwards they and their Children were Baptized, and they were solemnly joyned together in a Church-Cove∣nant; the said Mr. Eliot was the first that Ad∣ministred the Lords Supper to them. The Pastor of that Church now is an Indian, his Name is Daniel. Besides this Church at Natick, among our Inhabitants in the Massachusetts Colony there are four Indian Assemblies, where the Name of the True God and Jesus Christ is solemnly called upon; these Assemblies haveAmerican Preachers. Mr. Elliot formerly used to preach to them once every Fortnight, but now he is weakned with Labours and Old-age, being in the Eighty Fourth Year of his Age, and preacheth not to the Indians oftner than once in two Months. There is another Church, consisting only of Converted Indians, about fifty Miles from hence, in an Indian Town called Marshippang, the first Pastor in that Church was an English Man, who being skilful in the American Language, Preached the Gospel to them in their own Tongue. This English Pastor is dead, never∣theless that Church has an Indian Preacher. There are besides that, five Assemblies of Indians professing the Name of Christ, not far distant from Marshippang, which have Indian Preachers: John Cotton Pastor of the Church at Plymouth (Son of my venerable Father-in-law John Cotton, formerly the famous Teacher of the Church at Boston) hath made very great progress in learning the Indian Tongue, and is very skilful in it; he Preaches in their own Language to the last five mentioned Congrega∣tions every Week. Moreover of the Inhabi∣tants of Saconet in Plymouth Colony, there is a great Congregation of those who for distinction sake are called Praying Indians, because they pray to God in Christ.
Not far from a Promontory called Cape Cod, there are six Assemblies of Heathens who are to be reckoned as Catechumeni, amongst whom there are Six Indian Preachers: Samuel Treat, Pastor of a Church at Eastham, Preacheth to those Congregations in their own Language. There are likewise amongst the Islanders of Nantuchett a Church, with a Pastor who was lately a Heathen, and several Meetings of Ca∣techumeni's, who are Instructed by the Converted Indians. There is also another Island, about Seven Leagues long, (called Martha's Vineyard) where are Two American Churches planted, which are more Famous than the rest; over one of which there presides an Ancient Indian as Pastor, called Hiacooms: John Hiacooms, Son of the said Indian Pastor, also preacheth the Gospel to his Countrey-Men. Another Church in that place John Techinosh a Converted Indian teaches. In these Churches Ruling Elders of the Indians are Joyned to the Pastors; the Pa∣stors were chosen by the people, and when they had fasted and prayed, Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton laid their Hands on them, so that they were solemnly Ordained. All the Congregations of the Converted Indians (both the Catechumeni and those that are in Church Order) every Lords Day meet together, the Pastor or Preacher al∣wayes begins with Prayer, and without a Form,because from the Heart; when the Ruler of the Assembly has ended his Prayer, the whole Con∣gregation of Indians praise God with singing; some of them are excellent Singers: After the Psalm, he that preaches reads a place of Scripture (one or more Verses as he will) and expounds it, gathers Doctrines from it, proves them by Scripture and Reasons, and inferrs Uses from them after the manner of the English, of whom they have been taught; then another Prayer to God in the Name of Christ concludes the whole Service. Thus do they meet together twice every Lords-day: They observe no Holy-dayes but the Lords-day, except upon some extraor∣dinary occasion, and then they solemnly set a∣part whole days, either in giving Thanks or fasting and praying with great servour of Mind. Before the English came into these Coasts, these barbarous Nations were altogether igno∣rant of the True God; hence it is that in their Prayers and Sermons they use English Words and Terms; he that calls upon the most Holy Name of God, says, Jehovah, or God, or Lord, and also they have learned and borrowed many other Theological Phrases from us. In short, there are six Churches of Baptized Indians in New-England, and Eighteen Assemblies of Catechumeni's, professing the Name of Christ.
Of the Indians there are Four and Twenty who are Preachers of the Word of God; and be∣sides these, there are Four English Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the Indian Tongue. I am now my self weary with Writing, and I fear least if I should add more I should also be tedious to you; yet one thing I must add, (which I had almost forgot) That there are many of the Indian Children who have learned by heart the Catechism, either of that Famous Divine Mr. Perkins, or that put forth by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and in their own Mother-Tongue can Answer to all the Questions in it. But I must end. I Salute the Professors in your University; to whom I desire you to Communicate this Letter, as Written to them also. Farewell, Worthy Sir; the Lord preserve your Health for the Benefit of your Country, his Church, and of Learning. Yours ever, Increase Mathers. Boston in New-England, July 12. 1687.
An Advertisement. SOME further Account of that Jesuite Catechism, and Cases of Conscience, mention∣ed in the above-written Letter, may be seen in the Life of Mr. John Eliot: Written by Mr. Cotton Mather, pag. 135, 136, 137. Edit. Third, Printed at London for John Dunton. THE Righteousness of God through Faith, upon all without difference who do Believe: In Two Sermons; On Rom. 3.22. Preached at the Merchants-Lecture in Broad∣street, by Nathaniel Mather, Minister of the Gospel. Printed for Nathaniel Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-Hall street.
