P2198 13118893 97798
A SERMON PREACHED At St. MARGARETS in WESTMINSTER before the Honourable the House OF COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT Assembled, Upon the 29th Day of MAY, being the Anniversary Day of the KING'S and Kingdomes Restauration. BY THOMAS PIERCE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait, at the Little North-door of St. Paul's Church, 1661.
DEUT. 6. 12. Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, who brought thee out of the Land of AEgypt. WHen I look back upon the Church in all her motions out of the East, obser∣ving how Monarchy and Learning have been at once the two Shoulders to bear her up, and withall the two Legs to bring her hither; And when again I do reflect upon our twenty years sins, which were the complicated Cause of our twelve years sufferings; I mean our drunkenness and luxury, which were deservedly prescribed so long a Fast; the rashness and vanity of our
oathes, which gave us a miserable opti∣on betwixt a perjury, and an undoing; our profanation of the Quire, which turn'd us out of the Cathedral, our gross neglect of Gods Service, which helpt to vote down our publick Liturgie; our ge∣neral idleness and sloth, which often cast us out of our Houses, and as it were set us to eat our Bread in the sweat of our brows, or of our brains; our unpro∣fitable walking under all God's methods and means of Grace, which left us no∣thing but his Iudgements (for many sad years) to work upon us; And yet again when I consider, That God hath turn'dPsal. 126. 4. our Captivity as the Rivers of the South, and cast the Locusts out of our Vine∣yards, that we may sit under our Vines; injoying our Iudges as at the first, andIsa. 1. 26. our Counsellors as at the Beginning; And that the use we are to make of so mira∣culous a Recovery, is to be sedulous in providing against the Danger of a Re∣lapse; To sin no more after pardon, for fear a worse thing happen unto us; IJoh. 5. 14. think I cannot be transported with a
more innocent Ambition, because I can∣not be ambitious of a more profitable at∣tempt, then that of bringing down the Heads of certain Hearers into their Hearts; that what is now no more than Light, may by that means become Fire; That we may All (in this sense) be like the Baptist, not only shining, but burningJoh. 5. 35. Lamps; not only beautified with the knowledge of Christian duties, but zealous too in the discharge; as unaffectedly pun∣ctual in all our carriage, as the greatest Enemies of Godliness are hypocritically precise. And though Heresies are to be hated, as things which lead unto de∣struction, yet that Vice may be reckon'd the worst of Heresies, by how much the error of a mans practise is worse then that of his bare opinion. Last of all, when I consider, That though Peace is a blessing, and the grea∣test in its kind, yet many consequences of Peace are but glittering Snares, and that the things which are given us as helps to memory, are apt to make us Isa. 5. 12. Hab. 1. 13, 16. Amos 6. 1, 3. Hos. 13. 6. for∣getful of Him that gave them, I cannot
think of a fitter Text for the giving advantage to my Design, then This Re∣markable Caveat to the People of God, against forgetfulness and ingratitude a∣midst the pleasant Effects of a Restaura∣tion. When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give thee great and goodly Cities, and Houses full of all good things, when thou shalt have eaten, and art Full; THEN beware that thou forget not the Lord, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. AT the very first view of which holy Caveat, there are five particulars of Remarque which presently meet my ob∣servation. As first, the Downfal of a Nation, 2ly the Deliverance, 3ly the Author of that Deliverance, 4ly the Du∣ty by him injoyn'd, and lastly the Iun∣cture of affairs wherein this Duty is most in season. And of all these Particulars each is the greatest in its kind too. For
First behold the greatest Curse that anyI. poor Nation can struggle under. A yoke of Bondage and Captivity, impos'd by the hardest and worst of men. A yoke so insupportable to some mens Necks, that I remember Hegesistratus (a cap∣tive Souldier in Herodotus) would ratherHerodot. in Calliope. cut off his legs, then indure his Fetters; that by the loss of his Feet, he might be enabled to run away. So insuffera∣ble a thing is the state of Thraldome, ve∣ry significantly imply'd in the Land of Egypt, and exegetically express'd by the House of Bondage. But yet the Curse is so set, (like Sha∣dowsII. in a Picture, or Foyles with Dia∣monds,) as to commend and illustrate the greatest Blessing. A Deliverance brought about by such a miraculous complication, that nothing but the ex∣perience that so it is, can extenuate the wonder that so it should be. A People groaning under the pressures of several Centuries of years, and so accustom'd unto the yoke, as to have made it a kind of acquired Nature (, as Galen
speaks) de Terrâ AEgypti eductus est, is now at last brought out of the land of Egypt.—And yet the wonder begins to cease, Because The Author of this Deliverance is soIII. much the greatest to be imagin'd, that he is Dominus, the Lord; the Lord that stretcheth out the heavens; the Lord thatIsa. 40 22. layeth the foundations of the earth; thePsal. 104. 5. Lord that formeth the spirit of man with∣inZech. 12. 1. him. The Lord in whose Hand are the hearts of all men; who turneth manPsal. 90. 3. to Destruction, and again who saith, Come again ye children of men. In a word, It is the Lord, to whom Miracles are natural, and by whom impossibilities are done with ease. 'Tis He that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And therefore, The Duty in proportion must be su∣perlativelyIV. great too, however hid in this place by a little Meiosis of expres∣sion. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God; that is, Remember what he hath done, and thank him for it by thy obedience; Let thy gratitude be seen in
thy conversation. Be sure to Deut. 10. 12 love him and to serve him, with all thy heart and with all thy soul. Forget him if thou canst, unless thou canst forget thou wert Deut. 6. 20, 21. Pharaoh's Bondman. Nay forget him if thou dar'st, unless thou art so stout that thou dar'st be damn'd. And yet be∣ware lest thou forget him, whilest thou art swimming in prosperity, the stream of which may either drown thee, or make thee drunk, if thou art not fore∣arm'd with circumspection. And there∣fore beware that thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt. And that thou mayst not forget him, write the Favours which he hath done thee upon the posts of thine House, andDeut. 6. 7, 8, 9. place them as Frontlets between thine eyes; tell them out unto thy children, as thou walkest by the way, at thy lying down, and thy rising up; Let them be as a Signet upon thine Arm, and as a Seal upon thine Heart. That the pleasures of thy Deliverance may not make thee forgetful of thy Deliverer, (forgetful of the Deut. 32. 15, 18. Rock out of which thou wert hewn,
and kicking (like Deut. 32. 15, 18. Iesurun) at him that made thee,) keep an Exod. 13. 3, 4, 10, &c. Anniversary Feast, (a standing Passeover in May,) whereby to fix him in thy Remembrance. Lastly a Duty so indispensable shouldV. be inforc't upon the soul by the present season. A season of peace and prosperity, succeeding a season of Persecution. The greatest incitement to the Duty should be the manifold enjoyment of this Delive∣rance. For so 'tis obvious to infer from the particle THEN, (so strongly implied in the Hebrew, that in the Eng∣lish 'tis well express'd,) upon which there seems to lye the chiefest emphasis of the Text, if we observe how it stands in a double Relation to the Context. [When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, to give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things; when thou shalt have eaten and be full, THEN beware that thou forget not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt.] The Text is so fruitful of particulars, and each particular is so apt to administer
matter of Discourse, that it hath really been my hardest Question, whereabouts I should begin, and how I should end my me∣ditations. And after too much time lost in stating the Question within my self, I have thought it at once the fittest and the most useful to be resolv'd, as most immediately complying with the solem∣nity of the time, not to yield to the temptation of comparing our Land with the land of Egypt, for fear of seem∣ing to have a pique at the Act of In∣dempnity and Oblivion; (otherwise 'twere easie to make a Parallel, because however our native Countrey, yet for twelve years together it was a very strange Land;) But not advancing one step beyond the Threshold, I shall be∣stow my whole time upon the little word THEN; as being a particle of connexion betwixt our Duty and our De∣liverance, betwixt the business of the Time and the time it self; betwixt the occasion and the end of our present meet∣ing: looking like Homer's wise man, , with a visible prospect
on all that follows, and with as visible a retrospect upon the words going before. When Prosperity breaks in like a mighty stream, (in so much that I may sayAmos 5. 24. with our blessed Saviour, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears,) Then be∣wareLuk. 4. 21. that you forget not the Lord that brought you out of Egypt. Beware you forget him not at any time, but espe∣cially at this. For the particle Then is an important Monosyllable; and that especially in three respects. First because of the difficulty of ha∣ving God in our Remembrance, much more Then, than at other times. Next for the dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than before or after. Lastly by reason of the danger of not performing the Du∣ty Then, when it becomes incumbent on us by many unspeakable obligations. These especially are the Reasons of the particle Then in this place, on which alone I shall insist in this morning's Service. For should I adventure upon the rest, not on∣ly the hour, but (for ought I can conje∣cture) the day would fail me.
ANd first of all let us beware amidstI. the pleasant effects of our Deli∣verance, that we forget not the Author of it; because it is difficulter THEN, than at other times. For the Flattery and Dalliance of the world hath per∣petually been the mother of so much wantonness, or so much pride, that A∣dam found it dangerous to be in Para∣dise, yea and Lucifer to be in Heaven. Do but look upon Solomon in the Book of Kings, and again look upon him in Ecclesiastes, how was he there lifted up by his prosperity? and how does he here preach it down? I know not whe∣ther as a Prince he more injoy'd his pleasures, or as a Prophet more con∣demn'd them: whether the luxury of his Table made him a wanton, or whe∣ther the vastness of his wisdome made him a Fool; 'Twas that betrayed him to his Concubines, and this permitted him to his Idols. Since then a prosperous condition hath such a secret poyson in
it, as against which no medicine hath been sufficiently Alexipharmacal; and from the force of whose contagion there is no sort of men that hath been priviledg'd, no not Adam the Innocent, nor Solomon the wise, nor even Lucifer the beatified; who were so hugely swell'd up with this venom, and so quick∣ly burst; (not the first in a state of sin∣lesness, nor the next in a state of grace, nor yet the third in a state of glory;) since there is no other man then the man Christ Iesus, that hath been ever temptation-proof: Lord, how wretch∣ed a thing is happiness on this side Hea∣ven! and how dangerously treacherous are our enjoyments! I suppose we are taught by our late experience, how easie it is to be over-joy'd, and how equally hard to be truly thankful, for all those wonders of salvation which God hath wrought, and is working for us, the grateful commemorating of which, is religiously the end of our present meet∣ing. Sweet-meats indeed are pleasant, but then they commonly turn to choler. 'Tis
sure the state of humiliation, which though we can worst feed upon, we are notwithstanding best nourisht with: we are such barren pieces of clay, that our fruits will be wither'd with too much laughter, if Grace does not water them sometimes with tears. It should be mat∣ter of gladness to a considering Christian, that in the midst of his prosperity he can see himself sorrowful; that as he was de∣stitute, with comfort, so he abounds, with moderation; and that he does not live rejoycingly, is many times a chief rea∣son for which he ought. It was Davids resolution (at such a time as this is) to serve the Lord with fear, and (by a pious Oxymoron) to Psal. 2. 11. rejoyce unto him with trembling. And if we reflect on the abuses which many have made of a Re∣stauration, we may charitably pray, thatPsal. 102. 9. 80. 5. God will give them some tears to drink; and having given them some tears that he will put them into his Psal. 56. 8. Bottle, that they may serve for this end, to blot their merriments out of his Ibid. which compare with ▪Mal. 3. 16. Book. That the pleasant effects of a Delive
rance (which are peace, and plenty, living securely, and at ease,) are apt to make us turn Atheists, provoking the Author of our Deliverance to correct us once more in the house of Bondage; appears, as by many other reasons, so particularly by this; that it is hard for us to prosper, and not to lye snoring in our prosperi∣ties. For 'tis the natural language of a prosperous man, (as our Saviour implies by way of Parable,) Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou hast much goods laid up for many years, (Luk. 12. 19.) And therefore Agur's wisdome was never more seen, then in his prayer; Give me not Riches, lest I be full, and de∣ny thee, lest I say, who is the Lord? (Prov. 30. 8, 9.) He knew by manifold expe∣rience, that Jam. 4. 4. the friendship of the world is perfect enmity with God, and tends im∣mediately to practical, if not to specu∣lative Atheism. He did not therefore pray thus, Give me not Riches, lest I be liberal to my Coffers; or, Give me not Riches, lest I be bountiful to my Lusts; but (for fear of a greater mischief) Give me
not Riches, lest I be full and deny thee, lest I say in my heart, who is the Lord? that is, for fear I turn Atheist, and only sacrifice to my flesh. So also Solomon, when he was wisest, that is to say, when he repented, and of a very vicious Prince became a Preacher of Repentance, conclu∣ded all under the Sun to be but vanity of vanities; as having found by all his trials (who sure had made more trials then ever any man did,) that peace and plenty with their two daughters, which are idleness, and ease, are exceedingly great, though glorious dangers. But we need not go further for an in∣stance, then to the people in my Text, whom though God might have called a very wild Tamarisk, he was pleased to stile his Beloved Vine. Lord! how carefully it was manur'd with Rain and Sun-shine? with Quailes, and Manna, and water squeez'd out of a Rock? with the Dew of heaven, and with the Fatness of the earth? and yet when all was done that could be, they either brought forth no Grapes; or if they did, they were commonly
wild ones. And when sometimes they yielded good, 'twas rather for fear of cutting down, then for the fertility of their soil, or for the manifold helps of their cultivation. 'Twas their frequently be∣ing prun'd, which more especially made them fruitful. 'Tis true, that God did not evermore punish, although that peo∣ple was still offending. For as he own'd his being as well their Father, as their God; so he was pleas'd to make use of either Method for their Amendment; I mean incouragement, as well as terror. God dealt with them, as with us of this Nation. As he prescrib'd them a Law, so he promis'd them a Canaan. As he led them into Egypt, so he deliver'd them out of Egypt. As he thundred from on a cloud, so he whispered out of a Bush. As he pincht them with scarceness, so he feasted them with plenty. And if the one was even to famine, the other was even to satiety. But if we compare them with our selves in another instance, by considering how ingrateful and how un∣malleable they were; how repining under
their yoke, and how mutinous in their Liberty; How (like some amongst us in this very day of our Deliverance,) they fell a hungring after the Garlick and the Flesh-pots of Egypt, quite for∣getting the Bondage, and tale of Brick; how they murmur'd at their Moses, as if he were worse then a Pharaoh to them; like some repining at their King, as if he were worse then a Protector, (For that you know was the Euphemismus whereby to express the most bloudy Ty∣rant;) How like so many untam'd heigh∣fers, they were exceedingly hard to be brought to hand; or like a stable of un∣backt and unbridled Colts, how apt to kick at their Rider who gave them Food; How God Almighty was forc't to disci∣pline this stiff-neckt Rabble, first of all by committing them to the hardships of Egypt, and then by sending them to wrestle with the difficulties of the wil∣derness; And how when all this was done, they were fain to miss of their Ca∣naan, whilest they were taking it into possession; (for of so great a multitude
to whom the Promise of it was made, no more then a Num. 13. 30. Hab. 3. Caleb, and a Ioshua had a Capacity to inherit it,) we must conclude they were a People who de∣serv'd to be whipt with a Rod of Iron, not so easily reducible by the Deut. chap. 27. & 28. 17, 18, 19. allure∣ments of Mount Gerizzim, as by the curses and the threats to be thundred out from Mount Ebal. So far were they from considering, what they suffer'd a while agoe in the house of Bondage, that they forgot this very Caveat, (as many will do this very Sermon,) which was meant to bring it to their Remembrance, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land, to give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, (&c.) THEN beware that thou for∣get not the Lord that brought thee out of Egypt. Passe we now (if you please) out of the Vineyard into the Fold; from the People under the Law, to Us who live under the Gospel; whom though our Lord (out of goodness) was pleas'd to call his Flock of Sheep, he might have
stil'd (out of Iustice) his Herd of Swine. For if He, the great Shepherd, withhold his Crook Lord how quickly we go astray. And for here and there one who will be led into the Fold, how many are there that must be driven? like the Prodigal in the Gospel, (who would not return unto his Father untill he was brought to feed on Husks,) we seldome care for our Physician, until the time that we are sick; and then as soon as recover'd, are very glad, rather then thankful. And this may point us out a Reason, why for so many years together, (before this last,) our heavenly Father made use of his sharpest Methods for our amendment; even placing us as Israelites amongst Egyptians, like so many flowers amongst thorns; of which the principal design was not to torture but to defend us. To defend us from the danger of carnal security, and presumption; of pride, and wantonness; of forgetfulness, and ingratitude. And since the way to be thankfull for our twelve moneths liberty, is very soberly to re∣flect on our twelve years thraldome, Let's
so transcribe a fair Copy of God's Oeco∣nomy on the Iewes, as (with a grateful commemoration,) to consider it also in our selves. We who flourish at this day like a goodly Tree, not only planted by the river of God's rich Mercies, but sur∣rounded (like our Land) with an Ocean of them; we who stretch forth our branches, not only for our own, but for foreign birds also to build their nests; and whose Spring (blessed be God) doth promise at last to be as lasting, as once our Autumn was like to prove; we who flourish like a Myrtle, how like a Willow did we droop? How was our verdure al∣most exhausted; and our boughs, how deflowr'd? How did we fall after the mea∣sure our sins had risen? First God blasted our noblest Fruits; then he despoyled us of our leaves; next he hew'd down our branches. Nay how strangely were we fed on by those very vermin which we did feed? how greedily eaten up by all those Caterpillars and Locusts, which though ingender'd perhaps by a Northern
wind, I am sure were bred out of our Body? It is not easie to recapitulate how many Mercies we now enjoy, which our iniquities had withheld for so many years, and how many good things our sins hadJer. 5. 25. turn'd away from us. And now if after our Restitution, we shall be found to be a barren unfruitful tree, or fruitful only in our impieties; so as that which was intended to make us better, shall render us worse then we were before; what better usage can we expect, then (after a little tract of years) to be grubbed up by the Root? to have that sentence sent out against us, which once went out against the Fig-tree, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Luk. 13. 7. Then give me leave to repeat the Caveat; And in the meekness of a Re∣membrancer, 2 Pet. 1. 12. to put you in mind of these things, although ye know them already, and are established in the Truth. To put you in mind of being wary, not so much for your selves, as for the people you repre∣sent, by contributing to a Law for the puting of Lawes in execution; that they
may not intoxicate their souls with too many and great draughts of their peace and plenty, for fear a Curse should break forth from our this daies Blessing, by un∣thankfully forgetting the God that gave it. And let this suffice for the first im∣portance of the word Then; as 'tis a particle of connexion, betwixt the occa∣sion and the end of our present meet∣ing. SEcondly let us beware amidst theII. pleasant effects our Deliverance, (such as liberty and plenty, living in idleness and at ease,) that we forget not the Au∣thor of it; because of the dignity of the Duty, rather Then, than before, or after. For, as 'tis the mark of a most servile and base-born spirit, to be the worse for the good that is done unto us; so 'tis the noblest generosity, to mend our lives with our condition. The deep and seri∣ous consideration of which great Truth, as it should lift up our Hearts to a thank∣ful use of our prosperity, so it should
also pluck them down to an humble sense of our obligations. For that indeed is the proper season, wherein humility is a noble, because a difficult vertue. Humi∣liation in a Captive is not a grace, but a necessity. Nor hath temperance any place in the house of scarceness. These two must have a Theatre wherein to set themselves forth; cannot easily be seen in a little Room. The proper time of seeming base in our own modest eyes, is when we are matter of admiration in other mens. The time to shew our self∣denial, (that is, our victory over our selves,) is when we are brought out of an Egypt, into a Land overflowing with Milk and Hony; when our houses are full of all good things, and our Tables stoop∣ing under the weight of their sumptuous load. As our Afflictions a year agoe did make up God's opportunity, where∣by to shew us his mercy and louing kind∣ness; so prosperity ever since should make up ours, whereby to shew him our meek∣ness and moderation. The very Atheist will cry [o God!] in a fit of the Strangury
or the Stone; but let us be Religious in time of health. The profanest Mari∣ner will be devout in a tempest; but let us be so in a calm: when the tide of our injoyments is at the full, Then in a more especial manner let our ambition ebb lowest: when we are mounted aloft on the wings of Fame, Then let's retire in∣to the Desert of our most humble con∣templations; and be so meek amidst our eminencies, as to become most eminent for that our meekness. There are some of whom I may say, they have been arm'd with infirmities against the Devil: some, whose Igno∣rance hath kept them safe; some, whose coldness hath pass'd for continence; who have been flegmatick, and therefore meek; or kept under Hatches, and therefore lowly. But then it being their necessity, and not their choice; rather their lucki∣ness, then their valour; they having kept their ground, not by vertue of any conquest, but meerly because they never fought; , weAristot. eth. Nich l. 1. do not properly commend them, but call
them happy; they are but sancti Planetarii, (as a Father of the Church made bold to word it;) All their armour, if they have any, is but defensive; And for their not being worsted, they may thank their Bucklers, but not their Swords. Alas it should not be a wonder, to see simpli∣city in the village; or to keep one's in∣tegrity, where 'tis a hard thing to lose it. We cannot call that man abstemious, whoQuis abstinens diceiur, subla∣to eo à quo ab∣stinendum est? Quae Tempe∣rantia gulae in fame? quae Ambitionis re∣pudiatio in egestate; quae libidinis infre∣natio in Ca∣stratione? Tertul. ad∣vers. Marcion. l. 1. cap. 29. only riseth with an appetite, because he hath not enough to appease his hunger; nor is He to be commended for not be∣ing drunk, who either hath not sufficient to quench his thirst, or has an able Brain to carry it, or else loves his purse a great deal more then his intemperance, and so is beholding to his baseness for his sobriety. We do not say that he is strong, who doth not fall when no man thrusts him. Nor that he is cautelous and wary, who doth not stumble when the way is plain. No 'tis he is the brave and the gallant Christian, who can hold out his Castle however besieged with tempta∣tions; who can be chaste even in Italy,
or milde in Scythia; who can be a Spa∣niard, and yet not proud; an English man born, yet not inconstant; who can be loyal amidst the triumphs of the most prosperous Rebellion; and humbly thank∣ful in his advancement. He is generously a Christian, who can keep his Vow in Baptism, where 'tis ridiculous not to break it; who can at once live at Court, and forsake the world; who can be witty, yet not prophane; strong, and mettle∣some, yet not presumptuous; conspicu∣ously handsome, and yet not vain; a Ma∣thematician and a Chimist, yet not Athei∣stical; who will not be covetous in the midst of Treasure; nor reconcilable to a vice, although it offer him all advantages; who hath all his five senses (those Ave∣nues of the heart) at once attaque't by Hell's Artillery, and yet is able to pre∣vent, or maintain a Breach; and though they batter down the walls, doth not suf∣fer them notwithstanding to take the City. This I say is the generous, because the self-denying Christian. And agree∣able to the figure by which our viti∣ous
affections are call'd our members, (Colos. 3. 5.) we know in our Captain's Interpretation, (Mat. 5. 29.) that to part with an Avarice, is to pluck out an eye; and to cast away a lust, is to cut off a hand. That as in our military Oath, we swore to fight under his Banner; so as often as we part with a sinful passion, we are reputed (in his accompt) to lose a Limb in his battle. Self-denial it seems being one kind of martyrdome; a dying daily for his sake, who, as the Captain ofHeb. 2. 10. our salvation, was made perfect through sufferings. 'Tis very true in this sense, that the valiantest Souldier is the very best Man. For no man living is truly va∣liant, but he who dares be good, when the Times are evil; and dares not be evil, when Times are good; who stands the shock of temptations, not only in the worst but the best of daies; bravely holding out his Fort against the batteries and assaults, not of poverty only and pain, and other effects of persecution; but against plenty also, and pleasure, and other Fruits of a Restauration.
To sum up all in a word, and to car∣ry on my Metaphor the most I can to their advantage, who will not be carri∣ed to any duty which is not honourable, and brave: The Battles of Leuctra and Mantinéa were not half so full of glory to that immortal Theban Epaminondas, as the two victories of a Christian over his  & . That unruly E∣lement of double fire, his anger and his lust, which his greatest felicities do most enkindle. And this I hope may be enough for the second importance of the word Then; as 'tis a particle of connexion betwixt the business of the Time, and the time it self. LAst of all let us beware, that the mani∣foldIII. enjoyments of our Deliverance do not make us forgetful of our Deliverer, because of the greatness of the danger of not performing the Duty THEN, when it becomes incumbent on us by many unspeakable obligations. For let a man's sin be never so great in point of nature,
or degree, ingratitude will give it an aggra∣vation. And ingratitude taking its sta∣ture from precedent obligations, so as the sins we commit run higher or lower, as the graces we receive have been more or less: there are not any so very capable of provoking Gods Fury, as the men whom he hath pleas'd to take most into his favour. The reason of it may be taken from the Athenians in Thucydides, .Thucyd. l. 1. p. 52. The least unkindness from a Friend is of grea∣ter smart, then the hardest usage from an enemy. The very sight of Brutus more wounded Caesar to the heart, then all the rest of his Assassinates had done with Daggers. David indeed was somewhat troubled, that they who hated him did whisper together against him, (Psal. 41. 7.) but 'twas his greatest cross of all, that they who had eaten of his Bread should ingratefully lift up the heel against him. And in that he said, he could have born it from an Psal. 55. 12, 13. enemy, he did significantly imply, he could not bear it from a friend. And as it was David's Cordolium, the
Type of Christ; so also was it Christ's, the Son of David: who did not weep over other Cities, from which he met with an ill Reception; but he wept over Ierusa∣lem, the Royal City, which he had so much obliged, yet found so cruel. And no doubt but our Saviour is so much more keenly and nearly touch't, that the most obliged Christians should break his pre∣cepts, then that the ignorant Iewes should offer violence to his Person, that we may rationally suppose him thus speaking to us. Had the Iewes or Heathens spit up∣on me by their impurities, and buffeted me by their blasphemies, and stript me by their sacriledge, and murder'd me by their rage; from such as these I could have born it. But that you should war against me, and in the behalf of that base Triumvirate, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, having sworn to me in Baptism that you would fight under my Banner against all Three: That you who have the priviledge to be called by my Name, to be admitted into my House, to have a place at my Table, to hear
my Word, and to partake of my Sup∣per, to be miraculously brought from the house of Bondage, injoying your Kings as at the first, and your Natio∣nal Councils as at the beginning, and sit∣ting your selves as so many Princes un∣der your Vines and Fig-trees, injoy∣ing the liberty of your persons, the pro∣priety of your estates, the important benefit of your Lawes, and the glory to be subjected by a most honourable obedience; that such as you should de∣spise me, and cast my Law behind your back, this is that I can least endure. My greatest favour thus abus'd will be con∣verted into fury. And indeed if we consider, that as God (on the one side) accepteth ac∣cording2 Cor. 8. 12. to what a man hath, so withall (on the other side) of them who haveLuk. 12. 48. received much, much in proportion shall be required; we may with good Lo∣gick infer, and strongly argue within our selves, that an honest Heathen is far better than a Christian Knave. And if an Heathen shall be extirpate for being
barren, much more the Christian, if he is fruitless, shall be cast into the fire. A fruitless Tree which should by na∣ture bear fruit, being fit to make fewel, and nothing else. According to that of our Blessed Saviour, (which is at once of universal and endless verity) Mat. 7. 19. Every Tree which bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. And we who are grafted into the vine, must not only bear fruit, but such fruit too, as Christ expects to reap from us. A Bramble cannot be censur'd for not bearing fruit; because it is in its nature to bring forth none. It was therefore the Fig-tree, and not the Bram∣ble, on which our Saviour bestow'd a curse, Mat. 21. 19. Nor was it the Bram∣ble, but the Fig-tree, which he comman∣ded to be cut down, Luk. 13. 7. we must one day be call'd to dreadful Mat. 25. 19. reckoning, for all the uses we have made of our this daies talent. God's injur'd Iustice must needs be satisfied, (and sure much more his injur'd Mercy) either sooner or later; either in this, or another world.
And if in stead of being thankful for all the blessings we now enjoy, more espe∣cially for that which we this day ce∣lebrate, we shall but turn them into wantonness, and grow the worse for the effects of so great a goodness; what can we reasonably expect, but that the powers of Hell, should once again be let loose upon us and ours? For since to continue in our impieties, is the greatest dishonouring of God that can be; a fil∣ling up the measure of our iniquities, and so the vials of his wrath; He must de stroy us se defendendo; if for nothing but to defend, and secure his Glory. What then remains, but that we take up the words of the Royal Prophet, and together with them, his resolution? VVePs. 116. 13. will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. The Cup of Salvation, that is to say, the Cup of Thanks for that salvation which he hath wrought; as Iunius and Tremellius do rightly explicate the Trope. And mark the force of the Copulative, by which these Duties are tyed together. With∣out
the Cup of Salvation, (that is) the Cup of Thanks giving unto the Author of our salvation, all our calling upon his Name will be quite in vain: For when we spreadout our hands, he will hide his eyes, and when we make many prayers he will not hear (Isa. 1. 15.) And then to thank him as he requires, is not only to en∣tertain him with Eucharistical words, with the meer Calves of our lips, or a Doxologie from the teeth outwards; but to imitate, and obey him, and to love him after the rate of his favour towards us; that we may not forfeit all our interest in the temporal salvation we this day celebrate, nor bring a reproach on the Author of it for saving a people so ill deserving; we must add to our verbal, our vital Prayers; nor only keep an annual Day, but even an age of thanks∣giving for our Deliverance. And then with a greater force of Reason, we must beware that we for∣get not the Lord our God, who if he brought us not out of the land of E∣gypt, did yet deliver us this day from
the house of Bondage. We must not any of us forget him, in whatever represents, or presents him to us. But You espe∣cially must not forget him presented to you in his Vicegerent; whom the more you do enable to be indeed what he is stiled, Defensor Fidei, by so much the greater will be your Glory, and the bet∣ter you will provide for your childrens safety. The more you strengthen that Hand, which under God is to brandish the Sword of Iustice, (which ceaseth to be a Sword of Iustice, when wrested out of that Hand by the Hand of man) the better protected your Peace will be from the ungainable enemies of each ex∣tream; nor can you rationally hope to keep your Peace any longer, then whilest the evil-ey'd Factions want power to break it. Again beware that you for∣get not the Soveraign Author of your De∣liverance, wheresoever you shall find him presented to you in his Messengers; (and what I mean by that word, I need not explain in so wise an Audience;) by whose continuing unrestor'd to their
Ancient Priviledge and Right, your own Restauration remains imperfect. Again be∣ware you do not forget him presented to you in his Members, who are not only your fellow-members, but were your old fellow sufferers in the very same Cause; to which they ever have adhered with the very same constancy; and for which they have been Actors with the very same courage; and do rejoyce in the greatness at least of your Restauration, how much soever they are mourners for the scandalous littleness of their own. Prosperity I have shew'd is a dangerous weapon; such as none but the merci∣ful should dare to use. And if ever there were a Parliament, in which both Mercy and Iustice met, this has the ho∣nour to be reputed so very exemplary for both; that they who stand in need of both, are very confident to obtain them, now, or never. A Parliament so prepar'd by the special Providence of God, for the perpetuating of Peace in our British world, that nothing less then the presence of all perfections in a
Prince, can make us patiently think of its Dissolution. Will you hear the Conclusion of theEccles. 12. 13. whole matter? I shall deliver it to you briefly in this Petition. That so far forth as you regard the Righteous Judge of all the world, and are season'd by Him with the manifold gifts of the bles∣sed Comforter, with the Spirit of wisdomeIsa. 11. 2. and understanding, with the Spirit of counsel and ghostly strength, with the Spi∣rit of knowledge and true godliness, and lastly with the Spirit of his holy fear, you will consider what I have said by your own Authority, because in absolute obedience to your own Order and Com∣mand. ANd now the God of Peace and Power, who brought you forth on this Day from the House of Bondage, both defend and direct you, from this day forward, in all your
wayes. That every one of your Per∣sons, and the 1 Thes. 5. 23. whole of every one, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ. To whom with the Father in the unity of the Spirit, who is abundantly able to keep us from falling, and to raise us when we are down, and to preserve us be∣ing raised, and to present us so pre∣serv'd, before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise God our Saviour, be ascribed by us and by all the world, Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, and Wisdome, and Thanks∣giving, from this day forwards and for evermore, Amen. FINIS.
