P2282D R218932 99830483 34935
THE Pious Soul's Daily Exercise: OR, A GUIDE TO Eternal Glory. BEING MANNA Gathered out of the Holy Scriptures to Refresh the True Chri∣stian in his Passage through this Vale of TEARS to the Heavenly CANAAN. By G. L. The Sixth Edition Corrected. LONDON: Printed for Iohn Marshall, at the Bible in Grace-Church-Street. 1700. Where you may be supplied with Dr. Owen's, Mr. Bunyan's, and the Late Reverend Mr. Mead's Works.
Books Newly Printed and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in Grace-Church-Street. THE Young Man's Remembrancer, and Youth's Best Choice; being an Exhorta∣tion to Conversion, in Anniversary Discourses from Eccles. 12. 1. By M. M. Price Bound 1 s. The Effigies of the Late Reverend and Pious Mr. Matthew Mead, newly Engraved to the Life, by an Ingenious Hand; also several other Mini∣sters Effigies. An Elegiack Essay on the Pious Memory of Mr. Matthew Mead, Late Minister at Stepney. Price Sticht 6 d. The Heavenly Footman; or, A Description of the Man that gets to Heaven. The Second Edition. By Mr. Bunyan, Author of The Pilgrim's Progress. With the Life and Character of Mr. Bu∣nyan. Price 1 s. The Flowings of Christ's Blood freely to Sin∣ners, &c. Price Bound 1 s. Temple Songs; or Hymns Composed to be Sung at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, every Hymn fitted to two Tunes. Spiritual Songs; being the Marrow of the Scriptures, in Songs of Praise to Almighty God from the Old and New Testament, with a Hun∣dred Divine Hymns on several Occasions, as now practised in the several Congregations in and about London. The Second Edition. By Benja∣min Keach, Author of The War with the Devil. Youth's Recreation; or, A Copy-book of Round hand. By William Elder. A Reasonable Word to the Doctors of Reason. Price Bound 1 s.
Manna Gathered, &c. CHAP. I. 1 WHEN I am weary of travelling in the Day, the hopes of rest at Night is a Refreshment: O then the Thoughts of Heaven are sweet, after our short Pilgrimage. 2 It is a true Disposition of a Child of God, to be tender of his Father's Honour, being in his Fear all the Day. 3 All Grace flows in upon the humble Soul, as Waters from the Hills into the Valleys, making he Soul rich in God. 4 And since humble Souls are only safe, we must either humble our selves, or, if God love us, the will. 5 Yet if Humiliation have not Faith and Hope, to raise the Soul to some comfort in God, it turns to Desparation. 6 Fear for Sin proceeding from inward Grief, is a Temper becoming any Christian. 7 Magistrates that are tenderly Affectionate to∣wards a People, shall have a Peoples tender Affe∣ctions towards them. 8 It is great cause of Weeping to a gracious Heart, that he cannot Weep. 9 Prayers begs Blessings from God, and thank∣fulness continues them with Man. 10 Many times there is most Grief, where there is fewest Tears.
11 Spiritual Sorrow is a great deal better than natural; for it comforts the Soul. 12 He that prays with Resolution to sin, goes to God with a Petition in one hand, and a Dag∣ger in the other. 13 Whatsoever the Crosses of a Godly Man be, his latter end shall be assuredly Blest. 14 God takes notice of every good Word and Work the Godly do, and will reward it. 15 When a Christian looks only on the Ill that is in him, he robs God of his Glory, and himself of Comfort. 16 The Good are scattered amongst the Bad in this Life, but at Death they shall be divided. 17 He that joins himself in love and affection to Wicked Men on Earth, shall also be joined in Tor∣ment and Destruction in Hell, without Repentance. 18 Death is the King of Terrours; but that which is at his Back is more terrible, Damnation to the Wicked. 19 Many times good Parents are taken away, that they may not see the ruin of their Children. 20 Good Christians are like good Corn, will soon∣er be ground to pouder, than yield to the rough Blasts of Persecution, or smooth Flatterings of Errour and Heresie. 21 The chief care of a good Magistrate, is for the good of Church and State. 22 A Godly Man is freed from the Law, as his Judge, but not as his Counsellor. 23 If a Godly Man go out of the way, he shall smart for it, and be whipp'd home again. 24 We walk by Faith in this World's sense, and Sight is reserv'd for Heaven. 25 No good is to be done to the Soul by Pray∣ers and Cries, so long as we are careless of puri∣fying the Heart.
26 Let not thy Affection rove, and the Devil and the World can do thee no hurt. 27 He that suppresseth sin at the first motion, shall find Comfort. 28 If we mean to come to Heaven, we must not live in any known Sin; for it darkens Grace. 29 For a Christian ought to mend his pace e∣very Day, that Grace may shine more and more, to the perfect Day. 30 Every poor Man is not a blest Man, except his Bodily Poverty bring him to Spiritual Poverty. 31 He that hath Spiritual Comforts, hath them cheap, tho' they cost them many a Tear. 32 The Heart is never so chearful, as when it pours it self out in Tears and Sighs to God. 33 For Spiritual Mourning secures the Soul from Hell Mourning. 34 All Worldly Sorrow is to be sorrow'd a∣gainst, but Sorrow for sin is never to be repented of. 35 The Adventure and Return of the Stocks of Prayers, is most certain to increase more and more. 36 He that never knocks at Heavens Gates till Death, deserves to have the Gate knocked on his Teeth. 37 He that would speed in Temporal Things, must first seek Spiritual. 38 Cold Prayers have cold Answers; for▪ how should God hear us, when we hear not our selves? 39 He that would be sure to have his Prayers heard, must make a constant Trade in them. 40 The forgetfulness of receiv'd Mercies, makes God forget us. 41 We must put our Hands to the Plow, and then pray that our Endeavours may be Blessed. 42 For to ask Grace, and not to use the Means, is to knock at Heavens Gate, and pull it close on us.
43 He that says, Lord, forgive me my Sins, without a desire to leave them, cannot be heard without God forfeit his Word. 44 If Heavenly things were soon obtained, they would be soon forgotten. 45 Nothing more humbles the Child of God, than to be buffetted with base Temptations. 46 He hath not lost his Prayers, but is doubly paid; who with the Crosses of the VVorld hath his Heart taken off the VVorld. 47 He that hath most Grace, hath most VVork to do, and most Tryal to buckle withal. 48 Some are unfit to Pray, as ever David was to March in Saul's Armour. 49 For the bringing forth of a right Prayer, is like the bringing forth of a Child, with many Throws; yet when the Child is born, there is much Joy. 50 He that sees not his own Infirmities, is nei∣ther patient nor pitiful; not knowing himself, Brother, nor God. 51 Our Infirmities should be matter of Humi∣liation, not Desperation. 52 Tho' the Glory of a Saint be not seen by every Eye, yet they have an Excellency in the midst of all Deformities. 53 For he that sees not a true Christian to be a glorious Creature, has but a fleshly Eye. 54 No Company nor Comfort should put off the Thoughts of Death. 55 For Death will be terrible to that Man, that dyes not in his Thoughts daily. 56 Sin unrepented of, will bring a Sting in the time of Death; filling the Conscience with Hor∣ror and Amazement. 57 He that lays much on Nature's Back, will break it; and that trusts to Natural Parts, shall be disappointed.
58 All carnal Delights and Pleasures are but Poison if grace be not in the Heart for an Antidote. 59 Peace of Conscience will make a Man re∣joice in Sorrow, and live in Death. 60 An Hypocrite may seem better than a real Christian; but like Corn on the House top, soon ripe, soon rotten. 61 He that would profit in Heavenly Myste∣ries, must be knit to them, not by the Brain, but by the Affections. 62 The Signs at the Table, Seals no Grace to the Soul, where there is no Faith. 63 VVe are very sensible of Bodily-Hunger; but Soul-Hunger is hardly felt. 64 The VVorld to come is good Mens Hope, and bad Mens Fear. 65 He that will not be broken from Sin, shall have no portion in Christ's Body broken. 66 He that maketh a Divorce betwixt his Soul and Corruption, is in the State of Grace. 67 It is no Presumption, but our Duty, to judge by our Effectual Calling of our Election. 68 To know there is a Christ, and not our In∣terest in him; is rather a Punishment, than a Comfort. 69 A sinful doubting Soul, lives next in the Suburbs of Hell. 70 As Grace and Glory, so Sin and Shame goes together. 71 The more sanctified Afflictions on Earth, the more weight of Glory in Heaven. 72 Sin may draw down Judgment on a Godly Man, but shall not rest on him. 73 Let us have a care of being fair-tongu'd Hypocrites, lest we get Balaam's Brand, and Pi∣late's End; Eusebius, lib. 2. chap. 7. says, he was brought to such Misery, that he Murdered himself.
74 It is all one to Christ our Surety, to pay our great Debts as well as our small. 75 He that would avoid Sin, must avoid the occasion of Sin. 76 Saint by their great falls lose their Commu∣nion, but not their Union with God. 77 God's Love to us, and our Love to him, is like Corks in the deep VVaters of Affliction, car∣rying up the Sonl to eternal Bliss. 78 Satan and Seducers sometimes speaks Truth for their own advantage. 79 It is both sin and shame, that Christians break Oaths one to another, when Heathens dis∣dained it to Uladislaus. 80 It is Satan's policy, either to let us see no Sin, or nothing but Sin 81 No Scripture saith, the greatness of Man's Sin hinders the greatness of God's Mercy. 82 Oh let us admire the free Grace of God! and to know he does not shew Mercy because we please him, but because Mercy pleases him. 83 He that depends upon the Power and Mer∣cy of God in his Ordinances, shall be sure to find Joy and Comfort. 84 VVhen all means fail, let the Soul look up to God; for then is the fittest time to meet God, and disappoint Satan. 85 As a Tree may want Fruit and Leaves when the Sap is at the Root; so a Christian may want Sence and Feeling when true Faith. 86 He that listens to carnal Reasoning in his VVay to Heaven, sins deeply, and wounds his Soul dangerously. 87 The clearest Day of outward Comforts, may be clouded e're Night. 88 Riches make themselves VVings to fly a∣way, while we are making Doors and Boults to keep them in.
89 No sickness nor affliction can wear out the Marks by which Christ knows us. 90 In great Sorrows the Mind is very unfit to to take in Comfort. 91 A Flint and Steel consume one another, so do proud and hard Spirits wanting Grace. 92 Of old, in making a Coventant, they used to cut the Heifer, or put a suckled Sow betwixt them, to signifie the Breaker of no more esteem. 93 They that are in the Covenant with God, may say their Maker is their Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, it shall stand for ever. 94 Better be preserved in the Brine of Afflicti∣on, than rot in the Honey of Prosperity. 95 It is a Temporal Blessing to the wicked, to have the Godly live among them; and proves their ruin, when they are removed; witness Noah, Lot, Joseph. 96 The Devil accusing bold Rothel face to face, bade him, Be gone thou damn'd Devil, I have an Intercessor, and thou none. 97 If the Society of the Godly be so pleasant here, Oh how joyful shall it be hereafter with the Vision of God, holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, where no unclean thing can enter! 98 Honesty and Plain-dealing did, and ever will prove the best policy. 99 In self-judging, a Believer ought to observe his good as well as his bad, and not to lye at a catch with his own Soul, and take it at the worst. 100. Better cross our own Humours, than God's Spirit: For he tells us, better pluck and cut our Eyes and Feet of Lusts off, than go to Hell. CHAP. II. 1 LET Men hold to the Word in Dispute with Satan, as Christ and Michael did, he will be weary, and go away.
2 Look from one end of Heaven to the other, and see if ever any Man trusting in God was disappointed. 3 Every Soul in going to Prayer, ought to say to all sublunary things, as Abraham said to his Servants, Stand you here, while I go worship yonder. 4 We must not think to bring any good to the Promises, but go to them for all good. 5 O precious Faith, which brings all good with it; Grace here, and Glory hereafter. 6 It is an infallible mark of Regeneration, to have the cruelty of our Natures taken away. 7 He that refuses Works of Mercy to those in need, is a Miser. 8 The Word is sweeter to the Godly than Ho∣ney from the Comb, and dearer to him than thou∣sands of Gold and Silver. 9 As a Godly Man said at Death, If he were not going to the Fountain, he would be sorry to leave such Streams as the Promises. 10 No Man can love a Saint as a Saint, but a Saint. 11 The Doctrine of Christ is preached to many, but the Power thereof but extended to a few. 12 That Man is holy and harmless, who when opportunity of Revenge to his Enemy is offer'd, yet forbears. David to Saul. 13 It is a sign of a woful Estate, when our Tongues and Hearts are set on Mischief on small Matters. 14 No Man is turned to God, but he loves the Society he formerly hated. 15 A Heart set upon Brawling and Raging, is void of Comfort. 16 He may be sure of the Remission of his sins, who is released from the Bondage of sin.
17 He that would make all Comfort sure to him∣self, should first make sure. that his sins is forgiven him. 18 The only way to quiet our Hearts, is to hearken what God says. 19 Misery to the Righteous is as a Sojourner, but it rests on the back of the Wicked. 20 The Means, Time, and Measure of Affliction is of God's own Appointment. 21 There is another Life besides natural Life, and the Root of it is in Christ our Head. 22 He that finds such an Antipathy betwixt his Spirit and Sin, as betwixt him and poyson, hath true Grace in his Heart. 23 We must hate the Conversation of such who hinders us in the growth of spiritual Life. 24 As without shedding of Blood no forgive∣ness of sin; so without the Spirit seals the Pro∣mises to our Souls we have no Comfort. 25 Christ is the Fountain of spiritual Life, but Faith is the Pipe conveying it to us. 26 Better for us to sleep in a House full of Ser∣pents and Adders, than in a state of sin. 27 Happy Practices, when with the Day we clear the sins of the Day, fitting our selves for Life or Death. 28 Every falling into sin in a Believer, is not a total falling away. 29 Samson's strength was in his Locks, but our strength against sin and errour is in Christ. 30 The sense of God's love is sometimes with∣drawn, to make us mourn for it the more. 31 VVhen Afflictions are doubled, it is time to pray hard, believe, and apply the Promises, and Deliverance will come. 32 God's time of helping the poor and needy, is when all other helps is at a stand.
33 After Faith ends on Earth, comes the Life of Vision in Heaven. 34 All that the Father gives by Election, Christ by Redemption saves. 35 God rains the showers of his Ordinances up∣on all, but Believers reaps the benefit only. 36 Christ is our Husband; Faith yields consent, and that makes the Match. 37 Many are in the state of Grace, relying on Mercy, and wanting the assurance of Pardon. 38 Satan applying himself to the Distemper of a melancholy Spirit, keeps it in Darkness. 39 As Parents shews their love to the weakest Child, so God manifests his love to weak Christians 40 VVhere there is Faith, there is Prayer; for Faith is the pattern of Prayer, and Prayer is the breath of Faith. 41 A broken Heart expresses it self more in Sighs and Groans than VVords, which the Spirit only understands. 42 The sense of Christ's love in pardoning sin, constrains us to a holy Violence in performing our Duty. 43 Look upon the love of God, and it will cut the sinews of sin, and distrust in Providence. 44 Come in to Christ, and stoop, in doing thy Duty, and thou makes it unquestionable thou art one of God's Elect. 45 Oh the deep Ocean of the everlasting love of God to the Believer in giving him Free Grace, that shall bring a full Fraight of Glory to all Eternity! 46 Heaven and Earth rejoices at the Conversi∣on of a sinner, effectual Calling pursuing Election, the lost sheep and penny being found. 47 Remission of sins always accompanies Evan∣gelical Repentance, it being the gift of God, but not legal VVitness. Peter and Judas.
48 A godly Man, tho' poor, yet is still happy. O happy Mordecai, and unhappy Haman! O hap∣py Lazarus, and unhappy Dives! O happy Eli∣jah, and unhappy Jezebel! O happy John, and un∣happy Herod! 49 O the Magazine of Promises in the Bible to a Believer! it is an everlasting Fountain, which shall never run dry; it's a Title to Eter∣nal Life, where we shall enjoy the Company and Vision of God, Angels and Saints, to all Eternity. 50 Our love to God, is the ground of our love to our Neighbour; our love to our Neighbour, is a Testimony of our love to God. 51 The living of a happy Life, consists in the assurance of God's love to our Souls. 52 They who have no conflict in their Spirit, nor interruption in their Estate, may greatly fear their condition. 53 Complain of thy self and sins to Christ, and let sin have no quiet Possession. 54 He is a true Christian that lives in no gross sin, nor allows himself in any small sin. 55 That Man dies comfortably, who believes Christ will have a care of his Soul. 56 It is dangerous to take By-Paths, where the open Road is free and safe. 57 They that are most void of Learning and Experiences, dabble most in dark places. 58 That Heart is worse than Iron, whom Christ's Load-stone cannot attack. 59 The Graces of Christ are like the Springs of the Earth, can never run dry. 60 But are, and shall be gliding forth on Earth, till the whole Elect be gathered up into Heaven, to Eternity. 61 The love of Christians to Christ, is not blind and senseless, but guided by Reason and Election.
62 Grace destroys not Nature, but perfects  it by supernatural Reliefs. 63 There is a special intimacy and loving kind∣ness betwixt Christ and those that love him▪ 64 The more we meditate upon God, and his Word, the sweeter shall our fellowship be with him here, and to Eternity. 65 Many Souls are black through the night of Persecution, yet comely in the Hope of Patience. 66 False Teachers have many Followers, as Wasps have Combs, but no Honey. 67 Some are Eagle ey'd, to spy the Infirmi∣ties of their Brethren, passing over their Graces. 68 Afflictions may discolour the Church for a season; but her proper colour is Beauty for Ashes. 69 Get Protection in Christ by Faith, and he will not suffer thee to want any good thing. 70 It is truly Christianity for a Man to love those that hate him, and to do them no wrong. 71 It aggravates a Man's Sinfulness, to be un∣holy while he converses with such as are holy. 72 It brings Honour to God and Man, to be upright amongst those who are unjust. 73 Perfect Holiness is the Aim of the Saints on Earth, and it is the Reward in Heaven. 74 He who hath a plain Heart, hath also square Dealings. 75 If God hath given thee Grace, thou hast the best and choicest Blessing that can be given. 76 There is Fire in all Estates ill gotten, which at last will consume them. 77 The fear of the Lord sweeps the Heart, and keeps the Life clean. 78 Holy Enmity against Sin is the Temper of a Godly Man's Heart.
79 Emptiness and Poverty presseth those most who were once full and rich. 80 Great and Good, Rich and Holy, are hard things, and seldom meet. 81 To be extream Rich or Poor, is an extream Temptation. 82 That Man is rich in Grace, who is very poor, but very holy. 83 God never gives any thing evil in it self, to those that are good; nor the chief good to those that are evil. 84 The Time we spend in Spiritual Duties is the Time gained from Temporals; therefore to turn Poor, if thou turn Godly, fear not. 85 Nothing is more unnatural than Rents and Brawling in a Family. 86 The faithful Soul takes sure hold of Christ in the time of Darkness and Temptation. 87 If thy Heart fail thee in Distress, look to Christ for strength and supply of Comfort. 88 The virtue of Christ's Death never dieth, but flows down to all Ages, for ever. 89 God hath appointed, that where the Cross is, there is the Cordial against it. 90 Divine Love is the cause of Divine Beauty, and rejoyces in its own worth. 91 The Beauty of the Soul is the Holiness of it being God's Image. 92 Christ hath the Truth and Essence of Beauty, whereas Earthly things have it only in Estimation. 93 The unquiet Brains of many being tossed with Opinions, ought to rest in the Scripture as a Bed. 94 Our Sins are Thorns, so are Temptations to Sin, and Affliction for Sin. 95 Heresies and Schisms are worse than Briars and Thorns to the Church. 96 As weary Travellers seek for cool Arbours▪
and delight in them; so doth the weary Soul, af¦ter and in Christ. 97 It is neither loss nor dishonour, to be van∣quished in the Field where Christ is General; for at last we shall be Conquerors. 98 They are happy beyond expression, who are transfixed with the Wounds of Christ. 99 It is God's due, and our Duty, to give God our Morning-Thoughts first, and to be in his Fear all the Day. 100 All Holy Duties call upon us all for a Holy Preparation. CHAP. III. 1 IT no ways befits Christians to lye down and stretch themselves in sinful Pleasures. 2 The Elect on Earth have three degrees of Glory before they came to the full fruition in Heaven; after Conversion, after Death, and after Judgment, then full. 3 A Holy Conversation makes Grace visible to the World, and more Comfort to the Believer himself. 4 Parents may put Money in their Childrens Pockets, but they cannot put Grace in their Hearts; yet to train them up in the Fear of the Lord. 5 And their Care to them ought to be as long as their Children and they live together. 6 And Children when grown in years, must not think they have out-grown Obedience to their Parents. 7 And such Parents as think to make their Chil∣dren great, and not good in this World, may sus∣pect themselves to be the Devil's Children. 8 And the special Care of a holy Father is so the Soul of his Child. 9 Moderate Refreshing and Recreation may well become Holy Men.
10 Grace is very active; it desires to draw many into fellowship with it self. 11 God doth not only please the Creature, but pleaseth himself when he sheweth Mercy. 12 The industrious Man hath no time to sin, the idle Man lyes open to its Snares. 13 He is a happy Man that finds a true Friend in the time of extremity; but he is a happier Man that hath no extremity to try his Friend. 14 Better carry our selves that the World hate, and God smile; than that God frown, and the World smile. 15 There is a time coming when Ungodliness shall be as much prosecuted by Justice, as in times past Godliness hath been persecuted by Injustice. 16 They can but faintly make God known to others, who are not acquainted with God them∣selves; and to teach Christ to others, who have not learn'd him themselves. 17 Whoever brings Mercy in need, both the Mercy and the Bringer are of God's sending. Good Samaritan. 18 God will stain the Pride of all Carnal Glory; for indeed all Pride would stain his Glory. 19 It is not Man's Free Will, but God's Free Grace, which makes▪ one Man differ from another in Goodness. 20 I am sure there is more of the Dew of Hea∣ven upon a mortified Christian, than on the World∣ling in all his Pleasures. Haman. 21 The Faults of Holy Men in Scripture, should teach us rather to fear, than boldness to sin. 22 The Devil doth not, nay, cannot hate a Saint so much as God loves him. 23 It usually falls out, that they who seek others Destruction, find their own. Pharaoh.
24 They do not faithfully Love, who love not Faithfulness. 25 They who are most with God in secret, know most of God's Secrets; for he is most with them that fear him. 26 The Lord's Portion is his People, and the Lord is his People's Portion. 27 While Saints are on Earth, Christ is pre∣paring Heaven for them, and them for Heaven. 28 We may well wait for the Lord's Grace, since the Lord waits to be gracious. 29 The Saints have more Comfort from God's Love to them, than they have from their Love to God. 30 For it is seldom that the Duty sanctifies us, unless we labour to be sanctified for the Duty. 31 Of old they offered up a Beast in Sacrifices, but now God takes Obedience for a better. 32 In Trouble we reckon it some Joy to get a faithful Friend to tell our Mind to. O then doth not Experience bid the Godly call on him in the day of trouble, and he will deliver them? 33 God in the Sacrament sees the Death of his Son, and that satisfies him; and the Godly see the Death of their Saviour, and that sanctifies them. 34 Acting of Faith, and pouring out of Prayers, makes Sacraments effectual to Men, and accepta∣ble to God. 35 Christ was ever, and is, and shall be the on∣ly Remedy for Sin. 36 Usually, where God gives much Grace, he tries Grace much. 37 A Man that hath got an Interest in Christ, will be thirsting till he come to that bottom∣less Ocean of God's Love to him, where he shall never thirst more to Eternity.
38 Adam, tho' Lord of the whole Earth, was commanded to Work O then let us fly Idle∣ness, for it is like a Shop for the Devil to tread in, or his Baggage-Horses. 39 Dinah went idly to see the Daughters of the Land, and lost her Virginity; and was occasion of much Blood-shed, a whole City being killed; and made her old Father Jacob stink among the Inhabitants. 40 Carnal Pleasures wither in using, but Spi∣ritual becomes fresh and green. 41. A holy Soul longs to be uncloathed; and lives not in it self, but in Christ, in whom its Life is hid. 42 To be without gross Sin, is our Holiness on Earth; to be without any Sin, is the Holiness of Heaven. 43 He that repents of those Sins he fears he has committed, shall be sure to repent of those Sins he doth commit. 44 For a Man to bless God in his reigning Sins, resolving to continue in them, is a very spreading Deceit. 45 Christ denied himself for us, and left Hea∣ven to redeem us; and therefore we should deny our selves for him. 46 Saints have sometimes in this Life, enough to say, It is good to be here; but never enough to say, It is best to be here. 47 A Saint should welcom God when he comes to take, as well as when he comes to give. 48 God loves his People as well when he strikes them, as when he stroaks them. 49 That Man hath nothing who wants Christ, and that Man who hath Christ wants nothing. 50 God hath promised to keep his People, and
he will keep his Promise; I will keep them as the Ap∣ple of mine Eye. 51 A Christian should possess his Soul in the Patience of Hope, until his Soul possess that which he hath patiently hoped for. 52 As all Rivers flow from the Ocean, and to the Ocean; so all Graces from Christ, and to Christ. 53 As the Fishes cannot live without Water, nor the Birds without Air, no more can a Be∣liever without Christ. 54 In Affliction let us not give more eat to the Devil, and Conscience accusing, than to Christ, and his Mercy excusing. 55 Whilst some Men walk to get Stomachs for their Meat, others are glad to walk to get Meat for their Stomachs. 56 If we live to the Devil here, it is a token we shall live with him hereafter; and if we live to God here, that we shall live with him hereaf∣ter. 57 If bad Tongues could make Men ill, then many a good Man would be in evil taking. 58 Many Men, while disputing what to do, in the mean time neglect the thing they ought to do without dispute. 59 To maintain my Opinion, because it is my own, I think it my Folly; but to maintain my Opinion, because it is Truth, I think it my Wisdom. 60 Let us not seek Revenge on our Enemies; for if they get Grace they'll repent, and if they get Hell, they'll have more than we desire: One they must get. 61 No Man on Earth can be in so bad a condi∣tion, but he may be in a worse, that's in Hell. So let us not despair, for it is the Lord's Mercy we are not consumed.
62 Of the Sluggard Solomon says, he ought not to eat, yea, but to suffer Hunger; the Rain drops through his Roof, and his Vineyard is overgrown with Nettles. 63 It is a wilful Error, to chuse to be solitary, when there is a holy and wholly consent of good Company. 64 This is the difference between Saints and Hypocrites in Grace; the one the Motion, the other the Notion; the one the Expression, the other the Experience; the one reads and hears, the other tastes and feels. 65 The Ox or the Swine crying under the Hand of the Butcher, I have seen the rest come for their relief. O then how ought Christians to love, relieve, and sympathize one with another, under the hands of Persecutors. 66 Every Sin is a turning from God; but no Sins in his own can be a Farewel to God; for he will bring them back with Stripes and Rods. 67 The Heart is to be kept with all diligence, for sinful Thoughts are dangerous. 68 For the Hearts of Men are so wicked, as to sin on sin a thousand times over. 69 All things in Heaven and Earth are disposed by the unerring Wisdom of God, and limited by the Almighty Power. 70 Sleep is a short Death, and Death is a long Sleep. 71 It should be the Voice of every Soul, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? 72 There is no trusting to any Estate whatsoe∣ver, out of Christ. 73 None of us, left to our selves, but will quite undo our selves. 74 Sin spoils our Honour and Comfort at once. 75 He that is wicked, will be an Adversary, if
Grace prevent not: No sooner a Sinner, but a Satan. 76 All Apostacy from Goodness, is a spice of the Devil. 77 The height of Holiness is not only to do Good, but to oppose Evil. 78 It is the Duty of a Christian to be as full of Malice against the Devil as the Devil is against him. 79 Tho' the Devil roars about, yet he is in a double Chain of Justice, being under the Wrath and Eye of God. 80 They who depart from God, shall never find true rest in any Creature. 81 Wicked Men, tho' never so great, are scarce worth the looking on. 82 Cloisters are opener to Satan's Temptation than the open Fields. 83 There is a kind of Joy amongst Devils and wicked Men when the godly Man sins. 84 It is a holy Ambition, to strive to excel others in Grace and Goodness. 85 It is a Man's Duty, when God enlighten∣eth and gives Joy, to warble forth his Praise. 86 The Groans of a contrite Heart, are Musick in God's Ears, and a sure Proof of his Spirit in us. 87 God is a secure Rock, to defend his Doves when they are hunted and persecuted. 88 God bids his Servants ask and they shall have, and it grieves him they do not ask. 89 The Church suffers as much from Heresie and Schism, as from blind and mad Heathens. 90 Every faithful Soul is God's Garden, and every Grace is a beauteous Lilly 91 As the Waves on the back of one another are useful to help the Ship to the Heaven of rest, so are Afflictions to the Godly Man.
92 A Holy Life is pleasanter to a Christian, than the Sun to the Earth, or Wings to a Bird. 93 The Tranquillity and Peace of a good Con∣science, excels all worldly Treasure. 94 The Application of Christ's Blood, is not only our Strength, but our Glory and Prote∣ction. 95 He that blesseth God in his Afflictions, his Afflictions shall be a Blessing unto him. 96 When a Seducer speaks Truth, he doth set a Snare to catch the Truth. 97 In great Strains look not so much on the present, as what we were, and shall be e're long, and that will give content. 98 Tho' Sectaries intend it not, yet Antichrist and Hell have no better Agents. 99 No Man's Calling must call him from God or Godliness; for particular things must give way to general. 100 Sun, Moon and Stars, Birds of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Trees of the Field, spread forth JEHOVA s Praise; O how much more then should Christians, that shall live in that Employ to all Eternity!
Books Newly Printed and Sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in Grace Church-Street. VAriety without Vanity; or, a compact Number of Copies; with most sorts of Copy-Books, Copies on the Top to Learn by; also Variety of Pictures, as Birds, Beasts, &c. A Declaration, of the Congregational Mini∣sters in and about London, against Antinomian Errors, &c. The second Edition. To which is added, the Testimony of some of the Ministers in behalf of the Rest. All Men must Die. In a Funeral Sermon on the Death of Mr. Elias Keach. By Nathaniel Wiles. A Sermon on the Death of the Reverend Mr. Stephen Lobb. By Thomas Goodwin. Price 6 d. A Funeral Sermon preached at the Merchants Lecture in Broad-street, upon the Death of the Re∣verend Mr. Thomas Gouge, who Deceased January 8. 1700. By John Nesbitt. Price 6 d. Divine Meditations, or, a Honey-comb to Re∣fresh weary Travellers, in Collection of Divine Sentences out of the Scripture of Truth. Price Stitcht 2 d. Two Discourses on Patience, being some of the Last Sermons of Mr. Elias Keach, published by himself before his Death. The Flowings of Christ's Blood freely to Sin∣ners, or the free Grace of God. By Mr. Saltmarsh. A few Lines Touching Baptism; shewing, 1. What Baptism is. 2. Who are the fit Subjects. 3. The Good Old Way of Baptizing. 4. Some Objections answered by Matthew Fen. FINIS.
