p447 12252539 57169
A True Tale of ROBIN HOOD. Or, A Brief Touch of the Life and Death of that re∣nowned Outlaw Robert Earl of Huntington, vulgar∣ly called Robin Hood, who lived and dyed in A.D. 1198. being the 9th. year of the Reign of King Richard the First, commonly called Richard Coeur de Lyon. Carefully collected out of the truest Writers of our English Chronicles: And published for the satisfa∣ction of those who desire truth from falshood. By Martin Parker. Printed for J. Clark, W. Thackeray, and T. Passinger. 1686. A TRUE TALE OF Robin Hood.
BOth Gentlemen & Yeomen bold or whatsoever you are, To have a stately story told attention now prepare: It is a Tale of Robin Hood, that I to you will tell, Which being rightly understood, I know will please you well. This Robin (so much talked on) was once a man of Fame, Instiled Earl of Huntington, Lord Robert Hood by Name. In Courtship and Magnificence his Carriage won him praise,
And greater favour with his Prince than any in our days. In bounteous Liberality he too much did excell, And loved men of Quality more than exceeding-well: His great Revenues all he sold for Wine and costly chear, He kept three hundred Bow-men bold, he shooting lov'd so dear: No Archer living in his time with him might well compare: He practis'd all his youthful prime that Exercise most rare. At last by his profuse expence he had consum'd his wealth; And being outlaw'd by his Prince, in Woods he liv'd by stealth. The Abbot of St. Maries rich, to whom he mony ought, His hatred to the Earl was such, that he his downfal wrought. So being outlaw'd (as 'tis told) he with a Crew went forth Of lusty Cutters stout and bold, and robbed in the North. Among the rest one Little John a Yeoman bold and free,
Who could (if it stood him upon) with ease encounter three: One hundred men in all he got, with whom (the story says) Thrée hundred common men durst not hold combat any waies. They York-shire Woods frequented much and Lancashire also, Wherein their practises were such that they wrought muckle woe. None Rich durst travel to and fro, though ne'r so strongly arm'd, But by these Thieves (so strong in show) they still were rob'd and harm'd. His chiefest spight to th' Clergy was that liv'd in monstrous pride: No one of them he would let pass along the High-way side, But first they must to dinner go, and afterwards to shrift; Full many a one he served so, thus while he liv'd by Theft. No Monks nor Fryers he would let go, without paying their Fees: If they thought much to be used so, their Stones he made them lese; For such as they the Country fill'd with Bastards in those days:
Which to prevent, these Sparks did geld all that came in their ways. But Robin Hood so gentle was, and bore so brave a mind, If any in distress did pass, to them he was so kind, That he would give and lend to them to help them in their need; This made all poor men pray for him and wish he well might speed. The Widow and the Fatherless he would send means unto: And those whom famine did oppress found him a friendly foe. Nor would he do a woman wrong, but see her safe convey'd He would protect with power strong all those who crav'd his aid: The Abbot of St. Maries then who him undid before, Was riding with two hundred men, and Gold and Silver store: But Robin Hood upon him set, with his couragious Sparks, And all the Coyn perforce did get, which was twelve thousand Marks: He bound the Abbot to a Tree, and would not let him pass,
Before that to his men and he his Lordship had said Mass: Which being done, upon his Horse he set him fast astride, And with his face towards his Arse he forced him to ride, His men were forced to be his guide, for he rode backward home: The Abbot being thus villify'd, did sorely chafe and fume. Thus Robin Hood did vindicate his former wrongs receiv'd: For 'twas this covetous Prelate that him of Land bereav'd. The Abbot he rode to the King with all the haste he could: And to his Grace he every thing exactly did unfold: And said that if no course were ta'n by force or stratagem, To take this Rebel and his Train, no man should pass for them. The King protested by and by unto the Abbot then That Robin Hood with speed should dye, with all his merry men. But e're the King did any send, he did another feat:
Which did his Grace much more offend, the fact indeed was great: For in a short time after that the Kings Receivers went Towards London with the coyn they got, for s Highness Northern Rent; Bold Robin Hood and Little John, with the rest of their Train, (Not dreading Law) set them upon, and did their Gold obtain. The King much moved at the same, and the Abbots talk also, In thi his anger did proclaim, and sent word to and fro, That whosoever alive or dead could bring him Robin Hood, Should have one thousand marks well paid in Gold and Silver good. This promise of the King did make full many Yeomen bold Attempt stout Robin Hood to take with all the force they could; But still when any came to him within the gay green wood, He entertainment gave to them with Venison fat and good, And shew'd to them such Martial sport with his long Bow and Arrow,
That they of him did give report, how that it was great sorrow That such a worthy man as he should thus be put to shift, Being a late Lord of high degree, of living quite bereft. The King to take him more and more sent men of mickle might: But he and his still beat them sore, and conquered them in fight: Or else with love and courtesie, to him he won their hearts. Thus still he liv'd by Robbery throughout the Northern parts. And all the Country stood in dread of Robin Hood and's men: For stouter Lads ne'r liv'd by bread in those days nor since then: The Abbot (which before I nam'd) sought all the means he could, To have by force this Rebel ta'n and his Adherents bold: Therefore he armd five hundred men with furniture compleat: But the Outlaws slew half of them, and made the rest retreat, The long Bow and the Arrow keen, they were so us'd unto:
That still he kept the Forrest green in spight o' th' proudest foe, Twelve of the Abbots men he took who came to have him ta'n, VVhen all the rest the field forsook, these he did entertain, VVith banquetting and merriment, and having us'd them well, He to their Lord them safely sent and will'd them him to tell, That if he would be pleas'd at last to beg of our good King, That he might pardon what was past, and him to favour bring, He would surrender back again the mony which before VVas taken by him and s men from him and many more. Poor men might safely pass by him, and some that way would chuse, For well they knew that to help them he evermore did use. But where he knew a Miser rich that did the poor oppress, To feel his Coyn his hands did itch, he'd have it more or less: And sometimes when the High-way fail'd, then he his courage rouzes;
He and his men have oft assail'd such rich men in their houses: So that through dread of Robin then and his adventurous Crew, The Misers kept great store of men, which else maintain'd but few. King Richard, of that name the first, sirnamed Coeur de Lyon, Went to defeat the Pagans Curst, who kept the Coasts of Sion, The Bishop of Ely Chancellor, was left a Vice-Roy here, Who like a Potent Emperor did proudly domineer. Our Chronicles of him report that commonly he rode With a thousand horse from court to court where he would make abode. He riding down towards the North with his aforesaid Train, Robin and his did issue forth, them all to entertain. And with the gallant gray-Goose-wing they shew'd to them such play That made their Horses kick and fling and down their Riders lay. Full glad and fain the Bishop was, for all his thousand men,
To seek what means he could to pass from out of Robin's ken: Two hundred of his men were kill'd, and fourscore Horses good, Thirty who did as Captives yield were carried to the green wood: Which afterwards were ransomed for twenty marks a man: The rest set Spurs to Horse and fled to th' Town of Warrington. The Bishop sore inraged then did in King Richards name Muster up a power of Northern men, these Outlaws bold to tame, But Robin with his courtesis so won the meaner sort, That they were loath on him to try what rigour did import, So that bold Robin and his Train did live unhurt of them, Vntil King Richard came again from fair Jerusalem: And then the talk of Robin Hood his Royal Ears did fill, His Grace admir'd that i' th' green wood he was continued still: So that the Country far and near did give him great applause;
For none of them need stand in fear, but such as broke the Laws. He wished well unto the King, and prayed still for his health, And never practis'd any thing against the Common-wealth; Only because he was undone by th' cruel Clergy then, All means that he could think upon to vex such kind of men, He enterpriz'd with hateful spleen, for which he was to blame, For fault of some to wreak his teen on all that by him came. VVith wealth that he by Roguery got, eight Alms-houses he built, Thinking thereby to purge the blot of blood which he had spilt: Such was their blind Devotion then, depending on their works, VVhich if 'twere true, we Christian men inferiour were to Turks: But to speak true of Robin Hood, and wrong him not a jot, He never would shed any mans blood that him invaded not. Nor would he injure Husbandmen that toil at Cart and Plough:
For well he knew wer't not for them, to live no man knew how. The King in person with some Lords to Nottingham did ride, To try what strength and skill affords to crush this Outlaws pride. And as he once before had done, he did again proclaim, That whosoever would take upon to bring to Nottingham Or any place within the Laud Rebellious Robin Hood, Should be preferr'd in place to stand with those of Noble Blood. When Robin Hood heard of the same, within a little space, Into the Town of Nottingham a Letter to his Grace He shot upon an Arrow head one evening cunningly: VVhich was brought to the King & read before his Majesty: The Tenour of this Letter was That Robin should submit And be true Liegeman to his Grace in any thing that's fit, So that his Highness would forgive him and his merry men all:
If not, he must i' th' green wood live and take what chance did fall. The King would feign have pardoned him but that some Lords did say, This President will much condemn your Grace another day. While that the King and Lords did stay debating on this thing, Some of these Outlaws fled away unto the Scottish King. For they suppos'd if he were ta'n, or to the King did yield, By th' Commons all the rest of's train full quickly would be quell'd. Of more than full an hundred men, but forty tarried still, Who were resolv'd to stick to him let fortune work her will. If none had fled, all for his sake had got their pardon free: The King to favour meant to take his merry men and he. But e're the pardon to him came this famous Archer dy'd: His death and manner of the same i'le presently describe. For being vext to think upon his followers revolt,
In melancholly passion he did recount his fault: Perfidious Traytors said he then, in all your dangers past Have I you guarded as my men to leave me thus at last; This sad perplexity did cause a Feaver (as some say) Which him unto confusion draws though by a stranger way. This deadly danger to prevent, he hie'd him with all speed Vnto a Nunnery with intent for his healths-sake to bléed. A faithless Fryer did pretend in love to let him blood: But he by falshood wrought the end of famous Robin Hood. The Fryer (as some say) did this to vindicate the wrong Which to the Clergy he and his had done by power strong. Thus dyed he by treachery, that could not dye by force: Had he liv'd longer certainly King Richard in remorse Had unto favour him receivd, he brave men elevated:
'Tis pitty he was of life bereav'd by one which he so hated; A treacherous Leach this Fryer was, to let him bleed to death: And Robin was methings an Ass to trust him with his breath. His Corps the Prioress of the place the next day that he dyd, Caused to be buried (in mean case) close by the High-way side. And over him she caused a stone to be fixt on the ground, An Epitaph was set thereon, wherein his name was found, The date o'th' year and day also, she made to be set there: That all who by the way did go, might sée st plain appear. That such a man as Robin Hood was buried in that place: And how he lived in the green wood and robbed there for a space. It seems that though the Clergy he had put to mickle woe, He should not quite forgetten be, although he was their foe; This woman though she did him hate, yet loved his memory:
And thought it wondrous pitty that his fame should with him dye, This Epitaph, as Records tell, within this hundred years By many was discerned well, but time all things out-wears. His followers when he was dead, were some repriev'd to grace; The rest to forreign Countries fled, and left their native place. Although his Funeral was but mean, this woman had in mind, Least his fame should be buried clean from those that came behind. For certainly before nor since no man e're understood Vnder the Reign of any Prince, of one like Robin Hood. Full thirteen years and something more these Outlaws lived thus; Feared of the Rich, loved of the Poor, a thing most marvellous. A thing impossible to us this story seems to be: None dares be now so venturous, but times are chang'd we see. We that live in these later days of civil government,
If need be, have an hundred ways such Outlaws to prevent. In those days men more barbarous were, and lived less in awe: Now (God be thanked) people fear more to offend the Law. No roaring Guns were then in use, they dreamt of no such thing: Our English men in fight did use the gallant gray-Goose wing; In which activity these men (through practise) were so good, That in those days none equal'd them, (especially Robin Hood,) So that it seems keeping in Caves, in Woods and Forrests thick, They'd beat a multitude with staves, their Arrows did so prick: And none durst neer unto them come, unless in courtesie; All such he bravely would send home with mirth and jollity; Which courtesie won him such love, as I before have told, 'Twas the chief cause that he did prove more prosperous than he could. Let us be thankful for these times of plenty, truth and peace:
And leave our great and horrid crimes, least they cause this to cease. I know theres many feigned Tales of Robin Hood and's Crew, But Chronicles which seldome fails reports this to be true: Let none then think this is a Lye, for if 'twere put to th' worst, They may the truth of all descry i' th' Reign of Richard the first, If any Reader please to try as I direction show, The truth of this brave History, he'l find it true I know. And I shall think my labour well bestow'd, to purpose good, When't shall be said that I did tell true Tales of Robin Hood. The Epitaph which the Priores of the Mo∣nastry of Kirkslay in York shire set over Robin Hood, which (as is before men∣tioned) was to be read within these hun∣dred years, though in old broken English, much to the same sence and meaning. Decembris Quarto Die, 1198. Anno Regni Richardi primi 9.
Robert Earl of Huntington Lies under this little stone, No Archer was like him so good; His wildness named him Robin Hood; Full thirteen years and something more These Northern parts he vexed sore; Such Outlaws as he and his men May England never know agen. Some other superstitious words were in, which I thought fit to leave out. Finis.
