R2159 R32391 12657795 65416
THE Royalists Address LATELY Presented to the Honorable Committee OF PARLIAMENT Chosen to Consider Their Condition. DVM PREMOR ATTOLLOR printer's device consisting of a fountain whose flowing waters are pumped by two hands working hydraulic pump; not mentioned in McKerrow, but used by Thomas Newcomb LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1662.
The ADDRESS of the English Gentry that served the Crown in the late Wars to the Honourable COMMITTEE chosen by the Parliament to consider their CONDITION. WE do must humbly acknowledg his Majesties singular goodness, in taking notice to this Parlia∣ment of our past endeavours to serve him. We do return our most humble thanks to the Honourable House of Commons, for their quick and speedy care of us in se∣lecting (upon the first intimation of his Majesty) a Committee of so many Wor∣thy persons to consider our present Con∣dition. To you (worthy Gentlemen of that ho∣norable Committee, whose constant and chearful endeavours, since, on our behalf,
we do with all gratitude acknowledg) we humbly present this Paper. It is not unknown, That we took up Arms to defend our Prince and Country, and that we brought our Fortunes and Treasure, as well as our Persons into the War. Many of our Honourable Com∣panions are fallen in the Dispute, and are now at Rest: We that survive, have the happiness, after a long succession of vari∣ous Ills, to see our selves safe again under the Wing and Protection of our Native King. In this great Jubile, we hope, we may without interrupting or lessening the Pub∣lick Joy, offer our just desires; for though this happy day consumes our grief, it de∣stroys not our Right, nor our due Claims: Justice is best dispenced in Heaven, where no Sorrow is; and next on Earth, where deepest Peace is; with no less satisfaction of mind to the upright Judge, then to the di∣stressed Suitor.
When it pleased God by our stability and perseverance to restore the King, not by the Covenant, which because it killed, some would vainly make us believe that like the Scorpion there is a balsome in it that cures the wound it gives: It was then thought fit, both for the re-establish∣ment of the Royal Throne, and the King∣domes peace, to bury by an Act of Obli∣vion all by-past injuries; to this we were no less inclined then those whose lives and new gained possessions could not otherwise be secured: This present Calme proceeds principally from the re∣mission of injuries done to us, and we most willingly waved those remedies of our repair which the Law gives to inju∣red men. To that wisdom and Justice that Steer'd those Councils then, we now appeal, not doubting, since our Addresses to Courts of Justice are intercepted, but that the same Justice and prudence will
find some other waies to right us. It cannot sure be deemed equal or rea∣sonable that the ransome of the King∣dome should be paid by us alone that only contended to blood to preserve it, and in that endevour, have consumed our treasure and our youth. If to continue the quiet and repose of the Nation, we could imagine that the continuance of our Sufferings would con∣tribute but a Scruple, we would content our selves with that state that a War and a long Tyranny hath left us in: But since we see all men returned to a better condi∣tion then our selves, and even those that lately were our Enemies sit now safely un∣der our Vines, surely we may expect, not an Almes, but such a measured Reparati∣on of our harmes as may suite with our Quality, and not to be left in a worse state then all men else; If otherwise it should fall out, (which God forbid, and which we do not fear,) the Justice of the Nation
will grow Cheap and neglected as well as we, and men hereafter in distress, (though nothing can or shall shake our faith) may want friends either to help or pity them. To give countenance to our tryed and approved Faith will secure it in those where it is either doubtful or but budding, and where Naturally it will not grow, it will force it. To the early Labourer it appeared hard, That he that came late into the Vineyard should receive wages equal to his; but we never read that any repined at the Wages of him that wrought all day. We desire but the kindness shewen to the latest Pro∣selytes. That so much will not be denied us, is our hope and our assurance, though we have been delayed and past by so long; for we read that even in Heaven there was once a great silence, yet it lasted but half an hour.
We will not press our desires further, lest we seem to rely more upon our Im∣portunity then our Just Reasons, and by over solicitation, lessen the Honour of the English Gentry, and that Magnanimity that disdained to see a Crown and King∣dome Usurped and trampled on. FINIS.
