R2397B 99829696 34139
A RELATION Of the DEATH of David Rizzi, Chief FAVORITE to Mary Stuart Queen of Scotland; Who was killed in the Apartment of the said Queen on the 9th of March 1565. Written by the Lord RVTHEN, one of the principal Persons concerned in that Action. Published from an Original Manuscript. Together with an Account of DAVID RIZZI, faithfully translated from Geo. Buchanan's History of Scotland. LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick-lane. 1699.
Some Remarkable Passages concern∣ing David Rizzi, translated from the History of Scotland, written by George Buchanan. Edit. Edinburg. Folio 207. AMong the Servants of the Court was one David Rizzi born at Turin: His Fa∣ther was an honest Man, but so very poor, that all he could do was to main∣tain himself and his Family, by teaching the Elements of Musick. Having nothing to leave to his Children, he taught them, both Sons and Daughters, to sing. Of these, David being young and brisk, and trust∣ing to his Voice that was not disagreable, and to his Skill in Musick which he had learned from his Fa∣ther, he resolved to try his Fortune; and in order to this went to Nice, where the Duke of Savoy, who had lately been restored to his Dominions, kept his Court. But Matters there not answering his Ex∣pectation, he came to be in such extream want, that he knew not well what to do with himself, when be hapned to fall in with Signior Moretti, who was then (as the Duke's Envoy) preparing for his Iourney to Scotland, he waited on him thither. But being there, Moretti having but a small Allowance for himself, and no great need of his Service, dismissed him; however David resolved to make some stay, and try his Fortune again: he was chiefly encouraged to this, being told that the Queen delighted in hearing of Songs, and was not altogether unskilful in Musick. To make his way to her, he made an Interest with the Musicians
(who were for the most part French) that he might appear amongst them. Thus being heard to sing once or twice, she liked him so well, that he was im∣mediately added to their Number. Having got into this Post, and observed the Queen's humour and way, he, partly by flattering her, partly by carrying Stories to her of the other Ser∣vants, came in a little time to be as much in her Fa∣vour as he was hated by the rest of the Family. How∣ever, all this good Fortune could not satisfy him; but having either lessened with the Queen such as seemed to be on the same foot of Favour with himself, or got them turned out of the Family by his false Suggesti∣ons, he began insensibly to aspire to meddle in greater Matters; till at last he was employed to write her Letters, and then he had a fair pretext to be with the Queen alone, which afforded him opportunities of doing business with her under-hand. All this could not but make a great noise, to see a Man who was little better than a Beggar, raised on the sudden to great Riches; a Man whose Fortune did far exceed his Merit, and yet his arrogance in despising his Equals, and vying with his Superiors, surpassed even his Fortune. It was the meanness of a great many of the Nobility that served chiefly to encourage this Fellow in his extravagant Vanity: they slavishly made their court to him, cringing to him upon all occasions, admiring and applauding whatever he said; waiting at his Apartment, and presenting themselves in his way when he went in or out; Only the Earl of Murray, one that could ne∣ver dissemble, instead of making his court to him, shewed even by his Countenance, for the most part, the contempt he had of him. Which behaviour of the Earl's offended the Queen her self no less than it did David.
He on the other hand, to have a support against the hatred of the chief of the Nobility, courted with all the arts of flattery and insinuation, Henry Lord Darley, who was to marry the Queen; and got into that de∣gree of familiarity with him, that Darley made him his Companion and Bedfellow, and entirely trusted him. He perswaded the unwary Young Man, who was forward to believe whatever suted his Inclinati∣ons, that it was by his means chiefly that the Queen had been induced to cast her Eyes upon him. He was also daily sowing Discord betwixt Darley and the Earl of Murray; for he flattered himself, that if he could once get rid of that Earl, he might for the rest of his Life take his full career without opposi∣tion. By this time the Queen's intended Marriage with Darley, and his private meetings with her; as also her strange familiarity with David, were much talk∣ed of and censured every where. Vpon which the Earl of Murray finding there was nothing to be done, and that the good Advice he gave served only to irritate his Sister against him, resolved to leave the Court, lest he should seem to have any hand in what was doing. Fol. 207. These marks of the Peoples affectionTo the Earl of Murray. so incensed the Queen against her Brother, as to quicken her to put in execution the Design she had premeditated against his Life. The manner was agreed to be thus: That the Queen who was then at Perth with little Company, should send for the Earl of Murray thither, where the Lord Darley should enter into discourse with him; and as it was not doubted the Earl would speak plainly and freely, the Dispute by that means growing warm, David
Rizzi should give him the first Wound, and then the rest-should dispatch him upon the place. Of this Conspiracy the Earl of Murray was informed by his Friends who were in the Court; yet being resolved to go, he set forward on his Iourney, but receiving a second admonition fromAuthor of the follow∣ing Relation. Pa∣trick Lord Ruthen, he turned out of the way, and went to visit his Mother at her House, which stands situated on the Lake of Leven. Fol. 208. There was also another reason which prevailed not a little with the Queen to use expedition in this matter (of her Marriage) she knew herThe Duke of Guise, and Cardinal of Lorrain. Vncles were averse to the Match, and feared, if any longer delay should intervene, that some Obstruction might be laid in the way by them, which might disturb the whole Business. For when that secret Resolution was taken, of making a Holy War throughout all Christen∣dom for extirpating the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, the Duke of Guise who was designed for Commander in chief of all those Forces, having conceived the most unwarrantable and immoderate hopes, resolved by the means of his Niece, to embroil Britain in Do∣mestick Troubles, that they might not be able to send the least assistance to their Friends abroad. But Da∣vid, who was in great credit with the Queen, insist∣ing that the intended Marriage would be advantage∣ous to Religion, on account that Henry and his Fa∣ther were most strenuous assertors of the Papal Sect, agreable to both Nations, allied to divers Noble Fa∣milies, and supported by many Friends, the thing in dispute was at last forced that way. Notwithstanding all which, two things seemed to cross David's De∣signs,
if the Marriage should succeed with the consent of the Queen of England, and of the Nobility of Scotland: the first, that he should lose the Honour of being accounted the Author; the second, that provision would be made for the Security of Religion: whereas if the Queen would join her self with the Council of Trent, he promised himself Honours, Benefices, in∣finite Treasures, and uncontrouled Authority. For these reasons he left nothing unattempted to precipitate the Marriage, and effected it; the Scots being not well pleased, and the English most highly offended. Fol. 209. In the mean time David finding the Court cleared of the principal Persons of the Nobility, that he might confirm his intemperate hopes of Power, còn∣tinually laboured by rash Advice to excite the Queen to use the coercive Power of the Sword against the Heads of the several Parties, assuring her that if a few were removed, the rest would not dare to attempt any thing: But conjecturing that the Queen's Guards, being Scots∣men, would not easily consent to the Murder of the Nobility, he made it his principal business to turn them out from that Post, and to introduce Foreigners (which has almost ever been the rise of all Tyranies) into that Body. To that end a motion was first made to send for Germans, that Nation being esteemed to be of great fidelity to their Masters: but David having attentively consider'd the matter, concluded it to be more commodious for the carrying on of his De∣signs, that Italians should be admitted to that Im∣ployment; being perswaded that Men of the same Nation with himself would not only be more intirely under his Power, but that having no tincture of any Religion they would be also the most proper Instruments of embroiling Affairs; and making no distinction
between what is just and what unjust, might easily be driven to perpetrate any kind of Villany: besides which, men indigent and wicked, born and educated under Tyrants, accustomed to unjust War, and who being far from home esteemed nothing in Britain dear to them, seemed most fit to support the Innovations intended. To this end he began by degrees to send for vagabond Souldiers from Flanders and other Coun∣tries upon the Continent, who came single, and at different times, that what was doing might not ap∣pear: but to offend one of these was more dangerous than to offend the Queen. In the mean time, as the Power and Authority of David with the Queen in∣creased daily, so the King became daily more contem∣tible to her; and to treat him yet with greater in∣dignity, David was substituted to sign divers pub∣lick Acts in the place of the King. Fol. 209. The Queen not contenting her self to have raised David from the meanest obscurity, and exposed him to the view of the People in this high degree of Eleva∣tion, contrived another way of honouring him in a domestick and more familiar manner. She had for some Months admitted more Persons than had been u∣sual at her Table, that David might have a place there with less envy, on account of the number of those who received that honour; not doubting by this shew of Popularity, the numerous company, and daily use, the strangeness of the Spectacle would by degrees not only wear off, but the Stomach of the stoutest be in∣sensibly accustomed to suffer any thing. At last David with only one or two more was permitted to eat with her; yet that the straitness of the Place might in some measure diminish the Envy of the Action, they sometimes eat in a little Closet, and sometimes
in David's Chamber. But instead of lessening the Publick Envy by these means, they increased their own Infamy, confirmed former Suspicions, and afforded matter for sinister Discourses. Another thing fell in also to inflame the minds of Men already disposed to believe the worst, that David for surpassed the King in rich Furniture, Cloths, number and goodness of Horses; which Indignity seemed so much the greater, by how much his Face contributed more to de∣stroy the effect of every Ornament about him, than any of those Advantages to grace his Person. There∣fore the Queen, since she could not correct. the faults of Nature, endeavours by heaping Honours upon him to advance him into the highest Order of Men, that the Meanness of his Birth and his personal Deformity might lie concealed under the cover of a fortuitous No∣bility; but most especially that by this means having a right of voting in the publick Assemblies, he might be enabled to manage those Councils as the Queen should direct. And because it was thought necessary to ad∣vance gradually, and that he might not seem to be an indigent and mercenary Senator, their first attempt was made upon a Lordship, called by the Seots Malvil, and situated near Edinburgh. The Possessor of the Lordship, with his Father-in-law, and such Friends as were thought to have the most influence upon him, were sent for to the Queen, who endeavoured to pre∣vail with the Lord to deliver up his Possession quietly, and to induce his Father-in-law, with the rest of his Friends, to perswade him so to do. But this way not taking effect as was desired, the Queen interpreted their refusal as an affront to her; and which was more pernicious, David was highly offended. The People (for these things were not done in the dark) be∣gan to deplore the present Evils, and to expect worse eve∣ry day; If men of the most antient Families and Ho∣nour
might be expelled from the Seats of their An∣cestors at the will of an indigent Rascal. The old men called to mind, and frequently mentioned the time when Cockeran, after the barbarous Murder of the King's Brother, was advanced from a Porter to the Earldom of Marr, and filled the whole Kingdom with Fire and Sword; which Desolation terminated in the Death of the King, and almost total Sbversion of the Kingdom: To these things which were publick, men in private Discourses added many more, as is u∣sual in undecent and scandalous cases. But the King resolving to credit nothing, save what he should discover by himself, being informed that David was gone into the Queen's Chamber, he went to the Door, of which he always carried a Key; and contrary to custom, finding it to be bolted within, he knocked; but no one answering, he departed in a great rage; and being agitated by most violent Passions, passed the greater part of the Night without Sleep. Fol. 210. About that time Letters were brought from the Queen of England, in which many things concerning the present state of Affairs in Scotland were kindly and prudently treated, with a gentle and affectionate admonition to her Kinswoman to lay aside her Passion, and to entertain more moderate Counsels. The Queen understanding that the Lords knew such Letters were arrived, and that no one doubted the Contents, called divers of them to her (hoping the favour would be interpreted to proceed from inclination) and began to read them in their presence. But as she was in the course of her reading, David openly admonished her that she had read enough, and commanded her to stop: which Action was accounted by all to be rather insolent than new; for they were not ignorant how arrogantly
he used to carry himself to her, frequently reproving her with more sharpness than her Husband durst ad∣venture to do. Few days after this the Cause of the Exiles was warmly debated in Parliament, where some to gratify the Queen, moving they might be punished as Traytors, and others affirming they had done nothing which deserved so great Severity; David in the mean time surrounded the Members one by one, and endeavoured to penetrate the intention of each to∣wards those that were banished, if he should be chosen President by the rest of the Assembly; not doubting openly to discover that the Queen would have them con∣demn'd; and that whoever should oppose her, would not only take pains to no purpose, but incur her High Displeasure.
A RELATION Of the Death of DAVID RIZZI, Chief Favorite to MARY Queen of Scots, &c. Written by the Lord RUTHEN. IN the first, the Lord Ruthen of Scotland, a Man of forty and six Years, was visited by the Hand of God with great trouble and sickness, having two Infirmities, the one called the Inflammation of the Liver, and the other the Consumption of the Reins and Kidneys, where∣through he kept his Bed continually by the space of three months, and was under the cure of Physicians, as of the Queen's French Doctor, Dr. Preston, and Thomas Thompson Apothecary; and was so feebled and weakned through the Sickness and Medicines, that scarcely he might walk twice the length of his Chamber unsitting down. In this mean time the King, Husband to the Queen's Majesty of Scotland, conceived hatred against an Italian called David Riccio; and about the 10th day of February the said King sent his dear Friend and Kinsman George Douglas Son to Archibald,
sometime Earl of Angus, and declared to the said Lord Ruthen how that the said David Riccio had abused him in many sorts, and lately had staied the Queen's Majesty from giving him the Crown Matrimonial of Scotland, which her Ma∣jesty had promised to him divers times before: Besides many other Wrongs that the said David had done to him, which he could not bear with longer, and behoved to be revenged thereof. And because the said Lord Ruthen was one of the Nobility that he confided and trusted most unto, in respect that his Children and he were Sisters Children; therefore he desired his Coun∣sel and Advice what way was best to be revenged on the said David. The said Lord Ruthen hear∣ing the Message aforesaid, gave answer to George Douglass, that he could give no counsel in that Matter, in respect he knew the King's Youth and Facility; for he had sundry of the Nobility that had given him counsel for his own Honour and Weal, and immediately he revealed the same a∣gain to the Queen's Majesty, who reproved them with great anger and contumelious words: So the said Lord Ruthen would have no medling with his Proceedings until the time he could keep his own counsel. The said George departed with the said Lord's Answer to the King about the 12th of February: The said King hearing the Answer, was very miscontented, and said, It is a sore case that I can get none of the Nobi∣lity that will assist me against yonder false Vil∣lain Davie. The said George answered, The said Fault was in your self, that cannot keep your own counsel. Then the King took a Book and swore thereon, that what Counsel soever the Lord Ruthen should give him, he would not
reveal, neither to the Queen's Majesty, nor to any others; and immediately directed the said George to the said Lord Ruthen again, declaring what Oath the King had made. Notwithstand∣ing the said Lord Ruthen was eight days there∣after e're he would give any counsel therein; howbeit the said King sent the said George to him every day three or four times. After eight days were past, the which was toward the 20th day of February, the said Lord Ruthen perceiv∣ing that the King's whole Intent was but only the slaughter of Davie, the said Lord resolved in his mind, and considered that he had a good time to labour for certain of the Nobility his Bre∣thren that were banished in the Realm of Eng∣land and in Argile; and specially the Earls of Argile, Murray, Glencarn and Rothes; the Lord Boyd and Ocheltrie, and Lairds of Pittarro and Grange, with many other Gentlemen and Barons. Wherefore so soon as the said George was di∣rected again from the King to him, the said Lord Ruthen answered, That he could not med∣dle with the King's Affairs, without that he would bring home the Noblemen before rehear∣sed, who were banished only for the Word of God. And after long reasoning, and divers days travelling, the King was contented that they should come home into the Realm of Scot∣land; so that the said Lord Ruthen would make him sure that they would be his, and set forward all his Affairs. The said Lord gave answer to the King, and bad him make his own Security, and that he should cause it to be subscribed by the aforesaid Earls, Lords, and Barons. Im∣mediately thereafter the King directed the said George Douglass to the said Lord Ruthen with cer∣tain
Articles, which he desired the said Lord to put in form of Writing, to be subscribed by the Lords banished; the which the said Lord caused to be put in form. And having consideration that the said King desir'd them to be bound to him, the said Lord caused to be drawn certain Articles in the said Lords Names for the King's part towards them; which the King himself re∣formed with his own hand in the Margent, like as it is to be produced. The Articles being penned for both Parties, and the King reading and considering the same, he was contented therewith, and subscribed his part, and delivered it to the said Lord Ruthen, who sent the other Articles to the Earl of Mur∣ray, and the remanent being within England; and to the Earl of Argile and the remanent being with him in the West, who subscribed the same, and sent them to the said Lord Ruthen to be kept till their meeting with the King, and every one to have their own part: The Tenour whereof followeth.
Certain ARTICLES to be fulfilled by James Earl of Murray, Archibald Earl of Argile, Alexander Earl of Glen∣carne, Andrew Earl of Rothes, Ro∣bert Lord Boyd, Andrew Lord O∣cheltrie, and their Complices, to the Noble and Mighty Prince Henry King of Scotland, Husband to our Sovereign Lady: Which Articles the said Persons offer with most humility, lowliness and service to the said Noble Prince, for whom to God they pray, &c. Imprimis, THE said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall become, and by the Tenour hereof become true Subjects, Men and Servants, to the Noble and Mighty Prince Henry, by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, and Husband to our Sovereign Lady: That they and all others that will do for them, shall take a leyal and true part with the said Noble Prince in all his Actions, Causes and Quarrels, against whomsoever, to the uttermost of their Powers; and shall be Friends to his Friends, and Enemies to his Enemies, and neither spare their Lives, Land, Goods nor Possessions. 2. Item, The said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall at the first Parliament, and other Parliaments that shall happen to be after
their returning within this Realm, by themselves and others that have Voice in Parliament, con∣sent, and by these Presents do consent now as then, and then as now, to grant and give the Crown matrimonial to the said Noble Prince for all the days of his Life. And if any Person or Persons withstand or gainsay the same, the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall take such part as the said Noble Prince taketh, in what∣soever sort, for the obtaining of the said Crown, against all, and whatsoever that let or deny, as shall best please the said Noble Prince. 3. Item, The said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall fortify and maintain the said Noble Prince in his just Title to the Crown of Scotland, failing of Succession of our Sovereign Lady, and shall justify and set forward the same at their utmost Powers. And if any manner of Person will usurp or gainsay the just Title, then the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall maintain, defend, and set forwards the same, as best shall please the said Noble Prince, without fear of Life or Death; and shall seek and pursue them the Usurpers, as shall please the said Noble Prince to command, to extirp them out of the Realm of Scotland, or take or slay them. 4. Item, As to the Religion which was esta∣blished by the Queen's Majesty our Sovereign, shortly after her arrival in this Realm, where∣upon Acts and Proclamation was made, and now again granted by the said Noble Prince to the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices; they, and every of them, shall maintain and fortify the same at their uttermost Powers, by the help, supply, and maintenance of the said Noble Prince. And if any Person or Persons will gain∣say
the same, or any part thereof, or begin to make Tumult or Uproar for the same, the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, to take a full, true, and plain part with the said Noble Prince, against the said Contemners and Usur∣pers, at their uttermost. 5. Item, As they are become true Subjects, Men and Servants, to the said Noble Prince, so shall they be leyal and true to his Majesty, as be∣cometh true Subjects to their natural Prince; and as true and faithful Servants serve their good Master with their Bodies, Lands, Goods and Possessions; and shall neither spare Life nor Death in setting forward all things that may be to the Advancement and Honour of the said No∣ble Prince. 6. Item, The said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall labour at the Queen of England's hands for the relief of the said Noble Prince his Mother and Brother, by themselves and such others as they may procure, to the uttermost of their power, that they may be reliev'd out of Ward, or remain in England freely, or repair into Scotland, as they shall think most expedient, without stop or impediment to her self, her Son, their Servants and Moveables. 7. Item, The said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, shall, by themselves and others that will do for them, labour and procure, at the Queen of England's hands, that the said Noble Prince may have her kindness, good-will and as∣sistance in all his Majesty's honourable and just Causes, against whatsoever Foreign Prince.
Certain Articles to be fulfilled by the Noble and Mighty Prince Henry, King of Scotland, Husband to our Sovereign Lady, of his Majesty's mere Clemency and good will, to James Earl of Mur∣ray, Archibald Earl of Argile, Alex∣ander Earl of Glencarne, Andrew Earl of Rothes, Robert Lord Boyd, Andrew Lord Stuart of Ocheltrie, remaining in England, &c. Item, FIRST, The said Noble Prince shall do his good will to obtain them one Remis∣sion, if they require the same, for all Faults and Crimes by-past, of whatsoever quality or condi∣tion they be. And if that cannot be obtained at the first time, shall persevere in suing of the same until it be obtained; and at the last shall give them a free remission of all Crimes so soon as we are placed, by their help and supply, to the Crown Matrimonial: And in the mean time shall stop and make Impediments, so much as lieth in us, that they be not called nor accused for what∣soever Crime: And presently remits and forgives the aforesaid Earls, Lords, and their Complices, all Crimes committed against us, of whatsoever quality or condition they be; and do bury and put the same in Oblivion, as they had never been: And shall receive them at their returning, thank∣fully,
and with heartiness, as others our true and faithful Subjects and Servants. 2. Item, We shall not suffer, by our good wills, the foresaid Lords and their Complices, to be called or accused in Parliament, nor suffer a∣ny Forfeitures to be laid against them, but shall stop the same at our uttermost Power: And if any Person or Persons pretend otherwise, we shall neither consent to the holding the Parliament, nor yet shall grant to their Forfeiture willingly, but shall stop the same to our uttermost Power, as said is. 3. Item, That the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, returning within the Realm of Scot∣land, we shall suffer or permit them to use and enjoy all their Lands, Tackes, Steedings and Benefices that they or any of them had before their passage into England. And if any manner of Persons do make them Impediments in the peaceable enjoying of the said Lands, Steedings, Tackes, Benefices, and Possessions, it being made known to us, we shall fortify and maintain them to the uttermost of our Powers, to the obtaining of the same. 4. Item, As to the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices Religion, we are contented and con∣sent that they use the same, conform to the Queen's Majesty Act and Proclamation made thereupon, shortly after her Highness's return out of France. And if any Person or Persons pretend to make them Impediment thereunto, or to trouble them for using the same Religion, we shall take part with the aforesaid Earls, Lords, and their Complices, at our uttermost Power. And after their returning, upon their good bearing and service to be done to the said Noble
Prince, shall by their advice consent to the stablish∣ing the Religion now professed, and shall concur with them, if any persons do withstand them. Item, We shall fortify and maintain the said Earls, Lords, and their Complices, as a natural Prince should do to his true and Obedient Sub∣jects; and as one good Master should fortify and maintain his true and natural Servants against whatsoever, in all their just Causes, Actions, and Quarrels. All this while the King kept secret from the Queen's Majesty the whole Proceedings; and as her Majesty sought by subtil means to learn of him what was in his mind, so crafted he with her to seek out her mind: And in the same time he daily sent to the Lord Ruthen, saying that he could not abide Davie any longer; and if his Slaughter was not hastned, he would slay him himself, yea, tho it were in the Queen's Majesty's own Chamber. The said Lord Ruthen counselled him to the contrary, and thought it not decent that he should put hand on such a mean Person: yet always the King could not be content, with∣out the said Lord Ruthen affixed a day when the said Davie should be slain. The said Lord con∣sidering with himself that it was not convenient nor honourable to slay the said Davie, notwith∣standing the Offences he had made; but rather to take him, and give him Judgment by the No∣bility, the King's Majesty answered, it was cum∣bersome to tarry in such a Cause; but always he could be contented that he were taken and hang∣ed, or dispatched otherwise. In the mean time the King and Queen's Majesties rode to Seaton; the King so burning in his desire towards the
Slaughter of David, he sent divers privy Writ∣ings written in his own hand, and also Messages by tongue to George Douglas, to be shewed to the Lord Ruthen, to have all things in readiness a∣gainst his repairing to Edinburgh towards the Slaughter of David, or otherwise he would put the same in execution with his own hands. In the mean time the said Lord Ruthen was practi∣sing with the Earl of Morton, who was the King's near Kinsman, and with the Lord Lindsey, be∣cause his Wife was a Douglas, and of consan∣guinity to the King; and with a great number of Barons, Gentlemen, and Freeholders, to assist the King in such Affairs as he had to do; and then they should have their Religion freely established conform to Christ's Book, and to the Articles that the King had subscribed to the Lords. And after the King's return out of Seaton, he directed George Douglas to the said Earl of Morton and Lord Ruthen, to see what day should be appointed, with place and time, for the performance of the Enterprise against David. The said Earl and Lord sent answer to the King, and declared they should have a sufficient number ready against Friday or Saturday the 8th or 9th of March, to do what he pleased; and enquired of the King what time he would have it the ratherest performed; for according to the said Earl's and Lord's opini∣on, they thought it best to take time when David should be in his own Chamber in the Morning, or in passing through the Close: which the King refu∣sed simpliciter, and said he could not be well taken in his own Chamber, nor no time in the Morn∣ing, by reason that at night he tarried late with the Queen's Majesty; he lay in the over Cabinet, and otherwhiles in Signior Francisco's Chamber, and
sometimes in his own, to which he had sundry Backdoors and Windows that he might escape at; and if so it were, all were lost. Therefore he would have him taken at the time of the supping, sitting with her Majesty at the Table, that he might be taken in her own presence; because she had not entertained him her Husband accord∣ing to her accustomed manner, nor as she ought of Duty. To the which the said Earl and Lords were very loth to grant, and gave many reasons to the contrary, that it was better to have been done out of her presence, not in the same. Not∣withstanding no reason might avail, but the King would have him taken in her Majesty's Pre∣sence, and devised the manner himself, as after followeth: That upon the Saturday at Supper∣time the said Earl of Morton, Lord Ruthen, and Lord Lindsey, should have ready so many as would be Assistants and Partakers with the King, in their Houses, against he should send them word: and so soon as he sent them word, that the Earl of Morton should come in, and come up to the Queen's utter Chamber, and a Company with him; and the said Lord Ruthen to come through the King's secret Chamber; and that the King would pass up before by a privy Passage to the Queen's Chamber, and open the Door, where∣through the said Lord Ruthen and his Company might enter: and that the King himself should be speaking with the Queen's Majesty sitting at supper; the remanent Barons and Gentlemen to be in the Court of the Palace for keeping of the Gates, and defending of the Close, in case any of the Lords or Officers would endeavour to gain-stand the King's Enterprize. The said Earl of Morton and Lord Ruthen having consideration
of the King's Devise towards the taking of Da∣vie in the Queen's Majesty's Chamber, were loth to grant thereto; yet the King would not other∣wise, but have it done as he had devised. The said Earl and Lords considering he was a young Prince, and having a lusty Princess to lie in his Arms afterwards, who might perswade him to deny all that was done for his Cause, and to al∣ledg that others perswaded him to the same, thought it necessary to have security thereupon; and a Band was made in the King's name to the Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Merchants, and Craftsmen, declaring all that was to be done was his own Devise, Invention, and Fact; and bound and obliged himself, his Heirs and Suc∣cessors, to them, their Heirs and Successors, to keep them skeithless, and unmolested or troubled for the taking and executing of Davie in the Queen's presence or otherwise, like as the Band more at large specified hereafter word by word. Be it kend to all men by these present Letters: We Henry by the Grace of God, King of Scot∣land, and Husband to the Queen's Majesty; for so much we having consideration of the gentle and good nature, with many other good Qualities in her Majesty, we have thought pity, and also think it great conscience to us that are her Hus∣band, to suffer her to be abused or seduced by certain privy Persons, wicked and ungodly, not regarding her Majesty's Honour, Ours, nor the Nobility thereof, nor the Common-weal of the same, but seeking their own Commodity and privy Gains, especially a Stranger Italian called Davie: which may be the occasion of her Ma∣jesty's
Destruction, Ours, the Nobility, and Commonweal, without hasty remedy be put thereto, which we are willing to do: and to that effect we have devised to take these privy Persons, Enemies to her Majesty, Us, the Nobi∣lity, and Commonwealth, to punish them accord∣ing to their Demerits; and in case of any dif∣ficulty, to cut them off immediately, and to take and slay them wherever it happeneth. And be∣cause we cannot accomplish the same without the assistance of others, therefore have we drawn certain of our Nobility, Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Gentlemen, Merchants, and Crafts∣men, to assist us in our Enterprise, which cannot be finished without great hazard. And because it may chance that there be sundry great Personages present, who may endeavour to gain-stand our Enterprise, where-through some of them may be slain, and likewise of ours, where-through a perpetual Feud may be contracted betwixt the one and the other; therefore we bind and oblige Us, our Heirs, and Successors, to the said Earls, Lords, Barons, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Mer∣chants, and Craftsmen, their Heirs and Succes∣sors, that we shall accept the same Feud upon Us, and fortify and maintain them at the uttermost of our Power, and shall be Friend to their Friends, and Enemy to their Enemies; and shall neither suffer them nor theirs to be molested nor troubled in their Bodies, Lands, Goods, nor Possessi∣ons, so far as lieth in us. And if any person would take any of the said Earls, Lords, Ba∣rons, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Merchants, or Craftsmen, for enterprizing and assisting with us for the atchieving of our purpose, because it may chance to be done in presence of the Queen's
Majesty, or within her Palace of Holyrood-house, we by the Word of a Prince shall accept and take the same on us now as then, and then as now; and shall warrant and keep harmless the foresaid Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Gentlemen, Merchants and Craftsmen, at our utter power. In witness whereof we have subscribed this with our own hand at Edinburg, the 1st of March 1565. Upon Saturday the 9th day of March, as is conform to the King's Ordenance and Device, the said Earl Morton, Lords Ruthen and Lindsey, having their Men and Friends in readiness, abid∣ing for the King's Advertisement; the King hav∣ing supped, and the sooner for that Cause, and the Queen's Majesty being in her Cabinet within her inner Chamber at the Supper, the King sent to the said Earl and Lords, and their Complices; and desired them to make haste and come into the Palace, for he should have the door of the Privy Passage open, and should be speaking with the Queen before their coming, conform to his Device rehearsed before. Then the said Earl of Morton, Lord Ruthen and Lord Lindsey, with their Complices, passed up to the Queen's utter Chamber; and the said Lord Ruthen passed in through the King's Chamber, and up through the privy way to the Queen's Chamber, as the King had learned him, and through the Chamber to the Cabinet, where he found the Queen's Majesty sitting at her Supper at the middes of a little Table, the Lady Argile sitting at one end, and Davie at the head of the Table with his Cap on his head, the King speaking with the Queen's Majesty, and his hand about her Waste. The said Lord Ruthen at his coming in said to the
Queen's Majesty, It would please your Majesty to let yonder Man Davie come forth of your pre∣sence, for he hath been over-long here. Her Majesty answered, What Offence hath he made? The said Lord replied again, that he had made great Offence to her Majesty's Honour, the King her Husband, the Nobility and Commonweal of the Realm. And how? saith she. It will please your Majesty, said the said Lord, he hath offend∣ed your Majesty's Honour, which I dare not be so bold to speak of: As to the King your Hus∣ban's Honour, he hath hindred him of the Crown Matrimonial, which your Grace promised him, besides many other things which are not necessary to be expressed. And as to the Nobility, he hath caused your Majesty to banish a great part, and most chief thereof, and forefault them at this pre∣sent Parliament, that he might be made a Lord. And as to your Common-weal, he hath been a common destroyer thereof, in so far as he suffered not your Majesty to grant or give any thing but that which passed through his hands, by taking of Bribes and Goods for the same; and caused your Majesty to put out the Lord Ross from his whole Lands, because he would not give over the Lordship of Melvin to the said Davie; besides many other inconveniences that he sollicited your Majesty to do. Then the said Lord Ruthen said to the King, Sir, take the Queen's Majesty your Sovereign and Wife to you, who stood all amazed and wyst not what to do. Then her Majesty rose on her feet and stood before Davie, he hold∣ing her Majesty by the plates of the Gown, lean∣ing back over in the window, his Whiniard drawn in his hand. Arthur Erskin and the Abbot of Holy∣rood-house, the Laird of Crch Master of the House∣hold,
with the French Apothecary, and one of the Grooms of the Chamber, began to lay hands upon the said Lord Ruthen, none of the King's Party being present. Then the said Lord pulled out his Whiniard, and freed himself while more came in, and said to them, Lay not hands on me, for I will not be handled; and at the incoming of others into the Cabinet, the said Lord Ruthen put up his Whiniard. And with the rushing in of Men the Board fell to the wallwards, with Meat and Candles being thereon; and the Lady of Argile took up one of the Candles in her hand: and in the same instant the said Lord Ruthen took the Queen in his arms, and put her into the King's arms, beseeching her Majesty not to be afraid; for there was no Man there that would do her Majesty's Body more harm than their own Hearts; and assured her Majesty, all that was done was the King's own Deed and Action. Then the remanent Gentlemen being in the Ca∣binet, took Davie out of the Window; and af∣ter that they had him out in the Queen's Cham∣ber, the said Lord Ruthen followed, and bad take him down the privy way to the King's Chamber; and the said Lord return'd to the Cabinet again, believing that the said Davie had been had down to the King's Chamber, as said is: but the press of the People hurl'd him forth to the utter Chamber, where there was a great number standing, who were so vehemently moved against the said Davie, that they could not abide any longer, but slew him at the Queen's far Door in the utter Chamber. Immediately the Earl of Morton passed forth of the Queen's Majesty's utter Chamber to the inner Court for keeping of the same and the Gates, and deputed certain Barons to keep Davie's Chamber
till he knew the Queen's Majesty's pleasure, and the King's. Shortly after their Majesties send the Lord Lindsey and Arthur Erskin to the said Earl of Morton to pass to David's Chamber to fetch a black Coffer with Writings and Cyphers, which the said Earl of Morton delivered to them, and gave the Chamber in keeping to Iohn Simple Son to the Lord Simple, with the whole Goods there, Gold, Silver, and Apparel being therein. In this mean time the Queen's Majesty and the King came forth of the Cabinet to the Queen's Chamber, where her Majesty began to reason with the King, saying, My Lord, Why have you caused to do this wicked Deed to me, consi∣dering I took you from a base Estate, and made you my Husband? What Offence have I made you that ye should have done me such shame? The King answered and said, I have good reason for me; for since you Fellow Davie fell in credit and familiarity with your Majesty, ye regarded me not, neither treated me nor entertained me after your wonted Fashion; for every day before Din∣ner, and after Dinner, ye would come to my Chamber and pass time with me, and thus long time ye have not done so; and when I come to your Majesty's Chamber, ye bear me little com∣pany, except Davie had been the third Marrow: and after Supper your Majesty hath a use to set at the Cards with the said Davie till one or two of the Clock after midnight; and this is the en∣tertainment that I have had of you this long time. Her Majesty's answer was, It was not Gentle∣womens duty to come to their Husbands Cham∣ber, but rather the Husband to come to the Wive's Chamber, if he had any thing to do with her. The King answered, How came ye to my
Chamber at the beginning, and ever, till within these few Months that Davie fell in familiarity with you? or am I failed in any sort of my Bo∣dy? or what disdain have you at me? or what Offence have I made you, that you should not use me at all time alike? seeing that I am wil∣ling to do all things that becometh a good Hus∣band to do to his Wife. For since you have chose me to be your Husband, suppose I be of the baser degree, yet I am your Head, and ye promised Obedience at the day of our Marriage, and that I should be equal with you, and partici∣pant in all things. I suppose you have used me otherwise by the perswasions of Davie. Her Majesty answered and said, that all the shame that was done to her, that my Lord, ye have the weight thereof; for the which I shall never be your Wife, nor lie with you; nor shall never like well, till I gar you have as sore a Heart as I have presently. Then the Lord Ruthen made answer, and besought her Majesty to be of good comfort, and to treat her self and the King her Husband, and to use the Counsel of the Nobility, and he was assured her Government should be as well guided as ever it was in any King's days. The said Lord being so feebled with his Sickness, and wearied with his Travel, that he desired her Majesty's pardon to sit down upon a Coffer, and called for a drink for God's sake: so a French man brought him a Cup of Wine, and after that he had drunken, the Queen's Majesty began to rail against the said Lord: Is this your Sickness, Lord Ruthen? The said Lord answered, God forbid that your Majesty had such a Sickness; for I had rather give all the move∣able Goods that I have. Then, said her Majesty,
if she died, or her Barn, or Common-weal perished, she should leave the revenge thereof to her Friends to revenge the same upon the said Lord Ruthen and his Posterity; for she had the King of Spain her great Friend, the Emperor likewise, and the King of France her good Bro∣ther, the Cardinal of Lorrain, and her Unkels in France, besides the Pope's Holiness, with many other Princes in Italy. The said Lord answered that these noble Princes were over-great Person∣ages to meddle with such a poor man as he was, being her Majesty's own Subject: and where her Majesty said, that if either she, her Barn, or the Commonweal perished, the said Lord Ruthen should have the weight thereof; the said Lord answered, that if any of the three perished, her Majesty's self and her particular Counsel should have the weight thereof, and should be accused as well before God as the World: for there was no man there within that Palace, but they that would honour and serve her Majesty, as becometh true Subjects; and would suffer no manner harm to be done to her Majesty's Body than to their own Hearts; and if any thing be done this night that your Majesty mislikes, charge the King your Husband, and none of us your Sub∣jects; which the King confessed was of verity. In the same instant one came knocking fast at the Queen's Chamber-door, declaring that the Earls Huntly, Athol, Bothwel, Cathness, and Su∣therland, with the Lords Fleming, Levingstone, Secretary, Tillibarn the Comptroller, and Laird of Grant, with their own Servants and Officers of the Palace, were fighting in the Close against the Earl of Morton and his Company, being on the King's Party. The King hearing the same,
would have gone down, and the Lord Ruthen staid him, and desired him to intreat the Queen's Majesty, and he would go down and take order amongst them. So the said Lord passed to the Close, born under the Arm; and before his coming the Officers were dwong into their Hou∣ses; and the Lords were holden in at the Gallery Door by the Earl of Morton and others being with him, and were constrained to pass up to the Gallery and to their Chambers. So the said Lord Ruthen passed up to the Earl Bothwell's Chamber, where he found the Earls of Huntley, Sutherland, Cathness, the Laird of Grant, and divers others, to whom he shewed that the whole Proceeding that was done that night, was done and invented by the King's Majesty's own devise, like as his Hand writ∣ten was to shew thereupon; and how he had sent for the Lords that were banished in England and Argyle, who would be there before day: And because there was some Enmity unreconciled be∣twixt the Earls of Huntly and Bothwell, and the Earls of Argyle and Murray, and their Colleagues; the said Lords promised in their names, that it should be mended at the sight of two or three of the Nobility, they doing such like to them; whereupon the said Earls of Huntley and Bothwell gave the Lord Ruthen their hands, and received his for th' other part: and after they had drunk∣en, the said Lord Ruthen took his leave of them, and passed to the Earl of Athol's Chamber, ac∣companied with the Earls of Cathness, Sutherland, and the Laird of Grant; and found with the said Earl the Comptroller, Secretary, Mr. Iames Balfour, and divers others: and because of the Familiarity and Kindness betwixt the Earl of Athol and the Lord Ruthen, the said Earl began
to be angry with the said Lord, for that he would not shew him what Enterprise soever that he had to do; whose answer was, that it was the King's Action and the King's Devise, and that none of them had further medling therewith than the King had commanded, like as his Hand written did testify. Yet the said Earl enquired further upon the said Lord Ruthen, why he would not let him wit thereof: the said Lord answered, it was the King's Secret; and feared if he had gi∣ven knowledg thereof, he would have revealed it to the Queen's Majesty, which might have been a hindrance of the purpose, and caused the King have holden me an unhonest man for my part. The said Earl perceiving that all that was done was the Kings own deed, desired the said Lord Ruthen to pass to the King, and get him leave to pass to his Country, and so many as were presently in the Chamber with him. In this mean time the Earls of Bothwell and Huntly tak∣ing a fear of the other Lords returning out of England, and Argyle, and because they were hard∣ly imprisoned before, thought it better to escape too than to remain; so they went out at a low Win∣dow, and passed their ways. In the mean time while the Lord Ruthen was with the Earl of Athol, the King declared to the Queen's Majesty, that he had sent for the Lords to return again; whereunto she answered, she was not in the blame that they were so long away: for she could have been content to have brought them home at any time, had not been for angering the King; and to verify the same, when her Majesty gave a remission to the Duke, the King was very miscontent therewith: whereto the King answered, that it was true that the King
was miscontented then, but now he was content, and doubted not but she would also be content to persevere in the good mind to them as she had done before. At the same time came the Provost of Edenburgh, and a great number of men of the Town with him in Arms to the utter Court of the Palace of Holyrood-House, where the King called out of the Window to them, commanding them to return to their Houses, like as they did; for he declared to them that the Queen's Majesty and he were in good health. The Lord Ruthen being come up to the Queen's Chamber again, where the King was beside her, he shewed them that there was no hurt done, and that the Lords and all others were merry, and no harm done. Then her Majesty enquired what was become of Davie. The said Lord Ruthen answered that he believed he was in the King's Chamber; for he thought it not good to shew her as he died, for fear of putting her Ma∣jesty in greater trouble presently. Then the Queen's Majesty enquired of the said Lord what great kindness was betwixt the Earl of Murray and him, that rather than he and the remanent should be forfaulted, that he would be forfault with them. Remember ye not, said she, what the Earl of Murray would have had me done to you for giving me the Ring? The said Lord Ru∣then answered, that he would bear no quarrel for that cause, but would forgive him and all o∣thers for God's sake; and as to that Ring, it had no more virtue than another, and was one little Ring with a pointed Diamond in it. Re∣member ye not, said her Majesty, that ye said it had a virtue to keep me from poisoning? yea Madam (said he) I said so much, that the Ring
had that virtue, only to take that evil opinion out of your head of Poisoning, which you con∣ceived that the Protestants would have done; which the said Lord knew the contrary, that the Protestants would have done no more harm to your Majesty's Body than to their own Hearts; but it was so imprinted in your Majesty's mind, that it could not be taken away without a con∣trary impression. Then said her Majesty to the the said Lord, what Fault or Offence have I made to be handled in this manner? Inquire, said he, at the King your Husband. Nay, said she, I will enquire of you: who answered, Madam, it will please your Majesty, ye well re∣member that ye have had this long time a few number of privy Persons, and most special Davie a Stranger Italian, who have guided and ruled you contrary the Advice of your Nobility and Counsel; and especially against these Noble∣men that were banished. Her Majesty answered, were ye not one of my Council? what is the cause that ye should not have declared, if I had done any thing amiss against them that became me not? The said Lord answered, because your Majesty would hear no such thing: for all the time that your Majesty was in Glascow or Dum∣friese, let see if ever ye caused your Council to sit, or to reason upon any thing, but did all things by your Majesty's self and your privy persons, albeit the Nobility bare the Pains and Expences. Well, said her Majesty, ye find great fault with me, I will be contented to set down my Crown before the Lords of the Articles; and if they find I have offended, to give it where they please. Then answered the Lord Ruthen, and said, God for∣bid Madam, that your Crown should be in such ha∣zard;
but yet, Madam, who chose the Lords of the Articles? Not I, said she. Saving your Ma∣jesty's Reverence, said the Lord Ruthen, ye chose them all in Seaton, and nominated them: And as for your Majesty's Council, it hath not been suf∣fered to wait freely this long time, but behoved to say what was your Pleasure. And as to the Lords of the Articles, your Majesty chose such as would say whatsoever you thought expedient to the Forfaulters of the Lords Banished: And now when the Lords of the Articles have sitten fourteen days reasoning on the Summons of Treason, have ye found a just Head wherefore they ought to be forfaulted? No, Madam, not so much as one Point, without false Witness be brought in against them; whereunto she gave no answer. The said Lord Ruthen perceiving that the Queen's Majesty was weary, he said to the King, Sir, it is best ye take your leave at the Queen's Majesty, that she may take rest: So the King took his good-night and came forth of the Queen's Chamber, and we with him, and left none there but the Ladies, Gentlewomen, and the Grooms of the Queen's Majesty's Cham∣ber. And so soon as the King came to his own Chamber, the said Lord Ruthen declared the Message he had from the Earl of Athol to the King, that he might have license to return home to Athol: Which the King was loth to do with∣out he gave him a Band that he should be his. The Lord Ruthen answered, that he was a true Man of his Promise, and would keep the thing he said, as well as others would do their Hand∣writing and Seal. Then the King desired the said Lord Ruthen to fetch the Earl of Athol to
him; which he did: And after the King and Earl of Athol had talked together, he desired the said Earl to be ready to come whensoever he should send for him. His answer was, that when∣soever it pleased the Queen's Grace and him to send for him, that he would come gladly: And the said Earl desired the King that he might speak with the Queen's Majesty, which the King re∣fused. And then the said Earl took his good night, and passed to his Chamber, and the Lord Ruthen with him, where he made him ready and his Company to pass forth, like as they did; and in his company were the Earls of Sutherland and Cathness, the Master of Cathness, the Secretary, and Controler, Mr. Iames Balfour, the Laird of Grant, with divers others. Immediately the King directed two Writings, subscribed with his hand, on Saturday after the slaughter of Da∣vie, to certain men of Edenburg bearing Office for the time, charging them to convene Men in Arms, and make watch within the Town upon the Calsay; and to suffer none others to be seen out of their Houses, except Protestants, under all highest pain and charge that after may fol∣low. And on the morrow after, which was Sun∣day the 10th of March, the King directed a Letter, subscribed with his hand, making mention that it was not his Will that the Parliament should hold, for divers Causes, but discharged the same by the Tenor thereof: And therefore command∣ed all Prelats, Earls, Lords, Barons, Commissio∣ners and Barrowis, and others that are warned to the said Parliament, to depart from Edenburg within three hours next after that Charge, under the pain of Life, Lands, and Goods, except so many as the King by his special command caused
to remain; which Letter was openly proclaimed at the Market-Cross, and fully obeyed. The Gates being locked, the King being in his Bed, the Queen's Majesty walking in her Chamber, the said Lord Ruthen took air upon the lower Gate, and the privy Passages: and at the King's Command, in the mean time, Davie was hurled down the steps of the Stairs from the place where he was slain, and brought to the Porter's Lodg; where the Porter's Servant taking off his Clothes, said, This hath been his Destiny; for upon this Chest was his first Bed when he entred into this place, and now here he lieth again, a very ingrate and misknowing Knave. The King's Whiniard was found sticking in Davie's side after he was dead; but always the Queen inquired of the King where his Whiniard was? who answered, that he wit not well: Well, said she, it will be known afterwards. On the morrow, which was Sunday, March 10. the King rose at eight of the Clock, and passed to the Queen's Majesty's Chamber, where he and she fell to reasoning of the Matter proceeded the night afore, the one grating on the other till it was ten a Clock, that the King came down to his Chamber; and at his coming from her, she desi∣red him to let all the Ladies and Gentlewomen come unto her; which the King granted, and at his coming down shewed the same to the Earl of Morton and Lord Ruthen, who were not con∣tented with the same; and shewed the King, that they feared that the Queen's Majesty would traffick by them with the Lords, and all other that would do for her, like as it followed indeed: For instantly her Majesty wrote some Writing, and caused them to write others in her Name to
the Earls of Argile, Huntly, Bothwel, Athol, and others. After that the King had dined, on Sunday he passed up to the Queen's Majesty's Chamber, where the Queen made as she would have parted with Barn, and caused the Midwife come and say the same. So her Majesty complained that she could get none of the Gentlewomen to come up to her, Scots nor French. The King sending this word to the Earl of Morton and Lord Ruthen, all were let in that pleased. At the same time the Queen's Majesty thought that the Lord Ruthen would do her Body harm, and sent Iohn Simple, Son to the Lord Simple, to the said Lord Ruthen, to enquire what her Majesty might lippen unto in that behalf: Whose answer was, that he would no more harm to her Body, than to his own Heart; if any Man intended to do o∣therwise, he should defend her Majesty Body at the uttermost of his Power. And further the said Lord said, her Majesty had experience of his mind in that Night's proceeding, when he suf∣fered none come near her Majesty to molest and trouble her. The said Iohn Simple brought this Message to the said Lord Ruthen at two of the Clock Afternoon, on Sunday, sitting then in the King's utter Chamber at his Dinner. At four of the Clock the King came down to his Chamber, where the Lord Ruthen shewed him that the Queen's Majesty was to steal out among the throng of the Gentlewomen in their downcom∣ing, as he said he was advertised. So the King commanded him to give attendance thereto; which he did, and put certain to the Door, and let no Body nor Gentlewoman pass forth undis∣muffled.
After, about 7 or 8 of the Clock, the Earls of Murrey and Rothes, with their Complices, came out of England, and lighted at the Abbey, and were thankfully received of the King; and after certain communing, the Earl of Murrey took his Good-night of the King, and passed to the Earl of Morton's House to Supper. Immediately there∣after, the Queen's Majesty sent one of her Ush∣ers, called Robert Phirsell, for the said Earl of Murrey; who passed to her Majesty, whom she received pleasantly, as appeared; and after com∣muning, he passed to the Earl of Morton's House again, where he remained that Night. At this time the King remained communing with the Queen's Majesty, and after long reasoning with her, she granted to lie with him all Night, he coming to her Chamber, and putting all men out of his utter Chamber, except the Waiters of his Chamber, and made a complaint that her Gentle∣women could not go forth at the door undismuf∣fled at the King's coming down. He shewed the said Earl of Morton, and Lord Ruthen, the whole manner of his proceedings with the Queen's Ma∣jesty; which they liked no way, because they perceived the King grew effeminate again; and said to him, we see no other but ye are able to do that thing that will gar you and us both re∣pent. Always he would have the said Earl and Lord to rid all the House, conform to the Queen's Majesty's desire; which they did, and the said Lord Ruthen passed and lay in the King's War∣drobe: and after he was lien down, George Doug∣lass came to him, and shewed him that the King was fallen asleep. The said Lord caused George to go to wake the King; and after that he had gone in twice or thrice, finding him sleeping so
sound, he would not awake him. Thereat the said Lord was very miscontented; the King slept still till six in the morning, that the Lord Ru∣then came and reproved him, that he had not kept his Promise to the Queen's Majesty, in lying with her all that Night. His answer was, that he was fallen on such a dead sleep that he could not a∣waken; and put the blame to William Tellor one of his Servants that permitted him to sleep. But always, said he, I will take my Night-gown and go up to the Queen. The said Lord Ruthen answered and said, I trust she shall serve you in the Morning as you did her at Night. Always the King passed up, being Monday the 11th of March at six of the Clock, to her Majesty's Cham∣ber, and sat down on the Bedside, she being sleep∣ing, or at least made her self so, and sat there by the space of one hour e're she spake word to him. Then when her Majesty waked, she en∣quired of the King, why he came not up yester∣day night conform to his Promise? He answered, he fell in so dead a sleep, that he awaked not a∣fore six. Now, saith he, am I come, and offer∣ed to lie down beside her Majesty; but she would not suffer him, for she was sick, and said, she would rise incontinent. Then the King fell in reasoning with her Majesty towards the return∣ing of the said Lords-that were banished, and forgiving of them all Offences, and likewise for the slaughter of Davie: and as appeared to him, her Majesty was content; for the King came down to his own Chamber at eight of the Clock very merrily, and shewed the said Earl of Morton, and Lord Ruthen, the proceedings betwixt him and the Queen's Majesty: who answered him, and said, all was but words that they heard. For
look how ye intend to perswade her Majesty; we fear she will perswade you to follow her Will and Desire, by reason she hath been trained up from her Youth in the Court of France, as well in the Affairs of France as Scotland, in the Privy Council. Well, said the King, will ye let me alone, and I will warrant to dress all things well. And after that the King had put on his Clothes, he passed at nine to the Queen's Cham∣ber, where he reasoned of many things with her Majesty: And at his returning to his Dinner at eleven, he declared to the Earls of Murrey and Morton, Lords Ruthen and Lindzay, that he had dressed the Queen's Majesty; that the said two Earls, and Lord Ruthen, should come to the pre∣sence of the Queens Majesty, and she would for∣give, and put in Oblivion all things by-past, and bury them out of her Majesty's mind, as they had never been. The said Earls and Lords answer'd, that all that speaking was but policy; and sup∣pose it were promised, little or nothing would be kept. Always the King took freely in hand, and bad them make such Security as they pleased, and the Queen's Majesty and he should subscribe the same. And then after Dinner the King passed up again to the Queen's Chamber, where the Midwife was made to come to him, and said, that the Queen would not fail to part with Barn, if her Majesty went not to some other place where there were more freer Air; and in like manner divers of the Lords said the same. And the King re∣turning to his Chamber at three Afternoon, de∣clared the same to the said Earls, and Lord Ru∣then: And in the mean time in came the French Doctor, who declared to the King, that it was unable to the Queen's Majesty to eschew a Fever;
which if she take, she will not fail to part with Barn, without she were transported from that place to some better aired place. After they were departed, the King inquired of the said Earls and Lords, what they thought of their speaking? Who answered, they feared all was but craft-and policy that was spoken and done. Always the King would not trow the same, and said, that she was a true Princess, and that thing she promised, he would set his life for the same. And between four and five Afternoon, the King passed to the Queen's Chamber, and took the Earls of Morton, Murrey, and Lord Ruthen with him; and after they had come to the Queen's utter Chamber, the King went in and left the Lords, to know her pleasure, whether her Majesty would come out of her utter Cham∣ber, or if the Lords should come into her Maje∣sty. She took purpose, and came out of the ut∣ter Chamber, led by the King; the said Earls and Lords sitting down upon their Knees, made their general Oration by the Earl of Morton Chancel∣lor, and after, their particular Orations by them∣selves. And after that her Majesty had heard all, her answer was, that it was not unknown to the Lords, that she was never blood-thirsty, nor greedy upon their Lands and Goods, sithence her coming into Scotland; nor yet would be upon theirs that were present, but would remit the whole Number that was banished, or were at the last dead; and bury and put all things in Oblivi∣on as if they had never been; and so caused the said Earls, Lords and Barons, to arise on their Feet. And afterwards her Majesty desired them to make their own Security in that sort they pleas∣ed best, and she should subscribe the same. There∣after,
her Majesty took the King by the one hand, and the Earl of Murrey by the other, and walked in her said utter Chamber the space of one hour; and then her Majesty passed into her inner Cham∣ber, where she and the King appointed, that all they that were on the King's Party, should go forth of the place after Supper. The King com∣ing down to his Chamber afore six of the Clock, the Articles which were the Security that were on the King's Party, were given by the Earls of Murrey and Morton, and Lords Ruthen and Lind∣sey to the King, to be subscribed by the Queen, which the King took in hand so soon as he had supped to be done; and he desired the said Lords to remove themselves out of the Palace, to that effect, that her Majesty's Guard and Servants might order all as they pleased. The Lords an∣swer was to the King, You may well cause us to do that thing that is your pleasure, but it is sore against our wills; for we fear all this is but de∣ceit that is meant towards us, and that the Queen's Majesty will pass away secretly and take you with her, either to the Castle of Edenburg, or else Dunbar. And here the Lord Ruthen pro∣tested, that what end followed thereupon, or what Blood was shed for the same, that it should come upon the King's Head and Posterity, and nought upon theirs. The King said, he should warrant all. So they departed and took their leave of the King, and passed all forth of the Pa∣lace of Holyrood-house to the Earl of Morton's House, where they supped; and after Supper di∣rected Mr. Archibald Douglass to the King, to see if the Queen's Majesty had subscribed the Arti∣cles of the Lords and Barons Security. The King gave answer, that he had let the Queen's
Majesty see them, who found them very good; and because she was sick and going to her Bed, she delayed the subscribing of them to the morn∣ing; and immediately after Mr. Archibald return∣ed to the Lords with answer. The Laird of Traquair Master of the Guard made an Arrant to the Earl of Murray to see what the Lords were doing, and after he was departed, the whole Earls, Lords, and Barons, with Gentlemen, passed to the Town of Edinburgh to their Beds, believing surely the Queen's Majesty's Promise, and the King's. The same night about one a clock after mid∣night, the Queen's Majesty and the King with her, went out at one Back-door that passed through the Wine-Cellar; where Arthur Erskin the Capt in of the Guard, and other 6 or 7 persons, met her Majesty with her Horses, and rode toward Dun∣bar; and on the morrow, which was Tuesday, the 12th of March, the Lords hearing how the Queen's Majesty was departed, and taken the King with her, convened the Earls, Lords, Ba∣rons, and Gentlemen, and after the matter was appointed, enquired every man's opinion, which concluded all to remain in the Town of Edin∣burgh, till such time they might send some Noble∣men to her Majesty for performance of the Ar∣ticles promised for their security; and to that effect sent for the Lord Simple, and desired him that he would pass to Dunbar with a Writing of the Lords, which he granted to do, and received the same, with a Copy of the Articles that the King received before, and promised to do his utter diligence to get the same immediately sped, if it were the King and Queen's Majesties plea∣sure so to do. After the Lord Simple's coming
to Dunbar, having presented the Lords Writ∣ing to their Majesties, he was evil taken with the Queen's Majesty, who caus'd him to remain three days; he reported at his returning, that there was no good way to be looked for there, but Extremity to the Earls, Lords, and Gentlemen, who had been at the Slaughter of David, notwith∣standing her Majesty's promise made before. At that time her Majesty being in Dunbar, wrote to all Earls, Lords, Barons, to meet her in Haddington Town the 17th or 18th of March, and likewise directed universal Letters, charging all manner of men betwixt 60 and 16 to be there, day and place aforesaid, being in Arms in fear of War; and also sent divers charges to the Lord Eskin Captain of the Castle of Edenburgh, to shut up the Town, unless the Lords departed out of it. In this time it was declared to the Earl of Murray, that if he would sue Address to the Queen's Ma∣jesty, he would obtain the same, who shewed the same to the Lords, who counselled him to write to her Majesty to that effect; which he did, and re∣ceived her Majesty's Answer with certain Articles. In this time the Earl of Glencarn and Rothes took their Appointment of the Queen's Majesty. The Earl of Morton, Lord Ruthen, and remanent their Complices perceiving that the Queen's Majesty was willing to remit the Lords banished into England and Argyle, and bare her Majesty's whole rage against them that were with the King at the Slaughter of Davie, thought best to re∣tire themselves into England under the Queen's Majesty of England's Protection, till such time as the Nobility of Scotland their Peers understood their Cause: for they have done nothing with∣out the King's Command, as is before mentioned,
and doubt not but their Cause shall be found just and honest whensoever the same be tried; and lament the extream handling contrary to Order and Justice, that they may not compear for fear of their lives; in respect that her Majesty hath caused a Band to be made, and all Earls, Lords, and Barons that resorted to her Majesty, to sub∣scribe the same, that they shall pursue the said Earl Morton, Lord Ruthen, and Lindsay and their Complices with Fire and Sword; which is against all Order of the Law: And on Saturday the 22d of March her Majesty hath caused to be sum∣moned the said Earl of Morton, Lords Ruthen and Lindsay, the Master of Ruthvn, Lairds of Ormyston, Brinston, Halton, Elvelston, Calder, Andrew Carr of Faldomside, Alexander Ruthen Brother to the Lord Ruthen, Patrick Murray of Tippermure, William Douglas of Whittingham, Mr. Archibald Douglas his Brother, George Doug∣las, Lyndzay of Prystone, Thomas Scot of Cambysmichet, of Perth, William Douglas of Lochleven, Iames Ieffert of Shreffal, Adam Eskin Commendator of Camskinnel, Mentershfear of Kars, Patrick Ballenden of Stenehouse Brother to Justice Clerk, Patrick Wood of Conyton, Mr. Iames Magil Clerk of Re∣gisters, with others, to compear before her Majesty and secret Council within six days, un∣der the pain of Rebellion, and putting them to her Horn, and eschetting and bringing of all their moveables Goods, the which like Order is not used in no Realm Christened; nor is it the Law of Scotland of old; but new cropen in, and invented by them that understand no Law, nor yet good practise: and how her Majesty hath handled the Barons of Lothian our Brothers, it
is known; and in likewise our poor Brethren of Edinburgh, Merchants and Craftsmen, and how they are oppressed by the Men of War God knoweth, who will put remedy hereto when it pleaseth him best: and how the Lords and Ba∣rons Wives are oppressed in spoiling of their Places, robbing of their Goods without any Fine for the same, it would pity a godly Heart. And where her Majesty alledgeth, that night that Davie was slain some held Pistols to her Ma∣jesties Womb, some stroke Whiniards so near her Crag, that she felt the coldness of the Iron, with many other such like Sayings, which we take God to record was never meant nor done; for the said Davie receiv'd never a Stroke in her Ma∣jesty's presence, nor was not stricken till he was at the farthest Door of her Majesty's utter Cham∣ber, as is before rehearsed. Her Majesty makes all these Allegations to draw the said Earl Morton, Lords Ruthen and Lindsay, and their Complices, in greater hatred with other foreign Princes, and with the Nobility and Commonalty of the Realm, who have experience of the contrary, and know that there was no evil meant to her Majesty's Body. The eternal God who hath the rule of Princes Hearts in his hands, send her his Holy Spi∣rit to instruct her how she should rule and govern with Clemency and Mercy over her Subjects. Written at Berwick, day of March 1565.
Buchanan, Fol. 211. IN the first placeThe Queen. she took care that the Body of David, which had been buried with∣out the Doors of the next Church, should be removed by night, and placed in the Sepulchre of the last King and his Children: Which unworthy and un∣exempled Action, gave further occasion to disadvan∣tagious Reports of her. For what, said they, can be a more manifest Confession of her Adultery, than to make (as far as in her lies) a sordid Villain, who had nothing commendable in himself, nor had done any thing useful to the Publick, equal in the last of all Honours paid to Men, with her Father and Brothers; and (which seemed yet to be almost a great Indigni∣ty) to put an impure Fellow, Raskal, as it were, in∣to the Arms of the late Queen Magdalen de Valois? In the mean time she never ceased from menacing her Husband, deriding him with bitter raillery, and using the utmost of her Power to extinguish his Autho∣rity with all Men, and to render him as contemptible as she could. Strict inquiry was made concerning the slaugh∣ter of David: Many of those who were suspected to be concerned, were banished to different places; more were fined in Sums of Mony, and some who had hardly any part in the Action, and for that reason thought themselves secure, were punished capitally with death; for the principal Persons engaged in that Affair, had either escaped into England, or concealed themselves in the mountainous Countries of Scotland. All Offi∣ces of the Magistracy, and Places of Trust, were ta∣ken away from every one who was in the least sus∣pected, and conferred upon their Enemies. And a Proclamation was published, forbidding men to say
that the King had any knowledg or part in the death of David: But this, notwithstanding the publick Ca∣lamities, was entertained with a general Laughter. In April following, these Disturbances being a little calmed, the Earls of Argile and Murrey were re∣ceiv'd into Favour, the Queen retired into the Castle of Edinburg, (the time of her lying in approaching) and on the 19th of June, a little after nine, she was brought to bed of a Son, who was afterwards called James the 6th. Equinoctialem. It was reported that one John Damiette a French Priest, who was accounted a Magician, had often admonished him (David) that having got much Wealth, he should be gone, and so secure himself from the hatred of the Nobility, who were too strong a Party for him; and that his answer was, That the Scots were more ready to talk than to fight: And that a few days before his death, being advised to beware of the Bastard; he said, That so long as he lived, the Bastard should not have such Power in Scotland as to cause him to fear: He thought the Earl of Murrey was meant by that Name. But whether this Warning was fulfilled, or eluded, so it was in fact, That George Douglass, a Bastard of the Earl of Angus, gave him the first Wound. Buchanan, L. 17. FINIS.
